                                            
ADVL1614  
                                                                                                                                                                
  
Activated:  January 16, 2018   Version Date:  01/31/2019 
Closed:  April 24, 2020   Amendment #: 3 
   
 
   
CHILDREN’S ONCOLOGY GROUP  
ADVL1614  
 
 
A PHASE 1/ 2 STUDY OF VX15/2503  in Children, Adolescents, or Young Adults 
with Recurrent or Relapsed Solid Tumors  
 
 
 
Lead Organization: COG Pediatric Early Phase Clinical Trials Network (PEP -CTN)  
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ONLY , AND SHOULD NOT BE COPIED , REDISTRIBUTED 
OR USED FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSE .  MEDICAL AND SCIENTIF IC INFORMATION CONTA INED WITHIN 
THIS PROTOCOL IS NOT  INCLUDED TO AUTHORIZ E OR FACILITATE THE PRACTICE OF MEDICINE  BY 
ANY PERSON OR ENTITY .  RESEARCH  MEANS A SYSTEMATIC I NVESTIGATION , INCLUDING RESEARCH 
DEVELOPMENT , TESTING AND EVALUATI ON, DESIGNED TO DEVELOP OR CONTRIBUTE TO 
GENERALIZABLE KNOWLEDGE .  THIS PROTOCOL IS THE  RESEARCH PLAN DEVELOPED BY THE 
CHILDREN ’S ONCOLOGY GROUP TO INVESTIGATE A PARTICULAR STUDY QUESTION OR SET OF STUDY 
QUESTIONS AND S HOULD NOT  BE USED TO DIRECT TH E PRACTICE OF MEDICINE BY ANY PERSON OR 
TO PROVIDE INDIVIDUALIZED MEDICAL CARE , TREATMENT , OR ADVICE TO ANY PATIENT OR STUDY 
SUBJECT .  THE PROCEDURES IN TH IS PROTOCOL ARE INTENDED ONLY FOR USE BY CLINICAL 
ONCOLOGISTS IN CAREF ULLY STRUCTURED SETTI NGS, AND MAY NOT PROVE TO  BE MORE EFFECTIVE 
THAN STANDARD TREATM ENT.  ANY PERSON WHO REQUI RES MEDICAL CARE IS URGED TO CONSULT 
WITH HIS OR HER PERS ONAL PHYSICIAN OR TREATING PHYSICIAN OR VISIT THE NEAREST LO CAL 
HOSPITAL OR HEALTHCA RE INSTITUTION . 
 
STUDY CHAIR 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For PEP- CTN Operations and Data/Statistics Contacts s ee: http://members.childrensoncologygroup.org  
  

                                            
ADVL1614 
                                                                                                                                                                
2 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
SECTION  PAGE  
 
CHILDREN’S ONCOLOGY GROUP  1 
STUDY COMMITTEE  5 
STUDY COMMITTEE, CONT.  6 
ABSTRACT  7 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN SCHEMA  8 
1. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  (SCIENTIFIC AIMS)  9 
 Primary Aims  9 
 Secondary Aims  9 
 Exploratory Aim  9 
 BACKGROUND  9 
 Introduction/Rationale for Development  9 
 Preclinical Studies  11 
 Adult Studies  17 
 Pediatric Studies  18 
 Overview of Proposed Pediatric Study  18 
 SCREENING AND STUDY ENROLLMENT PROCEDURE S 20 
 Current Study Status  20 
 IRB Approval  20 
 Patient Registration  21 
 Reservation and Contact Requirements  21 
 Informed Consent/Assent  21 
 Screening Procedures  21 
 Eligibility Checklist  21 
 Institutional Pathology Report  22 
 Study Enrollment  22 
 Dose Assignment  22 
 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY  22 
 Inclusion Criteria  23 
 Exclusion Criteria  26 
 TREATMENT PROGRAM  27 
 Overview of Treatment Plan  27 
 Criteria for Starting Subsequent Cycles  27 
 Dose Confirmation Schem a (Completed)  27 
 Part B  28 
 Grading of Adverse Events  28 
 Definition of Dose -Limiting Toxicity (DLT)  28 
 DOSE MODIFICATIONS F OR ADVERSE EVENTS  29 
 Dose Modification for Day 1 Dosing  29 
 Dose Modifications for Day 15 Dosing due to T oxicity on Day 15.  30 
 SUPPORTIVE CARE AND OTHER CONCOMITANT THERAPY  32 
 Concurrent Anticancer Therapy  32 
 Investigational Agents  32 
                                            
ADVL1614 
                                                                                                                                                                
3 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Supportive Care  32 
 Growth Factors  32 
 EVALUATIONS/MATERIAL  AND DATA TO BE ACCES SIONED  33 
 Required Clinical, Laboratory and Disease Evaluation  33 
 Radiology Studies  34 
 Pharmacology (Required)  35 
 Immunogenicity Study (Required)  36 
 Pharmacodynamics:  T -lymphocyte saturation (Required)  37 
 Pharmacodynamics: Total soluble SEMA4D (Required)  38 
 Tumor A ssessment (archival -required and biopsy -optional)  39 
 AGENT INFORMATION  40 
 VX15/2503  40 
 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL  FROM PROTOCOL THERAP Y AND OFF STUDY 
CRITERIA  43 
 Criteria for Remov al from Protocol Therapy  43 
 Off Study Criteria  43 
 STATISTICA L AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  44 
 Sample Size and Study Duration  44 
 Definitions  44 
 Determination of MTD  45 
 Inclusion of Children, Women and Minorities  46 
 Pharmacokinetic and Correlative Studies and Response Analysi s 47 
 Study Design -  Part B  47 
 Method of Analysis – Phase 2  49 
 EVALUATION CRITERIA 50 
 Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  50 
 Response Criteria for Patients  with Solid Tumors  50 
 Response Criteria for Patients with Solid Tumors and Evaluable Disease  55 
 Response Criteria for Neuroblastoma Patients with MIBG Positive Lesions  56 
 Response Criteria for Neuroblastoma Patients w ith Bone Marrow Involvement  58 
 Best Response  58 
 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING REQU IREMENTS 59 
 Steps to Determine If an Adverse Event Is To Be Reported In an Expedited Manner  60 
 When to Report an Event in an Expedited Manner  62 
 Expedited Reporting Methods  62 
 Definition of Onset and Resolution of Adverse Events  63 
 Other Recipients of Adverse Event Reports  63 
 Reporting Secondary AML/MDS  63 
 Reporting Pregnancy, Fetal Death, and Death Neonatal  64 
 RECORDS, REPORTING, AND DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  65 
 Categories of Research Records  65 
 CDUS  65 
 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  66 
REFERENCES  67 
APPENDIX I: PERFORMANCE STATUS SCALES/SCORES 68 
APPENDIX II: CORRELA TIVE STUDIES GUIDE  69 
                                            
ADVL1614 
                                                                                                                                                                
4 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX III:  TOXICITY -SPECIFIC GRADING  70 
APPENDIX IV: PHARMAC OKINETIC STUDY FORM FOR PATIENTS > 10KG  71 
APPENDIX V: IMMUNOGE NICITY STUDY FOR PAT IENTS > 10KG  73 
APPENDIX VI: PHARMAC ODYNAMICS T -LYMPHOCYTE SATURATION (FOR ALL 
PATIENTS)  74 
APPENDIX VII: PHARMACODYNAMICS TOTAL SOL UBLE SEMA4D FOR                        
PATIENTS > 10KG  75 
APPENDIX VIII: TISSUE STUDIES FORM  76 
APPENDIX IX: PHARMAC OKINETIC STUDY FORM FOR PATIENTS ≤  10KG  77 
APPENDIX X: IMMUNOGENICITY STUDY FOR PATIENTS ≤  10KG  78 
APPENDIX XI: PHARMAC ODYNAMICS TOTAL SOLUB LE SEMA4D FOR PATIEN TS  ≤  10KG  79 
APPENDIX XII: YOUTH INFORMATION SHEETS  80 
APPENDIX XIII: YOUTH INFORMATION SHEETS  81 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
5 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
     
     
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
        

                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
6 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
STUDY COMMITTEE, CONT.  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 IND Sponsor: COG  
  
  
For PEP-CTN Operations and Data/Statistics  Contacts   see: http:members.childrensoncologygroup.org  
 
SEE SECTION 8.3.6, 8.4.6 , 8.5.6, 8.6.6, and 8.7.3  FOR  SPECIMEN SHIPPING ADDRESSES  

                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
7 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
This trial is covered by  a Certificate of Confidentiality from the federal government, which will help us 
protect the privacy of our research subjects.  The Certificate protects against the involuntary release of 
information about subjects collected during the course of our covered studies.  The researchers involved in 
the studies cannot be forced to disclose the identity or any information collected in the study in any legal 
proceedings at the federal, state, or local level, regardless of whether they are crimi nal, administrative, or 
legislative proceedings.  However, the subject or the researcher may choose to voluntarily disclose the 
protected information under certain circumstances.  For example, if the subject or his/her guardian requests 
the release of info rmation in writing, the Certificate does not protect against that voluntary disclosure.  
Furthermore, federal agencies may review our records under limited circumstances, such as a DHHS 
request for information for an audit or program evaluation or an FDA r equest under the Food, Drug and 
Cosmetics Act.  
 
The Certificate of Confidentiality will not protect against mandatory disclosure by the researchers of 
information on suspected child abuse, reportable communicable diseases, and/or possible threat of harm to  
self or others.  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Semaphorins consist of a family of soluble and transmembrane proteins, originally defined as axonal -
guidance factors1.  Binding of Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) to cells expressing the cognate plexin 
B1/2 receptors can induce cytoskeletal changes in immune, endothelial, and tumors cells and regulate their 
migration and differentiation within the tumor microenvironment (TME).2-4 SEMA4D has been shown to 
regulate leukocyte infiltration into tumors and promote tumor growth.  Immunohistochemical analysis of 
SEMA4D expression on tissues from se veral human tumor types has shown that SEMA4D is overexpressed 
in multiple malignancies, including urogenital, ovarian, pancreatic, head and neck, prostate, colon, breast, 
and lung cancer and correlates with invasive disease and poor prognosis.5,6,7 Expression of SEMA4D by 
tumor and cells of the tumor microenvironment, including inflammatory cells and tumor -associated 
macrophages, may be regulated by hypoxia. Additionally, strong expression of SEMA4D at the invasive 
margins of actively growing tumors influences distribution of leukocytes in the tumor microenvironment.8 
Investigators have studied the expression of SEMA4D in a variety of soft tissue sarcomas; two separate 
analyses have shown high level expression to correlate with poor prognosis and overall disease free 
survival.6,7   Recently, through a Sleeping Beauty  forward genetic sc reen that induced osteosarcoma in mice, 
analysis of common insertion site -associated genes found SEMA4D to be a strong candidate proto -
oncogene. Human osteosarcoma tumors demonstrated up- regulation of SEMA4D compared to normal 
human osteoblasts. Expression was confirmed in nearly all human osteosarcomas, with high level 
expression in over half of the tumors.9 Over -expression of SEMA4D in osteosarcoma cell lines led to 
activation of  MET or ERBB2 and subsequent increased phosphorylation of AKT and/or ERK. In addition, 
overexpression of SEMA4D resulted in increased colony formation in soft agar and proliferation and 
xenograft tumor formation in immunodeficient mice. The oncogenic role of SEMA4D in osteosarcoma was 
further confirmed by shRNA knockdown which resulted in significantly decreased colony formation.9  
VX15/2503 is a humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody that binds specifically to the SEMA4D (CD100) 
antigen, blocking the binding of SEMA4D to its high affinity receptor, plexin B1 (PLXNB1), plexin B2 
(PLXNB2), and a low -affinity receptor, CD72. It has strong affinity for SEMA4D with an antibody -antigen 
dissociation constant (K d) ranging from 1- 5 nM.10 Treatment of osteosarcoma cell lines with VX15/2503 
resulted in decreased cell migration and colony formation as compared to controls. A dditionally, a 
syngeneic mouse model of osteosarcoma treated with MAb67 -2, a mouse analog of VX15/2503, had 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
8 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
significantly reduced tumor growth compared to controls.10 
This is a parallel phase 1/2 study of VX15/2503 in children and adolescent/young adul ts with relapsed or 
refractory solid tumors and osteosarcoma, respectively.  The phase 1 study will employ a rolling six design, 
whereas the phase 2 study will employ a two -stage design.  The aims of the phase 1 study include  to 
determine the maximum tolerated dose or recommended phase 2 dose of VX15/2503 in children, as well 
as defining the pharmacok inetic and pharmacod ynamic activity of VX15/2503  in pediatric malignancies.  
The aim of the phase 2 study will be to determine the activity of VX15/2503 in treating relapsed or 
refractory osteosarcoma.  
 
 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN SCHEMA 
 
Part A & B Treatment Schedul e Table   
Cycles - 28 day duration  Agent  
 
 
 
  
Day 1                Day 15                Day 28 VX15/2503 intravenous infusion 
over 60 minutes  
 
Treatment will be discontinued if there is evidence of progressive disease or drug- related dose-
limiting toxicity that requires removal from therapy. Patients with stable disease or greater response may continue receiving protocol therapy provided that the patient meets the criteria for starting 
subsequent cycles ( Section 5.2
) and does not meet any of the criteria for removal from protocol 
therapy or off study criteria ( Section 10.0 ). 
 Infusion  Infusion  Evaluation  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
9 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
1. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES  (SCIENTIFIC AIMS)  
 
 Primary Aims  
 
 To estimate the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and/or recommended Phase 2 
dose of VX15/2503 administ ered as an intravenous infusion  every 14 days to  
children with recurrent or refractory solid tumors (Part A)  
 
 To define and descri be the toxicities of VX15/2503 administered on this schedule 
(Parts A -B) 
 
 To characterize the pharmacokinetics of VX15/2503 in children with recurrent or 
refractory cancer (Parts A -B) 
 
 To preliminarily define the antitumor activity of VX15/2503 for the treatment of 
relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma  (Part B)  
 
 To determine if VX15/2503 either improves the disease control rate at 4 months in patients with recurrent measurable osteosarcoma or produces an objective 
response rate in patients with relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma (Part B) 
 
 Secondary Aims  
 
 To assess the pharmacodynamics of VX15/2503 through VX15/2503 saturation 
of T-lymphocytes  
 
 To assess the immunogenicity of VX15/2503 in pediatric patients with recurrent 
or refractory cancer.  
 Exploratory Aim  
 
 To evaluate potential biomarkers of VX15/2503 sensitivity including S EMA4D, 
PlexinB1, and other markers of immune cell infiltration  in archival  tumor tissues.   
  
 BACKGROUND  
 
 Introduction/Rationale for Development  
 Semaphorins consist of a family of solubl e and transmembrane proteins, originally defined 
as axonal -guidance factors.
1 Binding of Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D, CD100) to cells 
expressing the cognate plexin B1/2 receptors can induce cytoskeletal changes in immune, 
endothelial, and tumors cells and regulate their migration and differentiation within the 
tumor microenvironment (TME).2-4 SEMA4D has been shown to regulate leukocyte 
infiltration into tumors and promote tumor growth.  
 
Immunohistochemical analysis of SEMA4D expression on tissues from several human tumor types has shown that SEMA4D is overexpressed in multiple malignancies, including 
urogenital, ovarian, pancreatic, head and neck, prostate, colon, breast, and lung cancer and 
correlates with invasive dis ease and poor prognosis.
5,6,7 Expression of SEMA4D by tumor 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
10 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
and cells of the tumor microenvironment, including inflammatory cells and tumor -
associated macrophages, may be regulated by hypoxia. Additionally, strong expression of 
SEMA4D at the invasive margins of actively growing tumors influences distribution of 
leukocytes in the tumor microenvironment.8 Investigators have studied the expression of 
SEMA4D in a variety of soft tissues sarcomas; two separate analyses have shown high 
level expression to correlate with poor prognosis and overall disease free survival.6,7  
 
Recently, through a Sleeping Beauty  forward genetic screen that induced osteosarcoma in 
mice, analysis of common insertion site- associated genes found SEMA4D to be a strong 
candidate proto -oncogene. Human osteosarcoma tumors demonstrated up- regulation of 
SEMA4D compared to normal human osteoblasts. Expression  was confirmed in nearly all 
human osteosarcomas, with high level expression in over half of the tumors.9 Over -
expression of SEMA4D in osteosarcoma cell lines led to activation of  MET or ERBB2 and 
subsequent increased phosphorylation of AKT and/or ERK. In addition, overexpression of SEMA4D resulted in increased colony formation in soft agar and proliferation and 
xenograft tumor formation in immunodeficient mice. The oncogenic role of SEMA4D in 
osteosarcoma was further confirmed by shRNA knockdown which resulted in significantly 
decreased colony formation.
9   
 
The role of SEMA4D and potential application of an anti -SEMA4D antibody is likely 
much broader than osteosarcoma. SEMA4D is expressed on cells within the tumor stroma 
and modulates the activity of the immune system. Expression of SEMA4D by tumor 
associated  macrophages (TAMs) can be regulated by hypoxia and contribute to aggressive 
tumor growth. High levels of SEMA4D positively correlate with the presence of 
immunosuppressive TAMs and myeloid- derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) with 
concomitant exclusion of act ivated antigen presenting cells (APCs) and CD8+ cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes (CTLs) from the tumor. Antibody neutralization of SEMA4D results in a 
marked redistribution of immune cells at the tumor invasive margins in multiple tumor 
models. This includes an inc reased frequency of activated tumor -infiltrating macrophages, 
a significant increase in intratumoral CD8+ T cells and dispersion of M2 TAMs and 
MDSCs. Increased levels of interferon γ  (IFN γ) and tumor necrosis factor α  (TNF α) are 
also seen, indicating a shift to a pro -inflammatory environment. Treatment with anti -
SEMA4D antibody also increases Teffector:Tregulatory (Teff:Treg) cell ratios within the 
tumor and tumor -specific cytotoxic T -cell activity. This immunologic response is localized 
to the tumor, wi th minimal T -cell and cytokine activity in the peripheral lymphoid organs. 
This is important because it has been reported that efficient entry of functional tumor -
specific T -cells into the tumor correlated with improved survival and response to 
immunothera py.12,15 
 
The combined role of SEMA4D in tumorigenesis from both the tumor cells and tumor 
microenvironment and the fact that it is a cell surface and soluble ligand makes it an 
attractive therapeutic target. Similar to checkpoint inhibitors, its role in c ontrolling the 
tumor microenvironment by modulating interactions with key players in the immune system make it an attractive target for many pediatric malignancies, however, its additional 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
11 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
roles in osteosarcoma tumorigenesis make it particularly applicable to this disease.  
 
VX15/2503 is a humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody that binds specifically to the 
SEMA4D (CD100) antigen, blocking the binding of SEMA4D to its high affinity receptor, 
plexin B1 (PLXNB1), plexin B2 (PLXNB2), and a low -affinity receptor, C D72. It has 
strong affinity for SEMA4D with an antibody -antigen dissociation constant (K d) ranging 
from 1 -5 nM.10 Treatment of osteosarcoma cell lines with VX15/2503 resulted in decreased 
cell migration and colony formation as compared to controls. Additionally, a syngeneic 
mouse model of osteosarcoma treated with MAb67 -2, a mouse analog of VX15/2503, had 
significantly reduced tumor growth compared to controls.10 
 
 
 Preclinical Studies  
 
 Antitumor Activity  
 
VX15/2503 and the surrogate mouse MAb67- 2 have demonstrated activity in both in vitro  
and in vivo  tumor models. In vitro  studies have demonstrated the agent’s ability to block 
the functional effects of SEMA4D binding to PLXNB1.11 In preclinical models, anti -
SEMA4D antibody blockade regulates the balance and activity of inflammatory and tolerance inducing cells and cytokines. This results in specifically increasing cytotoxic T -
cell infiltration and activity resulting in delayed tum or growth and durable tumor rejection 
in syngeneic murine tumor models.
12 
 
 
 
Treatment with a murine monoclonal antibody to SEMA4D (MAb67- 2) was evaluated in 
a syngeneic murine model of colorectal cancer using Colon26 cells. Mice were treated 
weekly with 10 mg/kg of MAb67- 2 (aSEMA4D) or isotype control (Control Ig) 
intraperitoneally for 30 days. Treatment with anti -SEMA4D antibody promoted infiltration 
of activated macrophage and cytotoxic T -cells, with a reduction in infiltration of immune -
suppressive T -regulatory and Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC) ( Figure 2).  
 
Figure 1. rSEMA4D (1 µg/ml) added 
to the lower chamber of a transwell 
inhibits spontaneous migration of mouse macrophage cell line, 
RAW264.
7 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
12 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
        
         
 
 
 
Preclinical models have demonstrated the importance of saturation of SEMA4D in that loss 
of saturation on circulating T -cells correlates with the minimal drug concentration needed 
for efficacy.  
 
Through work at the University of Minnesota, SEMA4D expression has been extensively 
evaluated in osteosarcoma. The majority of human osteosarcoma cell lines tested express 
high amounts of SEMA4D transcript as evaluated by RT -qPCR ( Figure 3 ). In addition, 
SEMA4D expression was analyzed in human tumor  tissue  microarrays of synovial 
sarcoma, neuroblastoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. There was low level expression in  8/30 
neuroblastoma tumors, 2/50  synovial sarcoma tumors, and 1/104 rhabdomyosarcoma 
tumors, while SEMA4D was strongly expressed on immune infiltrate in these samples.  
 
A  B  
C  D  
Figure 2. Changes in immune function after treatment with infiltration and rSEMA4D.  
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
13 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
  
The effect of treatment with anti -SEMA4D (VX15/2503) on osteosarcoma growth, 
migration, and proliferation has been studied in three human osteosarcoma cell lines 
(143B, MG -63, and HOS), one Ewing sarcoma (RD -ES), and two murine osteosarcoma 
cell lines (K12, K7M2) with encouraging results. Treatment with increasing 
concentrations of anti -SEMA4D (VX15/2503) in 143B and MG -63 osteosarcoma cells 
reduces cellular migrat ion as compared to anti -CD20 isotype control antibody ( Figure 
4). Treatment of 143B and HOS cells with 5 microgram/mL and 1 microgram/mL of 
VX15/2503 respectively demonstrated statistically significant decreases in colony 
formati on as compared to control treatment. Similarly, treatment with 5 
micrograms/mL also reduced colony formation in a human Ewing sarcoma cell line 
RD-ES when compared to anti -CD20 isotype control antibody ( Figure 5 ). Finally, 
cellul ar proliferation was evaluated via the MTS proliferation assay in MG -63 and 143B 
osteosarcoma cell lines. Treatment of 5 micrograms/mL and 1 microgram/mL in MG -
63 and 143B cells significantly reduced cellular proliferation on day 3 and days 2 and 
3 post -plating, respectively ( Figure 6 ). Interestingly, exposure to soluble SEMA4D 
(CD100) markedly increased migration in three osteosarcoma cell lines ( Figure 7 ) (data 
courtesy of Dr. Branden Moriarity, Univer sity of Minnesota).  
 
Figure 3. RT-PCR analysis of 
SEMA4D transcript levels in 
osteosarcoma cell lines, PDXs, and 
immortalized osteoblasts.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
14 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               Figure 4.  Osteosarcoma cell migration assays  
                 Figure  5. Osteosarcoma colony formation assays  
            Figure 6.  Osteosarcoma proliferation (MTS) assay  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
15 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Downstream signaling mediators as well as a co -receptor of SEMA4D, MET, were 
probed in 143B (Figs. 8A & B) and HOS (Fig. 8C) osteosarcoma cell lines following 
30’ of treatment with either CD20 isotype control or VX15 /2503  anti-SEMA4D 
antibody. Treatment wi th VX15/2503  reduced total AKT, activated ERK as well as total 
MET levels in 143B cells 30’ post administration (A &B). Similarly, treatment with 
Figure 7. Osteosarcoma cell migration in response to soluble SEMA4D exposure  
 Figure 8.  Reduced expression of SEMA4D signaling pathway members following 
treatment with VX15.  
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
16 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
VX15 in HOS cells also reduced total MET levels ( C).  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Rho family GTPases such as RAC1 are thought to play a role in PLXNB receptor 
localization to the surface in the presence of ligand. Activated RAC1 expression was probed in 143B osteosarcoma cell lines over a 30’ time course. Treatment of 143B 
osteosarcoma cells with VX15, but not CD20 control reduced activated RAC1 levels 
(Figure 9
).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Treatment with a murine monoclonal antibody to Sema4D (MAb67- 2) was evaluated in 
a syngeneic murine model of osteosarcoma using K7M2 cells. Mice were injected with 
2.5x105 cells intra -calcaneally and treated with 1 mg/kg of MAb67 -2 (anti -sema4D) or 
isotype control intraperitoneally every 2 days for 30 days (Fig. 10A) or were injected with 1x10
6 and treated with 10 mg/kg of MAb67- 2 (anti -sema4D) or isotype control 
intraperit oneally weekly for 30 days (Fig. 10B). Treatment with MAb67- 2 resulted in 
reduced tumor growth beginning at post -implantation day 7 (PID 7) with continued 
effects observed at PID 30 when compared to control antibody (Figure 10A). Similarly, 
mice treated wi th 10 mg/kg experienced similar reductions in tumor growth (Figure 
A B Figure 9. Reduction in Rho family GTPase activation (RAC1) following VX15 
treatment.  
 
Figure 10. Treatment of osteosarcoma syngeneic mouse model with 
mAb67- 2, murine anti -sema4D  antibody  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
17 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
10B).  
 
 Animal Toxicology  
 
No significant toxicological findings have been observed in single dose, one 
month, and six month GLP toxicology studies in Sprague Dawley rats and 
Cynomolgus maca ques regardless of dose level.  The no observed adverse effect 
level (NOAEL) was 100 mg/kg to 200 mg/kg.  Immunophenotypic analysis of rat 
lymphocyte subsets performed prior to and at the end of the dosing regimen in the one-month study detected a statisti cally significant reduction in absolute and 
related NK  levels in all treated animals.
8 Due to lack of clinical signs or 
histopathologic changes in the animals, decreases in NK cell levels were not 
considered adverse.   In addition, a host -resistance study using rats challenged with 
flu virus after five weekly doses showed that antibody treatment was not 
immunosuppressive .   
13 
Additional studies exploring whether the absence of SEMA4 D alters the 
development of fetal mice  demonstrated functional defects in the ir immune 
system, without apparent abnormalities in other tissues.13  Furthermore, Vaccinex 
has bred CD100- deficient mice and has not noted any bony malformations.  
(personal communication from Vaccinex)  
 
 Preclinical Pharmacokinetic Studies  
 
Formal pharmacokinetic analyses have been conducted through both single and 
multiple dose studies in Sprague Dawley rats and Cynomolgus  macaques.  In 
general, longer half -lives were estimated for higher doses and the apparent volume 
of distribution estimat ed the serum volume for each species.  The half -life at 100 
mg/kg was about 10 days whereas that at 10 mg/kg was about 4 days.  AUC did 
not increase linearly with dose but rather increased more rapidly.8  
 
 Adult Studies  
 
 Phase 1 Studies  
 
A phase 1 trial of VX15/2503 in adults with advanced solid tumors demonstrated 
the antibody to be well tolerated as weekly infusions up to and including doses of 
20 mg/kg. All treatment related adverse events were Grade 1 or 2 with the 
exception of one Gra de 3 GGT elevation at 15 mg/kg in a patient with progressive 
disease who had elevated GGT levels at baseline. The most common treatment related adverse events were nausea and fatigue.   
 
In terms of anti -tumor response, the progression free survival (PFS) w as 7.82 
weeks (range: 0.57 to 54.8 weeks) . One patient with papillary thyroid cancer 
treated at the 20 mg/kg dose level achieved a partial response. Nineteen patients 
(45.2%) exhibited stable disease for ≥ 8 weeks, with the longest durations of stable 
disease observed for patients with colorectal (48 weeks) and breast cancer (55 
weeks).
14 
 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
18 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Phase 2 Studies  
 
Phase 2 studies of VX15/2503 in adults with malignancies are in development.  
 
 
 Pharmacology/Pharmacokinetics/Correlative and Biological Studies  
 
The most accurate pharmacokinetic studies to date integrate the results of the 
Vaccinex phase 1 oncology and multiple sclerosis (MS) studies. Pharmacokinetic 
studies in adult oncology were limited due to inability to collect samples over a 
prolonged period of time. However, more extensive data collection points were 
obtained in the MS study allowing for more accurate assessment of T1/2 and 
AUC0 -infinity. Based on data collected from the MS study, the half -life appears 
to increase with dose (t1/2, 20 days +/ - 5 for 20 mg/kg dose, 15 days +/ - 5 days for 
10 mg/kg/dose) and clearance appear s to decrease with dose (0.0201 L/hr +/ - 
0.0053 for 20 mg/kg dose). This may be explained by target -mediated drug 
disposition, which is commonly observed with monoclonal antibodies (MAbs).  
 
Saturation of human T -cells with cSEMA4D was analyzed in the adult phase 1 
study, with the threshold estimated to be approximately 0.3 microgram/mL. The extent of T lymphocyte associated SEMA4D saturation was dose independent, 
with weekly doses of VX15/2503 of 1 mg/kg or above producing complete, 
sustained cSEMA4D saturation. The time required for T -lymphocytes to become 
desaturated was dose dependent.  Cellular SEMA4D desaturation occurred with 
VX15/2503 clearance from the periphery .  The mean cSEMA4D saturation value 
at the end of infusion for all doses studie d was 88% ( range  68.5 to 98.7%). At the 
1 mg/kg dose level, cSEMA4D saturation fell to approximately 20% at roughly  30 
days post -infusion whereas full desaturation took greater than 155 days for the 20 
mg/kg dose level.  Cellular SEMA4D expression levels decreased approximately 50% following VX15/2503 binding to the cell surface receptor and its 
internalization, and re turned to baseline expression levels with antibody 
clearance.
11,14   
 
 Pediatric Studies  
 
 Prior Experience in Children  
There have been no pediatric trials of VX15/2503.  
 
 Pharmacology/Pharmacokinetics/Correlative Biological Studies  
There have been no pediatric trials of VX15/2503.  
 
 Overview of P roposed Pediatric Study  
 
This is a phase 1/2 study of VX15/2503 in pediatric patients. The goal of Part A is to 
determine whether the adult recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D) of 20 mg/kg is both 
tolerated and deemed to be an optimal biologic dose, defined by adequate and sustained T-lymphocyte saturation by VX15/2503 (≥ 80% saturation).  Part A will enroll patients 
with relapsed/refractory solid tumors, excluding brain tumors, with either measurable or 
evaluable disease. Using a rolling 6 design, patients on P art A will receive  20 mg/kg of 
VX15/2503 IV every 14 days  until disease progression or toxicity requires treatment 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
19 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
interruption. If this dose is found to be tolerable and T -lymphocyte saturation is adequate 
and sustained through dosing, this will be the RP 2D.  If this dose is tolerated but  T-
lymphocyte saturation is not adequate or sustained, the study will be suspended while 
further dose escalation is considered. If at any time the dose level is determined to be 
intolerable, T -lymphocyte saturation will be assessed and  if T-cell saturation  is adequate, 
the dose will be de- escalated .  Part B w ill open concurrent to Part A for  older patients 
with relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma.  Once Part A is complete, Part B will expand to 
enroll patients of all ages with relapsed or refractory osteosar coma and PK expansion 
cohort  will open to further evaluate the pharmacokinetics of VX15/2503 in children of all 
ages with relapsed or refractory solid tumors . 
Measurable disease is required for Part B. Patients will be enrolled in two stages. In the 
first stage, 19 disease control and RECIST response evaluable patients will be enrolled. 
Each patient will be evaluated for both (1) disease control success and (2) RECIST response (CR or PR versus not CR or PR). Stage 2 will open if there are 5 or more disease control successes or 2 or more RECIST responders. Stage 2 will enroll 10 
evaluable patients.  
   Dose Rationale :  In adult phase 1 studies, doses up to 20 mg/kg weekly were well 
tolerated, so we  will start the study at 20  mg/kg . Modeling from adult trials s uggest that 
lower doses, including 10 mg/kg, maintain saturation of SEMA4D on circulating T -cells 
throughout the dosing and follow -up periods, thus a lower dose may be biologically 
active.   Thus, if 20 mg/kg is deemed in tolerable  and T-lymphocyte saturation was 
adequate at 20 mg/kg , we will dose de -escalate to 10 mg/kg.  This is important in 
choosing the dose as pre -clinical studies demonstrate that loss of saturation of SEMA4D 
on T-cells correlates with the minimal drug concentration needed for efficacy. Th e dosing 
interval is chosen based on the half -life determined in the MS study of 15 days +/ - 5 days 
for the 10 mg/kg dose. Dosing on the half -life, or once every 2 weeks, should achieve a 
steady -state in 5 -6 doses. Although steady- state will not be achieved until dose 5 or 6, 
based on experience from Vaccinex, we anticipate T -cell saturation to occur after the first 
dose and be maintained throughout the dosing periods. If the half -life or T -cell saturation 
is determined to be different in children, we will adjust the dosing interval accordingly.
10 
 
At the time of Amendment #2A , the first 6 patients on Part A have completed the first 
cycle of treatment and no dose limiting toxicities were observed.  In addition, 5 of the 6 
patients had sufficient samples to be evaluable for T -cell saturation and all 5 patients had 
adequate and s ustained saturations with ≥  80% saturation at all time points evaluated  
after the first infusion.  Thus, the RP2D is 20 mg/kg IV every 14 days.  Given this, with Amendment #2A  we will open Part B to patients >  12 months and < 30 years of age  with 
relapsed and refractory osteosarcoma once the initial 6 adult patients complete t oxicity 
assessments per Section 11.6 , and we will open the PK expansion cohort to patients >  12 
months and <  21 years of age  with relapsed/refractory  solid tumors.  
 
   
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
20 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 SCREENING AND STUDY  ENROLLMENT PROCEDURE S 
 
Patient enrollment for this study will be facilitated using the Slot- Reservation System in 
conjunction with the Oncology Patient Enrollment Network ( OPEN ), a web -based registration 
system available on a 24/7 basis. It is integrated with the NCI Cancer Trials Support Unit (CTSU)  
Enterprise System for regulatory and roster data and, upon enrollment, initializes the patient 
position in the RAVE  database.   
Access requirements for OPEN :  
Investigators and site staff will need to be registered with CTEP and have a valid and active Cancer 
Therapy Evaluation Program -Identity and Access Management (CTEP -IAM ) account  (check at  
<https:/ /ctepcore.nci.nih.gov/iam/index.jsp >). This is the same account (user id and password) used 
for credentialing in the CTSU members' web site. To perform registrations in OPEN, the site user 
must have been assigned the 'Registrar' role on the relevant Group or CTSU roster. OPEN can be 
accessed at https://open.ctsu.org or from the OPEN tab on the CTSU members’ side of the website 
at https://www.ctsu.org.  
 Current Study Status  
Investigators should refer to the COG website to determine if the study is currently open 
for accrual.  If the study is listed as active, investigators should  then access the Studies 
Requiring Reservations page to ensure that a reservation for the study is available. To 
access the Studies Requiring Reservations page:  
1. Log in to https://open.ctsu.org/open/  
2.  Click the  Slot Reservation Tab.  The Site Patient page opens.  
3.  Click the  Report Tab. The Slot Reservation Report opens. Available Slots are 
detailed per study strata.  
 
 IRB Approval  
NCI Pediatric CIRB approval or local IRB  approval of this study must be obtained by a 
site prior to enrolling patients . Sites must submit CIRB/ IRB approvals to the NCI’s Cancer 
Trials Support Unit (CTSU) Regulatory Office and allow 3 business days  for processing. 
The CTSU IRB Certification Form may be submitted in lieu of the signed IRB approval 
letter. All CTSU forms can be located on the CTSU web page ( www.ctsu.org ). Any other 
regulatory documents needed for access to  the study enrollment screens will be listed for 
the study on the CTSU Member’s Website under the Regulatory  Tab. 
 
Sites participating on the NCI CIRB initiative and accepting CIRB approval for the study 
are not required to submit separate IRB approval documentation to the CTSU Regulatory 
Office for initial, continuing or amendment review. This information will be provided to 
the CTSU Regulatory Office from the CIRB at the time the site’s Signatory Institution 
accepts the CIRB approval. The Signatory sit e may be contacted by the CTSU Regulatory 
Office or asked to complete information verifying the participating institutions on the study.  
Submitting Regulatory Documents:  
 
Submit required forms and documents to the CTSU Regulatory Office via the Regulatory  
Submission Portal, where they will be entered and tracked in the CTSU RSS.  
 
Regulatory Submission Portal: www.ctsu.org
 (members’ area) → Regulatory Tab 
→ Regulatory Submission  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
21 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
When applicable, original documents should be mail ed to:  
CTSU Regulatory Office  
1818 Market Street, Suite 3000 
Philadelphia, PA 19103  
 Institutions with patients waiting that are unable to use the Portal should alert the CTSU 
Regulatory Office immediately at 1 -866-651-2878 in order to receive further instruction 
and support.  
For general (non- regulatory) questions , call the CTSU General Helpdesk at 1 -888-823-
5923 or contact CTSU by email at ctsucontact@westat.com . 
 Study centers can check the status of their registration packets by accessing the Site 
Registration Status page on the CTSU Member’s Website under the Regulatory Tab. (Note: 
Sites will not receive formal notification of regulatory approval from the CTSU Regulatory Office.)  
 
 Patient Registration  
Prior to enrollment on study, patients must be assigned a COG patient ID number. This 
number is obtained via the COG Registry  in the OPEN system  once authorization for the 
release of protected health information (PHI) has been obtained.  
 
 Reservation and Contact Requirements  
Before enrolling a patient on  study, a reservation must be made through the OPEN website  
and the Study Chair or Vice Chair should be notified. (The patient will need a COG patient 
ID number in order to obtain a reservation). Patients must be enrolled within 7 calendar 
days of making a  reservation.  
 
Reservations may be obtained 24 -hours a day through the OPEN website.  
 
 Informed Consent/Assent  
The investigational nature and objectives of the trial, the procedures and treatments 
involved and their attendant risks and discomforts, and potential alternative therapies will 
be carefully explained to the patient or the patient’s parents or guardian if the patient is a 
child, and a signed informed consent and assent will be obtained according to institutional 
guidelines.  
 
 Screening Procedures  
Diagnostic or laboratory studies performed exclusively to determine eligibility for this trial 
must only be done after obtaining written informed consent.  This can be accomplished 
through one of the following mechanisms: a) the COG screening protocol, b) an IRB -
approved institutional screening protocol or c) the study- specific protocol.  Documentation 
of the informed consent for screening will be maintained in the patient’s research chart. 
Studies or procedures that were performed for clinical indication s (not exclusively to 
determine eligibility) may be used for baseline values even if the studies were done before 
informed consent was obtained.  
 
 Eligibility Checklist  
Before the patient can be enrolled, the responsible institutional investigator must sign  and 
date the completed eligibility checklist.  A signed copy of the checklist will be uploaded 
into RAVE immediately following enrollment . 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
22 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Institutional Pathology Report  
Immediately following enrollment, the institutional pathology report for the diagnos is 
under which the patient is being enrolled must be uploaded into RAVE . The report must 
include the associated study number and COG patient registration and accession numbers. 
Personal identifiers, including the patient’s name and initials must be removed  from the 
institutional pathology report prior to submission.  
 
 Study Enrollment  
Patients may be enrolled on the study once all eligibility requirements for the study have been met. Patients who give informed consent for the protocol in order to undergo 
screening for eligibility are not considered enrolled and should not be enrolled until the 
screening is completed and they are determined to meet all eligibility criteria. Study 
enrollment is accomplished by going to the CTSU OPEN (Oncology Patient Enrollment  
Network) https://open.ctsu.org/open/
. For questions, please contact the  COG Study 
Research Coordinator, or the  CTSU OPEN helpdesk at 
https://www.ctsu.org/CTSUC ontact.aspx.  Patients must be enrolled before treatment 
begins.  The date protocol therapy is projected to start must be no later than five ( 5) calendar 
days after the date of study enrollment.  Patients must not receive any protocol therapy 
prior to enrollment.  
 
 Dose Assignment  
The dose level will be assigned via OPEN at the time of study enrollment.  
 
 
 PATIENT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
All clinical and laboratory studies to determine eligibility must be performed within 7 days prior to 
enrollment unless otherwise indicated.  Laboratory values used to assess eligibility must be no older 
than seven (7) days at the start of therapy.  Laboratory tests need not  be repeated if therapy starts 
within  seven (7) days of obtaining labs to assess eligibility .  If a post -enrollment lab val ue is outside 
the limits of eligibility, or laboratory values are older  than 7 days, then the following laboratory 
evaluations must be re- checked within 48 hours prior to initiating therapy: CBC with differential, 
bilirubin, ALT (SGPT) and serum  creatinine .  If the recheck is outside the limits of eligibility, the 
patient may not receive protocol therapy and will be considered off protocol therapy. Imaging 
studies, bone marrow biopsy  and/or aspirate must be obtained within 14 days  prior to start of 
protocol  therapy (repeat the tumor imaging  if necessary).   
 
 
Clarification in timing when counting days : As an example, please note that if the patient’s last day 
of prior therapy is September 1st, and the protocol requires waiting at least  7 days for that type of 
prior therapy, then that patient cannot be enrolled until September 8th.   
 
Important note : The eligibility criteria listed below are interpreted literally and cannot be 
waived (per COG policy posted 5/11/01).  All clinical and lab oratory data required for 
determining eligibility of a patient enrolled on this trial must be available in the patient’s 
medical or research record which will serve as the source document for verification at the time of audit.  
  
 
 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
23 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Inclusion Criteria  
 
 Age:   
• Part A:  Patients must be ≥  12 months and ≤ 21 years of age at the time of study 
enrollment.  
• Part B:  Patients must be ≥  22 years  and ≤ 30 years of age at the time of study 
enrollment until part A is complete.  Part B will expand to include patients ≥  
12 months and ≤  30 years of age once Part A is complete and once the initial 
6 adult patients complete toxicity assessments per Section 11.6 . 
 
 Diagnosis :  
• Part A: Patients with re current  or refractory solid tumors are el igible , 
excluding CNS tumors . Patients must have had histologic verification of 
malignancy at original diagnosis or  relapse.  
• Part B:  Patients with recurrent or refractory osteosarcoma are eligible. Patients 
must have had histologic verification of malignancy at original diagnosis or  
relapse.  
 
 Disease Status:  
• Part A: Patients must have either measurable or evaluable disease (see Sections 
12.2 and 12.3 for definitions).  
• Part B:  Patients must have measurable disease (see Section 12.2 for 
definition).  
 
 Therapeutic Options : Patient’s current disease state must be one for which there 
is no known cu rative therapy or therapy proven to prolong survival with an 
acceptable quality of life.  
  
 Performance Level :  Karnofsky ≥  50% for patients > 16 years of age and Lansky 
≥ 50 for patients ≤  16 years of age (See Appendix I ).  Patients who are unable to 
walk because of paralysis, but who are up in a wheelchair, will be considered 
ambulatory for the purpose of assessing the performance score.  
 
 Prior Therapy  
 4.1.6.1  Patients must have fully recovered from the acute toxic effects of all prior 
anti-cancer therapy and must meet the following minimum duration from 
prior anti -cancer directed therapy prior to enrollment. If after the required 
timeframe, the numerical eligib ility criteria are met, e.g. blood count 
criteria, the patient is considered to have recovered adequately.  
 
a. Cytotoxic chemotherapy or other anti -cancer agents  known to be 
myelosuppressive . See DVL homepage for commercial and Phase 1 
investigational agent c lassifications.  For agents not listed, t he duration 
of this interval must be discussed with the study chair  and the study -
assigned Research Coordinator prior to enrollment . 
 
≥ 21 days after the last dose of cytotoxic or myelosuppressive 
chemotherapy (42 da ys if prior nitrosourea).   
  
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
24 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
   
b. Anti-cancer agents  not known to be myelosuppressive (e.g. not 
associated with reduced platelet or ANC counts) : ≥ 7 days after the 
last dose of agent. See DVL homepage for commercial and Phase 1 
investigational agent classifications . For agents not listed, t he duration 
of this interval must be discussed with the study chair  and the study -
assigned Research Coordinator prior to enrollment .  
 
c. Antibodies : ≥ 21 days must have elapsed from infusion of last dose of 
antibody, and toxicity related to prior antibody therapy must be 
recovered to Grade ≤ 1.  
 
d. Corticosteroids : See Section 4.2.2 . If used to modify immune adverse 
events related to prior therapy , ≥ 14 days must have elapsed since last 
dose of corticosteroid.  
 
e. Hematopoietic growth factors : ≥ 14 days after the last dose of a long-
acting growth factor (e.g. pegfilfrastim ) or 7 days for short -acting 
growth factor. For agents that have known adverse events occurring 
beyond 7 days after administration, this period must be extended 
beyond the time during which adverse events are known to occur.  The 
duration of this interval must be discussed with the study chair  and the 
study -assigned Research Coordinator.  
 
f. Interleukins, Interferons and Cytokines (other than Hematopoetic 
Growth Factors) : ≥ 21  days after the completion of interleukins, 
interferon or cytokines (other than Hematopoetic Growth Factors )  
 
g. Stem cell Infusions (with or without TBI) : 
• Allogeneic (non- autologous) bone marrow or stem cell transplant, 
or any stem cell infusion including DLI or boost infusion : ≥ 84 
days after infusion and no evidence of GVHD . 
 
• Autologous stem cell infusion including boost infusion:  ≥ 42 
days. 
 
h. Cellular Therapy : ≥ 42 days after the completion of any type of 
cellular  therapy (e.g. modified T cells, NK cells, dendritic cells, etc. ) 
 
i. XRT/External Beam Irradiation including Protons : ≥ 14 days after 
local XRT; ≥ 150 days after TBI, craniospinal XRT or if radiation to 
≥ 50% of the pelvis; ≥ 42 days if other substantial BM radiation.  
 
j. Radiopharmaceutical therapy  (e.g., radiolabeled antibody, 131I -
MIBG ): ≥ 42 days  after systemically administered 
radiopharmaceutical therapy.  
 
k. Patients must not have received prior exposure to VX15/2503  
 
 
  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
25 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Organ Function Requirements  
 
 Adequate Bone Marrow Function Defined as:  
 
a. For patients with solid tumors  without  known bone marrow 
involvement:  
- Peripheral absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥  1000/mm3 
- Platelet count ≥  100,000/ mm3 (transfusion independent, defined 
as not receiving platelet transfusions for at least 7 days  prior to 
enrollment ) 
- Hemoglobin ≥  8.0 g/dL at baseline (may receive RBC 
transfusions)  
 
b. Patients with known bone marrow metastatic disease will be 
eligible for study provided they meet the blood counts in 4.1.7.1.a 
(may receive transfusions provided they are not known to be 
refractory to r ed cell or platelet transfusions ). These  patients will 
not be evaluable for hematologic toxicity . At least 5 of every 
cohort of 6 patients must be evaluable for hematologic toxicity  for 
the dose -confirmation part of the study . If dose -limiting 
hematologic toxicity is observed, all subsequent patients enrolled 
must be evaluable for hematologic toxicity.  
 
 
 Adequate Renal Function Defined as:  
 
- Creatinine clearance or radioisotope GFR ≥  70ml/min/1.73 m2 or 
- A serum creatinine based on age/gender as follows:  
 
Age 
 Maximum Serum  
Creatinine (mg/dL)  
 Male  Female  
1 to < 2 years  0.6 0.6 
2 to < 6 years  0.8 0.8 
6 to < 10 years  1 1 
10 to < 13 years  1.2 1.2 
13 to < 16 years  1.5 1.4 
≥ 16 years  1.7 1.4 
The threshold creatinine values in this Table were derived from the Schwartz 
formula for estimating GFR  (Schwartz et al. J. Peds, 106:522, 1985)  utilizing 
child length and stature data published by the CDC.  
 
 Adequate Liver Function Defined as : 
 
- Bilirubin (sum of conjugated + unconjugated)  ≤ 1.5 x upper limit of 
normal (ULN) for age  
- (ALT)  (SPGT)  ≤  135 U/L.   For the purpose of this study, the ULN 
for ALT  is 45 U/L.  
- Serum albumin ≥  2 g/dL.  
.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
26 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Adequate Pulmonary Function Defined as : 
 
a. No clinical indications such as evidence of dyspnea at rest , or 
exercise intolerance due to pulmonary insufficiency. 
b. If clinical indications, pulse oximetry >94% on room air.  
 
 
 Informed Consent : All patients and/or their parents or legally authorized 
representatives must sign a written informed consent. Assent, w hen appropriate, 
will be obtained according to institutional guidelines.  
 
 Tissue blocks or slides must be sent per Section 8.7 . If tissue blocks or slides are 
unavailable, the study chair must be notified prior to enrollment. 
 
 Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Pregnancy or Breast - Feeding 
Pregnant or breast -feeding women will not be entered on this study. Pregnancy 
tests must be obtained in girls who are post -menarchal. Males or females of 
reproductive potential may not participate  unless they have agreed to use two 
effective methods of birth control, including a medically accepted barrier or 
contraceptive method (e.g., male or female condom) for the duration of the study. 
Abstinence is an acceptable method of birth control.  
 
 Concom itant Medications  
 
a) Corticosteroids :  Patients receiving systemic corticosteroids who have not 
been on a stable or decreasing dose of corticosteroid for at least  7 days prior to 
enrollment are not eligible.  If used to modify immune adverse events related to  
prior therapy , ≥ 14 days must have elapsed since last dose of  systemic  
corticosteroid  (See Section 4.1.6.1.d ). Note: patients who are using topical or 
inhaled corticosteroids are eligible.  
 
b) Investigational Drugs :  Patien ts who are currently receiving another 
investigational drug are not eligible.  
 
c) Anti-cancer Agents:  Patients who are currently receiving other anti -cancer 
agents are not eligible [except leukemia patients receiving hydroxyurea, which may be continued until  24 hours prior to start of protocol therapy].  
 
d) Anti-GVHD agents post -transplant :  
Patients who are receiving cyclosporine, tacrolimus or other agents to prevent graft -versus- host disease post bone marrow transplant are not eligible for this trial.  
 
 Infection :  Patients who have an uncontrolled infection are not eligible.  
 
 Patients who have received a prior solid organ transplantation are not eligible.  
 
 Patients who in the opinion of the investigator may not be able to comply with the safety monitoring requirements of the study are not eligible.  
  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
27 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 TREATMENT PROGRAM  
 
 Overview  of Treatment Plan  
 
Day 1  Day 15  Day 28  
VX15/2503 IV  VX15/2503 IV End of Cycle/Evaluation  
 
VX15/2503 will be administered  intravenously over 60 minutes on Days 1 and 15 of a 28 
day cycle. Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of infusion reactions 
during the drug infusion and for 4 hours after completion of post -infusion flush (e.g., 
monitor vital signs every 15 minutes during VX15/2503 infusion and every 30 minutes 
thereafter) . Precautions for anaphylaxis should be observed during VX15/2503 
administration. Emergency resuscitation equipment and medications should be present for immediate use in the immediate area where patients are receiving their infusions. If a 
patient develops a ≥ Grade 2 infusion related  reaction , the infusion should be stopped and 
standard institutional guidelines for management of infusion reactions should be followed. Note: If the initial dose is well tole rated subsequent doses will required patients 
to be monitored for 1 hour after completion of post -infusion flush.  
See Section 6.2.3
 for management and dose modification guidelines for infusion related  
reactions . If there is no evidence of an infusion related reaction during the initial 2 
infusions of VX15/2503, the n no observation period is required for subsequent treatment 
cycles. In the event an infusion related reaction occurs thereafter, the four -hour 
observ ation period should be reinstituted.   
A cycle of therapy is considered to be  28 days. A cycle may be repeated for a total of 13  
cycles, up to a total duration of therapy of approximately 12 months. As some of the 
correlatives require same- day shipping (se e Section  8.5), caution should be paid to the day 
of the week therapy should start and drug infusion should occu r so that correlative samples 
are able to be sent out for analysis without delay.  
 
Drug doses should be adjusted based on weight measured  within 7 days  prior to  the 
beginning of each cycle.   
 
Update: With the release of Amendment #2 A, the dose confirmatio n portion of 
the study is complete. Given this, Part B will be open to patients >  12 months and 
< 30 years of age with relapsed and refractory osteosarcoma once the initial 6 adult 
patients complete toxicity assessments per Section 11.6 .  
 
 Criteria for Starting Subsequent Cycles  
A cyc le may be repeated every 28 days if the patient has at least stable disease and has 
again met laboratory parameters as defined in the eligibility section, Section 4.0 , and is 
eligible to continue agent administration per the requirements in Section 6.0 .  
 
 Dose Confirmation  Schema  (Completed)  
 
 Inter -Patient Escalation  
The starting dose will be 20 mg/kg  (dose level 1)  
 
 
Dose Level  Dose (m g/kg) 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
28 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
-1 10 
1* 20 
* Starting Dose Level  
 
If the MTD has been exceeded at the first dose level, then the subsequent cohort 
of patients will be treated at a dose of 10 mg/kg (dose level - 1). If dose level - 1 is 
not well tolerated, further de -escalation will not occur. The study will be closed to 
accrual.  
 
 Update:  The RP2D was determined to be 20 mg/kg.  
 
 Intra -Patient Escalation  
Intra -patient dose escalation is not allowed.  
 
 PK Expansion Cohort and Part B  
VX15/2503 will be administered intravenously over 60 minutes on Days 1 and 15 of a 28 
day cycle at the RP2D of 20 mg/kg.  
 
 Grading of Adverse Events  
Adverse events (toxicities) will be graded according to the NCI Common Termi nology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0.  All appropriate treatment areas should 
have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 5.0.  A copy of the CTCAE version 5 .0 can 
be downloaded from the CTEP website (http://ctep.cancer.gov /protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm
). Any 
suspected or confirmed dose -limiting toxicity should be reported imme diately (within 24 
hours) to the Study Chair.  
 
 
 Definition of Dose -Limiting Toxicity (DLT)  
DLT will be defined as any of the following events that are possibly, probably or definitely attributable to  protocol therapy .  The DLT  observation period for the purposes of dose -
confirmation  will be the first cy cle of therapy.  
 
Dose limiting hematological and non- hematological toxicities are defined differently.   
 
 Non-hematological dose -limiting toxicity  
a) Any Grade 3 or greater  non-hematological toxicity attributable to protocol 
therapy  with the specific exclusio n of: 
 
• Grade 3 nausea and vomiting < 3 days duration  
• Grade 3 liver enzyme  elevation , including ALT,that returns to Grade ≤ 1 
or baseline prior to the time for the next treatment cycle. See Appendix I II 
for values that represent thresholds between CTCAE grades. Note:  For 
the purposes of this study the ULN for ALT is defined as 45 U/L.  
• Grade 3 fever  
• Grade 3 infection  
• Grade 3 hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia or 
hypomagnesemia responsive to supplementation.  
 
b) Non-hematological toxicity that causes a delay of ≥ 14 days between treatment 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
29 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
cycles.  
 
c) Note: Allergic reactions that necessitate discontinuation of study drug will not 
be considered a dose- limiting toxicity.  
 
 Hematological dose limiting toxicity  
a) In patients evaluable for hematological toxicity (see section 4.1.7.1 ), 
hematological dose limiting toxicity is defined as:  
• Day 15:  
o Grade 4 neutropenia or Grade 3 thrombocytopenia (platelets < 
50,000/mm3 ) that does not resolve to ANC ≥ 500/mm3 and platelets 
≥ 50,000/mm3 (transfusion independent) by Day 18 will be considered 
dose-limiting ( See Section 6.2.1 ). 
• Platelet count < 25,000/mm3 on 2 separate days, or requiring a platelet 
transfusion on 2 separate days, within a 7 day period   
• Myelosuppression that causes a delay of > 14 days between treatment 
cycles.  
 
b) Note:  Grade 3 or 4 febrile neutropenia will not be considered a dose- limiting  
toxicity.  
 
 
 DOSE MODIFICATIONS F OR ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
The Study Chair must be notified of any dosage modification or use of myeloid growth 
factor.  
 Dose Modification for Day 1 Dosing  
 
 Dose Modifications for Hematologic Toxicity  
 
 Patients who have dose -limiting thrombocytopenia should receive 
subsequent cycles at the next lower dose level.  
 
 Patients who have dose -limiting neutropenia with no other dose -limiting 
toxicity should receive the same dose in the next cycle with myeloid 
growth factor support or receive study drug at the next lower dose level.  
[Note: Patients MUST NOT receive prophylactic myeloid growth factor 
in the first cycle of therapy (See Section 7.4).] If dose -limiting neutropenia 
recurs after myeloid growth factor is added, then the patient should be 
given the next lower dose level for subsequent cycles. If dose- limiting 
neutropenia recurs in a patient that has received a dose level reduction but 
has not received myeloid growth fac tor, then myeloid growth factor should 
be administered . If, per the treating physician, addition of myeloid growth 
factor is not in the best interest of the patient, the patient should be 
removed from protocol therapy. In the case where myeloid growth fact or 
is used, it should be initiated 24 hours after the dose.  If the day 15 dose is 
delayed to allow for recovery, the myeloid growth factor should not be given until 24 hours after the day 15 dose is given. If the day 15 dose is 
omitted, myeloid growth fac tor can be given at the time the  decision is 
made to omit the dose .  
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
30 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Patients who experience dose- limiting thrombocytopenia after one  dose 
reduction or dose -limiting neutropenia after addition of myeloid growth 
factor and one dose reduction must be remove d from protocol therapy.  
 
 Patients who have a dose- limiting hematological toxicity that does not 
resolve to eligibility parameters within 21 days after the planned start of 
the next treatment cycle must be removed from protocol therapy.  
 
 Dose Modifications  for Non -Hematological Toxicity  
 
 Patients who have any dose- limiting non -hematological toxicity (as 
defined in Section 5.5.1) may continue on protocol therapy upon meeting 
eligibility lab requirements  or baseline but should receive subsequent 
doses at the next lower dose level.  
 
 If the patient experiences  non-hematological dose -limiting toxicity after 
one dose reduction, the patient must be removed from protocol therapy. 
 
 Patients who have a dose- limiting non- hematological toxicity that does not 
resolve to baseline or eligibility  (whichever is higher)  within 21 days after 
the planned start of the next treatment cycle must be removed from 
protocol therapy. 
 
 
 Dose Modifications for Day 15 Dosing due to Toxicity on Day 15.  
 
 Dose Modifications for Hematological Toxicity: 
 
 Patients who have Grade 4 neutropenia or Grade 3 thrombocytopenia 
(platelets < 50,000/mm3) on Day 15 will have their dose withheld. If the 
toxicity resolves to ANC ≥ 500/mm3 and platelets ≥ 50,000/mm3 (transfusion independent) by Day 18, the dose may be given. Platelets 
cannot be given to achieve a platelet count >50,000/mm3 to receive the 
day 15 dose. If the toxicity does not resolve to ANC ≥ 500/mm3 and 
platelets ≥ 50,000/mm3 by Day 18, the dose will be omitted and this will 
be considered a DLT.  Patients who require that their Day 15 dose be 
omitted for Grade 4 neutropenia or Grade 3 platelets (< 50,000/mm3) after a dose reduction for any reason  must be removed from protocol therapy.  
  Patients who meet hematological DLT criteria as defined in Section 5.5.2  
on Day 15 will have their Day 15 dose omitted. Patients should receive 
subsequent cycles of drug per Section 6.2  after their toxicity resolves, no 
sooner than the planned start of the subsequent cycle. Patients who require that their Day 15 dose be omitted for hematologic DLT as defined in 
Section 5. 5.1 after one dose reduction must be removed from protocol 
therapy. 
 
 Dose Modifications for Non-Hematologic Toxicity :  
 
  Patients who have Grade 3 or Grade 4 non -hematological toxicity 
attributable to the study drug prior to the Day 15 dose (with the exception 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
31 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
of the D LT exclusions in Section 5.5.1 ) will be considered to have had a 
DLT. If the toxicity resolves to meet eligibility or ≤ Grade 2 (if not part of 
eligibility criteria) by Day 15, the dose may be given but at the next lower 
dose level.  
 
  Patients who have Grade 3 or Grade 4 non -hematological toxicity 
attributable to the study drug on Day 15 prior to dosing (with the exception 
of the D LT exclu sions in Section 5.5.2 ) will have their dose withheld and 
this will be considered a DLT. If the toxicity resolves to meet eligibility or ≤ Grade 2 (if not part of eligibility criteria) by Day 18, the dose may  be 
given but at the next lower dose level. If the toxicity does not resolve by Day 18, the dose will be omitted. Patients should receive subsequent cycles of drug but with dose modifi cations according to 
Sectio n 6.2 . 
 
6.2.2.3  If the patient experiences non -hematological dose -limiting toxicity after 
 one dose reduction, the patient must be removed from protocol therapy.  
 
 
 Dose Modifications for Infusion- Related Reactions:  
 
For patients who have allergic or acute infusion reactions to VX15/2503 , therapy  
modifications based on grade should be as follows  
                                         
Grade (CTCAE v. 5) 
Infusion Related 
Reaction  Action  
Grade 1  
Transient flushing 
or rash, drug fever 
< 38° C  
 • Monitor patient until recovery from symptoms; infusion rate 
may be slowed.  
• If the infusion is interrupted, then restart the infusion at 50% 
of the original infusion rate when symptoms resolve. Monitor 
patient closely.  
 
The followi ng prophylactic premedications are recommended: 
diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg with max 50 mg (or equivalent) and/or 
acetaminophen 10- 15 mg/kg (max 1000 mg) at least 30 minutes 
before additional VX15/2503 administrations, slowing infusion 
rate as above.  Note: Pro phylactic premedications should be 
administered upon restart of infusion, when symptoms resolve.   
Grade 2  
Rash, flushing, 
urticaria, dyspnea, 
drug fever ≥ 38°C  • Stop infusion , begin an IV infusion of normal saline, and 
treat the subject with diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg with max 50 
mg IV (or equivalent) and/or acetaminophen  10-15 mg/kg 
(max 1000 mg ); remain at bedside and monitor patient until 
resolution of symptoms. Corticosteroid or bronchodilator 
therapy may also be admini stered as appropriate.  
• If the infusion is interrupted, then restart the infusion at 50% 
of the original infusion rate when symptoms resolve. Monitor 
patient closely.  
•  If symptoms recur, then no further VX15/2503 will be 
administered at that visit. Administer diphenhydramine 1 
mg/kg with max 50 mg IV (or equivalent), and remain at 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
32 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
bedside and monitor the patient until resolution of symptoms.  
 
The following prophylactic premedications are recommended: 
diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg with max 50 mg IV (or equivalent)  
and acetaminophen (10- 15 mg/kg, max 1000 mg) should be 
administered at least 30 minutes before additional VX15/2503 
administrations. If clinically indicated, corticosteroids (recommended dose: 1- 2 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone IV  or 
equivalent) may be used . 
Grade 3 or 4  
Symptomatic 
bronchospasm with 
or without urticaria, 
allergy -related 
edema/angioedema, 
hypotension; 
Anaphylaxis  • Immediately discontinue infusion of VX15/2503 .  
• Begin an IV infusion of normal saline, and treat the subject as follows. Recommend bronchodilators, epinephrine 0.2 to 1 mg 
of a 1 mg/ml  
solution for subcutaneous administration, 0.1 to 
0.25 mg of a 0.1 mg/ml  solution injected slowly for IV 
administration , 0.01 mg/kg of 1:1000 dilution (0.01 
ml/kg/dose) for intramuscular administration,  and/or 
diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg with max 50 mg IV with 1- 2 
mg/kg/day methylprednisolone IV (or equivalent), as needed.  
• Patient should be monitored until the investigator is 
comfortable that the symptoms will not recur.  
• VX15/2503 will be permanently discontinued.  
 
Investigators should follow their institutional guidelines for the treatment of anaphylaxis. Remain at bedside and monitor patient 
until recovery from symptoms. In the case of late- occurring 
hypersensitivity symptoms ( e.g., appearance of a localized or 
generalized pruritis within 1 week after treatment), symptomatic 
treatment may be given ( e.g., oral antihistamine, or 
corticosteroids).  
 
 
 
 
 SUPPORTIVE CARE AND OTHER CONCOMITANT  THERAPY 
 
 Concurrent Anticancer Therapy  
Concurrent cancer therapy, including chemotherapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, or biologic therapy may NOT be administered to patients receiving study drug. If these 
treatments are administered the patient will be removed from protocol therapy.  
 
 Investigational Agents  
No other investigational agents may be given while the patient is on study.  
 
 Supportive Care  
Appropriate antibiotics, blood products, antiemetics, fluids, electrolytes and general suppo rtive care are to be used as necessary . See COG Supportive Care Endorsed Guidelines 
at https://childrensoncologygroup.org/index.php/cog- supportive -care- endorsed -guidelines
 
for more information.  
 
 Growth Factors  
Growth factors that support platelet or white cell number or function can only be 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
33 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
administered in accordance with S ection 6.1.1.2  or for culture proven bacteremia or 
invasive fungal infection. The Study Chair should be notified before growth factors are 
initiated.  
 
 
 EVALUATIONS/MATERIAL  AND DATA TO BE ACCES SIONED 
 
 Required Clinical, Laboratory and Disease Evaluation  
All clinical and  laboratory studies to determine eligibility must be performed within 7 days 
prior to enrollment unless otherwise indicated. Laboratory values used to assess eligibility 
(see Section 4.0 ) must be no older than seven (7) days a t the start of therapy.  Laboratory 
tests need not  be repeated if therapy starts within  seven (7) days of obtaining labs to assess 
eligibility.  If a post- enrollment lab value is outside the limits of eligibility, or laboratory  
values are older  than 7 days , then the following laboratory evaluations must be re -checked 
within 48 hours prior to initiating therapy: CBC with differential, bilirubin, ALT (SGPT) and serum  creatinine.  If the recheck is outside the limits of eligibility, the patient may not 
receiv e protocol therapy and will be considered off protocol therapy. Imaging studies , bone 
marrow aspirate and/or biopsy,  must be obtained within 14 days  prior to start of protocol 
therapy  (repeat the tumor imaging if necessary). 
 
STUDIES TO BE OBTAINED  Pre-
Study  During Cycle 1  Prior to 
Subsequent 
Cycles^  
History  X Weekly  X 
Physical Exam with vital signs12 X Weekly  X 
Height, weight, BSA  X  X 
Performance Status  X   
CBC, differential, platelets  X Twice Weekly 
(every 3 to 4 days)3 Every 
subsequent 
cycle on D 14 
and D 154 
Pharmacokinetics1 X X X 
Urinalysis  X   
Electrolytes including Ca++, PO 4, Mg++ X Weekly  X 
Creatinine, ALT, bilirubin  X Weekly  X 
Albumin  X  X 
Tumor Disease Evaluation  X End of Cycle 1  Every other 
cycle x 2 
then q 3 
cycles 5 
Tumor Disease Evaluation - Part B 
Phase 2  X  After cycles 
2,4 and 6 and 
then q 3 
cycles 5 
Bone Marrow Evaluation7 X End of Cycle 18 Every other 
cycle x 2 
then q 3 
cycles 8 
Pregnancy Test2 X With tumor 
disease With tumor 
disease 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
34 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
evaluation2 evaluation 2 
Oxygen Saturation6  X   
Immunogenicity Study  X X9 X9 
T Lymphocyte Saturation  X X10 X10 
Total Soluble SEMA4D  X X11 X11 
Tumor Tissue  X13 X14 X14 
^  Studies may be obtained within 72 hours prior to the start of the subsequent cycle.  
1 See Section 8. 3 for timing of PK studies.  
2 Women of childbearing potential require a negative pregnancy test prior to starting treatment; 
sexually active patients must use an acceptable method of birth control  for the duration of t he 
study .  Abstinence is an acceptable method of birth control.  Pregnancy testing is required prior 
to tumor imaging per  institutional guidelines . 
3 If patients have Grade 4 neutropenia then CBCs should be checked at least every other day until 
recovery to G rade 3 or until meeting the criteria for dose limiting toxicity.  
4 If patients develop G rade 4 neutropenia then CBCs should be checked every 3 to 4 days until 
recovery to G rade 3  
5 Tumor Disease Evaluation should be obtained on the next consec utive cycle  after initial 
documentation of either a PR or CR.  Subsequent scans may restart 2 cycles after the 
confirmatory scan. Please note that for solid tumor patients, if the institutional investigator 
determines that the patient has progressed based on clinical or laboratory evidence, he/she may 
opt not to confirm this finding radiographically . 
6 Only if there is clinical indication of inadequate pulmonary function. See Section 4.1.7.4 . 
7 Patients with k nown bone marrow disease should have baseline bone marrow evaluation  
8 If bone marrow evaluation pre -study is positive for metastatic disease  
9 Immunogenicity Study  see section 8 .4 for timing of Immunogenicity  studies  
10 T Lymphocyte Saturation see section 8 .5 for timing of T Lymphocyte Saturation studies  
11 Total Soluble SEMA4D Solubility Assay  see section 8 .6 for timing of SEMA4D solubility 
studies . 
12     Monitor  vital signs every 15 minutes during VX15/2503 infusion and every 30 minutes 
thereafter  for 4 hours .  
13     Tumor tissue should be obtained if available. If a patient does not have tissue available, the 
study chair must be notified prior to enrollment. Se e Section 8.7 . 
14     In the event a subject requires a biopsy for surgery and tumor tissue is removed, tumor tissue 
will be requested for analysis. Tumor biopsies will not be performed solely for research purposes. See Section 8.7
. 
 
 
 Radiology Studies  
 
 Central Radiology Review for Response:  Patients who respond (CR, PR) to 
therapy or have long term stable disease (SD) (≥ 6 cycles) on protocol therapy 
will be centrally reviewed. COG Operation s Center will notify the Imaging 
Center of any patient requiring central review.  The Imaging Center will  then 
request  that the treating institution  forward  the requested images for central 
review. The central image evaluation results will be entered into R AVE for 
review by the COG Operations Center  and for data analysis.  
 
The images are to be forwarded electronically to the Imaging Research Center at 
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles via the ImageInBox .   
 
COG institutions that are not connected via the ImageInBox  can send the images 
on CD ROM  or USB flash drive . Submitted imaging studies should be clearly 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
35 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
marked with the COG patient ID, study number ( ADVL1614) and date and shipped 
to  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pharmacology (Required)  
 
 Description of Studies and Assay  
Pharmacokinetics (PK) will be performed to determine the PK of VX15/2503 in 
children. Serum will be collected and VX15/2503 concentration will be determined 
by a qualified ELISA assay . Samples will be analyzed by Covance Laboratories. 
 
 Sampling Schedule (S ee Appendix IV  and Appendix IX ) 
 
a. For patients ≤ 10kg, blood samples will be obtained prior to drug 
administration and at the following time points:  
-     Cycle 1 , Day 1: prior to start of infusion  [3.5 ml], at the end of infusion  
[2.5 ml], and 2 hours following the end of infusion [2.5 ml]  
          -  Cycle 1, Day 15: prior to start of infusion  [2.5 ml] 
          -     Cycle 2, Day 1: prior to start of infusion [3.5 ml]  
          -     Cycle 2, Day 15: prior to start of infusion [2.5 ml]  
          -       Each subsequent cycle, Day 1: These samples are collected in conjunction 
    with the immunogenicity study samples for patients ≤  10kg. No extra  
    blood draws or sample tubes for PK are required  for these time points . See 
    Section 8.4.2  for timing  and blood volume.  
 
b. For patients > 10kg, blood samples will be obtained prior to drug 
administration  and at the following time points . Blood sample volumes are 2.5 
ml unless otherwise indicated :  
- Cycle 1, Day 1: prior to start of infusion , at the end of infusion, and 2 
hours following the end of infusion.  
 Note:  The PK samples collected prior to infusion and at 
the end of infusion are collected in conjunction with the 
immunogenicity study samples for patients > 10kg on 
Cycle 1 Day 1. No extra blood draws or sample tubes for 
PK are required  for these time points. See Section 8.4.2  
for timing  and blood volume.  
- Cycle 1, Days 4 (±1), 8 (±1)  
- Cycle 1, Day 15: prior to start of infusion and at the end of infusion. 
- Cycle 2, Day 1: prior to start of infusion , at the end of infusion, and 2 
hours following the end of infusion.  
 Note:  The PK sample collected prior to start of infusion 
is collected in conjunction with the immunogenicity study sample for patient s > 10kg on Cycle 2 Day 1. No 

                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
36 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
extra blood draws or sample tubes for  PK are required 
for this time point . See Section 8.4.2  for timing  and 
blood volume .  
- Cycle 2, Day 15: prior to start of  infusion. 
- Each subsequent cycle, Day 1: These samples are collected in 
conjunction with the immunogenicity study samples for patients > 10kg. 
No extra blood draws  or sample tubes for PK are required for these time 
points. See Section 8.4.2  for timing  and blood volume .  
 
 Sample Collection and Handling Instructions  
Please refer to the lab manual.  Briefly, b lood samples will be colle cted in SST 
tubes at a site distant from the infusion for pharmacokinetic evaluation. Please note 
above which samples are 2.5 ml and which samples are 3.5 ml. For blood samples 
that are to be used for both pharmacokinetic analysis and immunogenicity analysis, 
3.5 ml of blood will be drawn total for both analyses. See Section 8.4.2 and Section 
8.4.3  for details. Samples cannot be drawn from the 2nd lumen of a multi -lumen 
catheter through which drug is being administered. Record the exact time that the 
sample is drawn along with the exact time that the drug is administered .  Please 
include the infusion start and stop times. 
 
 Sample Processing  
Refer to lab manual  for sample processing details.  
 
 Sample Labeling  
Each tube must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number, the study I.D., and the date and time the sample was drawn.  Data should be recorded on the 
Pharmacokinetic Study Form  (see Appendix IV  and Appendix IX
), which must 
accompany the sample(s).  Additional details will be provided in the Covance lab 
manual. 
 
 Sample Shipping Instructions  
Samples should be batched per patient and shi pped frozen on dry ice in opaque 
containers at the end of cycle 1 to the lab processing the samples.  Primary and 
backup samples should not be shipped at the same time, p lease refer to lab manual  
for detailed shipping information. 
 
Samples should be shipped to the following address:  
Covance Central Laboratory Services, Inc.  
8211 SciCor Dr.  
Indianapolis, IN 46214- 2985 
 
 
 Immunogenicity Study (Required)  
 
 Description of Studies  
Serum  samples will be evaluated for Anti -Drug Antibodies through a qualified 
ELISA assay.   
 
 Sampling Schedule (See Appendix V  and Appendix X ) 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
37 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
a) For patients ≤  10kg, samples will be collected at:  
- Cycle 3 , Day 1  and each subsequent cycle , Day 1 : prior to start of 
infusion . 
o  Note:  3.5 ml of blood will be drawn and will be used for both 
the immunogenicity analyses and the pharmacokinetic 
analyses.  
b) For patients > 10kg, s amples will be collected at : 
- Cycle 1, Day 1: prior to start of infusion and at the end of infusion.  
o Note:  3.5 ml of blood will be drawn and will be used for both 
the immunogenicity analyses and the pharmacokinetic analyses.  
- Each subsequent cycle, Day 1 : prior to start of infusion . 
o Note:  3.5 ml of blood will be drawn and will be used for both 
the immunogenicit y analyses and the pharmacokinetic 
analyses.  
 
 
 Sample Collection and Handling Instructions  
Please refer to the lab manual.  Briefly, b lood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected 
in SST tubes at a site distant from the infusion for both immunogenicity 
evaluation and pharmacokinetic evaluation. Record the exact time that the 
sample is drawn along with the exact time that the drug is administered.  
 
 Sample Processing  
Please refer to lab manual  
 
 Sample Labeling  
Each tube must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number, the study 
I.D., and the date and time the sample was drawn.  Data should be recorded on 
the Correlative Study Form, which must accompany the sample(s). Please refer 
to the Covance lab manual for additional information . 
 
 Sample Shipping Instructions  
Samples should be shipped to the following address:  
Covance Central Laboratory Services, Inc.  
8211 SciCor Dr.  
Indianapolis, IN 46214- 2985 
 
 Pharmacodynamics :  T-lymphocyte saturation  (Required)  
 
 Description of Studies  
Blood samples will be evaluated for T -lymphocyte saturation by VX15/2503  
utilizing a validated flow -cytometry based assay . 
 
 Sampling Schedule (See Appendix VI ) 
c) For all patients, s amples will be collected at:  
- Cycle 1, Day 1: prior to start of infusion and at the end of infusion  
- Cycle 1, Day 15: prior to start of infusion and at the end of infusion  
- Cycle 1, Day 28: prior to Cycle 2, Day 1 dose for all patients regardless 
of whether  or not patient is  proceedi ng to Cycle 2  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
38 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
- Each subsequent cycle, Day 1 : prior to start of infusion  
 
 Sample Collection and Handling Instructions  
Blood samples :  
- Cycle 1 Day 1: 2 x 4mL  
- Cycle 1 Day 15: 2 x 4mL  
- Cycle 1 Day 28: 1 x 4mL  
- Subsequent Cycles: prior to start of infusion , Day 1 : 1 x 4mL  
 
Blood samples w ill be collected in cyto-chex  tubes at a site distant from the infusion 
for pharmaco dynamic  evaluation. Record the exact time that the sample is drawn along 
with the exact time that the drug is administered.  
 
 Sample  Processing  
Please refer to lab manual  
 
 Sample Labeling  
Each tube must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number, the study 
I.D., and the date and time the sample was drawn.  Data should be recorded on the 
Correlative Study Form, which must accompany the  sample(s).  Please refer to the 
Covance lab manual for additional information.  
 
 Sample Shipping Instructions  
Please note that these samples are very time -sensitive and that samples are to be 
sent the day of collection.  
 
Samples should be shipped to the fol lowing address:  
Covance Central Laboratory Services, Inc.  
8211 SciCor Dr.  
Indianapolis, IN 46214- 2985 
 
 Pharmacodynamics : Total soluble SEMA4D  (Required)  
 
 Description of Studies  
Blood and serum  samples will be evaluated for total soluble SEMA4D through a 
qualified ELISA assay.   
 
 Sampling Schedule (See  Appendix VII and Appendix XI ) 
d) For patients ≤  10kg, samples will be collected at:  
- Cycle 3 , Day 1  and each subsequent cycle, Day 1 : prior to start of 
infusion 
 
e) For patients > 10kg, s amples will be collected at:  
- Cycle 1, Day 1: prior to start of infusion and at the end of infusion  
- Each subsequent cycle, Day 1 : prior to start of infusion  
 
 
 Sample Collection and Handling Instructions  
Please refer to lab manual.  B riefly, b lood samples ( 3.5mL) will be collected in 
SST tubes at a site distant from the infusion for pharmacodynamic  evaluation. 
Record the exact time that the sample is drawn along with the exact time that the 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
39 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
drug is administered.  
 
 Sample Processing  
Please refer to lab manual  
 
 Sample Labeling  
Each tube must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number, the study 
I.D., and the date and time the sample was drawn.  Data should be recorded on the 
Correlative Study Form, which must accompany the  sample(s).  
 
 Sample Shipping Instructions  
Samples should be batched per patient and shipped frozen on dry ice in opaque 
containers at the end of cycle 1 to the lab processing the samples.  Primary and 
backup samples should not be shipped at the same time, p lease refer to lab manual 
for detailed shipping information. 
 
Samples should be shipped to the following address:  
Covance Central Laboratory Services, Inc.  
8211 SciCor Dr.  
Indianapolis, IN 46214- 2985 
 
 
 Tumor Assessment  (archival -required and biopsy -optional)  
 
 Description of Studies  
Tumor Expression : SEMA4D, PlexinB1, and other markers of immune cell 
infiltration  will be performed by Immunohistochemistry.  Archival tumor tissue 
should be submitted for all patients.  If a patient does not have tissue available, the 
study chair must be notified prior to enrollment .   
 
 Sampling Schedules (See Appendix VIII ) 
a) Archival tumor tissue ( Archival Formalin -Fixed Paraffin -Embedded ( FFPE)) will 
be requested to be sent when available.  Please submit a redacted  copy of the 
pathology report along with the specimen. 
b) In the event a subject requires a biopsy or surgery and tumor tissue is removed, tissue will be requested for  the analysis of  SEMA4D, PlexinB1, and other markers 
of immune cell infiltration  (optional). Tumor biopsies will not be performed solely 
for research purposes.  
 
 Sample Shipping Instructions:  
Samples should be shipped to the following address:  
Immunochemistry Services  
Covance Laboratories, Inc.  
3635 Concorde Pa rkway, Suite# 100  
Chantilly, VA 20151  
  
 
 Sample Labeling  
Each specimen must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number, the 
study I.D., and must be accompanied by a pathology report.  Data should be 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
40 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
recorded on the Tissue Studies Form  (see Appendix VIII ), which must accompany 
the sample(s).  
 
 
 AGENT INFORMATION 
 
 VX15/2503  
(Mab2503 ) NSC#  795997 IND #136181  
 
 Structure and molecular weight:  
VX15/2503 is a humanized, IgG4 kappa monoclonal antibody  that binds 
specifically to the semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D; CD100) antigen, a member of the 
semaphorin family that normally functions to regulate the motility and 
differentiation of multiple cell types, including those of the immune, vascular, and 
nervous systems.  It bears a proline at  position 228 of the core hinge sequence 
(instead of a serine) to stabilize the hinge region and prevent chain recombination 
from occurring. SEMA4D blockade represents a novel mechanism and therapeutic 
strategy to promote immune infiltration into the tumor  microenvironment and 
inhibit tumor progression.   
 
VX15/2503 has a molecular weight of approximately  148 kDa.  
 
 Supplied by : Vaccinex, Inc  
 
 Formulation  
The agent is supplied as a sterile solution of 20 mg/ ml antibody in 20 mM sodium 
acetate,  pH5.4, containing 130 mM sodium chloride and 0.02% polysorbate 80.  
The formulation contains no preservatives. Each 10 mL vial of VX15/2503 
contains 10 mL (200 mg) of antibody; each vial is intended for single use. The 
product packaging consists of 10 mL USP Type  I Schott glass vials with West 
Pharmaceutical Services FluroTec  grey butyl rubber stoppers and a blue plastic 
cap with aluminum overseal. Each 10 mL p roduct vials is packaged in a cardboard 
box that provides protection from light.  
 
 Storage  
VX15/2503 is to be kept dry and refrigerated  at 2-8°C (36-46ºF) until use.  It 
should be protected from light. 
 
 Solution Preparation  
 
Using aseptic technique, prepare the solution for infusion as follows:  
 
• Drug vial s should be carefully inspected for discoloration and for particulates. 
The solution of VX15/2503 are normally clear to slightly opalescent, colorless or 
faintly yellow, and may contain a small amount of visible particulates. If the 
solution is discolored or otherwise does not meet this description the drug should 
not be administered and instead the study sponsor be  contacted. The  solution 
vials  contains no preservatives.  
  
• Do not shake the solution vials .  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
41 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
• To prepare infusion solution, withdraw the required amount of VX15/2503 and 
dilute the solution with 0.9% sodium chloride injection, USP, as needed. The final concentration should be  between  1-10 mg/mL after dilution. Doses of 2,000 
mg and above should be diluted to a total volume of 250 mL with 0.9% sodium chloride injection, USP. Mix the diluted solution by gentle inversion; do not 
shake. Inspect the prepared solution visually for particulates prior to 
administration.  
 
• Destroy any unused vialed material according to organizational procedures for 
the destruction of biologic agents. If no appropriate procedure exists, return the 
unused vialed solution to the study drug distributor for destruction.  
 
 Stability  
Refer to the package labeling for vials expirati on dating.  
 
Administration of VX15/2503 should occur as soon as possible following dilution  
(see Section 9.1.5 ). If a delay is anticipated, the prepared solution may be kept at 
room temperature for no more than 8 hours prior to infusion, or for no more than 
24 hours after dilution if stored at 2- 8 ºC (36 to 46ºF). Do not freeze the diluted 
solution  
 
 
 Administration   
See Treatment  (Section 5.0 ) and Dose Modification (Section  6.0) of the protocol 
for complete details.  
 
Administration of VX15/2503 should occur as soon as possible following dilution.  
 
Use one of the following (or comparable) infusion sets:  
•  Hospira product number 12030- 12 (polyvinyl chloride composition) (with 
or without in- line filter)  
• Baxter product number 2C8875 (polyvinyl chloride composition with 
polyethylene lined tubing) (with or without in -line filter)  
Administer the prepared intravenous solutions using an infus ion pump. Infuse all 
doses of VX15/2503 over the time interval specified in the study protocol using a 
peripheral intravenous line or indwelling intravenous catheter. Flush the line with 
0.9% sodium chloride injection, USP, after study drug infusion.  
 
Do not administer VX15/2503 as an infusion with intravenous solutions of other 
medicinal products. Do not add other medications to solutions containing 
VX15/2503.  
 
 Toxicities  
 
The table below lists the expected toxicity profile of VX15/2503. This list may not be 
comprehensive; VX15/2503 may result in events which have never been previously 
reported. Note:  An adverse event is unexpected for sponsor IND reporting purposes if 
it is not listed in bold font in the table below. Please refer to Section 13.1  for protocol -
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
42 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
specific exceptions to CTEP -AERS expedited reporting.  
 
 
 
Incidence  Toxicities  
Common  
(>20% of patients)  None  
Occasional  
(4-20% of patients)  • Nausea  
• Fatigue  
• Arthralgia  
• Decreased appetite  
• Infusion -related reaction  
• Fever  
• Myalgia  
• Prurit us 
Rare  
(<3% of patients)  • Elevated gamma glutamyl transferase  
• Lipase increased  
• Neutrophil count decreased  
• White blood cell count decreased  
• Abdominal pain  
• Hepatitis E  
• Lymphadenopathy  
• Lymphedema  
• Eye pain, decreased visual acuity  
• Rash  
• Pericardial effusion  
Pregnancy & 
Lactation  No reproductive toxicology, genotoxicity, or mutagenicity studies have been 
conducted with VX15/2503. Pregnant or breast -feeding women will not be entered 
on this study . Pregnancy tests must be obtained in girls who are post -menarchal. 
Males or females of reproductive potential may not participate unless they have 
agreed to use an effective contraceptive method for the duration of study therapy.  
 
 
 Agent Accountability  
The investigator, or a responsible party designated by the investigator, must 
maintain a careful record of the in ventory and disposition of all agents received 
using the appropriate NCI Drug Accountability Record Form (DARF) available on 
the CTEP forms page.  Accountability records will include dates, quantities, 
batch/serial numbers, expiration dates (if applicable), and patient numbers.   
   
Upon completion of preparation of an injection, used or partially used vials should 
be discarded per institutional standard operating procedures. Unused vials should 
be stored in the original carton under refrigeration at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) 
protected from light in a secure, limited access area. Do not freeze. If there are 
unused vials remaining at the end of the stud y, the pharmacist or designee should 
destroy unused or expired vials per institutional standard operating procedures. All 
material containing study drug will be treated and disposed of as hazardous waste 
in accordance with governing regulations. Appropriat e disposal confirmation will 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
43 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
be provided to Vaccinex.  
 
 Agent Ordering  
VX15/2503 will be supplied by Vaccinex, Inc. Information on drug supply and 
management is posted on the protocol web site. VX15/2503 is for investigational  
use only, and is to be used only within the context of this study. Under no 
circumstances should the investigator or other site personnel supply study drug to 
other investigators, subjects, or clinics, or allow supplies to be used other than 
directed by this protocol.  
 
 
 Useful Links an d Contacts  
• CTEP Forms, Templates, Documents:   
 http://ctep.cancer.gov/forms/  
 
 
 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL  FROM PROTOCOL THERAP Y AND OFF STUDY 
CRITERIA  
 
 Criteria for Removal from Protocol Therapy  
 
a) Clinical (including physical examination or serum tumor markers) or radiographic 
evidence of progressive disease (See Section 12.0 ). 
b) Adverse Events requiring removal from protocol therapy (See Section 6.0 ). 
c) Refusal of protocol therapy by patient/parent/guardian  
d) Non-compliance that in the opinion of the investigator does not allow for ongoing 
participation.  
e) Completion of 13 cycles of therapy.  
f) Physician determines it is not in the patient’s best interest.  
g) Repeated eligibility laboratory studies ( CBC with differential, bilirubin, ALT (SGPT) 
or serum creatinine)  are outside the parameters required for eligibility prior to the start 
of VX15/2503 ( See Section 8.1 ). 
h) Study is terminated by Sponsor. 
i) Pregnancy  
 
Patients who are removed from  protocol therapy during cycle 1 should continue  to 
have  the required observations in Section 8.1  until the originally planned end of the 
cycle or until all adverse events have resolved per Section 13.4.4 , whichever happens 
LATER. The only exception is  with documentation of the patient’s withdrawal of 
consent . Patients who are removed from protocol therapy in subsequent cycles should 
have the necessary observations to ensure adequate clinical care.  
 
Patients who are off protocol therapy are to be followed until they meet the criteria for Off 
Study (see below). Ongoing a dverse events, or adverse events that emerge after the patient 
is removed from protocol therapy, but within 30 days of the last dose of investigational 
agent, must be followed and reported via RAVE and CTEP -AERS  (if applicable).  Follow -
up data will be req uired unless consent is withdrawn.  
 
 Off Study Criteria  
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
44 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
a) Thirty days after the last dose of the investigational agent.  
b) Death  
c) Lost to follow -up 
d) Withdrawal of consent for any required observations or data submission.  
e) Enrollment onto another COG therapeutic (anti -cancer) study  
f) The patient does not receive protocol treatment after study enrollment.  
 
 
 
 STATISTICAL AND ETHI CAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
 Sample Size and Study Duration  
 
A minimum of 4 evaluable patients will be requi red for Part A. The expected maximum 
number of evaluable patients required to complete part A is 12. Once the MTD or 
recommended Phase 2 dose has been defined, up to 6 additional patients with recurrent or 
refractory solid tumors without restrictions on heme evaluability may be enrolled to acquire 
PK data in a representative number of young patients (i.e. patients < 12 years old).  
Therefore, the maximum number of patients anticipated to be enrolled into Part A is 23 patients which allows for 6 patients at each of 2 dose levels, 6 additional patients for PK, 
and 20% inevaluability. Review of the enrollment rate into previous COG new agent 
studies indicates that 4 patients per month are expected. Therefore, the study is expected 
to be  completed within about 6 months. In the unlikely event that both dose levels are 
expanded to 12 patients due to DLTs of different classes, the absolute maximum number 
of patients enrolled into Part A would be 38. The absolute maximum would be expected to 
be completed within 10 months.  
 
Additionally once the MTD/or RP2D has been determined in Part A, the Phase 2 portion 
of the study (Part B) will use a  Simon’s optimal two -stage design. In the first stage, 19 
disease control and RECIST response evaluable patients will be enrolled. Each patient will 
be evaluated for both outcome measures: (1) disease control success; and (2) RECIST 
response (CR or PR v. not CR or PR). The decision rule for the two sta ge study design is 
summarized in S ection 11.6
.  A maximum of 37 patients are expected to be enrolled to 
allow for 20% inevaluability. This is expected to be completed within about 10 months.  
Overall, a maximum of 60 patients are expected to be enrolled into the study, and this 
should be completed within about 16 months. An absolute maximum of 75 patients would 
take up to 19 months to complete enrollment.  
 
Strata : 
a) Part A -Determination of the MTD  
b) Part B - Osteo sarcoma Phase 2 cohort.   
  
 Definitions  
 
 Evaluable For Adverse Events  
Any patient who receives at least one dose of the study drug(s) or who experiences a 
dose-limiting toxicity is considered evaluable for Adverse E vents . Patients who do not 
have DLT and are not considered evaluable for toxicity will be replaced.  
 
 Maximum Tol erated Dose 
• The MTD will be the maximum dose at which fewer than one -third of 
patients experience DLT (See Section 5.5 ) during Cycle 1 of therapy.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
45 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
• In the unlikely event that two DLTs observed out of 6 evaluable patients are 
different classes of Adverse Effects (e.g. hepatotoxicity and myelosuppression), AND all  of the following conditions are met, expansion 
of the cohort to 12 patients will be considered:  
 
•  One of the DLTs does not appear to be dose -related  
•  The Adverse Effects are readily reversible  
•  The study chair, DVL statistician, DVL committee chair or vice chair, 
and IND sponsor all agree that expansion of the cohort is acceptable  
 
If fewer than 1/3 of patients in the expanded cohort experience dose -limiting 
toxicities, the dose escalation will be considered.  
 
• The DLTs observed in the pharmacokinetic (PK) expansion cohort will be 
counted towards the total number of DLTs observed at t he MTD during the 
dose escalation portion of the study. If ≥ 1/3 of the cohort of patients at the 
MTD (during the dose escalation plus the PK phase 2 ) experience DLT then 
the MTD will be exceeded.  
 
  Determination of MTD  
 
The rolling six phase 1 trial desi gn will be used for the conduct of this study15.  Two to six 
patients can be co ncurrently enrolled onto a dose level, dependent upon (1) the number of 
patients enrolled at the current dose level, (2) the number of patients who have experienced 
DLT at the current dose level, and (3) the number of patients entered but with tolerability  
data pending at the current dose level.  Accrual is suspended when a cohort of six has enrolled or when the study endpoints have been met.  
 
Dose level assignment is based on the number of participants currently enrolled in the 
cohort, the number of DLTs observed, and the number of participants at risk for developing 
a DLT (i.e., participants enrolled but who are not yet assessable for toxicity). For example, 
when three participants are enrolled onto a dose cohort, if toxicity data is available for all 
three when the fourth participant entered and there are no DLTs, the dose is escalated and 
the fourth participant is enrolled to the subsequent dose level. If data is not yet available 
for one or more of the first three participants  and no DLT has been observ ed, or if one DLT 
has been observed, the new participant is entered at the same dose level. Lastly, if two or 
more DLTs have been observed, the dose level is de- escalated. This process is repeated for 
participants five and six. In place of suspending accrual after every three participants, 
accrual is only suspended when a cohort of six is filled. When participants are inevaluable 
for toxicity, they are replaced with the next available participant if escalation or de -
escalation rules have not been fulfilled at the time the next available participant is enrolled onto the study.  
 
The following table provides the decision rules for enrolling a patient at (i) the current dose 
level (ii) at an escalated dose level, (iii) at a de- escalated dose level, or whether the study 
is suspended to accrual:  
 
 # Pts 
Enrolled  # Pts with 
DLT  # Pts without 
DLT  # Pts with 
Data Pending  Decision  
 2 0 or 1  0, 1 or 2  0, 1 or 2  Same dose level  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
46 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 2 2 0 0 De-escalate* 
      
 3 0 0, 1 or 2  1, 2 or 3  Same dose level  
 3 1 0, 1 or 2  0, 1 or 2  Same dose level  
 3 0 3 0 Escalate** 
 3 ≥ 2 0 or 1  0 or 1  De-escalate* 
      
 4 0 0, 1, 2 or 3  1, 2, 3 or 4  Same dose level  
 4 1 0, 1, 2 or 3  0, 1, 2 or 3  Same dose level  
 4 0 4 0 Escalate** 
 4 ≥ 2 0, 1 or 2  0, 1 or 2  De-escalate* 
      
 5 0 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  1, 2, 3, 4 or 5  Same dose level  
 5 1 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  Same dose level  
 5 0 5 0 Escalate** 
 5 ≥ 2 0, 1, 2 or 3  0, 1, 2 or 3  De-escalate* 
      
 6 0 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4  2, 3, 4, 5 or 6  Suspend  
 6 1 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  Suspend  
 6 0 or 1  5 or 6  0 or 1  Escalate** 
 6 ≥ 2 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  0, 1, 2, 3 or 4  De-escalate* 
* If six patients already entered at next lower dose level, the MTD has been defined.  
**If final dose level has been reached, the recommended dose has been reached.  
 
If two or more of a cohort of up to six patients experience DLT at a given dose level, then 
the MTD has been exceeded and dose escalation will be stopped (see Section 11.2.2  for 
exception to rule). 
 
In additi on to determination of the MTD, a descriptive summary of all toxicities will be 
reported.  
 
 
 
 Inclusion of Children, Women and Minorities  
 
CTEP PLANNED ENROLLMENT REPORT  
Race Categories  Ethnicity Categories  
Total  Not Hispanic or 
Latino  Hispanic or Latino  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
American Indian/ 
Alaska Native 0 1 0 0 1 
Asian  1 2 0 0 3 
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific 
Islander  0 0 0 0 0 
Black or African 
American  5 5 0 0 10 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
47 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
White  20 29 4 4 57 
More Than One Race  0 0 0 0 0 
Total  26 37 4 4 71 
 
The study is open to all participants regardless of gender or ethnicity.  Review of accrual 
to past COG studies of new agents demonstrates the accrual of both genders and all NIH -
identified ethnicities to such studies.  Efforts will be made to extend the accru al to a 
representative population, but in a Phase 1 trial which will accrue a limited number of 
patients, a balance must be struck between patient safety considerations and limitations on 
the number of individuals exposed to potentially toxic or ineffectiv e treatments on the one 
hand and the need to explore gender, racial, and ethnic aspects of clinical research on the other. If differences in outcome that correlate to gender, racial, or ethnic identity are noted, accrual may be expanded or additional studi es may be performed to investigate those 
differences more fully.  
 
 Pharmacokinetic and Correlative Studies and Response Analysis  
 
A descriptive analysis of pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of VX15/2503  will be 
performed to define systemic exposure, drug clea rance, and other pharmacokinetic 
parameters. The PK parameters will be summarized with simple summary statistics, 
including means, medians, ranges, and standard deviations (if numbers and distribution 
permit).   
 
While the primary aim of this study is to e valuate the toxicity of VX15/2503, patients will 
have disease evaluations performed as indicated in Section 8.1 . Disease response will be 
assessed according to RECIST criteria for patients with solid tumors, and will be report ed 
descriptively.  
 
All these analyses  will be descriptive and exploratory  and hypotheses generating in nature . 
 
 Study Design -  Part B   
 
Data collected from patients from the dose determining  portion (Part A) treated at the 
MTD/RP2D and who meet eligibility criteria for Part B of the study will be counted in the Phase 2 evaluation . The following Simon’s optimal two stage design will be used in each 
stratum.  
 
The two stage design is illustrated below:  
 
Stage  Number of patients 
enrolled in stage  Cumulative response 
results  Decision  
1 19 4 or fewer disease control 
successes and 1 or fewer 
RECIST responders  Terminate the trial with the 
conclusion that VX15/2503 is 
not associated with sufficient 
activity for further 
investigation  
  5 or more disease control 
success or 2 or more 
RECIST responders  Continue to stage 2  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
48 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
2 10 8 or fewer disease control 
successes and 4 or fewer 
RECIST responders  Terminate the trial with the 
conclusion that VX15/2503 is 
not associated with sufficient 
activity for further investigation 
  9 or more disease control 
successes or 5 or more RECIST responders  Terminate the trial with the 
conclusion that VX15/2503 is associated with sufficient 
activity for further 
investigation  
Part B will be initially opened to 6 adult patients. The Rolling 6 design logic will be 
applied for assessing toxicity in the initial cohort of 6 adults. If 2 or more patients in this 
cohort experience a DLT in Cycle 1, then enrollment to Part B will be su spended pending 
study committee discussion. If Part A is complete and the initial cohort of 6 adult patients 
in Part B is deemed safe, up to 19 patients will be enrolled into Stage 1 with a maximum 
of 12 adult patients. However, if at any point the percent age of patients experiencing a 
Cycle 1 DLT is >33%, then the study will be suspended pending internal review. This will 
include DLTs observed for all younger patients from Part A that were assigned to the 
MTD/RP2D used in Part B of the study. 
Design  Charac teristics:  Each  patient  enrolled will be evaluated  for: (1) complete  or 
partial  response  as defined  by the RECIST  criteria  where  the first evaluation  of CR or 
PR is made  at or before  the end of the sixth  cycle  of study therapy  (denoted  as R 
below);  or (2) stable  disease  after four months  of therapy or at the end of the sixth  
cycle,  whichever  occurs first (denoted  as S below).  We will not be interested  in 
promoting  the agent  for further  investigation  if the probability  of response  in any 
particular  individual  is less than or equal  to 0.05 (P(R)≤0.05)  and the probability of 
remaining  analytic  event  free in any particular  individual  is less than or equal  to 0.20 
(P(S)≤0.20). We  will be interested  in promoting  the agent  for further  investigation if 
the probability of  response  in any particular  individual  is at least 0.22 (P(R)≥0.22)  
or the probability of remaining  analytic  event  free in any particular  individual  
is at least 0.42 (P(S)≥0.42).  
 
For the calculations  below,  it is assumed  Pr (S | R) = 0.90.  
 
The statistical  characteristics  of this design  are:  
 
Probability  of four 
month disease 
control  Probability  of 
RECIST  
response  Probability  of 
Stopping After  Stage  
1 (and concluding the 
drug is ineffective)  Probability  of 
Concluding  the 
Drug  is Ineffective  
at the Conclusion  
of the Trial  Probability  of 
Concluding  the 
Drug  is Effective  
at the Conclusion  
of the Trial  
0.20 0.05 0.56 0.89 0.11 
0.42 0.22 0.014  0.05 0.95 
0.42 0.05 0.044  0.096  0.904  
0.20 0.22 0.056  0.21 0.79 
 
We will concurrent ly enroll on the Phase 1 and P hase 2 studies. While the P hase 1 study is 
accruing we will limit the Phase 2 enrollment to osteosarcoma patients greater than 21 
years of age to ensure the completion of  the phase 1 portion of this study. After the Phase 
1 study is complete, patients less than or equal to 21 will be enrolled into the Phase 2 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
49 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
portion of this study. The Phase 2 study will cap the number of older patients  (>21 years)  
enrolled into Stage 1 at 1 2 patients to ensure a representative number of patients in both 
age gr oups . Without this cap, it may be possible to open Stage 2 of the Phase 2 study 
without having enrolled any younger patients  and s tage 2 would have opened based on 
information collected solely in older patients. Osteosarcoma patients enrolled in Phase 1 
will also be included in the Phase 2 part of the study. 
 
 Method of Analysis  – Phase 2  
 
Response in Part B  osteosarcoma patients will be determined as defined in Section 12.0 . A 
report on the ef ficacy assessment will be posted on the completed disease stratum as part 
of the semi -annual study committee meeting book report.  
 Toxicities for patients will be described separately.  Every effort will be made to accrue 
the number of patients needed to evaluate efficacy according to the schema in Section 11.6
. 
For strata not appropriately filled , descriptive statistics will be employed to describe 
outcomes.  
 
Which  Patients  will be Considered  Evaluable  for RECIST  Response : 
Any eligible  patient  who receives at least one dose of VX15/2503 will be considered 
evaluable  for response  with the following  exception:  if a patient  receives  non-protocol  anti- 
cancer  therapy during  the response  evaluation  period after the patient  is considered  
as having  a partial  or complete  response  but prior  to confirmation  of this status  by 
tumor  imaging  and before  progressive  disease  is noted,  the individual  will be considered  
inevaluable  for the response  endpoint.  Further, patients  who stop VX15/2503  after the 
1st evaluation  because  of toxicities  or death  will be considered  evaluable for the 
response  evaluation  and will  be counted  as non-responders  for the response  endpoint. 
 
Which  Patients  Will Be Considered  Evaluable  for Disease  Control  Success:  
Any eligible  patient  who receives at least one dose of VX15/2503  will be considered  
evaluable  for response  with the following  exception:  if a patient  receives  non-protocol  anti- 
cancer  therapy  during  the first four months  of therapy or first six cycles  of therapy, 
whichever  occurs  first, is considered  as having  a partial  or complete  response  but prior  
to confirmation  of this status by  tumor  imaging  and before  progressive  disease  is noted,  
the individual  will be  considered  inevaluable  for the disease  control  success  endpoint. 
 
Which  Patients  Will be Considered  a Disease  Control  Success:  
Any patient  who is evaluated  free of all detectable disease  (complete  response)  or 
is considered as having a partial  response  or is considered  as having  stable disease (‘at 
least stable  disease’)  after four months  of therapy  or at the end of the sixth  cycle,  
whichever  occurs  first. 
 
Which  Patients  Will be Considered Not a Disease  Control  Success:  
Any evaluable  patient  who does not meet  the criteria  for disease  control  success  (complete  
response,  partial  response  or stable  disease)  will be considered  to not have experienced 
disease  control  success.  
In particular,  any patient  who dies because  of treatment -related  toxicity  during  the first 
six cycles  of  therapy  and  within   the  first  four  months   since   starting   treatment   
will  be considered not to have experienced disease control success. Also, any patient who 
is eligible, receives one dose of VX15 /2503 and is lost to follow -up at (for example) the 
end of cycle 2 will be considered not a disease control success (complete response, partial 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
50 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
response or stable disease)   
 
Patients  who are not evaluable  for both disease  control  and response  evaluation  may 
be replaced  for the purposes  of the statistical  rule. 
 
 EVALUATION CRITERIA 
 
 Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  
The descriptions and grading scales found in the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0 will be utilized for AE reporting.  All 
appropriate treatment areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 5.0.  A 
copy of the CTCAE version 5.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP website 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov /protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm
). 
 
 Response Criteria for Patients with Solid Tumors  
See the table in section 8.0  for the schedule of tumor evaluati ons. In addition to t he 
scheduled scans, a confirmat ory scan should be obtained on the next consecutive cycle  
following initial documentation of objective response.  
 
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the revised Response 
Evalua tion Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guideline (version 1.1) [ Eur J Ca  45:228-
247, 2009].  Key points are that 5 target lesions are identified and that changes in the largest  
diameter (unidimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions but the shortest  diameter of 
malignant lymph nodes are used in the RECIST v 1.1 criteria.  
 
 Definitions  
 
a)  Evaluable for objective response : Eligible patients who receive at least 
one dose of protocol therapy will be considered evaluable for response. Evaluable 
patients who  demonstrate a complete or partial response confirmed by central 
review before receiving non -protocol anti -cancer therapy will be considered a 
responder. All other evaluable patients will be considered non- responders.  
 
b)  Evaluable Non- Target Disease Respon se: Eligible patients who have 
lesions present at baseline that are evaluable but do not meet the definitions of 
measurable disease and have received at least one dose of protocol therapy will be 
considered evaluable for non -target disease. The response assessment is based on 
the presence, absence, or unequivocal progression of the lesions.  
 Disease Parameters  
 
12.2.2.1  Measurable disease:  Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be 
accurately measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter to b e 
recorded) as ≥  20 mm by chest x- ray, as ≥ 10 mm with CT scan, or ≥ 10 
mm with calipers by clinical exam.  All tumor measurements must be 
recorded in millimeters  (or decimal fractions of centimeters).  
 
Note :  Tumor lesions that are situated in a previously irradiated area 
might or might not be considered measurable. If the investigator 
thinks it appropriate to include them, the conditions under which 
such lesions should be considered must be defined in the 
protocol . 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
51 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
12.2.2.2  Malignant lymph nodes : To be considered pathologically enlarged and 
measurable, a lymph node must be ≥  15 mm in short axis when assessed 
by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness no greater than 5 mm).  At baseline 
and in follow -up, only the short axis will be measured and followed.  
 
12.2.2.3  Non-measurable disease:  All other lesions (or sites of disease), including 
small lesions (longest diameter <  10 mm or pathological lymph nodes 
with ≥ 10 to <  15 mm short axis), are considered non- measurab le 
disease.  Bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites, 
pleural/pericardial effusions, lymphangitis cutis/pulmonitis, 
inflammatory breast disease, and abdominal masses (not followed by CT 
or MRI), are considered as non- measurable.  
 
Note:   Cystic lesion s that meet the criteria for radiographically defined 
simple cysts should not be considered as malignant lesions 
(neither measurable nor non- measurable) since they are, by 
definition, simple cysts. ‘Cystic lesions’ thought to represent 
cystic metastases can be considered as measurable lesions, if they 
meet the definition of measurability described above. However, 
if non -cystic lesions are present in the same patient, these are 
preferred for selection as target lesions.  
 
12.2.2.4  Target lesions : All measurab le lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per 
organ and 5 lesions in total, representative of all involved organs, should be identified as target lesions  and recorded and measured at baseline.  
Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest diameter), be representative of all involved organs, but in 
addition should be those that lend themselves to reproducible repeated 
measurements.  It may be the case that, on occasion, the largest lesion 
does not lend itself to reproducible measurement in which circumstance 
the next largest lesion that  can be measured reproducibly should be 
selected.  A sum of the diameters (longest for non -nodal lesions, short 
axis for nodal lesions) for all target lesions will be calculated and repor ted as the baseline sum diameters.  If lymph nodes are to be 
included in the sum, then only the short axis is added into the sum.  The baseline sum diameters will be used as reference to further characterize 
any objective tumor regression in the measurable dimension of the 
disease.  
 
12.2.2.5  Non-target lesions : All other lesions (or sites of disease) including any 
measurable lesions over and above the 5 target lesions should be 
identified as non-target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline.  
Measu rements of these lesions are not required, but the presence, 
absence, or in rare cases unequivocal progression of each should be 
noted throughout follow -up.  
 
 Methods for Evaluation of Measurable Disease  
 
All measurements should be taken and recorded in me tric notation using a ruler or 
calipers.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
52 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
The same method of assessment and the same technique should be used to 
characterize each identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow -up. 
Imaging -based evaluation is preferred to evaluation by clinical examination unless 
the lesion(s) being followed cannot be imaged but are assessable by clinical exam.  
 
12.2.3.1  Clinical lesions : Clinical lesions will only be considered measurable 
when they are superficial (e.g., skin nodules and palpable lymph nodes) 
and ≥ 10 mm diameter as assessed using calipers (e.g., skin nodules).  In 
the case of skin lesions, documentation by color photography, including 
a ruler to estimate the size of the lesion, is recommended.  
 
12.2.3.2  Chest x -ray:  Lesions on chest x- ray are acceptable as measurable lesions 
when they are clearly defined and surrounded by aerated lung.  
However, CT is preferable.  
 
12.2.3.3  Conventional CT and MR I:  This guideline has defined measurability of 
lesions on CT scan based on the assumption that CT slice thickness is 5 
mm or less.  If CT scans have slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the 
minimum size for a measurable lesion shou ld be twice the slice 
thickness.  MRI is also acceptable in certain situations (e.g. for body 
scans). Ideally, the same type of scanner should be used and the image 
acquisition protocol should be followed as closely as possible to prior 
scans.  
 
12.2.3.4  PET-CT:  At present, the low dose or attenuation correction CT portion 
of a combined PET -CT is not always of optimal diagnostic CT quality 
for use with RECIST measurements.  However, if the site can document 
that the CT performed as part of a PET -CT is of i dentical diagnostic 
quality to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast), then the CT portion of the PET -CT can be used for RECIST measurements and can 
be used interchangeably with conventional CT in accurately measuring 
cancer lesions over time.  Note, however, that the PET portion of the CT 
introduces additional data which may bias an investigator if it is not 
routinely or serially performed.   
 
12.2.3.5  Tumor markers : Tumor markers alone cannot be used to assess response.  
If markers are initially abov e the upper normal limit, they must 
normalize for a patient to be considered in complete clinical response.  
 
12.2.3.6  Cytology, Histology : These techniques can be used to differentiate 
between partial responses (PR) and complete responses (CR) in rare 
cases (e.g., residual lesions in tumor types, such as germ cell tumors, 
where known residual benign tumors can remain).  
 
 Cytology should be obtained if an effusion appears or worsens during 
treatment when the measurable tumor has met criteria for response or  
stable disease.  
 
12.2.3.7  FDG -PET: While FDG -PET response assessments need additional 
study, it is sometimes reasonable to incorporate the use of FDG -PET 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
53 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
scanning to complement CT scanning in assessment of progression 
(particularly possible 'new' disease) .  New lesions on the basis of FDG -
PET imaging can be identified according to the following algorithm:  
 
a. Negative FDG -PET at baseline, with a positive FDG -PET at follow -
up is a sign of PD based on a new lesion.  
b. No FDG- PET at baseline and a positive FDG -PET at follow -up:  If 
the positive FDG -PET at follow -up corresponds to a new site of 
disease confirmed by CT, this is PD.  If the positive FDG -PET at 
follow -up is not confirmed as a new site of disease on CT, additional 
follow -up CT scans are needed to determ ine if there is truly 
progression occurring at that site (if so, the date of PD will be the date 
of the initial abnormal FDG -PET scan).  If the positive FDG -PET at 
follow -up corresponds to a pre -existing site of disease on CT that is 
not progressing on the  basis of the anatomic images, this is not PD.  
 
 Note :  A ‘positive’ FDG -PET scan lesion means one that  is FDG avid 
with an uptake greater than twice that of the surrounding tissue 
on the attenuation corrected image.  
 
 
 Response Criteria  for Patients with Solid Tumor and Measurable Disease  
 
12.2.4.1  Evaluation of Target Lesions  
 
Complete Response (CR) : Disappearance of all target and non -target 
lesions.  Any pathological lymph nodes (whether 
target or non -target) must have reduction in sh ort 
axis to <10 mm. If immunocytology is available, 
no disease must be detected by that methodology.  
Normalization of urinary catecholamines or other 
tumor markers if elevated at study enrollment (for 
patients with neuroblastoma).  
 
Partial Response (PR) : At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the 
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the 
baseline sum diameters  
 
Progressive Disease (PD) : At least a 20% increase in the sum of the 
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the 
smallest sum on  study (this includes the baseline 
sum if that is the smallest on study).  In addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum must also 
demonstrate an absolute increase of at least 5 mm.  
(Note:  the appearance of one or more new lesions 
is also consider ed progressions). Note:  in 
presence of SD or PR in target disease but 
unequivocal progression in non- target or non-
measurable disease, the patient has PD  if there is 
an overall level of substantial worsening in non-
target disease such that the overall tumo r burden 
has increased sufficiently to merit 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
54 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
discontinuation of therapy  
 
Stable Disease (SD) : Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor 
sufficient increase to qualify for PD, taking as 
reference the smallest sum diameters while on 
study  
 
12.2.4.2  Evaluation of Non -Target Lesions  
 
Complete Response (CR) : Disappearance of all non -target lesions and 
normalization of tumor marker level.  All lymph 
nodes must be non- pathological in size (<10 mm 
short axis)  
 
Note:  If tumor markers are initially above th e 
upper normal limit, they must normalize for a 
patient to be considered in complete clinical 
response.  
 
Non-CR/Non -PD: Persistence of one or more non- target lesion(s) 
and/or maintenance of tumor marker level above 
the normal limits  
 
Progressive Disease (P D): Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression  of existing non -target 
lesions.  Unequivocal progression  should not 
normally trump target lesion status.  It must be 
representative of overall disease status change, 
not a single lesion increase.     
 
 Overall Response Assessment  
 
Table 1: For Patients with Measurable Disease (i.e., Target Disease)  
 
Target 
Lesions  Non-Target 
Lesions  New 
Lesions  Overall 
Response  Best Overall Response 
when Confirmation is 
Required*  
CR CR No CR ≥ 28 days  Confirmation  
CR Non-
CR/Non -PD No PR  
≥ 28 days  Confirmation  
CR Not evaluated  No PR 
PR Non-
CR/Non -
PD/not 
evaluated  No PR 
SD Non-
CR/Non -
PD/not 
evaluated  No SD documented at least once ≥ 
28 days from baseline  
PD Any Yes or No  PD  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
55 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
Any PD**  Yes or No  PD no prior SD, PR or CR  
Any Any Yes PD 
*      See RECIST 1.1 manuscript for further details on what is evidence of a new lesion.  
**  In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression in non-target lesions may be accepted 
as disease progression.  
Note : Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of 
treatment without objective evidence of  disease progression at that time should be 
reported as “symptomatic deterioration.”   Every effort should be made to document 
the objective progression even after discontinuation of treatment.  
 
 
Table 2: For Patients with Non -Measurable Disease (i.e., Non -Target Disease)  
 
Non-Target Lesions  New Lesions  Overall Response  
CR No CR 
Non-CR/non -PD No Non-CR/non -PD* 
Not all evaluated  No not evaluated  
Unequivocal PD  Yes or No  PD 
Any Yes PD 
* ‘Non -CR/non -PD’ is preferred over ‘stable disease’ for non -target disease since SD is 
increasingly used as an endpoint for assessment of efficacy in some trials so to assign this 
category when no lesions can be measured is not advised  
 
Table 4: Overall Response for Patients with Neuroblastoma and Measurable Disease 
CT/MRI  MIBG  Bone Scan  Bone Marrow  Catechol  Overall  
PD Any Any Any Any PD 
Any PD Any Any Any PD 
Any Any PD Any Any PD 
Any Any Any PD Any PD 
SD CR/PR/SD  Non-PD Non-PD Any SD 
PR CR/PR  Non-PD Non-PD Any PR 
CR/PR  PR Non-PD Non-PD Any PR 
CR CR Non-PD Non-PD Elevated  PR 
CR CR CR CR Normal  CR 
 
 Overall Best Response Assessment  
Each patient will be classified according to his  “best response” for the purposes of 
analysis of treatment effect.  Best response is determined as outlined in Section 
12.6 from a sequence of overall response assessments.  
 
 Response Criteria for Patients with Solid Tumors and Evaluable Disease  
 
 Evaluable Disease  
The presence of at least one lesion, with no lesion that can be accurately  measured 
in at least one dimension.  Such lesions may be evaluable by nuclear medicine 
techniques, immunocytochemistry techniques, tumor markers or other reliable 
measures.   
 
 Complete Response  
Disappearance of all evaluable disease.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
56 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
 Partial response  
Partial responses cannot be determined in patients with evaluable disease  
 
 Stable Disease (SD)  
That which does not qualify as Complete Response (CR), Partial Response  (PR), 
or Progressive Disease.  
 
 Progressive Disease  
The appearance of one or more new lesions or evidence of laboratory, clinical, or 
radiographic progression.  
 
 Overall Best Response Assessment  
Each patient will be classified according to his  “best response” for the purposes of 
analysis of treatment effect.  Best response is determined as outlined in Section 
12.6 from a sequence of overall response assessments . 
 
 Response Criteria for Neuroblastoma Patients with MIBG Positive Lesions  
 
 MIBG Positive Lesions  
Patients who have a positive MIBG scan at the start of therapy will be evaluable 
for MIBG response. The use of 123I for MIBG imaging is recommended for all 
scans. If the patient has only one MIBG positive lesion and that lesion was 
radiated, a biopsy must be done at least 28 days  after radiation was completed and 
must show viable neuroblastoma.  
 The following criteria will be used to report MIBG response by the treating institution:  
 
Complete response :  Complete resolution of all MIBG positive lesions  
Partial Response :  Resolution of at least one MIBG positive lesion, with 
persistence of other MIBG positive lesions  
Stable disease :  No change in MIBG scan in number of positive lesions  
Progressive disease:  Development of new MIBG positive lesions  
 
 The response of MIBG lesions will be assessed on central review using the Curie 
scale14 as outlined below. Central review responses will be used to assess efficacy 
for study endpoint. See Section  8.2 for details on transferr ing images to the Imaging 
Research Center.  
 NOTE: This scoring should also be done by the treating institution for end of 
course response assessments.  
 
The body is divided into 9 anatomic sectors for osteomedullary lesions, with a 10
th 
general sector allocated for any extra -osseous lesion visible on MIBG scan . In each 
region, the lesions are scored as follows. The absolute extension score is graded 
as:  
0 = no site per segment,  
1 = 1 site per segment,  
2 = more than one site per segment,  3 = massive involvement (>50% of the segment).  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
57 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 
The absolute score is obtained by adding the score of all the segments. See 
diagram of sectors below:  
 
 
The relative score is calculated by dividing the absolute score at each time point 
by the corresponding pre -treatment absolute score. The relative score of each 
patient is calculated at each response assessment compared to baseline and 
classified as below:  
1. Complete response: all areas of uptake on MIBG scan completely resolved.  
If morphological  evidence of tumor cells in bone marrow biopsy or aspiration 
is present at enrollment, no tumor cells can be detected by routine morphology 
on two subsequent bilateral bone marrow aspirates and biopsies done at least 21 
days apart to be considered a Comple te Response.  
2. Partial response : Relative score ≤ 0.2 (lesions almost disappeared) to ≤ 0.5 
(lesions strongly reduced). 
3. Stable disease : Relative score > 0.5 (lesions weakly but significantly reduced) 
to 1.0 (lesions not reduced).  
4. Progressive disease : New les ions on MIBG scan.  
 
 
 Overall Response Assessment  
 
Table 5: Overall Response Evaluation for Neuroblastoma Patients and MIBG Positive Disease Only  
If patients are enrolled without disease measurable by CT/MRI, any new or newly 
identified lesion by CT/MRI that occurs during therapy would be considered progressive 
disease.  
 
MIBG  CT/MRI  Bone Scan  Bone Marrow  Catechol  Overall  
PD Any Any Any Any PD 
Any New Lesion  Any Any Any PD 
Any Any PD Any Any PD 
Any Any Any PD Any PD 
SD No New Lesion  Non-PD Non-PD Any SD 
PR No New Lesion  Non-PD Non-PD Any PR 
CR No New Lesion  Non-PD Non-PD Elevated  PR 

                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
58 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
CR No New Lesion  CR CR Normal  CR 
 
 
 Overall Best Response Assessment  
Each patient will be classified according to his  “best response” for the purposes of 
analysis of treatment effect.  Best response is determined from the sequence of the 
overall response assessments as described in Table 3 in Section 12.6 . 
 
 Response Criteria for Neuroblastoma Patients with Bone Marrow Involvement  
 
 Bone Marrow Involvement  
Bone marrow obtained within 28 days  prior to study enrollment  with tumor cells 
seen on routine morphology (not by immunohistochemical staining only) of bilateral aspirate or biopsy on one bone marrow sample. 
 
Bone Marrow responses are determined by H&E Staining of bilateral bone marrow biopsies and aspirates.  
 
Complete Response :  No tumor cells detectable by routine morphology on 2 
consecutive bilateral bone marrow aspirates and b iopsies 
performed at least 21 days  apart. Normalization of urinary 
catecholamines or other tumor markers if elevated at 
study enrollment. 
 
Progressive Disease :  In patients who enroll with neuroblastoma in bone 
marrow by morphology have progressive disease  if there 
is a doubling in the amount of tumor in the marrow AND 
a minimum of 25% tumor in bone marrow by 
morphology. (For example, a patient entering with 5% 
tumor in marrow by morphology must increase to ≥ 25% 
tumor to have progressive disease; a patient  entering with 
30% tumor must increase to > 60%).  
 
In patients who enroll without evidence of neuroblastoma 
in bone marrow will be defined as progressive disease if 
tumor is detected in 2 consecutive bone marrow biopsies 
or aspirations done at least 21 day s apart.  
 
Stable Disease:  Persistence of tumor in bone marrow that does not meet 
the criteria for either complete response or progressive 
disease.  
 
 Overall Best Response Assessment  
Each patient will be classified according to his “best response” for the purposes of 
analysis of treatment effect.  Best response is determined from the sequence of the 
overall response assessments as described in Section 12.6 . 
 
 Best Response  
 
 Evaluation of Best Overall Response  
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of the 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
59 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
treatment until disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for progressive 
disease the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started).  The 
patient 's best response assignment will depend on the achievement of both 
measurement and confirmation criteria.  
 
Table 3.  Sequences of overall response assessments with corresponding best 
response.  
1st Assessment  2nd Assessment  Best Response  
Progression   Progressive disease  
Stable, PR, CR  Progression  Progressive disease  
Stable  Stable  Stable  
Stable   PR, CR  Stable  
Stable   Not done  Not RECIST classifiable  
PR PR PR 
PR CR PR 
PR, CR  Not done  Not RECIST classifiable  
CR CR CR 
 
 Duration of Response  
 
 Duration of overall response :  The duration of overall response is 
measured from the time measurement criteria are met for CR or PR (whichever is first recorded) until the first date that recurrent or 
progressive disease is objectively documented (taking as reference for 
progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the 
treatment started).  
 
The duration of overall CR is measured from the time measurement criteria are first met for CR until the first date that progressive disease is 
objectivel y documented.   
 
 Duration of stable disease :  Stable disease is measured from the start of 
the treatment until the criteria for progression are met, taking as 
reference the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment 
started, including the baseline measurements.  
  
 ADVERSE EVENT REPORT ING RE QUIREMENTS  
 
Adverse event data collection and reporting which are required as part of every clinical trial, are 
done to ensure the safety of patients enrolled in the studies as well as those who will enroll in future 
studies using similar agents.  Adverse events are reported in a routine manner at scheduled times 
during a trial.  (Please follow directions for routine reporting provided in the Case Report Forms 
for this protocol).  Additionally, certain adverse events must be reported in an expedited manner to 
allow for optimal monitoring of patient safety and care.  The following sections provide information 
about expedited reporting. 
 
 
Reporting requirements may include the following considerations: 1) whether the patient has 
received an investigational or commercial agent; 2) whether the adverse event is considered serious; 
3) the grade  (severity); and 4) whether or not hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization was 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
60 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
associated with the event.  
 
An investigational agent  is a protocol drug administered  under an Investigational New Drug 
Application (IND).  In some instances, the investigational agent may be available commercially, 
but is actually being tested for indications not included in the approved package label.  
 
Commercial agents are those agents not provided under an IND but obtained instead from a 
commercial source.  The NCI, rather than a commercial distributor, may on some occasions 
distribute commercial agents for a trial.  
 
 Steps to Determine If an Adverse Event Is To Be Reported In an Expedit ed Manner  
 
Step 1 : Identify  the type of adverse event using the NCI CTCAE  version 5.0. All 
appropriate treatment areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 
5.0.  A copy of the CTCAE version 5 .0 can be downloaded from the CTEP 
website 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov /protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm ). 
 
Step 2 :  Grade the adverse event using the NCI CTCAE.  
 
Step 3 :  Review Table A in this section to determine if:  
• the adverse event is considered serious;  
• there are any protocol -specific requirements for expedited reporting of specific 
adverse events that require special monitoring ; and/or  
• there are any protocol -specific exceptions  to the reporting requirements.  
 
Note :  This includes all events that occur within 30 days of the last  dose of protocol 
treatment.  Any event that occurs more than 30 days after the last dose of 
treatment and is attributed (possibly, probably, or definitely) to the 
agent(s) must also be reported according to the instructions  in the table  
below . Attribution categories are as follows:  Unrelated, Unlikely, 
Possible, Probable, and Definite.  
 
Table A:  Phase 1 and Early Phase 2 Studies:  Expedited Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events 
that Occur on Studies under an IND/IDE within 30 Days of the Last Administration of the 
Investigational Agent/Intervention 1, 2 
 
FDA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (21 CFR Part 312)  
NOTE:   Investigators MUST  immediately report to the sponsor ANY Serious Adverse Events, whether or not they 
are considered related to the investigational agent(s)/intervention (21 CFR 312.64)  
An adverse event is considered serious if it results in ANY  of the following outcomes:   
1) Death  
2) A life -threatening adverse event  
3) An adverse event that results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization for ≥ 24 
hours  
4) A persis tent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions  
5) A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
6) Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require hospitalization may b e considered serious when, based upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. (FDA, 
21 CFR 312.32; ICH E2A and ICH E6).  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
61 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
ALL SERIOUS  adverse events that meet the above criteria MUST be immediately reported via CTEP -AERS within 
the timeframes detailed in the table below.  
Hospitalization Grade 1 and Grade 2 Timeframes  Grade 3 -5 
Timeframes  
Resulting in 
Hospitalization       
≥ 24 hrs 7 Calendar Days  
24-Hour 5 Calendar 
Days  Not resulting in 
Hospitalization       
≥ 24 hrs  Not required  
NOTE:   Protocol specific exceptions to expedited reporting of serious adverse events are found in the Specific 
Protocol Exceptions to Expedited Reporting (SPEER) portion of the CAEPR.  
Expedited AE reporting timelines are defined as:  
o “24-Hour; 5 Calendar Days” - The AE must initially be reported via CTEP -AERS within 24 hours of 
learning of the AE, followed by a complete expedited report within 5 calendar days of the initial 24-
hour report.  
o “7 Calendar Days” - A complete expedited report on the AE must be submitted within 7 calendar 
days of learning of the AE.  
1Serious adverse events that occur more than 30 days after the last administration of investigational 
agent/intervention and have an attribution of possible, probable, or definite require reporting as follows:  
Expedited 24 -hour notification followed by c omplete report within 5 calendar days for:  
• All Grade 3, 4, and Grade 5 AEs  
Expedited 7  calendar day reports for:  
• Grade 2 AEs resulting in hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization  
2 For studies using PET or SPECT IND agents, the AE reporting period is  limited to 10 radioactive half -lives, 
rounded UP to the nearest whole day, after the agent/intervention was last administered.  Footnote “1” above 
applies after this reporting period.  
Effective Date:  May 5, 2011  
 
• Any medical event equivalent to CTCAE grade 3, 4, or 5 that precipitates hospitalization (or 
prolongation of existing hospitalization) must be reported regardless of attribution and designation 
as expected or unexpected with the exception of any events identified as proto col-specific 
expedited adverse event  reporting  exclusions.  
 
• Any event that results in persistent or significant disabilities/incapacities, congenital anomalies, or 
birth de fects must be reported via CTEP -AERS  if the event occurs following treatment with an 
agent under a CTEP IND.  
 
• Use the NCI protocol number and the protocol -specific patient ID provided during trial registration 
on all reports.  
 
Additional Instructions or Exceptions to CTEP -AERS  Expedited Reporting Requirements for Phase 1 
Trials Utilizing an Agent under a CTEP -IND or Non -CTEP IND:  
 
• Any death that occurs more than 30 days after the last dose of treatment with an investigational agent which can be attributed (possibly, probably, or definitely) to the agent and is not  clearly due 
to progres sive disease must be reported via CTEP -AERS  for an agent under a CTEP or non- CTEP 
IND agent  per the timelines outlined in the table above.  
 
• Myelosuppression, (Grade 1 through Grade 4 adverse events as defined in the table below), does 
not require expedited reporting , unless it is associated with hospitalization . 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
62 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
Category  Adverse Events  
INVESTIGATIONS  Platelet count decreased  
INVESTIGATIONS  White blood cell decreased  
INVESTIGATIONS  Neutrophil count decreased  
INVESTIGATIONS  Lymphocyte count decreased  
BLOOD/LYMPHATICS DISORDERS  Anemia  
 
• Grade 1 and 2 adverse events listed in the table below do not require expedited reporting via 
CTEPAERS, unless it is associated with hospitalization  
   
Category  Adverse Events  
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS  Nausea  
GENERAL  DISORDERS  AND  
ADMINISTRATION  SITE  CONDITIONS  Fatigue  
MUSCULOSKELETAL AND 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS  Arthralgia  
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS  Decreased appetite  
IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDERS  Infusion -related reaction  
INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS  Fever  
MUSCULOSKELETAL AND 
CONNECTIVE TISSU DISORDERS  Myalgia  
SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS 
DISORDERS  Pruritus  
 
As referenced in the CTEP Adverse Events Reporting Requirements, an AE that resolves and then recurs 
during a subsequent cycle does not require CTEP -AERS  reporting unless (1) the Grade increases; or (2) 
hospitalization is associated with the recurring AE.  
 
 When to Report an Event in an Expedited Manner  
 
• Some adverse events require notification within 24 hours  (refer to Table A to NCI via 
the web at  http://ctep.cancer.gov  (email the ADVL1614 COG assigned study Research 
Coordinator  within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event if the CTEP -AERS  24-Hour 
Notification web -based application is unavailable) and by telephone call to the Study 
Chair . Once internet connectivity is restored, a 24 -hour notification phoned in must be 
entered e lectronically into CTEP -AERS  by the original submitter at the site.  
 
• When the adverse event requires expedited reporting, submit the report within 5 or 7 
calendar days  of learning of the event  (refer to Table A) . 
 
• Expedited AE reporting for this study must  only use CTEP -AERS  (Adverse Event 
Expedited Reporting System), accessed via the CTEP home page https://eapps -
ctep.nci.nih.gov/ctepaers . 
 
 Expedited Reporting Methods  
 
 CTEP -AERS  Reporting  
To report adverse events in an expedited fashion use the NCI’s Adverse Event 
Expedited Reporting System ( CTEP -AERS ) that can be found at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov . 
 
A CTEP -AERS  report must be submitted electronically  via the CTEP -AERS  Web -
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
63 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
based application located at https://eapps -ctep.nci.nih.gov/ctepaers/ .  If prompted 
to enter a sponsor email address, please type in: 
PEPCTNAERS@childrensoncologygroup.org . 
 
Send  supporting documentation by email to the  ADVL 1614 COG study assigned  
Research Coordinator .  ALWAYS include the ticket number on all faxed and 
emailed  documents . 
 
 Definition of Onset and Resolution of Adverse Events  
  
Note:  These guidelines below are for reporting adverse events on the COG case report  
forms and do not alter the guidelines for CTEP -AERS  reporting.  
 
 If an adverse event occurs more than once in a course (cycle) of therapy only the 
most severe grade of the event should be reported.  
 
 If an adverse event progresses through several grades during one course of 
therapy, only the most severe grade should be reported. 
 
 The duration of the AE is defined as the duration of the highest (most severe) grade of the Adverse Effects.  
 
 The resolution date of the AE is defined as the date at which the AE returns to baseline or less than or equal to Grade 1, whichever level is higher  (note that the 
resolution date may therefore be different from the date at which the grade of the AE decreased from its highest grade).  If the AE does not return to baseline the 
resolution date should be recorded as "ongoing."   
 
 An adverse event that  persists from one course to another should only be reported 
once unless the grade becomes more severe in a subsequent course. An adverse 
event which resolves and then recurs during a different course, must be reported 
each course it recurs.  
 
 Other Recipi ents of Adverse Event Reports  
 
 Events that do not meet the criteria for CTEP -AERS  reporting ( Section 13.3 ) 
should be reported at the end of each cycle using the forms provided in the CRF  
packet (See Section 14.1).  
 
 COG will forward reports and supporting documentation to the Study Chair, to 
the FDA (when COG holds the IND) and to the pharmaceutical company (for 
industry sponsored trials).  
 
 Adverse events determined to be reportab le must also be reported according to 
the local policy and procedures to the Institutional Review Board responsible for 
oversight of the patient.  
 
 Reporting Secondary AML/MDS  
All cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) that  
occur in patients following their chemotherapy for cancer must be reported via CTEP -
AERS  and included as part of the second malignant neoplasm reporting requirements for 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
64 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
this protocol (see data submission packet).  Submit the completed CTEP -AERS  report 
within 14 days  of an AML/MDS diagnosis occurring after protocol treatment for cancer . 
 
 Secondary Malignancy :  
A secondary malignancy is a cancer caused by treatment for a previous malignancy ( e.g., 
treatment with investigational agent/intervention, radiation or chemotherapy). A secondary 
malignancy is not considered a metastasis of the initial neoplasm.  
CTEP requires all secondary malignancies that occur following treatment with an agent 
under an NCI IND/IDE be reported via CTEP -AERS . Three options are available to 
describe the event:  
1) Leukemia secondary to oncology chemotherapy  (e.g., acute myelocytic 
leukemia [AML])   
2) Myelodysplastic syndrome  (MDS)   
3) Treatment -related secondary malignancy.   
 
Any malignancy possibly related to cancer treatment (including AML/MDS) should also 
be reported via the routine reporting mechanisms outlined in each protocol.  
Second Malignancy :  
A second malignancy  is one unrelated to the treatment of a prior malignancy (and is 
NOT a metastasis from the initial malignancy).  Second malignancies require ONLY 
routine reporting via CDUS unless otherwise specified.  
 
 Reporting Pregnancy, Fetal Death, and Death Neonatal  
When submitting CTEP -AERS reports for “Pregnancy”, “Pregnancy loss”, or “Neonatal 
loss”, the Pregnancy Information Form should be completed and emailed to the 
ADVL 1614 COG Study Assigned  Research Coordinator  along with any additional medical 
information . The potential risk of exposure of the fetus to the investigational agent should 
be documented in the “Description of Event” section of the CTEP -AERS report.  
 
 Pregnancy  
• Patients who become pregnant on study risk intrauterine exposure of the 
fetus to agents w hich may be teratogenic. For this reason, pregnancy 
occurring on study or within 6 months following the last dose of study 
therapy should be reported in an expedited manner via CTEP -AERS  as 
Grade 3  “Pregnancy, puerperium and perinatal conditions - Other 
(Pregnancy) ” under the “Pregnancy, puerperium and perinatal 
conditions ” System Organ Class (S OC). 
 
• Pregnancy should be followed until the outcome is known. If the baby is 
born with a birth defect or anomaly, then a second CTEP -AERS report is 
required.  
 
 Pregnancy Loss ( Fetal Death ) 
• Pregnancy loss is defined in CTCAE as “ Death in utero.”  
 
• Any pregnancy loss  should be reported expeditiously, as Grade 4 
“Pregnancy loss”  under the “Pregnancy, puerperium and perinatal 
conditions ” SOC.  Do NOT report a pregnancy  loss as a Grade 5 event 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
65 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
since CTEP -AERS recognizes any Grade 5 event as a patient death.   
 
 Death Neonatal  
• Neonatal death, defined in CTCAE as “Newborn deaths  occurring during 
the first 28 days  after birth ” that is felt by  the investigator to be at least 
possibly due to the investigational  agent/intervention, should be reported 
expeditiously. 
 
• A neonatal death should be reported expeditiously as Grade 4 “ Death 
neonatal ” under the “ General disorders and administration”  SOC  when 
the death is the result of a patient pregnancy or pregnancy in partners 
of men on study . 
 
• Do NOT report a n eonatal death  resulting from a patient pregnancy or 
pregnancy in partners of men as a Grade 5 event since CTEP -AERS 
recognizes any Grade 5 event as a patient death.  
 
Pregnancy should be followed up until the outcome of the pregnancy is 
known at intervals deemed appropriate by her physicians. The “Pregnancy 
Information Form” should be used for all follow -ups. This form is 
available at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/docs
/PregnancyReportForm.pdf .  
 
 
 RECORDS, REPORTING, AND DATA AND SAFETY MONIT ORING PLAN 
 
 Categories of Research Records  
Research records for this study can be divided into three categories  
 
1. Non-computerized Information:  Roadmaps, Pathology Reports, Surgical Reports. 
These forms are uploaded into RAVE . 
 
2. Reference Labs, Biopathology Reviews, and I maging Center data:  These d ata 
accompany submissions to these centers, which forward their data electronically 
to the COG Statistics & Data Center.  
 
3. Computerized Information Electronically Submitted:  All other data will be entered in RAVE  with the aid of schedules and worksheets (e ssentially paper 
copies of the OPEN and RAVE screens) provided in the case report form  (CRF) 
packet.  
 
See separate CRF  Packet, which includes submission schedule.  
 CDUS  
This study will be monitored by the Clinical Data Update System (CDUS) Version 3.0.  Cumulative protocol - and patient -specific CDUS data will be submitted electronically to 
CTEP on a quarterly basis by FTP burst of data.  Reports are due January 31, April 30, July 
31, and October 31.  Instructions for submitting data using the CDUS can be found on the 
CTEP Web site (http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/cdus.html). 
 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
66 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
Data and safety is ensured by several integrated components including the COG Data and 
Safety Monitoring Committee.  
 
2. Data and Safety Monitoring Commi ttee 
This study will be monitored in accordance with the Children’s Oncology Group 
policy for data and safety monitoring of Phase 1 and 2 studies. In brief, the role of 
the COG Data and Safety Monitoring Committee is to protect the interests of 
patients an d the scientific integrity for all Phase 1 and 2 studies. The DSMC 
consists of a chair; a statistician external to COG; one external member; one 
consumer representative; the lead statistician of the PEP- CTN  scientific 
committee; and a member from the NCI. The DSMC meets at least every 6 months 
to review current study results, as well as data available to the DSMC from other 
related studies. Approximately 6 weeks before each meeting of the Phase 1 and 2 
DSMC, study chairs will be responsible for working with the study statistician to 
prepare study reports for review by the DSMC. The DSMC will provide 
recommendations to the COG PEP -CTN  Chair and the Group Chair for each study 
reviewed to change the study or to continue the study unchanged. Data and Safety 
Committee reports for institutional review boards can be prepared using the public 
data monitoring report as posted on the COG Web si te. 
 3. Monitoring by the Study Chair and Developmental Therapeutics Leadership  
The study chair will monitor the study regularly and enter evaluations of patients’ 
eligibility, evaluability, and dose limiting toxicities into the study database. In 
addition, study data and the study chair’s evaluations will be reviewed by the C OG 
PEP- CTN  Chair, Vice Chair and Statistician on a weekly conference call.  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
67 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
REFERENCES  
1. Giraudon P, Vincent P, Vuaillat C: T -cells in neuronal injury and repair: semaphorins and 
related T -cell signals. Neuromolecular Med 7:207 -16, 2005  
2. Worzfeld T, Offermanns S: Semaphorins and plexins as therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov 13:603- 21, 2014  
3. Takamatsu H, Takegahara N, Nakagawa Y, et al: Semaphorins guide the entry of dendritic 
cells into the lymphatics by activating myosin II. Nat Immunol 11:594 -600, 2010 
4. Mendes -da-Cruz DA, Lepelletier Y, Brignier AC, et al: Neuropilins, semaphorins, and their 
role in thymocyte development. Ann  N Y Acad Sci 1153:20 -8, 2009  
5. Basile JR, Castilho RM, Williams VP, et al: Semaphorin 4D provides a link between axon guidance processes and tumor -induced angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:9017- 22, 
2006  
6. Campos M, SG DEC, Ribeiro GG, et al: Ki -67 and CD100 immunohistochemical expression 
is associated with local recurrence and poor prognosis in soft tissue sarcomas, respectively. 
Oncol Lett 5:1527 -1535, 2013 
7. Ch'ng E, Tomita Y, Zhang B, et al: Prognostic significance of CD100 expression in sof t tissue 
sarcoma. Cancer 110:164- 72, 2007  
8. Leonard JE, Fisher TL, Winter LA, et al: Nonclinical Safety Evaluation of VX15/2503, a 
Humanized IgG4 Anti -SEMA4D Antibody. Mol Cancer Ther 14:964- 72, 2015 
9. Moriarity BS, Otto GM, Rahrmann EP, et al: A Sleepin g Beauty forward genetic screen 
identifies new genes and pathways driving osteosarcoma development and metastasis. Nat Genet 47:615 -24, 2015  
10. Vaccinex: VX15/2503 Investigator's Brochure v. 3, 2015  
11. Fisher TL, Reilly CA, Winter LA, et al: Generation a nd preclinical characterization of an 
antibody specific for SEMA4D. MAbs:1 -13, 2015  
12. Evans EE, Paris M, Smith ES, et al: Immunomodulation of the tumor microenvironment by 
neutralization of Semaphorin 4D. Oncoimmunology 4:e1054599, 2015  
13. Shi W, Kumano goh A, Watanabe C, et al: The class IV semaphorin CD100 plays 
nonredundant roles in the immune system: defective B and T cell activation in CD100 -
deficient mice. Immunity 13:633 -42, 2000  
14. Patnaik A, Weiss GJ, Leonard JE, et al: Safety, Pharmacokinetics,  and Pharmacodynamics 
of a Humanized Anti -Semaphorin 4D Antibody, in a First -In-Human Study of Patients with 
Advanced Solid Tumors. Clin Cancer Res 22:827- 36, 2016  
15. Skolnik JM, Barrett JS, Jayaraman B, et al: Shortening the timeline of pediatric phase I  
trials: the rolling six design. J Clin Oncol 26:190 -5, 2008  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
68 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX I: PERFORMANCE STATUS SCALES/SCORES  
 
 
Karnofsky  Lansky 
Score  Description  Score  Description  
100 Normal, no complaints, no evidence of 
disease  100 Fully active, normal.  
90 Able to carry on normal activity, minor 
signs or symptoms of disease.  90 Minor restrictions in physically strenuous 
activity.  
80 Normal activity with effort; some signs or symptoms of disease.  80 Active, but tires more quickly  
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on normal 
activity or do active work.  70 Both greater restriction of and less time spent 
in play activity.  
60 Required occasional assistance, but is 
able to care for most of his/her needs.  60 Up and around, but minimal active play; 
keeps busy with quieter  activities.  
50 Requires considerable assistance and 
frequent medical care.  50 Gets dressed, but lies around much of the day; 
no active play, able to participate in all quiet 
play and activities.  
40 Disabled, requires special care and 
assistance.  40 Mostly in bed; participates in quiet activities.  
30 Severely disabled, hospitalization indicated.  Death not imminent.  30 In bed; needs assistance even for quiet play.  
20 Very sick, hospitalization indicated.  
Death not imminent.  20 Often sleeping; play entirely limited to very 
passive activities.  
10 Moribund, fatal processes progressing 
rapidly. 10 No play; does not get out of bed.  
  
  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
69 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX II:  CORRELATIVE STUDIES GUIDE   
 
FOR PATIENTS ≤ 10KG  
 
 
 
FOR PATIENTS > 10KG  
 
 
 
Correlative Study   
 
 
 
 
Appx Sample volume   
 
Tube Type  
Volume per 
sample  Total  
Cycle 1  Total Cycle 2  
 Subsequent 
Cycles   
Pharmacokinetic Study  IV 2.5ml  12.5ml  7.5ml  Included with 
Immunogenicity 
Samples  SST Tubes  
Immunogenicity Study (Anti -Drug Antibody ) V
 3.5ml  7ml 3.5ml  3.5ml  SST Tubes  
Pharmacodynamics -             
T lymphocyte 
saturation/cellular 
SEMA4D assay  VI 4ml 20ml  4ml 4ml Cyto-Chex 
Tubes 
Pharmacodynamics-  Total 
Soluble  SEMA4D  VII 3.5ml  7ml 3.5ml  3.5ml  SST Tubes  
Total Blood Volume   46.5ml  18.5ml  11ml    
 
Correlative Study   
 
 
 
 
Appx  Sample volume   
 
Tube Type  
Volume per 
sample  Total  
Cycle 1  Total Cycle 2  
 Subsequent 
Cycles   
Pharmacokinetic Study  IX 2.5-3.5ml 11ml  6ml Included with 
Immunogenicity 
Samples  SST Tubes  
Immunogenicity Study 
(Anti -Drug Antibody)  X 3.5ml  0ml 0ml 3.5ml  SST Tubes  
Pharmacodynamics -             
T lymphocyte saturation/cellular 
SEMA4D assay  VI 4ml 20ml  4ml 4ml Cyto-Chex 
Tubes 
Pharmacodynamics-  Total 
Soluble  SEMA4D  XI 3.5ml  0ml 0ml 3.5ml  SST Tubes  
Total Blood Volume   31ml  10ml  11ml   
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
70 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX III: TOXICITY -SPECIFIC GRADING  
 
Bilirubin  
 
Grade 1:  > ULN - ≤ 1.5 x ULN  
Grade 2:  > 1.5 x ULN - 3.0 x ULN   
Grade 3:  > 3.0 x ULN - 10.0 x ULN  
Grade 4:  > 10.0 x ULN  
 
ALT: For the purpose of this study, the ULN for SGPT is 45 U/L regardless of baseline.  
  
Grade 1:  > 45 U/L - ≤ 135  U/L 
Grade 2:  136 U/L - 225 U/L 
Grade 3:  226 U/L - 900 U/L 
Grade 4:  > 900 U/L 
 
AST:  For the purpose of this study, the ULN for SG OT is 50 U/L regardless of baseline.  
 
Grade 1:  > 50 U/L - ≤ 150  U/L 
Grade 2:  151 U/L - 250 U/L  
Grade 3:  251 U/L - 1000  U/L 
Grade 4:  > 1000  U/L 
 
GGT:  
 
Grade 1:  > ULN - 2.5 x ULN  
Grade 2:  > 2.5 x ULN - 5.0 x ULN  
Grade 3:  > 5.0 x ULN - 20.0 x ULN  
Grade 4:  > 20.0 x ULN  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
71 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX IV : PHARMACOKINETIC ST UDY FORM  FOR PATIENTS > 10KG  
 
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______ Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight: ______kg  VX15/ 2503 Dose  Level: ______mg/ kg    VX15/ 2503 Total Daily Dose: ______mg  
 
Blood samples ( 2.5 ml) will be collected in SST tubes at the following time points  during Cycle 1:  Day 1 ( 2 hrs. after 
the infusion), Day 4 (at any time  point ), Day 8 (at any time  point ), and Day  15 (pre-infusion , and at the end of infusion).  
For cycle 2, blood samples ( 2.5 ml) will be collected in SST tubes at the following time points: Day 1 (at the end of 
infusion, and 2 hrs. after the infusion), and Day 15 (pre -infusion). On Cycle 1 Day 1 (pre -infusion, and at the end of 
infusion), and Cycle 2 Day 1 (pre -infusion), pharm acokinetic blood samples (3.5 ml) will be collected in conjunction 
with immunogenicity samples in SST tubes. For subsequent cycles pharmacokinetic  samples (3 .5 ml) will be collected 
in conjunction with immunogenicity samples in SST tubes on Day 1 prior to infusion. 
 
Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/2503 is given on Days 1 and 15.  
 
Blood Sample 
No. Cycle 1 
Time point Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time Sample Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Day 1 Prior to  Cycle 1  Day 1 VX15/2503  
infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503 on Cycle 1 Day 1   Date: ___/___/___   Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : __|__|  |__|__|  End  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
2 Day 1 At the end of infusion  on Cycle  1 Day 1 
VX15/2503   ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
3 Day 1 2 hrs. following infusion on Cycle 1  
Day 1 VX15/2503   infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
4 Day 4      
(+/ - 1 Day)  Any time point  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
5 Day 8     
(+/ - 1 Day)  Any time point  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
6 Day 15  Prior to Day 15 VX15/2503   infusion    
VX15/2503  on Cycle 1 Day 15    Date: ___/___/___     Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
7 Day 15  At the end of infusion  on Cycle 1  Day 
15 VX15/2503  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
Blood Sample 
No. Cycle 2 
Time point Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time Sample Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
8 Day 1  Prior to Day 1 VX15/2503  infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  on Cycle 2 Day 1   Date: ___/___/___     Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
9 Day 1 At the end of infusion  on Cycle 2  Day 1 
VX15/2503   ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
10 Day 1 2 hrs. following infusion o n Cycle 2  
Day 1 VX15/2503   infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
11 Day 15  Prior to  Cycle 2  Day 15 VX15/2503   
infusion    
VX15/2503  on Cycle 2 Day 15    Date: ___/___/___    Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
72 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
               
 
Subsequent Cycles (cycle 3 onwards)  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Timep oint Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #_____________  
 Prior to VX1 5/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  Infusion on Day 1  Date: ___/___/___   Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
 One copy of this P harmacokinetic Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second copy should be sent with the samples 
to the address listed in Section 8.3.6 .  See Section 8.3
 for detailed guidelines for packaging and shipping PK samples.  
 
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________   
               (site personnel  responsible for collection o f samples)  
 
 
 
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
73 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX V: IMMUNOGE NICITY  STUDY  FOR PATIENTS > 10KG  
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______  Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight: ______kg VX15/ 2503 Dose  Level: ______mg/ kg  VX15/2503 Total Daily Dose: _____mg 
 
Blood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected in consenting patients in SST tubes during Cycle 1 at the following time 
points: Day 1 (pre -infusion and at the end of infusion) and each subsequent cycle  on Day 1  prior to infusion.  All of 
these blood draws will be used for both immunogenicity and pharmacokinetic analysis.  
 
Record t he exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/ 2503 is  given on Day s 1 and 15.  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Time Point  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual 
Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle 1, Day 1  Prior to VX15/2503  infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  Infusion on Day 1       Date: ___/___/___       Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
Infusion End  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
2 Cycle 1, Day 1 At the end of VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
Subsequent Cycles (Cycle 2 onwards)  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Time Point /Cycle 
Number  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #_____________  
 Prior to VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__|:|_ _|__| 
VX15/2503  Infusion on Day 1       Date: ___/___/___       Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
Infusion End  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
One copy of this Immunogenicity  Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second copy should be sent with the 
samples to the addre ss listed in Section 8.4.6  . See Section 8.4  for detailed guidelines for packaging and shipping PD 
samples.  
 
Record any notes for Sample Storage Conditions below.  
 
Notes _______________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________ _
____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________  
If this form will be used as a source document, the site personnel who collected the samples must si gn and date this 
form below:  
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________  
  (site personnel responsible for collection of samples)  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
74 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX VI : PHARMACODYNAMICS T -LYMPHOCYTE SATURATIO N (FOR ALL 
PATIENTS)  
COG Pt ID # _______________       Cycle # ______     Date: _____________  
Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight: ______kg             VX15/2503  Dose Level: ______mg/ kg VX15/2503              Total Daily Dose: _____mg 
 
Blood samples ( 4 ml) will be collecte d in consenting patients in cyto -chex  tubes during Cycle 1 at the following time 
points: Day 1 (pre -infusion and at the end of infusion) , Day 15 (pre -infusion and at the end of infusion) , and Day 28 (at 
any time point) . Blood samples ( 4 ml) will be collected in consenting patients prior to infusion  on Day 1  for each 
subsequent cycle.  
 
Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/2503 is given on Day 1  and Day 15.  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Time Point  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle 1, Day 1  Prior to VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503 on Day 1      Date: ___/___/___    Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|     End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
2 Cycle 1, Day 1  At the end of VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
3 Cycle 1, Day 15  Prior to VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503 on Day 1    Date: ___/___/___    Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|      End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
4 Cycle 1, Day 15  At the end of VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
5 Cycle 1, Day 28  Any time point   |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
One copy of this P harmacodynamic T-Lymphocyte Saturation S tudy Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second 
copy should be sent with the samples to the address listed in Section 8.5.6. See Section 8.5  for detailed guidelines for 
packaging and shipping PD samples.  
 
Record any notes for Sample Storage Conditions below.  
Notes:  
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________ __ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________________  
_____________________________________________________________________________________________  
If this form will be used as a source docum ent, the site personnel who collected the samples must sign and date this 
form below:  
  
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________  
    (site personnel responsible for collection of samples)  
 Subsequent Cycles (Cycle 2 onwards)  
Blood 
Sample 
No.  Time 
Point/Cycle 
Number  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #_______  Prior to VX15/2503 infusion  
   |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
VX15/2503 on Day 1    Date: ___/___/___  Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__| End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
75 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX VII: PHARMACODYNAMICS TOT AL SOLUBLE SEMA4D FOR                        
PATIENTS >  10KG  
 
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______  Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight: ______kg    VX15/ 2503 Dose  Level: ______mg/ kg 
 
VX15/2503 Total Daily Dose: _____mg 
 
Blood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected in consenting patients in SST tubes during Cycle 1 at the following time 
points: Day 1 (pre -infusion and at the end of infusion) and each subsequent cycl e on Day 1  prior to infusion.  
 Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/ 2503 is  given on Day s 1 and 15.  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Time Point  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle 1, Day 1  Prior to VX15/2503  infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
   VX15/2503 on Day 1   Date: ___/___/___   Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
2 Cycle 1, Day 1 At the end of VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
 
 
 
One copy of this P harmacodynamic  Total Soluble SEMA4D  Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second 
copy should be sent with the samples to the address listed in Section 8.6 . See Section 8.6.6  for detailed guidelines for 
packaging and shipping PD samples.  
 
Record any notes for Sample Storage Conditions below.  
 
Notes _______________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________ _
____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________ ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________  
If this form will be used as a source document, the site personnel who collected the samples mu st sign and date this 
form below:  
 Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________  
     (site personnel responsible for collection of  samples)  
  
 Subsequent Cycles (cycle 2 onwards)  
Blood 
Sample 
No.  Time 
Point /Cycle 
Number  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #______ _ Prior to VX15/2503 infusion  
   |__|__| : |__|__|  
  
VX15/2503 on Day 1    Date: ___/___/___  Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__| End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
76 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX VIII: TISSUE STUDIES FORM  
 
COG Pt ID #  _______________  ACC #  ______________ Date:________     Part of Study # ____  
(Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples)   
Sample Labeling:  
Samples should be labeled with the following information:  
Protocol number:    ADVL1 614 
Institution:        _________________  
Patient ID #:     _________________  
Accession #:     _________________  
Sample Date:    _________________  
Site of Acquired Tissue:  __________________  
 
Tissue obtained at (check one option below):  
Diagnosis            Relapse          Subsequent Resection/Biopsy  
 
Tissue sample is from a:  
    Resection     or        Biopsy  
Shipment of Tumor Tissue:  
Tissue is requested from original diagnosis, relapse, or any subsequent resection or biopsy prior to treatment with 
VX15/2503 . Archived tissue samples should be in the form of a paraffin -embedded tissue block or 8 -10 unstained 
slides from the tissue block accompanied by a copy of the pathology report. Fine needle aspirate samples or other 
cytology samples are not accept able and tumor samples obtained from bone metastases are generally not considered 
acceptable.  
 
All blocks or slides must be labeled with the patient’s study registration number (COG Patient ID #), the study I.D. 
(ADVL1 614), and the sample collection date. Data should be recorded on this Tissue Studies Form, which must 
accompany the sample(s) to the address provided in Section 8. 7.3.  
 
1. If sending paraffin block (PREFERRED):  
a. Place appropriate sample ID label on back of cassette  
b. Place labeled cassette in a Zipper lock bag  
c. Paraffin blocks are shipped to the lab at ambient temperature. It is acceptable to send blocks 
refrigerated if sending blocks and slides together.  
 
2. If sending slides:  
If slides will be cut from tissue block, r ecommended thickness of tissue sections for slides is 4 
microns. Positively charged slides are required (Superfrost Plus is recommended). After cutting, 
the slides should be kept in refrigerator (2 -5°C).  
a. Place slid es in the plastic slide holder and place sample ID label provided on the slide holder  
b. Place the slide holder in the Zipper lock bag and eliminate as much air (and therefore moisture) as 
possible prior to sealing the Zip -lock bag  
c. Slides are shipped to the lab at refrigerated temperature on a cold gel pack . It is acceptable to send 
blocks refrigerated if sending blocks and slides together.  
 
One copy of this form should be uploaded into RAVE.   
 
If this form will be used as a source document, the site personnel who collected the samples must sign and date this 
form below:  
 
Signature: _ ________________________________________          Date:________________________________  
                (site personnel responsible for collection o f samples)  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
77 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX IX : PHARMACOKINETIC STUDY FORM  FOR PATIENTS ≤ 10KG  
 
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______ Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight: ______kg  VX15/2503 Dose Level: ______mg/kg    VX15/2503 Total  Daily Dose: ______mg 
 
Blood samples will be collected in SST tubes at the following time points during Cycle 1: Day 1 (pre -infusion  [3.5 ml] , at 
the end of infusion  [2.5 ml] , and 2 hrs. after the infusion  [2.5 ml] ), and Day 15 (pre -infusion  [2.5 ml] ). For  Cycle 2, blood 
samples will be collected in SST tubes at the following time points: Day 1 (pre -infusion  [3.5 ml] ) and Day 15 (pre -infusion  
[2.5 ml] ). For subsequent cycles  pharmacokinetic blood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected in  conjunction with 
immunogenicity samples in SST tubes on Day 1 prior to infusion.  
 
Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/2503 is given on Days 1 and 15.  
Blood Sample 
No. Cycle 1 
Time point Scheduled Collection Time  Actua l Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time Sample Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Day 1 Prior to  Cycle 1  Day 1 VX15/2503  
infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  on Cycle 1 Day 1   Date: ___/___/___   Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : __|__| |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
2 Day 1 At the end of infusion on Cycle 1 Day 1 
VX15/2503  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
3 Day 1 2 hrs. following infusion on Cycle 1 
Day 1 VX15/2503   infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
4 Day 15  Prior to Day 15 VX15/2503   infusion    
VX15/2503  on Cycle 1 Day 15    Date: ___/___/___     Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
Blood Sample 
No. Cycle 2 
Time point Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time Sample Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
5 Day 1  Prior to Day 1 VX15/2503  infusion  ___/___/___  |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  on Cycle 2 Day 1   Date: ___/___/___     Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
6 Day 15  Prior to  Cycle 2  Day 15 VX15/2503   
infusion    
VX15/2503  on Cycle 2 Day 15    Date: ___/___/___    Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
Subsequent Cycles (cycle 3 onwards)  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Timep oint Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #_____________  
 Prior to VX1 5/2503 infusion   |__|__| : |__|__|  
VX15/2503  Infusion on Day 1  Date: ___/___/___   Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
 
One copy of this P harmacokinetic Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second copy should be sent with the samples 
to the address listed in Section 8.3.6 .  See Section 8.3  for detailed guidelines for packaging and shipping PK samples.  
 
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________   
               (site personnel responsible for collection o f samples)  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
78 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX X: IMMUNOGENICITY STUDY FOR PATIENTS ≤ 10KG  
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______ Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight : ______kg VX15/2503 Dose Level: ______mg/ kg  VX15/2503 Total Daily Dose: _____mg 
 
Blood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected in consenting patients in SST tubes during Cycle 3 and  each 
subsequent cycle on Day 1 prior to infusion. All of these blood draws will be used for both immunogenicity 
and pharmacokinetic analysis.  
 
Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/2503  is given on Day 1  of Cycle 
3 and each subsequent cycle.  
 
One copy of this Immunogenicity Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. A second copy should be 
sent with the samples to the address listed in Section 8.4.6 . See Section 8.4  for detailed guidelines for 
packaging and shipping immunogenicity  samples.  
 
Record any notes for Sample Storage Conditions below. 
 
Notes ______________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________ __________________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
If this form will be used as a source document, the site personnel who collected the samples must sign and 
date this form below:  
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________  
     (site personnel responsible for collection of  samples)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Cycle 3 Onwards  
Blood 
Sample 
No. Time Point /Cycle 
Number  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #_____________  
 Prior to VX15/2503 infusion   |__|__|:|_ _|__| 
VX15/2503  Infusion on Day 1       Date: ___/___/___       Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
Infusion End  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
79 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX XI: PHARMACODYNAMICS TOT AL SOLUBLE SEMA4D FO R PATIENTS  ≤ 10KG  
 
COG Pt ID # _______________      Cycle # ______ Date: _____________
 Please do not write patient names on this form or on samples.  
 
Patient Weight : ______kg VX15/2503 Dose Level: ______mg/ kgVX15/2503   
 Total Daily Dose: _____mg 
 Blood samples ( 3.5 ml) will be collected in consenting patients in SST tubes during Cycle 3 and each 
subsequent cycle on Day 1 prior to infusion.  
 
Record the exact time the sample is drawn along with the exact time VX15/2503  is given on Day 1  of Cycle 
3 and each subsequent cycle . 
 
 
One copy of this P harmacodynamic  Total Soluble SEMA4D  Study Form should be uploaded into RAVE. 
A second copy should be sent with the samples to the address listed in Section 8.6. See Section 8.6.6  for 
detailed guidelines for packaging and shipping PD samples.  
 
Record any notes for Sample Storage Conditions below. 
 
Notes ______________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 
 
If this form will be used as a source document, the site personnel who collected the samples must sign and 
date this form below:  
 
Signature: _________________________________________                    Date:___________________  
     (site personnel responsible for collection of  samples)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cycle 3 Onward s 
Blood 
Sample 
No.  Time 
Point /Cycle 
Number  Scheduled Collection Time  Actual Date 
Sample 
Collected  Actual Time 
Collected  
(24-hr clock)  
1 Cycle #______ _ Prior to VX15/2503 infusion  
   |__|__| : |__|__|  
  
VX15/2503 on Day 1    Date: ___/___/___  Infusion Start  Time:  |__|__| : |__|__| End Time:  |__|__| : |__|__|  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
80 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX XII: YOUTH INFORMATION SHEETS  
 
INFORMATION SHEET REGARDING RESEARCH STUDY ADVL1614  
(for children from 7 through 12 years of age)  
A study of VX15/2503 in children  
with a cancer that has come back after treatment or is difficult to treat  
 
 
1. We have been talking with you about your cancer. You have had treatment for the cancer already 
but the cancer did not go away or it came back after treatment.  
 
2. We are asking you to take part in a research study because other treatments did not get rid of the 
cancer. A research study is when doctors work together to try out new ways to help people who ar e 
sick. In this study, we are trying to learn more about how to treat the kind of cancer that you have. 
We will do this by trying a new medicine to treat your cancer.  
 
3. Children who are part of this study will be treated with a cancer -fighting medicine called 
VX15/2503. Yo u will also have regular tests and exams done more often while you are in this 
study. The doctors want to see if VX15/2503 will make children with your type of cancer get better. 
We don’t know if VX15/2503 will work well to get rid of your cancer. That is why we are doing 
this study.  
 
4. Sometimes good things can happen to people when they are in a research study. These good things 
are called “benefits.” We hope that a benefit to you of being part of this study is that VX15/2503 
may cause your cancer to stop growing or to shrink for a period of time but we don’t know for sure 
if there is any benefit of being part of this stud y. 
 
5. Sometimes bad things can happen to people when they are in a research study. These bad things 
are called “risks.” The risks to you from this study are that you may have more problems, or side 
effects, from VX15/2503 than other treatments. Other things may happen to you that we don’t yet 
know about.  
 
6. Your family can choose to be part of this study or not. Your family can also decide to stop being 
in this study at any time once you start. There may be other treatments for your illness that your 
doctor can tell you about. Make sure to ask your doctors any questions that you have. 
 
7. As part of your regular care, your doctor may have removed some tissue to see if you have cancer. 
If you take part in this study, we will keep some of the tissue that is left over to do special tests. 
These tests may help us learn more about how VX15/2503 works.   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
                         ADVL1614  
 
THIS PROTOCOL IS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES ON LY, SEE PAGE 1 FOR USAGE POLICY   
81 
Version Date: 01/31/19  
APPENDIX XIII: YOUTH INFORMATION SHEETS  
 
INFORMATION SHEET REGARDING RESEARCH STUDY ADVL1614  
(for teens from 13 through 17 years of age)  
A study of VX15/2503 in children  
with a cancer that has come back after treatment or is difficult to treat  
 
1. We have been talking with you about your cancer. You have had treatment for the cancer already but 
the cancer did not go away or it came back aft er treatment .  
 
2. We are asking you to take part in a research study because other treatments did not get rid of the cancer . 
A research study is when doctors work together to try out new ways to help people who are sick. In this 
study, we are trying to le arn more about how to treat the kind of cancer that you have. 
 
3. Children and teens who are part of this study will be given a cancer -fighting medicine called 
VX15/2503. VX15/2503 is an antibody (a protein that makes up part of the immune system) that binds 
to an antigen (a substance that activates the immune system) and therefore blocks the antigen from working to increase tumor growth. We are using VX15/2503  in this study because it seems to work 
against certain types of cancer cells in test tubes and  animals. VX15/2503 is considered experimental 
because the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved this drug. The dose of VX15/2503 
used in this study was found to be well -tolerated in adults.  
 
4. You will get VX15/2503 by IV on Days 1 and 15 o f a 28 -day period. This entire 28 -day period is called 
a cycle. You may continue to receive VX15/2503 for up to about 12 months (up to 13 cycles)  as long 
as you do not have bad effects from it and your cancer does not get any worse. You will also have 
exam s and tests done that are part of normal cancer care. But, the exams and tests will be done more 
often while you are being treated with VX15/2503. The doctors want to see if VX15/2503  will make 
children with your type of cancer get better. We don’t know if  VX15/2503 is better than other 
medicines. That is why we are doing this study.  
 5. Sometimes good things can happen to people when they are in a research study. These good things are 
called “benefits.” We hope that a benefit to you of being part of this study is that VX15/2503 may cause 
your cancer to stop growing or to shrink for a period of time but we don’t know for sure if there is any benefit of being part of this study. 
 6. Sometimes bad things can happen to people when they are in a research study. These bad things are 
called “risks.” The risks to you from this study are that you may have more problems, or side effects, 
from VX15/2503  than other treatments. Other things may happen to you that we don’t yet know about.  
 
7. Your family can choose to be  part of this study or not. Your family can also decide to stop being in this 
study at any time once you start. There may be other treatments for your illness that your doctor can 
tell you about. Make sure to ask your doctors any questions that you have.  
 
8. As part of your regular care, your doctor may have removed some tissue to see if you have cancer. If 
you take part in this study, we will keep some of the tissue that is left over to do special research tests. 
These tests may help us learn more about h ow VX15/2503 works.  The samples will come from leftover 
tissue so there would be no extra procedures.  