 
 
Home Pulmonary Rehabilitation for COPD   
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
August 23, 2021  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 1 of 17 
  
General Study Information  
 
Principal Investigator:  Roberto Benzo       
        
Study Title: Home Pulmonary Rehabilitation for COPD    
 
Protocol version number  an d date:     Protocol Version9 , Augus t 23, 2021  
Research Question and Aims  
 
Hypothesis :   
Home -based pulmonary rehabilitation with proper self -management  support through health coaching  rooted in motivational 
intervention during pulmonary rehabilitation will improve physical we llbeing, qual ity of life, increase daily physical activity , and 
decrease  health care utilization for patients with COPD.  
 
Ai ms, purpose, or objectives:  
The ideal system for a home PR program requires straightforward, accurate technology to monitor physiological param eters, patien t 
engagement, and simple exercises to be performed at home, all ensuring participant safety. Feedback is critical: MI -based health 
coaching, proven effective in COPD,6 can t ranslate to higher self -efficacy, subsequently promoting better SM and improve d QOL .15, 16  
The aims  of this pr oject: 
• Home -based PR will increase PR uptake and adherence, a significant existing gap in COPD care.  
• The addition of formal SM support through health coaching during PR may promote behavioral change to prolong the effects 
of PR on critical COPD health outc omes.  
• The home -based PR program may meaningfully engage participants in successful SM and translate into sustained improved 
physical wellbeing (QOL), increased daily PA, and decreased health care utilization for patients with COPD.  
• The proposed home -based PR system u sing “off -the-shelf” hardware and a previously commercialized software (accomplished 
through our Small Business Innovation Research Grant, SBIR 5R44HL114162- 03) will have a high likelihood of 
implementation and dissemination once proven effect ive. 
  
Background :
   
 
Role of Pulmonary Rehabilitation in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease care  
International guidelines for managing Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), one of the main causes of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide,1 suggest  that pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) programs and self -management support (SM) are a critical part of 
treatment. A com pelling body of evidence confirms that PR programs deliver improved exercise capacity, reduced breathlessness, and 
improved health- related quality of life (QOL)2 and are associated with fewer acute exacerbations and hospital admissions -the biggest 
costs burden in health care.2, 7 
Adherence to PR is poor 
Despite proven benefits, the proportion of people with COPD who receive PR is very small, with estimates from developed count ries 
of <20%.3 The current  model of a center -based PR program fails to address the needs of many patients with COPD.5 The most 
common patient barrier to attendance is travel to cen ter-based programs, particularly for frail patients with more severe COPD who 
need transportation assistance.3  
Home -based, unsupervised PR has been proposed as an alternative model4 to hospital- based programs and has been found to be safe 
and effective compared with traditional programs in terms of improvement in exercise tole rance, disease- specific QOL, and degree of 
breathlessness and fatigue.8 However, despite initial results, the implementation and dissemination of home -based PR has been po or 
in the U nited States due to a lack of simple home -based PR systems that combine proper monitoring and meaningful feedback to the 
patient.8 There is a knowledge and pr actice gap regarding effective systems that can deliver home PR.2, 5 Further research on feasible 
and effective hom e-based PR pa rticularly oriented to a sustained behavior change is needed.  
Aiming for home PR programs with lasting results   
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 2 of 17 
 It is well documented that the effects of PR diminish over time, with deterioration in both exercise capacity and health -related QO L 
within six to 12 months of program completion.9 One key reason for this decline is the lack of a behavioral change after completing 
PR (developing new habits). It  is now postulated that undertaking PR in the home may promote effective behavior change through 
integration of physical activity (PA) routines into daily life.5 Self-management support (SM), which creates ideal conditions for 
behavior change, is now recommended by guidelines as an essential part of chronic care, particularly in PR programs.2, 10 A recent 
large randomized study of COPD SM11 identifie d lack of patient engagement as the core problem in adopting new behaviors. In that 
study, significant effects on health- related QOL and health care utilization after the SM intervention occurred only in patients who 
were engaged in their care. Brief advice i s not enough to promote behavior change; meaningful engagement is necessary.12 
Health Coaching, promoting a behavior change  
In our previous work, we developed an d tested (R01 HL09468), an effective program for SM in COPD through health coaching13 
rooted in motivational interviewing (MI)13, 14 that decreased COPD re- hospitalizations6 and produced a sustained i mproved QOL at six 
and 12 months.  
Theoretical Framework  
The theoretical framework of the proposed intervention (Fig. 1) is based on two guiding theories: self -efficacy theory15, 17 and MI 
theory.16 In brief, trai ning in MI prepares the health coach to initiate conversations in the spirit of MI (compassion, acceptance, 
evocation of the client’s values, and collaboration) and skills (open questions, a non- coercive approach for change, and making the 
participant the ex pert and final decision -maker). The latter (spirit and skills) may not only impact social persuasion (part of self -
efficacy theory) but also directly increase self -efficacy (confidence) that leads to higher SM abilities (behavior change). Pulmonary 
rehab ilitation directly impacts the foundations of the self -efficacy theory: mastery in PA, by engaging in daily exercises (Aim 3, 
measured by activity monitor), social persuasion (weekly feedback from a trustworthy coach) and emotions and physiology (exercise 
is a known positive factor impacting emotions and COPD physiology). Self -efficacy (Sub aim 2 measured by CRQ Mastery) translates 
into SM or behavior change (Aim 2 measured by SMAS30) which in turn impacts physical QOL (Aim 1). We have recently confirmed and published the independent relationship between MI health coaching, SM and quality of life.
6, 18, 19 A proposed path 
analysis will confirm the proposed framework.  
 
 
 
      
 
 
  
*Compassion, A ccep tance , Evocation, Collaboration ; †Open -ended questions, affirmations, reflective listening, and summaries  
Fig.  1. Theoretical f ramework . Motivation al 
Interviewing                  
(MI) Theory  
 
 
  
 
 Self-Efficac y Theory  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 Mastery of PA by  
performi ng PR (Aim 3) 
Social Persuasion  by 
Health Coaching  
Positive Physiological 
and Emotional States  
by doing PR  Self-
Efficacy 
(Aim 2)  SM          
(behavior change)         
(Aim 2) Increased 
physical QOL: 
dyspnea and 
fatigue (Aim 1) MI 
Training  
MI 
Skills†  MI 
Spirit*  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 3 of 17 
  
Innovation  
The project is truly innovative due to the purely home -based nature of the system, the simplicity and accuracy of data collectio n 
attained with using commercially available monitors, and the addition of health 
coaching to engage and provide weekly feedback to participants. Previous 
studies required participants in home -based training groups to attend SM 
education4, 20 or weekly monitoring in the clinic or hospital.21 These approaches 
fail to overcome the transportation and mobility- related barriers to attendance, 
perpetuating the p resent lack of adherence.  
The proposed study will be the first of its kind combining monitored home -
based PR with theory- driven health coaching to provide SM support, a novel 
addition to PR which may translate to greater participant engagement, better comm unication, an d sustained behavior change.
13 Currently, there is no 
research -proven, effective home- based PR system available .  
 Preliminary Data :  
We present th e preliminary data of four projects (tested in previous applications) 
representing critical components that support the proposed home -based PR 
system:  
1. Creating the system using AMs and an Android™ receptor (R44 AG29087- 02A1) and pilot of its effect  on dis ease-specif ic 
QOL (Aim 1)  
2. Effect of the proposed health coaching on sustainable improvement of QOL (Aim 1). (R01 HL09468)  
3. Pilot testing the integrity of the transmission of physiologic data (R43 HL 114162- 01) 
4. Refinement of the system and Pilot testing of  the whole proposed intervention (5R44HL114162 -03) 
Project 1 – Creating the System. SBIR project NIH (R44 AG29087 -02A1 Kramer, PI; 
Benzo, Co I) provides the foundation for the proposed mobile system for home PR in this project. In this study, AMs with Blu etooth capabi lities were fastened to the ankle and 
connected to an Android™ device (proposed in the present application). The device then 
transferred activity and patient -reported outcomes to a server, which generated a report 
(Fig. 2) for a coach who revi ewed the data and provided support to participants. The system 
also included daily participant feedback about their symptoms (Fig. 3), which informed the coaching sessions. We tested 50 participants with severe COPD aiming to improve QOL as measured by the  Chronic Resp iratory Questionnaire (CRQ) (as in Aim 1). We found 
improved QOL at eight weeks, (Fig. 4) and this improvement was  maintained at six 
months.  
          
Qualitative analysis reported the following participant themes: (1) the system was efficaci ous in motivating increased activity; (2) improved wellbeing; (3) appreciation of the 
coach interaction; and (4) interested in a wrist monitor that enabled them to view activity 
(Garmin monitor with display is proposed in this application; see Fig. 5). Coa ch interviews  
indicated that coaches found reports useful and actionable. The technology was friendly and did not interfere with participant - coach communication. All themes and requests of the 
previous study are now incorporated in this application.  
 
Fig.  2. Project 1 - coach application  used .  
Fig.  4. Pilot 1 . CRQ scale is 1 -7, with 
higher scores indicating better health.*A 
clinically significant difference is ≥0.5 
points. ( P<.05)  
Fig. 5.  Garmin 
Vivofit ™. Fig.  3. Android ™ screen of reported 
t  

Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 4 of 17 
 Project 2 –Effect of the proposed health coaching on 
sustainable improvement of QOL (Aim 1). In a randomized 
study (N=215), 6 we tested the proposed MI -based health 
coaching telephone inte rvention (NHLBI R01 HL09468  Benzo, 
PI) to decrease  COPD readmission and to improve QOL. We 
discovered significant improvements in Physical QOL (Aim 1) and Emotional QOL measured by the CRQ at six months post -
intervention, and also observed that these bene fits were 
maintained at 12 months  (Fig. 6). Health coaching decreased ER 
visits and hospitalizations (see exploratory aim in this 
proposal).6 The SM worksheet is shown in Appendix 1. 
Qualitative anal ysis also demonstrated that the SM support 
intervention was acceptable to patients and interventionists, 
increased self -efficacy for dealing with COPD, and promoted an 
effective working alliance with the coach (Fig. 7). Details of the interventio n are published and publicly available.
13  
Project 3 –Addition of  physiologic monitoring to the system 
in Project 1: Feasibility and Signal Integrity. In  R43 HL 
114162- 01 (Benzo, Kramer Co I) we tested participants with 
severe COPD, we confirmed the feasibility and integrity of heart rate and oxygen saturation transmission during the proposed PR 
exercise routine in a simulated patient’s home, validating 
transm itted data from the monitor with in -site monitors (gold 
standard).  
Project 4 –Pilot Study Testing the Proposed System (home - based 
PR plus coaching) . The finalized proposed system, was 
finalized funded by NHLBI (5R44HL114162- 03 Home -Based Health 
Management of COPD Patie nts), and was tested in a pilot study that 
included health coaching. All participants were able to use the technology and were 100% compliant with daily activity measures. Participants highly rated the helpfulness of the study (8.5, 
scale 0 -10) and ease of technology navigation (9.67, scale 0- 10). A 
preliminary qualitative analysis is shown in Fig. 8.  
     
 
    
Study Design and Methods  
 
Methods:  Describe, in detail, the research activities that will be conducted under this protocol :   
 
Pilot  Study:  When the technology is ready, we will conduct a pilot study enrolling fifteen  or fewer participants.  The 
participants in the pilot study will not be randomized and will receive the Intervention.  The purpose of the pilot study is to observe how t he technology works in real life and to refine the intervention if needed.  The participants in the pilot study will 
complete all measures and activities of the randomized control trial, minus the randomization.   
 
Fig.  6. Quality of life outcomes from health coaching 
 
Fig. 7. Qualitative feedback of health coaching 
 
Fig.  8. Qualitative pilot feedback of the h ome pulmonary rehabi litation program.  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 5 of 17 
  
  Randomized Study:  
Participants will b e randomly as signed in equal proportion to one of two treatments: home PR with health coaching or the attention 
waitlist control (Fig. 9). Participants randomly assigned to the intervention will receive three months of home PR followed by six 
months of usual  care.  
Participants randomly assigned to the active control group will receive three months of usual care plus educati onal materials and non -
coaching  calls (matching the number of contacts in the intervention group), followed by three months of home PR pl us health 
coaching and three months of usual care.  
Phase 2:  Participants randomized to intervention will not change; three months of home PR followed by six months of usual ca re.  
Participants enrolled in the active control group will follow the scheme  listed above; 3 months of usual care followed by three months 
of home PR and three months of usual care.  During the control wait period they will receive a pamphlet of 12 Healthy Habits during the enrollment period as well as two letters during the contr ol period.  T he letters will remind them to review the 12 Healthy Habits 
and will remind them that the exercise portion of the study will start soon.    
 
Phase 3:   Forty Mayo participants who  have competed the intervention  (the 12 weeks  of home -based pulmona ry rehab with health 
coaching) will be randomly selected to complete a qualitative interview  to explore areas related to the intervention, quality of life and 
symptom severity .    The purpose of the qualitative interview is to take an  in-depth look at the  appropriat eness of the intervention as a 
potential method of treatment a s well as examining the impact on the participant as a whole.  Mayo Clinic participants who have 
completed the interv ention p ortion of the study will be contacted via the telephone to  inquire about their interest in part icipating in the 
interview.   If interested, oral consent will be conducted.  A mutu ally agreed upon time a nd date for the interview will be confirmed.   
(A phone script will be used. )  The participants will re ceive $40  for consi deration of their time.   
The interviews will be  recorded  for subsequent transcription of the interactions.  The transcribed interviews will be examined for 
common them es.    Each interview will vary between 20 and 30 minutes and will be performe d by a member of the Mindful Br eathing 
Labora tory who is trained in Motivational Interviewing and Qualitative Interviewing.   Additional members from  the Lab will assist in 
the transcription of the interviews as well as theme identification. Data collectio n and analy sis will be overseen by Dr. Benzo. (A 
guided interview script will be used.)    
 
In addition,  the five Mayo Clinic staff who se rved as health coaches on the study wi ll also be offered the opportunity to be i nterviewed 
to learn  their experiences  in the program.  The interviews will be condu cted by Qualitative Expert, Dr. Jennifer Ridgeway, either  in a 
private space or by phone call.  The inte rview will b e recorded so that it can later be transcribed  and analyzed.   An email inviting the 
health coach to partic ipate will be sent to the health coach.  The health coach w ill be orally consented and will have the option to opt 
out.  
  
  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 6 of 17 
  
 
 
     
 
  Questionnaires:  
Physical QOL will be assessed by the CRQ (Aim 1), SM abilities, self -efficacy (Aim 2), and d aily PA and self -efficacy for exercise 
(Aim 3). These QOL components will be measured at baseline, three, six, and nine months af ter ran domization in both groups. 
Qualitative analysis (Aim 4) will occur after the intervention in order  to further understan d the inter vention’s acceptability and to help 
interpret the comparative effectiveness findings from Aims 1- 3.  
Additional QOL que stionna ires will include the Interpersonal Support Evaluation List (ISEL -12), the Meaning of Life Questio nnaire 
(MLQ6), and th e Longitudinal Analogue Self -Assessment (LASA6).    Recent research has indicated that social support and sense of 
meaning of life  are im portant indicators in the perception of quality of life.  The added questionnaires will better mea sure these 
important factors.  
 
Study Sites:  
The clinical study sites include (1) Mayo Clinic —Rochester, Rochester, MN, (2) Mayo Clinic- Jacksonville, Ja cksonvi lle, FL, and (3) 
HealthPartners
® Specialty Center -Regions Hospital, St. Paul, MN. The engineer sit e is Minnesota Health Solutions, Maple Grove, MN. 
These study partners have collaborated for the past fi ve years. 
 
Recruitment   
The study coordinator wi ll util ize ACE to generate a list of eligible  participants with research authorization (avoiding any HIPA A 
noncompliance) and s end invita tion letters. In addition, patients presenting to the clinic with COPD may be referred to the study by Month 3  
Measures , AM, 
HCU  
 Final 
Analysis  Arm 1:  Intervention  
(n=100)  COPD patients 
eligible for PR  
are invited 
through letters 
and clinic 
    
 
 Screening Call  
-Able to walk  
-Not in PR in past 3 
months  
-Not in exacerbation  
-Past or current smoker  
 
 
Arm 2: Attention 
wait list control 
(n=100)  12 Weekly HC C alls 
HCU: Health care  u tilization  
AM: Activity m onitor  
HC: Health c oaching   
6 Educational Guides & 6 
Calls = 12 contacts  Clinic Visit  
-Baseline Measures  
-Taught technolog y 
-Sent home with AM (1 week)  
 
 
12 Weekly  HC Calls  Measures  
-CRQ                -mMRC  
-SMAS -30       - PAM  
-WAI (after intervention)  
Month 6 
Measures , AM, 
HCU 
 Month 9 
Measures , AM, 
HCU 
 
Randomization           
(after AM received)  
 
 
Fig. 9. Randomized  study  design.  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 7 of 17 
 
 Fig. 10. 
ActiGr aph™ 
wGT3X -BT. their provider.   The co ordinator will approach potential participants through a screening call (review inclusion and excl usion criteria) 
and w ill schedule an enrollment visit and to demonstrate the Home Rehab and to obtain consent.    
 
Subject Information  
 
Target accrual:   
400 total participants.   Mayo Clinic Rochester has a target enrollment of 150  participants, Mayo Cl inic Florida and Health P artners 
have a target enrollment of 70 participants each.  Up to fifteen  total participants will be enrolled in a Pilot Study.  
 Inclusion  Criteria : 
• Clinical diagnosis of COPD, confirmed by spirometry  
• Age ≥40 years (to avoid recruiting participants with ast hma rather than COPD)  
• Current or previous smoker (≥10 packs per year)  
• Confidence in using the proposed PR system  
• English language fluency  
Exclusion Criteria : 
• Study candidate experiencing an acute  COPD exacerbation (can  be included after the acute event)  
• Inability to walk (orthopedic -neurologic problems or confined to a bed)  
• Currently in PR or finished PR in the last three months (unlikely to improve)  
• Pregnant women  
• Live in an area where cell pho nes do not work/ 
 
Research Activity  
 
Randomization  
Eligible participants (after the screening call) will visit the site for the consenting process. In the clinic visit, all consented participa nts 
will receive baseline questionnaires, and information about  the system. They will complete the questionnaires during the visit, and 
take home the ActiGraph ™ AM (Fig. 10), to wear for one week. On return of the AM, the study coordinator will randomly assign the 
participant to intervention or attention waitlist control through a centralized program, Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap). 
Randomization will be stratified by whether the participant has poor lung function (forced expiratory volume [FEV1]  <50% predicted) 
and whether the participant has severe dyspnea  (recorded modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale [mMRC] score, 3 -4; 
scale, 0 -4); critical factors that can make the study arms unbalanced regarding risk factors. The study coordinator  will call the 
participant and inform him or her of the results  of randomization. Intervention participants will be mailed the home -based PR system 
(pulse oximeter, tablet and Garmin Vivofit™ ). While blinding participants will not be possible, as most behavioral interventions, the 
arms will be blinded to the research team in charge of the data entry and statistical analysis and revealed only at study conclusion.  
 
Clinic Visit: Face -to-Face Encounter 
The participant will practice the use of the proposed system and the PR routine in the PR lab to ensure understanding an d safety; 
therefore, no home visits are planned. The clinic visit is the best opportunity to evaluate the confidence of the individual in using the 
system. The study team will provide step -by-step instructions on how to perform the daily home -based PR routine (Fig. 11) and 
discuss the home environment where PR will take place to define the optimal conditions, particularly safety, for exercise. The 
participant will be asked to rate their confiden ce to use the technology presented and their confidence (self -efficacy) to perform the 
home rehabilitation routine on a scale from 0 (no confidence) to 10 (great confidence). A rating of six or greater will be de emed an 
acceptable confidence level to parti cipate in the study.  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 8 of 17 
 Each participant will be asked to define a  
particular place and time they can perform the 
home -based PR. The physical and mental 
environment is critical for the successful 
adoption of new behavior (PR). Each 
participant will learn about the weekly calls with the coach to discuss their rehabilitation and monitored measures (steps, level of shortness of breath, wellbeing and fatigue). They will then go over the daily answers to 
wellbeing questions (mood, energy, and 
breathlessness as tes ted in the pilot study) (Fig. 
3). After performing the PR routi ne (to ensure 
safety and understanding) and reviewing use of the monitors, a plan for the following week will be discussed. The coach will also confer 
with the participant and caregiver to identify 
possible exercise- related fall hazards in the 
home environment (see Human Protections section).  
Strategies for promoting recruitment and 
retention  
A thorough explanation of the technology and 
measures required will contribute to a better understandi ng of the study and decrease the 
risk of dropout. In the screening visit, the study coordinator will clearly and carefully explain 
the benefits of enrolling and the duties in this 
study from the perspective of potential participants. These benefits include  access to 
home -based PR and a coach, who is describe 
safety an d benefits of the proposed exercise in 
the home, the weekly call with a coach, the steps, oxygen and heart rate monitoring, and SM 
support. All tasks related to study participation (e.g., quest ionnaires and utilization of AMs) will 
be carefully explained.  We believe that the proposed study design will be attractive to both 
intervention and control participants.  
Intervention Group  
Participants are to engage in the home PR at least six days a w eek. The Garmin Vívofit™ AM 
(Fig. 5)  is to be worn at all times  (battery lasts one year)  to capture daily steps and metabolic 
equivalent of task (METs) per day. The PR routine begins with a slow breathing awareness exercise, “pursed lips breathing,” follow ed by upper -extremity exercises ( Fig. 12) and a 6- minute walk ( in the home or outside) 
finishing with another slow breathing- awareness exercise.  
Participants will complete two 6 -minute walks, either right after or at another time of day. The exercise prot ocol lasts about 24 
minutes, which is the amount of dedicated exercise time associated with a risk reduction in hospitalization and improved QOL
23, 24 and 
is recommend ed by current PR guidelines.2 The proposed protocol is currently being used by the PI of this proposal  in a prospective 
COPD trial (NIH NCI R01CA163293- 03). The PR coach will contact the pr i mary care or referring provider before PR to introduce the 
provider to the study as well as coordinate and develop a strategy in case of a COPD exacerbation (a common cause of PR 
abandonment).  
The proposed home -b ased PR system (Fig. 11)  consists of three  commercial devices and two software application. The devices are a 
Garmin Vívofit™ AM,  a Nonin 3150 WristOx 2® Pulse Oximeter (PO), and a 7” Android ™ tablet with 3G/4G cellular service. The 
AM and PO wirelessly communicate with the tablet via Bluetooth. D uring the upper extremity exercise routine (Fig. 12) and 6 -minute 
walks, the PO measures the participants’ heart rate (HR) and oxygen saturation (SpO 2). Near the end of the day, the tablets  
Fig. 12.  Depiction of 
exercises . 
Fig.11.  Proposed h ome pulmonary rehabilitation system with self -management 
support.  

Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 9 of 17 
 periodically sound a musical alarm and display a short health status  questionnaire (as demonstrated in the pilot study, Fig. 3)25 asking 
participants to rate their wellb eing,25 ease of breathing, and energy lev el. At night, the tablets securely transmit the device data and 
wellbeing questionnaire answers to a remote Web server, which securely stores the data and generates reports. Health coaches call  the 
participants weekly to discuss their progress in PR and SM  (see below).  
Participant software application : When the participant turns on the Android™ tablet, the application logs in, and the participant 
accesses two main screens (see appendix for all g raphics). First Screen:  
 
1) The top left corner of the screen displays the participant’s step count, step goal, and remaining number of steps. The top 
center of the screen shows a motivational message (based on the participant’s progress). The top right corner displays the 
weather, an important factor for the PR coach  to consider when interpreting a participant’s PA. The remainder of the screen 
displays the daily PR activities.  
 
2) To initiate one of these activities, the user selects the corresponding act ivity from the “To -Do” column. Selecting 
“Exercise” from the “T o-Do” column initiates a video guiding the user through the PR exercises. Similarly, selecting “Walk” 
from the “To -Do” column starts a 6 -minute countdown once the application detects that the participant has initiated walking. 
Before displaying the exercise and walking videos (asked to be followed), the application verifies that the participant is 
wearing the AM and PO to assure measure and compliance (during exercise an increase in heart rate is expected). When the 
participant finishes the selected activity, it appears in the “Done” column. The application provides instructions before and between each activity.  
The second screen plots historical data, allowing the participant to see trends as in the pilot study. From this screen, the user is able to view d aily steps, average heart rate, SpO
2, and questionnaire answers. The user also is able to select the historical 
window (e.g., last week, last month, last quarter).  
Coaching Calls (weeks 1- 12) content for PR feedback plus SM : After the in -person visit, coaching calls will occur weekly for 12 
weeks following the published protocol:13  
1) Set the call agenda. Listen for the participant’s exercise description, ask whi ch exercises were successful, and affirm. 2) 
Provide feedback of monitored sessions and generate dialog by listening for “change talk” (participant’s comments on anticipated activities he or sh e wants to do). 3) If problems arise, resist the urge to attempt to solve the participant’s 
problems and barriers. 4) Listen carefully and kindly (ambivalence from the participant in changing their behavior). 5) Discuss how behaviors connect to the participant’s values and strengths. 6) Collaborate in setting goal(s) for the following week. 7) Discuss the process of action planning: elicit the participant’s preferences/desires for behavior 
change. 8) Elicit the participant’s choice; do  not assign  goals,  and use the participant’s  language  to describe  the goal. 9) 
Assess  confidence  for goal completion, reaffirm  commitment  to the action  plan,  and express  optimism. 10) Thank the 
participant and plan the next call.  
All calls will be recorded to ensure compliance  with the protocol and MI principles (10% of all calls will be reviewed).     
Recorded files are saved on the restricted research drive, accessible only to study staff.  The recorded files are to be 
deleted off the drive after analysis of the intervention is completed and study is finished.  Only ten percent of the cal ls 
are reviewed, and that is to feedback and training to the health coach.  
 Coach Training  
Details of the health coach training have been published and publicly available.13 In brief, the health coach intervention is purposefully 
designed to be delivered by PR professionals, respiratory therapists, or nurses, the most common providers of care in PR, as opposed 
to psychologists.  Training includes: 1) face -to-face education on theory and strategies associated with SM education and MI in 
general (six hours); 2) reading materials detailing skills and strategies associated with SM education  and MI;  3) rol e play -based 
experiential learning of intervention strategies w ith participant vignettes (five hours); and 4) recorded and reviewed intervention 
sessions in which interventionists provide tailored training to discuss strengths, missed opportunities for use  of intervention strategies, 
and any deviations from the intervention protocol (10 hours over six months). The rationale for the latter is that training sessions that 
incorporate feedback from coded sessions increase skill retention.  All training sessions will be audio or video recorded for future 
review to minimize d rift from intervention protocol.   
Health Coach Software Application :  (see Appendix 1 for full size graphics and reports).  
The health coach software application provides three types of reports. The overview report (Fig. 13) allows health coaches to 
succinct ly ascertain the status of their participants and flag anyone who may be experiencing problems. The health coach may select a  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 10 of 17 
 participant from the overview to display the trend report (Fig. 14). The trend report allows the health coach to review the partic ipant’s 
progress between weekly health coaching sessions. Finally, the health coach may select a day from the trend report to display a 
detailed report (Fig. 15). These three reports are updated after the results of the pilot studies (preliminary data proj ects 1 and 3) are 
generated.  
While participant monitoring does not occur in real time, any 
significant physiologic abnormality measured during rehabilitation and transmitted to the server (O
2 saturation less than 
80% or heart rate >140 or <40 beats per minute) prompts a message to the coach to call the participant to investigate the event. The PI also is alerted within 24 hours by text message if a 
physiologic abnormality is measured to ensur e the appropriate 
response. In 5R44HL114162- 03 Home -Based Healt h 
Management of COPD Patients, the remote rehabilitation and 
health coaching systems have been pilot tested together and found feasible, accurate, and acceptable to participants.  
Attention Wai tlist Control Group Procedure  
Our experience with behavioral studies has shown that retention in a pure control arm is very poor when the active intervention seems intuitively very useful to participants.  A waitlist 
randomized attention control 
design not only permits each participant to receive an active intervention if assigned to control initially but also maximizes retention and helps fulfill immediate expectations.  
During the control group period, participants receive a educational materials on heal thy habits for 
physical activity based on the 12 
Habits of Highly Healthy People 
featured by Mayo Clinic.  The 
control group will also receive two letters  aimed at 
acknowledging the materials.  National Institute of We plan to control for a likely Hawthorn e effect that can be observed in the control group as participants may 
receive more attention than normal. Hence, the difference observed in the control group over time will be deducted from the e ffects 
observed in the intervention group when interpreting the results of the study as part of our analysis. The control group then receives the active intervention at month four after being randomized and upon completion of the active control period and the three month measures. 
 
Questionnaires  
Questionnaires per taining to quality of life are administered in the project.   T he questionnaires are reviewed and entered into REDCap 
in a timely basis.  If a participant indicates a score of 3 or higher on the PHQ 9 , the PI will be notified.  
 
Review of medical records, images, specimens  – Category 5  
 The target population consists  of patients who have COPD receiving outpatient care at Mayo Clinic (Rochester).  We plan to enroll 
200 patients in the study through referral from the Mayo Clinic Pulmonary Division ACE Databa se. Once enrolled, study staff will 
review the medical records and will document the most recent Pulmonary Function Test data and demographics.  Fig. 13.  Overvie w report . 
Fig.  14. Weekly individual r eport . 
Fig.  15. Detailed report.  

Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 11 of 17 
  
  
HIPAA Identifiers and Protected Health Information (PHI)  
  
Check all that apply:  INTERNAL  EXTERNAL  
Name  X  
Mayo Clinic medical record or patient registration number, la b accession, specimen or 
radiologic image number  X  
Subject ID, subject code or any other person -specific unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code that can link the subject to their medical data    X  
Dates: All elements of dates [month, day, an d year] directly related to an individual, their 
birth date, date of death, date of diagnosis, etc.   
Note: Recording a year only is not a unique identifier.  X  
Social Security number    
Medi cal device identifiers and serial numbers    
Biometric identifi ers, including finger and voice prints, full face photographic images and any 
comparable images  X  
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs),  Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers, email 
address    
Street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their  equivalent geocodes  X  
Phone or fax numbers  X  
Account, member, certificate or professional license numbers, health beneficiary numbers    
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including l icense plate numbers    
Check ‘None’ when none of the identifie rs listed above will be recorded, maintained, or 
shared during the conduct of this study.  (exempt category 4)   None   None  
  Data will be stored in Mayo Clinic’s REDCap database.  Mayo Clinic Florida and Health Partners w ill only be able to see data from 
their site.  Mayo Clinic Rochester will have access to data entered into REDCap as they are the coordinating site for this tr ial.  
REDCap ( Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture for research studies, 
providing:1) an intuitive interface for validated data entry; 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for importing data from external sources.  
 Health Coaches located at Mayo Clinic Rochester may fill in as Health C oaches at other sites to cover vacations , absen ces and 
employment gaps in health coaches .  Mayo Clinic Rochester Health Coaches only have a ccess to dat a in REDCap ( demographics  and 
health coach notes) and not t he medical record .   
   
 
Data Analysis  and Data Safety Monitoring  
 
DSMB  
See Data Safety Monitoring Charter.  
   
 
Analysis Plan  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 12 of 17 
 There are three d istinct quantitative study hypotheses (inform different aspects  of the process). Hypothesis 1 (Aim 1) states that 
participants on home -based PR will have higher physical (dyspnea fatigue) QOL at month three than participants in the waitlist 
control group as measured by the CRQ physical summary score. Hypothesis  2 (Aim  2) is that participants on home -based PR will 
have better SM abilities at month three than participants in the waitlist control group. The SMAS -30 will be used to test this 
hypothesis. Hypothe sis 3 (Aim 3) is that participants on home -based PR will  have m ore daily PA than participants in the control group 
at month three. This will be measured by steps and minutes spent in sedentary, light, and moderate activity measured by the 
ActiGraph34, 35 and greater self -efficacy for exercise. This study has two activity monitors, the ActiGraph, a gold standard activity 
monitor used for outcome measures (7- day wearing) at baseline, 3, 6 and 9 months. The Garmin Vivofit PR activity monitor used 
daily during PR period will NOT be used as an outcome measure, just for health coaching and participant awarene ss of physical 
activity (participant will keep this activity mo nitor after PR).  
For the continuous study outcomes, changes from baseline to three months will be compared between the study arms using two-s
ample, two -sided t -tests with 5% type I error rates . Changes in QOL and number of steps will be compared be tween t he two 
treatment sequences using two -sample two -sided t -tests. No adjustments will be made for multiple testing. Means, SDs, medians, 
ranges, and frequency distributions will be reported and plotted over time by study arm. Additional analyses will c ompare changes 
from baseline to three months. Linear models will be used to assess the impact of treatment arm on three month outcomes after adjusting for the corresponding baseline measure and other variables related to the outcome (age, degree of breathl essness at baseline 
using the mMRC, and FEV1. Repeated measures mixed models will be used to estimate the intervention effect over the three mont hs 
of the comparison study. Although there is a crossover element to the study design, crossover analyses will not be used due to the anticipated carryover effect in the intervention arm.  Intent -to-treat analyses will also be performed to determine the sensitivity of the 
results to dropouts and missing values.  In the intent- to-treat analyses, if a month three measu re is m issing for any reason, it will be 
described as not changing from baseline. Health care utilization (number of ED visits, hospitalizations, and length of stay) between 
baseline and three months will be treated (analyzed) as both binary (for incidence  rates)  and continuous (for the number of events). 
The binary endpoints will  all be compared between groups using Fisher’s exact test. Logistic regression models will also be fit to look 
for differenc es in these outcomes by arm after adjusting for age, mMR C, FEV1 , baseline levels of anxiety, depression, and fear, and 
baseline health care utilization (before starting the study). While significant missing -ness (>5%) in the Aim 1 outcome is not expected, 
imputation is planned in case it is.  
Descriptive summar ies of the changes between baseline, three, six, and nine months will be use d to assess the effect of the delayed 
intervention on the control arm and the residual beneficial effect on the intervention arm. These results will be only descriptive and 
explora tory. N o formal hypothesis testing will be done. All data will be stored in REDCap and analyzed using SAS (Cary, NC).  
Missing Values treatment : Initially, Little’s test for missing completely at rando m (MCAR)
36 will be used along with Potthoff and 
colleagues assessment of missing at ran dom (MAR+).37 Contingent on either MCAR or MAR data, imputation will  be considered in 
order to respond to the level of missing- ness and to be able to use the optimal amount of information in our model. In case of 
participant withdrawal, all available data will be used . 
Path analysis : The hypothesized framework will be test ed using structural equation modeling (SEM), which allows us to examine 
multiple dependent variables in one model and concurrently describe multiple paths of direct and indirect effects among the t heoretical 
constructs. We will use two steps in SEM analyse s. Firs t, the validity of the measures will be assessed by fitting a measurement model 
and investigating whether the items are strong indicators of the latent constructs (e.g., self -efficacy and quali ty of life). The second 
step involves testing the effect  of the  predictor variables (e.g., MI training, mastery in PA, social persuasion, physiological and 
emotional states) on the outcome variables (e.g., self- efficacy, self -management, and physical QOL) with a particular interest in the 
role self -efficacy has  in inc reasing self -management and physical QOL. In addition to the direct effects of MI training on self -efficacy, 
self-efficacy on self -management, self -management on physical QOL, mediating effects  can be tested, such as the effects of MI 
training on se lf-mana gement and physical QOL, or effects of self- efficacy on physical QOL by estimating their indirect effects. The 
model will be tested using lavaan, the R software package for SEM.38 The model fit will be examined by its model χ2 , goodness -of-fit 
index (GFI), and root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA).  
Qualitative Analysis (Aim 4) : Perceptions of the participants and the interventionist will be captured using qualitative meth ods. 
Qualitative inquiry in randomized controlled trials help interpret results and variation in results.39 It can also help ensure that 
interventions meet stakeholder needs and therefore aid in future transferability of interventions like the proposed system. This is 
increasingly important as trials move out of controlled setting s and into the social context of natural settings,40 including participant 
homes.  
This qualitative approach is part of an embedded mixed- methods design, a design commonly used when individuals’ perspectives 
inform experimental results.( 33)  This aim also helps us better understand the contextual factors related to implementation. As such, it 
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 13 of 17 
 reflects the principles of a ty pe 1 hybrid effectiveness -implementation design, the rationale for which is to study barriers and 
facilitators to widespread implementation alongside the intervention’s effectiveness, speeding future translation into practice.41 
The interview instruments will be informed by the quantitative study aims, and quantitative results will guide the qualitative sampling 
plan. Specifically, the purposive sampling for interviews and in order to increase the breath of representativeness of the  interviewees , 
we will use baseline scores o n the Patient Activation Measure to stratify the population available for interview recruitment, and we 
will aim to interview 10 patients with lower  levels of activation at baseline (Stages 1 and 2 indicating lower participant engagement) 
and 10 patients with higher levels (stages 3 and 4 indicating higher engagement) AND patients with high severity defined by a MRC 
dyspnea score 3- 4 (10 participants)  vs. low severity - score 0 -2-(10 participants). This variation in the sample will better ensure a range 
of experiences in the data and allow understanding of different opinions and outcomes. Patient activation in particular has been shown 
to impact adherence to self -care regimens, including home monitoring.  
Data Colle ction  
The primary method of qualitative data collection will be individual semi- structured interviews with a sample of participants in the 
intervention arm (n=40) and study interventionists (n=4). Interviews will be conducted at approximately week 12 (around the time of the last interventionist call). We will use an interview guide —reviewed by experts (patients and clinicians) —to ask a combination of 
broad, open- ended questions and focused quest ions eliciting information about: 1) the participant’s impressions of the program; 2) 
impressions of program  effectiveness or perceived benefits; and 3) participant’s prior experience with coaching. The interview guide 
will be informed by program theory, ( i.e., self -efficacy theory and MI)
15, 16 and the underlying constructs of measures from Aims 1- 3.  
To understand the feasibility and acceptability of the program, participants will be asked if they would recommend the program to 
another patient with COPD and what, if anything, they would change. Questions will also elicit feedback on the use of technology and barri ers and facilitators to long -term adoption. We will ask interve ntionists to assess perceptions of how well the program fits within 
the current clinical services delivery system and which methods should be modified to enhance feasibility, acceptability, and 
durability of the intervention. Interventionists will be inter viewed twice during the study in order to assess program delivery, including 
whether the intervention is being delivered as expected, at different points in the study implementation.  Interviews will be conducted 
by a qualitative research analyst not involved in the intervention. They will take place  by phone and be audio recorded and transcribed 
verbatim. After each interview, the interviewer will take detailed notes that describe the context o f the interview, emerging themes or 
issues that arose in the in terview, areas for clarification, and other comments. These notes and transcripts will be used in analysis. Per 
the reviewers’ suggestions, we purposefully included a qualitative expert, Jennifer Ridgeway, to conduct this analysis and work collaboratively with Dr. Matthew Clark, as they have previous ly reported  qualitative analysis  together.
42 
Qualitative Analysis Plan 
Qualitative methods will use directed content analysis. This approach is useful when existing theory informs research questions, and 
researchers are interested in extending the theory or using it to make predictions or look for relationships among variables.43 At least 
two investigators  will review the data and use an iterative process to develop l abels or codes and then higher -order categori es that 
represent key themes related to the study aims. These will be informed by the theoretical assumptions in Aims 1- 3. A coding 
framework will b e independently applied to transcripts before the investigators  discuss and agree on coding. Data will be en tered into 
NVivo software (NVivo 10.1, QSR International Pty. Ltd.) or another system for text data management to facilitate queries.  
Integration w ith Aims 1 -3: The function of the mixed- methods design is elaboration of the quantitative data on effectiveness with the 
qualitative findings. After initial quantitative and qualitative analyses are complete, the investigators will place findings  side-by-side 
to explore connections as well as divergent findings that need further exploration. This includes within - and between -case analysis to 
understand the perspectives of participants who differed on comparative effectiveness outcomes (Aim 1- 3) as well as t hose who 
differed in important baseline characteristics such as  participant activation.  
Sample Size :  We wi ll enroll at total of 200 participants , with 100 in each arm. Sample size calculations are based on two- sample, 
two-sized t -tests comparing the two groups at 3 months. Aim 1 : We calculated the sample size based on estimates from our previously 
published da ta6. From this research, the CRQ has a SD of about 1.13. A total sample of 189 participants (94 or 95 per group) is needed 
to detect a difference of 0.5 (the minimal clinically important difference) in the CRQ with 80% power. Based on our previous health 
coaching application (R01HL09468 Benzo, PI),6 we expect  5% attrition .  We will therefore enroll 200 participants, 100  in each arm.  
Aim 2 : A sample size of 128 is needed to detect a half SD change in SMAS -30 based on COPD studies using this measure. Aim 3 : 
The number of steps recorded by the AM is considered a valid measure of  PA in patients with COPD and the elderly. The clinically 
meaningful difference in steps is estimated at 1100. Therefore, a sample size of 170 participants (85 per group) is needed considering 
a SD of 2500 steps from our previous study.6 Aim 4: The sample size of 40 completed participant interviews is within standards for 
qualitative research, but interviewing and analysis will take place concurrently and iteratively to inform the sampling plan. We will 
continue interviewing until s aturation (the point at which interviews are not yielding much new information) is reached; the sample 
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 14 of 17 
 will be increased as needed to more fully understand variation in the data,44 especially between those who have low (versus high) 
levels of initial participant activation or those who differ in comp arative -effectiveness outcomes. We will ensure ample participan ts to 
represent a range of opinions and inves tigate variation, rather than statistical testing. In regard to interventionist data collection, we 
will invite all interventionists (n=4) in the study to complete an interview; based on our pilot data, we expec t high participation.   
Limitations: While co mparing the proposed intervention to center -based PR would be the  ideal study , it would not be feasible 
because most participants cannot attend PR  weekly (about 70%)3 and the study would be unlikely to accrue sufficiently. This study i s 
geared to capture the population willing to do home PR, and individuals who are confident using technology:  results may not be 
generalizable to all individuals with COPD. We realize that som e participants randomly assigned to the control group will rece ive 
center -based PR, and we plan to document and adjust our model analyses accordingly (intention- to-treat analysis) despite this 
limitations, the study will address a critical need in COPD care: bringing PR to all individuals with COPD.  
Conclusions  
The pr oposed study will be the first of its kind co mbining monitored home -based PM with theory -driven SM support 
through health coaching. Since there is no system available for home -based PR delivery the results of this application are 
critically needed in the field of COPD. We envision that the proposed intervention is feasible (already tested) and using 
commercially available software and hardware will be ready to be disseminated if effective.  Health Coaching will bring higher participant engagement, better participant provider communication, and possibl y improved outcomes. Inclusion of qualitative 
inquiry will strengthen our understanding of our results and provide further information for implement ation/ dissemination  
Timeline : This project will take five years to complete. The first year will be spent on institutional approvals (two months); 
development of materials (four months); training of health coaches on site; database creation; and the sta rt of the clinical trial. Years 
2-4 will involve the accrual of  all subjects and the completion of the clinical trial. A Method Paper will be produced and published in 
Year 2. The final year will involve the end of the clinical trial (first quarter) data analysis, triangulation of the quantitative with the qualitative  analysis manuscript publication, and prepara tions for grant renewal.  
 
YEAR 1  YEAR 2  YEAR 3  YEAR 4  YEAR 5  
Task  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Database 
Developmen t              
      
      
      
  
HC Training              
      
      
      
  
Recruitment     
                                
  
Clinical Trial     
                                
  
Monthly 
Team 
Meetings                                          
Qualitat ive 
Interviews      
      
      
      
          
Data Analysis                      
Publication      
      
      
      
          
Renewal                                          
   
 
 REFERENCES  
1. Vestbo  J, Hurd  SS, Agusti  AG, Jones  PW, Vogelmeier  C, Anzueto  A, Barnes  PJ, Fabbri  LM, Martinez FJ, Nishimura  M, 
Stockley  RA, Sin DD, Rodriguez -Roisin  R. Global  strategy  for the diagnosis,  management, and  prevention of chronic  
obstructive  pulmonary disease:  GOLD executive summary.  Am J Respir  Crit Care Med.  2013;187(4):347 -65. Epub  
2012/08/11.  doi: 10.1164/rccm.201204 -0596PP.  PubMed PMID: 22878278.  
2. Spruit  MA, Singh  SJ, Garv ey C, Zuwallack  R, Nici L, Rochester  C, Hill K, Holland  AE, Lareau  SC, Man WD, Pitta  F, Sewell  
L, Raskin  J, Bourbeau J, Crouch  R, Franssen  FM, Casab uri R, Vercoulen  JH, Vogiatzis  I, Gosselink  R, Clini EM, Effing  TW, 
Maltais  F, van der Palen  J, Troosters  T, Janssen  DJ, Collins  E, Garcia- Aymerich  J, Brooks  D, Fahy  BF, Puhan MA, 
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 15 of 17 
 Hoogendoorn M, Garrod  R, Schols  AM, Carlin  B, Benzo  R, Meek  P, Morgan  M, Rutten-van Molken  MP, Ries AL, Make  B, 
Goldstein  RS, Dowson  CA, Brozek  JL, Donner  CF, Wouters  EF. An official american  thoracic  society/european  respiratory  
society  statement: key concepts  and advances  in pulmonary rehabilitation.  Am J Respir  Crit Care  Med. 2013;188(8):e13- 64. 
Epub 2013/10/17.  doi: 10.1164/rccm.201309-1 634ST.  PubMed  PMID:  24127811.  
3. Bourbeau  J, Julien M, Maltais  F, Rouleau  M, Beaupre A, Begin  R, Renzi  P, Nault D, Borycki  E, Schwartzman  K, Singh  R, 
Collet JP. Reduction of hospital utilization  in patients  with chronic  obstructive pulmonary  disease:  a diseas e-specific  self-
management  intervention.  Arch  Intern  Med.  2003;163(5):585- 91. 
4. Keating A, Lee A, Holland AE. What prevents people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from attending 
pulmonary rehabilitation? A systematic review. Chron Respir Dis. 2011;8(2):89 -99. Epub 2011/05/21. doi: 
10.1177/1 479972310393756. PubMed PMID:  21596892.  
5. Holland  AE, Mahal  A, Hill CJ, Lee AL, Burge  AT, Moore  R, Nicolson  C, O'Halloran  P, Cox NS, Lahham  A, Ndongo R, 
Bell E, McDonald  CF. Benefits  and costs  of home -based  pulmonary  rehabilitation  in chronic obstructive  pulmonary disease  
- a multi- centre randomised  controlled  equivalence  trial. BMC Pulm  Med. 2013;13:57.  PMCID:  PMC3844512.  
6. Maltais  F, Bourbeau J, Lacasse Y, Shapiro  S, Perrault  H, Penrod  JR, Baltzan  M, Rouleau  M, Julien M, Paradis  B, 
Audet  R, Hernandez  P, Levy  RD, Camp  P, Lecours  R, Picard  D, Bernard  S. A Canadian, multicentre,  randomized 
clinical trial of home -based  pulmonary  rehabilitation  in chronic  obstructive pulmonary  disease:  rationale  and methods.  
Can Respir  J. 2005;12(4):193- 8. 
7. Pradella CO, Belmonte GM,  Maia MN, Delgado CS, Luise AP, Nascimento OA, Gazzotti MR, Jardim JR. Home- Based 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation for Subjects With COPD: A Randomized Study. Respir Care.  2015;60(4):526- 32. 
8. Griffiths TL, Burr ML, Campb ell IA, Lewis -Jenkins V, Mullins J, Shiels K,  Turner- Lawlor PJ, Payne N, Newcombe 
RG, Ionescu AA, Thomas J, Tunbridge J. Results at 1 year of outpatient multidisciplinary pulmonary rehabilitation: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.  2000;355(9201):362-8. 
9. Benzo R. Collaborative self -management in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Learning ways to promote patient 
motivation and behavioral change. Chron Respir Dis.  2012;9(4):257- 8. 
10. Bucknall  CE, Miller G, Lloyd SM, Cleland J, McCluskey S, Cotton M, Stevenson RD, Cotton P,  McConnachie  
A. Glasgow supported self -management trial (GSuST) for patients with moderate to severe COPD: randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ. 2012;344:e1060. PMCID:  PMC3295724.  
11. Greening  NJ, Williams  JE, Hussain  SF, Harvey -Dunstan TC, Bankart  MJ, Chaplin  EJ, Vincent  EE, Chimera R,  Morga n MD, 
Singh SJ, Steiner  MC. An early  rehabilitation  intervention  to enhance  recovery  during hospital  admission  for an exacerbation  
of chronic  respir atory  disease:  randomised  controlled  trial. BMJ. 2014;349:g4315 . PMCID:  PMC4086299.  
12. Benzo R, Vickers K, Erns t D, Tucker S, McEvoy C, Lorig K. Development and feasibility of a self - management 
intervention for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease delivered with motivational interviewing strategies. J 
Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2013;33(2):113 -23. PMCID:  PMC3586298.  
13. Benzo RP. Mindfulness and motivational interviewing: two candidate methods for promoting self - management. 
Chron Respir Dis. 2013;10(3):175- 82. PMC ID: PMC3953462.  
14. Benzo R, Vickers K, Novotny PJ, Tucker S, Hoult  J, Neuenfeldt P, Connett J, Lorig K, McEvoy C. Health Coaching and 
COPD Re -hospitalization: a Randomized Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.  2016;8:8.  
15. Bandura A. Self -efficacy: toward a unifying  theory of behavioral change. Psychological review.  
1977;84(2):191 -215. 
16. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Ten things th at motivational interviewing is not. Behav Cogn Psychother.  
2009;37(2):129 -40. 
 
17. Lorig  KR, Sobel  DS, Stewart  AL, Brown  BW, Jr., Bandura  A, Ritter  P, Gonzalez  VM, Laurent  DD, Holman HR.  Evidence  
suggesting that a chronic  disease  self-management  program  can improve  health status  while reducing  hospitalization: a 
randomized trial. Medical  care.  1999;37(1):5- 14. 
18. Benzo RP, Kirsch JL, Dulohery MM, Abascal -Bolado B. Emotional Intelligence: A Novel Outcome Associated with  
Wellbeing and Self -Management in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016;13(1):10- 6. 
PMCID:  PMC4722844.  
19. Benzo RP, Abascal -Bolado B, Dulohery MM. Self -management and qual ity of life in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD): Th e mediating effects of positive affect. Patient Educ Couns.  2016;99(4):617- 
23. PMCID: PMC4808334.  
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 16 of 17 
 20. Guell MR, de Lucas  P, Galdiz  JB, Montemayor  T, Rodriguez  Gonzalez- Moro JM, Gorostiza  A, Ortega  F, Bellon  JM, 
Guyatt  G. [Home  vs hospital -based  pulmonary rehabilitation  for patients  with chronic obstruct ive pulmonary  disease:  a 
Spanish multicenter  trial].  Arch  Bronconeumol.  2008;44(10):512- 8. 
21. Puente -Maestu L, Sanz ML, Sanz P, Cubillo JM, Mayol J, Casaburi R. Comparison of effects of supervised versus self -
monit ored training programmes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J.  2000;15(3):517 -25. 
22. Schmickl  CN, Li M, Li G, Wetzstein  MM,  Herasevich  V, Gajic  O, Benzo  RP. The accuracy  and efficiency  of electronic  
screening  for recruitment  into a clinical trial on COPD.  Respir  Med.  2011;105(10):1501- 6. Epub 2011/05/18.  doi: 
10.1016/j.rmed.2011.04.012.  PMCID:  PMC3156898.  
23. Benzo RP, Chang CC, Farrell MH, Kaplan R, Ries A, Martinez FJ, Wise R, Make B, Sciurba F. Physical activity, health 
status an d risk of hospitalization in patients with se vere chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respiration. 
2010;80(1):10- 8. PMCID:PMC2889264.  
24. Garcia- Aymerich  J, Lange  P, Benet  M, Schnohr  P, Anto  JM. Regular  physical  activity  reduces  hospital admission  and 
mortality  in chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease : a population based  cohort  study. Thorax.  2006;61(9):772- 8. 
PMCID:  PMC2117100.  
25. Killingsworth M, Gilbert D. A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind. Sci ence. 2010;330(6006):932.  
26. Kinser PA, Robins JL. Control group design: enhancing rigor in research of mind- body therapies for depression. 
Evidence -Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine.  2013;2013.  
27. Williams JE, Singh SJ, Sewell L, Guyatt GH, Morgan MD . Development of a self -reported Chronic Respiratory 
Questionna ire (CRQ -SR). Thorax. 2001;56(12):954- 9. PubM ed PMID:  11713359.  
28. Cramm  JM, Strating  MM,  de Vreede PL, Steverink  N, Nieboer  AP. Validation  of the self-management ability  scale 
(SMAS)  and developm ent and validation  of a shorter  scale (SMAS -S) among older  patients shortly  after hospitalisation.  
Health  Qual Life Outcomes. 2012;10(9):1477 -7525.  
29. Chawla  H, Bulathsinghala  C, Tejada JP, Wakefield  D, ZuWallack  R. Physical  activity  as a predictor  of thirty - day hospital  
readmission  after a discharge  for a clinical exacerbation  of chronic  obstructive  pulmonary dis ease. Ann Am Thorac  Soc. 
2014;11(8):1203- 9. 
30. Loprinzi PD, Walker JF, Lee H. Association between physical activity and inflammatory markers  among 
U.S. adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Health Promot. 2014;29(2):81- 8. 
31. Rabinovich RA, Louv aris Z, Raste  Y, Langer  D, Van Remoortel  H, Giavedoni  S, Burtin  C, Regueiro  EM, Vogiatzis  I, 
Hopkinson NS, Polkey MI, Wilson  FJ, Macnee W, Westerter p KR, Troosters  T. Validity  of physical  activity  monitors  
during daily  life in patients  with COPD.  Eur Respi r J. 2013;42(5):1205- 15. 
32. Bestall  JC, Paul EA, Garrod  R, Garnham  R, Jones  PW, Wedzicha JA. Usefulness  of the Medical  Research Council  (MRC)  
dyspnoea  scale as a measure of disability  in patients  with chronic  obstr uctive  pulmonary disease.  Thorax.  1999;54(7): 581-
6. 
33. Hibbard JH, Stockard  J, Mahoney  ER, Tusler  M. Development  of the Patient Activation  Measure (PAM): Conceptualizing  
and Measuring  Activation  in Patients  and Consumers.  Health  Serv Res. 2004;39(4 Pt 1):1005 -26. doi: 10.1111/j.1475 -
6773.2004.00269.x.  PubMed  PMID:  PMC1361049;  PMCID:  1361049.  
34. Van Remoortel  H, Giavedoni  S, Raste  Y, Burtin  C, Louvaris  Z, Gimeno -Santos  E, Langer  D, Glendenning  A, Hopki nson  NS, 
Vogiatzis  I, Peterson  BT, Wilson  F, Mann  B, Rabinovich R, Puhan MA, Troosters  T. Validity of  activity  monitors  in health  
and chronic  disease:  a systematic  review.  Int J Behav  Nutr Phys  Act. 2012;9(84):1479- 5868.  
35. Van Remoortel  H, Raste  Y, Louvaris  Z, Giavedoni  S, Burtin  C, Langer  D, Wilson  F, Rabinovich  R, Vogiatzis I,  Hopkinson 
NS, Troosters  T. Validity  of six activity  monitors  in chronic  obstructive  pulmonary disease:  a comparison  with indirect  
calorimetry.  PLoS One.  2012;7(6):20.  
36. Little RJ. A test of missing completely at random for multivariate data with missing values. Journal of the American 
Statist ical Association.  1988;83(404):1198- 202. 
37. Potthoff RF, Tudor GE, Pieper KS, Hasselblad V. Can one assess whether missing data are missing at random i n 
medical studies? Statistical methods in medical research.  2006;15(3):213- 34. 
38. Rosseel Y. lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of Statistical Software.  2012;48(2):1-
36. 
39. Sandelowski M. Using qualitative methods in intervention studies. Research in nursing & health. 1996;19(4):359-
64. 
40. Hesse -Biber S. Weaving a multimethodology and mixed methods praxis into randomized control trials to enhance 
credibility. Qualitative Inquiry.  2012;18(10):876- 89. 
Protocol Version 2:  M arch 1, 2018  
 
 Page 17 of 17 
 41. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM,  Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: combining elements of 
clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Medical care.  2012;50(3):217.  
42. Ridgeway JL, Hubbard AK, Hathaway JC, Egginton JS, Preston HR, Bradley KL, Mettler EA, Olsen KD, Clark MM, 
Vickers KS. Underst anding Participant Perspectives of Workplace Wellness Coaching. Health Behavior and Policy 
Review. 2014;1(3):218 -28. 
43. Hsieh H -F, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qua litative health research.  2005;15(9):1277-
88. 
44. Sandelowski M. Sa mple size in qualitative research. Research i n nursing & health.  1995;18(2):179- 83. 
45. Benzo R, Vickers K, Novotny PJ, Tucker S, Hoult J, Neuenfeldt P, Connett J, Lorig K, McEvoy C. Health Coaching and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Rehospitalization. A Randomized Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 
2016;194(6):672- 80. Epub 2016/03/10. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201512- 2503OC. PubMed PMID: 26953637; PMCID:  
PMC5027231.  
46. Holland AE, Mahal A, Hill CJ, Lee AL, Burge AT, Cox NS, Moore R, Nicolson C, O'Halloran P, Lahham A, Gillies R, 
McDonald CF. Home -based rehabi litation for COPD using minimal resources: a randomised, controlled equivalence trial. 
Thorax. 2017;72(1):57- 65. 
 