1 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021  
 
 
Effect of genotype on Resting State Connectivity during Methamphetamine Administration  
 
 
PI: Willia m Hoffman, PhD, MD  
 
NCT 0397348 9 
 
Protocol Version: 11-29-2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021  
 
 
Relevance to Veterans and the VA Mission:   Methamphetamine is one of the mo st common addictive 
disorders among  veterans  today .  Research seeking to understand the causes and maintenance of addiction 
are highly relevant to the VA’s mission of serving the healthcare needs of the Veteran.  
 
Specific Aims  and Rationale :   This proposal will determine the effect of a common variant ( CV) synonymous 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the gene for the human trace amine 
associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) on the neural and behavioral response of subjects 
with methamphetamine (MA) use disorder ( MUD ) to acute MA administration . The 
SNP (rs8192620 on human [GRCh38.p7] chromosome 6 at 132,645,140 bp in 
htaar1 , allelic frequency 22% ) results from a change of adenine to guanine in a 
valine codon at amino ac id 288 (v288v) .  MA is a potent agonist at the TAAR1 
receptor (Reese et al., 2007) , in addition to its actions at the dopamine transporter 
(Elliott and Beveridge, 2005)  and the vesicular monoamine transporter 
(Fleckenstein et al., 2009) .  In rodents, a decrease in TAAR1 expression or non -
functional TAAR1 receptor is associated with an increase in striatal dopamine 
(DA) signaling (Espinoza et al., 2015) . 
The scientific premise  of this project  is based on 1) our preliminary findings 
that support a model that the CV alters RSFC of the striatum, a dopaminergic 
terminal region, and associated behavior in chronic MUD , 2) published reports 
that delineate the effect of TAAR1 on DA signaling and 3) preclinical evidence 
that TAAR1 influences  sensitivity to rewarding and aversive effects of MA. 
Furthermore, this proposal will address questions that have important 
implications for understanding and treating patients with MUD,  as the TAAR1 
receptor is implicated in MA self -administration. As an allele of the murine TAAR1 
gene associated with an inactive receptor leads to increased MA intake in 
homozygot es (Harkness et al., 2015;Phillips and Shabani, 2015) , it is critically 
important to study  the feasibility of exploiting human variant  htaar1.  
We propose a model (Figure 1) based on this premise that makes testable 
predictions about the interaction  of the CV with chronic and acute MA 
administratio n in MUD.  Our preliminary data  show that the CV causes over -
expression of TAAR1 in cell culture. Stimulation of the TAAR1 receptor decrease s 
dopaminergic signaling  in mesocorticolimbic and corticostriatal networks (Pei et 
al., 2016;Berry et al., 2017) . We propose that this effect in conjunction with 
chronic MA use  cause s neuroadaptations that result  in the  increased striato - and 
corticolimbic RSFC  as well as increased drug craving  observed in MUD subjects 
with the CV . We can indirectly test the hypothesis of decreased DA release due to 
ever-expression via MA administration .  The effect of acute MA administration on 
RSFC in humans is not known but acute administration of S-amphetamine 
(Schrantee et al., 2016)  and methylphenidate (Konova et al., 2013)  reduce RSFC in salience attribution and 
default mode networks  presumably via increased DA release . Stimulation of over-expressed TAAR1 should 
blunt this effect in CV carrying individuals compared to WT .  There are no published reports on neural effects 
of the interaction between  either chronic or acute  MA administration and htaar1  genotype in humans, therefore 
this proposal represents a unique opportunity to determine whether the RSFC response to acute MA 
administration in humans is mediated by genotype.  
In Specific Aim 1 (SA 1 ), we will confirm and extend our preliminary RSFC findings in chronic  MUD using  
seed -based and data -driven precision brain mapping approaches.  The latter are made possible by extended 
(40 minute) acquisition of functional connectivity data.  We will investigate genotype and drug x genotype 
interactions with full connectivity matrices as well as topological RSFC measures including con nection density 
and strength, network segregation, global efficiency, rich club coefficients, and glo bal segregation in MA users 
at baseline and after MA administration. In SA 2 , we will examine how htaar1  genotype modifies the effects of 
acute MA administration on neural and behavioral measures in  MUD.  This provides an indirect test of Figure 
1A that g enotype modifies  TAAR1 expression in the ventral tegmental area ( VTA) and thus DA release in the 
striatum.  
SA 1.  Determine the influence of htaar1  CV vs. wild type (WT) genotype on RSFC and craving in chronic  
MUD .  
Figure 1: Proposed model of 
TAAR1 genotype modulation 
of RSFC in chronic MUD and 
hypothesized response to 
acute MA or placebo (PBO) 
administration from baseline.   
 

3 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Hypothesis 1:   CV vs. WT will exhibit higher cortico -striatal and striato -limbic  and intrastriatal RSFC 
(Figure 1B and C: Base) and report higher craving for MA at baseline . 
 SA 2:   Determine the effect of acute  oral MA or placebo ( PBO ) administration  on the interaction of  htaar1  
CV vs. WT genotype on  RSFC,  craving, cognitive control, attention and subjective experience in MUD.  
Hypothesis 2:   Acute MA administration will lower RSFC in both genotype s, with a blunted decrease in 
the CV group  (Figure 1C: MA and PBO) . 
Hypothesis 3 : The CV group will exhibit , compared to WT,  blunted effect of MA administration on craving, 
subjective experience and tests of attention and cognitive control.  
 
Experimental Design:  
Recruitment:   MUD and control s ubjects will be recruited by advertisement from VAPORHCS, OHSU, 
community assistance programs . Advertisements will also be posted  online  externally utilizing  Craigslist,  the 
VAPORHCS web page, the quarterly newsletter (Veteran Connection),  the VA Facebook  page  OHSU’s 
Research Opportunities pages, the OHSU website (MARC page or dedicated lab page), Indeed.com, 
Ziprecruiter, Google Jobs, Localwise.com, Skoll.org, and community news publications (Street Roots, Portland 
Mercury, Willamette Weekly and possibly other s). Approved flyers will be distributed throughout the community 
(retail locations, community assistance programs, primary care clinics, emergency departments, dental clinics, 
communi ty outreach programs).  All Craigslist ads , other job boards and social media  will have email reply 
turned off so that potential participants will have to call the study team. Facebook posts will have a link to a 
PDF of the approved flyer, which will direct any sub jects to contact the study team . All content published for 
both internal and external promotion will utilize the approved flyer or other approved language so that anyone 
interested in the study will have to call the study team for more information .  Newspaper, job board and social 
media ads will utilize the approved Craigslist ad language unless other language is specifically approved .  If 
potential subjects are referred by their VA providers, the provider will first ask permission from the subject to 
discuss the research project.  If the subject gives permission, the provider will document this either in a CPRS note 
or encrypted email to  the study team.  VA providers may also send out our approved flyer with their regular 
occurring mail outs to the ir clients.  
Research Match and OHSU OCTRI Research Volunteer Registry  will be used to recruit potential subjects.  
An IRB approved description of the study will be sent to individuals by Research Match who meet criteria for 
the study.  If the individual indicates they are interested, their contact information (i.e. name, mailing address, 
email, phone number)  will be sent through Research Match to the Hoffman Lab Research Match account. This 
information will remain in the ResearchMatch system and/or be exported to the OHSU RDS server. OHSU 
OCTRI Research Volunteer Registry will provide contact information of i ndividuals who meet study criteria and 
this information with be stored on the OHSU RDS server.  Research assistants will contact these individuals 
using phone or email to set -up a phone screen .  Subjects will be emailed via hoffmanlab@ohsu.edu to set up a 
phone screen . The Hoffman lab has substantial capacity and expertise to recruit MUD participants. Per NIDA 
guidelines , MUD subjects who have been  referr ed to appropriate VA or community treatment facilities  but will 
not be in drug treatment (court -mandated or otherwise) when recruited or while participating in the study (if 
subjects choose to join a treatment program during their participation in the study they will be withdrawn from 
the study and will not b e administered methamphetamine) .  The community as sistance programs we work with 
interact with precontemplative methamphetamine users regularly.   Subjects may also be recruited by calling 
participants who previously consented to being contacted for future research after enrollment into the MARC 
study (eIRB 8702).  As the IRB previously approved, t hese subjects will be pulled directly from the MARC 
study, not from a contact information repository.  CPRS will not be accessed for screening purposes.  Subjects 
who call in response to advertise ments are screene d with a telephone script to verify likelihood of meeting 
criteria and, if indicated , given an initial appointment.  Additional questions will be asked to screen for recent 
exposure and symptoms of COVID -19. If recent exposure or symptoms are disclosed, and the subject 
otherwise qualifies, we will wait to schedule them until they have self -isolated for two weeks from tim e of 
exposure and/or when their symptoms have completely resolved.  Our screening criteria already excludes 
those who are at increased risk o f severe illness from COVID -19; however some subjects who might  be at an 
increased risk may still qualify to participate during modified operations including smokers and those with well -
controlled moderate -to-severe asthma, hypertension, and/or high blood pressure. These subjects will be 
informed that they may be at h igher risk for COVID -19 infection and they may not want to put themselves at 
risk by participating in research. A VA waiver of informed consent and authorization for screening/recruitment 
purpo ses will be requested to collect subject names , phone numbers , and email  before potential subjects give 
formal informed consent.  Email addresses will be collected on the screening form for scheduling purposes and, 
if the potential subject agrees, email will be collected to send an appointment confirmation email (Azure).  Each 
subject will provide written informed consent before any data collection or additional screening takes place.  Up 
4 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 to 100 current users of methamphetamine (MA) who meet DSM -V criteria for MA use disorder (MUD) and 100 
controls will be recruited  for this project and 36 from each group will complete all study procedures (we 
anticipate many will screen out based on their genetic screening for TAAR1).  These 72 will break down into 4 
groups of 18:  
• MUD Wild Type (WT) Group: MUD individuals who are WT for the TAAR1 gene  
• MUD Common Variant (CV) Group: MUD individuals who are hetero - or homozygous for the V288V 
SNP on the TAAR1 gene  
• CS WT Group: Healthy controls who are WT for the TAAR1 gene  
• CS CV Group: Healthy controls who are hetero - or homozygous for the V288V SNP of the TAAR1 gene  
 
Data (including MRI scans) and s pecimens (saliva)  may be pulled from the MARC Biorepository (mIRB 3164) 
to supplement subjects enrolled into this study for data analysis.  Data and s pecimens will be coded and will 
not include any identifiers.  A Waiver of Process  of Informed Consent/Authorization will be obtained for 
analysis of th ese data/ specimen s and a DUA will be fully executed before data/ specimens are removed from 
the repository.   Repository d ata shared with this project may be sent to the University of Minnesota for analysis 
as described below in Specific Outcome Measures and Hypotheses .  This data will be a Limited Data Set 
that includes imaging data (defaced), demographics such as age (no one over age 89),  sex, treatment 
assignment (meth and placebo), TAAR1 genotype, substance use variables  and survey scores.  Data will be 
shared with study team members currently approved by the VA/OHSU joint IRB for this protocol .  As this data 
is being shared from the repository  (Sender)  to Minnesota  under this protocol  (Recipient) , a DUA between the 
repository and University of Minnesota will be fully executed before data is removed.  
 
Inclusion/ Exclusion criteria:  Entry criteria will be assessed based on self -report questionnaires, medical 
history and psychi atric diagnosis . Data/s pecimens  pulled from the MARC biorepository will have come from 
subjects with very similar relevant inclusion/exclusion criteria which will be evaluated before inclusion.  
Criteria for Inclusion:  
All groups:  
* 18 to 55 years old  
* Homozygous or heterozygous for the hTAAR1 V288V genotype or wild type for hTAAR1 (Part 2)  
 
MUD groups:  
* Subjects must have a positive urine drug screen for methamphetamine during visit one  
* Meets current criteria for methamphetamine use disorder  
* Subjects should have been using at least 100mg of  methamphetamine  (not prescribed), 5 days per week  
for at least one year  
* Abstinent from methamphetamine for 48 hours on days of scans      
 
CS groups:    
• At least one exposure to a stimulant, either recreational or prescribed  
 
Criteria for Exclusion:  
All groups:  
* Allergies to stimulants or hypersensitivity to taking a stimulant in the past  
* Diagnosis of a psychotic or mood disorders (past diagnoses of depression allowed) (DSM -V) 
* Self -reported claustrophobia  
* Women who are pregnant or breast -feeding  
* Positive urine drug screen result at any point during the study (excep t for amphetamines  except for 
verified medical reason ) 
* Intoxicated on study days (see Abstention from Methamphetamine below)  
* Clinically significant neurological, cardiovascular, endocrine, renal, hepatic or systemic disease that could 
compromise safe participation or confound outcomes (including hepatitis C, HIV, severe anemia, or liver 
disease)  
* History of glaucoma  
* Metal in the body which is contraindicated for MRI or  would compromise image quality  
* Current prescription use of stimulants , anti -psychotic drugs or anti -Parkinson’s drugs  
* Use of monoamine ox idase inhibitors within 14 days    
* Use of serotonin reuptake inhibiters, serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibiters, triptans, tricyclic 
5 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 antidepressants, Fentanyl, lithium, tramadol, tryptophan, bispurone, St. John’s Wort, insulin, 
phenothiazines, guanethidine, acidifying/alkalinizing agents, CYP2D6 inhibitors, proton pump inhibitors  
 
MUD Groups:  
• Positive urine drug screen at any point during the study (except for meth or marijuana)  
• History of any severe substance use disorders within the last 5 years, except for methamphetamine use 
disorder or tobacco use disorder  
 
CS Groups:  
• History of any severe substance use disorders within the last 5 years except tobacco use disorder  
• Positive urine drug screen at any point in the study (except for marijuana or verified medical reason)  
 
Enrollment: We will enroll up to 200 individuals into P art 1.  Individuals will then be screened into P art 2 based 
on their genotype and if they have no contraindications for methamphetamine administration or MRI.  Subjects 
must have the WT Group or CV Group  to screen into P art 2 and we will continue to enroll subjects into P art 2 
until we have 18 completers in each of the 4 WT and CV groups.  
Abstention from Methamphetamine:  MUD s ubjects will be asked to abstain from using methamphetamine 
on the day of Visit 1 and 2 will be asked to abstain from using methamphetamine for 24 hours  prior to Visits 3 
and 4.  If subjects come to the ir appointments intoxicated , they may be dropped from the study or rescheduled.  
Subject selection  and randomization : Dr. Aaron Janowsky’s laboratory  at the Portland VA  will genotype  the 
htaar1 in Part 1 participants to identify all V288V variants  (members of the Hoffman lab may also prep samples 
but will not read results) . The CV  Group s will be composed of subjects who are heterozygous or homozygous 
for the CV SNP without  any other variant, while the WT Group s will include those who have the  wild type  
genotype . The htaar1  gene  will also be sequenced in its entirety (the Janowsky lab will purify the DNA and 
then send it to the OHSU Core lab) so that  individuals with  rare non-synonymous taar1  can be identified post 
hoc and analyzed separately . We will  screen subjects until we have 18 subjects in each of the four  CV Group s 
and the WT Group s balanced by age and sex  (a research assistant not involved in the subject evaluations will 
check the balance and will adjust accordingly) . As the population gene frequency is 23%, we expect to 
genotype up to 200 individuals to ensure 
two groups of age and gender matched 
subjects. We will replace dropouts until 
we have 18 completers in each group (for 
a total of 72 completers). The study team 
will be blind to genotype. The Janowsky 
lab will determine genotype and refer 
subjects back to the study team  for 
inclusion in blocks  of six subjects (three 
CV and three  WT). If more than three CV 
or WT subjects are genotyped before 
three of the other group, then participants 
will wait for enrollment into P art 2 until 
the current block of six subjects is 
complete.  Genotype data will be 
provided to the pharmacy to allow 
stratification by genotype during 
randomization.  
Visit Schedule  
Part 1: Visit s 1 and 2 : 
Consent/Screening:   Subjects will be 
consented and then screened for 
eligibility criteria.  This will include medical history, vital signs, weighing , 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG), and 
cheek swab for genotyping. Research staff  with IRB-approved VA scope of work form s or the VA Portland 
Pathology Lab will collect urine , draw blood , and may collect oral fluid . Collection may happen in the Hoffman 
Lab or the Pathology Lab, both located at the VA.  The urine drug screen (UDS) will confirm no use of drugs 
other t han MA or nicoti ne and may be analyzed by either the research team or the VA lab .  A screening blood 
draw will screen for HIV, Hepatitis C, complete blood cell count , chem 7 panel (glucose, creatinine, potassium, 
chloride, sodium, calcium, CO2) , liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase and Visit Number  1 2 3 4 
 Part 1  Part 2  
Informed Consent  ✓    
Review Study Eligibility  ✓    
Medical History  ✓    
Family History  ✓    
Neuropsych Assessment   ✓   
Computer Tasks   ✓   
Vital Signs  ✓  ✓ ✓ 
Urine Drug Screen /Pregnancy 
Test ✓  
✓ ✓ ✓ 
Cheek Swab s ✓    
EKG ✓    
Study Drug or Placebo 
Administered    ✓ ✓ 
MRI Scans    ✓ ✓ 
Blood Draw  ✓  ✓ ✓ 
Saliva Collection  ✓  ✓ ✓ 
Questionnaires   ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Total Time (hours)  3 3 8 8 
6 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 gamma -glutamyl transferase) to ensure subjects meet criteria for inclusion in the study  will be analyzed by the 
Portland, VA Pathology lab .  An additional tube of blood will be drawn and given to the Janowsky lab to for 
DNA purification and then sent to the OHSU Core lab for sequencing of the htaar1 gene.   Another additional 
tube of blood and/or oral fluid will also be collected to quantify MA levels.  Subjects  will also receive a 
neuropsych  battery (NAB, WRAT4)  and perform computer tasks (Iowa Gambling Task, Word/Color Stroop, 
Delay Discounting ).  Visit 1 and 2 may be combined or broken up into multiple visits to accommodate the 
participant’s and the VA medical staff’s schedules  and will take place at VAPORHCS.  
Part 2: Visits 3 and 4: Scan Days:  All study procedures will happen at the Portland VA except for the 
MRI scans which will take place at the OHSU AIRC.  MA administration  and questionnaires  may take place at 
either the VA or OHSU.  Subjects are asked to abstain from MA for 72 h before the scan.  A urinalysis will be 
performed to ensure that women are not pregnant and that no other drugs are present.  Subjects will undergo 
a baseline MRI scan approximately 1 hour after the start of each visit followed by dru g administration (placebo 
or MA ) and a second scan 1.5 hours after that. Blood samples (3 mL)  and/or oral fluid samples will be drawn 
before drug administration and after the second scan to quantify MA levels.  At the Portland VA, during  visit 2, 
up to 15 mL  blood will be drawn  and a cheek swab will be taken  and both will be stored in the MARC 
biorepository  located at the Portland VA . Blood may be stored as plasma or whole blood.   Surveys and 
neurocognitive assessments will be performed before and after each scan  at the Portland VA . Pulse, 
respiration, and pulse oximetry will be monitored throughout each scan. Each visit will last approximately 8  
hours,  and the subjects will be monitored (blood pressure, heart rate) closely throughout. The Systematic 
Assessment for Treatment Emergent Effects (SAFTEE)  will be used to screen for adverse effects at the end of 
the day and the individual will be provided with discharge instructions in both verbal and paper form, which 
informs the subjects that these medications have the potential to impair driving and oper ation of heavy 
equipment. Subjects will be given a list of drugs that should be avoided for their interactive potential with MA  
and will be provided with a phone number to call Dr. Hoffman with questions. A break of at least two days  will 
be required betwe en visits to allow washout. Subjects will be required to take public trans it or have a 
designated driver for each visit.  Subjects may be offered a meal from OCTRI nutrition services, snacks or gift 
card to the VA canteen during each of these visits.   Subjects may be asked to be a backup subject for Visits 3 
or 4.  D ouble -booking will help ensure the best use of time and resources .  If both participants show up for the 
visit and we do not complete your visit, they will be paid $50 in prepaid debit cards for  your time.   
 
MA Administration and Randomization:  For P art 2, subjects will randomly receive 
oral MA (0.25 -0.3 mg/kg; Desoxyn®, Lundbeck) on one visit and placebo on the 
other. Subjects with weight between 50 -60 kg, will receive 15 mg oral dose; 60 -80 
kg, 20 mg; 80 -100 kg, 25 mg; 100+ kg to max weight, 30 mg dose. T he VA Portland 
Research pharmacy will provide MA and identical PBO  in tablet form.  The 
pharmacy will maintain a randomization schedu le such that for each group of 6 
subjects, three  will receive MA on vis it 2 and three  will receive MA on visit 3.  Study 
staff will be blinded to treatment.  
 
Appointment Confirmation:  Once subjects are consented, a ppointment confirmation with occur via phone or 
email.  Appointment confirmation emails may be sent via Azure to subjects.  Brief scheduling correspondence 
may also happen through Azure if the study team is not able to connect with the subject via phone.  Subjects 
will be screened for COVID -19 symptoms during confirmation calls prior to study visits and again at the 
beginning of each in -person visit along with a temperature check. If any symptoms are r evealed, the visit will 
be rescheduled for at least two weeks or until symptoms are resolved.  
 
Subject Reimbursement:  Participants will be paid in the form of Clincards for completing all or partial study 
procedures and will be paid at the end of the visit. For Clincard payments, subjects will be registered by name 
in the Clincard online system and issued a loaded debit card.  Participants will be reimbursed $40 for the first  
and second visits, $100 for the third visit and $1 25 for the fourth  visit (total = $ 305) in the form of prepaid debit  
cards.  Participants who need to combine visits or break vis its into multiple sessions  will be prorated based on 
completion of tasks during the session.  Subjects will also be offered  Trimet day use tickets if they are using 
public transportation.   If both subjects show -up to a double -booked appointment, the subject not undergoing 
imaging will receive a $50 prepaid gift card for the inconvenience and be rescheduled. Subjects may be asked 
to repeat procedures if data isn’t usable . If an entire visit is repeated, then they'll be paid for the whole visit 
at the regular amount again .  They will be paid at a pro -rate of $20 /hr for any other repeated procedures or 
partial visits.  Weight 
(kg) MA Dose 
(mg)  
50 - 60 15 
60 – 80 20 
80 – 100 25 
100 +  30 
7 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021  
MA Metabolites:  Blood/oral fluid drawn will be stored in a VAPORHCS freezer and then sent to the Center for 
Human Toxicology at the University of Utah to quantify the level of meth and meth metabolites prese nt in the 
sample using Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy.   Samples will be shipped via courier on dry ice  (NIDA 
contract N01DA -19-8951).   Samples will be recoded with a number (consecutive numbers, 1,2,3,etc) and will 
be labeled with this number prior to being shipped.  No other information will be on the label or b e provided to 
the University of Utah.   These samples will be acquired once during V1 and twice each during V3 and V4 for  
individuals in the MUD group.   Samples will be acquired only once during V3 and once during V4 for control 
subjects, after study drug is administered.  
Biorepository Data/ Specimen  Use:  A separate cohort of data/specimens  will be pulled from the MARC 
biorepository and included in the analysis for this project.  Data/specimens pulled will be nearly identical to the 
data used in this project and will include demographics (no identifiers), questionnaire data, information on 
drug/alcohol abuse, mental health diagnoses, computer task data, imaging data (MRI), coded la b results and 
saliva samples.  Saliva samples will be sent out with the other saliva samples collected for this project and 
analyzed for methamphetamine metabolites  at the University of Utah.  
  
8 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Data Acquisition and Processing  
Rating scales:  Subjective endpoints ( MA-elicited craving, subjective high and intoxication) , positive affect, will 
be measured using self -report surveys administered  prior to scanning and again after the scan  (Table 1).  
MRI Acquisition:  We will use a 3T Siemens Magnetom Prisma scanner and a 32 -channel phased array head 
coil. RSFC (T 2*-weighted): One T 2*- weighted echo -planar imaging (EPI) functional run will be acquired.  Each 
run will utilize real -time motion tracking, Framewise Integrated Real -time MRI Monitoring  (FIRMM), to ensure at 
least 40 min of motion -free data per run is collected for 
analysis (Dosenbach et al., 2017) . High -resolution anatomical 
(T1-weighted [T 1w]): One magnetically prepared rapid 
acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE ) will be acquired for co -
registration with functional images and statistical overlay.  The 
collection of 40 min  of high quality fcMRI data will ensure 
substantial increase in SNR of the connectivity signal and allow 
for the evaluation single subject  changes  (Laumann et al., 
2015;Gordon et al., 2017) .  
fMRI Standard Preprocessing : RSFC  data will be corrected 
for B0 inhomogeneity distortion, gradient nonlinearity distortion, 
head motion, and registration to pre -processed structural 
volumes. Gradient nonlinearity distortions will be corrected 
using scanner -specific field maps. Images will be preprocessed 
using FSL and software developed in -house by the Fair 
Laboratory . The motion censoring technique described recently 
by Power and colleagues, and used by Co -I Fair and 
colleagues , will greatly reduce the residual effect of head 
motion on observed time courses. fMRI time courses will be 
sampled to the cortical surface mesh, using the extent of overlap with the cortical ribbon as a weighting factor 
to account for partial volume effects to enable cortical surface -based analyses.  
RSFC  time courses will also be normalized and detrended, and signals correlated with motion, mean white 
matter, mean ventricle and mean brain , along with their temporal derivatives,  will be removed through linear 
regression. Motion regression will include 6 parameter displacement time courses plus their derivatives and 
squares; only frames where displacement is below standard cutoffs will be included in the regression. Post -
regressio n time courses will be band -pass filtered between 0.009 and 0.08 Hz. Signal  from ventricular regions 
and from white matter will be removed from the data through linear regression estimations.  
Specific Outcome Measures and Hypotheses: We will use a mixed effects model with one between -subjects 
variable (genotype) to investigate outcome variables. Precision brain mapping  (Gordon et al., 2017)  allows 
these analyses to occur between subjects  with excellent power.  SA 1  and Hy 1 predicts a significant effect of 
genotype on baseline intrastriatal connectivity and craving. Subsequent analyses can be conducted in several 
ways based on these data. We will use both a hypothesis driven seed region approach based on a priori  region 
of interests (ROIs) of the VS, midbrain, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and ventromedial prefrontal cortex and a 
data driven approach based on a fcMRI correlation matrix. Bivariate correlations between the average BOLD 
signals from these regions will provide connectivity estimates. In addition to our planned seed -based 
comparisons, we will secondarily investigate whole brain connectivity with pair-wise correlations between each 
ROI within the several sets of functionally -defined parcellations and s ubcortical ROIs, forming correlation 
matrices. We use ROIs from the highly cited and utilized Gordon Parcellation (Schaefer et al., 2017;Gordon et 
al., 2016) , a set of 333 ROIs supplemented by a set of 19 subcortical regions defined by FreeSurfer (Fischl, 
2012)  during pre -processing.  Correlations will be Fisher’s Z transformed to correct for non -normality and to 
allow averaging across groups.  Sub-matrices will be derived using InfoMap and sub -graphs identified with 
known cerebral networks (Fortunato and Hric, 2016;Rosvall and Bergstrom, 2008) .  Correlation matrices will 
provide access to specifi c circuits  within individuals and will be utilized to describe and provide specific pre -
defined network strengths and characteristics (e.g. default -mode, fronto -parietal, dorsal attention and salience 
attribution), as well as topological properties for each individual and genotype group. Statistic al analysis for 
these effects are modeled after Feczko et al. (2017)  and Eggebrecht et al. (2017)  and are detailed in 4.4 
Statistical Design and Power . Such an approach allows us to consider individual differences in the functional 
neuroanatomy, as well as investigate genotype -MA interactions.  Topological measures include: connection 
density and strength, network segregation, global efficiency, rich club coefficients, and global segregation; 
“hub” measurements will include hub degree, strength, within module z -score, and participation coefficien t.  
SA 2 and Hy 2  predicts a significant genotype x acute drug administration interaction , specifically that acute 
MA administration will have a blunted effect in the CV group .  For Hy 2 and Hy 3  our primary analytic model Instrument  Measures  
Visual Analog Scale for 
mood (VAS -today)  Methamphetamine 
effects  
Visual Analog Scale for 
craving (VAS -crave)  Drug liking  
Addiction Research Center 
Inventory (ARCI)  Drug effects  
Global Rating of Stimulation 
(GRS)  Stimulation  
Profile of Mood States 
(POMS)  Active mood states  
Profile of Mood States -Bi 
Elevation (POMS -E) Active mood states  
Rapid Visual Information 
Processing Task (RVIPT)  Sustained attention  
Digit Symbol Substitution 
Task (DSST)  Psychomotor speed; 
sustained attention  
Controlled Oral Word 
Association Test (COWAT)  Verbal fluency  
Table 1:  Rating scales and instruments.  
9 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 will again be a linear mixed effects analysis, with two within -subjects factors  (scan day and drug)  with either 
RSFC or behavioral measures included as dependent variables and main effects of genotype and their 
interaction as primary predictors. Post -hoc analyses will be used as necessary to examine effects for individual 
outcomes and to estimate allelic frequency associations as well as sex by genotype interactions .  HY 3 would 
be confirmed by finding a blunted effect of MA administration on reports of eup horia and craving and on effects 
on attention and cognitive control in the CV group.  
Interpretation of Results:  Higher RSFC in CV vs. WT would be consistent with our hypothesis that 
neuroadaptations to chronic  MA use interact with genotype  to differentially alter striatal connectivity.  A blunted 
effect of acute  MA on RSFC in CV vs. WT groups would be consistent with our hypothesis that the CV, v288v, 
is associated with increased  TAAR1 signaling that diminishes the corticostriatal effects of MA. The lack of 
group differences would suggest that genotype does not moderate the MA effects and o pposing results may 
indicate compensatory mechanisms in those with the htaar 1 variant.   
 
Risks to Subjects  
All study data derived from subject procedures (including tasks, rating scales, screening interview 
questionnaires and MRI scan) are obtained specifically for research purposes and not for treatment.  Urine and 
blood  specimens  will be analyzed by the VA lab and destroyed according to protocol. UAs will be obtained and 
analyzed by the research team or the VA lab and will be destroyed according to protocol.  Two cheek swabs 
will be taken, the first will be analyzed for genotype and then destroyed.  The second will be taken during Visit 
2 and banked for future research.  MRI scans are obtained at the Advanced Imaging Research Center at 
OHSU and stored on a disk partition specific to this study and only accessible by study staff.  The imaging data 
are downloaded to image analysis workstati ons located in the Hoffman Lab at the VA and raw images are 
archived on a dedicated server at the OHSU Advanced Computing Center (ACC).   Coded data may be 
processed temporarily on additional OHSU servers in the future.  
 
Risks of Questionnaires , Computer Tasks  and Cognitive/Neuropsychological Testing:  Participants may 
become upset or frustrated while answering personal questions during the interview or during administration of 
the neuropsychological tests  
 
Risks of MRI:  Subjects who are claustrophobic may become frightened in the MRI machine.  Subjects with 
metal fragments, wire sutures, staples, implanted pacemakers or defibrillators or metal fragments from welding  
or shrapnel from combat  are at risk from damage due to movement or heating of metal fragments in the 3T 
magnetic field.  Participants will be systematically assessed for ferromagnetic metallic foreign bodies and 
excluded if there is any doubt. Rarely, subjects experience vertigo , a metallic taste or muscle stimulation.  
Although none are currently known, there may be unknown risks to fetuses in from the MRI procedure and so 
pregnant women are excluded.  
 
Risks of Methamphetamine Administration : MA has a high potential for abuse and dependence with continual 
use. Hypersensitivity reactions are known and include angioedema and anaphylactic reactions.  Sudden death, 
stroke, and heart attack have been reported with use of high doses of methamphetam ine and other stimulants. 
According to FDA -approved Desoxyn® labeling, adverse events include:  elevation of blood pressure, 
tachycardia and palpitation, psychotic episodes, dizziness, dysphoria, overstimulation, eupho ria, insomnia, 
tremor, restlessness, headache, exacerbation of motor and phonic tics and Tourette’s syndrome, diarrhea, 
constipation, dry mouth, unpleasant taste, gastrointestinal disturbances, urticarial, impotence and changes in 
libido, frequent or prolo nged erections, rhabdomyolysis, suppression of growth in children, and alopecia.  
Stimulants can cause teratogenic and embryocidal effects during pregnancy and amphetamines can be 
excreted in human milk.  Our subjects typically self -administer much higher doses of MA than are used in this 
study.  
 
NIDA guidelines for administering abusable substances to individuals currently addicted to drugs:   
1) A serious and concerted effort be made to link these individuals to drug abuse treatment. We will 
engage participants (all of whom will be current MA users and meet criteria for MUD ) in education about MA 
addiction and we will offer referral to VA or community treatment at each visit.  
2) Inclusion of medical examination and screening to assure the absence of any medical or mental 
condition for which further drug exposure would be contraindicated. This examination will be performed at the 
initial visit and subjects will be excluded for c o-morbid medical or psychiatric conditions that contraindicate low 
doses of MA.   
3) A thorough assessment of the risks entailed if participants are to be exposed to higher doses, rate of 
10 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 administration, and/or new route of administration than they would normally encounter by their own choice in 
their usual circumstance. Subjects recruited for this study typically self -administer up to 500 mg MA orally, 
intravenously, by smoking or insuffla tion.  The low oral dose of MA used in this study is considerably less  than 
subjects routinely self -administer.  
 
Risks to Confidentiality : There are risks to confidentiality, particularly sensitive information about genetics, 
medical history and drug use.  Breaches in confidentiality may result in loss of privacy and could result in 
monetary loss due to identity theft.  It could also carry other risks, such as embarrassment or affect current or 
future job status, relations with your family, immigration status, parental right or responsibilities or status in the 
community.  Banking specimens and data in a biorepository  and sharing data with the University of Minnesota 
slightly increases the risk of a breach of confidentiality.  
 
Risks of X -Ray: If there is a chance that  subjects have metal fragments lodged in their eyes or face, we will 
perform an orbital x -ray to check.  Risks include exposure to radiation of about 40 mrems.  No increased risk 
has been scientifically demonstrated from this level of exposure, though a ve ry small increase in cancer risk 
may exist.  
 
Risks of Specimen Collection:  Blood drawing may cause pain or bruising at the site and carries a small risk of 
infection. There is also a risk of fainting during or after a blood draw.   
 
Adequacy of Protection against Risks  
A clinician will be available to consult with any participants who experience discomfort for any reason during 
the study visit.  Subjects will be asked to remain in laboratory either until the problem has been resolved or 
immediate referral to appropriate treatment is accomplished.  Subjects not in need of emergent treatment will 
be offered referral to counseling or other support resources as appropriate.  The subject may request 
termination of the assessments at any time. Subjects may refuse any single non -critical procedure in the study 
if it makes them uncomfortable without disqualification from the rest of the study.  
 
Protection of Risks of Questionnaires , Computer Tasks  and Cognitive Testing:  Subjects or study staff will 
terminate questioning or task performance at any time that the subject becomes upset or overly frustrated and 
does not wish to continue.  
 
Protection of Risks of MRI : Subjects are interviewed extensively to screen for any contraindication to MRI, e.g., 
surgical aneurysm clips, pacemaker, prosthetic heart valve, neuro -stimulator, implanted pumps, cochlear 
implants, metal rods, plates or screws, previous surgery, hearin g aids, history of welding, metal shrapnel or 
tattoos with ferro -magnetic particles. If there is any doubt, the subject will be excluded. The research team will 
obtain orbital x -rays if subjects have any history of welding, grindi ng or other exposure to metallic particles that 
could lodge in the eye. Pregnant women (negative urine pregnancy test required before the scan), because of 
the unknown risk to the fetus, will also be excluded.  Participants will be taken to a mock MRI prio r to the 
procedure if they are concerned about claustrophobia. If a subject becomes frightened during the procedure it 
can be terminated immediately.  
 
Protection of Risks of Methamphetamine Administration :  The study team will thoroughly screen potential 
participants for medications and conditions which would contraindicate use of stimulants.  This will include a 
medical history, family medical history and a brief physical performed by a study physician.  Women will be 
screened for pregnancy at the beginning of each visit and will be removed from the study if found to be 
pregnant.  After the administration of MA, subjects will be c ontinuously monitored for blood pressure and heart 
rate cha nges by research staff  and during the MRI.  Participants will complete a safety questionnaire before 
they can leave the lab after MA administration and will not be allowed to drive on study visits where MA may be 
administered.  
 
Protection of Risks to Confidentiality:  Study data will be coded and kept separately from any HIPAA Identifiers.  
Paperwork will be kept in locked cabinets in a locked office at the Portland VA.  Digital data, including the 
spreadsheet linking the subject ID to personally identifiable informati on, will be kept behind password protected 
applications and spreadsheets.  Data and specimens in the biorepository will not be linked to any personally 
identifiable data and the code linking spreadsheet will be encryp ted once the original study is completed.    
 
Protection of Risks of X -Ray:  Only subjects suspected of having a foreign body in their eyes or face will 
11 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 undergo this procedure.  The images will be obtained at the VA clinical imaging center and will be performed 
by clinical x -ray staff and read by a radiologist.  
 
Protection of Risks of Specimen Collection:  Blood  will be collected by trained VA phlebotomists to ensure the 
highest level of safety for subjects.  
 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Research Participants  and Others  
This project is not intended to benefit individual subjects but results may help us understand the neurobiology 
of methamphetamine  addiction and potentially help us evaluate future pharmacological treatment approaches 
for addicted individuals in the future.  
 
Importance of  the Knowledge to be Gained  
The results of this project will be valuable for understanding genotypic modulation of how addicted individuals 
respond to MA and informing our understanding of by establishing biomarkers useful in  predicting and 
evaluating treatment response .  A predictive model will help individualize relapse risk through a better 
understanding of neurobiological factors that influence addiction, craving and cognition.  
 
Participation of Non -Veterans  
This is an ambitious study and requires recruitment of subjects who are currently experiencing 
methamphetamine addiction .  There are also significant gender effects which necessitate have a gender 
balanced sample.   We will, therefore, need to recruit non -veterans to meet o ur ambitious recruitment goals and 
to recru it sufficient numbers of women .  Non -veterans may be recruited using flyers  posted at OHSU, the 
Portland VA , local retailers, college campuses, and businesses where social service assistance is pr ovided. 
Additionally, advertisement will occur on OHSU’s Study Parti cipation Opportunities web page, and Craigsl ist. 
The Craigslist ad will include a phone number for potential subjects to call and the email response option will 
be turned off during the generation of the ad.  VHA Notice of Privacy Practices (NOPP) us provided to non -
veterans and an NOPP acknowledgement is signed.    
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plans  
Data Security and Privacy : Data will be stored in a manner intended to preserve patient confidentiality.  
Hard -copy PHI will be stored in locked cabinets in the PIs VA office and laboratory space.  Electronic PHI will 
be stored only on servers behind the VA firewall accessed by pass word -protected VA computers.    Any email 
contact with subjects will occur through Azure secure email.  Each subject is given a unique identifier (UI) 
based on a random number and study  identifier .  Only coded or de -identified dat a, not PHI, are used for 
analysis.  The file linking the UI to the patient’s name will be stored in a separate password -protected file on a 
secure server behind the VA firewall.  Once the study has ended, the link will be stored by the VA R&D office 
(or de stroyed if regulations change) . We expect this study to be funded by the National Institute of Drug Abuse 
(NIDA). This funding will provide the study with an automatic certificate of confidentiality. Basic information 
about participation in the study, stud y procedures and x -ray results will be entered into the subject’s VHA 
medical record.  
The primary repository for de -identified data and neuroimages will be stored on a password -protected 
network drive at the OHSU Advanced Computing Center, to which only the research team has access.  Coded 
data will also be stored on OHSU's REDCap applicati on, a highly secure and robust web -based research data 
collection and management system.  No identifiable information will be entered into this application at any time.  
The statisticians will not have access to the code or PHI at any time . The spreadsheet linking the code to the 
subject will remain behind the VA firewall at VAPORHCS.  
Data being sent to Minnesota will be sent and returned via secure Box folder accessible only to approved 
study staff or by encrypted VA email.  Data will be stored  at the University of Minnesota (UMN) via the 
Minnesota Supercomputing Institute (MSI)'s high performance storage, "Tier 1" system. Tier 1 storage is 
connected to two HPC servers only accessible through UMN's private network.  Data will be stored and only 
accessible on Dr. Anita Randolph's personal share and only users granted permission by Dr. Ra ndolph will be 
able to access the data. Data access is further restricted through the UMN's campus; permitted users would 
need to login to the UMN network in order to access the data. Permitted users outside the UMN campus may 
be able to access the data by  logging into UMN's virtual private network (VPN). Both forms of access require 
a) a login and password, and b) two -factor authentication via Duo.   Data will be returned to the Portland VA 
and OHSU after it is analyzed at UMN.  
Clincard (by greenphire) will be used to pay subjects for each study visit  which may require inputting 
subject’s name, address, SSN, and DOB.  This a secure website that is approved by OHSU/VA as a form of 
12 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 payment.  
MRI images are collected at the Advanced Imaging Research Center (AIRC) at OHSU.  No PHI is used to 
identify subjects and only the subject’s coded ID is entered at the time of the scan.  Images are archived on a 
separate partition on the AI RC PACS server  to which only Hoffman Lab research computers and the AIRC IT 
specialist have access.  The raw data for each MRI scan is downloaded to Hoffman Lab Li nux workstations at 
the VA.  These workstations are, by necessity, hooked up to the OHSU network, but can be accessed only by 
Hoffman Lab personnel.  Image analysis takes place on these workstations in VA spac e.   
At the end of the study, the AIRC will scrub the partition containing archives and remove the partition, so 
that the data are permanently erased from the AIRC.  The Hoffman Lab will archive the raw image files in the 
already established MARC server  and bank imaging in the MARC biorepository.    
Records will be maintained according to the VA research retention schedule.  
 
Blood and Data Banking  
Serum, leukocytes  (from whole blood samples)  and a buccal swab will be obtained (via separate 
permission on the HIPAA and ICF), linked to study data for coded storage in the MARC Translational Service 
Core Biorepository  (Jennifer Loftis, PhD, Administrator).  No PHI will b e stored in the data repository.  
Banked contact information  
Subjects will be asked to have the following information collected for a contact repository: contact 
information, date of birth, gender, Veteran status, smoking status, substance use information, mental health 
status and previous participation in a Hoffman lab research study . This will be used to contact subjects who 
may be eligible for future studies with the Hoffman lab. Subjects will sign an addendum to the VA ICF if they 
consent to having their information stored for future contact , whic h is optional.   Information will be contributed 
to the Hoffman Lab Contact Information Data Repository (mIRB 4512, William Hoffman, MD, PhD 
Administrator).   
 
Oversight  
IRB-approved study staff will ensure that any protocol deviations or adverse event will be reported 
immediately to the PI, who will examine the patient and determine if any additional evaluation or treatment is 
needed. The PI will ensure that significant a dverse events are properly reported to the IRB (within 5 days to 
comply with VA policy).  The Hoffman Lab will examine all cumulative adverse events semi -annually to 
determine if there are any systematic problems.   OHSU’s IRB3 will oversee the study and wi ll be the sole 
source for study documentation and approval.  
 
Inclusion/Vulnerable Populations  
Women and Minorities : Given that gender effects may be prominent in this population, it is important that 
the ratio of male/female subjects approach 50/50.  We will recruit outside of the VA SATP to ensure that 
women are represented equally with men, in alcohol detox and treatm ent centers in the Portland area.  
Minority subjects will be recruited to be a representative cross section of the Portland, Oregon population. That 
population is primarily Caucasian 82.4%, with 7% African -American, 7%, Asian, 1.8% Na tive Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander, and 1.8% Native American. Additionally, the population will be primarily non -Hispanic 
93%, with 7% Hispanic.  
Children : Children will be excluded from this study.  
Prisoners: No prisoners will be included.   If subjects are incarcerated during their enrollment, they will be 
dropped from the study.   Potential subjects will not be in any formal treatment program.  
Decisionally -Impaired: Methamphetamine -addic ted individuals do not typically  exhibit cognitive deficits that 
interfere with capacity.   Acute intoxication or psychosis could potentially impair decision making.   Subjects will 
not be recruited if they are acutely intoxicated.   Symptoms of psychosis are common in MUD, but do not per s e 
interfere with decision making.   Subjects who score high on the MINI psychosis scale will be evalu ated by Dr. 
Hoffman  or Dr. Huckans to ensure that they can explain the purpose o f the study, the risks and benefits to 
others after having the study explained.   The MARC has recruited actively using MUD subjects in the past and 
did not exclude any for lack of capacity.   Note that the dose of MA administered (max 30 mg) is much less th at 
active users typically take (100 to over 500 mg per day) and is not expected to cause significant intoxication.  
Economically Disadvantaged:  Study compensation is in line with that used in previous investigations 
recruiting active users and the amount should not be coercive to individuals experienc ing economic 
hardship.   Compensation  will be provided in the form of prepaid debit cards instead of cash both to minimize 
possible coercion and to discourage immediate use of the stipend to obtain illicit drugs.  
 
13 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Determining VA from Non -VA Research  
This study will take place both at the Portland VA and at OHSU.  VA Research will include consent, 
screening, questionnaires, blood draws, EKG, urinalyses,  x-rays, computer task training, cheek swabs, 
medication dispensing and administration, and data analysis .  Non -VA Research will be  the MRI scans 
acquired at OHSU’s AIRC , advertising, and data analysis . 
 
Preliminary Studies  
PS1: MUD group  with TAAR1 CV Report Increased Craving: Individuals were enrolled into one of five 
groups: 1) CS group (n = 31): no lifetime history of dependence on any substance other than nicotine or 
caffeine; 2)  MA-active (MA -ACT) group (n = 13): actively using MA  and meeting criteria for MA dependence; 3) 
MA-remission (MA -REM) group (n = 19): early remission from MUD (≥ 1 month and ≤ 6 months); 4) Active 
polysubstance dependence (POLY -ACT) group (n = 11): actively using MA  and meeting criteria for MA 
dependence and using at least one other substance (other than caffeine or nicotine); and 5) polysubstance 
remission (POLY -REM) group (n = 32): early remission from MUD (abstinence > 1 month and < 6 months) and 
at least one other substance (other than caffeine or nicotine).   
Subjects were rated on the PHQ9 (depression), GAD7 (anxiety), FSS (fatigue), BPI severity and intensity 
(pain), PRMQ (memory), a sleep disturbance scale (P57) and three visual analog scales (VAS) of craving for 
MA, alcohol or any other drug.  Four componen ts from a principal components analysis, which accounted for 
80% of the variance, were varimax rotated ( Error! Reference source not found. ). A general linear model 
(GLM) was calculated with the factor scores as dependent variables and diagnostic group, TAAR1 (WT, at 
least one CV), a genotype by group interaction term and age, education and sex as covariates.  The overall 
GLM had a significant F with largest effect for Craving. For PC3 (craving response), there was a significant 
[X2(4df) = 15.82, p = 0.003] interaction involving TAAR1 and study group. CS showed no association between 
PC3 and TAAR1 (fold change = 0.99, p = 0.94), while the 
adjusted m ean PC3 for MA -ACT and MA -REM groups, with at 
least one copy of the CV, was estimated to be, 1.55 (95% CI: 1.03 
- 2.35; p = 0.036) and 1.77 (95% CI: 0.95 - 3.27; p = 0.071)  times 
the mean response,  respectively , for those without the CV. The 
POLY -REM group evidenced a similar, but non -significant trend; 
the adjusted mean PC3 for the CV group was estimated to be 
1.34 (95% CI: 0.90 - 2.01; p = 0.152) times the adjusted mean 
response for the WT group. In the POLY -ACT group, the direction 
reversed, such that the adjusted mean response for the CV group 
was lower than that of the  WT group (95% CI: 0.41 - 0.91; p = 
0.016); however, the POLY -ACT group was limited to only three 
participants without the CV ( Figure 2,Error! Reference source 
not found. ).  
 Further analysis  revealed that the TAAR1 genotype effects 
in the MA -ACT and MA -REM groups (i.e., 1.55 - and 1.77 -fold 
increases) did not differ significantly [ X2 (1df) = 0.11, p = 0.75], 
implying a shared underlying effect on craving for those with MUD. Having at least one copy of the TAAR1 CV 
SNP was associated with a 1.68 (95% CI: 1.14 - 2.47, p = 0.009) fold increase in the adjusted mean craving 
response as characterized by PC3. Thus, MUD participants with the CV reported higher craving than WT 
participa nts.  
PS2: TAAR1 genotype modulates RSFC in CS and MUD: Samples from the MARC Data Repository 
were examined under an IRB approved protocol. The htaar1 gene was sequenced in 24 CS (15 WT and 9 CV) 
and 26 MUD subjects in remission (13 WT and 13 CV) by the Core Laboratory at OHSU. The reported allelic 
frequency of the synonymous v288v SNP in the general population is 22% (Lek et al., 2016)  and, in our 
sample, 24%. There was no difference in the distribution of v288v genotypes between MUD and CS. 
Homozygotes for the CV (n=4) were combined with hetero zygotes for com parison to the WT group.    
Figure 2: Increased craving in MUD with the CV.  

14 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 RSFC scans were processed with FSL (Smith et al., 2004)  using a variation on the methods in Kohno et 
al. (2017) . We hypothesized that effects of TAAR1 genotype would be most robust in striatum. Thus, we 
examined RSFC  between a ventral striatum (VS)  seed and dorsal striatum (DS), midbrain, insula, anterior 
cingulate and dorso lateral prefrontal cortex and found a significant main effect of group (p = 0.018) and a 
group by genotype interaction (p < 0.005) with the regions in Figure 3.   
PS3: Effect of CV v288v SNP on expression of TAAR1 receptor in vitro : Chinese Hamster Ovary cells 
in culture were 
transfected with equal 
doses of either WT or CV 
cDNA tagged with Venus 
(a yellow fluorescing 
variant of green 
fluorescent protein). 
Figure 5 indicate more 
protein  expression for the 
CV by the Venus light 
intensity. The Venus tag 
is part of the protein 
molecule and co -
expressed with the TAAR1 receptor. Note that at all post transfection time points, the CV protein was 
expressed at higher levels than the WT protein. Finally, cAMP production (Figure 5D) was higher in the CV 
transfected cells compared to WT transfected cells in response to beta phenethylamine, but EC50s were 
similar. So, it is 
likely that 
expression but not 
protein structure 
was altered by the 
polymorphism. The 
Janowsky lab used  
TAAR1 specific 
antibodies to 
further confirm 
protein expression, 
but available 
antibodies lack 
sensitivity and 
specificity. Whether 
the CV genotype 
has any effect on 
expression in the brain is not known. It is possible, however, that the CV, through effects on mRNA splicing, 
structure or rate of translation, results in altered levels of the TAAR1 receptor in vivo  (Sauna and Kimchi -
Sarfaty, 2011;Hunt et al., 2014) . We assume, in our predictive model (Figure 1) that the CV genotype is 
associated with increased TAAR1 expression in the human brain. This assumption leads to testable 
Hypotheses (Hy) 1 -3. 
PS4:  Administration of oral MA:  We performed this study to develop 
methods for safely administering MA and monitoring behavioral responses. 
Twelve healthy CS (8 women and 4 men; mean age 31 y), who had previous 
experience with stimulants but did not regularly use stimulants recreational ly 
or by prescription were enrolled. None met criteria for any substance use 
disorder, including nicotine use disorder. The subjects were familiarized with 
the procedure, given a test dose of 20 mg oral S -methamphetamine 
(Desoxyn®, Lundbeck) and monitored for 6 hours after the dose. They 
returned on four more occasions when they were given either MA or a 
placebo 2 hours after baseline self -report and cognitive testing. All subjects 
tolerated the procedure without subjective o r objective (pulse, heart rate) 
measures of distress. We show results from the VAS for craving, a self -report 
inventory (Figure 4). This protocol showed that MA can be safely 
administered in a controlled setting. The time for peak subjective effects is  
Figure 4:  Normal CS respond 
with robust reports of craving  over 
a several hour time window when 
given MA compared to placebo .  
   
Figure 3: VS connectivity with A) dorsal striatum (DS), B) midbrain and C) insula in CS vs. MUD.  
 
Figure 5:  Fluorescent VENUS tagged - WT or -v288v hTAAR1 were transiently transfected into cells. 
Cells were collected and counted at 4, 24 and 48 hours post transfection. Fluorescence intensity was 
measured using a PerkinElmer Victor X light fluorescence plate reader. Light intensity was normalized to 
cell number of each condition (expressed as % WT) to correct for cell growth at different time points. Bar 
heights are mean ±SEM, * P<0.01 .  Shi and Janowsky (2017), private communication.  

15 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 between one and two hours after administration of MA.  
  
16 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Berry MD, Gainetdinov RR, Hoener  MC, Shahid M (2017) Pharmacology of human trace amine -
associated  recept ors: Therapeutic opportunities and challe nges. Pharmacol Ther 180 :161-180. 
 
Cabana -Domin guez J, Shivalikanjli A, Fe rnandez -Castllo N, Co rmand B  (2018) Genome-wide association 
meta-analysis of cocaine  dependence: sh ared genetics with comorbid co nditions.  bioRxiv. 
 
Chang  D, Nalls  MA, Hallgrimsdottir IB, Hunkapiller  J, van der B rug M, Cai F, Kerchner GA, Ayalon G, 
Bingol B, Sheng  M, Hinds  D, Behrens TW, Singleton AB, Bhangale TR, Graham RR (2017) A meta-analysis of 
genome- wide association studies  identi fies 17 new  Parkinson's disease  risk loci. Nat Genet 49 :1511-1516. 
 
Clarke TK, Ada ms MJ, Davies G, Howard DM, Hall LS,  Padmanabhan  S, Murray AD, Smith BH, Campbe ll 
A, Hay ward C, Porteous D J, Deary IJ, McIntosh  AM (2017) Genome-wide a ssociation s tudy of alcoh ol 
consum ption and  genetic overlap with other health-related t raits in UK Biobank  (N=112 11 7). Mol Psychiat ry 
22:1376 -1384. 
 
Dosenbach NUF,  Koller  JM, Earl EA,  Miranda -Domin guez O, Klein RL,  Van AN,  Snyder AZ, Nagel BJ, 
Nigg JT,  Nguyen AL,  Wesevich V, G reene D J, Fair DA  (2017) Rea l-time motion analytics during brain MRI 
improve data quality and  reduce  costs. Neuroimage 161:80-93. 
 
Eggebrecht AT, et al. (2017) Joint  Attention and Brain Functional Conne ctivity in Infants and  Toddlers. 
Cereb  
Cortex 27:1709-1720.  
 
Elliott  JM, Beveridge TJ (2005)  Psychos timulants and monoamine transp orters: upsetting the balance.  
Curr 
Opin Pha rmacol 5:94-100. 
 
Espino za S, Lignani G, Caffino L, Maggi S, S ukhanov  I, Leo D, Mus L,  Emanuele M, Ronzitti G, Har meier 
A, Medrihan L,  Sotnikova TD,  Chier egatti E, Hoener MC, Benfenati F, Tucci V, Fumagalli F, Gainetdinov RR 
(2015)  TAAR1 Modulat es Cortical Glutamate NMDA Receptor Functio n. Neuropsychopharmacology 40:2217- 
2227.  
 
Feczko E, Nalba N, Miranda-Domi nguez O,  Cordova M, Karalunas S L, Irwin L,  Demeter DV, Hill AP,  
Langorst BH,  Prieser J, Van Santen J, Fo mbonne  EJ, Nigg JL,  Fair DA  (2017) Sub typing cognitive profiles in  
Autism Spec trum Disord er using a random  forest a lgorithm. Neu roImage. 
 
Fischl B (2012) FreeSu rfer. Neu roImage 62:774-781. 
 
Fleckenstein AE, Volz TJ, Hanson  GR (2009) Psychos timulant-induced altera tions in vesicular  
monoamine transp orter-2 function: neurotoxic and therapeutic implicati ons. Neu ropharmacology 56 Suppl 
1:133-138. 
 
Fortunato S, Hric D (2016) Community detection in networks: A us er guide. Physics Repo rts 659:1-44. 
Gordon  EM, Laumann  TO, Ade yemo B, Hu ckins JF, Kelley  WM, Petersen  SE (2016) Generation and 
Evaluation of  a Co rtical Area Parcellation  from Restin g-State Correlation s. Cereb  Cortex 26:288-303. 
 
Gordon  EM, Laumann  TO, Gilmore AW, Newbold DJ, G reene D J, Berg JJ, Ortega M, Hoyt-Drazen C, 
Gratton C,  Sun H, Hampton J M, Coalson RS,  Nguyen AL, McDer mott KB, Shi mony JS,  Snyder AZ, Schlag gar 
BL, Pete rsen SE, Nelson  SM, Dosenbach  NUF (2017) Precision Fun ctional Mapping  of Individual Human  
Brains. Neu ron 95 :791-807. 
 
Harkness JH, Shi X, Janowsky A, Phillips TJ (2015) Trace Amine-Associa ted Recept or 1 Regulation of 
Methampheta mine Intake and Related  Traits. Neu ropsychophar macology 40:2175 -2184.  
 
Hart AB, Engelhardt BE, Wardle MC, Sokoloff G, Stephens M, de WH, Palmer AA (2012) Genome-wide 
association study of d-amphetamine response in  healthy volunteers ident ifies putative association s, including  
cadhe rin 13 (CDH13 ). PLoS ONE 7:e42646.  
 
17 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Hunt  RC, Si mhadri V L, Iandoli  M, Sauna ZE, Ki mchi-Sarfaty C (2014) Exposing s ynonymous mutations. 
Trends Genet 3 0:308-321. 
 
John J, K ukshal P, Bhatia T, Cho wdari KV,  Nimgaon kar VL, Deshpande  SN, Thelma BK (2017) Possible 
role of rare variants  in Trace  amine associ ated recep tor 1 in schi zophrenia.  Schizophr Res 189:19 0-195. 
 
Kohno M, Dennis  LE, McCready  H, Hoffman WF (2017)  Executive Cont rol and S triatal Resti ng-State 
Network 
Interact with Risk  Factors to Influence  Treatment Outcomes in Alcoho l-Use Disorde r. Front Ps ychiat ry 
8:182. 
 
Kohno M, Ghahremani DG, Morales A M, Rober tson CL, Ishibashi K, Morgan AT,  Mandel kern MA, London 
ED (2015) Ris k-taking beha vior: dopamine D2/D3  receptors, feedba ck, and frontolimbic activity. Cereb Cor tex 
25:236-245. 
 
Kohno M, Morales AM, Ghahremani DG, Hellemann G,  London  ED (2014) Risky decision making, 
prefrontal cor tex, and mesoco rticolimbic functional conne ctivity in methamphetamine  dependence. JA MA 
Psychiat ry 
71:812-820. 
 
Kohno M, Okita K, Morales AM, Rober tson CL, Dean AC, Ghahremani DG, Sabb FW, Rawson RA, 
Mandelkern MA, Bilder  RM, London ED (2016) Midbrain functional conne ctivity and ventral striatal dopamine 
D2-type receptors: link to impulsivity in methamphetamine users. Mol Psychiatry. 
 
Kono va AB,  Moeller SJ, Tomasi D, Vo lkow ND, Goldstein RZ (2013) Effects of methylphenida te on 
resting- state functional conne ctivity of the mesoc orticolimbic dopamine pa thways in cocaine addi ction. JAMA 
Psychiat ry 70:857-868. 
 
Laumann  TO, Gordon  EM, Adeyemo B, Snyder AZ,  Joo SJ, Chen MY, Gilmore AW, McDer mott KB,  
Nelson SM, Dosenbach NU, Sc hlaggar BL, Mumford JA, Poldrack  RA, Petersen SE (2015) Fun ctional S ystem 
and A real O rganization of a Highly Sampled Individual Human  Brain. Neuron 87:657-670. 
 
Lek M, et al. (2016) Anal ysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 6 0,706 humans. Nat ure 536:285-291. 
Levine J,  Schooler  NR (1986) SAFTEE: a  technique  for the systematic assessme nt of side effects in clinical  
trials. Ps ychophar macol Bull 22 :343-381. 
 
Lewin  AH, Miller GM, Gilmour B  (2011)  Trace amine-associated receptor 1 is a stereoselecti ve binding  site 
for compounds  in the amphetamine class. Bioo rg Med Chem 19 :7044 -7048.  
 
Lindemann L,  !Lost Dat a, Jeanneau  K, Bradaia A, Ozmen L, Blue thmann  H, !Lost Dat a, !Lost Dat a, 
Borroni E, Moreau JL,  !Lost Data (2008) Trace amine-associated recept or 1 modulat es dopa minergic activity. J 
Pharmacol E xp Ther 32 4:948-956. 
 
London ED,  Kohno  M, Morales A M, Ballard  ME (2015)  Chronic methamphetamine ab use and  
corticostriatal deficits revealed by  neuroi maging. Brain Res 16 28:174-185. 
 
Martinez D, Carpe nter KM, Liu F,  Slifstein M, Broft A, Friedman  AC, Kum ar D, Van HR, Kleber  HD, Nunes 
E (2011) I maging dop amine transmission  in cocai ne dependence: link be tween neuroch emistry and  response  
to treatment. Am J Ps ychiat ry 168:63 4-641. 
 
Mueller S, Costa A, Ke eser D, Pogarell O, Berman A,  Coates U, Reiser  MF, Riedel  M, Moller HJ, Ettinger 
U, Meindl T  (2014) The effects of methylphenida te on whole b rain in trinsic functional connec tivity. Hum  Brain 
Mapp 35 :5379 -5388.  
 
Muhlhaus J,  Dinter J, Jyrch S,  Teumer A, Jacobi SF, Hom uth G, Kuhnen  P, Wiegand S, Gruters A, Volzke 
H, Raile K,  Kleinau G, Krude H, Biebe rmann H (2017) Investigation of Naturally Occurring Single-Nucleotide 
Variants  in Human TAAR1. Front Pharmacol 8: 807. 
 
18 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021 Nichols  TE, Das S, Eickhoff SB, Evans AC, Glatard  T, Hanke M, Kriegeskorte N, Milham  MP, Poldrack  
RA, Poline JB,  Proctor SP, P roal E,  Thirion B, Van  Essen DC,  Yeo BTT (2016)  Best practices in data analysis 
and sh aring in neuroimaging using MRI.  bioRxiv. 
 
Pei Y,  Asif-Malik A, Canales JJ (2016)  Trace Amines and the Trace  Amine-Associated Recept or 1: 
Pharmacology, Neurochemist ry, and Clinical Implication s. Front Neu rosci 10:148. 
 
Phillips TJ, Shabani S  (2015) An an imal model of differential genetic  risk for methamphetamine int ake. 
Front 
Neurosci 9:32 7. 
 
Power JD, Barnes  KA, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE  (2012) Sp urious but s ystematic 
correlations in functional conne ctivity MRI networks arise  from subject motion. Neu roimage 59:2142-2154.  
 
Power JD, Mitra A, Laumann TO, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Pet ersen SE (2014)  Methods  to detect, 
characterize, and remove motion a rtifact in resting s tate fMRI. Neu roimage 84:320-341. 
 
Power JD, Schlag gar BL, Petersen SE (2015) Recent progress and outstanding  issues in  motion  
correction in resting state fMRI. Neu roimage 105:53 6-551. 
 
Reese EA,  Bunzow JR, A rttamangkul S, Sond ers MS, Grandy  DK (2007)  Trace amine-associated recept or 
1 displa ys species -dependent  stereosele ctivity for isomers of methamphetamine, amphetamine, and  para- 
hydroxyampheta mine. J Pha rmacol E xp Ther 32 1:178-186. 
 
Rosvall M, Bergstrom CT (2008) Maps of random walks on complex networks reveal com munity structure. 
Proc Na tl Acad Sci U  S A 105:111 8-1123.  
 
Rutigliano  G, Acco rroni A, Zucchi R  (2017) The Case  for TAAR1 as a Modulator  of Central Nervous 
System 
Function.  Front Pha rmacol 8:987.  
 
Sauna ZE,  Kimchi-Sarfaty C (2011) Under standing the contribution of synonymous mutations  to human 
disease.  Nat Rev  Genet 12:683-691. 
 
Scha efer A, Kong R,  Gordon E M, Laumann  TO, Zuo XN, Holmes AJ, Eickhoff SB, Yeo BTT (2017) Loca l- 
Global Parcellation of the Hu man Cerebral  Cortex from Intrinsic Functio nal Connec tivity MRI. Cereb Cor tex1-
20. 
 
Schran tee A, Fe rguson  B, Stoffers D, Booij J, Rombouts S, Reneman  L (2016) Effects of 
dexamphetamine- induced dopa mine release on resting-state network conn ectivity in recreational 
amph etamine users and heal thy controls. B rain Imaging Behav  10:548-558. 
 
Shi X, Walter NA,  Harkness JH, Ne ve KA,  Williams  RW, Lu L, Belknap JK, Eshleman  AJ, Phillips TJ, 
Jano wsky A (2016)  Genetic Po lymorphis ms Affect Mouse and H uman Trace A mine-Associated  Receptor 1  
Function.  PLoS  ONE 11:e0152581.  
 
Smith SM, Jenkinson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF,  Behrens TE, Joh ansen-Berg H, Banni ster PR, De 
LM, Drobnjak I, Flitney DE,  Niazy RK, Saunders  J, Vickers J, Zha ng Y, De S N, Brady J M, Matthews PM (2004) 
Advances in  functional and st ructural MR image analysis and implemen tation as FS L. Neuroimage 23 Suppl  
1:S208 -S219.  
 
Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler  JS, L ogan J, Gatley SJ, Wong C, Hi tzemann R,  Pappas NR  (1999)  
Reinforcing effects of psychos timulants in humans are assoc iated with inc reases  in brain dopa mine and  
occu pancy of  D(2) recept ors. J Pha rmacol Exp Ther 291:40 9-415. 
 
Wang GJ, Smith L, Volkow ND, Telang F, Logan J, Tomasi D, Wong CT, Hoffman W, Jayne M, Alia-Klein 
N, Thanos P, Fo wler JS (2012) Decr eased dop amine activity predic ts relapse in methamphetamine abusers. 
Mol Ps ychiat ry 17:918-925. 
19 
MATAAR Version: 11-29-2021  
Wilcox  CE, Abbott  CC, Calhoun  VD (2018)  Alterations  in resting -state  functional  connectivity  in 
substance  use disorders  and treatment  implications.  Prog  Neuropsychopharmacol  Bioi Psychiatry  
 