(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 1 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
PART B 
STUDY DESCRIPTION 
 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL  Seizure -like Hippocampal Activity in Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neurodegeneration  
Principal Investigator  Daniel Z. Press, M.D.  
Co-Investigators  Susan T. Herman, MD; David C. Alsop, PhD ; Sanjin 
Tunovic  
Mailing Address  330 Brookline Ave, KS -446, Boston, MA, 02215  
E-Mail Address  dpress@bidmc.harvard.edu  
P.I.’s Telephone   7-0459  P.I.’s Pager   3-4448 Fax: 7-7981  
Sponsor/Funding Source  Fidelity Biosciences Research Initiative; Neurology 
Department internal funding  
 
 
B1. PURPOSE OF PROTOCOL  
 
To test the hypothesis that  increased hippocampal perfusion on arterial spin labeling 
MRI in patients with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is partially driven by focal epileptiform 
activity, and that this abnormal activity contributes to memory dysfunction.  
 
Here we propose applying an imaging technique , arterial spin labeling MRI (ASL -MRI), ideally 
suited for testing this hypothesis.  We will utilize a pharmacological probe, levetiracetam,  to test 
whether sub- clinical epileptiform activity is driving increases in hippocampal perfusion and 
contributing to the declarative memory impairment in AD.  Levetiracetam is an antiepileptic 
drug (AED) that inhibits epileptiform activity.  Levetiracetam inhibits burst firing without 
affecting normal neur onal excitability.  We will s tudy patients with mild AD in three sessions, 
counterbalanced for order, in a crossover design. In each session, participants will undergo a 
baseline electroencephalogram (EEG).  They will then be given either a placebo or 
intravenous  levetiracetam low dose (2.5 mg/kg ) or high dose ( 7.5 mg/kg ). After drug 
administration, repeat EEG, ASL -MRI perfusion imaging, and behavioral testing will be 
conducted.  Participants will return at 1- 2 week intervals  for the second and third sessions in 
the other  conditions ( levetiracetam low dose / levetiracetam high dose / placebo). This study 
will test whether increased hippocampal perfusion in AD is caused by epileptiform activity, whether this activity is contributing to memory impairment, and whether anti epileptic  
medications might be a new avenue of treatment in AD. If validated, ASL- MRI would be an 
ideal tool to non- invasively determine whether antiepileptic medications are effective in 
decreasing aberrant excitatory activity in the hippocampus in AD.  
 
Aim 1: To determine whether increased hippocampal perfusion in AD is caused by 
epileptiform activity.  
 
Hypothesis 1: Hippocampal perfusion in AD will be decreased after the administration of an antiepileptic medication, levetiracetam, but not after placebo.  
 
Aim 2: To determine whether inhibition of burst firing can improve cognitive 
performance and neural function in cortical regions beyond the hippocampus.  
 
Hypothesis 1 : Decreases in hippocampal perfusion will correlate with improvements in 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 2 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
measures of declarative memory and spatial memory.  
 
Hypothesis 2: Decreases in hippocampal perfusion will correlate with increases in 
cortical perfusion, particularly in lateral temporal and parietal association cortices.  
 
 
B2. SIGNIFICANCE AND BACKGROUND FOR THE STUDY 
Seizures and Alzheimer’s Disease  
 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is associated with an increased risk of unprovoked seizures and accounts for approximately 2% of all epilepsy 
1. Clinical seizures develop in 1.5 -17% of long-
term AD survivors, most commonly in those with early age at disease onset and with familial AD 
2-4.  In familial AD due to mutations in presenilin, epilepsy is much more prevalent, approaching 
80% of affected members 5-7.  Seizures may be more common in sporadic AD, however, than 
previously reported 8.  Seizures may be under -recognized in patients with dementia.  S ubjective 
seizure auras  such as déjà vu, olfactory hallucinations, and other auras are uncommon in AD 3.  
Clinical manifestations of temporal lobe seizures are often subtle.  For example, focal seizures 
restricted to the hippocampus may produce only mild confusion or amnesia without other outward signs 
9.  Fluctuations in memory or wandering in AD can be due to unrecognized complex  
partial seizures  10.  Such seizures might easily be missed in patients with baseline memory and 
cognitive deficits.  Seizures in AD are usually considered to be rare and late byproducts of a diffuse neurodegenerative process, but recent evidence from animal studies has raised the intriguing possibility that  epilepsy plays a more central role in the pathophysiology of AD.  
 The exact mechanism of epileptogenesis (development of spontaneous seizures) in AD is not known, but new data from transgenic mice expressing human amyloid precursor protein (APP) in neurons suggest that high levels of beta amyloid (Aβ), the amyloid protein tightly linked to AD, 
are sufficient to elicit epileptiform activity and seizures 
11.  The excitatory connections within the 
perforant p athway of the hippocampus also promote focal epileptic activity. Inhibitory connections 
outside the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex can prevent the propagation of seizures beyond the medial temporal lobes. Epileptic activity directly damages the hippocam pus via hypoxia and 
ischemia 
12. Ischemia in turn increases amyloid deposition  in a potential feedback loop 13 (see 
Figure 1).  
 Human amyloid precursor protein ( hAPPJ20 ) mice have high levels of Aβ peptides in the brain 
without significant neuronal loss, and develop cognitive deficits comparable to those seen in human AD.  Continuous video- EEG monitoring with intracranial electrodes in hAPP mice 
demonstrates frequent epileptiform activity including spikes, sharp waves, and spontaneous nonconvulsive seizures in both hippocampus and multiple neocortical regions.  These seizures 
have no outward clinical manifestations.  Epileptic activity leads to hypoxia- ischemia, which can 
then lead to increased amyloid deposition 
13.  Animal studies show that amyloid acts as an 
excitatory epileptogenic stimulus in the hippocampus, leading to compensatory upregulation of inhibitory, GABAergic interneurons 
11.  Network changes in hAPP mice include both aberrant 
network excitability and compensatory inhibitory mechanisms, such as GABAergic sprouting, enhanced synaptic inhibition, and synaptic plasticity deficits in the dentate gyrus.  The interplay of excitatory and inhibitory changes prevents seizure generalization, but inhibits proper 
hippocampal function.  Similar epileptiform activity has been identified in independent transgenic 
mouse models of AD 
14-17, further highlighting the importance of APP and Aβ for the genesis of 
epileptiform activity.  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 3 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
 
Could a similar pathophysiological chain be occurring in patients with AD and, if so, could these 
events contribute to the pathological changes in the hippocampus and connected regions (figure 1)?  In hAPP mice, the degree of network changes is correlated with deficits in learning and 
memory 
11, 18.  More importantly , many of the Aβ -induced neuronal alterations as well as 
learning and memory deficits could be prevented by blocking excitotoxin- induced overexcitation 
19.  These findings raise the possibility that hippocampal epileptiform and seizure activity may 
not be solely an epiphenomenon of progressive neurodegeneration, but may play a causal role in the cognitive deficits in hAPP mice and possibly also humans with AD.  Confirmation of a 
relationship between excitatory neuronal activity and cognitive deficits in humans with AD would provide new insights into the pathogenesis of AD as well as open new potential avenues for therapy.   
 
 
 
Arterial spin -labelling MRI to detect hippocampal blood flow changes  
 
Demonstrating whether similar epileptiform activity and seizures occurs in the hippocampus of humans with AD is challenging.  Surface EEG, dense array EEG, and magnetoencephalography 
are extremely limited in their ability to detect hippocampal epileptic activity 
20-22. The 
hippocampus can be recorded with intracranial depth electrodes, but these are invasive and carry a risk of hemorrhage and infection.  For this reason, indirect measures of hyperexcitability, such as increases in cerebral blood flow by functional MRI or SPECT, are commonly used to aid in localization of deep epileptic foci.  The mechanism of hyperperfusion due to seizure activity is not completely understood, but may be related to transient loss of autoregulatory function in surrounding vasculature or to the release of excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate in areas of increased neuronal firing.   
 In this project, we hypothesize that aberrant epileptiform and seizure activity occurs in the hippocampus in patients with AD, and that suppression of epileptiform activity will improve memory deficits. We will study hippocampal activity using a proxy for epileptiform activity, Arterial Spin Labeling MRI (ASL- MRI), as well as EEG.  We have completed a study of brain 
perfusion in mild- AD using Arterial Spin Labeling MRI (ASL -MRI), a non - invasive technique to 
quantifiably measure cerebral blood flow  
23. We found decreases in cerebral perfusion in lateral 
temporal and parietal cortex, in agreement with previous PET studies. In addition, we found increased perfusion in the hippocampus, particularly when the perfusion measure was corrected for atrophy  
23, Figure 2.  These unexpected findings were recently corroborated 24, 25.  A similar 
pattern of increased hippocampal activity has been seen with functional MRI, where patients with mild cognitive impairment show increased activation, a finding recently extended to 
presymptomatic patients with familial AD  26, 27.  Hippocampal hyperperfusion can also be se en in  
Figure 1 . Possible pathway linking AD with 
aberrant epileptic activity.  Amyloid deposition 
leads to epilepti c activity.   
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 4 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
mild cognitive impair ment and even in healthy elderly patients with apoE4 allele, which 
predisposes to development of AD.  
 
 
 
In our previous study of 22 AD participants (mean age=75.6, MMSE 22.2) and 16 demographically matched controls (mean age=72.6, MMSE 27.9), we measured hippocampal, amygdala, and parahippocampus CBF as a % of visual cortex. In addition, we corrected for atrophy on a voxel -by-voxel basis by measuring gray matter volume in each voxel using T1 
maps that were acquired in the same sequence as the perfusion maps. A region of interest analysis was performed using an a priori template, with left and right regions averaged together. 
The table below shows the results of the atrophy -corrected perfusion measurements as a 
percentage of visual cortex perfusion.  
 
 Hippocampus  Amygdala  Parahippocampus  
Mean AD (SD)  0.96 (0.29)  0.61 (0.19)  0.74 (0.20)  Figure 2.  Arterial spin labeling is a non -invasive technique to measure cerebral perfusion by 
applying a magnetic “tag” to arterial blood without requiring administration of a contrast agent 
(panel A).  We have previously found increased hippocampal perfusion in AD participants that was 
visible at the individual level (top of panel B is AD participant, bottom is age-mat ched control).  The 
perfusion change was prominent at the group level (panel C shows individual data points, panel D shows statistical maps of group data and panel E shows areas of both decreased perfusion in temporal -parietal cortex (in red) and increased perfusion in medial temporal structures (in green). 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 5 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
Mean CN (SD)  0.77 (0.17)  0.52 (0.11)  0.62 (0.14)  
Prob of difference  0.008  0.043  0.017  
 
Choice of levetiracetam as a pharmacologic probe 
 
In this pilot study, we aim to determine whether the hippocampal hyperperfusion seen on ASL-
MRI reflects  abnormal epileptiform activity  by using levetiracetam as a pharmacological probe.   
Even intermittent epileptic discharges, in the absence of clinically obvious seizures, may lead to 
memory impairment.  If so, a reduction of hippocampal epileptif orm activity could improve 
declarative memory and potentially alter progression of AD. 
 Levetiracetam, a newer antiepileptic drug, decreases the frequency and limits propagation of 
epileptiform activity without affecting normal neuronal excitability 
28, 29.  The mechanism of action 
of levetiracetam is not fully understood, but it binds specifically to synaptic vesicle protein SV2A and likely modulates its function 
30.  Levetiracetam may also have an indirect effect on GABA -A 
inhibitory neurotransmission and on high- voltage activated calcium channels.  Levetiracetam  
decreases  cortical excitability measured by transcranial magnetic stimulation 31.  In a study of 
levetiracetam in photosensitive epilepsy, 250mg oral doses decreased epileptiform activity 
induced by photic stimulation within 1 hour, and 750mg oral doses completely abolished 
epileptiform activity 32.  Acute dosing of levetiracetam 500mg caused significant reduction in the 
frequency of interictal epileptiform activity in 8/10 patients with epilepsy 33.  Because of its rapid 
onset of action and effect on interictal epileptiform activity  as well as seizures , levetiracetam is 
an excellent candidate AED to examine changes in perfusion on ASL-MRI.  
 Levetiracetam is FDA -approved for the treatment of partial epilepsy in adults and children > age 
4 years.  Levetiracetam has a serum half -life of 10- 11 hours in healthy elderly subjects  
34.  
Excretion is 100% renal; the half -life is prolonged in patients with renal impairment.  There is no 
significant plasma protein binding.  Because levetiracetam is not metabolized by hepatic microsomal P450 enzymes, it has no known drug interactions and kinetics are linear 
35.  
Levetiracetam intravenous infusion is bioequivalent to oral tablets 36.   
 Cognitive effects of acute administration of levetiracetam have been studied in healthy volunteers, ages 20- 50 years  
37.  There was no difference between levetiracetam and placebo in 
the summary score for the cognitive neurophysiologic test (CNT), which combines electroencephalography  (EEG), evoked potential (EP), and cognitive performance measures . 
 Levetiracetam is a well -tolerated and safe AED in elderly  patients.  In 166 elderly patients with 
cognitive disorders (post -stroke or post -traumatic cognitive disorder or memory disorders), 
asthenia (16.9%), somnolence (7.8%), headache (7.2%), and dizziness (7.2%) were the most common adverse effects  
35.  In an open label phase IV study of patients > 65 years with 
epilepsy, approximately 40% of patients reported one or more adverse events, usually mild or moderate in severity, with 19.2% discontinuing levetiracetam because of side effects  
38.  
Somnolence (16.7%) and dizziness (9%) were the most commonly reported adverse ef fects.  In 
24 cognitively impaired elderly patients with epilepsy treated with levetiracetam for 12 weeks, significant overall improvements were observed for the Folstein's Mini -Mental State Examination 
and the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale- Cognitiv e 
39.  A study comparing AED retention 
rates in patients > age 55 found levetiracetam to have the second- highest one- year retention 
and seizure -free rate (73%), a t a median daily dose of 1500mg 40.  In an open label study in 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 6 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
patients with AD  and epilepsy , levetiracetam was effective and well tolerated 41.  Of 25 patients 
with severe AD treated with levetiracetam 1000– 1500 mg daily, 72% were seizure- free f or at 
least one year, 16% discontinued for adverse effects, 8% were unresponsive, and 4% were lost 
to follow -up.   
 Data on acute use of intravenous levetiracetam in elderly patients is limited.  Levetiracetam is well tolerated in healthy  young subjects (<  65 years) after 15 minute (2000- 4000mg) and 5 
minute (1500- 2500mg) infusions 
42.  One retrospective observational study included 14 older 
patients (mean age 73.9 years) with a series of complex partial seizures or convulsive or non-
convulsive status epilepticus needing emergent intravenous (IV) treatment  43.  Seizure control 
was achieved in 11/14 patients (78.6%) at a mean dosage of 1,643 mg/day (range 500- 4,000). 
The only adverse effect was sedation.  
 
Levetiracetam was recently tested in animal models of AD and in adults with mild cognitive impairment.  Levetiracetam 5 mg/kg reduced epileptiform discharges and improved memory performance in hAPP mice, while sodium channel blocking AEDs resulted in worsened memory performance.  In a recent study in patients with mild cognitive impairment,  levetiracetam 250mg 
twice daily for two weeks normalized hippocampal hyperperfusion,  as measured by blood 
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) MRI.  For this study, we chose two doses of levetiracetam (low 
2.5 mg/kg and high 7.5 mg/kg) based on the information above . 
 
 
B3. DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH PR OTOCOL  
A. Study Design – Overview, Methods, Procedures  
 
1.  Study Overview  
 
This double- blind, within -subject cr ossover pilot  study will test whether increased 
hippocampal perfusion on ASL -MRI in AD is caused by epileptiform activity .  If epileptic 
activity is occurring and impairing hippocampal function, then levetiracetam should lead to 
decreased rCBF in the hippocampus and improved declarative memory.   
 Twenty  subjects with mild AD (MMSE≥20) will participate in this study in the Clinical 
Research Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center .  Subjects will be screened to 
ensure they meet inclusion and exclusion criteria and will provide  written informed consent 
before any study procedures are performed.  Each eligible subject will undergo three 
sessions, held 1- 2 weeks apart, in a double blind, within- subject cross over design, 
counterbalanced for  order (placebo / levetiracetam 2.5 mg/kg /  levetiracetam 7.5 mg/kg), 
Figure 3.  During each session, placebo or levetiracetam will be administered intravenously  
over 20 minutes .  Drug administration will occur during EEG recording so that 
neurophysiological recordings can be acquired before, during, and after administration.  Changes in EEG background frequency and level of synchrony will be analyzed 
44-46.  After 
drug administration and EEG recording, hippocampal perfusion and functional connect ivity 
will be measured with ASL- MRI and resting BOLD fMRI.  Finally, participants will undergo a 
cognitive battery with memory tests particularly sensitive to hippocampal function (declarative 
memory, attention, working memory and executive function) .   
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 7 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
 
 
2.  Study Rationale 
 
This protocol has three primary goals: to test the hypothesis that increased hippocampal perfusion in AD is at least partially driven by epileptic activity, that lowering epileptic activity may improve cognitive performance, and that perfusion MRI can be used as a non-invasive assay of the effects of medications that decrease epileptic activity in AD.  
  
3.  Subject Recruitment and S creening      
We plan on testing twenty  AD participants (> age 50 years) meeting the NINCDS -ADRDA 
criteria  for probable AD  from the Cognitive Neurology Unit at BIDMC .   All participants will 
have mild AD by  the Mini -Mental Status Examination (MMSE≥20 ).  The P.I. , who specializes 
in neurodegenerative disorders, maintains an active clinic and treats over 100 patients with AD.  In addition, the Cognitive Neurology Unit has over 13,000 patient visits per year.  
Exclusion criteria include a history of seizures prior t o the onset of AD, current use of an 
antiepileptic medication, current use of a medication known to lower seizure threshold (e.g. 
bupropion or a neuroleptic), presence of parkinsonism, significant cerebrovascular disease, other CNS disease or major depression.  Subjects  will be screened for depression with the 
Geriatric Depression Scale and excluded if they score greater than 9 
47.  Participants 
receiving standard treatments for dementia including cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine and serotonergic selective reuptake inhibitors may participate.  
 
4.  Crossover Design, Randomization, and Blinding 
This is a within -subject, crossover study.  Each subject will receive one of 3 study drug 
regimens at each session:  
a. Placebo  
b. Low dose levetiracetam (2.5 mg/kg)  Figure 3. Overall paradigm.  Participants will undergo testing in 3 sessions counterbalanced for 
order,  with placebo, low dose LEV or higher dose LEV.  Drug will be administered intravenously 
during EEG recording.   Imaging will be acquired with anatomical, perfusion and resting state bold 
MRI.  Cognitive testing will be performed with a battery including a memory test particularly 
sensitive to hippocampal function as well as other tests of frontal func tion. 

(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 8 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
c. High dose levetiracetam (7.5mg/kg)  
A computer -generated, blocked randomization list will be generated that will randomly assign 
subjects to one of 6 groups.  The order of drug administration will be counterbalanced to 
avoid pitfalls of the crossover repeated measures design.   
     Group 1: A, B, C  
     Group 2: A, C, B  
     Group 3: B, A, C  
     Group 4: B, C, A  
     Group 5: C, A, B  
     Group 5: C, B, A  
The BIDMC research pharmacy will provide for randomization and blinding.  Patients and 
investigators will be blinded to study group.  
 
5.  Study Procedures 
 
Details and timing of the study procedures are listed below in the section “Study Plan”.  
 
a. Demographics and baseline  characteristics  
b. Medical history  
c. Neurologic history, including date of onset and progression of AD, history of prior 
seizures, and history of other neurological disorders.  
d. Recent and concomitant medications  
e. Assessment of renal function (blood urea nitrogen  and creatinine)  
f. Vital signs  
g. At screening and at each visit: Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and 
respiratory rate; weight  
h. 20 minutes before each dose of study drug, and at 10, 20, and 30 minutes after start of intravenous infusion of stu dy drug:  Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and 
respiratory rate  
i. Physical exam: appearance, cardiovascular, lung/chest, abdomen, extremities, and musculoskeletal.  
j. Neurological exam: mental status, cranial nerves, motor system, sensory syst em, 
reflexes, coordination, stance, gait  
k. Mini-Mental Status Examination  
l. Electroencephalogram  
A 21-electrode array (Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4, O1, O2, F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, 
T6, Fz, Cz, Pz, reference, ground) of gold disc electrodes will be placed using  paste 
technique, with electrode positions determined by the 10- 20 International System .  
Additional electrodes will be placed to monitor eye movements (superior and inferior to outer canthus of each eye) and electrocardiogram.  EEG will be sampled at 250 Hz 
and band- pass filtered from 0.1 -70Hz.  EEG will be recorded for 20 minutes before, 20 
minutes during, and 20 minutes after administration of study drug.  During each 20 
minute session, EEG will be recorded for 5 minutes with eyes open and 15 minutes resting with eyes closed.  EEG will be analyzed using both visual and quantitative 
techniques  
44-46.  EEG will be visually inspected to determine 1) whether baseli ne 
epileptiform activity is present and is altered by study drug, and 2) whether study drug 
has other effects on EEG (such as diffuse slowing), which might affect the results of cognitive testing.  Automated artifact detection and artifact decontamination filters will 
be used to minimize contributions of eye movements and other artifact sources.  Data 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 9 of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
segments containing possible artifacts will be excluded from analysis.  For each 
session, EEG measures will include alpha peak power, beta band power, and 
delta/theta band power.  will be determined for each session.  
m. Study drug administration  
For each session, the BIDMC research pharmacy will prepare study drug (intravenous levetiracetam 2.5mg/kg, levetiracetam 7.5mg/kg, or identical -appearing placebo) 
according to the subject’s assigned group.  Commercially -available levetiracetam will 
be purchased using study funds.  All IV study drug will be prepared, labeled, and 
dispensed by the research pharmacy in accordance with clinical GMP guidelines.  All study drug w ill be stored in a secure location.   The study drug will be administered 
over 20 minutes by a research nurse in the BIDMC General Clinical Research Center.  
Study drug will be infused at room temperature.   
n. Imaging paradigm  
All participants will undergo brain imaging with a structural MRI, a resting brain perfusion MRI using arterial spin labeling, and a resting BOLD fMRI for functional connectivity.   Imaging will be acquired on a 3.0T research- dedicated General Electric 
scanner.  
 1 . Structural MRI - A hig h-resolution MPRAGE sequence will be performed with 
1x1x1mm isotropic voxels to allow for accurate measures of atrophy.   This sequence 
requires 7 minutes for acquisition.  
 2 . Perfusion MRI - Arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI will be performed using a 
custom sequence that employs several features to increase reliability for clinical 
studies:  background suppression to reduce motion related noise and artifacts; fast spin echo imaging to eliminate distortion and susceptibility related signal attenuation; and a long post -labeling delay to insure labeled blood actually reaches brain tissue of 
interest  (Dai et al., 2008). For quantification of the blood flow corrected for atrophy, a 
second, anatomical imaging acquisition with the identical imaging sequence as t he 
perfusion sequence will be performed but with two inversion preparations replacing the ASL. We have successfully employed this sequence and method of atrophy correction in patients with Alzheimer’s disease (Alsop et al., 2008) .  This sequence requires 10-
15 minutes for acquisition.  
 3 . Functional Connectivity MRI - A resting BOLD fMRI sequence will be applied 
a rapid- acquisition echoplanar sequence (TE 25msec, TR 2500ms, 3.75mm isotropic 
voxels) over a 10 minute epoch to measure correlated activity at low  frequencies, a 
measure of the strength of functional connectivity.   
o. Behavioral testing Participants will undergo declarative memory testing with the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test, a task that is particularly sensitive to hippocampal function 
48.  In 
addition, a short battery will be administered to test executive function, naming, visuospatial ability and semantic function (Trail Making Test Parts A+B, Phonemic fluency Test, Boston Naming Test 15- item version, clo ck drawing, category fluency).  
The primary endpoint for memory testing will be the free recall score from the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test. This battery is fairly brief (30 min) but sensitive to both hippocampal function and changes in other cognitive realms impai red in AD.  
p. Adverse events observed by investigator or reported spontaneously by the subject  
 
6.  Study Plan  
The following assessments and procedures will be done at each study visit:  
a. Screening visit  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 10  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
1. Informed consent  
2. Demographics and baseline characteristi cs 
3. Medical history  
4. Neurologic history  
5. Recent and concomitant medications  
6. Blood collection for blood urea nitrogen and creatinine)  
7. Vital signs: Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate;  
weight  
8. Physical exam  
9. Neurological exam  
10. Mini-Mental Status Examination  
 
b. Visits #1-3 (identical procedures, visit length 5 -7 hours)  
1. Vital signs: Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate; 
weight  
2. Physical exam  
3. Neurological exam  
4. IV catheter placement  
5. EEG (60 minute recording)  
6. Study drug infusion (20 minutes)  
7. Vital signs at 10, 20, 30 minutes after infusion  
8. Imaging paradigm  (60 minutes)  
9. Behavioral testing  (60-90 minutes)  
10. Adverse events  
There will be s cheduled breaks between tests and scheduled lunch 
 
c. Telephone follow -up  
1. Follow up for adverse effects  
 
B. Statistical Considerations 
Sample Size Justification:    
 
We plan to study 20- 25 subjects at BIDMC.  We anticipate screening 25 subjects to enroll 
and randomize 20 eligible subjects.  We have performed a power calculation based on our previous study finding hyperperfusion of the hippocampus in AD as compared to c ontrols  
23. 
With a sample size of 20 AD participants, we will have a 72% probability of detecting a 
decrease in perfusion after levetiracetam, assuming administration of the drug lowers hippocampal CBF only to normal levels. This estimate is likely overly conservative for two reasons. First, the within subject design should markedly decrease variance. Second, if 
epileptiform discharges are contributing to hippocampal hyperperfusion and damage, then briefly ceasing the abnormal activity with drug should reveal underlying hypoperfusion like that typically  seen in temporal lobe epilepsy.   
 
Data Analysis:   
The primary study outcomes are:  
Differences in hippocampal perfusion on ASL- MRI  
Differences in memory performance  
 
The secondary study outcomes are:  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 11  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
Differences in whole brain regional cerebral blood fl ow on ASL -MRI  
Differences in working memory and executive functions  
Differences in EEG measures (alpha peak power, beta band power, delta/theta band 
power , coherence)  
 
 Behavioral Data 
Measures of memory encoding, retrieval and storage will be analyzed us ing repeated 
measures ANOVA. We will test our a priori main hypothesis of improved memory performance after drug. In a secondary analysis, we will measure effects of drug on working memory and executive functions in a similar manner.  
 
Imaging Data  
We will do two analyses, one focused specifically on hippocampal perfusion and a 
second analyzing regional CBF throughout the whole brain. First, we will use a 
repeated measures  ANOVA with  hippocampal perfusion and session (placebo, 
2.5mg/kg and 7.5mg/kg) being the factors.   Hippocampalm perfusion is measured as 
a percentage of visual cortex perfusion, using a template available within the Statistical Parametric Mapping package. Second, we will measure regional CBF throughout the whole brain using SPM5 and measure changes after drug vs. placebo using a random effects model and accounting for the repeated measures design.  In 
addition to direct analysis of perfusion, we will examine cortical changes in CBF correlated with our seed region in the hippocampus. We predict that decreases in perfusion in the hippocampus after levetiracetam will correlate with increases in perfusion in association cortical regions. Lastly, we will test for correlations between behavioral measures of memory and regional changes in CBF in hippocampus and whole brain. We predict that decreases in hippocampal perfusion will paradoxically correlate with improved declarative memory performance.  
  
EEG Data  
EEG will be visually analyzed for presence of epileptiform activity.  Peak alpha power, 
beta band power, delta/theta power, and coherence will be calculated using BESA 
(Brain Electrical Source Imaging) software and Persyst MagicMarker software.  Measures will be analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA.  We hypothesize that levetiracetam will decrease source coherence in temporal regions.  
 
Analyses will be performed in the Cognitive Neurology Unit , Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Center of the Department of Radiology, and EEG Laboratory at Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center.  
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 12  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
C. Subject Selection 
Subje cts will be recruited from the Cognitive Neurology Unit at BIDMC. The P.I., who 
specializes in neurodegenerative disorders, maintains an active clinic and treats over 100 
patients with AD. In addition, the Cognitive Neurology Unit has over 13,000 patient v isits per 
year.  
 Inclusion Criteria:  
• Meets the NINCDS -ADRDA criteria for probable Alzheimer’s disease 
• Mild AD (MMSE≥20 ) 
• Age >= 50 years  
• English as first language 
 Exclusion Criteria :  
• A history of seizures prior to the onset of AD  
• Familial Alzheimer’s Disease due to known genetic mutations  
• Current use of an anti -epileptic medication  
• Current use of a medication known to lower seizure threshold (e.g. bupropion or a 
neuroleptic)  
• Presence of parkinsonism  
• Significant cerebrovascular disease  
• Other C entral Nervous System  disease (e.g. stroke, severe traumatic brain injury)  
• Major depression or other psychiatric or behavioral disorders (psychosis, agitation)  
• Medical  contraindication to MRI (e.g. cardiac pacemaker, intraocular or intracranial 
metallic objects)  
• Severe claustrophobia or inability to lie flat for MRI  
• Known allergy to levetiracetam, or history of previous adverse reaction to levetiracetam .  
• Serum creatinine >= 2  
 
Participants receiving standard treatments for dementia including cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine and serotonergic selective reuptake inhibitors may participate.
 
 
  
  
B4. POSSIBLE BENEFITS 
The presen t study is designed to enhance our understanding of the role of epileptiform activity  
in Alzheimer’s disease .  There is no direct benefit to the subject from participating in this study.  
 Confirmation of a relationship between excitatory neuronal activity and cognitive deficits in humans with AD would provide new insights into the pathogenesis of AD .  If levetiracetam 
decreases this excitatory activity, antiepileptic drugs may be a new potential avenue for 
treatment or prevention of AD .  
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 13  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
 
B5. POSSIBLE RI SKS AND ANALYSIS OF RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
Several  aspects of this trial have a p otential for subject discomfort or injury.  All study 
procedures are low- to moderate- risk procedures, as described below .  These r isks are 
balanced by the potential benefit that the knowledge gained from this research may help to 
determine new methods to treat or prevent Alzheimer’s Disease.   
 
Study drug:   Levetiracetam has been approved by the FDA as safe and effective in the 
treatment of seizures and epilepsy and is generally w ell tolerated.  No laboratory monitoring is 
recommended by the FDA for patients receiving levetiracetam for seizures.  Levetiracetam may 
cause some, all, or none of the side -effects listed below.  Subjects will receive only one dose of 
study medication at each visit, so side effects should not last longer than 12- 24 hours.  
 
More Common:  The most frequently reported side effects from levetiracetam are 
drowsiness, dizziness, nausea, and headache.  Other side effects can include vomiting, tremor, irritability , or depression.  More than 10% of subjects may experience these side 
effects when levetiracetam is given intravenously.  The side effects are usually mild and temporary.  The medication will be given slowly over 20  minutes to minimize these side 
effects.   
 Less Common: Less common side effects (occurring in 1 -10% of subjects) include 
anger, anxiety, decreased appetite, diarrhea, and infection (colds or viral infections).  
 Rare: Rare side effects (occurring in less than 1% of subjects) include severe depr ession 
or the development of suicidal thoughts, effects on blood cells (low blood counts, low platelets or white blood cells), liver failure and weight loss.  
 
Blood draws :  The risks and discomforts of blood drawing from a vein include the possibility of 
pain or bruising at the site of the blood draw; occasional feeling of lightheadedness; and rarely, 
infection at the site of the blood draw.  
 
Intravenous catheter placement and medication infusion:  Levetiracetam and placebo will be 
given through an intravenous catheter.  Possible risks of the catheter or infusion include: skin 
infection at the catheter site; redness, swelling, discomfort, pain, or bruising at the injection (IV) site; bruising of the skin caused by broken blood vessels leaking blood under the  skin; or local 
thrombosis . 
 
EEG:  EEG is a commonly used procedure which has low risk.  Some subjects experience mild 
discomfort during scalp preparation for electrode placement, or have itching or skin irritation at the electrode site.  Some subjects fin d it difficult to lie still during the EEG, which will last 
approximately one hour.  
 
MRI scans  are safe and routinely used in medical diagnosis.  Exposure to strong, static 
magn etic fields is accepted as safe.  Subjects will be screened for MRI safety, inc luding 
presence of metal in their body.  For this protocol, all MRI studies will be performed on a 3T 
General Electric research magnet that has received FDA approval.  There is no exposure to ionizing radiation.  This technique is non -invasive and does not  require administration of 
exogenous contrast agents. The most common adverse event associated with MRI is 
claustrophobia.  Subjects will have voice contact with the technologist performing the study at 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 14  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
all times, and the MRI scan can be immediately stoppe d at the subject’s request.     
 
If subjects are injured as a direct result of participation in this study , BIDMC  will provide the 
necessary care to treat the injury.  The subject or his/her insurance company will be billed for medical care and/or hospitalization related to this injury.  Subjects will be responsible for all copayments and deductibles required under their insurance.  BIDMC will consider reimbursement of injury related expenses not covered by insurance on a case -by-case basis.  
There is no re imbursement for items such as lost wages or lost time from work.  
 
 
B6. RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT PROCEDURES 
Recruitment  
Investigators will recruit from their own patient population as well as screen the neurology clinical research database and appointment books for patients who qualify for the study.  The 
investigators will reach out to other neurology physicians to inform them about the study so that they may refer patients who are interested in participating to the investigators.  Flyers describing 
the st udy will be placed in the Cognitive Neurology Unit and in the outpatient neurology clinic.   
 A neurologist in the Cognitive  Neurology Unit at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center will 
approach potential study participants.  The Principal Investigator will then contact those patients who express an interest in participating in the study.  The Principal Investigator will tell potential subjects about the ongoing study, including the specific aims of the study, outline of the study design, techniques to be used, and anticipated risks and benefits.  If the potential subject expresses an interest in the study, Dr. Press will ensure that exclusion and inclusion criteria are met and that there are no contraindications for study participation by reviewing the p atient’s 
medical record and/or completing a full neurological history and physical examination of the patient.  If the potential subject meets these criteria, he or she will be invited to participate in the study.  Written informed consent will be obtained after all of the subject’s questions have been 
completely answered.
  
 
Consent/Subject Protection  
The Principal Investigator will obtain informed consent from all subjects up to one week prior to their participation in this study .  The consent form describes the study and provides sufficient 
information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study.  The principal investigator or his designee will discuss the study with the subject.  Patients 
with mild AD ( MMSE≥20) are able to understand a consent form and over 95% can supply 
true consent (Buckles et. al, Neurology 2003).  Participants will be reminded at the start of each session that they may discontinue at any time and that this will not affect their care in 
any way.  In addition, we will engage a health care proxy, spouse, or close family member , 
where available.  The subject will be given time to read the consent form and to ask questions.  Upon entry into the study, the subject or surrogate will receive a copy of the 
consent form, and a copy will be filed with their study binder.  
 
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 15  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
B7. STUDY LOCATION  
Privacy   
The subjects’ privacy will be protected by ensuring that the conditions under which information 
will be collected afford protections against inte ractions with participants being witnessed, 
overheard or inadvertently intercepted or viewed. Furthermore, the information being collected will be minimized to include only the data necessary to accomplish the research.   
 A unique identifier code will be assigned to each subject.  All information, including EEG data files, will be stripped of personal identifying information.   Patient confidentiality will be strictly 
maintained, and results of all testing will be available only to subjects and/or their heal th care 
providers, if requested by the subjects . 
 
Physical Setting 
Study sessions will in the Clinical Research Center on the East Campus of BIDMC.   MRI 
scans will be conducted in the Research Radiology department in an adjoining building (  
Rabb Building).  Drug administration will take place at the Clinical Research Center and the 
Research Pharmacy will be responsible for counterbalancing.  
 
B8. DATA SECURITY  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the 
requirement s of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  
Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the 
following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information 
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization.   
 Subject binders will be kept in in a locked cabinet  accessible only to the investigators.  For 
data analysis, data will be entered into a password- protected computerized database behind 
the BIDMC firewall.  The investigator will retain study essential documents for at least 2 years after completion of the study.  
 
General Safety  
All safety considerations were included as part of the design of this study.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan   
Monitoring of Adverse Events:  While levetiracetam is not used in treating Alzheimer’s disease, 
it is widely used in the treatment of epilepsy, including epilepsy that develops in pa tients with 
Alzheimer’s disease. We will be using a single dose, so the risk of side effects is low. 
Participants will complete the side effects questionnaire prior to and after every session in order 
to evaluate side effects.  
 
The occurrence of any unexp ected undesirable side effect will result in holding the trial until 
communication with the IRB, the CRC  administrative staff, and the Research Subject Advocate 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 16  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
has taken place, and the risk for participants reassessed. Participation in the study for any 
given participant will stop in the event of any unexpected side effects or any cognitive 
deterioration as measured by the serial assessments described above.  
 
Reporting of Adverse Events: All adverse events will be reported and reviewed every week 
according to laboratory policies. Information about all adverse events relating to this study will be collected and reported on the attached Report of Adverse Event Form. Any adverse event occurring in participants after they sign the consent form and until two we eks after the trial will 
be reported according to the following guidelines:  
 
(1) All fatal, life -threatening or serious adverse events will be reported verbally (7- 1764) 
and faxed (7- 5953) to the CRC RSSO Director and the CCI within 24 hours.  
(2) Unexpected serious adverse events will be reported verbally in real time to the CCI and 
the CRC RSSO Director.  
(3) Unexpected moderate adverse events will be reported in writing to the CCI and the CRC RSSO Director within 10 days of occurrence or recognition.  
(4) The PI will provide the CRC RSSO with any copies of adverse event reports that are 
sent to any entity such as the CCI,FDA, and NIH within the same time constraints.  
 
The PI will also provide the CRC  RSSO with an annual summary of adverse events (including 
anticipated, non -serious adverse events).  
 
B9 Multi- Site Studies  
 
Is the BIDMC the coordinating site or is the BIDMC PI the lead investigator of the multi -site study?      
 Yes     No  
 
 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 17  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
References 
1. Annegers JF, Rocca WA, Hauser WA. Causes of epilepsy: contributions of the Rochester epidemiology 
project. Mayo Clin Proc 1996;71:570- 575. 
2. Amatniek JC, Hauser WA, DelCastillo- Castaneda C, et al. Incidence and predictors of seizures in 
patients with Alzheimer's disease. Epilepsia 2006;47:867- 872. 
3. Mendez MF, Catanzaro P, Doss RC, R AR, Frey WH, 2nd. Seizures in Alzheimer's disease: 
clinicopathologic study. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1994;7:230 -233. 
4. Scarmeas N, Honig LS, Choi H, et al. Seizures in Alzheimer disease: who, when, and how common? 
Arch Neurol 2009;66:992- 997. 
5. Fox NC, Kennedy AM, Harvey RJ, et al. Clinicopathological features of familial Alzheimer's disease 
associated with the M139V mutation in the presenilin 1 gene. Pedigree but not mutation specific  age at onset 
provides evidence for a further genetic factor. Brain 1997;120 ( Pt 3):491 -501. 
6. Larner AJ, Doran M. Clinical phenotypic heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease associated with mutations 
of the presenilin- 1 gene. J Neurol 2006;253:139- 158. 
7. Snider BJ, Norton J, Coats MA, et al. Novel presenilin 1 mutation (S170F) causing Alzheimer disease 
with Lewy bodies in the third decade of life. Arch Neurol 2005;62:1821- 1830.  
8. Larner AJ. Epileptic seizures in AD patients. Neuromolecular Med 2010;12:71-77.  
9. Thomas RJ. Seizures and epilepsy in the elderly. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:605 -617. 
10. Rabinowicz AL, Starkstein SE, Leiguarda RC, Coleman AE. Transient epileptic amnesia in dementia: a 
treatable unrecognized cause of episodic amnestic wandering. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2000;14:231- 233. 
11. Palop JJ, Chin J, Roberson ED, et al. Aberrant excitatory neuronal activity and compensatory remodeling 
of inhibitory hippocampal circuits in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. Neuron 2007;55:697- 711. 
12. Tho m M, Eriksson S, Martinian L, et al. Temporal lobe sclerosis associated with hippocampal sclerosis in 
temporal lobe epilepsy: neuropathological features. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009;68:928- 938. 
13. Guglielmotto M, Aragno M, Autelli R, et al. The up- regul ation of BACE1 mediated by hypoxia and 
ischemic injury: role of oxidative stress and HIF1alpha. J Neurochem 2009;108:1045- 1056.  
14. Steinbach JP, Muller U, Leist M, Li ZW, Nicotera P, Aguzzi A. Hypersensitivity to seizures in beta-
amyloid precursor protein deficient mice. Cell Death Differ 1998;5:858- 866. 
15. Vogt DL, Thomas D, Galvan V, Bredesen DE, Lamb BT, Pimplikar SW. Abnormal neuronal networks and 
seizure susceptibility in mice overexpressing the APP intracellular domain. Neurobiol Aging 2009.  
16. Westmark CJ, Westmark PR, Beard AM, Hildebrandt SM, Malter JS. Seizure susceptibility and mortality 
in mice that over- express amyloid precursor protein. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2008;1:157- 168. 
17. Palop JJ, Mucke L. Epilepsy and cognitive impairments in Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 2009;66:435-
440. 
18. Palop JJ, Mucke L, Roberson ED. Quantifying biomarkers of cognitive dysfunction and neuronal network 
hyperexcitability in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease: depletion of calcium -dependent proteins and inhibitory 
hippocampal remodeling. Methods Mol Biol 2011;670:245- 262. 
19. Roberson ED, Scearce -Levie K, Palop JJ, et al. Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-
induced deficits in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Science 2007;316:750 -754. 
20. Ebersole JS, Pacia SV. Localization of temporal lobe foci by ictal EEG patterns. Epilepsia 1996;37:386 -
399. 
21. Holmes MD, Tucker DM, Quiring JM, Hakimian S, Miller JW, Ojemann JG. Comparing noninvasive 
dense array and intracranial electroencephalography for localization of seizures. Neurosurgery 2010;66:354 -362. 
22. Shigeto H, Morioka T, Hisada K, et al. Feasibility and limitations of magnetoencephalographic detection 
of epileptic discharges: simultaneous recording of magnetic fields and electrocorticography. Neurol Res 
2002;24:531 -536. 
23. Alsop DC, Casement M, de Bazelaire C, Fong T, Press DZ. Hippocampal hyperperfusion in Alzheimer's 
disease. Neuroimage 2008;42:1267 -1274.  
24. Dai W, Lopez OL, Carmichael OT, Becker JT, Kuller LH, Gach HM. Mild cognitive impairment and 
alzheimer disease: patterns of altered cerebral blood flow at MR imaging. Radiology 2009;250:856- 866. 
25. Fleisher AS, Podraza KM, Bangen KJ, et al. Cerebral perfusion and oxygenation differences in 
Alzheimer's disease risk. Neurobiol Aging 2009;30:1737 -1748.  
26. Dickerson BC, Sperling RA. Large -scale functional brain network abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease: 
insights from functional neuroimaging. Behav Neurol 2009;21:63- 75. 
27. Quiroz YT, Budson AE, Celone K, et al. Hippocampal hyperactivation in presymptomatic familial 
Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol 2010;68:865 -875. 
28. Gorji A, Hohling JM, Madeja M, et al. Effect of levetiracetam on epileptiform discharges in human 
neocortical slices. Epilepsia 2002;43:1480-1487.  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 18  of 18  
 
Study Description – Part B 
CCI Form:  6-2011 
 PI Revision Date: 08/01/2011  
 
29. Larsson PG, Eeg- Olofsson O,  Michel CM, Seeck M, Lantz G. Decrease in propagation of interictal 
epileptiform activity after introduction of levetiracetam visualized with electric source imaging. Brain Topogr 
2010;23:269 -278. 
30. Lynch BA, Lambeng N, Nocka K, et al. The synaptic vesicle protein SV2A is the binding site for the 
antiepileptic drug levetiracetam. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:9861- 9866.  
31. Solinas C, Lee YC, Reutens DC. Effect of levetiracetam on cortical excitability: a transcranial magnetic 
stimulation study. Eur J  Neurol 2008;15:501- 505. 
32. Kasteleijn -Nolst Trenite DG, Marescaux C, Stodieck S, Edelbroek PM, Oosting J. Photosensitive 
epilepsy: a model to study the effects of antiepileptic drugs. Evaluation of the piracetam analogue, levetiracetam. 
Epilepsy Res 1996;25:225 -230. 
33. Stodieck S, Steinhoff BJ, Kolmsee S, van Rijckevorsel K. Effect of levetiracetam in patients with epilepsy 
and interictal epileptiform discharges. Seizure 2001;10:583- 587. 
34. Patsalos PN. Clinical pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam. Clin Pharmacokinet 2004;43:707- 724. 
35. Cramer JA, Leppik IE, Rue KD, Edrich P, Kramer G. Tolerability of levetiracetam in elderly patients with 
CNS disorders. Epilepsy Res 2003;56:135- 145. 
36. Ramael S, De Smedt F, Toublanc N, et al. Single- dose bioavailability  of levetiracetam intravenous 
infusion relative to oral tablets and multiple- dose pharmacokinetics and tolerability of levetiracetam intravenous 
infusion compared with placebo in healthy subjects. Clin Ther 2006;28:734 -744. 
37. Meador KJ, Gevins A, Leese PT, Otoul C, Loring DW. Neurocognitive effects of brivaracetam, 
levetiracetam, and lorazepam. Epilepsia 2011;52:264 -272. 
38. Ferrendelli JA, French J, Leppik I, et al. Use of levetiracetam in a population of patients aged 65 years 
and older: a subset analysis of the KEEPER trial. Epilepsy Behav 2003;4:702- 709. 
39. Lippa CF, Rosso A, Hepler M, Jenssen S, Pillai J, Irwin D. Levetiracetam: a practical option for seizure 
management in elderly patients with cognitive impairment. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 2010;25:149- 154. 
40. Arif H, Buchsbaum R, Pierro J, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 10 antiepileptic drugs in older adults 
with epilepsy. Arch Neurol 2010;67:408 -415. 
41. Belcastro V, Costa C, Galletti F, Pisani F, Calabresi P, Parnetti L. Levetiracetam monotherapy in 
Alzheimer patients with late -onset seizures: a prospective observational study. Eur J Neurol 2007;14:1176 -1178.  
42. Ramael S, Daoust A, Otoul C, et al. Levetiracetam intravenous infusion: a randomized, placebo-
controlled safety and pharmacokinetic study. Epilepsia 2006;47:1128- 1135.  
43. Beyenburg S, Reuber M, Maraite N. Intravenous levetiracetam for epileptic seizure emergencies in older 
people. Gerontology 2009;55:27- 31. 
44. Czigler B, Csikos D, Hidasi Z, et al. Quantitative EEG in early Alzheimer's disease patients - power 
spectrum and complexity features. Int J Psychophysiol 2008;68:75 -80. 
45. Dauwels J, Vialatte F, Musha T, Cichocki A. A comparative study of synchrony measures for the early 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease based on EEG. Neuroimage 2010;49:668 -693. 
46. Kwak YT. Quantitative EEG findings in different stages of Alzheimer's disease. J Clin Neurophysiol 
2006;23:456 -461. 
47. Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, et al. Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening 
scale: a preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res 1982;17:37-49.  
48. Grober E, Sanders AE, Hall C, Lipton RB. Free and cued selective reminding identifies very mild 
dementia in primary care. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2010;24:284-290.  
 
 