FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO 
CONTROLLED TRIAL  
 
Principal Investigator:  Eric Lenze, MD and Angela Reiersen, MD  
Sponsor: Washington University School of Medicine  
Funded by : COVID -19 Early Treatment Fund  
Version Number:  v. 5 
April 14 , 2021  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 1 1  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
1.1 SYNOPSIS  
Title:  FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, 
RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL   
Study Des cription : This clinical trial will test a promising drug  for early treatment of COVID -19 
in 880 adults who are SARS -CoV-2 positive and recently infected.  The trial 
will determine whether fluvoxa mine  (1) prevent s clinical deterioration 
(defined as the combination of shortness of breath and hypoxia), and (2) 
improve s short - and long -term functional outcome. Clinical deterioration is 
the primary endpoint. Fluvoxamine is an SSRI (FDA approved for OCD and 
Social Anxiety Disorder) that also activates the  sigma -1 receptor (an 
immunomodulatory receptor). It prevented  clinic al deterioration in a 
preliminary RCT  (called STOP COVID) .  Fluvoxamine  (or placebo) will be 
given for approximately 15 days  post -randomization , during which 
participants will self -report on shortness of breath and oxygen saturation 
via a twice -daily surve y.  At the end of approximately 15 days, fluvoxamine  
(or placebo) will be stopped.  An additional survey at approximately day 15 
and approximately day 90 will assess function.  
 
Objectives:  
 The primary objective of this clinical trial is to test whether fluvoxamine  
prevents  clinical deterioration in early COVID -19 illness.    
 
The primary  outcome  will be clinical  deterioration , defined  as both  of the 
following: (1) presence of dyspnea and/or hospitalization for shortness of 
breath or pneumonia, plus (2) decrease in O 2 saturation (<92% on room air 
and/or supplemental oxygen requirement to keep O 2 saturation ≥92%).   
The hypotheses are:  
Participa nts randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  a lower  rate of clinical  
deterioration,  compared  to placebo.   
A secondary objective of this clinical trial is to test whether fluvoxamine  
improve s 15-day and 90 -day functional outcome in early COVID -19 
illness.    
 
Secondary  outcome  will be post -COVID  functioning  at approximately   15 
days  and at approximately  90 days  post -randomization  using  the PROMIS  
10-item  Global  Health  Scale.   This secondary  outcome  reflects  the 
increasing  concern  regarding  persistence  of COVID -19 illness  and 
functional  impairment  in a substantial  percentage  of individuals  with  
initially  “mild”  symptoms.  We will also explore  persistent  symp toms  of 
COVID -19 at these  timepoints.    
The hypotheses  are:  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 2 Participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  higher  post -COVID  
functional  status  at day 15 and day 90, compared  to placebo.  
Another  secondary  objective  is to test whether  baseline  oxygen  saturation  
moderates  (modulates  the drug -placebo  difference)  fluvoxamine’s  effect  
on clinical  deterioration.    
The hypothesis  is:  
Participants  with  baseline  O2 saturation  ≤96%  will have  a larger  treatment  
effect  size (i.e.,  larger  fluvoxamine -placebo  difference  in rate of clinical  
deterioration)  than  those  with  O2 saturation  ≥97% .   
The basis  for this hypothesis  is an exploratory  analysis  of the preliminary  
RCT which  found  that all cases  of clinical  deterioration  (26%  of the placebo  
group)  occurred  in participants  whose  baseline  oxygen  saturation  was 96%  
or less.  
 
Endpoint s: Primary Endpoint: Clinical Deterioration  
Secondary Endpoints: PROMIS Global Health Scale   
Study Population:  Not currently hospitalized, participants age 30 and older who are SARS -
CoV-2 positive and symptomatic with onset <7 days.   
Phase:  Phase 3   
Description of 
Sites /Facilities  Enrolling 
Participants:  Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis  
Northwestern University  
University of Utah  
Fred Hutchinson Center Clinical Research Center  
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai   
Description of Study 
Intervention : Fluvoxamine Maleate, 100mg  twice daily x 15 days   
Study Duration:  Up to 3 months   
Participant Duration:  Up to 3 months  
  
1.2 SCHEMA  
 
 
 
Diagram 1: Randomized Clinical Tria l 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 3 Prior to  
Enrollment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time Point  
 
 
Base line 
Time Point  
 
 
 
 
Day 0 -15 
Treatment  
 
 
 
 
Day 15  
 
 
 
 
 
Day 90  
 
 
 
  Total  1100 :  Pre-Screen, Obtain informed consent. Screen potential participants  by 
inclusion and exclusion  criteria.  
Study Supplies (including pulse oximeter) and medication (fluvoxamine vs placebo, for 15 
days) is delivered to participants   
 
Participants report via REDCap: (1) twice -daily O2 sat, temperature and shortness of breath. (2) once 
daily pulse, blood pressure. Research staff collect data on any hospital/ER/urgent care visits.  
Participants take fluvoxamine 100mg (or placebo), twice daily.    
PLACEBO  FLUVOXAMINE  
 
Participants record self -collected baseline measurements.  Participant then takes first 
(day 0) dose of fluvoxamine 50mg (or placebo) and records this, whereupon they are in 
the modified intention to treat group (n=880 anticipated*).  Randomize  
*Note this number (n=880) refers to the modified intent to treat sample: all participants for whom study eligibility is 
met at baseline and who take at least one dose of study medication.  All data analyses will be conducted using this 
sample.  The larger number n=1100 refers to the estimated number who will receive study medication (and therefore 
are conside red randomized) in order to achieve n=880 in the modified intent to treat sample.  Last day of study medication.  
Participants complete PROMIS Global Health survey and make a treatment guess (fluvoxamine/placebo)  
Participants fill out survey about their COVID -19 symptoms  
Research staff continues to collect details on hospital/ER/urgent care that occurred during days 1 -15 
Last day of study.  
Participants complete PROMIS Global Health survey  
Participants fill out survey about th eir COVID -19 symptoms  
Research staff continues to collect details on hospital/ER/urgent care that occurred up to day 90.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 4 1.3 SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES (SOA)  
 
 
Procedures  
Screening  
Day -5 to 0 
Enrollment/Bas
eline  
 
Treatment days 
0-15  
Day 15   
Treatment  
Day 90 Post 
Treatment  
Informed consent  X     
Demographics  X     
Medical history  X     
Randomization  X     
Administer study intervention   X   X 
Twice -daily REDCap survey to assess oxygen 
saturation, self -reported dyspnea , vital 
signs , and treatment adherence  X-------------------------------------------- X 
  
Assessment of details of COVID -19 care 
received  (e.g.. hospitalization, ER, or urgent 
care visit ; length of stay; requirement for 
supplemental oxygen, ventilator, or other 
organ support; mortality ) X--------------------------------------------- X 
 X 
Adverse event review and evaluation  X---------------------------------------------- X X 
Treatment guess (patient guesses whether 
they took fluvoxamine vs placebo)     X  
 
 
2  INTRODUCTION  
 
2.1 STUDY R ATIONALE   
 
2.2 BACKGROUND   
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19), caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-
2), can cause serious illness including lung damage, hypoxia, and cardiac damage, which can lead to hospitalization, 
intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and death.1   
Clinical deterioration  often occurs during the second week of illness.  Early i nvestigations of COVID -19 found that serious 
illness leading to hospital admission occurred a median of 8 -10 days after initially mild to moderate symptoms.2-4 
Evidence that many patients with COVID -19 develop lung damage from an excessive inflammatory response led to 
recommendations to repurpose immunomodulatory drugs to counter this hyperinflammation.5,6  More recent evidence 
supports the assertion that the inflammatory reaction, including elevations in cytokines such as IL -6, predicts clinical 
deterioration.7,8 
Many patients have debilitating persistent symptoms and loss of function , even three or more months after the initial 
stage of illness.  The causes of this persistent illness are unclear and likely heterogene ous; they include persistence of 
the viral infection, immunological changes, and exacerbation of underlying medical conditions.9 As a result, both anti -
viral and immunomodulatory drugs could potentially prevent or reduce this post -COVID functional impairment.  
 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 5 Fluvoxamine, an SSRI, repurposed for early treatment of COVID -19 
Fluvoxamine is unique among the SSRIs in that it strongly activates the sigma -1 receptor (S1R), and preclinical studies 
have suggested that by this mechanism fluvoxamine could prevent the immunopathology seen in serious COVID -19.  In 
2019, it was shown that fluvoxamine given early in treatment, reduced d eterioration and mortality in two animal models 
of sepsis (bacterial peritonitis and lipopolysaccharide stimulation).10 The same study demonstrated that fluvoxamine was 
anti-inflammatory in human cells, reducing IL -6 and other cytokines in lipopolysaccharide -induced inflammation.  This 
study is part of an increasing body of research supporting the S1R in protection fr om deleterious consequences of 
inflammation.11-13  
Fluvoxamine has one of the strongest S1R agonist effects of any existing medication.14,15  It is also highly lipophilic and 
has rapid, substantial intracellular uptake.16  Fluvoxamine also has many pragmatic advantages for repurposing, 
including ease of use, high safety margin, good  tolerability, wide availability, and low cost.  We determined that, if it 
could be shown that fluvoxamine had a beneficial effect in reducing clinical deterioration of COVID -19, the drug (and 
other S1R agonists) could be an important addition to the armam entarium vs. this pandemic.  
Therefore, we conducted a double -blind, placebo -controlled RCT to test whether fluvoxamine, given as early treatment 
in individuals with mild COVID -19 illness, might prevent clinical deterioration.  49  
From April 10 -Sept 19 , 2020, we conducted the 
STOP COVID trial  (Study Registry ID: [REMOVED] ), a preliminary single -site trial 
conducted in Missouri and Illinois, to test whether 
a course of fluvoxamine given early in COVID -19 
illness could prevent clinical deterioration.  
Participants were recruited mainly from review of 
electronic medical record s to identify individuals 
with a recent positive SARS -CoV-2 PCR test. Based 
on review of the medical record, potentially eligible 
individuals were contacted to confirm eligibility 
criteria and offer participation in the study. The 
study was fully -remote, w ith no in -person contact 
with participants.  
The STOP COVID participant flow diagram is shown along with participant baseline characteristics ( see Figure and Tables 
on next page ). Participants were randomized to receive fluvoxamine 100 mg vs. placebo up to  three times daily. Study 
medication and monitoring equipment (fingertip pulse oximeter, blood pressure cuff, thermometer) were delivered 
directly to participant homes. Participants entered their own O 2 saturation, vital signs, and symptom rating data twic e 
daily for 15 days online or via phone into REDCap surveys, which were monitored daily by study staff. Participants were 
contacted as needed to clarify symptom and vitals/ O 2 saturation (e.g., when participants reported an out -of-bounds 
value or one indic ating hypoxia). This monitoring included study staff, under study physician supervision, advising 
participants to contact their physician or visit an emergency room when appropriate. The primary study endpoint was 
time to clinical worsening, which was defi ned as 1) dyspnea or hospitalization for shortness of breath or pneumonia and 
2) O 2 saturation <92% or requirement for supplemental O 2 to keep saturation ≥92%.   

FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 6  
  

FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 7  
The key finding from STOP COVID was that 0% (0/80) 
of fluvoxamine -treated individuals suffered clinical 
deterioration, vs. 8.3% (6/72) of those who received 
placebo ( Figure, right ).  In this study, fluvoxamine was 
generally well -tolerated.  The fluvoxamine group had 
1 serious adverse event and 11 other advers e events, 
while the placebo group had 6 serious and 12 other 
adverse events. Further, we collected 30 -day follow -
up data (after the 15 -day RCT phase): 1 individual in 
each group received ER or hospital care (1 placebo for 
chest pain, 1 fluvoxamine for head ache) and no 
individuals clinically deteriorated.  This demonstrated 
that fluvoxamine prevented, rather than merely 
delayed, deterioration.  
 
This preliminary study demonstrates the feasibility of conducting a fully -remote COVID -19 early treatment trial, wi th 
first dose of medication an average of 4 days after onset of symptoms.  A fully -remote design has been demonstrated to 
be an efficient, pragmatic technique for conducting COVID -19 early treatment trials, as demonstrated by this study as 
well as the hydr oxychloroquine studies led by University of Minnesota.  
Baseline O 2 may be a moderator of 
fluvoxamine’s treatment effect size.   As the 
figure to the right shows, we found that low -
normal baseline O 2 saturation may be a risk 
factor for clinical deterioration and a 
moderator of fluvoxamine’s treatment effect 
size.  In post -hoc analyses, we examined 
baseline (pre -treatment) O 2 saturations in the 
152 participants.  All of the clinical 
deterioration occur red in individuals with 
baseline O 2 saturation of ≤96%: 6/23 (26%), 
compared to 0/49 (0%) in those with baseline 
O2 saturation ≥97%.  This is important 
because it suggests that fluvoxamine could be 
given to individuals with early COVID -19 only 
if and when their O 2 saturation falls to 96% or 
less.  
Anti-inflammatory (cytokine reduction) actions resulting from S1R activation would fit with recent findings of benefits of 
other anti -inflammatory drugs for COVID -19, including colchicine and corticosteroids.17,18  However, a recent study found 
lower levels of cytokines in severe COVID -19 comp ared to bacterial sepsis.19  If fluvoxamine’s benefit is a S1R -mediated 
effect, this drug could be utilized not only to reduce morbidity and mortality in COVID -19, but also in other medical 
conditions in which treatments to  dampen immunopathology are relevant – including future pandemics.  
There were, however, several limitations to this study.  First, this was a single -site study with a small sample size; the 
small sample size also results in wide confidence intervals (i.e.,  fluvoxamine appeared 100% effective at preventing 
clinical deterioration, but true effect size may be much lower than this).  Second, we did not enrich the sample for risk 
factors for deterioration (such as older age); as a result, the rate of deteriorati on was low (8.3%) in the placebo group; 
this led to a fragile study finding.    

FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 8 Third, we attempted to measure symptoms of COVID -19 as a treatment outcome , by asking about most severe symptom 
at baseline and then measuring change in that symptom.  This method proved to be invalid for several reasons.  First, 
the presenting symptoms were highly heterogeneous as demonstrated in the Table above. Second, we conducted 
several advanced data analytic techniques focusing on latent trajectory modelling, and we fo und that the temporal 
dynamics of COVID -19 symptoms were highly heterogeneous.  In other words, while symptoms overall decelerated 
(declined non -linearly over time), the trajectories of symptoms varied greatly between participants.  This great 
heterogeneit y of symptoms and their time course presents a challenge for the assessment of symptom change in clinical 
trials.20  A validated measure of functional status may be more robust for assessing COVID -19 persistence ; however, we 
did not include such a measure in STOP COVID.  Additionally, a longer -term  outcome is needed (beyond 15 days) to 
assess persistence of COVID -19.   
Fluvoxamine Possible Mechanisms of Action  
Fluvoxamine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and a S1R agonist.21 The preliminary study was motivated 
by a hypothesis that S1R agonists could dampen excessive inflammation in COVID -19.  This and other potential 
mechanisms by which fluvoxamine might impr ove outcomes in COVID -19 are summarized below.  
1) Anti -inflammatory effects though the S1R -IRE pathway.   The S1R is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone protein 
involved in many cellular functions, including regulation of the ER stress response/unfolded protein response (UPR) and 
inflammation.22 S1R has been shown to inhibit ER stress sensor inositol -requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1) mediated spl icing  of 
XBP123, a master regulator of cytokine production. These a nti-inflamma tory effects may be the most likely explanation 
for fluvoxamine’s beneficial effects. In COVID -19, an excessive inflammatory process known as “cytokine storm” may 
contribute to worsening of symptoms and cardiopulmonary complications, which can sometimes oc cur around the 
second week of illness. Fluvoxamine may dampen this excessive inflammatory response.   
In a 2019 study by Rosen and colleagues, fluvoxamine showed benefit in preclinical models of inflammation and sepsis.10 
In one model, mice were exposed to the Toll -like receptor 4 (TLR4) ligand li popolysaccharide (LPS), which can trigger an 
inflammatory response.  In another model, a fecal slurry was injected, which triggers a usually sub -lethal infection and 
an inflammatory response. Mice lacking the S1R showed excessive increases in cytokine leve ls and greatly reduced 
survival under either of these conditions, suggesting the S1R inhibits excessive inflammatory responses.  Wildtype mice 
exposed to the same inflammatory triggers showed reduced cytokine levels and increased survival when treated with  
fluvoxamine (a S1R agonist). When investigating the underlying mechanism of this effect, the authors demonstrated that 
S1R inhibits activity of IRE1, which in turn prevents the excessive cytokine production. In an experiment using human 
peripheral blood, they also showed that fluvoxamine can reduce LPS -induced cytokine production by human cells. In the 
case of COVID -19, fluvoxamine’s S1R agonist action may have a similar ability to reduce the excessive inflammatory 
response induced by the viral infection, thus reducing inflammation -mediated organ damage.  
2) Anti -viral action through effects on lysosomes, autophagy and/or endocytosis.   Coronaviruses utilize cathepsin 
proteases present in the late endosome to facilitate cell entry24 and re -model ER and phagosomal membranes into sites 
of viral replication.25 Both of these processes require stimulating the endocytosis and phagosome arms of autophagy 
and then terminating autophagy before lysosomal fusion. SARS -CoV-2 proteins Nsp6, Nsp2, Orf7b, and Orf9b have been 
shown to localize with and modulate components o f the autophagy pathway.26,27 Further Nsp6 has been shown to 
physically  associate with S1R.28 Critically, S1R not  only drives early stage autophagy through the IRE1/UPR pathway, but 
is also essential for lysosomal fusion to complete autophagy, likely by chaperoning components of the SNARE complex.29 
We hypothesize activation of S1R with fluvoxamine may overcome Nsp6 inhibition of S1R to allow autophagy to clear 
SARS -CoV-2. Others have also recognized targeting the autophagy pathway as a promising strategy to treat SARS -CoV-
2.30,31 
Chemically, fluvoxamine is a cationic amphiphilic drug (CAD) wit h a log P 3.1 and a pKa 9.4 and, along with a range of 
antipsychotic and antihistamine drugs, preferentially accumulates in the lysosome. Perhaps due to this, fluvoxamine 
achieves higher concentrations in the lungs (which are lysosome -rich) than in the bra in.32 In the case of COVID -19, this 
may enhance treatme nt effects in the airway epithelium.33 At high doses (10 uM), CADs including fluvoxamine, have 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 9 been shown to inhibit lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase34 to cause drug -induced phospholipidosis. This non -specific 
activity can globally dysregulate lipid homeostasis, which in turn modulates autophagy  through the mTOR nutrient 
sensing pathway.35  
3) Antiviral effects and prevention of organ damage through regulation of the ER stress  response/UPR.  Some viruses 
hijack the ER stress response/UPR to achieve viral functions36,37, and a number of studies have suggested drugs targeting 
the ER stress response/UPR may be beneficial in treating COVID -19.28,38  S1R agonists (such as fluvoxamine) regulate ER 
stress.  S1R ligand effects on ER stress and other ER functions may reduce organ  dysfunction/damage.39,40 
4) Antiplatelet Effects (common to all SSRIs) . Hyperactivity of platelets may contribute to pathophysiological processes 
leading to thrombotic complications in COVID -19.41 SSRIs can inhibit platelet activation, which may reduce the risk of 
thrombosis, and these anti -platelet effects may be cardioprotective.42  
5) Elevation of melatonin levels in the body. The SARS -CoV-2 vir us may activate the NLRP3 inflammasome43, whic h may 
contribute to cytokine storm.44 Melatonin may act on this NLRP3 pathway to reduce inflammation.45,46 Fluvoxamine 
inhibits the metabolism of melatonin, so can increase the melatonin level in the body47, which may be beneficial in 
COVID -19. 
 
In summary:  We need to replicate (or refute) these preliminary findings in a larger confirmatory trial.  We need to find 
out: (1) can fluvoxamine prevent clinical deterioration in early COVID -19? (2) Can fluvoxamine  mitigate the long -term 
impact of COVID -19? (4) Do the benefits of fluvoxamine for preventing deterioration vary as a function of baseline 
oxygen saturation?  
 
2.3 RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT   
 
2.3.1  KNOWN  POTENTIAL RISKS  
Potential risks associated with study assessments  
There are no risks associated with any of the as sessments.  
POTENTIAL RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH STUDY MEDICATION  
Fluvoxamine:  
General comments: Fluvoxamine is an antidepressant drug that functions as a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
(e.g., similar to escitalopram (Lexapro), fluoxetine (Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), etc – among the most commonly  
prescribed drugs in the US). Its risk profile  below is for chronic use in a psychiatrically ill population; the risks for short -
term use in a non -psychiatric population are likely lower , as our initial STOP COVID trial demonstrated (18 total AEs in 80 
fluvoxamine -randomized participants, compared to 19 AEs in 72 placebo participants ).  The research team will carefully 
evaluate co -prescribed drugs as well as OTC medications and will instruct participants to minimize caffeine (which has its 
metabolism inhibited by fluvoxamine) , to mitigate drug -drug int eractions.   
Likely risks: none . 
Less likely (1 -10%):  Nausea, Vomiting, Weight loss, Yawning, Loss of appetite, Agitation/Nervousness/Anxiety, Insomnia, 
Somnolence , Tremor , Headache, Dizziness, Palpitations , Tachycardia  (high heart rate), Abdominal pain, 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 10 Dyspepsia  (indige stion), Diarrhea , Constipation , Hyperhidrosis  (excess sweating), Asthenia  (weakness), Malaise , Sexual 
dysfunction  (including delayed ejaculation, erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, etc.), Xerostomia  (dry mouth).  
Rare (<1%):  Arthralgia , Hal lucination, Confusional state , Extrapyramidal side effects (e.g. dystonia, parkinsonism, tremor, 
etc.), Orthostatic hypotension , Cutaneous hy persensitivity reactions (e.g. edema [buildup of fluid in the tissues], rash, 
pruritus), Mania  (elevated mood together with reduced need for sleep and increased energy), seizures, Abnormal 
hepatic (liver) function, Photosensitivity (being  abnormally sensitive to light), Galactorrhea (expulsion of breast milk 
unrelated to pregnancy or breastfeeding).  
Minimizing risk of fluvoxamine in this study:  
Fluvoxamine has been used for the treatment of depression and anxiety disorders worldwide since the 1990s.  Its safety 
profile is well -known from millions of patient -years of use.  It is not fatal even in overdose48 and it does not prolong the 
QTc interval unlike other SSRIs (especially citalopram).  It requires no therapeu tic drug level monitoring or safety labs for 
its use. Its use in this study is within FDA -approved dosing; and it is only used for approximately 15 days.  As well, all 
participants receive an initial dose of 50mg , and based on tolerability with this initia l dose and in the first day(s) of 
intervention, the dose can be adjusted  as needed to minimize side effects.  Further, monitoring will include oversight by 
physicians with expertise in this drug class .  Study exclusions will minimize the risk of clinically  significant drug:drug 
interactions or other problems.  
Other risks  
There may also be unknown risks .  We will adjust the informed consent process if new risks are identified.   
2.3.2  KNOWN POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Although the study hopes to prevent serious symptoms of COVID -19, there is no guarantee that the study participants 
will receive any clinical benefits by participating in the study. All participants regardless of study randomization, will 
receive increased monitoring  of their COVID -19 illness , potentially leading to management (e.g., being told to contact 
their provider or go to the ER)  that would not have occurred otherwise  or as promptly without this monitoring .  
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
COVID -19 is a US -wide and worldwide public health emergency . This study may result in effective treatment that 
reduce s its morbidity.  
 
2.3.3  ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT  
All personnel involved in the design and conduct of the research involving human participants will receive the required 
education on the protection of human research participants prior to the start of this project. Procedures to recruit 
participants for the protocol and obtain their informed consent or assent a re conducted and supervised by the PI. 
Trained study staff will discuss the study, including the risks and benefits of participation, with potential participants an d 
relevant members of their treatment team as needed to provide informed consent for interes ted individuals. Informed 
consent will be obtained from all participants before any study procedures are initiated. The consent form, which 
incorporates HIPAA authorization, contains a description of the purpose and procedures, risks, procedures to minimiz e 
them, and possible benefits. Participants will be assured that participation in the study in completely voluntary , and that 
they are free to withdraw consent at any time and discontinue participation without prejudice to their current or future 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 11 medical c are. The objectives of the project, all of the requirements for participation, and any possible discomforts and 
risks will be clearly explained to the participants orally and in writing.  All participants must sign a consent document (e -
consent or paper), indicating their consent, approved by the Washington University School of Medicine Institutional 
Review Board, before they can participate in the study.  
PREVENTING BREACH OF CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Electronic records (computer files, electronic databases, etc.): The risks of breaching confidentiality will be strictly 
limited by the use of locked and restricted access to data, as well as the use of participant ID numbers rather than names 
in the survey database. All other data will be collected/entered in the secur ed, c entralized REDCap database.  
Paper/hard copy records (hard copy surveys, questionnaires, consent, etc.): The major ity of data for this study will be 
collected and maintained electronically.  For participants without access to internet, we will collect consent and data 
using paper documents. The risks of breaching confidentiality for paper documents will be strictly limi ted by the use of 
locked and restricted access to data, as well as the use of participant ID numbers rather than names whenever possible. 
Medical records containing PHI and research records are stored using the two -lock rule.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Pl an:  
Serious adverse events (SAE) and adverse evets will be monitored continuously throughout the study and will be 
reported to the DSMB and IRB according to pre -specified requirements. SAE/AE rates and interim study results will be 
reviewed and discussed by the DSMB at the DSMB meetings.  
 
3 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINT S 
Primary    
(a) Participants  randomized  to 
fluvoxamine  will have  a lower  rate 
of clinical  deterioration,  compared  
to their  respective  placebo s. (b) 
Participants  with  baseline  O2 
saturation  ≤96%  will have  a larger  
treatment  effect  size with  
fluvoxamine  (i.e.,  larger  
fluvoxamine -placebo  difference  in 
rate of clinical  deterioration)  than  
those  with  O2 saturation  ≥97%.  
 The primary  outcome  will be clinical  
deterioration , defined  as both of the 
following: (1) presence of dyspnea 
(SOB rating of 4+ on the twice daily 0 -
10 scale, and/or hospitalization for 
shortness of breath or pneumonia, 
plus (2) decrease in O 2 saturation 
(<92% on room air via the twice -daily 
at-home self -monitoring or via 
monitoring at a hospital/ER/urgent 
care center, and/or supplemental 
oxygen requirement to keep O 2 
saturation ≥92%).   
Two blinded research staff will 
adjudicate all potential cases of 
clinical deterioratio n to confirm these 
criteria are (or are not) met.  
 The goal  of the study  is to test 
prevention  of clinical  
deterioration.   We chose  a clinical  
outcome  including  a laboratory -
confirmed  (ie SpO2)  endpoint,  
consistent  with  World Health 
Organization clinical t rial 
recommendations 
(https://www.who.int/blueprint/15 -
01-2020 -nfr-bp-wg-clinical -trials -
ncov.pdf?ua=1 ).   In our previous 
trial (STOP COVID), 6 participants 
met this endpoint; 5/6 went to the 
hospital and 4/6 were hospitalized 
for an average of 10 days, 
demonstrating the clinical relevance 
of this endpoint . Although  we saw 
no mortality  and only  1 ventilator,  
mortality  from  COVID -19 is largely  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 12 OBJECTIVES  ENDPOINTS  JUSTIFICATION FOR ENDPOINT S 
due to a generalized  inflammatory  
response  with  a deterioration  in the 
respiratory  status  being  the largest  
contri butor  to death.  A focus  on 
clinical  deterioration  from  a 
respiratory  standpoint,  commonly  
observed  in COVID -19 patients  early  
on prior  to ventilator  need,  would  
be in line with  WHO’s  scale  and 
would  be consistent  with  an early  
deterioration  observed  in the 
clinical  course  of COVID -19 as 
described  in the symptomatology  
literature    
 
Regarding  baseline  O2 saturation  
potential  moderator  of treatment  
effect  on outcome,  this is based  on 
observations  made  in our 
preliminary  study:  all 6 cases  of 
clinical  deterioration  (in the placebo  
group)  were  among  those  with  
baseline  O2 saturation  96%  or 
below.  
Secondary    
Participants  randomized  to 
fluvoxamine  will have  higher  post -
COVID  functional  status  at day 15 
and day 90, compared  to placebo.  
 Secondary  outcome  will be post -
COVID  functioning  at 15 days  and at 
90 days  using  the PROMIS  Global  
Health  Scale.   This secondary  
outcome  reflects  the increasing  
concern  regarding  persistence  of 
COVID -19 illness  and functional  
impairment  in a substantial  
percentage  of individuals  with  
initially  “mild”  symptoms.  We will 
also explore  persistent  symptoms  of 
COVID -19 at these  timepoints.    
 It is increasingly clear that COVID -19 
is a persistent illness for some.  
Measuring this persistence is 
challenging because the symptoms 
are highly heterogeneous and 
temporally dynamic.  An alternative 
is to use a validated measure of 
functional status to assess whether 
fluvoxamine  results in an increased 
level of function and quality of life.  
The 10 -item PROMIS Global Health 
Scale is a validated measure of 
function and quality of life.  
Tertiary/Exploratory    
We will also explore symptoms of 
COVID -19 at  approximately day 15 
and day 90 . We will ask each participant about 
symptoms of COVID -19 on a 0 -10 
scale for greatest severity ever of the 
symptom, and a 1 -10 scale for 
current severity of the symptom.  
 The long -term course of symptoms 
of COVID -19 is still poorly 
understood.  These data will 
provide additional information 
about COVID -19 symptoms and 
whether their persistence is 
influenced by the study 
medications.  
 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 13  
 
4 STUDY DESIGN  
 
4.1 OVERALL  DESIGN  
Summary:  We propose a fully -remote US study: we will  screen, consent, deliver fluvoxamine/placebo and other supplies 
to (self -quarantined) patients, including thermometers, blood pressure cuffs, and O 2 saturation monitors.  We will 
collect data via participants’ phones/computers and via medical records.  We  will carry out national recruitment, similar 
to the University of Minnesota COVID -19 hydroxychloroquine trial s carried out in early 2020 .   
Hypotheses : 
Primary : 
Participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  a lower  rate of clinical  deterioration,  compared  to placebo.   
Secondary : 
Participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  higher  post -COVID  functional  status  at day 15 and day 90, compared  
to placebo.  
Partic ipants  with  baseline  O2 saturation  ≤96%  will have  a larger  treatment  effect  size (i.e.,  larger  fluvoxamine -placebo  
difference  in rate of clinical  deterioration)  than  those  with  O2 saturation  ≥97%.    
Phase:  3 
Design : randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blinded, parallel design, nationally -recruiting, fully -remote, multi -site. 
Methods to minimize bias : placebo control , blinding, randomization.  
 
Interim analyses planned : none.  
Stratification planned : sex, age.  
Study team: The complementary expertise of our group will assure the success of this clinical trial, as already evidenced 
by the successful conduct of the preliminary trial supporting this application.  
Eric Lenze, M.D., is a clinical trialist and geriatric psychiatrist.  He has success fully conducted numerous clinical trials, 
including large -scale trials.  He and his research team led the STOP COVID trial that randomized 152 individuals to 
fluvoxamine or placebo for early treatment of COVID -19 and demonstrated fluvoxamine’s efficacy at preventing clinical 
deterioration. He will lead this clinical trial along with his study team, overseeing all aspects of the research.  
Angela Reiersen, M.D., M.P.E., is a child psychiatrist and epidemiologist with experience conducting studies of 
comorbidi ties, longitudinal course, and genetics (including pharmacogenetics) of various childhood -onset psychiatric 
disorders and a rare genetic disorder of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (Wolfram Syndrome).  She developed the 
hypothesis regarding fluvoxamine’s  potential anti -inflammatory benefits in the treatment of COVID -19. Dr. Reiersen 
hypothesized the potential anti -inflammatory effect may occur through fluvoxamine’s known actions on the S1R -
Inositol -requireing enzyme 1α (IRE1) pathway, which is a component  of the ER stress response. She initially became 
interested in S1R ligands years ago due to observed differences in anxiety/depression treatment response to SSRIs with 
varying S1R actions, which she saw among study participants with Wolfram Syndrome. Along  with Dr. Lenze, she 
developed and oversaw the STOP COVID trial.  Her role in the proposed trial will include study design (with emphasis on 
development of appropriate symptom questionnaires and other outcome measures), supervision of study staff, 
interpre tation of findings based on knowledge of drug mechanisms, supervision of data analysis, and publication of 
results.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 14 Caline Mattar, M.D., is an infectious disease physician and global health researcher.  She helped design and oversee the 
STOP COVID trial.  She will continue to advise the conduct of this new study and will help interpret, publish, and 
disseminate the results.  
William Powderly, M.D., is an infectious disease physician. He is the Director of the Institute for Public Health at 
Washington Univer sity in St. Louis. He also directs the Institute for Clinical and Translational Sciences (ICTS) and is co -
director of the Division of Infectious Diseases at the Washington University School of Medicine.   He is an expert on the 
immune pathologies present i n severe COVID -19.  He will provide advice on the conduct of this study, and will help 
interpret, publish, and disseminate the results.  
Phil Miller, biostatistician, has directed data management and analysis for numerous clinical trials, including many lar ge-
scale efforts, and has worked with Dr. Lenze for the past 5 years on several successful clinical trials, including STOP 
COVID.  
Michael Avidan, M.D., is a critical care and anesthesiology specialist.  He has successfully conducted several large 
pragmatic  clinical trials in critical care populations, including the use of intra -operative ketamine to prevent post -
operative delirium. He will provide advice on the conduct of this study, and will help interpret, publish, and disseminate 
the results.  
John W. New comer M.D. , is a psychiatrist and the President and CEO of South Florida Behavioral Health Network in 
Miami, Florida. He has previously a professor in psychiatry at Washington University in St. Louis. He will act as a 
consultant on this project.  
Mike Rich,  M.D., is a cardiologist at Washington University.  He is known for his work on clinical trials, including studies of 
antidepressant medication in medically ill populations.  He is also the PI of a new study on long -term post -COVID -19 
functioning.  
Jeffrey Rado, M.D., is a psychiatrist and internist at Northwestern University. He is a clinical trialist who will lead the study 
at the Northwestern site.  
Rachel Hess, M.D., is an internist and PI of the CTSA at University of Utah.  She is an experienced clinical  trialist who has 
carried out COVID -19 trials.  
Adam Spivak, M.D., is an infectious disease specialist at University of Utah.  He and Dr. Hess will lead the University of 
Utah site for this trial.  
Joshua Schiffer, M.D., is an infectious disease specialist at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, 
Washington.  He is an experienced COVID -19 clinical trialist.  
Rachel Bender Ignacio, M.D., is an infectious disease specialist at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, 
Washington .  She is an experienced COVID -19 clinical trialist. She and Dr. Schiffer will lead the Fred Hutch site for this 
trial. 
Sean Liu, M.D., Ph.D., is an infectious disease specialist at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New 
York, New York.  
Internal consultant Charles Zorumski, M.D., is a neuroscientist and is chair of Psychiatry at Washington University.  He 
has been a member of the STOP COVID team and has provided scientific direction and will continue to do so.  
Consultant David Boulware, M.D ., is an infectious disease specialist.  He has successfully conducted fully -remote clinical 
trials with national (and Canada) recruitment, including the hydroxychloroquine early treatment trial which randomized 491 
patients with early COVID -19 in approxim ately 6 weeks.  Dr. Boulware and his team has been advising the investigators 
on the development of this new trial and will continue to do so, to ensure successful recruitment, screening and remote 
assessment and treatment of a large national sample.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 15 Consu ltant M atthew Pullen, M.D., is an infectious disease specialist.  He worked with Dr. Boulware as a key team 
member in the hydroxychloroquine study.  He will work with this team to ensure successful recruitment, screening and 
remote assessment and treatment  of a large national sample.  
 
 
 
4.2 SCIENTIFIC R ATIONALE FOR STUDY DESIGN  
Rationale for study design: placebo control provides the highest level of rigor for efficacy and safety analyses.  A placebo 
control is both necessary and safe/ethical because of the lack of a widely -available standard of care treatment for early 
COVID -19 illness.  
 
 
4.3 JUSTIFICATION FOR DO SE 
Fluvoxamine: Participants receive a day zero dose of 50mg fluvoxamine (or matching placebo) in the evening 
immediately after the baseline assessment and confirmation of eligibility, and 100mg twice daily as tolerated, on days 1 -
15.  This dose range was determined based on fluvoxamine’s binding affinity for the S1R.  After 15 days, this study drug 
is stopped; there is no need to taper fluvoxamine (i.e.,  to prevent SSRI withdrawal) after only a brief course.  
The dosing target of 200mg (100mg twice daily) in the proposed study is also justified by experience from the STOP 
COVID trial. T hat preliminary study  used  a target of 100mg three times daily based on the FDA maximum dose of 
300mg/day, and based on a review of the S1R agonist activity at various doses of fluvoxamine  
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1766 2961/ ).  However, in STOP COVID almost all participants (86/90; 96%) in the 
fluvoxamine group achieved a dose of 200mg/day, but only 50% increa sed up to 300mg/day and of those that did, this 
was only after 5 -6 days’ treatment, which may have already been outside the period of greatest risk for clinical 
deterioration.  In other words, it did not appear necessary to reach 300mg/d.  We also reviewed  fluvoxamine’s 
pharmacokinetics and binding affinity at the S1R with several experts in pharmacology, who agreed that a maximum of 
200mg/d was sufficient for adequate binding of the S1R.   
 
4.4 END OF STUDY DEFINITION  
The end of the study is day 90, when the p articipant has completed the day 90 survey; or when the participant has 
withdrawn consent or was withdrawn by the PI.  
 
5 STUDY POPULATION  
 
5.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion criteria:   
1) Men and woman age 30 and older;  
2) Not currently hospitalized  
3) Proven SARS -CoV-2 positive (per lab or physician report).   Positive test is within 3 days prior to or during the current 
symptomatic episode.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 16 Note: Test positivity can be via participant self -report initially; however, sta ff will also attempt to  get confirmation (eg 
forwarded text from lab, photo of positive report, etc).  For randomized participants for who there is no confirmation , a 
pre-planned secondary analysis of outcome will be conducted without them . 
4) Currently sy mptomatic with one or more of the following symptoms: fever, cough, myalgia, mild dyspnea, chest pain, 
diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anosmia (inability to smell), ageusia (inability to taste), sore throat , nasal congestion . 
5) Expectation, on screening, that  the participant will start study medication within 7 days of symptom onset.   
Note: participants who are randomized and then fail to start study medication by day 7 of symptoms  will (or 
may) remain in the study and be managed and assessed just as other ra ndomized participants.  They will not be 
included in the modified intention to treat sample during data analysis.  
5) Able to provide informed consent.  
6) Upon initial screening, participant reports one of the following risk factors for clinical deteriorat ion: age≥40, 
racial/ethnic group African -American, Hispanic, South Asian, or Native American (including more than one race), or 1+ of 
the following medical conditions which increase risk for developing moderate -severe COVID illness: obesity, 
hypertension, diabetes, heart disease (coronary artery disease, history of myocardial infarction, or heart failure), lung 
disease (eg asthma, COPD), immune disorder (eg rheumatoid arthritis, lupus).  
 
5.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Note: exclusions are same as in previous STOP COVID trial, but with additional exclusions for Coumadin and several 
other medications, based on recommendations of DSMB and co -investigators.  
1) Illness severe enough to require hospitalization or already meeting study’s primary endpoint for clinical worsening (eg 
current O 2 saturation <92% on room air, current use of supplemental oxygen to maintain O 2 saturation ≥92%).  
Note: participants who are randomized and then found to meet clinical deterioration criteria at baseline – or 
meet deteriorat ion criteria prior to starting study medication - will (or may) remain in the study and be managed 
and assessed just as other randomized participants.  They will not be included in the modified intention to treat 
sample during data analysis.  
2) Unstable me dical comorbidities (eg decompensated cirrhosis), per patient report and/or medical records.  
3) Immunocompromised from the following: solid organ transplant, BMT,  high dose steroids (>20mg prednisone per 
day) , or tocilizumab  
4) Already enrolled in another  COVID 19 medication trial  (not including vaccination or prophylaxis trials ) 
5) Unable to provide informed consent  
6) Unable to perform the study procedures  
7) Taking donepezil (rationale: donepezil is a S1R agonist) , or sertraline (rationale: sertraline is a strong sigma -1 
antagonist) . 
8) Taking warfarin -also known as Coumadin (rationale: increased  risk of bleeding), phenytoin (rationale:  fluvoxamine 
inhibits its metabolism ), clopidogrel (rationale: fluvoxamine inhibits its metabolism from pro -drug to active drug which 
raises risk of cardiovascular events), and St John's wort  (rationale:  fluvoxamine + St John’s wort are considered 
contraindicated because of the risk of serotonin syndrome ) 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 17 9)  Taking SSRIs, SNRIs, or tricyclic antidepressants, unless these are at a low dose such that a study  investigator 
concludes that a clinically significant interaction with fluvoxamine (ie either serotonin syndrome or TCA overdose) is 
unlikely  (examples: participant takes escitalopram but only at 5 -10mg daily; that dose plus 200mg fluvoxamine would be 
insufficient to cause serotonin syndrome; or, participant takes amitriptyline but only at 25mg nightly; even if 
fluvoxamine inhibits its metabolism, it would  be an insufficient dose to cause QTc prolongation or problematic side 
effects) . 
10) Individuals who report they have bipolar disorder or are taking medication for bipolar  disorder  (lithium, valproate, 
high -dose antipsychotic), unless the investigator conc ludes that the risk for mania is unlikely (ie it is doubtful that the 
patient actually has bipolar disorder).  
11) Individuals who take alprazolam or diazepam and are unwilling to cut the medication by 25% (rationale: fluvoxamine 
modestly inhibits the metab olism of these drugs ). 
12) Participants taking theophylline, tizanidine, clozapine, or olanzapine (drugs with a narrow therapeutic index that are 
primarily metabolized by CYP 1A2, which is inhibited by fluvoxamine) will be reviewed with a study investigato r and 
excluded  unless the investi gator concludes that the risk to the participant is low ( this would be unlikely; example: 
participant takes tizanidine only as needed and is willing to avoid it for the 15 days of the study) . 
13) Received vaccine for COVID -19.  Rationale: COVID -19 vaccines may prevent serious illness.  Note that participants in 
vaccine trials are eligible, unless they know that they received the active vaccine.  
14) Individuals who are already taking an approved or investigational COVID -19 treatment , or have already 
received monoclonal antibody treatment or convalescent plasma . (rationale:  these individuals are unlikely to 
develop serious COVID -19). 
 
 
5.3 SCREEN FAILURES  
 
Screen failures are defined as participants who consent to participate in the clinical trial and subsequently  randomly 
assigned to the study intervention but do not meet inclusion crit eria prior to taking their first dose of study medication.  
Individuals  who do not meet the criteria for participation in this trial (screen failure) will be rescreened if they 
subsequently meet inclusion criteria.  The same subject number will be used .  
 
5.4 STRATEGIES FOR RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION  
This proposed remote clinical study will be conducted both locally through Washington University in St Louis, and 
nationally. The catchment reflects a diversity of settings including urban and rural settings, creating a diverse sample .  
Study patients will be identified via a number of  strategies, chiefly those shown effective in the fully -remote 
hydroxychloroquine studies: advertisements, media, and social media.  As well, we will use strategies that were 
successful in the STOP COVID trial: using EHR, self -referral or through referrals  from individual physicians.  The research 
team, using interview with the potential participant and medical records review or discussion with the patient’s 
physician, will then screen for eligibility as per the inclusion/exclusion criteria below.  
Pre-screening and consent are conducted via REDCap surveys and telephone.  No in person visits are required.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 18  
6 STUDY INTERVENTION  
 
6.1 STUDY INTERVENTION (S) ADMINISTRATION  
 
6.1.1  STUDY INTERVENTION  DESCRIPTION  
 
Participants are randomized to  approximately 15 days of fluvoxamine or placebo . Study medications are matching oral 
capsules (taken twice daily).  The study medication is stopped after approximately 15 days.   The observation period for 
measuring the primary endpoint (clinical deterioration) is days 1 -15 (beginning as soon as the first dose of the study 
medication and ending on day 15).   
Sample size:  We propose to enroll approximately n=1,100 participants, in  order to have 880 in the modified intention to 
treat sample or analyzed sample.  This sample will include all enrolled participants who were confirmed eligible at the 
baseline assessment and reporting taking at least one dose of study medication.  A modif ied intention -to-treat strategy 
is required because participants are shipped supplies and study medication (whereupon they are randomized) prior to 
their measuring oxygen saturation to confirm study eligibility.  In the preliminary study (STOP COVID), appr oximately 
20% of individuals who received study supplies were not in the intention to treat sample, mainly because study eligibility 
could not be confirmed.  
Randomization:  Patients are randomized 1:1 to fluvoxamine or matching placebo capsules.  A study statistician will 
generate randomization schedules stratified by age and sex.  Treatments will be randomly allocated using alternating 
blocks of sizes 2 and 4.  Randomizatio n allocation is conducted via REDCap which displays randomization assignment to 
research team members who prepare study materials including drug or placebo but otherwise have no contact with 
participants.  All individuals who are in contact with participan ts are blinded, including outcome assessors and 
investigators, as are participants themselves.  
6.1.2  DOSING AND ADMINISTRATION  
Participants receive a day zero dose of 50mg fl uvoxamine (or matching placebo) in the evening immediately after the 
baseline assessment  and confirmation of eligibility  (as is feasible; sometimes this dose is not taken until the next day) , 
and fluvoxamine 100mg (or placebo) twice daily as tolerated, on days 1 -15.  Fluvoxamine will be self -administered.  
 
6.2 MEASURES TO MINIMIZE BIAS: RANDOMIZA TION  AND BLINDING  
Participants and all study staff (except for the study statistician running the randomization, and the study staff putting 
study medication into the package to deliver to participant) are blinded.  This blinding is kept throughout the study until 
analyses of the primary endpoint are preliminarily conducted.   
 
Blocked randomization will also reduce the chance of bias.  Another strategy to reduce bias is that the primary endpoint, 
clinical deterioration, includes an objective component, oxygen saturation, wh ich may be less prone to an expectancy 
effect (vs. self -reported measures).   Blinded study staff will not have access to randomization assignment for 
participants. Study investigators will also be blinded.  
Treatment guess: Participants will make a treatmen t guess at the end of the 15 -day double -blind RCT phase, as is 
standard for double -blinded trials to test the adequacy of the blind.   
 
6.3 STUDY INTERVENTION  COMPLIANCE  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 19 Participant data, including IP compliance, will be collected via REDCap daily surveys.    Each day the survey will ask the 
participant how many fluvoxamine (vs placebo) capsules they took.  
 
 
 
7 STUDY INTERVENTION  DISCONTINUATION  AND PARTICIPANT  DISCONTINUATION /WITHDRAWAL  
 
7.1 DISCONTINUATION  OF STUDY INTERVENTION  
Management of participants who clinically deteriorate and/or are hospitalized or visit an emergency room or urgent 
care:  We will make every effort to continue the study intervention throughout the 15 -day period if patients are not 
hospitalized, or if they are hospitalized but do not meet criteria for clinical deterioration.   However, we will not exclude 
hospitalized participants from other physician -directed treatments (e.g., remdesivir, dexamethasone, convalescent 
plasma).   For patients who are hospitalized an d show deterioration, such patients will discontinue fluvoxamine/placebo, 
with the rationale that this study’s main goal is test whether fluvoxamine prevents deterioration, and in such cases, the 
participant will have met this study’s primary endpoint (i.e ., the prevention has “failed”).   They  would  be eligible  for any 
studies  of treatments  for serious  COVID.   We will continue to collect data including day -15 and day -90 data under the 
intention -to-treat principle, as well as the rationale that fluvoxamine m ay improve longer -term outcomes even in cases 
that it fails to prevent hospitalization .56  
 
Discontinuation from fluvoxamine or placebo  does not mean discontinuation from the study, and remaining study 
procedures should be completed as indicated by the stu dy protocol  whenever possible.   If a clinically sig nificant finding 
is identified ( including, but not limited to changes from baseline) after enrollment, the investigator or quali fied designee 
will determine if any change in participant management is needed. Any new clinically relevant finding will be reported as 
an adverse event (AE) . 
 
The data that we will attempt to collect  at the time of study intervention discontinuation will include the following:  
• Vital signs, including O2 saturation,  pulse,  blood pressure and temperature.  
• Hospitalization and supplemental oxygen status.  
 
 
7.2 PARTICIPANT  DISCONTINUATION /WITHDRAWAL  FROM THE STUDY  
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  
The PI  may discontinue or withdraw a participa nt from  the study for the following reasons : 
 
• Participant is not contributing data and/or appears to be lost to follow -up. 
• If any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality, or other medical condition or situation occurs such 
that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest of the participant  or interferes with 
the integrity of the study data.  
• Disease progression which requires discontinuation of the study intervention  
• If the participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or not previously recognized) that 
precludes further study participation  
 
 
8 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
 
8.1 EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 20 Outcome Assessments: The primary endpoint will be clinical deterioration  of COVID -19 illness. The secondary endpoint 
will be day 15 and day 90 functioning.  
Clinical deterioration  is defined meeting both  of the following: (1) presence of dyspnea and/or hospitalization for 
shortness of breath or pneumonia, plus (2) decrease in O 2 saturation (<92%) on room air and/or supplemental oxygen 
requirement in order to keep O 2 saturation ≥92 %.  
The primary method of assessment for these outcomes is participants’ reports on twice -daily surveys throughout the 15 -
day randomized period, corrob orated by research staff (e.g., calling participants when low oxygen saturation was 
reported).  For participants who stop answering the surveys prior to day 15, as well as those who appear to be meeting 
the primary endpoint, we will use , as is feasible,  medical records and subsequent calls to these participants and their 
family to determine whether they sought medical care for shortness of breath or hypoxia.  We will also confirm medical 
care needed (e.g., supplemental oxygen, length of stay, ventilator sup port)  as is feasible .    
We will collect sufficient data on all participants to also measure the clinical deterioration on the World Health 
Administration COVID -19 clinical trial outcome scale: 0 -1: ambulatory (no clinical deterioration during RCT phase), 2: 
limitation of activities but no hospitalization; 3: hospitalization but no O 2 needed; 4: hospitalization, O 2 needed; 5: non -
invasive ventilation or high -flow oxygen; 6: ventilator needed; 7: ventilator plus organ support needed; 8: death.  Scale 
can be found on p6 of: https://www.who.int/blueprint/priority -diseases/key -action/COVID -
19_Treatment_Trial_Design_Master_Protocol_synopsis_Final_18022020.pdf . Since ordinal scales have proved useful in 
studies of hospitalized patients with respiratory illnesses, this measure will be particularly helpful as an outcome 
measure for the subset of study participants who require hospitalization. This cross -walk with the WHO scale is also 
useful given that our primary outcome is a study -specific scale.  
The secondary endpoint will be functioning at day 15 and day 90, measured by the 10 -item PROMIS Global Health Scale 
(“Global -10”).    This scale’s items  assess general domains of health and functioning including overall physical health, 
mental health, social health, pain, fatigue, and o verall perceived quality of life. The 10 questions of the Global -10 have 
largely been adapted from older measures such as the  SF-36 and EQ-5D, with modifications that resulted in greater 
sens itivity and precision than the questions as originally worded.  
We will also measure persistence of COVID -19 symptoms as an exploratory measure, asking about all symptoms that 
have been reported in the literature to date on a 0 -10 scale (0= absent; 10=sever e).  
Data collection and participant interaction specifics: All interactions with participants will be fully -remote via 
phone/text/email/videoconference.  Data collection is done by twice -daily REDCap surveys sent to patients via email, 
with telephone -based data collection as a back -up to ensure that individuals wi thout internet access are able to 
participate.  The surveys record oxygen saturation, vital signs, medication adherence, and COVID -19 symptoms.  Fixed 
race and ethnicity categories are collected by interviewers as part of the demographic information to  characterize the 
sample.  The surveys measure dyspnea (shortness of breath) using a continuous 0 -10 scale (0= symptom not present, 
10= symptom is very severe) via the technique of Ecological Momentary Assessment (i.e., “how bad is your symptom 
right now?”).  Phone contact is attempted daily during the first three days of the trial to address participants’ questions 
and concerns such as medication -related issues, and throughout the trial to remind them to complete assessments as 
necessary.  Additional phone cal ls are conducted on a case -by-case basis when participants’ survey data indicate out of 
range values (e.g., low O 2 saturation) and to recheck and confirm these as necessary. This messaging will also be 
displayed  when participants enter out of range values  online for the baseline and daily surveys . Also, for participants 
who appear to be having worsening COVID -19 illness, study staff recommend that they seek medical attention from 
their primary care provider or via a local emergency room.  
 
8.2 SAFETY AND OTHER ASSESSMENTS  
The first assessment of safety will be conducted at screening.  Research staff will, via telephone, determine whether 
participants meet eligibility criteria and what are their medical conditions and medications.  This information will be 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 21 provided to the study physician investigator to concur with enrollment, prior to starting any stu dy medication.  For 
example, if participants are taking an SSRI or a medication of concern for interaction with fluvoxamine (e.g., olanzapine), 
this will need to be reviewed by the physician to determine whether the participant could safely participate in the study.   
 
The second assessment of safety is conducted when study materials (including pulse oximeter, blood pressure cuff, and 
thermometer).  Participants will report on their O2 saturation, vital signs, and current symptoms , via electronic survey , 
prior to starting study medication.  
 
The third assessment of safety is throughout days 1 -15 of the study.  Participants will report on their O2 saturation, vital 
signs, symptoms, and any adverse events, via the twice -daily survey, with telephone corroboratio n with study staff as 
necessary.  
 
All participants will, as is feasible, have a phone visit with study staff daily on days 1-3.  Additional phone calls will be as 
needed (e.g., to confirm out of bounds values on O2 saturation or vitals, and to advise participants whether to call their 
provider or go to an emergency room).  
 
Medical records, if available, will be used to supplement each of these assessments.  
   
9 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
 
 
9.1 STATISTICAL HYPOTHESES  
A formal Statistical Analysis Plan  (SAP) will be completed prior to database lock and unblinding of the study data.  It will 
include any additional details regarding the strategies described in this section.   
The primary hypotheses (superiority hypotheses) are: 
Participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  a lower  rate of clinical  deterioration,  compared  to placebo.  (Null:  
participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will not have  a lower  rate of clinical  deterioration,  compared  to placebo)  
• Primary Efficacy Endpoint:  
 
Participants  will meet  the primary  endpoint  of clinical  deterioration  at the point  that  they  meet  both  of the following: 
(1) presence of dyspnea and/or hospitalization for shortness of breath or pneumonia, plus (2) decrease in O 2 saturation 
(<92% on room air and/or supplemental oxygen requirement to keep O 2 saturation ≥92%).  This will be measured during 
study days 1 -15. The primary source of information to ascertain this endpoint is the twice -daily survey which is carried 
out on study days 1 -15; this survey includes participant  self-report of  their shortness of breath (dyspnea) rating on a 0 -
10 scale (wher e a score of 4 or greater, indicating at least moderate dyspnea, meeting the first part of this endpoint) and 
of their pulse oximeter reading (where a reading of <92% meets the second part of this endpoint).  Study staff will 
confirm the pulse oximeter rea dings with participants via phone when possible, asking them to re -check, and will call 
participants to collect these data via telephone if surveys have been skipped.   Other data sources for this endpoint 
include participant and/or family report, or medic al records data, regarding medical care received, during study days 1 -
15, in a hospital/ER/urgent care center.  
 
The secondary hypotheses (also superiority hypotheses) are:  
Participants  randomized  to fluvoxamine  will have  higher  post -COVID  functional  statu s at day 15 and day 90, compared  
to placebo.  
• Secondary Efficacy Endpoint(s):  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 22 Secondary  outcome  will be post -COVID  functioning  measured  at 15 days  and at 90 days  post -randomization  using  the 
PROMIS  10-item  Global  Health  Scale.   The source  of this data  will be a survey  sent  to participants  on these  days,  with  
data  collection  via telephone  if the survey  is skipped.  
 
An exploratory analysis will examine outcomes of participants who are randomized but discovered to meet the study 
endpoint of clinical deterioration at baseline.  We will examine whether those randomized to fluvoxamine have lower 
rates of hospitalization, ventilator care , and mortality, and we will gather the same outcomes at day 15 and day 90 post -
randomization.  
 
 
9.2 SAMPLE SIZE  DETERMINATION  
Software used for power calculations was power.prop.test in R.  
With a sample size of 880 in the modified intention to treat sample, we will have 80% power to detect a treatment 
effect of 35% reduction (20% in placebo vs. 13% in fluvoxamine).  Two -tailed a lpha=0.05 for this power analysis, as time 
to clinical deteriora tion is the primary analysis and endpoint.   
The basis for the assumption of 20% meeting the clinical deterioration endpoint (in the placebo group) is the enrichment 
strategy for this trial, in which participants must indicate, on screening, at least one r isk factor for clinical deterioration 
(e.g., age, medical condition).  
The basis for the assumption of 35% reduction: (1) 35% would be a clinically meaningful relative risk reduction in a high -
risk group; (2) a 35% relative risk reduction is what has been reported with corticosteroids such as dexamethasone when 
given in more serious COVID -19. 
To achieve n=880 in the modified intention to treat sample, we  anticipate enrolling 1100 individuals, because we expect 
20% dropout/ineligible from the time of shippin g/couriering study supplies to the first dose of medication, as in the 
preliminary clinical trial.  The main reason for dropout/ineligibility in the preliminary  study was that we were unable to 
confirm study entry criteria, which included a baseline O 2 saturation of 92% or greater.   This level of dropout/withdrawal 
after consent and shipping supplies is also consistent with the hydroxychloroquine early treatment trial conducted by 
University of Minnesota.  
This sample size has suitable power for the secondary endpoint analysis (function at day 15 and day 90).  For a simple t -
test between two groups, n=400 each (allowing for dropout), we can detect a difference of 0.2 standard deviations 
(Fleiss’ d) with a po wer of 80%; i.e., a small effect size.  
The examination of persistent symptoms at day 15 and day 90 will be exploratory only; the analytic plan will depend on 
the structure of the data collected.  Therefore no power analysis was conducted for this explorato ry examination.  
The moderator  hypothesis  is: Participants  with  baseline  O2 saturation  ≤96%  will have  a larger  treatment  effect  size (i.e.,  
larger  fluvoxamine -placebo  difference  in rate of clinical  deterioration)  than  those  with  O2 saturation  ≥97%.  
This moderator  hypothesis  is consistent  with  the strategy  of prognostic  enrichment , and our methodology  and analytic  
strategy  follows  the FDA guidance  on prognostic  enrichment,  found  in https://www.fda.gov/regulatory -
information/search -fda-guidance -documents/enrichment -strategies -clinical -trials -support -approval -human -drugs -and-
biological -products . 
The test for moderation  is a test of the interaction  between  treatment  and baseline  O2 saturation  (dichotomized  as 
≤96%  vs. ≥97%).   
Power  for this moderator  hypothesis:  We have  at least  80%  power  at p=0.016  to find an effect  size modulation  such  that 
in the low-risk group  (baseline  O2 saturation  ≥97%)  there  was a treatment  odds  ratio  of 1 (e.g.,  equal  proportions  of 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 23 deterioration  in both  fluvoxamine  and placebo  groups),  while  in the high -risk group  (baseline  O2 saturation≤96%)  there  
was a treatment  odds  ratio  of 0.4 (i.e.,  12%  deterior ation  in the fluvoxamine  group  vs. 26%  in the placebo  group).  
This is not a power calculation for the moderation per se, but is an example of a moderation effect which could be 
detected. The odds ratios and the standard error of the log odds ratio are base d on the usual formulas, e.g.   
OR = *x11*x22)/(x21*x12)   
SE(log(OR)) = sqrt(1/x11 + 1/x22 + 1/x21 + 1/x12)   
as is a simple Z test of the difference between the odds ratios and its P value.   
 
 
 
9.3 STATISTICAL ANALYSES  
. 
 
9.3.1  GENERAL APPROACH  
• For descriptive statistics, categorical data will be presented as n (percentage), and continuous data will be 
presented  as means with standard deviations,  or median  with interquartile  range.  
• For all inferential tests, p-value will be 0.05 with 95% confide nce intervals reported, all two -tailed.  
• Any covariates will be  specified at the time of conducting analyses, but prior to unblinding . 
• The primary analysis requires no checks for normality; the secondary endpoint analysis will require a check of 
normality a nd corrective procedures  will be applied  (e.g., transformation or nonparametric tests).  
• We will use SAS 9.4 for analyses.  
 
 
9.3.2  ANALYSIS OF THE PRIMARY EFFICACY ENDPOINT(S)  
 
The primary analysis is survival analysis of the primary outcome (clinical deteriorati on).  This analysis treats participants 
as censored on the day that they meet the primary outcome, or on the last day that they fill out an outcome 
assessment. It is superior to an exact test of proportions because of the ability to handle missing data (du e to dropout or 
meeting endpoint).  
 
Findings will be reported as the rates of clinical deterioration in groups  (i.e., fluvoxamine vs. placebo ), the absolute 
difference in the endpoint, the logrank chi square, and the respective p -value.  
 
No imputation for missing data will be used.  However, for all participants who do not complete surveys through day 15, 
we will use follow -up phone calls and medical records to ascertain whether they met the endpoint (e.g., were 
hospitalized and received supp lemental oxygen).  
 
 
9.3.3  ANALYSIS OF THE SECONDARY ENDPOINT(S)  
 
Because of the potential for type 1 error due to multiple comparisons, findings for analyses of secondary endpoint 
(global function at day 15 and 90) should be interpreted as exploratory.  The analyses will proceed regardless of findings 
of primary endpoint . 
 
The measurement is the summary of the 10 -item scale which is expected to have a normal distribution.  It will be 
examined separately at days 15 and 90 rather than as a repeated measure.  The scale is not measured at baseline, so the 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 24 comparison is a t -test or AN COVA (if covariates are used) between intervention and placebo at these time points (day 
15, day 90).  
 
No imputation for missing data will be used.  
 
 
10 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 REGULATORY, ETHICA L, AND STUDY OVERSIGHT CONSIDERATIONS  
 
 
 
10.1.1  FUTURE USE OF STORED SPECIMENS AND DATA  
Data collected for this study will be analyzed and stored at Washington University.   After the study is completed, the de -
identified, archived data will be stored at Washington University  for use by other researchers including those outside of 
the study. Permission to transmit data to other researchers  will be included in the informed consent.  
 
10.1.2  SAFETY OVERSIGHT  
We will appoint DSMB members who are not involved in the study (i.e., as investigators). The board will include 
individuals with expertise important to this trial who will be responsible for overseeing the safety of participants and 
overseeing that the trial’s conduct.  
The DSMB will meet, at intervals determined by the DSMB, du ring the study (e.g., prior to start of recruitment, various 
times during recruitment phase, and as needed).  They will review study processes such as screening rate, enrollment 
rate, follow -up rate, dropout rate, demographics of enrolled sample, baseline clinical data, and participant safety. The 
primary safety measure will be AE reports.  
 
10.1.3  QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
Each clinical site will perform internal quality management of study conduct, data collection, documentation and 
completion.   
 
Quality control ( QC) procedures will be implemented beginning with the data entry system and data QC checks that will 
be run on the database will be generated. Any missing data or data anomalies will be communicated to the site(s) for 
clarification/resolut ion. 
 
The investigational site will provide direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and reports for the 
purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by loc al and regulatory authorities.  
 
 
11 REFERENCES  
 
1. Wiersinga WJ, Rhodes A, Cheng AC, Peacock SJ, Prescott HC. Pathophysiology, Transmission, 
Diagnosis, and Treatment of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19): A Review. JAMA. 
2020;324(8):782 -793. 
2. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Ch aracteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J 
Med. 2020;382(18):1708 -1720.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 25 3. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in 
Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):497 -506. 
4. Lescure FX, B ouadma L, Nguyen D, et al. Clinical and virological data of the first cases of COVID -19 in 
Europe: a case series. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;20(6):697 -706. 
5. Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, et al. COVID -19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and 
immunosuppressi on. Lancet. 2020;395(10229):1033 -1034.  
6. Prasad A, Prasad M. Single Virus Targeting Multiple Organs: What We Know and Where We Are 
Heading? Front Med (Lausanne). 2020;7:370.  
7. Del Valle DM, Kim -Schulze S, Huang H -H, et al. An inflammatory cytokine signat ure predicts COVID -19 
severity and survival. Nat Med. 2020;26(10):1636 -1643.  
8. Laing AG, Lorenc A, del Molino del Barrio I, et al. A dynamic COVID -19 immune signature includes 
associations with poor prognosis. Nat Med. 2020;26(10):1623 -1635.  
9. Rubin R. A s Their Numbers Grow, COVID -19 “Long Haulers” Stump Experts. JAMA. 2020.  
10. Rosen DA, Seki SM, Fernandez -Castaneda A, et al. Modulation of the sigma -1 receptor -IRE1 pathway 
is beneficial in preclinical models of inflammation and sepsis. Sci Transl Med. 2019;11(478).  
11. Bourrie B, Bribes E, Derocq JM, Vidal H, Casellas P. Sigma re ceptor ligands: applications in 
inflammation and oncology. Current opinion in investigational drugs (London, England : 2000). 
2004;5(11):1158 -1163.  
12. Lewis R, Li J, McCormick PJ, C LHH, Jeevaratnam K. Is the sigma -1 receptor a potential 
pharmacological t arget for cardiac pathologies? A systematic review. International journal of cardiology 
Heart & vasculature. 2020;26:100449.  
13. Oxombre B, Lee -Chang C, Duhamel A, et al. High -affinity σ1 protein agonist reduces clinical and 
pathological signs of experimen tal autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Br J Pharmacol. 2015;172(7):1769 -
1782.  
14. Hashimoto K. Activation of sigma -1 receptor chaperone in the treatment of neuropsychiatric diseases 
and its clinical implication. J Pharmacol Sci. 2015;127(1):6 -9. 
15. Cobos EJ, E ntrena JM, Nieto FR, Cendan CM, Del Pozo E. Pharmacology and therapeutic potential of 
sigma(1) receptor ligands. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2008;6(4):344 -366. 
16. Hallifax D, Houston JB. Saturable Uptake of Lipophilic Amine Drugs into Isolated Hepatocytes: 
Mecha nisms and Consequences for Quantitative Clearance Prediction. Drug Metabolism and 
Disposition. 2007;35(8):1325.  
17. Deftereos SG, Giannopoulos G, Vrachatis DA, et al. Effect of Colchicine vs Standard Care on Cardiac 
and Inflammatory Biomarkers and Clinical  Outcomes in Patients Hospitalized With Coronavirus 
Disease 2019: The GRECCO -19 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Network Open. 
2020;3(6):e2013136 -e2013136.  
18. Group TWREAfC -TW. Association Between Administration of Systemic Corticosteroids and Mortality 
Among Critically Ill Patients With COVID -19: A Meta -analysis. JAMA. 2020.  
19. Kox M, Waalders NJB, Kooistra EJ, Gerretsen J, Pickkers P. Cytokine Levels in Critically Ill Patients 
With COVID -19 and Other Conditions. JAMA. 2020.  
20. Mofsen AM, Rodebaugh TL, N icol GE, Depp CA, Miller JP, Lenze EJ. When All Else Fails, Listen to the 
Patient: A Viewpoint on the Use of Ecological Momentary Assessment in Clinical Trials. JMIR Ment 
Health. 2019;6(5):e11845.  
21. Narita N, Hashimoto K, Tomitaka S, Minabe Y. Interactio ns of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
with subtypes of sigma receptors in rat brain. Eur J Pharmacol. 1996;307(1):117 -119. 
22. Delprat B, Crouzier L, Su TP, Maurice T. At the Crossing of ER Stress and MAMs: A Key Role of 
Sigma -1 Receptor? Adv Exp M ed Biol. 2020;1131:699 -718. 
23. Mori T, Hayashi T, Hayashi E, Su TP. Sigma -1 receptor chaperone at the ER -mitochondrion interface 
mediates the mitochondrion -ER-nucleus signaling for cellular survival. PLoS One. 2013;8(10):e76941.  
24. Hoffmann M, Kleine -Weber H, Schroeder S, et al. SARS -CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and 
TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell. 2020;181(2):271 -280 e278.  
25. Knoops K, Kikkert M, Worm SH, et al. SARS -coronavirus replication is supported by a re ticulovesicular 
network of modified endoplasmic reticulum. PLoS Biol. 2008;6(9):e226.  
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 26 26. Gassen NC, Papies J, Bajaj T, et al. Analysis of SARS -CoV-2-controlled autophagy reveals spermidine, 
MK-2206, and niclosamide as putative antiviral therapeutics. bioRxiv. 2020:2020.2004.2015.997254.  
27. Laurent EMN, Sofianatos Y, Komarova A, et al. Global BioID -based SARS -CoV-2 proteins proximal 
interactome unveils novel ties between viral polypeptides and host factors involved in multiple 
COVID19 -associated mechanisms . bioRxiv. 2020:2020.2008.2028.272955.  
28. Gordon DE, Jang GM, Bouhaddou M, et al. A SARS -CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for 
drug repurposing. Nature. 2020;583(7816):459 -468. 
29. Yang H, Shen H, Li J, Guo LW. SIGMAR1/Sigma -1 receptor ablation impairs autophagosome 
clearance. Autophagy. 2019;15(9):1539 -1557.  
30. Gorshkov K, Chen CZ, Bostwick R, et al. The SARS -CoV-2 cytopathic effect is blocked with autophagy 
modulators. bioRxiv : t he preprint server for biology. 2020:2020.2005.2016.091520.  
31. Homolak J, Kodvanj I. Widely available lysosome targeting agents should be considered as potential 
therapy for COVID -19. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020;56(2):106044.  
32. Daniel WA, Wojcikowski J. Contribution of lysosomal trapping to the total tissue uptake of psychotropic 
drugs. Pharmacol Toxicol. 1997;80(2):62 -68. 
33. Fung TS, Liu DX. The ER stress sensor IRE1 and MAP kinase ERK modulate autophagy induction in 
cells infected with coronavirus i nfectious bronchitis virus. Virology. 2019;533:34 -44. 
34. Kornhuber J, Tripal P, Gulbins E, Muehlbacher M. Functional inhibitors of acid sphingomyelinase 
(FIASMAs). Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013(215):169 -186. 
35. Breiden B, Sandhoff K. Emerging mechanisms of d rug-induced phospholipidosis. Biol Chem. 
2019;401(1):31 -46. 
36. Chan SW. The unfolded protein response in virus infections. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:518.  
37. Jheng JR, Ho JY, Horng JT. ER stress, autophagy, and RNA viruses. Front Microbiol. 2014;5:388.  
38. Nabirotchkin S, Peluffo AE, Bouaziz J, Cohen D. Focusing on the Unfolded Protein Response and 
Autophagy Related Pathways to Reposition Common Approved Drugs against COVID -19. Preprints. 
2020.  
39. Hosszu A, Antal Z, Lenart L, et al. sigma1 -Receptor Agonism Protects against Renal Ischemia -
Reperfusion Injury. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(1):152 -165. 
40. Tagashira H, Bhuiyan MS, Fukunaga K. Diverse regulation of IP3 and ryanodine receptors by 
pentazocine through sigma1 -receptor in cardiomyocytes. Am J Physiol Hear t Circ Physiol. 
2013;305(8):H1201 -1212.  
41. Manne BK, Denorme F, Middleton EA, et al. Platelet gene expression and function in patients with 
COVID -19. Blood. 2020;136(11):1317 -1329.  
42. Schlienger RG, Meier CR. Effect of selective serotonin reuptake inhibi tors on platelet activation: can 
they prevent acute myocardial infarction? Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2003;3(3):149 -162. 
43. van den Berg DF, Te Velde AA. Severe COVID -19: NLRP3 Inflammasome Dysregulated. Front 
Immunol. 2020;11:1580.  
44. Ratajczak MZ, Kucia M.  SARS -CoV-2 infection and overactivation of Nlrp3 inflammasome as a trigger 
of cytokine "storm" and risk factor for damage of hematopoietic stem cells. Leukemia. 2020;34(7):1726 -
1729.  
45. Garcia JA, Volt H, Venegas C, et al. Disruption of the NF -kappaB/NLR P3 connection by melatonin 
requires retinoid -related orphan receptor -alpha and blocks the septic response in mice. FASEB J. 
2015;29(9):3863 -3875.  
46. Volt H, Garcia JA, Doerrier C, et al. Same molecule but different expression: aging and sepsis trigger 
NLRP3 inflammasome activation, a target of melatonin. J Pineal Res. 2016;60(2):193 -205. 
47. Hartter S, Wang X, Weigmann H, et al. Differential effects of fluvoxamine and other antidepressants on 
the biotransformation of melatonin. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2001 ;21(2):167 -174. 
48. Henry JA. Overdose and safety with fluvoxamine. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1991;6 Suppl 3:41 -45; 
discussion 45 -47. 
49. Lenze EJ, Mattar C , Zorumski CF, et al. Fluvoxamine vs Placebo and Clinical Deterioration in 
Outpatients With Symptomatic COVID -19: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA . Published online 
November 12, 2020.   doi:10.1001/jama.2020.22760 .  
 
FLUVOXAMINE FOR EARLY TREATMENT OF COVID -19: A FULLY -REMOTE, RANDOMIZED PLACEBO CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  
 27  
 
 