Design Document and Analysis Plan  
Project Name: Using Letters and Emails to Increase  Health Insurance Take -up in California’s ACA 
Marketplace  
Date Finalized: 6/18/2021  
 
This document serves as a basis for distinguishing between planned (confirmatory) analysis and any  unplanned 
(exploratory) analysis that might be conducted on project data. This is crucial to ensuring that  results of statistical 
tests will be properly int erpreted and reported. For the Analysis Plan  to fulfill this purpose, it is essential that it be 
finalized and date -stamped before we begin looking at outcome data. Once this plan is finalized, a date is entered  
above, and the document is shared with the primary customer for the project.  
 
Project Objec tives  
Use direct mail  and email  to increase ACA  marketplace  take-up among low -income Californians 
who submitted an application , were found eligible for a $1 per member per month (PMPM)  
Enhanced Silver  94 plan but had yet to enroll in a health insurance plan  for the 2021 coverage 
year. 
 
Evaluation Design  
Test Arms / Treatment Conditions:  
This is a randomized design among 44,000 households who submitted a Covered California 
application for the 2021 coverage year and were found eligible for a $1  PMPM  Enhanced Silver 
94 plan. Households were randomly assigned to one of three arms: (1) a Control group assigned 
to receive no letter or emails during the month of June 2021 , a (2) a Generic outreach g roup 
assigned to receive a letter and email reminders about the availability of $1 plans , or (3) a 
Personalized outreach group assigned to receive a letter and email reminders informing them 
that they are eligible for a $1  PMPM  Enhanced Silver  94 plan.  
 
Total Number of Observations:  
N = 44,000  
 
 
 
Randomization / Assignment:  
Randomization was done at the household level by Covered California staff.  
 
Power:  
The intervention will run for approximately four weeks in the month of June 2021. Given the 
short duration of the intervention , we expect the baseline health insurance take -up rate to be 
under 5 percent , based on prior evaluations among applicants  referred by the Medicaid 
eligibility system . In a pairwise comparison (e.g. Control vs. Personalized treatment), we are 

powered at the 80% level to detect a 0.5 percentage point difference in health insurance take -up 
rates.  
 
Likely Effect Size:  
Based on prior letter interventions  on the ACA Marketpl aces, we would expect to observe an ITT 
effect between 0.3pp and 1.3pp.  
 
Data and Data Structure  
This section describes variables that will be analyzed, as well as changes that will be made to the  raw data with 
respect to data structure and variables.  
 
Data:  
We will use Covered California administrative data from the 2021 coverage year, which includes 
consumer demographics  as well as eligibility and  enrollment information . To complement this 
core dataset, we will also use CDPS risk scores and OSHPD encounter data  from 2019 .  
 
Outcomes:  
This randomized evaluation has three primary outcomes: (1) an indicator for whether the 
household selected a Covered California plan, (2) an indicator for whether the household 
selected an Enhanced Sil ver plan and (3) an indicator for whether the household’s plan selection 
has a $1 PMPM  net premium . We will measure outcomes at three points in time: the end of June 
2021, the end of July 2021 and the end of August 2021.  
 
Secondary outcomes will include plan effectuation, duration of coverage and estimated out -of-
pocket expenses.  
 
Quality Control Checks:  
After carrying out the randomization, we checked for balance across several observable 
covariates, which indicated no significant differences across arms.  
 
 
 
Anticipated Limitations:  
The main limitation with our design is that approximately 40% of households do not have an 
email address on file and thus cannot receive part of the treatment to which they were assigned.  
 
Control Generic Personalized
Subsidy FPL % 122% 122% 121%
County-referred application 95% 95% 94%
English Language Preference 67% 67% 67%
Spanish Language Preference 28% 29% 29%
Has Email 63% 62% 62%
Head of Household Female 70% 70% 70%
Head of Household Age 42                   42                   42                      
N 11,000           16,500           16,500             
Statistical Models & Hypothesis Tests  
This section describes the statistical models and hypothesis tests that will make up the  analysis — including any  follow -ups on 
effects in the main statistical model and any  exploratory analyses that can be anticipated prior to analysis.  
 
Statistical Models:  
Intent -to-treat: to estimate treatment effects, our primary analysis will be an intent -to-treat (ITT) 
specification, examining the effect of treatment assignment. We will estimate the effect of each 
treatment arm using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. That i s, we will regress the 
outcome of interest (e.g. take-up) for household i on the set of indicator variables for each of 
the treatment groups:  
outcome i = ∝+ β 1Generic  + β 2Personalized i + ε i 
 
The coefficient β1 will be the estimate of the causal effect of the intent to treat of the  generic  
letter and email s. The coefficient β2 will be the estimate of the causal effect of the intent to treat 
of the personalized letter and emails. To the extent there are differences across treatment arms, 
we will te st for equality of coefficients.  
While covariates are not required to obtain unbiased estimates, they can help improve precision, 
so we will also estimate covariate -adjusted regressions that includes  the pre -treatment 
covariates in the balance table above . 
Follow -Up Analyses:  
We will explore  treatment heterogeneity among the following observable characteristics:  
• Whether the household has an email address on file  
• Age (e.g. above or below the mean)  
• Language preference  (e.g. English vs. non -English ) 
• Prior health status based on OSHPD encounter data from 2019  
• Recency of application submission  
 
For all of the heterogeneity analyses, we will interact the categories above with the treatment 
indicators.  
 
Inference Criteria, Including Any Adjustments for Multiple Comparisons:  
Because we are examining a small set of outcomes, we will not perform any corrections for 
multiple hypothesis testing, and we will use two -tailed tests with p -values <= 0.05 to denote 
statistically significant effects.    
 
Exploratory Analysis:  
To the extent the treatments have an effect on primary outcomes, we will use two -stage least 
squares regression (2SLS) to estimate downstream  effects : 
• The impact of health insurance take -up on retention, for those who enrolled as  a result 
of the intervention  
• The impact of selecting an Enhanced Silver plan on out -of-pocket savings , for those who 
select ed an Enhanced Silver plan as a result of the intervention  