Imperative Trial: A prospective, multi -center, open label and single arm 
clinical investigation to evaluate the safety and efficacy of using the Zoom 
Reperfusion System in thrombectomy procedures to treat acute ischemic 
stroke patients  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Version  Date: December 21, 2022  
Versio n: I 
  
Imperative Trial Protocol    
 
Imperative Care  Confidential  Page 2 of 6 
ICI-001                                                                                                                              Version I, December 21 , 2022 
 Protocol Synopsis  
Trial Name  Imperative Trial  
Sponsor  Imperative Care, Inc.  
Trial Number  ICI-001 
Title  A prospective , multi -center , open label and single arm  clinical investigation to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of using the Zoom  Reperfusion System  in 
thrombectomy procedures to treat acute ischemic stroke patients  
Investigational or 
Trial Device The Zoom  Reperfusion System uses  single lumen catheters that have been 
specifically designed to track through the tortuous anatomy of the 
neurovasculature and are intended to be used, in conjunction with a vacuum 
source, to remove thrombus in order to restore blood flow to the brain during an acute ischemic stroke .  
 
The Zoom Reperfusion System i ncludes the commercially available Imperative 
Care 0.088” ID Catheters  and the Zoom Reperfusion Catheters  (0.035” to 0.071” 
ID Catheters) , Zoom Aspiration Tubing, and Zoom Aspiration Pump (or 
equivalent vacuum pump). The Imperative Care 0.088” ID Catheters have FDA 
clearance for facilitating introduction of interventional devices into the 
neurovasculature  and the Zoom Reperfusion Catheters , with the Zoom 
Aspiration Tubing and Zoom Aspiration Pump (or equivalent aspiration pump ), 
have FDA clearance for direct aspiration of thrombus from the 
neurovasculature.  
 
Within this trial, the  Imperative Care 0.088” ID Catheters will be used  as the 
primary access device for all cases and  direct aspiration where feasible.  If a Zoom 
Reperfusion Catheter is used  for direct aspiration , the Imperative Care 0.088” ID 
Catheter should be positioned as close to the occlusion as possible and 
aspiration applied as the Zoom Reperfusion Catheter is retracted into the lumen 
of the Imperative Care 0.088” ID Catheter .      
Objectives  To assess  the safety and efficacy of the  Zoom  Reperfusion System  in subjects 
diagnosed with acute ischemic stroke and undergoing mechanical 
thrombectomy procedure.  
Control Devices  N/A - This is a single arm study.  
Imperative Trial Protocol    
 
Imperative Care  Confidential  Page 3 of 6 
ICI-001                                                                                                                              Version I, December 21 , 2022 
 Indications for Use  The Zoom  Reperfusion System , including  the Zoom  Aspiration Tubing and Zoom  
Aspiration Pump (or equivalent vacuum pump), are indicated for use in the 
revascularization of patients with acute ischemic stroke secondary to 
intracranial large vessel occlusive disease (within the internal carotid, middle 
cerebral – M1 and M2 segments,  basilar, and vertebral arteries) within 8 hours 
of symptom onset.  
 
Patients who are ineligible for intravenous thrombolytic therapy  or who fail 
thrombolytic  therapy are candidates for treatment.  
Clinical Trial/ 
Investigation Design  Prospective, Multicenter, Open label, Single arm study to assess  safety and 
reperfusion success following thrombectomy within 8 hours of stroke onset  
Subject Population  Acute ischemic stroke patients eligible for mechanical thrombectomy within 8 
hours of symptom onset or time last seen normal and meeting all trial 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Number of Subjects  Up to 350 subjects will be enrolled to yield 262 evaluable subject s after  
excluding the post consent screen failures . Enrollment will stop when the 
target number of  evaluable  subjects or enrollment limit ha s been reached.   
Number of 
Arms/Randomization  Single arm/No randomization  
Number of Centers  Up to 30 sites (US)  
Imperative Trial Protocol    
 
Imperative Care  Confidential  Page 4 of 6 
ICI-001                                                                                                                              Version I, December 21 , 2022 
 Trial Endpoint(s)  Primary Efficacy Endpoint:  
The primary efficacy endpoint is reperfusion  success, defined as achieving a 
mTICI score ≥ 2b  in three or less passes of the Zoom  Reperfusion System  (primary 
modality ) without using additional thrombectomy devices or rescue therapy . 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints:  
• Time to achieve mTICI score ≥ 2b, defined as the time from groin 
puncture to physician assessment of m TICI score ≥ 2b  
• The mTICI 3 success rate, defined as the proportion of patients achieving 
mTICI score  3 flow  
• First pass success rate ( mTICI score ≥ 2b), defined as the proportion of 
patients where the primary treatment was accomplished with the first 
pass   
• The mTICI 2c success rate, defined as the proportion of patients 
achieving mTICI score ≥ 2c flow  
• Modified Rankin S cale (mRS) ≤2 at 90 days using the primary treatment 
modality  
• Quality of Life Assessement, measured by Stroke Impact Scale (SIS) 
Questionnaire.  
 
Primary Safety Endpoint:  
• Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage ( sICH), as confirmed by imaging, 
at the 24 -hour post -procedure visit  
Secondary Safety Endpoints:  
• 90-day all-cause mortality  
• Intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) as confirmed by imaging at the 24 -hour 
post -procedure visit  
• Embolization in new territory (ENT)  
• All serious  adverse device effects  (SADEs) through 90 days  post -
procedure  
• All serious adverse events through 90 days  
Follow -up Subject s will be followed for 90 days post -procedure , combining office visits and 
phone contact  
Imperative Trial Protocol    
 
Imperative Care  Confidential  Page 5 of 6 
ICI-001                                                                                                                              Version I, December 21 , 2022 
 Inclusion Criteria  1. Age 18 and older  
2. NIHSS >=6  
3. The operator feels that the stroke can be treated with endovascular 
thrombectomy approaches and the interventionalist estimates that groin 
puncture can be achieved within 8  hours from time last seen well  
4. Pre-event mRS scale  0-1 
5. Large vessel o cclusion of the  intracranial internal carotid artery (ICA) , middle 
cerebral artery (MCA) -M1 or M2 segments , basilar, or vertebral arteries  as 
evidenced by MRA or CTA  
6. For strokes in anterior circulation, ASPECT S >=6; For strokes in posterior 
circulation, pc -ASPECTS >=8 
7. Non -contrast CT/CTA or MRI/MRA for trial eligibility performed or repeated 
at treating stroke center or outside medical facility within 2 hours  of 
treatment initiation  
8. If indicated  per American Heart Association  clinical guidelines , thrombolytic 
therapy  should be  administered as soon as possible  
9. Consenting requirements met according to local IRB or E thics Committee  
Exclusion Criteria  1. Female known  to be pregnan t at time of admission  
2. Patient has suffered a stroke in the past 3 months  
3. Presence of an existing or pre -existing large territory infarction  
4. Pre-existing neurological or psychiatric disease that would confound the 
neurological or functional evaluation, e.g. , dementia with prescribed anti -
cholinesterase inhibitor  
5. Known history of severe contrast allergy or absolute contraindication to iodinated contrast  
6. Clinical history, past imaging or clinical judgement suggest that the 
intracranial occlusion is chronic  
7. Life expectancy of less than 6 months prior to stroke onset  
8. Clinical symptoms suggestive of bilateral stroke or stroke in multiple 
territories  
9. Subject participating in another clinical trial involving an investigational 
device or drug 
10. Known cancer with metastases  
11. Evidence of active systemic infection  
12. Any known hemorrhagic or coagulation deficiency  
Imperative Trial Protocol    
 
Imperative Care  Confidential  Page 6 of 6 
ICI-001                                                                                                                              Version I, December 21 , 2022 
 Imaging Exclusion 
Criteria  13. Evidence of intracranial hemorrhage on CT/MRI  
14. CTA or MRA evidence of carotid stenosis requiring treatment for intracranial 
access  
15. Excessive vascular access tortuosity or target vessel size that will likely 
prevent endovascular access  with the Imperative Care 0.088” ID Catheters  
16. Intracranial stent implanted in the same vascular territory that would 
preclude the safe deployment/removal of the thrombectomy devices  
17. Occlusions in multiple vascular territories (e.g., bilateral anterior circulation, 
or anterior circulation/vertebrobasilar system) as confirmed on CTA/MRA, 
or clinical evidence of bilateral strokes or strokes in multiple territories  as 
determined by the treating physician  
18. Significant mass effect with midline shift as confirmed on CT/MRI  
19. Evidence of intracranial tumor (except small meningioma defined as ≤  3cm 
and asymptomatic ) as confirmed on CT/MRI  
20. Angiographic evidence of pre -existing arterial injury, e.g. , carotid dissection, 
complete cervical carotid occlusion, or vasculitis  
Determination of 
Sample Size The sample size for this trial was based on determining the number of subjects 
needed to demonstrate that the performance goals  established for the primary  
safety and efficacy endpoint s, as well as the first Secondary Safety endpoint, will 
be met with 90% probability of success  or power.   
Sponsor  
Study Management  Imperative Care, Inc.  
1359 Dell Avenue  
Campbell, CA 95008  
USA 
www.imperativecare.com  
 Contact:  Emir Deljkich  
Title:  Vice President, Clinical Affairs  
Telephone:  +1-650-743-4346 
 
Email:  edeljkich @imperativecare.com  
 
 