PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 1 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  1) Protocol Title 
The Effect of Mindfulness-Based Stress Re duction on Pain and Function in Persons 
with Knee Osteoarthritis 
 Protocol Version Date: April 3, 2018   
2) Study Aims 
Our goals are to establish feasibility of a controlled trial at UC Davis comparing the 
effects of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reducti on (MBSR) versus online MBSR versus 
an active comparison Health Enhancement Program (HEP) (Aim 1) on measures of 
pain and function in persons with knee osteoarthritis ( OA) (Aim 2), and to collect 
preliminary data on the eff ect of MBSR on serum stress and inflammatory markers 
(Aim 3). This pilot study w ill be complete in one year. 
 Specific Aim 1:  To determine the feasibility of enrolling symptomatic knee OA 
patients and performing a non-randomized study comparing MBSR vs online MBSR vs HEP.  Hypotheses 1: It will be possible in the UC Davis Medical System to enroll knee OA 
patients and perform an RCT.  Specific Aim 2:  Compare the effect of MBSR vs online MBSR vs HEP on pain and 
function limitations in knee OA.  Hypothesis 2: Compared with HEP, MBSR  will result in significantly greater 
improvement in pain intensity and function.   Specific Aim 3:  Investigate whether MBSR and on line MBSR result in decreases in 
serum cortisol level or changes in ei cosanoid parameters compared with HEP 
intervention.  Hypothesis 4: MBSR will result in decrease s in serum cortisol level and changes in 
eicosanoid parameters compared with HEP intervention.  
3) Background 
Rationale:  Current treatments for OA and pain in OA all are non-ideal. Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are associat ed with a high risk of gastrointestinal 
bleeding and cardiovascular events1,2 and are only moderately effective for treating 
pain, while opiates and surger y carry other risks. There is evidence that interventions 
affecting emotional state may moderate pain  in OA, both in our work and elsewhere3-
5. MBSR6 is a secular program that trains mindfulness meditation for stress reduction 
and to increase emotional regulation skills. Meta-analyses of mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) have demonstrated reli able clinical efficacy, specifically in the 
reduction of symptoms of stress, depression and anxiety
7. A recent meta-analysis of 
MBIs for non-OA chronic pain patients dete rmined that mindfulness meditation is 
associated with decreases in pain, as we ll as improvement in depression and quality 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 2 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  of life compared with all types of control conditions8. To our knowledge, there are no 
prior peer-reviewed studies that answer whether an MBSR intervention improves pain 
or function in knee OA.   
Research is needed to investigate th e relation of mindfulness practices with 
stress hormones and markers of inflammation. Prior studies investigating the 
effect of mindfulness interv entions on changes in the level of the stress hormone 
cortisol conflict, with some studies showing no effect and others demonstrating significant changes with  mindfulness training 
9,10; one study of a short-term MBI 
demonstrated reductions over 10 days of the intervention in levels of inflammatory 
cytokines interleukin-6 and TNF-alpha 11.    
 
Preliminary data - MBSR effect on pain and cognitive reappraisal in adults with 
primary anxiety disorders:  In a sample of 39 adults w ith primary anxiety disorders, 
we found that standard MBSR produced si gnificant decreases in Patient Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) measures of pain intensity 
(p<.001) and interference (p<.001). This  confirms that MBSR reduces pain 
experience in anxiety disorder patients with  a variety of secondary pain problems.  
 
Description of intervention and comparator: The intervention will be MBSR as 
described above. The online MBSR course will be offered through: http://www.breathworks-mindfulness.org.uk/ mindfulness-for-health. We propose to 
use an active control trai ning, the Health Enhancement Program (HEP), an 
intervention designed to isolate mindful ness as a testable active ingredient
12. HEP and 
MBSR are structurally equivalent, both us ing a group format that meets once a week 
for 2.5  hours for 8 weeks with an “all da y” component  after week 6, plus home 
participation. The content of the HEP intervention meet the following criteria: (1) class activities match MBSR activities as cl osely as possible, (2) activities represent 
valid, active, therapeutic ingredients in th eir own right, and (3) these ingredients do 
not include mindfulness. We will also m easure steroid and oxylipin inflammation 
markers through the UC Davis designated metabolomics core at baseline and end of intervention. 
 
Description of outcome measures: Participants will be asked at each time point to 
complete a validated, widely-used disease-  and joint-specific questionnaire-based 
knee OA symptom evaluation, the Western Ontario and McMaster University 
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC)
13. We will ask participants to record baseline and 
weekly WOMAC pain and function, the num ber of minutes of meditation practice 
and frequency of use of cognitive reapprai sal. To evaluate changes in psychological 
functioning, we will administer a brief batter of self-report que stionnaires that 
measure state emotion, emotion regulation, mindfulness skills, compassion, and pain catastrophizing before the inte rvention, midway and after the final week. For oxylipin 
and steroid profiling, usually 84 markers are positively detected and quantified even in healthy subjects using 150 ul  plasma or serum. We exp ect higher concentrations of 
these markers in elderly subjects with  OA pain. We expect differences in 
concentrations of these mark ers for MBSR or HEP groups. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 3 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  Methodology, selection criteria and recruitment: We will recruit 30 adults 50-80 
years of age with symptomatic knee OA defi ned as pain in the index joint on most 
days of the past month, and radiographi cally confirmed OA structural lesions 
(Kellgren/Lawrence grade ≥ 2); we expect to have  20% dropout, leaving 24 
participants completing the study. We will exclude participants using antipsychotic medications, who have alcohol or drug dependency, are scheduled to have joint 
replacement surgery in either leg within th e next six months, or have inflammatory 
arthritis or avascular necrosis. The C linical Trials arm of our Center for 
Musculoskeletal Health has successfully pa rticipated in and recruited numerous knee 
OA-related trials over a decade, and we are c onfident we will be able to achieve our 
goal. 
 
Data Analysis Approach: Given that the proposed study is a feasibility study with 
very small numbers of participants, we will likely not reach significance for the pain outcomes; however, intention to treat (ITT) an alysis will be undertaken to evaluate 
the effect of MBSR vs. HEP or vs. online MBSR. First we will compare the baseline characteristics using χ
2 test for categorical or nomi nal variables and t-test for 
continuous variables between MBSR a nd HEP groups. Second, we will assess 
whether, compared to HEP, MBSR results in significantly greater improvement in 
WOMAC pain or daily function, as well as for steroid and inflammatory markers. 
Using mixed models, we will compare the effect of MBSR vs. HEP on changes in 
WOMAC pain at each weekly visit from baseline using a mixed-effects regression 
model. Oxylipin and steroid profiles will be assessed by FDR-corrected univariate 
statistics in addition to partial least squa re regression analyses for differences in 
metabolites that are associated with pain cha nge, in addition to correlation analysis of 
metabolic changes along the different time points of blood withdrawals.  
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
We will be enrolling 30 subjects who have symptomatic knee osteoarthritis.  a) Inclusion Criteria 
 Male or female, aged 50-80 years 
 Positive “Frequent Knee Pain” question 
 Radiographically confirmed knee OA (Kellgren/Lawrence ≥ 2) 
 
b) Exclusion criteria  Scheduled to have knee replacement surgery within 6 months from enrollment 
 Rheumatoid arthritis or anot her inflammatory arthritis 
 Known avascular necrosis 
 Failure to comply with run-in proc edures: poor attendance or non-compliant 
with completing the activity 
 Major psychiatric illness, cognitive impairment or alcohol/substance abuse 
 Non-English speaking 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 4 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  Participants will be recruited by referral from their physician and posted 
announcements in the Department of Ort hopedics Clinics, UC Davis Orthopaedic 
Surgery clinics, UC Davis Rheumatology Clin ics, UC Davis primary care clinics, and 
local Sacramento and Davis senior community.  We will exclude the following special populations: adults unable to consent, individuals who are not yet adults, pregnant women, pr isoners, and any UC Davis 
staff directly under the oversight of the Principle Investigators. 
 
5) Study Timelines 
The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study will be at least 10 weeks starting from the screening visit all the way to the follow-up visit. 
 The in-person MBSR course c onsists of 8 weekly classes plus 1 all-day class between 
Weeks 6 and 7, and is sequential. Depending on  when a participant is consented, they 
may have to wait until a new 8-week course is available in order to begin. The HEP 
course also consists of 8 weekly clas ses and will start when a group of 7-10 
participants have been assigned to the HE P intervention. The online MBSR course is 
designed to last 8 weeks and can be started at any time. 
 Since initiation of the in-person MBSR  or HEP courses will depend upon when 
subjects are enrolled, it is not possible to provide the maximum length of time for a 
subject’s participation. However long the subject’s pa rticipation, they are only 
expected to complete 2 in-clinic visits a nd 8 weeks of class (plus 1 all-day class for 
MBSR).  Visits to the clinic may last from 1 to 2 hours. Weekly classes are 2.5 hours with the 
one-day retreat lasting from 10am to 5pm on a weekend day. The online MBSR 
course is roughly 20 minutes per day fo r 6-7 days of the week for 8 weeks. 
 We expect enrollment to occur over the cour se of 6 months. Final data collection is 
anticipated at 15 months.  
6) Study Endpoints 
Anticipated results, interpretation and pitfalls: We anticipate success in the 
feasibility Aim, and also that, compared with HEP, MBSR will result in greater improvement in pain and function in persons  with knee OA. If this test study finds a 
positive feasibility result, we intend to pro ceed with a formal NIH clinical trial to 
establish the basis for introduction of  MBSR practice into the standard 
armamentarium of knee OA treatment, as a primary or adjunct treatment. A negative result would also be important. If we have problems recruiting or bringing participants through the inte rvention, it will allow us to  refine our approaches. 
Finally, a completely negative result with regard to pain and function here would 
have a critically important impact as well.  MBSR is gaining significant attention in 
medicine as a potentially valuable clini cal and research tool for pain and other 
conditions. If we find no association with im portant clinical outcomes in the fastest 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 5 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  growing major painful health condition ( OA), it would necessarily begin a critical 
discussion regarding the value of MBSR in the treatment of knee OA, as well as in 
other pain conditions.  
 
7) Procedures Involved 
The study will consist of two in-person clin ic visits and the 8-week MBSR or HEP 
course. 
 
Visit 1: Screening/Baseline (Clinic) 
The following procedures will be performed: 
1. Informed consent 
2. Demographics (including age, sex, race, religious affiliation) 
3. Tobacco smoking status 
4. Vital signs (heart rate) 
5. Height, weight, BMI 
6. Medical/surgical history in cluding history of preg nancies if applicable 
7. Concomitant medication review 
8. Inclusion/exclusion review 
9. Blood draw (about 1.5 ml for oxylipin, cort isol, and other metabolite analyses 
with any leftover specimens banked for fu ture use, 3 ml for CRP and 3 ml for 
ESR) 
10. Saliva collection (about 1ml for cortisol an alysis with the any leftover specimens 
banked for future use) 
11. Surveys: Western Ontario and McMaster  Universities Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC), Emotion Regulation Questionn aire (ERQ), Five Facet Mindfulness 
Questionnaire (FFMQ), Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) 
 
Weeks 1 through 8 (MBSR or HEP course) 
After the participant is verified as eligible  to be enrolled and as completed all pre-
treatment (i.e., baseline) assessments, they will be assigned to either the in-person 
MBSR course, the online MBSR course or the in-person group HEP course. 
 
MBSR & HEP Courses 
The weekly in-person HEP courses will be held at UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento. The in-person MBSR course s have three locations: UCDMC, Sutter 
Health University in Sacramento, and Davis Holistic Health Center in Davis. Weekly classes will consist of didactic content, guided experiential med itation exercises, and 
group discussion. Additionally, the MBSR c ourse will have an all-day class on a 
weekend day to be completed between Weeks 6 and 7.  
The online MBSR course can be accessed at home or any place of the subject’s 
choosing and will also consist of training in mindfulness meditation and mindfulness 
exercises. Training takes place twi ce per day, 10 minutes per session. 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 6 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  Participants will complete self-reporte d online surveys (WOMAC) , weekly during 
treatment and at 2-week follow-up. ERQ w ill be completed once during the midpoint 
(around Week 5). 
 
Visit 2: 2-Week Follow-Up (Clinic) 
Within 2 weeks of the final class, subject s will return to clinic to complete the 
following: 
1. Vitals (heart rate) 
2. Blood draw (same as Visit 1) 
3. Saliva collection (same as Visit 1) 
4. Surveys  (same as Visit 1) 
 
All courses will be provided to en rolled subjects free of charge. 
 
Schedule of Events 
 Visit 1: 
Screening/
Baseline Week 
1 Week 
2 Week 
3 Week 
4 Week 
5 Week 
6 Week 
7 Week 
8 Visit 2: 2-Week 
Follow-Up 
Informed Consent X          
Inc/Exc Review X          
Vitals X         X  
Medical/Surgical 
History X           
Concomitant 
Medication X           
Demographics X          
Blood Draw X         X  
Saliva Collection X         X  
WOMAC X X X  X X X X X X X 
ERQ X     X    X  
FFMQ X         X  
PCS X         X 
Courses  Below Will Be Assigned  by Study Investigator  
In-Person MBSR 
Class  X X X X X Xa X X  
Online MBSR Class  Xb Xb Xb Xb Xb Xb Xb Xb  
In-Person HEP 
Class  X X X X X X X X  
aSubjects assigned to the in-person MBSR course will also comp lete an all-day class on a weekend day between Weeks 6 and 7 
bSubjects assigned to the online MBSR course will complete self-directed classes at home 
 
8) Data and/or Specimen Management and Confidentiality 
We will implement a mixed model to examine the effect of treatment (MBSR vs 
online MBSR vs HEP) on changes in pain  and psychological functioning from pre, 
weekly during treatment, post- treatment to 2-week follow-up. Because this is a pilot 
study with only 30 patients, there is no need  for a power analysis. Each participant 
will be given a unique identification number that will be linked to all data collected. Names will not be used. This will provide confidential responses. Self-report data will be stored in password protected and encr ypted spreadsheets. Blood samples will be 
stored in sub-zero freezers at the Center for Musculoskeletal Disorders at UC Davis medical Center in locked research labs and linked only to identification numbers (no 
names). All data will be stored for at least 7 years. All research personnel will 
complete HIPAA and confidentiality training.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 7 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018   
9) Data and/or Specimen Banking 
Left over blood or saliva samples will be banked for future use. At the end of the 
study, the key that links the samples to th e subjects will be destroyed. All samples 
will be stored without identifiers. As this  is a pilot study, we may develop novel ideas 
in the future as it relates to this study and may want to conduct additional analyses. 
The samples will be stored indefinitely in a controlled-accessed location. We do not 
intend to share these samples out side of the research group. 
 
10) Provisions to Monitor the Data to  Ensure the Safety of Subjects 
There will be continuous safety surve illance with emphasis on the potential side 
effects of each intervention, as detailed below. Partic ipation in the study will be 
discontinued if the subject fails to adhere  to the study requirements in a way that 
may cause harm to him or herself or seriously interfere with the validity of the study results; or the investig ator determines that furt her participation would be 
detrimental to the subject’s health or well-being. Subjects who are injured as a 
result of being in this study will have treatment available. The costs of such 
treatments may be covered by the University of California depending on a number of factors.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP):  The Data and Safety Monitoring 
Plan for the proposed project incorporates  the policies on human subject data and 
safety monitoring specified by the UC Davis IRB. Since this is not a NIH-defined Phase III Clinical Trial and it is a low risk trial at a single site, a formal Internal and External Review Board is not requi red, and the PI can conduct the data and 
safety monitoring in conjunction with the UC Davis IRB. The PI of the project 
along with relevant project staff will meet regularly with the Clinical 
Coordinator/Data Manager (post-doctoral fell ow) to review issues of data quality 
or other issues that might arise. The PI will be responsible for evaluating any 
adverse event and if necessa ry reporting it to the IRB.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 8 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  1. Risk assessment – minimal risk: This study represents a minimal risk to 
study participants since it is a behavior al intervention study  and prior studies 
with mindfulness meditation (MBSR) have not demonstrated the occurrence of serious adverse events. 
 
2. Description of adverse event grading and anticipated adverse events:  An 
adverse event (AE) is here defined as any unfavorable and unintended sign, 
symptom, injury or disease temporaril y associated with an intervention or 
procedure, regardless of whether it is c onsidered related to an intervention or 
procedure that occurs duri ng the course of the study. There is a minimal risk 
of an unfavorable psychol ogical event, which has ge nerally not been observed 
in other trials of MBSR. Th erefore, the likelihood and seriousness of this risk 
is small. 
 
3. Description of monitoring study pr ogress and safety of human subject 
participants: The principal investigator, Ba rton L. Wise, MD, MSc, FACP, 
has primary responsibility for the ove rall conduct of the study and for the 
safety of participating human subjects.  The PI will ensure that (1) the 
informed consent process is conducted appropriately and that informed consent is obtained prior to proceedi ng with any study proc edures; (2) only 
eligible subjects, per protocol eligibility  criteria, are enrolle d in the study; (3) 
data are collected and analyzed per protocol requirements; (4) procedures are implemented to ensure that the project is consistently monitored for possible 
adverse events; (5) adverse events ar e reviewed promptly and reported as 
required to the IRB; (6) the privacy and confidentiality of study subjects is maintained. Monitoring for adverse events will occur in real time at the single site, and the PI will be made aware of  potential adverse events immediately 
during the conduct of the tr ial by study staff. When an event occurs, the PI 
will make an estimation of whether it is serious or likely to be related to the study interventions; serious adverse even ts or reportable new information will 
be reported to the IRB following local guidelines If events are minor or 
unrelated, they will be collected and reviewed on a yearly basis to examine for unforeseen patterns. While implementati on of aspects of the DSMP may be 
delegated to members of the research team, the PI maintains ultimate responsibility for the project and for th e safety of study participants. The PI, 
Dr. Wise, has served in the past as designated safety officer for multiple NIH/NIAMS sponsored clin ical trials, and thus has significant experience 
with the process and with consider ation of potential adverse events. 
 
11) Withdrawal of Subjects 
The study doctor or the IRB can remove subject from the research study without 
their approval. The study doctor may stop subjects’ participa tion in the study at 
any time for any reason if, in his/her judg ment, continuation of study is not in the 
subject’s best interest. Possible reas ons for stopping study participation may 
include: 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 9 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018   Subject does not meet study requirements 
 Subject does not follow the study instructions given by the study doctor or 
study staff; 
 Subject does not show up for scheduled visits; 
 The study doctor determines that it is not in the best interest of the subject to 
continue in the study; 
 Administrative reasons 
 
12) Risks to Subjects 
Possible risks/inconveniences to subjects include: 1. Venipuncture: Pain, bruising, or infe ction at the site of blood draw. 
2. Loss of confidentiality: Part icipation in research can  involve loss of privacy. 
Research records will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. Subjects will be identified by a code, and personal information from records 
will not be released without writ ten permission. Subjects will not be 
personally identified in any publication about the study. 
3. Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction Training (MBSR): There is minimal risk associated with participating in the MBSR intervention. If we or our contracted trainer observes any evidence of significant depression we will refer the participant to psychological services. 
4. Health Enhancement Program (HEP): Ther e is minimal risk associated with 
participation in the HEP alternate inte rvention. The only potential risks are the 
same as attending a series of sit down lectures. If we obs erve any unusual or 
unforeseen behavior, we will refer the participant to psychological services. 
 
13) Potential Benefits to Subjects 
There is no guaranteed benefit to subj ects who participate in this study. The 
benefits of participation in this study include social partic ipation in a group 
activity and the opportun ity to contribute to scientif ic understanding that may lead 
to treatment for an unmet health need. The information gathered in this study will be very important in learning whether targeted MBSR can improve pain or 
function in osteoarthritis. Improvement in  pain or function could promote health 
and improved social partic ipation in older adults. 
 
14) Multi-Site Research 
N/A 
 
15) Community-Based Participatory Research 
N/A  
16) Sharing of Results with Subjects 
 Research results for each individual  participant will not be shared.   
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 10 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  17) Prior Approvals  
N/A 
 
18) Provisions to Protect the Pr ivacy Interests of Subjects 
Subject’s personal and medical information will be kept confidential. Each 
subject will be given a subject identifica tion number that will be used throughout 
the study on any source documents, blood samples or other study materials.  
In addition to signing a consent form s ubjects will also be signing a HIPAA 
release form, which allows the study t eam to access subject UCD medical records 
for research purposes only. On the HIPAA fo rm subjects can select what parts of 
their medical history they are giving us permission to access. 
 
During the consent process subjects will be provided with an explanation regarding how we plan on protecting thei r privacy by keeping their personal and 
medical records confidential.   Only trained study staff will have access to study records, which will be stored in 
a locked cabinet in a secure building. 
 
19) Compensation for Rese arch-Related Injury 
Subjects will be provided with contact information and asked to promptly report any injury believed to be rela ted to their participation in  this study. If a subject is 
injured as a result of being in this study, the University of California will provide 
necessary medical treatment. Depending on the circumstances, the costs of the 
treatment may be covered by the University  or may be billed to the subject’s 
insurance company just like other medical costs. The University does not 
normally provide any other form of compensation for injury. 
 
20) Economic Burden to Subjects 
The investigator is paying for all study procedures and subjects will receive 
compensation for participating in the study;  therefore there will not be any costs 
that the subjects will be res ponsible for related to their participation in this study. 
 
21) Drugs or Devices 
Not applicable.  
22) ClinicalTrials.gov  Registration  
This study will be registered  with ClinicalTrials.gov. 
 
Section 1:  NIH Funded Studies 
If yes to BOTH, the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov. 
Yes  
 This study is funded by the NIH. (If this study is not funded by NIH, go to Section 
2.) 
 One or more human subjects will be pr ospectively assigned to one or more 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 11 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  interventions (which may include placebo or ot her control) to evaluate the effects of 
those interventions on health-related bi omedical or behavioral outcomes. 
 
Section 2:  Studies subj ect to FDA jurisdiction 
If yes to ANY the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov. 
Yes  
 This is a prospective clinical study of health outcomes in human subjects that 
compares an intervention with an FDA-re gulated device against a control. This is 
not a small clinical trial to determine the feas ibility of a device, or a clinical trial to 
test prototype devices where the primary outcome measure relates to feasibility 
and not to health outcomes. 
 This is a pediatric postmarket surveill ance of a device as required under section 
522 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
 This is a controlled clinical inves tigation, other than a phase I clinical 
investigation, of a drug subject to se ction 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act or to section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. 
To view a flowchart describing applicable clinical trials subject to FDA jurisdiction click here.  
 Section 3: Publishing the results 
If yes to BOTH the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov. 
Yes  
 This study prospectively assigns people or a group of people to an intervention, 
with or without concurrent comparison or control groups, to study the cause-and-
effect relationship between a health-related intervention and a health outcome. 
 The PI has access to and cont rol over all the data from the clinical trial and has the 
right to publish the results of  the trial and plans to publis h the results in a journal 
that follows the ICMJE recommendations.  
This requirement includes studies of behavioral interventions. 
 
Section 4: Registration on C linicaltrials.gov is not required 
Yes  
 I have read sections 1-3 above and regist ration on clinicaltria ls.gov is not required 
for this research.  
 
23) Criteria for 10 Year Approval  
If yes to all items below this research  may qualify for a 10-year approval period. 
 
Yes  
 This research involves no more than minimal risk. 
 This research does not receive any fede ral or state government funding or funding 
from a private funder who require s annual review per contract. 
 This research is not subject to FDA jurisdiction.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 12 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018   This research does not include  prisoners as participants. 
 This research is not pa rt of an IRB reliance. 
 This research is not subject to SCRO oversight. 
 This research is not subject to oversi ght by the Research Advisory Panel of 
California (RAP of C). 
 This research does not involve personnel supported by federal training, center, or 
program grants. 
 No personnel involved in the design, conduct, or reporting of this research have a 
financial interest (RFI)  in this study. 
References 
1. Trelle S, Reichenbach S, Wandel S, et al. Cardiovascular safety of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs: network meta-analysis. Bmj 2011;342:c7086. 
2. Wolfe MM, Lichtenstein DR, Singh G. Gastrointestinal toxicity of nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs. The New En gland journal of medicine 1999;340:1888-99. 
3. Abou-Raya S, Abou-Raya A, Helmii M. Du loxetine for the management of pain in 
older adults with knee oste oarthritis: randomised placebo-controlled trial. Age and 
ageing 2012;41:646-52. 
4. Chappell AS, Desaiah D, Liu-Seifert H,  et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled study of the efficacy and safety of duloxetine for the treatment of chronic 
pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee. Pa in practice : the official journal of World 
Institute of Pain 2011;11:33-41. 
5. Wise BL, Niu J, Zhang Y, et al. Ps ychological factors a nd their relation to 
osteoarthritis pain. Osteoart hritis Cartilag e 2010;18:883-7. 
6. Kabat-Zinn J, University  of Massachusetts Medica l Center/Worcester. Stress 
Reduction Clinic. Full catastrophe living : using the wisdom of your body and mind 
to face stress, pain, and illness. Ne w York, N.Y.: Delacorte Press; 1990. 
7. Hofmann SG, Sawyer AT, Witt AA, Oh D. The effect of mindfulness-based therapy 
on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic re view. Journal of consulting and clinical 
psychology 2010;78:169-83. 
8. Hilton L, Hempel S, Ewing BA, et al. Mindfulness Meditation for Chronic Pain: 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Anna ls of behavioral medicine : a publication 
of the Society of Behavioral Medicine 2016. 
9. O'Leary K, O'Neill S, Dockray S. A system atic review of the effects of mindfulness 
interventions on cortisol. Journal of health psychology 2016;21:2108-21. 
10. Rosenkranz MA, Lutz A, Perlman DM, et al. Reduced stress and inflammatory 
responsiveness in experienced  meditators compared to a matched healthy control 
group. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016;68:117-25. 
11. Yadav RK, Magan D, Mehta N, Sharma R, Mahapatra SC. Efficacy of a short-term 
yoga-based lifestyle intervention in reduci ng stress and inflammation: preliminary 
results. Journal of a lternative and complement ary medicine 2012;18:662-7. 
12. MacCoon DG, Imel ZE, Rosenkranz MA, et al. The validation of  an active control 
intervention for Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR). Behaviour research 
and therapy 2012;50:3-12. 
13. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH , Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study 
of WOMAC: a health status instrument fo r measuring clinically important patient 
PROTOCOL TITLE: The Effect of Mindfulne ss Based Stress Reduction on Pain and 
Function in Persons with Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Page 13 of 13   Revised: February 20, 2018  relevant outcomes to antirheumatic drug therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the 
hip or knee. The Journal of rheumatology 1988;15:1833-40. 
14. Gross JJ, John OP. Individual differences  in two emotion regulation processes: 
implications for affect, relationships, and well-being. Journal of pe rsonality and social 
psychology 2003;85:348-62. 
15. Lange T, Vansteelandt S, Bekaert M. A simple unified approach for estimating 
natural direct and indirect effects. Amer ican journal of epidemiology 2012;176:190-5. 
 