  Official Title: PROMOTE Pilot Study Pharmacy multimodal communication strategy to promote HPV vaccination Study ID: [REMOVED] Document Type:  Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan Date of the Document: DEC 05 2022   
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
1 PROMOTE Pilot Study  
Pharmacy multimodal communicati on strategy to promote  HPV vaccination  
IRO REC'D 11/17/2022
FHCRC IRB Approval  
DEC 05 2022 
Document Released Date
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
2  
 
Table of Contents  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  ................................ ................................ ...........  3 
1. SHORT TITLE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  4 
2. INVESTIGATORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  4 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
3. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  5 
4. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE  ................................ ...............................  6 
5. SPECIFIC AIMS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  7 
6. STUDY DESIGN AND DATA MANAGEMENT ................................ ................................ .........  7 
7. DATA MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  13 
9.  TRAINING PROCEDURES AND QUALITY ASSURANCE ................................ ...................  17 
10. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN ................................ ................................ ..........  17 
11. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ ............................  18 
12. STUDY DISSEMINATION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ........................  19 
13. STUDY LIMITATIONS AND HOW TO MINIMIZE THEM  ................................ .....................  19 
14. STUDY TIMELINE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  20 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  20 
  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
3 List of Abbreviations and Acronyms  
 
FHCC Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  
HICOR  Hutchinson Institute for Cancer Outcomes Research  
HPV Human papillomavirus  
IOF Implementation Outcomes Framework  
IRB Institution Review Board  
TDF Theoretical Domains Framework  
  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
4 1. Short Title 
PROMOTE Pilot Study  
 
2. Investigators  
Principa l  Investigator  
 
Parth Shah PharmD, PhD  
Assistant Professor, HICOR  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  
1100 Fairview Ave N  
M3-B232  
Seattle, WA 9810 9 
pshah@fredhutch.org   
 
Co-Investigators  
 
Linda Ko, PhD  
Associate Professor, Public Health Sciences  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  
1100 Fairview Ave N  
M3-B232  
Seattle, WA 98109  
 
 
Jennifer Bacci, PharmD, PhD  
Assistant Professor, Department of Pharmacy  
University of Washing ton School of Pharmacy  
H-361C Box 357630  
1959 NE Pacific St  
Seattle, WA 98195  
 
William Calo, PhD  
Assistant Professor, Department of Public Health Sciences  
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine  
3400 Public Health Sciences  
Hershey, PA 17033 US  
 
Project coordinators   
 
Debbie Delaney  
Project Coordinator, HICOR  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  
1100 Fairview Ave N  
M3-B232  
Seattle, WA 98109  
 
Morgan G lascock  
Project Coordinator, HICOR  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  
1100 Fairview Ave N  
M3-B232  
Seattle, WA 98109  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
5 3. Executive Summary  
 
 
 
 
 Background & 
Significance  
 
 
 
 
 
Objective:  HPV vaccination of children ages 9 -17 in Washington state is sub -
optimal, particularly among underserved populations.  Convenient 
and easy to  access, pharmacies are promising vaccination settings 
that have potential to increase HPV vaccination rates. However, low 
parent awareness of services and poor engagement by pharmacy 
staff are significant barriers to wider implementation.   
 
This will be a mixed methods pilot intervention study exploring the 
use and development of  a multimodal  communication strategy to 
increase pharmacy ‐located HPV vaccination for adolescents. The 
multimodal  strategy includes adapting an existing electronic 
“forecasting” system to identify vaccine eligible children who are due 
for vaccination and communication training for pharmacy staff to 
effectively recommend HPV vaccination. The study will involve the 
enrollment of parents/guardians with children between the ages of 9 -
17 and pharmacy staff at pharmacies in Western Washington state .  
 
 
Methods  Aim 1:  Conduct key informant interviews to infor m/adapt an existing 
electronic forecasting system and behavioral counseling framework 
to match  barriers and facilitators to HPV vaccination in pharmacies.  
 
Aim 2:  Pilot and test  the impact of an adapted multimodal 
communication strategy in pharmacies to support HPV vaccination.  
Population:  Aim 1:   Key informant interviews will be conducted with up to 12 
parents/guardians of children aged 9 -17 and up to 18 Bartell Drugs 
pharmacy staff members.  
 
Aim 2:  Administer a pre/post implementation stu dy questionnaire  to 
all pharmacy staff in up to four  independent pharmacies in Western 
Washington state  and assess the adoption of the intervention based 
upon audits.  
 
Sites:  Bartell Drugs and independent pharmacies in Western Washington 
state  (independent  pharmacies provided letters of support ) located in 
the Cancer Consortium Catchment Area  
 
 
Study Duration:  12 months   
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
6 4. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE   
 
Background  
Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes 34,800 new cancer cases in men and women each year in  
the US, over 90% of which could be prevented by HPV vaccine1. Despite national recommendations for HPV  
vaccination since 20062 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports the percentage of US 
adolescents  who are  with HPV vaccination in 2018 is only 51%, well below the Healthy People 2020 goal of 
80%3. Low vaccination rates are persistent in Washington State (including the Cancer Consortium’s Catchment 
Area), with  significant geographic variation in up ‐to‐date coverage (Figure 1). The President’s Cancer Panel4 
and the National  Vaccine Advisory Committee5 have recommended expanding HPV vaccination to pharmacies 
to capitalize on the  “medical neighborhood” to increase v accine access and coverage.  Pharmacies are 
promising HPV vaccination  settings: 89% of US residents live within 5 miles of a pharmacy6; 50 states and US 
territories allow pharmacists to  administer HPV vaccine7; and pharmacists have a long history as vaccine  
providers8, administering millions of doses  of several types of vaccines every year9. Our previous national 
surveys showed parents are willing to have  pharmacists administer HPV vaccine to their children10‐12 and 
primary care physicians are supportive of pharmacist -provided HPV vaccination13. Our analysis of 
demonstration projects in 5 states also showed that while pharmacy -located  HPV vaccination was highly 
acceptable, there are significant barriers to wider implementation: low awareness for  services among parents 
and poor engagement by pharmacy staff with adolescent vaccinations undermine HPV vaccine uptake in the 
pharmacy setting14. Our findings prompt the policy question: How can HPV vaccination be effectively 
implemented in pharmacies to help achieve the Healthy People 2020 goal? To date, no implementation 
research has methodically evaluated strategies that could support HPV vaccination in pharmacies.  
 
Rationale  
Our long‐term goal is to increase HPV vaccination rates by strengthening exist ing capacity in pharmacy ‐
located vaccination. The objective of this CCSG catchment area pilot is to adapt and test a multimodal 
communication strategy that can mitigate barriers pharmacies face in communicating about HPV vaccination 
with parents and patien ts. The strategy will consist of two evidence ‐based communication approaches: 1) 
Electronic  forecasting to identify vaccine ‐eligible children15; and 2) Pharmacy staff using the 5A’s (Ask, Advice, 
Assess, Assist,  and Arrange) Behavioral Counseling Framework  to recommend HPV and other vaccines. 
Electronic forecasting allows  pharmacy staff to proactively check which of their patients are eligible for 
vaccines. A study lead by Dr. Bacci found  that proactive prompting improved pharmacy staff engagement with 
vaccination services, resulting in a 15%  increase in adult vaccinations at Bartell Drugs, a regional pharmacy 
chain in Western Washington.15 Although the  forecasting system improved staff engagement, vaccination rates 
may have been further improved linking  the electronic forecasting with communication training on how to 
effectively communicate about vaccines with patients.  The 5A’s Framework is a behavioral counseling 
approach endorsed by the United States Preventive Services Task16 and has been effectively  used in smoking 
cessation and physical activity interventions for two decades. The  framework provides an easy rubric for 
clinicians to evaluate and engage patients’ readiness and intentions for  behavior change. Training clinical staff 
to use the 5A’s has been successful for behaviorally intensive  interventions, so  it would be reasonable to 
believe that it could be used to motivate HPV vaccination. Dr. Shah recently lead a study,  published in 
Pediatrics , that identified effective HPV vaccine message charact eristics17 that could be applied to the  5A’s. 
The two communication approaches would work together by preempting pharmacy staff to proactively engage 
adolescents/their parents with vaccinations and teach pharmacy staff how to effectively communicate about 
HPV vaccination. However, these communication approaches have not been used in pharmacies to improve 
HPV vaccination.  
 
  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
7 5. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Aim 1:  Adapt an existing electronic forecasting system and behavioral counseling framework to match  
barriers and facilitators to HPV vaccination in pharmacies. Guided by the Theoretical Domains Framework 
(TDF)20, we will conduct in ‐depth interviews with pharmacy staff ( n=18) and parents  or guardians  of children 
aged 9‐17 (n=12) to identify  factors that i mpede or promote parent and patient engagement with pharmacy ‐
located vaccination services.  
 
Aim 2:  Test the impact of an adapted multimodal communication strategy in pharmacies to support 
HPV vaccination. We will deliver a communication strategy training to pharmacy staff at predetermined 
pharmacy sites within Western Washington.  We will assess pharmacy staff’s experiences with the multimodal 
communication strategy and deliverin g HPV vaccination at baseline and post ‐implementation, measuring 
outcomes selected from Proctor’s Implementation  Outcomes Framework (IOF) .21 We will also develop an 
environmental scan25 to characterize a pharmacy’s environment, vaccination workflow, and team dynamics.  
The  findings will be used to adapt the pharmacy’s workflow to better use the currently available forecasting 
syste m and  tailor a vaccine communication training for pharmacy  staff based on the 5A’s.  
 
 
6. STUDY DESIGN AND DATA MANAGEMENT  
 
6.1 Study design  
This is a mixed methods  pilot study  aimed at improving the dissemination and implementation of  adolescent 
vaccination services in community pharmacies, particularly HPV vaccination. These services are readily 
available in all pharmacies in Washington state , and, as such, this protocol is largely focused on quality 
improvement of vaccination service s. 
 
Aim 1.  This aim will use qualitative approaches to identify facilitators and barriers of behavioral determinants 
related to the adolescent vaccine communication and delivery in community pharmacies, with an emphasis on 
HPV vaccination. The activities o f this aim will include  1) Conducting cognitive testing with a convenience 
sample of non -participants to get feedback on our interview questions to ensure that they are understandable 
as intended.  No personal information or data will be collected during t his phase ; 2) C onducting key informant 
interviews with Parents/Guardians and Pharmacy staff using semi -structured interview techniques and 
environmental scans. Interviews will be guided using the TDF.  The TDF provides a sound theoretical 
foundation for our inquiry into barriers/facilitators of HPV vaccination in pharmacies, as it provides a 
comprehensive framework of behavioral determinants that impact how well individuals like a pharmacist can 
adopt a nd integrate an evidence -based practice like HPV vaccination. The TDF constructs we initially include 
in the guide will be informed by our previous research on HPV vaccination in pharmacies[26-28] and our other 
implementation research in pharmacies.[29, 30]  
 
Aim 1  outcomes.  Qualitative information will be used to evaluate how well the proposed communication 
strategy matches barriers and facilitators to HPV vaccination in pharmacies for both parents/guardians and 
pharmacy staff.  The activities of th is aim will result in findings that will be used to adapt the existing forecasting 
system in pharmacies to identify vaccine -eligible children and develop a vaccine communication training for 
pharmac y staff.  
 
Aim 2.  This aim will use quantitative approaches to evaluate the feasibility and impact of the communication 
strategies developed in Aim 1 on adolescent vaccination rates in pharmacies, emphasizing HPV vaccination. 
We will use a pre/posttest quas i-experimental design to evaluate the change in vaccination rates at selected 
pharmacy sites after implementation of the multimodal communication strategy , as well as changes in 
perceptions and behavioral predictors of pharmacy staff.   We will also develop  an environmental scan[25] to 
characterize a pharmacy’s environment, vaccination workflow, and team dynamics. Conducting environmental 
scans of pharmacies will further contextualize barriers/facilitators to HPV vaccination .[31]  
 
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
8 Aim 2  outcomes.   Quantitative information  will be collected through the use of online surveys at baseline and 
follow -up. Surveys will  assess the acceptability, appropriateness, and feasibility of the proposed 
communication strategy to support HPV vaccination  and other adolescent vaccinations . Additionally, pharmacy 
audits will be conducted from the pharmacy electronic records to assess adoption of HPV  vaccination, 
measured as the average HPV vaccination rate per pharmacist at each pharmacy. We will  also assess the 
impact of the communication strategy on adoption of other adolescent vaccines  (e.g., tetanus, diphtheria, 
acellular pertussis; meningoccocal conjugate; influenza) . 
 
 
6.2 Study area description  
The catchment area includes independent pharmacies in  Western Washington  state.  
 
6.3 Study population  
This study will include:  
 
6.3.1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
 Aim 1   Aim 2  
Group  Parents/Guardians  
Pharmacy staff   Independent pharmacies in Western 
Washington  state   
Number targeted  Parents/Guardians:  
Up to 1 2 
 
Pharmacy staff:  
Up to 18  
(9 pharmacists, 9 pharmacy technicians)  Up to 4 sites 
All pharmacy staff at participating sites  (up 
to 25 staff members )  
Age restriction  >18 years   >18 years  
Inclusion  Parent/Guardians  - Individuals  with 
children between the ages of 9 -17 in 
their care  who are English speakers , live 
in Washington state , and have access to 
a telephone or computer with internet 
access  (up to 12 parents)  
 
Pharmacy staff - Employed at a Western 
Washington Bartell Drugs  pharmacy 
sites and have access to a telephone or 
computer with internet access  
 Pharmacy staff e mploye d at up to four  
independent pharmacies in  Western 
Washington who speak English and have 
access to a computer with internet access  
 
 
Exclusion  Pharmacy staff: Floaters/per diem . Those who object to having their interview audio 
recorded.  
Parents/Guardians:  Those who object to having their interview audio recorded.   
 
6.3.2 Representation of women, children and minorities  
All parents/guardians , pharmac y technicians  and pharmacists  will be eligible to participate in this study 
regardless of sex/gender and race/ethnicity. Since the research will be conducted in community pharmacies in 
Washington state, majority (>60%) participants are expected to be White/Caucasian , which is typical of the 
population in Washington state.  We expect roughly equal numbers of male and female participants across all 
populations.  Pharmacy staff recruited into the study will likely be 60% female based on current demographics 
of this professional workforce in  Washington state.  
 
6.3.3 Co -enrollment guidelines  
There are no restrictions on co -enrollment for aims 1 & 2.  
 
6.4 Sample size considerations and sampling strategy  
Aim 1:  Purposive  sampling will be used to identify potential parent/guardian  study participants . Purposive  
sampling from participating pharmacies will be used to identify pharmacy staff.  Since the research components 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
9 of this aim are entirely qualitative in nature, no power  calculation is required. Based on previous research 
studies with pa rents/guardians and  pharmacy staff, we believe that the proposed sample sizes for Aim 1 will 
allow us to capture a diverse range of viewpoints and to achieve thematic saturation, where no new information 
is gained by additional interviewing . Sample sizes were determined based on qualitative literature that indicate 
that thematic saturation can be achieved with as few as 12 participants.  
 
Aim 2:  Purposive sampling of independent pharmacies in Western Washington state . As this is a pilot study 
aimed at understanding the feasibility, appropriateness, and potential impact of a multimodal communication 
strategy, a  power calculation is not necessary for Aim 2 . Additionally, th is study is purposively designed to be 
of limited scope based on the Fred Hutch/UW Cancer Consortium expectations for CCSG pilot project . Our 
planned future study to conduct a large scale implementation trial will have resources available to hire a 
biostat istician who can support the study team in trial design and conducting power calculations /appropriate 
statistical analyses.  
 
Definition of cases and controls:  Not applicable  
 
6.5 Recruitment, screening, consent and enrollment procedures  
 
6.5.1 Aim 1  
 
6.5.1.A Participant recruitment for cognitive testing the interview guides  
We will use convenience sampling to identify participants for cognitive testing the interview guides. The 
convenience sample will include family and friends who have children aged 9 -17 and pharmacy staff known by 
the research team. These individuals will not be participating in research.  They will be providing feedback on 
interview guides to improve interview questions and to ensure interview questions are understood as the 
research team intended.  
 
6.5.1.B Parents/Guardians with children ages 9 -17 
Recruitment & screening:  We will use both in -person and online recruitment. Parents will be approached during 
Health Fairs and community events by community health educators employed at the Fred Hutch Office of 
Community Outreach and Engagement.  Approached participants will receive a flyer that provides an overview 
of the study, what their participation will entail for the key informant interview, and the incentive they will receive 
upon completion.  Additionally, we will recruit parents online th rough social media platforms such as the Fred 
Hutch Facebook  page and provide similar details about the study as with our in -person recruitment method . 
Interested parents will contact study staff by email or phone. The study staff will  provide interested p articipants 
with additional study information and schedule them for a key informant interview that will be conducted either 
by phone  or in-person (if permitted).  If the participant is interested in participating,  study staff will obtain contact 
information  for participants to schedule key informant interview appointments.  A waiver of documentation of 
written consent will be obtained prior to the beginning of the project  for those who are not consented in person . 
 
Enrollment:  Interested parent/guardian participants will complete a demographic survey  (approximately 10 
minutes to complete)  and participate in a key informant interview either in -person or over the phone.  
 
List of procedures for all parent/ guardian participants – Online recru itment  
a. Participants interested in participating in key informant interviews will click on the Fred Hutch Facebook 
recruitment ad which will send them to a secure online form set up by Fred Hutch’s Communication and 
Marketing team. This form will provide in formation about the study and fields to enter their contact 
information if they wish to participate in key informant interviews.  
b. Study staff  will contact participants by email or phone and provide additional information about the 
study and answer any quest ions.  
c. Study staff will schedule key informant interview s with interested participants and provide them with an 
option to conduct the interview in -person (subject to appropriate social distancing procedures) or by 
telephone.  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
10 d. During the interview time, study staff with go over the informed consent process with participants and 
obtain their verbal consent which will be documented by the study staff.  
e. During the interview time, study staff will conduct the 90-minute key informant interview and 
demographic s urvey.  
 
List of procedures for all parent/ guardian participants – In-person recruitment (subject to appropriate 
social distancing procedures)  
a. We will work with the Fred Hutch Office of Community Outreach and Engagement (OCOE). OCOE 
community health educato rs will approach parents at health fairs and community events. They will 
provide information about the study through a recruitment flyer. This flyer with have instructions for how 
parents can contact study staff (e.g., study email and phone number) if they  wish to participate in key 
informant interviews.  
b. Study staff  will contact participants by email or phone and provide additional information about the 
study.  
c. Study staff will schedule key informant interviews with interested participants and provide them w ith an 
option to conduct the interview in -person (subject to appropriate social distancing procedures), by 
telephone , or by approved video conferencing platforms that are HIPAA compliant.  
d. During the interview time, study staff with go over the informed consent process with participants and 
obtain their verbal consent which will be documented by the study staff.  
e. During the interview time, study staff will conduct the 90-minute key informant interview and 
demographic survey.  
 
6.5.1.C Pharmacy Staf f  
Recruitment & screening : Christina Ree , Director of Clinical Programs,  will approach Bartell’s pharmacy staff to 
inquire about their interest in participating in the key informant interview portion of the study. Interested 
participants will reach out to study staff, who will further explain the study and obtain contact infor mation for 
participants and schedule  key informant interview  appointments. A waiver of documentation of consent will be 
obtained prior to the beginning of the project; thus, written consent will not be provided.  
 
Enrollment:  Interested pharmacy staff will participate in a key informant interview  either in -person or over the 
phone  and complete a demographic survey at the end of the interview.  
 
 
List of procedures for all pharmacy staff participants  
a. Study staff will provide a recruitment flyer for pharmacy staff to Christina Ree, Director of Clinical 
Programs, at Bartell Drugs. The recruitment flyer will contain pertinent study information and 
instructions for how pharmacy staff can contact study staff (e.g., study email and phone number) if they 
wish to participate in key informant interviews.  
b. Christina Ree will approach Bartell’s pharmacy staff (in-person, by telephone, or email) to inquire about 
their interest in participating in the key informant interviews  and ask them to contact the study staff if 
interested . 
c. Study staff will contact participants by email or phone and provide additional information about the 
study.  
d. Study staff will schedule a 90- minute key informant interview with interested participants and provide 
them with an option to conduct the interview in -person (subject to appropriate social distancing 
procedures) , by telephone , or by approved video conferencing platforms that are HIPAA compliant.  
e. During the interview time, study staff with go ove r the informed consent process with participants and 
obtain their verbal consent which will be documented by the study staff.  
f. During the interview time, study staff will conduct the  90- minute  key informant interview  and 
demographic survey . 
 
6.5.2 Aim 2  
6.5.2.A Participant recruitment for cognitive testing the survey questions  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
11 We will use convenience sampling to identify participants for cognitive testing the survey questions. The 
convenience sample will include family and friends who are pharmacy staff known by the research team. 
These individuals will not be participating in research.  They will be pr oviding feedback on survey questions to 
improve survey items and to ensure survey items are understood as the research team intended.  
 
6.5.2.B Pharmacy Staff  
Recruitment & screening:  Mylinh Nguyen , Director of Practice Development  for the Washington State 
Pharmacy Association (WSPA) , will introduce study information to independent pharmacy owners in Western 
Washington state . Pharmacy owners who are interested in participating in the study must manage/operate an 
independently -owned community pharmacy . Pharmacy owners  will contact  the study team . Pharmacy owners 
will provide documented confirmation of their pharmacy site’s agreement of participation in the communicatio n 
intervention . We will select 2 to 4 independently -owned community pharmacies with similar patient case load, 
demographic and community characteristics  to control for inte rnal threats to intervention validity and 
confounding . A waiver of written  consent for the pharmacy sites will be obtained prior to the beginning of the 
project; thus,  no written consent will be provided.  
Enrollment:  Once pharmac ies have been enrolled into the pilot,  pharmacy staff will be asked to complete a pre -
implementation  online survey  (i.e., pretest ; 10-15 minutes to complete ) via a survey link to assess the 
acceptability, appropriateness, and feasibility of providing HPV vaccination to children aged 9 -17 in their 
pharmacies . They will be asked to attend training on the new communication strategy and employ the new 
communication strategy for HPV vaccinations for up to 6 months.   
Once the pilot is complete, pharmacy staff will again be as ked to complete a post -implementation survey  (i.e., 
post test) in the same fashion as the pre -implementation survey.  
 
Description of communication strategy intervention:  The communication intervention will be planned to be no 
more than 120 minutes (target time 90 minutes).  The strategy will consist of two evidence -based 
communication approaches: 1) Electronic forecasting  to identify vaccine -eligible children; and 2) Pharm acy 
staff using the 5A’s (Ask, Advice, Assess, Assist, and Arrange) Behavioral Counseling Framework  to 
recommend HPV and other vaccines. Electronic forecasting allows pharmacy staff to proactively check which 
of their patients are eligible for vaccines. Th e 5A’s Framework is a behavioral counseling approach endorsed 
by the United States Preventive Services Task and  provides an easy rubric for clinicians to evaluate and 
engage patients’ readiness and intentions for behavior change.  The two communication appr oaches would 
work together by preempting pharmacy staff to proactively engage adolescents/their parents with vaccinations 
and teach pharmacy staff how to effectively communicate about HPV vaccination.  This strategy capitalizes on 
existing vaccination syste ms in pharmacies and interpersonal communication training pharmacy staff will be 
familiar with using with patients.  
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
12  
 
The communication training will consist of 5 parts  delivered during the session:  
1) An educational overview of adolescent vaccination, with an emphasis on HPV vaccination  
2) Overview of the communication strategy  
3) Process for integrating the communication strategy into clinical workflow at the pharmacy  
4) Training on communication strategy  
5) Pharmacy staff practice with the communicat ion strategy  
 
List of procedures for pharmacy staff  
a. Mylinh Nguyen, Director of Practice Development  for the Washington State Pharmacy Association  ( 
WSPA ) will invite independent Western Washington pharmacies to participate in the pilot study  
b. Pharmacy staff at enrolled sites will provide a waiver of written consent to the study team prior to the 
intervention . Waiver will be provided before completing the pre -implementation survey.  
c. Enrolled pharmacies will ask pharmacy staff to consent to the study and complete the pre -
implementation survey  
d. Pharmacy staff will complete the 2 -part vaccine communication strategy training  (2 sessions, 60 
minutes each)  
i. The first session will be online provided as pre -recorded continuing education  provided through 
the Washington State Pharmacy Association (WSPA).  This session will be used to teach the 
vaccine communication strategy.  
ii. 4-6 weeks later, t he second session will be live, in person or conducted online using Zoom, and 
will also count as CE  administered through WSPA.  This session will be used to answer any 
follow -up questions  about the training, garner feedback on how the pharmacy staff has been 
using the vaccine communication strategy,  and retrain on any compo nents of the strategy.  
e. The enrolled pharmacies will partake in the communication  intervention  pilot for up to six months.  
f. After pilot completion, pharmacy staff will be asked to complete the post -implementation survey  

CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
13  
 
List of procedures to conduct environmental scan of pharmacy  (subject to appropriate social 
distancing procedures)  
a. Study staff will contact  the owners of each pharmacy  to schedule a time to visit the pharmacies where 
pharmacy staff who participated in the Aim 2 intervention  work.  
b. Under the supervision of the pharmacy manager s (in compliance with pharmacy  policies and 
procedures), study staff will be granted permission to enter the pharmac ies and conduct the 
environmental scan.  
c. The study staff member will observe the pharmacy staff and make note of the environment (e.g., 
workflow set up, features of the p harmacy, medical services provided, etc.) and complete the 
environmental scan. The scan is designed to avoid disturbing or contacting pharmacy staff while they 
are working. No personal identification of staff members will be collected during this observati on. Study 
team members completing the environmental scans will be compliant with local jurisdictions’ policies 
and procedures with wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) to reduce risk of coronavirus 
exposure  as needed . 
 
 
6.6 Compen sation for study participation  
Participant Incentives. Compensation  of $50 (as a check, cash, or gift card) will be provided to 
parents/guardians and pharmacy staff for complet ing the Aim 1 key informant interview s. Compensation  
totaling $40, in the form of  cash , will be provided to pharmacy staff for complet ing the Aim 2 pre - and post - 
intervention  surveys .   
 
Pharmacy Incentives . Compensation of $1,000  (as a check)  will be given to each participating pharmac y in 
the Aim 2 pilot intervention .  
 
6.7 End of study/final contact  
Aim 1:  Parent/guardian and pharmacy staff participants will exit the study after completing the ir key informant 
interview.   
 
Aim 2:  Pharmac ies will exit the study once the ir pharmacy staff  have completed the post -implementation 
survey  (i.e., post  test, 10 -15 minutes to complete)  . This post survey will be administered  up to  5 months  after 
the communication strategy intervention has been delivered to the pharmacy site s. The data management 
team from the participating Western Washington independent pharmacies will conduct an audit of the 
pharmacy sites’ vaccination data and send it to the study team for data analysis  using a secure data transfer 
method  approved by the independent p harmacy  and Fred Hutch.   
 
 
6.8 Participant retention  
For Aim 1, participants who do not present for the key informant interview  will be called using contact  
information obtained at enrollment. A participant will be considered lost to follow up (LTFU) after 5 attempts 
have been made to contact them on 5 separate occasions without successful  rescheduling of an  interview . Aim 
2’s retention is based upon pharmacy contractual agreement to participate in the pilot. Therefore, retention is 
not applicable.  
 
6.9 Participant withdrawal  
Participants may voluntarily withdraw from the study for any reason at any time. The PI and research team 
may also withdraw participants from the study in order to protect their safety.  
 
7. Data Management  
7.1 Key informant interview  audio recordings and transcripts  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
14 An interview Excel tracking file with study ID numbers will be used and kep t by the project coordinator in a 
password protected server at Fred Hutch and accessible only to the PI and authorized staff. Participants will be 
assigned a study ID number to track their interview audio data and transcript.  
 
Procedure for  audio recordings and transcriptions  
a. One day before the interview, the interviewer will ensure that the recorder is fully operational and that 
the batteries are charged.  
b. Prior to the start of the interview, the interviewer will test the recorder to ensure that t he audio is being 
well captured.  
c. At the end of the interview , the research staff will play the recording in a private office or room to ensure 
that the discussion was well captured.  
d. After ensuring the interview was well captured, the interviewer will down load the recordings into a Fred 
Hutch study folder on a secured server.  
e. After the down load is done and confirmed, the file in the audio recorder will be deleted.  
f. The interviewer will then hand over the audio recording device to Fred Hutch staff for safekeeping after 
all the interviews have been completed.  
g. Audio Files will be labeled:  
 
Parent interviews   Parent_ ParticipantNumber_Date  
Example: Parent_009_2020.05.07  
Pharmacy staff interviews  Pharm _ ParticipantNumber_Date  
Example : Pharm_009_2020.05.07  
 
a) The audio files will then be uploaded to GMR Transcription to produce a  verbatim  transcri ption .  
b) Audio files and transcriptions will be stored on a password protected server at Fred Hutch that only 
study staff have access to.  
 
7.2 Demographic survey  
The demographic survey will be completed at the time of the key informant interview is conducted. Once the 
intervi ew is completed, study staff will ask participants about the demographics (e.g., age, sex/gender, 
race/ethnicity, etc.) using the questionnaire developed for the survey. The answers will be recorded on a paper 
survey with the participants’ study ID as desc ribed in section 7.  1 above. Study staff will ent er the data in an 
electronic database created in either REDCap or Qualtrics. This database will be stored securely on Fred 
Hutch servers in a password protected folder only accessible by authorized study staff. Paper copies of the 
demographic survey will be stored in a study folder in either the PI or study coordinator’s office at Fred Hutch in 
a locked file cabinet.   Demographic data will also be collected as part of the Aim 2 online surveys  mention ed in 
7.4 below .  
 
7.3 Environmental scan  
The environmental scans will be completed by study staff during their observation of the pharmacy under the 
supervision of the pharmacy owner or their delegate . Study staff will complete the scan using paper copies . 
The data collected will be entered into an electronic database created in either REDCap or Qualtrics. This 
database will be stored securely on Fred Hutch servers in a password protected folder only accessible by 
authorized study staff. Paper copies of the demographic survey will be stored in a study folder in either the PI 
or study coordinator’s office at Fred Hutch in a locked file cabinet.  
 
7.4 Pre- and post -implementation survey.  
Surveys will be administered online through REDCap or Qualtrics.  Participants will  be assigned a unique ID to 
identify their pre - and post -implementation survey responses. These individuals will  receive a survey link sent 
by the study team that  will give them secure access to complete the online questionnaire. Survey data will be 
stored on a password protected server at Fred Hutch. Access to data identifying individual subjects will be 
restricted to investigators and staff directly involved in t he study, all of whom have completed  human subjects 
and standard data confidentiality training.  
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
15 7.5 Vaccination audit data  from the Independent Pharmacies . 
The s tudy team will  establish a  data use agreement with the independently pharmacies  for the secure transfer 
and management of patient vaccination data from pharmacy sites participating in the pilot intervention. The 
agreement will describe variables to be included, data format, and data management.  Data shall consist of the 
following for  each patient aged 9 -17 receiving vaccinations at the pilot sites : Age, sex/gender, race/ethnicity (if 
captured), insurance status, vaccine type, pharmacy where the patient was immunized, pharmacist who 
immunized the patient (using a unique code assigned to each pharmacist) . 
 
7.6 FHCC infrastructure that will secure data files.   
The database management is built with multiple layers of security and the center practices appropriate due 
diligence to ensure the data is maintained in an appropriate manner. The file and database servers at FHC C 
are housed in a dedicated computer machine room containing emergency backup power, a UPS, a back -up 
power generator, a non -liquid fire suppression system, and authorization -based limited access. In  addition to 
personal workstations, administrative access to databases and corresponding data will be limited to Virtual 
Private Network (VPN) and/or Terminal Server access. Furthermore, all databases will reside behind a 
redundant firewall system and intr usion prevention system.  
 
A copy of the data will be stored in an Amazon Web Services (AWS) VPC. This account is covered by a 
Business Associates Agreement (BAA) signed by Fred Hutch and Amazon Web Services. The data will be 
transferred to this secure loc ation via an IPsec VPN tunnel between the Fred Hutch Data Center and the AWS 
VPC. While stored in the VPC, all data will be encrypted at rest using custom encryption keys managed with 
AWS Key Management Service. All transport between authorized AWS service s including AWS EC2 and AWS 
S3 will be over secure TLS connections. Any processing of the data will be performed using dedicated EC2 
instances to ensure compliance. All access to the AWS Environment is controlled via Security Groups and 
Network Access Cont rol Lists and audited to ensure no unauthorized access occurs.  
 
The electronic data files for this study will be processed on this dedicated, layered -security system. Access to 
data identifying individual subjects will be restricted to investigators and s taff directly involved in the study, all of 
whom have completed standard data confidentiality training. Data will be accessed by the study team 
exclusively using encrypted desktop computers.  Per institutional standards, all desktops connecting to Fred 
Hutch networks must be baselined by Center IT to ensure adequate encryption, password protections, and 
configuration for the network to recognize an approved device.  Unauthorized users do not have access to 
areas of the network which contain sensitive data, including PHI. All paper records and forms will be stored in 
locked drawers when not in use. Access to computer records will be strictly controlled and will require 
simultaneous knowledge of the database structure, database language, and multiple passwords . Since the 
system is behind a firewall and is accessible only to study staff, the risk of unlawful penetration is not a 
significant data safeguard concern.  
 
7.7 Policies and procedures regarding the physical possession and storage of data files.  
Access  to data identifying individual subjects will be restricted to investigators and staff directly involved in the 
study, all of whom have completed standard data confidentiality training. All hard and soft copies of the data 
with identifiable information will be stored in locked drawers when not in use. Physical media that are received 
from the distributer or any physical copies of the data will be encrypted while at rest and will be held in a locked 
cabinet within the user’s office. All paper records and forms  will be stored in locked drawers when not in use. 
Secure pulping will be used on any printed material containing individual identifiers  
 
In order to access data, all individuals on the study team must have completed FHC C’s Confidentiality Training 
for Investigators and Research Staff and will have to apply for access according to the Center’s Information 
Security Policy by submitting a CIT Data Services Data Request Form. The granting of access is contingent 
upon agreement to these security  policies, which dictate responsible data usage and the loss of use privileges 
if violated.  
 
7.8 Data destruction  
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
16 Study records will be destroyed 7 years after the study IRB file is closed per Fred Hutch data destruction 
guidelines.  
The Aim 2 limited data  set from the independent  pharmacies , showing vaccination rates , will be destroyed after 
the study manuscript is published.  
 
Data stored on:  Will be destroyed by:  
Server or workstation hard disks, or  
Removable media (e.g.  floppies, USB flash drives, 
portable hard disks) excluding optical discs  Using a “wipe” utility which will overwrite the Data at 
least three (3) times using either random or single 
character data, or  
Degaussing sufficiently to ensure that the Data 
canno t be reconstructed, or  
Physically destroying the disk  
Paper documents with sensitive or Confidential 
Information.  Recycling through a contracted firm provided the 
contract with the recycler assures that the 
confidentiality of Data will be protected.  
Paper documents containing Confidential Information 
requiring special handling (e.g. protected health 
information)  On-site shredding, pulping, or incineration  
 
7.9 Endpoints and variables  
Aim 1:  Qualitative information will be used to evaluate how well the proposed communication strategy matches 
barriers and facilitators to HPV vaccination in pharmacies for both parents/guardians and pharmacy staff.  See 
interview question guides for the interview content .  
 
Aim 2:   Quantitative  information  will be collected  to assess the acceptability, appropriateness, and feasibility of 
the proposed communication strategy to support HPV vaccination . See the Pre and Post Implementation 
Survey. P harmacy audits will be conducted from the pharmacy electronic records to assess adoption of HPV  
vaccination, measured as the average HPV vaccination rate per pharmacist at each pharmacy. We will also 
assess the impact of the communication strategy on adoption of other adolescent vaccines  (e.g., tetanus, 
diphtheria, acellular pertussis; meningoccocal conjugate; influenza) . 
 
8. Data collection procedures & data management of study records  
 
8.1 Case Report Forms (CRFs):  
Enrollment  & Demographic Survey Information  
Data collection instruments will be developed by the research  team. Surveys and outcomes from in -depth 
interviews will be collected by study staff. Survey data will be collected electronically using  REDCap . 
Compared to paper data collection, electronic data collection has the potential to be more secure, in that all 
data will be password protected from the moment of data collection. Data will be uploaded directly to the 
study's secure server from REDCap . The secure server that warehouses data will be password protected and 
accessible only to study personnel directly involved in data cleaning and analysis. We will plan to use wireless 
internet to send digital data.  To protect the data, the  website to which  data will be uploaded will use  existing 
well-known SSL/TLS (Secure Socket Layer/Transport Layer Security), as indicated by "HTTPS" in the URL. 
SSL/TLS is used by sites such as Google to protect data.  All digital data will be sent and received using 
HTTPS.  
 
8.2 Record Storage:  PI and study team  will maintain, and store in a secure manner, complete, accurate, and 
current study records throughout the study.  The investigator will retain all study records for at least seven  
years after completion of the study.   Study records include administrative documentation and regulatory 
documentation as well as documentation related to each participant screened and enrolled in the study, 
including informed consent forms, contact information  forms and case report forms fro m all visits during  the 
study.  
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
17 8.3 Data analysis  
 
For both Aim 1 & Aim 2:  
 
 Aim 1: Using community ‐based sampling in collaboration with the Fred Hutch Office of  Community 
Engagement and Outreach, we will conduct audio ‐recorded, semi ‐structured interviews with parents of  
children aged 9 ‐17 (up to n=12) and Bartell Drugs pharmacy staff (up to n=18; 9 pharmacists, 9 pharmacy 
technicians)  to evaluate how well our proposed communication strategy match barriers and facilitators to HPV 
vaccination in  pharmacies. Interview guides will be informed by the TDF20, a widely used theoretical framework 
to understand  behavioral determinants to successfully implement health promotion programs. Interviews will be 
about 90 minutes  and qualitative data will be analy zed using framework ‐guided rapid analyses described by 
Gale et al.22 The qualitative  data will be used to adapt the pharmacy staff’s workflow to improve their use of the 
electronic forecasting system  and develop a tailored vaccine communication training ba sed on the 5A’s. 
Adaptations made to the communication  strategy will be methodically documented using Stirman’s Taxonomy 
of Adaptation Characteristics23. 
 
Aim 2: We will  evaluate the impact of the communication strategy using a pre/post implementation stud y 
design in independent pharmacies located in Western Washington state . This design is commonly used in 
exploratory/development studies. The communication strategy  will be delivered at the pharmacy study sites by 
study staff members. We will use the IOF21 which identifies distinct  implementation outcomes widely used to 
determine how successful implementation of an evidence ‐based practice,  like HPV vaccination, was in a 
specified setting, like pharmacies. We will use validated survey measures to assess  pharmacy staff’s report of 
the acceptability , appropriateness , and feasibility of the communication strategy to  support HPV vaccination .24 
We will also conduct audits of the pharmacy electronic records to assess adoption of HPV  vaccination, 
measured as the ave rage HPV vaccination rate per pharmacist at each pharmacy. We will also assess the  
impact of the communication strategy on adoption of other adolescent vaccines  using pre -post data analysis 
method s like Wilcoxon signed -rank test  or other nonparametric test s appropriate for small sample statistics . 
 
9.  Training procedures and quality assurance  
Study PI  will supervise training of study staff and clinic/pharmacy staff  in study procedures , including 
recruitment, enrollment, conduct of the interviews, and maintenance of confidentiality and privacy.  Specific 
expertise in the conduct of qualitative research will be provided by our team’s qualitative expert , who  has 
conducted  qualitative research in numerous settings . All staff have been or wil l be trained in the responsible 
conduct of human subjects’  research (NIH or CITI courses).  
 
Clinical care :  No clinical care will be provided by study staff.  
 
Adherence to protocol :  For Aim 1, bi -weekly reporting of enrollment will enable us to monitor if the  study is 
running a ccording to approved protocols.  Frequent reporting will also enable us to quickly respond to any 
problems that may arise during the study.   
 
For Aim 2, we will rely on periodi c reporting from the independent pharmacies  who will audit their pharmacy 
records and report their vaccination rates. Periodic reporting will occur at baseline (Month 0) and at least 1  
follow -up time point  after implementation of the communication strategy (Month 2 ). 
 
10. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
All members of the research staff and the personnel employed by the community -based organization will be 
trained in responsible conduct of research, i ncluding enrollment of human subjects, by Dr. Shah and the 
research recruitment training offered by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center.    
To protect against the risk of loss of confidentiality, only Dr. Shah and the Project Coordinator will have ac cess 
to identifiable information or the study database. The study database will be password -protected and housed 
on a secure server at the Fred Hutch. Immediately after the semi -structured in -depth interviews data will be 
collected, the Project Coordinator  will transport the data to locked offices at the Fred Hutch. Survey data will be 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
18 collected via a secure online survey platform. Survey data will be kept in a secured cabinet under lock and key 
in the locked office at the Fred Hutch. For analysis, identifiable information will be removed from the datasets 
and participants will be assigned a unique study identifier. Audiotaped data from the semi -structured interviews 
will be transcribed and kept on a password -protected server. The participa nts will be encouraged to use a 
pseudonym during the semi -structured interviews, and the transcripts will identify each participant by their 
pseudonym.  
 
11. Ethical considerations  
 
11.1 Consent explanation  
The relevant consents include the following information:  
▪ Title 
▪ Researchers’ contact information  
▪ Introduction  
▪ Purpose of the study  
▪ Procedures  
▪ Risks, stress, or discomfort  
▪ Alternatives to taking part in this study  
▪ Benefits of being in the study  
▪ Funding  
▪ Confidentiality  
▪ Fred Hutchinson  HSD contact information  
▪ Study participant statement  
▪ Study participant signature page  
 
11.2 Institutional Review Board  
The study will be reviewed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center . The 
study will not recruit subjects prior to approval from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center  IRB. 
 
11.3 Risks to subjects  
 
The primary risk of participation in the study is the loss of confidentiality. Although study staff will take all 
necessar y precautions to protect confidential data, it is possible that participants’ involvement in the research 
could be discovered by a third party.  Employment of pharmacy staff will not be affected if staff either wish or do 
not wish to participate in this study.  
 
In-Depth I nterviews: S ome questions may be sensitive or cause embarrassment to participants. Participants 
will be informed they can withdraw at any time and do not have to answer any questions if they do not want to.  
 
Surveys /Questionnaires : Quest ions may cause emotional stress or embarrassment. The surveys  have been 
designed in such a way as to minimize questions implying blame or judgment. Participants will be informed and 
reminded periodically that they can refuse to answer any question or stop the survey  at any time.  
 
 
Study staff will attend training s essions by the study investigators and receive ongoing supervision in areas 
related to ethical conduct, confidentiality protection, and other topics of human subject’s  protection. We will 
ensure that study staff are trained to clearly explain the purpose o f the study to obtain informed consent and 
inform respondents about their rights and benefits without coercion to participate. We will also ensure that our 
interviewers inform the potential respondents about the confidentiality measures put in place to pro tect their 
privacy.  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
19  
11.4 Potential benefits of the proposed research to the subjects and others  
While there are no direct benefits to the participants for their involvement in this study; t he information obtained 
from this study will be used to inform refinement and implementation of pharmacy -located HPV vaccination  
programs ; such interventions are expected to increase coverage of  HPV vaccination rates  and benefit a child’s 
future adult heal th and survival.  
 
11.5 Alternatives to participation  
There are no noted alternatives to participating in this study.  
 
11.6 Study discontinuation  
This study may be discontinued at any t ime by the Protocol Chairs,  regulatory authorities, or the relevant IRB .  
 
12. Study dissemination plan  
Use of Information and Publications  
The PI and research team intend to submit final  findings to  peer-reviewed journal manuscripts and present 
findings at local, national,  and international conferences.  
 
13. Study Limitations and how to minimize them  
With this study being  conducted only in Washington state , the results may not be generalizable to the rest of 
the country. Were the findings of this study to generate further interest in scaling up  of pharmacy -located  HPV 
education and vaccinations , further research would need to be done.   
  
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
20  
14. Study Timeline   
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Senkomago V, Henley SJ, Thomas CC, Mix JM, Markowitz LE, Saraiya M. Human papillomavirus –
attributable cancers —United States, 2012 –2016.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2019;68(33):724 ‐728. 
 
2. Meites  E, Kempe A, Markowitz LE. Use of a 2 ‐dose schedule for human papillomavirus vaccination —
Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.  MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep.  2016;65(49):1405 ‐1408.  
 
3. Walker TY, Elam ‐Evans LD, Yankey D, et al. National, regional, state, and selected local area 
vaccination coverage among adolescents aged 13 –17 years —United States, 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2019;68(33):718 ‐723. 
 
4. The President's Cancer Panel. HPV vaccination for cancer prevention: Progress, opportunities, and a 
renewed call to action. A report to the president of the United States from the chair of the president’s 
cancer panel.  Bethesda,  MD: National Cancer Institute;2018.  
 
5. National Vaccine Advisory Committee. Recomme ndations to Address Low HPV Vaccination Coverage 
Rates in the United States.  June 9, 2015 2015.  
 
6. National Association of Chain Drug Stores. NACDS Community Engagement.  
https://community.nacds.org/ . 
Published 2018. Accessed August 26, 2019.  
 
7. American Pharmacists Association. Immunization Center, Immunization Authority: Pharmacist 
authority to  immunize ‐ by type of immunization  (Webpage). https://www.pharmacist.com/immunization ‐
center . Published  
2019. Accessed August 28, 2019.  
 
8. Goad J, Ba ch A. The role of community pharmacy ‐based vaccination in the USA: current practice and 
future  directions. Integrated Pharmacy Research and Practice. 2015;4:67 ‐77. 

CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
21 9. Goad JA, Taitel MS, Fensterheim LE, Cannon AE. Vaccinations administered during off ‐clinic hours at a 
national  community pharmacy: implications for increasing patient access and convenience. The Annals of 
Family  Medicine. 2013;11(5):429 ‐436. 
 
10. Calo WA, Gilkey MB, Shah P, Marciniak MW, Brewer NT. Parents' willingness to get human 
papillomavirus  vaccination for their adolescent children at a pharmacy.  Preventive Medicine. 
2017;99:251 ‐256. 
 
11. Shah PD, Calo WA, Marciniak MW, Golin CE, Sleath B L, Brewer NT. Service quality and parents' 
willingness to get adolescents HPV vaccine from pharmacists.  Preventive Medicine. 2018;109:106 ‐112. 
 
12. Shah PD, Marciniak MW, Golden SD, Trogdon JG, Golin CE, Brewer NT. Pharmacies versus doctors’ 
offices for adolescent vaccination. Vaccine. 2018;36(24):3453 ‐3459.  
 
13. Shah PD, Calo WA, Marciniak MW, Gilkey MB, Brewer NT. Support for pharmacist ‐provided HPV 
vaccination: National surveys of US physicians and parents.  Cancer  Epidemiology and Prevention 
Biomarkers. 2018;27(8):970 ‐978. 
 
14. Calo WA, Shah PD, Gilkey MB, Vanderpool R, Barden S, Brewer NT. Implementing pharmacy ‐located 
HPV vaccination: Findings from pilot projects in five states.  Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics. 
2019.  
 
15. Bacci JL, Hansen R, Ree C, Reynolds MJ, Stergachis A, Odegard PS. The effects of vaccination 
forecasts and value -based payment on adult immunizations by community pharmacists.  Vaccine. 
2019;37(1):152 ‐159. 
 
16. Whitlock EP, Or leans CT, Pender N, Allan J. Evaluating primary care behavioral counseling 
interventions: an evidence ‐based approach.  American journal of preventive medicine. 2002;22(4):267 ‐284. 
 
17. Shah PD, Calo WA, Gilkey MB, et al.  Questions and concerns about HPV vac cine: A communication 
experiment.  Pediatrics. 2019;143(2):e20181872.  
 
18. Calo WA, Gilkey MB, Leeman J, et al. Coaching primary care clinics for HPV vaccination quality 
improvement: Comparing in ‐person and webinar implementation.  Translational Behavioral M edicine. 
2018;9(1):23 –31. 
 
19. Calo WA, Gilkey MB, Malo TL, Robichaud M, Brewer NT. HPV vaccination messages: An 
environmental scan and content analysis.  In preparation.  
 
20. Atkins L, Francis J, Islam R, et al. A guide to using the Theoretical Domains Fra mework of behaviour 
change to investigate implementation problems.  Implementation Science. 2017;12(1):77.  
 
21. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, et al. Outcomes for implementation research: conceptual 
distinctions,  measurement challenges, and research agenda.  Administration and Policy in Mental Health 
and Mental Health  
Services Research. 2011;38(2):65 ‐76. 
 
22. Gale RC, Wu J, Erhardt T, et al. Comparison of rapid vs in ‐depth qualitative analytic methods from a 
process evaluation of academic deta iling in the Veterans Health Administration.  2019;14(1):11.  
 
23. Stirman SW, Baumann AA, Miller CJ. The FRAME: an expanded framework for reporting adaptations and  
modifications to evidence ‐based interventions. Implementation Science. 2019;14(1):58.  
 
CCSG catchment Area health pilot – PROMOTE Pilot Study  Version 3, 10/27/2022  
22 24. Weiner BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly developed 
implementation  outcome measures.  Implementation Science. 2017;12(1):108.  
 
25. Rowel R, Moore ND, Nowrojee S, Memiah P, Bronner Y. The utility of the environmental scan for 
public health practice: Lessons from an urban program to increase cancer screening . Journal of the 
National Medical Association 2005; 97(4):527 –534. 
 
26. Shah PD, Calo WA, Marciniak MW, Gilkey MB, Brewer NT. Support for pharmacist -provided HPV 
vaccination: National surveys of US physicians and parents . Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention 
Biomarkers 2018; 27(8):970 -978. 
 
27. Shah PD, Marciniak MW, Golden SD, Trogdon JG, Golin CE, Brewer NT. Pharmacies versus doctors’ 
offices for adolesc ent vaccination . Vaccine 2018; 36(24):3453 -3459.  
 
28. Calo WA, Shah PD, Gilkey MB, Vanderpool R, Barden S, Brewer NT. Implementing pharmacy -located 
HPV vaccination: Findings from pilot projects in five states.  Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics 
2019.  
 
29. Bacci JL, Coley KC, McGrath K, Abraham O, Adams AJ, McGivney MS. Strategies to facilitate the 
implementation of collaborative practice agreements in chain community pharmacies . Journal of the 
American Pharmacists Association 2016; 56(3):257 -265.e252.  
 
30. Bacci JL, Bigham KA, Dillon ‐Sumner L, Ferreri S, Frail CK, Hamada CY, et al. Community pharmacist 
patient care services: A systematic review of approaches used for implementation and evaluation . 
Journal of the American College of Clinical Pharmacy 2019; 2 (4):423 -432. 
 
31. Lyon AR, Munson S, Atkins D, Pullmann M, Friedman E, Areán P. Human -centered design to improve 
implementation of evidence -based psychotherapies in low -resource communities: UW ALACRITY 
Center Methods Core protocol . Journal of Medical Inte rnet Research In press.  
 
 
 