Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 1 of 19 
 
 Merz North America, Inc  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Evaluation of Pain with Belotero® Balance with Integral Lidocaine 
for Correction of the Nasolabial Folds  
Device Pre -Market  
M930021001  
 
Final Version  1.0 
Date: 25-JAN-2018 
Author: Biostat istician  
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  
The contents of this document are confidential and proprietary to Merz North America, Inc.  
Unauthorized use, disclosure or reproduction is strictly prohibi ted. This document or parts thereof may not be 
disclosed to parties not associated with the clinic al investigation without the prior written consent of Merz 
North America, Inc . 
 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 5 of 19 
 
 1 LIST OF ABBREVIATION S 
AE Adverse event 
ATC  Anatomic al therapeutic  chemical  
BDRM  Blinded Data Review Meeting  
CI Confidence interval 
CTR  Common treatment site response  
  
FAS Full analysis set  
 
LOCF  Last observation carried forward  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
NLF  Nasolabial folds 
OC Observed cases  
PPS Per protocol set  
SAE  Serious adverse e vent 
SD Standard deviation 
SES Safety evaluation set  
TEAE  Treatment emergent adverse event  
TFL Tables / figures / listings  
VAS  Visual analog scale  
WHO  World health organization 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 6 of 19 
 
 2 GENERAL AND TECHNICA L ASPECTS  
The objective of this statistical analysis plan is to specify the statistical analyses in more detail 
than stated in the clinical study protocol and to be precise enough to serve as a guide line for 
statistical programming and creation of tables, figures and listings (TFLs) . 
This statistical analy sis plan is based on the clinical study protocol, dated 24-Jul-2017. 
All programs will be  written using SAS version 9.3 or higher for generating TFLs.     
3 CLINICAL STUDY DESIGN AND OBJ ECTIVES  
3.1 Clinical Study Design  
This is a 6-week, prospective, randomized,  split-face, double -blind, multicenter, pre -market 
study to demonstrate the effectiveness of Belotero Balance with integral lido caine (Test 
product) for reduction of injection -related pain when compared to Belotero Balance without 
lidocaine (Control produc t) for the correction of NLFs. Approximately 52 subjects will be 
enrolled at approximately 3 investigational sites in the United States; a minimum of 2 0% of 
the enrolled subjects will be Fitzpatrick skin type IV, V, or VI. Subjects from the Fitzpatrick 
skin type IV, V, and VI group will be approximately evenly distributed within the IV, V, and 
VI categories. Subjects enrolled will have right and left NLF ratings of 2 or 3 (i.e., moderate 
or severe) on the Merz NLF Scale , as determined by the blinded evaluat or (The Merz NLF 
Scale is an outcome measure with a 5 -point ordinal rating for the assessment of NLF severity, 
ranging from 0=No Folds to 4=Very Severe Folds ). Both NLFs must have the same rating 
(i.e., symmetrical NLFs) at baseline.  
In this split -face des ign, a single randomization scheme will determine which NLF (subject’s 
right or left) will be assigned to Test product or Control product and which NLF (subj ect’s 
right or left) will be injected first. The treating investigator, the Merz NLF Scale ev aluato r, 
and the subject will be blinded to which NLF is randomized to Test and which NLF is 
randomized to Control.  
Study subjects will receive treatment with Belotero Balance with integral lidocaine in one 
NLF (Test) and Belotero Balance without lidocaine in the contralateral NLF (Con trol) on Day 
1. All s ubjects without ongoing , treatment -related, investigator -reported AEs  will be eligible 
for a n optional touch -up treatment, at the investigator’s discretion and to achieve optimal 
correction, at Week 2. Each tre atment session will consist of multiple mid - to deep -dermal 
injections of 0.1 to 0.2 milliliters ( mL) Belotero Balance with and without lidocaine (up to a 
maximum of 3 m L per NLF over the two treatment sessions) into the left or right NLF 
according to the randomization assignment and the instructions for use . Subjects will be 
evaluated at screening/ enrollment, by phone at 72 hours after treatment, at Week 2  (optional 
touch- up treatment) and Week 6 (end of study) . If subjects report a safety concern at the 7 2-
hour phone call, an unscheduled visit will be arranged  to address safety concerns. Of the 52 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 7 of 19 
 
 estimated subjects enrolled, each NLF will be analyzed as a separate unit of measure (i.e., 
either Test or Control NLF)  for the primary and secondary efficacy en dpoints , resulting in 
approximately 104 evaluable NLFs (52 Test, 52 Control). Pain levels will be compared 
between the Test NLF and Control NLF using a 10 -cm VAS. Pain assessments will be 
evaluated at time zero (i.e., time the last injection needle is remo ved from each NLF, 
separately, after a full correction) .  
Standard safety endpoints, including the incidence and nature of device - and/or injection -
related AEs and SAEs observed during the study  will be  assessed. Furthermore, several pre -
defined common treatment site responses (CTRs) will be evaluated via subject diaries.  
Figure 1 illustrates the visit schedule associated with the split -face design.  
Figure 1: Study design  
 
NLFs: Nasolabial folds; N: sample size; V: Visit; W k: Week; R: Randomization; HR: hour  
Schedule of assessments is summarized in the following table:  
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 9 of 19 
 
 3.2 Clinical Study Objectives  
3.2.1  Effectiveness  
The primary objective of the study is to demonstrate the effectivene ss of Belotero Balance 
with lidocaine (Test product) for the reduction of injection -related pain in comparison to 
Belotero Balance without lidocaine (Control product) for the correction of NLFs.  
3.2.2  Safety  
The safety objective s include the identification and d escription of device - and/or injection -
related adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs)  as well as assessment of 
common treatment site responses (CTRs)  during the course of the study. 
4 DETERMINATION OF SAM PLE SIZE  
Sample size calculation was p erformed using the nQuery+nterim version 4.0 statistical 
software. Based on a review of comparable clinical literature  ([2-8]), it is assumed for this 
power calculation that a change of 3.8 cm on a 10 -cm VAS represents a clinically meaningful 
difference in  pain as experienced between lidocaine -treated and non -lidocaine- treated NLFs. 
Assuming a statistical power, 1 –β of 95%, a one -sided level of significance of α = 0.025, and 
a conservative estimate of standard deviation of difference of 7, a total of 47 subj ects will be 
required to be enrolled into the trial . In order to  accommodate likelihood of potential subject 
dropout after randomization and prior to treatment (up to 10% attrition), a total of 52 su bjects 
will be enrolled, yielding approximately 104 total NLFs (52 Test and 52 Control). 
Additionally, a minimum of 20% of the enrolled total sample size will consist of subjects in 
the Fitzpatrick Skin Types IV, V, or VI group.  Subjects from the Fitzpatrick skin type IV, V, 
and VI group will be approximately evenly distributed within the IV, V, and VI categori es. 
5 ANALYSIS SET S 
The following analysis sets will be define d for the statistical analysis of this clinical study : 
Safety Evaluation Set (SES)  
The Safety Evaluation Set (SES) will comprise subjects who are enrolled i nto the study, 
randomized, and receive an injection. 
Full Analysis Set (FAS)  
The Full Analysis Set ( FAS) will consist of all randomized subjects and will be analyzed as 
randomized. This will be the primary population used for the efficacy analyses. . 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 15 of 19 
 
 Number and percentage of subjects with CTR, as well as the number of continuous CTR 
episodes, will be summarized by treatment and maximum severity as well as by treatment and 
maximum duration. Duration will be classified as 1 -3 days, 4 -7 days, 8 -14 days 15 -30 days 
and > 30 days. 
7.3 Other Variables  
Subject disposition, demographic characteristics and baseline characteristics will be presented 
using standard descriptive statistics  for c ontinuous variables (i.e. n , mean, SD, median, 
minimum, and maximum) and for q ualitative variables  (absolute and percent frequencies ( i.e. 
n, % ). Demographic and b aseline characteristics will be summarized for the SES, the FAS, 
and the PPS.  
Prior and concomitant treatments as well as non -pharmacological concomitant procedures 
will be listed. Prior and concomitant medications will be coded using WHO Drug  Dictionary 
version Sept 2016 B2. 
Frequencies of concomitant medications will be given based on different ATC code levels as 
well as by generic name for  the SES. Indications for concomitant procedures  will be coded 
and only listed. Medications will be considered prior of they have a stopping date that is prior 
to the first study injection. Medications that are ongoing or have stopped on or after the date 
of the first study injection will be considered concomitant.  
Medical history and concomitant diseases will be summarized based on MedDRA (version 
20.0) system organ class and preferred term levels for the SES.  Medical history is defined as 
conditions that have a stopping date that is prior to the first study injection. Concomita nt 
diseases are defined as conditions that are ongoing or have stopped on or after the date of the 
first study injection.  
7.4 Special Statistical/Analytical Issues  
7.4.1  Discontinuations and Missing Data  
Imputation of effectiveness data  
Observed Cases (OC)  
• For the OC method, there will be no missing value imputations conducted. All  
effectiveness data will be analyzed as observed data.   
Last Observation Carried Forward ( LOCF ) 
• For the LOCF,  in the analysis of the secondary effectiveness variable the subjects who 
have a missing score on the  Merz NLF scale at We ek 6 will have their latest available 
assessment (from the early discontinuation or unscheduled visit if available; failing 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 16 of 19 
 
 that, from the baseline visit) carried forward and imputed into  the missing Week 6 
assessment.   
Imputation of safety data  
For partial or complete ly missing start date of adverse events , the following imputation rules 
related to any treatment period will be  used if applicable:  
• If only the day is missing for any date used in a calculation, the 1st will be used to 
replace the missing day.   If the new estimated date falls before the date of first dose, 
while the known month and year match the month and year of the first dose, the date 
of first dose will be used as the new estimated date.   
• If the day and the month are missing, no estimation will be performed.   However, if 
the year of onset is the same or greater than the year of the first dose date, the AEs wil l 
be considered treatment emergent and included in the summary tables. 
• AEs with completely missing onset dates wi ll be considered treatment emergent; no 
estimation of the dates will be performed.  
 
Duration of CTRs would be computed using the following logic: 
• Each subject is expected to have diary entries from Day 1 (day of the initial injection ) 
up to and including Day 42 or the day of their completion/discontinuation, whichever 
comes first. If any subject does not have a diary entry for any of the required days, 
then for the purposes of CTR analysis it will be assumed that on the missing days the y 
had all those CTRs (if any) that they had on the day before or on the day after the 
missing day, with the same severity. 
• For any CTR with an uninterrupted single episode event, the duration will be 
computed as the days from the beginning of event to last date of event. 
• For a ny CTR with multiple episodes, the CTR will be regarded as a continuous event 
if the date between paired episodes is not more than 1 day apart. 
• For any CTR with multiple episodes, the CTR will not be regarded as a continuous 
event if the date between paired episodes is at least 2 days apart. In such instances, the 
duration with the longest duration will be used for that particular CTR. 
• For any CTR with multiple continuous and not continuous events, the logic as 
aforementioned will be adopted, in which case the maximum of all CTR durations will 
be selected as the CTR duration to be used for summary purposes. 
7.4.2  Interim Analyses  
Not applicable. 
7.4.3  Data Monitoring Committee  
Not applicable 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 17 of 19 
 
 7.4.4  Multiple Comparisons/Multiplicity  
Not applicable 
7.4.5  Examination of Subgroups  
Not a pplicable 
8 CHANGES IN THE PLANN ED ANALYSES  
The original  protocol (Version 1.0, dated 26APR2017 ) specified that “In the event of 
occurrence of missing primary effectiveness data on any of the NLFs, the multiple i mputation 
(MI) will be used for imputation of missing data”. However, by the definition of the FAS, 
there will not be any missing primary effectiveness data in the FAS. As a result,  no 
imputation  for missing data will be possible. 
The secondary effectiveness variable will now be analyzed both with and  without imputation . 
The post -baseline Last Observation Carried Forward ( LOCF ) imputation will thus be used for 
imputation of missing values. 
 
9 REFERENCES  
1. Study protocol: Evaluation of Pain with Belotero® Balance with Integral Lidocaine  
for Correction of th e Nasolabial Folds , dated 24- JUL-2017. 
2. Grunebaum LD, Elsaie ML, Kaufman J. Six -month, double-blind, randomized, s plit-
face study to compare the efficacy and safety of calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA) 
mixed with lidocaine and CaHA alone for correction of nasolabial fold w rinkles.  
Dermatol Surg . 2010; 36(supp 1):760-765. 
3. Marmur E, Green L, Busso M. Controlled, randomized study of pain levels in subject s 
treated with calcium hydroxylapatite premixed with lidocaine for correction of 
nasolabial folds. Dermatol Surg . 2010; 36(3):309-15. 
4. Weinkle S. Efficacy and tolerability of admixing 0.3% lidocaine with Dermicol -P35 
27G for the treatment of nasolabial folds. Dermatol Surg . 2010; 36(3):316-320. 
5. Schachter D, Bertucci V, Solish N. Calcium hydroxylapatite with integ ral lidocaine 
provides improved pain control for the correction of nasolabial folds. J Drugs 
Dermatol . 2016; 15(8):1005-1010. 
6. Weiss R, B ank D , Brandt F. Randomized, double-blind, s plit-face study of small-gel-
particle hyaluronic a cid with and without lidocaine during c orrection of nasolabial 
folds. Dermatol Surg . 2010; 36(suppl 1): 750- 759. 
Merz North America, Inc   M930021001 SAP  
                           Final  Version 1.0, 25JAN2018 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 18 of 19 
 
 7. Hedén  P, Fagrell D, Jernbeck J, Rylander R, S amuelson U, S ellman G, S tark B. 
Injection of stabilized hyaluronic a cid-based gel of non-a nimal origin for the 
correction of  nasolabial folds: Comparison with and without lidocaine. Dermatol Surg . 
2010; 36(suppl 1): 775-781. 
8. Brandt F, Bank D, Cross SL, Weiss R.  A lidocaine -containing formulation of large -gel 
particle hyaluronic acid alleviates pain. Dermatol Surg . 2010; 36 (suppl 3):1876-1885. 