Clinical Study Protocol 
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
PONENTE: A Multicenter, Open -label, Phase 3b Efficacy and Safety Study 
of Benralizumab 30 mg Administered Subcutaneously to Reduce Oral 
Corticosteroid Use in Adult Patients with Severe Eosinophilic Asthma on 
High -Dose Inhaled Corticosteroid plus Long- acting β 2Agonist and Chronic 
Oral Corticosteroid Therapy
Sponsor:
AstraZeneca AB, S -151 85 Södertälje, Sweden
EudraCT Number: 2018 -000170 -30
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
2(157)VERSION HISTORY
Version 4.0, 17 October 2020
This amendment includes the addit ion of a long -term fo llow-up visit 12 to 18 months after 
end of PONENTE treatm ent peri od where we will retrospectively collect data to understand 
changes in OCS dose and other background asthma therapy , and occurrence of asthma 
exacerbations under real -world condi tions. We will also evaluate the recovery  from adrenal 
insuffici ency (AI) and the l ong-term impact of OCS reduction achieved during PONENTE 
study  on the gl ucocorti coid toxicit y. Appendix K has been created to describe all details 
related to the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up Visit substudy  and consequently, the 
following sections include a reference to the newly created Appendix K:
CSP Synopsis
Section 1.1 –Background and rationale for conducting this study
Section 1.4 –Study design
Section 2 –Study Objectives
Section 3 –Patient Selections, Enrollment, Restrictions, Di scontinuation, and Withdrawal
Section 5 –Study Assessments
Section 6 –Safety Reporting and Medical Management
Section 7.8 –Concomitant and other treatments
Section 8.2 –Sample size estimate
Section 8.3 –Safety analysis set
Section 8.4 –Outcome measures for analyses
Section 8.5 –Methods for statistical analyses
CSP Synopsis: Added synopsis o f the Ponente long term fo llow up substudy .
CSP Synopsis: In the Primary  object ive regarding a ≥90%, ≥75%, and ≥50% reduction, added > 
0% reduction.
List of Abbreviations and Definition of Terms: Added abbreviat ions for coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID -19),, and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP).
Figure 1: Updated to include the long term fo llow up visi t 12-to 18 -months after end of 
PONENTE treatment per iod. Rem oved text regarding fixed -visits only related to 
benralizumab dosing; as this may be confusing in context of the long term fo llow up 
substudy .
Section 2.1 Primary objective: In the Primary objective regarding a ≥90%, ≥75%, and ≥50% 
reduction, adde d > 0% reduction.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
3(157)Section 4 -Study plan and timing of procedures:
Added new subsect ion, 4.4 PONENTE Long Term Follow  Up Substudy, to describe 
the addi tion of  an long term  follow up peri od to the PONENTE study , high -level 
objectives, and to refer to new Appendix K for details.
Added new subsect ion, 4.5 Study Conduct Mitigation During Study Disruptions Due 
to Cases of Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public Health Crisis . The impact of 
COVID -19 has highlighted the risk to continuit y of clinical tri als during times of 
study  disrupt ion, whether by civil crisis, natural disaster or public healt h crisis. This 
section details the measures that may be implemented if a participa nt is not able to 
visit a study  site to ensure that the clinical trial can continue whilst minimizing risk to 
the participant, maintaining co mpliance with GCP, and minimizing risks to study  
integrity. These changes will only  be ini tiated at a time of study disrupti on.   
Section 6.3.1 –Hy’s Law :Added clarificat ion that any potential Hy’s Law case should be 
reported as SAE promptly (even before all other possible causes of liver injury have been 
excluded). This was added after direct feedback from a regul atory  authori ty/ethics committee
Section 8.1 –Statistical considerations: Added clarificat ion that there will be a second and 
separate SAP for the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  
Section 8.5.3 –Analysis of safety outcomes: Corrected informat ion regarding spaghetti plots 
will be for patients with Partial AI (not indeterminate results).  
Section 11 –List of References: Added new reference to GINA 2020 - this is the current 
GINA report at the start of the long term fo llow up substudy . Previ ous ref erence to GINA 
2018 will remain, as this was the version when the enro llment phase of the main study was 
active.
Appendix D – Actions Required in Cases of Increases in Liver Biochemistry and Evaluation 
of Hy’s Law :In Subsect ion 4.2 – potential Hy’s Law cr iteria met, added cl arificat ion that any  
potenti al Hy’s Law case should be reported as SAE promptly (even before all other possible 
causes o f liver injury have been excluded). This was added after direct feedback from a 
regul atory  authori ty/ethics commi ttee
Appendix K: added new appendix –PONENTE Long Term Follow  Up Visit Substudy to 
include details of the Long Term Fo llow Up visit. At this visit we will retrospectively  collect 
changes in OCS dose and other background asthma as well as occurrence of asthm a 
exacerbations since the PONENTE fo llow-up visit . In addit ion, we will assess recovery  from 
AI in those patients who had partial or complete AI at the end of PONENTE study , and we 
will also assess the long term impact of the OCS dose reduction on glucocor ticoid toxicit y by 
means of GTI. Eligible patients who consent to have a Long Term Fo llow Up visit will be 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
4(157)treated according to standard practice; any changes to the maintenance asthma regimen are 
allowed, including further reductions of OCS as recommended in the GINA report. Consent 
for PONENTE Long Term Follow Up can be obtained at any  time from the EOT visit to 
before the Long Term Fo llow Up visi t. 
Appendix L: new appendix, Changes Related to Mitigation of Study Disruptions Due to Cases 
of Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public Health Crisis . The impact of COVID -19 has 
highlighted the risk to continuit y of clinical trials during times of study  disrupt ion, whether by 
civil crisis, natural disaster or public healt h crisis. This sect ion details the measu res that m ay 
be implemented if a part icipant is not able to visit a study  site to ensure that the clinical trial 
can cont inue whilst minimizing risk to the participant, maintaining compliance with GCP, and 
minimiz ing ri sks to study  integrity. These changes will only be init iated at a time of study  
disrupt ion.   
Whole document:
Deleted mention of the supplemental protocol, as this mention has been replaced with the 
addition of the long term follow up substudy
Formatting, grammatical and minor editorial changes have been made throughout the 
document. In addition, changes have been made to section heading numbers and table cross 
references, where necessary, due to amendments detailed in this document.
Version 3.0, 06 November 2019
CSP Synopsis –Study De sign: Clarified the differences between the morning cortisol test 
and ACTH stimulat ion test, both used to evaluate HPA integrit y. Clarified that the m orning 
cortisol test is used to ident ify pat ients with norm al corti sol levels or complete AI only; for 
indeterminate resul ts, pati ents m ust undergo m ore specific testing via the ACTH st imulation 
test.
CSP Synopsis –Study Design: updated termino logy to cl arify that for patients with cortisol 
levels below normal range and above the Co mplete AI range, “indeterm inate results” 
replaced “Partial AI” in the case o f morning corti sol tests; “Parti al AI” is only  used in the 
case of ACTH stimulat ion tests. The term “intermediate” is removed throughout.
CSP Synopsis –Study Design: Added an addit ional morning cortisol  test (and if required, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS Reduction phase, for 
patients who have Partial AI after the repeat morning cortisol test.
CSP Synopsis – Study Design Maintenance Phase: Added a final morning co rtisol test (and 
if required, ACTH stimulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS 
Maintenance phase, for patients who have Co mplete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS 
Reduction phase.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
5(157)CSP Synopsis: Added recommendat ion for pati ents w ho have Co mplete AI or Partial AI at 
the end of the Maintenance phase to be fo llowed-up by  an endocrinol ogist or other 
appropriate specialist, per Invest igator discret ion.
CSP Synopsis: All reference to the sputum substudy has been deleted. The sub- study  was 
terminated due to low enro llment rate. Sputum samples already co llected at the time o f this 
amendment will not be analyzed, and will be destroy ed.
CSP Synopsis –Exploratory Objective: Removed ment ion of sputum -related outcom e 
measures fro m table list ing expl oratory  objectives
CSP Synopsis –Statistical Methods: Added information that a database lock and analysis o f 
all relevant data collected through end of OCS reduction phase may be performed after all 
patients have co mpleted the OCS reduction phase Rep laced “way o f diagnosi s,” wi th 
“method of diagnosis.”
Table of Contents: Updated all sect ions and page numbers to reflect new subsect ion(s)
Section 1.2 –Rationale for study design, doses, and control groups: Added ment ion of a 
supplemental  protocol , which may be conducted to evaluate additional safet y endpo ints.
Section 1.4.3 –OCS Reduction phase (Week 4 onwards): Added clarifications on the 
differences between the morning cortiso l test and ACTH st imulat ion test, both used to 
evaluate HPA integrit y. Clarified that the m orning corti sol test is used only to ident ify 
patients wi th norm al cortisol  levels or com plete AI only; for indeterminate results, patients 
must undergo more specific testing via the ACTH stimulat ion test.
Section 1.4.3 –OCS Reduction ph ase (Week 4 onwards): Updated termino logy to clarify  
cortisol levels fro m mo rning corti sol test vs fro m ACTH st imulat ion test: for patients with 
cortisol levels below normal range and above the Complete AI range, “indeterminate results” 
replaced “Partial AI” in the case o f morning corti sol tests; “Parti al AI” is only  used in the 
case of ACTH stimulat ion tests. The term  “intermedi ate” i s rem oved throughout.
Section 1.4.3 –OCS Reduction phase (Week 4 onwards): Added an addi tional m orning 
cortisol test (and if required, ACTH stimulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of 
the OCS Reduction phase, for patients who have Partial AI after the repeat morning cortiso l 
test.
Section 1.4.4 –Maintenance Phase: Added a final morning cortiso l test (and if re quired, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS Maintenance phase, 
for pati ents who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS Reduct ion phase.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
6(157)Section 1.4.5 – Premature Discontinuation and Follow- Up Contact: Added recommendat ion 
for pati ents who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the Maintenance phase to be 
followed-up by  an endocrino logist or other appropri ate speci alist.
Section 1.4.6 –Sputum Sampling for Exploratory Biomarkers: made this sect ion not 
applicable due to protocol amendment. 
Figure 1: Added Footnote ‘7,’ to describe the additional fo llow-up recommended for patients 
who have Co mplete AI or Partial AI at the end of the Maintenance phase
Section 2.4 –Exploratory Objectives: Removed ment ion ofsputum -related outcom e 
measures fro m table
Section 3.1 –Inclusion criteria: For inclusio n criterion #3, the text was updated to clarify  
that onemethod of highly effect ive form of birth control  must be used, and trade names were 
removed, based on feedbac k from prior regul atory  submissi ons.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: -For exclusio n criterion #19, the following wording : 
Influence the findings of the study or the interpretation was replaced with: Confound the 
study result; or w ould impact the scientific validity of the data outcome, based on feedback 
from prior regul atory  submissio ns.
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures –Table 1 :Sputum induct ion row and 
Footnote 'n' updated to note that the sputum study  is no longer applicable du e to protocol 
amendment.
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 :Footnote ‘q’ updated to remove 
sputum  collect ion. 
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 :In the Morning cortiso l testing 
row, an addit ional test was added to the “Maintenance Phase benralizumab visit” and “EOT 
visit” co lumns. Footnote ‘r’ was added.
Section 4.2.1 –Induction phase: Deleted menti on of  baseline sputum  sample collection
Section 4.2.2 –OCS Reduction Phase: Added clarificat ions on the d ifferences between the 
morning corti sol test and ACTH st imulat ion test, both used to evaluate HPA integrit y. 
Clarified that the m orning corti sol test is used to ident ify pat ients with norm al cortisol  levels 
or com plete AI only; for indeterminate results, pat ients must undergo more specific testing 
via the ACTH stimulat ion test.
Section 4.2.2 –OCS Reduction Phase: Updated termino logy to cl arify cortisol  levels fro m 
morning corti sol test vs from ACTH st imulation test: for patients with cortiso l levels below
norm al range and above the Complete AI range, “indeterminate results” replaced “Partial 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
7(157)AI” in the case o f morning corti sol tests; “Partial AI” is only used in the case of ACTH 
stimulat ion tests. The term “intermediate” is removed throughout.
Section 4.2 .2 –OCS Reduction Phase: Added an addi tional morning corti sol test (and if 
requi red, ACTH stimulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS Reduction 
phase, for patients who have Partial AI after the repeat morning cortiso l test.
Section 4 .2.3 – Maintenance phase: Added a final morning cortiso l test (and if required, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS Maintenance phase, 
for pati ents who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS Reduct ion phase.
Section 4.3 –Follow -up period: Added recommendation for patients who have Co mplete AI 
or Parti al AI at the end of the Maintenance phase to be followed -up by an endocrino logist or 
other appropriate specialist.
Section 5.1.2 –OCS dose titration: Added clari ficati ons on the differences between the 
morning corti sol test and ACTH st imulat ion test, both used to evaluate HPA integrit y. 
Clarified that the m orning corti sol test is used to ident ify pat ients with norm al cortisol  levels 
or com plete AI only; for inde terminate resul ts, patients m ust undergo m ore specific testing 
via the ACTH stimulat ion test.
Section 5.1.2 –OCS dose titration: Updated termino logy to cl arify cortisol  levels from  
morning corti sol test vs from ACTH st imulation test: for patients with co rtisol levels below 
norm al range and above the Complete AI range, “indeterminate results” replaced “Partial 
AI” in the case o f morning corti sol tests; “Partial AI” is only used in the case of ACTH 
stimulat ion tests. The term “intermediate” is removed throu ghout.
Section 5.2.1 –HPA axis evaluation: Added clarifications on the differences between the 
morning corti sol test and ACTH st imulat ion test, both used to evaluate HPA integrit y. 
Clarified that the m orning corti sol test is used to ident ify pat ients with norm al cortisol  levels 
or com plete AI only; for indeterminate results, patients must undergo more specific testing 
via the ACTH stimulat ion test.
Section 5.2.1 –HPA axis evaluation: Updated termino logy to cl arify cortisol  levels fro m 
morning corti sol test vs from ACTH st imulation test: for patients with cortiso l levels below 
norm al range and above the Complete AI range, “indeterminate results” replaced “Partial 
AI” in the case o f morning corti sol tests; “Partial AI” is only used in the case of ACTH 
stimulation tests. The term “intermediate” is removed throughout.
Figure 2 –HPA axis evaluation: Footnote was updated to also reflect the addit ional HPA -
axis assessments.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
8(157)5.2.1.1 -Morning cortisol test (done at “OCS ≤ 5mg/day [morning cortisol]” visit): Added 
additional assessments to be conducted at the end of the OCS Reduction phase and OCS 
Maintenance phases. Added reco mmendat ion for pati ents wi th Com plete AI or Partial AI at 
the end of the Maintenance phase, to be referred to an endocrino logist or othe r appropri ate 
specialist per Invest igator discretion.
5.2.1.2 –ACTH stimulation test : Added addit ional assessments to be conducted at the end of 
the OCS Reduction phase and OCS Maintenance phases. Added recommendat ion for 
patients wi th Com plete AI or Par tial at the end of the Maintenance phase, to be referred to an 
endocrino logist or other appropriate specialist per Invest igator discretion.
Section 5.2.3 –Sputum collection and biomarkers: Secti on updated to note that the sputum 
substudy  is no longer applicable due to protocol amendment.
Section 5.2.7 –Glucocorticoid toxicity index:   Added clarificat ion that only a subset of the 
domains fro m the com posite GTI will  be assessed in the PONEN TE study .
Section 6.4 –Reporting of serious adverse events: Added new subsect ion, 6.4.1 Regulatory 
Reporting Requirements for SAEs to reflect changes to the AstraZeneca glo bal protocol 
template.
Section 8.4 –Outcome measures for analyses: Under the third Secondary  efficacy Outcom e 
variable, added “init ial morning corti sol test,” as an addit ional timepo int for reporting ACQ -
6 scores.
Section 8.5.1 –Analysis of the primary variables: Added that patients who do not achieve 
100% reduction in their dail y OCS dose, the reason for no further reduction will be listed
Section 8.5.2.2 –ACQ -6:Added clarificat ion to timepo int at whi ch OCS dose equal s 5mg.
Section 8.5.3 –Analysis of safety outcomes: Added the fo llowing, “Spaghetti  plots m ay be 
produced for p atients with indeterminate AI throughout the OCS reduction phase, showing 
cortisol levels over time.”
Section 8.5.4 –Subgroup analysis: Updated the baseline OCS subgroups to the fo llowing 3 
categori es: Pati ents wi th baseline OCS dose >10 mg/day , >5 m g/day to ≤10 mg/day, and 5 
mg/day
Section 8.5.4 –Subgroup analysis: Updated the baseline serum eosinophil count subgroups 
as in to the fo llowing 3 categori es: Pati ents wi th baseline blood eosinophil count:
- <150/µL and ≥150/µL; 
- <300/µL and ≥300/µL; and 
- <150, ≥150 to <300, and ≥300 cells/ μL
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
9(157)Section 8.5.5 –Interim review  and Analysis: updated section t itle, and added details on the 
additional database l ock which m ay occur after all patients have completed the OCS 
reducti on phase.
Section 8.5.7 –Explo ratory analysis: added the fo llowing: Baseline blood eosinophil counts 
may be further invest igated by summarizing vs. baseline OCS dose and/or by region/country.
Section 8.5.7 –Exploratory analysis: deleted menti on of sputum
Section 11 –List of References: Deleted Bafadhel et all 2012, and Pizzichini et al 1996, 
which related to the sputum study
Appendix D – Actions required in cases of increases in liver biochemistry and evaluation of 
Hy’s Law :Updated text throughout the appendix to reflect ch anges to the AstraZeneca 
global protocol  template, specifically in sect ions 1, 3, 4.2, 5, 6, and 7. A new reference has 
also been added in this appendix.
Version 2.0, 15 January 2019
Title Page: Added EudraCT number. 
CSP Synopsis: Added headers to tables. 
CSP Synopsis –Study design: Added clarificat ion that serum prednisone/predniso lone 
testing is only  for pati ents who were not already  on predniso ne/predniso lone pri or to Vi sit 1
CSP Synopsis –Study Design: Deleted text ‘fro m 3months before screening’ when 
referencing ICS/LABA in order to correct and align with rest of CSP. Text replaced with ‘as 
is defined in Section 3.1 (Inclusio n Cri teria)’.
CSP Synopsis –Induction phase: Clarified the timeframe of the induct ion phase 
CSP Synopsis –Cortisol levels confirm AI: Clarified that repeat cortiso l testing will only 
occur on one occasion.
CSP Synopsis –Maintenance phase: added cl arificati on that if a pat ient experiences an 
exacerbation during the maintenance phase, this perio d will not be extended.
CSP Synopsis –Primary Objectives: Removed “average” from the key  supportive outcome 
measures when describing the daily  OCS dose.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
10(157)CSP Synopsis –Secondary Objective #2: Removed “timepoint at which OCS dose equals 
5mg” from the out come measures.
CSP Synopsis –Safety Objective #2: Removed “severe” when describing asthma 
exacerbation rate.
CSP Synopsis –Duration of Treatment: Removed “Week 0 to Week 4” and clarified that the 
induct ion phase is 4 weeks in duration.
CSP Synopsis –Statistical Methods: Replaced “The proportion and confidence interval o f 
the primary  outcom e measures will be est imated using the Clopper -Pearson formula for 
overall pat ients and for at least the fo llowing prespecified subgroup: baseline OCS dose 
level, ba seline eosinophil count, and duration of chronic OCS dose.  The endpoints will be 
evaluated independent ly.” with “The proportion and 95% confidence interval for each of the 
primary  outcom e measures will  be estimated for all patients in the full analysis se t and for at 
least the fo llowing prespecified subgroups based on: baseline OCS dose level, baseline 
eosinophil count, and duration of chronic OCS dose.  The endpo ints will be evaluated 
independent ly.  All confidence intervals will be estimated using the Cl opper -Pearson exact 
method”. 
CSP Synopsis –Statistical Methods: Text describing the plans for conducting the interim 
review was clarified. The locat ion of where the interim review would be detailed was 
updated from “SAP” to “separate interim review plan ”.  Interim “analysis” was changed to 
interim “review” throughout CSP.
List of Abbreviations &  Definition of Terms: Abbr eviat ions for ACO, ‘COPD’, EGPA, and 
HES added in line wit h Exclusio n 1 update.  
Section 1.1 –Background and rationale for conductin g this study: The fo llowing text was 
removed as this is specific to the US label - “Benralizumab (Fasenra®) is indicated for the 
add-on m aintenance treatm ent of  patients 12 years of age and o lder and with severe 
eosinophilic asthma.”
Section 1.2 –Rationale for study design, doses, and control groups: Clarified the previous 
study  referenced here is the ZONDA study . 
Section 1.4 –Study Design: Added sub -sections to organize this sect ion. Added clarificat ion 
on the duration of each study  period (Enrollment Weeks -2 to Week -1, Induction phase 
Week 0 to Week 3, OCS Reduction phase Week 4 onwards). This change was also 
implemented globally throughout the document.
Section 1.4.1 –Study Design -Enrollment period: Clarified that at Visit 1 (screening visit) 
the serum  prednisone/predniso lone laboratory  test is only  for pati ents swi tching from  other 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
11(157)OCS, and clarified when benralizumab is to be administered. Added text clarifying when the 
screening period may be extended.
Section 1.4.2 –Study Design -Induction phase: Clarified the benralizumab and OCS dosing 
during thi s peri od, and added instruction on how to proceed if an exacerbation occurs during 
this phase.
Section 1.4.3 –Study Design (OCS reduction phase): Added text to clarify benralizumab 
dosing. Added text to clarify that HPA axis integrity will be assessed at the start of the 
reducti on phase (Visit 3, "4 weeks after the first dose of benralizumab and before init iation 
of the OCS reduction") for all pat ients on a baseline OCS dose of 5 mg/da y. Also added text 
to clarify  that the first OCS dose reduction can occur at Visit 3 after the dose of 
benralizumab at the site.
Section 1.4.4 –Maintenance phase: added clarifications to indicate that worsening of asthma 
control  will be determined by the invest igator based on the cortiso l/ACTH stimulat ion 
resul ts, the durati on of  the m aintenance phase and the procedure should a subject experience 
an asthma exacerbat ion (if exacerbat ion, the length of the maintenance phase will not be 
extended and the pati ent will cont inue on 3 doses of benralizumab Q8W).
Figure 1 –Study flow  chart: Updated to cl arify the fo llowing: 
when benralizumab is to be administered
the OCS reduction phase will vary for a variety of factors detailed in the figure
information regarding the IPD visit for patients who discontinue treatment early
Section 1.5.1 –Scientific Committee: The charter details ro les of scient ific co mmit tee also. 
Section 2.1 –Primary Objective: Removed “average” from the key  supportive outcome 
measures when describing the daily  OCS dose.
Section 2.2 –Secondary Objective #2: Removed “timepo int at whi ch OCS dose equal s 5m g” 
from the outcom e measures.
Section 2.3 –Safety objectives: Deleted “severe” from “annualized severe asthma 
exacerbation rate”
Section 3.1–Inclusion criteria: The fo llowing text was added to inclusio n 3 for clarit y -
“[periodic abst inence (e.g. calendar, ovulat ion, symptothermal, post- ovulati on methods), 
declaration of abst inence for the duration of exposure to study drug, and withdraw al are not 
acceptable methods of contraception].” The fo llowing text was updated for clarificat ion: “a 
vasectomized sexual partner, female sterilizat ion by tubal occlusio n, any effect ive 
intrauterine device (e.g copper IUD, levonorgestrel intrauterine syst em), depot i njecti ons or 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
12(157)implanted con tracepti on (e.g. Depo -Provera™, Implanon®), oral  contraceptive, and 
contraceptive patches or vaginal rings (e.g. Evra Patch™, Xulane™, or NuvaRing®).”
Section 3.1 –Inclusion criteria: Inclusio n 5 was updated to clarify  that pati ents m ust have a 
smoking history  of 20 pack y ears or l ess. 
Section 3.1 –Inclusion criteria: Inclusio n 7 was updated to clarify  defini tion of  high -dose 
ICS includes: budesonide/formoterol HFA ≥ 640/18/ per day or equivalent , flut icasone 
propi onate DPI > 500/day  or equivalent, or authorized generics for these products; see 
Appendix E and GINA 2018 guidelines for more recommendations); and that for ICS 
monotherapy  preparati ons, or ICS/LABA co mbination preparatio ns not m entioned in GINA 
(e.g. newer formulat ions), the highest approved maintenance dose in the local label will also 
meet this ICS criterion. Addit ionally , in countri es where the high -dose ICS i s not available 
(e.g. only the medium -dose ICS is available in that country ), the hi ghest approved 
maintenance dose in the local label will also meet this ICS criterion. Inclusi on 7 was al so 
updated to note that ICS can also be given via nebulized so lution for inhalat ion.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Abbrevia tions were included within exclusio n 1 to enhance 
abilit y to search CSP for certain condit ions; and asthm a-COPD overl ap [ACO] was added an 
as example o f clinical important pulmonary  disease other than asthma.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Clarified Ex clusion 8 to indicate that a history  of posi tive 
HIV test (not a baseline HIV test; as baseline HIV test is not a part of study  procedures) is 
also exclusio nary.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Clarified Exclusion 11 that intervent ional clinical trials (not 
all clinical tri als) is an exclusio n.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Updated Exclusion 15 (prior benralizumab in present 
study ) to cl arify that patients may not re -enter the study after completion or premature 
discontinuat ion.
Section 3.2 –Exclu sion Criteria: Added the following new  exclusion criteria to enhance 
patient safety and to better align w ith prior studies: 
19. Any disorder, including, but not limited to, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepatic, renal, 
neurological, musculoskeletal, i nfectious, endocrine, metabolic, hematological, psychiatric, or major 
physical impairment that is not stable in the opinion of the investigator and could:
- Affect the safety of the patient throughout the study
- Influence the findings of the study or the interpretation
- Impede the subject’s ability to complete the entire duration of study.
20. Any clinically  significant abnormal findings in physical examination, medical history, vital 
signs, hematology, clinical chemistry, or urinalysis during the enrollm ent period, which in the opinion 
of the Investigator, may put the patient at risk because of his/her participation in the study, or may 
influence the results of the study, or the patient’s ability to complete entire duration of the study.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
13(157)21.  History of c ancer. Patients who have had basal cell carcinoma, localized squamous cell carcinoma 
of the skin, or in situ carcinoma of the cervix are eligible provided that the patient is in remission and 
curative therapy was completed at least 12 months prior to the d ate informed consent was obtained.
-Patients who have had other malignancies are eligible provided that the patient is in remission and 
curative therapy was completed at least 5 years prior to the date informed consent was obtained
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Added new Exclusion (#22) to allow for an extensio n of 
screening period up to 3 months for other (non -asthma related) disease flare -up or AE/SAE 
which occurs during the screening period and requires temporary  use of systemic 
corticosteroi ds. This extensio n is not allowed when OCS is used for related diseases, such as 
rhinit is or nasal polyposis; in this case, the OCS use is an exclusio n. See Secti on 7.8 Table 6 
for more detail.
Section 3.2 –Exclusion Criteria: Added new Exclusion (#23) to clarify that current night -
shift workers are not allowed into the study .
Section 3.5 –Restrictions: Clarified that SABA rescue medicat ion will be permitted 
throughout the study  and that ICS (not LABA if taken separately) should be wit hheld prior to 
cortisol/ACTH st imulation testing.
Section 3.6 – Discontinuation of study drug and criteria for w ithdra wal: Update was made to 
how a l ost to foll ow-up (LTFU) pati ent will be defined in order to reduce prevalence o f 
LTFU patients. 
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures –Table 1 :Table headers and Footnote ‘k’ 
updated to clarify  Week numbers for the study  periods, and for the PGIC timepoints.
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 : The header for the "OCS </= 
5mg/day" visit was updated wi th text to desi gnate this the "morning cortisol visit."  
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 :Footnote ‘d’ updated to clarify 
calls/visits during OCS reduction period. 
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1:Footnote ‘m’ updated to clarify 
that prednisone testing is only done for patients who switch to prednisone/predniso lone at 
V1.
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 :Footnote ‘n’ updated to clarify 
the timing of sputum sample co llection; and to ment ion that thi s incl udes spirometry
Section 4 –Study Plan and Timing of Procedures -Table 1 :Footnote ‘q’ added to clarify 
additional types of  visits to be cl assified as Unscheduled visits. 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
14(157)Section 4.1 –Enrollment period (header): Text was rem oved as length of screening period 
was listed incorrectly .
Section 4.1.1 –Screening Visit: Clarified in the tit le that the screening visit is Visit 1 and 
starts Week -2. Text was added to clarify prednisone/predniso lone testing and to clarify th at 
for pati ents swi tching to predni sone/predniso lone and who thus require a delay  in the 
laboratory  tests, Vi sit 2 can be done up to 2 weeks after collect ion of laboratory  samples.
Section 4.1.1 –Screening Visit: Text added to clarify  that pati ents exper iencing acute 
upper/l ower respi ratory  infect ion that requires ant ibiotics or antiviral medicat ion during 
screening will be granted an extensio n to the screening period of up to 3 months. 
Section 4.1.1 –Screening Visit: Text was added to clarify that patients experiencing non -
asthma rel ated events requi ring tem porary  increase (bolus/burst) of systemic steroids may be 
granted an extensio n to the screening period of up to 3 months, if approved by the 
AstraZeneca Physician.
Section 4.1.2 –Rescreening: Text added to confirm that rescreening is allowed only once for 
each patient.
Section 4.2.1 –Induction phase: Added clarificat ions regarding t iming of induct ion phase, 
timing of baseline sputum sample collection and that P GIC will co mpleted weekly only  
during the induction phase . 
Section 4.2.2 –OCS reduction phase: Added text to clarify when reduction phase starts, that 
there are 8 weeks between the 3rd and 4th dose of benralizumab, and that HPA axis integrit y 
will be assessed at the start of the reduction phase (Visit 3) for all pat ients on a baseline OCS 
dose of 5 mg/day. Text also added to clarify which ACQ -6 score should be used if baseline 
resul t is missing. 
Section 4.2.3 –Maintenance phase: Text added to clarify the fo llowing:  
that replacement/additional asthma treatment may be prescribed at EOT visit, per
Investigator discretion. 
the duration of the maintenance phase will vary based on when the patient enters the 
maintenance phase, relative to the dosing cycle of benralizumab
the length of the maintenance will not change due to an asthma exacerbation
the registration of completion of treatment will be captured in IWRS/IVRS
Section 4.3 –Follow -up Period: The fo llowing text was added for clarit y -“The fo llow-up 
contact can be done either on -site or vi a telephone contact.”
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
15(157)Section 5.1.2 -OCS dose titrati on:Added text to clarify how to start the init ial OCS 
reducti on if: 1. Tabl e 2 instructs to reduce dose by  5mg increments, but the init ial OCS dose 
is < 5mg to the nearest dosing level, and 2. Table 2 instructs to reduce the init ial dose by 2.5 
mg increme nts, but the init ial dose i s < 2.5 to the next dosing level.
Section 5.1.2 Table 2 –OCS dow n-titration approaches: Table was updated to show the 
correct down -titration method, in line with the OCS down -titration table in the protocol 
Synopsis. Correction is in the co lumn titled 7.5 mg (‘Q4W’ was corrected to ‘Q2W’). 
Corrected text is “2.5 mg Q2W unt il reaching a dose of 7.5 mg/day”. Footnote ‘a’ was 
updated to clarify  that ‘Risk AI’ m eans cortisol  testing confirmed with ACTH stimulat ion 
testing and if co mplete AI, no modificat ion to the OCS dose will occur.
Section 5.2.1.1 –Asthma w orsening or asthma exacerbation preventing OCS down- titration:
Text added to clarify  which ACQ -6 score should be used if baseline result is missing. 
Section 5.2.1 –HPA axis evaluation: Moved the following from sect ion 5.2.1.1 “For the 
morning corti sol test, the last OCS dose should be taken 24 hours prior to testing. 
Addit ionally , pati ents m ust not take ICS (or ICS/LABA if in single inhaler) treatment on the 
morning of the cortiso l testing (for patients taking a once -daily  ICS/LABA form ulation, e.g. 
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol; patients must not take the treatment the night prior or the 
morning o f the cortiso l testing). If a patient requires a short course of ma crolides, ant ivirals, 
or azol es, there must be a window of ≥1 week pri or to the testi ng of cortisol levels (see 
Secti on 7.8).
Section 5.2.1 –HPA axis evaluation: Clarified that details related to values for normal, 
partial and com plete AI for females usi ng oral  estrogen -containing contraceptives or oral 
estrogen -containing hormone replacement therapy  are provi ded in the laboratory  manual . 
Section 5.2.1.1 –Morning cortisol andSection 5.2.1.2 – ACTH stimulation test: Sections 
revised to add further deta il and clarificat ion to both the init ial and repeat cortisol and ACTH 
stimulat ion testing process along with act ions on OCS titration based on results. 
Section 5.2.1 , Figure 2 –HPA axis evaluation: figure footnotes to clarify actions after 
retesting.
Section 5.2.1.2 –ACTH stimulation test: The fo llowing text was removed -“An injection o f 
250µg tetracosactide depot will be given intravenously”. This text was replaced by -“An 
inject ion of the fast -acting ACTH stimulant will be given intravenously”.
Section 5.2.1.2 –ACTH stimulation test: The fo llowing text was added for clarit y: “Please 
refer to the package insert of the product used locally for further guidance on preparation and 
administration”
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
16(157)Section 5.2.1.2 –ACTH stimulation test: The fo llowing text was added: “In the event of any 
issues wit h availabilit y of the product used for the ACTH st imulat ion test, please consult 
with AZ study  physician for further guidance”.
Section 5.2.3 –Management of asthma exacerbations, Maintenance phase: Clarified that the 
length of the maintenance phase will not be extended should the patient experience an 
exacerbation
Section 5.2.4 –Laboratory safety assessments Table 4 :Added glucose to the laboratory 
safet y variables table as this is required for assessmen t of adrenal  insufficiency. Clarified 
text for abso lute leukocy te count i s whi te blood cell  count wi th differenti al.
Section 5.3.2 –Prednisone/prednisolone levels: Text was added to this sect ion to cl arify  the 
prednisone/predniso lone testing is only done for patients who are swi tching to 
prednisone/predniso lone at V1.
Section 5.3.4.1 Patient -reported outcomes (Patient Global Impression of Change 
assessment): The text was corrected to reflect the new PGIC standards. Text was also added 
to clarify  the timi ng of  PGIC collect ion (in line with Table 1 –Study  Plan).  
Section 5.7.3 –Sputum collection and biomarkers: Secti on updated to align timing of sputum 
collect ion in Treatment with text throughout CSP (after approximately 24 weeks of 
benralizumab treatment).
Section 5.7.3 -Sputum collection and biomarkers: Added new subsect ion, "Spi rometry," to 
clarify that spi rometry is included in the sputum induction procedure, is included only  for 
patient safet y during the procedure, and that spirometry  resul ts will  neither be captured nor 
analyzed.
Section 5.7.3 Sputum collection and biomarkers: Added a new subsection, "ord er of 
administration of usual asthma controller medicat ion and investigational product relat ive to 
scheduled spiro metry," to give details on when to dose patient, and also to note that detailed 
sputum  collect ion procedures are in a separate sputum manual.
Section 6.6 Pregnancy: Subsect ion 6.6.2 ‘Paternal exposure’ added alo ng with the fo llowing 
text: “ Pregnancy  of the pati ents’ partners will not be considered an AE. However, the 
outcom e of all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elective terminat ion, ecto pic pregnancy, 
norm al birth or congeni tal abnorm ality) shoul d be fo llowed up and documented for 
conceptions occurring fro m the date of the first administration of study  drug until 16 weeks 
(approximately 5 half -lives) after the last administration of study drug.” 
Section 7.2 –Dose and treatment regimens (Conditions that w ill require rescheduling of study 
drug administration) :“The pat ient, in the opinio n of the Invest igator, is experiencing an acute 
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
17(157)or em erging asthma exacerbat ion” was remo ved as one of t he condit ions requiring study  drug 
rescheduling. 
Section 7.2 –Dose and treatment regimens (Conditions that w ill require rescheduling of study 
drug administration) : The fo llowing text was added to clarify act ion for potential out of 
window dosing -“Every possible effort should be made to bring the patient in wit hin the 
allowed visit window and study  drug shoul d be administered at that visit. If this is not 
possible, the AZ study  physician shoul d be contacted to discuss further.”
Section 7.3 –Management o f study drug- related reactions: Removed “lung funct ion” as an 
example of a pre -assessment as lung funct ion is not a CSP -required assessment.
Section 7.8 –Concomitant and other treatments: Text updated to clarify that informat ion is 
collected in eCRF for t reatments received 3 months prior (versus 6 months prior) and that 
inform ation is collected through fo llow-up peri od. The following text was also added “The as -
needed use of short -acting bronchodilators for relief of acute asthma symptoms is permitted 
throughout the study” and removed table referencing short -acting bronchodilators. 
Section 7.8 –Concomitant and other treatments: Added Table 5 “Medication Restrictions” 
and Table 6 “Prohibited Medicat ions” headers to exist ing tables. 
Section 7.8 Concomitant and other treatments: Deleted table summarizing Rescue usage and 
instead summarized in text at the top of this sect ion. 
Section 7.8 Concomitant and other treatments 
Table 5 : Clarificat ion added regarding withho lding of high -dose ICS for morn ing 
cortisol/ACTH st imulation test. 
Section 7.8 –Concomitant and other treatments Table 6 :updated to define short course of 
marco lides, antivirals, and azole therapies as “ ≤ 2 weeks”. 
Section 7.8 –Concomitant and other treatments Table 6 : Added new ro w with new washout 
periods for marketed respiratory  biologics (as foll ows) and clarified pre- exist ing row is in 
reference to non -respi ratory  marketed bi ologics or any invest igational bio logics.
Any marketed respiratory biologic treatment (eg, omalizumab, m epolizumab, reslizumab, 
benralizumab) is not allowed 4 months or 5 half -lives (whichever is longer) prior to the date informed 
consent is obtained and throughout the entire treatment period.
- For patients who have previously not tolerated or have not resp onded to marketed 
mepolizumab, omalizumab or reslizumab (as assessed by the treating physician), a shorter washout 
period of ≥ 30 day s between the last dose of mepolizumab, omalizumab or reslizumab and the first dose 
of open label Benralizumab (Visit 2), i s allowed. 
- Patients who have previously received benralizumab still require a complete washout prior to 
date of informed consent; those who have not tolerated or have not responded to benralizumab would 
not be a candidate for this study.
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
18(157)Section 7.8 – Concomitant and other treatments Table 6 : Added clarificat ions to 
immunosuppressive medicat ions, to allow short course of OCS for non -asthma rel ated di sease 
flare ups; at any  time during the study  and to indicate that the prohibited period for any  non-
respi ratory  marketed or any  invest igational biologics
Section 8.1 –Statistical considerations: Removed text referencing sputum collection as a 
subgroup.
Section 8.1 –Statistical considerations: Updated text fro m ‘synt hetic control arm’ to ‘external 
data sourc es’ when referring to what will be used to assess certain changes seen in pat ients 
and clarified where it will be described. 
Section 8.2 –Sample size estimate: Provided further clarificat ion regarding the sample size 
estimate in relat ion to the primary  outcom e measure and 95% confidence interval
Section 8.2 –Sample size estimate Table 7 : Updated the values of expected distance between 
observed proportion and confidence limit.
Section 8.4 –Outcome Measures for Analyses: Remo ved “average” fro m the key  supportive 
outcom e variables to the primary  efficacy outcom e vari ables when describing the daily OCS 
dose.
Section 8.4 –Outcome Measures for Analyses: Remo ved “t imepoint at which OCS dose 
equals 5mg” fro m the secondary  efficacy outcom e variables.
Sectio n 8.4 –Outcome Measures for Analyses: Remo ved “severe” when describing asthma 
exacerbation rate in the safet y outcom e variables.
Section 8.5.1 –Analysis of the primary variable: Provi ded further cl arificat ion regarding the 
analysis of the primary  variable using the Clopper -Pearson exact method
Section 8.5.2.1 –Time to 1stOCS increase; section header was renamed; updated to describe 
analysis method for measuring the time to 1stOCS increase
Section 8.5.2.2 –ACQ -6:‘+’ signs added for clarificat ion, to indicate that deterioration is a 
change from baseline in an ACQ -6 score of at least +0.5.
Section 8.5.2.4 –PGIC: The text was corrected to reflect the new PGIC standards, and to 
better align wit hTable 1.
Section 8.5.3 –Analysis of safety outcomes :Removed “severe” when describing how the 
annualized rate of asthma exacerbat ions will be summarized 
Section 8.5.4 –Subgroup analysis: Updated the baseline serum eosinophil count subgroups 
as ≥300/ μL and <300/μL
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
19(157)Section 8.5.5 –Interim analysis: Text describing the plans for conducting the interim review 
was clarified. The location of where the interim review would be detailed was updated fro m 
“SAP” to “separate interim review plan”. Interim “analysis” was changed to interim 
“review” throughout.
Sectio n 10.4 :Text updated to clarify that genetic consent is a separate consent but not 
necessarily a separate form. 
Appendix C –Informed consent: Text updated to clarify that genetic consent is a separate 
consent but not necessarily a separate form.
Append ix E(Estimated daily doses for inhaled corticosteroids): Updated the “inhaled 
corticosteroi d” sect ion of the table to match the current GINA 2018 guidelines. Updated the 
“inhaled corticosteroid in ICS/LABA co mbinat ion” to m atch highest dose per local labe ls of 
major m arkets; GINA 2018 does not specifically  address ICS/LABA com parable doses.
Appendix E (Estimated daily doses for inhaled corticosteroids): Updated in footnotes to 
clarify references, and to add addit ional clarificat ion from GINA 2018 on how t o interpret 
data. Also added clarificat ion that, “t his protocol also allows clinically co mparable doses of 
newer products, including authorized generics. High -dose ICS vi a nebulized sol ution for 
inhalat ion is also allowed. For products not listed in this t able, the highest approved 
maintenance ICS or ICS/LABA dose in the local country  label will meet the protocol -
defined criterion for ‘high -dose ICS.’”
Appendix F -Estimated OCS dose therapy equivalence: Added footnote that for other OCS 
products or doses not listed, to see local label o f OCS product or online calculators.
Appendix G -Prednisone/Prednisolone Doses <5 mg in Relation to Available Tablet 
Strengths: Administered number of tablets to achieve a 3 mg daily dose with 5 mg tablets 
was corrected. M ade corrections to dosing conversio ns throughout, added rows for 0.5mg 
and 1.5m g.
Appendix H –Glucocorticoid Toxicity Index: Added in -text headers to make it clear that 
Appendix H spans several pages.
Adjustments made throughout:
For general administrative purposes (i.e. headers, formatting) and grammatical corrections
To clarify the timeframe of screening and induction phases
To clarify that patients who are already taking prednisone/prednisolone at Visit 1 do not 
require the serum prednisone/prednisolone laboratory test
To clarify that baseline visit is Visit 2
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
20(157)To clarify that repeat morning cortisol testing is done only once
To clarify that for patients who are on a baseline OCS dose of 5 mg/day, HPA axis integrity 
will be assessed after 4 weeks at 5mg/day, at the start of the reduction phase (Visit 3).
To clarify that the duration of the maintenance phase will depend on when the patient enters 
the maintenance phase relative to the dosing cycle of benralizumab.
Created consistency i n the language for sputum (that sputum will be done for a subset of up 
to approximately 100 patients at selected clinical sites).
Added clarification that there are 8 weeks between the 3rd and 4th benralizumab doses
Version 1.0, 12 April 2018
Initial Creat ion
Clinical Study Protocol
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
21(157)This Clinical Study  Protocol  has been subject to a peer review according to AstraZeneca 
Standard procedures.  The Clinical Study  Protocol  is publicly  registered and the results are 
disclosed and/or published according to the AstraZeneca Global Policy  on Bi oethics and in 
compliance wi th prevailing laws and regulat ions.
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
23(157)Induction phase (starting Week 0): Patients who are receiving benralizumab 
treatm ent shoul d rem ain stable on their baseline (Visit 2) OCS dose during this 4 -week 
phase. 
OCS reduction phase (Week 4 onwards): Patients will reduce their dosage of OCS 
according to the schema defined below for each baseline OCS dose until they reach 
5mg/day.
Table A   OCS Titration Schema Until Reaching 5 mg/day 
Baseline OCS dose OCS down -titration schema until reaching 5 mg/day (without worsening of 
asthma)
>20 mg/day Reductions of 5 mg every 1 week until reaching a dose of 20 mg/day; followed 
by reductions of 5 mg every 2 weeks (Q2W) until a dose of 1 0 mg/day is reached; 
followed by reductions of 2.5 mg Q2W until reaching a dose of 7.5 mg/day; and 
then reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching a dose of 5 mg/day 
>10 to ≤20 mg/day Reductions of 5 mg Q2W until reaching a dose of 10 mg/day; followed by 
reductions of 2.5 mg Q2W until reaching a dose of 7.5 mg/day; and then 
reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching a dose of 5 mg/day
>7.5 to ≤10 mg/day Reductions of 2.5 mg Q2W until reaching a dose of 7.5 mg/day followed by 
reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching a dose of 5 mg/day
>5 to ≤7.5 mg/day Reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching a dose of 5 mg/day
For all patients, hy pothal amic -pituitary-adrenal  (HPA) axis integrit y will be evaluated after 4 -
weeks on 5 mg/day and prior to tapering down the OCS dose ( for patients with baseline OCS 
doses equal to 5 mg/day, this will be assessed 4 weeks after the first dose of benralizumab 
administration and before init iation of the OCS reduction phase).  
First, a screening m ethod wi th morning serum  cortisol  is done (8 -9am morning cortisol level), 
to evaluate whether the patient has:
Normal cortisol levels 
Complete adrenal insufficiency (AI)
Corti sol levels fro m the morning corti sol test that are below normal range and above the 
Com plete AI range are considered “Indeterminate;” and require addit ional testing as described 
below.
Secondly, the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulat ion test (i e, Synacthen®, 
Cortrosyn™) is done wit hin approximately 1 week in the subset of patients with indeterminate 
resul ts fromthe morning corti sol test [see al so Secti on5.2.1.2 for details). The ACTH 
stimulat ion test is more specific than the morning cortiso l test, and ca n determine whether the 
patient has:
Normal cortisol levels
Complete AI
Partial AI
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benral izumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
24(157)Depending on the morning cortiso l level resul ts and the presence of cortisol level values 
indicat ing AI, the patient will cont inue per the fo llowing guidance:
-Corti sol level s within normal range:
Patient exhibit s absence of signs and/or symptoms of AI:  continue 
OCS down -titration by 2.5 mg Q4W 
Patient exhibit s signs and/or symptom s of AI:  continue OCS down -
titration at a sl ower pace (1 m g Q4W)
-Corti sol levels are indeterminate: Patient will undergo the ACTH st imulation testing 
(Secti on5.2.1.2 ).  Decisions regarding how to con tinue OCS down -titration will  be
based on the results of the ACTH stimulat ion testi ng (see Table B)
Table B    ACTH Stimulation Testing
ACTH stimulation test results
Normal Partial AI  Complete AI
OCS down -titration Reduction of 2.5 mg 
Q4WReduction of 1 mg Q4W Continue on same 
OCS dose 
Repeat morning cortisol test 
for further OCS down -titrationNo need 2 months later 3 months later (see 
below)
Corti sol levels confirm co mplete AI:  OCS dose will remain the same without further 
reducti on unt il there is evidence of recovery from the co mplete AI.  The test will be 
repeated on one occasion 3 months later, and patients will be educated for symptom 
awareness o f adrenal suppressio n and use of steroid emergency cards
If a patient experiences an exacerbation or an asthma deterioration, OCS dose 
reducti ons shoul d stop.  After recovery  from the fi rst exacerbat ion or asthma 
deteri oration, the pati ent will be allowed to proceed with another attempt to reduce 
OCS dose; however, this must fo llow a l ower speed of OCS down -titration (reductions 
Q4W).  However, in case of a second exacerbat ion or asthma deterioration, no further 
OCS dose reduction will be allowed, a nd the patient will cont inue on the same OCS 
dose or will return to a one -step hi gher dose l evel (or m ore as consi dered necessary  by 
the Invest igator), and the patient will then enter the maintenance phase.  Further details 
are provided in Sect ions 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 . 
At each clinic/phone call visit, in addit ion to the informat ion provi ded by  the pat ient 
on his/her asthma disease, invest igators will have access to the patient’s weekly 
Asthma Control Quest ionnaire 6 (ACQ -6) scores and co mpliance with maintenance 
asthma therapy  (com pleted by  means of an electronic pat ient-reported outcom e device 
[ePRO] to evaluate whether the patient’s condit ion has significant ly deteriorated [ie, 
increase in ACQ -6 score of ≥0.5 from  Visi t 2, ie, before benralizumab administration]) 
and will make the final decisio n to further reduce the OCS dose unt il the patient 
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
25(157)reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day  (or l owest OCS dose possible in case no further 
OCS down -titration is allowed because of the presence of AI as measured by  corti sol 
levels or in case of inadequate asthma control) without losing asthma control . 
Approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to end of the OCS reduction phase, the patients who 
have Partial AI after the repeat morning cortiso l test, will undergo an additional 
morning corti sol test (and if required, ACTH stimulat ion test for indeterminate result) 
at the end of the OCS Reduction phase.
Maintenance phase: This phase will last approximately 24 to 32 weeks from the time 
the pati ent reaches a complete withdrawal o f OCS wi thout worsening of asthma 
control . The m aintenance phase could be init iated earlier if OCS dose reduction fails 
due to clinical deterioration or if the patient does not recover fro m AI. The length of 
the maintenance phase will vary depending on when the patient enters the maintenance 
phase. During this phase, patients will cont inue benral izumab Q8W for 3 doses, and 
then the End of Treatment (EOT) visit will be scheduled 8 weeks (± 7 day s) after the 
last dose of benralizumab. Patients who have Co mplete AI or Partial AI at the end of 
the OCS Reduction phase, will undergo a final morning cort isol test (and if required, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterminate result) approximately 1 -2 weeks prior to end 
of the OCS Maintenance phase. If a patient experiences an exacerbation during the 
maintenance phase, this period will not be extended.
Patients shoul d be m aintained on their current ly prescribed ICS plus LABAs with or without 
other asthm a controller therapy , without change, as i s defined in Section 3.1 (Inclusio n 
Criteria) unt il the EOT visit.
All patients w ho prematurely discontinue study drug/invest igational product or discontinue 
from the study  shoul d return to the study  center and com plete the procedures described for the 
Prem ature Invest igational Product Discont inuat ion (IPD) vi sit within 4 weeks (± 7 days) after 
the last dose of benralizumab.  
For all patients dosed with benralizumab, a fo llow-up contact will be scheduled 12 weeks 
(±7days) after their last dose of benralizumab. Patients who have Partial AI or Complete AI 
at the end of the Maintenance phase shoul d be f ollowed -up by an endocrino logist or other 
appropriate specialist, if deemed necessary  by the Investi gator.
PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Visit Substudy
After complet ion of the EOT visit procedures, eligible patients may  consent to a l ong ter m 
follow up visit that will occur 12 -to 18 -months after complet ion of the main PONENTE 
study . The object ives of this long term fo llow up visit are to retrospectively  collect changes in 
OCS dose and other background asthma therapy  and to further assess rec overy  from AI in a 
real-world setting. Between the EOT visit of the main PONENTE study  and the l ong term  
follow up, pati ents will  be treated according to standard practice; for example, any changes to 
maintenance asthma regimens are allo wed, including furt her reductions of OCS as 
recommended in the GINA report (GINA 2020). 
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
26(157)See Appendix K: for details on eligibilit y for and endpoints of the PONENTE Long Term 
Follow Up Vi sit substudy . 
Objectives and Endpoints
Primary Objective Endpoints/Outcome Variables
To assess the ability to reduce OCS dose 
in adult patients with severe eosinophilic 
asthma treated with benralizumab 30 mg 
SC Primary outcome measures
Patients who achieve 100% reduction in daily OCS 
dose that is sustained over at least 4 weeks without 
worsening of asthma 
Patients who achieve 100% reduction or a daily OCS 
dose ≤5 mg, if reason for no further OCS reduction is 
AI, that is sustained over a t least 4 weeks without 
worsening of asthma
Key supportive outcome measures
Patients who achieve a daily OCS dose of ≤5mg that 
is sustained over at least 4 weeks without worsening 
of asthma
Patients who achieve a ≥90%, ≥75%, ≥50%, and >0% 
reduction in dai ly OCS dose, sustained over at least 
4weeks without worsening of asthma
Change from baseline in daily OCS dose (mg) from 
start of OCS reduction to end of the OCS reduction 
phase
Secondary Objective Outcome Measure
To assess the sustained reduction of daily 
OCS dose while not losing asthma 
control during approximately 6 mont hs 
after the end of OCS down -titration 
(maintenance phase) in adult patients 
with severe eosinophilic asthma treated 
with benralizumab 30 mg SCKey outcome measure
Change in daily OC S dose from the end of OCS 
reduction phase to the end of the maintenance phase 
(EOT visit)
Time to first increase in OCS dose during the 
maintenance phase, after achieving the minimum OCS 
dose during the OCS reduction phase 
To assess the effect of OCS 
down -titration protocol on asthma control 
in adult patients with severe eosinophilic 
asthma treated with benralizumab 30 mg 
SCKey outcome measure
ACQ -6 scores at baseline (Visit 2), Visit 3, end of 
OCS reduction phase, and monthly from end of OCS 
reductio n phase to end of maintenance phase (EOT 
visit)
Change from baseline in ACQ -6 to Visit 3, end of 
OCS reduction phase, and end of maintenance phase 
(EOT visit)
Responder analysis of ACQ -6 scores from Visit 2 
through end of maintenance phase
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
27(157)Secondary Objective Outcome Measure
To assess the e ffect of OCS 
down -titration protocol on quality of life 
in adult patients with severe eosinophilic 
asthma treated with benralizumab 30 mg 
SCKey outcome measure
Change from baseline (Visit 2) in St. George's 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores to the 
end of maintenance phase (EOT visit)
Responder analysis of SGRQ total scores at the end of 
maintenance phase
Safety Objective Outcome Measure
To evaluate the occurrence of AI when 
reducing OCSKey outcome measure
Patients with complete AI 
To assess the effect of OCS 
down -titration protocol on asthma 
exacerbations in adult patients with 
sever e asthma treated with benralizumab 
30mg SCKey outcome measures
Annualized asthma exacerbation rate
Annualized asthma exacerbation rate leading to 
hospitalization or emergency room visit
To assess the safety and tolerability of 
benralizumab in patients who reduce 
their chronic OCS doseAdverse events/Serious adverse events
Laboratory parameters and vital signs
To evaluate corticosteroid toxicity af ter 
OCS reductionGlucocorticoid toxicity index
Exploratory Objective Outcome Measure
To investigate the contribution of 
genomic variants to the study outcomesAssociation of common and rare genomic variants 
with patient responses
To assess early improvements in asthma 
status during the first 4 weeks of 
benralizumab treatment before initiation 
of OCS reductionPatient Global Impression of Change 
To assess the impact of OCS 
down -titration on blood eosinophil levelsKey outcome measure
Change from baseline blood eosinophils
To investigate biomarkers for predicting 
response to benralizumabKey biomarker parameters
Serum samples at baseline for protein biomarkers
Plasma for eosinophil -derived neurotoxin
Target patient population
Male and female patients aged ≥18 y ears wi th diagnosed asthma and requiring cont inuous 
treatm ent wi th high -dose ICS (high- dose ICS at the highest approved dose in a country ) plus 
LABAs for ≥6 months.  Patients must be on chronic treatment with OCS (equival ent to a 
prednisone dose of ≥5 m g/day) for ≥3 m onths pri or to study  entry .  The OCS dose m ust be 
stable for ≥4 weeks prior to study  entry .  Pati ents must have peripheral blood eosinophil 
counts of ≥150 cells/ μL as assessed by a central laboratory  at Visi t 1 or docum ented 
eosinophil count of ≥300 cells/μL in the past 12 months. 
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C0006 5
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
28(157)Duration of treatment
Patients will  start receiving open -label benralizumab at Visit 2 (Week 0) and will enter the 4 
week induct ion phase, where they will remain stable on their base line OCS dose during this 
period.
The OCS reduction phase will start at Visit 3 (Week 4) and will be completed depending on 
the baseline OCS dose, the occurrence of asthma exacerbat ion or asthma worsening, and the 
integrity of the HPA axis (which will guid e the speed of OCS down -titration for pati ents 
taking doses of <5 mg/day ).  After OCS down -titration, pati ents will  cont inue to receive 
treatm ent wi th benralizumab 30 m g Q8W for approximately  24 to 32 weeks (the maintenance 
phase).  The maintenance phase w ill end with an EOT visit conducted 8 weeks after the last 
dose of benralizumab.  A fo llow-up contact will be conducted 12 weeks fo llowing the l ast 
dose of benralizumab.
The total planned study  durati on is flexible and will vary  for each individual pat ient
depending on the factors previously ment ioned.  The expected durati on can range from 
approximately  32weeks (eg, a pati ent wi th a baseline OCS dose of 5 mg) to approximately 
48weeks (eg, a patient with a baseline OCS dose of 40 mg), assuming the patient has 
completely wi thdrawn OCS wi thout the occurrence of an asthma exacerbat ion, com pletes the 
study , and m orning corti sol levels do not indicate risk for AI.
Study drug , dosage, and mode of administration
Benralizumab 30 mg/mL solution for injection in an accessorized prefilled syringe will be 
administered at the study  center SC Q4W up until the third dose of benralizumab and then 
Q8W thereafter 
(8 weeks between the 3rd and 4th benralizumab doses) .
Statistical methods
The study  includes two primary endpoints: 1) Patients who can reduce their daily OCS dose 
by 100% and 2) Patients who can reduce their daily OCS dose by 100% or reduce to a dose 
≤5mg if the reason for no further OCS reduction is AI; both endpo ints to be sustained over at 
least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma.  The proportion and 95% confidence interval for 
each of the primary outcome measures will be est imated for all pat ients in the full analysis set 
and for at least the fo llowing prespeci fied subgroups based on: baseline OCS dose level, 
baseline eosinophil count, and duration of chronic OCS dose.  The endpo ints will be evaluated 
independent ly.  All confidence intervals will be estimated using the Clopper -Pearson exact 
method. 
The full ana lysis set, which will include all pat ients who receive any  dose of benralizumab, is 
defined based on an intent ion-to-treat approach.  All efficacy and safet y analyses will be 
analyzed using the full analysis set.  
The changes in OCS daily  dose, ACQ -6 scor es, and SGRQ scores will be summarized in 
descript ive statistics. Asthma control and SGRQ responders will be summarized in count and 
percentage.
Clinical Study Protocol Synopsis
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
29(157)As thi s study  is primarily descript ive in nature, no statist ical multiplicit y adjustment will be 
made over diff erent endpoints or subgroups.  
As the study  does not include any  predefined confirm atory  tests, the sam ple size is based on 
the abilit y to provi de sufficient precisio n in po int estimates.  The primary outcome, the 
observed proportion of pat ients who succe ssfully  down -titrated thei r doses, i s expected to be 
equal  to or greater than 50%.  A total sample size of 600 patients is expected to provide 95% 
confidence intervals for a single proportion extending approximately 4.1% from the point 
estimate of a 50% success rate.
One interim review may be performed after approximately 90 -100 pat ients have completed (or 
have had the opportunity  to com plete) thei r OCS down -titration; further details will be 
described in a separate interim review plan.
An addit ional databa se lock and analysis of all relevant data collected through the end of the 
OCS reducti on phase, m ay be perf ormed after the final patient has had the opportunit y to 
complete the OCS reduction phase. The purpose of this analysis is to generate a sub -set of  the 
pre-planned analysis outputs of all relevant data for all pat ients up to the end of the OCS 
reducti on phase. Further details will be outlined in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  The 
number and percentage of patients diagnosed with AI will be tabula ted overall  and by  the 
method of diagnosis.
The PONENTE long term fo llow up visi t substudy is designed to understand the clinical 
management of OCS and other background asthma maintenance medicat ions in a real -world 
setting fo llowing com pletion of the main tenance phase of PONENTE study .  Outcom e 
measures include the proportion of patients who achieve 100% reduction (and other pre -
defined percentage reductions) in OCS use and other background asthma maintenance 
medicat ions from  the PONENTE baseline to the en d of the PONENTE Long Term Follow 
Up.  Proporti ons will be presented with no minal 95% confidence intervals estimated using the 
Clopper -Pearson exact method.  Results will be presented for all pat ients who si gn inform ed 
consent to continue into the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up and will be repeated by  
exposure to (i) any bio logic and (ii) commercial Benralizumab during the PONENTE Long 
Term  Follow Up.  No formal hypothesis will be tested and no mult iplicit y adjustm ent will  be 
applied in the statist ical analysi s.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
30(157)TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
TITLE PAGE ....................................................................................................... 1
VERSION HISTORY .......................................................................................... 2
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS .................................................. 22
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................................................... 30
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 38
1.1 Background and rationale for conducting this study ........................................... 38
1.2 Rationale for study  design, doses, and control groups ......................................... 39
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessment .................................................................... 40
1.4 Study  design ...................................................................................................... 41
1.4.1 Enrollment Period (starting Week -2):................................................................ 42
1.4.2 Induct ion phase (starting Week 0): ..................................................................... 42
1.4.3 OCS Reduction phase (Week 4 onwards): .......................................................... 42
1.4.4 Maintenance phase: ............................................................................................ 43
1.4.5 Prem ature Di scontinuati on and Follow -Up Contact: ........................................... 44
1.4.6 Sputum  Sam pling for Exploratory  Biomarkers: .................................................. 44
1.5 Study  governance and oversight ......................................................................... 46
1.5.1 Scientific Co mmitt ee.......................................................................................... 46
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES ...................................................................................... 46
2.1 Primary object ive............................................................................................... 46
2.2 Secondary  object ives.......................................................................................... 47
2.3 Safety objectives................................................................................................ 47
2.4 Exploratory  objectives ....................................................................................... 48
3. PATIENT SELECTION, E NROLLMENT, RESTRICTI ONS, 
DISCONTINUATION, AND WITHDRAWAL ................................................. 48
3.1 Inclusio n criteria................................................................................................ 48
3.2 Exclusio n criteria............................................................................................... 50
3.3 Patient enrollment .............................................................................................. 52
3.4 Procedures for handling incorrectly enro lled patients ......................................... 53
3.5 Restri ctions........................................................................................................ 53
3.5.1 Other restrict ions................................................................................................ 54
3.6 Discontinuati on of  study  drug and criteria for withdrawal .................................. 54
3.6.1 Procedures for discont inuat ion of a patient fro m study  drug ............................... 54
3.6.2 Screen failures ................................................................................................... 55
3.6.3 Withdrawal o f informed consent ........................................................................ 55
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
31(157)4.3.1.1 Withdrawal o f consent for genet ic research ........................................................ 55
3.7 Discontinuati on of  the study ............................................................................... 55
4. STUDY PLAN AND TIMIN G OF PROCEDURES ........................................... 56
4.1 Enrollment period .............................................................................................. 62
4.1.1 Screening visit –Visit 1 (Week -2)..................................................................... 62
4.1.2 Rescreening ....................................................................................................... 63
4.2 Open -label treatment period ............................................................................... 63
4.2.1 Induct ion phase .................................................................................................. 63
4.2.2 OCS Reduction phase ........................................................................................ 63
4.2.3 Maintenance phase ............................................................................................. 66
4.3 Follow-up peri od................................................................................................ 67
4.4 PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up Substudy : Study  Plan and Timing of 
Procedures ......................................................................................................... 67
4.5 Study  Conduct Mit igation During Study  Disrupt ions Due to Cases of Civil 
Crisis, Natural  Disaster, or Public Healt h Cri sis................................................. 67
5. STUDY ASSESSMENTS .................................................................................. 68
5.1 Efficacy assessments .......................................................................................... 68
5.1.1 Assessment of OCS dose .................................................................................... 68
5.1.2 OCS dose ti tration.............................................................................................. 69
5.1.2.1 Asthma worsening or asthma exacerbation preventing OCS down -titration........ 73
5.2 Safety assessmen ts............................................................................................. 73
5.2.1 HPA axis evaluat ion........................................................................................... 73
5.2.1.1 Morning cortisol test (done at “OCS ≤ 5mg/day  [morning corti sol]” visi t)......... 75
5.2.1.2 ACTH st imulat ion test ....................................................................................... 77
5.2.2 Assessment of asthma exacerbat ions.................................................................. 79
5.2.3 Management of asthma exacerbat ions during treatmen t peri od........................... 80
5.2.4 Laboratory  safet y assessments ................................
............................................ 81
5.2.4.1 Pregnancy test .................................................................................................... 81
5.2.5 Physical examinat ion......................................................................................... 82
5.2.5.1 Com plete physical  examinat ion.......................................................................... 82
5.2.5.2 Brief physical  examinat ion................................................................................. 82
5.2.6 Vital signs .......................................................................................................... 82
5.2.7 Glucocorti coid toxicit y index ............................................................................. 82
5.3 Other assessments .............................................................................................. 83
5.3.1 Weight and height .............................................................................................. 83
5.3.2 Prednisone/Predniso lone levels .......................................................................... 83
5.3.3 Total  IgE and Phadiatop ..................................................................................... 83
5.3.4 Clinical outcome assessments ............................................................................ 83
5.3.4.1 Patient-reported outcomes .................................................................................. 83
5.4 Pharmacokinet ics............................................................................................... 85
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
32(157)5.5 Pharmacodynamics ............................................................................................ 85
5.6 Geno mics ........................................................................................................... 85
5.7 Biomarker collecti ons and analysis .................................................................... 86
5.7.1 Serum  for biomarkers ......................................................................................... 86
5.7.2 Plasma for eosinophil -derived neurotoxin .......................................................... 86
5.7.3 Sputum  collect ion and bio markers ...................................................................... 86
5.7.4 Storage, reuse, and destruction of bio marker samples ......................................... 86
5.7.5 Labelling and shipment of bio logical  samples .................................................... 87
5.7.6 Chain o fcustody  of biological samples .............................................................. 87
5.7.7 Withdrawal o f informed consent for donated bio logical samples ........................ 87
6. SAFETY REPORTING AND MEDICA L MANAGEMENT ............................. 87
6.1 Definit ion of adverse events ............................................................................... 87
6.2 Definit ions of s erious adverse events .................................................................. 88
6.3 Recording of adverse events ............................................................................... 88
6.3.1 Time period for collect ion of adverse events ...................................................... 88
6.3.2 Follow-up of  unreso lved adverse events ............................................................. 88
6.3.3 Variables ............................................................................................................ 88
6.3.4 Causalit y collection ............................................................................................ 89
6.3.5 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms .................................................... 90
6.3.6 Adverse events based on examinat ions and tests ................................................ 90
6.3.7 Hy’s Law ........................................................................................................... 90
6.3.8 Disease under study ........................................................................................... 91
6.4 Reporting of serious adverse events ................................................................... 91
4.3.1 Regulatory  Reporting Requirements for SAEs ................................................... 92
6.5 Overdose ............................................................................................................ 92
6.6 Pregnancy .......................................................................................................... 93
6.6.1 Maternal exposure .............................................................................................. 93
6.6.2 Paternal  exposure ............................................................................................... 93
6.7 Medicat ion error ................................................................................................ 93
7. STUDY DRUG AND OTHER TREATMENTS ................................................ 95
7.1 Ident ity of study  drug(s) ..................................................................................... 95
7.2 Dose and treatment regimens ............................................................................. 95
7.3 Management of study  drug –related reacti ons...................................................... 97
7.4 Labelling ............................................................................................................ 97
7.5 Storage ................................
............................................................................... 98
7.6 Com pliance ........................................................................................................ 98
7.7 Accountabilit y.................................................................................................... 98
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
33(157)7.8 Concomitant and other treatments ................................................................ ......98
7.8.1 Other concomitant treatment .............................................................................101
8. STATISTICAL ANALYSES BY ASTRAZENECA .........................................101
8.1 Statistical considerat ions...................................................................................101
8.2 Sample size est imate .........................................................................................101
8.3 Definit ions of analysis sets ................................................................................102
8.3.1 All patients analysis set .....................................................................................102
8.3.2 Full analysis set ................................................................................................. 102
8.3.3 Safety analysis set .............................................................................................103
8.4 Outcom e measures for analyses .........................................................................103
8.5 Methods for statist ical analyses .........................................................................104
8.5.1 Analysis of the primary  variables ......................................................................105
8.5.2 Analysis of the secondary variables ...................................................................105
8.5.2.1 Time to 1stOCS increase ...................................................................................105
8.5.2.2 ACQ -6..............................................................................................................105
8.5.2.3 SGRQ ...............................................................................................................107
8.5.2.4 PGIC .................................................................................................................107
8.5.3 Analysis of safet y outcom es..............................................................................107
8.5.4 Subgroup analysis .............................................................................................108
8.5.5 Interim review and Analysis ..............................................................................108
8.5.6 Sensit ivity analysis ............................................................................................109
8.5.7 Exploratory  analysis ..........................................................................................109
9. STUDY AND DATA MANAGEMENT BY ASTRAZENECA ........................109
9.1 Training of study  site staff.................................................................................109
9.2 Moni toring of the study .....................................................................................110
9.2.1 Source data .......................................................................................................110
9.2.2 Study  agreem ents..............................................................................................110
9.2.3 Archiving of study  docum ents...........................................................................110
9.3 Study  timetable and end of study .......................................................................110
9.4 Data m anagement by  AstraZeneca ....................................................................111
10. ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY REQUIREMENTS ......................................112
10.1 Ethical conduct of the study ..............................................................................112
10.2 Patient data protecti on.......................................................................................112
10.3 Ethics and regulatory  review .............................................................................112
10.4 Inform ed consent ..............................................................................................113
10.5 Changes to the Clinical Study  Protoco l and informed consent form ...................113
10.6 Audits and inspect ions......................................................................................114
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
34(157)11. LIST OF REFERENCES .................................................................................. 114
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Study  plan –Treatm ent peri od and foll ow-up* ............................................ 57
Table 2 OCS down -titration approaches ................................................................... 71
Table 3 “Rescue” OCS down -titration after recovery  from an asthma 
exacerba tion or deteri oration....................................................................... 72
Table 4 Laboratory  safet y variables .......................................................................... 81
Table 5 Medicat ion Restri ctions............................................................................... 99
Table 6 Prohibited Medications ................................................................................ 99
Table 7 Expected distance between observed proportion and confidence limit 
(Clopper -Pearson 95% CI width) ................................................................102
Table 8 PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up Substudy  –Study  plan: Enrollment 
to End of Study ..........................................................................................149
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Study  flow chart .......................................................................................... 45
Figure 2 HPA axis evaluat ion.................................................................................... 75
Figure 3 Inject ion sites and rotation scheme .............................................................. 96
LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A: Addit ional Safet y Informati on....................................................................118
Appendix B :International Airline Transportation Associat ion (IATA) 6.2 Guidance 
Docum ent...................................................................................................120
Appendix C: Genet ic Research ........................................................................................121
Appendix D: Actions Required in Case s of Increases in Liver Biochemistry  and 
Evaluat ion of Hy’s Law ..............................................................................124
Appendix E: Estimated Daily Doses for Inhaled Corticosteroids .....................................131
Appendix F: Estimated OCS Dose Therapy  Equivalence ................................................132
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
35(157)Appendix G: Prednisone/Predniso lone Doses <5 mg in Relat ion to Available Tablet 
Strengths .................................................................................................... 133
Appendix H: Glucocorti coid Toxicit y Index....................................................................134
Appendix I: Anaphylaxis: Signs, Symptoms, and Management ......................................140
Appendix J: Adrenal Crisis Guidelines ...........................................................................143
Appendix K: PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up Substudy ..............................................145
Appendix L:    Cha nges Related to Mitigation o f Study  Disrupti ons Due to Cases of 
Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public Healt h Crisis ................................. 155
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
36(157)LIST OF ABBREVIATION S AND DEFINITION OF TERMS
The fo llowing abbreviat ions and special terms are used in this study  Clinical Study  Protocol .
Abbreviation or special term Explanation
ACO
ACQ -6Asthma -COPD overlap
Asthma Control Questionnaire 6
ACTH Adrenocorticotropic hormone
AE Adverse event
AI Adrenal insufficiency
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
APFS Accessorized prefilled syringe
AST Aspartate aminotransferase
BP Blood pressure
CI
COPDConfidence interval 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COVID -19 Coronavirus disease 2019
CSR Clinical Study Report
EC Ethics Committee, synonymous to Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) and Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)
eCRF Electronic case report form
EDN
EGPAEosinophil -derived neurotoxin
Eosinophilic granulomatous polyangiitis
ePRO Electronic patient -reported outcome device
EOT End of Treatment
FAS Full analysis set
GC Glucocorticoid
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GINA Global Initiative for Asthma
GMP Good Manufacturing Practice
GTI Glucocorticoid toxicity index
HCG
HESHum an chorionic gonadotropin
Hyper eosinophilic syndrome
HL Hy’s Law
HPA Hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation
ICF Infor med consent form
ICS Inhaled corticosteroids
IgE Immunoglobulin E
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
37(157)Abbreviation or special term Explanation
IL-5 Interleukin -5
IL-5Rα Interleukin -5 receptor alpha subunit
IPD Investigational product discontinuation
International Coordinating 
investigatorIf a study is conducted in several countries, the International 
Coor dinating Investigator is the Investigator coordinating the 
investigators and/or activities internationally. 
IVRS Interactive voice response system
IWRS Interactive web response system
LABA Long -acting β 2agonist
LTRA Leukotriene receptor antagonist
OCS Oral corticosteroids
PGIC Patient Global Impression of Change
PHL Potential Hy’s Law
PRO Patient -reported outcome
Q2W Every 2 weeks
Q4W Every 4 weeks
Q8W Every 8 weeks
SAE Serious adverse event 
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan
SARS -CoV-2 Sever e acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SC Subcutaneous
SGRQ St. George ’s Respiratory Questionnaire
SOP Standard Operating Procedures
TBL Total bilirubin
ULN Upper limit of normal
WBDC Web-based data capture
WOCBP Women of childbearing potential
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
38(157)1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background and rationale for conducting this study
Asthma i s a syndrom e characterized by airway  inflammat ion, reversible airway  obstructi on, 
and airway  hyper -responsiveness.  Patients present clinically  with recurrent wheezing, 
shortness of breath, cough, and chest tightness.  Asthma is a leading cause of morbidit y with a 
global prevalence of approximately 300 million; it is est imated that the number of people with 
asthma m ay increase to 400 to 450 millio n peopl e worl dwide by 2025 ( Maso li et al 2004).
The current approach to anti -inflammatory  controller ther apy in asthma is based on a 
step-wise intensification of a daily maintenance regimen primarily centered around inhaled 
corticosteroi ds (ICS) and l eukotri ene receptor antagonists (LTRAs), with the addit ion of 
long-acting β 2agoni sts (LABAs) in pat ients withmore severe asthma ( NAEPP 2007, 
GINA 2018).  Approximately 5% to 10% of persons wit h asthma have a severe form of 
disease that is usually  managed wi th high -dose inhal ed glucocorti coids (GCs) and 
bronchodilators ( Bateman et al 2010 , Chung et al 2014).  Wi thin this group, 32% to 45% of 
persons rely on frequent or maintenance use of oral GC therap y (Moore et al  2007 , 
Shaw et 
al2015, Milosl avsky  et al  2017 ).  Bi ologics targeting interleukin -5 (IL -5) and 
immunogl obulin E (IgE) are now included in internat ional treatment guidelines a s an add-on 
treatm ent to pati ents uncontrolled wit h LABA/ICS treatment ( GINA 2018
).
Although oral GC therapy  can be effect ive at treating several infla mmatory  diseases, i t 
adversely  affects heal th-related quali ty of life (Sweeney  et al  2016 ) and i s associ ated wi th 
several side effects, including osteo porosis, hypertensio n, and depressio n (Dinsen et al 2013 ).  
Chronic use of oral GCs suppresses the hypothalamic -pituitary-adrenal  (HPA) axis ( Broersen 
et al 2015 ) and prevents cortiso l producti on (Neogi et al 2010 , Nicholas et al 2018 ).  Upon 
withdrawal  of GCs, restorati on of  the HPA axis may  take a l onger time, thus l eading to 
adrenal insuffic iency  (AI) in approximately  48.7% of pat ients (Dinsen et al 2013, 
Broersen et 
al 2015 ).  Sym ptoms of AI are nonspecific and can include fat igue and nausea and, in severe 
cases, acute adrenal crisis; however, the suppressio n of a cortiso l-induced stress response can 
be fatal in physio logically  traum atic situat ions such as during surgery, bodily injury, or severe 
systemic infect ions (Alves et al 2008, Dinsen et al 2013, Jo hnson et al 2014, Joseph et 
al2016
).  It i s therefore important to monitor patients for AI while down -titrating their oral  
GC dose, especially once the patient has reached a physio logical dose, which is defined as 
approximately  5mg per day  of oral predniso ne (Alves et al 2008). 
Interl eukin- 5 is a key  cytokine involved in the different iation and maturation of eosi nophils 
from hematopoiet ic stem cells in the bone marrow, their mobilization and migrat ion from the 
bone marrow to the blood, and their activation and survival in t issue ( Blanchard and 
Rothenberg 2009).  The receptor for IL -5 (IL -5Rα [IL -5 receptor alpha subunit]) is 
exclusively  expressed on eosinophils and basophils.
Benralizumab is a humanized, afucosylated, monoclonal ant ibody  that binds specifically to the 
human IL -5Rα on the target cell ( Takatsu et al  1994 , 
Toba et al 1999, Tedeschi et al 2018).  
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
39(157)The purpose of this glo bal study  is to assess the potential for reducing the use of maintenance
oral corti costeroi ds (OCS) in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma who are 
OCS -dependent.  Patients will receive benralizumab 30 mg on an open -label basis, and, 
4weeks after the first benralizumab dose, invest igators will init iate the tapering of the OCS 
dose while not losing asthma control and managing signs/symptoms of AI.  Primary 
effect iveness will be determined by the abili ty of patients to reduce their OCS dose to 
0mg/day wit hout losing asthma control  or to reach the lowest OCS dose possible in case no 
further OCS down -titration is all owed because of the presence of AI as measured by  corti sol 
levels or in case of inadequate asthma control. 
At the end of the PONENTE EOT visit, patients will be invited to participate in a long term 
follow up visi t sub -study  to further assess changes in asthma maintenance therapy  in an a real -
world setti ng, i.e., according to the treatment prescribed by their healt hcare provider. 
Addit ionally , there will  be assessment of recovery  from AI as well as assessment of 
glucocorti coid toxicit y by means of GTI. See Appendix Kfor details on the background and 
rationale of the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up visit substudy . 
1.2 Rationale for study design, doses, and control groups
The treatment options for patients who remain uncontrolled on high -dose ICS/LABA are 
extrem ely limited; one of the treatm ent opti ons is the addit ion of OCS to the current treatment 
(GINA 2018).  However, regular intake of OCS can lead to a number of adverse events (A Es) 
and, as a result, can decrease qualit y of life for these patients ( Kwong et al 1987 ).
In the ZONDA study , benralizumab significant ly reduced the m edian final oral GC doses 
from baseline by 75%, as compared wit h a reduction of 25% in the placebo group ( Nairet 
al2017), and 56% of patients who received benralizumab were able to have a 100% reduction 
in their OCS dose.  However, this study  had so me limitations, and there are medical quest ions 
still to be addressed.  Patients who were receiving baseline prednisone doses above 12.5 mg 
were not allowed to completely wit hdraw from OCS as the study duration did not allow for 
this.  Also, the adequacy  of the speed of the OCS dow n-titration and whether i t can be 
perform ed faster than the down -titration regimen used in the ZONDA study  (Nairet al 2017) 
remains unclear.  Finally ,the maintenance phase was limited to 4 weeks after last OCS dose 
reducti on, so i t is uncertain as to whether benralizumab benefit s are m aintained after OCS 
down -titration or wi thdrawal . 
Furtherm ore, pati ents who are receiving higher doses of OCS or who h ave been on prolonged 
OCS therapy  at baseline may potentially experience secondary  AI upon 
complete/inappropriate withdrawal of OCS due to HPA axis suppressio n.  Patients may also 
experience steroid withdrawal or deprivat ion symptom s and reactivation/relap se of underlying 
disease ( Alves et al 2008
).  This has not y et been evaluated in previous studies.
This study  will recrui t patients who are receiving chronic treatment with OCS for ≥3 months 
prior to study  entry  and receiving stable doses of OCS for ≥4 weeks prior to study  entry .  
Addit ionally , pati ents m ust have peri pheral  blood eosinophil counts of ≥150 cells/μL, as 
assessed by  the central  laboratory  at Vi sit 1, or docum ented eosinophil counts of 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
40(157)≥300 cells/μL in the past 12 months.  These historical eosinophil values will help to ident ify 
patients wi th eosinophilic phenoty pes, as pati ents on OCS m ay have reduced eosinophils.
The purpose of this trial is to assess the potential for reducing the use of maintenance OCS in 
systemic corticosteroid –dependent asthm a pati ents treated wi th benralizumab 30 mg (who 
have severe refractory  eosinophilic asthma).  This study  will allow pati ents to reduce their 
OCS do se to 0 mg/day or to the lowest OCS dose that is physio logically  possible (given the 
possibilit y of AI in this populat ion of pat ients) and will assess whether a faster OCS 
down -titration com pared wi th what has been previously studied ( Nairet al 2017) i s 
appropriate.  Patients will enter the maintenance phase of approximately 24 to 32 weeks after 
their OCS dose has been reduced to 0 mg/day  (or to the l owest OCS dose possible in case no 
further OCS down -titration is all owed because of the presence of AI as measured by  corti sol 
levels or in case of inadequate asthma control), which will assess the abilit y of benralizumab 
to maintain clinical benefit s after OCS withdrawal.  
Patients will  receive open -label benralizumab 30 mg/mL so lution for inject ion in an 
accessorized prefilled syringe (APFS).  It will be administered subcutaneously (SC) at the 
study  site as every -4-week (Q4W) dosing up until the third dos e of benralizumab (Visit s 2 to 
4) and then every -8-week (Q8W) dosing thereafter.  This dose is aligned with the current 
prescribing information for benralizumab, and an open -label design allo ws for a real -world 
assessment of OCS down -titration as i t relates specifically  to benralizumab effect iveness.
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessment
There are few treatment options for patients whose asthma remains uncontrolled on high -dose 
ICS/LABA ( GINA 2018).  The evidence base for oral add
-on therapies (ie, OCS, leukotriene 
inhibitors, and xanthenes) is extremely limited.  Tiotropium is a long -acting bronchodilator 
that has recent ly been shown to produce improvement in lung funct ion and exacerbation risk 
(pool ed data) in patients with severe asthma, with inconsistent effects on other measures of 
asthma control ( Juniper et al 2005, Juniper et al 2006
, Kerstjen s et al  2012 ).  
Biologics targeting IL -5 and IgE are now included in internat ional treatment guidelines as an 
add-on treatment to patients uncontrolled with ICS/LABA treatment (GINA 2018).  In adult 
patients whose asthma was poorly controlled on high dose ICS/LABA and chronic OCS (with 
or wi thout other controller medicat ions), benralizumab significantly reduced the median OCS 
doses fro m baseline by  75%, as com pared wi th a reducti on of  25% in the oral  GC doses in the 
placebo group.  The odds of a reduction in the oral GC dose were 4.12 times higher with 
benralizumab than with placebo, respectively (P<0.001) ( Nair et al 2017
).
There i s the ri sk of  an asthma exacerbat ion or worsening due to withdrawal o f OCS in 
OCS -dependent patients.  However, data from the ZONDA study  shows benefits in 
exacerbation reduct ion as the rate of exacerbat ions in OCS -dependent asthmat ics treated wi th 
benralizumab who are withdrawn fro m OCS was 70% l ower than the rate in those who are not 
treated with benralizumab (placebo) ( Nair et al 2017 ).
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
41(157)Development of ant idrug ant ibodies to benralizumab has been documented without an 
apparent clinical impact.  Theoretical risks of developing ant idrug antibodies include 
hypersensit ivity react ions (eg, anaphylaxis or immune co mplex disease) and decreased drug 
efficacy .
Blood eosinophils are a prominent feature of the inflammatory  response to helmint hic 
parasit ic infect ions, and the presence of infiltrat ing eosinophils has been circums tantially 
associ ated wi th a posi tive prognosi s in certain so lid tumors.  Therefore, there is a theoretical 
risk that prol onged eosinophil deplet ion may diminish the abilit y to defend against helmint hic 
parasites or negatively  impact the natural  history  of certain malignant tumors.  Risk 
minimizat ion measures include exclusio n of patients with untreated parasit ic infect ion and 
active or recent malignancy , in conjunct ion with the perform ance of routine 
pharmacovigilance act ivities.
The i dentified (inject ion-site reacti on) and potenti al (hypersensi tivity react ions/anaphylaxis, 
malignancies, and serious infect ions [especially  helmint hic ones]) risks of benralizumab are 
discussed in detail in the latest version of the Investigator’s Brochure.
Furtherm ore, there i s a risk of AI when OCS is completely or inappropriately withdrawn 
(Alves et al 2008 , Dinsen et al 2013 , Johnson et al 2014, Jo seph et al 2016 ) in:
 Patients who are on prolonged OCS therapy .
 Patients who are treated with a high dose of OCS at baseline.
 During periods of stress to the body  when a corti sol-induced response is crit ical to 
maintain homeostasis, eg, during acute intercurrent illness, fo llowing traum a, and 
during surgery  and childbirth.
The symptoms of chronic AI include many nonspecific symptoms such as anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, abdo minal pain, weakness, tiredness, and depression. In severe cases, a 
life-threatening event of acute adrenal crisis may occur ( Alves et al 2008).  The study  will 
include close mo nitoring of the risk of AI by assessing HPA axis integrit y in pat ients who 
have reached OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day  and f or pati ents who have baseline OCS doses 
equal  to 5 m g/day . A detailed assessment of the overall risks/benefits of benralizumab in 
patients wi th asthma is gi ven in the Invest igator’s Brochure.  
1.4 Study design 
This is an open -label, mult icenter study  designed to evaluate the efficacy and safet y of 
reducing OCS use after init iation of a 30- mg dose of SC benralizumab administered with 
Q4W dosing up unt il the thir d dose of benralizumab (Visits 2 to 4) and then Q8W thereafter in 
approximately  600 adul t pati ents wi th severe eosinophilic asthma who are receiving high -dose 
ICS/LABA and OCS wit h or without additional asthma controller(s).  Each patient must have 
been re ceiving an average daily  dose equivalent to ≥5mg of predniso ne for the l ast 3 m onths 
before study  entry .  
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
42(157)Please see Appendix Kfor details on the study  design of the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow 
Up Substudy .
1.4.1 Enrollment Period (starting Week -2): 
After patients sign the informed consent form (ICF), patients will undergo a Screening visit 
(Visit 1) to assess eligibilit y criteria and l aboratory tests . All pat ients who are not already 
taking predniso ne/predniso lone as their OCS treatment will be switched to 
prednisone/predniso lone, and the l aboratory  tests (including serum prednisone/predniso lone) 
will be delayed 3 to 7 days. Patients who are already  taking prednisone/predniso lone at Visit 1 
do not requi re the serum  prednisone/predniso lone laboratory  test (see Table 1). Addit ionally ,
an extensio n of the screening period up to 3 months is allowed to ensure that a patient 
recovers fro m any asthma exacerbat ion or acute upper/lower respiratory  infect ion (refer 
Secti on 4.1.1 for more details).  Patients still fulfilling inclusio n/exclusio n criteria at Visi t 2 
(Week 0) will enter the study  and receive open -label benralizumab.
The treatment period is divided into 3 phases: induction, reduction, and maintenance 
(Figure 1).  The durati on of  the benralizumab treatment period will be dependent on the 
baseline OCS dose, the occurrence of asthma exacerbat ion(s) or asthma worsening, and the 
integrity of the HPA axis, which will guide the speed of OCS down -titration below 5 mg/day. 
However benralizumab treatment will start at Visit 2, continue throughout the Reduction phase, 
and will end after 3 doses in the Maintenance Phase.
1.4.2 Induction phase (starting Week 0): 
Patients in the induct ion phase will start their first dose of benralizumab at Visit 2 and should 
remain stable on their baseline OCS dose during this 4 -week phase. If an asthma exacerbat ion 
occurs duri ng the induction phase, the patient will be mana ged per Secti on 5.2.3 .
1.4.3 OCS Reduction phase (Week 4 onwards): 
Benralizumab dosing
Patients will receive Q4W benralizumab up until the 3rddose (8 weeks between 
the 3rdand 4thbenralizumab dose). Benralizumab will then continue Q8W 
through the end of the Reduction phase and continue to the Maintenance phase. 
OCS reduction
Patients will  reduce thei r dosage of OCS according to the schema defined for each baseline 
OCS dose unti l they reach 5 m g/day  (Secti on 5.1.2 ). 
For all patients, hy pothal amic -pituitary-adrenal  (HPA) axis integrit y will be evaluated after 
4-weeks on 5 mg/day and prior to tapering down the OCS dose (for patients with baseline 
OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day, this will be assessed 4 weeks after the first dose of 
benralizumab administration and before init iation of the OCS reduction phase)
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
43(157)First, a screening m ethod wi th mornin g serum  cortisol  is done (8 -9 am morning cortisol 
level), to evaluate whether the patient has:
Normal cortisol levels
Complete AI
Corti sol levels fro m the morning corti sol test that are below normal range and above the 
Com plete AI range are considered “Indeterminate;” and require confirmat ion via addit ional 
testing described below.
Secondly, the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulat ion test (i e, Synacthen®, 
Cortrosyn™) is done wit hin approximately 1 week in the subset of patients with 
indeterminat e resul ts from the m orning cortisol  test [see also Section 5.2.1.2 for details). The 
ACTH st imulat ion test is more specific than the morning cortiso l test, and can d etermine 
whether the patient has:
Normal cortisol levels
Complete AI
Partial AI.
The OCS reduction will continue unt il the pat ient reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day (or 
lowest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS down -titration is allowed because of the 
presence of AI as measured by cortiso l levels or in case of inadequate asthma control) 
without losing asthma control . The fi rst OCS dose reducti on m ay occur at Vi sit 3 af ter the 
dose of benralizumab at the site. Investigators should monitor the occurrence of asthma 
exacerbation(s) or asthma deterioration.  After recovery  from the first exacerbat ion or asthma 
deteri oration, the pati ent will be allo wed to proceed with another attempt to reduce OCS 
dose; however, this must fo llow a l ower speed of OCS down -titration (reducti ons Q4W).  
However, in case of a second exacerbat ion or asthma deterioration, no further OCS dose 
reducti on will be allowed, and the patient will continue on the same OCS dose or will return 
to a one -step hi gher dose l evel (or m ore as conside red necessary  by the Invest igator), and the 
patient will then enter the maintenance phase. 
Approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to end of the OCS reduction phase, the patients who have 
Parti al AI after the repeat morning cortiso l test, will undergo an addit ionalmorning cortiso l 
test (and if required, ACTH st imulation test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS 
Reduction phase.
1.4.4 Maintenance phase: 
This phase will start from the time the patient reaches a complete withdrawal o f OCS (or 
lowest possible OCS dose) wi thout worsening o f asthm a control  and as determined by the 
Invest igator (based on the cortiso l/ACTH stimulat ion results). The maintenance phase could 
be initiated earlier if OCS dose reduction failed due to clinical deterioration or because the 
patient di d not recover from  AI. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
44(157)The length of the maintenance phase will last approximately  24to32week s. The durati on of  
the maintenance treatment phase will depend on when the patient enters the maintenance 
phase relat ive to the dosing cycle of benralizumab. During this phase, patients will continue 
benralizumab Q8W for 3 doses, and then the End of Treatment (EOT) visit will be scheduled 
8 weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of benralizumab. 
Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS Reduction phase, will 
undergo a final morning cortiso l test (and if required, ACTH stimulat ion test fo r indeterminate 
resul t) approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to end of the OCS Maintenance phase. 
If an asthma exacerbat ion occurs during the maintenance phase, the length of the maintenance 
phase will not be extended.
1.4.5 Premature Discontinuation and Follow -Up Co ntact:
All patients who prematurely discontinue study  drug/invest igational product or who 
discontinue fro m the study  shoul d return to the study  center and com plete the procedures 
described for the Premature Investigational Product Discont inuat ion (IPD) vis it within 
4weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of benralizumab.
For all patients dosed with benralizumab, a fo llow-up contact will be scheduled 12 weeks 
(±7days) after their last dose of benralizumab. Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI 
at the end of the Maintenance phase should be fo llowed -up by an endocrino logist or other 
appropriate specialist, if deemed necessary  by the Investi gator.
1.4.6 Sputum Sampling for Exploratory Biomarkers: 
Not applicable due to protocol amendment.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D325 0C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
45(157)Figure 1 Study flow chart 
1. The duration of the OCS reduction phase will vary based on asthma exacerbations, asthma worsening, HPA integrity, or other safety issues a ltering the OCS titration 
schedule.
2. For patients who have reached OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day, HPA axis integrity will be assessed at the end of a 4 -week period on 5 mg/day (8 -9am morning cortisol 
level), followed by a ACTH stimulation test within approximately 1 week, in case of indeterminate result.  For those patients who had a baseline OCS dose equal to 
5mg/day, HPA axis integri ty will be assessed 4 weeks after first dose of benralizumab administration and before initiation of the OCS reduction phase
3. The maintenance phase will start from the time the patient reaches a complete withdrawal of OCS (or lowest possible OCS dose per Section 1.4.3 ) without worsening of 
asthma control and as determined by the Investigator (based on the cortisol/ACTH stimulation results). This period will last approximately 24 to 32 weeks from the time 
the patient reaches a complete withdrawal of OCS (0 mg) or the lowest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS down -titration is allowed because of the presence of AI 
as measured by cortisol levels or in case of inadequate asthma control.  The length of the maintenance phase may vary depending on the when the patie nt enters the 
maintenance phase.  During this phase, patients will continue benralizumab Q8W for 3 doses and then the EOT visit wi ll be scheduled 8 weeks (± 7 days) after the last 
dose of benralizumab.
4. End of the study will be different for individual patients and will depend on baseline OCS dose, occurrence of asthma exacerb ation or asthma worsening, and HPA axis 
integrity.
5. Patients who discontinue treatment early will undergo the Premature IPD visit within 4 weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of benralizumab.
6. A follow -up contact will occur 12 weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of benralizumab, discontinuation of study drug, or d iscontinuation from the study.  All patients who 
prematurely discontinue study drug or discontinue from the study should return to the study center and complete the procedure s described for the Premature IPD visit 
within 4 weeks (± 7 days) after the last d ose of benralizumab.
7. Patients who have Partial AI or Complete AI at the end of the Maintenance phase, should be followed -up by an endocrinologist or other appropriate specialist, if deemed 
necessary by the Investigator.
8. Patients who enro ll in the long term follow up substudy during the EOT visit will still undergo the final 4 -week follow -up visit. ICF for the PONENTE Long Term 
Follow Up substudy must be obtained any time from EOT of the main PONENTE study and to prior to any activities of the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up visit.

Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
46(157)1.5 Study governance and oversight
1.5.1 Scientific Committee
A Scientific Co mmittee consist ing of internal AstraZeneca and external experts 
(pulm onologists, allergists, and endocrinologists) who have been involved in the design of the 
clinical study  will advise the sponsor on changes to the study  design and provi de 
recommendat ions on issues related to the study  conduct, if required. In addit ion, the 
committee will be invo lved in the review and interpretation of the study  resul ts.The 
Scientific Co mmittee will be governed by a charter, detailing roles and responsibilit ies and 
processes.
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES
2.1 Primary objective
Primary Objective Endpoints/Outcome Variables
To assess the ability to reduce OCS dose in 
adult patients with severe eosinophilic 
asthma treated with benralizumab 30 mg 
SC Primary outcome measures
Patients who achieve 100% reduction in daily OCS 
dose that is sustained over at least 4 weeks without 
worsening of asthma 
Patients who achieve 100% reduction or a daily OCS 
dose ≤5 mg, if reason for no further OCS reduction 
is AI, that is sustained over at least 4 weeks without 
worsening of asthma
Key supportive outcome measures
Patients who achieve a daily OCS dose of ≤5mg that 
is sustained over at least 4 weeks without worsening 
of asthma
Patients who achieve a ≥90%, ≥75%, ≥50%, and 
>0% reduction in daily OCS dose, sustained over at 
least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma
Change from baseline in da ily OCS dose (mg) from 
start of OCS reduction to end of the OCS reduction 
phase
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
47(157)2.2 Secondary objectives
Secondary Objective Outcome Measure
To assess the sustained reduction of daily 
OCS dose while not losing asthma control 
during approximately 6 months after the 
end of OCS down -titration (maintenance 
phase) in adult patients with severe 
eosinophilic asthma treated with 
benralizumab 30 mg SCKey outcome measure
Change in daily OCS dose from the end of OCS 
reduction phase to the end of the maintenance pha se 
(EOT visit)
Time to first increase in OCS dose during 
maintenance phase, after achieving the minimum 
OCS dose during the OCS reduction phase 
To assess the effect of OCS down -titration 
protocol on asthma control in adult patients 
with severe eosinophilic asthma treated 
with benralizumab 30 mg SCKey outcome measure
Asthma Control Questionnaire 6 (ACQ -6) scores at 
baseline (Visit 2), Visit 3, end of OCS reduction 
phase, and monthly from end of OCS reduction 
phase to end of maintenance phase (EO T visit)
Change from baseline in ACQ -6 to Visit 3, end of 
OCS reduction phase, and end of maintenance phase 
(EOT visit)
Responder analysis of ACQ -6 scores from Visit 2 
through end of maintenance phase
To assess the effect of OCS down -titration 
protocol on quality of life in adult patients 
with severe eosinophilic asthma treated 
with benralizumab 30 mg SCKey outcome measure
Change from baseline (Visit 2) in St. George ’s 
Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) total scores to the 
end of maintenance phase (EOT visi t)
Responder analysis of SGRQ total scores at the end 
of maintenance phase
2.3 Safety objectives
Safety Objective Outcome Measure
To evaluate the occurrence of AI when 
reducing OCSKey outcome measure
Patients with complete AI 
To assess the effect of OCS down -titration 
protocol on asthma exacerbations in adult 
patients with severe asthma treated with 
benralizumab 30 mg SCKey outcome measures
Annualized asthma exacerbation rate
Annualized asthma exacerbation rate leading to 
hospitalization or emergency room visit
To assess the safety and tolerability of 
benralizumab in patients who reduce their 
chronic OCS doseAdverse events/Serious adverse events
Laboratory parameters and vital signs
To evaluate corticosteroid toxicity after 
OCS reductionGlucocortic oid toxicity index (GTI)
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
48(157)2.4 Exploratory objectives
Exploratory Objective Outcome Measure
To investigate the contribution of genomic 
variants to the study outcomesAssociation of common and rare genomic variants 
with patient responses
To assess early improvements in asthma 
status during the first 4 weeks of 
benralizumab treatment before initiation of 
OCS reductionPatient Global Impression of Change (PGIC)
To assess the impact of OCS 
down -titration on blood eosinophil levelsKey outcome measure
Change from baseline blood eosinophils
To investigate biomarkers for predicting 
response to benralizumabKey biomarker parameters
Serum samples at baseline for protein biomarkers
Plasma for eosinophil -derived neurotoxin
Please refer to Appendix Kfor the obj ectives of the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up 
Substudy .
3. PATIENT SELECTION, E NROLLMENT, RESTRICTI ONS, 
DISCONTINUATION, AND WITHDRAWAL 
Each patient should meet all o f the inclusio n criteria and none of the exclusio n criteria for this 
study .  Under no ci rcumstances can there be exceptions to this rule.
3.1 Inclusion criteria
For inclusio n in the study , pati ents shoul d fulfil the f ollowing cri teria:
1. Provisio n of informed consent prior to any study -specific procedures 
2. Female or m ale aged ≥18 y ears at the time of Visit  1 
3. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must agree to use one highly  effect ive 
form of bi rth control  (confirmed by the Invest igator) from 48inimizin throughout the 
study  durati on and wi thin 16 weeks after last dose of IP. Highly effect ive forms of 
birth control include: 
 Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal contraception 
associ ated wi th inhibit ion of ovulat ion-oral, intravaginal, or transdermal
 Progestogen -only horm onal contracepti on associ ated wi th inhibit ion of 
ovulation-oral, injectable, or implantable
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
49(157) Intrauterine device (IUD)
 Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS)
 Bilateral tubal occlusio n
 Sexual abst inence, i.e. refraining fro m heterosexual interc ourse (The reliabilit y of 
sexual abst inence needs to be evaluated in relat ion to the duration of the clinical 
study  and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the patient.)
 Vasectomized sexual partner provided that partner is the so le sexual partner of 
the WOCBP study  patient and that the vasectomized partner has received 
medical assessment of the surgical success 
Women not of childbearing potential are defined as women who are either 
perm anent ly sterilized (hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy, or bilate ral 
salpingectomy ) or who are postm enopausal.  Women will be considered 
postm enopausal if they  have been amenorrhoei c for 12 m onths pri or to the pl anned 
start date of the induct ion phase wit hout an alternative medical cause.  The 
age-specific requirements that apply  are as f ollows:
-Women <50 years old will be considered postmenopausal if they have been 
amenorrhoei c for 12 months or more fo llowing cessation o f exogenous 
horm onal treatm ent and have fo llicle -stimulat ing horm one l evels in the 
postm enopausal ran ge
-Women ≥50 years ol d will  be considered postmenopausal if they have been 
amenorrhoei c for 12 months or more fo llowing cessation o f all exogenous 
horm onal treatm ent
4. Weight of ≥40 kg
5. Nonsmokers, current smokers, or former smokers with a smoking history  of 
≤20pack -years at Visit 1
6. Peripheral  blood eosinophil  count of  ≥150 cells/ μL assessed by central  laboratory  at 
Visit 1 or documented eosinophil count of ≥ 300 cells/ μL in the past 12 months
7. History  of physician -diagnosed asthma that requires continuous tre atment wi th 
high-dose ICS (high
-dose ICS is budesonide/formoterol HFA ≥640/18 per day or 
equivalent, fluticasone propionate DPI > 500/day or equivalent, or authorized generics 
for these products; see Appendix Eand GINA 2018 guidelines for more 
recommendations ) plus a LABA for at l east 6 m onths pri or to Vi sit 1. The ICS and 
LABA can be contained wit hin a co mbinat ion product or given by separate inhalers. 
The IC S can also be given via nebulized solut ion for inhalat ion: 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
50(157)In order to aid the dose assessment, ICS equivalents for high- dose flut icasone 
propi onate dry  powder, as published by the Global Init iative for Asthma 
(GINA) gui delines, are presented in Appendix E
For ICS monotherapy  preparati ons, or ICS/LABA combinat ion preparations 
not specifically  mentioned in GINA (e.g. newer formulations, authorized 
generics), the highest approved maintenance do se in the local label will also 
meet this ICS criterion. Addit ionally , in countri es where the high -dose ICS or 
ICS/LABA is not available (e.g. only  the medium -dose ICS or ICS/LABA is 
available in that country ), the highest approved maintenance dose in the local 
label will also meet this ICS criterion
Note: Addi tional maintenance asthma controller medicat ions (eg, LTRAs, 
tiotropi um, crom one, theophylline) are allowed.
8. Chronic OCS therapy  equivalent to a daily dose of at least 5 mg of prednisone for at 
least 3 continuous months direct ly preceding Visit 1 (to be documented in medical 
records)
Note: Al ternate intake of OCS (ie, every  other day) or other frequency is allowed 
provi ded the average daily  dose is equivalent to at least 5 mg of prednisone and the 
patient is switched to a daily  intake of prednisone/predniso lone at Visit 1.  Systemic 
corticosteroi d doses administered by  any route other than oral  cannot be used to 
determine the average daily  dose preceding Vi sit 1
9. Patient shoul d be on a stable OCS dose fo r at least 4 weeks prior to Visit 1. To aid the 
dose assessment, a guide for OCS dose equivalence is presented in Appendix F. 
Patients m ust agree to switch to study -requi red prednisone/predn isolone as thei r OCS 
for the durati on of  the study
See Appendix Kfor inclusio n/exclusio n criteria, and restrict ions rel ated to the PONENTE 
Long Term Follow Up substudy .
3.2 Exclusion criteria
Patients shoul d not enter the study  if any of the fo llowing exclusio n criteria are fulfilled:
1. Clinically important pulmonary disease other than asthma (eg, active lung infect ion, 
chronic obstructive pulmo nary disease [COPD], asthm a-COPD overl ap [ACO] 
bronchiectasis, pulmo nary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, hypovent ilation syndrome 
associ ated wi th obesi ty, lung cancer, al pha-1 ant itrypsin deficiency, primary ciliary 
dyskinesia) or have ever been diagnosed with pulmo nary or sy stemic diseases, other 
than asthma, that are associated with elevated peripheral eosinophil counts (eg, allergic 
bronchopulmo nary aspergill osis/mycosis, eosinophilic granulo matous polyangiit is 
[EGPA], hy pereosinophilic syndrome [HES])
2. Known history  of allergy  or reacti on to the study  drug f ormulation
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
51(157)3. History  of anaphylaxis to any  biologic therapy
4. Helmint h parasit ic infection diagnosed wi thin 24 weeks pri or to the date informed 
consent is obtained that has not been treated with, or has failed to respond to, standard 
of care therapy
5. Asthma exacerbat ion requiring use of systemic corticosteroids, increase in 
maintenance dose of OCS, or acute upper/lower respiratory  infect ion that requires 
antibiotics or antiviral medicat ion within 30 days pri or to Visit 2 (first benralizumab 
dose) 
An extensio n of the screening period up to 3 months is allowed to ensure that a patient 
recover s from any asthma exacerbat ion or acute upper/lower respiratory  infect ion 
(refer Section 4.1.1 for more details)
6. Intention to use any  concomi tant m edicat ion that i s not permitted by  this protocol  or 
failure to undergo the required washout period for a particular prohibited medicat ion
Explanatory note: Refer to Section 7.8for washout periods of prohibited medications 
7. History  of alcohol  or drug abuse within 12 months prior to the date informed consent 
is obtained
8. History  of known immunodeficiency disorder, including history  of a posi tive HIV test
9. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level ≥3×upper 
limit of normal (ULN) confirmed at Visit 1 
10. Receipt of immunoglobulin or blood products within 30 days pri or to the date 
inform ed consent i s obtained 
11. Concurrent enrol lment in another intervent ional clinical trial
12. AstraZeneca staff invo lved in the planning and/or conduct of the study
13. Employees of the study  site or any  other individuals involved with the conduct of the 
study , or immediate family members of such individua ls
14. Current ly pregnant, breastfeeding, or lactating
15. Received previous treatment with benralizumab in the present study  (pati ents m ay not 
re-enter the study  after com pletion or prem ature discontinuation).
16. Coincident primary adrenal failure (Addison’s disease) or irreversible secondary  
hypoadrenalism due to another independent cause (eg, pituitary  tumor or i ts treatm ent)
17. Coexistent inflammatory  condi tions for which chroni c OCS doses are part of their 
maintenance treatment such as, but not limit ed, giant cell arterit is or polymyalgia 
rheumat ica
18. Exclusio n from genet ic research may be for any  of the exclusio n criteria specified in 
the main study  or any  of the f ollowing:
-Previous allogeneic bone marrow transplant
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
52(157)-Non-leukocyte depleted whole blood transfusi on within 120 days of genet ic 
sample collect ion
19. Any disorder, including, but not limited to, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepat ic, 
renal, neuro logical, muscul oskeletal , infect ious, endocrine, metabo lic, hematological, 
psychiatric, or major physical im pairment that i s not stabl e in the opinio n of the 
investigator and could:
-Affect the safet y of the pati ent throughout the study
-Confound the study  resul ts; or woul d impact the scient ific validit y of the data 
outcom e. Im pede the subject’s abilit y to com plete the ent ire durati on of  study
20. Any clinically  significant abnormal findings in physical examinat ion, medical  history , 
vital signs, hematol ogy, clinical chemistry , or urinalysis during the enrollment period, 
which in the opinion o f the Invest igator, may put the pat ient at risk because o f his/her 
participat ion in the study, or may influence the results of the study, or the patient’s 
abilit y to complete enti re durati on of  the study .
21. History  of cancer. Patients who have had basal cell carcinoma, localized squam ous cell 
carcino ma of the skin, or in situ carcino ma of the cervix are eligible provided that the 
patient is in remissio n and curative therapy  was completed at l east 12 m onths prior to 
the date informed consent was ob tained.
-Patients who have had other mal ignancies are eligible provided that the patient is 
in remissio n and curat ive therapy was completed at least 5 years prior to the date 
inform ed consent was obtained
22. Any other (non -asthma rel ated) disease flare -up or AE/SAE during the screening 
period that requires the temporary  use of systemic corticosteroids, increase in 
maintenance OCS, or requires ant ibiotics or antiviral medicat ion within 30 days prior 
to Visit 2 (first benralizumab dose). However, an extension o f 3 months of the 
screening period is all owed to ensure that a patient recovers from any non -asthma 
related disease flare- up or AE/SAE. See Section 7.8Table 6for more detail.
23. Current night -shift workers.
See Appendix Kfor inclusio n/exclusio n criteria, and restrict ions rel ated to the PONENTE 
Long Term Follow Up substudy .
Procedures for withdrawal of incorrectly  enrolled pati ents are discussed in Sect ion 3.4.
3.3 Patient enrollment 
Invest igators will keep a record of patients considered for and included in the study .  Thi s 
prescreening/screening log will be evaluated periodically by AstraZeneca or its delegates 
during routi ne m onitoring visi ts.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
53(157)The Investigators will do the fo llowing:
1. Obtain signed informed consent fro m the potenti al patient before any  study -specific 
procedures are performed
2. Assign each potential pat ient a uni que enrollment number, beginning with ‘E#’ via 
an interactive web/vo ice response system (IWRS/IVRS)
3. Determine patient eligibilit y. See Secti ons 3.1and 3.2
Specific information concerning the use of the IWRS/IVRS will be provided in a separate 
manual. 
If a patient withdraws fro m participat ion in the study , then his/her enro llment code cannot be 
reused.  Withdrawn patients will not be replaced in the study.
3.4 Procedures for handling incorrectly enrolled patients
Patients who fail to meet the eligibilit y criteria shoul d not, under any  circumstances, be 
enrolled or re ceive study  medicat ion.  Pati ents who are enrolled but are subsequent ly found 
not to m eet all the eligibilit y criteria must be wi thdrawn from  the study .  If a patient who does 
not m eet all  the eligibili ty criteria i s incorrectly started on treatment, the I nvest igator should 
inform  the AstraZeneca Physician immediately .  A discussi on shoul d occur between the 
AstraZeneca Physician and the Investigator regarding whether to con tinue or discontinue the 
patient from treatm ent.
The AstraZeneca Physician must ensur e all decisio ns are appropriately documented.
3.5 Restrictions
After enro llment, the patient should continue their usual asthma controller medicat ion regimen 
without change during the study .  Any  changes deemed essent ial for pati ent safet y or any  
other reason shoul d be brought to the attention of the Medical Monitor or AstraZeneca 
Physician.  The rationale for any  change in the patient’s usual controller medicat ion should be 
docum ented in the source as well as in the medicatio n electronic case report form (eCRF ).  
Asthma exacerbations should be treated with oral or other sy stemic corti costeroi ds according 
to standard practice.  Section 7.8describes the c oncomi tant m edicat ions allo wed and 
prohibited during the study  period.
Treatment with prednisone/predniso lone shoul d be wi thhel d until  the m orning of serum 
cortisol measurement/ACTH stimulation test as defined below: 
 Prednisone/predniso lone:  24 hours pri or to m orning cortisol  level testing
 High-dose ICS:  No ICS (or ICS/LABA if in single inhaler) treatment on the 
morning o f the cortiso l testing
The visit should be rescheduled if the above medications are not withheld properly (note: 
SABA rescue is allowed throughout the study ). Use of  ICS/LABA as a reliever (eg, Symbicort 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
54(157)Maintenance and Reliever Treatment) that was part of the patient’s usual asthma controller 
regimen at baseline is allowed; however, it should also be withheld before cortiso l testing as 
described above. Any  maintenance therapy  such as l ong-acting muscarinic antagonists used 
prior to study  entry  shoul d not be changed during the study .
3.5.1 Other restrictions
 Fertile and sexually act ive pat ients and their partners must use highly effective 
contra ceptive methods throughout the study and at least for 16 weeks (5 half -lives) 
after last administrati on of  the study  drug  
 Patients m ust abstain fro m donating blood or plasma fro m the time of informed 
consent and for 16 weeks (5 half- lives) after last dos e of study  drug
3.6 Discontinuation of study drug and criteria for withdrawal
Patients m ay be di scontinued from study  drug in the fo llowing si tuations:
 Patient deci sion—the patient i s free at any  time to di scontinue treatm ent, wi thout 
prejudice to further treatm ent
 Severe nonco mpliance with the Clinical Study  Protocol  
 Eligibilit y requirement found not to be fulfilled
 Pregnancy
 AE that, in the opinio n of the Invest igator, contraindicates further dosing
 Lost to follow -up when the fo llowing three attem pts at contact have failed:
- Three (3) attempts of either phone calls, faxes, or emails
- Having sent 1 registered letter/certified mail
- One unsuccessful effort to check the vital status of the patient using publicly 
available sources, if allowed by  local regulati ons 
 Development of any study -specific criteria for discontinuat ion:
- Anaphylactic reaction to the study  drug
- Development of helmint h parasit ic infestations requiring hospitalizat ion
- An asthma -related event requiring mechanical ventilat ion
3.6.1 Procedures for disc ontinuation of a patient from study drug 
A pat ient who decides to discont inue study  drug will  always be asked about the reason(s) and 
the presence o f any A Es.  
All patients who prematurely discontinue study  drug shoul d return to the study center and 
complete the procedures described for the IPD visit within 4 weeks (± 7 days) after last study  
drug administration.  The reason for premature discontinuat ion of study  drug shoul d be 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
55(157)docum ented in the source documentation and recorded in the eCRF.  Patients wil l be required 
to return to the study  center one last time at 12 weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of study  
drug for final study -related assessments (see Table 1).
3.6.2 Screen failures 
Screen failures are patients who do not fulfill the inclusion criteria (see Sect ion 3.1) or who 
meet an exclusio n criterion (see Secti on 3.2) during the enro llment period.  These patients 
shoul d have the reason for study  withdrawal  recorded as ‘screen failure’ ( the potential pat ient 
does not m eet one or m ore cri teria requi red for parti cipat ion in a trial; this reason for study 
withdrawal  is only valid for not enrolled patients). 
3.6.3 Withdrawal of informed consent
Patients are free to withdraw from the study  at any t ime (study  drug and assessments), without 
prejudice to further treatment.
A pat ient who wi thdraws consent will always be asked about the reason(s) and the presence of 
any A Es.  The Invest igator will fo llow up A Es outsi de of  the clinical study . The pati ent will 
return the electronic patient -reported outcome device (ePRO).
If a patient withdraws fro m participat ion in the study , then his/her enrollment code cannot be 
reused.  Withdrawn patients will not be replaced. 
If the patient agrees, he/she will be asked to return to the study  site to com plete procedures 
described for the IPD visit and fo llow-up visi ts (Table 1).
4.3.1.1 Withdrawal of consent for genetic research 
Patients m ay withdraw from  this genet ic research at any t ime, independent of any decisio n 
concerning participat ion in other aspects of the main study .  Vol untary  withdrawal will  not 
prejudice further treatment.
3.7 Discontinuation of the study
The st udy may be stopped if, in the judgment of AstraZeneca, trial patients are placed at 
undue risk because o f clinically significant findings that:
 Meet individual stopping criteria or are otherwise considered significant 
 Are assessed as causally related to s tudy drug
 Are not considered to be consistent with cont inuat ion of the study
Regardless of the reason for terminat ion, all data available for the patient at the time of 
discontinuat ion of fo llow-up m ust be recorded in the eCRF. 
In terminat ing the study, t he Sponsor will ensure that adequate considerat ion is given to the 
protecti on of  the pati ents’ interests.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
56(157)4. STUDY PLAN AND TIMING OF PROCEDURES 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
57(157)Table 1 Study plan –Treatment period and follow -up
Assessment *Protocol 
sectionScreening 
(starting 
Week -2)Induction 
phase 
(starting 
Week 0)OCS reduction phase 
(Week 4 onwards)Maintenance phaseeIPD Follow -
upgUnscheduled 
visitq
V1 V2
+7 daysBenralizumab 
dosing visita  
(V3 onwards) OCS
≤5mg/day 
(Morning 
Cortisol Visit)bPhone 
calldMaintenance 
Phase 
benralizumab 
visitEOTf
± 7 days ± 7 daysc± 7 days ± 7 
days± 7 
days± 7 days
Written 
informed 
consent10.4 X
Demographicsh4.1.1 X
Verify  
inclusion/exclus
ion criteria3.1/3.2 X X
Medical/surgical 
and asthma 
history4.1.1 X
Complete 
physical 
examination5.2.5.1 X
Brief phy sical 
examination5.2.5.2 X X X X X X X
Weight and 
heighti 5.3.1 X X X X
ACQ -6j and 
maintenance 
medication 
assessment5.3.4.1 X <<Weekly  from Visit 2 until EOT visit>> X X
SGRQ 5.3.4.1 X X X
PGICk5.3.4.1 X X
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benr alizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
58(157)Table 1 Study plan –Treatment period and follow -up
Assessment *Protocol 
sectionScreening 
(starting 
Week -2)Induction 
phase 
(starting 
Week 0)OCS reduction phase 
(Week 4 onwards)Maintenance phaseeIPD Follow -
upgUnscheduled 
visitq
V1 V2
+7 daysBenralizumab 
dosing visita  
(V3 onwards) OCS
≤5mg/day 
(Morning 
Cortisol Visit)bPhone 
calldMaintenance 
Phase 
benralizumab 
visitEOTf
± 7 days ± 7 daysc± 7 days ± 7 
days± 7 
days± 7 days
Train o n and 
dispense ePRO5.3.4.1 X
Check ePRO 
compliance5.3.4.1 X X X X X X X
Vital signs 5.2.6 X X X X X X X X
Serum 
chemistry5.2.4 X X X X
Hematology 5.2.4 X X X X
Serum 
pregnancy test 
and FSH testl5.2.4.1 /
3.1X X X
Urine pregnancy 
test5.2.4.1 X X X X
Prednisone/
prednisolone 
levelsm5.3.2 X
Serum for total 
IgE5.3.3 X
Serum for 
Phadiatop test5.3.3 X
Blood sample 
for genomic 
analy sis5.6 X
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
59(157)Table 1 Study plan –Treatment period and follow -up
Assessment *Protocol 
sectionScreening 
(starting 
Week -2)Induction 
phase 
(starting 
Week 0)OCS reduction phase 
(Week 4 onwards)Maintenance phaseeIPD Follow -
upgUnscheduled 
visitq
V1 V2
+7 daysBenralizumab 
dosing visita  
(V3 onwards) OCS
≤5mg/day 
(Morning 
Cortisol Visit)bPhone 
calldMaintenance 
Phase 
benralizumab 
visitEOTf
± 7 days ± 7 daysc± 7 days ± 7 
days± 7 
days± 7 days
Plasma for 
eosinophil -deriv
ed neurotoxin5.7.2 X X X
Serum for 
biomarkers5.7.1 X X
Sputum 
inductio nn 5.7.3 Not applicable due to protocol amendment
Morning 
cortisol testingc5.2.1.1 X XrXr
AI symptom 
evaluation5.2.1 /
5.2.1.2X
Glucocorticoid 
toxicity index5.2.7 X X X X
Assessment of 
asthma 
exacerbations5.2.2/
5.2.3X XOngoing based on investigators’ 
indicationX X XX X
OCS dose 
reductio no 5.1.2Ongoing based on investigator’s 
indication
Adverse events 6.1 X X X X X X X X X X
Concomitant 
medication7.8 X X X X X X X X X X
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
60(157)Table 1 Study plan –Treatment period and follow -up
Assessment *Protocol 
sectionScreening 
(starting 
Week -2)Induction 
phase 
(starting 
Week 0)OCS reduction phase 
(Week 4 onwards)Maintenance phaseeIPD Follow -
upgUnscheduled 
visitq
V1 V2
+7 daysBenralizumab 
dosing visita  
(V3 onwards) OCS
≤5mg/day 
(Morning 
Cortisol Visit)bPhone 
calldMaintenance 
Phase 
benralizumab 
visitEOTf
± 7 days ± 7 daysc± 7 days ± 7 
days± 7 
days± 7 days
Switch to 
prednisone/
prednisoloneAppen -
dixGX
Administration 
of benralizumab4.2 X X XpX
a Benralizumab dosing will be administered as Q4W dosing up until the third dose of benralizumab (Visits 2 to 4) and Q8W for ea ch subsequent 
dose (8 weeks between the 3rdand 4thbenralizumab dose).
b For patients who have reached OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day, HPA axis integrity will be assessed after 4 weeks have passed on 5 mg/day  
(8-9 am mo rning cortisol level, followed by an ACTH stimulation test within approximately 1 week, in case of partial AI).  For those patients 
who had baseline OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day , HPA axis integrity will be assessed 4 weeks after first dose of benralizumab administration 
and before initiation of the OCS reduction phase.  
c Benralizumab administration should be delayed/advanced to match the visit where HPA axis evaluation will be tested, provided the period 
between benralizumab administration is no longer than 10 weeks.
d During the OCS reduction phase, the Investigator and/or an author ized delegate should call the patient for his/her OCS reduction.  OCS 
reductio n could also coincide with a benralizumab dosing visit, or unscheduled visit (due to other clinical issue, per Invest igator discretion).
e Maintenance phase will last approximat ely 24 to 32 weeks from the time the patient reaches a complete withdrawal of OCS without worsening 
of asthma control.  The length of the maintenance phase will vary depending on when the patient enters the maintenance phase.
f The EOT visit will occur 8 weeks (± 7 days) after the last dose of benralizumab.  Patients w ho prematurely discontinue study drug should 
return to the study site and complete the procedures described for the Premature IP Discontinuation Visit (IPD) within 4 week s (±7 days) after 
the last dose of benralizumab.
g For all patients who receive benralizumab, a follow -up contact will be scheduled 12 weeks (± 7 days) after their last dose of benralizumab.
hDemographic information includes date of birth, age, sex, race, and ethnicity (as per local regulations).
i     Height to be measured only at screening
j Patients will complete the ACQ -6 weekly (± 2 days) from Visit 2 until EOT using the ePRO.
k The PGIC will be completed on a weekly (± 2 days) basis (starting at Week 0) during the first month of treatment using the ePRO.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
61(157)l FSH will be analyzed at the screening visit to confirm postmenopausal status only in women <50 years of age who have been ame norrhoeic 
for ≥12 months.
mDone only for patients who switch to prednisone/prednisolo ne at V1. If this test is required, the laboratory tests should be delayed (for all parameters, not 
just prednisone levels) by 3 to 7 days after having switched the OCS and V2 can be done up to 2 weeks after collection of laboratory samples.  
Prednisone/pr ednisolone levels should be measured approximately 1 to 2 hours after prednisone/prednisolone intake on the same day.
n     Not applicable due to protocol amendmen t
o        The OCS reductio n will continue until the patient reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day (or lowest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS down -titration 
is allowed because of the presence of AI as measured by cortisol levels or in case of inadequate asthma control) without losi ng asthma control.
p Benralizumab administration to follow Q8 W periodicity, so it may or may not occur at the same time as morning cortisol testing.  
q The following instances should also be captured as an UNS visit: 1) unscheduled blood collection (ex. Hy’s Law); 2) replacement genetic 
blood sample in case of DNA extraction failure.
rPatients who have Partial AI after the repeat morning cortisol test, will undergo an additional morning cortisol test (and if required, ACTH 
stimulation test for indeterminate result) approximately 1 -2 weeks prior to the end of the O CS Reduction phase. Patients who have Complete 
AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS Reduction phase, will undergo a final morning cortisol test (and if required, ACTH sti mulation test for 
indeterminate result) approximately 1
-2 weeks prior to the end of the OCS Maintenance phase (prior to EOT visit).
*for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy, please refer to Appendix K. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00 065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
62(157)4.1 Enrollment period 
4.1.1 Screening visit –Visit 1 (Week -2)
Each patient will provide written informed consent prior to any  study -specific procedures and 
will undergo assessments applicable for each visit as outlined in Table 1.  Registration of the 
patient’s enrollment via IWRS/IVRS should occur on the day  that Visi t 1 procedures are 
perform ed.
At screening, consent ing patients will be assessed to ensure that they meet all eligibilit y 
criteria.  Vi sit 1 assessments are primarily  concerned wi th assessment of eligibilit y 
(inclusio n/exclusion criteria), including asthma disease state, requisite level o f severit y based 
on background medicat ions and eosinophil count.
Dem ographic informat ion, including date of birth, age, sex, race, and ethnicit y, will be 
collected during the screening visit as per local regulat ions.  All pat ients who are not already  
taking predniso ne/predniso lone as their OCS treatment will be switched to 
prednisone/predniso lone. Testing o f prednisone/predniso lone levels will be done only  for 
patients who swi tch to predni sone/predniso lone. If thi s test i s requi red, all laboratory  tests 
shoul d be delayed by 3 to 7 days after having switched the OCS (Appe ndix F).  
Prednisone/predniso lone levels should be measured approximately 1 to 2 hours after 
prednisone/predniso lone intake on the same day.
At the screening visit, blood sam ples will  be collected for assessments such as laboratory  
tests, genomic analysis, serum bio markers, total IgE, Phadiatop test, EDN, eosinophil count, 
etc., as m entioned in Table 1.  Current, regular use of a high -dose ICS and LABA for 
≥6months prior to enrollment will be recorded.  Addit ionally , pati ents m ust be on chroni c 
daily  OCS therapy  (equivalent to ≥5 mg/day of prednisone) for ≥3 con tinuous m onths di rectly 
preceding Visit 1, and this must be documented in the medical records.  Inhaled 
corticosteroi ds and LABAs may  have been administered as either a fixed dose or 2 separate 
inhalers and must be consistent with the highest approved maintenance dose in the local 
country  (Inclusio n Cri terion 6).  A stable dose of OCS must have been maintained for 
≥4weeks prior to Visit 1.
Patients can proceed direct ly to Visit 2 once central laboratory results are received, and all 
eligibilit y requi rements are confi rmed.  Vi sit 2 should be done up to 2 weeks after Visit 1. For 
patients swi tching to predni sone/predniso lone at V1 and who thus require a delay in 
laboratory  tests, Vi sit 2 can be done up to 2 weeks after the collect ion of laboratory  samples. 
Patients will  cont inue to rec eive treatment with their current ICS/LABA and other 
controller(s) (if applicable) with no changes.
If the patient experiences an asthma exacerbation during screening that requires evaluat ion in 
an urgent care center or emergency  depart ment, hospitalizatio n, or temporary  increase 
(bolus/burst) of systemic steroids, they will not be screen failed, but an extensio n of the 
screening period up to 3 months will be allowed to ensure that the patient recovers fro m the 
asthma exacerbation and the OCS dose is stabil ized. Addi tionally , if a patient experi ences
acute upper/lower respiratory  infect ion that requires ant ibiotics or antiviral medicat ion during 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
63(157)screening, then they  also will not be screen failed and an extensio n of the screening period of 
up to 3 months wil l be allowed. If the patient recovers fro m the asthma exacerbat ion or acute 
upper/l ower respi ratory  infect ion and is stable for ≥2weeks, then the patient will be allo wed 
to con tinue in the study .  Pati ents m ust enter the treatm ent phase wi thin 3 m onths of
screening; if it has been longer than 3 months, then the patient may  be rescreened.
If the patient experiences a non- asthma related event requiring temporary  increase 
(bolus/burst) of systemic steroids, an extensio n of the screening period of up to 3 mont hs m ay 
be allowed (AZ study  physician can be consulted if required).
Patient’s eligibilit y shoul d be evaluated at the screening visit with the relevant documentation 
entered in the source and eCRF.
4.1.2 Rescreening
Rescreening of pat ients for any  reason will  beallowed only  once f or each pati ent and only  
upon approval o f the AstraZeneca Physician.  Patients will keep the same e -code.
4.2 Open -label treatment period
The open -label treatm ent peri od is divided into 3 phases based on the OCS dose adjustment: 
induct ion phase (Section 4.2.1 ), reduction phase (Section 4.2.2), and maintenance phase 
(Secti on 4.2.3 ).  Patients will co mplete the ACQ -6 and maintenance medicat ion assessment 
weekly using the eP RO throughout the treatment period (see Section 5.3.4 for details).
4.2.1 Induction phase
The induct ion phase will start at Visit 2 (Week 0) and will continue until the day prior to Visit 
3.  Inclusio n and exclusio n criteria will  be confi rmed at Visi t 2 and the pati ent will co mplete 
the ACQ -6, maintenance medicat ion assessment, and SGRQ on the ePRO, prior to 
benralizumab administration, to establish bas eline scores. Addit ionally , during the induct ion 
phase only, patients will co mplete the Patient Global Assessment of Change (PGIC) on a 
weekly basis on the ePRO in addit ion to weekly complet ion of the ACQ- 6 and m aintenance 
medicat ion assessments.  All pat ients who m eet eligibilit y criteria and enter the study  will 
receive open- label benralizumab.  The first dose of the study  drug will  be administered SC as 
Q4W dosing at Visit 2.  Patients will be observed at the site for 2 hours after dosing.  During 
this time, patients will remain on their regular asthma controller medicat ions, and no dose 
adjustm ents to OCS will be made.  Patients who experience asthma exacerbat ions that require 
evaluat ion in an urgent care center or emergency department, hospitalizat ion, or tem porary  
increase of systemic steroids (bo lus/burst dosing) will be managed as per Section 5.2.3 .  
4.2.2 OCS Reduction phase
The reduction phase will start at Visit 3 (Week 4) after the dose of benralizumab, and 
subsequent OCS dose reductions will occur according to the schema defined for each baseline 
OCS dose until pat ients reach a 5 mg/day dose ( Table 2).  
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
64(157)The study  drug will be administered SC as Q4W dosing up unt il the third dose of 
benralizumab (therefore at Visits 3 and 4 during the OCS reduction phase) and then Q8W 
thereafter (8 weeks between the 3rdand 4thbenraliz umab dose). Pati ents will be observed at 
the site for 2 hours after dosing for the first 3 study drug administrations (therefore at Visits 3 
and 4 during the OCS reduction phase) and for 1 hour after subsequent study drug 
administrations for any  acute drug reactions.
For all patients, HPA axis integrit y will be evaluated after 4 -weeks on 5 mg/day and prior to 
tapering down the OCS dose (for patients with baseline OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day, this 
will be assessed 4 weeks after the first dose of be nralizumab administration and before 
initiation of the OCS reduction phase)
First, a screening m ethod wi th morning serum  cortisol  is done (8 -9 am morning cortisol level), 
to evaluate whether the patient has:
Normal cortisol levels
Complete AI
Corti sol levels from the morning corti sol test that are below normal range and above the 
Com plete AI range are considered “Indeterminate;” and require addit ional testing described 
below.
Secondly, the ACTH stimulat ion test (i e, Synacthen®, Cortrosyn™) is done within 
approximately  1 week in the subset of patients with indeterminate results from the morning 
cortisol test [see also Section 5.2.1.2 for details). The ACTH st imulation test i s more specific 
than the morning cortiso l test, and can determine whether the patient has:
Normal cortisol levels
Complete AI
Partial AI
Dose reduction of OCS should be interrupted if the patient suffers an asthma exacerbat ion 
(Secti on 5.2.3 ) or in case the Invest igator considers the patient to be having a significant 
deteri oration of  his/her asthma disease (Section 5.1.2.1 ).  After the OCS bolus/burst to treat an 
exacerbati on is com pleted, or after recovery  from an asthma deterioration, the Invest igator 
may eit her return the OCS dose to a one -step hi gher dose l evel (or m ore if considered 
necessary  by the Invest igator) than what was prescribed when the exacerbat ion or asthma 
worsening occurred or continue wit h the same OCS dose, which must be maintained at a 
stable dosage for at least two weeks.
After recovery  from the first exacerbat ion or asthma deterioration, the patient will be allowed 
to proceed with another attempt to reduce their OCS dose; however, the patient will fo llow a 
lower speed for OCS down -titration (reducti ons Q4W; Table 3).
In case of a second exacerbat ion or asthma deterioration, no further OCS dose reduction will 
be allowed, and the patient will remain on the same OCS dose or return to a one -step higher 
dose l evel (or m ore as considered necessary  by the Invest igator) than what was prescribed 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
65(157)when the exacerbat ion/worsening occurred.  The OCS dose reduction phase will then be 
terminated, and the patient will enter the maintenance phase.  Further details ar e provi ded in 
Secti on 5.2.3 . 
Patients who experience asthma exacerbat ions that require evaluat ion in an urgent care center 
or em ergency depart ment, hospitalizat ion, or temporary  increase of systemic steroids 
(bolus/burst dosing) will be managed as per details in Sect ion 5.2.3 . 
To hel p invest igators eval uate the occurrence of a significant asthma deterioration, 
investigators will have access to the patient’s weekly ACQ -6 scores (completed by  means of 
an ePRO).  A significant deterioration is defined as a worsening in ACQ -6 score of at l east 0.5
from value at Visit 2. If the ACQ -6 score at Visit 2 is missing, the 1stscore recorded post -Visit 
2 and pre -OCS reduction may be used as baseline for the 0.5- point increase (note, however, 
that it will  not be used to impute the baseline value for ACQ- 6 analysis). Invest igators should 
consider this informat ion together with an y other inform ation reported by  patients on 
signs/symptom s of the disease as well as compliance with maintenance asthma therapy .  
Based on the totalit y of the informat ion, invest igators can decide whether the patient can 
continue wit h the OCS dose reductio n unt il the patient reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day (or 
lowest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS down -titration is allowed because of the 
presence of AI as measured by cortiso l levels or in case of inadequate asthma control) without 
losing asthma co ntrol.  The other patient -reported outcomes (PROs) will be carried out per the 
schedule in Table 1.
The l ength of the benralizumab treatment period wi ll depend on the baseline OCS dose, 
occurrence of asthma exacerbation(s) or asthma worsening, and whether the patient 
experiences AI.  Procedures specific for the visits are listed in Table 1.  Restri ctions as set out 
in Section 3.5will cont inue to apply throughout th e treatment period.
From  Visi t 3 onwards, the dose of OCS may be reduced only  when condi tions listed in 
Secti on 5.1.2 are met.  The reductions will occur at an interval accordin g to the ti tration 
schedule.  The first OCS dose reduction can occur at Visit 3 after the dose of benralizumab at 
the site.
Patients will  reduce OCS following confirmat ion from  the Invest igator/study  site personnel at 
site visi ts or vi a telephone calls.  P hone calls can be scheduled as required to assess the 
occurrence of exacerbat ions, asthm a control  (ACQ-6 scores), A Es, and concomitant 
medicat ion use. Addit ional site visits can be scheduled for patients in case of poor asthma 
control .  
Table 2depicts the proposed dose reduction schedule, provided the patient does not 
experience an exacerbat ion, worsening of asthma control, or AI.  In case of asthma 
exacerbation or wo rsening, the dose reduction schedule will be longer ( Table 3) and will vary  
depending on HPA axis integrit y and/or on the patient’s recovery  from an e xacerbat ion.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
66(157)Depending on the baseline OCS dose and on the possibilit y of experiencing AI symptoms, 
each patient will spend a different amount of time in the reduction phase and the number of 
visits will be adjusted accordingly.  
Approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to end of the OCS reduction phase, the patients who have 
Parti al AI, will  undergo an addi tional morning cortisol  test (and if required, ACTH stimulat ion 
test for indeterminate result) at the end of the OCS Reduction phase.
4.2.3 Maintenance phase
A pat ient will enter the approximately 24 -to 32 -week maintenance phase when they reach an 
OCS dose of 0 mg/day (or lowest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS down -titration is 
allowed because of the presence of AI as measured by  corti sol levels or in case of i nadequate 
asthma control) without losing asthma control. This could be earlier if OCS dose reduction 
fails due to clinical deterioration or if the pat ient experiences an asthma exacerbation. The 
durati on of  the m aintenance phase will depend on when the pat ient enters the maintenance 
phase relat ive to the dosing cycle of benralizumab. During this phase, patients will continue 
benralizumab Q8W for 3 doses and then the EOT visit will be scheduled 8 weeks (± 7 days) 
after the l ast dose of benralizumab (assessme nts performed as per Table 1). However, if 
during thi s peri od, the pati ent experiences asthma deterioration or an exacerbat ion, the l ength 
of the m aintenance phase will not be extended and the patient will continue on 3 doses of 
benralizumab Q8W. Addit ionally  increases in the maintenance OCS dose due to an asthma 
exacerbation is permitted per investigator discret ion.  Patients who experience an asthma 
exacerbation that requires evaluat ion in an urgent care center or emergency depart ment, 
hospi talizati on, or tem porary  increase of systemic steroids (bo lus/burst dosing) will be 
managed as per details in Sect ion5.2.3 .  
Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS Reduction phase, will 
undergo a final morning cortiso l test (and if required, ACTH stimulat ion test for indeterminate 
resul t) approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to end of the OCS Maintenance phase (prior to EOT 
visit).
Patients will  return the ePRO at the EOT visit.  Complet ion of the treatment will be registered 
in IWRS/IVRS at the EOT visit for each patient. After stopping s tudy drug, the pati ent will be 
adjusted to a post- study asthma maintenance regimen (which may include a respiratory 
biologic, if needed), per Investigator discret ion.    
Patients who prem aturely  discontinue study  drug (see Secti on 3.6 ) shoul d return to the study  
site and com plete procedures described for the IPD visit a nd fo llow-up visi t within 4 weeks 
(±7 days) and 12 weeks (± 7 day s) after the l ast dose of study  drug, respectivel y.  Study  
assessments and procedures to be performed at the IPD and fo llow
-up visits are outlined in 
Table 1.  Reasons for premature discont inuat ion of study  drug shoul d be recorded in the 
eCRF.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
67(157)4.3 Follow -up period
All patients who complete the maintenance phase or who prematurely discont inue study  drug 
will have a fo llow-up contact after 12 weeks of the last dose of benralizumab. The follow-
up 
contact ca n be done either on -site or vi a telephone contact. During this visit, patients will be 
assessed for any  ongoing safet y issues, and A Es and concomitant medicat ions will be 
collected. Patients who have Partial AI or Complete AI at the end of the Maintenance phase, 
shoul d be f ollowed-up by an endocrino logist or other appropriate specialist, if deemed 
necessary  by the Invest igator.
4.4 PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy: Study Plan 
and Timing of Procedures
At the end of the PONENTE EOT visit, patients will be inv ited to parti cipate in a l ong term  
follow up visit 12- to 18 -months after complet ion of the main PONENTE study . This substudy  
is intended to further assess changes in asthma maintenance therapy  in a real -world setting, 
i.e., according to the treatment pres cribed by  their healt hcare provider. Addit ionally , there will 
be assessment of recovery  from AI as well as assessment of glucocortico id toxicit y by means 
of GTI.  
Between the EOT visit of the main PONENTE study  and the l ong term  follow up visit, 
patients will be treated according to standard practice; for example, any changes to 
maintenance asthma regimens are allo wed, including further reductions of OCS as 
recommended in the GINA 2020 report. There will be one on -site visi t 12-18 m onths after the 
EOT vi sit of the m ain PONENTE study . Pati ents who enrol  in the l ong term  follow up visit 
substudy  will st ill co mplete the fo llow-up visit at the end of the main PONENTE study . See 
Appendix Kfor further details.
4.5 Study Conduct Mitigation During Study Disruptions Due to 
Cases of Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public Health 
Crisis
The gui dance given below supersedes instructions provided elsewhere in this CSP and should 
be implemented only during cases of civil crisis, natural disaster, or public healt h crisis (eg, 
during quarant ines and result ing site closures, regional travel rest rictions, and considerat ions if 
site personnel or study pat ients beco me infected with severe acute respiratory  syndrom e 
coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV -2) or similar pandemic infect ion) which would prevent the conduct 
of study -related activit ies at study sites, th ereby compromising the study  site staff or the 
patient’s abilit y to conduct the study . The investigator or designee should contact the study  
Sponsor to discuss whether the mit igation plans bel ow shoul d be implemented.  
To ensure continuit y of the clinical study  during a civil crisis, natural disaster, or public healt h 
crisis, changes m ay be implemented to ensure the safet y of study  patients, m aintain 
compliance wi th Good Clinical Practice, and minimize risks to study  integrity. 
Where allowable by  local he alth authori ties, ethi cs commi ttees, heal thcare provi der gui delines 
(eg, hospital po
licies) or local government, these changes may include the fo llowing opti ons: 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
68(157)• Obtaining consent for the mit igation procedures (note, in the case of verbal consent, 
the Informed Consent Form (ICF) should be signed at the patient’s next contact with the study 
site).
• Hom e or Rem ote vi sit: Perf ormed by  a site qualified Heal th Care Professio nal (HCP) 
or HCP provided by a third -party  vendor (TPV).
• Telemedicine visit: Remote contact with the patients using teleco mmunicat ions 
techno logy including phone calls, virtual or video visit s, and m obile heal th devices. 
• At-home Invest igational Product (IP) administration: Performed by  a site qualified 
HCP, HCP provided by a TPV, if possible. Addit ional informat ion related to the visit can be 
obtained via telemedicine. 
For further details on study  conduct during civil crisis, natural disaster, or public health crisis, 
refer to Appendix L.
5. STUDY ASSESSMENTS
The Rave Web -Based Data Capture (WBDC) system will be used for data collection and 
query  handling.  The Invest igator will ensure that data are recorded on the eCRFs as specified 
in the Clinical Study  Protocol  and in ac cordance wit h the instructions provided.
The Investigator ensures the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the data recorded and 
of the provisio n of answers to data queries according to the Clinical Study  Agreement.  The 
Invest igator will sign the com pleted eCRFs.  A copy  of the com pleted eCRFs will be archived 
at the study  site.
Please refer to Appendix Kfor details on study  assessments conducted during the PONENTE 
Long Term Follow Up substudy .
5.1 Efficacy assessments
5.1.1 Assessment of OCS dose
All patients who meet eligibilit y criteria and enter the study  will receive open -label 
benralizumab and reduce their OCS dose until the patient reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day 
(or lowest OCS dose possibl e in case no further OCS down -titration is allowed because of the 
presence of AI as measured by cortiso l levels or in case of inadequate asthma control) as per 
the details provided in Sect ion 4.2.2 and the schedule provided in Table 2and Sect ion 5.1.2
No further reductions will be made to OCS dose after complet ion of the reduction phase, and 
the pati ent will enter an approximately 24 -to 32 -week maintenance phase.  In case of 
exacerbations , pati ents will  be managed as per details provided in Section 5.2.3 .  Addit ionally, 
in case the patient experiences asthma deterioration or an exac erbat ion, increase in the 
maintenance OCS dose is permitted per invest igator discretion.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
69(157)All OCS dose changes will be documented in the source documentation and recorded in the 
appropriate eCRF form.  Moreover, in case o f OCS reducti on being tem porarily in terrupted 
(in case of an exacerbat ion or asthma deterioration) or permanent ly int errupted (exacerbation, 
asthma deterioration, AI based on cortiso l tests, or occurrence of an adrenal crisis), the reason 
shoul d be docum ented in the appropriate eCRF, and red uction will be done slowly as per 
Table 3.
5.1.2 OCS dose titration
At Visit 1, patients will continue with or be switched to prednisone/predniso lone.  For p atients 
not previously receiving predniso ne/predniso lone as OCS, the conversio n table shown in 
Appendix Fwill be used to cal culate the equivalent prednisone/predniso lone dose for dose 
titration.
The OCS dose titration in the reduct ion phase will be fo llowed as per Table 2depending on 
the init ial OCS dose and HPA axis evaluat ion. If Table 2instructs to reduce dose by 5mg 
increments, but the init ial OCS dose is <5 mg to th e nearest dosing level: The 1streducti on 
woul d be smaller, rounding down to the nearest 5 mg, then continue on with 5 mg Q2W 
reducti ons (examples below):
e.g. 12.5 →10 mg →etc.
e.g 23 →20→15→10 mg →etc.
e.g. 19 →15→10 mg →etc.
If Table 2instructs to reduce the init ial dose by 2.5mg increments, but the init ial dose i s 
<2.5m g to the next dosing level: The 1streduct ion would be smaller, rounding down to the 
nearest 2.5m g, then continue on with 2.5 Q4W reductions (examples below):
e.g. 8 →7.5→5→etc.  
e.g. 6.25 →5→etc.
For all patients, HPA axis integrit y will be evaluated after 4 -weeks on 5 mg/day and prior to 
tapering down the OCS dose (for patients with baseline OCS doses equal to 5 m g/day , this 
will be assessed 4 weeks after the first dose of benralizumab administration and before 
initiation of the OCS reduction phase)
First, a screening m ethod wi th morning serum  cortisol  is done (8 -9 am morning cortisol level), 
to evaluate whe ther the pati ent has:
• Normal cortisol levels
• Complete adrenal insufficiency (AI)
Corti sol levels fro m the morning corti sol test that are below normal range and above the 
Com plete AI range are considered “Indeterminate,” and require addit ional testing descr ibed 
below.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
70(157)Secondly, the ACTH stimulat ion test (i e, Synacthen®, Cortrosyn™) is done within 
approximately  1 week in the subset of patients with indeterminate results from the morning 
cortisol test [see also Section 5.2.1.2 for details). The ACTH st imulation test i s more specific 
than the morning cortiso l test, and can determine whether the patient has:
• Normal cortisol levels
• Complete AI
• Partial AI.
Invest igators may a lso choose to slow the down -titration to 1 m g Q4W once the pati ent 
reaches a OCS dose of 5 mg/day  based on pati ent symptom s alone regardl ess of cortisol  
levels.  Once there is evidence of recovery , OCS reducti on will cont inue unt il the patient 
reaches an O CS dose of 0 mg/day  (or l owest OCS dose possible in case no further OCS 
down -titration is allowed because of the presence of AI as measured by  corti sol levels or in 
case of inadequate asthma control) without losing asthma control.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
71(157)Table 2 OCS down -titration approaches
Initial OCS 
dose/dayOCS down -titration to reach an OCS dose of:
20 mg 10 mg 7.5 mg 5 mg 0 mg
>20 mg Reduction of 
5mg weekly 
until reaching 
dose of 
20mg/dayReduction of 
5mg Q2W 
until reaching 
dose of 
10mg/day2.5mg 
Q2W until 
reaching 
dose of 
7.5mg/day2.5mg Q4W until 
reaching dose of 
5mg/dayNo AI: reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching dose of 
0mg/day
Risk AI: reductions of 1 mg Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months 
laterb
>10 mg to 
≤20mgReduction of 
5mg Q2W 
until reaching 
dose of 
10mg/day2.5mg 
Q2W until 
reaching 
dose of 
7.5mg/day2.5mg Q4W until 
reaching dose of 
5mg/dayNo AI: reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching dose of 
0mg/day
Risk AI: reductions of 1 mg Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months 
laterb
>7.5 mg to 
≤10mg 2.5mg 
Q2W until 
reaching 
dose of 
7.5mg/day2.5mg Q4W until 
reaching dose of 
5mg/dayNo AI: reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching dose of 
0mg/day
Risk AI: reductions of 1 mg Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months 
laterb
>5 m g to 
≤7.5 mg2.5mg Q4W until 
reaching dose of 
5mg/dayNo AI: reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching dose of 
0mg/day
Risk AI: reductions of 1 mg Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months 
laterb
5 mg No AI: reductions of 2.5 mg Q4W until reaching dose of 
0mg/day
Risk AI: reductions of 1 mg Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months 
laterb
aRisk AI means “partial AI” cortisol testing confirmed with ACTH stimulation testing. After repetitio n of the test 2 months later, the decision to further 
reduce OCS dose will be based on the morning cortisol test results. If test results are normal, the OCS dose may be reduced d irectly to 0 mg/day  (if 
patient is receiving ≤3 mg); the patient will continue receiving 1 mg Q4W if still at risk. If complete AI is indicated, OCS dose will not be modified.
bIf morning cortisol test results again indicate complete AI at 3 months, the OCS dose will not be modified as this is the fin al attempt.  If morn ing cortisol 
test results indicate risk AI, then reductions will be 1 mg Q4W and, if normal, then reductions will be 2.5 mg Q4W.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
72(157)Table 3 “Rescue” OCS down -titration after recovery from an asthma exacerbation or deterioration
Initial OCS 
dose/day“Rescue” OCS down -titration after recovery from an asthma exacerbation or deterioration to reach an OCS dose of:
10 m g 5 mg 0 mg
>20 mg Reduction of 5 mg Q4W 
until reaching a dose of 
10mg/da yReduction of 2.5 mg 
Q4W until reaching a 
dose of 5 mg/dayNo AI: Reduction of 2.5 mg Q4W
Risk AI: 1 mg/day Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months laterb
>10 mg to 
≤20mgReduction of 5 mg Q4W 
until reaching a dose of 
10mg/da y Reduction of 2.5 mg 
Q4W until reaching a 
dose of 5 mg/dayNo AI: Reduction of 2.5 mg Q4W
Risk AI: 1 mg/day Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months laterb
>5 mg to 
≤10 mgReduction of 2.5 mg 
Q4W until reachin g a 
dose of 5 mg/dayNo AI: Reduction of 2.5 mg Q4W
Risk AI: 1 mg/day Q4W and repeat test 2 months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months laterb
5 mg No AI: Reduction of 2.5 mg Q4W
Risk AI: 1 mg/day Q4W and repeat test 2months latera
Complete AI: No OCS dose reduction and repeat test 3 months laterb
aAfter repetition of the test 2 months later, the decision to further reduce OCS dose will be based on the morning cortisol te st results. If test results are 
normal the O CS dose may be reduced directly to 0 mg/day  (if patient was receiving ≤3 mg); the patient will continue receiving 1 mg Q4W if still at risk.
bIf morning cortisol test results again indicate complete AI at 3 months, the OCS dose will not be modified as this is the last attempt.  If morning cortisol 
test results indicate risk AI, then reductions will be 1 mg Q4W and, if normal, then reductions will be 2.5mg Q4W.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
73(157)For predni sone doses below 5 mg, if the exact dose strength is not available in the country , the 
daily  dose to be administered coul d be achieved by dosing every  other day .  Daily  dose will be 
the average of 2 days.  See Appendix Gfor help dosing <5 mg in relat ion to tabl et strength.
5.1.2.1 Asthma worsening or asthma exacerbation preventing OCS down -titration 
The OCS dose titration will be interrupted in case of one of the fo llowing circumstances 
related to the asthma condit ion:
 Asthma deterioration will be assessed by the investigators when there is an increase 
in ACQ -6 scores of ≥0.5 from the value at Visit 2. If the ACQ -6 score at Vi sit 2 is 
missing, the 1stscore recorded post -Visit 2 and pre -OCS reduction may be used as 
baseline value for the 0.5 -point increase (note, however, that it will not be used to 
impute the baseline for ACQ -6 analysis). The Investigator will decide whether the 
worsening of asthma should lead to an interru ption in tapering of OCS dose until 
asthma control improves.  
 In case of an asthma exacerbat ion that requires treatment with systemic 
corticosteroi ds for at l east 3 consecut ive days, hospitalizat ion, or emergency room 
admissio n, the OCS dose titration will be interrupted, and appropriate treatment will 
be administered as described in Sect ion 5.2.3 .
After recovery  from the first asthma deterioration o r exacerbat ion, pati ents will be offered to 
continue OCS tapering down at a slower speed (ie, Q4W); however, in the case of a second 
event of asthma deterioration or exacerbation, the OCS reduction will be stopped.
The l ower OCS dose (0 m g or above, if required to control asthma disease) that is not changed 
during a period of 4 weeks and that ensures a patient does not suffer from an asthma 
exacerbation or that avo ids the occurrence of an asthma deterioration/worsening requiring an 
increase in OCS dose, bas ed on invest igator criteria, will be considered the final OCS dose of 
the OCS reduction phase, and, thereafter, the patient will init iate the OCS maintenance phase 
on that OCS dose.
5.2 Safety assessments
5.2.1 HPA axis evaluation
For all patients, HPA axis integrit y will be evaluated after 4 -weeks on 5 mg/day and prior to 
tapering down the OCS dose (for patients with baseline OCS doses equal to 5 mg/day , this 
will be assessed 4 weeks after the first dose of benralizumab administration and before 
initiation of the OC S reduction phase)
First, a screening m ethod wi th morning serum  cortisol  is done (8 -9 am morning cortisol level), 
to evaluate whether the patient has:
• Normal cortisol levels
• Complete adrenal insufficiency (AI)
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
74(157)Corti sol levels fro m the morning corti sol testthat are below normal range and above the 
Com plete AI range are considered “Indeterminate,” and require addit ional testing described 
below.
Secondly, the ACTH stimulat ion test (i e, Synacthen®, Cortrosyn™) is done within 
approximately  1 week in the subset of patients wi th indeterminate results fro m the morning 
cortisol test [see also Section 5.2.1.2 for details). The ACTH st imulation test i s more specific 
than the morn ing cortiso l test, and can determine whether the patient has:
• Normal cortisol levels
• Complete AI
• Partial AI.
The process will be as described in Figure 2.
For females using oral estrogen -containing contraceptives or oral estrogen -containing 
horm one repl acement therapy , the threshold for normal values will be 2 times the normal 
morning corti sol levels and 1.5 times the normal ACTH stimulation test cortiso l levels. Details 
related to val ues f or norm al, parti al AI, and com plete AI for these patients are provided in the 
laboratory  manual. 
For the morning cortiso l test, the l ast OCS dose should be taken ≥ 24 hours prior to testing. 
Addit ionally , pati ents m ustnot take ICS (or ICS/LABA if in single inhaler) treatment on the 
morning o f the cortiso l testing (for patients taking a once -daily  ICS/LABA form ulation, e.g. 
fluticasone furoate/vilanterol patients must not take the treatment ≤ 24 hours prior to the 
morning of the cortiso l testing). If a patient requires a short course of macro lides, ant ivirals, or 
azoles, there m ust be a window of ≥1 week pri or to the testing of cortiso l levels (see Sect ion 
7.8).
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
75(157)Figure 2 HPA axis evaluation
Figure 2: For normal cortisol levels with concurrent signs/symptoms of AI, OCS down -titration should continue 
at a slower pace (1 mg Q4W). For complete AI identified via morning cortisol testing, refer to se ction 5.2.1.1 for 
instructio ns on 3-month repeat testing. For partial AI or complete AI identified via ACTH stimulation test see 
Section 5.2.1.2 for instructions on 2 -month or 3-month repeat testing respectively. Patients who have Partial AI 
will undergo an additional morning cortisol test (and if required, ACTH stimulation test for indeterminate result) 
approximately 1 -2 weeks prior to the end of the OCS Reduction phase. Pa tients who have Complete AI or Partial 
AI at the end of the OCS Reduction Phase, will undergo a final morning cortisol test (and if required, ACTH 
stimulation test for indeterminate result) approximately 1 -2 weeks prior to the end of the Maintenance phase 
(prior to EOT).
Note: Central lab reports list reference ranges that are different than this study -reference ranges. To interpret 
laborato ry results for each morning cortisol or ACTH stimulation test, please look for the study -specific lab alerts 
indicatin g normal, partial AI, and complete AI on the lab reports provided by central labs. The study -specific 
reference ranges for normal, partial AI, and complete AI are provided in the laboratory 
manual. 
5.2.1.1 Morning cortisol test (done at “OCS ≤ 5mg/day [morning cortisol]” visit)
For the morning cortiso l test, hol d OCS dose and other concomitant medicat ions that coul d 
interfere wi th corti sol resul ts per Secti on 5.2.1 . Serum samples for cortiso l will be collected 
between 8 and 9 am  and will  be sent to a central  laboratory  for evaluat ion.  Once the results 
are available, the site will inform the pat ient of the results via telephone.  Depending on the 
resul t, the acti ons that will be implemented are as follows:
 If corti sol levelsare wi thin norm al range and the pati ent does not exhibit any  signs 
and/or symptoms of AI, the patient will continue OCS down -titration by 2.5 mg 
Q4W 

Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
76(157) If corti sol levels are wi thin norm al range but the pati ent exhibit s signs and/or 
symptoms of AI, then OCS down -titration shoul d continue at a sl ower pace 
(1mgQ4W).  
 If corti sol levels are below the normal range and above the complete AI range 
(indeterminate result), then the patient will be instructed to maintain the current 
OCS dose and come back to the s ite within 1 week for an ACTH st imulat ion test 
(Secti on5.2.1.2 )
 If co mplete AI i s confirmed, sites will inform pat ients that the OCS dose will 
remain the same without further reduction unt il there is evidence of recovery fro m 
the com plete AI wi thout worsening of asthma control.  The morning cortiso l test 
will be repeated 3 months later, and patients will be educated for symptom 
awareness o f adrenal suppressio n and use of steroid emergency cards.  During this 
repeat test 3 months later, the patient would also repeat all clinical assessments that 
were done with the init ial morning corti sol test (see Table 1). After the repeat 
morning corti sol test, the si te will inform the pat ient based on the results as follows:
-If morning cortiso l resul ts at 3 m onths indicate normal cortisol values, then 
reducti ons will  be 2.5 m gQ4W, and the patient would subsequently mo ve to 
maintenance phase at OCS 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
-If morning cortiso l tests at 3 m onths are indeterminate, then reduct ions will be 
delayed further, and the patient would return approximately  1-week later for an 
ACTH st imulat ion test:
If normal result after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by  2.5mg Q4W then 
move to m aintenance phase at 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
If the result is Partial AI after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by 1mg Q4W 
then move to m aintenance phase at 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
If co mplete AI result after ACTH stimulat ion: OCS dose will not be 
reduced further, move to maintenance phase at current OCS dose
-If morning cortiso l tests again indicate complete AI at 3 months, the OCS dose 
will not be modified as this is the final attempt. The patient would mo ve to 
maintenance phase at OCS 5mg (or lowest possible dose). 
Patients who have Partial AI will undergo an additio nal morning corti sol test (and if required, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterm inate result) approximately  1-2 weeks pri or to the end of 
the OCS Reduction phase. Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS 
Reduction Phase, will undergo a final morning cortiso l test (and if required, ACTH 
stimulat ion test for indeterminate resul t) approximately 1 -2 weeks pri or to the end of the 
Maintenance phase (prior to EOT). In the absence of evidence of HPA axis recovery, 
corticosteroi d supplementati on is recommended during situations of stress (ie, fractures, 
surgery , traum a,labor, invasive dental procedures, severe systemic infect ions, m ajor burns, 
and fever >38.5ºC). Addit ionally , pati ents wi th Parti al AI or Com plete AI at the end of the 
Maintenance phase should be referred to an endocrino logist or other appropriate special ist, per 
Invest igator discretion.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
77(157)Details related to values for normal, partial AI and complete AI are provided in the laboratory  
manual.
5.2.1.2 ACTH stimulation test 
The ACTH stimulat ion test (e.g., Synacthen®, Cortrosyn™, etc.) test will be performed when 
morning cortiso l levels are below the normal range (but above complete AI levels). Please 
refer to the package insert of the product used locally for further guidance on preparation and 
administration. The sites will inform the pat ients of the morning cortiso lresul ts via phone call, 
and a visit will be scheduled within 1 week for the ACTH st imulat ion test. In the event of any 
issues wit h availabilit y of the product used for the ACTH st imulat ion test, please consult with 
AZ study  physician for further guidance.
For the ACTH stimulat ion test, hold OCS dose and other concomitant medications that could 
interfere wi th corti sol resul ts per Secti on 5.2.1 . An injection o f the fast-acting ACTH 
stimulant will be given intravenously.  Serum samples for cortiso l will be collected between 8 
and 9 am and will be sent to a central laboratory  for eval uation as f ollows:a blood sam ple for 
serum  cortisol  will be collected at 0 minutes (b efore inject ion) and 30 minutes after the 
inject ion.  Peak cortiso l response at 30 minutes will be selected to assess AI, and the OCS 
taper will fo llow the applicable scenario below:
 If a normal peak cortisol level is demonstrated at 30 minutes, the site will inform 
the pati ent vi a phone call , and the pati ent will continue OCS dose titration by 
2.5mg Q4W, and subsequently would move to the maintenance phase at OCS dose 
of 0mg (or l owest possible dose). 
 If the peak cortiso l level at 30 minutes is below the normal range y et above the 
level of co mplete AI (“partial AI”), or there are some signs/symptoms of AI or 
corticosteroi d withdrawal syndrom e, the si te will inform  the pati ent to cont inue 
OCS down -titration at a sl ower speed (1 m g Q4W). The morning cortiso l test will 
be repeated 2 months later, as per the process described in Figure 2.During this 
repeat test 2 months later, the patient would also repeat all clinical assessments that 
were done with the init ial morning corti sol test (see Table 1).
-If morning cortiso l test results indicate normal cortiso l values, then reductions 
will be up to 2.5 mg Q4W (based on patient’s current OCS dose), and the 
patient woul d subsequent ly move to m aintenance phase at OCS 0mg (or lowest 
possible dose)
-If morning cortiso l test results at 2 months are indeterminate, then reductions 
will be delayed, and the patient would return approximately 1 -week l ater for an 
ACTH st imulat ion test.
If normal result after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by  2.5mg Q4W then 
move to m aintenanc e phase at 0m g (or l owest possible dose)
If the result is Partial AI after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by 1mg Q4W 
then move to m aintenance phase at 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
78(157)If co mplete AI result after ACTH stimulat ion: OCS dose will not be 
reduced furthe r, move to m aintenance phase at current OCS dose
-If morning cortiso l test results at 2 months indicate complete AI, the OCS dose 
will not be modified as this is the final attempt. The patient would mo ve to 
maintenance phase at OCS 5mg (or lowest possible d ose). 
 If peak cortiso l level at 30 minutes indicates complete AI, sites will inform pat ients 
that the OCS dose will remain the same without further reduction unt il there is 
evidence of recovery  from the com plete AI wi thout worsening of asthma control.  
The morning corti sol test will be repeated 3 months later and patients will be 
educated for symptom awareness of adrenal suppressio n and use of steroid 
emergency cards. During this repeat test 3 months later, the patient would also 
repeat all clinical assess ments that were done with the init ial m orning cortisol  test 
(see Table 1). After the repeat morning cortiso l, the si te will inform the patient 
based on the results as follows:
-If results indicate normal cortiso l values, then reductions will be 2.5 mg Q4W, 
and the patient would subsequently mo ve to m aintenance phase at OCS 0mg 
(or lowest possible dose)
-If morning cortiso l tests at 3 m onths indicate indeterminate results , then 
reducti ons will  be delayed further, and the patient would return approximately 
1-week l ater for an ACTH stimulat ion test.
If normal result after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by  2.5mg Q4W then 
move to m aintenance phase at 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
Ifthe resul t is Parti al AI after ACTH stimulat ion: Reduce by 1mg Q4W 
then move to m aintenance phase at 0mg (or lowest possible dose)
If co mplete AI result after ACTH stimulat ion: OCS dose will not be 
reduced further, move to maintenance phase at current OCS dose
-If morning cortiso l tests again indicate complete AI at 3 months, the OCS dose 
will not be modified as this is the final attempt. The patient would mo ve to 
maintenance phase at OCS 5mg (or lowest possible dose).
Patients who have Partial AI will unde rgo an addi tional morning corti sol test (and if required, 
ACTH st imulat ion test for indeterminate result) approximately 1 -2 weeks pri or to the end of 
the OCS Reduction phase. Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the OCS 
Reduction Phase , will undergo a final morning cortiso l test (and if required, ACTH 
stimulat ion test for indeterminate result) approximately 1 -2 weeks pri or to the end of the 
Maintenance phase (prior to EOT).
In the absence of evidence of HPA axis recovery , pati ents shoul d be instructed to carry  som e 
type of ident ificat ion (worn around the neck or wrist or carried as a card) warning of their 
clinical status of corticosteroid dependence alo ng with a medical report detailing the treatment 
measures needed, including intramusc ular hydrocorti sone requirements.  Corticosteroid 
supplementati on is recommended during situat ions of stress (ie, fractures, surgery , trauma, 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C 00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
79(157)labor, invasive dental procedures, severe systemic infect ions, m ajor burns, and fever >38.5ºC). 
Addit ionally , pati ents wi th Parti al AI or Com plete AI at the end of the study  shoul d be 
referred to an endocrino logist or other appropriate specialist, per Investigator discret ion.
Details related to values for normal, partial AI and complete AI are provided in the laborato ry 
manual.
5.2.2 Assessment of asthma exacerbations
During the study , an asthma exacerbat ion will be defined as a worsening of asthma symptoms 
that leads to any  of the f ollowing:
 A tem porary  bolus/burst of systemic corticosteroids (at a dose above one level 
higher than the current titration step) for at least 3 consecut ive days to treat 
symptoms of asthma worsening; a single depo -injectable dose of corticosteroids 
will be considered equivalent to a 3 -day bolus/burst of systemic corticosteroids. 
Note: Per -protocol up-titration of  the OCS dose to one level higher is not 
necessarily considered to be an exacerbat ion event
-Patients who experience an exacerbation during the screening period (between 
Visits 1 and 2) can be granted an extensio n of the screening period to ensure that a 
patient recovers from  an asthma exacerbat ion and the OCS dose is stabilized.  
 An emergency  room  or urgent care visit (defined as evaluat ion and treatment for 
<24 hours in an emergency  depart ment or urgent care center) due to asthma that 
requi red systemic corticosteroids (as per the above)
 Inpat ient hospi talizat ion (defined as admissio n to an inpatient facilit y and/or 
evaluat ion and treatment in a healt hcare facilit y for ≥24 hours) due to asthma
The Investigator must justify the decisio n for defining an event of worsening asthma as an 
exacerbation and record it in the source documents and eCRF.  An asthma exacerbation that 
occurs within 7 days o f the last dose of systemic steroids, prescribed for a prior exacerbation, 
will be counted as the same exacerbat ion event.
The patient may  remain in the study  after an exacerbat ion and cont inue to receive study drug 
if the Invest igator judges that it is medically appropriate for the patient to do so and will be 
managed as per the details provided in S ection 5.2.3 .
Reasonable attempts should be made by the Invest igator to bring the patient into the study site 
for pati ent-initiated asthma worsening , parti cularly when i t resul ts in addit ional treatment 
being prescribed.  Study  site evaluat ions for asthma worsening may  occur as an unscheduled 
visit or as part of a routine center visit if the worsening happens to occur in line with a 
scheduled visit.  A copy  of the m edical record should be obtained for exacerbat ions evaluated 
and treated at non -study  sites (eg, by  the primary  care provi der or at an em ergency 
departm ent/hospi tal).  Details shoul d be entered into the exacerbation eCRF in a timely  
fashio n.  Changes in conco mitant m edicati ons due to exacerbat ions must be recorded in the 
appropriate module of the eCRF.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
80(157)5.2.3 Management of asthma exacerbations during treatment period
Patients who experience an exacerbation during the treatment period may remain on t he study 
drug at the Investigator’s discret ion.  Asthma exacerbat ions will be treated with oral or other 
systemic corticosteroids according to standard clinical practice.
 Induction phase: If a patient experiences an exacerbat ion during the induct ion 
phase, the start of the OCS dose reductions may be delayed.  After the OCS 
bolus/burst to treat an exacerbation is co mplete, the patient may be returned to a 
one-step hi gher dose l evel (or m ore if considered necessary  by the Invest igator) 
than what was prescribe d when the exacerbat ion occurred.  The Invest igator may 
decide to m aintain the same OCS dose.  The patient’s OCS dose should be stable 
for at least two weeks before entering the OCS reduction phase 
 Reduction phase: If a patient experiences an exacerbat ionduring the reduction 
phase, the Investigator may  do one of the following for at least two weeks after 
completion of the OCS bo lus/burst:
-The patient may  be returned to a one -step hi gher dose l evel (or m ore if 
considered necessary  by the Invest igator) than what was prescribed when the 
exacerbation occurred 
or
-The same OCS dose may be maintained at a stable dosage and then OCS 
down -titration may  be cont inued once the patient recovers from the 
exacerbation
Further dose reductions during this phase will be consi dered as per the 
Invest igator’s opinio n.  After recovery  from the fi rst exacerbat ion, the pati ent will 
be allowed to proceed with another attempt to reduce their OCS dose; however, 
they woul d follow a l ower speed of OCS down -titration (reducti ons ever y 4 weeks) 
(Table 3).
In case of a second exacerbat ion, no further OCS dose reduction will be allowed, 
and the patient will cont inue the same dose or w ill return to a one- step hi gher dose 
level (or more as considered necessary  by the Investi gator) than what was 
prescribed when the exacerbation occurred.  The patient will then enter the 
maintenance phase and continue the same dose through the end of study .
 Maintenance phase: If a patient experiences an exacerbat ion during the 
maintenance phase, the length of the maintenance phase will not be extended; and 
the pati ent will continue on 3 doses of benralizumab Q8W. After the OCS 
bolus/burst is co mplete, the p atient may then be returned to a one -step hi gher dose 
level (or more if considered necessary by  the Investi gator) than the OCS dose they  
were on when the exacerbat ion occurred, or the Investigator may  deci de to m aintain 
the sam e OCS dose throughout the mai ntenance phase.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
81(157)5.2.4 Laboratory safety assessments
Laboratory  safet y assessments (listed in Table 4) will  be perform ed in a central  laboratory .  
For informat ion on m ethods of collect ion, assessment, labelling, storage, and shipment of 
samples, please refer to the separate laboratory  manual.   Safet y samples will be collected 
according to the schedule provided in Table 1. 
Laboratory  resul ts shoul d be reviewed by  the Investi gator/authori zed delegate and evaluated 
for abnorm alities.  Any laboratory  abnorm alities consi dered to be si gnificant in the 
Invest igator/authorized delegate’s judgement should be reported as A Es, as described in 
Secti on6
.
The copy  of the laboratory  resul ts report shoul d be si gned and dated by  the 
Invest igator/authorized delegate and retained at the study  site.
Table 4 Laboratory safety variables
Hematology/Hemostasis (whole blood) Serum  chemistry
Hematocrit Alanine aminotransferase
Hemoglobin Alkaline phosphatase 
Platelet count Aspartate aminotransferase
Red blood cell count Creatinine 
Absolute Leukocyte count (White blood cell count) and 
differ entia l Low-density lipoprotein
Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase
Potassium 
Sodium
Total bilirubin 
Glucose 
5.2.4.1 Pregnancy test
The fo llowing tests are applicable to female pat ients only  and will  be conducted according to 
the schedule provided in Table 1. 
 Serum  beta -HCG (beta -human chorionic gonadotropin):  To be done at screening 
visit (Visit 1) and EOT only for WOCBP (analyzed at central laboratory ).
 Follicle -stimulating horm one:  To be done at screening visit (Visit 1) only for 
female patients <50 y ears who have been amenorr hoeic for ≥12m onths to confirm 
postm enopausal status 
 Urine HCG:  To be performed at the study  site for WOCBP at each treatment visit 
using a dipst ick before any invasive study procedures (eg, blood sampling) are 
perform ed and before study  drug administrat ion.  Posi tive urine test result must be 
confirmed wit h serum beta -HCG.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
82(157)5.2.5 Physical examination
Physical examinat ion will be done according to the schedule provided in Table 1.
Baseline data will be collected at Visit 1.  Any new finding(s) or aggravated existing 
finding(s), judged as clinically significant by  the Investi gator, will  be reported as A Es as 
described in Section 6.1.
5.2.5.1 Complete physical examination
The complete physical examinat ion will include an assessment of the following: general 
appearance, skin, head and neck (including eyes, ears, no se, mouth, and throat), lymph nodes, 
abdo men, muscul oskeletal  (incl uding spine and extremit ies), cardiovascular, respiratory , and 
neuro logical systems.
5.2.5.2 Brief physical examination
The brief physical examinat ion will  include an assessment of the general appe arance, 
abdo men, cardi ovascular, and respiratory  system . For the bri ef physical  examinat ion, only 
inform ation on whether the assessment was performed or not is to be recorded.
5.2.6 Vital signs
Predose vi tal signs (pul se, bl ood pressure [BP], respi ration rate and body  temperature), will be 
recorded according to the schedule provided in Table 1. 
The vital signs will be recorded prior to blood draw, administration of study  drug, and, if 
possible, administration of usual asthma controller medicat ion. 
Pulse rate and BP should be measured after the patient has been rest ing for at least 5 minutes. 
The m easurement will be taken in sitting posit ion. Pul se rate will be obtained before BP.
Body  temperature will be measured in Celsius before administration of study  drug and in 
accordance with local standards.
5.2.7 Glucocorticoid toxicity index
Glucocorti coidtoxicity index will be assessed as described by Miloslavsky  et al  2017 (see 
Appendix Hfor details).  The composite GTI captures commo n GC toxicit ies that are 
sensit ive to differing cumulat ive GC doses over the period of a ty pical  clinical tri al (6 m onths 
to 3years).  The individual items within the GTI are weighted relat ive to each other for 
severit y, and the instrument has the capabilit y of measuring not only worsening of GC toxicit y 
from baseline, but also improvement.
The composite GTI measures change in GC toxicit y rather than absol ute GC toxicit y in order 
to account for the effects of prior GC therapy .  Scoring shoul d be perform ed as per the 
schedule of assessments, using entry  assessment as the baseline.  The GTI items were ranked 
in order of severit y within each domain.  The relat ive weights for each toxicit y item were 
derived using mult icriteria decisio n analysis.  Multicriteria decisio n analysis has been used for 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
83(157)the creati on of  multiple classificat ion criteria sets in a variet y of inflammatory  diseases, 
including rheumatoid arthri tis (Neogi  et al  2010 ), systemic sclerosis ( Johnson et al 2014), and 
systemic lupus ery thematosus ( Tedeschi et al 2018).
The composite GTI will be assessed at the time points given in Table 1.  Only  a subset of 
items fro m the com posite GTI will  be assessed in PONENTE: body  mass index, glucose 
tolerance (glycosylated hemoglobin), BP, low -densit y lipoprotein, steroid my opathy , skin 
toxicity, neuropsy chiatri c toxi city, and infecti on (items f rom the Specific List will not be 
assessed).
5.3 Other assessments
5.3.1 Weight and height
Weight and height will be measured according to the schedule provided in Table 1. Hei ght 
will be taken at screening Visit 1 only. The pat ient’s weight will be recorded in kilograms, and 
height in cent imeters. Weight and height mea surements will be performed in light clothing 
and wit h shoes off.
5.3.2 Prednisone/Prednisolone levels
For pati ents who swi tch to predni sone/predniso lone only , a prednisone/predniso lone test will 
be done with V1 laboratory  work. For these patients, the site shou ld delay the laboratory  test 
(for all parameters, not just prednisone/predniso lone levels) by 3 to 7 days after the patient has 
switched thei r OCS.  Im portantly, prednisone/predniso lone levels should be measured 1 to 
2hours after prednisone/predniso lone intake on that day  to ensure levels are detectable. This 
test i s not requi red for pati ents entering the study  on predniso ne/predniso lone.
5.3.3 Total IgE and Phadiatop
The tests will be performed at screening according to Table 1and will be used to characterize 
patients at baseline.  Analysis will be performed by  the central  laboratory .  Instructi ons f or 
sample collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment can be found in the separate laboratory  
manual provided to the centers.
5.3.4 Clinical outcome assessments
5.3.4.1 Patient -reported outcomes
Patient-reported outcomes data will be captured electronically using a handheld device 
(ePRO).  Site personnel will be trained on using the ePRO.  Detailed procedures for using the 
ePRO and training the patients will be described in a separate instruction manual.  Patients 
will be trained on at- home use of the ePRO at Visit 2.  Training will include explanat ion of 
device funct ionality and i ts proper use.  Patients will also be asked to verify completion of 
training on the ePRO.  Patients will be asked to bring the device back at each study  visit.  
On-site PRO quest ionnaires should be completed prior to any  other assessments.  Data fo r all 
PROs will be collected in accordance wit h Table 1.  Patients should be informed that the 
recording made electronically cannot be retrospectively or prospectively  entered and m ust be 
completed wi thin a defined time window.  Patients will also be provided wit h informat ion 
about when and where to request help if problems occur.  The Invest igator/authorized delegate 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
84(157)will check the patient’s adherence t o complet ing the ePRO as described in Table 1. There will 
be tri ggers in the PROs to alert invest igators to signs o f worsening o f asthma and advising 
them to contact the patient for evaluat ion.  These alerts will be described in a separate guide.  
Asthma Control Questionnaire 6
The ACQ- 6 is a shortened version o f the ACQ that assesses asthma symptoms (nighttime 
waking, symptoms on waking, activit y limitation, shortness of breath, wheezing, and use of 
short -acting β 2agoni sts), omitt ing the forced expiratory  volume in 1second measurement 
from the original  ACQ score.
Patients will  be asked to recall how their asthma has been during the previous week by 
responding to 1 bronchodilator use question and 5 symptom quest ions.
Quest ions are weighted equally and scored from 0 (totally controlled) to 6 (severely 
uncontrolled).  The mean ACQ -6 score is the m ean of the responses.  Mean scores of ≤0.75 
indicate well -controlled asthma, scores between 0.75 and ≤1.5 indicate partly  controlled 
asthma, and scores >1.5 indicate not well -controlled asthma ( Juniper et al 2006).  Individual 
changes of ≥0.5 are considered to be clinically  meaningful .
From  Visi t 2 onwards, the pati ent will co mplete the ACQ
-6 at hom e every  1 week (± 2 day s) 
until the EOT visit.  The ePRO device will be set up with functionalit y to collect unscheduled 
ACQ -6 assessments on site if required by invest igators at a visit.
At each clinic/phone call visit, in addit ion to the informat ion provi ded by  the pat ient on 
his/her asthma disease, investigators will have access to the patient’s ACQ -6 scores 
(completed by  means of an ePRO) to evaluate whether the patient’s condit ion has not 
significant ly deteriorated (ie, increase in score of ≥0.5 from  baseline [baseline defined as 
value at Visit 2 before benralizumab administration]) and take the final decisio n to further 
reduce the OCS dose until the pat ient reaches an OCS dose of 0 mg/day (or lowest OCS dose 
possible in case no further OCS down -titration is all owed because of the presence of AI as 
measured by cortisol levels or in case of inadequate asthma co ntrol) while not losing asthma 
control .
St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire
The SGRQ is a 50- item PRO instrum ent devel oped to m easure the healt h status of subjects 
with airway obstructi on diseases ( Jones et al  1991 ).  The questionnaire is divided into 2 parts: 
Part 1 consists of 8 items that pertain to the severit y of respi ratory  symptom s in the preceding 
4 weeks, and Part 2 consists of 42 items relat ed to the daily  activity and psychosocial impacts 
of the individual’s respiratory  condi tion.  The SGRQ yields a total score and 3 domain scores 
(symptom s, activit y, and impacts).  The total score indicates the impact of disease on overall 
healt h status.  T his total score is expressed as a percentage of overall impairment, in which 
100 represents the worst possible health status and 0 indicates the best possible healt h status.  
Likewise, the dom ain scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicat ive of greater 
impairment.  Specific details on the scoring algorithms are provided by the developer in a user 
manual ( Jones et al  2009 ).  A decrease of 4 units in the SGRQ total score has been established 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
85(157)as the criterion for minimal meaningful improvement ( Jones 2005 ).  SGRQ responders will be 
those wi th ≥4-unit decreases in SGRQ total score. 
The SGRQ will be completed on site at the beginning of Visit 2 and EOT/IPD Visit using the 
ePRO. 
Maintenance medication adherence assessment
Adherence wit h maintenance medicat ion over the past week will be captur ed using a single 
question that asks the respondent to report the number of days they took their maintenance 
medicat ion per thei r physician’s instructions .  Patients will respond to the maintenance 
medicat ion query  on a weekly (± 2 days) basis using the eP RO beginning at Visit 2 and 
ending at EOT/IPD Visit.
Patient Global Impression of Change assessment
The PGIC instrument is used for an overall evaluatio n of response to treatment.  The patient 
will be asked to rate the degree of change in the overall asthm a status com pared to the first 
dosing using the fo llowing 7 -point scale: Much Better (+3), Moderately Better (+2), A Little 
Better (+1), About the Same (0), A Little Worse ( -1), Moderately Worse ( -2), and Much 
Worse (-3).  
The PGIC will be captured at Vis it 2 as well as weekly (± 2 day s) until the end of the 
Induct ion phase (day  prior to Vi sit 3) by  using the ePRO.
5.4 Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinet ic samples will not be taken during the study.
5.5 Pharmacodynamics
Samples for the analysis of peripheral blood eosi nophils will be analyzed in a central 
laboratory  as part of the routi ne hematol ogy assessment (com plete bl ood count).  Refer to 
Secti on 5.2.4 .
5.6 Geno mics
Approximately  10 mL bl ood sam ples f or DNA i solation will be collected fro m patients who 
have consented to participate in the genet ic analysis component of the study.  Participat ion is 
optional.  Pati ents who do not wi sh to parti cipate in the genet ic research may  still parti cipate 
in the main study .
In the event of DNA extraction failure, a replacement genet ic blood sample may be requested 
from the pati ent.  
The geno mic sample will be used to explore how geno mic variation may be associated with 
study  outcom es.  In addi tion, the genomic sample may be used for further genet ic research to 
explore how genet ic variat ions may affect clinical parameters, risk and prognosis of diseases, 
and response to medicat ions.  Genet ic research may lead to better understan ding of diseases, 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
86(157)better diagnosis of diseases, or other improvements in health care and to the discovery  of new 
diagnosti cs, treatm ents, or m edicati ons.
Addit ional information regarding the genet ics research co mponent of the study is provided in 
Appendix C.
5.7 Biomarker collections and analysis
The patient’s consent to the use of donated bio logical  samples is m andatory .
Biological samples will be collected for exploratory  analyse s to invest igate the effect of 
benralizumab on bio markers of inflammat ion, asthma disease, pharmaco logy of benralizumab, 
and potenti al predictors of response.
Instructi ons for sam ple collect ion, processing, storage, and shipment can be found in the 
separat e laboratory  manual provided to the si tes.
The results of the exploratory  biomarker analyses will be reported separately  from the Clinical  
Study  Report (CSR) in a scient ific report or publication.
5.7.1 Serum for biomarkers
Who le blood for the preparation of serum for analysis o f proteins and inflammatory  markers 
will be co llected at the screening visit (Visit 1) and at the visit to assess morning cortiso l 
levels, according to Table 1.  
5.7.2 Plasma for eosinophil -derived neurotoxin 
Plasma sam ples will be collected according to the schedule in Table 1to eval uate EDN, a 
biomarker of eosinophil level and activation. 
5.7.3 Sputum collection and biomarkers
Not applicable due to protocol amendment. 
5.7.4 Storage, reuse, and destruction of biomarker samples
AstraZeneca or a designee will retain bio marker samples for invest igation of asthma, the 
pharmaco logy of benralizumab, and potential predictors of response for a maximum of 
15years fo llowing the l ast pati ent’s last visit, after which they  will be destroy ed.
The results of this bio marke r research m ay be pooled wi th biomarker data from  other studi es 
with the study  treatm ent to generate hy potheses to be tested in future research.  Any residual 
samples may  be used for future bio marker research.  If a patient does not allow samples to be 
used f or future bi omarker research, they  may continue wi th their samples being used for the 
main study .
The results of any  investi gation will  not be reported in the CSR but separately in a scient ific 
report or publicat ion.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
87(157)5.7.5 Labelling and shipment of biological samples
The Principal Invest igator ensures that samples are labelled and shipped in accordance with 
the laboratory  manual  and the Bi ological  Substance, Category  B Regulat ions (m aterials 
containing or suspected to contain infect ious substances that do not meet Category  A cri teria). 
See Appendix B.
Any samples ident ified as Infect ious Category  A materi als are not shipped, and no further 
samples will be taken from the patient unl ess agreed upon wi th AstraZeneca, and appropriate 
labelling, shipment, and containment provisio ns are approved.
5.7.6 Chain of custody of biological samples 
A full chain o f custody  is maintained for all samples throughout their life cycle.
The Principal Invest igator at each site keeps full traceabilit y of co llected bio logical  samples 
from the pati ents while the samples are in storage at the center until shipment or disposal 
(where appropriate) and keeps documentation of receipt of arrival (if applicable).
The sa mple receiver keeps full traceabilit y of the sam ples while in storage and during use unt il 
used or disposed of or until further shipment and keeps documentation of receipt of arrival.
AstraZeneca keeps oversight of the ent ire life cycle through internal pr ocedures, m onitoring of  
study  sites, and audi ting of external laboratory  providers.
Samples retained for further use are registered in the AstraZeneca bio bank system during the 
entire life cycle.
5.7.7 Withdrawal of informed consent for donated biological sample s
If a patient withdraws consent to the use of donated bio logical samples, the sam ples will  be 
disposed of/destroy ed, and the acti on documented.  If samples are already  analyzed, 
AstraZeneca is not obliged to destroy  the resul ts of this research.
6. SAFETY RE PORTING AND MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
The Principal Invest igator is responsible for ensuring that all staff invo lved in the study  are 
familiar wit h the content of this sect ion.
6.1 Definition of adverse events
An AE is the development of any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical study  
patient administered a medicinal product and which does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.   An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended 
sign (eg, an abnorm al laboratory  finding), symptom (for example, nausea, chest pain), or 
disease tem porally associ ated wi th the use of a m edicinal product, whether or not considered 
related to the medicinal product. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
88(157)The term  AE is used to inclu de both serious and nonseri ous A Es and can include a 
deteri oration of  a preexist ing medical occurrence. An AE m ay occur at any  time, including 
run-in or washout periods, even if no study  treatm ent has been administered.
6.2 Definitions of serious adverse event s
An SAE is an AE occurring during any study  phase (i e, run -in, treatment, washout, 
follow-up), that fulfils one or more of the following criteria:
 Results in death
 Is immediately life -threatening
 Requi res inpat ient hospi talizat ion or prolongat ion of exist ing hospi talizati on 
 Results in persistent or significant disabilit y/incapacit y or substantial disrupt ion of 
the abilit y to conduct normal life funct ions 
 Is a congenital abnormalit y or birth defect
 Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the pat ient or may require 
medical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above
For further guidance on the definit ion of an SAE, see Appendix Ato the Clinical Study  
Protocol .
6.3 Recording of adverse events
6.3.1 Time period for collection of adverse events
Adverse events and SAEs will be collected from time of signature of informed consent
throughout the treatment period and including the follow -up peri od (12 weeks after the last
dose of study  drug). 
Please refer to Appendix Kfor details regarding safet y reporti ng in the PONENTE Long Term 
Follow Up substudy .
6.3.2 Follow -up of unresolved adverse events
Any A Es that are u nresolved at the patient’s last AE in the study are fo llowed up by the 
Invest igator for as long as medically indicated, but without further recording in the eCRF.  
AstraZeneca retains the right to request additional informat ion for any  patient with ongoing
AEs/SAEs at the end of the study , if judged necessary . 
6.3.3 Variables 
All AEs will  be recorded in the eCRF.  The fo llowing vari ables will be collected for each AE:
 AE (verbat im)
 The date when the AE started and stopped
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
89(157) Maximum intensit y of the AE
 Whether the AE is serious or not
 Invest igator causalit y rating against the study  drug (y es or no)
 Action taken with regard to study  drug
 AE caused patient’s withdrawal fro m study  (yes or no )
 Outcom e
In addit ion, the fo llowing vari ables will be collected for SAEs:
 Date AE met criteria for serious AE
 Date Invest igator became aware of serious AE
 AE is seri ous due to
 Date of hospitalization
 Date of discharge
 Probable cause of death
 Date of death
 Autopsy  performed
 Causalit y assessment in relat ion to study  procedure(s)
 Caus ality assessment to other medicat ion
 Descript ion of AE
It is important to dist inguish between serious and severe A Es.  Severi ty is a m easure of 
intensity, whereas seriousness is defined by  the criteri a in Sect ion 6.2.  An AE of severe 
intensity need not necessarily be considered serious.  For example, nausea that persists for 
several hours may  be consi dered severe nausea but not an SAE unless it meets the criteria 
shown in Section 6.2. On the other hand, a stroke that results in only  a limi ted degree of 
disabili ty may be considered a mild stroke but would be an SAE when it satisfies the criteria 
shown in Section 6.2.
6.3.4 Causality collection
The Investigator will assess the causal relat ionship between the study drug and each AE, and
answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the question, ‘Do y ou consider that there is a reasonable possibilit y 
that the event may have been caused by  the study  drug?’
For SAEs, the causal relat ionship will also be assessed for other medicat ion and study  
procedures.  Note that for SAEs that could be associated with any study procedure, the causal 
relationship is implied as ‘yes’.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
90(157)A guide to the interpretation of the causalit y quest ion is found in Appendix Ato the Clinical 
Study  Protocol .
6.3.5 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms
All AEs spontaneously reported by  the pati ent, reported in response to the open question fro m 
the study  site staff, ‘Have you had any health problems since the previous visit/you were last 
asked? ’, or revealed by observat ion will be collected and recorded in the eCRF.  When 
collect ing AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred (when possible) to recording a list of 
signs and sy mptoms.  However, if a diagnosis is known and there are other signs or symptoms 
that are not generally part of the diagnosis, the diagnosis and each sign or symptom will be 
recorded separately.
6.3.6 Adverse events based on examinations and tests
The results fro m the Clinical Study  Protocol –mandated l aboratory  tests and vi tal signs will be 
summarized in the CSR.  Deterioration as co mpared to baseline in protocol -mandated 
laboratory  values and vital signs should therefore only  be reported as A Es if they fulfil any of 
the SAE criteria or are the reason for discont inuat ion of treatment with the study drug.
If deteri oration in a laboratory  value/vi tal sign i s associ ated wi th clinical signs and symptoms, 
the sign or symptom  will be reported as an AE and the associated laboratory  resul t/vital sign 
will be considered as addit ional informat ion.  Wherever possible, the reporting Investigator 
uses the clinical, rather than the laboratory  term  (eg, anemia versus low hemoglobin value).  
In the absence of clinical signs or symp toms, clinically  relevant deteri orations in nonmandated 
param eters shoul d be reported as A Es.
Deteri oration of  a laboratory  value, which is unequivocally due to disease progression, should 
not be reported as an AE/SAE.
Any new or aggravated clinically rele vant abnormal medical finding at a physical examinat ion 
as com pared wi th the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE.
The signs and symptoms of AI will not be considered as A Es except under certain 
circumstances (eg, adrenal crisis Appendix J). 
6.3.7 Hy’s Law
Cases where a patient shows elevat ions in liver bio chemistry  may require further evaluat ion, 
and occurrences o f AST or ALT levels ≥3 × ULN together with total bilirubin (TBL) l evels 
≥2×ULN m ay need to be reported as SAEs.  
Any potential Hy’s Law case should be handled as a serious unexpected adverse event 
associ ated wi th the use of the drug and reported prompt ly (i.e., even before all other possible 
causes o f liver injury have been excluded). It should be promptly reported to the appropriate 
regul atory /ethics authori ty before fully working up the pati ent to rul e out other eti ologies. 
Reporting should include all available information, especially that needed for evalu ating the 
severit y and likelihood that the drug caused the reaction, and should init iate a cl ose fo llow-up 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
91(157)until complete resol ution of the problem and co mpletion of all attempts to obtain 
supplementary  data.
Please refer to Appendix Dfor further instructi on regarding cases of increases in liver 
biochemistry  and eval uation of  Hy’s Law (HL).
6.3.8 Disease under study
When co llecting AEs, the recording of diagnoses is preferred, when possible, to recording a 
list of signs and symptoms.  Asthma symptoms or signs, such as wheeze, cough, chest 
tightness, dy spnea, breathlessness, and phlegm, will be recorded as A Es only  when:
 The sign or symptom is serious according to definitions; see Se ction 6.2
 The patient discont inues the study due to the sign or symptom
 The sign or symptom is new to the patient or not consistent with the patien t’s 
preexist ing asthma history  (defined as within 1 y ear pri or to Visit 1) as judged by  
the Invest igator
Asthma exacerbations occurring during the treatment period should be recorded in the eCRF.  
An asthma exacerbat ion shoul d be recorded as an AE or SAE o nly if it fulfills any  of the 
above criteria.
6.4 Reporting of serious adverse events
All SAEs have to be reported, whether or not considered causally related to the study  drug, or 
to the study  procedure(s). All SAEs will be recorded in the eCRF.
If any SAE oc curs in the course of the study , then Invest igators or other site personnel inform 
the appropriate AstraZeneca representatives within one day , ie, immediately but no later than 
24hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it .
The designated AstraZeneca representative works with the Invest igator to ensure that all the 
necessary  informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site within 
1calendar day of initial receipt for fatal and life -threatening events and within 5 calendar
days of initial receipt for all other SAEs.
For fatal  or life -threatening adverse events where important or relevant informat ion is missing, 
active fo llow-up is undertaken immediately .  Investi gators or other site personnel inform 
AstraZeneca representatives of any fo llow-up informat ion on a previously  reported SAE 
within one calendar day  ie, immediately but no later than 24 hours of when he or she 
beco mes aware of it .
Once the Invest igators or other site personnel indicate an AE is serious in the WBDC system, 
an autom ated email alert is sent to the designated AstraZeneca representative.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
92(157)If the WBDC system is not available, then the Investigator or other study  site staff reports a 
SAE to the appropriate AstraZeneca representative by telephone.  The AstraZeneca 
representative will advise the Invest igator/study  site staff how to proceed.
The reference document for definit ion of expectedness/listedness is the Investigator’s 
Brochure for the AstraZeneca drug.
4.3.1 Regulatory Reporting Requirements for SAEs
Prom pt notificat ion by the invest igator to the sponsor of a SAE is essent ial so that l egal 
obligat ions and ethical responsibilit ies towards the safet y of parti cipants and the saf ety of a 
study  interventi on under clinical invest igation are met.
The sponsor has a legal responsibilit y to notify both the l ocal regulatory  authori ty and other 
regul atory  agencies about the safet y of a study  intervent ion under clinical investigation. The 
sponsor will co mply wi th country -specific regulatory  requi rements relating to safet y reporti ng 
to the regulatory  authori ty, Inst itutional Review Boards (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committees 
(IEC), and invest igators.
For all studies except those utilizing med ical devices investigator safet y reports m ust be 
prepared for suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSAR) according to local 
regul atory  requi rements and sponsor policy and forwarded to invest igators as necessary.An 
investigator who receives an i nvestigator safet y report describing a SAE or other specific 
safet y informat ion (e.g., summary  or list ing of SAEs) from the sponsor will review and then 
file it along wit h the Invest igator’s Brochure or and will notify the IRB/IEC, if appropriate 
according to local requi rements.
6.5 Overdose
 An overdose with associated AE s is recorded as the AE diagnosis/symptoms on the 
relevant AE m odules in the eCRF and in the overdose eCRF module
 An overdose without associated symptoms is only  reported on the overdose eCRF 
module
If an overdose on an AstraZeneca study  drug occurs during the study , then the Invest igator or 
other si te personnel will inform appropriate AstraZeneca representatives immediately, or no 
later than 24 hours of when he or she becom es aware of i t.
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site.
For overdoses associated with an SAE, the standard reporting timelines apply; see S ection 6.4.  
For other overdoses, reporting must occur within 30 day s.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
93(157)6.6 Pregnancy
All pregnancies and outcomes of pregnancy should be reported to Ast raZeneca.
6.6.1 Maternal exposure
If a patient becomes pregnant during the study , study  drug shoul d be di scontinued 
immediately .
Pregnancy itself is not regarded as an AE unless there is a suspicio n that the study  drug under 
study  may have interfered wi th the ef fectiveness of a contraceptive medicat ion.  Congenital 
abnorm alities/birth defects and spontaneous miscarriages should be reported and handled as 
SAEs.  El ective abortions without complications should not be handled as A Es.  The outcome 
of all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elect ive terminat ion, ectopic pregnancy, normal 
birth, or congenital abnormalit y) shoul d be f ollowed up and docum ented even if the pat ient 
was discont inued from the study.
If any pregnancy  occurs during the study , then the Invest igator or other si te personnel will 
inform  the appropri ate AstraZeneca representatives within 1 day, ie, immediately but no later 
than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it .
The designated AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is provided to the AstraZeneca Patient Safet y data entry  site wi thin 1 or 
5calendar days for SAEs (see Section 6.4) and within 30 days for all other pregnancies.
The same timelines apply when outcome informat ion is available.
The PREGREP module in the eCRF will be used to report the pregnancy, and the pregnancy  
outcom e (PREGOUT) form will be used to report the outcom e of the pregnancy.
6.6.2 Paternal exposure
Pregnancy of the patients’ partners will not be considered an AE. However, the outcome of all 
pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elect ive terminat ion, ectopic pregnancy, normal birth 
or congenital abnormalit y) shoul d be f ollowed up and docum ented for concept ions occurring 
from the date of the first administration of study  drug until 16 weeks (approximately  5 half -
lives) after the last administration of study  drug. 
6.7 Medication error
For the purposes of this cli nical  study , a m edicati on error i s an unintended failure or mistake 
in the treatment process for an AstraZeneca study  drug that ei ther causes harm to the patient 
or has the potential to cause harm to the patient. 
A medicat ion error is not lack of efficacy of the drug, but rather a human or process -related 
failure while the drug is in control of the study  site staff or pati ent.
Medicat ion error includes situat ions where an error: 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
94(157) Occurred
 Was i dentified and intercepted before the patient received the drug
 Did not occur, but circumstances are recognized that could have led to an error
Examples of events to be reported in clinical studies as medication errors:
 Drug name confusio n
 Dispensing error, eg, medicat ion prepared incorrectly, even if it was not actual ly 
given to the patient
 Drug not administered as indicated, for example, wrong route or wrong site of 
administration
 Drug not taken as indicated, eg, tablet disso lved in water when it should be taken as 
a solid tablet 
 Drug not stored as instructed, eg, ke pt in the refrigerator when it should be at room 
temperature 
 Wrong patient received the medication (excluding IWRS/IVRS errors)
 Wrong drug administered to patient (excluding IWRS/IVRS errors)
Examples of events that do not require reporting as medicat ion errors in clinical studies:
 Errors related to or resulting fro m IWRS/IVRS, including those which lead to one 
of the above listed events that would otherwise have been a medication error 
 Patient acci dentally  missed drug dose(s), eg, forgot to take medicat ion
 Accidental  overdose (will be captured as an overdose)
 Patient failed to return unused medicat ion or em pty packaging
 Errors related to background and rescue medicat ion, or standard of care medicat ion 
in open -label studi es, even if an AstraZeneca product 
Medicat ion errors are not regarded as A Es, but A Es may occur as a consequence of the 
medicat ion error.  
If a medicat ion error occurs during the study , then the Invest igator or other site personnel will 
inform  the appropri ate AstraZeneca representatives within 1 day , ie, immediately  but no later 
than 24 hours of when he or she beco mes aware of it.
The designa ted AstraZeneca representative will work with the Invest igator to ensure that all 
relevant informat ion is completed wi thin 1 or 5 calendar days if there is an SAE associated 
with the m edicat ion error (see Section 6.4) and wi thin 30 days for all other medicat ion errors.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
95(157)7. STUDY DRUG AND OTHER TREATMENTS
7.1 Identity of study drug(s)
Study  drug will be manufactured in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practi ce (GMP).
Benralizumab administered in the study  will be a clear to opalescent, colorless to yellow 
solution.
Study drug Dosage form and strength Manufacturer
Benralizumab 30mg/mL solution for injection in prefilled syringe, 
1mLfill volumeMedImmune
7.2 Dose and treatment regimens
Benralizumab 30 mg/mL solution for injection in an APFS will be administered SC at the 
study  site Q4W f or the fi rst 3 doses and then Q8W thereafter (8 weeks between the 3rdand 4th
benralizumab doses).  See Table 1for more details.
Before study drug administration
The Investigator or authorized delegate will assess the inject ion site as per standards of 
medical care.  For WO CBP, a urine pregnancy test will be performed, and study  drug will be 
administered when the result of the test is negat ive (Section 5.2.4.1 ).
Study drug administration
The study  drug will be administered by  the Invest igator and/or auth orized delegate.  It is 
advised that the site of inject ion of the study  drug be rotated such that the patient receives 
study  drug at a different anatomical site at each treatm ent visi t.  A suggested injection site 
rotati on sequence is presented below (see Figure 3).
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D325 0C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
96(157)Figure 3 Injection sites and rotation scheme
In cases where rotation of the injection site is not favorable for the patient and/or the 
Invest igator, the reason should be recorded in the source documents.  Further details on study 
drug administration can be found in applicable guidance outside o f this Clinical Study  
Protocol .  Study  drug administration must be carried out in line wit
h this guidance.
After study drug administration
After study  drug administrati on, the pati ent shoul d be observed for a minimum of 2 hours in 
case of any acute drug reacti ons for the first 3 doses of study  drug.  For the fourth dose and 
onwards, the patient should be observed for 1 hour.
Conditions that will require rescheduling of study drug administration 
The Investigator should reschedule the visit and the study  drug shoul d not be administered 
until the rescheduled visit if eit her of the fo llowing occur:
 The pati ent has an intercurrent illness that, in the opinio n of the Invest igator, may 
compromise the safet y of the pati ent in the study  (eg, vi ral illnesses)
 The pati ent is febrile ( ≥38°C; ≥100.4°F) within 72 hours prior to administration o f 
the study  drug
Every  possible effort shoul d be m ade to bring the patient in wit hin the allowed visit window 
and study  drug shoul d be administered at that visit. If this is not possible, the AZ study 
physician should be contacted to discuss further. 

Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
97(157)7.3 Management of study drug–related reactions
Appropriate drugs such as epinephrine, H1 and H2 antihistamines, and corticosteroids, as well 
as medical equipment to treat acute anaphylactic reactions must be immediately available.  
Study  personnel must be trained to recognize and treat anaphylaxis.  Details on anaphylaxis 
management are provided in Appendix I. 
Anaphylaxis will be defined as a serious reaction that is rapid in onset and may cause death 
(Simpson et al 2006).  Anaphylaxis t ypically  manifests as 1 of 3 clinical scenarios: 
 The acute onset of a reaction (minutes to hours) with invo lvement of the skin, 
mucosal t issue, or both, and at least one of the fo llowing: a) respiratory 
compromise or b) reduced BP or symptoms of end- organ dy sfunct ion 
 Two or more of the fo llowing that occur rapidly  after exposure: involvement of 
the skin/mucosal t issue, respi ratory  com promise, reduced BP or associated 
symptoms, and/or persistent gastrointestinal symptoms
 Reduced BP after exposure
Patients will have had a pre -assessment (ie, vital signs) prior to study  drug administration and 
shoul d be observed after study  drug administration for a minimum o f 2hours for the 
appearance of any  acute drug reacti ons f or the first 3 doses of study  drug.  F or the fo urth dose 
onwards, patients should be observed for 1 hour after study  drug administration.
7.4 Labelling
Labels will be prepared in accordance wit h GMP and local regulatory  guidelines.  The l abels 
will fulfil GMP Annex 13 requirements for labelling.  Label tex t will be translated into local 
language where applicable. The label will include the fo llowing informat ion:
 Study code
 Study  drug dosage form, route of administration, and quantit y of dosage uni ts
 Kit identificat ion
 P lot identificat ion 
 Expiry date
 Invest igator name (if applicable locally; to be written on label)
 E-code (to be written on label)
 Sponsor name and contact details
 Directions for use
 Storage condit ion
 Standard statements required by  regulatory  authoriti es
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
98(157) Storage
7.5 Storage
All study  drugs shoul d be kept in a secure place with limited access and under appropriate 
temperature -controlled storage condit ions.  The temperature should be mo nitored daily , and 
monitoring shoul d be docum ented in a tem perature m onitoring log.  The study  drug m ust be 
kept i n the ori ginal outer container and under condit ions specified on the label (between 2°C 
and 8°C [36°F and 46°F] and protected from light).
The site should not use affected study  drug and shoul d immediately contact an AstraZeneca 
representative for fur ther gui dance in the following cases:
 Temperature excursion upon receipt or during storage at the study
 Dam aged ki t upon recei pt
 Dam aged sy ringe/cartri dge
The center staff should not use affected study  drug and shoul d immediately  contact an 
AstraZeneca representative for further guidance.  Damaged study  drug shoul d be docum ented 
via IWRS/IVRS (please refer to the IWRS/IVRS manual for further details).
7.6 Compliance
The administration of all study  drugs (including study  drugs) shoul d be recorded i n the 
appropri ate secti ons of the eCRF.  Study  drug will  be administered at the study  site during 
treatm ent visi ts as outlined in Table 1.
7.7 Accountability
The study  drug provi ded for thi s study  will be used only as directed in the Clinical Study  
Protocol .  The study  site staff will  account for all study  drugs di spensed to the pati ent.  The 
monitor will  account for all study  drugs received at the site, for unused study  drugs, and for 
appropriate destruction according to local procedures.  Certificates of delivery, destruction, 
and/or return should be signed. 
In case of malfunctioning APFS, the site should contact the study  monitor to ini tiate return of 
the APFS accordin g to the procedures described in the separate pharmacy manual.
7.8 Concomitant and other treatments
Inform ation about any  treatm ents received in the 3 months pri or to the date of informed 
consent and all the conco mitant treatm ents given during the study  (thro ugh fo llow-up period) 
with reason for the treatment will be co llected by the Invest igator/authorized delegate at each 
visit (as shown in Table 1) and recorded in the eCRF.
Use of ICS/LABA as a reliever (eg, Symbicort Maintenance and Reliever Treatment) that was 
part of the patient’s usual asthma controller regimen at baseline is allowed.  Any maintenance 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
99(157)therapy  (in addi tion to ICS/LABA) such as long- acting m uscarinic antagonists used prior to 
study  entry  shoul d not be changed during the study. The ‘as -needed’ use o f short -acting 
bronchodilators for relief o f acute asthm a symptoms is permitted throughout the study .
Please refer to Appendix Kfor details on concomit ant medicat ions and other treatments in the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy .
Table 5 Medication Restrictions 
Allowed medication/Class of drug Usage
Inactive/killed vaccinations Allowed provided they are not administered within 5 days 
befor e or after dosing with benralizumab
Allergen immunotherapy Allowed if patient has been receiving stable therapy for at 
least 30 days prior to Visit 1 and there is no anticipated 
change during the treatment period.  Allergen 
immunotherapy should not be administered on the same 
day as study drug
Prednisone/prednisolone Allowed provided it is not administered 24 hours prior to 
morning cortisol level/ACTH stimulation test
High- dose ICS Allowed; however, ICS (or ICS/LABA if in single 
inhaler) treatment should not be administered on the same 
day as morning cortisol/ACTH stimulation test (for 
patients taking a once -daily ICS/LABA formulation, e.g. 
fluticasone furoate/vil anterol; patients must not take the 
treatment the night prior or the morning of the cortisol 
testing).
Immunosuppressive medication  Topical or nasal administration may be allowed at the 
discretion of the Investigator  
Table 6 Prohibited Medications 
Prohibited medication/Class of drug Usage
Macrolides, antivirals, and azole 
therapiesChronic treatment with macrolides, antivirals, or azole 
therapies are not allowed during the study.  If a patient 
has been receiving long -term treatment of these therapies, 
all such medications need to be stopped 30 days or 5 half -
lives, whichever is the longer, prior to the date informed 
consent is obtained.   If a patient requires short courses of 
these medications (short course defined as ≤ 2 wee ks), 
they should be stopped at least 1 week prior to testing of 
cortisol levels 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
100(157)Prohibited medication/Class of drug Usage
Benralizumab and other marketed 
respiratory biologics.Any marketed respiratory biologic treatment (eg, 
omalizumab, mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab) is 
not allowed 4 mont hs or 5 half -lives (whichever is longer) 
prior to the date informed consent is obtained and 
throughout the entire treatment period.
-For patients who have previously not tolerated 
orhave not responded to marketed 
mepolizumab, omalizumab or reslizumab (as
assessed by the treating physician), a shorter 
washout period of ≥ 30 days between the last dose 
ofmepolizumab, omalizumab or reslizumab and the 
first dose of open label benralizumab (Visit 2), is 
allowed. 
-Patients who have previously received benralizu mab 
still require a complete washout prior to date of 
informed consent; those who have not tolerated or 
have not responded to benralizumab would not be a 
candidate for this study.
Non-respiratory marketed biologics or 
any investigational biologicsAny marketed (non -respiratory) or investigational 
biologic treatment is not allowed 4 months or 5 half -lives 
(whichever is longer) prior to the date informed consent is 
obtained and throughout the entire treatment period
Immunosuppressive medications Use of immunosuppressive medications (including, but 
not limited to, methotrexate, troleandomycin, 
cyclosporine, azathioprine, intramuscular long -acting 
depot corticosteroid, any experimental anti -inflammatory 
therapy, or oral/parenteral/intra -articular corticoste roids 
for reasons other than asthma) is not allowed except 
maintenance use of OCS for asthma if present at baseline 
and rescue use of systemic corticosteroids (oral, 
intravenous, or intramuscular) to treat an asthma 
exacerbation.  Immunosuppressive medicat ions must be 
discontinued 3 months or 5 half-lives (whichever is 
longer) prior to Visit 1; during the treatment period; and 
3months or 5 half-lives (whichever is longer) after the 
last dose. For flare- ups of non -asthm a related indications 
(e.g. arthritis, crohn’s disease, atopic dermatitis) or 
AE/SAE requiring temporary OCS use (or temporary 
increase in maintenance OCS), a short course of OCS ( ≤ 
2 weeks) use is allowed anytime during the study. Use of 
OCS for nasal polyposis, allergic rhinitis, or related 
eosinophilic conditions is not allowed.
Blood products or immunoglobulin 
therapyReceipt of immunoglobulin or blood products is not 
allowed within 30 days prior to the date informed consent 
is obtained and throughout the entire treatment period
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
101(157)Prohibited medication/Class of drug Usage
Live atte nuated vaccines Not allowed within 30 days of Visit 1 or during treatment 
period
Lipoxygenase inhibitors Five-lipoxygenase inhibitors (eg, zileuton) are prohibited 
and are not allowed within 30 days of Visit 1 or during 
the treatment period
7.8.1 Other concomitant treatment
Medicat ions other than those described in Sect ion 3.5, which are considered necessary for the 
patient’s safet y and well -being , may be given at the discret ion of the Invest igator and recorded 
in the appropriate sections of the eCRF.
8. STATISTICAL ANALYSES BY ASTRAZENE CA
8.1 Statistical considerations
The stati stical analyses will be fully described in a Statist ical Analysis Plan (SAP), as 
appropriate.  Data from the main PONENTE study will be summarized for the population 
overall and by prespecified subgroups: baseline OCS dose, baseline blood eosinophil count, 
and duration of chronic OCS.  Addit ional subgroups of interest will be furth er defined in more 
detail in the SAP.
Due to the single -arm study  design, external  data sources m ay be used to contextualize any  
change seen in asthma control, asthma exacerbat ion rate, or other safet y endpo ints in pat ients 
treated with benralizumab fo llowing reduction of OCS.  Any  data sources i dentified, together 
with planned analyses, will be described in a separate analysis plan. 
Statistical analyses for this study will be conducted using SAS (Cary, NC) versio n 9.3 or 
higher and will be performed by  AstraZeneca or a designated representative. The data cutoff 
for the primary  analysis will occur when the last patient completes the follow up visit of the 
PONENTE main study . A separate docum ent (SAP) to address detailed statist ical analysis 
issues for the PONENTE main study will be developed and approved by the t ime the first 
patient is enrolled to the study . A second and separate SAP detailing the analyses for the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  will be devel oped and approved pri or to the final 
databa se lock (DBL) of the m ain study .
8.2 Sample size estimate
There i s no predefined study  hypothesis to test in this study .  The sam ple size for thi s study  is 
based on the abilit y to provi de sufficient precisio n in po int estimates, both in the FAS and in 
subgroups f or statistical analysis.
The primary  outcom e, the observed proportion of patients down -titrated and maintained for at 
least 4 weeks, is expected to be equal to or greater than 50%.  For the sample size est imation, 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
102(157)a success rate of 50% is assumed.  Esti mate preci sion is expressed in a two -sided 95% 
confidence interval (CI) distance from the point estimate of a 50% success rate for a total of 
approximately  600 patients. CI calculat ions were conducted using the exact Clopper -Pearson 
CI form ula for a single proporti on in SAS versio n 9.4M5.
A total sample size of approximately 600 patients is expected to provide a 95% CI extending 
approximately  4.1% f rom the point estimate of a 50% success rate.  Estimates of the 95% CI 
for a >50% success rate are incremental ly smaller, as is shown in the fo llowing table:
Table 7 Expected distance between observed proportion and confidence limit 
(Clopper -Pearson 95% CI width)
Proportion of Patients with Total 
OCS ReductionSample Size
100 150 300 600
50 ±10.2 ±8.3 ±5.8 ±4.1
60 -10.3, +9.7  -8.3, +7.9 -5.8, +5.6  -4.0, +4.0
70 -10.0, +8.8 -8.0, +7.2 -5.5, +5.1  -3.8, +3.6
80   -9.2, +7.3 -7.3, +6.1  -5.0, +4.4 -3.4, +3.1
The table also shows that the 95% C is for subpopulat ion analyses as small  as 100 are ≤10% 
from the point estimate for proportions between 70% and 80% and 10.2% for a proportion of 
50%.
A sample size o f 300 pati ents is expected to provide 95% C is for a single proportion 
extending approximately 5.8% fro m the point esti mate of a 50% success rate.
8.3 Definitions of analysis sets
The fo llowing stati stical analysis sets will be defined to support data analyses of the study .
8.3.1 All patients analysis set
This analysis set comprises all pat ients screened fo r the study  and will  be used fo r reporti ng of 
disposi tion and screening failures.
8.3.2 Full analysis set
All enrolled pat ients who received at least one dose of benralizumab will be included in the 
FAS, i rrespect ive of their protocol adherence and continued participat ion in the study .  
Patients will be analyzed irrespect ive of whether they prematurely discont inue, according to 
the intent -to-treat pri nciple.  Pati ents who wi thdraw from  the study  will be included up to the 
date of their study  terminat ion.  
All efficacy analyses will be perform ed using the FAS.  For consistency, demographic and 
baseline characterist ics will be presented using the FAS.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
103(157)8.3.3 Safety analysis set
The FAS will be used for all safet y analyses.
Analysis sets for the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  will be detailed in Appendix 
K.
8.4 Outcome measures for analyses
The fo llowing study  outcom e measures are designed to support primary , secondary , and 
exploratory  object ives of the study.  
For a response outcome, if a pat ient withdraws from  the study  before reaching the defined 
endpo int, the pati ent will be considered as non -successful.
For a time -to-event outcome, if a patient withdraws from the study  before reaching the defined 
endpo int or does not reach the endp oint by  the end of the predefined study  phase, the pati ent 
will be censored at the withdrawal date or at the end date of the corresponding study  phase, 
whichever i s earlier. 
For outcomes measured in continuous data such as cumulative dose, ACQ -6 score, an d SGRQ 
score, no imputation will be performed for missing outcomes.
Primary efficacy outcome variables
 Patients who achieve 100% reduction in daily OCS dose that is sustained over at 
least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma (as defined in Sect ion 5.1.2.1 of the 
protocol )
 Patients who achieve 100% reduction or daily OCS doses of ≤5mg, if reason for no 
further OCS reduction is AI, that are sustained over at l east 4 weeks wi thout 
worsening of asthma
Key supportive outcome variables
 Patients who achieve a daily OCS dose of ≤5mg that is sustained over at least 
4weeks without worsening o f asthma
 Patients who achieve a ≥90%, ≥75%, and ≥50% reduction in daily OCS dose, 
sustained over at least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma
 Change from baseline in daily  OCS dose (m g) from start of  OCS reducti on to end 
of the OCS reduction phase
Secondary efficacy outcome variables
 Change in daily  OCS dose from  the end of OCS reducti on phase to the end of the 
maintenance phase (at EOT visit)
 Time to first increase in OCS dose during the maintenance phase, after achieving 
the minimum OCS dose during the OCS reduction phase 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
104(157) ACQ -6 scores at baseline (Visit 2), Visit 3,initial morning corti sol test, end of OCS 
reducti on phase, and mo nthly from end of OCS reduction phase to end of 
maintenance phase (EOT visit)
 Change from baseline in ACQ -6 score to Vi sit 3, end of OCS reducti on phase, and 
end of maintenance phase (EOT visit )
 Responder analysis o f ACQ -6 scores from Visit 2 through end of maintenance 
phase
 Change from baseline (Visit 2) in SGRQ total scores to the end of maintenance 
phase (EOT visit)
 Responder analysis o f SGRQ total  scores at the end of maintenance phase 
Safety outcome variables
 Patients wi th com plete AI 
 Annualized asthma exacerbation rate
 Annualized asthma exacerbation rate leading to hospitalization or emergency room 
visit
 AE
s
 SAEs
 GTI
Exploratory outcome variables
 Change from baseline (Visit 1) blood eosin ophils
 PGIC at Weeks 1, 2, 3, and 4
Outcom e variables for the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  will be detailed in 
Appendix K.  
8.5 Methods for statistical analyses
Statistical tabulat ionwill be presented for overall patients and by baseline OCS dose level, 
category  of baseline eosinophil count, and category  of durati on of  chronic OCS use.  
Continuous variables will be summarized using the mean, two -sided 95% CI of the mean, the 
standard deviat ion, median, minimum value, and maximum value.  Categorical variables will 
be summarized using frequency counts and percentages, as well as a two -sided 95% CI for 
proporti ons com puted using exact Cl opper -Pearson method.  Time to event data will be 
summar ized using median and 25thand 75thpercentiles wit h 95% C is.  Data will be listed in 
patient-level data list ings. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
105(157)No formal hypothesis will be tested in this study , and no m ultiplicit y adjust ment will be 
applied in the statist ical analysis.  No imputati on will be performed bey ond the approach 
defined for outcome measures in Sect ion 8.4.  Imputati on for parti al date will  be detailed in 
the SAP document.
Analysis methods for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy  will be detailed in 
Appendix K. 
8.5.1 Analysis of the primary variables
The count and proportion (with 95% CI) of patients who achieve 100% reducti on in their OCS 
dose, sustained for at least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma or resumed OCS tr eatment, 
and the count and proportion of patients who achieve 100% reduction or a daily OCS dose of 
≤5mg, if reason for no further OCS reduction is AI, sustained over at least 4 weeks without 
worsening of asthma, will be tabulated. 
The same analysis will be carried out for the supporting endpo ints: pati ents who reduce to a 
daily  OCS dose of ≤5mg sustained over at least 4 weeks without worsening of asthma; and 
patients who achieve a ≥90%, ≥75% and ≥50% reduction in their daily  OCS dose wi thout 
worsening o f asthma. 
All 95% C is for proporti ons will be calculated using the Clopper- Pearson exact method. 
For pati ents who do not achieve 100% reduction in their daily  OCS dose, the reason for no 
further reduction will be listed.
Change from baseline in OCS dose variables will be summarized using descriptive statist ics in 
tables and graphs (supporting primary  and secondary  endpo ints).
8.5.2 Analysis of the secondary variables
8.5.2.1 Time to 1stOCS increase
Time to first OCS increase in the maintenance phase will be summarized using median, 25th
and 75thpercent iles (with 95% C is) and Kaplan Meier plots.  The start time for the analysis 
will be the time, in the OCS reduction phase, at which the patient first reaches the minimum 
stable dose that is cont inued into the start of th e maintenance phase.
Cox-regression model analysis will also be used to summarize and analyze time to first OCS 
increase; covariates will include at least baseline OCS daily dose and baseline eosinophil 
count (categorized).  If a patient withdraws fro m thestudy  before reaching the defined 
endpo int or does not reach the endpoint by the end of the study , whichever is earlier, the 
patient will be censored at that time point.
8.5.2.2 ACQ -6
Change from baseline ACQ -6 score will be summarized by study  visit using descri ptive 
statist ics and analyzed using a mixed model for repeated measures, with change fro m baseline 
in ACQ -6 score as the response variable, and baseline ACQ-6 score, baseline OCS dose, and 
baseline categories of serum eosinophil count as covariates.  Resul ts of the mixed model 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
106(157)analyses will be presented in terms of least square mean wit h 95% CI of change fro m Visit 2 
in ACQ -6 score.
Asthma control responders will be evaluated as a supportive analysis outcome measure.  
Patients will  be categori zed according to the fo llowing limits ( Juniper et al 2005 ), where 
observed study  time points include, but are not limited to, Visit 3, init ial morning corti sol test 
(time point at which OCS dose equals 5mg for 4 weeks), end of OCS reduction phase, and end 
of maintenance phase (EOT visit) from Visit 2:
 Improvem ent: Change from  baseline in ACQ -6 score of ≤ -0.5
 No change: Change fro m baseline in ACQ -6 score of > -0.5 an d < +0.5
 Deteri oration: Change from baseline in ACQ -6 score of ≥ +0.5
Asthma control responders will be defined as pat ients who had improvements based on 
changes fro m baseline in their ACQ -6 scores.  Patients with no change or deterioration 
according to ACQ -6 score evaluat ion will be defined as nonresponders.  Patients with missing 
or nonevaluable ACQ -6 scores at a postbaseline assessment time point will be considered 
nonresponders at the time point.  
Furtherm ore, pati ents will  be categori zed according to their ACQ -6 score –defined asthma 
control  status at post Visit 2 assess ments using the fo llowing score thresho lds (Juniper et 
al2006):
 Well controlled: ACQ -6 score of ≤0.75
 Parti ally controlled: ACQ -6 score of >0.75 and <1.5 
 Not well controlled: ACQ -6 score of ≥1.5 
Asthma control responders will be summarized in count and proportion with 95% C is 
estimated using the Clopper -Pearson m ethod.  Patients with missing or nonevaluable ACQ -6 
scores will be considered nonresponde rs. 
In the event that there is a different ial proporti on of pat ients with missing ACQ -
6 score results 
at postbaseline study  visit s, based on review o f an ACQ -6 reporting co mpliance summary , a 
sensit ivity analysis will be performed using a hybrid last -observation-carried-forward 
approach.  For this analysis, patients who complete the study visit and have missing ACQ -6 
scores at the visit will have their last non -missing score carried forward.  Patients who 
terminate early prior to the study  visit will be tr eated as nonresponders. 
The number and percentage of patients who achieve improvements, no change, or 
deteri oration, and the number and percentage of patients who achieve ACQ -6 scores of ≤0.75 
(well controlled), >0.75 to <1.5 (partially  controlled), or ≥1.5 (not well controlled) will be 
summarized in a table. Clopper -Pearson 95% C is will  be presented, Pati ent wi th missing or 
nonevaluable ACQ -6 scores will be classified as “Not well controlled”.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
107(157)8.5.2.3 SGRQ
Potenti al changes in healt h status will be evaluated by  assessing the change from baseline to 
EOT vi sit in SGRQ total scores.  
Summary  statistics for SGRQ total score and domain scores (symptoms, activit y, and impacts) 
at Vi sit 2 (baseline) and EOT vi sit along wi th change from  baseline to EOT vi sit will be 
produced.  Change fro m baseline in SGRQ total score and the three domain scores will also be 
analyzed separately  using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with change from baseline in 
SGRQ score as response variable and baseline SGRQ score and baseline OCS dose and 
baseline categories of serum eosinophil count as covariates.  Results will be presented in terms 
of least square m ean wi th 95% CI of change from baseline in SGRQ total score.
A 4-point thresho ld will be used to define the response.  If there is a ≥4-point decrease fro m 
baseline in SGRQ total score, it will be defined as ‘improvement’; if there is a ≥4-point 
increase at EOT fro m baseline, i t will be defined as ‘worsening’; if the change is not more 
than 4 points at EOT, it will be defined as ‘no change’ . 
Missing SGRQ total score change at end of the study  or assessment time points will be 
considered as ‘not evaluable’. 
For the responder analysis of SGRQ, a responder will be defined as a patient who had 
‘improvement’ (ie, ≥4-point decrease in SGRQ total score). Pati ents who had SGRQ total 
score changes defined as ‘no change’ or ‘worsening’ will be considered nonresponders.  If 
SGRQ total  score change is not evaluable due to missing data, then the patient will also be 
treated as a nonresponder.  
8.5.2.4 PGIC
PGIC will be presented descript ively by week during the induct ion phase.  Calculat ion of 
percentages will be based on the number of patients in the full analysis set with a co mpleted 
assessment.  There will be no imputation for missing values.
Patients will  also be categorized according to the following three responses starting at Visit 2 
and through the induct ion phase:
 Much Better (+3), Moderately  Better (+2), A Li ttle Better (+1) → Improved
 Much Better (+3), Moderately  Better (+2) → Moderately improved
 Much Better (+3) → Much improved.
These three categorized variables will be presented descript ively by week.
8.5.3 Analysis of safety outcomes
The number and percentage of patients diagnosed with AI will be tabulated as fo llows: 
 Patients wi th com plete AI 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
108(157)In addition, the number and percentage of pat ients diagnosed wi th AI will  be tabulated 
according to the way  of diagnosi s.  The associ ation between AI diagnosis and OCS 
down -titration will be explored .
Spaghetti  plots m ay be produced for patients with Partial AI throughout the OCS reduction 
phase, showing cortiso l levels over time.
The incidence of A Es and SAEs will be summarized overall and stratified by  relati onship to 
study  interventi on and severit y grade. 
The annualized rate of asthma exacerbat ions will be summarized using mean, 95% CI, and 
dispersi on based on the negat ive bino mial distributio n. 
Glucocorti coid toxicit y index will be summarized over time.  Statist ical correl ation between 
GTI and daily OCS dose will be explored.
The number and percentage of patients di agnosed wi th AI will be tabulated overall and by 
baseline OCS dose according to the way  of diagnosis: m orning corti sol or ACTH stimulat ion 
test, morning cortiso l test, interm ediate m orning corti sol and ACTH st imulation test, and 
intermediate m orning cortiso l and interm ediate ACTH stimulat ion test.
In addit ion, the number and percentage of pat ients diagnosed wi th AI will  be tabulated by  
subgroup according to duration of chronic OCS treatment.  
8.5.4 Subgroup analysis
Prespecified subpopulat ions will in clude the follo wing:
 Patients wi th baseline OCS dose >10 mg/day , >5 mg/day  to ≤10 mg/day, and 5 
mg/day
 Patients wi th baseline blood eosinophil count:
-<150/µL and ≥150/µL; 
-<300/µL and ≥300/µL; and 
-<150, ≥150 to <300, and ≥300 cells/ μL
 Patients wi th durati on of  chroni c OCS use <1 year and ≥1 year
Addit ional subgroups may be described in the SAP. 
8.5.5 Interim review and Analysis
One interim review may be performed after approximately 90 -100 pat ients have completed (or 
have had the opportunity  to com plete) their OCS down -titration; further details will be 
described in a separate interim review plan. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
109(157)An addit ional database l ock and analysis of all relevant data collected through the end of the 
OCS reducti on phase, m ay be perf ormed after the final patient has had the opportunit y to 
complete the OCS reduction phase. The purpose of this analysis is to generate a sub -set of  the 
pre-planned analysis outputs of all relevant data for all pat ients up to the end of the OCS 
reducti on phase. Further details will be provided in the SAP.
8.5.6 Sensitivity analysis
The primary  efficacy  outcome based on data as observed wit h exclusio n of the early 
withdrawn pati ents will be analyzed using the same method used for the primary  analysis o f 
the FAS.
Further sensit ivity analyses and missing data strategies will be specified in the SAP.
8.5.7 Exploratory analysis
Statistical analysis o f the following exploratory  outcom es will  be detailed in the SAP for this 
study :
 Change from baseline in blood eosinophils
- Baseline blood eosinophil counts may be further investigated by  summarizing 
vs. baseline OCS dose and/or by  region/country .
 Serum  samples at baseline for protein bio markers
 Plasma for EDN
 Associ ation of co mmo n and rare geno mic variants with patient responses
9. STUDY AND DATA MANAG EMENT BY ASTRAZENECA
9.1 Training of study site staff
Before the first patient is entered into the study , an AstraZeneca representative will review and 
discuss the requirements of the Clinical Study  Protocol  and rel ated docum ents wi th the 
investigat ional staff and also tra in them on any study -specific procedures and the WBDC, 
IxRS, ePRO, and other sy stem s to be utilized.
The Principal Invest igator will ensure that appropriate training relevant to the study is given to 
all of these staff, and that any  new informati on relevan t to the perform ance of this study  is 
forwarded to the staff invo lved.
The Principal Invest igator will maintain a record of all individuals invo lved in the study  
(medical, nursing, and other staff).
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
110(157)9.2 Monitoring of the study
During the study , an AstraZeneca representative will have regular contact with the study  site, 
including visits to:
 Provi de inform ation and support to the invest igators
 Confirm that facilit ies remain acceptable
 Confirm that the invest igational team  is adhering to the Clinical Study  Protoc ol, that 
data are being accurately and timely recorded in the eCRFs, that bio logical samples 
are handled in accordance wit h the l aboratory  manual , and that study  drug 
accountabilit y checks are being performed
 Perform  source data verification (a comparison of the data in the eCRFs with the 
patient’s medical records at the hospital or practice, and other records relevant to 
the study ), including verification of informed consent of participating pat ients.  This 
will require direct access to all original records for each patient (eg, clinic charts)
 Ensure withdrawal of informed consent to the use of the patient’s bio logical 
samples is reported, that the bio logical  samples are i dentified and disposed 
of/destroy ed accordingly, and that the action is documented and reported to the 
patient
The AstraZeneca representative will be available between visit s if the invest igators or other 
staff at the center needs information and advice about the study  conduct.
9.2.1 Source data
Please refer to the Clinical Study  Agreement for the locati on of  source data.
9.2.2 Study agreements
The Principal Invest igator at each/the center should comply wit h all the terms, condit ions, and 
obligat ions of the Clinical Study  Agreement, or equivalent, for this study .  In the event of any 
inconsistency bet ween this Clinical Study  Protocol and the Clinical Study  Agreement, the 
terms of the Clinical Study  Protocol  shall  prevail  with respect to the conduct of the study  and 
the treatment of patients, and, in all other respects, not relat ing to study conduct or treatment 
of patients, the term s of the Clinical Study  Agreement shall prevail.
Agreements between AstraZeneca and the Principal Investigator should be in place before any 
study -related procedures take place or patients are enrolled.
9.2.3 Archiving of study doc uments
The Investigator will fo llow the principles outlined in the Clinical Study  Agreement.
9.3 Study timetable and end of study
The end o f the study  is defined as ‘the l ast vi sit of the last pati ent undergoing the study ’.  A 
patient is considered to have com pleted the study  when he/she has completed his/her last
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
111(157)scheduled contact.
The study  may be terminated at individual sites if the study  procedures are not being 
perform ed according to Good Clinical Pract ice (GCP) or if recruit ment is slow.  AstraZeneca 
may also terminate the entire study  prem aturely if concerns for safet y arise wi thin this study  
or in any  other study  with benralizumab.
9.4 Data management by AstraZeneca
Data m anagement will be performed by AstraZeneca Data Management Center staff , 
according to the Data Management Plan .
The data collected through third -party  sources will be obtained and reconciled against study  
data.
Adverse events and medical/surgical history  will be cl assified according to the termino logy of 
the latest version of the Medical D ictionary for Regulatory  Activities.  Medicat ions will be 
classified according to the WHO Drug Dict ionary.  All coding will be performed by the 
Medical Coding Team at the AstraZeneca Data Management Center.
The WBDC system will be used for data collect ionand query  handling.  The Invest igator will 
ensure that data are recorded on the eCRF as specified in the study  protocol  and in accordance 
with the instructi ons provi ded.
Data queri es will be raised for inconsistent, impossible, or missing data.  All entri es to the 
study  database will be available in an audit trail.
The Investigator will ensure the accuracy, co mpleteness, and t imeliness of the data recorded 
and of the provisio n of answers to data queries according to the Clinical Study  Agreement. 
The Invest igator will sign the completed eCRFs.  A copy  of the com pleted eCRFs will be 
archived by  the Invest igator.
The data will be validated as defined in the Data Management Plan.  Qualit ycontrol  
procedures will be applied to each stage of data handling to ensu re that all data are reliable 
and have been processed correctly .  
When all activit ies have been performed to ensure data are complete and accurate, a clean file 
will be declared.
Serious Adverse Event Reconciliation
The SAE reconciliat ion will be performed by co mparing the safet y database standard reports 
with relevant AE/SAE listings from the clinical study database. 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
112(157)10. ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY REQUIREMENTS
10.1 Ethical conduct of the study
The study  will be perform ed in acco rdance with ethical principles that have their origin in the 
Declaration of Helsinki and are consistent with Internat ional Conference on Harmonisat ion 
(ICH)/GCP, applicable regulatory  requi rements, and the AstraZeneca policy on Bioethics and 
Hum an Bi ological Samples.
10.2 Patient data protection
The ICF will incorporate (or, in some cases, be accompanied by a separate document 
incorporating) wording that complies with relevant data protection and privacy legislat ion.
10.3 Ethics and regulatory review
An Ethi cs Commit tee (EC) shoul d approve the final Clinical Study  Protocol , including the 
final versio n of the ICF and any  other wri tten informat ion and/or m aterials to be provi ded to 
the pati ents.  The Invest igator will ensure the distribut ion of these documents to the ap plicable 
EC and to the study  site staff.
The opinio n of the EC should be given in writ ing. The Investigator should submit the written 
approval  to AstraZeneca before enrollment of any patient into the study . 
The EC should approve all advertising used to re cruit patients for the study .
AstraZeneca should approve any  modificati ons to the ICF that are needed to meet local 
requi rements.
If required by  local regulat ions, the Clinical Study  Protocol  shoul d be reapproved by  the EC 
annually.
Before enrollment of an y patient into the study , the final Clinical Study  Protocol , including 
the final versio n of the ICF, is approved by the nat ional regulatory  authori ty or a notificat ion 
to the nat ional regulatory  authori ty is done, according to local regulat ions.
AstraZenec a will handle the distribut ion of any of these documents to the national regulatory  
authori ties.
AstraZeneca will provide regulatory  authori ties, E cs, and Principal Investigators with safet y 
updates/reports according to local requirements.
Each Principal I nvestigator is responsible for providing the EC with reports of any serious and 
unexpected adverse drug reactions fro m any other study  conducted wi th the study  drug.  
AstraZeneca will provide this information to the Principal Invest igator so that he/she ca n meet 
these reporti ng requirements.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
113(157)10.4 Informed consent
The Principal Invest igator(s) at each center will:
 Ensure each patient is given full and adequate oral and written informat ion about 
the nature, purpose, possible risk and benefit of the study  (before any procedures 
are perform ed) as per local requirements. 
 Ensure each patient is notified that they  are f ree to di scontinue fro m the study  at any  
time
 Ensure that each patient is given the opportunit y to ask questions and allowed time 
to consi der the inform ation provi ded
 Ensure each patient provides signed and dated info rmed consent before conducting 
any proce dure specifically for the study
 Ensure the original, signed ICFs are stored in the Investigator’s Study  File and kept 
for a peri od that i s compliant with GCP/local regulatory  requi rements, whi chever i s 
longer
 Ensure a copy  of the signed ICF is given to the patient
 Ensure that any  incentives for patients who participate in the study  as well  as any  
provi sions for pati ents harmed as a consequence of study  parti cipat ion are described 
in the ICF that is approved by an EC
 The genetic component of this study  is optional, and the patient may  parti cipate in 
other components of the main study  without parti cipating in the genet ic component.  
To parti cipate in the genet ic component of the study, the pat ient must provi de thei r 
signed and dated consent for both the main s tudy and the genet ic co mponent of the 
study .  A copy  of the si gned and dated consent form(s) must be given to the patient 
with the ori ginal  filed at the study  center.  The Principal Invest igator is responsible 
for ensuring that consent is given freely and that the pati ent understands that they  
may freely wit hdrawal fro m the genetic aspect of the study  at any  time
10.5 Changes to the Clinical Study Protocol and informed 
consent form
Study  procedures will not be changed without the mutual agreement of the Principal 
Invest igator and AstraZeneca.
If there are any substant ial changes to the Clinical Study  Protocol , then these changes will be 
docum ented in a new versio n of the study  protocol .
The new versio n of the Clinical Study  Protocol  is to be approved by  the relevant EC and, if 
applicable, also the nat ional regulatory  authori ty, before implementati on.  Local  requi rements 
are to be fo llowed for new versio ns of clinical study protocols.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
114(157)AstraZeneca will distribute any new versio ns of the Clinical Study  Protoc ol to each Principal 
Invest igator for distribut ion to E cs (see Section 10.3).
If a change to a Clinical Study  Protocol  requi res a change to a site’ s ICF, AstraZeneca and the 
site’s EC are to approve the revised ICF before the revised form is used. 
10.6 Audits and inspections
Authori zed representatives of AstraZeneca, a regulatory  authori ty, or an EC m ay perf orm 
audits or inspect ions at the center, includ ing source data verificat ion.  The purpose of an audit 
or inspect ion is to sy stem atically and independent ly examine all study -related acti vities and 
docum ents and to determine whether these activit ies were conducted and data were recorded, 
analyzed, and ac curately  reported according to the Clinical Study  Protocol , GCP, gui delines of 
ICH, and any applicable regulatory  requi rements.  The Investigator will contact AstraZeneca 
immediately  if contacted by  a regulatory  agency or other body  about an inspect ion or an audit 
at the study  site.
11. LIST OF REFERENCES
Alves et al 2008
Alves C, Robazzi TC, Mendonça M. Wit hdrawal from glucocorticosteroid therapy : clinical  
practi ce recommendat ions. J Pediatr (Rio J) 2008;84(3):192 -202. 
Bateman et al 2010
Bateman ED, Reddel HK , Eriksson G, Peterson S, Ostlund O, Sears MR et al. Overall asthma 
control : The rel ationship between current control and future risk. 
J Allergy  Clin Immunol  2010;125(3):600-8.
Broersen et al 2015
Broersen LH, Pereira AM, Jørgensen JO, Dekkers OM. Adrenal insufficiency in 
corticosteroi ds use: System atic review and meta -analysis. 
J Clin Endocrino l Metab 2015;100(6):2171 -80.
Blanchard and Rothenberg 2009
Blanchard C, Rothenberg ME. Biology  of the eosinophil. Adv Immunol 2009;101:81 -121. 
Chung et al 2014
Chung KF, Wenzel SE, Brozek JL, Bush A, Castro M, Sterk PJ et al. Internat ional ERS/ATS 
guidelines on definit ion, evaluat ion and treatment of severe asthma. 
Eur Respi r J 2014;43(2):343 -73. 
Dinsen et al 2013
Dinsen S, Baslund B, Klose M, Rasmussen AK, Friis -Hansen L, Hilsted L, Feldt -Rasmussen 
U. Why glucocortico id withdrawal may so metimes be as dangerous as the treatment itself.  
Eur J Intern Med 2013;24(8):714 -20.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
115(157)GINA 2018
Global Strategy  for Asthma Management and Prevent ion, Gl obal Init iative for Asthma
(GINA) 2018. Available fro m: http://gi nasthma.org/2018 -gina-report- global -strategy -for-
asthma -management -and-prevent ion.
GINA 2020
Global Strategy  for Asthma Management and Prevent ion, Gl obal Init iative for Asthma 
(GINA) 2020. Available fro m: https://ginasthma.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/04/GINA -
2020- full-report_ -final-_wms.pdf
Johnson et al 2014
Johnson SR, Naden RP, Fransen J, van den Hoogen F, Pope JE, Baron M, et al. Multicriteria 
decisio n analysis methods with 1000Minds for developing systemic sclerosis classification 
criteria. J Clin Epidemio l 2014;67(6):706 -14.
Jones et al 1991
Jones PW, Quirk FH, Baveystock CM. The St George’s Respiratory  Quest ionnaire. 
Respir Med 1991;85(Suppl B):25 -31.
Jones 2005
Jones PW. St. George ’s Respiratory  Quest ionnaire: MCID. COPD 2005;2(1):75 -
9.
Jones et al 2009
Jones PW, Harding G, Berry  P, Wi klund I, Chen WH, Kline Leidy N. Development and first 
validat ion of the COPD Assessment Test. Eur Respir J 2009;34(3):648 -54.
Joseph et al 2016
Joseph RM, Hunter AL, Ray DW, Dixo n WG. Systemic glucocortico id therapy and adr enal 
insufficiency in adults: A systemat ic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2016;46(1):133 -41.
Juniper et al 2005
Juniper EF, Svensson K, Mörk AC, Ståhl E. Measurement properties and interpretation of 
three shortened versions of the asthma control questionnai re. Respir Med 2005;99(5):553-8.
Juniper et al 2006
Juniper EF, Bousquet J, Abetz L, Bateman ED; GOAL Committee. Identifying 
‘well -controlled’ and ‘not well -controlled’ asthma using the Asthma Control Quest ionnaire. 
Respir Med 2006;100(4):616 -21.
Kerstjen s et al 2012
Kerst jens HA, Engel M, Dahl R, Paggiaro P, Beck E, Vandewalker M et al. Tiotropi um in 
asthma poorly  controlled wi th standard combination therapy . 
N Engl  J Med. 2012;367(13):1198 -207.
Kwong et al 1987
Kwong FK, Sue MA, Klaustermeyer WB. Cortic osteroi d com plicat ions in respiratory disease. 
Ann Allergy 1987;58(5):326-30.
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
116(157)Masoli et al 2004
Maso li M, Hol t S, Weatherall M, Beasley R. The dose -response relationship of inhaled 
corticosteroi ds in asthma. Curr Allergy  Asthma Rep 2004;4(2):144 -8.
Milosl avsky et al 2017
Milo slavsky EM, Naden RP, Bijlsma JW, Brogan PA, Brown ES, Brunetta P et al. 
Development of a Glucocortico id Toxicit y Index (GTI) using mult icriteria decisio n analysis. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76(3):543-
6.
Moore et al 2007
Moore WC, Bl eecker E R, Curran -Everett D, Erzurum SC, Ameredes BT, Bacharier L et al. 
Characterization of the severe asthma phenoty pe by  the Nati onal Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute’s Severe Asthma Research Program. J Allergy  Clin Immuno l 2007;119(2):405 -13.
NAEPP 2007
National Asthma Education and Prevent ion Program. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for 
the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma 2007. Available fro m: 
http://www .nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.pdf.
Nair et al 2017
Nair P, Wenze l S, Rabe KF, Bourdin A, Lugogo NL, Kuna P, ZONDA Trial Invest igators 
etal. Oral glucocortico id-sparing effect of benralizumab in severe asthma. 
N Engl  J Med 2017;376(25):2448-58.
Neogi et al 2010
Neogi  T, Al etaha D, Silman AJ, Naden RL, Felson DT, Aggarwal R et al. The 2010 American 
College o f Rheumatol ogy/European League Against Rheumat ism classificat ion criteria for 
rheumatoi d arthri tis: Phase 2 m ethodol ogical  report. Arthri tis Rheum. 2010;62(9): 2582-91.
Nicholas et al 2018
Nicholas MN, Li  SK, Dy toc M. An approach to 116inimizing risk of adrenal insufficiency  
when discont inuing oral glucocorticoids. J Cutan Med Surg 2018;22(2):175- 81.
Shaw et al 2015
Shaw DE, Sousa AR, Fowler SJ, Fleming LJ, Roberts G, Corfield J et al. Clinical and 
inflammatory  characteri stics of the European U -BIOPRED adult severe asthma cohort. 
EurRespir J 2015;46(5):1308-
21.
Simpson et al 2006
Simpson JL, Scott R, Boyle MJ, Gibson PG. Inflammatory subt ypes in asthma: assessment
and ident ificat ion using induced sputum. Respiro logy 2006;11(1):54-61.
Sweeney et al 2016
Sweeney J, Patterson CC, Menzies -Gow A, Niven RM, Mansur AH, Bucknall C, et al. 
Com orbidi ty in severe asthma requiring systemic corticosteroid therapy : cross -section al data 
Clinical Study Protoco l
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
117(157)from the Optimum Pat ient Care Research Database and the Brit ish Thoraci c Difficult Asthma 
Registry . Thorax 2016;71(4) :339-46.
Tedeschi et al 2018
Tedeschi SK, Johnson SR, Boumpas D, Daikh D, Dörner T, Jayne D et al. Devel oping and 
refining new candidate criteria for sy stemic lupus ery thematosus classificat ion: An 
internat ional co llaboration. Arthrit is Care Res (Hoboken) 2018;70(4):571 -81.
Takatsu et al 1994
Takatsu K, Takaki S, Hitoshi Y. Interleukin -5 and i ts receptor system : implicat ions in the 
immune system and inflammat ion. Adv Immuno l 1994;57:145 -90.
Toba et al 1999
Toba K, Koike T, Shibata A, Hashimoto S, Takahashi M, Masuko M et al. Novel technique 
for the di rect fl ow cy tofluorimetric analysis of human basophils in unseparated blood and 
bone marrow, and the characterizat ion of phenoty pe and peroxi dase of human basophils. 
Cytometry 1999;35(3):249 -59.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
118(157)Appendix A: Additional Safety Information
Further Guidance on the Definition of a Serious A dverse Event (SAE)
Life threatening
‘Life -threatening’ means that the patientwas at immediate risk of death from the AEas it 
occurred, or it is suspected that use or continued use of the product would result in the 
patient’s death.  ‘Life -threatening’ do es not mean that, had an AEoccurred in a more severe 
form, it might have caused death (eg, hepat itis that resolved without hepatic failure).
Hospitalization
Outpati ent treatm ent in an emergency room is not in itself a serious AE , although the reasons 
for it may be (eg, bronchospasm, laryngeal edema).  Hospital admissio ns and/or surgical 
operati ons planned before or during a study  are not consi dered AEs if the illness or disease 
existed before the patientwas enrolled in the study , provi ded that i t did not deteri orate in an 
unexpected way  during the study .
Important medical event or medical intervention
Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding whether a case is serious in 
situations where important m edical e vents may not be immediately life threatening or result in 
death, hospi talizat ion, disabilit y, or incapacit y but may jeopardize the patient or may require 
medical intervention to prevent one or more outcomes listed in the definit ion of serious.  
These shou ld usually be considered as serious.
Simply stopping the suspect drug does not mean that it is an important medical event; medical 
judgement must be used.
 Angioedema not severe enough to require intubation but requiring intravenous 
hydrocortisone treatment
 Hepatotoxicit y caused by paracetamo l (acetaminophen) overdose requiring 
treatm ent wi th N-acetylcysteine
 Intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm
 Blood dy scrasias (eg, neutropenia or anemia requiring blood transfusio n) or 
convulsio ns that do not result in hospitalizat ion
 Development of drug dependency or drug abuse
A Guide to Interpreting the Causality Question
When making an assessment of causalit y, consider the following factors when deciding if 
there is a ‘reasonable possibilit y’that an AE may  have been caused by the drug.
 Time course.  Exposure to suspect drug.  Has the patient actually received the 
suspect drug? Did the AE occur in a reasonable temporal relat ionship to the 
administration of the suspect drug?
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix A
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
119(157) Consist ency wit h known drug profile.  Was the AE consistent with the previous 
knowl edge of the suspect drug (pharmaco logy and toxi cology) or drugs of the same 
pharmaco logical class? Or could the AE be ant icipated from its pharmaco logical 
properties?
 De-challenge experience.  Di d the AE resolve or improve on stopping or reducing 
the dose of the suspect drug?
 No al ternative cause.  The AE cannot be reasonably  explained by another etio logy 
such as the underlying disease, other drugs, other host, or environmental fact ors
 Re-challenge experience.  Did the AE reoccur if the suspected drug was 
reintroduced after having been stopped? AstraZeneca would not normally 
recommend or support a re -challenge
 Laboratory  tests.  A specific laboratory  invest igation (if performed) has confirmed 
the relationship
In difficult cases, other factors could be considered such as:
 Is this a recogni zedfeature of overdose of the drug?
 Is there a known mechanism?
Causalit y of ‘related’ is m ade if, fo llowing a review of the relevant data, there is evidence for 
a ‘reasonable possibilit y’of a causal relat ionship for the individual case.  The expression 
‘reasonable possibilit y’ of acausal relationship is meant to convey, in general, that there are 
facts (evidence) or arguments to suggest a causal re lationship.
The causalit y assessment i s perform ed based on the available data including enough 
inform ation to m ake an informed judgment.  With limited or insufficient information in the 
case, i t is likely  that the event(s) will be assessed as ‘not related’ .
Causal relat ionship in cases where the disease under study  has deteri orated due to l ack of 
effect shoul d be classified as no reasonable possibilit y.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix B
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
120(157)Appendix B : International Airline Transportation Association (IATA) 6.2 
Guidance Document
Labelling and shipme nt of biohazard samples
International Airline Transportation Associat ion (IATA) classifies bio hazardous agents into 
3categori es.  For transport purposes the classificatio n of infect ious substances according to 
risk groups was removed fro m the Dangerous Go ods Regulations (DGR) in the 46thedition 
(2005).  Infect ious substances are now classified either as Category  A, Category  B or Exempt.  
There i s no di rect relati onship between Risk Groups and categories A and B.
Category A Infectious Substances are infect ious substances in a form that, when exposure to 
it occurs, i s capable of causing permanent disabilit y, life-threatening or fatal  disease in 
otherwi se healt hy humans or animals.  Category  A pathogens are eg, Ebola, Lassa fever virus:
 are to be packed and s hipped in accordance wit h IATA Instruction 602.
Category B Infectious Substances are infect ious Substances that do not meet the criteria for 
inclusio n in Category  A.  Category  B pathogens are eg, Hepatit is A, B, C, D, and E viruses, 
Hum an immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ty pes 1 and 2.  They  are assigned the following UN 
number and proper shipping name:
 UN 3373 –Biological Substance, Category  B
 are to be packed in accordance with UN3373 and IATA 650
Exempt –all other materials wit h minimal risk of containing pathogens
 Clinical trial samples will fall into Category  B or exempt under IATA regulations
 Clinical trial samples will routinely be packed and transported at ambient 
temperature in IATA 650–co mpliant packaging
 Biological samples transported in dry  ice req uire addi tional dangerous goods 
specification for the dry -ice content
 IATA -compliant courier and packaging materials should be used for packing and 
transportation, and packing should be done by an IATA-certified person, as 
applicable
 Samples routinely tran sported by  road or rail are subject to local regulations, which 
requi re that they  are al so packed and transported in a safe and appropriate way  to 
contain any  risk of infect ion or contaminat ion by using approved couriers and 
packaging/containment materials at all times.  The IATA 650 bio logical sample 
containment standards are encouraged wherever possible when road or rail transport 
is used
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix C
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
121(157)Appendix C: Genetic Research 
Rationale and Objectives
AstraZeneca intends to collect and store DNA for genet ic research to explore how genetic 
variat ions may affect clinical parameters, risk and prognosis o f diseases, and the response to 
medicat ions.  Genetic research may lead to better understanding of diseases, better diagnosis 
of diseases, or other improvements in health care and to the discovery  of new di agnost ics, 
treatm ents, or m edicati ons. 
In addit ion, collect ion of DNA samples from populat ions with well -described clinical 
characterist ics may lead to improvements in the design and interpretation of clinical trials and, 
possibly , to geneti cally guided treatment strategies.
Genetic Research Plan and Procedures
Selection of genetic research populati on
Study selection record
All patients will be asked to participate in this genetic research.  Participat ion is vo luntary and, 
if a pat ient declines to participate, there will be no penalt y or l oss of benefit.  The patient will 
not be excluded from any asp ect of  the main study .
Inclusion criteria
For inclusio n in this genet ic research, patients must fulfil all o f the inclusio n criteria described 
in the main body  of the Clinical Study  Protocol  and:
 Provi de inform ed consent for the genetic sampling and analys es
Exclusion criteria
Exclusio n from this genet ic research may be for any o f the excl usion criteria specified in the 
main study  or any  of the fo llowing:
 Previous allogeneic bone marrow transplant
 Non–leukocyte -depleted whol e blood transfusio n in 120 days o f genetic sample 
collect ion
Discontinuation of patients from this genetic research
Specific reasons for discont inuing a patient fro m this genet ic research are as fo llows:
Withdrawal o f consent for genet ic research:  Patients may withdraw fro m this genet ic research 
at any  time, independent of any decisio n concerning participat ion in other aspects of the main 
study .  Vol untary  discontinuati on will  not prej udice further treatment.  Procedures for 
discontinuat ion are outlined in Sect ion 3.6.1 of the main Clinical Study  Protocol .
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix C
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
122(157)Collection of samples for genetic research
The blood sample for genet ic research will be obtained fro m the pati ents at Visit 1. Although 
DNA is stable, early sample co llection is preferred to avoid introducing bias through 
excluding pat ients who may wit hdraw due to an adverse event (AE), such patients would be 
important to include in any genet ic analysis.  If for any reason the sa mple is not drawn at Visit 
1 it may be taken at any  visit until the l ast study  visit.  Only  one sam ple shoul d be collected 
per patient for genetics during the study .  Sam ples will  be collected, l abelled, stored and 
shipped as detailed in the Laboratory  Man ual.
Coding and storage of DNA samples
The processes adopted for the coding and storage of samples for genet ic analysis are 
important to maintain pat ient confident iality.  Sampl es will  be stored for a m aximum  of 
15years, from the date of last patient last visit, after which they will be destroy ed.  DNA is a 
finite resource that is used up during analyses.  Samples will be stored and used until no 
further analyses are possible or the maximum storage time has been reached.
An addit ional second code will be a ssigned to the blood either before or at the time of DNA 
extracti on repl acing the information on the sample tube.  Thereafter, the sample will be 
ident ifiable by the second, unique number only.  This number is used to ident ify the sample 
and corresponding data at the AstraZeneca genetics laboratories, or at the designated 
organi zation. No personal details ident ifying the individual will be available to any  person 
(AstraZeneca emplo yee or designated organizat ions working with the DNA).
The link between the p atient enrollment and the second number will be maintained and stored 
in a secure environment, with restricted access at AstraZeneca or designated organizations.  
The link will be used to ident ify the relevant DNA samples for analysis, to facilit ate 
correl ation of genoty pic resul ts wi th clinical data, to allow regulatory  audi t, and to trace 
samples for destruction in the case of withdrawal of consent.
Ethical and Regulatory Requirements
The principles for ethical and regulatory  requi rements for the study , including this genet ics 
research component, are outlined in Section 10of the main Clinical Study  Protocol .
Informed consent
The genetic component o f this study  is opti onal, and the patient may  parti cipate in other 
components of the m ain study  without parti cipat ing in the genet ic component.  To participate 
in the genet ic co mponent of the study, the patient must provide their signed and dated consent 
for both the m ain study  and the genetic component of the study .  A copy  of the si gned and 
dated consent form(s) must be given to the patient with the original filed at the study  center.  
The Principal Invest igators is responsible for ensuring that consent i s given freely and that the 
patient understands that they  may freely  discontinue from  the genet ic aspect of the study at 
any time.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix C
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
123(157)Patient data protection
AstraZeneca will not provide individual genoty pe resul ts to patients, any  insurance co mpany, 
any empl oyer, thei r family members, or general physician unless required to do so by  law.
Extra precautions are taken to preserve confident iality and prevent genetic data being linked to 
the identi ty of the patient.  In except ional circumstances, however, certain individuals might 
see both the genetic data and the personal ident ifiers of a pati ent.  For example, in the case of 
a medical emergency , an AstraZeneca Physician or an Invest igator might know a patient’s 
ident ity and also have access to his or her genet ic data.  Al so, regul atory  authori ties may  
requi re access to the relevant files, though the patient’s medical information and the genetic 
files woul d rem ain physically  separate.
Data management
Any genoty pe data generated during this study  will be stored at a secure sy stem  at 
AstraZeneca and/or designated organizations to analyze the samples.
The results from this genet ic research may be reported in a separate report fro m the CSR or 
published in scient ific journals.
AstraZeneca and its designated organizat ionsmay share summary results (such as genet ic 
differences fro m groups of individuals with a disease) fro m this genetic research with other 
researchers, such as hospitals, academic organizat ion, or health insurance co mpanies.  This 
can be done by placing the resul ts in scient ific databases, where they can be combined wit h 
the resul ts of similar studies to learn even more about healt h and disease.  The researchers can 
only use this inform ation for healt h-related research purposes.  Researchers may  see summary  
results, but they  will not be able to see individual patient data or any  personal  identifiers. 
Some or all  of the clinical datasets from the main study  may be merged wi th the genet ic data 
in a suitable secure environment separate from the clinical database .
Statistical Methods and Determination of Sample Size
The number of pat ients who will agree to participate in the genet ic research is unknown.  It is 
therefore not possible to establish whether sufficient data will be collected to allow a formal 
statist ical evaluati on or whether only  descri ptive statist ics will be generated.  A Statist ical 
Analysis Plan will be prepared where appropriate.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
124(157)Appendix D: Actions Required in Cases of Increases in Liver 
Biochemistry and Evaluation of Hy’s Law
1.INTRODUCTION
This Appendix describes the process to be fo llowed in order to ident ify and appropriately 
report cases of Hy’s Law.  It is not intended to be a comprehensive guide to the management 
of elevated liver biochemistries.  
Specific guidance on managing liver ab norm alities can be found in Sect ion 6.3.7 of the 
Clinical Study  Protocol .
During the course of the study  the Invest igator will remain vigilant for increases in liver 
biochemistry .  The Invest igator is responsible for determining whether a patient meets 
potenti al Hy’s Law (PHL) criteria at any  point during the study .
All sources of l aboratory  data are appropri ate for the determinat ion of PHL and HL ev ents; 
this includes samples taken at scheduled study  visits and other vi sits including central  and all 
local laboratory  evaluat ions even if co llected outside of the study  visit s; for exam ple, PHL 
criteria coul d be m et by  an elevated ALT from  a central  laboratory  and/or elevated TBL fro m 
a local laboratory . 
The Investigator will also review Adverse Event data (for example, for A Es that may indicate 
elevations in liver biochemistry ) for possible PHL events.
The Investigator participates, together with Astra Zeneca clinical project representatives, in 
review and assessment of cases meeting PHL criteria to agree whether Hy’s Law (HL) criteria 
are met.  HL criteria are met if there is no alternat ive explanat ion for the el evations in liver 
biochemistry  other than Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI) caused by  the Invest igational 
Medicinal Product (IMP).
The Investigator is responsible for recording data pertaining to PHL/HL cases and for 
reporting Adverse Events (AE) and Serious Adverse Events (SAE) according to the o utcome 
of the review and assessment in line with standard safet y reporting processes.
2.DEFINITIONS
Potential Hy’s Law (PHL)
Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) or Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) ≥ 3x Upper Limit of 
Norm al (ULN) together with Total Bilirubin (T BL) ≥ 2xULN at any po int during the study  
following the start of study  drug irrespect ive of an increase in Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP).
Hy’s Law (HL)
AST or ALT ≥ 3x ULN together with TBL ≥ 2xULN, where no other reason, other than the 
IMP, can be found to explain the combinat ion of increases, eg, elevated ALP indicating 
cholestasis, viral hepat itis, another drug.  
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
125(157)For PHL and HL the elevat ion in transaminases must precede or be coincid ent wi th (ie, on the 
same day ) the el evati on in TBL, but there is no specified timeframe within which the 
elevations in transaminases and TBL must occur.
3.IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL HY’S LAW CASES
In order to i dentify  cases of PHL i t is important to perfo rm a com prehensive review of 
laboratory  data for any  patient who m eets any  of the fo llowing i dentificat ion criteria in 
isolation or in combinat ion:
 ALT ≥ 3xULN
 AST ≥ 3xULN
 TBL ≥ 2xULN
When a pat ient meets any of the identificat ion criteria, in isol ation or in co mbination, the 
central  laboratory  will immediately  send an alert to the Invest igator (also sent to AstraZeneca 
representative). 
The Investigator will also remain vigilant for any  local  laboratory  reports where the PHL 
ident ificat ion criteria are met , where this is the case the Investigator will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative
 Request a repeat of the test (new blood draw) by  the central  laboratory  without 
delay
 Com plete the appropri ate unscheduled laboratory  eCRF m odule(s) wi th the ori ginal  
local laboratory  test resul t
When the identificat ion criteria are m et from central  or local laboratory  resul ts, the 
Invest igator will, without delay:
 Determine whether the patient meets PHL criteria (see Section 2 within this 
appendix for definit ions) by  reviewing l aboratory  reports from  all previ ous visi ts 
(including both central and local laboratory  resul ts)
4.FOLLOW -UP
4.1.Potential Hy’s Law criteria not met
If the patient does not meet PHL criteria, the Investigator will:
 Inform  the AstraZeneca representati ve that the patient has not met PHL criteria
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
126(157) Perform  follow-up on subsequent laboratory  resul ts according to the guidance 
provi ded in the Clinical Study  Protocol
4.2.Potential Hy’s Law criteria met
If the patient does meet PHL criteria, the Invest igator will:
 Notify  the AstraZeneca representative who will then inform the central Study  Team
Within 1 day of PHL criteria being met, the Invest igator will report the case as an SAE of 
Potenti al Hy’s Law; seri ous cri teria ‘Im portant m edical event’ and causalit y assess ment 
‘yes/related’ according to CSP process for SAE reporting. This shoul d be reported 
prom ptly to the appropriate regulatory /ethics authori ty (i.e., even before all other possible 
causes o f liver injury have been excluded) before fully  working up the pati ent to rul e out 
other etio logies. Reporting should include all available informat ion, especially  that 
needed for evaluat ing the severit y and likelihood that the drug caused the reaction, and 
shoul d initiate a cl ose f ollow-up until co mplete resol ution of th e problem and co mpletion 
of all attem pts to obtain supplementary  data.
For subjects that met PHL criteria prior to starting IMP, the invest igator is not required to 
submit a PHL SAE unless there is a significant change #in the subject’s condit ion
The Study Physician contacts the Invest igator, to provide guidance, discuss and agree an 
approach for the study  subjects’ foll ow-up (including any  further l aboratory  testing) and 
the continuous review o f data
Subsequent to this contact the Invest igator will:
 Moni tor the subject until liver biochemistry  parameters and appropriate clinical 
symptoms and signs return to normal or baseline levels, or as long as medically 
indicated. Completes fo llow-up SAE Form as required.
 Invest igate the etio logy of the event and perform  diagnosti c investi gations as 
discussed wi th the Study  Physician. << For studies using a central laboratory  add: 
This includes deciding which the tests available in the Hy ’s law lab ki t shoul d be 
used>> 
 Com plete the three Liver CRF Modules as infor mation becom es available 
# A ‘significant’ change in the subject’s condit ion refers to a clinically relevant change in any 
of the individual liver biochemistry  parameters (ALT, AST or total bilirubin) in iso lation or in 
combinat ion, or a clinically  relevant change in associated symptoms.  The determinat ion of 
whether there has been a significant change will be at the discret ion of the Invest igator, this 
may be in consultat ion with the Study  Physician if there is any uncertaint y.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
127(157)5.REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL HY’S LAW CASES
The instructions in this sect ion shoul d be fo llowed for all  cases where PHL cri teria are m et.
As soon as possible after the biochemistry  abnormalit y was ini tially detected, the Study  
Physician contacts the Invest igator in order to review available data and agree on whether 
there is an alternat ive explanat ion for meeting PHL criteria other than DILI caused by the 
IMP, to ensure timely analysis and reporting to healt h authorit ies wit hin 15 calendar days 
from date PHL cri teria was met .  The AstraZeneca Global Clinical Lead or equivalent and 
Global Safet y Physician will also be invo lved in this review together with other subject matter 
experts as appropriate.  
According to the outcome of the review and assessment, the Invest igator will follow the 
instructi ons bel ow.
Where there is an agreed alternative explanation for the ALT or AST and TBL elevations, 
a determination of whether the alternat ive explanatio n is an AE will be made and 
subsequent ly whether the AE meets the criteria for a SA E:
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is notan AE, record the alternative explanation on 
the appropriate CRF
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is an AE/SAE: update the previously submitted 
Potenti al Hy’s Law SAE and AE CRFs accordingly  with the new inform ation 
(reassessing event term; causalit y and seri ousness cri teria) fo llowing the AZ 
standard processes.
If it is agreed that there is no explanat ion that would explain the ALT or AST and TBL 
elevations other than the IMP:
 Send updated SAE (report term ‘Hy’s Law’ ) according to AstraZeneca standard 
processes. 
 The ‘Medically  Important’ seri ous cri terion shoul d be used if no other serious 
criteria apply
 As there is no alternat ive explanation for the HL case, a causalit y assessment of 
‘related’ should be assigned.
If, there i s an unavo idable delay, of over 15 calendar day s in obtaining the informat ion 
necessary  to assess whether or not the case meets the criteria for HL, then it is assumed that 
there is no alternat ive explanation unt il such time as an informed decis ion can be made:
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
128(157) Provi des any  further update to the previously submitted SAE of Potential Hy’s 
Law, (report term now ‘Hy’s Law case’) ensuring causalit y assessment i s related 
to IMP and seriousness criteria is medically  important, according to CSP process 
for SAE reporting.
 Continue fo llow-up and review according to agreed plan.  Once the necessary  
supplementary  informat ion is obtained, repeat the review and assessment to 
determine whether HL criteria are still met.  Update the previously submitted PHL 
SAE report following CSP process for SAE reporting, according to the outcome of 
the review and amending the reported term if an alternative explanat ion for the 
liver biochemistry  elevat ions is determined.
No later than 3 weeks after the biochemistry  abnorma lity is initially detected, the Study  
Physician will contact the Investigator to review available data and agree on whether there is 
an alternative explanation for meet ing PHL criteria other than drug -induced liver injury 
caused by  the invest igational medi cinal  product.  The AstraZeneca Global Clinical Lead or 
equivalent and Global Safet y Physician will also be involved in this review together with 
other patient matter experts as appropriate.  
According to the outcome of the review and assessment, the Inve stigator will fo llow the 
instructi ons bel ow.
If there is an agreed upon alternat ive explanat ion for the elevat ions in ALT or AST and TBL
levels, a determinat ion of whether the alternative explanat ion is an AE will be made and 
subsequent ly whether the AE me ets the cri teria for an SAE:
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is notan AE, record the alternative explanation on the 
appropriate eCRF
 If the alternat ive explanat ion is an AE/SAE, record the AE/SAE in the eCRF 
accordingly and fo llow the AstraZeneca standard processes
If it is agreed that there is no explanat ion that would explain the elevat ions in ALT or AST 
and TBL levels other than the investigational medicinal product:
 Report an SAE (report term ‘Hy’s Law’) according to AstraZeneca standard 
processes 
-The ‘Medically  Important’ seri ous cri terion shoul d be used if no other serious 
criteria apply
-As there is no alternat ive explanation for the HL case, a causalit y assessment of 
‘related’ should be assigned
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
129(157)If there is an unavo idable delay o f over 3 weeks, in ob taining the information necessary  to 
assess whether or not the case meets the criteria for HL, then it is assumed that there is no 
alternat ive explanat ion unt il such time as an informed decisio n can be made:
 Report an SAE (report term ‘Potential Hy’s Law’) applying serious criteria and 
causalit y assessment as per above
 Continue fo llow-up and review according to agreed plan.  Once the necessary  
supplementary  informat ion is obtained, repeat the review and assessment to 
determine whether HL criteria are met.  Update the SAE report according to the 
outcom e of the review amending the reported term if an alternat ive explanat ion for 
the liver biochemistry  elevati ons is determined
6.Actions Required When Potential Hy’s Law Criteria Are Met Before and After 
Starting Study Treatment 
Not applicable in PONENTE 
7. ACTIONS REQUIRED FOR REPEAT EPISODES OF POTENTIAL HY’S LAW
This sect ion is applicable when a patient meets PHL criteria on study treatment and has 
already met PHL cri teria at a previous on study  treatm ent visi t
.
The requi rement to conduct fo llow-up, revi ew, and assessment of a repeat occurrence(s) of 
PHL i s based on the nature of the alternat ive cause identified for the previous occurrence.  
The Investigator should determine the cause for the previous occurrenc e of PHL cri teria being 
met and answer the fo llowing quest ion:
 Was the alternat ive cause for the previous occurrence o f PHL cri teria being met 
found to be the di sease under study , eg, chroni c or progressing malignant disease, 
severe infect ion or liver dise ase? 
If No: follow the process described in Appendix D, Secti on 4.2for reporti ng PHL as an SAE
If Yes: Determine if there has been a significant cha nge in the subject’s condit ion#compared 
with when PHL cri teria were previously  met
 If there is no significant change no action is required
 If there is a significant change fo llow the process described in Appendix D, 
Secti on 4.2for reporti ng PHL as an SAE
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix D
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
130(157)# A ‘significant’ change in the subject’s condit ion refers to a clinically relevant change 
in any of the individual liver biochemistry  parameters (ALT, AST or total bilirubin) in 
isolation or in combinat ion, or a clinically  relevant change in associated symptoms.  The 
determinat ion of whether there has been a significant change will be at the discret ion of 
the Invest igator, this may be in consultat ion wi th the Study  Physician if there is any 
uncertaint y.
REFERENCES
Aithal et al 2011, Clinical Pharmaco logy and Therapeutics 89(6):806 -815.
FDA Guidance for Industry  (issued July  2009) ‘Drug -induced liver injury: Premarket ing 
clinical evaluat ion’
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix E
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 Oct ober 2020
131(157)Appendix E: Estimated Daily Doses for Inhaled Corticosteroids
Asthma therapy (adults and adolescents 12 years and older) Total daily dose (µg/day)b
Inhaled corticosteroidaMedium High
Beclomethasone dipropionate CFCc> 500 -1000 >1000
Beclomethasone dipropionate HFA >200 – 400 >400
Budesonide DPI > 400 – 800 >800
Ciclesonide HFA > 160 – 320 >320
Flunisolided2000 >2000
Fluticasone furoate DPI (eg, Arnuity®Ellipta®)dn.a. 200
Fluticasone propionate DPI > 250 – 500 >500
Fluticasone propionate HFA > 250 -500 >500
Mometasone furoate >220 – 440 >440
Triamcinolone acetonide > 1000 –2000 >2000
Inhaled corticosteroid in ICS/LABA combinationdMedium High
Beclomethasone dipropionate (eg, Fostair®) 400 >400
Fluticasone furoate (eg, Relvar®Ellipta®, Breo®Ellipta®) n.a. 184,200
Fluticasone propionate HFA (eg, Seretide®, Advair®) >320 – 460 >460
Fluticasone propionate DPI (eg, Seretide® Diskus®, Advair® 
Diskus®)> 250 – 500 >500
Budesonide HFA (eg, Symbicort®) 320 to <640 640
Budesonide DPI (eg, Symbicort®Turbuhaler®) 400 to <800 800
Mometasone furoate HFA (eg, Dulera®) 400 800
Mometasone DPI (eg Asmanex®Twisthaler®) 330 – 440 >440
CFC = chlorofluorocarbon propellant; DPI = dry powder inhaler; HFA = hydrofluoroalkane propellant; ICS = inhaled corticosteroid; 
LABA = long -acting beta 2agonist; n.a. = not applicable
a Modified from the Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention, G lobal Initiative for Asthma (GINA) 2018. Available 
from: http://ginasthma.org/2018 -gina-report -global -strategy -for-asthma -management -and-prevention . 
b. This protocol also allows any product with clinically comparable doses, including newer products and authorized generics. Hig h-
dose ICS via nebulized solution for inhalation is also allowed. For products not listed in this table, the highest approved m aintenance 
ICS or ICS/LABA dose in the local country label will meet the protocol -defined criterion for “high -dose ICS.” See Section 3.1). 
Additionally, in countries where the high -dose ICS or ICS/LABA is not available (e.g. only the medium -dose ICS or ICS /LABA is 
available in that country), the highest approved maintenance dose in the local label will also meet this ICS criterion
c. Beclomethasone dipropionate CFC is included for comparison with older literature
d. See local label.
Note: Data provided from GINA 2018 is not a table of equivalence, but of estimated clinical comparability. Categories of “low,” 
“medium,” and “high” doses are based on published information and available studies (at the time of GINA 2018 publication), 
including direct comparisons where available. Doses may be country -specific depending on labelling requirements. Most of the 
clinical benefit from ICS is seen at low doses, and clear evidence of dose -response relationships is seldom available within the dose 
ranges evaluated for regu latory purposes. “High” doses are arbitrary, but for most ICS are those that, with prolonged use, are 
associated with increased risk of systemic side -effects. For new preparations, manufacturer’s information should be reviewed 
carefully; products containin g the same molecule may not be clinical equivalent (GINA 2018).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix F
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
132(157)Appendix F: Estimated OCS Dose Therapy Equivalence
Oral corticosteroid Approximate equivalence dose
Prednisone 10 mg
Prednisolone 10 mg
Cortisone 50 mg
Hydrocortisone 40 mg
Methylprednisolone 8 mg
Triamcinolone 8 mg
Betamethasone 1.2 m g
Dexa methasone 1.5 m g
Deflazacort 12 mg
For conversions of other OCS doses or other OCS products, please see local label of OCS product or online conversion 
calculators (e.g. https://clincalc.com/corticosteroids/ )
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix G
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
133(157)Appendix G: Prednisone/Prednisolone Doses <5 mg in Relation to 
Available Tablet Strengths
Desirable daily dose Available tablet strength Administered number of tablets and 
frequency
0.5 m g 1 mg ½ tablet each day, or 1 tablet every other 
day
1.5 m g 1 mg If divisible –1½ tablets each day
If non -divisible –Dose over 2 days as 
follows: 1 tablet on day 1 and 2 tablets 
on day 2.
2 mg 1 mg 2 tablets each day
2.5 m g 1 mg If divisible –2½ tablets each day 
If non -divisible –dose over 2 days as 
follows: 2 tablets on day 1 and 3 tablets 
on day 2.
2.5 m g 5 mg ½ tablet each day, or 1 tablet every other 
day
3 mg 1 mg 3 tablets each day
4 mg 1 mg 4 tablets each day
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
134(157)Appendix H: Glucocorticoid Toxicity Index

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
135(157)Appendix H (continued)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
136(157)Appendix H (continued)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
137(157)Appendix H (continued)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
138(157)Appendix H (continued)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix H
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
139(157)Appendix H (continued)

Clinical Study Protocol Appendix I
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
140(157)Appendix I: Anaphylaxis: Signs, Symptoms, and Management
1.Introduction
As wi th any antibody , allergic reacti ons to dose administration are possible.  The World 
Health Organizat ion has categorized anaphylaxis into 2 subgroups, which are clinically 
indist inguishable: immuno logic [IgE -mediated and non -IgE-mediated (eg, IgG and immune 
complex mediated) and non immuno logic (Johansson et al, 2004).  The clinical criteria for 
defining anaphylaxis for this study  are listed in section 2.  A guide to the signs and symptoms 
and management of acute anaphylaxis is provided in sect ion 3.  Appropriate drugs, such as 
epinep hrine, ant ihistamines, corticosteroids, etc, and medical equipment to treat anaphylact ic 
reacti ons must be immediately available at study  sites, and study  personnel should be trained 
to recognize and treat anaphylaxis according to local guidelines.
If an a naphylact ic react ion occurs, a blood sample will be drawn fro m the pati ent as soon as 
possible after the event, at 60 minutes ± 30 minutes after the event, and at discharge for 
analysis of serum tryptase.
2.Clinical Criteria for Defining Anaphylaxis
In ad ults, anaphylaxis is highly likely  when any one of the following 3 criteria is fulfilled:
 Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with invo lvement of the 
skin, mucosal t issue, or both (eg, generalized hives, pruritus or flushing, swollen 
lips-tongue-uvula)
AND AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING
(a) Respiratory  com promise (eg, dyspnea, wheeze- bronchospasm, stridor, reduced peak 
expiratory  flow, hypoxemia)
(b) Reduced BP or associated symptoms of end -organ dy sfunct ion (eg, hy potoni a 
[collapse], syncope, incon tinence)
 Two or more of the fo llowing occur rapidly after exposure to a likely  allergen 
for that pati ent (minutes to several hours):
(a) Involvement of the skin -mucosal t issue (eg, generalized hives, itch -flush, swollen 
lips-tongue-uvula)
(b) Respiratory  com promis e (eg, dyspnea, wheeze- bronchospasm, stridor, reduced peak 
expiratory  flow, hypoxemia)
(c) Reduced BP or associated symptoms (eg, hy potonia [coll apse], syncope, 
incont inence)
(d) Persi stent gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, crampy  abdominal  pain, vomi ting)
 Reduced BP after exposure to known allergen for that patient (minutes to 
several hours): Adults: systolic BP of less than 90 mm Hg or greater than 30% 
decrease fro m that pati ent’s baseline value
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix I
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
141(157)3.Signs, Symptoms, and Management of Acute Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is an acute and potentially lethal mult isystem allergic react ion in which so me or 
all of the following si gns and symptoms occur:
 Diffuse ery thema
 Pruri tus
 Urticaria and/or angioedema
 Bronchospasm
 Laryngeal edema
 Hypotensi on
 Cardi ac arrhy thmias
 Feeling of impending doom
 Unconsciousness
 Shock
Other earlier or concomitant signs and symptoms can include the following:
 Itchy  nose, ey es, pharynx, genitalia, palms, and so les
 Rhinorrhea
 Change in voice
 Metallic taste
 Nausea, vo miting, di arrhea, abdominal cramps, a nd bl oating
 Lightheadedness
 Headache
 Uterine cramps
 Generalized warmt h
4. Management of Acute Anaphylaxis
4.1 Immediate intervention
 Assessment of airway , breathing, ci rculation, and adequacy  of mentati on
 Administer epinephrine intramuscularly  every  5-15 minutes, in appropriate 
doses, as necessary , depending on the present ing signs and symptoms of 
anaphylaxis, to control signs and symptoms and prevent progression to more 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix I
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
142(157)severe symptoms such as respiratory  distress, hy potensi on, shock, and 
unconsciousness
4.2 Possibly appropriate, subsequent measures depending on response to epinephrine
(e) Place pat ient in recumbent posit ion and elevate lower extremit ies
(f) Establish and maintain airway
(g) Administer oxy gen
(h) Establish venous access.
(i) Norm al saline IV for fluid replacement.
Specific measures to consider after epinephrine injections, where appropriate
(j) Consider epinephrine infusio n.
(k) Consider H1 and H2 ant ihistamines
(l) Consider nebulized β2 agonist (eg, albuterol [salbutamo l]) for bronchospasm 
resistant to epinephrine
(m) Consider systemic corticosteroids
(n) Consider vasopressor (eg, dopamine)
(o) Consider glucagon for patient taking a β -blocker
(p) Consider atropine for symptomat ic bradycardia
(q) Consider transportation to an emergency  depart ment or an intensive care facilit y
(r) For card iopulmo nary arrest during anaphylaxis, high -dose epinephrine and 
prolonged resuscitat ion efforts are encouraged, if necessary
Adapted from: Kemp SF, Lockey  RF, Simo ns FE; World Allergy Organization ad hoc 
Committee on Epinephrine in Anaphylaxis. Epinephrin e: the drug of cho ice for anaphylaxis. 
A statement of the World Allergy Organizat ion. Allergy  2008;63(8):1061 -70.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix J
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
143(157)Appendix J: Adrenal Crisis Guidelines
Management of Acute Adrenal Insufficiency Secondary to Glucocorticoid 
Withdrawal
National or l ocal guidelines for the m anagement of acute adrenal insufficiency (adrenal crisis), 
where they  exist, shoul d be f ollowed. The fo llowing guidelines have been adapted from the 
guidelines o f the Soci ety for Endocrino logy. They  are intended for gui dance subject to clinical 
judgement only.
The possibilit y of acute adrenal insufficiency  should be considered in any  acutely  unwell 
patient undergoing wit hdrawal o f chronic systemic corticosteroid treatment.
Recognition
 Clinical signs and symptoms
 Fatigue, lack of energy, weight loss
 Low bl ood pressure, postura l dizziness and hypotensio n (≥20 mmHg drop in 
systolic BP from supine to standing posit ion), di zziness, collapse, and in severe 
cases hypovo laemic shock
 Abdo minal pain, tenderness and guarding, nausea, vo miting
 Fever
 Confusio n, so mnolence, in severe cases delirium or com a
 Back and leg cramps/spasms may  be reported
 Lab findings:
 Hyponatraemia
 Pre-renal failure (increased serum creat inine due to hypovo laemia)
 Norm ochromic anaemia, so metimes also lymphocytosis and eosinophilia
 Hypoglycaemia
Management
 Hydrocor tisone (immediate bo lus inject ion of 100 mg hydrocortisone i.v. or i.m. 
followed by cont inuous intravenous infusio n of 200 mg o f hydrocortisone per 
24hours (alternatively 50 mg o f hydrocorti sone per intravenous or intramuscular 
inject ion every  6 hours)
 Rehydrate withintravenous 0.9% sodium chloride in hypotensive patients. The 
rate and total vo lume o f infusate must be decided on an individual patient basis with 
continuous monitoring for fluid overload. Correction of hyponatremia must be 
according to relevant local guidelines
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix J
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
144(157) Consider any other potential precipitat ing factors (in addit ion to corti costeroi d 
withdrawal), eg, infection; invest igate and treat as appropriate
Contact an endocrinologist at an early stage to advise on ongoing management.
Refer ence
Arlt W; Societ y for Endocrino logy Clinical  Commi ttee. Soci ety for Endocrinology  Endocrine 
Emergency  Guidance: Emergency  management of acute adrenal insufficiency  (adrenal  crisis) 
in adult pati ents. Endocr Connect 2016;(5):G1- G3.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
145(157)Appendix K: PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy
1.PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy Background and Rationale
The PONENTE study  assesses an algorithm for OCS reduction that also defines when OCS 
reducti on shoul d be interrupted (i.e. after 2 exacerbat ions, or after two laboratory  tests 
showing co mplete AI within a 3- month peri od). Once the OCS dose has been completely 
reduced or the lowest OCS dose achieved based on the OCS reduction treatment algorithm, 
patients enter a m aintenance phase where no further reductions in OCS dose are allowed. 
After complet ingthe 6-month OCS maintenance phase, patients who couldn’t completely  
reduce OCS may  have been well -controlled on the lowest OCS dose achieved during the OCS 
reducti on phase or m ay have recovered from  AI, and, therefore, healt hcare providers may 
decide to f urther reduce OCS or other background asthma medicat ion, which is in line with 
the GINA report on severe asthma management (i.e. first reducing OCS and then, reducing 
ICS dose as tolerated according to clinical assessment) (GINA 2020).
According to the GINA report, asthma therapy  shoul d be peri odically  reviewed to assess 
patient’s response to therapy . For pati ents who have had a good response to biologic therapy , 
the treating physician should consider not only the reduction or eliminat ion of maintenance 
OCS, but al so reducing the ICS dose from high to medium dose (GINA 2020). GINA 
describes this guidance as “consensus advice” recognizing that no data are available to guide 
this clinical decisio n. 
However, it is anticipated that in the future healt hcare providers are likely to reduce the ICS 
dose significant ly or completely at the behest of patients whose as thma becomes well -
controlled after the addit ion of bio logic therapy .
This l ong term  follow up substudy  aims to observe changes in the OCS dose and other 
background asthma therapy , and to assess the am ount of recovery  from AI, in a real -world 
setting as we ll as assessment of glucocortico id toxicit y by means of GTI. 
2.PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy Design
After completion of the EOT visit procedures, eligible patients (See Appendix K –Secti on 4
and 5) may consent to a l ong term  follow up visit 12 to 18 months after com pletion of the 
main PONENTE study . Accordingly , the l ong te rm follow up visi t  can occur in a range of 12 
to 18 m onths after an eligible pat ient completes the EOT visit such that the last visit of the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up will take place 1- year after the last patient completes the 
EOT of the main PONENTE st udy.
Patients will  be treated according to healthcare provider discretion and therefore no IP (i.e. 
Benralizumab) will be provided by the sponsor. Between the EOT visit of the main 
PONENTE study  and the Long Term Fo llow Up visit, any changes in the mainte nance 
asthma regimen are allowed, including further reductions o f OCS as recommended in the 
GINA report (GINA 2020
).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
146(157)2.1 Consent:
Written consent must be obtained at any  time fro m the EOT visit to prior to the Long Term 
Follow Up visit . Pati ents will co mplete the 4 -week fo llow-up visit after EOT, regardless of 
whether they  enrol  in the l ong term  follow up substudy , as thi s is the l ast visit of the 
PONENTE study .  
Patients who have already co mpleted the EOT visit or the fo llow-up visit before the start of 
the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up may be contacted after EOT for participat ion. In thi s 
case, all assessments previously  captured dur ing the EOT visit will be included in the analysis 
of the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up .
Enrolment into the long term fo llow up substudy  will remain open unt il the last PONENTE 
patient has com pleted the EOT vi sit.
2.
2 Long Term Follow Up Visit: 
At the Long Term  Follow Up visit, the patient will undergo an on -site visi t for assessment of 
daily  OCS dose, concomitant medicat ions (including changes in background asthma regimen), 
asthma exacerbations, laboratory  assessments, vi tal signs, and i tems f or the GTI as sessments.  
Addit ionally , pati ents who had Complete or Partial AI at the end of the OCS maintenance 
phase (EOT visit) of the primary PONENTE study, will undergo morning cortisol testing. 
Patients wi th indeterminate results fro m the morning cortisol test at the Long Term Follow Up
visit will return on -site to conduct ACTH stimulat ion test within a week after the Long Term 
Follow Up visit .
2.3 Assessment and collection of asthma exacerbations:
Asthma exacerbations will be defined per Section 5.2.2.  The Inve stigator will assess 
exacerbations at the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up , and if applicable, at any other time 
when made aware by the patient (Table 8). The Investigator must justify the decisio n for 
defining an event of worsening asthma as an exacerbat ion, and document this just ification, 
including symptoms, in the source documents and the eCRF.
2.4 Safety reporting: 
Any event that occurs from the time period between the main PONENTE study  follow up visit 
and the patient signing the ICF will be captured as part of the medical history  for the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up. After PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up inform ed consent 
up until the Long Term Fo llow Up visit, any events will be captured as AEs/SAEs .Any 
AE/SAE that are unreso lved at the Long Term Fo llow Up visit will be fo llowed-up by  the 
Invest igator as long as medically necessary but will not be captured in the eCRF. Causalit y 
will be confirmed by the invest igator per Section 6.3.4. Adverse events based on signs and 
symptoms, or based on examinat ions and te sts, will be reported per Sections 6.3.5 and 6.3.6 , 
respectively .
Any spon taneous reports of AE/SAE related to any drug products other than benralizumab 
will not be captured in the eCRF but will be reported as spontaneous reports to the drug 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
147(157)manufacturer (e.g. to AstraZeneca or other manufacturer) and/or local regulatory  agencie s as 
requi red by l ocal regulat ions. 
3.PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy objectives
The m ain object ive of the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up Substudy  is to retrospectively  
collect changes of OCS and other background asthma maintenance medicat ions, in a real-
world setti ng 12 to 18 months after complet ion of the main PONENTE study . Addi tionally, 
the substudy  aims to further observe shifts in the AI status in pat ients who had Complete or 
Parti al AI at the end of the PONENTE study  and to further evaluate the GTI over time.
Observational Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To observe real -world clinical management of 
OCS dose 12 to 18 months after completion of 
the main PONENTE studyPatients who achieve 100% reduction in 
daily OCS dose from baseline* OCS 
dose to the end of the long term follow 
up substudy
Patients who achieve a daily OCS dose 
of ≤5mgat the end of the long term 
follow up substudy
Patients who achieve ≥90%, ≥75%, 
≥50% or >0% OCS reduction from 
baseline* OCS dose to the end of the 
long term follow up substudy.
Change in daily OCS dose from 
baseline* to the end of the long term 
follow up substudy
To observe real -world clinical management of 
backgr ound maintenance asthma regimenChange in background asthma 
maintenance medication from EOT of 
PONENTE main study*  to the end of 
the long term follow up substudy
Safety Objectives: Outcome Measures:
To observe shift in AI status in patients who had 
Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the 
PONENTE studyShifts in AI status and further OCS dose 
changes from the main PONENTE study to 
the long term follow up visit
To observe asthma exacerbations in adult 
patients from the main PONENTE study to the 
long term follow up visitAnnualized asthma exacerbation rate
Percentage of patients without exacerbation
To assess the safety and tolerability from the 
main PONENTE study to the long term follow 
up visitAdverse events / Serious adverse events
Laboratory parameters and vital signs
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
148(157)To evaluate corticosteroid toxicity from the main 
PONENTE study to the long term follow up visitGlucocorticoid toxicity index
*the PONENTE main study baseline
4.Inclusion criteria
For inclusio n in the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up  substudy , patients shoul d fulfil the 
following criteria:
a.Patients m ust have completed the PONENTE EOT visit. 
b.Written informed consent to participate in the observational PONENTE  Long Term Follow 
Up
5.Exclusion criteria
Patients shoul d not enter the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up if any o f the following 
exclusio n criteria are fulfilled: 
a.Concurrent enrolment in another intervent ional clinical trial
b.AstraZeneca staff invo lved in the planning and/or conduct of the study
c.Employees of the study  site or any  other individuals involved with the conduct of 
the study , or imm ediate family members of such individuals
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
149(157)6.Study Plan and timing of procedures
Table 8 PONENTE Long Term Follow Up Substudy –Study plan: Enrolment to End of Study
Assessment/Activity Protocol section Enrollment Long Term Follow Up Period Withdrawal Unscheduled Visit
PONENTE Long Term 
Follow UpEnrolment
(after EOT procedures)aPONENTE Long Term Follow 
UpVisit
Written Informed consent for long term follow up 
substudybAppendix K:2.1X
Medical History X
Review EOT Visit Assessments Table 1 X
Brief phy sical examination 5.2.5.2 N/A X X
Vital signs 5.2.6 N/A X X X
Weight 5.3.1 N/A X X
Serum chemistry 5.2.4 N/A X X
Hematology 5.2.4 N/A X X
Morning Cortisol testingc5.2.4 N/A X X
Glucocorticoid toxicity index 5.2.1.1 N/A X X
Assessment of asthma exacerbations 5.2.2/ 5.2.3N/AXX X
Adverse events 6.1 N/A
XX X
Concomitant medication 7.8/ 
Appendix K: 7N/AXX X
OCS and asthma medications Appendix K: 7N/AXX X
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
150(157)a.Enrolment for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy can occur any time after al l PONENTE EOT procedures are completed. Patients w ho have already  
completed EOT prior to the start of the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy may be contacted for participation at any time u p to 18 months after the EOT 
visit. Assessments labeled N/A are n ot applicable because they will be collected as a part of the PONENTE EOT visit.
b.ICF for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy must be obtained any time from EOT of the main PONENTE study and prior to an y activities of the 
PONENTE Long Term Follow Up visit
c.Patients who have Complete AI or Partial AI at the end of the primary PONENTE study will undergo a morning cortisol test at t he  Long Term Follow Up visit. 
Patients with indeterminate results will return to the site within a week after the Long Term Follow Up visit to conduct an ACTH stimulation test.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
151(157)7.Concomitant medication and other treatments
The PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up is observatio nal only. There are no sponsor -provided 
investigat ional products, restrict ions related to concomitant me dicati ons other than those 
detailed in Sect ion 3.5, or restrict ions on concurrent disease. Restrict ions described in Secti on
7.8do not apply in the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up .
Addit ionally , from the EOT vi sit of the m ain PONENTE study  to the Long Term Follow Up
visit, any changes in the maintenance asthma regimen are allowed , including reductions of 
maintenance OCS therapy  as recommended in the GINA report.
Due to potential interactions with morning cortiso l and ACTH stimulat ion testing, the 
restri ctions on concomitant medicat ions detailed in Section 3.5remain in place for the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy .
8.Statistical Analyses by AstraZeneca
8.1 Statistical Analysis Plan
The PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up will be managed under a separate SAP fro m the 
PONENTE main study  and reported by  way of an addendum to the PONENTE CSR.
8.2 Sample Size Estimate for PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy
The PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up i s not formally  powered; all  patients from  the 
PONENTE main study  meeting all inclusio n criteria and no exclusio n criteria of this long 
term follow up substudy  will be eligible to enrol. 
8.3 Definition of analysis sets for PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy
Observational and safet y analyses will use a common analysis set –the Long Term Fo llow Up 
Analysis Set -which will include all pat ients who si gn informed consent to continue into the 
PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up .  Two further analysis sets are defined as fo llows:
The "Bio logic" Analysis Set will include all pat ients in the Long Term Fo llow Up Analysis set 
with >=50% exposure to any  biologic treatm ent for asthm a during the PONENTE Long Term 
Follow Up ; and
The "Benralizumab" Analysis Set will include all patients in the Long Term Follow Up 
Analysis set with >=50% exposure to commercial Benralizumab during the PONENTE  Long 
Term  Follow Up.
Addit ional analysis sets may be defined in the SAP.
8.4 Outcome measures for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up substudy
Definition of baseline
Baseline definit ions will be as per definit ions for the PONENTE main study  (see the m ain 
PONENTE SAP for full definit ions).
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
152(157)Outcome variables
 Patients who achieve 100% reduction in daily OCS dose fro m PONENTE baseline 
dose to the Long Term Fo llow Up visit
 Patients who achieve a daily OCS dose of ≤5mg (prednisone equivalent dose) at the 
Long Term Follow Up visit
 Patients who achieve ≥90%, ≥75%, ≥50% and >0% reduction in daily  OCS dose 
from PONENTE baseline dose to the Long Term Fo llow Up visit
 Change in daily  OCS dose (m g prednisone equiva lent dose) fro m the baseline dose 
of the PONENTE m ain study  to the Long Term Follow Up visit
 Change in background asthma maintenance medication fro m baseline of the 
PONENTE main study  to the Long Term Fo llow Up visit
Change from baseline will be calculated as the post -baseline assessment value minus the 
baseline assessment value.  If either value is missing, then the change from baseline value will 
be missing. Full details will be defined in the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy
SAP.
Safety outcome variables
 Patients wi th com plete AI and changes in AI status
 Annualized asthma exacerbation rate
 AEs, SAEs
 Laboratory  parameters and vital signs
 GTI
8.5 Methods for statistical analyses for the PONENTE Long Term Follow Up
substudy
Statistical tabulat ion will be presented for all patients in the long term fo llow up analysis set, 
biologic analysis set and Benralizumab analysis set. Continuous variables will be summarized 
using the mean, two- sided 95% CI of the mean, the standard deviat ion, median, minimum 
value, and maximum value.  Categorical variables will be summarized using frequency counts 
and percentages, as well as a two -sided 95% CI for proportions co mputed using exact 
Clopper -Pearson method.  Data will be listed in patient -level data list ings. 
No formal hypothesis will be tested and no mult iplicity adjustm ent will be applied in the 
statist ical analysis.  No imputation of observat ional or safet y data will be performed.  
Imputati on for parti al dates will be detailed in the SAP.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
153(157)Analysis of the observa tional variables
Changes in OCS dose over time will be summarized using descriptive statist ics in tables and 
presented graphically for the long term fo llow up analysis set, bio logic analysis set and 
Benralizumab analysis set.  Percentages achieving 100% re duction in OCS daily dose, a ≤5mg 
daily  dose, other pre -specified percentage reductions in OCS daily dose and reductions in 
background asthma medicat ions will be reported wit h nominal 95% CIs derived using the 
exact Clopper -Pearson method.
Addit ional analy ses will be detailed in the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  SAP.
Analysis of safety outcomes 
The number and percentage of patients with co mplete AI at the  Long Term Fo llow Up visit 
will be presented for the long term fo llow up analysis set, bi ologic analysis set and 
Benralizumab analysis set.  A logist ic regressio n model will be developed to ident ify factors 
potenti ally predict ive of lo ng-term adrenal  insufficiency.  Com plete AI status at the  Long 
Term  Follow Up visit will be the dichotomous respo nse variable with demographic, 
respi ratory  and metabo lic baseline characterist ics as explanatory  variables.  Full details will be 
provi ded in the SAP.
Spaghetti  plots will  be produced for pati ents in the lo ng term  follow up analysis set, bio logic 
analysis set and Benralizumab analysis set with partial AI throughout the OCS reduction 
phase of the main PONENTE study , showing cortisol  levels over time until the  Long Term 
Follow Up visit.
The incidence of AEs and SAEs will be summarized over the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow 
Upsubstudy  for com parison wi th incidence rates during the PONENTE main study . 
Summaries of laboratory  parameters and vital signs may be provided, including absolute 
values and changes over time.  Full details will be provided in the SAP.
The an nualized rate of asthma exacerbat ions during the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up 
substudy  will be summarized using mean, 95% CI and dispersio n based on the negat ive 
binomial distribut ion, for the long term fo llow up analysis set, bio logic analysis set and 
Benr alizumab analysis set.  This will be repeated for exacerbat ions result ing in hospi talizati on 
or an ER visit.  Rates will be compared with those recorded during the PONENTE main study .  
The number and percentage of patients remaining exacerbation -free durin g the PONENTE 
Long Term Follow Up substudy  will be presented.
Glucocorti coid toxicit y index will be summarized over time fro m the start of the PONENTE 
main study  to the end of the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy , for the l ong term  
follow up analysis s et, bi ologic analysis set and Benralizumab analysis set.  Statist ical 
correl ation between GTI and daily OCS dose will be explored.
Subgroup analysis
Any subgroup analyses will be defined in the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up SAP.
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix K
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study Code D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
154(157)9.Study timetable and end -of-study
Enrolment for the PONENTE Long Term Fo llow Up substudy  will be closed once the final 
PONENTE patient completes the EOT visit. For patients who participate in the PONENTE  
Long Term Follow Up substudy , the final  study  visit will  be the  Long Term  Follow Up visi t 
except for patients with indeterminate morning cortiso l resul ts at thi s visi t who will  return 
within 1 week after Long Term Fo llow Up visi t to conduct the ACTH stimulat ion test. 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix L
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study C ode D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
155(157)Appendix L:     Changes Related to Mitigation of Study Disruptions Due to 
Cases of Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public Health 
Crisis
Note: Changes below should be implemented only during study disruptions due to any of or a 
combinat ion of civil crisis, natural disaster, or public healt h crisis (eg, during quarant ines and 
resul ting site closures, regional travel restrictions and considerat ions if site personnel or study  
patients beco me infected with SARS -CoV -2or similar pandemic infect ion) during which 
patients may not wish to or m ay be unable to vi sit the study  site for study  visit s. These 
changes should only be implemented if allowable by lo cal/regi onal guidelines and following 
agreem ent from the Sponsor and instructions on how to perform these procedures will be 
provi ded at the time of implementation.
Please note that during civil crisis, natural disaster, or public healt h crisis, some study  
assessment sand procedures may  not be conducted due to internat ional or local po licies or 
guidelines, hospital or clinic restrict ions and other measures implemented to ensure the 
patient’s safet y. If indoubt, please contact the AZ Study  Physician . 
1 Reconsent of Study Patients During Study Interruptions
During study  interrupti ons, i t may not be possible for the patients to complete s tudy visits and 
assessments on site and alternat ive means for carrying out the visits and assessments may be 
necessary , eg, rem ote vi sits. Reconsent shoul d be obtained for the al ternat ive means of 
carrying out visits and assessments and should be obtained prior to performing the procedures 
described in Section 2 to Section 5. Local and regional regulat ions and/or guidelines regarding 
reconsent of study  patients shoul d be checked and fo llowed. Reconsent may  be verbal  if 
allowed by  local and regi onal guidelin es (note, i n the case of verbal reconsent the ICF should 
be signed at the patient’s next contact with the study  site). Vi siting the study  sites for the sol e 
purpose of obtaining reconsent should be avo ided. 
2 Home or Remote Visit to Replace On -site Visit (where applicable)
A qualified HCP fro m the study  site or TPV servi ce m ay visit the patients home / or other 
remote locati on as per l ocal Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), as applicable. Supplies 
will be provided for a safe and efficient visit. The qua lified HCP will be expected to collect 
inform ation per the clinical study  protocol  (CSP). If applicable, assessments will be performed 
according a the revised Schedule of Assessments (SoA) in the Study  Instructi on Manual for 
Mitigation Due to Civil Crisis, Natural  Disaster, or Public Healt h Crisis . 
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix L
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study C ode D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
156(157)3 Telemedicine Visit to Replace On -site Visit (where applicable)
In thi s appendix, the term telemedicine visit refers to remote contact with the patients using 
telecommunicat ions techno logy including phone calls , virtual  or vi deo vi sits, and m obile 
healt h devices.
During a civil crisis, natural disaster, or public healt h crisis, on -site visi ts may  be replaced by 
a telemedicine visit if allowed by  local/regional guidelines. Having a telemedicine contact 
with the patients will allow adverse events, concomitant medication, exacerbat ions, OCS dose 
(including reasons for no OCS reduction in an otherwise controlled pat ient), GTI data, blood 
sample collect ion for central lab analysis, etc to be reported and documented. I f applicable, 
safet y procedures and blood sample co llection will be performed according to the revised SoA 
in the Study  Instructi on Manual for Mit igation Due to Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or Public 
Health Crisis .
4 At-home or Remote Location IP Admini stration Instructions
If a site visit is not possible, at -home or remote location administration of IP may be 
perform ed by  a qualified HCP, provi ded this is acceptable wit hin local regulati on/guidance. 
The opti on of  at-home or remote location IP administra tion ensures patientssafet y in cases o f 
a pandemic where patients may be at increased risk by traveling to the site/clinic. This will 
also minimize interruption o f IP administration during other study  disrupti ons, e.g., si te 
closures due to natural disaster. 
4.1 - At-home or Remote Location IP Administration by a Quali fied HCP 
or TPV Service
A qualified HCP fro m the study  site or TPV servi ce m ay administer the IP at the patient’s
home or other remote location according to the CSP. All necessary supplies and instructions 
for administration and docum entati on of  IP adminis tration will be provi ded. Addit ional 
inform ation related to the visit can be obtained via a telemedicine or home visit.
5 Data Capture During Telemedicine or Home / Remote Visits
Data collected during telemedicine or home / remote visits will be captured by the qualified 
HCP fro m the study  site or TPV servi ce in the source documents, or by  the patientthemselves 
if applicable. 
Refer to the Study  Instructi on Manual  for Mi tigation Due to Civil Crisis, Natural Disaster, or 
Public Healt h Cri sis for step by  step gui dance.
6 Changes to Statistical Analyses
Clinical Study Protocol Appendix L
Drug Substance Benralizumab
Study C ode D3250C00065
Version 4
Date 17 October 2020
157(157)Addit ional sensit ivity and supportive analyses to assess the impact of study  disrupti on (e.g. 
effects of the COVID -19 pandemic) on th e primary , secondary  and key supportive efficacy  
endpo ints may be defined.  Full details will be included in the Statist ical Analysis Plan.
SIGNATURE PAGE
This is a representation of an electronic record that was signed
electronically and this page is the manifestation of the electronic signature
Document Name: d3250c00065-csp-v4
Document Title: D3250C00065 Clinical Study Protocol version 4
Document ID: Doc ID-003819839
Version Label: 4.0 CURRENT LATEST APPROVED
Server Date
(dd-MMM-yyyy HH:mm ‘UTC’Z)Signed by Meaning of Signature
19-Oct-2020 15:40 UTC Content Approval
19-Oct-2020 14:26 UTC Management Approval
19-Oct-2020 21:15 UTC Content Approval
Notes: (1) Document details as stored in ANGEL, an AstraZeneca document management system.
