Retrospective Study on the
Use, Efficiency, and Safety of  
the at-home Mosie Kit
. 
Principal Investigator: Karina Loyo, Ph.D., MBA, CCDM
Funded by Mosie Baby
Protocol Number: MOSIE-001
Short Name: Mosie Kit Survey
Version Number: 1; this is the first version of the protocol.
July 31, 2020
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT
This document is confidential communication. Acceptance of this document constitutes
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or
disclosed without prior approval of the Principal Investigator or other participating study
leadership.
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 2
Statement of Compliance 6 
Investigator’s Signature 6
1       PROTOCOL SUMMARY 7 
1.1      Synopsis 7 
1.2   Schema 9 
1.3      Schedule of Activities 9 
2 INTRODUCTION 10
2.1      Study Rationale 10 
2.2 Background 10
2.3      Risk/Benefit Assessment 12 
2.3.1 Known Potential Risks 12
2.3.2     Known Potential Benefits 13 
2.3.3 Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits 13
3   OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOIN TS 1 4 
4       STUDY DESIGN 16 
4.1 Overall Design 16
4.2      Scientific Rationale for Study Design 18 
4.3 Justification for Intervention 19
4.4      End-of-Study Definition 19 
5       STUDY POPULATION 19 
5.1      Inclusion Criteria 20 
5.2      Exclusion Criteria 20 
5.3      Lifestyle Considerations 20 
5.4   Screen Failures 20 
5.5   Strategies for Recruitment and Retention 21 
6    STUDY INTERVENTION(S) OR EXPERIMENTA L MANIPULATION(S) 2 2 
6.1 Study Intervention(s) or Experimental Manipulation(s) Administration 22
6.1.1     Study Intervention or Experimental Manipulation Description 22 
6.1.2 Administration and/or Dosing 22
6.2   Fidelity 22 
6.2.1 Interventionist Training and Tracking 22
6.3 Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomization and Blinding 22 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 2  
6.4      Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation Adherence 22 
6.5 Concomitant Therapy 23
6.5.1 Rescue Therapy 23 
7       STUDY INTERVENTION/EXPERIMENTAL MANIPULATION DISCONTINUATION AND 
PARTICIPANT DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL 23 
7.1   Discontinuation of Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation 23 
7.2 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study 23 
7.3      Lost to Follow-Up 23 
8 STUDY ASSESSM ENTS A ND PROCEDURES 23
8.1   Endpoint and Other Non-Safety Assessments 23 
8.2 Safety Assessment 23
8.3 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events 24 
8.3.1 Definition of an Adverse Event 24
8.3.2     Definition of Serious Adverse Events 24 
8.3.3 Classification of an Adverse Event 24
8.3.3.1. Severity of Event 24 
8.3.3.2. Relationship to Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation 24
8.3.3.3.  Expectedness 25 
8.3.4 Time Period and frequ ency o f Event Assessment and Follow-up 25
8.3.5 Adverse Event Reporting 25 
8.3.6 Serious Adverse Event Reporting 26
8.3.7 Reporting Events to Participants 26 
8.3.8 Events of Special Interest 26
8.3.9 Reporting Pregnancy 26 
8.4 Unanticipated Problems 26
9       STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 26 
9.1      Statistical Hypotheses and General Statistical Approach 26 
9.2      Sample Size Determination 29 
9.3    Populations for Analyses 30 
9
.4      Statistical Analyses 30 
9.4.1     General Approach 30 
9.4.2  Sub-Group Analyses 30 
9.4.3     Exploratory Analyses 31 
1 0 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 31
10.1      Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations 31 
10.1.1 Informed Consent Process 31
10.1.1.1 Consent/assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to participants 31
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 3  
10.1.1.2 Consent Procedures and Documentation 32 
10.1.2 Study Discontinuation and Closure 32
10.1.3     Confidentiality and Privacy 32 
10.1.4 Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data 33
10.1.5     Key Roles and Study Governance 33 
10.1.6 Safety Oversight 33
10.1.7     Clinical Monitoring 33 
10.1.8 Quality Assurance and Quality Control 33
10.1.9     Data Handling and Record Keeping 34 
10.1.9.1 Data Collection and Management Responsibi lities 3 4
10.1.9.2 Study Records Retention 35 
10.1.10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 35
10.1.11 Publication and Data Sharing Policy 35 
10.1.12 Conflict of Interest Policy 35
10.2   Additional Considerations 35 
10.3 Abbreviations and Special Terms 35
10.4   Protocol Amendment History 37 
11   REFERENCES 38 
Appendix A: Online Survey Tool and Consent Form (Google Form) 39
Appendix B: ​Frequently Asked Questions 81 
Appendix C: ​Participant Recruit ment Emails 8 5 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 4  
Statement of Compliance 
The trial will be conducted in accordance with International Council on Harmonisation Good             
Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and applicable United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations              
(CFR); specifically the United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to              
clinical studies (45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, 21 CFR Part 312, and/or 21                     
CFR Part 812) . T he Principal Investigator will assure that no deviation from, or changes to the                 
protocol will take place without prior documented approval from the Institutional Review Board              
(IRB), and the Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) sponsor, if applicable, except where             
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants. All personnel involved in               
the conduct of this study have  completed Human Subjects Protection and ICH GCP Training. 
T
he protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will           
be submitted to the IRB for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol and the consent                 
form(s) must be obtained before any participant is consented. Any amendment to the protocol               
will require review and approval by the IRB before the changes are im plemented t o the study.                 
All changes to the consent form(s) will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regarding                
whether a new consent needs to be obtained from participants who provided consent, using a                
previously approved consent form. 
Investigator’s Signature 
The signature below constitutes the approval of this protocol and provides the necessary 
assurances that this study wi ll be conducted according to all stipulations of the protocol, 
i
ncluding all statements regarding confidentiality, and according to local legal and regulatory 
requirements and applicable US federal regulations and ICH guidelines, as described in the Statement of Compliance
​ above. 
 
Principal Investigator or Clinical Site Investigator: 
Signature:_______________________________________ Date: _____/_ _____/2020 
N
ame: Karina Loyo, Ph.D. MBA, CCDM, Independent Researcher 
Investigator Contact Information 
Affiliation: Independent Consultant Address: 307 Champions Drive, Georgetown TX 78628 Email: ​karina@drkarina.com 
Phone: 512-563-1393 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 5  
1       PROTOCOL SUMMARY 
1.1 Synopsis
 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 6  Title: Retrospective Study on the Use, Efficiency and Safety of 
the at-home insemination Mosie Kit 
Study Description: This study examines the experience of people who have selected to use the at-home insemination Mosie Kit to understand the user’s experience, the perceived safety and the efficiency. People who have recently purchased  and 
v
oluntarily selected to use the Mosie Kit will be invited to 
complete a one-time online anonymous survey. The results of the survey will be analyzed to understand their experiences.  
Objectives
*
: 
  The primary objective is to understand how many people end up pregnant by using the at-home insemination Mosie Kit during up to 6 cycles of voluntary use and how many people get pregnant using the Mosie Kit without using sex 
b
ecause they are either single, in a same-sex relationship, 
or in an unconsumated mariage due to infertility problems. The secondary objectives are to understand perceived safety and ease of use of the at-home Mosie Kit.The tertiary objective will be to examine pregnancy outcome in relationship to self-reported reason for infertility. Additionally, since COVID-19 has re cently affected 
e
veryone, its effect on family expansion plans and stress 
will also be examined. 
Endpoints*: The specific study endpoints include pregnancy rates after up to 6 cycles of at-home intracervical insemination (ICI), perceived ease of use, perceived safety, and the relationship of infertility source with pregnancy outcome rates, stress related to COVID-19 and its impact on family expans ion plans. 
S
tudy Population: The sample will be drawn from all people who have purchased an at-home Mosie Kit in the past 2-8 full months prior to the study commencement. The approximate sample size will be 500 but all will be invited to participate. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 7  Both females and males will be included in the study. It is 
expected that the age range of the participants will vary from approximately 21 - 50 years of age. The participants will have a history of fertility problems, specifically problems getting pregnant. Otherwise, the participants should be in overall good health. No other health conditions  are being used as exclusion criteria for 
p
articipation in the study. Participants may be located 
anywhere in the world as this study will be conducted using an online web-based survey.  
Phase
* or Stage: This is a post-market retrospective study to examine the experience people have with using the Mosie Kit for at-home insemination. 
Description of Sites/Facilities Enrolling Participants: No sites o r facilities will be used in this study. Participants 
w
ill be existing Mosie Baby Clients who have purchased a 
Mosie Kit in the prior 8 months.​ ​Participants may reside 
anywhere in the world​.  
Description of Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation: This is a retrospective study. Participants completing the study survey will have voluntarily purchased a Mosie Kit in the prior 8 months. Each participant will be asked to 
c
omplete one study survey. Each participant will receive up 
to 5 email invitations to participate in the study. The study survey will be administered anonymously online on an individual basis.   
Study Duration
*
: It is estimated that participants will complete the retrospective study survey within one month of receipt of the initial email requesting their participation.However, the 
s
tudy might continue until sufficient surveys are collected. 
Participant Duration: Participants will be able to complete all study related questions in less than 25 minutes (approximately 10-20 minutes). 
1.2 Schema 
Following is the flow of this study.
1.3       Schedule of Activities 
This study consists of completion of a one-time online survey. The following type of information
is contained within this one-time survey:
● Informed consent
● Demographics (includes gender, sexual identification, type of relationship. race,
ethnicity, household income and age. No identifying information will be requested)
● Fertility history and diagnosis if any● Mosie Kit use and experience● Post-Mosie Kit use pregnancy suc cess r
ate
● Perceived safety
● Perceived ease of use● Effect of COVID-19 on family expansion plans
● Effect of COVID-19 on stress
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 8  
2 INTRODUCTION
2.1      Study Rationale  
At-home intracervical insemination (ICI), folklorickly known as the “turkey-baster” method, has
been used for decades to increase likelihood of pregnancy. This method works by depositing
semen close to or at the cervix. While there are several devices such as over the counter
syringes and silicone caps, the creator of the Mosie Baby syringe believes it is designed to be
more ergonomic and compatible with a woman’s body, easy and safe to use, a nd r esults in
depositing the semen at or near the cervix opening. The Mosie Kit provides people with an
at-home intracervical insemination option which could be used before resorting to more invasive
and expensive options such as Intrauterine Insemination (IUI) or in vitro fertilization. There is
vast evidence of Mosie’s success in the form of happy users who have conceived. There is a
desire to learn more about the safety, useability and experience of using the Mosie kit.
This r etrospective study will examine the experience of people who have voluntarily chosen to
purchase and use the Mosie Kit. The Mosie Kit consists of 2 syringes and a semen collection
cup Understanding the safety, useability and experience of using the Mosie Kit will provide
additional information about the nature of using intracervical insemination as a viable method for
getting pregnant. The information gained will increase understanding of how viable the Mosie Ki t
i
s as a first step in trying to conceive and how it is perceived by the people who have chosen to
use it.
2.2 Background
Infertility is defined as not being able to get pregnant after one year of unprotected sex. About                  
6% of married and overall 12% of women ages 15 to 44 have infertility issues. Infertility issues                 
can be of male or female origin. According to the CDC, in 35% of the infertility cases a male                   
factor was found along with a female factor and in 8% of the cases the only identifiable cause                   
was a m ale factor. Fertility is affected by multiple factors, one of which is the female’s age. For                  
this reason it is recommended that people anatomically female under the age of 35 seek help                
after one year of trying to conceive while those over the age of 35 should seek help after 6                   
months. One of the first options available is artificial insemination. 
The first documented case of artificial insemination w as d one in the 1770s by John Hunger in                 
London (Obmelet & Robays 2015). Subsequently J. Mario Sims reported his findings in the               
mid-1880s. Sims describes 55 inseminations. Unfortunately since he believed ovulation           
occurred during meneses, only one pregnancy was reported (Obmelet & Robays 2015).             
Research has come a long way since the early 18th century. Artificial insemination is now a                 
much mo re f requent occurrence. Initially used by couples with male infertility (low sperm count              
and inherited Y-chromosome disease), later for couples with physiological and psychological           
dysfunction, such as retrograde ejaculation, vaginismus, hypospadias and impotence, and now            
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 9  
is very commonly used by people with no male partner (both single and those in lesbian                
relationships).  
Since Dr. Sherman’s sperm freezing success in 1953 with a subsequent live birth, collecting and                
using sperm for insemination in humans was made possible. However, it would be more than a                
decade before it became legally possible as it was initially ruled as contrary to public policy and                  
good morals . I n the 1960s and 70s, sperm selection and washing techniques led to Intrauterine                
insemination (IUI) which placed the sperm even further into the woman's body by putting it                
directly into the uterus. By the 1970s sperm banks in the US became popular. Also in the 1970s,                   
Steptoe and Edwards introduced the world to In-Vitro Fertilization (IVF). More recently,             
techniques such as intratubal insemination, a nd i ntraperitoneal insemination have been added            
to the available conception methods. During the last decades the popularity of Intrauterine             
Insemination (IUI) increased because it was safer, painless, and more cost-effective.            
Additionally, more information has become available about sperm selection techniques and now             
there is a greater understanding of many of the causes of infertility. The mo st p
opular method of insemination is to use the husband's sperm (Artificial Insemination              
by Homologous or Husband (AIH)). In some cases anonymous donor sperm is used.             
Intracervical (ICI) or intravaginal insemination (IVI) are terms used interchangeably to describe             
the insemination technique colloquially known as the “turkey baster method”. This method            
consists of placing the semen into the vagina at or nea r t he cervix. In the United States, IUI is                    
the most frequently doctor assisted technique. Some researchers have examined the success            
rates of each technique. ICI/IVI has been found to have a per cycle pregnancy rate of 10-15%                  
while IUI has been found to be slightly higher up to 10-35%. Meanwhile techniques such as IVF                  
can be as high as 31% in people under 35 years of age and as low as 3% for those above 43                      
a
ccording to the CDC.  
Getting pregnant using IUI can cost $250-500 per insemination before accounting for the cost of 
the testing and other imaging done as part of the process. IVF is even more expensive and invasive. According to Katz et al. 2011, the median per-person cost of IVF was approximately $24,373 (for just IVF) to $38,015 (for IVF-donor egg). Voorhis et al. 1997 fou nd ICI to cost 
$
7.800-10,300 while Assisted Reproductive Therapy (ART) cost $37,00 - 76,000. The cost 
difference between IVI/ICI, IUI and ART therapies such as IVF is significant. This makes cost a consideration for people attempting to conceive.  
The good news is a number of studies such as Cohlen and Ombelet 2014 and Banerjee and                 
Singla 2017, demonstrate the viability of using IVI/ICI as a means of AIH. The b enefits o
f ICI is                   
that it can be done in the privacy of the home, is relatively low cost, and over a 6 cycle time                     
frame seems to have comparable rates to its more expensive counterparts.  Cohlen and Ombelet 2014 showed that for many couples with cervical factor infertility,              
psychological sexual dysfunction, physiological dysfunction, unexplained infertility and mild to           
moderate male su bfertility u
sing artificial insemination with a husband's sperm (AIH) was a              
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 10  
preferred treatment option. Banerjee and Singla (2017), tested couples with unconsummated            
marriages due to vaginismus, erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation. They found 69%             
of couples ages 20-32, 43% ages 33-36, and 25% over 36 years old conceived using IVI. This is                  
comparable to the expected 10-35% pregnancy rate of IUI. 
Additionally, Kop et al. 2018 conducted a literature review to dete rmine if there was a difference 
b
etween pregnancy rates and live births of IUI versus ICI. They reported that out of six trials 
totalling 708 women. They concluded that there was not enough evidence to determine that IUI 
resulted in more live births or pregnancies than ICI.  
Carroll and Palmer (2001) conducted a prospective randomized cross over control study on 62 
single fertile women choosing to  use donor sperm. They had a total of 189 cycles (94 IUI and 95 
I
CI). The resulting pregnancy rate was 15% and 9% respectively (p=0.04) which indicated that 
IUI was more effective than ICI. On the other hand, Hogerzeil et al. (1988) studied 53 women who either had at home ICI (n=29) or in clinic ICI (n=24). In the first 6 cycles 13 pregnancies resulted in the home ICI group while only 11 pregnanci es resulted in the clinic group. 
A
dditionally, they followed 138 couples who did not meet the inclusion criteria. Of these 45 had 
opted for at home insemination and 20 of them ended up with a pregnancy.  
In conclusion, there is a lot of room to learn more about the pregnancy rates of ICI and the                   
experience of at-home artificial insemination. With 12% of women of child bearing age              
experiencing infer tility t here is an important contribution to be made to the fertility field. Using                
the Mosie Baby at-home artificial insemination kit is a low cost option that could potentially be a                 
first line alternative for many people seeking to conceive. Therefore, it is important to              
understand the experience and pregnancy rates of people who have chosen to use the Mosie                
Kit to get pregnant at home. This study will p rovide v aluable information for the fertility industry                 
as a whole, as well as, will provide information for a follow up study where people choosing to                  
use the Mosie Kit will be prospectively followed to capture their data in real time. Together these                 
studies will provide a better understanding of at-home insemination success, safety and             
perception.  
2.3 Risk/Benefit Assessment
2.3.1     Known Potential Risks 
Since this is a retrospective study and the participants will have already used the Mosie Kit,                 
there is no potential additional physical risk from participating in the study. In some cases,                
because fertility is a sensitive issue, some people might become a bit emotional in recalling                
unsuccessful attempts to get pregnant. Otherwise, there are no known additional r isks for              
participating in this study.  
This retrospective study will be conducted as an anonymous one-time self-report survey that will              
contain no personal information that will allow the participant to be identified. This is done to                 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 11  
reduce the risk of the information being associated with the individual providing the information.               
This also ensures there are no immediate or long-term risks associated with participation. 
2.3.2     Known Potential Benefits 
The potential benefit of this study is mostly for people seeking to perform at-home intracervical               
insemination in the future using the Mosie Kit. Each Mosie Kit provides syringes for two                
i
nseminations to occur within a cycle at the cost of about $89. This is less than 20% of the cost                     
of IUI which can range between $500-1500/ procedure before labs, ultrasounds, and additional            
expenses, and around 5% once all costs are added up. The study will provide valuable                
information to people trying to conceive about the efficiency of using the Mosie Kit for ICI, how                  
that efficiency m ight c ompare to the effectiveness of IUI, and how the cost of each compares.                 
This will help the user decide whether the Mosie Kit is the right conception tool for them. The                  
study will also provide valuable information about the safety and usability of the kit. The                
research will let Mosie know if they have successfully communicated how to use the kit, if the                  
instructions are clear or if any changes are n eeded, a nd whether anything else should be                
considered in future design changes. The study might also provide information on the timing of                
the insemination that might lead to a positive pregnancy outcome. Additionally, this knowledge            
might provide Mosie Baby with information to help it position itself better in the market.. 
The participant themselves will only benefit by having been able to share their e xperience a bout                
the Mosie Kit. While they might receive a discount code towards the purchase of a future Mosie                 
Kit, this is not considered a benefit but a thank you for participation. Note the discount code will                  
be a standard code used for other marketing purposes in order to ensure there is no way for                  
Mosie staff to know if the participant obtained it for completing the survey or obtained it via othe r                   
m
arketing avenues. The participant may feel good because they shared their experience and              
provided input into the Mosie Kit which will in turn help others. The information obtained through this study will allow Mosie Baby to enhance or clarify the               
instructions provided with the Mosie Kit and will be considered in future production of the Mosie                 
Kit.  
2.3.3 Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits 
As stated previously there is minimal risk to the subject because this a retrospective              
observational study of the subject’s previously chosen voluntary behavior to purchase and use
the Mosie Kit. There are also minimal to no benefits to the participants for completing the
survey except for their personal satisfaction of having shared and contributed to the research
via their experience(s). The benefit will mainly be for people wh o w ill use the Mosie Kit in the
future and who will benefit by being able to try the Mosie Kit before they resort to more
expensive and invasive methods of getting pregnant. It is believed that the good of many and
future possibility of having an acceptable method of artificial insemination at home outweighs
the risk of participation in the study.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 12  
3 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 13  OBJECTIVES ENDPOINTS JUSTIFICATION FOR
ENDPOINTSPUTATIVE
MECHANISMS OF
ACTION
Primary      
The primary 
objective is to understand the outcome of using the at-home intracervical insemination Mosie kit, i.e. pregnancy rate after its use.   The primary endpoints is: Pregnancy Rate after up to 6 cycles.   Another primary end point is to understand the rates of pregnancy in people who desire to get pregnant without intercourse
(
i.e. both single and 
those in LGBTQ relationships.  The ultimate objective of 
using the Mosie Kit is to end up pregnant. Thus pregnancy rate is a primary endpoint. Specifically, pregnancy rate in up to 6 (six) cycles will be examined as it is the typical standard timeframe for attempting to get pregnant using IVI or IUI before seeking an alternative method. 
People who have no kno wn 
f
ertility issue who are trying 
to conceive without 
intercourse such as those who are in LGBTQ relationships or those who are not in any relationship at all will likely have higher pregnancy rates than those with known fertility issues of female origin.
Women in LGBTQ 
relationships wishing to conceive might also have a higher pregnancy rate than those in heterosexual relationships where infertili ty 
m
ight be caused by things 
like low sperm count, sperm motility issues or erectile dysfunction (ED). The Mosie Kit is 
intended to be used to deposit semen at or near the cervix where the sperm will have an increased likelihood of entering the uterus and pairing up with the ovum resulting in a pregnancy.  Pregnancy rates increase when sperm reaches the ovum and fertilizes it. In people with no kn own 
f
ertility issues, the 
Mosie kit deposits the semen where it is able to fertilize the ovum.   People without infertility issues who want to get pregnant without sex by using the Mosie Baby are also more likely than people with known fertility issues to get pregnant. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 14  Secondary      
The secondary 
objective(s) are to understand the user’s experience with the Mosie Kit and it’s safety.   Secondary endpoints are: perceived ease of use and perceived safety.  
  The perceived ease of use is being examined as a secondary endpoint because being able to follow the instructions and use the kit as designed will directly affect whether the semen is deposited at or near the  cervix having a 
d
irect effect on the results. 
Perceived ease of use is viewed as a mediating variable. 
Finally, perceived safety 
of the Mosie Kit will be examined. It is expected to be a moderating variable.   In order for the delivery of sperm at or near the cervix, the user needs to maximize the sperm drawn up into the Mosie syringe, insert it into the vagina, and deposit the sperm at or near t he cervix. 
B
ecause the Mosie 
syringe is inserted into the vagina, it is important to understand any perceived issues or concerns related to safety and use of the syringe. 
Tertiary/Exploratory
The tertiary 
objective will be to examine the pregnancy rate of people with different self-reported sources of infertility.  Given the Pandemic, exploratory effect of COVID-19 on family planning, stress and pregnancy results 
w
ill be examined. Because the reason for a person’s or couple’s infertility might affect pregnancy rates, the reason for the infertility will also be examined. This will provide information as to whether the Mosie Kit is more effective given a specific source of infertility.  
 The pandemic has caused an overall increase in stress, higher stress can affect fertility. The source of i nfertility 
m
ay play a mediating role 
in a successful pregnancy. For example, it might be more likely that a couple with a woman with no known infertility issue using Mosie might be more likely to get pregnant than a woman with a specific known infertility issue.  
Stress can play a 
mediating role in pregnancy. Concern over future stability and Women who do not have a fertility issue might be more l ikely 
t
o get pregnant when 
the sperm is successfully deposited at or near the cervix. For example, this would help if the infertility was rooted in Erectile Dysfunction (ED).  Stress hormones can affect pregnancy outcome. Stressful and uncertain times make people more 
 
4       STUDY DESIGN 
4.1 Overall Design
This is a post-market retrospective cross-sectional observational study of people using the            
Mosie Kit for at-home insemination. The goal of the study is to understand the pregnancy rate
resulting from using the Mosie Kit of people with known fertility issues or those wishing to
conceive without intercourse due to medical reasons such as vaginismus or being in a LGBTQ
relationship desiring a child.
This study uses a convenience sample of p eople w ho purchased the Mosie Kit in the past 8
complete months prior to the commencement of the study. The complete known list of people
will be invited to participate in the study. For the primary hypothesis 1, all study participants will
be treated as one group initially. Subsequently, the study participants may be divided into
groups according to their age, the type of relationships (heterosexual or LGBTQ), and/or source
of infertility to examine the hypothesis as it re lates t o these subgroups if sufficient sample size
indicates this is appropriate; this analysis corresponds to the tertiary hypothesis.
Primary hypothesis 1: Pregnancy rates using the at-home insemination Mosie Kit to
deposit semen near or at the cervix (i.e. intracervical insemination) are equivalent orbetter than traditional in doctor’s office intrauterine insemination.
Given the participants can either be people with fertility issues or people in LGBTQ relat ionships
w 
ithout known problems conceiving or single women wishing to conceive, another primary
hypothesis that will be examined is the difference of pregnancy rates in each of these groups.
Specifically, the primary hypothesis related to this is as follows:
Primary Hypothesis 2: Pregnancy rates of LGBTQ people or single women using the
Mosie Kit where the female has no know fertility issues will be higher than that of
heterosexual people with a known fertility cause or t hose t hat are designated as having
an unexplained fertility issue.
The secondary hypothesis will examine the use of the Mose Kit and its safety as perceived andreported by the study participants. For these hypotheses the participants will be examined as
one group as well as categorized by age group and type of relationship. Specifically, the
secondary hypothesis will be as follows:
Secondary Hypothesis 1: The participants perceived the Mosie Kit to be easy to use forits intended p
urpose.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 15  Additionally, family planning may be affected. uncertainty can affect family planning.  prone to put off expanding their families. 
Secondary Hypothesis 2: The participants were able to use the Mosie Kit as instructed               
using the instructions contained in the kit. 
Secondary Hypothesis 3: The participants reported they used the kit as intended,             
specifically, using it within 24 hours of initial signs of ovulation and again 24-48 hours                
after ovulation was confirmed or expected. Secondary Hypothesis 4: Participants reported they perceived the M
osie Kit to be a safe               
way to conceive. Secondary Hypothesis 5: The majority of participants indicate they have little to no safety               
concerns related to using the Mosie Kit. 
The tertiary hypothesis for this study dives further into the primary hypothesis by breaking out               
the participants into groups based on their type of relationship and the source of their infertility                
to examine their c ohort specific pregnancy rates.  
T 
ertiary Hypothesis 1: There will be higher pregnancy rates when using the Mosie Kit               
when the source of infertility is male-based than when infertility is female-based.  Tertiary Hypothesis 2: There is a difference in pregnancy rates of people or couples with                
known fertility issues depending on the source of their infertility. Specifically, the             
following sources of  infertility will be examined if sufficient data is available.  
○ P 
COS 
○ Endometriosis 
○ Low AMH or low ovarian reserve ○ Low sperm count ○ Sperm motility issues ○ Unexplained infertility ○ Erectile dysfunction  
○ Performance issues or sexual anxiety, or inability to orgasm with partner. ○ Vaginismus or vulvodynia ○ Tilted uterus ○ Multiple uterus/cervix ○ Loss of a fallopian tube 
Tertiary Hypothesis 3: There  will be a difference between individuals who perform 2 
i
nsemination instances as described in the instructions and those that follow a different 
schedule or dosage number. 
Additionally since we are in the midst of a pandemic with COVID-19, exploratory analysis will be conducted on the stress levels and its impact on family expansion plans. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 16  
Tertiary Hypothesis 4: COVID-19 has affected people’s family expansion plans. 
Tertiary Hypothesis 5: There will be a decrease in pregnancy rates in those using the 
Mosie Kit during the Months of March - June. 
This study does not use randomization. While no control group will be examined for the study,               
determining the result of some of the hypotheses is based on using the reported pregnancy rate
of IUI in the literatur e. S pecifically, the reported rate of pregnancy with IUI is as high as 20% in
one cycle according to the American Pregnancy Association. According to the CDC, it can
range between 10-35% across 6 cycles.
4.2 Scientific Rationale for Study Design
The retrospective cross-sectional study design was selected because the desire is to examine             
the pregnancy rates and perception of useability and safety of the Mosie Kit. Since this is a                 
post-market study, the use of an existing group of participants who voluntarily purchased and               
used the Mosie Kit exists and provides an excellent group of participants to study. The past                 
e
xperiences of these participants will provide valuable information for future participants on the              
success rate of at-home insemination, information as to the ease of use of the instructions                
included in the kit, ease of use of the kit, and perceived safety.  
The rationale for examining the participants first as a complete cohort and then stratified by type                
of relationship, infertility sourc e, a nd age group is that the primary hypotheses relate to overall                
pregnancy rates using the at-home insemination Mosie Kit and the rate of pregnancy in women                
without a known fertility cause wanting to get pregnant without intercorse. The type of               
relationship is also important because a woman in an LGBTQ relationship without fertility issues               
is more likely to easily get pregnant than a heterosexual female with f ertility issues once the                 
semen is deposited at or near the cervix. While there might be LGBTQ women that also have a                   
known cause of fertility, they will be examined by type or relationship as well as by infertility                  
source. Likewise, single women will be categorized by their known infertility source or as not                
having a known fertility issue. It is important to study the difference between the two groups a nd                  
explore the impact on the overall pregnancy rate of Mosie Kit users. Additional hypotheses aim to examine more specifics related to each stratification. For example,              
age is known to affect fertility rates. Women ages 20-30 are more likely to get pregnant than                 
those in their 40s. The source of infertility may also indicate underlying biological or physical                
issues that might m ediate t
he pregnancy rates causing different rates of success in each of the                 
groups. All the information obtained through this study will be used to benefit people who are                 
trying to get pregnant and are experiencing infertility issues. Specifically, the study will examine               
the viability and success rate of at-home insemination. Another benefit of conducting a retrospective study is being able to examine the natural u
se of                 
the Mosie Kit. While instructions are provided as to how and when to use the Mosie Kit for                 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 17  
insemination, it is known that there will be a variation of use among study participants. This                 
might affect the pregnancy outcome. Therefore, one of the tertiary hypotheses will collect              
information related to timing and dosing (with dosing being the instance of insemination). This is                
important because the results will help provide information that will help ensure future studies               
have clearer instruc tions a nd so that all users regardless of study participation optimize the use                
of the Mosie Kit in order to get pregnant. 
4.3      Justification for Intervention 
This is a retrospective cross-sectional study of existing users of the Mosie Kit. Participants will
be recruited via email. Specifically, it is planned that participants will receive up to 5 email
invitations to participate in the study, however more emails might be used to recruit sufficient
participants.. The email will direct them to the study survey where they will read the consent
form and choose to participate in the st udy. T he email will contain a link to the survey. If they
elect to participate, they will complete the study survey and submit it online. Participation
consists of completing a 10-20 minute survey. This is a one time survey. Since no identifying
information will be collected, there will be no possibility of follow up.
There is no intervention. This study merely looks at the past experience of using the Mosie Kit. It
is important to know the success rates of pregnancy with at-ho me i nsemination kits, and
understand the usability and safety as there are individuals and couples using these types of
options on a regular basis as a means to get pregnant. For people who suffer from infertility,having this information will help them choose whether ICI is right for them and whether theMosie Kit should be chosen for this method. Additionally, since age is a factor in pregnancy
success and risks increase with age, there is a need to understand the success of a t h
ome ICI
so recommendations can be made as to whether to use ICI and how long to use it before
seeking other methods of conception. This study aims to address some of these issues.
4.4 End-of-Study Definition
It is expected that the study will be completed within 30 days of the initial email. This will provide                   
participants with an opportunity to find 10-20 minutes to participate in the study during a 30 day                  
window. Participants will receive up to three additional reminder emails at least 7 days apart and                 
one final email 2 days prior to study close. Participants who choose to participate in th e s tudy                  
will be considered to have completed the study upon submission of the complete survey. If               
sufficient participants have not completed the survey, the study timeframe may be expanded at               
the discretion of the PI. 
5       STUDY POPULATION 
The study population will consist of all individuals who have purchased the Mosie Kit in the past                 
2-8 complete months prior to study initiation. All qualifying individuals will receive an invitation to               
participate. These individuals will typically be of child-bearing age, both females and males, and               
generally ages ranging 18-50 years old.  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 18  
 
It is assumed that purchasing the Mosie Kit means the kit will be used as intended for at-home                  
insemination. One of the inclusion criteria is to have previously used the kit. Therefore, the initial                 
list of study participants will be drawn from people who have placed a purchase order within the                 
prior 8 complete months; complete months are used with the expectation that the Mosie Kit               
would be used wit hin t he month post-purchase. If the study duration is expanded, additional              
potential participants will be invited who have purchased the kit at least 2 full months prior to                  
being invited to participate in the study. 
5.1      Inclusion Criteria 
In order to be included in the study, the following inclusion criteria will be used. 
Inclusion Criteria: 
● Provide implicit consent by filling out and submitting the survey. 
● Used a Mosie Kit to conceive during at least one cycle. 
● At least 18 years old. ● Has an active email on file (presumed or they would not have received an invitation to                
participate. This information will not b
e verified as there is a desire to keep the survey                
completely anonymous.) 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria
The following exclusion criteria will be used. 
● Never used a Mosie Kit 
5.3 Lifestyle Considerations
There are no exclusions due to lifestyle considerations as this is a one time cross-sectional survey of past experiences. 
 
5.4 Screen Failures 
Participants who are consented to participate in the study, and who do not meet one or more                  
criteria required for participation in the trial during the screening procedures, are considered              
screen failures. If an individual identifies their age as less than 18 years old or as not having                   
used the Mosie Kit which will be the first 2 questions, then the survey will automatically end.                  
T
hese participants will be designated as screen failures. Screen failures will not be rescreened               
or included in the study in the future as this study is expected to have a very short duration                   
(approximately 30 days). 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 19  
5.5 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention
Recruitment of participants will be conducted via a direct email campaign. Participants will              
receive multiple emails requesting their participation in the study. Specifically they will receive
emails according to the following schedule:
If the study duration is expanded, a weekly email and a reminder a couple of days prior to the
new deadline will be sent. 
Typical response rates vary between 5-30% for e mail s urveys. The rate of response is higher                
when people have a connection with the company or product. They also go up with repeated                 
reminders and incentives to participate. A good survey response rate is about 50%.  Participants who complete the survey will receive a code to purchase a future Mosie Kit at a
discount. This discount code will also be a code used in other marketing efforts in order to help                   
reduce the likelihood a participant’s status of participating in the study will remain masked.  
T
he expected response rate for this study is between 30-50%.This response rate is expected              
because the potential participants will have all previously purchased a Mosie Kit. Additionally,              
the Mosie Newsletter has about a 20% open rate so it is expected that participation might be                 
slightly higher than thi s. 
B
ecause participants will only be selected from people who have previously purchased a Mosie
Kit there will be a limit in the mix of people available for selection for study participation. This                  
means the results might not be generalizable to the public in general, nonetheless it is a                 
representative sample of the people who would do at-home insemination. 
 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 20   Email Content Expected Date 
Initial Email Initial Invitation to participate Day 0 
Second Email Reminder of invitation to participate Day 7
Third Email Reminder of invitation to participate Day14 
Fourth Email Last week to participate survey Day 21 
Fifth Email Final email - 2 days left to complete 
survey Day 28 
6 STUDY INTERVENTION(S) OR EXPERIMENTAL 
MANIPULATION(S)
6.1 Study Intervention(s) or Experimental Manipulation(s)      
Administration
6.1.1      Study Intervention or Experimental Manipulation Description
This is a cross-sectional retrospective observational study of people who have selected to             
voluntarily purchase and use the Mosie Baby at-home insemination kit. No additional             
intervention or manipulation is planned for this study. 
6.1.2      ​Administration and/or Dosing 
This study retrospectively examines the administration and dosing of semen during insemination 
i
n the home environment by using the Mosie Kit. The recommended dosing of semen to 
produce a positive pregnancy outcome is at least 2 times in a cycle. With the first dose 
preferably administered within 24 hours of the first signs of ovulation and the second one between 24-48 hours post ovulation confirmation. Since this study is retrospective, it w ill not 
i 
nfluence dosing, but merely will collect information on the dosing frequency and timing.  
 
6.2 Fidelity 
While this study will look backwards onto how the Mosie Kit was used and resulting pregnancy rates, it also affords the opportunity to examine variations in timing of the insemination with respect to ovulation as well as the frequency of insemination within a cycle. The study will not influence how the Mosei Kit was used, but it is hoped that the information gathered will add understa nding to whether timing and frequency might have played a role in pregnancy results. It 
i
s important to study how people use Mosie because timing and dosage might impact the 
pregnancy rate. It is also important to understand the variations in use. 
6.2.1 Interventionist Training and Tracking
No intervention will be performed. 
6.3 Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomization and Blinding 
This study will not have any masking or randomization. It is a retrospective study. Participant selection bias will be minimized by including all people who have purchased a Mosie Kit in the prior 2-8 whole months.  
  
6.4      Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation Adherence 
This study does not have an intervention. However data will be collected on the self-administered intervention that will be examined retrospectively. The data will allow determination as to whether the minimum intervention was followed, i.e. administration of two 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 21  
at-home insemination instances one within 24 hours of initial signs of ovulation and one at 24-48 
hours after confirmed ovulation. 
6.5      Concomitant Therapy 
N/A 
6.5.1 Rescue Therapy 
N/A 
7       STUDY INTERVENTION/EXPERIMENTAL MANIPULATION 
DISCONTINUATION AND PARTICIPANT
DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL  
7.1   Discontinuation of Study Intervention/Experimental Manipulation 
N/A
7.2 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study
Participants may choose to leave the survey at any time without submitting the completed survey. There will be no way to know which participant did not complete the survey or why the survey was not completed. There will be no way to follow up with the participant to request continued participation as the survey will not contain any identifying in formation.  
T
here will be no replacement participants. Any incomplete surveys will be discarded 
automatically by the system. They will not be available for use in the final analysis.  
7.3      Lost to Follow-Up 
N/A
8 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES
8.1 Endpoint and Other Non-Safety Assessments 
The only assessment for this study will be one online survey which can be completed inapproximately 10-20 minutes. The survey will collect demographics information, relationship
status, infertility history, experience using the Mosie Kit and perceptions related to its use and
safety.
8.2 Safety Assessment
Since there is no intervention there will be no safety assessments related to the survey however, questions about the perceived safety of using the Mosie Kit Syringe will be asked. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 22  
8.3 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events 
This retrospective study does not expect there to be any adverse events reported due to
participating in the survey. It does however ask questions about any infections that might have
occurred during the prior 7 months. While these infections might be completely unrelated tousing the Mosie syringe, the response will be evaluated and examined as a percentage of
respondents and cycles. It is one of the goals of this study to f
ind out if there might be any
adverse events due to the use of the Mosie Kit.
Nonetheless, the definitions and classification for adverse events are outlined below.
8.3.1 Definition of an Adverse Event 
This protocol uses the definition of adverse event from 21 CFR 312.32 (a): any untowardmedical occurrence associated with the use of an intervention in humans, whether or not
considered intervention-related. However, as a cross-sectional study, only retrospec tive
i 
nformation will be available if provided by the Participant.
8.3.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events
According to the FDA a serious adverse event is one that results in death, disability, require and intervention to prevent a disability or permanent damage, birth defect or hospitalization. ER visits without hospitalization are individually evaluated for their severity to determine if they are a serious a dverse event. 
8.3.3 Classification of an Adverse Event
8.3.3.1. Severity of Event 
For adverse events (AEs) not included in the protocol defined grading system, the following 
guidelines will be used to describe severity. 
●Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s               
daily activities. 
●Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic               
m
easures. Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning. 
●Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic             
drug therapy or other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life-threatening or            
incapacitating.  Of note, the term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious”. 
8.3.3.2.  Relationship to Study Intervention/Expe rimental Manipulation 
A
ll adverse events (AEs) will have their relationship to study procedures, including the
intervention, assessed by an appropriately-trained clinician based on temporal relationship andhis/her clinical judgment. The degree of certainty about causality will be graded using thecategories below.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 23  
●Definitely Related – There is clear evidence to suggest a causal relationship,             
and other possible contributing factors can be ruled out. The clinical event,            
including an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs in a plausible time            
relationship to study procedures administration and cannot be explained by           
concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of             
the study procedur es s hould be clinically plausible. The event must be            
pharmacologically or phenomenologically definitive. 
●Probably Related – There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and the              
influence of other factors is unlikely. The clinical event, including an abnormal             
laboratory test result, occurs within a reasonable time after administration of the             
study procedures, is unlikely to be attributed to concu rrent d isease or other drugs              
or chemicals, and follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal. 
●Potentially Related – There is some evidence to suggest a causal relationship             
(e.g., the event occurred within a reasonable time after administration of study             
procedures). However, other factors may have contributed to the event (e.g., the             
participant’s clinical condition, other concomitant e vents). A lthough an AE may           
rate only as “possibly related” soon after discovery, it can be flagged as requiring              
more information and later be upgraded to “probably related” or “definitely            
related”, as appropriate. 
●Unlikely to be related – A clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test              
result, whose temporal relationship to study procedures administration makes a           
causal relationship im probable ( e.g., the event did not occur within a reasonable             
time after administration of the study procedures) and in which other drugs or             
chemicals or underlying disease provides plausible explanations (e.g., the          
participant’s clinical condition, other concomitant treatments). 
●Not Related – The AE is completely independent of study procedures            
administration, and/or evidence exists that the event is de finitely r elated to            
another etiology. There must be an alternative, definitive etiology documented by            
the clinician. 
8.3.3.3.  Expectedness  
There are no expected adverse events for this study.  
8.3.4 Time Period and frequency of Event Assessment and Follow-up
This retrospective study will only capture past self-reported vaginal infections. There will be no 
way to tell if it was a potentially relate d adverse event of the Mosie Kit use in a one time survey. 
N
o additional follow-up will be conducted. No identifying information will be collected to allow 
follow up. 
8.3.5 Adverse Event Reporting
Adverse Events will be captured via the survey but will have occurred in the past. Due to the nature of this study, it will not be possible to follow-up with participants reporting these AEs. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020  Mosie Baby  
                   Page 24  
8.3.6 Serious Adverse Event Reporting 
It is unlikely that there will be any SAEs related to the Mosie Kit. Even if a participant reveals an 
SAE, because identifying information will not be collected, it will be impossible to follow up. 
8.3.7 Reporting Events to Participants 
N/A 
8.3.8 Events of Special Interest 
Only the events associated with the use of the Mosie Kit will be captured via the survey. If there 
a
re any concerns of special interest, the information will be shared immediately with Mosie. This 
complete study is expected to take approximately 30 days. At the latest, the information will be reviewed for any special items of interest within 2 weeks of the study completion. 
8.3.9 Reporting Pregnancy 
Pregnancy status will be obtained during the survey. It is not used as an exclusion factor. It is 
u
sed as an outcome measure. 
8.4 Unanticipated Problems 
Given the nature of a cross-sectional one-time survey no unanticipated events are expected.
9 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
9.1      Statistical Hypotheses and General Statistical Approach 
The primary objective is to understand the outcome of using the Mosie kit for Intracervical
insemination, i.e. pregnancy rate after its use. Specifically the hypothesis is as follows.
Primary hypothesis 1: Pregnancy rates using the at-home insemination Mosie Kit to             
deposit semen near or at the cervix (i.e. intracervical insemination) are equivalent or              
better tha n t raditional in doctor’s office intrauterine insemination (IUI). Conversely the           
null hypothesis is that the pregnancy rates using the at-home insemination Mosie Kit to              
deposit semen near or at the cervix do not have higher rates of pregnancy than in                 
doctor’s office IUI. 
Analysis: Comparison of total rates of pregnancy using the Mosie Kit to the 10-20% rate               
reported for IUI by the American Pregnan cy Association.  
P
rimary Hypothesis 2: Pregnancy rates of LGBTQ couples or single women using the              
Mosie Kit where the female has no know fertility issues will be higher than that of                 
heterosexual couples with a known fertility cause or those that are designated as having               
an unexplained fertility issue. The alternative hypothesis is that people with no known             
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 25  
fertility issues using the Mosie Kit will have less pregnancies than heterosexual couples              
with known fertility issues. 
Analysis: Rate of pregnancy using the Mosie Kit will be obtained for the following groups:                
LGBTQ couples where carrying female has no known fertility issues, LGBTQ couples             
where carrying female has a known fertility issue, Heterosexual people with no known              
fertility issue, Heterosex ual p eople with a known fertility issue, Single females with no              
known fertility issue and Single females with a known fertility issue. The rates of each                
group will be analyzed using descriptive statistics and the aggregate of the 3 groups with                
fertility issues will be compared with the aggregate of the 3 groups without fertility issues.                
An ANOVA will be used to compare the differences between gr oups.
S
econdary Hypothesis 1: The participants perceived the Mosie Kit to be easy to use              
for its intended purpose. The alternative hypothesis is that the participants perceive the             
Mosie Kit to be difficult to use for its intended purpose. Analysis: Descriptive statistics surrounding the ease of use on a 5-point likert (very easy               
to very difficult) will be analyzed on five different aspects of use. Specifically, the s
teps of                 
using the Mosie Kit (collecting a sperm sample, drawing up the sample in the Mosie                
syringe, inserting the syringe, and depositing the sperm at or near the cervix) and overall                
ease of use will be examined. Additionally questions related to use such as comfort,               
ease and safety of the process, enjoyable and intuitiveness of use (able to use it without                 
instructions) will allow t he u ser to rate their experience from Strongly agree to strongly               
disagree (5 point scale). The data will be plotted and examined as part of the analysis. Secondary Hypothesis 2: The participants were able to use the Mosie Kit as instructed               
using the instructions contained in the kit. The alternative hypothesis is that the              
participants were not able to use the kit using the instructions containe d in the kit. 
A 
nalysis: Descriptive analysis of perceived overall success rate will be analyzed.            
Additionally, descriptive analysis of the frequency of each expected behavior related to             
use of the kit will be examined.  Secondary Hypothesis 3: The participants reported they used the kit as intended,             
specifically, using it within 24 hours of initial signs of ovulation and again 24-48 hours                
after ovu lation w
as confirmed or expected. The alternative hypothesis is that the             
participants report they did not use the kit as intended with respect to timing (within 24                 
hours of initial signs of ovulation and again 24-48 hours post ovulation). Analysis: Frequency rates related to timing of insemination at all reported cycles will be               
analyzed. The data will be reported in both total number of attempts at each time po int                 
a
s well as percentage of attempts at each time point in comparison with total cycles               
where the Mosie Kit was used. T-tests will also be used in this analysis. Additionally,                
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 26  
amount of time lying after insemination and position of lying will be analysed using               
descriptive statistics and correlations with pregnancy rate.  
Secondary Hypothesis 4: Participants reported they perceived the Mosie Kit to be a             
safe way to conceive. The alternative hypothesis is that participants did not perceive the              
Mosie Kit to be a safe way to conceive. Analysis: Descriptive statistics will be used to a
nalyze perceived safety. Qualitative            
analysis will be used on any comments made related to safety. Rates of vaginal               
infections will be analyzed using descriptive statistics. Secondary Hypothesis 5: The majority of participants indicate they have little to no              
safety concerns related to using the Mosie Kit. Alternative hypothesis is the majority of               
participants will be very concerned or extremel y c
oncerned about the safety of using the               
Mosie Kit. Analysis: Descriptive statistics of self-reported level of concern. Additionally, safety           
measures such as hand washing, disposing of the syringe after use, and reading the               
instructions will be examined using descriptive statistics. Tertiary Hypothesis 1: There will be higher pregnancy rates when using the Mosie Kit               
when the source of infertili ty i
s male-based than when it is female-based. The alternative               
hypothesis is there will be lower pregnancy rates when using the Mosie Kit when the                
source of infertility is male-based than when it is female-based. Analysis: In addition to the descriptive statistics a t-test will be run to examine this                
hypothesis. Tertiary Hypothesis 2: There is a difference in pregnancy rates of people with known               
f
ertility issues depending on the source of their infertility. Specifically, the following             
sources of infertility will be examined if sufficient data is available.  
○ PCOS 
○ Endometriosis ○ Low AMH or low ovarian reserve ○ Low sperm count ○ Sperm motility issues ○ Unexplained infertility ○ Erectile dysfunction  
○ Performance issues or sexual anxiety, or inability to orgasm with partner. ○ Vaginismus or vulvodynia 
○ T
ilted uterus 
○ Multiple uterus/cervix ○ Loss of a fallopian tube 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 27  
The alternative hypothesis is that there will be no difference in the fertility rates 
associated with different sources of infertility. 
Analysis: Descriptive statistics, t-test, correlations and multiple ANOVAs will be used to 
examine this hypothesis.  
Tertiary Hypothesis 3: There will be a difference between individuals who perform 2 
insemination instances as described in the instructions and tho se that follow a different 
s
chedule or dosage number. The alternate hypothesis is that there will be no difference 
between the individuals that perform the minimum 2 insemination instances and those that follow  difference dosage schedule. 
Analysis: Descriptive statistics of pregnancy rates for groups with 1, 2, 3 and 4 or more 
inseminations per cycle will be used. These rates will then be compare d to determine if 
t 
here is a difference. 
Tertiary Hypothesis 4: COVID-19 has affected people’s family expansion plans. The alternate hypothesis is that COVID-19 has had no effect on people’s family expansion plans. 
Analysis: Descriptive analysis and a t-test will be conducted to examine this hypothesis. Tertiary Hypothesis 5: There will be a decrease in pregnancy rates in those using the 
Mosie Kit  during the Months of March - June. 
A
nalysis: Descriptive statistics, graphing, ANOVA and multiple regression analysis will 
be used to examine this hypothesis. 
Additional Analysis will also be conducted to explore why people might choose to use 
the Mosie Kit, how they actually use it, additional things they do when using the Mosie Kit to complement the experience, and whether they think their heal th care provider 
s 
hould recommend Mose as an conception option. Most of this analysis will be achieved 
using descriptive statistics, correlations, and t-tests. 
9.2      Sample Size Determination 
The desired final sample size for this study is 500 completed surveys. This will produce a 95%
confidence interval with +/- 4.4% within larger populations. In order to obtain that rate of
respondents, the study will invite about 50% people who have ordered a Mosie Kit in the prior
2-8 months to the study start date. It is expected that approximately 4000 people will be invitedto participate. By inviting 4000 potential participants, i t i
s expected that with a response rate of
15% approximately 600 will complete the survey. Currently Mosie has about a 20% open rate
on their general emails. For this reason, all people who purchased a kit within the last 2-8
months will be invited to participate.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 28  
According to the sample size tables, a response rate of 384 is sufficient to provide a 95%                  
confidence interval with a 5% margin of error rate. While the total number of respondents can                 
not be controlled, every effort will be made via the reminder emails to obtain at least 500                 
participants but no less than 384. 
9.3    Populations for Analyses 
The population to be analyzed include any one using the Mosie Kit in the full 2-8 months prior to
study commencement. Respondents can be male or female. Overall the data will be analyzed
as a whole and stratified by sex (having ovaries and a uterus as indication of being a female),
age and type of relationship .
9.4 Statistical Analyses
9.4.1      ​General Approach 
Statistical analysis will commence with descriptive statistics for each survey question and 
plotting of the individual data into scatter plots to understand the data distribution.If any information suggests corrective procedures should be employed, the appropriate transformation or non-parametric test will be used. 
Categorical values will be report ed using descriptive statistics and frequency of occurrence. Key 
c
ategorical values will also be converted into a percentage of total responses in order to allow 
an understanding of the prevalence of the response in the sample. For continuous variables, the 
means with standard deviations, median and range will be reported. 
Qualitative data is only expected as a response to two questions, an open e nded safety 
q
uestion and an additional comments question.The responses will be evaluated and 
categorized. Then the frequency of each category will be provided. For inferential tests such as t-tests and ANOVAs, a p-value of 0.05 and a confidence interval of 
95% will be used for statistical significance. The type of hypothesis will determine whether the specific tests will be one-tailed or two-taile d. Hypothesis seeking to understand whether there is 
o
r is not a difference will use a two-tailed test while those seeking a greater than or less than 
relationship will use a one-tailed test. Correlations among some of the variables will also be examined as appropriate. 
Statistical analysis process for each hypothesis has already been described in section 9.1. No 
baseline analysis is used for cros s-sectional studies. No interim analyses are planned for 
c 
ross-sectional one survey studies. 
9.4.2 Sub-Group Analyses 
All endpoints (primary, secondary and tertiary) will be analyzed based on age, sex, race.ethnicity, SES, relationship preference, male/femaile infertility issues. Only aggregate 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 29  
information will be used in the final analysis. No tabulation of individual participant data will be 
used in reporting findings. 
9.4.3     Exploratory Analyses 
Additional exploratory data analysis will be conducted to examine the main characteristics of the data. This analysis will be done using descriptive statistics, scatter plots, and odds ratio. If the exploratory analysis warrants the testing  of new hypotheses, t-test or ANOVA may be used for 
f
urther analysis. 
Exploratory modeling will be conducted to examine multiple variables and their relationship to the pregnancy outcome. This will include the source of infertility, age, number of inseminations, number of cycles, lying time, and type of relationship. The model will use correlations and goodness of fit tests in its analysis. 
1 0 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
10.1      Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations 
10.1.1 Informed Consent Process 
Upon receiving the invitation email, the potential participant will select to follow the study link. Inthe study web page, the user will be provided with information related to the study and consentto participate in the study. They will be informed that if they choose to respond to the questions
and submit their responses, they are providing consent. They wi ll a
gree to participate in the
research by selecting “Yes” to “Do you agree to participate in this study?”. No signature will be
collected as the intent is for the study to be completely anonymous.
Waiver of signed consent was selected for this study in order to be able to ensure the anonymity
of the participant in this cross-sectional post-elective-intervention study. Since participantspreviously elected to use the Mosie Kit and now are selecting to share their experienc es a
nd
perceptions about it, they need only share these experiences; there is no reason to collect any
identifying information for this one time survey.
10.1.1.1 Consent/assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to participants 
A consent form describing in detail the study procedure and risks will be displayed to the
participant upon access to the study website using the link provided in the email. Each
participant will be able to read and provide conse nt. T he participant may print the displayed
consent. Additionally, the email will contain a link to a Frequently Asked Question Document
where the participant can learn more about the study.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 30  
10.1.1.2 Consent Procedures and Documentation 
After reading the consent form, the participant can elect to proceed to the survey or conclude
the survey. The only documentation collected about the consent is whether or not the participant
elected to respond to the questions. A consent is not required for participation in this study.
Answering the questions and submitting the responses provides consent. Only completed
surveys that are submitted will end up in the da tabase.
10.1.2 Study Discontinuation and Closure 
It is not expected that the study will end prematurely. The expected total duration of study datacollection is approximately 30 days. However, if the minimum number of surveys are not
collected within the 30 day time-frame, the study will continue collecting data for up to 90 days.
Since this is a one-time anonymous survey there is no reason to follow up with the participant.
There is also no way to follow up with any given participant s
 hould there be a desire to do so
since the surveys will be responded to completely anonymously.
Should there be any reason to discontinue the study prematurely, the PI will advise the study
Sponsor and the institutional review board (IRB) of this occurrence. Circumstances that might
warrant termination or suspension might include:
● Difficulties with the data capture/survey technology
● Difficulties with participant recruitment● Data that are not suffi ciently c
omplete and/or evaluable
● Determination of a need to prematurely complete the study as determined by the PI,
Sponsor, IRB or regulatory agency.
The study may resume once concerns about data quality and data security are addressed, andsatisfying any requirements of the Sponsor, IRB, or regulatory agency.
The study may be terminated prematurely if sufficient surveys are completed prior to the 30days of data collection. This will be done at the discretion of the Primary I
nvestigator (PI).
10.1.3     Confidentiality and Privacy 
Participation in this study is completely anonymous. Participants will receive an invitation email
with a generic link to the study website. Once informed about the study and its participation, the
participant can respond to the survey questions without entering any identifiable information.
The PI deemed the value of obtaining any identifying information was inferior to protecting the
partic ipant’s p rivacy and that it was unnecessary for this study. Therefore, no identifying
information will be collected. There will be no identifiers that can link directly back to anindividual. While information about race, gender, and age will be collected, it will not be possible
to point the information back to any given individual.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 31  
Invitations to participate will be sent out by the Sponsor company. The full list of those emails 
will never be released to the PI. This will help keep the information from being able to be linked back to the group of emails sent. 
The final database will be an anonymous database that will be the property of the Sponsor. 
There is currently no intent to share the results of that study beyond this re search. There is an 
i 
ntent to publish the findings of the study as a journal article and for information on the 
Sponsor’s company website, but this information will be limited to aggregate results and to discussions related to the findings. The Sponsor might also use aggregate data or results in future marketing materials. 
10.1.4      ​Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data 
Specimens are not part of this study. Therefore no storage of specimens is required. 
D
ata collected for this study will be analyzed and stored as an anonymous de-identified 
database in the possession of the PI and at Mose Baby. The archived data will be stored for use by Mosie Baby. No one will be given access to the raw study data without the written consent of the PI or Mosie Baby. 
10.1.5     Key Roles and Study Governance 
Principal Investigator: 
Karina Loyo, Ph.D., MBA, CCDM  Clinical Research Consultant 307 Champions Drive, Georgetown, TX 78628 512-563-1393 karina@drkarina.com  
This one time survey does not require a medical monitor or safety oversight as no interventions are occurring.  
10.1.6     Safety Oversight 
Safety oversight is provided by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) who is responsible for independently reviewing this study to ensure protection of human subjects. This study will seek exempt approval Category2(i) since the research is an observation of pub lic behavior and the 
i
nformation obtained is recorded in such a manner that the identity of the human subjects 
cannot be readily ascertained, directly or through identifiers linked to the subject.. 
10.1.7     Clinical Monitoring 
N/A 
10.1.8  Quality Assurance and Quality Control 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 32  
This one time survey does not require clinical monitoring or an external QA process. Quality 
Assurance is conducted to ensure the quality of data is complete and that appropriate documentation is in place to support and conduct the study. 
Quality Control (QC) Procedures will be implemented as follows: 
●Informed Consent - PI and Sponsor will both review the documentation of the 
consenting process. This review will be conducted in compliance with GCP, accuracy 
a 
nd completeness. Feedback will be provided to the PI and Sponsor in order to ensure 
proper consenting procedures are followed. The Institutional Review Board will also review and provide feedback on this process. 
●Source Documents and the electronic data - The electronic data capture will constitute the source documents for this study . The data will be entered by the 
p
articipant directly into the final study database. 
●Intervention fidelity - This is a retrospective observational study of people using the Mosie Kit. Part of data collection will include information about the use of the kit and how it was used. This information will be used to determine whether the person used the kit as intended thus confirming the intervention  fidelity occurred voluntarily prior to 
p
articipation in the study. 
●Protocol Deviations - There is no directed intervention for this study. Therefore, protocol deviations with respect to an intervention are not expected. If any deviations occur with relation to how the data is collected or the participants recruited, that will be collected as part of the study documentation. 
There is no expectati on that independent monitoring would be necessary. However, if it is 
r
equired, the necessary arrangements will be made. 
10.1.9      ​Data Handling and Record Keeping 
The following section pertains to data handling and record keeping. It is described in accordance with GCP standards. 
10.1.9.1 Data Collection and Management Responsibilities  
Google forms will be used to collect this one time survey. T he only data quality checks that will 
b 
e included in the survey will be those that are implemented via the appropriate selection of the 
type of field in order to ensure the appropriate data is entered into the field and edit checks to 
ensure all questions are filled in.  
The online Google Form and resulting excel sheet will constitute the source data for this study. 
No external records or informat ion will be combined with the survey data. Only the PI and the 
S
ponsor will have access to download the data.  
Data standards will be implemented for the study. Descriptive field names will be used for each field. All data collection is the responsibility of the PI. The PI is responsible for ensuring the accuracy and completeness of the data. 
 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 33  
10.1.9.2 Study Records Retention  
Study documents will be retained for a minimum of 3 years. No records will be destroyed without 
the written consent of the Sponsor. It is the responsibility of the Sponsor to inform the PI when these documents are no longer needed. 
10.1.10PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
This protocol defines a protocol deviation as any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol and Intern ational Council on Harmonization Good Clinical Practices (ICH GCP). The non 
c 
ompliance may be either on the part of the participant or the investigator. Since this is a 
one-time survey, no deviations are expected. If any deviations do occur, they will be documented and corrective action plans will be implemented promptly. 
10.1.11 Publication and Data Sharing Policy 
This study will result in data that is proprietary to the Sponsor. As such, this data will be held 
p
rivately and will only be shared at the discretion of the Sponsor.  
The trial will be registered with and the results of the analysis will be submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov. In addition, every attempt will be made to publish results in a peer-reviewed journal(s). Aggregate data may also be shared in any format by the Sponsor.  
10.1.12      ​Conflict of Interest Policy 
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence, is critical. In order to ensure the integrity of this research, any conflict of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication or any aspect related to the trial will be disclosed and managed. The PI reports that this study is a work for hire by the Spons or. There is no other 
k
nown conflict of interest. 
10.2 Additional Considerations 
No additional considerations. 
10.3 Abbreviations and Special Terms 
Below is a list of abbreviation or special terms used in this study protocol. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 34  AE Adverse Event 
ANCOVA Analysis of Covariance 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CRF Case Report Form
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 35  eCRF Electronic Case Report Forms 
FDA Food and Drug Administration GCP Good Clinical Practice
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ICH International Council on Harmonisation IDE Investigational Device Exemption 
IRB Institutional Review BoardITT Intention-To-Treat 
LSMEANS Least-squares Means NIH National Institutes of Health NIH IC NIH Institute or CenterOHRP Office for Human Research Prot ections 
P
I Principal Investigator 
QA Quality Assurance QC Quality Control
SAE Serious Adverse Event SAP Statistical Analysis Plan SOP Standard Operating Procedure UP Unanticipated Problem
US United States 
10.4 Protocol Amendment History 
The table below is intended to capture changes of IRB-approved versions of the protocol,
including a description of the change and rationale. A Summary of Changes table for the
current amendment is located in the Protocol Title Page.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 36  Version Date Description of Change Brief Rationale
        
        
        
        
        
        
11 REFERENCES 
Banerjee, K., & Singla, B. (2017). Pregnancy Outcome of Home Intravaginal Insemination in
Couples with Unconsummated Marriage. Journal of human reproductive sciences, 10(4),
293–296. https://doi.org/10.4103/jhrs.JHRS_5_17
Carroll, N. and Palmer, J.R. (2001). A comparison of intrauterine versus intracervicalinsemination in fertile single women. Fertility and Sterility. 75: 4.
Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion
Hogerzeil, H.V., Hamerlynck, J.V., van Amstel, N., Nagelkerke, N.J.D., and Lammes, F.B.
(1988). Results of artificial insemination at home by the partner with cryopreserved donor
semen: a randomized study. Fertility and Sterility. 49(6): 1033-1035.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0015-0282(16)59956-7
Katz, P., Showstack, J., Smith, J. F., Nachtigall, R. D., Millstein, S. G., Wing, H., Eisenberg, M.
L., Pasch, L. A., Croughan, M. S., & Adler, N. (2011). Costs of infertility treatment: results from
an 18-month prospective cohort study. Fertility and sterility, 95(3), 915–921.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.11.026
Kop, P. A., Mochtar, M. H., O'Brien, P. A., Van der Veen, F., & van Wely, M. (2018). Intrauterine
insemination versus intracervical insemination in donor sperm treatment. The Cochranedatabase of systematic reviews, 1(1), CD000317.https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000317.pub4
Ombelet, W. and Robays, J.V. (2015). Artificial Insemination History: Hurdles and Milestones.
Facts Views and VISION in OBGYN. 7(2):137-143. Accessed online at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4498171/
Van Voorhis BJ, Sparks AE, Allen BD, Stovall DW, Syrop CH, Chapler FK. Cost-effectiveness of
infertility treatments: a cohort study. Fertil Steril. 1997;67(5):830-836.
doi:10.1016/s0015-0282(97)81393-3
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 37  
Appendix A:
Online Survey Tool and Consent Form  
(Google Form)
. 
This section shows what the Google Form will look like to the study participant. These are the
questions the participant will be asked.
The first page of the study contains the consent form and the question that confirms the
participant’s agreement to participate.
There is skip logic for certain sections. For example, if the participant selects one cycle of using
Mosie, the information related to cycles 2-6 will be skipped. If the participant selects that she ispregnant the q
uestions related to the pregnancy will be asked, otherwise they will be skipped. If
a donor was used, the questions related to producing a sperm sample will be skipped.
Note: Final language and questions might be tweaked or revised at any time to increase clarity.
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 38  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 39  
This is the inclusion/exclusion form. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 40  
If Participant selected to not participate in the study, he/she will see this screen next. If the 
participant said he/she is not 18 or older or has not used Mosie this screen will be displayed. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 41  
Qualifying participants will continue the survey on this page.
 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 42  
 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 43  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 44  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 45  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 46  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 47  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 48  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 49  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 50  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 51  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 52  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 53  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 54  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 55  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 56  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 57  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 58  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 59  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 60  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 61  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 62  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 63  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 64  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 65  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 66  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 67  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 68  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 69  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 70  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 71  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 72  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 73  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 74  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 75  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 76  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 77  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 78  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 79  
Appendix B:
Frequently Asked Questions 
.
The frequently asked questions will be hosted by Mosie Baby on their website. There will be a 
hyperlink within the survey tool on the consent form allowing participants to be able to access the frequently asked questions at any time. 
The following page shows the text of the FAQ. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 80  
Frequently Asked Questions 
Study Name: ​Retrospective Study on the Use, Efficiency, and Safety of the at-home Mosie 
Kit Short Study Name: ​Mosie Kit Survey Principal Investigator: Karina Loyo, Ph.D., MBA, CCDM Contact Information: 512-630-0990 or karina@drkarina.com 
Why am I being asked to participate in this study? 
You are being asked to participate because we are interested in learning about you r experience 
u
sing the Mosie Kit for at-home insemination. Since you have purchased at least one kit, we 
hope that you have had an opportunity to use it and can share your experience. 
How long will the survey take? 
It is expected that most people will be able to complete the survey in about 15-30 minutes. 
Do I have to participate? 
No. Participation is optional, although we would really appreciate your help! The feedback you 
p
rovide is crucial for us to improve the experience for others in the future. 
Will the survey be anonymous or will I have to identify myself? The survey is completely anonymous. While we will ask some questions about your demographics (ex. race, age, income, preferred relationship), nothing will be able to identify you as the person submitting the responses. In fact, Mo sie will be sending the invitations, but our 
e
xternal primary investigator will be the one receiving the results in a completely separate 
database that can never be linked. 
Do you want both of us to participate by filling out a survey? Or do you have a preference 
about who fills it out? We would prefer to have the person who was inseminated respond to the survey. But if they are not able to fill i t out, you are welcome to fill it out on their behalf. 
C 
an I forward the link to a friend? 
Please only forward to friends who have used the Mosie syringe. One of the reasons we are using a general link is to allow you to share it if you desire and the other is to make sure we keep your responses anonymous. 
I noticed the survey is being conducted in a google form. Is my data safe? 
Yes. The information you provide is transmitted safely into our Principal Investigator’s custody. 
A
ccess to it is password protected. The only person who will be able to access the survey data 
during the data collection period will be the principal investigator, who does not have access to the email list. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 81  
Is the Principal Investigator an employee of Mosie Baby?  
No, the Principal Investigator is an independent consultant hired by Mosie Baby to conduct the 
research. 
Will I be compensated for my time? 
There is no cash compensation for participating in the study. However, in appreciation for sharing your experience and your time, Mosie will provide you with a discount code to be used on your next purch ase. Using this discount code will not identify you as having participated in 
t
he study as we have used it before in a prior marketing campaign. We selected this code 
because it will help keep your participation anonymous. 
What do you hope to learn from our responses? 
We hope to learn about your experience using the Mosie Kit. We are studying how well people understand our instructions and the eff ectiveness of doing at-home insemination with Mosie 
B 
aby.  
Are there any risks involved in participating in the study? There are no known risks for participating in the study. You will be asked about your conception history which can be a trigger for some folks, and if this is too much, please know you do not have to complete the survey and can exit at any time. Please know that by exiting the sur vey 
y
our answers will not be submitted at all. 
Why is Mosie Baby doing this study? Mosie Baby cares about its community and wants to continuously improve to meet your fertility needs for at-home insemination. This study will provide us some valuable information about the product and your experience. 
How is this clinical research study different from a marketing survey? 
Marketing surveys focus on p eople’s purchasing behaviors. This clinical research study focuses 
o
n your experience with Mosie and the experience of others like you. The purpose is to 
understand your interaction with and use of the kit, the ease of use, identify any concerns over safety, understand the rates of pregnancy, and what if anything people are doing that could be beneficial when doing at-home insemination. 
Additional ly, this study has been reviewed by an Independent Review Board who has 
d
etermined that the study has been designed to protect your rights as a participant and will in no 
way endanger you. The study is also registered with clinicaltrials.gov. Will the results be published? 
We do plan to analyze and publish the results. We hope that the information we gain will not only be valuable for Mosie, but a lso to the whole fertility industry. There is very little research on 
t
he effectiveness of at-home insemination so this study will definitely add to the general 
knowledge about its effectiveness.  
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 82  
Can I withdraw at any time? 
Yes. You have the right not to participate and the right to withdraw at any time. One of the reasons the google forms was selected is that if you choose to end your participation before submitting the survey, none of the data will be posted into the database. If you choose to stop mid-survey you can close your browser and no data will be recorded. 
What happens if I stop  the survey somewhere in the middle? 
O
nly completed surveys where the user clicks the Submit button at the end of the survey end up 
posting to the study database. Be sure to click submit when you are done to send the 
information to the database. 
Can I get my name taken off the list of reminders as I already completed the survey or 
decided not to participate?  Absolutely, please send an email to ​m osie@mosiebaby.com​ to be taken off the list. In the email 
simply include the title: Remove from SURVEY list. 
There is no need to provide any additional information. That way, we won’t know if you 
participated or not. Note: This will not take you off Mosie’s regular mailing list, that takes a separate request. 
How many surveys do you hope to get? 
We hope to get around 500 completed surveys. This will allow us to analyze the data and have strong significance in our findings. 
H 
ow long do you think it will take to get all those surveys? 
Our Mosie community is very engaged. We strongly believe we can have all the needed surveys within 30 days. However, if more time is needed, we can continue to receive responses. 
What if I have additional questions about this survey? Is there anyone I can call? 
Yes. You can call the Principal investigator directly, he r contact information is at the top of this 
p 
age as well as below.  
Karina Loyo, Ph.D., MBA, CCDM 512-630-0990  karina@drkarina.com 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 83  
Appendix C:
Participant Recruitment Emails  
.
This section contains samples of the participant recruitment emails. 
Note: These are samples. Final language and appearance might be tweaked. 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 84  
Initial Email 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 85  
Second email (approximately 1 week later) 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 86  
Third Email (approximately 2 weeks after initial email) 
Fourth email (third week) 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 87  
Final email reminder (approximately 24 hours prior to study close) 
MOSIE-001 © 2020 Mosie Baby                    Page 88  