1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
Official title : Vigor and the LDR in Parkinson Diseas e 
 
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
IRB Approval Date: 10/25/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Vigor and the LDR in Parkinson Disease  
PI: Roger L. Albin, MD; Co -I: Taraz Lee, PhD  
 
A. Abstract : 
 
Dopamine  replacement  therapy  (DRT)  is the standard  and very effective  symptomatic  treatment  for early  to 
moderate  Parkinson  disease  (PD).  The most  important  DRT component  is the Long  Duration  Response  
(LDR), a  pharmacodynamic  effect  that builds  up over the course  of weeks.  DRT actions  are poorly  understood  
and the  basis  of the LDR is unknown.  As the LDR wanes  in advancing  disease,  PD patients  develop  
troublesome motor  fluctuations  and increasing  disability.  LDR kinetics  suggest  long-term plastic  changes  in 
striatal function.  Studies  of striatal  dopamine  actions  indicate  that striatal  dopaminergic  neurotransmission  
regulates  “vigor;”  modulation  of the velocity,  amplitude,  force,  or frequency  of movements.  Vigor  is closely  
allied with  the concept  that striatal  dopaminergic  neurotransmission  mediates  motivation;  assessment  of act 
utility and appropriate  scaling  of actions  to perceived  rewards.  Recent  theoretical  and experimental  results  
suggest  that tonic  striatal  dopamine  signaling  is a key determinant  of movement  vigor.  Convergent  clinical  
pharmacologic  and experimental  data lead to a strong  hypothesis  that the LDR results  from chronic  DRT 
partially  restoring  movement  vigor.  This model  of the LDR requires  stable  “records”  of action  values.  Recent  
non-human  primate  work  on saccadic  eye movement  vigor  indicates  the existence  of striatal  dopaminergic  
neurotransmission  stably  encoding  motor  behavior  values  for prolonged  periods  – a potential  mechanism  for 
the LDR.  Prior  experiments  examining  vigor  in PD did not take the LDR into account,  resulting  in incomplete  
examinations  of the role of vigor  deficits  in PD. Our long-term goal is to understand  the clinically  relevant  
actions  of DRT.  The primary  objective  of our proposal  is to test the hypothesis  that the LDR results  from 
partial  restoration  of normal  movement  vigor -motivation.  Our secondary  objective  is to evaluate  a potential  
mechanism  underlying  the LDR.  The rationale  for these  experiments  is that better  understanding  of the LDR,  
a clinically  crucial  component  of DRT action,  will lead to improved  symptomatic  therapy.  We will study  
recently  diagnosed  PD subjects.  All subjects  will undergo  standard  evaluations  of clinical,  cognitive,  and 
motivational  features.   Subjects  will perform  incentive  motivation  tasks  assessing  movement  vigor  – 
motivation  coupling  to assess     our primary  hypothesis.  A task assessing  saccadic  eye movement  vigor  in 
response  to stable  value  signals   will be employed  to evaluate  our secondary  hypothesis.  They  will perform  
all tasks  before  and after LDR induction  in both the “practical  off” and post-acute  treatment  states.  Validation  
of our hypotheses  would  have  considerable  impact  by identifying  the functional  process  underlying  the LDR 
and providing  information  for uncovering  the mechanisms  of the LDR.  This would  facilitate  research  into LDR 
mechanisms,  provide  a rational  basis  for developing  valid animal  models  of the LDR,  and open  a new path 
towards  improved  symptomatic  management  of PD. 
 
B. Specific  Aims  
Dopamine  replacement therapy  (DRT)  is the standard  symptomatic  treatment for early  to moderate  Parkinson  
disease  (PD).  In early  to moderate  PD, the most  important  DRT component  is the Long  Duration  Response  
(LDR), a pharmacodynamic  effect that builds  up over the course  of days-weeks  and can be induced  by 
dopamine  agonists. Despite  its effectiveness, DRT actions  are poorly  understood  and the basis  of the LDR is 
unknown.   As the LDR wanes  in advancing  disease,  PD patients  develop  troublesome  motor  fluctuations  and 
increasing  disability.  Improved  understanding  of the LDR has the potential to prolong  the duration  of its 
effects  and could  have  a significant  positive  effect  on clinical practice.  
 
The kinetics  of the LDR suggest  long-term plastic  changes  in striatal  function.  Recent  studies  of striatal  
dopamine  actions  in PD subjects  and experimental animals  indicate that striatal  dopaminergic  
neurotransmission  regulates “vigor,” the force,  velocity,  or amplitude  of actions.   Vigor is  closely  allied  to the 
concept that  striatal  dopaminergic  neurotransmission  mediates motivation,  which  involves  the assessment  of 
act utility  and the appropriate  scaling  of actions  to perceived  rewards.  Recent theoretical and  experimental  
results  suggest that tonic  striatal  dopamine  signaling,  mimicked  by dopamine  agonist  administration,  is a key 
determinant  of movement  vigor.   Convergent clinical pharmacologic  and experimental  data lead to a strong  
hypothesis  that the LDR results  from chronic  DRT partially  restoring  motivational  coupling  of effort  to 
perceived  reward  and movement  vigor.   Prior experiments  examining  vigor  in PD subjects  did not take  the 
LDR into account, resulting  in incomplete  examinations  of the role of vigor  deficits  in PD. 
3 
 
Recent  non-human  primate  work on the control and  vigor  of saccadic  eye movements  indicates the existence  
of basal  ganglia  circuit changes that  stably encode  motor action  values  for prolonged  periods.   Striatal  
dopaminergic  neurotransmission  is critical  for establishing  this remarkably  stable  form of value -action  
coupling.  This phenomenon  is a plausible  circuit  level mechanism  underlying  the LDR.  
Our long-term goal is to understand the clinically  relevant  actions  of DRT.  The primary  objective  of our 
proposal  is to test the hypothesis  that the LDR results  from partial  restoration  of normal  action  vigor  by 
reinstating  the link between  motivation  and effort.  Our secondary  objective  is to explore  potential 
mechanisms  underlying  the LDR.  The rationale for these  experiments  is that better understanding  of the 
LDR,  a clinically  crucial  component of DRT action,  will lead to improved  symptomatic  therapy.  
 
We will study  recently  diagnosed  PD subjects.  All subjects  will undergo  standard  evaluations  of clinical,  
cognitive,  and motivational  features.  Subjects  will perform  incentive  motivation  tasks  assessing  movement  
vigor  in response  to monetary incentives.  Two complementary tasks, one  based  on modulation  of movement  
velocity  and one based  on modulation  of grip strength, will be employed.    To assess  whether the recently  
described  stable  action -value  coupling  for saccades  is relevant  to the LDR,  subjects  will perform  a task that 
measures saccadic  eye movement vigor  in response  to stable  value  signals  learned  prior to LDR induction.  
Subjects  will perform all  tasks  before  and after LDR induction  in both the “practical  off” and post-acute  
treatment  states.  
Specific  Aim 1: To use incentive  motivation  tasks  to evaluate  the coupling  between  motivation  and movement  
vigor  in recently  treated  PD subjects  before  and after LDR induction.  
Hypothesis  1A:  LDR induction  will result  in partial restoration  of movement  vigor  in response  to monetary  
incentives  in PD subjects  in the “practical  off” state.  
Hypothesis  1B: The magnitude  of partially  restored  movement vigor  in response  to monetary  incentives  will 
correlate  with reduced  bradykinesia  in PD subjects  in the “practical off” state.  
Hypothesis  1C:  Identical effects  will be found  with an incentive  motivation  task based  on movement  
amplitude  and one based  on grip strength.  
Specific  Aim 2: To use a saccadic  eye movement task  to assess  saccadic  eye movement vigor  in 
response  to stable  value  signals  in recently  treated  PD subjects  before  and after LDR  induction.  
Hypothesis  2:  LDR induction  will result  in partial restoration  of saccadic  eye movement  vigor  in response  to 
previously  learned  stable  value  signals  in PD subjects  in the “practical  off” state.  
Validation  of our hypotheses  would  have  considerable  impact  by identifying  a specific  functional process  
underlying  the LDR and a potential mechanism  of the LDR.  This will facilitate  research into  LDR mechanisms,  
provide  a rational  basis  for developing  valid animal models  of the LDR, and open a  new path towards  improved  
symptomatic  management  of PD. 
 
C. Research  Strategy  
 
The Long  Duration  Response  in Parkinson  disease:   Parkinson  disease  (PD) is  the second  most  common  
neurodegenerative  disorder,  affecting  approximately  1 million  Americans.  PD is defined  by a constellation  of 
motor features  – bradykinesia,  rigidity,  resting  tremor,  and postural instability.  Bradykinesia,  which  includes  
slowed  movements  and progressive  decrements  of movement speed  and amplitude  with movement 
repetition,  is regarded  as the core deficit  of PD.1   Motor  dysfunction  in PD results  from reduced  striatal  
dopamine  (DA) signaling  accompanying  degeneration  of the DAergic nigrostriatal  projection.  
DA replacement therapy  (DRT)  is the cornerstone  of PD treatment  and is generally  very effective  in mild to 
moderate  PD. The most  effective  and commonly  used  treatment is the DA precursor L -dopa.   Synthetic  DA 
agonists, with longer half -lives,  are used  for monotherapy  and as adjunctive  agents.   These  are primarily  D2 
receptor  selective  agents,  are less potent, and  exhibit  significantly  higher rates  of serious  side effects.  
There  are 2 major components  of patient response  to L-dopa  treatment  – the Short  Duration  Response  
(SDR)  and the Long  Duration Response  (LDR) .2-4   L-dopa  has a half-life of approximately  1 hour  in blood.  
With typical oral administration  schedules  (3-4x/day),  plasma  L-dopa  levels  are very low  at the end of dose  
intervals.  The SDR  begins  quickly,  lasts minutes  to hours,  and then declines,  with clinical effects  
approximately  paralleling  plasma L -dopa  levels.  The LDR is sustained  improvement  following  chronic  
4 
 
treatment  which  builds  up over days  to weeks  and declines  over similar intervals  with treatment  suspension.  
The LDR is the major  component of treatment  response  in early PD  and is responsible  for the fact that many  
early  phase  PD patients  experience  little or no decrement  in performance  if they miss L -dopa  doses.  
Pharmacodynamic  modeling  studies  suggest that the half-life of the LDR is approximately  8 days,  with 
plausible  suggestions  of longer half - lives.5,6 
 
The LDR wanes  with disease  progression  with increasing  importance of the SDR.7,8   This results  in motor  
fluctuations,  including  wearing  off of drug effect  and dyskinesias.  Patients  require  increasing  L-dopa  doses,  
frequent regimen  adjustments,  and adjunctive  agents.  There  is significantly  increased  incidence  of 
troublesome  medication  side-effects.   Many  need  Deep  Brain  
Stimulation (DBS)  surgery to obtain adequate  quality  of life. 
 
Initial  hypotheses  about LDR  mechanisms  suggested  that its existence  reflected  a brain  “buffer”  compartment  
taking  up and storing  L-dopa  and/or  DA for subsequent release.  This hypothesis  was falsified  by several  
experiments  demonstrating  that DA agonists  can initiate  and sustain  the LDR.5.9-11   In addition, LDR kinetics  
are identical  in patients  with Dopa  Responsive  Dystonia,  a rare disorder of deficient  DA synthesis  highly  
responsive to L-dopa  treatment.12   These  individuals  have  normal  nigrostriatal  terminals  and normal  DA 
storage  capacity.  
 
The mechanism(s) underlying  the LDR are  unknown  as there  have  been no subsequent  studies  investigating  
the underpinnings  of the LDR.  
 
Phasic  Dopamine  Signaling  Does  Not Explain  the LDR:  Striatal  DA actions  have  been the  focus  of intense  
study  over the past generation.  Striatal  DAergic  neurotransmission  is described  as mediating  a number of 
important  processes, including  reinforcement  learning, habit formation,  action  selection,  action  vigor,  and 
motivation  (for discussion  of vigor  and motivation,  see Approach  below).   The best characterized  aspect  of 
striatal  DA signaling  is its role in reinforcement  learning.   Considerable  evidence  indicates that rapid  (100-300 
msec), phasic  bursting  of nigrostriatal  neurons, resulting  in discrete  boluses  of striatal  DA, provides  a Reward  
Prediction Error  signal  for reinforcement  learning.13-15   Observed  originally  in seminal  non-human  primate  
experiments  by Wolfram Schultz,  studies  of this aspect  of striatal  DAergic signaling  dominate the literature  on 
striatal  DA actions.  
 
As pointed  out by Schultz  and others, restoration  of phasic  nigrostriatal  DA signaling  is unlikely  to occur  with L- 
dopa treatment and  cannot  account  for the effects  of L-dopa  treatment in PD.2,16,17    At onset of symptomatic  
PD, patients  have  already  experienced  massive, >60%  loss, of motor striatum  nigrostriatal  terminals.18 
Accompanying  nigrostriatal  terminal  degeneration  is loss of dopamine  transporters  (DAT) located  uniquely on  
DAergic terminals.   DAT activity is  the primary mechanism for clearing  DA from the synaptic  cleft. Massive  
nigrostriatal terminal  loss results  in both diminished  DA release  and increased  DA extracellular residence  time,  
degrading phasic  DA signaling.19,20    Other  components  of striatal DA  signaling  must account  for the 
effectiveness  of L-dopa  in PD.  Schultz  suggested  that some  form(s) of tonic  striatal  DA signaling  accounts  for 
L-dopa effectiveness.16   LDR kinetics  suggests  long-term plastic  changes  in striatal  DA actions.  
 
Approach Overview : Our primary  objective  is to test the hypothesis  that the LDR results  from partial  
restoration  of a critical aspect  of striatal  DA signaling: mediation  of vigor and  motivation  (Specific Aim 1). 
Confirmation  of our hypothesis  would  connect  the LDR to a fundamental  feature  of striatal  DA action.  The 
burgeoning  preclinical  and human  experimental  literature  in this area would  provide  a solid foundation  for 
mechanistic  studies  of the LDR.  Our secondary  objective  is to evaluate  a potential LDR  circuit  level 
mechanism ( Specific  Aim 2). 
 
The proposed  work  is based  on collaboration  between  investigators  with strongly  complementary  expertise.  
Dr. Albin  is a Movement  Disorder  neurologist  and experienced  PD clinical researcher.  Dr. Lee is a Cognitive  
Neuroscientist  focused  on the interactions  between  cognitive  control,  motivation,  and action.  We engaged  
expert  collaborative  consultants  for critical aspects  of the proposed  experiments.   Dr. Joshua  Dudman  
(HHMI - Janelia  Farms)  is a leading  expert  on striatal  dopamine  signaling  and vigor  modulation.  Dr. 
Dudman  developed  the movement  amplitude task  deployed  for SA1, a human  adaptation  of the task his lab 
5 
 
used  in influential  murine experiments  demonstrating  DAergic  modulation  of movement vigor.   Dr. Brian  
Anderson  (Texas  A&M)  is an expert  on the task deployed  for SA2.  Drs. Dudman  and Anderson  agreed  to 
advise  us on implementation  of these  tasks  and data interpretation  (see attached  LOS).  
Specific  Aim 1: To use incentive  motivation  tasks  to evaluate  the coupling  between  motivation  and 
movement  vigor  in recently  treated  PD subjects  before  and after LDR induction.  
Hypothesis  1A:  LDR induction  will result  in partial restoration  of movement  vigor in  response  to monetary  
incentives  in PD  subjects  in the “practical  off” state.  
Hypothesis  1B: The magnitude  of partially  restored  movement vigor  in response  to monetary  incentives  will 
correlate  with reduced  bradykinesia  in PD subjects  in the “practical off” state.  
Hypothesis  1C:  Identical  effects  will be found  with an incentive  motivation  task based  on movement  
amplitude  and one based  on grip strength.  
 
Rationale:  A substantial body  of data indicates  that striatal  DAergic  neurotransmission  mediates  vigor  – the 
speed,  amplitude,  force,  or frequency  of actions.21-25   These  different aspects  of vigor  have  in common  
modultion  of effort,  ultimately  the degree  of energy  expenditure  required  to accomplish  actions.   Vigor  
modulation  is closely  linked  to the motivational  role of striatal  DAergic neurotransmission.  Salamone  and 
others  argue  persuasively  that striatal  DAergic  neurotransmission  is critical  for efficient  effort allocation  by 
proportioning  actions  to perceived rewards  – the fundamental  process  of motivation.21-23   Several  studies  
implicate  aberrant  movement vigor modulation  as the underlying  mechanism  of PD bradykinesia.  An 
influential  experiment  by Mazzoni  et al. indicates  that PD subjects  exhibit  aberrant estimation  of effort -reward  
tradeoffs  of movements.26   These  results  were  replicated  by several  groups  using  a variety  of paradigms  to 
assess  movement vigor  in PD subjects.27-29   These  paradigms  generally  isolate  modulation  of movement  
velocity,  force  (e.g., grip strength),  or amplitude  as outcome  measures.  These outcome  variables  all reflect  
effort and  in most  paradigms,  the chosen  outcome  variable  (e.g.,  amplitude of reaching)  is co-linear  with 
other  potential  outcome  variables  (e.g., force  of reaching).  
 
Consistent  with Schultz’s  suggestion  that some  form of tonic  striatal  DA action  is critical  for treatment  of PD, 
LDR induction  by dopamine  agonists  suggests tonic  striatal  DA signaling  in the LDR.  Theoretical and  recent  
experimental evidence  indicates that tonic  striatal  DA signaling  is an important mediator  of vigor.   Niv et al. 
elaborated  a model  of reinforcement learning  in which  subjects  make  choices  about action  selection  and vigor  
with the goal of maximizing  the net value  of rewards  per unit time.30   Faster  or more  intense  movements  are 
more  costly.30,31    Optimal  performance requires  an effort -reward  (cost -benefit) analysis  including  the costs  of 
action  vigor.  Simulations with  this model  recapitulate results  of typical animal experiments  examining  
response  vigor.   In this model,  a mechanism  is needed  to provide  a long-term account  of the prior average 
rate of rewards.  Niv et al. predicted  that tonic  striatal  dopamine  signaling  provides  the necessary  history of 
prior rate of reward.   Zhuang  and colleagues  tested  this hypothesis  with partial DAT  knockdown  (pDATKD) 
mice.32,33  These  mice  manifest  chronic, moderate  elevation  of striatal  DA but exhibit normal nigrostriatal  
neuron  phasic  activity  and normal  reinforcement  learning.   pDATKD  mice  work more  vigorously  than control  
mice  for equivalent  rewards, exhibiting  distorted  effort -reward  coupling.  Panigraphi  et al. examined  forelimb  
movement  vigor  in MitoPark  mice,  a model of adult -onset, selective  nigrostriatal  neuron  degeneration  with 
slowly  progressive bradykinesia.34   In clever  experiments, they  demonstrated normal  reward  contingency  
learning  but impaired  ability  to scale  forelimb  movements  appropriately.  Panigraphi et al. also demonstrated  
significant  improvements  in MitoPark  mice  movement  vigor  with L-dopa  treatment.  Remarkably,  improved  
movement  vigor  did not occur  with acute treatment,  but only with weeks  of daily treatment,  a possible  LDR 
analogue.  
Converging  theoretical  work, preclinical experiments, and  clinical experiments  suggest  that DRT improves  
bradykinesia  via partial  restoration  of normal striatal vigor modulation  and that the LDR is the manifestation  of 
improved  vigor modulation  via partially  restored  tonic  dopamine  signaling.  There  is, however,  a critical  gap in 
the chain  of data.   None  of the human  experiments  adequately  controlled for DRT treatment  effects.  The 
Mazzoni et al. study  was performed  in chronically  treated  PD subjects.26   Several  other  experiments  
evaluated  PD subjects  during  DRT and after withholding  DRT for 10-12 hours  (the “practical  off” state) and  
obtained  analogous  results.28,29    These  experiments  report reduced  vigor  modulation in the  “practical  off” 
state.  The PD subjects  in these  studies  were  inevitably  beneficiaries  of the LDR, confounding  comparison  of 
6 
 
performance  of PD subjects  evaluated  in the “practical  off” state  with control  subject  performances.   
Rigorous  evaluation  of the concept that  PD bradykinesia  results  from aberrant modulation  of vigor  requires  
human  experiments  that control  for LDR effects.  A well designed  experiment  will assess  whether  the LDR is  
correlated  with improved  vigor,  as predicted  by our hypothesis.  
 
Procedures:  
a) We will study  newly  diagnosed PD subjects recruited  from the Movement  Disorders  clinics  at the 
University  of Michigan.  We see approximately  1300  PD patients  annually.   Subjects  must  meet  Movement  
Disorder  Society  (MDS)  criteria  for PD.1   Only H&Y1 -2 subjects  will be enrolled.   Exclusion  criteria  include  
significant  cognitive  impairment (Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  score  <24),  significant  depression  
(Geriatric  Depression  Scale  [GDS]  >5), stimulant  use, dopamine  agonist  treatment,  or confounding  other  
neurologic  or medical  disorders.  Subjects  will be characterized  at each  testing  condition with standard  
scales:  Parkinsonism  – MDS - Unified  Parkinson  Disease  Rating  Scale (UPDRS); Mood  – GDS; Apathy  – 
Lille Apathy  Rating  Scale;  Cognition  – a short  battery  of selected  domain  specific  tests used previously.35   
Bradykinesia  will be quantified  with a tapping  task used  extensively  by Nutt et al. in prior LDR studies  (see 
section  c below).7,8 
 
b) Subjects will be studied  at pre-treatment baseline  and 2-3 months  after L-dopa  treatment  initiation  and 
regimen  stabilization.  We will only enroll drug -naïve subjects about to start treatment with L -dopa.  
Subjects  will be studied  in OFF and ON acute  treatment states  at baseline  and after LDR  induction.  There  
will be 4 measurement states:  at baseline  prior to chronic  treatment  initiation  (OFF -No LDR);  at baseline  
after a standard,  acute  oral dose  (25/250  carbidopa/L -dopa)  of L-dopa  (ON-No LDR),  2 months  after initiation  
of chronic, stable  L-dopa  treatment  but with no L-dopa  for 10-12 hours  prior to  evaluation  (Practical OFF– 
LDR), and  after subjects’  usual L -dopa  dose  (ON-LDR) ( Table  1). 
Table 1:  
 
Practical  ON and OFF state measurements  will be counterbalanced  across  individuals.  We will recruit  both 
male  and female  PD subjects, though  we expect  more  male  subjects  as PD is more  common  in men.  This is 
a within  subjects  design  and randomization  per se is not used.  Blinding  of study  conditions  is not feasible.   
It would  be potentially  interesting  to include  a placebo  LDR induction  arm, but denying  PD subjects effective  
treatment  is not ethical.  Data  analysis  will be blinded.  It would  also be interesting  to include  a normal subject  
arm, but this is ethically  problematic  as it would  involve  chronic  L-dopa  treatment.  If, however,  we obtain  
results  confirming  our hypotheses, we will explore  inclusion  of normal controls  in the next phase  of 
experiments.  
 
c) LDR magnitude will be measured  by reduction  of bradykinesia between  the initial OFF-No LDR state  and the 
Practical  OFF-LDR state.  Comparisons  of the On-No LDR state  and OFF-No LDR state,  and the Practical  
OFF-LDR and ON-LDR states  will measure  the SDR.   As a measure  of bradykinesia,  we will use the  well-
validated  tapping  task used  by Nutt et al. in their experiments  defining  LDR kinetics.7,8   With the hand  most  
affected  by PD, subjects  are instructed  to alternately  tap 2 manual  counters spaced  20 cm apart as rapidly  as 
possible  for 1 minute.   Subjects  will practice  several  times  until they feel comfortable   with the task. They  will 
perform  5 trials  spaced  ~3-4 minutes  apart  with the initial trial discarded  to reduce  variation  secondary  to 
anxiety.   Results  of the remaining  4 trials  will be averaged        to generate  a tapping  speed  (taps/min)  for each  
subject in  each condition.  This is very similar  to the approach  used  by Nutt et al. (JG Nutt, personal 
communication).  
d) Vigor modulation  will be evaluated  with two separate  incentive  motivation  tasks; one  based  on modulation  
of movement  amplitude  and one based  on modulation  of grip strength.  The latter  is similar to a task used  
previously  in PD subjects  by Schmidt et al.36   It is implemented  in the Lee laboratory.   This task was chosen  
because  it is relatively  easy  to use and implement,  is compatible  with functional neuroimaging,  and results  in 
PD subjects  were  replicated  using  a very similar  task by Chong  et al.28   Briefly,  subjects  will be tasked  with 
modulating  their grip  strength  in response  to monetary  incentives.  With the hand  most affected  by          PD OFF-No LDR Baseline  - Treatment  Naïve  Subject  
ON-No LDR Baseline  - Treatment  Naïve  Subject  After  Acute  L-Dopa  
OFF-LDR Chronically  Treated  – “Practical  Off” State  
ON-LDR Chronically  Treated  – After  Usual  L-Dopa  
 
7 
 
symptoms, they  will be asked  to squeeze  a hand  dynamometer at the outset  of the experiment  to measure  
the strength  of their maximum voluntary contraction  (MVC).   All grip strength targets  will be scaled  to this  
value.   Subsequently,  subjects  will undergo  a series  of trials in which  they will be presented  with an incentive  
cue that indicates  the level of reward  for that trial.  They  will be informed  that on each  of these  trials  they will 
earn a percentage  of the incentive  shown  that is directly  proportional to how hard they squeeze  on that trial.  
While  healthy  individuals  generally  increase  grip strength  with increasing  incentive  values  on this task,  
previous  work has shown  that PD patients  are impaired  in their ability  to modulate  their grip strength  in this                
way.  To ensure  that any  deficits  found  are due to motivational  vigor  and not simply  a reflection  of impaired  
muscle  power,  we will incorporate  control  trials  in which  PD subjects  are instructed  to increase  grip strength  
to similar  target levels  of force  without  monetary incentives.  
We will use a  variant  of the mouse  task used  in Panigrahi  et al.34 This task was inspired  by tasks  used  in 
human  PD studies.26,27  A spring  loaded  joystick  that returns  to a center position  if no force  is applied  is used.  
Application  of force  to the joystick  displaces  it from the center and  is monitored  to detect the real-time 
trajectory  of the movement.  A water  reward  is delivered  1 second  after the joystick  passes  a specified  
amplitude  threshold.   For human  equivalent  tasks, a flexible  range  of manipulanda  (varying  the force  
requirements) and  flexible  visuomotor feedback  during  training  and/or  testing  are deployed.  Varying  force  
requirements  for reward  measure  reward -effort coupling.  Use of 2 incentive  motivation  tasks  is 
complementary  and provides  a more  stringent test  of our hypothesis.   As these  tasks  are different measures  
of movement  vigor  modulation,  we should  obtain  similar and  strongly  correlated  results.  Confirmation  of our 
hypothesis  with the amplitude modulation  task will provide  reassurance  that we are studying  the same  vigor  
modulation  phenomenon  studied  in basic  investigations.  The grip strength  modulation  task is better  suited  to 
functional imaging  experiments  and will be a valuable  platform  for future  experiments.  
e) Analysis  Plan:   Hypothesis  1A; Our primary  comparisons  will be performance  on the incentive  motivation  
tasks  before  and after LDR induction.  We predict that improved  performance  on the incentive  motivation  
tasks  will be apparent  between  the OFF-No LDR and Practical  OFF-LDR conditions  but not in  comparisons  
between  the other conditions.  Data will be analyzed  via 2-Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA followed  by 
post-hoc tests  with incentive  level and  treatment condition  as the factors and multiple  comparison  
adjustments.  Based  on the Schmidt  et al. data36, we estimate that achieving  power  of 0.9 at an effect size of 
η2 = 0.15 requires  complete  data from 16 subjects.   Based  on experience  with complex,  serial  imaging 
studies, we project  a 10% dropout  rate (~2 subjects).  To compensate  for dropouts,  we will recruit  20 
subjects.   Hypothesis  1B; We will correlate  changes  in performance  on the  incentive  motivation  task with the 
change  in tapping  rates  with Pearson  or Spearman  correlation  tests.  Hypothesis  1C: We will correlate the 
results  of the amplitude modulation  based  and grip strength  based  incentive  motivation  tasks  with Pearson  or 
Spearman  correlation  tests.  
Interpretations  and Potential  Problems:   If our predictions  are correct, we will validate  the connection  between  
the LDR and partial restoration  of vigor  modulation.  Falsifying  this hypothesis  will be equally  valuable  as it 
would  direct  research  on the LDR towards  different features  of striatal  DA action.  We may,  for example, find  a 
relationship  between  the SDR  and improved  vigor modulation,  which  would  direct research  towards  the 
mechanisms  of the SDR.   As discussed  above,  prior experiments  evaluating  vigor modulation  in PD have  not 
taken  the LDR into account.  We may find no  clear  relationship  between  vigor modulation  and bradykinesia.  
This would  be important  as it would  cast doubt on the widely  accepted  concept that PD  bradykinesia  is the  
consequence  of altered  vigor  modulation,  and potentially  re-direct  research  in this field. 
Subject recruitment is  a potential obstacle  to study completion.  Our clinics  follow  ~1300  PD subjects  with 
~200  new PD patient  visits  per year.  Our group  successfully  recruited  for trials  requiring  untreated  PD 
patients  such  as STEADY -PD and SURE -PD.  Our group  expanded  this past summer  with the addition  of 2 
faculty   Movement  Disorder specialists  primarily  committed  to clinical practice.  Treatment  with dopamine  
agonists  is an exclusion  criterion  and will not affect recruitment.  Our Movement  Disorders group is  
conservative  in terms       of treatment recommendations  and the overwhelming  majority  of our patients  initiate  
therapy  with L-dopa  monotherapy.   If recruitment  lags, we will recruit through  the Michigan  Parkinson  
Foundation, the major  lay PD organization  in Michigan  with 71 affiliated  support  groups  and a mailing -email  
list of ~15,000  (see attached  LOS).  These experiments  are straightforward,  using  simple  behavioral  tasks.   A 
potential  problem is  that some  patients  experience nausea  with initial L -dopa  treatment, which  could  
8 
 
complicate  the ON-No LDR assessment.  We will reduce  the possibility  of nausea by 48 hour pretreatment 
with the peripheral  decarboxylase  inhibitor  carbidopa.   Another  potential  problem is  enrollment  of subjects  
with one of the PD mimics  (Multiple  System  Atrophy,  etc.).   An advantage  of our design  is that we will be 
evaluating  subjects  after treatment  initiation,  allowing  us to gauge  treatment  responses.  Subjects  not 
improving  with L-dopa  treatment,  defined  by the MDS  criteria of > 30% improvement in  MDS -UPDRS III score,  
will be excluded.  
Specific  Aim 2: To use a saccadic  eye movement task  to assess  saccadic  eye movement vigor in  
response  to stable  value  signals  in recently  treated  PD subjects  before  and after LDR  induction.  
Hypothesis  2:  LDR induction  will result  in partial restoration  of saccadic  eye movement  vigor  in response  to 
previously  learned  stable  value  signals  in PD subjects  in the “practical  off” state.  
 
Rationale:  The long half-life of the LDR indicates  that it is based  on long-term DA mediated  striatal  plasticity.  
The computational  model  of Niv et al. suggests  that accurate  vigor modulation  requires  a striatal  DA signaling  
“recording” the long-term prior average  value  of rewards.   Rodent and  non-human  primate  lesion  experiments  
suggest  that the striatum mediates  estimates  of prior reward  histories.37,38    Studying  saccadic  eye movements  
in non-human  primates, Hikosaka  and colleagues  described  a basal  ganglia  mechanism  stably  encoding  
values  of visual  stimuli  to modulate the vigor of saccadic  eye movements.39,40    Hikosaka  et al. presented  
animals  with a large  set of fractal images, training  them to associate  a subset  with rewards.  Weeks  to months  
later and in unrewarded  conditions,  animals  are exposed  to groups  of fractal images  containing  some  images  
associated  previously  with rewards.   Saccadic  eye movement  vigor was measured.  Images  associated 
previously  with rewards  evoked  greater saccadic  vigor.   In detailed  physiologic  experiments,  Hikosaka  et al. 
established  that activity of  DAergic  nigrostriatal  neurons  projecting  to the caudate  nucleus  tail are critical  for 
this phenomenon.  This demonstration  of long-term stable  action -value  association  has features  required of 
a DAergic  mechanism “recording” reward  history and underpinning  vigor modulation.  
If this phenomenon  underpins  vigor modulation, then  DRT partial restoration  of DAergic  signaling  in this 
circuit  is a plausible  substrate  for the LDR.  LDR induction  is predicted  to improve  saccadic  eye movement  
vigor in  tasks  analogous  to that used  by Hikosaka  et al. 
Procedures:   Subject recruitment, characterization,  and test conditions  are as described  in Specific  Aim 1. 
It is not feasible  to train PD subjects  on hundreds  of fractal  images.  We will use an analogous  task validated  
well in humans; value  driven attentional oculomotor  capture  (VDAOC).41-43 A probabilistic  learning task  is used  
to train subjects  to associate  a salient visual  stimulus  (color)  with reward. In  a test phase,  the previously  
rewarded  stimulus  is presented  in task-irrelevant context  as a distractor.   Saccades  to the test phase  target  
and distractor  are assessed,  including  percentage  of saccades  to distractor  or target, saccade latency,  and 
saccade  duration.   Previously rewarded  distractor  stimuli  capture  initial saccades  and the magnitude  of 
VDAOC is  assessed.  This task is accompanied  by striatal  dopamine  release.44   Subjects  are trained  in a 
single  session  and attentional  capture  is remarkably durable;  it persists in  test phase  experiments  months  
after a single  training  session.45 To duplicate  the approach  used  by Hikosaka  et al., PD  subjects  will be 
trained  on reward -color  association  prior to initiation  of L-dopa  therapy.   VDAOC  will be measured  in 4 
measurement  states  described  above  (Table  1).  Saccades  will be evaluated  with an Eyelink  tracker  with a 
sampling  rate of 250 Hz.  If we again  assume  a modest effect size of η2 = 0.15,  16 subjects  will be sufficient to 
achieve  a power  of 0.9. To guard  against  dropouts,  we will target enrolling  20 subjects.   Data  analysis  
approach  will be similar  to that proposed  for Specific  Aim 1. 
Interpretations  and Potential  Problems:   Straightforward  interpretation  of this experiment  presupposes  
validation  of our hypothesis  that LDR induction  is associated  with improved  modulation  of vigor as tested  in 
Specific  Aim 1 experiments.  Assuming  validation  of our primary  hypothesis,  we predict that  LDR induction  
will be associated  with improved  saccadic  eye movement vigor  (VDOAC  magnitude).  The analysis  approach  
will be similar  to that used  for Specific  Aim 1 experiments.  The primary  comparison  will be between  
saccadic       vigor  in OFF-No LDR and Practical OFF -LDR conditions.   If LDR induction  is associated  with 
improved  saccadic  vigor in  the context  of successful  Specific  Aim 1 experiments, we  will have  evidence  
supporting  the hypothesis  that the stable  striatal  DAergic  signaling  described  by Hikosaka’s  group underpins  
the LDR.   This would  be an excellent  point  of departure  for future  experiments on LDR mechanisms.  This 
experiment  will have  value  even  if we falsify Hypothesis  1.  Regardless  of the outcome  of the SA1 
9 
 
experiments,  success  with this experiment would  support the existence  in humans  of the interesting  and 
potentially  important  phenomenon  described  by Hikosaka  et al. in monkeys.  It’s possible  that we might 
validate  Hypothesis  1 but falsify  Hypothesis  2. That result  would  certainly  point  away  from the mechanism  
described  by Hikosaka  et al. as underlying  the LDR.  An alternative  interpretation  then would  be that  the 
dopamine  deficient (PD) state     impairs  value  encoding.  This could  be evaluated  in subsequent  experiments  
in which  different colors  are associated  with reward  in different training  sessions  during  each  of our 
measurement conditions.  
Potential obstacles  and responses  to problems associated  with this experiment are those  outlined  above  for 
Specific  Aim 1 experiments.  This task has not been  used in  a patient  population  and a  more  prolonged  
training  phase  may be needed. Initial experiments  will assess  this potential issue.  
D. Recruitment and Retention:  
 
Subjects  will include  30-40 with Parkinson  disease  (PD).  For experiments for  SA1 and SA2, our power  
estimates  indicate  that 16 participants  will be adequate  for each  experiment.  We project  recruiting  20 subjects  
for each  experiment  to compensate  for possible  dropouts.  A number  of subjects  will participate  in both SA1 and 
SA2 experiments . 
 
Subjects will be recruited  from the UMHS  Movement  Disorders  Clinics. The  UMHS  Movement  Disorders clinic  
follows  a population  of about  1300  clinically  well-defined  patients  with PD, and  evaluates  approximately  200 
new PD patients  per year.   Dr. Albin,  Co-Director of the UMHS  Movement  Disorders clinic,  will be in charge  
of subject recruitment.  The UM Movement  Disorders  group  is one of the largest  in the nation  with 13 faculty 
and actively  involved  in clinical research.  We successfully  recruit simultaneously  for major clinical trials  such 
as STEADY -PD and other clinical  research  projects  involving  complex  protocols  such a  multiple  imaging  
studies.  Movement  Disorders  group  faculty  work closely  on recruitment with all members  of the group  
committed  to assisting  with recruitment  of study  subjects.  We have  a weekly  email  notification  of studies  
actively  recruiting  and a well established  system  for directing  patients  identified  in clinics  as potential 
research  subjects  to the attention  of study  coordinators.  The Movement Disorders  group is  expanded  this 
past summer  with the addition  of 2 additional, primarily  clinical, faculty.  We also have  2 clinical  fellows.  
 
In addition,  we will apply  to the UM IRB for a waiver  of consent  for screening  and recruitment  purposes  only. 
Our study  coordinator (SC) will use the  electronic  medical record  (EMR)  to screen  all subjects  scheduled  for 
clinic  visits  and will maintain  a password -protected  screening  log. The SC will contact  possibly  eligible  
subjects  by phone  in advance  of their Neurology  clinic  appointment —so that subjects  can discuss  the study  
with their physician  and so that our team  can be available  at that time  to answer  any questions —and will 
introduce  them  to the study,  the ardor and nature  of the study  procedures,  and to review  inclusion/exclusion  
criteria. Subjects  who are interested  in participating  will be scheduled  for a baseline  testing  visit. 
 
If recruitment lags, we will recruit regionally  through  the Michigan  Parkinson  Foundation  (MPF;  see attached  
letter of support).   MPF is the  major  service  organization  for PD in Michigan.   It supports  dozens  of local 
chapters  and has a newsletter with circulation  in the thousands.  
 
Retention  is clearly  critical in  studies  of this type.  Our experience  with complex  studies  is reassuring.   For 
multiple  PET imaging  studies  our group has performed,  often  involving  anywhere  from 2 – 4 PET studies  
(plus  MRI imaging)  and serial evaluations,  including  follow -up PET studies, we have  had little difficulty  with 
retention.  Dropout rates  are <10%.  Our study  plan budgets  for potential dropouts.  To enhance  retention, our  
SC will contact subjects  via phone  on a regular basis  throughout the period  from study  entry  to completion.  
This type of personal contact is  usually  effective  in maintaining  study  participation.  We will provide  
reimbursement  for travel expenses  and a modest  volunteer  fee on study completion.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria:  PD diagnosis  will be based  on the recent  Movement  Disorder  Society criteria.   
a) PD subjects  >45 years  and <81 will be studied.  
b) H&Y1 -2 (early  PD) subjects  will be recruited.  
c) Only subjects about to initiate treatment with L -dopa preparations will be enrolled.  
 
10 
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
a) The presence  of other  neurologic  disease  or neurologic  findings  on examination.  
b) Cognitive  Impairment:  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (MoCA)  score  <24. 
c) Depression:  Geriatric  Depression  Scale  (GDS)  score  >5. 
d) Use of dopamine  agonists  or stimulants.  
e) Evidence  of a stroke  or mass  lesion  on prior structural  brain  imaging  (CT or MRI).  
f) Evidence  of any confounding  medical  or psychiatric  problem  that would  preclude  task participation.  
 
Sources  of Materials : 
Information  gathered  specifically  for this research  project  includes  test results  from clinical  test scales,  
standardized  neuropsychological  measures  and from experimental  cognitive  tests,  neurobehavioral  rating  
scales,  clinical  motor  data,  questionnaires,  standardized  interview,  and data derived  from structural  and 
functional  MRI. 
 
Potential  Risks : 
Confidentiality  of Research  Information:  The research  data to be collected  from subjects  will consist  of 
confidential  information  relating  to clinical,  neuropsychological,  mood,  neuroanatomical,  and neurochemical  
functions.  These  research  data are not intended  for entry  into the subjects’  clinical  medical  records.  
However,  the data remain  potentially  discoverable.  This may lead to violation  of privacy  and embarrassment  
of the subject.  
 
Clinical  and Behavioral  Testing:  Risks  in regard  to the behavioral  assessment  are limited  to fatigue,  frustration  
and momentary  embarrassment  that may occur  when  one experiences  difficulty  disclosing  information  or 
during  task performance.   The overnight “off” state may result in discomfort and transient worsening of 
parkinsonism symptoms.   
 
Adequacy  of Protection  Against  Risks : 
 
Recruitment  and Informed  Consent:  
Subjects  will be recruited  from the UM Movement  Disorders  clinic  and by advertisement.  Individuals  willing  to 
participate  will be scheduled  for the research  procedures  at which  time the nature  and risks of the procedures  
will again  be review  d with the subjects  and a written  informed  consent  form will be obtained  by one of the 
study  investigators. One  copy  of the signed  consent  form will be given  to the subject,  one will be placed  in the 
patient’s  medical record  and a third will be kept in the patient’s  study  binder  kept at the patient’s  research  site. 
Study  visits  will be conducted  in Dr. Lee’s  laboratory  in East Hall at the University  of Michigan.  
 
Protection  Against  Risk:  
Confidentiality  of Research  Information:  The possibility  of unintended  disclosure  of medical  or research  data is 
minimal,  but not entirely  impossible.  We will employ  stringent  safeguards  against  unintended  and inappropriate  
discovery  and dissemination  of personal  medical  and research  data in our subjects  by a multi -layered  
approach.  All data bearing  potential  subject  identifiers  will reside  solely  in locked  files in the offices  of the study  
investigators.  Original  data collection  documents  will be maintained  in secure  files under  the control  of the 
investigators.  Entries  regarding  details  of the research  project  and its results  will not be submitted  to clinical  
medical  databases.  Electronic  databases  in the project  will employ  subject  codes  that cannot  be linked  directly  
to participants  without  a “key”,  possessed  only by the study  investigators  in a secure  location,  and maintained  
separately  from the databases.  Databases  will be housed  on protected  UM servers.  Personal  information   
that would  directly  identify  study  subjects  will not be used  in any publications  or presentations  resulting        
from this research  study,  unless  separate  written  permission  is given  by the subject  (or proxy).  Any superfluous  
records  will be shredded.  
Clinical  and Behavioral  Testing:  Care  will be taken  to minimize  distress.  The study protocol is designed with 
the minimum number of procedures and tasks, so as to minimize participant burden.  Subjects  will be 
addressed  in a courteous  manner  that does  not infringe  the patient’s  dignity.  These  individuals  are 
prepared  to respond  to patient  anxiety,  concern  and other  behavioral  changes  as appropriate  to the 
situation.  Offering  breaks  and 
11 
 
reassuring  subjects  will further  minimize  risks when  necessary.   All study visits will occur in the morning.  
Subjects studied in the overnight “off state” will take their medication as soon as study procedures are 
concluled.   
 
E. Safety Monitoring:  
 
Review  of study  procedures  and adverse  effects  will be performed  on a monthly  basis.  The PI will be 
responsible  for monitoring  any break  in confidentiality  and for reporting  any adverse  events  following  
University  of Michigan  IRB guidelines.  For purposes  of this study,  an AE is defined  as any unfavorable  or 
unintended  change  in structure,  function,  signs,  or symptoms  temporally  associated  with participation  in this 
study,  whether  or not a causal  relationship  with the study  has been  established.  Clinically  significant  
abnormalities  may be considered  an AE if deemed  appropriate  by the PI. Unexpected  worsening  of a pre-
existing  condition  is also considered  an AE, as is the discovery  of an abnormal  finding  during  physical  exam  
that was not included  in the medical  history.  Breaches  of confidentiality  will be considered  related  to the 
research  whenever  they occur  and will be reported.  Withdrawals  from the study  and the reason  for these  
withdrawals  will also be reported.  
 
The PI and Co-I are in daily contact  with the project  research  staff testing  the participants,  scoring  and entering  
data,  and will monitor  their procedures  to ensure  that confidentiality  is maintained.  The PI will ensure  that the 
IRB is notified  of any adverse  event  following  the IRB guidelines.  Expected  and unexpected  serious  (including  
fatal)  adverse  reactions  and major  unresolved  disputes  between  the research  investigator(s)  and the research  
participant  or between  research  investigator(s)  will be expeditiously  reported  to the IRB of the University  of 
Michigan.  At the time of renewal,  the IRB will be provided  with a summary  indicating  the frequency  of the 
monitoring,  cumulative  adverse  event  data,  information  regarding  participant  safety  or ethics  changes,  
confidentiality  issues,  benefit -to-risk changes  and recommendations  on continuing,  changing  or terminating  the 
study.  
 
For independent  oversight,  Dr. Kelvin  Chou,  a Movement  Disorder  neurologist  with considerable  trial 
experience,  will act as a DSMB.  Dr. Chou  will meet  with the study  team  to review  the protocol  prior to study  
initiation,  6 months  after study  initiation,  and then yearly.  Dr. Chou  will receive  a study  charter  that empowers  
him to recommend  significant  study  changes,  including  study  termination.  All AEs will be immediately  
communicated  to Dr. Chou  for review.  
 
Definitions:  
An Adverse Event  is any undesirable experience occurring in a subject during a clinical trial, whether or not 
considered related to the investigational protocol. For reporting purposes, we will distinguish among pre -existing 
conditions and trial -emergent adverse events.  
Pre-Existing Conditions  (i.e., undesirable experiences, signs, or symptoms that begin prior to Study Procedures) 
will not be reported as adverse events unless they worsen in intensity or frequency after study entry (i.e., satisfy 
definition of Trial -Emergent, below).  
Trial-Emergent Adverse Events  are undesirable experiences, signs or symptoms that begin or worsen in intensity 
or frequency after the Screening Visit, and prior to administration of study drug at the Imaging Visit. These will 
be reported as adverse events.  
Serious Adverse Event : A serious adverse event is an adverse event that is fatal or life -threatening, or results in 
hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect. A life -threatening adverse event is an adverse event that, in the view of the investigators, 
places the subject at immediate risk of death from the reac tion, as it occurred.  
Unexpected Adverse Event : An unexpected adverse event is an experience not previously reported or an 
adverse event that occurs with specificity, severity or frequency that is not consistent with the investigator’s prior 
experience with the research methods.  
Relationship to Research Protocol:  The assessment of the relationship of an adverse event to the study protocol 
(none, remote, possible, and probable) is a clinical decision based on all available information at the time of 
resolution or stabilization. The following definitions of the rela tionship between the study procedures and the 
adverse event (including serious adverse events) will be considered:  
12 
 
Remote (unlikely, doubtful, improbable) : The time course of the study procedure(s) and the occurrence or 
worsening of the adverse event makes a causal relationship unlikely and another cause is probable.  
 
Possible : The time course of the study procedure(s) and the occurrence or worsening of the adverse event is 
consistent with a causal relationship, but another cause cannot be ruled out. OR The time course of the study 
procedure(s) and the occurrence or worsening o f the adverse event is not consistent with a causal relationship 
but no alternative cause can be identified.  If the Investigators are unable to assess causality, the adverse event 
will be considered “Possible” by definition and not “Remote.”  
Probable : The time course of the study procedure(s) and the occurrence or worsening of the adverse event is 
consistent with a causal relationship, and no other cause can be identified.  
Intensity/Severity of an Adverse Event:  In addition to assessing the relationship of the administration of the 
investigational product/procedure to adverse events, an assessment is required of the intensity (severity) of the 
event. The following classifications will be used:  
Mild: A mild adverse event is usually transient in nature and generally does not interfere with normal activities.  
Moderate : A moderate adverse event is sufficiently discomforting to interfere with normal activities.  
Severe : A severe adverse event is incapacitating and prevents normal activities. However, a severe event is not 
necessarily a serious event.  Nor must a serious event necessarily be severe.  
 
References  
1)         Postuma  RB, Berg  D, Stern  M, et al. MDS  clinical  diagnostic  criteria  for Parkinson's  disease.    
Mov Disord  2015;30:1591 -601. PMID:  26474316  
2) Albin  RL, Leventhal  DK. The missing,  the short,  and the long:  L-dopa  responses  and 
dopamine  actions.  Ann Neurol  2017;82:4 -19. PMID:  28543679  
3) Anderson  E, Nutt J. The long-duration  response  to levodopa:  phenomenology,  potential  
mechanisms  and clinical  implications.  Parkinsonism  Relat  Disord  2011;17:587 –592. PMID:  
21530536  
4) Nutt JG, Holford  NH. The response  to levodopa  in Parkinson's  disease:  imposing  pharmacological  
law and order.  Ann Neurol  1996;39:561 –573. PMID:  8619540  
5) Hauser  RA, Holford  NH. Quantitative  description  of loss of clinical  benefit  following  withdrawal  of 
levodopa -carbidopa  and bromocriptine  in early  Parkinson's  disease.  Mov Disord  2002;17:961 –
968. PMID:  12360545  
6) Holford  NH, Chan  PL, Nutt JG, et al. Disease  progression  and pharmacodynamics  in Parkinson  
disease —evidence  for functional  protection  with levodopa  and other  treatments.  J 
Pharmacokinet  Pharmacodyn2006;33:281 –311. PMID:  16625427  
7) Nutt JG, Carter  JH, Lea ES, Sexton  GJ. Evolution  of the response  to levodopa  during  the first 4 
years  of therapy.  Ann Neurol  2002;51:686 –693. PMID:  12112073  
8) Nutt JG, Woodward  WR, Carter  JH, Gancher  ST. Effect  of long-term therapy  on the 
pharmacodynamics  of levodopa.  Relation  to on-off phenomenon.  Arch Neurol  1992;49:1123 –1130.  
PMID:  1444877  
9) Nutt JG, Carter  JH. Apomorphine  can sustain  the long-duration  response  to L-DOPA  in 
fluctuating  PD. Neurology  2000;54:247 –250. PMID:  10636162  
10) Barbato  L, Stocchi  F, Monge  A, et al. The long-duration  action  of levodopa  may be due to 
a postsynaptic  effect.  Clin Neuropharmacol  1997;20:394 –401. PMID:  9331515  
11) Stocchi  F, Vacca  L, Berardelli  A, et al. Long -duration  effect  and the postsynaptic  compartment:  
study  using  a dopamine  agonist  with a short  half-life. Mov Disord  2001;16:301 –305. PMID:  
11295785  
12) Nutt JG, Nygaard  TG. Response  to levodopa  treatment  in dopa -responsive  dystonia.  Arch 
Neurol  2001;58:905 –910. PMID:  11405805  
13) Schultz  W. Neuronal  reward  and decision  signals:  from theories  to data.  Physiol  Rev 2015;95:853 –
951. PMID:  26109341  
14) Glimcher  PW. Understanding  dopamine  and reinforcement  learning:  the dopamine  reward  
prediction  error  hypothesis.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A 2011;108:15647 –15654.  PMID:  21389268  
15) Keiflin  R, Janak  PH. Dopamine  prediction  errors  in reward  learning  and addiction:  from theory  to 
neural  circuitry.  Neuron  2015;88:247 –263. PMID:  26494275  
13 
 
16) Schultz  W. Multiple  dopamine  functions  at different  time courses.  Ann Rev Neurosci  2007;30:259 –
288. PMID:  17600522  
17) Schultz  W. Reward  prediction  error.  Curr Biol 2017;27:R369 -R371.  PMID:  28535383  
18) Bohnen  NI, Albin  RL, Koeppe  RA, et al. Positron  emission  tomography  of monoaminergic  
vesicular  binding  in aging  and Parkinson  disease.  J Cereb  Blood  Flow  Metab  2006;26:1198 –
1212.  PMID:  16421508  
19) Garris  PA, Walker  QD, Wightman  RM. Dopamine  release  and uptake  rates  both decrease  in the 
partially  denervated  striatum  in proportion  to the loss of dopamine  terminals.  Brain  Res 
1997;753:225 – 234. PMID:  9125407  
20) Janezic  S, Threlfell  S, Dodson  PD, et al. Deficits  in dopaminergic  transmission  precede  neuron  loss 
and dysfunction  in a new Parkinson  model.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A 2013;110:E4016 –E4025.  
PMID:  24082145  
21) Salamone  JD, Correa  M, Farrar  AM, et al. Dopamine,  behavioral  economics,  and effort.  Front  
Behav  Neurosci  2009;3:13.  PMID:  19826615  
22) Salamone  JD, Correa  M. The mysterious  motivational  functions  of mesolimbic  dopamine.  
Neuron  2012;76:470 –485. PMID:  23141060  
23) Beeler  JA, Frazier  CR, Zhuang  X. Putting  desire  on a budget:  dopamine  and energy  
expenditure,  reconciling  reward  and resources.  Front  Integr  Neurosci  2012;6:49.  PMID:  
22833718  
24) Yttri EA, Dudman  JT. A Proposed  Circuit  Computation  in Basal  Ganglia:  History -Dependent  Gain.  
Mov Disord  2018;33:704 -716. PMID:  29575303  
25) Dudman  JT, Krakauer  JW. The basal  ganglia:  from motor  commands  to the control  of vigor.  Curr 
Opin  Neurobiol  2016;37:158 -166. PMID:  27012960  
26) Mazzoni  P, Hristova  A, Krakauer  JW. Why don't  we move  faster?  Parkinson's  disease,  
movement  vigor,  and implicit  motivation.  J Neurosci  2007;27:7105 –7116.  PMID:  17611263  
27) Baraduc  P, Thobois  S, Gan J, et al. A common  optimization  principle  for motor  execution  in 
healthy  subjects  and parkinsonian  patients.  J Neurosci  2013;33:665 –677. PMID:  23303945  
28) Chong  TT, Bonnelle  V, Manohar  S, et al. Dopamine  enhances  willingness  to exert  effort  for reward  
in Parkinson's  disease.  Cortex  2015;69:40 –46. PMID:  25967086  
29) Gepshtein  S, Li X, Snider  J, et al. Dopamine  function  and the efficiency  of human  movement.  J 
Cogn  Neurosci  2014;26:645 –665. PMID:  24144250  
30) Niv Y, Daw ND, Joel D, Dayan  P. Tonic  dopamine:  opportunity  costs  and the control  of 
response  vigor.  Psychopharmacology  (Berl)  2007;191:507 –520. PMID:  17031711  
31) Shadmehr  R, Huang  HJ, Ahmed  AA. A representation  of effort  in decision  making  and motor  
control.  Curr Biol 2016;26:1929 -34. PMID:  27374338  
32) Cagniard  B, Beeler  JA, Britt JP, et al. Dopamine  scales  performance  in the absence  of 
new learning.  Neuron  2006;51:541 –547. PMID:  16950153  
33) Beeler  JA, Daw N, Frazier  CR, Zhuang  X. Tonic  dopamine  modulates  exploitation  of 
reward  learning.  Front  Behav  Neurosci  2010;4:170.  PMID:  21120145  
34) Panigrahi  B, Martin  KA, Li Y, et al. Dopamine  is required  for the neural  representation  and control  
of movement  vigor.  Cell 2015;162:1418 –1430.  PMID:  26359992  
35) Petrou  M, Bohnen  NI, Müller  ML, Koeppe  RA, Albin  RL, Frey KA. Aβ-amyloid  deposition  in patients  
with Parkinson  disease  at risk for development  of dementia.  Neurology  2012;79:1161 -1167.  PMID:  
22933741  
36) Schmidt  L, d'Arc  BF, Lafargue  G, et al. Disconnecting  force  from money:  effects  of basal  
ganglia  damage  on incentive  motivation.  Brain  2008;131:1303 -1310.  PMID:  18344560  
37) Muranishi  M, Inokawa  H, Yamada  H, et al. Inactivation  of the putamen  selectively  impairs  
reward  history -based  action  selection.  Exp Brain  Res 2011;209:235 –246. PMID:  21298425  
38) Wang  AY, Miura  K, Uchida  N. The dorsomedial  striatum  encodes  net expected  return,  critical  
for energizing  performance  vigor.  Nat Neurosci  2013;16:639 –647. PMID:  23584742  
39) Hikosaka  O, Ghazizadeh  A, Griggs  W, Amita  H. Parallel  basal  ganglia  circuits  for decision  making.  
J Neural  Transm  (Vienna)  2017  Feb 2. doi: 10.1007/s00702 -017-1691 -1. PMID:  28155134  
40) Kim HF, Ghazizadeh  A, Hikosaka  O. Dopamine  Neurons  Encoding  Long -Term  Memory  of Object  
Value  for Habitual  Behavior.  Cell 2015;163:1165 -1175.  PMID:  26590420  
14 
 
41) Anderson  BA, Laurent  PA, Yantis  S. Value -driven  attentional  capture.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci 
USA 2011;108:10367 -10371.  PMID:  21646524  
42) Anderson  BA, Yantis  S. Vlaue -driven  attentional  and oculomotor  capture  during  goal-
directed,  unconstrained  viewing.  Atten  Percept  Psychophys  2012;74:1644 -1653.  PMID:  
22810561  
43) Theeuwes  J, Belopolsky  AV. Reward  grabs  the eye: Oculomotor  capture  by rewarding  stimuli.  Vis 
Res 2012;74:80 -85. PMID:  22902641  
44) Anderson  BA, Kuwabara  H, Wong  DF, et al. The Role of Dopamine  in Value -Based  
Attentional  Orienting.  Curr Biol 2016  ;26:550 -555. PMID:  26877079  
45) Anderson  BA, Yantis  S. Persistence  of value -driven  attentional  capture.  J Exp Psych  Hum  
Percept  Perform  2013;39:6 -9. PMID:  23181684  
46) da Silva  JA, Tecuapetla  F, Paixão  V, Costa  RM. Dopamine  neuron  activity  before  action  initiation  
gates  and invigorates  future  movements.  Nature  2018;554:244 -248. PMID:  29420469  
47) Thura  D, Cisek  P. The Basal  Ganglia  Do Not Select  Reach  Targets  but Control  the Urgency  
of Commitment.  Neuron  2017;95:1160 -1170.e5.  PMID:  28823728  
48) Gadagkar  V, Puzerey  PA, Chen  R, Baird -Daniel  E, Farhang  AR, Goldberg  JH. Dopamine  
neurons  encode  performance  error  in singing  birds.  Science  2016;354:1278 -1282.  PMID:  27940871  
 
 