Official  study  title: Preventing  Weight  Gain  Among  Those  Who  Decline  Behavioral  Weight  Loss 
Treatment  
 
 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Date : 10.04.2022  
University  of Florida  IRB-01 
1. Title:  Understanding  health  behaviors  and interest in  interventions  
2. Investigators:  
Principal  Investigator:  Megan  McVay 
Co-Investigator: Kathryn Ross  
3. Abstract:  
Obesity treatment guidelines recommend comprehensive behavioral weight loss 
treatments as the first line approach for adults  with either obesity or  overweight with a 
weight -related comorbidity. However, the vast majority of adults who are eligible for 
these weight loss treatments do not initiate them, even when offered at no cost. For 
individuals who decline weight loss treatment, obesity guidelines suggest a focus on 
weight gain prevention. Unfortunately, existing interventions to prevent weight gain 
have the same characteristics that cause many individuals to reject weight -loss 
treatments in the first place, such as didactic -focused meetings and pre scriptions for 
dietary and physical activity change. To prevent weight gain while overcoming these 
common barriers to engaging in weight management interventions, we propose an 
intervention that prescribes self -weighing but does not prescribe changes in di et or 
physical activity behaviors or require attendance at didactic -focused meetings. The 
potential of self -weighing to promote weight management is supported both by self - 
regulatory theory and empirical research. Promoting self -weighing may activate 
participants’ self -regulatory skills, leading to spontaneous decisions to reduce calorie 
intake or increase physical activity, thus preventing further weight gain. The proposed 
intervention will also provide individuals with text message -based feedback to  
prom ote continued self -weighing and to motivate engagement with evidence -based 
resources for weight management at a time when they may be more open to using 
these resources —e.g., after experiencing a small weight gain.  The current proposal 
will investigate the  feasibility and acceptability of this low burden self -weighing 
intervention in order to prepare for a fully -powered, pragmatic randomized controlled 
trial. We will enroll 40 patients with either obesity or overweight with a weight -related 
comorbidity and who have declined to participate in a comprehensive behavioral 
weight  management  program.  Participants  will be asked  to weigh  themselves  daily via 
a “smart” scale that transmits weight data directly to the study team via the cellular 
network. Every -other w eek, participants will be sent text messages providing brief 
feedback encouraging continued self -weighing. Moreover, if a small weight gain is 
observed, participants will be sent text messages aiming to engage them in 
commercial or community -based evidence -based weight management resources.  In 
a single -arm design, all enrolled participants will receive the intervention for 12  
months and will complete assessments at 3 and 12 months to assess feasibility and 
acceptability of the intervention and trial design,  while weight will be obtained from 
participants’ Electronic Health Records (EHR). We will evaluate our success in 
meeting pre -specified metrics for trial feasibility and intervention acceptability 
outcomes, including intervention enrollment, intervention satisfaction, and obtainment 
of weight data abstracted from participants’ EHRs. We will also evaluate the success 
of the intervention in promoting regular self -weighing and use of evidence -based 
weight management resources.  
4. Background:  
Obesity and overweight affect two out of three American adults, and increase the risk 
for numerous diseases and premature mortality.1 –3 These risks can be minimized by 
use of comprehensive behavioral weight -loss treatments,4 –6 which are the 
recommended fir st-line treatment for adults with obesity or overweight with a weight - 
related comorbidity.6 However, 80 –93% of affected adults reject these treatments,7 
even  when  offered  for at no cost.8 –10 Research  by our team  and others  indicates  that 
treatment is decl ined because individuals see no benefit in didactic treatment, dislike 
in-person and/or group meetings, and have numerous barriers to changing their diet 
and physical activity.11 –13 For individuals who decline weight -loss treatment, 
preventing weight gain is the recommended approach.6 Unfortunately, existing 
evidence -based interventions to prevent weight gain have the same characteristics 
that cause individuals to reject weight -loss treatments in the first place: many provide 
didactic group meetings and foc us on changes in diet and physical activity.14 –16 
Thus, an alternative approach is needed to prevent weight gain in individuals who 
decline  comprehensive  weight -loss treatments.  One such  approach  is to offer a lower - 
burden intervention. For example, an in tervention could prescribe self -weighing but 
not require changes in diet or physical activity or attendance at didactic meetings.  
The efficacy  of self-weighing  interventions  to prevent  weight  gain has been  supported 
both by self -regulatory theory and existing empirical research.17 –19 However, what 
has not yet been investigated is the effect of a low -burden self -weighing intervention 
on preventing  weight  gain in adults  with obesity  or overweight,  and particul arly among 
those who decline behavioral weight -loss treatments. Thus, the current application 
proposes  a pilot study  to investigate  the feasibility  and acceptability  of a self-weighing  
+ text messaging intervention. In the proposed intervention, participan ts will be asked 
to weigh themselves daily using a “smart” scale that transmits weight measurements 
directly  to the study  team  via a cellular  network.  In addition  to receiving  text messages 
every other week which provide feedback and encourage continued se lf-weighing, 
participants whose weight gain passes a specific threshold will receive an additional, 
tailored  text message.  This text message  will encourage  the use of low-cost evidence - 
based weight -management resources (e.g., online dietary trackers). Messages 
encouraging use of resources may be particularly impactful given that they will come 
at a time when participants may be more willing to consider using resources to 
manage  their weight (i.e., due to recent weight gain).20 Further, evidence supports  
the importance of responding quickly to small weight gains in order to prevent larger 
gains over time.21  Participants in this intervention who self -weigh infrequently will 
receiv e tailored  messages aiming  to engage them  in more  frequent  self-weighing  or in 
using weight management resources. This intervention approach has high potential  
for implementation within health care systems given its low complexity and potential 
for low cos t.22,23 Further, our preliminary data demonstrate that many adults who 
decline traditional weight -loss treatments are willing to enroll in this sort of low -burden 
intervention.  
A large clinical trial is needed to test the effectiveness of the proposed intervention. 
However,  prior to that, we need  data on feasibility  and acceptability  of the intervention 
and trial design, particularly given that individuals declining weight loss t reatments 
have rarely been studied.  
5. Specific  Aims:  
 
Aim 1: Identify  predictors  of willingness  to engage  in a weight  loss intervention  and a 
weight gain prevention intervention.  
Aim 2 : Determine the feasibility of the trial and acceptability of the intervention. We 
will examine  the following  feasibility/acceptability  outcomes:  intervention  enrollment, 
intervention satisfaction, and whether adequate weight data can be extracted from 
participants’ EHR.  
Aim 3: Evaluate  whether  the intervention  can promote  regular  self-weighing  and use 
of evidence -based weight -management resources.  
Overview: This study has two parts. Part 1 is a 15 –20-minute survey, which 
participants are paid $10 for completing. Some participants will be offered a second 
survey one month later, which also pays $10. Part 2 is a 12 -month intervention that 
involves participants being sent a smart scale, asked to weigh themselves daily, and 
being sent text messages every other week with feedback on their weight and 
suggestions for weight management. Part 2 also involves obtaining weight from EHR 
for 3 years after enrollment. Part 2 participants are paid $10 for each of two online 
assessments and $20 for a qualitative interview, for a total possibility of $40. Only a 
portion of participants who complete the first (survey) part of this study will be invited 
to the second  (interventio n) part. Participants  from Part 1 will be asked  if they agree  to 
allow us to obtain weight data from their EHR for a period of four years and will be 
given an option to complete REDCap e -consent for this.  
 
Participants,  recruitment,  and enrollment.  We will recruit  UF medical  patients 
aged  18–70 years  whose  EHR  records  indicate  either  obesity  (BMI  ≥30 kg/m2) or 
overweight (BMI ≥25 kg/m2) accompanied by a weight -related comorbidity.  
We aim to obtain  a sample  size of 40 participants  for part 2 of this study  (intervention). 
We will cease recruiting for part 1 (survey) when we reach that goal. Thus, we are  not 
able to know  our total sample  size for the entire  study in  advance,  though  we estimate 
that it will be 200.  
We will recruit via  two approaches:  
(1) Emails and letters sent to patients identified by an IDR query for patients who 
meet criteria related to weight/comorbidity and age, have BMI recorded in the past 
month, and who have consented to be contacted by researchers through 
consent2share.  IDR will provide  patients'  names,  emails  address  and mailing  address 
so we can send them the Consent2Share recruitment letter, as well as their race and 
gender so that we can over -recruit minority individuals to ensure representativeness.  
(2) Emails and letters to pati ents who have had an appointment in the prior month 
with a primary care provider (PCP) who has agreed to allow us to send emails to 
his/her  patients.  We will obtain  the list of patients  by conducting  an IDR pull to identify 
patients with appointments in th e prior month who meet weight/comorbidity and age 
criteria. IDR will provide patients' names, emails address and mailing address so we 
can send them the letter from their provider, as well as their race and gender so that 
we can over -recruit minority indiv iduals to ensure representativeness of our sample. 
We will send a signed letter from the PCPs from the study email address.  
Patient  identified  through  Consent2Share  or the IDR query who  have  email  addresses 
will be sent one email and up to one letter; pati ents who do not have email addresses 
will be sent one mailed letter. The email or letter sent to participants will inform them 
about the study and inviting them to complete a survey, with a link provided to a 
REDCap survey in the email/letter. Once on the REDCap site, all interested 
participants will read a consent document (see waiver to documentation of informed 
consent for Part I) and indicate consent by clicking a button, which will then lead to  
the eligibility portion of the survey.  
Eligibility  criteri a (Part  I) 
Inclusion  criteria  
 Weight  record  in EHR  from year prior to recruitment  email  with last BMI in EHR 
≥25.0  kg/m2. 
 Age 18-70. 
 Self-report of BMI 24.0 -29.9 kg/m2 with comorbidity ((hypertension, type 2 
diabetes,  pre-diabetes,  dyslipidemia,  sleep  apnea)  or self-report  BMI ≥ 30.0.  
 Self-report weight ≤ 375 lbs (the maximum weight that BodyTrace scales can 
accurately  detect  is 397 lbs, thus 375 lbs provides  a buffer  to allow  detection  of 
at least 20 lbs weight gain).  
 Self-reported  of sending  at least  one text message  per month  for past 6 
months.  
 Able to read and understand  English  without  help.  
Exclusion  criteria  
 Currently  enrolled  in comprehensive  behavioral  weight  loss treatment or 
lifestyle -focused research study.  
 Has engaged  in self-weighing  ≥ 5 times  per week  over prior month.  
 Pregnant,  breastfeeding,  or planning  to become  pregnant  in next 6 months.  
 Currently  undergoing  radiation  or chemotherapy  for cancer.  
 History  of Congestive  Heart  Failure  or heart  attack  in past 6 months.  
 History  of eating  disorder.  
 Planning  to move  out of the region  in the following  12 months.  
 Answer  incorrectly  on an attention  check/  validation  survey  item.  
 Report  unwillingness  to use  data plan for this study.  
 
Participants will be identified as eligible or ineligible for the intervention component 
(Part 2) based on responses of the survey study (Part 1, including one -month follow - 
up). The criteria  for eligibility  (in addition  to being  eligible  to complete  the survey)  are: 
 Respond  “No” to question  asking  if they would  like to enroll  in a comprehensive  
weight  loss program  in the next month.  AND 
 Respond  “yes”  to question  asking  about  interest  in a self-weighing  weight  gain 
prevention intervention.  
OR 
 On the one-month  follow -up Part 1 survey,  respond  that they have  not enrolled 
in a weight loss program in the prior month, and that they are interested in a 
self-weighing weight gain prevention program  
 
Procedures  
Participants who are eligible for the survey stud y (Part 1) will be directed to the main 
survey on REDCap. Survey instruments include: Center for Epidemiological Studies - 
Depression (CES -D), Yale Food Addiction Scale, Social Phobia Scale (SPS -6), 
Weight Bias Internalization -Modified (WBIS -M), Perceived T reatment Efficacy, 
Barriers to Help Seeking Scale (BHSS), Financial Stress Measure, Experience of 
Racism,  Stanford  Leisure -Time  Activity  Categorical  Item (L -CAT),  as well as individual 
questionnaire items regarding weight loss history, and effects of COVID -19 on health.  
Participants  who are eligible  for the intervention (Part  2) will be immediately  linked  to 
a brief introduction  to part 2  of this study  at the end of the survey  and asked  to share 
their contact information (phone number and email address) if they are interested.  
Research staff will call participants who are eligible and will review the consent form 
and answer any questions they have about the study and confirm their interest. The 
participants  will be presented  with the full informed  consent  document  and consent  to 
participate  via signature  provided  through  a REDCap  e-consent.  After  completing  this 
consent, they will be considered enrolled in the intervention.  
Participants  who indicate  interest  in the weight  loss program  will be informed  that they 
will be sent a second survey in one month. They will be asked if it is ok to use the 
email address they provide for human subject payment to send them this second 
survey.  This survey  will ask them  if they have  joined  a weight  loss program  in the past 
month,  perceived  barriers  to joining weight  loss programs,  and if they are interested  in 
the self -weighing program at that time. If they have not joined a weight loss program  
and are interested in the self -weighing program, they will be linked to a brief 
introduction  to part 2 (self -weighing  intervention)  of this study  at the end of the survey 
and asked to share their contact information. Procedures to consent and enroll them 
in part 2 will be as described above.  
After a participant consents to part 2, they will be sent a standalone questionnaire, 
called  the eating  disorder  examination  questionnaire  (EDE -Q). This will be sent to the 
participant’s email address via the REDCap pla tform.  
After Part 1 (first survey) all participants will be directed in REDCap to an  invitation to 
share their weight data from their EHR beginning one year prior to the study until 3 
years after the study (Part 2b). Interested participants will be present ed with an 
informed  consent  document  and consent  to participate  via signature  provided  through 
a REDCap e -consent.  
 
Intervention  
All intervention elements are delivered remotely. Participants who enroll in the 
intervention (Part 2) will be mailed a cellular -connected “smart” scale (BodyTrace, 
Inc). Participants will also receive a study handout with instructions on obtaining an 
accu rate weight  (e.g.,  weigh  themselves  daily,  first thing  in the morning,  after voiding), 
suggestions for remembering to self -weigh (e.g., placing the scale in a prominent 
location), and assistance in interpreting changes in weight (e.g., how to spot trends 
and noting that day -to-day weight fluctuations are normal). Participants will be 
informed in the consent process that BodyTrace is a third party and data stored there 
are not regulated by UF.  
Every  other  week,  text messages  will be sent to the participant’s  personal  cell phones. 
Messages will be delivered via REDCap/Twilio integration. Messages will differ based 
on weight change observed and the frequency of scale use over the preceding 2 -4 
weeks. A library of messages is provided with this submission.  
Participants who regularly self -weigh and are not gaining weight will receive 
messages encouraging them to continue weighing themselves. A message 
encouraging use of weight management resources will be sent to participants who 
gain ≥1.5%  of their baseline body weight  over a 2 or 4 week period,  or if a 3% weight 
gain from baseline is detected. In particular, the first message sent to those with 
weight  gain will ask if  they are  willing to receive suggestions for weight  management. 
Participants who respond “yes” will be asked to text back how much time per week 
are they able to spend managing their weight from the choices of <30 minutes or 30 
minutes –2 hours.  Participants  who select  <30 minutes will  be given  information  about 
a popular, freely available online tool for tracking dietary and physical activity  
(MyFitnessPal). Participants  who select  0.5-2 hours will be  asked a few additional 
questions  (e.g.,  preference  for in-person  vs remote  approaches;  barriers  to weight  
loss),  then they will be sent information  on selected  free/low -cost,  evidence -based 
community -based and commercial weight -loss options.  
If participants  weigh  themselves  ≤5 times  per week,  we will send  them  tips to increase 
self-weighing. If this is followed by a period of very infrequent self -weighing (one time 
per week or less), they will be sent a message suggesting that they may have gained 
weight and offering weight management resources.  
 
Assessments  and measure s. 
All assessments will be conducted remotely via REDCap. In addition to the Part 1 
survey, and the one -month follow -up Part 1 survey (for those who qualify), 
participants  who enroll  in the intervention will  complete  survey  assessments at  3 and 
12 months,  and a portion  of participants  will be invited  to a qualitative  interview  at 12 
months.  
Part 1 one-month  follow -up survey  
 Study -specific  questions  about  their interest  in weight  loss programs,  and their 
barriers to joining weight loss programs.  
Supplemental  Survey/  Part 1 
 Eating  Disorder  Examination  Questionnaire  EDE-Q. 
3- and 12-month surveys  
 Weight management behaviors. At 3- and 12 -month assessments, we will 
ask participants if they have engaged in 19 common strategies for weight 
management  since  prior assessment  using  items  from the National  Health  and 
Nutrition Examination  Survey (NHANES). These strategies include eating less 
food, eating more or less of certain foods, joining a weight -loss program, or 
using  weight -loss medications.  We will also ask: (a) for additional  details  about 
some of the strategies used (e.g., which weight -loss program) and (b) about 
the timing  of strategy  use. This will tell us whether  the messages  we sent were 
related  to strategy use. We will also  ask about  their use of  food intake tracking 
apps.  
 Weight  management  motivation  and readiness . The same  questions  from 
baseline/part I survey will be asked.  
 Intervention satisfaction . At 3 - and 12 -month surveys, participants will rate 
specific  components  of the intervention  on a seven -point  Likert  scale,  and will 
be asked to explain their responses. These components will include: (1) 
helpfulness of self -weighing instructions provided at study onset, (2) ease -of- 
use of the scale and reasons for any difficulties, (3) helpfulness of  message 
content, (4) frequency of text messages, (5) overall satisfaction with the 
program, including the things they did or did not like, (6) likelihood of  
recommending  the program  to others  and the reasons  why, (7) satisfaction  with 
text messages that offered weight -management resources.  
 EDEQ  
 CESD  
 WBIS -M 
 COVID -19 health  questions  
Self-weighing data from BodyTrace scale . Self -weighing frequency and weights 
from self-weighing  throughout  the 12 month  study  will be obtained  from Body Trace  via 
an API.  
Qualitative  interviews . At 12 months,  we will conduct  interviews  with 20 participants 
to better  understand  their experience  of the intervention. Interviews  will be conducted 
over HIPAA -compliant Zoom, with video if participants are willing and able, or 
otherwise with audio only. The interviews will cover the survey topics (e.g., message 
content) in greater depth. See interview guide in myIRB.  
Body  weight  from  EHR . We will extract  all clinical  body  weight  data from the EHR  of 
participants from a period beginning one year prior to the study until  3 years  after the 
study.  
 
Sample  size.  
The primary goal of this study is to evaluate feasibility and acceptability of the sel f- 
weighing intervention, and the sample size was determined based on standards for 
achieving  that goal.  We aim to obtain  a sample  size of 40 participants  for part 2 of this 
study (intervention). We will cease recruiting for part 1 (survey) when we reach that 
goal. Thus, we are not able to know our total sample size for the entire study, though 
we estimate that it will be 200.  
 
Data  analyses.  
We will conduct  logistic  regression  analyses  to examine  predictors  of willingness  to 
engage  in the weight  management  interventions,  among  the variables  measured  in 
the survey.  
For those  who enroll  in Part II, we will describe  quantitative  ratings  of intervention 
satisfaction (mean and standard deviation of satisfaction items) and will conduct 
qualitative content analyses of the qualitative questions about intervention 
satisfaction.  
To evaluate the potential for intervention effectiveness, we will calculate a sample 
mean and standard deviation for number of days per week that self -weighing occurs 
across the 12 month intervention and in each quarter of the intervention (to evaluate 
sustainability of self -weighing). We will evaluate participants’ willingness to learn 
about  weight  management  resources  offered  by the research  team,  initiation  of use of 
resources, and sustain use of resources among those participants offered resources. 
Finally, we will characterize weight change by reporting means, standard deviations, 
and the portion who gain ≥ 3% of baseline weight in order to inform planning for our 
subsequent trial.  
 
Data  Safety  Monitoring  Plan 
The safety of all study participants will b e monitored by the study PI, Dr. McVay. 
Adverse  event  reporting  will occur  in accordance  with UF IRB guidelines.  In particular, 
we will submit an adverse via myIRB within 5 days of discovery if it is serious and 
unexpected and related to the study; otherwise, any adverse events discovered will  
be reported at next continuing review or study closure on the cumulative adve rse 
event  table.  Unanticipated  problems  will be reported  at the time they are learned  of by 
study investigators. Given the minimal risk of this study, a safety officer or data safety 
monitoring board is considered unnecessary.  
6. Possible  Discomforts  and Risks:  
One area of risk of this study  is loss of privacy.  There  are two ways  that privacy  is at 
risk: (a) through data collected and stored by the study team at UF, and (b) by data 
collected and stored by BodyTrace.  
With regard to study team collected data, we cannot guarantee that data will not be 
unlawfully  obtained.  To minimize  risk of loss of confidentially,  all data obtained  directly 
by the study team will be held on a secure server accessed only by authorized st udy 
staff via password. Data will be obtained through REDCap. Written materials will be 
stored in a locked location within Yon Hall at UF. Prior to access to any study -related 
information, personnel will be required to sign statements agreeing to protect t he 
security and confidentiality of identifiable information. Whenever feasible, identifiers 
will be removed from study -related information. At the end of data collection, all 
identifying information will be removed from all data files.  
With regard  to BodyT race data,  any data the patients  share  with Bodytrace  (via self- 
weighing) is subject to the privacy terms of BodyTrace,. Patients will be informed 
during  the consent  process  that the data they share  with BodyTrace  is not  protected 
by the University.  Participants  will be notified  in the informed  consent  document  that 
their name and address will be provided to BodyTrace, Inc. for scale shipping 
purposes.  
 
Participants will be informed that use of resources suggested to them, such as 
MyFitnessPal  and Noom, are optional. Patients  will be informed  during  the consent 
process that the data they share with these companies is not protected by the 
University and is subject to the terms outlined in the privacy policy of these 
companies.  
Data obtained during video - or audio -recorded interviews may be used in future 
publications but will not be linked with names or identifying information. The audio file 
will be downloaded from Zoom, saved on a password protected computer in our 
University office, and transcribed fo r responses to the questions. No names will be 
included  on the typed  files. If any personal information comes up during the interview, 
the information will be redacted from the transcript. Quotes from the interview  may be 
used  in future  publications,  but will not be linked  with names  or identifying  information. 
All audio  recordings will be deleted from the  network drive where it will be stored, with 
assistance  from the IT department  once  they have  been  de-identified  and transcribed, 
no later than 12 months after they are recorded.  
Another area of risk for this study is the potential for patients to engage in unhealthy 
or risky health behaviors while pursuing weight loss. Because this study does not 
provide close supervision by trained professionals and patients may encounter 
suggest ions from the support  network  that are not consistent  with guidelines.  This risk 
is not dissimilar, and is likely lesser, from what individuals encounter when they  
attempt  weight  loss on their own,  which  over 50% of adults  with obesity  report 
attempting in a given year.  
Further,  it is generally  unsafe  for women  who are pregnant  to engage  in weight  loss 
efforts, and it is an exclusion criteria in our study. As such, participants will be 
withdrawn from the study if they become pregnant.  
Some participants  may find self-weighing  to be aversive.  However,  those  participants 
will have the chance to decline enrolling in the intervention or to withdrawal from the 
intervention. Although it is possible that regular self -weighing may be aversive to 
some individuals who enroll, past research clearly demonstrates that there is no 
increase  in eating  disorder  symptomatology  among  individuals  assigned  to daily self- 
weighing.  
7. Possible  Benefits:  
Participants  who complete  only the survey  are not expected  to experience  any direct 
benefits. Participants who engage in the intervention may  experience improvements 
in weight management.  
8. Conflict  of Interest:  
The investigators  have  no conflicts  of interest  to report.  
9. References  
Hales,  C. M., Carroll,  M. D., Fryar,  C. D. & Ogden,  C. L. Prevalence  of obesity  among 
adults and youth: United States, 2015 -2016. NCHS Data Brief 1–8 (2017).  
2. Overweight  & Obesity  Statistics  | NIDDK.  National  Institute  of Diabetes  and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases https: //www.niddk.nih.gov/health - 
information/health -statistics/overweight -obesity.  
3. Field,  A. E. et al. Impact  of overweight  on the risk of developing  common  chronic 
diseases during a 10 -year period. Arch. Intern. Med. 161, 1581 –1586 (2001).  
4. Look AHEAD Research Group & Wing, R. R. Long -term effects of a lifestyle 
intervention  on weight  and cardiovascular  risk factors  in individuals  with type 2 
diabetes  mellitus:  four-year results  of the Look  AHEAD  trial. Arch.  Intern.  Med. 
170, 1566 –1575 (2010).  
5. Diabetes  Prevention  Program  Research  Group et al. 10-year follow -up of 
diabetes incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program 
Outcomes Study. Lancet Lond. Engl. 374, 1677 –1686 (2009).  
6. Jensen, M. D. et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS Guideline for the Management of 
Overweight and Obesity in Adults: A Report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American  Heart  Association  Task  Force  on Practice  Guidelines  and 
The Obesity Society. J. Am. Coll. Cardio l. 63, 2985 –3023 (2014).  
7. Nicklas,  J. M., Huskey,  K. W., Davis,  R. B. & Wee,  C. C. Successful  weight  loss 
among obese u.s. adults. Am. J. Prev. Med. 42, 481 –485 (2012).  
8. Ackermann, R. T., Finch, E. A., Brizendine, E., Zhou, H. & Marrero, D. G. 
Translating  the diabetes  prevention  program  into the community.  The Deploy 
pilot study. Am. J. Prev. Med. 35, 357 –363 (2008).  
9. John,  L. K. et al. The effect  of cost sharing  on an employee  weight  loss program: 
a randomized trial. Am. J. Health Promot. 32, 170 –176 (2018).  
0. Maciejewski, M. L. et al. Geographic variation in obesity, behavioral treatment, 
and bariatric  surgery  for veterans. Obes.  Silver  Spring  Md 27, 161–165 (2019).  
1. McVay, M. A., Yancy, W. S., Bennett, G. G., Jung, S. -H. & Voils, C. I. Perceiv ed 
barriers  and facilitators  of initiation  of behavioral  weight  loss interventions  among 
adults with obesity: a qualitative study. BMC Public Health 18, 854 (2018).  
2. McVay,  M. A. et al. Patient  factors  associated  with initiation  of behavioral  weight 
loss treatment: a prospective observational study in an integrated care setting. 
Transl. Behav. Med. 7, 75–83 (2017).  
3. Morgan, P. J., Warren, J. M., Lubans, D. R., Collins, C. E. & Callister, R. 
Engaging  men in weight  loss: Experiences  of men who participated  in the male 
only SHED -IT pilot study. Obes. Res. Clin. Pract. 5, e239 –e248 (2011).  
4. Wing, R. R. et al. Innovative self -regulation strategies reduce weight gain in 
young  adults:  the study  of novel  approaches  to weight  gain prevention (SNAP) 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 176, 755 –762 (2016).  
5. Bennett, G. G. et al. Behavioral treatment for weight gain prevention among 
black  women  in primary  care practice:  A randomized  clinical  trial. JAMA  Intern. 
Med. 173, 1770 –1777 (2013).  
6. Lytle,  L. A. et al. Designing  a weight  gain prevention  trial for young  adults:  The 
CHOICES Study. Am. J. Health Educ. 45, 67–75 (2014).  
7. Carver,  C. S. & Scheier,  M. F. Control  theory:  A useful  conceptual  framework  for 
personality –social, clinical, and health psychology. Psychol. Bull. 92, 111 –135 
(1982).  
8. Gokee -Larose, J., Gorin, A. A. & Wing, R. R. Behavioral self -regulation for 
weight  loss in young  adults:  a randomized  controlled  trial. Int. J. Behav.  Nutr. 
Phys. A ct. 6, 10 (2009).  
9. VanWormer,  J. J. et al. Self-weighing  promotes  weight  loss for obese  adults.  Am. 
J. Prev.  Med.  36, 70–73 (2009).  
0. McVay,  M. A. et al. Obesity -related  health  status  changes  and weight -loss 
treatment utilization. Am. J. Prev. Med. 46, 465 –472 (2014).  
1. Phelan, S., Hill, J. O., Lang, W., Dibello, J. R. & Wing, R. R. Recovery from 
relapse  among  successful  weight  maintainers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.  78, 1079 –1084 
(2003).  
2. Rogers,  EM. Diffusion  of Innovation . (The Free Press,  2003).  
3. Damschroder,  L. J. et al. Fostering  implementation  of health  services  research 
findings  into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation 
science. Implement. Sci. 4, 50 (2009)  
 