1 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
  
 
 
 
CLINICAL USE OF A NEONATAL  MRI SYSTEM   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
January 9,  2020   
2 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
  
 
 
 
CLINICAL USE OF A NEONATAL  MRI SYSTEM  
Date of  initial IRB approval : February 11, 2018  
Version: January  9, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator : 
Beth Kline -Fath, MD  
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital  Medical Center  
 
 
 
 
 
Study Loc ation:  Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center  (CCHMC)   
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit  (NICU )  
  
3 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 ABSTRACT:  
There are significant safety and image quality issues associated with transferring 
neonates from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) to the main Radiology 
Department for imaging in  an adult -sized magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner . 
For these reas ons, the smallest and/or sickest neonates are typically precluded from 
receiving an MRI exam . The goal of our research effort is to bring high -performance 
MRI  into the NICU  so that all neonates  can benefit from the same quality of diagnostic 
imaging as adu lts. To accomplish this , we have converted a commercial small-bore 1.5 
Tesla (T) MRI scanner designed for orthopedic use into  a neon atal MRI system 
optimized for whole body i maging of neonates  (NICU MRI) . To expand the imaging 
capabilities of the NICU MRI system, t he measurement control electronics and operating 
system software  of the FDA cleared OPTIMA platform  have been augmented with state 
of the art HDX electronics  and software currently used on a conventional commercially 
available adult sized whole body MRI scanner. The clinical safety of  the integrated 
HDX/OPTIMA  NICU MRI system and its ability to produce diagnostic image quality has 
been shown in 15 pilot patients (CCHMC Prot ocol 2011 -2045).  Further we have scanned 
almost 600 patients under a prior protocol (CCHMC Protocol 2011 -2850) without an 
adverse event.  
The present  protocol seeks to allow continued  perform ance of  clinical MRI exams on the 
NICU magnet with improved admini strative processes and procedures . NICU patients for 
whom  an MRI exam is medically indicated  will be recruited for the present study . Images 
will be obtained using both the FDA cleared OPTIMA NICU MRI platform  and the 
integrated HDX/OPTIMA NICU MRI platfor m with the additional HDX images 
augmenting the OPTIMA images and contributing to diagnosis and guidance of 
subsequent clinical management . The specific MR imaging methods/procedures  utilized  
will be determined by the type of exam to  be performed and the  medical indication. All 
of the  MR images obtained will be reviewed by a board certified pediatric radiologist as 
part of clinical care and a clinical report will be generated  and included in the infant’s  
medical record . 
 
PURPOSE OF ST UDY:  
The purpose of the present study is to continue clinical scanning on the NICU MRI with 
improved administrative processes and procedures, thereby making medically indicated , 
state of the art/high end MRI  exams available to all infants treated at  CCHMC.  
 
BACKGROUND:  
Complications related to prematurity and congenital malformations are the most common 
cause of morbidity in infants, and now contribute almost equally to infant mortality [1-4]. 
4 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 The diagnosis and management  of many of these medical conditions commonly seen in 
the NICU could be improved by MR imaging.  While MR I has been widely available to 
the adult patient population since the early 1980s, its use for premature and term infants 
has been extremely limited.  Although some studies have shown the potential of MRI in  
these patients  [5-9], routine clinical use remains beyond reach due to the potentially life -
threatening risks associated with  moving a baby out of the NICU  for the exam . Although 
transporting neonates between departments is possible and has been successful in a few 
institutions  [5, 10 -16], the diagnostic image quality of neonatal MRI suffers considerably 
from the us e of imaging technology optimized for adult anatomy  [6-10, 17 -29]. 
In order to address the need for neon atal access to high -end diagnostic MRI 
instrumentation , engineers and scientists in the Imaging Research Center (IRC) at 
CCHMC have adapted a commercially available , FDA cleared , small (2 1.8 cm diameter 
bore, as compared to 60 -70 cm for a conventional scan ner) 1.5T MRI system , the GE 
OPTIMA 430 s, originally designed for adult orthopedic use . The operating manual and 
data sheets for this MRI system are  included as Appendix A. The OPTIMA measurement 
control electronics and operating system software have been augmented with  HDX/GE 
electronics and software (see Appendix B: HDX/GE platform operating manual and data 
sheets).  The HDX/GE platform is FDA cleared  and is used to operate much of the  GE 
MRI product line , including scanners used clinically at CCHMC . The original OPTIMA 
electronics will remain operational with the OPTIMA hardware with the option to readily 
switch between the two operating platforms (i.e. HDX/GE vs . OPTIMA).  This 
integration of the HDX/GE electronics and the OPTIMA hardware allows for a dvanced 
MR imaging more relevant to whole body and brain scanning.  
An extensive detailed description of the modifications that were made to the systems to 
accommodate whole body MR imaging of the neonate and a detailed description of the 
patient table developed to accommodate the smaller size of the magnet are documented in 
the “BACKG ROUND ” section of  CCHMC IRB Protocol 2011 -2045 (“Pilot Study: 
Safety of a Customized MRI System for Neonatal Imaging ”) (See Appendix C: Detailed 
description of 1) m odifications made to the  MR systems to accommodate whole body 
MRI of the neonate ; 2) patient  table developed to accommodate the smaller size of the 
magnet ). 
 
PREVIOUS WORK IN THIS AREA:  
Details of prior pre -clinical animal testing are documented in  the “PREVIOUS WORK 
IN THIS AREA ” section of CCHMC IRB  Protocol 2011 -2045  (“Pilot Study: Safety of a 
Customized MRI System for Neonatal Imaging”). (See Appendix D. Previous work done 
in this area on p rototype neonatal MRI system ). Further details about the NICU  MRI 
system's safety testing are documented in the Previous Work In T his Area section of 
protocol 2011 -2045.  The patient table, coils, specific absorption rate ( SAR ), acoustic 
noise, and peripheral nerve stimulation are all discussed. (See Appendix E: MR system 
safety testing data).  
5 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 CCHMC IRB Protocol 2011 -2045 was a pilot study including 15 neonates demonstrating 
safety and feasibility of the NICU MRI. Photographs from the scanning process and 
images from the first patients are attached in Appendix F. Permission to use the 
photographs was obtained from the parents of the ba by. 
Subsequently we have scanned nearly 600 patients on the NICU MRI without adverse 
event under CCHMC IRB Protocol 2011 -2850.  
 
STUDY METHODS:  
This is a study to use a customized MRI system installed in the CCHMC NICU  to 
perform medically indicated MRI exa ms in the neonatal population . 
Study population:  
Neonates admitted to CCHMC  for whom an MRI exam is medically indicated will be 
recruited into the study.  All neonates in the study will be viable, as defined in subpart B 
of the Code of Federal Regulations.  The infants will be medically stable to undergo the 
MRI procedure, as determined by the attending neonatologist.  
Study design:  
Infants who may meet study criteria will be identified by the attending neonatologist and 
study staff will be notifi ed of a potential candidate for the study.  As per usual clinical 
care, orders for the MRI will be placed in EPIC.   
Inclusion criteria:  
• Any infant admitted to CCHMC  
• Have a medical condition for which an MRI exam is indicated , as determined by 
the attending neonatologist  
Exclusion criteria:  
• Infants too large to fit in the customized NICU MRI system comfortably 
(generally  infants > 6 kg) 
• Standard MRI exclusion criteria as set forth by the CCHMC Division of 
Radiology  
Pre-scan : 
The attending  neonatologist  will d etermine whether the MRI scan is to be done with 
sedation or without sedation.  Whenever possible, infants will be scanned without 
sedation  utilizing a feed and bundle technique. Occasionally , at the discretion  of the 
6 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 neonatologist , sedation  will be necessary to obtain the imaging  required for clinical 
diagnosis . This mirrors the process utilized on the conventional magnets in the 
Department of Radiology.  The use of sedation and/or contrast is not part of the research.  
Prior to MRI scanning, the patient’s NICU care team will attempt to contact parent/LAR 
to communicate that a MRI has been ordered and provide information on the device, any 
potential risks and answer any questions the parent/LAR may have . 
Infants will  be prepared for the MRI exa m at the bedside by switching all monitoring 
devices over to MRI compatible monitors . Switching monitoring devices confers no 
additional risk to the patient.  Hearing protection  will be used for  acoustic noise reduction . 
Infants will then be moved to the MR I control room and transferred to the patient 
table/ transfer station  by the NICU nurse and/or physician . 
Standard MRI safety screening will be performed by the MRI technologist per 
Department of Radiology practice.  Screening will be documented according to standard 
Department of Radiology procedure . 
MRI scan:  
All studies will be performed with a nurse and/or physician in the control room.  The 
specific MR sequences used will be determined by the type of exam  to be performed  
based on the medical i ndication . Some  patients may get IV contrast and/or sedation if 
indicated by the  specific  MR exam protocol.  The scanner will be operated by a certified 
MR technologist . 
Sequences will be obtained using the OPTIMA electronics during each MRI exam in 
order to have images from a device  that is FDA cleared . Additional sequences will be 
obtained with the HDX/GE platform.  Images  from the HDX/GE platform  are expected to 
be of diagnostic quality equal to or better than those obtained from an adult -sized 1.5T  
MRI scanner . If the patient remains stable throughout the MRI exam, an additional 10 
minutes of scanning beyond the clinically indicated sequences may be obtained for 
ongoing sequence development and improvement efforts.  
All coils used will be FDA cleared . Those not cleared will be submitted to the IRB and 
approved before they are used.  
Monitoring of safety and tolerability:  
Adverse events will be monitored during the MRI scan by the MRI technologist and the 
nurse/physician in the control room . Only  adver se events that take place during MRI 
scanning will be re corded . Adverse events will be recorded  on an adverse event log form  
kept in the MRI control room . In the event of an adverse event, the study team  will be 
notified and a  full report of the specific event will be submitted to the IRB  promptly . 
Nurses will collect vital signs for clinical care purposes, but there will be no vital sign 
collection as part  of this protocol . 
7 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 Evaluation of MRI data:  
As is done for any  medically indicated clinical MRI exam , all images acquired will be 
interpreted  by a board certified pediatric radiologist or neuroradiologist  and a standard 
report will be generated.  This report will be included in  the neonate’s  medical record and 
made available to the clinical team.  The MRI data collected  using the OPTIMA/ HDX 
MRI platform  will be used in conjunction with the  images  obtained using the FDA 
cleared OPTIMA MRI platform and the results of other appropriate standard diagnostic 
tests to inform  diagnosis and/or subsequent medical management.  Deidentified images 
may be used in publications or in support of a 510K application to the FDA.   
Sample size:   
The goal of this study is to make MRI available to all neona tes admitted to CCHMC for 
whom an MRI exam is medically indicated.  Thus, the maximum number of patients 
recruited into the study per year will reflect the maximum number of patients  admitted 
into the NICU.  A review of the historical data  documenting the number of patients 
admit ted to the CCHMC NIC U over a  five year period (200 6 – 2010) indicated that on 
average,  714 (range 662 -759) patients were admitted each year over that period.   
 
DURATION:  
This protocol is considered a continued access protocol and will remain open indefinitely.  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS:  
By eliminating the need to transfer neonate s from the NICU to the main Radiology 
Department for an MRI exam , neonatal  patients will benefit by avoiding the medical risk 
associated with removal  from the NICU . Patients evaluated  on the NICU MRI will also 
benefit from reduced acoustic noise, lower RF power deposition and less chance of 
peripheral nerve stimulation during the MR exam as compared to th at associated with 
exams performed on the adult sized conventional MR scanner.  Patients  may also benefit 
from earlier and/or more comprehensive and accurate diagnosis and medical 
management.  
 
POTENTIAL RISKS, DISCOMFORTS, AND INCONVENIENCES:  
MRI exams are considered minimal risk for research purposes.  The customized NICU 
MRI scanner will have no increase in risk beyond conventional adult MRI scanners . 
Although chart review is not part of this protocol, there is a risk of loss of confidentiality 
8 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 of medical record information  related to maintenance of research records . In order to 
protect the privacy of medical information, the research records will be co ded and access 
to the records will be limited to research personnel. The MR report  will be included in  the 
clinical medical  record to supplement diagnosis and medical management. All other 
study specific data (e.g. parental permission , safety record) will be de -identified and kept 
in a locked cabinet.  No individual identifiers will be used in publications or reports 
resulting  from the study.  After the study is completed and the results are published, the 
records will be destroyed.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ANALYSIS:  
In the opinion of the investigator s, this study involves no increase over minimal risk  with 
potential immediate and direct benefit to the study subjects and potential benefit to future 
patients and the scientific community.  We believe  that making MRI more re adily 
available to this population will benefit their subsequent medical management.  In 
addition, infants  in the study may, in fact , have less risk than they would during an MRI 
scan obtained on a conventional clinical MRI system as part of usual clinical care, due to 
the decreased risk of acoustic noise injury and the elimination of the risk associated with 
transporting the infant out of the NICU to the Radiology department.  
 
SECURITY/CONFIDE NTIALITY:  
All subjects enrolled in this study will be identified in research records by a unique study 
number only.  The MR report will be included in the clinical  medical record to 
supplement diagnosis and medical management.  All other study specific data will be de -
identified.  Protected health information will be entered into a  secure  database.  A single 
copy of a list linking medical record number to study number will be kept locked and 
available only to study investigators.  All records will be kept in a l ocked cabinet at 
CCHMC and maintained by the study investigator.  All computerized records will be 
password protected.  
 
REIMBURSEMENT/PAYMENT FOR STUDIES : 
The parents /LARs  of the  study patient  and/or their medical insurance company will be 
responsible for the financial charges/costs associated with each of the MRI exam s he/she 
receives using the OPTIMA NICU MRI platform while enrolled in the study  as these are 
examinations being performed for cl inical indications . These costs will be identical to 
those incurred by patients who receive MRI exams on the adult sized conventional MRI 
scanners in the main Radiology Department. The costs associated with additional 
imaging  performed using the OPTIMA/ HDX  NICU M RI platform will be assumed by  
9 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 the Department of Radiology.  There will be no compensation or payment to the study 
participant.  
RECRUITMENT : 
Patients will be identified based on clinical need . After potential study subjects are 
identified, the NICU  fellow or attending assigned to the patient (the fellow  and attending 
are also part of the study team)  will discuss the study with the parents/ LARs.   
Informational flyers or materials directed at healthcare providers and/or the general 
public may be create d. All marketing materials will be approved by the IRB prior to 
circulation.  
CONSENT : 
We are requesting a Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent in accordance with 
45 CFR 46.117 and 21CFR56.109 for  this study. According to these regulations, the IRB 
may waive the requirements for investigators to obtain signed consent if one of two 
requirements are met. Our research study meet s the second criteri on that “the research 
presents no more than minimal ri sk of harm to subjects and involves no procedures for 
which written consent is normally required outside of the research context (45 CFR 
46,117) ”. 
MR imaging is of no more than minimal risk for patients  and is performed daily for 
clinical care of children in the CCHMC system. Other than potential administration of 
intravenous contrast (utilized only when clinically indicated), there is no instrumentation 
of, or intervention on, the patient as part of the MRI exam . Accordingly, specific 
procedural  consent is not signed by LARs for the  perform ance of  MRI on conventional 
scanners (or administration of intravenous contrast) as part of normal clinical care.  
In regards to 45 CFR 164.501, 164.508, 164.512(i), a ll protected health information 
generated as part of th is study will remain  confidential in accordance with CCHMC best 
practices. PHI, including but not limited to, date of birth, name, medical history, must be 
used to safely and adequately perform and document an MR exam . PHI related to  this 
clinical MR study  will not be disclosed to any other person or entity  for additional 
research  without a specific study IRB . All images and patient data are maintained 
securely in CCHMC’s protected clinical PACS and in EPIC, both of which have 
electronic access controls . Specifically, CCHMC personnel must request access to these 
systems from their manager and CCHMC Information Services . Granted access is 
dependent on their institutionally assigned job description and credentials. Clinical PACS 
and EPIC are highly secure syst ems, hosted and supervised by CCHMC network security  
and are HIPAA compliant.  
Patient i dentifiers will be available to the patients’ c are team  as part of  their clinical 
duties . It is not possible for the study team to withhold  the MR  images  generated as part 
of this study from  the patient’s  clinical staff  because they  rely on them for diagnostic 
10 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 purposes  and withholding these images would deny these patients potential clinical 
benefit . At no point will we  destroy patient identifiers as they a re the patient’s clinical 
identifiers . 
In many  cases the parent/ LAR is not on site when the physician orders an MRI  and NICU 
staff have to reach them by phone . Transferring NICU patients to the main Radiology 
Department has specific risks related to diffic ulties with mobile monitoring, inadequate 
environmental controls (for a population susceptible to heat loss) and exposure to a 
general hospital population. All parents/LARs of prospective patients will have the NICU 
MRI study explained to them by their cli nical care team who order the MR scan - the 
nature of the scan, financial costs, and possible adverse reactions , none of which differ 
from conventional MRI scanners . It will be made  clear that participation in the study is 
voluntary . 
NICU fellows  or attendi ngs, who are part of the study staff, will use the study 
information sheet provided and the verbal script below to communicate and obtain 
consent from parents/LARs.  
The fellow  or attending  taking care of patient will call the parents/LARs and introduces 
him/her self. The fellow  or attending  then verifies that they are speaking with the correct 
parent/LAR using information. The physician will tell the parent/LAR that their child is 
scheduled to have an MRI of their brain/spine/abdomen/etc. and explain why th e MRI is 
needed. Next, they tell them that they are calling the get their permission to use our NICU 
MRI. The script that follows will be used after the above introduction:  
“An MRI machine uses a computer and a big magnet to take pictures.  The magnet in o ur 
NICU scanner is much smaller than the magnets used in the MRI machines downstairs in 
the Radiology department. We are one of the only NICU's in the country that have MRI 
capability within the NICU as opposed to the hospital -wide radiology suite. Our MRI  
machine uses a smaller magnet than a typical MRI machine. Individually the MRI 
magnet and imaging software are FDA approved, but together as one unit they are not, 
therefore, I need your permission to use our NICU MRI for your child’s study. We use 
the sa me process for obtaining the study and are able to get the same quality images using 
this machine as we would if your child were to have their MRI done in radiology, but 
with the added benefit of not having to travel off the unit. There are no additional r isks by 
using the NICU MRI and in general we find it safer and more seamless to obtain the 
images when not having to travel off the floor. The same Radiologists read these images 
and we are able to bill your baby’s insurance. There are no additional costs beyond the 
costs of an MRI in the big scanner downstairs. We will collect basic information about 
your child and the type of scan that was performed as part of quality control for the study. 
There are no known risks to the MRI scan itself and the MRI does not involve radiation. 
If you do not wish to have your baby’s MRI performed in the NICU, we will schedule 
your baby to move downstairs for the MRI - sometimes it takes a little longer to schedule 
that. Do you have any questions for me at this time?  ...Do you consent to having your 
baby’s scan being done in our custom - built NICU MRI?”  
11 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 A participant information sheet will be provided to parents/LARs. This information sheet 
serves as a study summary.  
Non-English speaking participants will be consented us ing a n interpreter. The interpreter 
will read the verbal script above to the family. The NICU fellow  or attending consenting 
the parent/LAR will be present to answer any questions and to confirm the family 
understands the research . A witness (any available  NICU staff)  will be present to confirm 
the process has been completed. The fellow or attending will document consent has been 
obtained and that all questions have been answered, in addition to, the interpreter’s name , 
ID, and credentials and the witness’ name and credentials in the EPIC process note . This 
note will also be saved into the patient’s research record .  
 
This instance is rare. Under CCHMC IRB 2011 -2850 we obtained consent from two non -
English speaking parents/LARs on average per year. This is in comparison to the 110 
English speaking parents/LARs  on average per year .  
 
DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING PLAN : 
As the study involves no increase over minimal risk, no Data Safety Monitoring Board 
will be created for this study.  The study PI will communicate  regularly with the study 
coordinator and will review documentation and any AEs that have occurred.  
All unanticipated problems and adverse event will be submitted to the IRB per 
institutional policy.  
CONCURRENT RESEARCH PROTOCOLS:  
Subjects will be allowed to participate in other research protocol(s) concurrently . 
APPENDICES:  
APPENDIX A: OPTIMA 430s data sheets and operating manual.  
APPENDIX  B: HDX/GE data sheets and o perating manual.  
APPENDIX C: Detailed description of 1) modifications made to the M R systems to 
accommodate whole body MRI of  the neonate; 2) patient table developed to 
accommodate the smaller size of the magnet.  
APPENDIX D: Previous work done in this area on the prototype neonatal MRI system . 
APPENDIX E. MR System Safety Testing Data  
APPENDIX F: Neonatal MRI images from the pilot study   
12 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 REFERENCES:  
1. McCormick, M.C. and R.E. Behrman, The quiet epidemic of premature birth: 
commentary on a recent Institute of Medicine report.  Ambul Pediatr, 2007. 7(1): 
p. 8-9. 
2. Berns, S.D., et al., Results of the premature birth national need -gap study.  J 
Perinatol, 2007. 27 Suppl 2 : p. S38 -44. 
3. BE, H., M. JA, and V. SJ. Births: preliminary data for 2007 . October 15, 2010]; 
Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr57/nvsr57_12.pdf . 
4. Beck, S., et al., The worldwide incidence of preterm birth: a systematic review of 
maternal mortality and morbidity.  Bull World He alth Organ, 2010. 88(1): p. 31 -8. 
5. Arthur, R., Magnetic resonance imaging in preterm infants.  Pediatr Radiol, 2006. 
36(7): p. 593 -607. 
6. Hirsch, W., et al., MRI of the lungs in children.  Eur J Radiol, 2008. 68(2): p. 278 -
88. 
7. Adams, E.W., et al., Investigation of lung disease in preterm infants using 
magnetic resonance imaging.  Biol Neonate, 2000. 77 Suppl 1 : p. 17 -20. 
8. Krishnamurthy, R., Neonatal cardiac imaging.  Pediatr Radiol, 2010. 40(4): p. 
518-27. 
9. Schweigmann, G., I. Gassner, and K. Maurer, Imaging the neonatal heart --
essentials for the radiologist.  Eur J Radiol, 2006. 60(2): p. 159 -70. 
10. Barkovich, A.J., MR imaging of the neonatal brain.  Neuroimaging Clin N Am, 
2006. 16(1): p. 117 -35, viii -ix. 
11. van Wezel -Meijler, G., et al., Magnetic re sonance imaging of the brain in 
newborn infants: practical aspects.  Early Hum Dev, 2009. 85(2): p. 85 -92. 
12. Saunders, D.E., et al., Magnetic resonance imaging protocols for paediatric 
neuroradiology.  Pediatr Radiol, 2007. 37(8): p. 789 -97. 
13. Mathur, A. M., et al., Transport, monitoring, and successful brain MR imaging in 
unsedated neonates.  Pediatr Radiol, 2008. 38(3): p. 260 -4. 
14. Dumoulin, C., R. KW, and P. JE, Magnetic resonance imaging compatible 
incubator.  Concepts in Magnetic Resonance Part B: Magnetic Resonance 
Engineering, 2002. 15: p. 117 -128. 
13 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 15. Blüml, S., et al., MR imaging of newborns by using an MR -compatible incubator 
with integrated radiofrequency coils: initial experience.  Radiology, 2004. 231(2): 
p. 594 -601. 
16. Erberich, S.G., et al., Functional MRI in neonates using neonatal head coil and 
MR compatible incubator.  Neuroimage, 2003. 20(2): p. 683 -92. 
17. Foran, A.M., et al., Three -tesla cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for preterm 
infants.  Pediatrics, 2007. 120(1): p. 78 -83. 
18. Groves, A.M., et al., Functional cardiac MRI in preterm and term newborns.  
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed, 2011. 96(2): p. F86 -91. 
19. Michael, R., Potential of MR -imaging in the paediatric abdomen.  Eur J Radiol, 
2008. 68(2): p. 235 -44. 
20. Rao, P., Neonatal gastrointestinal imaging.  Eur J Radiol, 2006. 60(2): p. 171 -86. 
21. Riccabona, M., Imaging of the neonatal genito -urinary tract.  Eur J Radiol, 2006. 
60(2): p. 187 -98. 
22. Darge, K., D. Jaramillo,  and M.J. Siegel, Whole -body MRI in children: current 
status and future applications.  Eur J Radiol, 2008. 68(2): p. 289 -98. 
23. Olsen, O.E., Practical body MRI -A paediatric perspective.  Eur J Radiol, 2008. 
68(2): p. 299 -308. 
24. Seghier, M.L. and P.S. Hüpp i, The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging 
in the study of brain development, injury, and recovery in the newborn.  Semin 
Perinatol, 2010. 34(1): p. 79 -86. 
25. Simbrunner, J. and M. Riccabona, Imaging of the neonatal CNS.  Eur J Radiol, 
2006. 60(2): p. 133 -51. 
26. Rutherford, M., et al., Magnetic resonance imaging in perinatal brain injury: 
clinical presentation, lesions and outcome.  Pediatr Radiol, 2006. 36(7): p. 582 -92. 
27. Bartha, A.I., et al., The normal neonatal brain: MR imaging, diffusion te nsor 
imaging, and 3D MR spectroscopy in healthy term neonates.  AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol, 2007. 28(6): p. 1015 -21. 
28. Glass, H.C., et al., Magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound injury in preterm 
infants with seizures.  J Child Neurol, 2009. 24(9): p. 1105 -11. 
29. Prager, A. and S. Roychowdhury, Magnetic resonance imaging of the neonatal 
brain.  Indian J Pediatr, 2007. 74(2): p. 173 -84. 
14 
Version : 09/Jan/2020 
 30. Roelants -van Rijn, A.M., et al., Parenchymal brain injury in the preterm infant: 
comparison of cranial ultrasound, MRI and neurodevelopmental outcome.  
Neuropediatrics, 2001. 32(2): p. 80 -9. 
31. de Vries, L.S., M.J. Benders, and F. Groenendaal, Imaging the premature brain: 
ultrasound or MRI?  Neuroradiology, 2013.  
32. Maalouf, E.F., et al ., Comparison of findings on cranial ultrasound and magnetic 
resonance imaging in preterm infants.  Pediatrics, 2001. 107(4): p. 719 -27. 
33. Epelman, M., et al., Neonatal encephalopathy: a prospective comparison of head 
US and MRI.  Pediatr Radiol, 2010. 40(10): p. 1640 -50. 
 
 