APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  1 of 20
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2017-1)
Protocol Title:  Follicular revival in androgenic alopecia: evaluating use of micro-needling
Principal Investigator: Brett  King,  MD, PhD
Version Date: 3 May 2021
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #: Click or tap here to enter text.
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  2 of 20SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
To evaluate  the efficacy  microneedling through a professional tattoo machine in hair regrowth  in patients 
with androgenic alopecia over  up to 6 treatments (6 months).
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
Subject participation will be 8 months, the protocol will be kept open  for 24 months for patient enrollment,  
the entire study length including data analysis and publication  will be 32 months
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
Androgenic alopecia is the miniaturization of scalp  terminal hairs into vellus hairs in an androgenic-dependent  
pattern. Often with a genetic component, it results in in aesthetic hair thinning and scalp hair loss. Patients  
with androgenic alopecia often have  significant changes in quality of life and self-esteem.1
Current treatments include topical  Minoxidil and oral finasteride. Topical  minoxidil is limited in efficacy due to 
pharmacokinetics. Less than 5% of drug reaches hair follicles with topical formulations.2 Topical often 
demonstrate statistically significant hair growth  but only have cosmetically satisfactory results for a limited 
number of patients.3 Oral Minoxidil has 20 times  higher concentration in the blood stream compared  to 
topical but 90% of the drug is inactivated in the liver.2 Similarly oral minoxidil is effective  for frontal areas but 
less effective  at the scalp vertex and is associated  with systemic side effects.4 Oral minoxidil is not currently 
FDA approved  for hair loss. 
Microneedling is an emerging  treatment for multiple  conditions  in dermatology.5 Microneedling involves  
mechanically rolling a wheel  of fine needles over the skin to puncture the epidermis  to induce inflammation 
and trigger neovascularization.5 Because  of pulling of long hair by rolling the roller, this technique was 
modified by stamping the roller or using a device that has an engine  that stamps needles in a perpendicular  
way, in a similar  way to a tattoo machine. Recent work  has demonstrated use of micro needling to stimulate 
regrowth in androgenic alopecia.6,7,8, 9,10  We propose using microneedling via the SOL Nova Device to 
stimulate hair regrowth. This device has previously been used by dermatologists in Brazil  that perform  this 
procedure and was recommended for use by a colleague who has previously  had success  performing this 
procedure with the SOL Nova device
4.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
We propose an open label trial of tattoo machine microneedling in ten patients with androgenic alopecia. Ten 
healthy patients older than 18 years will undergo 6 microneedling sessions. Over the course of six months, 
subjects will undergo up to six treatment sessions (one session every 30 day). Photographs will be taken at 
each session. Patients  will be evaluated  at 8 visits over 8 months with the first visit for screening purposes. 
Each visit will last about an hour. Approximately 30 minutes will be spent on consenting and time  for patient 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  3 of 20to ask questions during  the first visit.  The remaining  30 minutes will be allotted for the investigator  to 
determine if the patient  meets criteria  for trial enrollment. During the remaining visits, 20 minutes will be 
allotted for photography, 15-20 minutes for the procedure and 10-15 minutes for post-procedure patient 
assessment. Remaining  10 minutes on visits 2 and 8 will be used for biopsy.  
Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3 Visit 4 Visit 5 Visit 6 Visit 7 Visit 8
Screening 
Visit
Consent SignedFirst Treatment
Photographs taken
Biopsy (optional)Second Treatment
Photographs taken Third Treatment
Photographs taken  Fourth
Treatment
Photographs taken  Fifth treatment
Photographs taken  Final 
Treatment
Photographs taken  Follow up 
visit
Photographs taken
Biopsy (optional)
Procedure: 
The procedure will occur in an outpatient dermatology office either at YCCI or Yale Dermatology in Middlebury 
(YDM). The patient will be positioned in a conformable seated position.  The entire scalp  will be cleansed  using an 
alcohol swab.  A nerve  block will be offered, using up to 3 ml of 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine. The IRB 
understands that a block will be used to numb the entire scalp at each visit, prior to microneedling. The 
surgeon will use a professional tattoo machine, SOL Nova (Cheyenne, MT.DERM, Berlin, Germany), attached  to 
Cheyenne needle cartridge 27 magnum-bugpin-Soft  Edges (MT.DERM, Berlin, Germany) to perform 
microneedling to the scalp, setting the needle exposure to approximately 1mm and the repetition rate in the 
tattoo machine power source to 120-150 Hz. Sterile water or sterile saline  will be used  to lubricate the skin during  
the procedure. 
Post procedure aftercare:
Patients will be provided with  verbal and written  aftercare recommendations. Patients  will be advised to wear a 
hat, avoid sun protection  and continue their normal  hair care routine. Additionally, expected side effects (skin 
flaking a few days post procedure  (will be discussed. Concerning side effects will be listed with a number to call if 
patient is concerned. 
Biopsy
One biopsy  will be taken on visits two and eight (two  biopsies total). The biopsy on visit eight will be taken prior  to 
the tattooing procedure.  The area for biopsy will be cleaned with an alcohol  swab.  The area will be anesthetized 
using up to 0.5 ml of lidocaine HCL 1% and epinephrine 1:100,000  injection.  A 4 mm punch biopsy will be 
obtained. The biopsy site will be closed using a 4-0 monocryl absorbable suture.  Biopsy  specimens will be fixed  in 
formalin for routine  histology  (H&E)  and immunohistochemistry. Both biopsies will be optional.
Primary and Secondary Outcome Measures:
The primary  outcome will be change in SALT score over  6 months. Hair growth  will be accessed by a board-
certified dermatologist.  Secondary outcomes  will include Hamilton-Norwood classification.   We will also measure  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  4 of 20change in hair shaft  diameters, number  of follicular units with one or more  hair follicles, number of yellow  dots, 
white dots, presence of perifollicular halo, total hair count,  hair density,  percentage of anagen hairs,  catagen  
hairs, ratio of vellus hairs and terminal  hairs over an area  of 1 cm2.
Photographs will be taken prior to each  session.  Subjects will be consented at the time  of screening and informed 
of the risks  and benefits  of the participation. Subjects  will be informed that participation is voluntary, and 
withdrawal can occur  at any time. 
Early Termination:  
The IRB understands  that early stopping  rules (e.g.,  3 months with no response) may not be applicable as 
subjects may be delayed in showing  a response of hair growth, which can take up to 6 months. 
5.Genetic Testing   N/A ☒
A.Describe
i.the types of future  research to be conducted using  the materials, specifying if immortalization  of 
cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing,  genome  wide  association studies, or animal 
studies are planned Write here
ii.the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under  which  material will be received 
Write here
iii.the types of information about the donor/individual contributors  that will be entered into a 
database Write here
iv.the methods  to uphold confidentiality Write here
B.What are the conditions  or procedures  for sharing of materials  and/or distributing for future research 
projects? Write here
C.Is widespread sharing of materials planned? Write here
D.When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  Write here
E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials  at any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers that connect 
them to their materials?  Write  here
i.How will requests to withdraw materials be handled  (e.g., material no longer identified: that is, 
anonymized) or material destroyed)? Write here
F.Describe the provisions for protection of participant  privacy Write here
G.Describe the methods  for the security of storage  and sharing of materials  Write  here
6.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
A total of 10 patients, over the age of 18. All male patients will have androgenic alopecia and a Hamilton-
Norwood IIIa, III, III vertex, IV, IVa, V, or Va with at least low density  hairs present in alopecic areas or female  
with any degree of hairloss.  
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in 
the research project. Will subjects  who may require additional  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a justification  
for their  involvement.
☐Children ☒ Healthy ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  5 of 20☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐Pregnant women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
Inclusion criteria:  
Healthy 
18 years of age or older
Symmetric hair loss from AGA
Hamilton-Norwood IIIa, III, III vertex, IV, Iva, V with  low density hair coverage  over majority of alopecic 
areas or female with any degree  of hair loss
No or minimal scalp hair regrowth on oral and/or topical minoxidil
Exclusion criteria-  
Any patient with hair loss for other reasons 
Unilateral or asymmetric hair loss
Hamilton-Norwood I, II, IIa, Va, IV, VII x in male patients
Patients without hair 
Pregnant patients
Patients containing the following who would make poor candidates for microneedling:
oSkin conditions
oDiabetes
oHistory of keloid formation
oAnything additional existing comorbidities that in the opinion of the investigator may cause  
unnecessary risk for the patient to participate
9.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  
Eligibility will be determined  by Dr. Brett King the PI. 
10.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
Risk associated with tattooing procedure:
Discomfort during tattooing process
Scalp irritation 
Redness immediately afterwards (usually decreases within an hour)
Sensitivity to sunlight
Skin infection 
Scarring 
Hyperpigmentation of skin 
Skin flaking a day after the procedure
Minimal (pinpoint) bleeding
Given the limited depth of the needles,  large bleeding  or hematoma formation is unlikely
Unknown risks to unborn fetus in pregnant patients
Risks associated with privacy  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  6 of 20Breach of confidentiality 
11.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
Patients will be instructed on the risks associated  with treatment  (as listed above)  and instructed to notify the 
PI immediately  if experiencing any side effects. Blood pressure will be measured  fifteen  minutes post 
procedure. Subjects  who experience severe side effects  such as hypotension will be instructed  on how to 
obtain appropriate medical  care (i.e. outpatient  follow up or emergency care) and will be discontinued  from  
the study.  
Risks of confidentiality breach will be minimized by using a password protected excel  spread sheet  on a 
password protected encrypted Yale laptop  to which only  the principal investigator and subinvestigators will 
have access to. Patient information will be deidentified during and after the trial to protect patient  
information. Deidentified data will remain  stored on the password protected encrypted Yale laptop  and then  
destroyed after  the study  has been concluded and the results have been published. 
12.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
a.What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study? 
Greater than minimal risk 
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? N/A
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal
Greater Than Minimal  Risk  DSMP
1. Personnel responsible for the  safety review and its frequency:
The principal investigator will  be responsible  for monitoring  the data, assuring protocol  compliance,  and 
conducting the  safety reviews  at the specified frequency, which must be conducted at a minimum of 
every 6  months (including when reapproval of the protocol is sought).  During the review process, the 
principal investigator (monitor) will evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged,  require 
modification/amendment, or close to enrollment. Either the principal investigator, the IRB or the Yale Cancer Center Data and  Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) have the authority  to stop or suspend 
the study or  require modifications.
2. The  risks associated  with  the current  study  are deemed greater than minimal for the following 
reasons: 
We do not view the risks associated with the use of scalp microneedling using a tattoo device as  minimal 
risks. Although we  have assessed the proposed  study  as one of greater than minimal risk, the potential 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  7 of 20exists for anticipated  and/or unanticipated adverse  events, serious or otherwise, to  occur since  it is not  
possible to predict with certainty the absolute risk in any given individual or in  advance  of first-hand  
experience with the proposed study methods. Therefore,  we provide a plan for monitoring the data and  
safety of  the proposed study as follows:
3. Attribution of Adverse  Events:
Adverse events will be monitored  for each subject participating in the study and attributed to the study 
procedures / design by the principal  investigator,  Brett King, according to the following categories:
a.) Definite: Adverse event is clearly related  to investigational procedure/agent.
b.) Probable: Adverse event is  likely  related to investigational procedures/agent.
c.) Possible:  Adverse event may be  related to investigational procedures/agent.
d.) Unlikely:  Adverse event is likely not to be  related to the investigational procedures/agent.
e.) Unrelated:  Adverse event is clearly not related to investigational procedures/agent.
4. Plan  for Grading Adverse  Events:
The following scale will be used in grading  the severity of adverse events noted during the study:
1.Mild  adverse event
2.Moderate adverse  event
3.Severe 
5. Plan  for Determining Seriousness of  Adverse  Events:
Serious Adverse  Events:
In addition  to grading  the adverse event,  the PI will determine whether the adverse event  meets the 
criteria for a Serious Adverse Event (SAE).  An adverse event is considered serious if it results  in any  of 
the following  outcomes:
1.Death;
2.A life-threatening experience in-patient hospitalization or  prolongation of existing  
hospitalization; 
3.A persistent  or significant disability or incapacity; 
4.A congenital  anomaly or birth defect;  OR
5.Any other adverse  event that, based  upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the 
subject’s health and may require  medical  or surgical intervention  to prevent one of the other 
outcomes listed  in this  definition.  
An adverse event may be  graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event.  
Similarly, an adverse  event may be  graded  as moderate but  still meet the criteria for an SAE.  It is 
important for the PI  to consider the grade of the  event as well as its “seriousness” when determining 
whether reporting to the  IRB is necessary.
6. Plan  for reporting  UPIRSOs (including  Adverse  Events) to the IRB
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  8 of 20The principal investigator will  report the following types of events to  the IRB: 
Any incident, experience or outcome  that meets  ALL 3 of the  following criteria:
1.Is unexpected (in terms of nature, specificity,  severity, or  frequency) given (a) the research 
procedures described  in the  protocol-related documents, such as the IRB-approved  protocol  
and informed consent  document and (b) the characteristics of the subject population being 
studied; AND 
2.Is related  or possibly related  to participation in the research (possibly related means there is a 
reasonable possibility that  the incident,  experience, or outcome may have been caused  by the 
procedures involved  in the research); AND
3.Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm (including physical, psychological, economic, legal,  or social  harm) than was  previously known  or 
recognized.
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks  to Subjects or Others (UPIRSOs) may be medical or non-
medical in nature, and  include – but are not limited to – serious, unexpected, and related  adverse 
events and unanticipated adverse device  effects.  Please note  that adverse events are  reportable to  the 
IRB as UPIRSOs only if they meet all 3 criteria  listed above.
These UPIRSOs/SAEs will be reported  to the IRB in accordance with  IRB Policy 710, using the 
appropriate forms found  on the website.  All related  events involving  risk but  not meeting the prompt 
reporting requirements described in IRB Policy 710 should be reported to  the IRB in summary form at 
the time of continuing review.  If appropriate, such summary may be a simple  brief statement  that events  
have occurred at  the expected frequency  and level of severity as previously documented.  In lieu of a  
summary of external  events, a current  DSMB  report can be submitted for research studies that  are 
subject to oversight by a DSMB (or  other monitoring entity that  is monitoring the study on behalf of an 
industry sponsor).
7. Plan  for reporting  adverse events to co-investigators  on the study, as  appropriate the protocol’s 
research monitor(s), e.g., industrial sponsor, Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC), Protocol Review Committee (PRC), DSMBs, study sponsors,  funding and 
regulatory agencies, and regulatory and  decision-making bodies.
For the current  study,  the following individuals, funding, and/or  regulatory agencies will be  notified 
(choose those that apply):
X All Co-Investigators listed on the protocol.
□ Yale Cancer Center Data and Safety  Monitoring Committee (DSMC)
□ National Institutes of  Health
□ Food  and Drug  Administration (Physician-Sponsored IND #_______)
□ Medical  Research Foundation (Grant______)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  9 of 20□ Study  Sponsor
□ Other Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB)  or Committee (DSMC)
The principal investigator, Brett  King, will conduct a review of all adverse  events  upon completion of 
every study subject. The principal investigator  will evaluate the frequency  and severity of the adverse 
events and determine if modifications  to the protocol or consent form  are required.
Please note:  For any  study that may be considered  high risk, the IRB will be  more  focused  on the  safety 
requirements for the study  and a DSMB will likely be required. 
For more  guidance  on Adverse Event reporting and DSMPs, see IRB Policy 710 Reporting 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others,  including  Adverse Events
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:
i.How will adverse events and unanticipated  problems involving  risks to subjects  or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed? N/A
ii.What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  N/A
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? N/A
13.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
Statistics will be descriptive only.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  10 of 20SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
1.Name of the radiotracer: King
2.Is the radiotracer FDA approved?     ☐YES ☐NO
If NO, an FDA issued IND is required for the investigational  use unless RDRC assumes  oversight.  
3. Check  one:    ☐IND#  Write here  or  ☐RDRC oversight (RDRC approval will be required  prior to use)
4.    Background Information: Provide a description of previous human use, known risks,  and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this radiotracer  is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Write here
4.    Source:   Identify the source  of the radiotracer  to be used. Write here
5.    Storage,  Preparation  and Use:  Describe the method  of storage, preparation, stability information, method of 
sterilization and method of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 Write  here
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☒N/A
1.If an exemption from IND filing requirements is sought for a clinical investigation of a drug product that is 
lawfully marketed in the United States, review  the following categories  and complete the category  that 
applies (and delete  the inapplicable categories) :
Exempt Category 1: The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed  in the United States  
can be exempt from  IND regulations if all of the following  are yes: 
1.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report  to the FDA as a well-controlled study in support  
of a new indication  for use or to be used to support any other  significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug.☐
2.The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed  as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the investigation is NOT  to support  a significant change  in the advertising for the 
product.☐
3.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration  or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor  that significantly increases the risks (or decreases  the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product☐
4.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC) ☐
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  11 of 20review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50 and 
21 CFR Part 56).
5.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for investigational drugs.☐
 Exempt Category 2 (all items i, ii, and iii must  be checked  to grant  a category 2 exemption)
☐i. The clinical investigation is for an in vitro diagnostic  biological product that involves  one or
more of the following (check all that apply):
☐ Blood  grouping serum
☐ Reagent red blood cells 
☐ Anti-human globulin
☐ii. The diagnostic  test is intended to be used  in a diagnostic  procedure that confirms  the
diagnosis made by another,  medically established,  diagnostic product or procedure; and
☐iii.  The diagnostic  test is shipped in compliance with 21 CFR §312.160.
 Exempt Category 3
☐ The drug is intended solely for tests in vitro  or in laboratory research animals if shipped  in accordance with 
21 CFR 312.60
 Exempt Category 4 
☐ A clinical  investigation  involving use of a placebo if the investigation does not otherwise  require submission  
of an IND. 
2. Background Information: Provide  a description of previous  human use, known risks, and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this drug is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
2.Source:  Identify the source of the drug  or biologic  to be used.
a) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects? ☐YES  ☐NO 
If yes, by whom? 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  12 of 204.Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, and for 
parenteral products, method  of sterilization and method  of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service  utilized:
    ☐  YNHH IDS                                                        ☐  CMHC Pharmacy                                           ☐ West  Haven VA
    ☐  PET Center                                                      ☐    None       
    ☐   Other:
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service  at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail  how the PI 
will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.   
5.Use of Placebo:  ☒Not applicable to this research project
If use of a placebo  is planned, provide a justification  which addresses  the following:
a)Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies. If there  are no other available therapies, state 
this.
b)State the maximum total  length  of time a participant  may receive placebo while on the study.  
c)Address the greatest potential harm that may come  to a participant as a result  of receiving placebo. 
d)Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo. 
6.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure   ☒Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has ended?
☐ Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under  which continued access to study  drug(s)  may  apply as well as 
conditions for termination of such access.  Write here
☒ NO   If no, explain  why this is acceptable. Not commercially available in this form at this time. 
 B.  DEVICES  ☐N/A
1. Are there any investigational devices used  or investigational procedures performed at Yale-New Haven 
Hospital (YNHH) (e.g.,  in the YNHH  Operating  Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular  Center)?   ☒Yes   ☐No    
 If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements :
A YNHH New  Product/Trial Request Form must be completed via EPIC:  Pull down  the Tools tab in the EPIC Banner,  
Click on Lawson,  Click  on “Add new”  under  the New Technology Request Summary and fill out the forms 
requested including  the “Initial Request  Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary”, and attach any other pertinent  
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;    AND
Your request  must be reviewed  and approved in writing by the appropriate YNHH  committee before 
patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive  the investigational device or investigational procedure.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  13 of 202.Background Information: Provide  a description of previous human use, known risks, and any other factors  
that might influence risks.  If this is the first time this device is being used  in humans,  include relevant  data on 
animal models. 
The SOL Nova tattoo machine will be used for drug  delivery microneedling using needle cartridge 27-
magnum-bugpin-soft edges (27-MG-BP-SE). The cartridge 27-magnum-bugpin-soft edges (27-MG-BP-SE)  
are single use disposable needles which include a guard that prevents going to deep in the skin, which 
minimizes the risk of bleeding or infection.  This equipment  is commonly  used commercially for human 
tattoos worldwide.  Needle  cartridges will be run at 120-150  Hz. This device has previously  been  used by 
dermatologists in Brazil  that perform this procedure and was recommended for use by a colleague who has 
previously had success  performing this procedure  with the SOL Nova device.
3.Source: 
a) Identify the source of the device to be used. Cheyenne professional tattoo equipment, Berlin Germany  
b) Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? ☒Yes   ☐No     The procedure,  not the device, is 
offered free to the subjects.  
4.Investigational device accountability:  State how the PI, or named designee, ensures that an investigational 
device is used only in accordance with the research protocol approved by the HIC, and maintains control of 
the investigational device  as follows:
a)Maintains appropriate records,  including  receipt of shipment, inventory at the site, dispensation  or use 
by each participant, and final disposition  and/or  the return of the investigational device (or other 
disposal if applicable): Shipments of needle cartridges (27-magnum-bugpin-Soft Edges) will be 
documented by the principal investigator  and/or sub-investigators. Inventory of needles will be kept at 
YCCI. A single needle cartridge will be used for each patient at each treatment session. Serial numbers 
and expiration dates will be documented  with  the patient’s  unique identifier. Disposal of cartridges will 
be in sharps containers.
b)Documents pertinent information  assigned to the investigational device (e.g., date, quantity, batch or 
serial number, expiration  date if applicable, and unique code number): New needle cartridges (27-
magnum-bugpin-Soft Edges) will be used  for each  patient. Needles are sterile and single use. Surgeons 
will document serial number  and expiration  date  for each needle cartridge on procedure note in the 
case of malfunction or error. Needles  past expiration  date will not be used for the procedure and will be 
discarded. 
c)Stores the investigational device according to the manufacturer's recommendations with  respect to 
temperature, humidity,  lighting, and other environmental considerations: The Sol Nova  tattoo machine 
will be stored at the YCCI clinic in the manufacturer provided  case  at room  temperature  in a key locked 
cabinet. There are no manufacture specific requirements for lighting or humidity  control with regards to 
this device. 
d)Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements: The Sol Nova  tattoo machine  will be stored in a locked  cabinet at YCCI. Only 
the surgeon and principle investigator  will have access  to the machine. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  14 of 20e)Distributes  the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol: Only Dr. King  
and Dr. Peterson  will access  to the Sol Nova  tattoo machine for subjects  enrolled in the trial during their  
designated treatment  visits per protocol. 
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  
a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 10
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: N/A
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☐Flyers ☐ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☒ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical record review* ☒ Departmental/Center research  boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☐ Web-based  clinical trial registries ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☐ YCCI Recruitment database ☐ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook): 
☒ Other: Dr. King’s Clinic
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.Describe how potential subjects  will be identified.
 Dr. King sees numerous  patients with hair loss and so patients will be recruited  directly  from his clinic.
b.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. Patients will be informed  about  the trial in clinic  during  their 
appointment.
c.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted.  Patients will be informed  of trial enrollment in clinic during 
their appointment and by phone  by their physician.
d.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? Dr. King 
4.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☒Yes, all subjects
☐Yes, some of the subjects
☐No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. Dr. King is the dermatologist for all potential  study subjects.
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☐ For entire study 
☐ For recruitment/screening purposes  only
☐ For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there  is no translated  HIPAA 
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  15 of 20i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: Write  here
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data:  Write here
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
6.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
Patients will be recruited  by Dr. Brett King in his outpatient clinical setting. He will explain to patients  the 
treatment procedure, benefits, risks, and the study details  as documented in the consent form.  
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
Individuals will be assessed for comprehension and capacity with the following  questions:
(1)Explain to me in your  own  words what  will happen once you start the study
(2)Is there an option to stop the study if you decide to?
(3)How would withdraw  from  the study if you didn’t  want to keep going?
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
None will be included  in this study 
As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☐
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  16 of 20If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☒Not Requesting any consent waivers 
☐Requesting  a waiver of signed consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  (Note that an information  sheet may  be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent,  address the following:
Would  the signed consent form be the only  record  linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal  risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk? YES ☐    NO☐ 
Does the research include any activities  that would require  signed consent in a non-research  context? YES ☐   
NO ☐
 ☐ Requesting a waiver  of consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  
 
For a full waiver of consent,  please  address all of the following:
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.  
☐ No
Will the waiver  adversely affect  subjects’  rights  and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why  would the research be impracticable to conduct  without the waiver? Write here
Where  appropriate,  how will pertinent information  be returned to, or shared  with subjects at a later  date?  
Write  here
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  17 of 201.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected  and used  for the research?   Name,  age, diagnosis of androgenic alopecia, duration of disease, 
other comorbidities,  course of disease, social  history, family history, other failed therapies, current 
medications, baseline  Hamilton-Norwood score,  change in score, reported patient side effects,  photographs. 
Key to this identifier with patient  name and identifier will be maintained in a separate password  protected file 
that will be destroyed immediately after the conclusion of the trial according  to ITS guidelines.  
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded and stored? Data will be stored in a password  protected excel  
spreadsheet on an encrypted Yale Laptop. 
3.How will the digital  data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard  Drive   ☐Secured Server  
☒Laptop Computer  ☐Desktop Computer   ☐Other
4.What methods and procedures will be used  to safeguard the confidentiality and security of the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated  above  during and after  the subject’s participation in the study? All 
study information will be contained on Yale encrypted  laptop. Information will be deindentified during and after 
the conclusion of the trial. Only principal investigator and sub investigators  will have access to the data. 
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
5.What will be done with the data  when the research  is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when  identifiers  will be destroyed. If no, describe how  the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured. 
Within 6 months of the trial conclusion, all patient identifiers will be destroyed by the principal investigator Dr. 
Brett King according to ITS guidelines. Any remaining data will be completely  deidentified. After the publication 
of the results  (anticipated within 24 months  of the trial)  all data will be destroyed according to ITS guidelines. 
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obtained? N/A
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
Patients who  are otherwise poorly responsive  to therapies for hair growth  may grow hair.
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
Alternatives to trial therapy:
Topical Minoxidil
Oral Finasteride 
Hair transplant
No therapy 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  18 of 202.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
There is no monetary  compensation for participation in this trial. 
3.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
The tattooing procedure and evaluation of hair growth  by clinicians  will be provided to the patient  free of 
charge.  
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Yes
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? Staff at YNHH
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  No
d.Who will pay for this treatment? Patient’s insurance  company or the patient  
e.How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? Patients will be referred to outpatient 
clinics or urgent  care  unless the issue is serious and urgent, then  they  will be referred  to the 
emergency room. 
IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  19 of 20Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☒  No ☐ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☒  No 
☐
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☒
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No  ☒
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
References: 
1. Han S-H, Byun J-W, Lee W-S,  et al. Quality of Life Assessment  in Male Patients with Androgenetic 
Alopecia: Result of a Prospective,  Multicenter  Study. Ann Dermatol. 2012;24(3):311. 
doi:10.5021/ad.2012.24.3.311
2. McEvoy GK (ed. ). American Hospital Formulary Service-  Drug Information. 2002:3485.
3. Gupta AK, Charrette A. Topical minoxidil: Systematic review and meta-analysis  of its efficacy in 
androgenetic alopecia. Skinmed. 2015;13(3):185-189.
4. Lueangarun S, Panchaprateep  R, Tempark  T, Noppakun N. Efficacy and safety of oral minoxidil  5 
mg daily  during 24-week treatment in male androgenetic alopecia.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2015;72(5 (Suppl 1)):AB113. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2015.02.466
5. Hou A, Cohen B, Haimovic A, Elbuluk N. Microneedling: A Comprehensive Review. Dermatol  Surg. 
2017;43(3):321-339. doi:10.1097/DSS.0000000000000924
6. Fertig RM, Gamret  AC, Cervantes J, Tosti A. Microneedling for the treatment  of hair loss? J Eur 
Acad Dermatology Venereol.  2018;32(4):564-569. doi:10.1111/jdv.14722
7. Wambier C. Dermatologic treatments  with microinfusion of drugs into the skin with tattoo 
equipment: Teaser series. J Am Acad Dermatol . 2018;79(3 (Suppl  1)):AB103. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2018.05.441
8. Contin  LA. Male androgenetic alopecia treated with microneedling alone or associated  with 
injectable minoxidil by microinfusion of drugs into the skin. Surg  Cosmet Dermatology. 
2016;8(2):158-161. doi:10.5935/scd1984-8773.201682782
9. Dhurat  R, Sukesh M, Avhad  G, Dandale A, Pal A, Pund P. A randomized  evaluator blinded study  of 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021Page  20 of 20effect of microneedling in androgenetic alopecia: A pilot  study. Int J Trichology. 2013;5(1):6. 
doi:10.4103/0974-7753.114700
10. Gajjar  P, Mehta  H, Barvaliya M, Sonagra B. Comparative study between  mesotherapy and topical 
5% minoxidil by dermoscopic evaluation for androgenic  alopecia in male: A randomized 
controlled trial. Int J Trichology . 2019;11(2):58. doi:10.4103/ijt.ijt_89_18
11. Food and Drugs Administration. Drugs@FDA: FDA Approved Drug Products.  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=reportsSearch.process&rptName=2&reportSelectMonth=8&reportSelectYear=1988&nav. Accessed September  11, 2019.
12. Olsen EA, Whiting D, Bergfeld W, et al. A multicenter,  randomized, placebo-controlled, double-
blind clinical  trial of a novel formulation  of 5% minoxidil topical foam versus placebo in the 
treatment of androgenetic alopecia in men.  J Am Acad  Dermatol.  2007;57(5):767-774. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2007.04.012
13. Jimenez-Cauhe J, Saceda-Corralo D, Rodrigues-Barata R, et al. Effectiveness and safety of low-
dose oral minoxidil in male  androgenetic alopecia. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;81(2):648-649. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2019.04.054
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/5/2021