CONFIDENTIAL AND PRIVATE INFORMATION OF EnteraSense Ltd
Protocol Number: CIP -019-03 Rev. 4.0 CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN (CIP)  
Protocol Number: CIP-0 19-03 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 Clinical Study to evaluate effectiveness and safety of the PillSense System in 
detecting blood in the stomach for the evaluation of upper gastrointestinal 
bleeding (UGIB) 
Brief Title: DETECT-1 Study 
Version: 4. 0 
February 03, 2022

CSR-019-0 3 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 Page 22 of 309  7 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
7.1 Study Design  
The DE TECT-1 study was a prospective, single- center, single- arm comparative clinical 
investigation designed to evaluate safety and effectiveness of the PillSense System when used 
for the detection of blood in  subjects suspected to have an Upper Gastrointestinal B leed (UGIB). 
PillSense System performance for blood detection was compared with EGD performed within 4 
hours of the PillSense System reading. The investigators performing the EGD were blinded to the 
results provided by the PillSense system.   
 Subjects were  monitored for Capsule passage during hospitalization. An X -ray was taken before  
discharge if PillSense Capsule passage was not confirmed. As required, subjects were provided 
with a Capsule Retrieval Kit and were instructed to monitor their stools. A follow -up visit was 
performed within 7 days of Capsule administration. If Capsule passage was confirmed (either via return of the Capsule or photographic evidence of passage) the subject was exited from the study. 
Otherwise, the subject was required to return f or another visit between Day 8 and Day 21. During 
this visit, if Capsule passage was not confirmed, an X -ray was to be performed before the subject 
was exited from the study. During hospitalization and at each in- person visit and telephone follow -
up, occur rence of adverse events was assessed by verbally asking subjects if they have had any 
problems or symptoms since their last assessment . Upon discharge, the Subject was reminded 
to contact site staff immediately in the case of any discomfort and/or abdominal pain.  
 
The complete final (Rev. 04) clinical protocol can be found in Appendix  16.1. 
7.2 Discussion of Study Design, Including the Choice of Reference Group 
The DETE CT-1 study was designed as a prospective single -arm cohort study  with the aim of 
evaluating safety and effectiveness of the PillSense System by comparing the sensitivity and 
specificity (and accuracy) of the PillSense System for detecting blood to the widely accepted 
reference standard; EGD. The Sensitivity and Specificity  endpoints  were compared with 
prespecified performance goals of 75% and 60% respectively .  
 The performance goals (PG) were developed based on a literature review of capsule endoscopy  
(CE) as the CE device represents the best comparator for the PillSense System as both the 
PillSense and CE are capsule technologies  used for the detection of blood in the upper 
gastrointestinal tract. In a meta -analysis  performed by Shah and colleagues [12], sensitivity 
among 5 studies evaluating CE for diagnosing UGIB ranged from 62% to 100% with a pooled 
sensitivity of 78% (lower 95% CI of 58%). Within this same meta- analysis, t he specificity was 
documented to range from 64% to 100% with a pooled specificity of 74.8% (lower 95% CI of 68%).  
Of the two endpoints/performance goals, sensitivity was seen as the more important characteristic and therefore the PG was set higher for sensitivity than it was for specificity and on par with values 
observed for CE. Although the specificity for the PG in the PillSense protocol is slightly lower than 
the lower range documented in the literature for CE,  the lower value is justified on the following 
basis:  
• The PillSense reading is immediate,  providing a “reading at the moment”; therefore , it is 
very possible that when the EGD wa s performed hours after the PillSense reading, that 
CSR-019-03 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
Page 23 of 309bleeding may no longer be present, which may present as a “false positive” for the 
PillSense device.  
•Since the PillSense detects the presence of fluids that are indicative of bleeding, ther e
m
ay be remnants of blood in the stomach even if there is no active bleeding, providing a
f
alse positive response.
•The risks associated with a false positive is minimal in that once the confirmation EGD is
performed the patient’s treatment pathway would be reaffirmed within hours of th e
P
illSense procedure.
The appr
opriateness of the study design and suitability of the PG values were reviewed with and 
accepted by  FDA via review of a pre -submission Q210522.  
7.3 Study Objectives  
The study objectives  are the following:  
•to demonstrate the PillSense  System can  detect  blood  in the stomach in
clinically relevant scenarios and heterogeneous  environment of the upper GI
tract.
•to assess the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV),  and
negat
ive predictive value (NPV) of the PillSense System in a clinical
environment.
•to show that the PillSense Capsule will pass through the GI tract withoutincident in a timely manner.
7.
4 Selection Of Study Population  
7.4.1  Inclusion Criteria  
Subject s who met all  the following criteria were eligible for participation in the study:  
1. A
ge ≥ 18 years
2.Ability to provide informed consent
3.Clinical suspicion of UGIB  based on initial physical evaluation and intake history e.g., prior
episodes of UGIB , presence of comorbid illnesses or medications associated with UGIB ,
l
aboratory data and symptom assessment, and subject is a candidate for endoscopy
7.4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
Subject s who met any of the following criteria were excluded from participation in the study: 
1.Based on the investigator’s assessment there is a clear need for urgent endoscopy or
surgery at the time of consent
2.Known GI tract stricture
3.History of Zenker’s diverticulum and fistulas
4.Using a pacemaker or other implantable electrical device
5.Dysphagia or difficulties in swallowing pills the size of the capsule
6.History of achalasia or known esophageal dysmotility
CSR-019-03 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
Page 24 of 3097.History of gastroparesis
8.History of severe constipation (1 bowel movement per week or less)
9.Currently taking medications intended for stimulation of GI motility
10. Subject s that have had Upper GI barium study within the previous 24 hours
11.Currently pregnant or breastfeeding, or intend to become pregnant during the investigation
12.Presence of psychological issues preventing participati on
13.The pr
esence  of a known gastric bezoar
14.History of Crohn’s diseas e
15.H
istory of small or large bowel obstruction
16.Suspected or previously diagnosed obstructing gastrointestinal tumor
17.Currently participating in another clinical trial that in the opinion of the investigator w ould
interfere with the outcomes of this study or increase risk to the subject.
18.Planned MRI investigation (MRI needed before the capsule is excreted)
19.Presence of known hiatal hernia 5 cm or greater
20.Presence of known gastrointestinal abnormalities that could impact capsule performanc e
21.P
resence of other concurrent conditions or known history that in the opinion of the
Investigator would compromise subject  safety or study objectives
7.4.3  Withdrawal Of Subject s from Therapy or Assessment  
In accordance with the 21 CFR Part 50, each subject had the right to withdraw his/her consent to 
participate in the trial at any time, for any reason, and without prejudice to his future medical care 
by the physician or at the investigational site.  
The 
investigator also had the right to withdraw patients from the study for any legitimate reason, 
such as patient non- compliance with study procedures.  
I
f a subject  decided to withdraw from the study, or if a subject  was withdrawn from the treatment 
or study, the date of and the reason for discontinuation was  recorded on the electronic case report 
form (eCRF). All efforts were made to complete the end of treatment (EOT) evaluations at a time agreed by the patient and investigator, and observations/assessments were recorded as thoroughly as possible.  
A
ll patients were to be followed until it was determined that the capsule had passed via 
photographic evidence provided by the subject or with a confirmatory x -ray performed within 21 
days (about 3 weeks)  to confirm capsule passage, as necessary . Reasons for not evaluating a 
subject  through the follow -up period included:  
1. Subjec t Lost to Follow -Up: Unable to locate the subject  despite documented attempts to
notify the subjects  via three telephone calls and one registered letter .
2.Subject Withdrawal: The subject  requested to terminate his/her involvement in the study.
To the extent possible, an exit interview was conducted with each subject  to determine if
the capsule had passed and to assess the subject ’s specific reason(s) for study
withdrawal.
CSR-019-03 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 Page 25 of 309  Full documentation was made of any withdrawals that occurred during the study. The Investigator documented the date of the withdrawal and results of any assessments made at this time   
7.5 Study Procedures  
7.5.1  Subject  Informed Consent  
All subject s provided written informed consent before  participat ion in the study.  The informed 
consent form detailing the investigational nature of the device and the procedures involved in the 
study including aims, methodology, potential risks, and anticipated benefits. The consent process was documented in the subject’s medical chart prior to the performance of any research related assessments.  
7.5.2  Screening Assessment  
The following procedure s or documentation was to be obtained as part of screening. 
• Review and signing of th e informed consent  
• Identification number assignment 
• Review of inclusion and exclusion criteria 
• Obtaining a medical history and demographic data 
• Record medication history and concomitant medication (limited to medications that affect 
the gastrointestinal tract or coagulation status, such as proton pump inhibitors, 
antiplatelets or anticoagulants)  
• Urine or blood -based pregnancy test ( for women of childbearing potential)   
7.5.3  Pre–recording procedures 
The following procedures or documentation was to be obtained prior to administration of the PillSense Capsule.  
 
• Confirmation of inclusion and exclusion criteria 
• Record of medical history  
• Record of concomitant medications (limited to medications that affect the gastrointestinal 
tract or coagulation status, s uch as proton pump inhibitors, antiplatelets or anticoagulants).  
• Physical examination  
• Vital signs (pulse, blood pressure, body temperature) 
• All laboratory tests routinely performed in case of a GI bleeding as a standard of care at 
the investigation site (no investigation- specific lab tests were  needed)  
• The subject  had fasted for  2 hours for intake of only clear liquids or 4 hours for PO intake  
other than clear liquids  
 
7.5.4  Recording procedures  
The following procedures or documentation was to be obtained at the time of PillSense Capsule 
administration.  
 
CSR-019-0 3 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 Page 26 of 309  • The Investigator ensure d that the Subject  had been fasting at least 2 hours if intake of 
only cl ear liquids or 4 hours for PO intake other than clear liquids  
• The Investigator paired  the PillSense Capsule to its Receiver Unit  in accordance with the 
Instructions  for Use (see Appendix  16.4)  
• The Investigator provided the PillSense Capsule to the Subject  which was ingested with 
approximately 150mL of water  
• The Subject  was asked to lie on their left side on a bed  
• The PillSense Receiver wa s placed next to the Subject  
• The PillSense Receiver recording was initiated once the Subject  was comfortable  
• The PillSense Receiver was monitored,  and the output recorded on the Case Report Form 
and a photograph taken of the monitor screen to document the result,  i.e., “Blood detected” 
or “No blood detected”  
 
Subjects that could not or refused to swallow the capsule were withdrawn. Reason for withdrawal 
was documented on the End of Study form.  
 
7.5.5  Post -recording procedure 
The following procedures or documenta tion was to be obtained at the time within approximately 
4 hours after PillSense Capsule administration.  
• An EGD was completed within 4 hours after PillSense Capsule administration to confirm 
the result achieved with PillSense System. The EGD procedure was  conducted according 
to the site standard of care procedure. The endoscopist was not  told the result of the 
PillSense Capsule evaluation.  
• The EGD result was recorded on the Case Report Form  
• After the sequence of examinations had  been completed, the Subject  was brought back 
to the recovery ward.  
• The Subject  was informed to check their stool for passage of the PillSense Capsule and 
bring it to the next on -site visit, if possible, or to document passage via a photograph and 
notify th e study coordinator or PI. The subject  received a Stool Collection Kit and 
instructions to check for the passage of the PillSense Capsule.  
• The Subject  could be admitted to the hospital depending on the severity of the symptoms 
of the illness and duration of the investigation procedures or if clinically indicated.  
7.5.6  Follow -up Contact (visit 2): Within 7 days  
A phone call or on- site follow up was to take  place wi thin 7 days after the PillSense Capsule 
administration. If the Subject  was still in the Hospital the Subject  was reviewed by the investigation 
staff or if the Subject  had already been discharged, they were  contacted by investigation staff via 
phone to : 
• Perform AE/SAE review  
• Determine w hether the PillSense Capsule had passed since the intervention:  
CSR-019-0 3 Clinical Study Report - DETECT -1 Study   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
 Page 27 of 309  o if the PillSense Capsule had not passed or there was no evidence / record, the Subject  
was scheduled for a confirmatory X -ray examination between 2 and 7 days .  
o if the Subject  confirmed by submitting a photograph documenting that the PillSense 
Capsule passed, a subsequent follow -up visit could be planned earlier upon 
Investigator´s and Subject ´s agreement if deemed necessary or eliminated altogether.  
• The Subject  was reminded to contact site staff immediately in the case of any discomfort 
and/or abdominal pain.  
7.5.7  Discretionary On -site or phone follow -up (visit 3): Between Day 8 and Day 21  
A phone call or on- site follow up was to take place between 8 and 21 days afte r the PillSense 
Capsule administration to:  
• Perform AE/SAE review  
• Perform confirmatory X -Ray examination to ascertain the passage status of the PillSense 
Capsule i f there was no confirmation that the PillSense Capsule has  passed through the 
GI tract prior to this timepoint   
This visit was considered the final visit in the investigation if the Investigator does not have a 
medical reason to carry out any further follow -up visits  with the Subject  for the purpose of the 
investigation.  