TITLE: A Patient Advocate to improve real-world asthma management for adults living in the inner -city   
 
  
  
 
 
A. SPECIFIC  AIMS    
Asthma, a chronic treatable disease, affect s 17.5 million US adults . Blacks have 3.3 times the emergency 
department  (ED) visits, 2.2 times the hospitalizations, and 2 times the death rate for asthma compared to 
whites. Other groups including Puerto Ricans also have increased morbidity. Few interventions have targeted 
low-income minority adults with moderate or severe asthma and even fewer have focused on the real -world 
clinical practices where care is provided. Yet, according to an Institute of Medicine report, access to health 
care and patient -provider communication may be particularly difficult to achieve for low -income and minority 
patients  and contribute to health disparities .1 We propose to asses s the effectiveness, sustainability , and 
budget impact of a patient navigator intervention to facilita te and maintain patient -provider communication and 
access to chronic care of moderate or severe asthma in low  income minority adults with other chronic 
morbidities.  We will implement the intervention in a variety of clinic practices including those of an urban 
academic health center, a VA, and a federally qualified health center  and in both English- speaking and 
Spanish- speaking patients . Our intervention is tailored to patients  and their clinics , allowing the clinic practice 
to take account of individual patients’ comorbidities and psychosocial and community barriers to accessing 
care. Informed by focus groups of patients and providers , our intervention activates both groups . It integrates 
activities with demonstrated efficacy; its feasibility , acceptability , and preliminary efficacy  were demonstrated in 
RC1 HL099612 (HAP Study) . Here w e test its  effectiveness, sustainability, and applicability to the real world.   
Our navigator, called a Patient Advocate (PA) , according to the preference of patients in the focus groups, 
works with patients by coaching and modeling preparation for a visit with the asthma doctor, attending the visit 
with the permission of participant and provider, and confirming understanding of issues discussed. The PA also facilitates scheduling, obtaining insurance coverage, overcoming patients’ unique social and administrative barriers to carrying out medical advice, and exchange of information between providers and patients. PA 
activities are individualized, multi -faceted, take account of comorbidities, and are generalizable to other chronic 
diseases.  The PA s, highly valued by patients in RC1HL099612,  are recent college graduates interested in 
health- related or education careers, research experience, working with patients , and generally have  the same 
race/ethnicity distribution as potential subjects.  
This dissemination and implementation project refines the intervention of RC1 HL099612 for real -world 
practice by 1) conducti ng a randomized controlled trial that compares the Patient Advocate Intervention 
(PAI)  to currently practiced guideline- based usual  care; 2) carrying out the intervention in a variety of primary 
care and asthma specialty practices ; 3) extending the observation time to a year to test its sustainability ; 4) 
assessing patient -centered outcomes including asthma control , quality of life, ED visits , and hospitalizations ; 5) 
assessing mediators/moderators of the PAI -asthma outcome relationship; and 6) evaluat ing its cost -
effectiveness.    
Aims : 
Recruiting 300 adults with moderate or severe persistent asthma from clinics serving low -income, urban, 
primarily minority patients , we will conduct a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to:   
Specific Aim 1: Assess whether 6 months of the PAI improves  asthma control  relative  to baseline compared 
with usual care (UC)  and whether such a difference is sustained in the 6 months following  the intervention’s 
completion. 
Specific Aim 2: Assess whether the PAI improves other asthma outcomes ( need for prednisone burst s, ED 
visits, hospitalizations , quality  of life , FEV1 ) relative to baseline compared with UC at 6 months and is 
sustained in the 6 months following the intervention’s completion . 
Secondary Aim 1:  Evaluate whether improvement in self -efficacy, appointment -keeping, communication 
with providers , adherence, and navigating ability  mediate  the effect of the PAI on asthma control . 
Secondary Aim 2: Assess whether  baseline patient factors  (e.g.,  educational attainment and health 
literacy , demographics, household income, depression, anxiety, social /commun ity barriers ) and provider 
factors  (e.g. demographics, years in practice, primary versus specialty practice),  moderate  the effect of  the PAI 
on the mediators and asthma control . 
Specific  Aim 3: Measure the incremental direct and indirect (i.e., productivit y) costs of the PAI compared with 
UC from both payer and societal perspectives and determine the incremental cost -effectiveness of the PAI 
relative to UC for  asthma control and other outcomes.  
Exploratory Aim: Conduct post -study focus groups of providers  to explore awareness of the intervention and 
response to the PA.  
Impact: This proposal is  innovative and significant because it 1) compares effectiveness of PA to usual care , 
2) focuses on inner -city low -income predominantly minority adults  who experience high asthma morbidity, 3) 
uses a real-world behavioral intervention to test for sustainability in an RCT design, 4) tests a multi -faceted 
individualized intervention which considers comorbidities as it provides a model of chronic asthma 
management and is t hus generalizable to patients with other chronic diseases and comorbidities , 5) examines  
patient -provider communication, 6) uses a unique PA, 7) considers both English- and Spanish- speaking 
patients, and 8) asses ses the cost-effectiveness  of PAI relative t o UC.  
Interface
Health Policies
•Regulations at State & Federal Levels
Insurance Status
Reimbursement Levels
Operation of the Health System
•Cultural Sensitivity
•Work Force Diversity
•Use of Evidence- Based Care
Provider/Clinician Factors
•Stereotyping, attitudes of minority groups
•Clinician ’s training
•Prescription Practices
•Diagnosis of Severity
•Provider/Patient InteractionSocial/Environmental Context
•Poverty
•Indoor/Outdoor Allergens
•Pollution
•Environmental Stress
Process of Care
•Access to treatment 
•Quality of Care
Differential Treatment/ Outcomes
•Prevalence
•Asthma control
•Quality of life
•# ED and HospitalizationHealth Care System Individual/Community SystemLegal, Economic, and Socio -cultural Parameters
Individual/Family Context
Inherent factors
•Genetics & biological factors
•Race/ethnicity
Modifiable factors
•Beliefs
•Health literacy
•Illness Management= points where PA 
could potentially facilitate 
access to care or
help the provider &     
practice  take into account 
contextual informationFigure 1. Multilevel asthma disparities model by Canino et al 6
 B. SIGNIFICANCE  
B.1. Asthma, a chronic treatable disease affecting 17.5 million US adults, is characterized by 
persistent disparity in prevalence, severity , and morbi dity.2-6 Blacks have 3.3 times the ED visits, 2.2 times 
the hospitalizations, and 2  times the death rate for asthma compared to whites .2 Puerto Rican populations also 
have high morbidity.2, 7 The Institute of Medicine (IOM) found racial and ethnic inequities in health care at two 
levels : 1) the operation of the practice/health system where administrative tasks  are completed; and 2) the 
individual patient -provider interaction.1  Asthma provides an excellent setting for addressing both levels. At the  
practice/health system level features associated with lower quality of asthma care in vulnerable patients 
include complicated office schedules , insurance , and health forms; lack of evening and urgent visit  schedules ; 
and absence of policies that 
consider  cultural or language 
differences between patients 
and staff .8-10 At the patient -
provider level, physicians have 
been found to underestimate asthma severity in black 
patients.11 A PA can address  
both levels  in a feasible real-
world approach.  
B.2. Canino et al4 
expanded upon the IOM levels, creating a multi -level 
framework that informs 
research and practice  (Fig. 
1). Our PA coaches  and 
model s preparation for a visit 
with the asthma doctor, attending the visit with the 
permission of participant and 
provider, and confirming understanding of issues discussed. The P A facilitates 
scheduling, obtaining insurance coverage, overcoming patients’ unique social and administrative barriers to carrying out medical 
advice, and exchange of information between providers and patients  including consideration of patients’ 
environmental and social context . The PAI is individualized, address ing relevant  levels  of the framework as 
indicated in Figure 1 . Because the PA is a college graduate but not medically trained, PA activities can be 
distributed within one practice or several for those patients in most need.   
B.3. Communication, essential for improving health outcomes and eliminating health disparities,  is 
compromised by language and cultural differences.
1, 4, 12 In addition,  accessing care, obtaining 
insurance, making appointments, and filling forms requires significant literacy . However,  half of US 
adults have no more than basic reading and numerical skills .13 Health literacy is the subset of literacy skills 
necessary “to obtain, process and understand basic health information and services needed to make 
appropriate health decisions”,14 that is, to successfully self -manag e a chronic disease like asthma .14-16 It 
includes cultural knowledge, reading comprehension, numerical skills, listening and speaking  fluency .14 Low 
health literacy is found in all  patient groups ; its prevalence is increased among the poor and underserved 
minorities  and is associated with poorer health access and outcomes, higher health costs, and less patient 
satisfaction with health providers.14, 15, 17- 28 Low literacy may impair communication, self -efficacy, and ability to 
navigate the health system.29-31 In fact, there is concern that the literacy requirements to enroll in health plans 
under  the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will impede enrollment by the very groups most in need 
of its provisions.32 A PA can address health literacy and cultural context , mitigat ing health disparities.29-31 
In asthma, low reading ability has been associated with improper use of inhalers  and less asthma 
knowledge,33 poor aural skills with poorer disease management.34 However, inadequate health literacy is not 
associated with difficulty learning or retaining instructions about medications or inhaler technique ,35 but rather 
reflects limited access to effective education.36 Limited literac y is not easily  recognized because patients  do not 
disclose such difficulty.37-39 Screening patients for low literacy may not measure the skills needed for accessing 
care, but may increase patient anxiety and deter communication.40 Thus , health literacy experts recommend 
providing the simplest explanation for all patients, tailoring formats to the individual patient, and confirming understanding using techniques such as “teach -back” (The patient teaches the instructions) .41-43 Our PA 
promotes  practical, immediate and sustainable communication using these methods.    
B.4. Inner -city low -income neighborhoods have been called “socially toxic,”44-46 because the 
presence of poverty, deprivation, disadvantage, and segregation results in increased exposure to indoor and 
outdoor pollutants, inadequate housing, tobacco, and violence. Exposure to violence has been associated with 
asthma symptoms in children and may be a marker of these toxic ex posures.47-52 The disproportionate 
psychological stress  of living in such communities may explain why  interventions at the patient or practice level 
may not lead to results. Clinicians must understand these stresses and the community resources available to 
patients.  The PA can promote this awareness .  
B.5. Patient Navigator activities are efficacious and inform our Patient Advocate Intervention (PAI). 
Harold P. Freeman, MD proposed the concept of a Patient Navigator (PN) to overcome barriers to early diagnosis and treatment of cancer of patients living in poverty in Harlem.53-55 In 2005 the National Cancer 
Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities adapted his PN ( http://crchd.cancer.gov/pnp/pnrp -index.html ). PN -
related interventions have focused on  uninsured, minority, elderly, and low -income patients in a number of 
different settings, particularly in screening or assisting with induction of therapy for cancer.56-58 PNs have 
arranged transportation, scheduled appointments, ensured medical  record availability , and provided social and 
financial support.59 PNs have demonstrated e fficacy in activities that our PA  will accomplish:  coordination of 
care, navigation of the practice, increasing self-efficacy, and facilitating adherence.56, 60- 68 PNs have enhanced 
communication, foster ed trust, and improved patient satisfaction.64, 69, 70 Interventions that are PN -like also 
have demonstrated  efficacy . Older outpatients accompanied by visit companions who facilitated visit 
communication at routine medical encounters were more satisfied with their physician.71 A tailored intervention 
involving a masters -level social worker working with inner -city children  with asthma resulted in reduced asthma 
symptoms and was most cost -saving in those with more severe asthma.72, 73 In summary, t hese efficacious 
activities are integrated into the PAI which we now implement , testing its effectiveness and cost -effectiveness.  
Patient navigators have been nurses,74 social workers,72, 73, 75 commu nity health workers76; none used the 
recent college graduates that have been successful in our pilot studies  (See D.1.4).  Our PAs , accepted by both 
patients and providers,  have demonstrated they can facilitate such communication.77  
B.6. Comparative effectiveness research (CER) allows dissemination and implement ation of a 
patient -oriented intervention to the real-world .78-86 CER compares patient -oriented interventions to current 
care using intent ion to treat (ITT) analyses in settings representative of “real -world” care.79 Given the 
established efficacy of asthma management, CER is needed to assess its real -world  effectiveness.86 CER 
accommodates demographically diverse patients with complex lives and comorbidities and uses patient -
centered outcomes, as in the proposed project. As recommended by a recent  NHLBI workshop,85 stakeholders 
were engaged in the design of this  project through focus groups of patients and providers (D.1.3) . Along the 
multi- faceted continuum from efficacy to CER, our proposal uses a pragmatic trial design,79, 86 a variety of 
outcomes important to its stakeholders (patients and providers),85, 87 and assesses the cost -effectiveness of the 
intervention in an RCT .88, 89 Literacy -sensitive disease management  and addressing racial and ethnic 
disparities , themes of our proposal, are advocated as  high priority in CER by the IOM  and NIH .90-92 
B.7. Adherence, according to an IOM report,1 is a measure of the effectiveness of patient -provider 
communication; poor adherence is hypothesized to be an important mediator of minority status and poorer 
health and the result of unsatisfactory communication.1 In asthma, regular use of inhaled corticosteroids , 
reduces morbidity and mortality,93-99 and is recommended for all but those with the mildest disease. Poor 
adherence is presumed to be an important cause of asthma m orbidity.100-103 Underuse occurs in all patient 
groups,104 even when medications are provided.105-108 Reasons include personal -level factors like fear of side 
effects, not believing in their benefit , or dissatisfaction with medical advice.108, 109 System -level deterrents 
include difficulty with access (cost, obtaining refills).  Electronically recorded inhaled steroid use is the best 
measure of adherence in t his setting,105, 110, 111 but is associated with a Hawthorne effect (Cha nge in behavior 
due to known observation) .77 Additionally, monitoring is not “real -world .” Thus,  patient -centered outcomes: 
asthma control, ED visits, hospitalizations will be captured as primary outcomes. Adherence  to inhaled 
steroids , explored as a mediator, will be self -reported , which correlates with monitored adherence .112 In 
addition, related to adherence, we will measure keeping of appointments with participant’s asthma provider.    
B.8. Our Conceptual Model (Fig 2) is based on t he multilevel framework of Canino et al4 (Fig. 1) and 
hypothesizes that the PA I will improve ast hma management measured by patient -centered outcomes: asthma 
control, prednisone bursts, ED visits, hospitalizations . Within the setting of preparing for, accompanying, and 
reviewing information and assignments after a medical visit, the PA will improve co mmunication by coaching 
and modeling ways to ask questions, obtain information, communicate lack of understanding of medical information  to providers. We hypothesize as a secondary analysis that the PAI will improve outcomes by  
improving patient self -efficacy, appointment -keeping, patient satisfaction with communication with the provider , 
adherence, and navigating ability.  The PAI -health outcome relationship may vary depending upon different 
levels of moderators like educational attainment,  and baseline health literacy, sociodemographics, 
comorbidities, community factors, presence of anxiety of depression, and clinician characteristics.113 Our model 
is grounded in Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) that suggests that individuals will engage in a behavior  like 
asthma self -management to the degree they believe that they are capable of carrying it out to achieve a 
desired result, e.g. improved asthma control.114-117 SCT proposes that behavior and the environment  (e.g. 
clinical practice, health system, social) interact continuously and these interactions should be taken int o  
account.118 The individualized PAI does this. 
Because implementation of a PAI requires 
additional resources (time and personnel), we will estimate the incremental cost -
effectiveness of the PAI relative to usual care to help ascertain w hether the additional 
resources are partially or completely offset by other savings, such as a reduction in asthma hospitalizations and ED visits.    
C. INNOVATION:  Adults  with moderate or 
severe asthma particularly those living in  
poverty are at risk for poor asthma outcomes. They  often have comorbidities  and 
community and social barriers that make accessing healthcare difficult, and  frequently 
have had limited educational opportunities ; all 
of which contribute to difficulties navigating 
the complicated health system and its practices. In addition, providers with limited time allotted to patients have little opportunity to understand these barriers and patients’  priorities. Such patients experience  more 
hospitalizations and ED visits  and shorter life spans. The PAI is innovative as a multi -faceted real-world  
intervention. The PAs , recent college -graduates without specific medical training but representative of the 
racial/ethnic diversity of the patients , are attractive to patients and the clinical practices a like. Because they do 
not require medical expertise, their tasks could potentially and ultimately be distributed to several members of 
one practice or across practices to those patients most in need. The protocol is innovative and significant for    
1) focus ing on inner -city low- income predominantly minority adults  who experience high asthma morbidity,  2) 
comparing the effectiveness of a PA to usual care  in an implementation and dissemination format , 3) us ing a 
real-world behavioral intervention tested for sustainability in a RCT design, 4) test ing a multi -faceted 
individualized intervention which considers comorbidities as it provides a model of chronic asthma 
management and is thus applicable to patients with other chronic diseases and comorbidities , 5) ex amining  
patient -provider communication, 6) using a unique PA, 7) using patient -centered outcomes including asthma 
control and ED visits, 8) carrying out the intervention in a variety of primary care and asthma specialty 
practices to improve generalizabilit y, 8) includes Spanish- in addition to English- speaking patients, and 9) 
assessing  the cost -effectiveness of PAI relative to UC.  By considering mediators , moderators , and cost-
effectiveness , we provide a rich implementation design that will inform future comparative effectiveness 
research  of both PAI s and other interventions among low-income urban populations . 
D. APPROACH  
D.1. Two studies, WIN and ongoing HAP , motivate, inform , and support  PAI’s likelihood of success.
77 These 
and other studies30, 52, 105, 108, 119 -121 demonstrate our ability to recruit patients from low income urban  
neighborhoods with moderate or severe asthma and follow them for significant periods of time.  All pertain to 
the patient -MD relationship beginning with a study  of adherence which the IOM1 and our studies found to be a 
measure of the success of the patient -physician relationship.105, 108, 109  
D.1.1. WIN Study: “Individualized Interventions to Improve Adherence in Asthma”  (R01 HL073932; 
Apter, PI) ,77 a randomized controlled trial (RCT) , compared problem -solving (PS) to asthma education (AE) to 
improve inhaled steroid adherence and asthma outcomes  in adults with moderate or severe asthma recruited 
from clinics serving  low-income urban neighborhoods.52, 77, 121 PS involves identifying  specific barriers to 
adherence, proposing and weighing solutions, trying the best, assessing, and revising. Adherence was 
monitored electronic ally.122 333 adults  (English - or Spanish- speaking)  were randomized: 49+14 years, 72% 
female, 68% African American, 7% Latino, mean FEV1 66%+ 19%, 52% w ith ED visits, 31% with 
hospitalizations for asthma in the prior year. Comorbidities were common: hypertension  in 52%, diabetes  in 
22%, mean BMI 33+ 9. In an intention to treat ( ITT) analysis , there was no difference between groups with 
respect to overall change in any outcome (p> 0.20). Mean adherence was 61% + 27%. Both groups changed 
similarly from baseline:  adherence declined overall by 12% but asthma control ,123 asthma -related quality of life 
(AQOL), and FEV1 improved overall by 15 %, 18%, and 6% respectively . ED visits and hospitalizations did not 
significantly decrease. While PS was not better than AE, monitoring adherence with provision of medications 
and attention to patients given to both groups was associated with improvement in some asthma outcomes.  
Electronic monitoring is not a real-world intervention. C hanges in inhaler formulation will make current monitors 
obsolete. Thus, m onitoring is unlikely to be a feasible or cost -effective  intervention.  
A secondary analysis:  Exposure to community violence ( ECV) .52 In a longitudinal analysis we asked 
subjects  whether they had witnessed violence in their neighborhood over the 6 months  prior to enrollment . 
ECV was common, occurring in 23% and associated with 2.5 (95%CI:  1.1, 5.6) times more asthma -related 
hospitalizations, 2.3 (95%CI:  1.3, 3.9) times more ED visits for asthma , 1.7(95%CI: 1.1, 2.6) times  more ED Patient Advocate 
Intervention
(PAI)Figure 2. PAI is a real -world intervention to improve asthma management
Notes
*Primary outcome is Asthma Control
Comorbidities are treated as potential confounders.AQOL= asthma -related quality of lifeMediators of PAI:
Self-efficacy
Appointment -keeping
Adherence
Satisfaction with communication
Navigating ability
Moderators
Educational attainment
Baseline Health literacy
Sociodemographics
Comorbidities
Community factors
Anxiety/Depression
Clinician characteristicsHealth Outcomes
Asthma control*
Prednisone bursts
ED visits 
Hospitalizations
FEV1
AQOL
visits for any cause , and lower AQOL  (-.40; 95%CI : -.77, -0.025) over the observation period.  These results  
suggest  that ECV generates psychosocial distress that directly affects health and/or is a marker for other 
physical/social exposures that contr ibute to poor outcomes , like the presence of environmental pollutants , 
inadequate housing , limited access to pharmacies  and grocery stores , and poor public transportation. While a 
PAI may not be able to remedy these exposures , a PA may facilitate transfer of information so that the clinician 
can take account of such barriers to asthma management. 
Conclusions:  The WIN S tudy demonstrated that an individualized intervention is feasible and acceptable. 
Monitoring, providing medications , and attention, the intervention in both groups, improved self -management to 
some degree but ED visit s and hospitalizations did not significantly  decrease, possibly because these had 
other determinants from social , community , and health access barriers . WIN did not take account of the 
practice environment . A real-world  individualized intervention is needed that  consider s the patient , practice, 
providers, and social and community barriers impeding access to health care.  
D.1.2. “Literacy and improving patient -clinician encounters for asthma, ” (K02 HL088469; Apter, PI) , 
is ongoing research examining  whether limited health literacy, particularly numeri cal skills, hinders  patient -
physician communication and ultimately the ability to successfully self -manage asthma.  We previously  
developed and validated the Asthma Numeracy Questionnaire ( ANQ ), a 4-item questionnaire derived from 
numerical concepts commonly used in patient instructions for self -managing asthma.119 ANQ scores indicated 
many adults do not understand the numerical concepts embedded in standard asthma education. Low ANQ 
scores were associated with hospitalizations and ED visits for asthma.119 We hypothesized that adequate 
literacy is associated with better health, mediated by patient -provider communication. We proposed a 
hierarchical model of numerical and communication skills to guide such communication.41  
The K02 Specific Aims test in participants of the parent WIN Study whether electronically -monitored 
inhaled steroid adherence, and asthma outcomes differ by literacy status . To the ongoing WIN Study , we 
added assessment of numeracy (ANQ) and reading comprehension, the Short Test of Functional Health 
Literacy in Adults (S- TOFHLA)124 to baseline questionnaires . In an analysis of the first 80 WIN  participants for 
which we had literacy data, we found only 20% could answer all 4 ANQ items  correctly.30 Less than half 
understood a question involving percent age (S ee Appendix, ANQ questionnaire, item 2). However, t he reading 
comprehension score on the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults ( S-TOFHLA )124 was adequate 
for 80%  of participants. The ANQ results demonstrated that this test  can distinguish among literacy  levels .125 
Additionally, higher  ANQ scores were associated with better  AQOL and self -efficacy to accomplish asthma 
self-management.30 The association of numeracy and AQOL supports a link  between literacy and health.  
 Preliminary analyses  of the entire dataset  for this analysis  (n=284)  adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity 
and the randomized intervention condition of WIN (PS vs AE) , found that better adherence was associated with 
better  numerac y (β = 2.70, 95% CI=[0. 31, 5.10]) and reading comprehension ( β =10.17, 95% CI=[1.48, 18.9]). 
Similarly, higher AQOL was associated with better  numeracy ( β =0.14 [0.02, 0.26]) and reading  
comprehension ( β =0.63 [0.18, 1.07]). Asthma control was associated with reading comprehension (β =0.53 
[0.18, 0.88]) . In summary, t hese findings support the need for an intervention directed at health  literacy and 
communication as  a pragmatic way of overcoming health disparities and improving asthma control .   
Conclusions: Numer ical concepts in patient education may be difficult for patients to understand. Low 
literacy , reading and numeracy,  is associat ed with poorer health outcomes. A PA I that facilitat es 
communication with health care personnel about health information may b e able to improve asthma outcomes . 
These  preliminary analyses support our proposed secondary aims  assessing potential mediators such as self-
efficacy and adherence , of the relationship between PA intervention and asthma control.   
D.1.3. Focus groups: To develop a feasible acceptable PAI, we conducted 4 focus groups of patients who 
completed the WIN Study and 2 of providers.121 Providers and patients thought a PA feasible and potentially 
beneficial, particularly as a means  of social support. Providers thought PAs can help with tasks for which 
providers are limited by time, staff, or resources, such as helping with obtaining medications, transportation, 
insurance coverage, and  medical information. Patients wanted an advocate (a term they preferred to 
“navigator ”): “someone on your side.” They reported being anxious about  medical visits, forgetting to ask 
questions  and obtain prescriptions , and forgetting what the doctor said after they left the visit. Patients  strongly 
recommended the PA be like the research coordinator (RC) of the WIN Study who they recognized as an 
advocate, uniformly preferring an RC to a community PA,  possibly because they perceived the RC as accepted 
by and comfortable with clinical staff . The focus groups revealed that patients experienced a variety of barriers 
in addition to limited literacy  (e.g., transportation difficulties , caring for sick family members, inability to afford 
co-payments or to obtain  insurance ), suggesting a resource book  (see Appendix)  and input  from someone 
familiar with these resources , a PA,  would be valuable.  
Conclusions: The PAI is acceptable to patients and providers. Patients’ need for instrumental social 
support and providers’ need to transmit medical information can be facilitated  by th e PA.  
D.1.4. The ongoing HAP Study: “A Patient Advocate & Literacy -Based Treatment of Asthma”  (RC1 
HL099612; Apter, PI) demonstrates the feasibility of the PAI and compares it to standard asthma education 
(AE). Participants are adults with moderate or severe asthma ( D.3), whose demographics and comorbidities 
are similar to WIN.  Those in the PAI arm work with a non-health- professional PA who assists with and models 
preparations for a visit with the asthma doctor; attends visits; and afterwards confirm s patient understanding , 
facilitating  scheduling , obtaining insurance coverage, and overcoming other barriers to carrying out medical 
advice. The PA accompanies participants to 1-3 medical visits as scheduled by their asthma physician during 
the 16-week participation period. Electronically -monitored inhaled steroid adherence is the primary outcome ; 
asthma outcomes  also are obtained. Of 100 participants  (100% of planned enrollment ) 93 completed the 
protocol . Of 7 failing to finish , 3 had been assigned to the PAI and 4 to AE. Three  withdrew  being  too busy, 
with school /job; 4 were lost to follow -up. A PA attended 65 medical appointments . One patient  refused to have 
PA accompaniment  to one  medical visit. One physician refused to have the PA  participate in  one patient visit.  
Protocol r efinement s were made.  To ensure  adequate contact between PA and participant before a 
medical visit , we added brief PA visit s following  early data collection visits . Because we found the data 
collector ( DC) received information from partici pants that might be useful to the PA, we modified the IRB 
consent to allow the DC and PA to journal about their contacts  with participants  in a blog  accessible only to 
team members. A resource book of social services was developed. We discovered that we re cruited asthmatic 
adults with high prevalence of  low literacy and significant asthma morbidity, high rates of ED visits and 
hospitalizations . Highly educated patients with demanding highly paid jobs were too busy to enroll.   
Preliminary a nalysis of the 53 PA patients showed improvement in asthma control  (decrease asthma 
control score from 2.23 to 1.67 , p= 0.018126, 127) and asthma -related quality of life ( 3.75 to 4.34 p=-.001.128, 129 
(In both , a 0.5 change  is clinically significant in an individual ). FEV1 improved over 16 weeks from 65% to 69%, 
p=.25 , but not significantly. These statistics provide preliminary evidence of the PAI’s efficacy. There was no 
difference between PA and AE groups , but the comparison was different from what we propose here. In HAP 
both groups were monitored, supplying a Hawthorne effect , there was not a usual care comparison , the study 
period was short only 16 weeks , and the study was underpowered for comparisons . Analy zing WIN data during 
this time , we realize d monitored adherence is itself an intervention and so could not be an outcome  for the 
proposed pragmatic  intervention. Thus, usual care is a real-world  comparison group.  
 Conclusions:  The PAI intervention is acceptable , feasible, and shows evidence of efficacy . HAP and WIN 
taught us that UC is the appropriate comparison group.86   
D.2. Methods and Procedures 
D.2.1. Summary: This pragmatic RCT will recruit 300 adults with moderate or severe asthma from clinics 
serving low -income inner -city neighborhoods, randomizing participants  1:1, stratified by practice,  to PAI or 
usual care  (UC) for 6 months of intervention followed by  6 months of observation. We will assess PAI’s  cost-
effectiveness . Secondary  aims will assess mediators and moderators of the PAI -asthma outcome relationship. 
We will explore the awareness and response to PAI with post -study focus groups  of providers.  
D.2.2. Design and Methodological Choices  
Desi
gn: We choose a RCT because randomization reduces the likelihood of bias from  both known and 
unknown confounders .130 This is particularly important in a study of health behavior where many complex  
influences are not well understood , but will be equally distributed across comparison groups.   
Along the multidimensional continuum of explanatory/efficacy to pragmatic/effectiveness designs , this 
study  has strong pragmatic /effectiveness features .79, 81, 86, 131 These include compar ison of  the PA intervention 
to the existing standard of care practiced in both specialty and primary care. The study population enrolled will 
be demographically diverse with significant asthma morbidity and a range of co-morbidities , selected only on 
the basis of having  moderate/severe asthma  (patients with mild asthma do not require the  resources of a 
PAI).79  Smokers, often excluded in efficacy trials , are included.86  Randomization should equally distribute 
smokers , other comorbidities , and relevant characteristics to PA or UC groups.  We will recruit from 
heterogeneous practice settings (primary care, specialty ; federally qualified health center, academic health 
center , Veterans Affairs  Medical Center  (VA)) and collect a broad range of patient -oriented  outcomes : asthma 
control, ED visits, hospitalizations, prednisone requirements, quality of life.79, 81  If cost -effective , the 
intervention can be implemented in a variety of settings.79 No special strategies will be used to improve study 
protocol adherence and the protocol is individualized.79 The analysis is ITT. T he NIH and AHRQ  have  identified 
both pragmatic designs  and achieving health equi ty as major priorities .82, 85, 91, 132 
Randomization  by participant stratified by practice : The PAI is directed at the patient -PA interaction, so 
there is little opport unity  for the providers to change their behavior with patients not randomized to PA. There 
has been no evidence of contamination of study arms  in HAP. Randomization by clinic requires  approximately 
20 sites ; a multi -site trial is not feasible given the res ources . We will convene post -study  focus groups of 
providers to explore their awareness of the intervention and response to it. We will insert a post -study question 
for all participants (PAI and UC) asking if provider s changed behavior during the study. 
Eligible consenting patient participants will be randomized 1:1 to PAI or UC.   Block randomization with 
block sizes ranging randomly between 4 and 6 consecutive participants within each site will be employed to 
ensure that equal numbers of participants are assigned to each of the two groups and are balanced with 
respect to observed and unmeasured baseline factors.133 Randomization will be single- blind ; study 
investigators will be blinded to group assignment  throughout the study and its analysis . Dr. Morales, the 
biostatistician,  will generate randomization lists based on the above procedure.  
Participants  are adults recruited from clinics serving low -income neighborhoods.  Most asthma 
studies involve children; adults are relatively understudied. With the WIN and HAP Studies, we established 
effective recruitment methods and relationships with a variety of clinical practices  to recruit and retain adults . 
Our experience suggests we will recruit  patients with significant numbers of hospitalizations  and ED visits and 
other health care  costs. An effective intervention will reduce these costs  and improve patient health. From  
HAP, we observed that  patients who find a PA most useful  will enroll . Very busy, employed, highly educated 
persons , least likely to benefit from a PA , do not have time to participate and do not enroll .  
PA activities:  Informed by focus groups (D.1.3 )121 and HAP (D.1.4) , the PA will facilitate  and model 
administrative tasks  to navigate the health system  and practice, prepar e for visits, carry o ut medical 
recommendations , and overcom e social and community barriers to accessing care.  The PA will coach patients 
to articulate appointment  goals and concern about or lack of understanding of medical advice. We will 
individualize PA activities surrounding 1) preparation for asthma doctor visits , 2) medical  visits attended by the 
PA, and 3) ensuring understanding, scheduling, and administrative tasks agreed upon by doctor and patient.134   
Research coordinators (RCs) will function either  as PA s or data collector s (DCs) . PAs will not collect 
data; DCs will not perform PA activities . In our focus groups,121 patient participants preferred PAs to be like the 
RCs of the WIN study: recent college graduates interested in health- related or education careers, research 
experience, further school ing, working with patients, and generally having the same race/ethnicity distribution 
as potential subjects. We considered other choices : lay health workers, social worker s,75 and nurse s; but no 
one background has been shown to be superior.135 Ultimately, we followed the recommendat ion of our focus 
group participants . End of study questions and comments to  DCs and PAs in the HAP study , collected from 
their blogs,  confirmed participants like working with PAs and frequently ask to continue working with them 
when the study ends. HAP PAs  were also well- received by clinic personnel. Since PAs do not take part in 
medical decision- making , they do not need extensive medical background. RCs will b e thoroughly trained in 
asthma education, research principles, protocol integrity, and cultural co mpetence (D. 6.6). Training procedures 
will be derived from those already developed for the HAP Study.  
A resource for accessing social services: The WIN Study and the focus groups underscored the 
importance of knowledge  of resources for overcoming insuranc e, social, and health system -related barriers. 
Heather Black, PhD has experience in provision of social services for disadvantaged populations in 
Philadelphia. She identified resources specific to the needs of asthma patients and developed a resource 
manual for HAP which we have updated (Appendix). She will review with the PA problems being encountered 
by participants pertaining to insurance, practice procedures, health system barriers that interfere with patients’ 
communication with their providers and their practices, and self -management of asthma.   
Comparison group: UC participants , like intervention participants will receive asthma care from their 
providers in the participating practices which generally follow  asthma guidelines.103, 136 Data will be collected 
quarterly ( q 3 months)  to minimize a Hawthorne effect. We will not provide medications to either group.           
The Primary outcome is asthma control , patient -oriented and the primary therapeutic goal emphasized 
by national and international guidelines for managing asthma87, 137, 138 and a recent Asthma Outcomes 
Workshop .139 Preliminary data from the HAP Study demonstrates  overall improvement in asthma control 
(D.1.4 ). Other asthma -related patient -oriented outcomes: prednisone bursts, ED visits, hospitalizations,  ICU 
admissions, and quality of life  (D.8.1)  will be collected.139, 140 
 In WIN and HAP  Studies , electronically -monitored adherence to inhaled steroids  was the primary 
outcome. In WIN , both groups improved and the monitoring process was a common intervention between 
problem -solving  and asthma education groups. Monitoring had 3 elements  that together improved asthma 
outcomes : attention, monitoring feedback, and provision of inhaled steroids  necessary for electronic 
monitoring.  Thus, although adherence is a measure of patient -provider communication,1 it is not  an appropriate 
outcome to test the effectiveness of this pragmatic PAI. Additionally,  monitored adherence is not patient -
oriented or pragmatic . We will measure self-report of adherence, which is correlated to monitored adherence112 
and more pragmatic  although less precise (D.8.2).  
Mediators and moderators:  Potential mediators , testing how the PAI might affect asthma outcomes, were 
chosen from the literature and our preliminary results (B.8, Fig 2).113, 141 -143 Self-efficacy,  a prom inent construct 
in social cognitive theory, is the conviction that one can successfully manage asthma.114-116 Specifically, we will 
measure self -efficacy as 1) confidence in filling out medical forms and 2) confidence in adherence to essential 
inhaled steroid regimens. Appointment -keeping  and adherence  to inhaled steroid regimens  are measures of a 
working alliance between participant and  provider facilitated by the PA . They are manifestations of self -
manag ement and should lead to improved asthma outcomes .144-146 We hypothesize patient satisfaction with 
communication with providers  should improve with the PAI. Finally, w e have developed and are validating a 
questionnaire, Navigating Ability (Appendix)  that measures specific participant beliefs and behaviors promoted 
by the PA.  This validation study will be completed b efore the start of enrollment . Moderators  are baseline 
characteristics that interact with PAI to influence the level of outcomes .113, 141 We will test whether the 
relationship between PAI and outcome changes across levels of a moderator ,113, 141 including both patient 
(baseline health literacy , educational attainment ,30 comorbidities,  smoking history, socio- demographics, 
Table 1.  Data Collection for Specific and Secondary Aims   
Measure  Visit 1 Baseline  
Randomization  Visit 2  
Week12  Visit 3  
Week 24  Visit 4  
Week 36  Visit 5  
Week 48  
Mediators       
Self-efficacy  x x x x x 
Appoint ment keeping  x x x x x 
Adherence  x x x x x 
Satisfaction with communication  x x x x x 
Navigating ability  x x x x x 
Moderators       
Educational attainment  x     
Baseline health literacy (ANQ, S -TOFHLA)  x     
Socio -demographics  x     
Comorbidities*       
Community factors (ECV)  x     
Affective State: Anxiety/Depression  x     
Clinician characteristics  x     
Participant Outcomes       
Asthma Control  x x x x x 
Prednisone bursts, ED, hospitalizations   x x x x x 
Asthma –Related Quality of Life (AQOL)   x x x x x 
Spirometry (FEV1, FVC) ) x x x x x 
*Comorbidities include diabetes, hypertension, obesity, cancer, smoking history, and other conditions as reported by participant and verified in the medical record.  
ANQ= Asthma Numeracy Questionnaire, S -TOHFLA= Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults, ECV= Exposure to community violence.    
 community barriers,47, 52anxiety ,147, 148 depression147, 149) and provider  characteristics (demographics, pr actice 
type, years in practice) .(See D.8.2, D. 8.3, D.9)113   
Duration of patient participation  in this  pragmatic study  is the longest observational period feasible 
based on HAP/W IN experiences : 12 months . For those in PAI, the intervention will take place in the first 6 
months. Both groups will be observed in the second 6 months without intervention.  For both groups , number of 
visits   per 12 months with the asthma doctor will be recorded.    
Cost -effectiveness analysis: Implementation of a PAI will increase initial resource requirements . 
However,  initial increased resource utilization may be partially or completely offset by savings related to better 
asthma outcomes, such as reductions in asthma- related hospitalizations and ED visits. Additionally, even if a 
PAI is not cost -saving, based on analysis of direct medical costs, it may be cost -effective from a societal 
perspective, which takes into account other non -medical and indirect benefits of improved asthma control, such 
as increased productivity and self-reported improvement in functional status and quality of life.  
D.3. Subjects: Inclusion criteria for 300 subjects (1-5 also of the HAP Study ) are: 1) > 18 years of age, 2) 
physician’s diagnosis of asthma, 3) prescribed an inhaled- steroid -containing medication for asthma (ensuring 
the patient is believed to have moderate or severe reversible airways obstruction by their physician) , 4) 
moderate or severe persistent asthma according to the NHLBI Guidelines,103 5) evidence of reversible airflow 
obstruction: (a) forced expiratory volume in 1 second ( FEV1) < 80% predicted at the time of screening or within 
the 3 years prior  to this screening, and (b) improvement with bronchodilator:  either ( i) an increase of >15% and 
200ml in FEV1 with asthma treatment over the previous 3 years  or (ii) after 4 puffs of albuterol by MDI (or 2.5 
mg by nebulizer) , an increase in FEV1 or FVC >12% and 200 ml in FEV1 within 30 minutes,103, 150 and 6) at 
least one appointment scheduled with the asthma physician during the 1st 6 months of participation.  
Exclusion criteria: 1) Severe psychi atric or cognitive problems (e.g., obvious mania,  schizophrenia, 
significant mental retardation) that make it impossible to understand and carryout PA activities . Formal 
psychiatric evaluations are outside the scope of this project . However, RCs will be trained to identify  patients 
during screening who do not appear to be mentally competent to carry out study tasks. Individual cases will be 
reviewed by the PI. In HAP and WIN Studies this has happened in 1 -2 instances/study. Each clinical site has 
mental health facilities for referral of patients . 2) Unable to understand and provide informed consent , 3) 
Unable to communicate in English or Spanish . 4) Participants of the  HAP Study are excluded.  
We will not exclude patients with other comorbidities who meet the above inclusion criteria. Patients with  
comorbidities may benefit most from a PA. Smoking is not an exclusion criterion. Initially, we excluded smokers 
in WIN, but eliminated  this exclusion because it  excluded significant numbers of patients, particularly poor 
patients, who might benefit from  the intervention.  Although this is a study of asthma patients, the PAI is not 
necessarily specific to asthma . Thus, defining “pure” asthma, if it were possible, is unnecessary .  
D.4. Recruitment sites  include primary care and asthma -specialty practices in a variety of settings. There 
are 2 family medicine, 2 general internal medicine, 2 pulmonary and 1 allergy outpatient practice from the 
University of Pennsylvania Health System; practices at  the Philadelphia Veterans A ffairs  Medical Center ; the 
community -based primary care practice of the Woodland Avenue Health Clinic , a federally qualified health 
center ; and the Episcopal Hospital Comprehensive Health Center, a primary care practice serving mainly  
Spanish- speaking patients.  All sites have  a large  pool of patients with asthma and serve urban low income and 
minority patients  from the surrounding communit ies. We have previously recruited from all  sites. Having 10 
sites, including both specialty and primary care practice s, improves the generalizability of the results by asthma 
severity and patient demographics  and ensures adequate enrollment . Eight  sites are within  walking distance of 
our office and the last two are  easily accessed by public transportation (See Resources) . All participating 
practices  will have an orientation meeting prior to the beginning of recruitment.   
D.5. Recruitment procedures: As for the HAP Study , the RC will screen electronic or paper health 
records for patients with upcoming appointments in participating practices who have an asthma diagnosis and 
are prescribed an inhaled- steroid -containing medication. Data collectors  (DCs)  will call or approach potential 
participants at the practice  and request consent for further screening. IRB-approved consent (See Human 
Subjects) will be read in English or Spanish as appropriate to the potential participant to permit screening. A 
second consent will be obtained for enrollment. Recruitment will be continuous. Seasonal variation in asthma 
will be controlled by randomization and by recruiting through all seasons .  
D.6. Protocol  
D.6.1. Data Colle ction Visits  generally occur at a private location in the practice of the participant’s 
asthma provider . (Most providers are physicians;  but some are  physician trainees (residents, fellows), or nurse 
practitioners .) After explanation of the protocol, informed consent  is obtained and baseline data collected by 
the DC (Table 1, Fig. 2)). Participants  then are randomized (D.2.2) 1:1 to either PAI or UC. As a pragmatic trial , 
there is no run- in as this would  select  those most adherent.79 Except for the test of reading comprehension, 
questionnaires are read to patients as they look on in English or Spanish as preferred by the participant . All 
questionnaires and all scripts have been translated into Spanish and independently reviewed by other native 
Spanish speakers and compared with English versions. Data collection ( Table 1) occurs  quarterly.  All 
participants are  reminded of data collection appointments  with a phone call a few days prior to the visit .  
At each visit the DC asks participants how they are feeling and about urgent care obtained since the last 
visit, e.g., ED visits, hospitalizations, new or increased prednisone prescriptions  (“prednisone bursts”) . From  
HAP we know  there will be 3-5 participant visits with the clinician during the observation period for both PA and 
UC participants. PA , but not UC, activities surround these visits. Randomization ensures approximately equal 
numbers of MD visits  (which will be tallied)  in participants assigned to PA and UC. 
  D.6.2. PA protocol: As in  HAP, the PA meet s the PA -assigned participant after randomization at Visit 1. 
After introductions, the PA gives the participant some personal background (e.g ., where the PA grew up, went 
to school , career goals) to begin to establish the PA -patient relati onship and to motivate the patient to 
volunteer similar information. The PA gives the participant  a notebook containing pages  to enter medications; a 
calendar for appointments ; and a page to enter  contact information for physicians , pharmacies , and insurance 
(Appendix) . It contains a sample action plan that the PA encourages the patient to discuss with their asthma 
doctor.  This notebook is used at subsequent meetings with the PA and as the patient otherwise desires.  At 
Visit 2 the PA again  meets  briefly (5 minutes) with the patient following data collection to further solidify  the PA -
patient relationship. They may review clinician recommendations or converse about personal experiences  or 
plans. In HAP we found it was important for the patient to get to know the PA as much as possible before the medical visits. The PA meet s the participant before, during, and after a visit to the asthma- treating clinician  and 
model s, facilitate s, and empower s patients to complete tasks related to asthma management . Activities before 
during and after visits were prompted by our focus groups.121   
  A few days before  each visit with the asthma clinician : By phone or in person, the PA assist s the 
participant in making a medication list to provide to the MD, if not already made. Patient and PA  discuss any 
problems with obtaining, refilling, or taking medications. The participant review s any questions she/he plans to 
address with the clinician, as this has been shown to improve communication and patient satisfaction with the visit.151 The PA pr ompt s the  patient to prepare no more than 2 to 3 points to address at the medical visit  (We 
found preparing too many points to be frustrating to the clinician who may have other issues to discuss  and to  
the patient if they are not addressed) . The PA inquir es if forms, referrals, or other documents are needed for 
the visit and helps the patient obtain them if necessary.   
 The PA meets the patient in the waiting room when the patient comes for a visit. The PA asks the  
participant if there is an emergency plan for an exacerbation and encourages the participant to discuss this at  
the visit if it is not well described by the patient. The PA helps the participant organize any needed materials, 
e.g. study results, medication lists, insurance information in the notebook.  The PA use s the waiting time (which 
is sometimes considerable) to get to know more about the patient’s life and priorities.  
During  the Medical  Visit : If participant and clinician permit, the PA accompanies  the participant as an 
observer . In general t he PA speak s only if invited by the participant .121 Patients and clinician s sign consent that 
allow s PAs to take notes to assist with “teach back” (patient repeating provider recommendations) . 
In primary care practices, other health issues besides asthma will likely be discussed. The PA will assist in 
organizing the visit to include all health issues and “teach back” to include all health recommendations.  
Immediately after the Medical Visit:  As needed, the  PA facilitate s scheduling follow -up appointment s with 
the clinician and/or other s as recommended and completion of any paperwork, e.g., insurance forms or other 
documents. The PA review s instructions given to the participant at the appointment by asking the patient to 
“teach back ,” that is, to teach the instructions as if the patient were the clinician. If the participant has questions 
for the clinician after reviewing these instructions, the PA and participant complete a report of items needing 
clarification for the clinician or staff. Such reports have improved asthma outcomes and patient satisfaction.9 
The PA and participant, as necessary, organize medical and administrative information.  
Between Visits:  If there has been no contact with a participant for a month, the PA calls, and check s how 
the patient is feeling, general well -being, and whether the patient has suffic ient medications . They review 
upcoming appointments. The PA ask s whether there are new problems surrounding obtaining care or obtaining 
or taking medications and whether there have been ED visits or hospitalizations. The participant with help as needed from the PA, will notify the clinician of problems judged significant by either PA or participant.   
The PA will make use of the social service resource book  and Dr. Black  as needed. With patient consent , 
PAs and DCs will keep a log of impressions and information given by patients that is shared only among team 
members.  PA visits and the logs will be  discussed at weekly team meetings  to solve problems patients have in 
self-managing asthma. (For example, sometimes a patient shares important information with the  DC, this 
mechanism allows the DC to forward it to the PA . If the DC or team is concerned that information impacts on 
participants’ health, the PI will be notified and, as she judges necessary, the medical service).  
D.6.3. UC protocol : There are no meetin gs with a PA ; PAs do not accompany participants or play a role in 
doctor visits.  There are phone calls as needed to schedule data collection visits . 
D.6.4.  Participant honorarium: Potential participants receive $10 for screening. Participants receive a 
total of $ 170: $25 for each of data collection Visits 1–4, $70 for completing Visit 5 . Public transportation tokens  
provided for all data collection visits.  (No payment is given for PA visits or attending medical visits. )  
D.6.5. Participating providers will be informed about the project in a conference and by email prior to 
enrolling patients. The protocol will be described generally as a study comparing ways to improve asthma outcomes . Clinicians  will be  asked to complete a brief questionnaire of demographics, type of practice, years in 
practice , and on strategies used in accommodating patients with low literacy . Since current national guidelines  
for asthma
87 recommend visits for moderate/ severe asthma at 1- 6 month  intervals  if control is not optimal (i.e. 
symptoms or bronchodilator response), we will ask if we may schedule all otherwise eligible participants for an 
appointment during study participation, if they had not been seen in the last 3 months and no appointment is scheduled.  The HAP Study demonstrated that patients generally have upcoming clinician appointments and 
there is no difficulty ensuring participants  have such a medical visit for asthma scheduled during participation. 
In that brief 16-week study of 53 patients assigned a PA, 36 patients had at least one visit, 20 had 2 visits, and 
9 had 3 visits with their asthma provider.  
Upon randomization to PA I, we will send a letter /email  to the patient’s  asthma doctor informing them of the 
enrollment and briefly describe protocol activities prior to and after a visit. The letter will ask permission, if the participant agrees, for the PA to accompany the participant to an appointment. We will not communicate with doctors of UC participants. Thus, a doctor will likely not know if a patient is enrolled in the UC arm. 
D.6.6. RC training and protocol integrity: RCs will train for 3 weeks initially, using procedure manuals of 
recruitment, protocol, and data collection adopted from HAP. Training topics include asthma pathophysiology and education; spirometry; human subjects research; cultural competence; interpersonal skills; relating to practice personnel; administrative tasks required of patients; procedures for reviewing medical records, screening, enrolling, obtaining consent, recognition of adverse and serious adverse events, and data collection 
procedures.
152 Training will involve observation of encounter s with participants by the project manager and 
review of procedures and problems at weekly team meetings with the PI. To ensure protocol integrity all 
sessions will be taped. A random sample of 10% of the sessions will be chosen for formal assessment of 
integrity by the PI. If a researcher  believes a patient’s asthma or health is unstable, Dr. Apter and the patient’s 
clinician will be notified i mmediately.  At least two RCs will be  fluent in Spanish.   
D.7. Post -study focus groups of providers  (Exploratory Aim):  We will convene three  2-hour focus groups 
of 5-8 providers, with at least 3 providers  whose patient had a PA and some providers who did not come in 
contact with a PA. Led by Heather Black, PhD , using methodology of our earlier focus groups,121 providers will 
be asked about  their awareness o f and response to PAs and how PAs might change practice procedures.  (See 
Appendix for draft of script).  Data will be collected by audio recording and note- takers.  
D.8. Measures are classified as predictors ( PAI or UC), outcomes, mediators, and moderators  (Fig 2, Table 1,  
See Appendix for questionnaires) . All questionnaires have Spanish versions .   
D.8.1. Outcomes: The primary outcome, asthma control , reflecting symptoms over the past week, will be 
measured using the 7 -item version of the Asthma Control Questionnaire (ACQ).123, 153, 154 The score is the  
Table 2: Project Timeline  
Year  1 2 3 4 5 
Months  
1-6 
7-8 
9-12 
13-16 
17-20 
21-24 
25-28 
29-32 
33-36 
37-40 
41-44 
45-48 
49-52 
53-56 
56-60 
Start up : finalize 
IRB approval, 
finalize CRFs, 
train staff, create 
database                 
New enrollment   50 100 100 50      
Follow -up                 
Data analysis                 
Focus groups : 
set up, conduct, 
analyze                 
DSMB meets  X      X
                X   
 
 
      
   
     
    
   
           
         
         
         
    
         
              the mean of all responses (0=total control, 6=extremely 
uncontrolled).  The minimal ly important clinical 
difference is 0.5. A score >1.5 is considered 
inadequate control.155 Several other patient -oriented 
outcomes will be evaluated. AQOL  will be measured 
with the Mini- Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire 
(AQLQ).126, 128, 129 This 15 -item questionnaire has a 7 -
point response scale that provides a mean summary score. A 0.5- unit change is considered clinically 
meaningful.129 The AQLQ has been shown to be a 
useful indicator of AQOL in low -income adults.156 
Participants will report hospitalizations  including ICU 
admissions , ED visits , urgent medical visits  (scheduled 
< 24 hrs in advance), prednisone bursts  (a new 
prescription for > 3 days of prednisone or an increase in an already -prescribed dose for an asthma 
exacerbation) , and other medical visits . DCs will examine medical records for documentation. Spirometry will 
be obtained using American Thoracic Society procedures  for FEV1 and FVC.150   
D.8.2. Mediator s explain  how the PAI could influence asthma outcomes  (B.8, D.2.2).113 We will measure 
self-efficacy, appointment keeping, adherence to inhaled steroi d regimens , satisfaction with communication 
with providers and practices, and ability to navigate the clinical practice/health system . Self-efficacy  will be 
measured by response to “How confident are you filling out medical forms by yourself?”, a validated question 
that correlates with REALM, a standard test of literacy .157, 158 Subjects  also will complete our  previously 
validated questionnaire  of self -efficacy that asks about confidence to take prescribed inhaled steroids  
regularly .105, 108, 159 Appointment -keeping  will be assessed by reviewing administrative records to assess if 
appointments with the asthma provider are kept (appointments kept/appointments scheduled). We will measure adherence
 to inhaled steroids using the Inhaler Adherence Scale, a 6 -item tool which we used in 
HAP and WIN.160 Its range is 0 -6, a lower score associated with better adherence.  In WIN this score correlated 
with monitored adherence (corr=.23, p=0.002). Patient satisfaction with patient -provider communication will be 
measured  with our previously used 13- item questionnaire.105, 108 Each item has a 6- point response scale. The sum 
is used as the measure (alpha 0.74).  We are  validat ing a questionnaire, Navigating Ability , which focuses on 
specific tasks promoted in the PAI protocol (Appendix) . The instrument was completed by a small number of 
patients (n=31); we observed a Cronbach’s alpha=0.54 , potentially suggesting there are several concepts 
being measured by the instrument (i.e. multidimensional) . We observed a trend towards a positive correlation 
of the overall score with numeracy (Spearman correlation=0.35, p- value=0.057), reading comprehension (0.30, 
p=0.098), and perception of benefits over risks of inhaled steroids (0.32, p=0.082).  
D.8.3. Moderators are baseline variables , gleaned from the literature, hypothesized to affect the PAI- 
outcomes  relationships .113 They include patient educational attainment  (years of formal education completed ), 
household income , other socio- demographics , comorbidities  (patient report ed and verified  in the medical 
record  including  hypertension, diabetes, obesity, cancer , smoking history, etc). Baseline health literacy  will be 
measured with the Asthma Num eracy Questionnaire ( ANQ ), the brief 4-item questionnaire of numerical 
concepts (arithmetic , percentage)  that we developed and validated.119 Reading comprehension will be tested 
using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults ( S-TOFHLA ).124 Community barriers are estimated 
by measuring report of exposure to community violence  (D.1.1) .52  Social cognitive theory predicts  anxiety  
inhibit s learning. We will use the 20 trait items of the  State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (C. Spielberger , Mind 
Garden, Inc).161 Depress ive symptoms  will be measured by the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression 
Scale, a validated 20- item scale.162 Clinician characteristics  include demographics, years in practice, type of 
medical practice (primary care vs . specialty ; physician vs . nurse -practitioner; resident vs . attending, etc) .  
D.8.4. Cost s: Direct m edical costs of intervention administration will b e measured by the resource- costing 
method.73, 163, 164 The primary resource used in the treatment intervention is PA time. Each contact, the type of 
contact, and the duration of the contact (including preparation, travel, waiting and follow -up time) will be 
recorded by the PA on a case report form  initiated at the time of each contact. The cost of a contact per hour is 
based on PA wage plus a proportion of the fixed costs of training and of the facility. Other medical resources 
such as office visits, hospital, ED, MD urgent visits will be  converted into costs based on insurance 
reimbursement rates. Drug use is recorded on the case report forms. The cost of medication will be estimated 
from US average wholesale prices published in the Red Book or actual insurance payments  (including patient 
co-payments) .163, 164 The total direct medical costs of treatment are the sum of all of these components. The 
perspective for the primary cost analysis will be that of the payer. We also will estimate direct medical costs 
and incremental cost -effectiveness attributable to the intervention from a societal perspective, including patient 
co-payments and indirect costs such as patient and family member time, lost/gained productivity etc . The base 
case analysis will value indirect costs using a standardized representative rate per unit time. Sensitivity analyses will estimate representative wage rates by job category for employed individuals and examine a 
range of representative rates for those not employed. We will adjust costs for inflation using the Consumer and 
Medical Price Indices, as appropriate,  and discount costs to the base year using a discount rate of 3%.163, 164 
D.9. Data Analysis: We will perfo rm descriptive analys es of all variables, then compare PA and UC  groups for 
the adequacy of randomization, examining if covariates or baseline variables including potential moderators of 
the intervention and mediating relationships are equally distributed among patient groups. These baseline comparisons will be based on t -tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests for continuous variables depending on t he 
symmetry of the distributions, on logistic regression for binary or ordinal variables; and on Poisson log -linear 
regression for count data. If imbalances are found at baseline, the relevant variables will be treated as 
confounders in the ITT analyses and the analyses of mediators and moderators of the intervention on asthma 
control . To account for the potential for variation in the effectiveness of the intervention across physician 
practices, our analyses will compensate by including site as a fixed effect in all analyses. Analyses of PA and 
UC differences with respect to change from baseline at 6 and 12 months for each outcome in Aims 1 and 2 will 
be based on the ITT principle: all randomized subjects will be included in the analysis regardless of whether 
they drop out of the intervention or study. We will perform a sensitivity analysis of the missing at random 
assumption by following Bruce et al165 with a non -ignorable shared parameter model.166  
The analysis will be based on random effects  (RE) models applied to baseline and all follow -up visits at 
which outcome data are collected. The RE will be included to account for correlated and missing data. 
Separate time effects and time -treatment interactions will be specified for each follow -up visit, such that the 
treatment -time interaction for a particular visit will be the ITT effect on change since baseline. The RE  models 
will be linear, logistic, and log -linear for continuous, binary, and count outcomes, respectively. Similar RE 
models will be employed for assessment of mediation and moderation in Secondar y Aims 1 and 2 . 
Data description, screening, and reorganization: We will screen data for quality and integrity as 
proposed by Altman.167 For all variables we will determine measures of central tendency: mean and standard 
deviation for continuous variables , median and range for categorical variables. We will examine frequency 
distribution graphically (histograms, scatter plots) for all variables. Specific concerns will be directed to 
understanding the pattern of missing values, isolating outliers, confirming the homoscedasticity of observation 
groups, verifying the coding consistency, examining adherence to normality for variables anticipated to be so, 
and locating normalizing transformations for continuous variables intended to be investigated as such.  For the tools we developed, we will examine internal consistency using Cronbach’s α.  
Addressing the impact of site  on each outcome: First, we will pool participants across sites, assuming 
no site effect , using logistic and regression modeling to isolate the relationship between outcome and exposure 
and other de mographics. We  have stratified randomization to analyze the effect of site. We have amplified the 
sample size ( D.10) to have a large enough sample to conduct this analysis. As a secondary analysis, we will 
examine treatment -site interactions. In the presence of statistically significant interactions, we will present 
separate estimates of treatment effects for each site. In the case of statistically, but clinically marginally significant interactions, we will present main effect estimates of treatment effect  but with interactions in the 
model using –1, 0, 1 dummy coding for site, so that the main effects’ estimates will be for the average site.  
Aims 1 & 2 (To assess whether PAI improves asthma control and other asthma outcomes ): The ITT 
effect of PA relative to UC on change in asthma control and other asthma outcomes  since baseline at 6 
months will be assessed with estimation and testing of the treatment -6 month visit interaction in the linear RE 
model (described above) with asthma control as the dependent var iable. In addition, the  treatment -12 month 
interaction will be tested and estimated to asses s if the ITT effect is retained after the PA intervention ends.  
Secondary  Aim 1 (Mediator s): The mediation analysis will follow the 4- step regression approach for 
testing mediated effects of Holmbeck.
113 First, we will examine the association between PAI and mediators 
(D.8.2) by fitting separate longitudinal RE models with each mediator as the dependent variable. These models 
will test the effects of the PAI  relative to the UC group with respect to change since baseline at each follow -up 
visit for the potential mediators. Second we examine the association between the PAI and asthma control as 
descri bed in Aim 1. Third, w e will assess the relationship between the mediators and asthma control by fitting 
separate longitudinal RE models with the mediators (D.8.2) as the independent variables and asthma control as the dependent variable. Finally,  the mediators with significant effects at steps 1 and 3 will be included as a 
lagged time -varying covariate in the ITT linear RE model for asthma control in Aim 1. Mediators of the PAI will 
be assessed by comparing the randomization (intervention) effect estimate with and without the potential mediator in the model. A reduction of at least 15% in the treatment -visit interaction parameters at 6 and 12 
months due to the inclusion of the mediator in the model will be the criteria for a significant mediator.
130  
Secondary Aim 2: Moderators  of the intervention (D.8.3)  will be tested and estimated with 3- and 2-way 
interactions among the treatment factor, potential moderator, and visit factor in the ITT model in Aim 1. 
Similarly, modera tors of the mediating relationship will be assessed with 3- and 2-way interactions among the 
treatment factor, mediator, potential moderator, and visit factor in the mediation model in Secondary Aim 1.   
Specific  Aim 3 (To estimate the incremental costs and  incremental cost -effectiveness (ICE)  of PA ): 
ICE will be assessed  by comparing the incremental cost of PA (including both intervention costs, as well as 
costs of care) relative to UC per outcome, e.g. cost per day asthma control  or avoided ED, hospitalization. The 
ICE will be determined based on differences in direct costs (payer perspective) and also including indirect 
costs (societal perspective) and will be calculated based on differences in mean costs for the UC group from 
those in the PA group, divided by the mean difference in outcomes (asthma control, prednisone bursts , ED 
visits , hospitalizations, etc.). We also will calculate the incremental cost per quality adjusted life year as 
estimated from the AQOL. We will estimate statistical error and construct confidence intervals using bootstrap 
procedures168 for the incremental cost difference and the incremental cost -effectiveness ratio (ICER) . 
Exploratory Aim  (Post-study focus groups of providers):  Audio records and notes will be code d into 
categories  emerging from the data by independent coders (A Apter, I Bennett, H Black) who will achieve inter -
coder reliability.169 Using the Grounded Theory approach,170 we will then analyze the agreed upon cat egories , 
and place them into themes emerging from discussions.   
D.10. Sample size: We will enroll  300 adults  (150 per intervention group). The primary outcome (Aim 1) is  
asthma control at Visit 3 (6 months)  and Visit 5 (12 months) . While a clinically mean ingful difference in asthma 
control within- individual is 0.5, we expect the average difference across groups to be smaller. The W IN Study 
demonstrated a small difference in mean change of 0.2+ 1.1 in asthma control across intervention groups at 
Visit 8 ( 6 months ).77 The effect was neither clinically nor statistically significant. A difference in mean change of 
0.32 in asthma control was found in a study with a different focus ,171 but the effect was not statistically 
significant , probably due to the small sample size.  
Specific Aim 1: The  power analysis is based on the 2- sample t -test with adjustments for 3 or 5 repeated 
measures per participant . The adjustment for clustering by patient multiplies the estimated sample size under 
simple random sampling by a design effect, d=1+ ρ(n-1), where n=average number of visits per patient, and ρ is 
the patient intraclass correlation.  We apply a conservative intraclass  correlation of 0.30. The power analysis 
also takes into consideration the following factors: 1) 18% drop -out as observed in WIN ; 2) adjusted 2-sided 
significance level of 0.025; and 3) 80% power . With these factors, the study is powered to observe a 
standardized effect of 0.29 and 0.32 difference in mean change in asthma control across intervention groups  at 
6 months and 12 months, respectively . Specific Aim 2: The p ower analysis examines the intervention effect 
on 5 asthma outcome measures  at 6 and 12 months . Using the same assumptions but with 2- sided α=0.005 to 
conservatively adjust for multiple comparisons, we will have 80% power to detect a standardized effect of 0.34 
and 0.31 between groups  at 6 months and 12 months, respectively . Specific Aim 3:  Power for the economic 
analysis172, 173 (costs have greater variability than clinical outcomes) is 81% based on the same effect size, 2 -
sided α of 0.05, an effect -cost correlation of -0.1, a difference in cost of $500 and a willingness to pay (WTP) 
threshold of $2500 per year of improved adherence or avoided hospitalization. An increase in the WTP to 
$3000 results in 98% power. Thus, the sample size will provide sufficient statistical power for assessment of 
both clinical and economic evaluations (which requires detecting both effect and cost differences).172, 173 
D.11. Data Management:  The Clinical Research Computing Unit will collaborate to finalize CRFs, construct 
the database, protect its security, perform data entry, review, query and update data; assist with preparation of 
DSMB reports, and collaborate with biostatisticians  as it has for HAP and  WIN studies.  
D.12. The Data Safety Monitoring Board (see Human Subjects) will meet  at study start, y ear 2, and year 5. 
At these and every 6 months  the DSMB will review reports of accrual , baseline comparability between PA and 
UC groups, adverse events, safety concerns, data quality, maintenance of confidentiality and recommend  
study modifications and whether the study can continue.  
D.13. Timeline is summarized in Table 2. Some staff is already identified and trained. We have established 
relationships at recruitment sites and successful recruitment strategies. The MOP of HAP needs minor 
modifications . HAP c ase report forms require small  modifications.   
D.14. Anticipated problems:  Insuring recruitment /retention:  We will use  our successful  procedures , using  
electronic medical records, and relationships developed with practices . We obtain contact information, e.g., cell  
phone, address, for 3 contacts per participant. Incentives will be given for each DC Visit  with the largest at the 
final visit . We flexibly a ccommodate meeting times for the convenience of  participants. RCs will be diverse, 
reflecting participant demographics . Guaranteeing a culturally appropriate intervention:  RCs will undergo 
formal training. Co-investigators are also diverse and will in observation of the protocol and in staff meetings 
guarantee a culturally appropriate approach. Standardizing delivery of PA will be accomplished by the use of 
procedure manuals ; standardized, well-annotated , and carefully constructed case report forms ; regular  direct 
observation; and audio- taping of researcher  interactions with participants. Assuring physicians do not treat UC 
participants like PA participants:  Physicians will not know which of their pa tients , if any , are enrolled in the UC 
arm, only those in P A. Almost all of the intervention takes place between PA and patient or is PA -related so it 
is unlikely to result in change of provider behavior in the absence of a PA.  DCs will ask all subjects post -study 
if they noted changes in their physician over the study period. Post-study focus groups should add support to 
this claim. Differences  in the impact of the intervention between specialty and primary care practices:  will be 
explored in post -intervention focus groups  and in the quantitative analysis of outcomes and mediators .  
D.15. Summary: This RCT disseminates and implements the PAI to improve asthma outcomes  in primary care 
and specialty  practices , in an academic  health center, a federally qualified health center, a VA and in English- 
and Spanish- speaking  practices, testing its effectiveness, sustainability, and cost- effectiveness. The real-world 
individualized PAI is  compared to usual care, crafted for  a vulnerable population, consider s patients’ unique 
context s, social barriers, and comorbidities and is  generalizable to many diseases and medical settings.   
References  
 
1. Smedley BD, Stith AY, Nelson AR. Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine. The National Academies Press; 2003.  
2. Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Liu X. Asthma prevalence, health care use, and mortality: United States, 
2005- 2009. Natl Health Stat Report 2011:1 -14. 
3. Moorman JE, Rudd RA, Johnson CA, King M, Minor P, Bailey C, et al. National surveillance for asthma--United States, 1980 -2004. MMWR Surveill Summ 2007; 56:1- 54. 
4. Canino G, McQuaid EL, Rand CS. Addressing asthma health disparities: a multilevel challenge. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009; 123:1209- 17; quiz 18- 9. 
5. Gupta RS, Carrion- Carire V,  Weiss KB. The widening black/white gap in asthma hospitalizations and 
mortality. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006; 117:351 -8. 
6. Ginde AA, Espinola JA, Camargo CA. Improved Trends but Persistent Racial Disparities in Emergency 
Department Visits for Acute Asthma, 1993 -2005. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008; 122:313- 8. 
7. Hunninghake GM, Weiss ST, Celedon JC. Asthma in hispanics. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 173:143- 63. 
8. Haas JS, Cleary PD, Guadagnoli E, Fanta C, Epstein AM. The impact of socioeconomic status on the 
intensity of ambulatory treatment and health outcomes after hospital discharge for adults with asthma. J Gen Intern Med 1994; 9:121- 6. 
9. Lieu TA, Finkelstein JA, Lozano P, Capra AM, Chi FW, Jensvold N, et al. Cultural competence policies and other predictors of asthma care quality for Medicaid- insured children. Pediatrics 2004; 114:e102-
10. 
10. Lowe RA, Localio AR, Schwarz DF, Williams S, Tuton LW, Maroney S, et al. Association between primary care practice characteristics and emergency department use in a medicaid managed care 
organization. Med Care 2005; 43:792- 800. 
11. Okelo SO, Wu AW, Merriman B, Krishnan JA, Diette GB. Are physician estimates of asthma severity 
less accurate in black than in white patients? J Gen Intern Med 2007; 22:976- 81. 
12. Diette GB, Rand C. The contributing role of health- care communication to health disparities for minority 
patients with asthma. Chest 2007; 132:802S -9S. 
13. National Assessment of Adult Literacy. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics;Institu te of Education Sciences; U.S. Department of Education, 2003. 
14. Nielson -Bohlman L, Panzer A, Kindig D, editors. Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press 2004.  
15. Healthy People 2010: Health Communication. Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human 
Services (
http://www.healthypeople.gov/document/html/volume1/11healthcom.htm) , accessed 
8/17/2010, 2010.  
16. Healthy People 2020: Health Communication and Health Information Technology. US Department of 
Health and Human Services (
http://healthypeople.gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/overview.aspx?topicid=18 ) (Accessed 6/17/2011), 
2011.  
17. Health literacy: report of the Council on Scientific Affairs. Ad Hoc Committee on Health Literacy for the 
Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical Association. Jama 1999; 281:552- 7. 
18. Gazmararian JA, Baker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, Scott TL, Green DC, et al. Health literacy among Medicare enrollees in a managed care organization. Jama 1999; 281:545- 51. 
19. Baker DW, Parker RM, Williams MV, Clark WS, Nurss J. The relationship of patient reading ability to self-reported health and use of health services. Am J Public Health 1997; 87:1027- 30. 
20. Weiss BD, Blanchard JS, McGee DL, Hart G, Warren B, Burgoon M, et al. Illiteracy among Medicaid 
recipients and its relationship to health care costs. J Health Care Poor Underserved 1994; 5:99- 111. 
21. Ginde AA, Clark S, Goldstein JN, Camargo CA, Jr. Demographic disparities in numeracy among emergency department patients: evidence from two multicenter studies. Patient Educ Couns 2008; 
72:350- 6. 
22. Baker D W, Parker RM, Williams MV, Clark WS. Health literacy and the risk of hospital admission. J 
Gen Intern Med 1998; 13:791- 8. 
23. Baker DW, Gazmararian JA, Williams MV, Scott T, Parker RM, Green D, et al. Health literacy and use 
of outpatient physician services by Medicare managed care enrollees. J Gen Intern Med 2004; 19:215-
20. 
24. Wolf MS, Knight SJ, Lyons EA, Durazo -Arvizu R, Pickard SA, Arseven A, et al. Literacy, race, and PSA 
level among low -income men newly diagnosed with prostate cancer. Urology 2006; 68:89 -93. 
25. Sarkar U, Karter AJ, Liu JY, Moffet HH, Adler NE, Schillinger D. Hypoglycemia is more common among 
type 2 diabetes patients with limited health literacy: the Diabetes Study of Northern California 
(DISTANCE). J Gen Intern Med; 25:962 -8. 
26. Schillinger D, Grumbach K, Piette J, Wang F, Osmond D, Daher C, et al. Association of health literacy 
with diabetes outcomes. Jama 2002; 288:475 -82. 
27. Scott TL, Gazmararian JA, Williams MV, Baker DW. Health literacy and preventive health care use 
among Medicare enrollees in a managed care organization. Med Care 2002; 40:395- 404. 
28. Berkman ND, Sheridan SL, Donahue KE, Halpern DJ, Crotty K. Low health literacy and health outcomes: an updated systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2011; 155:97- 107. 
29. Paasche- Orlow MK, Wolf MS. Promoting health literacy research to reduce health disparities. J Health 
Commun 2010; 15 Suppl 2:34 -41. 
30. Apter AJ, Wang X, Bogen D, Bennett IM, Jennings RM, Garcia L, et al. Linking numeracy and asthma-
related quality of life. Patient Educ Couns 2009; 75:386- 91. 
31. Bennett IM, Chen J, Soroui JS, White S. The contribution of health literacy to disparities in self -rated 
health status and preventive health behaviors in older adults. Ann Fam Med 2009; 7:204 -11. 
32. Martin LT, Parker RM. Insurance Expansion and Health Literacy. Jama 2011.  
33. Williams MV, Baker DW, Honig EG, Lee TM, Nowlan A. Inadequate literacy is a barrier to asthma knowledge and self -care. Chest 1998; 114:1008 -15. 
34. Rosenfeld L, Rudd R, Emmons KM, Acevedo- Garcia D, Martin L, Buka S. Beyond reading alone: The 
relationship between aural literacy and asthma management. Patient Educ Couns 2010; Epub ahead of print.  
35. Paasche- Orlow MK, Riekert KA, Bilderback A, Chanmugam A, Hill P, Rand CS, et al. Tailored 
education may reduce health literacy disparities in asthma self -management. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2005; 172:980- 6. 
36. Weiss BD, Coyne C. Communicating with patients who cannot read. N Engl J Med 1997; 337:272- 4. 
37. Parikh NS, Parker RM, Nurss JR, Baker DW, Williams M V. Shame and health literacy: the unspoken 
connection. Patient Educ Couns 1996; 27:33- 9. 
38. Wolf MS, Williams MV, Parker RM, Parikh NS, Nowlan AW, Baker DW. Patients' shame and attitudes 
toward discussing the results of literacy screening. J Health Commun  2007; 12:721- 32. 
39. Wittich AR, Mangan J, Grad R, Wang W, Gerald LB. Pediatric asthma: caregiver health literacy and the clinician's perception. J Asthma 2007; 44:51 -5. 
40. Davis TC, Williams MV, Marin E, Parker RM, Glass J. Health literacy and cancer communication. CA 
Cancer J Clin 2002; 52:134- 49. 
41. Apter AJ, Paasche- Orlow MK, Remillard JT, Bennett IM, Ben- Joseph EP, Batista RM, et al. Numeracy 
and communication with patients: they are counting on us. J Gen Intern Med 2008; 23:2117 -24. 
42. Paasche- Orlow MK, Schillinger D, Greene SM, Wagner EH. How health care systems can begin to 
address the challenge of limited literacy. J Gen Intern Med 2006; 21:884 -7. 
43. Paasche- Orlow MK, Wolf MS. Evidence does not support clinical screening of literacy. J Gen Inte rn 
Med 2008; 23:100- 2. 
44. Wright RJ. Health effects of socially toxic neighborhoods: the violence and urban asthma paradigm. 
Clin Chest Med 2006; 27:413- 21, v.  
45. Wright RJ, Subramanian SV. Advancing a multilevel framework for epidemiologic research on asthma disparities. Chest 2007; 132:757S -69S. 
46. Wright RJ, Visness CM, Calatroni A, Grayson MH, Gold DR, Sandel MT, et al. Prenatal maternal stress 
and cord blood innate and adaptive cytokine responses in an inner -city cohort. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med; 182:25- 33. 
47. Wright RJ, Mitchell H, Visness CM, Cohen S, Stout J, Evans R, et al. Community violence and asthma 
morbidity: the inner -city asthma study. Am J Public Health 2004; 94:625- 32. 
48. Clougherty JE, Levy JI, Kubzansky LD, Ryan PB, Suglia SF, Canner MJ, et al. Synergistic effects of 
traffic -related air pollution and exposure to violence on urban asthma etiology. Environ Health Perspect 
2007; 115:1140- 6. 
49. Berz JB, Carter AS, Wagmiller RL, Horwitz SM, Murdock KK, Briggs -Gowan M. Prevalence and 
correlates of early onset asthma and wheezing in a healthy birth cohort of 2- to 3-year olds. J Pediatr 
Psychol 2007; 32:154 -66. 
50. Swahn MH, Bossarte RM. The associations between victimization, feeling unsafe, and asthma 
episodes among US high- school students. Am J Public Health 2006; 96:802- 4. 
51. Cohen RT, Canino GJ, Bird HR, Celedon JC. Violence, abuse, and asthma in Puerto Rican children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 178:453 -9. 
52. Apter AJ, Garcia L, Boyd R, Wang X, Bogen D, Ten Have T. Exposure to Community Violence is 
Associated with Asthma Hospitalizations and ED Visits. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010; 126:552- 7. 
53. Freeman HP. Patient navigation: a community centered approach to reducing cancer mortality. J 
Cancer Educ 2006; 21:S11- 4. 
54. Freeman HP,  Chu KC. Determinants of cancer disparities: barriers to cancer screening, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 2005; 14:655 -69, v.  
55. Freeman HP. A model patient navigator program. Oncol Issues 2004; 19:44- 6. 
56. Wells KJ, Battaglia TA, Dudley DJ, Garcia R, Greene A, Calhoun E, et al. Patient navigation: state of 
the art or is it science? Cancer 2008; 113:1999- 2010.  
57. Petereit D, Molloy K, Reiner M, Helbig P, Cina K, Miner R, et al. Establishing a patient navigator program to reduce cancer dis parities in the American Indian communities of Western South Dakota: 
initial observations and results. Cancer control : journal of the Moffitt Cancer Center (Cancer Control) 2008; 15:254- 9. 
58. Jandorf L, Gutierrez Y, Lopez J, Christie J, Itzkowitz SH. Use of a patient navigator to increase 
colorectal cancer screening in an urban neighborhood health clinic. J Urban Health 2005; 82:216- 24. 
59. Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities Patient Navigator Program, 
http://crchd.cancer.gov/  
accessed 9/27/2010. National Cancer Institute.  
60. Fang CY, Ma GX, Tan Y, Chi N. A multifaceted intervention to increase cervical cancer screening 
among underserved Korean women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007; 16:1298- 302. 
61. Nash D, Azeez S, Vlahov D, Schori M. Evaluation of an intervention to increase screening colonoscopy 
in an urban public hospital setting. J Urban Health 2006; 83:231 -43. 
62. Vourlekis B, Ell K. Best practice case management for improved medical adherence. Soc Work Health 
Care 2007; 44:161- 77. 
63. Rahm AK, Sukhanova A, Ellis J, Mouchawar J. Increasing utilization of cancer genetic counseling services using a patient navigator model. J Genet Couns 2007; 16:171 -7. 
64. Natale -Pereira A, Enard KR, Nevarez L, Jones LA. The role of patient navigators in eliminating health 
disparities. Cancer 2011; 117:3543 -52. 
65. Ferrante JM, Chen PH, Kim S. The effect of patient navigation on time to diagnosis, anxiety, and 
satisfaction in urban minority women with abnormal mammograms: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Urban Health 2008; 85:114- 24. 
66. Van Walleghem N, Macdonald CA, Dean HJ. Evaluation of a systems navigator model for transition 
from pediatric to adult care for young adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2008;  31:1529 -30. 
67. Szilagyi PG, Humiston SG, Gallivan S, Albertin C, Sandler M, Blumkin A. Effectiveness of a citywide patient immunization navigator program on improving adolescent immunizations and preventive care 
visit rates. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2011; 165:547- 53. 
68. Donelan K, Mailhot JR, Dutwin D, Barnicle K, Oo SA, Hobrecker K, et al. Patient perspectives of clinical 
care and patient navigation in follow -up of abnormal mammography. J Gen Intern Med 2010; 26:116-
22. 
69. Han HR, Lee H, Kim MT, Kim KB . Tailored lay health worker intervention improves breast cancer 
screening outcomes in non- adherent Korean- American women. Health Educ Res 2009; 24:318- 29. 
70. Carroll JK, Humiston SG, Meldrum SC, Salamone CM, Jean- Pierre P, Epstein RM, et al. Patients' 
experiences with navigation for cancer care. Patient Educ Couns; 80:241 -7. 
71. Wolff JL, Roter DL. Hidden in plain sight: medical visit companions as a resource for vulnerable older 
adults. Arch Intern Med 2008; 168:1409- 15. 
72. Evans R, 3rd, Gergen PJ, Mitchell H, Kattan M, Kercsmar C, Crain E, et al. A randomized clinical trial to reduce asthma morbidity among inner -city children: results of the National Cooperative Inner -City 
Asthma Study. J Pediatr 1999; 135:332- 8. 
73. Sullivan SD, Weiss KB, Lynn H, Mitchell H, Kattan M, Gergen PJ, et al. The cost -effectiveness of an 
inner -city asthma intervention for children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110:576- 81. 
74. Jack BW, Chetty VK, Anthony D, Greenwald JL, Sanchez GM, Johnson AE, et al. A reengineered hospital discharge program to decrease rehospitalization: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2009; 
150:178- 87. 
75. Ferrante JM, Cohen DJ, Crosson JC. Translating the patient navigator approach to meet the needs of 
primary care. J Am Board Fam Med 2010; 23:736- 44. 
76. Petereit DG, Molloy K, Reiner ML, Helbig P, Cina K, Miner R, et al. Establishing a patient navigator program to reduce cancer disparities in the American Indian communities of Western South Dakota: 
initial observations and results. Cancer Control 2008; 15 :254- 9. 
77. Apter AJ, Wang X, Bogen DK, Rand CS, McElligott S, Polsky D, et al. Problem solving to improve adherence and asthma outcomes in urban adults with moderate or severe asthma: A randomized 
controlled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011; 128:516- 23. 
78. Schwartz D, Lellouch J. Explanatory and pragmatic attitudes in therapeutical trials. J Chronic Dis 1967; 
20:637- 48. 
79. Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M, Oxman AD, Treweek S, Furberg CD, Altman DG, et al. A pragmatic -
explanatory continuum indicator summary (PRECIS): a tool to help trial designers. Cmaj 2009; 
180:E47- 57. 
80. Travers J, Marsh S, Williams M, Weatherall M, Caldwell B, Shirtcliffe P, et al. External validity of 
randomised controlled trials in asthma: to whom do the results of the trials apply? Thorax 2007; 62:219-
23. 
81. Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM. Practical clinical trials: increasing the value of clinical research for decision making in clinical and health policy. JAMA 2003; 290:1624 -32. 
82. Clancy C, Collins FS. Patient -centered outcomes research institute: the intersection of science and 
health care. Sci Transl Med 2010; 2:37cm18.  
83. Luce BR, Kramer JM, Goodman SN, Connor JT, Tunis S, Whicher D, et al. Rethinking randomized 
clinical trials for comparative effectiveness research: the need for  transformational change. Ann Intern 
Med 2009; 151:206- 9. 
84. Ware JH, Hamel MB. Pragmatic trials --guides to better patient care? N Engl J Med 2011; 364:1685 -7. 
85. Lieu TA, Au D, Krishnan JA, Moss M, Selker H, Harabin A, et al. Comparative effectiveness research in 
lung diseases and sleep disorders: recommendations from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute workshop. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184:848- 56. 
86. Krishnan JA, Schatz M, Apter AJ. A call for action: Comparative effectiveness research in asthma. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol 2011; 127:123- 7. 
87. Expert Panel Report 3:  Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma Bethesda, MD: 
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2007:NIH Publication 08-
5846:1- 416. 
88. Goss CH. Comparative effectiveness research: what happened to incorporating costs of care? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183:973- 4. 
89. Krishnan JA. Con: comparative effectiveness research. More than dollars and cents. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2011; 183:975 -6. 
90. Initial National Priorities for Comparative Effectiveness Research, 
http://www.iom.edu/~/ media/Files/Report%20Files/2009/ComparativeEffectivenessResearchPriorities/C
ER%20report%20brief%2008- 13-09.pdf , Accessed 8/31/2010. Institute of Medicine, 2009.  
91. Lauer MS, Collins FS. Using science to improve the nation's health system: NIH's commitmen t to 
comparative effectiveness research. JAMA 2010; 303:2182- 3. 
92. Iglehart JK. Prioritizing comparative- effectiveness research-- IOM recommendations. N Engl J Med 
2009; 361:325- 8. 
93. Ernst P, Spitzer WO, Suissa S, Cockcroft D, Habbick B, Horwitz RI, et al. Risk of fatal and near -fatal 
asthma in relation to inhaled corticosteroid use. Jama 1992; 268:3462- 4. 
94. Welch MJ, Levy S, Smith JA, Feiss G, Farrar JR. Dose- ranging study of the clinical efficacy of twice -
daily triamcinolone acetonide inhalation aerosol in moderately severe asthma. Chest 1997; 112:597-606. 
95. Donahue JG, Weiss ST, Livingston JM, Goetsch MA, Greineder DK, Platt R. Inhaled steroids and the risk of hospitalization for asthma. JAMA 1997; 277:887- 91. 
96. Goldman M, Rachmiel M, Gendler L, Katz Y. Decrease in asthma mortality rate in Israel from 1991 -
1995: is it related to increased use of inhaled corticosteroids? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000; 105:71 -4. 
97. Suissa S, Ernst P, Benayoun S, Baltzan M, Cai B. Low -dose inhaled corticosteroids and the prevention 
of death from asthma. N Engl J Med 2000; 343:332- 6. 
98. Suissa S, Ernst P. Inhaled corticosteroids: impact on asthma morbidity and mortality. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2001; 107:937- 44. 
99. Dahl R, Larsen BB, Venge P. Effect of long- term treatme nt with inhaled budesonide or theophylline on 
lung function, airway reactivity and asthma symptoms. Respir Med 2002; 96:432- 8. 
100. Pignone MP, DeWalt DA. Literacy and health outcomes: is adherence the missing link? J Gen Intern 
Med 2006; 21:896- 7. 
101. Expert Panel Report II: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda, MD: 
Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 1997:Publication 97- 4051.  
102. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention.  Global Initiative for Asthma.  National 
Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2002:02 -3659.  
103. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, Full Report 2007. U.S. Department of  Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute, 2007.  
104. Gottlieb DJ, Beiser AS, O'Connor GT. Poverty, race, and medication use are correlates of asthma 
hospitalization rates. A small area analysis in Boston. Chest 1995; 108:28 -35. 
105. Apter AJ, Reisine ST, Affleck G, Barrows E, ZuWallack RL. Adherence with twice- daily dosing of 
inhaled steroids. Socioeconomic and health- belief differences. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 
157:1810- 7. 
106. Apter AJ, Jof fe M, Weber A, George M, Norfleet AL, Cucchiara AJ, et al. Potentially modifiable 
predictors of adherence with inhaled steroids. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2002; 
109S:184.  
107. Diette GB, Wu AW, Skinner EA, Markson L, Clark RD, McDonald RC,  et al. Treatment patterns among 
adult patients with asthma: factors associated with overuse of inhaled beta- agonists and underuse of 
inhaled corticosteroids. Arch Intern Med 1999; 159:2697- 704. 
108. Apter AJ, Boston R, George M, Norfleet A, Tenhave T, Coyne JC, et al. Modifiable barriers to adherence to inhaled steroids among adults with asthma: it's not just black and white. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2003; 111:1219 -26. 
109. George M, Freedman TG, Norfleet AL, Feldman HI, Apter AJ. Qualitative research enhanc ed 
understanding of patients' beliefs: results of focus groups with low -income urban African American 
adults with asthma. J Alllergy Clin Immunol 2003; 111:967- 73. 
110. Rand CS, Wise RA, Nides M, Simmons MS, Bleecker ER, Kusek JW, et al. Metered- dose inhaler 
adherence in a clinical trial. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 146:1559- 64. 
111. Riekert KA, Rand CS. Electronic monitoring of medication adherence: when is high- tech best? Clinical 
Psychology in Medical Settings 2002; 9:25 -34. 
112. Cohen JL, Mann DM, Wisnivesky JP, Home R, Leventhal H, Musumeci- Szabo TJ, et al. Assessing the 
validity of self -reported medication adherence among inner -city asthmatic adults: the Medication 
Adherence Report Scale for Asthma. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2009; 103:325- 31. 
113. Holmbec k GN. Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the study of mediators and 
moderators: examples from the child- clinical and pediatric psychology literatures. J Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology 1997; 65:599- 610. 
114. McAlister AL, Perry CL, Parcel GS. How individuals, environments, and health behaviors interact. In: Glanz K, Rimer BK, Viswanath K, editors. Health Behavior and Health Education: theory, research, and 
practice, 4th edition. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2008. p. 169- 88. 
115. Bandura A. Self -efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychol Rev 1977; 84:191 -
215. 
116. Bandura A. Self -efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist 1982; 37:122- 47. 
117. Bandura A. Self -efficacy in changing societies: Cambridge University Press; 1995.  
118. Butterfoss FD, Kegler MC, Francisco VT. Mobilizing Organizations for Health Promotion. In: Glanz K, 
Rimer BK, Viswanath K, editors. Health Behavior and Health Education, Fourth Edition. San Francisco: 
John Wiley & Sons; 2008. p. 335 -57. 
119. Apter AJ, Cheng J, Small D, Albert C, Fein DL, Bennett IM, et al. Asthma Numeracy Skill and Health 
Literacy. J Asthma 2006; 43:705 -10. 
120. Naimi DR, Freedman TG, Ginsburg KR, Bogen D, Rand CS, Apter AJ. Adolescents and  asthma: why 
bother with our meds? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009; 123:1335- 41. 
121. Black HL, Priolo C, Akinyemi D, Gonzalez R, Jackson DS, Garcia L, et al. Clearing clinical barriers: 
enhancing social support using a patient navigator for asthma care. J Asthma 2010; 47:913- 9. 
122. Bogen D, Apter AJ. An adherence logger for a dry -powder inhaler: an new device for medical 
adherence research. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004; 114:863 -8. 
123. Juniper EF, O'Byrne PM, Ferrie PJ, King DR, Roberts JN. Measuring asthma control. Clinic questionnaire or daily diary? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162:1330- 4. 
124. Baker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, Gazmararian JA, Nurss J. Development of a brief test to measure 
functional health literacy. Patient Educ Couns 1999; 38:33- 42. 
125. Griffin JM, Partin MR, Noorbaloochi S, Grill JP, Saha S, Snyder A, et al. Variation in estimates of limited health literacy by assessment instruments and non- response bias. J Gen Intern Med 2010; 25:675- 81. 
126. Juniper EF, Buist AS, Cox FM, Ferrie PJ, King DR. Validation of a standardized version of the Asthma 
Quality of Life Questionnaire. Chest 1999; 115:1265- 70. 
127. Juniper EF, Svensson K, Mork AC, Stahl E. Measurement properties and interpretation of three shortened versions of the asthma control q uestionnaire. Respir Med 2005; 99:553- 8. 
128. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Cox FM, Ferrie PJ, King DR. Development and validation of the Mini Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire. Eur Respir J 1999; 14:32- 8. 
129. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Willan A, Griffith LE. Determining a minimal important change in a disease-specific Quality of Life Questionnaire. J Clin Epidemiol 1994; 47:81 -7. 
130. Rothman K, Greenland S. Modern Epidemiology. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 1998.  
131. Schwartz D, Lellouch J. Explanatory and pragmatic attitudes in therapeutic trials. J Clin Epidemiol 2009; 62:499- 505. 
132. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute Advisory Council, 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/meetings/nhlbac/feb2010sum2.htm#cer . Accessed 8/20/2010. Bethesda, MD: , 
2010.  
133. Piantadosi S. Clinical Trials: A Methodological Perspective. New York: John Wiley, 1997:276 -77. 
134. Schillinger D, Hammer H, Wang F, Palacios J, McLean I, Tang A, et al. Seeing in 3 -D: examining the 
reach of diabetes self -management support strategies in a public health care system. Health Educ 
Behav 2008; 35:664 -82. 
135. Ramsey S, Whitley E, Mears VW, McKoy JM, Everhart RM, Caswell RJ, et al. Evaluating the cost-
effective ness of cancer patient navigation programs: conceptual and practical issues. Cancer 2009; 
115:5394- 403. 
136. Guidelines Implementation Panel Report for Expert Panel Report 3--Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma; Partners Putting Guidelines into Action. US Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, NIH Publication No. 09-
6147, 2008:1- 45. 
137. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention 
http://www.ginasthma.com/Guidelineitem.asp??l1=2&l2=1&intId=1561.accessed  7/23/2010. 2009:1 -92. 
138. Reddel HK, Taylor DR, Bateman ED, Boulet LP, Boushey HA, Busse WW, et al. An official Ameri can 
Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society statement: asthma control and exacerbations: 
standardizing endpoints for clinical asthma trials and clinical practice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 
180:59- 99. 
139. Busse WW, Morgan WJ, Taggart V, Togias A. Asthma Oucomes Workshop: Overview. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. In press   
140. Fulbrigge A, Peden D, Apter AJ, Boushey HA, Camargo CA, Jr., Gern JE, et al. Asthma Outcomes: Exacerbations. J Allergy Clin Immunol. In press. 
141. Evans GW, Lepore SJ. Moderating and mediating processes in environment behavior research. In: 
Moore GT, Marans RW, editors. Advances in environment, behavior and design, Volume 4. New York: 
Plenum Press; 1997. p. 255- 85. 
142. Edwards JR, Lambert LS. Methods for integrating moderation and mediation: a general analytical framework using moderated path analysis. Psychol Methods 2007; 12:1- 22. 
143. Muller D, Judd CM, Yzerbyt VY. When moderation is mediated and mediation is moderated. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 2005; 89:852 -63. 
144. Wilson SR, Strub  P, Buist AS, Knowles SB, Lavori PW, Lapidus J, et al. Shared treatment decision 
making improves adherence and outcomes in poorly controlled asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2010; 181:566- 77. 
145. Fuertes JN, Boylan LS, Fontanella JA. Behavioral indices in medical care outcome: the working alliance, adherence, and related factors. J Gen Intern Med 2009; 24:80 -5. 
146. Fuertes JN, Mislowack A, Bennett J, Paul L, Gilbert TC, Fontan G, et al. The physician- patient working 
alliance. Patient Educ Couns 2007; 66: 29-36. 
147. Oraka E, King ME, Callahan DB. Asthma and serious psychological distress: prevalence and risk 
factors among US adults, 2001 -2007. Chest 2010; 137:609- 16. 
148. Katon WJ, Richardson L, Lozano P, McCauley E. The relationship of asthma and anxiety disorders. 
Psychosom Med 2004; 66:349- 55. 
149. Loerbroks A, Apfelbacher CJ, Bosch JA, Sturmer T. Depressive symptoms, social support, and risk of 
adult asthma in a population- based cohort study. Psychosom Med; 72:309 -15. 
150. Standardization of Spirometry,  1994 Update. American Thoracic Society. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
1995; 152:1107- 36. 
151. Thompson SC, Nanni C, Schwankovsky L. Patient -oriented interventions to improve communication in 
a medical office visit. Health Psychol 1990; 9:390 -404. 
152. Calhoun EA, Whitley EM, Esparza A, Ness E, Greene A, Garcia R, et al. A National Patient Navigator 
Training Program. Health Promot Pract 2008. 
153. Juniper EF, O'Byrne PM, Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, King DR. Development and validation of a questionnaire to measure ast hma control. Eur Respir J 1999; 14:902 -7. 
154. Juniper EF, O'Byrne PM, Roberts JN. Measuring asthma control in group studies: do we need airway calibre and rescue beta2 -agonist use? Respir Med 2001; 95:319 -23. 
155. Juniper EF, Bousquet J, Abetz L, Bateman ED. Identifying 'well -controlled' and 'not well- controlled' 
asthma using the Asthma Control Questionnaire. Respir Med 2006; 100:616- 21. 
156. Leidy NK, Chan KS, Coughlin C. Is the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire a Useful Measure for Low -
Income Asthmati cs? American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 1998; 158:1082- 90. 
157. Wallace LS, Rogers ES, Roskos SE, Holiday DB, Weiss BD. Brief report: screening items to identify 
patients with limited health literacy skills. J Gen Intern Med 2006; 21:874 -7. 
158. Davis TC, Long SW, Jackson RH, Mayeaux EJ, George RB, Murphy PW, et al. Rapid estimate of adult literacy in medicine: a shortened screening instrument. Fam Med 1993; 25:391- 5. 
159. Mahony -Anaya P, Wang X, Tenhave T, Frazier C, Jennings R, Mims  A, et al. Self -efficacy & Situational 
Barriers to Adherence in Asthma among Low -Income Populations of Color. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2007; 175:A547.  
160. Dolce JJ, Crisp C, Manzella B, Richards JM, Hardin JM, Bailey WC. Medication adherence patterns in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chest 1991; 99:837- 41. 
161. Spielberger CD, Gorsuch RL, Lushene R, Vagg PR, Jacobs GA. Manual: State -Trait Anxiety Inventory 
for Adults. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc./Mind Garden, 1983.  
162. Radloff LS. The CES -D Scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general population. 
Applied Psychological Measurement 1977; 1:385 -401. 
163. Gold MR, Russell LB, Siegel JE, Weinstein MC. Cost -effectiveness in health and medicine. New York: 
Oxfor d University Press; 1996.  
164. Sullivan SD, Liljas B, Buxton M, Lamm CJ, O'Byrne P, Tan WC, et al. Design and analytic considerations in determining the cost -effectiveness of early intervention in asthma from a multinational 
clinical trial. Control Clin Tr ials 2001; 22:420 -37. 
165. Bruce ML, Ten Have TR, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Katz, II, Schulberg HC, Mulsant BH, et al. Reducing 
suicidal ideation and depressive symptoms in depressed older primary care patients: a randomized 
controlled trial. Jama 2004; 291:1081-9 1. 
166. Ten Have TR, Kunselman AR, Pulkstenis EP, Landis JR. Mixed effects logistic regression models for 
longitudinal binary response data with informative drop -out. Biometrics 1998; 54:367- 83. 
167. Altman DG. Practical statistics for medical research. London: Chapman and Hall; 1991.  
168. Polsky D, Willke RJ, Scott K, Schulman KA, Glick HA. A comparison of scoring weights for the EuroQol 
derived from patients and the general public. Health Econ 2001; 10:27- 37. 
169. Krueger RA, Casey MA. Focus Groups: A practical guide for applied research. 3 ed. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publisher; 2000.  
170. Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory, Procedures, and Techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications; 1990.  
171. Clerisme -Beaty EM, Bart lett SJ, Teague WG, Lima J, Irvin CG, Cohen R, et al. The Madison Avenue 
effect: how drug presentation style influences adherence and outcome in patients with asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011; 127:406- 11. 
172. Glick HA. Sample size and power for cost -effectiveness analysis (part 2): the effect of maximum 
willingness to pay. Pharmacoeconomics 2011; 29:287- 96. 
173. Glick HA. Sample size and power for cost -effectiveness analysis (part 1). Pharmacoeconomics 2011; 
29:189- 98. 
 