Protocol #201600785  Page 1 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021   
Augmenting Cognitive Training In Older Adult s 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 6/16/202 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol #201600785  Page 2 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Protocol  – IRB # 201600785  
1. Project Title  
Augmenting Cognitive Training In Older Adults : The ACT Study  
2. Investigator(s):  
University of Florida -  
Adam J. Woods, PhD – PI – (Contact PI)  
Ronald Cohen, Ph .D. – Co-PI  
Michael Marsiske, Ph .D. – Co- PI  
Mingz hou Ding, Ph.D., - Co-I 
Christiaan Leeuwenburgh , Ph.D.  - Co-I 
Samuel Wu, Ph.D. – Co-I 
Eric Porges, PhD - Co-I 
 
Staff:  
Andrew O’Shea, M.S.  
Roxanne Razaei, B.A.  
Jessica Kraft, M.A .  
Steven DeKosky, M.D.  
Aprinda Indahlastari, Ph.D.  
Yunfeng Dai , Ph.D.  
Yuting Y ang 
Kristin Calfee, B.A.  
Alexander Albizu, B.S.  
Daniela Carballo , B.S.  
Michael Gordon , B.S.  
Emanuel Boutzoukas , B.S.  
Nicole Evangelista , B.S.  
Hanna Hausman , B.A.  
Danielle Guess , B.S.  
Joshua Crow, Ph.D.  
Cheshire Hardcastle  
Ayden Dunn  
Claudia Corbo  
Kailey La nger 
Stacey Alvarez Alvarado  
Ruogu Fang  
Skylar Stolte  
Kyle See  
Guanhong Miao  
Crysten Repetti  
Christina Clarke  
Johnna Cesta  
Matthew Garrepy  
Samantha Pedersen  
Nathan Barkdull  
 
 
Protocol #201600785  Page 3 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021   
 
3. Abstract:  
The current study will investigate methods for enhancing cognitive  training effects in healthy 
older adults by employing a combination of interventions  to potentially  facilitat e neural plasticity 
and optimiz e readiness for learning. Adults over the age of 65 represent the fastest growing 
group in the US population. As su ch, age -related cognitive decline represents a major concern 
for public health. Recent research suggests that cognitive training in older adults can improve 
cognitive performance, with effects lasting up to 10 years. However, these effects are typically 
limited to the tasks trained, with little transfer to other cognitive abilities or everyday skills. A two-
phase adaptive randomized clinical trial will examine the individual and combined impact of 
pairing cognitive training with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) . tDCS is a method of 
non-invasive brain stimulation that directly stimulates brain regions involved in active cognitive 
function and  could  enhance neural plasticity when paired with a training task. We will compare 
changes in cognitive a nd brain function resulting from CT and ET combined with tDCS using a 
comprehensive neurocognitive, clinical, and multimodal neuroimaging assessment of brain 
structure, function, and metabolic state. Functional magnetic resonance imaging ( FMRI) will be 
used to assess brain response during working memory, attention, and memory encoding; the 
active cognitive abilities trained by CT. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) will 
assess cerebral metabolites, including GABA concentrations sensitive to neural  plasticity. We 
hypothesize that: 1) tDCS will enhance neurocognitive function, brain function, and functional 
outcomes from CT, with combined CT  and tDCS providing the most benefit; 2) Effects of tDCS 
on CT will be maintained up to 12 months following tra ining, and 3) Neuroimaging biomarkers of 
cerebral metabolism, neural plasticity (GABA concentrations) and functional brain response 
(FMRI) during resting vs. active cognitive tasks will predict individual response to tDCS. To date, 
no studies have examined  combined intervention strategies using CT or optimization of learning 
and functional status through facilitation of active versus resting brain states in the elderly. The 
present study will provide a unique window into critical mechanisms for combating co gnitive 
decline in a rapidly aging US population and possible novel methods for counteracting this 
looming public health crisis.  
4.  Background:  
 
4.1. Public Health / Clinical Significance : 1) Increased life expectancy has resulted in a 
marked increase of the older population. 2) Cognitive changes occur with advanced age that 
affect functional and health status. 3) While Al zheimer’s and related neurodegenerative 
diseases cause the most dramatic cognitive disturbances in the elderly, cogn itive aging occurs 
even among people considered to be neurologically healthy. 4) Even mild neurocognitive 
disturbances affect people’s daily functioning, health status, and quality of life. 5) Alterations of 
brain structure and function occur as people reach advanced age, alo ng with cerebral metabolic 
changes, that are associated with neurocognitive decline. 6) Our preliminary data suggests that 
baseline cerebral metabolite (MRS) and functional neuroimaging (FMRI) indices are associated 
with baseline neurocognitive functioning  and predictive of subsequent age -related cognitive 
decline and brain disturbances. 7) There is a paucity of preventive and treatment interventions 
for averting cognitive aging and enhancing cognitive function. 8) Certain cognitive training (CT) 
approaches  improve specific areas of cognitive performance, al though their relative efficacy and 
mechanisms of action are not well understood. 9) Most CT approaches do not genera lize well to 
cognitive abilities beyond those being trained or to everyday functional ab ilities. Efforts are 
Protocol #201600785  Page 4 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  needed to improve the generalizability of CT. 10) Methods exist which could  feasibly  potentiate 
CT (e.g., tDCS), but they have not been rigorously tested in RCTs.  
 
4.2. Scientific significance.  1) While there is evidence that CT can i mprove cognitive 
functioning, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. 2) The efficacy of CT likely is 
dependent on the plasticity of neural systems. 3) Evidence that certain types of neurochemical, 
electrical and behavioral stimulation potentiat es synaptic plasticity and e nhances learning has 
been demonstrated in laboratory animals. It is important to be able to measure these changes in 
humans during the course of learning such as that occurring with CT. Yet, in vivo human studies 
of these effect s are diff icult for obvious reasons. 4) Functional (FMRI) and cerebral metabolic 
(MRS) neuroimaging indirectly assess changes in neural plasticity during cognitive tasks. 5) 
Many open questions exist regarding the brain’s stru ctural and functional connecti vity in 
relationship to regional cerebral metabolites. Achieving better understanding of these 
relationships is important, since cerebral metabolic alterations may contribute neuropathology 
and perhaps even normal cognitive aging. 6) Extensive research exi sts for each of these 
neuroimaging modalities in isolation for various diseases, but multimodal studies employing 
these approaches simultaneously are less common, particularly in studies of normal aging or 
CT. 7) Various CT approaches exist, but only a few  have been tested and shown to be effective 
in larger scale clinical trials (e.g., UFOV, dual N -back training). RCTs are needed to test the 
relative efficacy of these CT approaches, and whether there is value in using them in 
combination. 8) Brain stimulat ion may potentiate neural plasticity based on animal studies. Most 
of these approaches have yet to be tested in conjunction with CT in humans. 9) It is unclear 
whether optimal CT benefit is achieved by bolstering activation of brain regions necessary for 
the tasks to be performed. 10) Individual differences exist in the ability of people to benefit from 
CT. 11) State -of-the-art neuroimaging analysis methods may yield insights into interactions 
among brain ne tworks/systems, and ways to optimally integrate st ructural and functional 
connectivity with cerebral MRS and cognitive outcomes. 12) We will employ state -of-the-art 
statistical methods, extending predictive modeling and causal inference approaches for 
neuroimaging.  
 
4.3. Clinical and scientific backgroun d.  
4.3.1. Cognitive aging and dysfunction affects health status, Quality of Life (QOL), and 
functional capacity. Brain dysfunction resulting from neurodegenerative disease or other 
medical condition adversely affects overall health status.7-11 Even mild cognitive deficits affect 
QOL, diet, physical activity and other health behaviors,10,12,13 and are often stronger predictors 
of health outcomes than other physical factors,7 but typically receive less clinical attention. 
Accor dingly, cognitive aging has considerable functional relevance.  
4.3.2. Cognitive training. Various CT approaches enhance cognitive functioning in the elderly 
and remediate cogn itive disorders. While improvements in cognitive performance are reported 
in man y studies, this research suffers from a lack of well -conducted RCTs designed to 
determine the specific factors contributing to cognitive improvements. However, several 
approaches are effective in improving cognitive performance in the context of large RCTs . The 
ACTIVE study showed that CT improved cognitive performance and resulted in some 
generalization to other functional abilities.  
4.3.3. Benefits of cognitive training. Various CT approaches exist  with differing degrees of 
demonstrated efficacy . While i mproved cognitive performance is often reported, this research 
has suffered from a lack of well -controlled RCTs, experimental designs that did not enable the 
basis for effects to be determined, and limited transfer of training.14-18 Yet, findings over the past 
decade (e.g., ACTIVE) suggest that certain CT approaches are effective for enhancing cognitive 
aging.17,19-36 Significant cognitive and fun ctional improvements occur in laboratory and home -
based CT studies.19,23,31,37-41 Effect sizes generally exceed d =1.0 i mmediately after CT, and 
Protocol #201600785  Page 5 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  even after 10 years ( η2 >0.6).  In ACTIVE,22,24,32,36,42 people receiving CT outperformed those 
who were untrained, with normal cognitive aging attenuated. We considered and selected CT 
approaches based on conse nsus of our study team (Woods, Marsiske, Edwards, Czaja, et al.), 
and evidence supporting their effectiveness. Three types of CT training have been particularly 
effective in studies by our group and others: 1) UFOV; 2) N -back Workin g Memory; 3) Attention -
arousal training, all available in the PositScience BrainHQ suite . Specifically , we will be using 
eight training programs from the PositScience BrainHQ suite described below.  
 
 
 
Attention/Speed of Processing  
1. Hawk Eye - works on visual  precision, which helps the brain perceive what is 
seen quickly and accurately so that it can be recall ed better.  
2. Divided Attention - requires the brain to focus in on and react to particular 
details —matching colors, shapes, and/or fill patterns —while at th e same time 
dismissing competing information.  
3. Target Tracker - is designed to help build divided attention by requiring 
participants  to track several items moving around their screen at the same time  
4. Double Decision  - requires visual search and selective at tention to peripheral 
objects among distractors.20 Difficulty gradually increases relative to object 
similarity, presentation rate, and distractor complexity and eccentricity.  
 
Working Memory  
1. To Do List Training - the brain hears a set of instructions, then  uses its memory of 
those instructions to follow them in order. The instructions get longer and more 
complex over time at the task, making greater demands o n the working memory 
systems.  
2. Memory Grid  - Auditory processing is one of the most important buildin g blocks 
of memory. Only when participants take in information with crystal clarity can the 
brain store it accurately and recall it clearly later.  In Memory Grid , the task is  to 
match cards representing syllables together.  
3. Auditory Aces - Participant will  be presented with auditory information about 
playing cards. The information is presented one card at a time. The task is to 
decide if the current card information matches the card information presented a 
specific number of steps back in the sequence.  
4. Card S hark- N-back working memory task that varies on whether the current 
target matches stimuli presented 0 -n steps befo re and presentation speed, 
leading to increased difficulty,44,45 and age -sensitivity46.  
  
4.3.4. Generalization and functional outcome. Many CT inte rventions fail to generate transfer 
to functional outcomes. Training transfer has been most studied and shown on UFOV. In 
ACTIVE, ten -year maintenance of UFOV training effects occurred with evidence of substantial 
transfer at 5 and 10 years. UFOV training resulted in fewer self -reported limitations of everyday 
activities,24 higher locus of control 30 and perceived health -related quality of life,  68 better 
subjective health,29 and less depression.27 68 At ten years, UFOV -trained people still reported 
less limitation in daily activities36. Self -reported driving cessa tion and archival accident records 
indicated lower odds of crashes and driving cessation for UFOV -trained elders at three,25 five,28 
and ten -years post training.35 In other RCTs involving greater sustained adaptive CT dosages 
Protocol #201600785  Page 6 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  (similar to the currently proposed study) superior performance and reaction times were found on 
a driving -simulator and  also for instrumental activities of daily living (look up phone numbers, 
read pill bottles, etc.).23 For the other two intervention components, near transfer to other 
cognitive tasks has been shown. N -back training transfers to matrix reasoning44 and to 
sustained attention and self -reported cognitive fun ction in older adul ts for at least three months 
post training.48 Tonic/phasic attenti on training transfers to spatial selective attention and the 
temporal distribution of attention (attentional blink).66 
4.3.5. Brain stimulation to potentiate training. Since the pioneering work of Penfield, it has 
been recognized that sensory, motor and cognitive functions could be altered via ele ctrical 
stimulation of specific brain regions. In laboratory animals, brain stimulation represented an 
alternative approach to experimental lesions, enabling both the potentiation and inhibition of 
neural activity depending on where in the brain stimulatio n was applied. Until recently, most 
human brain stimulation studies involved neurosurgically implanted electrodes, which has 
obvious limitations for general clinical use.  
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)  is a non -invasive brain stimulation m ethod that 
alters the sub threshold membrane potential of neurons, facilitates neural plasticity and learning, 
and increases regional blood flow while modula ting local GABA concentrations during 
stimulation.69-89 During tDCS, a weak electrical current is applied to the scalp that penetrates 
skin, bone, CSF and the meninges to stimulate underlying cortical and subcortical tissue.90-95 
tDCS applied to dysfunctional cortical regions improves performance on a variety of cognitive 
tasks.96-99 Bilateral tDCS to the frontal cort ices improves decision -making, attention and working 
memory performance in older adults.100-103 Improvements from a single session of tDCS have 
been shown to last for up to five years in healthy adults.104-108 Small pilot RCTs (n=20/group) 
pairing CT with bila teral frontal tDCS show significant and lasting improvement in older adults 
experiencing declining cognitive function.108-112 Maintenance of these tDCS and CT effe cts have 
been shown to last beyond one year. 104,105,107,108,110 These studies demonstrate that CT 
combined with tDCS leads to lasting improvement in CT effectiveness for older adults and 
patie nts. Research suggests that increased regional blood flow and decreased GABA 
concentrations during tDCS facilitate the brain’s neural plastic response to paired training 
tasks.75,80,83,84,89,113-117 Pairing CT with tDCS to combat age -related cognitive decline  may 
potentially  hold great promise for older adults.  
 
4.3.6 . Age -associated brain changes. It is well known that with advanced age, humans are 
vulnerable to ne urodegenerative diseases that cause brain pathology, usually evident on post -
mortem autopsy.118-127 Though less pervasive, neuropathology is also relatively commo n in 
elderly adults without documented brain disease.128  
4.3.6 .1. Age -associated brain change on structural neuroimaging. Changes in structural 
brain volume an d mo rphometry on MRI, along with specific abnormalities, occur with advanced 
age, particularly when there is vascular co -morbidity.129-160  Raz et al. showed cortical and 
subcortical volume loss of .5 -4% per year across different cortical and subcortical regions in 
older adults without overt brain disease.129,133,141,143,161 We hav e shown cortical and white matter 
volume loss across the lifespan in past large international studies.146,147,162-167 
4.3.6 .3. Functional neuroimaging provides a potentially powerful method for assessing 
healthy and abnormal brain functioning (see Cohen and Sweet, for a review168). FMRI is 
noninvasive, can be used in conjunction with stru ctural MRI and MRS, and is sensitive to 
functional brain abnormalities.153,157,169-179 It holds promise as a biomarker of cognitive aging, 
neural plasticity, and cognitive improvements following CT. Age -associated alterations in brain 
activation on FMRI during both rest state and active cognitive tasks have bee n demonstrated in 
many past studies. Unfortunately, the clinical pote ntial of FMRI has yet to be fully realized, in 
part because many different paradigms have been employed across studies. Furthermore, 
longitudinal change in BOLD response as a function of aging has been examined in relatively 
Protocol #201600785  Page 7 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  few studies, and almost no large RCTs. Reduced cognitive reserve with aging has been linked 
to a number of FMRI effects, including HAROLD and PASA.180-183 Chang et al. showed that 
cognitive reserve influences FMRI activation, with a reduced “d ynamic range” of BOLD 
response during tasks relative to rest explaining this effect.184-190 The concept of dynamic range 
is both important and useful, and will be discussed in greater detail when reviewing preliminary 
data (C4).  
4.3.6 .4. Cerebral metabolites ( MRS): Proton MRS, which is sensitive t o chemical compounds 
containing hydrogen, useful for measuring brain metabolites, including N -Acetyl Aspartate 
(NAA), choline (Cho), myo -inositol (MI), creatine (Cr), and glutamate -glutamine complex (Glx). 
Our group and others have shown that MRS abnormali ties occur among people with a variety of 
age-related brain disorders, including neurodegenerative disease, cerebrovascular disease, and 
HIV191-206, with reduced NAA and elevated MI associated with cognitive dysfunction and 
conversion to dementia. Elevated Cho and MI reflect inflammatory processes and glial and cell 
membrane disturbances, and are differentially associated with cognitive pe rformance, clinical 
status, and also cortical, subcortical, and white matter volumes on MRI204-211. Thus, MRS is 
predictive of clinically significant neurocogniti ve dysfunction.206,208-210 
GABA, the brain’s principle inhibitory neurotransmitter,212 is essential for synaptic 
communication and regulation of neuronal excitability,213 and neural plasticity.214-218 It plays a 
key role in learning and memory219-235 and modulates other behavioral and affective functions, 
including executive control and attention.236-238 Decreased cerebral GABA occurs with advanced 
age,219,223,227,230 and GABA dysregulation occurs in neurological and psychiatric conditions.49,239-
267 GABA deli vered to the frontal cortex and hippocampus in animals facilitates cognitive and 
working memory performance. GABA can now be reliability measured using pro ton MRS,5,268-273 
based on seminal work by Edden (consultant).274-278 GABA pr ovides an in vivo biomarker of 
neural plasticity in brain ROIs important for the cognitive functions to be trained in our study. 276 
84 
 
Summary and Conceptual Model.  Age-associated 
functional, structural and metabolic brain changes 
occur, even in the absence of frank 
neurodegenerative disease. CT holds promise for 
reducing the adverse effects of cognitive aging, 
enhancing neural plastic ity, cognitive efficiency, 
functional capacity, and quality of life. In theory, CT 
benefits could be augmented by coupling it with 
other interventions that either in crease neural 
plasticity. Yet, relatively few of these approaches 
have been tested in RCTs, and the mechanisms underlying their effects are largely u nknown. 
Even less is known about the combined effects of CT with tDCS. Our preliminary data provides 
strong  support for CT to combat co gnitive aging, and also for the effects of tDCS on cognition 
and brain function. We hypothesize that CT leads to improv ements in neural plasticity (GABA 
MRS) and functional brain response (FMRI). In turn, this can lead to improv ed cerebral 
metabolic health and structural brain preservation. Coupling CT with tDCS will increase neural 
plasticity in brain areas important for working memory, focused attention, and executive control, 
improve effectiveness of CT, and ultimately co gnitive health (see Figure 1 for conceptual 
model).  
5. Specific Aims:  
 
Figure 1 
Protocol #201600785  Page 8 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Aim 1.  Determine whether neurocognitive improvement and longer -term functional outcome (as 
measured by “ec ological assessment”) are better when CT is coupled with tDCS, an intervention that  
will increase neuroplasticity and augment training effects.  
H1.1. CT will produce significant improvements on a composite measure of cognitive training 
performance on the POSIT Science BrainHQ tasks (Posit Composite Score) compared to 
the treatment contr ol condition. This aim will be assessed at the end of Phase 1.  
H1.2.  tDCS combined with CT will produce significant improvements on a composite measure of 
attention, working memory, processing speed, and executive function (NIH Toolbox Fluid 
Cognition Comp osite Score, NIHTB FCCS) compared to the sham treatment control 
condition. FCCS will serve as the study primary outcome measure.  
H1.3. Near and far transfer of CT and tDCS will occur, as assessed by the UM Functional Battery 
Composite Index and comprehensi ve neurocognitive assessment.   
Aim 2.  Determine whether CT combined with tDCS leads to greater functiona l and metabolic brain 
changes (F MRI, MRS). Effects will parallel Aim 1.  
H2.1.  Compared to TC, CT will decrease activation in working memory and attenti onal brain 
systems (dorsolateral prefrontal co rtex, medial frontal cortex, inferior parietal lobe, 
supplementary motor association cortex), reflecting increased neural efficiency.  
H2.2.  Combined CT + tDCS will potentiate these effects.  
H2.3.  Cerebral met abolite alterations will occur secondary to CT and tDCS, with long -term 
increases in GABA and N-acetyl aspartate ( NAA) concentrations, and decreased choline 
(Cho) and myoinositol (MI) concentrations in the frontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex. 
CT and tDCS will modulate MRS GABA in frontal areas.   
Exploratory Aim. Examine which baseline factors (e.g., clinical, demographic, neuroimaging, 
cognitive) best predict ind ividual differences in neurocognitive and functional outcome.  
HE.1.   White matter abn ormalities on FLAIR MRI will predict poorer outcome.  
HE.2.  Metabolic -vascular risk factors/disorders (e.g., diabetes) will be predictive of reduced 
outcome.  
HE.3.   Alzheimer’s disease risk factors (APOE4 and familial history) will predict poorer outcome . 
6. Research Plan:  
6.1. Experimental design.  This study employs a two -phase randomized clinical trial with 360 
participants  total across  two sites (University of Florida and University of Arizona; 240 at the University 
of Florida and 120 at  the University  of Arizona ). UF will be the parent site for the study. An in itial cohort 
of 80 participants collected across the two sites will be assigned to one of four conditions as shown in 
Figure 2. Half of the recruited sa mple in Phase 1 will undergo CT; the other half will undergo training 
control (TC). The first interim analysis, to be pe rformed when the first cohort of 80 completes 12 -month 
follow -up (Phase 1), will investigate whether CT is significantly better than TC thereby enabling 
elimination of the TC cond ition. CT has previously been established with strong e ffects on cognitive 
and functional outcomes. If CT and TC are equally effective, groups will be collapsed at initiation of 
Phase 2 for planned assessment of adjunctive tDCS effects. If CT is more effec tive than TC, as 
previously shown, TC will be eliminated. Data from Phase 1 will also provide important mechanistic 
insight regarding neural mechanisms of CT vs. a well -matched education training control (TC). In 
Phase 2, the remaining 280 participants wil l be randomized to the two CT arms (i.e., eliminating the 
TC arms). After the remaining 280 participants have co mpleted follow up in the CT arms (including 
those in Phase 1, total n=3 60) analyses will investigate the benefit of adjunctive 
administration of  CT with tDCS. Participants will be assessed at three 
primary time points: 1) baseline pre -training; 2) post -12 weeks of CT /TC + 
stimulation /sham ; and 3) one year follow -up after all training (see Figure 3 
for timeline).  This design will enable l ongitudina l analyses of CT and tDCS 
effects individually and in combination. We will examine CT and tDCS effects 
on cognitive performance, functional and metabolic neuroimaging measures, 
and everyday fun ctional abilities. At each assessment, we will obtain clinical and medical history, 
neurocognitive measures, and neuroimaging (structural MRI, FMRI, MRS). All participants will 
undergo neuroimaging at baseline, following CT, and at one -year fo llow-up.  
 

Protocol #201600785  Page 9 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  6.2. Study participants and randomization procedure . We will recr uit 240 older adults 
(women = 120; age: 65 -89 years)  at UF . Study participants will consist of healthy individuals 
who have expressed an interest in taking part in an intervention aimed at optimizing and 
possibly preserving cognitive functioning and brain health. Web -based permuted block 
randomization (with block size 8) will be used. In phase 1, each block will have two participants 
for each arm. In phase 2, each block will have four participants for each remaining arm. We will 
enroll people with evidence of age -related cognitive decline as defined by performance below 
the 80th percentile on the Cognitive Training  assessment. People with pre -existing dementia, 
neurological brain disease, or who meet criteria for a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI ) will be excluded.  
 
6.2.1. Experimental Design Considerations and Limitations:  CT Approach.  The 
POSITScience BrainHQ treatment program was selected because it 1) provides specific training 
tasks directed at three essential cognitive domains tied to our a ims and hypotheses (attention, 
working memory, exec utive control) that correspond with the neurocognitive and functional 
neuroimaging measures to be studied; 2) is shown to produce significant cognitive and 
functional improvements with good e ffect sizes in  past RCTs (ACTIVE) with up to 10 year 
durability and transfer of training to measures of self -reported everyday functioning; 3) provides 
a “cognitive treatment engine282” which alone has a very highly likelihood of yielding significant 
cognitive and functional improv ements, enabling us to test the augmenting effects of tDCS; and 
4) is computerized, well standar dized, and efficiently implemented.  
Combined CT . We selected a combined CT approach rather than testing one specific training 
task: 1) This would optimize CT treatment effects for this primary intervention, providing a strong 
and reliable engine of change with  which to examine effects of tDCS; 2) This approach enables 
us to affect several related cognitive functions that are strongly dependent on neural plasticity of 
the frontal cortex; and 3) This approach would maximize participants interest and motivation 
versus a single task that could become boring.  
tDCS . Brain stimulation provides a means of directly augmenting CT effects. tDCS was s elected 
from possible alternatives (e.g., transcranial magnetic stimulation) based on research and data 
by Woods (PI), incl uding its safety profile, ability to facil itate neural plasticity, and potential for 
application outside of research settings. Frontal stimulation was chosen based on prior and 
preliminary studies demonstrating significant impact on attention, working -memo ry, and other 
cognitive abilities to be trained during CT. 2mA tDCS was chosen based on prior research 
demonstrating that this parameter excites, rather than inhibits, activity 
in stimulated neurons. 283  
NIH Toolbox . A battery of neurocognitive tests was selected that could 
be completed in 1.5 hrs for all participants. A battery was selected that 
would enable optimal assessment of attention, executive functio ns, 
and working memory, but would also include some measures of 
learning and memory, and to a lesser extent other cognitive functions. 
We use the NIH Toolbox -Cognitive as a core element of this 
assessment, as it: 1) Can be completed in 30 minutes; 2) Is 
compute rized and well standardized with norms from a large national 
cohort of older adults; 3) Provides both accuracy and r esponse time 
measures; 4) Emphasizes the cognitive domains of relevance to the 
study; and 5) Has been the subject of considerable focus  and 
investment by NIA. This study provides an ideal vehicle for 
implementing this battery. We su pplement the Toolbox with measures 
to provide more coverage of working memory, attention, learning and 
memory.  
Functional outcome.  Since important clinical qu estions remain with 

Protocol #201600785  Page 10 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  respect to the extent to which CT generalizes to other cognitive abilities and everyday 
functioning, a set of functional and ecologically derived outcome measures will be used that 
were developed and used by Czaja (consultant) and her c olleagues. Like the NIH Toolbox, this 
battery is co mputerized, well standardized with good norms on accuracy and response time 
from older adults. It taps into important everyday functions such as using an ATM machine and 
refilling a prescription. See Appen dix 2 for detailed manual.  
Neuroimaging measures . We will focus on functional (FMRI) and cerebral metabolic (proton 
MRS) indices for two reasons: 1) These modalities are most linked to and likely sensitive to CT -
associated neural plasticity and brain chang es; and 2) Changes in these domains are likely to 
occur over the course of training compared to structural neuroimaging measures. We include 
active FMRI tasks related to the cognitive functions to be trained, as well as a passive resting 
state condition to  examine the DMN. With respect to MRS, we use a single voxel method to 
achieve optimal sensitivity and will measure from a single  ROI (frontal) corresponding to task 
and resting state associated brain areas. Along with Creatine (Cr), we will examine cerebr al 
metabolites sensitive neuronal loss and membrane disturbances (NAA, GLx), and pro -
inflammatory processes (Ch, MI). We will also measure cerebral GABA concentrations using a 
state of art MRS approach that will reflect neural plasticity in ROIs. The MRS i ndices will be 
examined for Aims 2.  
 
6.3. Procedural sequence.  The sequence and flow of the assessments to be conducted at 
baseline and each su bsequent assessment is shown in Subject Timeline . 
Screening Visit  
Task  Estimated Time  
Informed Consent  45 
Full m edical History/rx drugs  15 
MRI screening form  5 
NACC UDS  45 

Protocol #201600785  Page 11 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  WTAR  5 
BDI 5 
Computer use questionnaire  5 
Vision/color vision/hearing  10 
AD-8 3 
Cognitive Training  assessment  20 
 
Assessment Visits  
Task  Estimated Time  
MRI scan  60 
MRI scan practic e 20 
MRI safety questionnaire  5 
NIH toolbox  45 
Computerized functional task  40 
HVLT  20 
Stroop  10 
PASAT  10 
COWA & Animals  5 
Digit Span  10 
Symbol Digit Coding  5 
Letter -Number Sequencing  5 
Trails A&B  5 
BVMT -R 20 
BDI 5 
STAI  5 
PSQI (sleep)  5 
SF-36 5 
Apathy scale  2 
PROMIS  2 
AUDIT -10 8 
DAST -10 5 
UCLA loneliness  3 
Social Network Scale  5 
CALCAP  8 
IADL Questionnaire  5 
Expectancy Questionnaire  5 
Driving Questionnaire  10 
10 meter walk test  5 
Abbreviated Medical History/rx drugs  10 
Cognitive  Training Assessment  20 
 
Protocol #201600785  Page 12 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  We will inform potential participants about the study, and facilitate the informed consent  process 
using the IRB approved ICF . We will then screen for inclusion/exclusion criteria and schedule 
them for baseline evaluation. All ass essments are identical otherwise.  Assessment visits will be 
split over a two-day period, to reduce participant burden and ensure quality data collection.  
 
6.4 Cognitive Training. CT will involve sixty sessions over 12 -weeks  (40 hours total) ; this 
includes  ten daily sessions  combined with stimulation  for two weeks, then one weekly session  
combined with stimulation  for the remaining ten weeks.  The remaining 40 sessions will be 
performed by participants at their home on days they do not receive stimulation.  Training 
platform . CT employs a n eight component, PositScience BrainHQ suite via its researcher porta l 
(described in section 4.3.3). These tasks are web -based and multi -platform (i.e., Windows, 
Mac). Participants will be required to have minimum screen siz es and specific viewing 
distances. The interface masks perfo rmance feedback to reduce frustration in the control 
condition. Study interventionists will provide weekly performance summaries. The rationale and 
task demands for each component were d escribed e arlier (A.3.3). These CT are commercially 
available ( www.positscience.com ), with well -documented protocols/manuals (See Appendix 1) 
and thus not described in detail here. Participants will have computers  supplied, with training 
and orientation sessions and 24/7 support.  
Training control . The TC condition will serve as a co ntrol for the CT condition. TC will involve 
sixty sessions over 12 -weeks  (40 hours total) ; this includes ten daily sessions  combined with 
stimulation  for two weeks, then one weekly session  combined with  stimulation  for the remaining 
ten weeks. The remaining 40 sessions will be performed by participants at their home on days 
they do not receive stimulation.  The duration and frequency of TC will match that of CT. TC 
involves watching educational videos produced by the National Geographic Channel, which 
cover a range of topics such as history, nature, and wildlife. Participants will be asked to 
complete questions on the content of the videos to ens ure sustained attention.  
Cognitive Training  assessment.  An assessment of performance on the 8 cognitive training 
tasks will be given at the screening  and assessment  visits. The assessment consists of ten 
levels  (comprised of the games described in section  4.3.3.)  designed to challenge working 
memory, attention, executive function, and speed of processing. The assessment takes 
approximately twenty minutes to complete.    
 
6.5. Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: Bilateral Frontal tDCS:  A Soterix Clinica l Trials 
Direct Current Stim ulator will apply 20 minutes of 2.0mA direct current through two biocarbon 
rubber electrodes encased in saline soaked 5cm2 sponges ( 8cc of 0.9% saline solution) placed 
over the frontal cortices at F3 and F4 (10 -20 system). Based  on our well -established 
computational modeling workflow (C.4.1), F3/F4 stimulation delivers a broad pattern of frontal 
stimulation (see C.4.1d). Current inflow will occur  on the right (F4), and outflow on the left (F3). 
Impedance quality will be ≤10kΩ to insure proper stimulation of brain tissue. Sham tDCS:  Sham 
stimulation is performed with the same device and all proc edures will be identical except for the 
duration of st imulation. Participants will receive 30 seconds of 2 mA of direct cu rrent stimulation 
at the beginning of the session. Participants habituate to the sensation of tDCS within 30 -60 
seconds of stim ulation. This procedure provides the same sensation of tDCS w ithout the full 
duration of stimulation, making it a highly e ffective sham procedure. Blinding:  The device has 
built in RCT double blinding protocols. Soterix will communicate only with Dr. Wu (Co -
I/statistician) to de -identify data for analyses . Physiolog ical Recording : During stimulation 
sessions participants will be asked to wear a special wristband that will be used to record 
physiological information such as pulse. Quality Control:  We will take a brief set of pictures of 
the participant’s head after th e electrodes are placed to make sure that the electrodes are in the 
correct location.  These photos will be used to create a 3D model of the participant’s head that 
will give us accurate information about where the electrodes were placed.   
Protocol #201600785  Page 13 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021   
6.6. Neuroimagi ng Methods.  We will conduct neuroimaging on a Siemens 3.0 Tesla research 
dedicated scanner with an existing research agreement.  Scanning will take 1 hour to acquire: 1) 
Structural MRI (T1 , FLAIR ), 2) FMRI (EPI -BOLD), 3) Proton MR Spectroscopy (MRS).  
6.6.1 . FMRI paradigms. We will present the t wo FMRI tasks (2 -Back,  UFOV ) using E -Prime 2 
software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA), with the video signal on a screen 
behind the partic ipant’s head. The screen is viewed through a double -mirror at tached to the 
head coil. An MR -compatible piano -key r esponse box attached to the stimulus presentation 
computer will collect performance data. We will apply a cushioned -pillow head stabilizer to 
minimize head movement during scanning.  
2-Back.  This task wi ll measure brain changes due to our N -back training.  We will assess verbal 
working memory on a 2 -Back task, as in past studies153,157. 
Consonants are visually presented briefly with a  small rest 
period between each.  Participants determine if each stimulus is 
the same or different from previously stimuli, responding by 
binary button press (yes vs. no). Executive c ontrol, phonemic 
buffering, and sub -vocal phonemic rehearsal are required. 0 -back and 2 -Back conditions are 
alternated in a block design with two 5 -minute runs of eight blocks (consonant lists), with four 
blocks of the 0 -Back and four blocks of the 2 -Back.  0-Back: F our blocks of nine consonants of 
random case and order (33% targets). Yes -no responses are made if targets that match stimuli 
occurring two earlier. 2 -Back: Four blocks of 15 consonants (33% targets) will be 
pseudorandomly presented across the vi sual field. Accuracy and RT are recorded.  
 
Useful Field of View. This task will measure brain changes due to alterations in attention and 
decision -making processes due to BrainHQ Double Decision and Freeze Frame training.  We will 
assess a ttentional and dec ision-making processes on a scanner adapted event related UFOV task 
that requires participants to simult aneously apprehend the identification of a centrally located target 
(car or truck) and the location of a target (car) among a parametrically manipula ted array of distractors 
(0-47 distractors). Following a visual mask, participants then make a two -alternative forced choice 
(correct or incorrect) decision based on whether both the central target and distal target (without 
distractors) are identical to what  was seen in the prior display (Figure 17).Two five -minute blocks of 56 
trials are presented. Accuracy and reaction times are recorded. Jitter prior to stimulus presentation 
and response probe allows contrasts assessing unique activation associated with at tentional and 
decision-making brain regions, providing mechanistic insight into cognitive training effects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resting State.  Participants will also be asked to rest for 6 minutes while functional data is being 
collected to assess resting state act ivation.  
 
6.6.2 . Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy ( MRS ): GABA -edited spectra will be 
acquired using the MEGA -PRESS experiment, from a 3x3x3 cm3 voxels (medial frontal ). 
Spectra will be analyzed u sing Gannet  and LCModel to assess cerebral metabolites and 
neurotransmitter concentrations.295. 412,413 
 

Protocol #201600785  Page 14 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  6.6.3 . Structural MRI.  High-resolution whole brain axial gradient -echo MPRAGE 3 -D T1 -
weighted images will be a cquired for volumetric and cortical thickness analyses and FMRI 
localization .  Analyses : Volumetric indices will be obtained for total gray and white matter, 
FreeSurfer ROIs296-298, and a priori ROIs (MRS, FMRI).  
 
 
6.7. Neurocognitive Assessment : Assessments will include a neurocogn itive battery (see 
Table 7). The battery consists of standardized, well -established neuroc ognitive measures with 
strong reliability and validity 304. For cognitive measures with functions assessed see Table 7  
below . Our goal is to assess global cognitive ability (NIH -Toolbox: cognitive module), and 
specifically attention -executive functions, working memory, processing speed, and memory. 
These are domains affected by a ging24,31,146,305-314 and will also tap the dom ains assessed by 
FMRI (Aim 2).  
 
Table 7. Neurocognitive Assessment    
HVLT  Verbal Learning/Memory  
Stroop  Attention/Executive  
Trail Making A & B  Executive  
COWA  & Animals  Verbal Fluency  
BVMT  Visual Memory  
Symbol Digit Coding  Processing Speed  
Letter Nu mber Sequencing  Working Memory  
PASAT  Working Memory  
Digit Span  Working Memory  
NIH Toolbox Subtests:    
*  Dimensional Card Sort  Executive  
* Flanker  Attention/Executive  
* Picture Sequence  Episodic Memory  
* Picture Vocabulary  Language  
* Oral Reading  Language  
* Pattern Comparison  Processing Speed  
* List Sorting  Working Memory  
 
6.7.1. Functional Outcomes. A touchscreen computer -based functional assessment tool will 
be used to measure tasks like medication management, ATM banking, prescription refill via 
voice menu. Task difficulty can be varied and real -time efficiency and accuracy data are 
collected; the measure is highly correlated with component cognitive abil ities targeted in this 
study315,316. See Appendix 2 for a detailed manual.  
 
6.7.2 . QOL  and PROMIS self -reported health assessment . We will administer the Medical 
Outcomes Study Short Form -36 (SF -36: v. 2.0, a widely used QOL measure), and the PROMIS 
self report measures at each assessment. The PROMIS measures assess change in self -
reported cognitive and physical function. 321 321. Change in self reported physical and mental 
health status correlate with QOL and mental and physical health status. 322,323 324 These t wo 
measures will serve as important assessments of interventions influence on everyday life.  
 
6.8. Alcohol and Drug Use Questionnaires. We will administer the Alcohol Use Disorders 
Test (AUDIT -10) and Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST -10). These measures will provide 
Protocol #201600785  Page 15 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  valuabl e information about how drug and alcohol use may alter the overall efficacy to tDCS , 
cognitive training  and education training .  
 
6.9. Driving Record Assessment.  Driving records will be reques ted following the completion of 
the intervention ; records will b e requested at 5 years post intervention and at 10 years post 
intervention . These records will allow us to examine real world driving outcomes.  The driving 
record assessment is optional (the participant choses to consent to this portion or not at 
screening ). Participants who do not consent to the driving record assessment can still 
participate in the study.  
 
6.10. Walking assessment . We will administer a 10 -meter walk test. This test measures the 
time it takes participants to walk ten meters in a line. Par ticipants are instructed to walk at their 
normal pace, as if they were walking down the street. Participants are instructed to use any 
walking aids they normally use (e.g. cane).  
 
6.11. Quality Control.  We will record (with audio and/or video) study proce dures for the 
purpose of ensuring quality data collection. Participants will consent (via a checkbox on the 
informed consent form) to this recording. Recording will only be done on participants who 
provide written consent.  
 
6.12. Theft Prevention . This st udy will be loaning out university computers and other supplies. 
All university equipment must be returned when the participant completes or withdraws from the 
study.  In the event university equipment is stolen we will be required to file a police report w ith 
local authorities.  We will make copies of the participant’s  driver’s license when they are provided 
university equipment.  Having a copy of the driver’s license provides us with needed information 
in the event of lost or stolen university property.  This procedure is described in the informed 
consent form.  As a driver’s license is protected health information it will be kept separate from 
any de -identified data.  
 
6.13. Transportation. Certain potential participants may lack reliable transportation to the  study 
sites. When possible study staff may transport willing participants to the study sites using a 
vehicle owned by the Department of Clinical and Health Psychology. All study staff will follow 
the procedures and regulations for operating University own ed vehicles as described by UF 
Environmental Health and Safety at: http://www.ehs.ufl.edu/programs/insurance/automobile/  
 
To facilitate transportation to and from the study site Uber He alth may be used if the participants 
desire to have transportation provided. All costs associated with Uber Health will be covered by 
the study; the participant will not have any cost associated with the Uber Health travel. The 
option to have travel provid ed will be offered to all potential study participants  within a 40  mile 
radius of the study site  as costs outside of a 40 mile  radius will not be feasible with the current 
travel budget.  
 
Uber Health offers a HIPAA compliant service designed specifically with enhanced ease and 
privacy in mind for those using the service. Participants will not need to have any account 
associated with Uber and study staff will coordinate the whole process. The Uber driver will 
send the participant a text when they are about to arrive at their location, however, the 
participants personal phone number will not be revealed and instead a covert masking of 
numbers is provided by Uber to allow the driver and passenger to communicate without 
revealing their personal phone number s. If participants do not have or use mobile phones the 
study coordinator can help coordinate the pickup.   
Protocol #201600785  Page 16 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  6.14. Payment.  Participants  will receive $75 in gift cards at the end of each of the three  MRI 
sessions to compensate them for  their time a nd effort.  
If participants are traveling from more tha n 20 miles away (one -way) to the  study location they will 
receive an additional $10 compensation per study visit. If they attend all study visits they will 
receive an additional $270 in  compensation for travel. If participants  live less than 20 miles away 
they will receive no additional compensation for travel.  If participants are utilizing Uber Health for 
transportation they will not receive the additional $10 per visit compensation.  
6.15. Notification of Particip ants for Cognitive Findings Leading to Study Exclusion. The 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) serves as a brief global dementia screening tool 
commonly implemented in clinical practice. Any participant falling below the 1.5 SD norms 
(adjusted for age an d education) would screen fail in the ACT study, as per current 
criteria. If this occurs, the participant will first be contacted  via phone call by the study 
physician  (Dr. DeK osky)  and then provided with a letter from the study team describing 
their reaso n for screen fail and encouraging them to follow up with their primary care 
physician (the letter  and phone call template  are submitted in miscellaneous attachments 
in the myIRB system). The procedure for implementation will be built into our RedCap 
data s ystem such that any person meeting this criterion will trigger an email to the site PI 
and site physician alerting the team to follow up with the participant and to provide the  
phone call  by the study physician  and a letter notifying the participant.  
6.16. COVID -19 Adjunctive Study  
 
6.16.1 Background  
In early 2020 the COVID -19 pandemic reached the United States, and has been 
subsequently spreading rapidly throughou t the state of Florida. The pandemic has 
brought about an exceptional number of public health  ramifications. The most striking 
public response has been to push for a quarantining of exposed, or likely exposed, 
citizens and a general practice of ‘social distancing’ for the masses. Additionally, public 
places frequented by older adults, such as chur ches and community centers, have been 
closed leaving an unprecedented number of older adults shuttered in. It has been 
almost unanimously found that social isolation is a major health problem for older adult 
populations living in the general community (Nic holson 2012). There currently is a 
unique opportunity to investigate an enforced social isolation that affects older adults of 
all demographics. In this study we will record and investigate the outcomes of social 
isolation for older adults as well as analy ze the individual factors that contribute to 
certain outcomes.  
 
We have a unique set of circumstances where older adults are being forced to remain in 
their home and away from people indiscriminately. This relative uniformity in social 
isolation in respons e to a significant, state -wide crisis allows us to observe the effects of 
the pandemic on the wellbeing and daily life of older adults, even in adults who might 
otherwise not experience social isolation in their lifetimes. With such a wide array of 
people affected we can investigate indi vidual responses to the crisis by  looking at a 
variety of factors as well as track the responses over time.  
 
6.16.2  Specific Aims  
Protocol #201600785  Page 17 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021   The following aims will be accomplished using cognitive tests and psychosoc ial 
questionnaires in an older population during the immediate COVID -19 pandemic and 
aftermath:  
Aim 1 —Assess the current consequences of the COVID -19 social isolation  in 
comparison to pre - COVID 19 .  
H.1.1 Social isolation resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic will result in an 
alteration in cognition, daily living, mental health, and wellbeing in an older 
adult population.  
 
Aim 2 —Monitor and record changes in the older adult population throughout and 
following the COVID -19 pandemic and social isolation.  
H.2.1. There will be disti nct variations in individual responses to social isolation 
resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic and there will be observable 
characteristics that contribut e to the differences in response.  
 
16.6.2  Research Plan  
Study timetable and logistics. Due to the rapidly ev olving situation our aim is to 
administer the study measures as soon as possible pending IRB approval. All 
adjunctive administrations will be completed with no in person contact  via online 
surveys and telephone calls . At the final COVID -19 assessment time point  
participants will be asked to complete an in person visit where MRI and blood draw 
will be done.  
 
Experimental  design.  Participants will complete the same set of tasks several times 
starting with acute administration 1, followed by monthly repeats f or 6 months, with a 
final assessment at 9 months following the first. A total of 8 assessments will be 
completed.  Participants will be asked to complete one in person visit at the final 
COVID -19 time point. At this visit MRI will be conducted to examine po ssible 
neurological consequences of social isolation from the ongoing pandemic. Only 
resting state functional and structural scans will be done as to no t impact functional 
measures of the main study.  The MRI will last around 1 hour  (see measures section 
below for additional details regarding the MRI) . At this final time point we will  also 
draw a small amount of blood with the aim of conducting COVID -19 antibody testing. 
COVID -19 antibody testing will allow better classification of previous COVID -19 
positive  participants. Blood will be collected by a trained phlebotomist in a biosafety 
level 2 lab at the McKnight Brain Institute and processed in a biosafety level 3 lab. 
Upon request participants will be provided with their COVID -19 antibody results.  
 
Partici pants. A strength of this proposed adjunctive study is that baseline (pre - 
COVID -19) data has already been collected on the ACT study sample. This adjunct 
will allow us to collect additional information in willing participants without interfering 
with the main study aims. Participation is completely voluntary and in no way affects 
participation in the main ACT study.   
 
Recruitment. Participants who have enrolled in the ACT study will be contacted by 
phone to assess interest in this adjunctive study. D ue to the timing of current events , 
Protocol #201600785  Page 18 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  we aim to contact all current participants within 30 days of revision approval.  
However, we will continue to recruit those who we have been unable to make 
contact with until the PI deems that it  is no longer fruitful.  Only pa rticipants who have 
been enrolled  in the main study prior to March 16, 2020 will be asked to participate 
in the COVID 19 adjunct. To supplement phone recruitment we will mail letters to 
eligible participants.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria. Only participant s who have previously provided 
written informed consent to participate in the ACT study will be contacted. The only 
additional inclusion criteria is a willingness to participate in the adjunctive measures.  
Measures .  Adjunctive measures will be conducted v ia a combination of telephone 
and REDCap online survey responses. Self -Report questionnaire measures will be 
completed by the participants using REDCap.  An email will be sent to participants 
with the link to the REDCap survey for them to complete.  Cognitiv e assessments will 
be completed via telephone and entered by research staff into REDCap. For 
participants without internet or computer access an option will be provided to 
complete all measures via telephone.  In total each assessment will last around 1 
hour. See the table below for an estimate of the time each measure will take.  All 
measures have been previously approved to be completed in the main ACT study 
with the exception of newly created COVID -19 specific questionnaires. We will be 
conducting an addi tional MRI at the 9 -month COVID -19 time point.  
 
MoCA : A version of the MoCA without visual elements will be completed over the 
phone.  The MoCA is a cognitive screening measure.  We will use all three 
versions of the MoCA in a counterbalanced order over th e 8 assessments to limit 
test-retest effects.  
 
UDS Number Span : This measure assesses working memory by asking 
participants to remember a series of digits and to repeat them in forward and 
backward order.  
 
Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT) : This measure is a widely 
used self -report questionnaire designed to assess alcohol use. Alcohol use is 
common in adult populations and this measure will allow us to quantify use, 
potential impacts of use, and relate it to stress, individual differences i n stress 
and response to the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) :  Symptoms of depression may be a relevant 
factor in response to uncertainty and social unrest.  
 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  (PSQI) : Sleep problems are common. This can 
impact emotional status and cognition, including sustained attention. Thus, we 
have selected a measure that assesses sleep quality.  
 
Protocol #201600785  Page 19 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  State -Trait Anxiety inventory (STAI) : Subjects may experience increased 
anxiety as a result of the turbulent circumstances su rrounding the pandemic.  
 
UCLA Loneliness Scale : Designed to measure one’s subjective feelings of 
loneliness as well as feelings of social isolation.  
 
PROMIS  Cognitive Scale : Assesses a person’s perception of cognitive function 
in areas such as concentrat ion, memory, and mental acuity. Cognitive functions 
have been known to diminish in periods of extreme stress, which could be 
aroused as a response to the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
PROMIS Physical Function Scale : Assesses a person’s perception of their 
ability to  perform daily activities of living such as chores around the house or 
carrying groceries.  
 
Social Network Scale : Assesses participants’ social networks , such as the 
frequency, time,  and number of people they communicate with on a regular 
basis.  
 
Medical  Outcomes Study Short Form -36: Self report questionnaire that  
assesses a variety of functional health outcomes.  
 
Apathy Scale : Measures self-reported  feelings of apathy.  
 
COVID -19 Questionnaire : Self report questionnaire that assesses the impact of 
COVID  -19 in areas such as a participant’s health behaviors, psychological 
wellbeing, and employment.  
 
Pet Questionnaire:  Assesses the influence of animal companions during self -
isolation.  
 
Medical Changes Questionnaire : Assesses any change in medical conditio ns, 
such as the worsening or appearance of new health problems.  
 
MRI: We will collect structural T1 images, FLAIR (white matter hyper -intensities), 
resting state fMRI, diffusion -weighted imaging (white matter integrity) and 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy  (cerebral metabolism). With emerging 
concerns that COVID attacks the central nervous system, these data will be 
important for understanding the impact of COVID on brain health in older adults. 
When compared to each participants most recent ACT MRI, these data will be 
invaluable for quantifying the impact of COVID -19 on brain health . 
 
Estimated time of Online/Phone assessments  
Task  Estimated Time (Minutes)  
MoCA  10 
UDS Number Span  10 
Protocol #201600785  Page 20 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  AUDIT  8 
BDI 5 
PSQI  5 
STAI  5 
UCLA Loneliness Scale  3 
PROMIS Cognitiv e Scale  2 
PROMIS Physical Function Scale  2 
Social Network Scale  5 
SF-36 5 
Apathy Scale  2 
COVID -19 Questionnaire  10 
Pet Questionnaire  5 
Medical Changes Questionnaire  5 
Total  82 
 
 
 
6.16.3  Safety Monitoring. The current pandemic is likely to result in incre ased mental 
health problems among the general population. If participants indicate suicidality 
on the BDI the study psychologist (Dr. Ron Cohen) will immediately contact them 
for evaluation and referral for treatment.  
 
6.16.5 Adjunctive Study Payment . Participants willing to complete the adjunctive study 
will receive a $20 payment for their time for each assessment timepoint. This payment is 
in addition to any other payment they may receive for the main study.  An additional $30 
will be paid for the final v isit MRI and blood draw.  
6.17 Safety p rocedures for resumption of in person research (June 2020)  
 
Additional COVID precautions for assessment/study visits at the MBI.  All surfaces in 
the lab space will be disinfected before and after each participant. Keyboard s, mice, ipad 
screens, etc. will be disinfected before and after each session. 6 foot distancing will be 
observed in all sessions. PPE will be worn by the participant and the study staff at all times. 
AMRIS COVID guidelines will be followed for all MRI pro cedures (MRI compatible PPE, no 
additional visitors or personnel in the MRI suite, etc.). All study activities occur within the 
MBI. The MBI has positioned PPE and sanitization stations throughout the ground floor. 
Participants will be met outside the buil ding by study staff, provided with PPE, if they do not 
arrive with PPE, and escorted directly to the study location on the ground floor.  
 
Additional COVID precautions for tDCS.  For the tDCS intervention, we are required to 
apply electrodes on the scalp of  the participant. As is already our standard, only disposable 
electrodes are used for each visit to prevent any potential cross participant contact and 
electrodes are disposed of in biowaste containers after each session. All study staff wear 
non-latex exa m gloves for all study procedures and gloves are disposed of in bio -waste 
containers after each session. Headstraps to affix electrodes to the scalp will be disinfected 
Protocol #201600785  Page 21 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  with Clorox after each use. Measurement of electrode locations requires placement of sm all 
marks using either a sharpie or wax pencil to determine the precise location for the 
electrode on the scalp. Thus, the tip of the pen/pencil makes contact with the scalp. Each 
participant will be assigned a single sharpie/pencil and it will only be use d on that participant 
(labeled with participant ID). Once the participant has completed all intervention sessions, 
the pen will be disposed of in biowaste. After each session, the pen tip will be wiped with 
Clorox for disinfection.  
 
Additional COVID preca utions for Cognitive Training.  Participants are provided a laptop 
for completion of cognitive training. The laptop surfaces will be disinfected before being 
provided to the participant. For in lab training sessions, the laptop surfaces will be 
disinfected before and after each session  
6.18 Mechanisms, response heterogeneity and dosing from MRI -derived electric field models in 
tDCS augmented cognitive training  
 
We will leverage existing multimodal neuroimaging and behavioral outcomes data from the ACT 
trial to 1) elucidate mechanism of action underlying response to tDCS treatment with CT , 2) 
address heterogeneity of response in tDCS augmented CT  by determining how individual 
variation in the dose of electrical current delivered to the brain interacts with ind ividual brain 
anatomical and lesion characteristics; and 3) refine the intervention strategy  of tDCS paired 
with CT by evaluating computational methods for estimating precision delivery of targeted dosing 
characteristics to facilitate tDCS augmented outcom es. We will employ state of the art MRI -
derived computational modeling and machine learning (ML) applied to existing data to 1) create 
precision individualized computational models of electrical current in the brain from tDCS for all 
360 participants in AC T (based in T1 weighted images) , 2) determine the characteristics of 
electrical current  calculated from electric current models  associated with trial outcomes, and 3) 
evaluate a computational  method for calculating possible precision dosing of tDCS paramet ers for 
optimizing trial outcomes in older adults.  
To date, all prior trials of tDCS have applied a fixed dosing strategy (e.g., 2mA for 20 min with 
electrodes at F3/F4 [10 -20 measurement system ]) in attempts to enhance CT  – including ACT . 
However, prior r esearch demonstrates that individual variability in head and brain anatomy (e.g., 
degree of atrophy, skull thickness, etc.) significantly alters the spread and intensity of direct 
electrical current delivered to the brain person to person. The impact of in dividual variation in 
electrical current delivered to the brain for clinical outcomes has rarely been examined , and 
methods aimed at increasing stimulation effectiveness and optimizing readiness to learn are only 
now beginning to be explored. We will use a dvanced MRI -derived computational modeling of 
electrical current from existing MRIs to provide a means for accurately estimating individual 
differences in tDCS current delivery to the brain in the largest existing sample of participants 
undergoing tDCS (i.e., ACT) with multimodal neuroimaging data. When combined with state -of-
the-art machine learning approaches and behavioral outcome data  (only unblinded once ACT has 
completed all follow -up visits) , precision models of tDCS current will be derived to identi fy critical 
stimulation dosing characteristics (e.g., current intensity, direction/path of current ) in specific brain 
regions associated with response vs. non -response to tDCS and CT intervention. These data will 
not only provide much needed information fo r determining how individual participant 
characteristics impact tDCS efficacy, but will also serve as a foundation for future  precision 
medicine application s of tDCS and CT to remediate cognitive decline in older adults and 
potentially prevent or alter th e trajectory towards Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
Protocol #201600785  Page 22 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Aim 1.  Determine inter -individual variability in tDCS current distribution using MRI -derived finite 
element modeling.  
H1.1.  Variability in neuroanatomy (e.g. increased atrophy, sulcus depth, skull thickness , etc.) will 
significantly decrease  current intensity and alter the pathway/direction of electrical current flow 
induced by tDCS in  the brain.  
H1.2.  White matter lesions, as measured by white matter hyper -intensities on FLAIR imaging, 
will significantly decrea se current intensity and significantly alter the direction of electrical current 
flow induced by tDCS . 
 
Aim 2.  Determine critical tDCS current properties and specific brain regions associated with 
responder vs. non -responder to tDCS and CT intervention usi ng machine learning.  
H2.1. Current intensity and direction will significantly predict response vs. non -response to tDCS 
and CT intervention on the NIH Toolbox Fluid Cognition Composite Score (ACT primary 
outcome).  
H2.2. Current intensity and direction  within bilateral rostral middle frontal, right superior frontal 
and frontal pole, and left pars orbitalis regions will most strongly predict response vs. non -
response to tDCS and CT intervention.  
H2.3. Current intensity and direction will outperform clinical/ demographic characteristics alone 
(e.g., age, sex, comorbidities, mental health, Alzheimer’s disease risk, cognition, etc.) in 
predicting tDCS response.  
 
Exploratory Aim.  Evaluate computational methods for achieving precision delivery of dosing 
characteris tics in tDCS.  
HE.1.  Adjusting tDCS current intensity  input into computational models  will achieve precision 
delivery of targeted dosing characteristics .  
HE.2.  Adjusting electrode locations input into computational models  will achieve precision 
delivery o f targeted dosing characteristics .  
No new data will be collected from participants to achieve these aims.  Only existing data 
collected with consent from participants in the course of the primary ACT study will be used. 
These data will be analyzed  using ad vanced analytic methods (computational modeling and 
machine learning) to achieve all three aims specified in section 6.18 .  
 
Aim 1.  Dependent measures.  The primary dependent measure in Aim 1 is current density 
computed in individual head models  from existi ng MRIs . Current components will be further 
quantified as current intensity and direction. Rationale . Computed current density will provide an 
estimate of tDCS current dose within brain regions unique to each person’s neuroanatomy . 
Outcome analyses.  H1.1.  The regression analysis between current density (dependent variable) 
and anatomical measures (independent variable) e.g., brain volume ratio, sulcus depth, bone 
thickness will test the hypothesis that unique current density distribution in each person is 
significantly affected by individual characteristics in neuroanatomy.  H1.2.  Current characteristics 
generated from models will be compared between inclusion and exclusion of white matter lesions. 
A false discovery rate (FDR) -corrected voxel -wise within part icipants analysis will test the 
hypothesis that inclusion of white matter lesions in computational models significantly alters 
current characteristic predictions.  
Aim 2. Dependent measures.  The primary dependent measure in Aim 2 is balanced accuracy . 
This measure provides an overall index of the performance to differentiate responders from non -
responders. Rationale . By using this measure, we provide a single performance indicator upon 
which the heterogeneity of response in tDCS augmented CT  can be revealed . Much of our 
preliminary data is based on analyses using this measure. Outcome analyses.  All analyses will be 
conducted with the intent to optimize prediction of tDCS outcome. McNemar test at one -tailed 
0.05 significance level will be conducted to determi ne whether current intensity and direction will 
outperform clinical and demographic characteristics alone in predicting tDCS response.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 23 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Explorat ory Aim. Dependent measures.  The primary dependent measure in the Explora tory Aim 
is log-likelihood  distance meas ure. Adjustments of electric current intensity and electrodes 
placement in computational models will be used to minimize the log -likelihood  distance measure 
to the Gaussian Mixture Model of the responders’ current distribution.  
Timeline . Construction of t he MRI -derived finite element computational models as 
described in aim 1 is estimated to begin in January 2021. We estimate approximately 24 
months will be required to complete this process. By Q3 2022 the ACT study is 
anticipated to be completed and acces s to the currently blinded randomization conditions 
will be available to complete aim 2  and the exploratory aim .  
The additional analyses described in section 6.18 will not impact study participation in any way. 
The analyses will only use data collected un der currently approved study procedures.  
7. Possible Discomforts and Risks:  
Potential Risks .  
There are minimal risks associated with participation in this study. The potential risks are  as 
follows :   
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI is a procedure t hat allows doctors to look inside the 
body by using a scanner that sends out a strong magnetic field and radio waves.  This 
procedure is used routinely for medical care and is very safe for most people, but participants 
will be monitored during the entire MRI scan in case any problems occur. The risks of MRI are:  
• The MRI scanner contains a very strong magnet.  Therefore, participants may not be able to 
have the MRI if  they have any type of metal implanted in their body, for example, any pacing 
device (such as a heart pacer), any metal in their eyes, or certain types of heart valves or 
brain aneurysm clips.  A MRI technologist will question participants about any 
contraindications before they enter the scanner.  
• There is not much room inside the MRI scanner. Participants may be uncomfortable if they 
do not like to be in close spaces ("claustrophobia").  During the procedure, participants will be 
able to talk with the MRI staff through a speaker system, and, in the event of an emergency, 
participants can tell th em to stop the scan . 
• The MRI scanner produces a loud hammering noise, which has produced hearing loss in a 
very small number of  participants.  Participants will be given earplugs to reduce this risk, and 
headphones for added protection.  
• If an obvious abnorm ality is discovered during  the participant’s MRI scan, they will be 
informed about it by the research team,  and will be provided with a copy of the M RI scan and 
we will encourage them to see their primary care physician. MRI will only be done for 
research purposes in this study.  
• Participants  will be monitored very carefully while in the scanner, and repeatedly checked to 
ensure comfort.  
Transcranial direct current stimulation.  Transcranial direct current stimulation is considered safe 
but a small number of people do experience some side effects.  The most common side effects 
are itching and tingling or mild discomfort at the area of stimulation, and headache.  Other 
possible side effects include dizziness and nausea.  Whenever an electrical stimulation is ap plied 
to the body, it could possibly cause a seizure or abnormal heartbeat, but this has never occurred 
with the transcranial direct current stimulation parameters used in this study.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 24 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Cognitive Training.  There is a risk  participants  will find cognitive tr aining on the computer 
challenging, fatiguing, and/or boring.  Research staff will explain what to do and how to perform 
the training tasks tests during an initial study visit.  Participants  will also have access to a 24 -hour 
help line should they have trou ble working with the training computer.   
Educational training . There is a risk participants may find ET to be challenging, fatiguing, and/or 
boring. Research staff will be present to address any concerns. Participants are free to skip any 
content they find objectionable and refrain from answering any questions that they find 
uncomfortable. All material presented has been judged appropriate for an educational setting.  
 
Neurocognitive and Functional tests . There is a risk that participants will find cognitiv e and 
functional tests challenging, because it may be difficult to remember the things that  they are 
asked to remember or  participants may  have trouble hearing or seeing some of the sounds and 
pictures presented on the computer screen. Participants may ski p any tests they do not wish to 
complete. Research staff will explain what to do  and aid participants during their  study visit.  
 
Questionnaires.  There is a risk that participants will find questions on the questionnaires 
uncomfortable to answer. Participan ts may skip any question they feel uncomfortable 
answering.  
  
Participants will be asked questions about previous and current alcohol and drug use with two 
questionnaire measures (AUDIT -10 and DAST -10). These questions are of a particularly 
sensitive natur e. There is a risk that participants may feel uncomfortable about answering such 
questions. Like any other part of the study , participants are free to decline to answer anything 
that they are uncomfortable with.  
 
Other p ossible risks to participants may i nclude fatigue due to the testing. Should this occur, 
participants can take a rest -break at any time or may discontinue the testing at any time.   
 
When being tested some people may develop anxiety. If these tests make participants anxious 
we can stop the testing.  
Researchers will take appropriate steps to protect any information they collect about participants .  
However, there is a slight risk that information about participants could be revealed inappropriately 
or accidentally.  Depending on the nature o f the information, such a release could upset or 
embarrass  participants , or possibly affect their insurability or employability.  
This study may include risks that are unknown at this time.  
Participation in more than one research study or project may furth er increase the risks to 
participants. If participants are currently participating in another study using transcranial direct 
current stimulation or transcranial magnetic stimulation, they will not be enrolled in this study until 
all external studies are c ompleted.  
If participants consent to the COVID -19 ancillary blood draw risks associated with phlebotomy 
apply. These include discomfort at the site of puncture, possible bruising and swelling around the 
puncture site, rarely an infection, and uncommonly fa intness from the procedure.  
 
Adequacy of Protection against Risks.  
Recruitment and Informed Consent.  All study participants will provide written informed consent. 
Persons will be recruited from the CAM -CTRP research registry,  advertisements such as 
Protocol #201600785  Page 25 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  newspa per, magazine, and bus ads, community outreach, or community agencies.  Participants 
will also be recruited at community events with IRB -approved flyers, and participants will have 
the option to confidentially provide name, phone number, and email if they w ish to be contacted 
by the study team to determine study eligibility.  Contact information will also be obtained 
through the UF Health Consent2Share registry to identify potential participants. If 
Consent2Share contacts are interested in hearing more about the study, they will be 
administered the phone screening.  If we are unable to reach potential participants we will leave 
a phone message (see phone message script) to let them know the reason for our call. If they 
are interested in hearing more about the s tudy they will be directed to call us back and then 
administered the approved phone screening  after confirming initial interest and addressing any 
questions they may have .  The contact information will be securely stored during the event and 
immediately st ored in the Woods Lab  after the event  per study data safety management plan . 
People interested in participating in the study will call the CAM -CTRP study recruitment 
coordinator. Potential participants interested in hearing more about the study will be pro vided 
information about the study. Persons will then indicate their agreement to participate by signing 
the informed consent document.  
 
Our inclusion and exclusion criteria are designed to minimize risks to participants.  
Inclusion criteria :  
1. Age 65 to 89 years; this age group was selected because it is at high risk of age -related 
cognitive decline and have a sufficiently long life expectancy319 to participate in the 
study;  
2. Evidence of age -related cognitive decline in the C ognitive Training  assessment  defined 
by performance below the 80th percentile .  
3. Ability to participate in the intervention and attend training sessions; willingness to be 
randomized to either treatment group.  
 
Rationale : (1) The age range is selected to include a higher proportion of persons with cognitive 
deficits . (2) Par ticipants will need to show some form of impairment to be included in the study 
in order to avoid biasing the study with extremely high functioning individuals. (3) Participants 
must be willing to perform study activities.  
 
Exclusion criteria : 1) Neurolog ical disorders (e.g., dementia, stroke, seizures, traumatic brain 
injury). 2) Evidence of  cognitive impairment (as defined by NACC UDS performance below 1.5 
standard deviations on age/sex/education normative data  in at least one cognitive domain) . 3) 
Past opportunistic brain infection 4) Major psychiatric illness (schizophrenia, intractable affective 
disorder, current substance dependence diagnosis or severe major depression and/or 
suicidality. 5) Unstable (e.g., cancer other than basal cell skin) and chron ic (e.g . severe 
diabetes) medical conditions. 6) MRI contraindications (e.g., claustrophobia, metal implants). 7) 
Physical impairment precluding motor response or lying still for 1 hr and inability to walk two 
blocks without stopping.  8) Currently on GABA -ergic or glutamatergic medications, or on sodium 
channel blockers . 9) Left -handedness.  
 
Rationale : (1) neurological diseases affecting the brain create obvious confounds that would 
obscure the study’s findings or increase risk from non -invasive brain stimu lation (i.e., seizures). 
(2) The NACC UDS will be used to exclude people meeting criteria for severe dementia, as this 
study is focused on more mild -moderate  cognitive impairment ; (3) past opportunistic brain 
infection, and (4) a history of severe psychiat ric illness (schizophrenia, chronic intractable 
unipolar or bipolar depression) also would directly affect neurocognitive test performance and 
thus would confound study findings. (5) Unstable (e.g., cancer) and certain chronic medical 
conditions (e.g., sev ere obesity) may also confound findings and increase study attrition; (6) 
Protocol #201600785  Page 26 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  Given that this study requires MRI imaging to address all aims, factors that make MRI imaging 
unsafe or infeasible for particular study candidates will serve as a basis for exclusion ; and (7) 
Physical limitations are a basis for exclusion based on inability to participate in all study 
procedures. Excluding people who cannot walk or sit for an hour will reduce problems in the 
scanner that could confound study findings. (8) GABA -ergic, glutamatergic, or sodium channel 
blocking medications may alter or block the ability of tDCS to facilitate tissue excitability . (9) 
Left-handedness com plicates the interpretation of F MRI findings.  
 
Protection against Risk.   
Protection against Risk of conf identiality . Information pertaining to research subjects will be 
obtained from (1) interviews with subjects and (2) procedures described in the "research design 
and methods" section. All data will be considered confidential according to HIP AA guidelines fo r 
personal health information. All participants will sign a combined consent to participate in 
research and HIP AA compliant confidentiality document approved by the IRB overseeing the 
clinical recruitment setting (i.e. the University of Florida IRB, and th e Florida Department of 
Health IRB).  
 Precautions will be taken to ensure that all research materials are inaccessible to anyone 
other than the investigators, and by ensuring that only qualified and trained individuals conduct 
the study research procedur es. Prior to study initiation, procedures for protecting the 
confidential nature of participant data collected will be reviewed and all questions or concerns 
will be clarified at this time. These procedures will be reviewed throughout the study. Staff will  
be trained and certified in handling human subject information to maintain privacy and 
confidentiality. Procedures for allowing access to investigators to use this information for 
research will be under the authority of the PI and will follow HIP AA compli ant guidelines for the 
release of PHI.  
 Contact information for study participants will be kept in separate files and databases from 
the research data. This information will be used by the research assistants to send reminders 
about follow -up times and a ppointments  via phone, email, or mail correspondence depending 
on the participant’s preference . Research assistants may contact study participants via phone, 
email, or mail to provide directions to the study site or answer general questions or concerns 
about the study. In order to avoid participants who are lost to follow up, we will contact study 
participants periodically between their 3 month post intervention visit and their one year follow 
up visit at approximately 3 month intervals. We will send a letter and/or email to participants who 
we are unable to contact via phone to see if their contact information has changed. The 
information will only be kept on computers or devices that are both password protected and 
encrypted.   Any written forms will be kep t in locked file cabinets or locked briefcases. None of 
the research data in the central database will have participant identity information. No results 
will ever be reported in a personally identifiable manner. All research data will be entered 
directly i nto a web -based survey that is maintained by the University of Florida CTSI (REDCap), 
and the data are encrypted as soon as they are sent in a wireless format. The data will be 
transferred and stored on secure servers at the University of Florida, with no identifying 
information. Only de -identified data will be entered into the REDCap database across all sites. A 
data confidentiality agreement will be signed and filed with the UF IRB before any data are 
collected at any site.  
 No survey data will be labele d with the participant’s name or other identifying information, 
but will instead be labeled with a study ID number. Documents linking study ID numbers to 
identifying information (e.g., name, address, etc) will be stored electronically in a password -
protect ed file. All paper -data with identifying information will be stored in locked file drawers, 
separate from coded data. Documents linking study ID numbers to identifying information will be 
destroyed at the end of the study. Documents containing data collect ed on un -consented 
Protocol #201600785  Page 27 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  individuals (i.e., screening logs used to avoid approaching the same individual for study 
enrollment twice) will be shredded daily. All electronic data will be secured and encrypted. 
Identifying information will not be reported.  
 
Protec tions of risks related to study questionnaires . To minimize any risks related to emotional 
responses to questionnaires, persons will be informed about the types of questions included in 
the surveys, which are similar to the types of questions persons might  be asked by their doctor 
in a clinical setting.  
 
Protection of risks related to tDCS . To minimize risk associated with tDCS, participants will be 
monitored throughout stimulation sessions and asked to report any discomfort. If scalp 
sensation is uncomfor table, stimulation  will be stopped. In the event of a headache, stimulation  
will be stopped. All tDCS sessions will be administered and continually supervise by a trained 
experimenter. The above symptoms have only been reported when participants are activ ely 
being stimulated. However, to assess for any symptoms occurring during the 24 h interval 
between stimulation sessions, we will administer a brief symptom screening questionnaire at the 
beginning (symptoms in the past 24 hours) and end of each session ( symptoms during 
stimulation). tDCS has not been shown to cause seizures nor lower the seizure threshold in 
animals. There are no reports of seizure induced by tDCS in human participants in the literature. 
However, this may not be true for epilepsy patients , whose seizure threshold rates are likely 
abnormal. Prior history of neurological disorders is an exclusionary criterion for our study and 
thus no participants will have a history of seizure.  
   
Protection against risks associated with neuroimaging . MRI is widely regarded as a safe, 
noninvasive procedure for visualization of brain tissue in both adults and children. Prior FMRI 
studies by our group and by other groups document the innocuous nature of these procedures. 
Prior to study participation, all part icipants will be informed of the MRI procedure during the 
informed consent/assent process. The proposed study will be performed on an FDA approved 
Siemens 3 Tesla scanner located at the Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and 
Spectroscopy (AMRIS) research facility at UF. There are no known long -term effects of MRI 
procedures on the body. The FDA Information Sheets, Food and Drug Administration, October 
1995, p. 79, lists as a non -significant risk device, “Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Devices 
within FDA -specified parameters.”  This study satisfies those parameters. The 3.0 tesla MR 
scanners meets FDA parameters for field strength, gradient switching, and RF power deposition 
for all FDA -approved acquisition schemes including echo -planar imaging. In additio n, this 
research protocol involves the use of an FDA -approved acquisition scheme, or the power 
deposition of experimental acquisition scheme proposed meets FDA parameters as verified on 
a phantom using the power monitoring system installed on the MR scanne r. Both Dr. Woods  
and trained MRI staff will check for exclusion criteria. The main MRI -related risks include: (a) 
sensitivity to the loudness of the MRI machine - all subjects will be given and must wear ear 
plugs; a squeeze -ball and microphone will be pr ovided so that they may stop the testing if they 
become uncomfortable or anxious at any time; (b) claustrophobia - subjects will have the 
opportunity to practice in a simulator and to become as familiar and comfortable as possible 
before commencing the exp eriment. In addition, they will be given the opportunity to examine 
the scanner before the tasks starts. The study will be ended early if the space is a problem for 
them; no medications (e.g., benzodiazepines or tranquilizers) will be offered to them; (c) 
lightheadedness when sitting up after lying in the MRI machine - this feeling sometimes occurs 
but has always gone away in a few minutes. Participants will thus be assisted in getting up to 
make sure they do not fall; In sum, the MRI neuroimaging procedure s pose no radiological or 
medical risk, given that participants with metal implants susceptible to magnetic heating will be 
excluded based on standard scanner policies. A small number of people may become anxious 
Protocol #201600785  Page 28 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  in the small space of the scanner. These in dividuals will have the opportunity to terminate the 
scan session. Furthermore, all recruits will be screened for phobias prior to enrollment. There is 
a medical technologist at the imaging site at all times to insure scanner safety, and 
neuroradiologists on call as needed. If an abnormality is noted on the structural MRIs by study 
staff, the PI will provide the participant with a copy of the scan and encourage them to follow up 
with a neurologist.  
 
Protection against risks associated with neurocognitive te sts. The neurocognitive assessments 
have minimal risk associated with them. Some participants experience stress associated with 
being tested, though this tends to be quite limited. Breaks will be given in those cases. 
Research staff that collect data have been trained in the conduct of all cognitive function tests 
by other senior staff members. Research staff members will be certified in the conduct of the 
cognitive function tests before they work with study participants.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
The research team will follow the procedures for data safety and monitoring as required by the 
Institutional Review Board at the University of Florida (UF IRB). The research team will monitor 
participants for any potential adverse events, and all reported events will be forwarded by the PI 
to the UF IRB.  
 
A data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP) has been implemented to ensure the safety of all 
participants involved in the study and to ensure the validity and integrity of the data. The primary 
goal of the DS MP will be to monitor the progress of the study and safety of participants and if 
necessary, recommend modifying the study or terminating the study as appropriate.  
 
• The PI ’s will be responsible for coordinating activities of the DSMP, including:  
  
o Lab Meet ings twice per month, to discuss participant involvement in the study, 
and any issues that have developed or need revision  
o Safety concerns  
o Data Storage and safety  
o Participant safety  
o Outcome data  
o Data quality  
o Integrity  
o Intervention efficacy  
o Recruitment  
o Performance  
 
Both the PI and the study staff will review and examine reports of adverse incidents 
immediately, and make reports to the IRB as necessary for any and all of the following 
situations:  
   
o Serious and non -serious adverse events that may occur  
o Suspic ion of scientific fraud or misconduct  
o Any other issues which may warrant protocol changes or modifications.  
 
Procedure for collection and storage of data.   A number of quality control procedures will be 
used to ensure the validity and integrity of the data  and the safety of all participants involved in 
the study. Relevant data and safety information obtained on each study participant will be 
verified against the original source documents by the primary study coordinator and any 
Protocol #201600785  Page 29 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  identified discrepancies will  be reviewed at these meetings. The primary goal of these meetings 
will be to monitor the progress of the study and safety of participants and if necessary, 
recommend modifying the study or terminating the study as appropriate.  
All identifying information  will be archived in Dr. Cohen’s  and Woods  neuroimaging laboratory 
within the Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory . Imaging data will undergo several levels of 
processing, and all raw and processed data will be archived on a University password -protected 
server in password -protected folders and files. Only study staff will have access to these files. 
The self -report data will be double entered using the  RedCap Data System . This system signals 
the user when an out -of-range value is entered. All data entry i s then verified via double -entry, 
with the program signaling mismatches with the original entry. Next, computer -generated 
reports of variable frequencies and subject lists will be reviewed, leading to possible corrections 
to coding or entry. After checking  for accuracy of data within a given group, data will be stored in 
the password -protected folders along with the imaging data.  
  
Location and logistics of data collection. All procedures involving human subjects will be 
performed at facilities of the UF He alth Care System. Neurocognitive testing and training will be 
performed at the clinical research unit of the Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory  with an 
ancillary location at the Village at Gainesville . Several clinical research examination rooms are 
equipped and dedicated to neurocognitive and functional assessment, and contain all necessary 
computers and test materials. Storage of neuroimaging data backup will occur at the CAM 
Neuroimaging Laboratory.  Neuroimaging will take place at the AMRIS facility o f the McKnight 
Brain Institute . 
 
Sharing of data from collaborating sites. Due to the multi -center design of the study, data will be 
shared with the University of Florida from  a collaborating site , the University of Arizona. The 
collaborating site will sen d fully de -identified data. Data transfer will take place using the 
secured infrastructure of the University of Florida RedCap system  for questionnaire data . De-
identified raw neuroimaging  data will be transferred to UF using the Secure File Transfer 
Proto col (SFTP) onto UF Dropbox  servers.  A data confidentiality agreement will be signed and 
filed with the UF IRB before any data are collected at any site.  
 
Storage of collected data. All electronic data are stored in password protected, secured 
computer syst ems. All paper data will be stored in a locked file cabinet. Data will only be 
removed when coded, entered, or audited. Only the participant’s study identification number will 
appear on any data forms. Only the PI, the Co -Is, and the RAs will have access t o the 
completed data forms and electronically stored data. All data are considered part of the 
participant’s confidential record. Data collected from research participants will be stored in a 
secured, password protected computer file that is separate from network systems. All paper 
data (e.g., subject contact information, consent forms, etc.) will be placed in a locked file cabinet 
within 24 hours of their acquisition as designated by the study's RA. All data will remain 
confidential. Data entry requirement s. The data entry system will require a login identification 
and password in order to gain access to the data. Where appropriate, validation and range rules 
will be applied to the actual entry fields. Only the PI and Co -Is will be able to view the data in its 
raw state.  
   
Audit/verification of entered data. All data designated as primary outcome data will be subject to 
a 100% cross -referencing between electronic and paper forms. This audit must have an error 
rate less than 1%. If the verification fails the  audit, all data will be re -entered, the original 
computer files discarded, and the newly re -entered data audited. This process will continue until 
the audit no longer exceeds the maximum allowable error rate. All audits will be supervised and 
documented b y the PI.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 30 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021    
Data management and analysis . Our research team has substantial experience in the design 
and implementation of data management procedures that provide accurate recording and 
storage of data, participant confidentiality, and timely analysis. Bas ed on our past experience, 
we believe that our major data management and analysis needs for the proposed project can be 
met by using a high -end PC, equipped with the latest version of SPSS for Windows and 
appropriate spreadsheet programs. All data files ar e automatically backed -up daily.  
  
Data quality control . All staff involved in data collection will be trained and certified to ensure 
their competence, and re -certified periodically throughout the study as we have done in similar 
trials. Data will be coll ected and numerically coded using pre -tested electronic entry forms. At 
the time of collection, there will be initial clerical review of all data for accuracy and 
completeness. Every effort will be made to ensure that missing data are kept to a minimum. 
Data entry programs with range checking and response validation will be used for all data 
entered. Under supervision from the PI, the data manager will conduct error checking 
procedures and preliminary analyses on all data to ensure their accuracy. The RAs w ill be 
trained to avoid omissions in data entry and computer entry protocols will be programmed to 
avoid accidental skipping of question items. We believe that the quality control system to be 
used will ensure a complete and accurate database, and maximize  the likelihood that the 
intervention will be delivered correctly and efficiently. As we have done in prior studies, a 
manual of procedures will be developed during the initial study start -up period that explicitly 
describes the specific procedures related  to intervention delivery, data collection, and quality 
assurance.   
Frequency of data review.  Relevant data and safety information obtained on each study 
participant will be verified against the original source documents by the primary study 
coordinator o n a bi -weekly basis. As noted above, any identified discrepancies will be discussed 
with the Principal Investigator and reviewed at weekly meetings.  
  
Measurement and reporting of participant accrual and adherence to eligibility criteria . Review of 
the rat e of participant accrual, adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur weekly during 
the recruitment phase and then every month to assure that participants meet eligibility criteria 
and ethnic diversity goals outlined in the grant proposal.  
 
Safet y Review Plan Study progress and safety will be reviewed  twice per month (and more 
frequently if needed) by the principal investigator. An annual report will be compiled and will 
include a list and summary of AEs. In addition, the annual report will addres s (1) whether 
adverse event rates are consistent with pre -study assumptions; (2) reason for dropouts from the 
study; (3) whether all participants met entry criteria; (4) whether continuation of the study is 
justified on the basis that additional data are n eeded to accomplish the stated aims of the study; 
and (5) conditions whereby the study might be terminated prematurely. The IRB and other 
applicable recipients will review progress of this study annually.  
 
Final storage of paper data. All paper data (e.g.,  consent forms) may be scanned, and will finally  
be housed at a facility that specializes in the storage of medical/ research information. The 
destruction date of these files will be at least 7 years from the termination of the study and will 
be authorized  by the Principal Investigator of the research study.  
Access to cleaned computer data. Once the study is complete, and all data have been 
collected, entered and passed the audit process, the data will be available to the Principal 
Investigator and his desi gnates for analysis. Only the Principal Investigator can give permission 
for the release of aggregated study data. No confidential information may be released without 
Protocol #201600785  Page 31 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  the express written consent of the study participants. Only copies of the finalized data will be 
released. The original data file will remain in its pristine state.  
Description of plan for safety monitoring.  Protection of participants from risks related to the 
study is of paramount concern.  
Monitoring physical health and safety . All assessmen t visits will be conducted at a central 
location and all testing sessions will be conducted and supervised by a trained and certified 
research staff that will monitor potential adverse experiences and symptoms. At each visit, 
participants will be asked to report any adverse events they have experienced since their last 
visit. Immediate medical treatment will be provided for any illness or injury resulting from this 
study. Trained nursing staff members are present in the research center at all times, and a 
physician will also be available to evaluate the participant if needed.  
In addition to the assessments conducted at in -person study visits , participants will be asked 
about any adverse events, including itching, pain, nausea, headache, etc. they have had. 
Participants will also be asked about their mood, including depressive symptomatology, and 
other health related activities (i.e., physical activity), as well as general health status. Based on 
reported symptoms, participants may be asked to come in for an a dditional follow -up 
assessment visit with one of the healthcare professionals on the study team (i.e., physician or 
psychologist) for further evaluation of their symptoms. Based on information obtained at this 
visit, participants will then be referred for follow -up assessment and/or treatment with the 
appropriate healthcare provider.  
Monitoring mental health and safety.  Any participant who endorses clinical levels of any 
psychiatric disorder or who endorses suicidality will be referred to Dr. Cohen, study 
psychologist, for further follow -up assessment. The psychologist will then provide a 
recommendation regarding the appropriate course of follow -up and also advise on whether it is 
safe for the participant to continue in the study. If a participant is found t o be actively suicidal 
with a plan and/or intent, they will be escorted immediately to the emergency room at the 
Shands Hospital at the University of Florida. If safety is an issue, UF security or local authorities 
will be called for assistance.  
 
Data and  Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB):  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  is established, with responsibility to monitor all 
aspects of the study, including those that require access to any masked data. The DSMB and its 
chair are named and approved by the NIA . It is planned that the DSMB meets by conference 
call as determined by the DSMB and the NIA. The DSMB has access to all deidentified study 
data, documents and progress. The Intervention and Safety Committee , comprised of safety 
personnel from each site, t he Chair, and a representative of the DMAQC  reports to the 
DSMB for issues related to participant safety.  
The DSMB has the following charges:  
• Review the study protocol.  
• Review data (including masked data) over the course of the trial.  
• Identify problems re lating to safety over the course of the study.  
• Identify needs for additional data relevant to safety issues and request these data from 
the study investigators.  
• Propose appropriate analyses and periodically review developing data on safety and 
endpoints.  
• Make recommendations regarding recruitment, treatment effects, retention, compliance, 
safety issues and continuation of the study.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 32 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  • At any time, the DSMB may recommend discontinuation of any component/treatment 
group of the study  
 
Finally, the NIA makes the  final decision on whether or not to accept the DSMB’s 
recommendation about discontinuation of any component of the study. Any serious adverse 
event that might be due to the study intervention are reported to the DSMB, the IRBs, and t o the 
NIA Project Offi ce. The exact timeline for reporting serious adverse events is determined by the 
DSMB, IRBs, and NIA.  
8. Possible Benefits:  
There are well -documented benefits for older adults who participate in cognitive training, 
including improvement in working memory,  attention, and executive functions. Deficits in these 
cognitive abilities significantly impact quality of life, financial capacity, medication adherence, 
and mortality in older adults. Those participants randomly assigned to the CT groups may 
benefit from  these effects. Participants assigned to the Education Training Control group may 
obtain better knowledge about educational facts from the videos, but are unlikely to have the 
same benefits as those in the CT group. Those participants randomly assigned to the tDCS+CT 
treatment group may experience further benefit beyond that of cognitive training alone. Benefits 
to society will include the contribution of novel data regarding the efficacy of neuromodulation 
methods for enhancing cognitive training effects i n older adults. This may help inform treatment 
protocols in a growing segment of the US population (i.e., those 65 years and older). Data 
collected from this study will serve as a foundation for larger clinical studies that examine 
optimized methods for tr eating aging -related cognitive decline using cognitive training and 
tDCS. Some participants may not benefit from the study at all.  
9. Conflict of Interest:  
None  
 
1. Sumner P, Edden RA, Bompas A, Evans CJ, Singh KD. More GABA, less distr action: a 
neurochemical predictor of motor decision speed. Nat Neurosci. Jul 2010;13(7):825 -827. 
2. Streeter CC, Jensen JE, Perlmutter RM, et al. Yoga Asana sessions increase brain 
GABA levels: a pilot study. J Altern Complement Med. May 2007;13(4):419 -426. 
3. Edden RA, Muthukumaraswamy SD, Freeman TC, Singh KD. Orientation discrimination 
performance is predicted by GABA concentration and gamma oscillation frequency in 
human primary visual cortex. J Neurosci. Dec 16 2009;29(50):15721 -15726.  
4. Puts NA, Edde n RA, Evans CJ, McGlone F, McGonigle DJ. Regionally specific human 
GABA concentration correlates with tactile discrimination thresholds. J Neurosci. Nov 16 
2011;31(46):16556 -16560.  
5. Gao F, Edden RA, Li M, et al. Edited magnetic resonance spectroscopy det ects an age -
related decline in brain GABA levels. Neuroimage. Sep 2013;78:75 -82. 
6. Streeter CC, Whitfield TH, Owen L, et al. Effects of yoga versus walking on mood, 
anxiety, and brain GABA levels: a randomized controlled MRS study. J Altern 
Complement Med . Nov 2010;16(11):1145 -1152.  
7. Cohen RA, Moser DJ, Clark MM, et al. Neurocognitive functioning and improvement in 
quality of life following participation in cardiac rehabilitation. Am J Cardiol. May 1 
1999;83(9):1374 -1378.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 33 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  8. Osowiecki DM, Cohen RA, Morro w KM, et al. Neurocognitive and psychological 
contributions to quality of life in HIV -1-infected women. AIDS. Jul 7 2000;14(10):1327 -
1332.  
9. Al-Khindi T, Macdonald RL, Schweizer TA. Cognitive and functional outcome after 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage . Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 
Aug;41(8):e519 -536. 
10. Wadley VG, Crowe M, Marsiske M, et al. Changes in everyday function in individuals 
with psychometrically defined mild cognitive impairment in the Advanced Cognitive 
Training for Independe nt and Vital Elderly Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. Aug 
2007;55(8):1192 -1198.  
11. Soderqvist A, Miedel R, Ponzer S, Tidermark J. The influence of cognitive function on 
outcome after a hip fracture. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. Oct 
2006;88(10):2115 -2123 . 
12. Ettenhofer ML, Hinkin CH, Castellon SA, et al. Aging, neurocognition, and medication 
adherence in HIV infection. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. Apr 2009;17(4):281 -290. 
13. Ochner CN, Green D, van Steenburgh JJ, Kounios J, Lowe MR. Asymmetric prefrontal 
cortex activation in relation to markers of overeating in obese humans. Appetite. Aug 
2009;53(1):44 -49. 
14. Reijnders J, van Heugten C, van Boxtel M. Cognitive interventions in healthy older adults 
and people with mild cognitive impairment: a systematic revie w. Ageing Res Rev. Jan 
2013;12(1):263 -275. 
15. Li H, Li J, Li N, Li B, Wang P, Zhou T. Cognitive intervention for persons with mild 
cognitive impairment: A meta -analysis. Ageing Res Rev. Apr 2011;10(2):285 -296. 
16. Papp KV, Walsh SJ, Snyder PJ. Immediate a nd delayed effects of cognitive 
interventions in healthy elderly: a review of current literature and future directions. 
Alzheimers Dement. Jan 2009;5(1):50 -60. 
17. Ball K, Edwards JD, Ross LA. The impact of speed of processing training on cognitive 
and eve ryday functions. The journals of gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences 
and social sciences. Jun 2007;62 Spec No 1:19 -31. 
18. Cicerone KD, Dahlberg C, Kalmar K, et al. Evidence -based cognitive rehabilitation: 
recommendations for clinical practice. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. Dec 2000;81(12):1596 -
1615.  
19. Ball KK, Beard BL, Roenker DL, Miller RL, Griggs DS. Age and visual search: expanding 
the useful field of view. Journal of the Optical Society of America. A, Optics and image 
science. Dec 1988;5(12):2210 -2219.  
20. Ball K, Owsley C. The useful field of view test: a new technique for evaluating age -
related declines in visual function. Journal of the American Optometric Association. Jan 
1993;64(1):71 -79. 
21. Jobe JB, Smith DM, Ball K, et al. ACTIVE: a cognit ive intervention trial to promote 
independence in older adults. Control Clin Trials. Aug 2001;22(4):453 -479. 
22. Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, et al. Effects of cognitive training interventions with older 
adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. Nov 13  2002;288(18):2271 -2281.  
23. Edwards JD, Wadley VG, Vance DE, Wood K, Roenker DL, Ball KK. The impact of 
speed of processing training on cognitive and everyday performance. Aging & mental 
health. May 2005;9(3):262 -271. 
24. Willis SL, Tennstedt SL, Marsiske  M, et al. Long -term effects of cognitive training on 
everyday functional outcomes in older adults. JAMA. Dec 20 2006;296(23):2805 -2814.  
25. Edwards JD, Ross LA, Ackerman ML, et al. Longitudinal predictors of driving cessation 
among older adults from the A CTIVE clinical trial. The journals of gerontology. Series B, 
Psychological sciences and social sciences. Jan 2008;63(1):P6 -12. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 34 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  26. Edwards JD, Myers C, Ross LA, et al. The longitudinal impact of cognitive speed of 
processing training on driving mobility. The Gerontologist. Aug 2009;49(4):485 -494. 
27. Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Martin R, et al. The effect of speed -of-processing 
training on depressive symptoms in ACTIVE. The journals of gerontology. Series A, 
Biological sciences and medical sciences. Apr 200 9;64(4):468 -472. 
28. Ball K, Edwards JD, Ross LA, McGwin G, Jr. Cognitive training decreases motor vehicle 
collision involvement of older drivers. J Am Geriatr Soc. Nov 2010;58(11):2107 -2113.  
29. Wolinsky FD, Mahncke H, Vander Weg MW, et al. Speed of proce ssing training protects 
self-rated health in older adults: enduring effects observed in the multi -site ACTIVE 
randomized controlled trial. International psychogeriatrics / IPA. May 2010;22(3):470 -
478. 
30. Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Martin R, et al. Does c ognitive training improve internal 
locus of control among older adults? The journals of gerontology. Series B, 
Psychological sciences and social sciences. Sep 2010;65(5):591 -598. 
31. Belchior P, Marsiske M, Sisco SM, et al. Video game training to improve s elective visual 
attention in older adults. Computers in human behavior. Jul 1 2013;29(4):1318 -1324.  
32. Jones RN, Marsiske M, Ball K, et al. The ACTIVE cognitive training interventions and 
trajectories of performance among older adults. J Aging Health. Dec 2013;25(8 
Suppl):186S -208S.  
33. Marsiske M, Dzierzewski JM, Thomas KR, et al. Race -related disparities in 5 -year 
cognitive level and change in untrained active participants. J Aging Health. Dec 
2013;25(8 Suppl):103S -127S.  
34. Ross L, Edwards, JD, Ball, K.  Mobility Outcomes in ACTIVE. Paper presented at: 
Gerontological Society of America Meetings 2013; New Orleans, LA.  
35. Ross LA, Edwards, J. D., & Ball, K. . Mobility Outcomes in ACTIVE. Gerontological 
Society of America Meetings; 2013; New Orleans, LA.  
36. Rebok GW, Ball K, Guey LT, et al. Ten -Year Effects of the Advanced Cognitive Training 
for Independent and Vital Elderly Cognitive Training Trial on Cognition and Everyday 
Functioning in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jan 13 2014.  
37. Edwards JD, Ruva CL , O'Brien JL, Haley CB, Lister JJ. An examination of mediators of 
the transfer of cognitive speed of processing training to everyday functional 
performance. Psychology and aging. Jun 2013;28(2):314 -321. 
38. Edwards JD, Hauser RA, O'Connor ML, Valdes EG, Ze siewicz TA, Uc EY. Randomized 
trial of cognitive speed of processing training in Parkinson disease. Neurology. Oct 8 
2013;81(15):1284 -1290.  
39. Edwards JD, Valdes EG, Peronto C, et al. The Efficacy of InSight Cognitive Training to 
Improve Useful Field of V iew Performance: A Brief Report. The journals of gerontology. 
Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences. Nov 8 2013.  
40. Wolinsky FD, Unverzagt FW, Smith DM, Jones R, Wright E, Tennstedt SL. The effects of 
the ACTIVE cognitive training trial on clinically relevant declines in health -related quality 
of life. The journals of gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and social 
sciences. Sep 2006;61(5):S281 -287. 
41. Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Howren MB, Jones MP, Dotson MM. A randomized 
control led trial of cognitive training using a visual speed of processing intervention in 
middle aged and older adults. PloS one. 2013;8(5):e61624.  
42. Singer T, Verhaeghen P, Ghisletta P, Lindenberger U, Baltes PB. The fate of cognition in 
very old age: six -year longitudinal findings in the Berlin Aging Study (BASE). Psychology 
and aging. Jun 2003;18(2):318 -331. 
43. Berry AS, Zanto TP, Clapp WC, et al. The influence of perceptual training on working 
memory in older adults. PloS one. 2010;5(7):e11537.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 35 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  44. Jaeggi S M, Buschkuehl M, Jonides J, Perrig WJ. Improving fluid intelligence with training 
on working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. May 13 2008;105(19):6829 -6833.  
45. Jaeggi SM, Buschkuehl M, Perrig WJ, Mei er B. The concurrent validity of the N -back 
task as a working memory measure. Memory. May 2010;18(4):394 -412. 
46. Schneider -Garces NJ, Gordon BA, Brumback -Peltz CR, et al. Span, CRUNCH, and 
beyond: working memory capacity and the aging brain. Journal of co gnitive 
neuroscience. Apr 2010;22(4):655 -669. 
47. Brehmer Y, Rieckmann A, Bellander M, Westerberg H, Fischer H, Backman L. Neural 
correlates of training -related working -memory gains in old age. Neuroimage. Oct 15 
2011;58(4):1110 -1120.  
48. Brehmer Y, Wester berg H, Backman L. Working -memory training in younger and older 
adults: training gains, transfer, and maintenance. Frontiers in human neuroscience. 
2012;6:63.  
49. Harrison PJ. The neuropathology of schizophrenia. A critical review of the data and their 
interpretation. Brain. Apr 1999;122 ( Pt 4):593 -624. 
50. Jaeggi SM, Studer -Luethi, B., Buschkuehl, M., Su, Y. F., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J. . 
The relationship between n -back performance and matrix reasoning —Implications for 
training and transfer. Intellige nce. 2010;38(6):625 -635. 
51. Jaeggi SM, Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Shah, P. Cogmed and working memory 
training —Current challenges and the search for underlying mechanisms. J Appl Res 
Mem Cogn. 2012;1(3):211 -213. 
52. Klingberg T. Training Working Memory . The ADHD Report: Special Issue —Focus on 
Assessment. 2006;14(1):6 -8. 
53. Coull JT, Nobre AC, Frith CD. The noradrenergic alpha2 agonist clonidine modulates 
behavioural and neuroanatomical correlates of human attentional orienting and alerting. 
Cerebral co rtex. Jan 2001;11(1):73 -84. 
54. Heilman KM, Schwartz HD, Watson RT. Hypoarousal in patients with the neglect 
syndrome and emotional indifference. Neurology. Mar 1978;28(3):229 -232. 
55. Hjaltason H, Tegner R, Tham K, Levander M, Ericson K. Sustained attenti on and 
awareness of disability in chronic neglect. Neuropsychologia. Dec 1996;34(12):1229 -
1233.  
56. Husain M, Shapiro K, Martin J, Kennard C. Abnormal temporal dynamics of visual 
attention in spatial neglect patients. Nature. Jan 9 1997;385(6612):154 -156. 
57. Malhotra P, Coulthard EJ, Husain M. Role of right posterior parietal cortex in maintaining 
attention to spatial locations over time. Brain. Mar 2009;132(Pt 3):645 -660. 
58. Posner MI. Measuring alertness. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 
2008 ;1129:193 -199. 
59. Robertson IH, Mattingley JB, Rorden C, Driver J. Phasic alerting of neglect patients 
overcomes their spatial deficit in visual awareness. Nature. Sep 10 1998;395(6698):169 -
172. 
60. Sturm W, Willmes K. On the functional neuroanatomy of in trinsic and phasic alertness. 
Neuroimage. Jul 2001;14(1 Pt 2):S76 -84. 
61. Thiel CM, Zilles K, Fink GR. Cerebral correlates of alerting, orienting and reorienting of 
visuospatial attention: an event -related fMRI study. Neuroimage. Jan 2004;21(1):318 -
328. 
62. Thimm M, Fink GR, Kust J, Karbe H, Sturm W. Impact of alertness training on spatial 
neglect: a behavioural and fMRI study. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(7):1230 -1246.  
63. Woods AJ, Mennemeier M, Garcia -Rill E, et al. Improvement in arousal, visual neglect, 
and perception of stimulus intensity following cold pressor stimulation. Neurocase. 
2012;18(2):115 -122. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 36 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  64. Woods AJ, Philbeck JW, Chelette K, Skinner RD, Garcia -Rill E, Mennemeier M. Cold 
pressor stimulation diminishes P50 amplitude in normal subjects. Acta neurobiologiae 
experimentalis. 2011;71(3):348 -358. 
65. Woods AJ, Philbeck JW, Wirtz P. Hyper -arousal decreases human visual thresholds. 
PloS one. 2013;8(4):e61415.  
66. Degutis JM, Van Vleet TM. Tonic and phasic alertness training: a novel behavioral 
therapy to improve spatial and non -spatial attention in patients with hemispatial neglect. 
Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2010;4.  
67. Van Vleet TM, Hoang -duc AK, DeGutis J, Robertson LC. Modulation of non -spatial 
attention and the global/local processing bia s. Neuropsychologia. Feb 2011;49(3):352 -
359. 
68. Wolinsky FD, Unverzagt FW, Smith DM, Jones R, Stoddard A, Tennstedt SL. The 
ACTIVE cognitive training trial and health -related quality of life: protection that lasts for 5 
years. The journals of gerontology.  Series A, Biological sciences and medical sciences. 
Dec 2006;61(12):1324 -1329.  
69. Antal A, Fischer T, Saiote C, et al. Transcranial electrical stimulation modifies the 
neuronal response to psychosocial stress exposure. Human brain mapping. Dec 31 
2013.  
70. Arlotti M, Rahman A, Minhas P, Bikson M. Axon terminal polarization induced by weak 
uniform DC electric fields: a modeling study. Conference proceedings : ... Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Conference. 2012;2012:4575 -4578.  
71. Chrysikou EG, Hamilton RH. Noninvasive brain stimulation in the treatment of aphasia: 
exploring interhemispheric relationships and their implications for neurorehabilitation.  
Restorative neurology and neuroscience. 2011;29(6):375 -394. 
72. Clark VP, Coffman BA, Mayer AR, et al. TDCS guided using fMRI significantly 
accelerates learning to identify concealed objects. Neuroimage. Jan 2 2012;59(1):117 -
128. 
73. da Silva MC, Conti CL , Klauss J, et al. Behavioral effects of transcranial Direct Current 
Stimulation (tDCS) induced dorsolateral prefrontal cortex plasticity in alcohol 
dependence. Journal of physiology, Paris. Dec 2013;107(6):493 -502. 
74. Moreno -Duarte I, Morse LR, Alam M, B ikson M, Zafonte R, Fregni F. Targeted therapies 
using electrical and magnetic neural stimulation for the treatment of chronic pain in 
spinal cord injury. Neuroimage. Jan 15 2014;85 Pt 3:1003 -1013.  
75. Nawani H, Kalmady SV, Bose A, et al. Neural Basis of t DCS Effects on Auditory Verbal 
Hallucinations in Schizophrenia: A Case Report Evidence for Cortical Neuroplasticity 
Modulation. The journal of ECT. Mar 2014;30(1):e2 -4. 
76. Nitsche MA, Niehaus L, Hoffmann KT, et al. MRI study of human brain exposed to weak  
direct current stimulation of the frontal cortex. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of 
the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Oct 2004;115(10):2419 -2423.  
77. Nord CL, Lally N, Charpentier CJ. Harnessing electric potential: DLP FC tDCS induces 
widespread brain perfusion changes. Frontiers in systems neuroscience. 2013;7:99.  
78. Okano AH, Fontes EB, Montenegro RA, et al. Brain stimulation modulates the autonomic 
nervous system, rating of perceived exertion and performance during m aximal exercise. 
British journal of sports medicine. Feb 27 2013.  
79. Radman T, Datta A, Ramos RL, Brumberg JC, Bikson M. One -dimensional 
representation of a neuron in a uniform electric field. Conference proceedings : ... 
Annual International Conference o f the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Conference. 
2009;2009:6481 -6484.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 37 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  80. Rahman A, Reato D, Arlotti M, et al. Cellular effects of acute direct current stimulation: 
somatic and synaptic t erminal effects. The Journal of physiology. May 15 2013;591(Pt 
10):2563 -2578.  
81. Reato D, Rahman A, Bikson M, Parra LC. Effects of weak transcranial alternating 
current stimulation on brain activity -a review of known mechanisms from animal studies. 
Fronti ers in human neuroscience. 2013;7:687.  
82. Sehm B, Schafer A, Kipping J, et al. Dynamic modulation of intrinsic functional 
connectivity by transcranial direct current stimulation. Journal of neurophysiology. Dec 
2012;108(12):3253 -3263.  
83. Shah PP, Szaflar ski JP, Allendorfer J, Hamilton RH. Induction of neuroplasticity and 
recovery in post -stroke aphasia by non -invasive brain stimulation. Frontiers in human 
neuroscience. 2013;7:888.  
84. Stagg CJ, Bachtiar V, Johansen -Berg H. The role of GABA in human motor learning. 
Current biology : CB. Mar 22 2011;21(6):480 -484. 
85. Stagg CJ, Lin RL, Mezue M, et al. Widespread modulation of cerebral perfusion induced 
during and after transcranial direct current stimulation applied to the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex . J Neurosci. Jul 10 2013;33(28):11425 -11431.  
86. Stagg CJ, Nitsche MA. Physiological basis of transcranial direct current stimulation. The 
Neuroscientist : a review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry. Feb 
2011;17(1):37 -53. 
87. Turkelt aub PE, Benson J, Hamilton RH, Datta A, Bikson M, Coslett HB. Left lateralizing 
transcranial direct current stimulation improves reading efficiency. Brain stimulation. Jul 
2012;5(3):201 -207. 
88. Woods AJ, Hamilton RH, Kranjec A, et al. Space, Time, and Cau sality in the Human 
Brain. Neuroimage. Feb 18 2014.  
89. Zheng X, Alsop DC, Schlaug G. Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
on human regional cerebral blood flow. Neuroimage. Sep 1 2011;58(1):26 -33. 
90. Fregni F, Boggio PS, Santos MC, e t al. Noninvasive cortical stimulation with transcranial 
direct current stimulation in Parkinson's disease. Movement disorders : official journal of 
the Movement Disorder Society. Oct 2006;21(10):1693 -1702.  
91. Kessler SK, Minhas P, Woods AJ, Rosen A, Gorm an C, Bikson M. Dosage 
considerations for transcranial direct current stimulation in children: a computational 
modeling study. PloS one. 2013;8(9):e76112.  
92. Lang N, Nitsche MA, Paulus W, Rothwell JC, Lemon RN. Effects of transcranial direct 
current stimu lation over the human motor cortex on corticospinal and transcallosal 
excitability. Experimental brain research. Jun 2004;156(4):439 -443. 
93. Lang N, Siebner HR, Ward NS, et al. How does transcranial DC stimulation of the 
primary motor cortex alter regiona l neuronal activity in the human brain? The European 
journal of neuroscience. Jul 2005;22(2):495 -504. 
94. Liebetanz D, Nitsche MA, Tergau F, Paulus W. Pharmacological approach to the 
mechanisms of transcranial DC -stimulation -induced after -effects of human motor cortex 
excitability. Brain. Oct 2002;125(Pt 10):2238 -2247.  
95. Minhas P, Bikson M, Woods AJ, Rosen AR, Kessler SK. Transcranial direct current 
stimulation in pediatric brain: a computational modeling study. Conference proceedings : 
... Annual Interna tional Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Conference. 
2012;2012:859 -862. 
96. Feng WW, Bowden MG, Kautz S. Review of transcranial direct current stimulation in 
poststroke rec overy. Topics in stroke rehabilitation. Jan-Feb 2013;20(1):68 -77. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 38 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  97. Polanowska K, Seniow J. [Influence of transcranial direct current stimulation on cognitive 
functioning of patients with brain injury]. Neurologia i neurochirurgia polska. Nov-Dec 
2010;44 (6):580 -590. 
98. Schlaug G, Renga V. Transcranial direct current stimulation: a noninvasive tool to 
facilitate stroke recovery. Expert review of medical devices. Nov 2008;5(6):759 -768. 
99. Schlaug G, Renga V, Nair D. Transcranial direct current stimulation  in stroke recovery. 
Archives of neurology. Dec 2008;65(12):1571 -1576.  
100. Berryhill ME, Jones KT. tDCS selectively improves working memory in older adults with 
more education. Neuroscience letters. Jul 19 2012;521(2):148 -151. 
101. Cerruti C, Schlaug G. A nodal transcranial direct current stimulation of the prefrontal 
cortex enhances complex verbal associative thought. Journal of cognitive neuroscience. 
Oct 2009;21(10):1980 -1987.  
102. Dell'Osso B, Zanoni S, Ferrucci R, et al. Transcranial direct current sti mulation for the 
outpatient treatment of poor -responder depressed patients. European psychiatry : the 
journal of the Association of European Psychiatrists. Oct 2012;27(7):513 -517. 
103. Javadi AH, Walsh V. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) of t he left 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex modulates declarative memory. Brain stimulation. Jul 
2012;5(3):231 -241. 
104. Brunoni AR, Nitsche MA, Bolognini N, et al. Clinical research with transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future dir ections. Brain stimulation. Jul 
2012;5(3):175 -195. 
105. Cohen Kadosh R, Soskic S, Iuculano T, Kanai R, Walsh V. Modulating neuronal activity 
produces specific and long -lasting changes in numerical competence. Current biology : 
CB. Nov 23 2010;20(22):2016 -2020. 
106. Dockery CA, Hueckel -Weng R, Birbaumer N, Plewnia C. Enhancement of planning 
ability by transcranial direct current stimulation. J Neurosci. Jun 3 2009;29(22):7271 -
7277.  
107. Hamilton RH, Chrysikou EG, Coslett B. Mechanisms of aphasia recovery aft er stroke 
and the role of noninvasive brain stimulation. Brain and language. Jul 2011;118(1 -2):40 -
50. 
108. Park SH, Seo JH, Kim YH, Ko MH. Long -term effects of transcranial direct current 
stimulation combined with computer -assisted cognitive training in he althy older adults. 
Neuroreport. Jan 22 2014;25(2):122 -126. 
109. Ditye T, Jacobson L, Walsh V, Lavidor M. Modulating behavioral inhibition by tDCS 
combined with cognitive training. Experimental brain research. Jun 2012;219(3):363 -
368. 
110. Lesniak M, Polan owska K, Seniow J, Czlonkowska A. Effects of Repeated Anodal tDCS 
Coupled With Cognitive Training for Patients With Severe Traumatic Brain Injury: A Pilot 
Randomized Controlled Trial. The Journal of head trauma rehabilitation. Jun 10 2013.  
111. Li SC, Schm iedek F, Huxhold O, Rocke C, Smith J, Lindenberger U. Working memory 
plasticity in old age: practice gain, transfer, and maintenance. Psychology and aging. 
Dec 2008;23(4):731 -742. 
112. Martin DM, Liu R, Alonzo A, et al. Can transcranial direct current stim ulation enhance 
outcomes from cognitive training? A randomized controlled trial in healthy participants. 
The international journal of neuropsychopharmacology / official scientific journal of the 
Collegium Internationale Neuropsychopharmacologicum. Oct 2013 ;16(9):1927 -1936.  
113. Kim GW, Ko MH. Facilitation of corticospinal tract excitability by transcranial direct 
current stimulation combined with voluntary grip exercise. Neuroscience letters. Aug 26 
2013;548:181 -184. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 39 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  114. Krause B, Marquez -Ruiz J, Kadosh RC . The effect of transcranial direct current 
stimulation: a role for cortical excitation/inhibition balance? Frontiers in human 
neuroscience. 2013;7:602.  
115. Nitsche MA, Liebetanz D, Schlitterlau A, et al. GABAergic modulation of DC stimulation -
induced mot or cortex excitability shifts in humans. The European journal of 
neuroscience. May 2004;19(10):2720 -2726.  
116. Ranieri F, Podda MV, Riccardi E, et al. Modulation of LTP at rat hippocampal CA3 -CA1 
synapses by direct current stimulation. Journal of neurophys iology. Apr 
2012;107(7):1868 -1880.  
117. Tremblay S, Beaule V, Lepage JF, Theoret H. Anodal transcranial direct current 
stimulation modulates GABAB -related intracortical inhibition in the M1 of healthy 
individuals. Neuroreport. Jan 9 2013;24(1):46 -50. 
118. Stopa EG, Butala P, Salloway S, et al. Cerebral cortical arteriolar angiopathy, vascular 
beta-amyloid, smooth muscle actin, Braak stage, and APOE genotype. Stroke; a journal 
of cerebral circulation. Mar 2008;39(3):814 -821. 
119. Rapp MA, Schnaider -Beeri M, Purohit DP, Perl DP, Haroutunian V, Sano M. Increased 
neurofibrillary tangles in patients with Alzheimer disease with comorbid depression. Am 
J Geriatr Psychiatry. Feb 2008;16(2):168 -174. 
120. Mortimer JA, Gosche KM, Riley KP, Markesbery WR, Snowdon DA. De layed recall, 
hippocampal volume and Alzheimer neuropathology: findings from the Nun Study. 
Neurology. Feb 10 2004;62(3):428 -432. 
121. Braak E, Griffing K, Arai K, Bohl J, Bratzke H, Braak H. Neuropathology of Alzheimer's 
disease: what is new since A. Alzh eimer? Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1999;249 
Suppl 3:14 -22. 
122. Thal DR, Arendt T, Waldmann G, et al. Progression of neurofibrillary changes and PHF -
tau in end -stage Alzheimer's disease is different from plaque and cortical microglial 
pathology. Neurobiol Aging. Nov-Dec 1998;19(6):517 -525. 
123. Thal DR, Hartig W, Schober R. Stage -correlated distribution of type 1 and 2 dystrophic 
neurites in cortical and hippocampal plaques in Alzheimer's disease. J Hirnforsch. 
1998;39(2):175 -181. 
124. Mizukami K, Gr ayson DR, Ikonomovic MD, Sheffield R, Armstrong DM. GABAA receptor 
beta 2 and beta 3 subunits mRNA in the hippocampal formation of aged human brain 
with Alzheimer -related neuropathology. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. May 1998;56(1 -
2):268 -272. 
125. Jellinger KA,  Bancher C. Senile dementia with tangles (tangle predominant form of 
senile dementia). Brain Pathol. Apr 1998;8(2):367 -376. 
126. Nagy Z, Vatter -Bittner B, Braak H, et al. Staging of Alzheimer -type pathology: an 
interrater -intrarater study. Dement Geriatr C ogn Disord. Jul-Aug 1997;8(4):248 -251. 
127. Braak H, Braak E. Evolution of the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease. Acta Neurol 
Scand Suppl. 1996;165:3 -12. 
128. Knopman DS, Parisi JE, Salviati A, et al. Neuropathology of cognitively normal elderly. J 
Neuropathol Exp Neurol. Nov 2003;62(11):1087 -1095.  
129. Raz N, Schmiedek F, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Lindenberger U, Lovden M. 
Differential brain shrinkage over 6 months shows limited association with cognitive 
practice. Brain Cogn. Jul 2013;82(2):171 -180. 
130. Fjell AM, Westlye LT, Grydeland H, et al. Critical ages in the life course of the adult 
brain: nonlinear subcortical aging. Neurobiol Aging. Oct 2013;34(10):2239 -2247.  
131. Raz N, Yang YQ, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Lindenberger U, Ghisletta P. White matt er 
deterioration in 15 months: latent growth curve models in healthy adults. Neurobiol 
Aging. Feb 2012;33(2):429 e421 -425. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 40 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  132. Rodrigue KM, Haacke EM, Raz N. Differential effects of age and history of hypertension 
on regional brain volumes and iron. Neuro image. Jan 15 2011;54(2):750 -759. 
133. Raz N, Ghisletta P, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Lindenberger U. Trajectories of brain 
aging in middle -aged and older adults: regional and individual differences. Neuroimage. 
Jun 2010;51(2):501 -511. 
134. Burgmans S, van B oxtel MP, Gronenschild EH, et al. Multiple indicators of age -related 
differences in cerebral white matter and the modifying effects of hypertension. 
Neuroimage. Feb 1 2010;49(3):2083 -2093.  
135. Kennedy KM, Rodrigue KM, Head D, Gunning -Dixon F, Raz N. Neuro anatomical and 
cognitive mediators of age -related differences in perceptual priming and learning. 
Neuropsychology. Jul 2009;23(4):475 -491. 
136. Head D, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Raz N. Neuroanatomical and cognitive mediators 
of age -related differences in ep isodic memory. Neuropsychology. Jul 2008;22(4):491 -
507. 
137. Kennedy KM, Erickson KI, Rodrigue KM, et al. Age -related differences in regional brain 
volumes: a comparison of optimized voxel -based morphometry to manual volumetry. 
Neurobiol Aging. Oct 2009;30 (10):1657 -1676.  
138. Raz N, Rodrigue KM, Haacke EM. Brain aging and its modifiers: insights from in vivo 
neuromorphometry and susceptibility weighted imaging. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences. Feb 2007;1097:84 -93. 
139. Erickson KI, Colcombe SJ, R az N, et al. Selective sparing of brain tissue in 
postmenopausal women receiving hormone replacement therapy. Neurobiol Aging. Aug-
Sep 2005;26(8):1205 -1213.  
140. Raz N, Lindenberger U, Rodrigue KM, et al. Regional brain changes in aging healthy 
adults: gen eral trends, individual differences and modifiers. Cerebral cortex. Nov 
2005;15(11):1676 -1689.  
141. Raz N, Gunning -Dixon FM, Head D, Dupuis JH, Acker JD. Neuroanatomical correlates 
of cognitive aging: evidence from structural magnetic resonance imaging. 
Neuropsychology. Jan 1998;12(1):95 -114. 
142. Raz N, Gunning FM, Head D, et al. Selective aging of the human cerebral cortex 
observed in vivo: differential vulnerability of the prefrontal gray matter. Cerebral cortex. 
Apr-May 1997;7(3):268 -282. 
143. Raz N, To rres IJ, Acker JD. Age, gender, and hemispheric differences in human 
striatum: a quantitative review and new data from in vivo MRI morphometry. Neurobiol 
Learn Mem. Mar 1995;63(2):133 -142. 
144. Raz N, Torres IJ, Briggs SD, et al. Selective neuroanatomic ab normalities in Down's 
syndrome and their cognitive correlates: evidence from MRI morphometry. Neurology. 
Feb 1995;45(2):356 -366. 
145. Brickman AM, Provenzano FA, Muraskin J, et al. Regional white matter hyperintensity 
volume, not hippocampal atrophy, predi cts incident Alzheimer disease in the community. 
Archives of neurology. Dec 2012;69(12):1621 -1627.  
146. Zimmerman ME, Brickman AM, Paul RH, et al. The relationship between frontal gray 
matter volume and cognition varies across the healthy adult lifespan. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. Oct 2006;14(10):823 -833. 
147. Brickman AM, Habeck C, Zarahn E, Flynn J, Stern Y. Structural MRI covariance patterns 
associated with normal aging and neuropsychological functioning. Neurobiol Aging. Feb 
2007;28(2):284 -295. 
148. Paul RH, Haque O, Gunstad J, et al. Subcortical hyperintensities impact cognitive 
function among a select subset of healthy elderly. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Aug 
2005;20(6):697 -704. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 41 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  149. Tate DF, Jefferson AL, Brickman AM, et al. Regional White Matter Signal Abn ormalities 
and Cognitive Correlates Among Geriatric Patients with Treated Cardiovascular 
Disease. Brain Imaging Behav. Sep 1 2008;2(3):200 -206. 
150. Jefferson AL, Tate DF, Poppas A, et al. Lower cardiac output is associated with greater 
white matter hyperi ntensities in older adults with cardiovascular disease. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. Jul 2007;55(7):1044 -1048.  
151. Miller LA, Gunstad J, Spitznagel MB, et al. CAMTA1 T polymorphism is associated with 
neuropsychological test performance in older adults with cardiovas cular disease. 
Psychogeriatrics. Sep 2011;11(3):135 -140. 
152. Cohen RA, Poppas A, Forman DE, et al. Vascular and cognitive functions associated 
with cardiovascular disease in the elderly. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. Jan 2009;31(1):96 -
110. 
153. Haley AP, Sweet  LH, Gunstad J, et al. Verbal working memory and atherosclerosis in 
patients with cardiovascular disease: an fMRI study. J Neuroimaging. Jul 
2007;17(3):227 -233. 
154. Hoth KF, Tate DF, Poppas A, et al. Endothelial function and white matter 
hyperintensities in older adults with cardiovascular disease. Stroke; a journal of cerebral 
circulation. Feb 2007;38(2):308 -312. 
155. Garrett KD, Browndyke JN, Whelihan W, et al. The neuropsychological profile of 
vascular cognitive impairment --no dementia: comparisons to p atients at risk for 
cerebrovascular disease and vascular dementia. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Sep 
2004;19(6):745 -757. 
156. Alosco ML, Gunstad J, Jerskey BA, et al. The adverse effects of reduced cerebral 
perfusion on cognition and brain structure in older adu lts with cardiovascular disease. 
Brain Behav. Nov 2013;3(6):626 -636. 
157. Irani F, Sweet LH, Haley AP, et al. A fMRI Study of Verbal Working Memory, Cardiac 
Output, and Ejection Fraction in Elderly Patients with Cardiovascular Disease. Brain 
Imaging Behav.  Dec 2009;3(4):350 -357. 
158. Haley AP, Hoth KF, Gunstad J, et al. Subjective cognitive complaints relate to white 
matter hyperintensities and future cognitive decline in patients with cardiovascular 
disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. Nov 2009;17(11):976 -985. 
159. Gunstad J, Bausserman L, Paul RH, et al. C -reactive protein, but not homocysteine, is 
related to cognitive dysfunction in older adults with cardiovascular disease. J Clin 
Neurosci. Jun 2006;13(5):540 -546. 
160. Gunstad J, Cohen RA, Tate DF, et al. Blood pressure variability and white matter 
hyperintensities in older adults with cardiovascular disease. Blood Press. 
2005;14(6):353 -358. 
161. Raz N, Williamson A, Gunning -Dixon F, Head D, Acker JD. Neuroanatomical and 
cognitive correlates of adult age diff erences in acquisition of a perceptual -motor skill. 
Microsc Res Tech. Oct 1 2000;51(1):85 -93. 
162. Brickman AM, Zimmerman ME, Paul RH, et al. Regional white matter and 
neuropsychological functioning across the adult lifespan. Biol Psychiatry. Sep 1 
2006;60 (5):444 -453. 
163. Brickman AM. Contemplating Alzheimer's disease and the contribution of white matter 
hyperintensities. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. Dec 2013;13(12):415.  
164. Brickman AM, Buchsbaum MS, Shihabuddin L, Hazlett EA, Borod JC, Mohs RC. Striatal 
size, glucose metabolic rate, and verbal learning in normal aging. Brain Res Cogn Brain 
Res. Jun 2003;17(1):106 -116. 
165. Brickman AM, Paul RH, Cohen RA, et al. Category and letter verbal fluency across the 
adult lifespan: relationship to EEG theta power. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Jul 
2005;20(5):561 -573. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 42 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  166. Brickman AM, Schupf N, Manly JJ, et al. Brain morphology in older African Americans, 
Caribbean Hispanics, and whites from northern Manhattan. Archives of neurology. Aug 
2008;65(8):1053 -1061.  
167. Brickman AM, Sneed JR, Provenzano FA, et al. Quantitative approaches for assessment 
of white matter hyperintensities in elderly populations. Psychiatry Res. Aug 30 
2011;193(2):101 -106. 
168. Cohen R, Sweet LH. Neuroimaging in Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Neurosc ience.  
New York, NY: Springer Publishing; 2012.  
169. Clark US, Cohen RA, Sweet LH, et al. Effects of HIV and early life stress on amygdala 
morphometry and neurocognitive function. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. Jul 2012;18(4):657 -
668. 
170. Sweet LH, Hassenstab JJ , McCaffery JM, et al. Brain response to food stimulation in 
obese, normal weight, and successful weight loss maintainers. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
Nov 2012;20(11):2220 -2225.  
171. Sweet LH, Mulligan RC, Finnerty CE, et al. Effects of nicotine withdrawal on  verbal 
working memory and associated brain response. Psychiatry Res. Jul 30 2010;183(1):69 -
74. 
172. McCaffery JM, Haley AP, Sweet LH, et al. Differential functional magnetic resonance 
imaging response to food pictures in successful weight -loss maintainers  relative to 
normal -weight and obese controls. Am J Clin Nutr. Oct 2009;90(4):928 -934. 
173. Browndyke JN, Paskavitz J, Sweet LH, et al. Neuroanatomical correlates of malingered 
memory impairment: event -related fMRI of deception on a recognition memory task . 
Brain Inj. Jun 2008;22(6):481 -489. 
174. David SP, Munafo MR, Johansen -Berg H, et al. Effects of Acute Nicotine Abstinence on 
Cue-elicited Ventral Striatum/Nucleus Accumbens Activation in Female Cigarette 
Smokers: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging S tudy. Brain Imaging Behav. Dec 
2007;1(3 -4):43 -57. 
175. Sweet LH, Paskavitz JF, Haley AP, et al. Imaging phonological similarity effects on 
verbal working memory. Neuropsychologia. Mar 7 2008;46(4):1114 -1123.  
176. Sweet LH, Paskavitz JF, O'Connor MJ, Brownd yke JN, Wellen JW, Cohen RA. FMRI 
correlates of the WAIS -III symbol search subtest. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. Jul 
2005;11(4):471 -476. 
177. Sweet LH, Rao SM, Primeau M, Durgerian S, Cohen RA. Functional magnetic 
resonance imaging response to increased verbal working memory demands among 
patients with multiple sclerosis. Human brain mapping. Jan 2006;27(1):28 -36. 
178. Sweet LH, Rao SM, Primeau M, Mayer AR, Cohen RA. Functional magnetic resonance 
imaging of working memory among multiple sclerosis patients. J Neu roimaging. Apr 
2004;14(2):150 -157. 
179. Sweet LH, Paul RH, Cohen RA, et al. Neuroimaging correlates of dementia rating scale 
performance at baseline and 12 -month follow -up among patients with vascular 
dementia. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. Dec 2003;16(4):2 40-244. 
180. Davis SW, Kragel JE, Madden DJ, Cabeza R. The architecture of cross -hemispheric 
communication in the aging brain: linking behavior to functional and structural 
connectivity. Cerebral cortex. Jan 2012;22(1):232 -242. 
181. Madden DJ, Costello MC,  Dennis NA, et al. Adult age differences in functional 
connectivity during executive control. Neuroimage. Aug 15 2010;52(2):643 -657. 
182. Davis SW, Dennis NA, Buchler NG, White LE, Madden DJ, Cabeza R. Assessing the 
effects of age on long white matter trac ts using diffusion tensor tractography. 
Neuroimage. Jun 2009;46(2):530 -541. 
183. Davis SW, Dennis NA, Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Cabeza R. Que PASA? The posterior -
anterior shift in aging. Cerebral cortex. May 2008;18(5):1201 -1209.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 43 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  184. Chang L, Holt JL, Yakupo v R, Jiang CS, Ernst T. Lower cognitive reserve in the aging 
human immunodeficiency virus -infected brain. Neurobiol Aging. Apr 2013;34(4):1240 -
1253.  
185. Chang L, Lee P, Yiannoutsos C, et al. A multicenter In Vivo Proton MRS study of HIV -
associated brain i njury and the effects of aging.  HIV MRS Consortium;Submitted.  
186. Chang L, Speck O, Miller EN, et al. Neural correlates of attention and working memory 
deficits in HIV patients. Neurology. Sep 25 2001;57(6):1001 -1007.  
187. Chang L, Wong V, Nakama H, et al . Greater than age -related changes in brain diffusion 
of HIV patients after 1 year. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. Dec 2008;3(4):265 -274. 
188. Ernst T, Chang L, Jovicich J, Ames N, Arnold S. Abnormal brain activation on functional 
MRI in cognitively asymptomatic  HIV patients. Neurology. Nov 12 2002;59(9):1343 -
1349.  
189. Ernst T, Itti E, Itti L, Chang L. Changes in cerebral metabolism are detected prior to 
perfusion changes in early HIV -CMC: A coregistered (1)H MRS and SPECT study. J 
Magn Reson Imaging. Dec 2000;1 2(6):859 -865. 
190. Ernst T, Yakupov R, Nakama H, et al. Declined neural efficiency in cognitively stable 
human immunodeficiency virus patients. Ann Neurol. Mar 2009;65(3):316 -325. 
191. Watanabe T, Shiino A, Akiguchi I. Absolute quantification in proton mag netic resonance 
spectroscopy is useful to differentiate amnesic mild cognitive impairment from 
Alzheimer's disease and healthy aging. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010;30(1):71 -77. 
192. Ding B, Chen KM, Ling HW, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging correlates wi th proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy in posterior cingulate region of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;25(3):218 -225. 
193. Metastasio A, Rinaldi P, Tarducci R, et al. Conversion of MCI to dementia: Role of 
proton mag netic resonance spectroscopy. Neurobiol Aging. Jul 2006;27(7):926 -932. 
194. Ackl N, Ising M, Schreiber YA, Atiya M, Sonntag A, Auer DP. Hippocampal metabolic 
abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. Neuroscience 
letters. Aug 12 -19 2005;384(1 -2):23 -28. 
195. Modrego PJ, Fayed N, Pina MA. Conversion from mild cognitive impairment to probable 
Alzheimer's disease predicted by brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Am J 
Psychiatry. Apr 2005;162(4):667 -675. 
196. Frederick BD, Lyoo IK, Sa tlin A, et al. In vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
of the temporal lobe in Alzheimer's disease. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol 
Psychiatry. Dec 2004;28(8):1313 -1322.  
197. Pilatus U, Lais C, Rochmont Adu M, et al. Conversion to dementia in mild co gnitive 
impairment is associated with decline of N -actylaspartate and creatine as revealed by 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Psychiatry Res. Jul 15 2009;173(1):1 -7. 
198. Waldman AD, Rai GS. The relationship between cognitive impairment and in vivo 
metabo lite ratios in patients with clinical Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia: a 
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Neuroradiology. Aug 2003;45(8):507 -
512. 
199. Pagonabarraga J, Gomez -Anson B, Rotger R, et al. Spectroscopic changes associated 
with mild cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's disease. Dement Geriatr 
Cogn Disord. 2012;34(5 -6):312 -318. 
200. Gasparovic C, Prestopnik J, Thompson J, et al. 1H -MR spectroscopy metabolite levels 
correlate with executive function in vascular cog nitive impairment. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. Jul 2013;84(7):715 -721. 
201. Wang S, Yuan J, Guo X, et al. Neurochemical correlates of cognitive dysfunction in 
patients with leukoaraiosis: a proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Neurol 
Res. Dec 2 012;34(10):989 -997. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 44 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  202. Griffith HR, Stewart CC, den Hollander JA. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in 
dementias and mild cognitive impairment. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2009;84:105 -131. 
203. Ross AJ, Sachdev PS, Wen W, Valenzuela MJ, Brodaty H. 1H MRS in stroke patients 
with and without cognitive impairment. Neurobiol Aging. Jun 2005;26(6):873 -882. 
204. Chang L, Lee PL, Yiannoutsos CT, et al. A multicenter in vivo proton -MRS study of HIV -
associated dementia and its relationship to age. Neuroimage. Dec 2004 ;23(4):1336 -
1347.  
205. Lee PL, Yiannoutsos CT, Ernst T, et al. A multi -center 1H MRS study of the AIDS 
dementia complex: validation and preliminary analysis. J Magn Reson Imaging. Jun 
2003;17(6):625 -633. 
206. Yiannoutsos CT, Ernst T, Chang L, et al. Region al patterns of brain metabolites in AIDS 
dementia complex. Neuroimage. Nov 2004;23(3):928 -935. 
207. Hua X, Boyle CP, Harezlak J, et al. Disrupted cerebral metabolite levels and lower nadir 
CD4 + counts are linked to brain volume deficits in 210 HIV -infecte d patients on stable 
treatment. Neuroimage Clin. 2013;3:132 -142. 
208. Harezlak J, Buchthal S, Taylor M, et al. Persistence of HIV -associated cognitive 
impairment, inflammation, and neuronal injury in era of highly active antiretroviral 
treatment. AIDS. Mar 13 2011;25(5):625 -633. 
209. Cohen RA, Harezlak J, Gongvatana A, et al. Cerebral metabolite abnormalities in human 
immunodeficiency virus are associated with cortical and subcortical volumes. Journal of 
neurovirology. Nov 2010;16(6):435 -444. 
210. Paul RH, Ernst T, Brickman AM, et al. Relative sensitivity of magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy and quantitative magnetic resonance imaging to cognitive function among 
nondemented individuals infected with HIV. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. Sep 
2008;14(5):725 -733. 
211. Paul RH, Gunstad J, Cooper N, et al. Cross -cultural assessment of neuropsychological 
performance and electrical brain function measures: additional validation of an 
international brain database. Int J Neurosci. Apr 2007;117(4):549 -568. 
212. Watanabe M, Maemur a K, Kanbara K, Tamayama T, Hayasaki H. GABA and GABA 
receptors in the central nervous system and other organs. Int Rev Cytol. 2002;213:1 -47. 
213. Szabadics J, Varga C, Molnar G, Olah S, Barzo P, Tamas G. Excitatory effect of 
GABAergic axo -axonic cells in cortical microcircuits. Science. Jan 13 
2006;311(5758):233 -235. 
214. Foster TC, Sharrow KM, Kumar A, Masse J. Interaction of age and chronic estradiol 
replacement on memory and markers of brain aging. Neurobiol Aging. Oct 
2003;24(6):839 -852. 
215. Foster TC , Kumar A. Calcium dysregulation in the aging brain. The Neuroscientist : a 
review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry. Aug 2002;8(4):297 -301. 
216. Foster TC, Sharrow KM, Masse JR, Norris CM, Kumar A. Calcineurin links Ca2+ 
dysregulatio n with brain aging. J Neurosci. Jun 1 2001;21(11):4066 -4073.  
217. Foster TC. Involvement of hippocampal synaptic plasticity in age -related memory 
decline. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. Nov 1999;30(3):236 -249. 
218. Foster TC, Norris CM. Age -associated changes in  Ca(2+) -dependent processes: relation 
to hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Hippocampus. 1997;7(6):602 -612. 
219. Baumgartner BJ, Harvey RJ, Darlison MG, Barnes EM, Jr. Developmental up -regulation 
and agonist -dependent down -regulation of GABAA receptor subuni t mRNAs in chick 
cortical neurons. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. Oct 1994;26(1 -2):9-17. 
220. Green EJ, Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. Behavioral state dependence of homo - and 
hetero -synaptic modulation of dentate gyrus excitability. Experimental brain research. 
1993 ;93(1):55 -65. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 45 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  221. Mizumori SJ, Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. Differential effects of age on subpopulations 
of hippocampal theta cells. Neurobiol Aging. Nov-Dec 1992;13(6):673 -679. 
222. Burke SN, Barnes CA. Senescent synapses and hippocampal circuit dynamics. Trends 
Neurosci. Mar 2010;33(3):153 -161. 
223. Burke SN, Maurer AP, Yang Z, Navratilova Z, Barnes CA. Glutamate receptor -mediated 
restoration of experience -dependent place field expansion plasticity in aged rats. Behav 
Neurosci. Jun 2008;122(3):535 -548. 
224. Barnes J, Hinkley L, Masters S, Boubert L. Visual memory transformations in dyslexia. 
Percept Mot Skills. Jun 2007;104(3 Pt 1):881 -891. 
225. Barnes P, Good M. Impaired Pavlovian cued fear conditioning in Tg2576 mice 
expressing a human mutant amyloid prec ursor protein gene. Behav Brain Res. Feb 10 
2005;157(1):107 -117. 
226. Barnes DE, Tager IB, Satariano WA, Yaffe K. The relationship between literacy and 
cognition in well -educated elders. The journals of gerontology. Series A, Biological 
sciences and medica l sciences. Apr 2004;59(4):390 -395. 
227. Barnes CA. Long -term potentiation and the ageing brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 
Biol Sci. Apr 29 2003;358(1432):765 -772. 
228. Barnes CA, Rao G, Orr G. Age -related decrease in the Schaffer collateral -evoked EPSP 
in awake, freely behaving rats. Neural Plast. 2000;7(3):167 -178. 
229. Barnes CA, Rao G, Houston FP. LTP induction threshold change in old rats at the 
perforant path --granule cell synapse. Neurobiol Aging. Sep-Oct 2000;21(5):613 -620. 
230. Barnes CA, Rao G, Sh en J. Age -related decrease in the N -methyl -D-aspartateR -
mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential in hippocampal region CA1. Neurobiol Aging. 
Jul-Aug 1997;18(4):445 -452. 
231. Rao G, Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. Effects of age on L -glutamate -induced 
depolariz ation in three hippocampal subfields. Neurobiol Aging. Jan-Feb 1993;14(1):27 -
33. 
232. Nelson HE, Pantelis C, Carruthers K, Speller J, Baxendale S, Barnes TR. Cognitive 
functioning and symptomatology in chronic schizophrenia. Psychol Med. May 
1990;20(2):357 -365. 
233. Barnes CA. Effects of aging on the dynamics of information processing and synaptic 
weight changes in the mammalian hippocampus. Prog Brain Res. 1990;86:89 -104. 
234. Barnes CA. Aging and the physiology of spatial memory. Neurobiol Aging. Sep-Dec 
1988;9(5 -6):563 -568. 
235. Barnes CA. Memory deficits associated with senescence: a neurophysiological and 
behavioral study in the rat. J Comp Physiol Psychol. Feb 1979;93(1):74 -104. 
236. Alexander GE, Ryan L, Bowers D, et al. Characterizing cognitive aging  in humans with 
links to animal models. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012;4:21.  
237. Bizon JL, Foster TC, Alexander GE, Glisky EL. Characterizing cognitive aging of working 
memory and executive function in animal models. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012;4:19.  
238. Robe rson ED, Defazio RA, Barnes CA, et al. Challenges and opportunities for 
characterizing cognitive aging across species. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012;4:6.  
239. Nilsen LH, Melo TM, Saether O, Witter MP, Sonnewald U. Altered neurochemical profile 
in the McGill -R-Thy1 -APP rat model of Alzheimer's disease: a longitudinal in vivo 1 H 
MRS study. J Neurochem. Nov 2012;123(4):532 -541. 
240. Martin WR. MR spectroscopy in neurodegenerative disease. Mol Imaging Biol. Jul-Aug 
2007;9(4):196 -203. 
241. Broccardo C, Nieoullon V , Amin R, et al. ABCA2 is a marker of neural progenitors and 
neuronal subsets in the adult rodent brain. J Neurochem. Apr 2006;97(2):345 -355. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 46 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  242. Wang H, Lian K, Han B, et al. Age -Related Alterations in the Metabolic Profile in the 
Hippocampus of the Sene scence -Accelerated Mouse Prone 8: A Spontaneous 
Alzheimer's Disease Mouse Model. J Alzheimers Dis. Nov 27 2013.  
243. Paul SM, Doherty JJ, Robichaud AJ, et al. The major brain cholesterol metabolite 24(S) -
hydroxycholesterol is a potent allosteric modulator of N-methyl -D-aspartate receptors. J 
Neurosci. Oct 30 2013;33(44):17290 -17300.  
244. Nilsen LH, Rae C, Ittner LM, Gotz J, Sonnewald U. Glutamate metabolism is impaired in 
transgenic mice with tau hyperphosphorylation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. May 
2013;33(5 ):684 -691. 
245. Ferchmin PA, Perez D, Castro Alvarez W, Penzo MA, Maldonado HM, Eterovic VA. 
gamma -Aminobutyric acid type A receptor inhibition triggers a nicotinic neuroprotective 
mechanism. J Neurosci Res. Mar 2013;91(3):416 -425. 
246. Koh MT, Rosenzweig -Lipson S, Gallagher M. Selective GABA(A) alpha5 positive 
allosteric modulators improve cognitive function in aged rats with memory impairment. 
Neuropharmacology. Jan 2013;64:145 -152. 
247. Leon -Espinosa G, DeFelipe J, Munoz A. Effects of amyloid -beta plaque  proximity on the 
axon initial segment of pyramidal cells. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;29(4):841 -852. 
248. Krantic S, Isorce N, Mechawar N, et al. Hippocampal GABAergic neurons are 
susceptible to amyloid -beta toxicity in vitro and are decreased in number in the  
Alzheimer's disease TgCRND8 mouse model. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;29(2):293 -308. 
249. Poil SS, Jansen R, van Aerde K, et al. Fast network oscillations in vitro exhibit a slow 
decay of temporal auto -correlations. The European journal of neuroscience. Aug 
2011;34(3):394 -403. 
250. Li G, Bien -Ly N, Andrews -Zwilling Y, et al. GABAergic interneuron dysfunction impairs 
hippocampal neurogenesis in adult apolipoprotein E4 knockin mice. Cell Stem Cell. Dec 
4 2009;5(6):634 -645. 
251. Rangel A, Madronal N, Gruart A, et a l. Regulation of GABA(A) and glutamate receptor 
expression, synaptic facilitation and long -term potentiation in the hippocampus of prion 
mutant mice. PloS one. 2009;4(10):e7592.  
252. Molinaro G, Battaglia G, Riozzi B, et al. Memantine treatment reduces the  expression of 
the K(+)/Cl( -) cotransporter KCC2 in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, and 
attenuates behavioural responses mediated by GABA(A) receptor activation in mice. 
Brain Res. Apr 10 2009;1265:75 -79. 
253. Matsuyama S, Taniguchi T, Kadoyama K, Mat sumoto A. Long -term potentiation -like 
facilitation through GABAA receptor blockade in the mouse dentate gyrus in vivo. 
Neuroreport. Dec 3 2008;19(18):1809 -1813.  
254. Yuk DY, Lee YK, Nam SY, et al. Reduced anxiety in the mice expressing mutant (N141I) 
prese nilin 2. J Neurosci Res. Feb 2009;87(2):522 -531. 
255. Albuquerque EX, Pereira EF, Mike A, Eisenberg HM, Maelicke A, Alkondon M. Neuronal 
nicotinic receptors in synaptic functions in humans and rats: physiological and clinical 
relevance. Behav Brain Res. Aug 2000;113(1 -2):131 -141. 
256. Alkondon M, Pereira EF, Yu P, et al. Targeted deletion of the kynurenine 
aminotransferase ii gene reveals a critical role of endogenous kynurenic acid in the 
regulation of synaptic transmission via alpha7 nicotinic receptors i n the hippocampus. J 
Neurosci. May 12 2004;24(19):4635 -4648.  
257. Edgar PF, Schonberger SJ, Dean B, Faull RL, Kydd R, Cooper GJ. A comparative 
proteome analysis of hippocampal tissue from schizophrenic and Alzheimer's disease 
individuals. Mol Psychiatry. Mar 1999;4(2):173 -178. 
258. Griguoli M, Cherubini E. Regulation of hippocampal inhibitory circuits by nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors. The Journal of physiology. Feb 15 2012;590(Pt 4):655 -666. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 47 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  259. Uehara T, Sumiyoshi T, Hattori H, et al. T -817MA, a novel  neurotrophic agent, 
ameliorates loss of GABAergic parvalbumin -positive neurons and sensorimotor gating 
deficits in rats transiently exposed to MK -801 in the neonatal period. J Psychiatr Res. 
May 2012;46(5):622 -629. 
260. Tao R, Li C, Newburn EN, et al. Transcript -specific associations of SLC12A5 (KCC2) in 
human prefrontal cortex with development, schizophrenia, and affective disorders. J 
Neurosci. Apr 11 2012;32(15):5216 -5222.  
261. Pattwell SS, Bath KG, Perez -Castro R, Lee FS, Chao MV, Ninan I. The BDNF Val 66Met 
polymorphism impairs synaptic transmission and plasticity in the infralimbic medial 
prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci. Feb 15 2012;32(7):2410 -2421.  
262. Vinkers CH, Oosting RS, van Bogaert MJ, Olivier B, Groenink L. Early -life blockade of 5 -
HT(1A) recept ors alters adult anxiety behavior and benzodiazepine sensitivity. Biol 
Psychiatry. Feb 15 2010;67(4):309 -316. 
263. Miczek KA, Yap JJ, Covington HE, 3rd. Social stress, therapeutics and drug abuse: 
preclinical models of escalated and depressed intake. Pharm acol Ther. Nov 
2008;120(2):102 -128. 
264. Hoschl C, Hajek T. Hippocampal damage mediated by corticosteroids --a 
neuropsychiatric research challenge. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2001;251 Suppl 
2:II81 -88. 
265. Motohashi N, Ikawa K, Kariya T. GABAB recep tors are up -regulated by chronic 
treatment with lithium or carbamazepine. GABA hypothesis of affective disorders? Eur J 
Pharmacol. Jul 4 1989;166(1):95 -99. 
266. Martin P, Pichat P, Massol J, Soubrie P, Lloyd KG, Puech AJ. Decreased GABA B 
receptors in help less rats: reversal by tricyclic antidepressants. Neuropsychobiology. 
1989;22(4):220 -224. 
267. Lloyd KG, Morselli PL, Bartholini G. GABA and affective disorders. Med Biol. 1987;65(2 -
3):159 -165. 
268. Long Z, Li XR, Xu J, et al. Thalamic GABA Predicts Fine M otor Performance in 
Manganese -Exposed Smelter Workers. PloS one. 2014;9(2):e88220.  
269. Mullins PG, McGonigle DJ, O'Gorman RL, et al. Current practice in the use of MEGA -
PRESS spectroscopy for the detection of GABA. Neuroimage. Feb 1 2014;86:43 -52. 
270. Shaw A, Brealy J, Richardson H, et al. Marked reductions in visual evoked responses 
but not gamma -aminobutyric acid concentrations or gamma -band measures in remitted 
depression. Biol Psychiatry. Apr 1 2013;73(7):691 -698. 
271. Foerster BR, Callaghan BC, Petro u M, Edden RA, Chenevert TL, Feldman EL. 
Decreased motor cortex gamma -aminobutyric acid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Neurology. May 15 2012;78(20):1596 -1600.  
272. Stone JM, Dietrich C, Edden R, et al. Ketamine effects on brain GABA and glutamate 
levels with 1H -MRS: relationship to ketamine -induced psychopathology. Mol Psychiatry. 
Jul 2012;17(7):664 -665. 
273. Dydak U, Jiang YM, Long LL, et al. In vivo measurement of brain GABA concentrations 
by magnetic resonance spectroscopy in smelters occupationally exposed to manganese. 
Environ Health Perspect. Feb 2011;119(2):219 -224. 
274. Edden RA, Puts NA, Barker PB. Macromolecule -suppressed GABA -edited magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy at 3T. Magn Reson Med. Sep 2012;68(3):657 -661. 
275. Edden RA, Crocetti D, Zhu H,  Gilbert DL, Mostofsky SH. Reduced GABA concentration 
in attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Jul 2012;69(7):750 -753. 
276. Michels L, Martin E, Klaver P, et al. Frontal GABA levels change during working 
memory. PloS one. 2012;7(4) :e31933.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 48 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  277. Edden RA, Intrapiromkul J, Zhu H, Cheng Y, Barker PB. Measuring T2 in vivo with J -
difference editing: application to GABA at 3 Tesla. J Magn Reson Imaging. Jan 
2012;35(1):229 -234. 
278. Edden RA, Barker PB. If J doesn't evolve, it won't J -resolve: J -PRESS with bandwidth -
limited refocusing pulses. Magn Reson Med. Jun 2011;65(6):1509 -1514.  
279. Sisco SM, Marsiske M, Gross AL, Rebok GW. The influence of cognitive training on 
older adults' recall for short stories. J Aging Health. Dec 2013;25(8 Sup pl):230S -248S.  
280. Payne BR, Gross AL, Parisi JM, et al. Modelling longitudinal changes in older adults' 
memory for spoken discourse: Findings from the ACTIVE cohort. Memory. Dec 4 2013.  
281. Merzenich M. POSIT Science. 2014; http://www.positscience.com . 
282. Nadeau SE, Wu SS. CIMT as a behavioral engine in research on physiological 
adjuvants to neurorehabilitation: the challenge of merging animal and human research. 
NeuroRehabilitation. 2006;21(2):107 -130. 
283. Batsikadze G, Moliadze V, Paulus W, Kuo MF, Nitsche MA. Partially non -linear 
stimulation intensity -dependent effects of direct current stimulation on motor cortex 
excitability in humans. The Journal of physiology. Apr 1 2013;591(Pt 7):1987 -2000.  
284. Trahan DE, Larrabee GJ, Quintana JW. Visual recognition memory in normal adults and 
patients with unilateral vascular lesions. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. Dec 1990;12(6):857 -
872. 
285. Larrabee GJ, Trahan DE, Curtiss G. Construct validity of the Continuous Visual Memory 
Test. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Oct 1992;7(5):395 -405. 
286. Paolo AM, Troster AI, Ryan JJ. Test -retest stability of the Continuous Visual Memory 
Test in elderly persons. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. Oct 1998;13(7):617 -621. 
287. Paolo AM, Troster AI, Ryan J J. Continuous Visual Memory Test performance in healthy 
persons 60 to 94 years of age. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. May 1998;13(4):333 -337. 
288. Snitz BE, Roman DD, Beniak TE. Efficacy of the Continuous Visual Memory Test in 
lateralizing temporal lobe dysfuncti on in chronic complex -partial epilepsy. J Clin Exp 
Neuropsychol. Oct 1996;18(5):747 -754. 
289. Hall S, Pinkston SL, Szalda -Petree AC, Coronis AR. The performance of healthy older 
adults on the Continuous Visual Memory Test and the Visual -Motor Integration T est: 
preliminary findings. J Clin Psychol. Jul 1996;52(4):449 -454. 
290. Harker KT, Connolly JF. Assessment of visual working memory using event -related 
potentials. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of 
Clinical Neur ophysiology. Nov 2007;118(11):2479 -2488.  
291. Banos JH, Dickson AL, Greer T. A computer -assisted administration of the Continuous 
Visual Memory Test. Clin Neuropsychol. Dec 2001;15(4):551 -555. 
292. Retzlaff PD, Morris GL. Event -related potentials during th e Continuous Visual Memory 
Test. J Clin Psychol. Jan 1996;52(1):43 -47. 
293. Woods AJ, Hamilton, et al., . Space, time, and causaltiy in the human brain. 
Neuroimage. 2014;in press.  
294. Woods AJ, Lehet M, Chatterjee A. Context modulates the contribution of time and space 
in causal inference. Front Psychol. 2012;3:371.  
295. Provencher SW. Automatic quantitation of localized in vivo 1H spectra with LCModel. 
NMR in biomedicine. Jun 2001;14(4):260 -264. 
296. Fischl B, Dale AM. Measuring the thickness of the human  cerebral cortex from magnetic 
resonance images. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. Sep 26 2000;97(20):11050 -11055.  
297. Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM. Cortical surface -based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening,  
and a surface -based coordinate system. Neuroimage. Feb 1999;9(2):195 -207. 
298. Fischl B, Sereno MI, Tootell RB, Dale AM. High -resolution intersubject averaging and a 
coordinate system for the cortical surface. Human brain mapping. 1999;8(4):272 -284. 
Protocol #201600785  Page 49 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  299. Andrade KC, Pontes -Neto OM, Leite JP, Santos AC, Baffa O, de Araujo DB. 
Quantitative aspects of brain perfusion dynamic induced by BOLD fMRI. Arq 
Neuropsiquiatr. Dec 2006;64(4):895 -898. 
300. Leoni RF, Mazzeto -Betti KC, Andrade KC, de Araujo DB. Quantitativ e evaluation of 
hemodynamic response after hypercapnia among different brain territories by fMRI. 
Neuroimage. Jul 15 2008;41(4):1192 -1198.  
301. Kim SG, Rostrup E, Larsson HB, Ogawa S, Paulson OB. Determination of relative 
CMRO2 from CBF and BOLD changes: s ignificant increase of oxygen consumption rate 
during visual stimulation. Magn Reson Med. Jun 1999;41(6):1152 -1161.  
302. Kastrup A, Kruger G, Glover GH, Neumann -Haefelin T, Moseley ME. Regional variability 
of cerebral blood oxygenation response to hypercap nia. Neuroimage. Dec 
1999;10(6):675 -681. 
303. Posse S, Kemna LJ, Elghahwagi B, Wiese S, Kiselev VG. Effect of graded hypo - and 
hypercapnia on fMRI contrast in visual cortex: quantification of T(*)(2) changes by 
multiecho EPI. Magn Reson Med. Aug 2001;46(2) :264-271. 
304. Lezak MD. Neuropsychological assessment in behavioral toxicology --developing 
techniques and interpretative issues. Scandinavian journal of work, environment & 
health. 1984;10 Suppl 1:25 -29. 
305. DiGirolamo GJ, Kramer AF, Barad V, et al. Gene ral and task -specific frontal lobe 
recruitment in older adults during executive processes: a fMRI investigation of task -
switching. Neuroreport. Jul 3 2001;12(9):2065 -2071.  
306. Gross AL, Rebok GW, Brandt J, Tommet D, Marsiske M, Jones RN. Modeling learning  
and memory using verbal learning tests: results from ACTIVE. The journals of 
gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and social sciences. Mar 2013;68(2):153 -
167. 
307. Gunstad J, Cohen RA, Paul RH, Luyster FS, Gordon E. Age effects in time estimation : 
relationship to frontal brain morphometry. Journal of integrative neuroscience. Mar 
2006;5(1):75 -87. 
308. Jones RN, Rosenberg AL, Morris JN, et al. A growth curve model of learning acquisition 
among cognitively normal older adults. Experimental aging res earch. Jul-Sep 
2005;31(3):291 -312. 
309. Okonkwo OC, Cohen RA, Gunstad J, Tremont G, Alosco ML, Poppas A. Longitudinal 
trajectories of cognitive decline among older adults with cardiovascular disease. 
Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010;30(4):362 -373. 
310. Paul RH, Brick man AM, Cohen RA, et al. Cognitive status of young and older cigarette 
smokers: data from the international brain database. J Clin Neurosci. May 
2006;13(4):457 -465. 
311. Roller CA, Cohen HS, Kimball KT, Bloomberg JJ. Effects of normal aging on visuo -motor 
plasticity. Neurobiol Aging. Jan-Feb 2002;23(1):117 -123. 
312. Woods AJ, Mark VW, Pitts AC, Mennemeier M. Pervasive cognitive impairment in acute 
rehabilitation inpatients without brain injury. PM & R : the journal of injury, function, and 
rehabilitation. May 2011;3(5):426 -432; quiz 432.  
313. Zimerman M, Nitsch M, Giraux P, Gerloff C, Cohen LG, Hummel FC. 
Neuroenhancement of the aging brain: restoring skill acquisition in old subjects. Ann 
Neurol. Jan 2013;73(1):10 -15. 
314. Zlatar ZZ, Towler S, McGregor KM, et al. Functional language networks in sedentary 
and physically active older adults. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. Jul 2013;19(6):625 -634. 
315. Taha J, Czaja SJ, Sharit J, Morrow DG. Factors affecting usage of a personal health 
record (PHR) to manage health. Psychology and aging. Dec 2013;28(4):1124 -1139.  
Protocol #201600785  Page 50 of 50 
IRB version 03/09/04  
PI version 6/16/2021  316. Sharit J, Czaja SJ, Nair S, Lee CC. Effects of age, speech rate, and environmental 
support in using telephone voice menu systems. Hum Factors. Summer 2003;45(2):234 -
251. 
317. Baecke JA, Burema J, Frijters J E. A short questionnaire for the measurement of habitual 
physical activity in epidemiological studies. Am J Clin Nutr. Nov 1982;36(5):936 -942. 
318. Richardson MT, Ainsworth BE, Wu HC, Jacobs DR, Jr., Leon AS. Ability of the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communit ies (ARIC)/Baecke Questionnaire to assess leisure -
time physical activity. International journal of epidemiology. Aug 1995;24(4):685 -693. 
319. Philippaerts RM, Westerterp KR, Lefevre J. Doubly labelled water validation of three 
physical activity questionnai res. International journal of sports medicine. Jul 
1999;20(5):284 -289. 
320. Philippaerts RM, Lefevre J. Reliability and validity of three physical activity 
questionnaires in Flemish males. American journal of epidemiology. May 15 
1998;147(10):982 -990. 
321. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, et al. The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -reported 
health outcome item banks: 2005 -2008. Journal of clinical epidemiology. Nov 
2010;63(11):1179 -1194.  
322. Magasi S, Ryan G, Revicki D, et al. Content validity of patient -reported outcome 
measures: perspectives from a PROMIS meeting. Quality of life research : an 
international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation.  Jun 
2012;21(5):739 -746. 
323. Tucker CA, Cieza A, Riley AW, et al. Concept Analysis of the Patient Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) and the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Quality of life r esearch : an 
international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. Feb 6 
2014.  
324. Reeve BB, Hays RD, Bjorner JB, et al. Psychometric evaluation and calibration of 
health -related quality of life item banks: plans for the Patient -Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System (PROMIS). Medical care. May 2007;45(5 Suppl 
1):S22 -31. 
 