Title:  A Phase II Trial of Poly -ICLC in the Management of 
Recurrent or Progressive Pediatric Low Grade Gliomas  
 
Date:  5/21/2014  
NCT0118809 6 
  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Phase II Trial of Poly -ICLC in the Management of Recurrent 
or Progressive Pediatric Low Grade Gliomas  
 
 
 
 
 
October 22 , 2010  
 
 
                   
               Amendment #1: 6/6/2011  
Amendment #2: 3/13/2012  
Amendment #3 5/21/2014  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 3  
 
Contact Information  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator : Donald L. Durden, M.D., Ph.D.  
    Professor and Vice Chair for Research  
    UCSD Department of Pediatrics  
    Rady Children’s Hospital -San Diego  
Moores Cancer Center , RM 3312  
University of California, San Diego  
3855 Health Sciences Drive #0819  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0819  
Phone: 858 -534-3355  
    ddurden@ucsd.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 4  
STUDY COMMITTEE  
 
Study Chair:  
Donald L. Durden, M.D., Ph.D.  
Professor and Vice Chair for Research  
UCSD Department of Pediatrics  
Rady Children’s Hospital -San Diego  
Moores Cancer Center , RM 3312  
University of California, San Diego  
3855 Health Sciences Drive #0819  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0819  
Phone: 858 -534-3355 ; Fax : 858 -822-0022  
ddurden@ucsd.edu  
 
 
Study Committee Members:  
Dolly Aguilera , M.D. 
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics  
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta  
Emory University  
5455 Meridian Mark Road 4th Floor  
Atlanta, GA 30342  
Phone: 404 -785-3721; Fax: 404 -785-3511  
dolly.aguilera@@choa.org  
 
John Crawford, M.D. , M.S.  
Assistant Adjunct Professor of Neurosciences and Pediatrics  
Rady Children’s Hospital -San Diego  
University of California, San Diego  
8010 Frost St Suite 400 Neurology  
San Diego CA 92123  
Phone: 858 -966-5811; Fax: 858 -966-8035  
jrcrawford@rchsd.org  
 
Anna Janss , M.D., Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Pediatrics  
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta  
Emory University  
2015 Uppergate Drive  4th Floor  
Atlanta, GA 30322  
Phone: 404 -785-0854 ; Fax: 404 -785-6288  
anna.janss@choa.org  
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 5 Howard Katzenstein, M .D. 
Associate Professor of Pediatrics  
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta  
Emory University  
2015  Uppergate Drive 4th floor  
Atlanta, GA 30322  
Phone: 404 -785-0853 ; Fax: 404 -727-4455  
howard.katzenstein@choa.org  
 
Tobey  MacDonald , M.D. 
Associate Professor of Pediatrics  
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta  
Emory University  
2015 Uppergate Drive 4th Floor  
Atlanta, GA 30322  
Phone: 404 -727-1447; Fax: 404 -727-4455  
Tobey.macdonald@emory.edu  
 
Scott R. VandenBerg, M.D.,  Ph.D.  
Professor of Pathology, Director of Neuropathology  
University of California, San Diego  
9500 Gilman Drive,  MC 0612  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0612  
Phone: 858-822-2808  
srvandenberg@ucsd.edu  
 
 
Research Study Coordinator:  
Mehrzad Milburn, RN, BSN, CCRC  
Oncology Research Data Center  
UCSD/Rady Children’s Hospital  
3020 Children’s Way MC 5128  
San Diego, CA 92123   
Phone: (858) 966 -8155; Fax: (858) 966 -8966  
mmilburn@rchsd.org  
Biostatistics Support:  
Karen Messer , Ph.D.   
Professor, Div ision of  Biostatistics  
Director, Biostatistics/Bioinformatics Shared Resource  
Moores UCSD Cancer Center   
University of California, San Diego  
3855 Health Sciences Drive # 0901  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0901  
Phone: 858 -822-4334  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 6 kmesser@ucsd.edu  
 
Hongying Li, Ph.D  
Senior Statistician  
Biostatistics /Bioinformatics Shared Resource  
Moores UCSD Cancer Center  
University of California, San Diego  
3855 Health Sciences Drive #0901  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0901  
Phone: 858 -822-4818  
hol031@ucsd.edu  
  
Minya Pu, M.A.  
Senior Statistician  
Biostatistics/Bioinformatics Shared Resource  
Moores UCSD Cancer Center  
University of California, San Diego  
3855 Health Sciences Drive #0901  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0901  
Phone: 858 -534-2368   
mpu@ucsd.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
SECTION            PAGE   
1.0 OBJECTIVES                                       7 
           1.1 Primary Objectives                                                                                    7 
           1.2 Secondary Objectives                                                                               7 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE                        7-14 
 
3.0 PATIENT ELIGIBILITY AND STUDY ENTRY            14-19 
 3.1 Patient Registration         14-15 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 7  3.2 Inclusion Criteria               15-18 
 3.3 Exclusion Criteria               18-19 
 3.4 Regulatory                19 
 
4.0 STUDY TREATMENT                19-20 
 4.1 Treatment Schedule               19 
 4.2 Dose Modificatio ns Based on Toxicity            20 
 4.3 Concomitant Therapy               20 
 
5.0 REQUIRED OBSERVATIONS              21-26 
 5.1 Pretreatment evaluation              22 
 5.2 Evaluation during treatment              22 
 5.3 Evaluation at end of therapy or relapsed disease     23  
 5.4 Special Laboratory Specimens                        23-25 
            5.5 Pathology Specimens        25-26 
 
6.0 DRUG INFORMATION               26-27 
 
7.0 RESPONSE CRITERIA               27-29 
 7.1  Evaluation Criteria         27-29 
 
8.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM  PROTOCOL T HERAPY          29-30 
 8.1 Criteria for Removal from Protocol Therapy      29-30 
 8.2 Off Study Criteria         30 
 
9.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATONS              30-33 
 9.1 Study Design and Justification of S ample Size                      31-32 
 9.2 Analysis of Results               32-33 
 
10.0 ADVERSE REACTION REPORTING AND TOXICITY CRITERIA           33-35 
 10.1 Reporting Adverse Drug Reactions Occurring with Investigational Agents  34 
 10.2 Toxicity Criteria          34 
 10.3 Data Safety Monitoring                       35 
 10.4 FDA Annual Reporting        35 
 
11.0 REFERENCES                 36-39 
APPENDIX I -IV         40-43 
 
 
1.0 Objectives:  
 
1.1 Primary Objectives  
 
1.1.1  The primary endpoint will be  the progression free survival  rate to poly -ICLC at 6 months, in the children 
with recurrent low grade gliomas ; tumor assessments are to be performed per Modified McDonald’s 
criteria.  Progression free survival is defined as the time from starting study therapy to tumor progression, 
tumor recurrence, death from any cause, or occurrence of a second malignant neoplasm.  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 8  
1.2   Secondary Objectives  
 
1.2.1  To determine the overall  response rate to poly -ICLC in the treatment of children with recurrent low grade 
gliomas; tumor assessments are to be performed per 3D measurements.  
 
1.2.2   Progression free survival  over the course of the study . 
 
1.2.3  Overall survival at 6 months  – the time from starting study therapy  to death from any cause.  
 
1.2.4  To assess the toxicity associated with treatment with poly -ICLC in pediatric patients with recurrent low 
grade gliomas.  
            
1.2.5 To study the effect of treatment with poly -ICLC on the signaling pathways controlling apoptosis  in low 
grade glioma tumor cells.  
 
1.2. 6   To determine if surrogate markers of tumor response and progression can be identified in the serum,    
      PBMC and/or cerebrospinal fluid of patients with recurrent low grade gliomas treated with poly -ICLC.    
      Proteomics analysis will be performed to obtain protein levels of these markers such as OAS, interferon ,     
     , , PKR kinase, phosphorylation state of eIF2a, and induction of p21waf-1.   
 
 
2.0 Background/Rationale  
 
 The incidence of primary pediatric brain tumors in the United States is about 1500 per year.  Brain tumors 
are the most common solid tumor diagnosed in childhood and thus account for significant childhood mortality in 
the United States. Low -grade astrocyto mas and gliomas are the most common type of brain tumor of childhood 
(36% of childhood brain tumors). These tumors encompass a heterogeneous assortment of histological subtypes 
including: fibrillary, protoplasmic, gemistocytic, and mixed variants. Pilocyti c astrocytomas, pleomorphic 
xanthroastrocytomas and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas are also included. Furthermore, in young children 
there are some unique rare entities that behave like low -grade tumors, including infantile desmoplastic 
ganglioglioma s, pilomyxoid variant, and desmoplastic astrocytomas.  
 
  Although children with low -grade astrocytomas often survive many years after conventional treatment with 
surgery and sometimes radiotherapy,  there can be tremendous morbidity depending on the location of tumor and 
the effects of therapy.  These tumors constitute a heterogeneous group because of differing locations within the 
brain and varying biological behavior of different subtypes. For those  where total excision is possible, such as 
cerebellar astrocytomas, prognosis is excellent with over 90% ten -year survival rates with surgical excision alone. 
In contrast, survival rates in children with cerebral or diencephalic tumors are 40 -70% at five y ears with irradiation, 
but decline to 11 -50% at 10 years (Mundigers, 1990). Some tumors however may be unresectable/partially 
resectable, and radiation can have undesirable side effects in young children. While the most significant 
intellectual deficits oc cur in young children less than 5 years treated with cranial irradiation, the deficits recognized 
even in young adults warrant extending the age to 10 years for avoiding radiation. Chemotherapy regimens are 
used for high -risk patients (progressive tumor, r esidual tumor) as a means to avoid or delay radiation in young 
patients, but side effects of chemotherapy are frequent ly reported. N ewer forms of effective treatment that will 
have lesser side effects are much needed in childhood brain tumors especially lo w-grade gliomas. We propose to 
study the efficacy and toxicity of poly -ICLC, a biological response modifier in children with low -grade gliomas.  
PRO TEOMICS  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 9  
 Current diagnostic and therapeutic monitoring of brain tumor patients are significantly hindered du e to 
limited understanding of brain tumor biology and response to therapy. The majority of CNS tumors cannot be 
identified or followed by expression of serum or CSF markers. However, if available, such markers would be 
highly desirable and could be used to : 
 
• Detect minimal residual disease  
• Predict response to specific targeted therapies  
• Predict or anticipate tumor progression  
• Distinguish tumor recurrence from post surgical changes or post -radiation changes on neuro -imaging  
• Augment current histopathologic cl assification systems  
• Improve current clinical and pathological treatment stratification schemata  
• Assess efficacy of and tumor response to specific biologic targeted therapies that may not impact tumor 
size as a primary tumor endpoint (e.g., small molecule inhibitors or anti -angiogenic strategies)  
 
 While such markers would be useful to prognosticate, monitor and treat all CNS tumors, its use in glial 
tumors including recurrent low grade astrocytomas is critical since these tumors are often biopsied at 
prese ntation, but not at recurrence. Often these tumors are not amenable complete resection or biopsy due to 
the eloquence of brain tissue they infiltrate (e.g., optic pathway, brainstem or hypothalamic gliomas),  or the blood 
vessels that they encase.   
 
CNS bi ologic material in CSF  
 Glial tumors tend to disseminate locally along white matter tracts rather than through sub -arachnoid 
seeding. Dissemination of low grade gliomas along the sub -arachnoid space has been reported in children with 
low grade gliomas .  Even focal tumors are frequently adjacent to CSF pathways (e.g., intrapeduncular foss a, 
third and fourth ventricles) resulting in direct contact between tumor tissue and spinal fluid.  Yet examination of 
CSF cytology for these tumors is not standard. Given l imitations of identifying tumor cells in the CSF, 
methodologies that could improve our understanding of CNS tumors of all types are needed. This would provide 
a significant improvement in currently available knowledge about the biology of these tumors, and  could elucidate 
potential therapeutic avenues.  
 
 Proteomics, a relatively new area of research whereby total protein complement of a tissue compartment 
is analyzed, has successfully been used to identify novel biomarkers  in solid tumors (Zheng, 2003;  Khwaja , 
2007). Because proteins are effectors of all cellular functions, their measurement should represent the most 
direct means of cellular characterization and hence tumor biology. Because cells and their environment exist  in 
an integrated state, it has been possible to interrogate the proteins of extra -cellular compartments to assess the 
presence and impact of tumor cells. This has been done primarily using serum or plasma to establish a method 
of screening for the presenc e of low stage tumors.  
 
 An analogous extra -cellular compartment for use in brain tumors would be cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). It 
circulates throughout the CNS and exchanges proteins with the extra -cellular fluid of the brain and spinal cord. 
CSF is continuously created and reabsorbed, providing a real time steady state proteome. Unlike serum, which 
contains a highly complex protein mixture ranging from very low abundance proteins in the 10 -30 pg/mL range to 
very abundant proteins in the 35 -55 mg/mL r ange, CSF contains a less complex protein mixture (Omenn, 2005). 
Therefore, the CSF is more likely to contain higher relative concentrations of tumor -specific proteins  (higher 
signal to noise ratio) than serum. Taken together this makes CSF and attractive alternative to serum for detection 
of brain tumor related biomarkers.  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 10  
 Unlike leukemia and many solid tumors outside the CNS, where serial biopsies are readily performed, 
tumors of the CNS are not easily accessible other than at the time of initial or rep eat resection or biopsy. While 
studies on these samples provide important findings regarding tumor biology, serial analyses during treatment 
are not reasonable. By contrast, the CSF of tumor patients can be more readily sampled in most pediatric 
patients. With the development of proteomic technology, investigation of tumor related signals at the time of 
diagnosis through treatment, and then in remission and/or at the time of recurrence or progression is possible.  
 
 While CSF for seeding tumors is readily av ailable and routinely obtained for cytology, the systematic 
evaluation of the proteins within these samples could be of considerable scientific importance. In addition to 
identifying potential makers of disease or response to therapy, the glycosylation and  phosphorylation status of 
many proteins can also be evaluated. Studies in tumor tissue  have  show that such information reveals activity of 
different enzymes that correlate with  either  treatment response (Mellinghoff , 2005; Helgi, 2005) or progression of 
leptomeningeal metastases (Brandsma, 2006).   
 
 
Proteomics  
 CSF proteomics has been applied to many neurological disorders including Alzheimer’s disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, acute brain injury and Creutzfeldt -Jakob disease (Roh lff, 20 01). 
Reports of its use in neuro -oncology are limited, but demonstrate the potential of this technology to effectively 
identify tumor biomarkers. One study used two dimensional polyacrylamide (2 -D) gel electrophoresis to measure 
the relative quantit ies of two pre -selected markers, N -Myc and l -CaD, in the CSF of brain tumor patients (Zheng, 
2003) . Another used ELISA of CSF to identify Ost eopontin as predictive of AT/RT and correlated with response 
to therapy (Kao, 2005) . CSF proteomics using 2 -D gel e lectrophoresis in combination with mass spectroscopy 
and cleavable isotope Coded Affinity Tag (cICAT) was used to evaluate 60 samples of CSF and tumor cyst fluid 
taken from adults with brain tumors and non -neoplastic controls. These techniques were used to  find a panel of 
proteins differentially expressed in lower vs. higher -grade gliomas. Findings were confirmed using Western Blot 
analysis probing for eight selected proteins based on implied role in gliomagenesis and availability of antibodies. 
This report , which has been accepted for publication pending revisions, identified 21 potential CSF biomarkers 
for astrocytoma.  
 
 As mentioned above, there is evidence that gliomas disseminate through the subarachnoid space. The 
presence of leptomeningeal disseminati on of glial tumors is significant because it demonstrates that glial tumor 
cells have access to the CSF space, and thus, proteins secreted from these tumors have the ability to access the 
CSF space and may be detected by CSF proteomics.  Currently there ar e several consortia actively studying 
protein expression in the spinal fluid of children with malignant glial and embryonal tumors (P ediatric Brain Tumor 
Consortium and  Pediatric Oncology Experimental Therapeutics Consortium).  Proteins interrogated in the se 
protocols include those involved with angiogenesis and neovas cularity (EGF, VEGF an d bFGF), those involved in 
tumor growth and migration (s ecreted protein with acidic and cysteine rich domains (SPARC), attractin).  There is 
no consortium actively collec ting spinal fluid sample in children with lower grade tumors.  A secondary goal of this 
study is to examine these proteins in the CSF of children with low grade gliomas who have tumor progression.  
Comparison of CSF protein expression of high grade and low  grade tumors is likely to help identify biological 
markers specific for tumor progression, or for tumor pathology.  
 
 
 
2.1       Pre -clinical studies:  
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 11  Polyinosinic -Polycytidylic acid stabilized with polylysine and carboxymethylcellulose (poly -ICLC) (Levy, 
1985) is a double stranded RNA (dsRNA) that was used as an interferon inducer at high doses (up to 300 mcg/kg, 
IV) in short -term can cer trials some years ago.  These trials gave mixed results with  moderate toxicity , and the use 
of poly -ICLC was generally abandoned when recombinant interferons became available (Levy , 1987); 
(Rettenmaier, 1986); (Krown,  1985); (Theriault , 1986); (Droller , 1987); (Hawkins, 1985); (Nakamura,  et al 1982).  
However, lower dose (10 to 50 m cg/kg) poly -ICLC results in a broader host defense stimulation, including T -cell 
and natural killer cell activation, and cytokine release (interferons alpha, beta, and gamma, interleukins, 
corticosteroids, and TNF). Levels of serum interferon induced by th ese doses of poly -ICLC are relatively low and 
have not in the past been associated with anti -tumor action. Preliminary laboratory results of a pilot study showed 
no clear relationship between tumor response and measurable serum interferon, TNF, IL -2, IL-6, or neopterin; this 
agrees with prior animal studies (Black, 1992).  Low dose poly -ICLC also has a direct immune enhancing action 
independent of IFN, including increased antibody response to antigen, and NK cell, T -cell, macrophage and 
cytokine activation.   While discussion of the complex immunostimulatory effects of poly -ICLC and the interferons is 
beyond the scope of this protocol, their role in the potential anti -neoplastic effect that has been seen needs further 
investigation.  
  
 Recent evidence suggest s that polyIC is a ligand for the Toll receptor 3 (TLR3) , an important component of 
innate immunity.  Another  action of poly -ICLC is a more direct antiviral and perhaps antineoplastic effect mediated 
by at least two interferon inducible nuclear enzyme syst ems, the 2'5'oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) and the 
P1/eIF2a kinase, also known as the dsRNA dependent P 68 protein kinase (PKR) (Chebath , 1992), (Samuel , 
1992), (Katze , 1992) (Williams , 1999). Double -stranded -RNA -dependent protein kinase PKR is a 
serine/threonine kinase which is activated by autophosphorylation upon binding to dsRNA. Activated PKR then 
phosphorylates the  subunit of the translation initiation factor eIF -2, a modification that ca uses inhibition of 
protein synthesis. dsRNA induces an antiviral state in cells by functioning as an obligatory cofactor for OAS, 
which activates RibonucleaseL; as well as for the PKR, which inhibits initiation of protein synthesis (Levy, 1992); 
(Talmadge,  1985); (Levy , 1988); (Ewel, 1992); (Black, 1992 ).  Both, OAS and PKR are very sensitive to dsRNA 
dose and structure (Minks, West et al, 1979).  For example, simple, long chain dsRNA (as in poly -ICLC) is the 
most potent stimulator of OAS and PKR, while mis matched or irregular dsRNA can be inhibitory. Clinically , the 
OAS response is  maximal at a dose of about 30 mcg/kg  of poly-ICLC , and is much diminished above a dose of 
100 mcg/kg (M. Kende, unpublished). The clinical half -life of the OAS response to IM pol y-ICLC is about 2.5 days, 
suggesting an optimum dose schedule of two or three times per week (Maluish, 1985) (M. Kende, unpublished).  
Previously treated patients showed up to a 40 fold increase in serum OAS product in response to treatment at 10 
to 20 mcg /kg, and a significant association of serum OAS with tumor response (P= .03) (Salazar, 1996). Similarly, 
the PKR has both high and low affinity binding sites and is inhibited by too high a dose of dsRNA (Galabru, 1989). 
Koromilas, et al, have demonstrated that expression of a functionally defective mutant of PKR results in malignant 
transformation in vitro, suggesting an important role for this enzyme in suppression of tumorigenesis as well 
(Koromilas, 1992).  They also suggest a possible relation to the p53 tumor suppressor associated with multiple 
malignancies Li -Fraumeni syndrome, which includes astrocytomas, sarcomas, lung, and breast cancers (Malkin, 
1990). Recently the role of PKR has been implicated in signaling pathways leading to transcriptional act ivation 
of the tumor suppressor p53, possibly through the PI -3 kinase pathway (Cuddihy , 1999); (Williams, 1999).  
Folkman et al reported that the interferons exert antiangiogenic activity against the tumor vasculature supporting a 
potential antiangiogenic e ffect of poly -ICLC (Folkman , 1992).  Importantly, the length of therapy with interferon 
alpha is limited whereas the use of poly -ICLC has been extended for up to 12 years without untoward effects. This 
capacity for extended use further supports our clinica l trial of poly -ICLC in low -grade gliomas where a more 
extended length of treatment (2 -3 years) may be required to establish a response to therapy. These multiple 
effects on cellular metabolism if sustained may mediate a broad -spectrum antitumor effect on a wide range of 
tumor cell types  (Fig.1) . If further studies confirm the hypothesis that OAS and/or the PKR may mediate the 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 12 possible antitumor action of poly -ICLC, this might help explain why the high doses of poly -ICLC used in early 
cancer trials were rel atively ineffective.  
 
 
                                             
   
                                                                   
2.2    Previous clinical trials:  
 
 A pilot trial in adults suggested a possible beneficial effect of poly -ICLC in newly diagnosed and recurrent 
brain tumors (Salazar et al, 1996).  Thirty -eight patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), anaplastic 
astrocytoma (AA), or recurrent GBM/AA were  treated with varying doses of poly -ICLC of 10 -50 mcg/kg IM, one to 
three times per week for approximately 56 months.  The drug was exceptionally well tolerated, with little or no 
toxicity and quality of life was preserved in most patients.  The most commo n side effect was mild temporary 
discomfort at the injection site, and transient fever or malaise. Twenty of thirty patients receiving at least twice 
weekly poly -ICLC showed regression or stabilization of tumor on MRI.  All but one patient with AA, who rec eived 
poly-ICLC without interruption, remain alive, with median progression -free survival of 54 months from diagnosis. 
This small study demonstrated the safety and tolerability of long -term, low dose intramuscularly administered poly -
ICLC at a potentia lly beneficial dose range of 20 mcg/kg  2-3 times weekly, in patients with malignant gliomas.  
 
 Most malignant gliomas actually represent a mixture of highly malignant tumor cells and lower grade  
cells that nevertheless eventually become malignant themselves. C hemotherapy and radiation  therapy are 
generally more effective against rapidly dividing malignant cells, but are less so against the  lower grade tumor 
elements. Based on information available to date, agents such as poly -ICLC may be  more effective in 
stabi lizing certain of these lower grade tumor elements and could thus be useful in  treatment of low grade 
tumors.  In one study, the patients with lower grade tumors had a much greater response to  poly-ICLC than 
standard chemotherapy regimens, with a longer med ian survival in months (119  versus 59) in WHO class 1 
tumors  (see Figure 2) . One hundred percent of patients who received the poly -ICLC regimen were alive at 2 
years versus only 76% who received standard chemotherapy  (Salazar et al, 1996).  This supports the 
effectiveness and likely less complications of poly -ICLC over chemotherapy.  
 
polyICLC PKR ↓Protein synthesis
↓proliferationp53
Anti-angiogenesis
TLR3
Innate immunityFigure  1. This schematic shows the 
molecular basis for polyICLC action on 
signaling pathways in glioma or stromal 
cells, the inhibition of protein synthesis, 
angiogenesis and growth arrest. PolyICLC 
via TLR3 also induces innate immunity . 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 13  
  
Figure 2 . This table demonstrates median survival  (months)  of patients with prognostic class I -VI tumors treated in three large 
chemotherapy trials versus treatment with Poly ICLC. † Represents N= only one P -ICLC patient in groups II and IV.  
  
 Two adult phase II clinical trials  conducted by the NI H’s North Ameri can Brain Tumor Consortium (NABTC)  
have been completed. The first trial evaluated  long term p oly-ICLC monotherapy in patients with  recurrent 
glioblastoma . This study  included 55 patients,  where  11% had radiographic response, 6  month progression -free 
surviv al (PFS) was  24% and medi an survival was  43 weeks. Poly -ICLC was well tolerated but did not show 
improvement on 6 month PFS.  The second trial included patients  newly diagnosed with glioblastoma. The 
treatment schema inclu ded a combination of radiation with poly-ICLC. 30 patients were enrolled in the  trial. The 
6-month progression -free survival was 30% and the estimated 1 -year progression -free survival was 5%. 
Median time to progression was 18 weeks. The 1 -year survival was 69% and the median survival was 65 
weeks. The combination therapy was well -tolerated. This study suggests a survival advantage compared to 
historical studies using radiation therapy ( RT) without chemotherapy but no surviva l advantage compared to 
RT with adjuvant nitrosourea or non -temozolomide chemotherapy.  A third trial is a combin ation study of poly -
ICLC with t emodar chemotherapy, and is being conducted by the NIH’s NABTT consortium.  
 
 A Phase I/II study of p oly-ICLC was conducted by the Principal investigator  (Donald L. Durden), in children 
with multiple types of newly diagnosed or recurrent brain tumors. Long -term responses were seen in 2 of 4 
patients with low -grade gliomas (unpublished data). Four children with progres sive low grade gliomas treated on  
this pilot study were evaluated  for response. These four children had stable disease after documented progression 
for 10, 12, 22 and 24 mon ths while receiving poly -ICLC. One of these children suffered  from reduced white count 
(grade 3) that resolved despite continued therapy, and another developed respiratory distress at the time of tumor 
progression. The other cohorts of recurrent high -grade gliomas and newly diagnosed brain stem gliomas showed 
minimal to no response.  All eight children enrolled due to growing diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas had 
progression of disease in <8 months of therapy.  Eleven children enrolled on the study had progressive high grade 
gliomas (anaplastic astrocytoma or glioblastoma  multiforme).  Ten demonstrated disease progression within 1 -10 
months of initiation treatment, however, one child on therapy had radiographic and clinical stability on therapy for 
over 2 years.  The other cohorts of recurrent high -grade gliomas and newly diagnosed brain stem gliomas showed 
minimal to no response. Patients with neurofibromatosis associated brain tumors, appeared to be very s ensitive to 
poly-ICLC but  demonstrated more side effects, particularly fever and erythema. Thus it appears that poly -ICLC 
may have a beneficial role in children with lo w-grade gliomas. However more  children with low -grade gliomas 
need to be studied to confirm this impression.  
 

Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 14  Phase I/II data for use of poly -ICLC has also been reported in patients with renal cell carcin oma, refractory 
lymphomas, melanomas, and colorectal cancers (Giantonio et al, 2001, Ewel et al, 1992). Varying doses of  poly-
ICLC from  0.01 mg/m2 up to 1 mg/m2 were used either IV or IM  2 times a week. In all of these studies, poly-ICLC 
was well tolerated . Grade 1 or 2 fatigue, fever, nausea, vomiting and pain at injection site were seen in some 
patients and usually resolved by  24 hours after the injection (Ewel , 1992). In another study fever was a common 
side effect in 25.6% of patients, and chills in 23. 1% (Giantonio, 2001). In both studies stable disease and a partial 
response was seen in some patients: however no complete remissions were observed. Thus it appears that poly -
ICLC has been used in several types of cancers in varying doses and varying modes  of administration, and is well 
tolerated: however best results were seen in patients with brain tumors, at doses of 20 -30 micrograms/kg given 2 -
3 times a week as IM injections.  
 
  Based on preliminary data showing efficacy and tolerability of poly -ICLC in  brain tumors, we propose to 
study this drug further, in children with  progressive or recurrent  low-grade  gliomas, for clinical efficacy  and 
tolerability. We would also simultaneously like to conduct laboratory experiments to determine the patient’s cellul ar 
response to poly -ICLC, by evaluating the induction of PKR, the phosphorylation of eIF2 , and the activation of p53 
specific target gene, p21waf-1 in an attempt to better understand the anti -tumor effects of this drug.   
 
 
2.3     Drug Information and Toxicity:  
 
Drug Information:  
 Poly-ICLC is classified as an investigational new drug.  It is a synthetic complex of polyinosinic and 
polycytidylic acid, stabilized with polylysine and carboxymethyl cellulose.  The thermal denaturation point  is 89.5o 
C, about 40o C above that of plain polyI.polyC; the resistance to hydrolysis is eight times that of the parent 
compound, and it induces peak levels of about 1000 -2000 IU of interferon per ml of serum in monkeys given 1 
mg/kg intravenously.  
 
 The current study will be done under IND #43984, held by Oncovir.  The drug to be used in this study is 
prepared and packaged in the GMP facility of Bioserv, Inc, San Diego, under the direction and under contract to 
Oncovir.  It is then tested for identity (RN Aase resistance and thermal denaturation) bioactivity in primates, sterility 
and pyrogenicity before release for clinical experimental use.   
 
Toxicity:    
 The degree of adverse effects of poly -ICLC is dependent on three factors: (1) dose, (2) route of inj ection, 
and (3) health status of the patient.  Early Phase I studies were done to determine the maximum tolerated dose 
(MTD) under the assumption that this was also the most effective dose.  In these studies of cancer patients, it was 
found that the MTD wa s 12 mg/m2 IV in 25 adult and pediatric patients (Levine and Levy, 1978).  Patients typically 
showed fevers of 40oC, myalgia, arthralgia, malaise, nausea and vomiting, and mild elevations of liver enzymes.  
Fever was the primary dose -limiting factor.  At t his dose, the mean serum interferon level was 2000 IU/ml.  While 
this level is rarely attained by giving exogenous interferon, levels of 100 IU/ml in response to exogenous interferon 
are associated with the same types and degree of adverse effects as seen with high dose poly -ICLC.  Children 
who were terminally ill with leukemia could not tolerate 12 mg/m2 IV, although healthier children could (Leventhal 
et al, 1981).  In most of the early cancer trials, however, about 6 mg/m2 poly -ICLC IV was generally used .  Mild 
(grade 1), transient (7 days) hepatic enzyme elevations were described in a trial of 100 mcg/kg poly -ICLC given 
intravenously in multiple sclerosis patients.  In three patients this was prolonged >7 days, but in all patients the 
enzymes returned to  normal values after temporary discontinuation of the poly -ICLC.  One paralyzed multiple 
sclerosis patient in this group suffered a fatal pulmonary embolus which was not judged to be du e to the drug.  
Poly-ICLC has been associated with coagulopathy in dogs , but not in other species (including primates); and there 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 15 has been no increase in the expected incidence of deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, or coagulopathy 
in multiple sclerosis, AIDS or malignant glioma patients on low dose IM poly -ICLC.  
 
Low dose poly -ICLC :   
 It was subsequently shown that low doses were better than higher ones for enhancing immune effects, 
and that the higher dose actu ally inhibited a number of cell -associated immune functions.  It was also found that 
intramuscular injec tion brought about a much milder set of side effects.  The most common complain t is a mild, 
transient discomfort at the injection site.  On occasion, 8 -12 hours after doses of 10 to 50 mcg/kg IM, patients may 
also develop a mild flu like syndrome with feve r of less than 38oC which may last for another 12 hours, but 
responds readily to acetaminophen or aspirin.  Mild myalgia, arthralgia, sometimes nausea, and malaise are 
present during this period of time.  This flu -like syndrome typically diminishes markedl y after the first little poly -
ICLC treatment.  Hepatic enzyme elevations are not typically seen at these dosages.  Several multiple sclerosis or 
malignant glioma patients at Walter Reed Army Medical Center (WRAMC) have been maintained on regular 
intramuscu lar poly -ICLC for as long as 12 years without significant adverse effects.  On very rare occasions in the 
course of treatment patients who have been tolerating treatments uneventfully may develop a more pronounced 
fever with chills and malaise (typical of higher dose IV poly -ICLC) in response to a single IM injection on 
subsequent dosing.  This will typically respond to aspirin or acetaminophen and does not recur on repeated 
dosing.  Whether it represented inadvertent IV injection on those occasions is unce rtain.  In a previous  pediatric  
study  conducted by the Principal Investigator , there was no dose limiting toxicity  seen over 3 years  in 45 children 
at doses of 20 -30 micrograms /kg given 2 times a week as intra -muscular injection.  
 
Summary of Poly -ICLC Toxic ity data reported to FDA, 2005:  
 In the two recent, ongoing multi -center NIH consortium studies in adult glioblastoma patients and in 
patients with multiple -recurrent anaplastic glioma, most patients (N=62) reported at least one adverse event.  The 
majorit y of adverse events were classified as either grade 1 (63%) or grad e 2 toxicity (28%). The reported grade 3 
and grade 4 toxicities were 8% and  0.8%  respectively. Only  two grade 5 events  were reported, which were not 
assessed  to be related to  the study drug.  The most frequently reported events (toxi cities) were fatigue, pain, and 
myalgia. Very transient  elevated liver enzymes, main ly grade 1 or 2 , were  also reported in fourteen patients.  
 
 However, combining both trial s, there were only eight een toxicity grade 2 or higher adverse events that 
were definitely or probably ascribed to the study drug by the local study physician.  The seventeen grade 2 and 
one grade 3 events occurred in only nine patients and had a median duration of five days.  Tw o patients had six 
grade 2 hematologic reports with a median duration of five days.  Animal studies suggest that a major portion of 
this leucopenia does not reflect my elotoxicity, but is related to leukocyte trafficking, with transient migration of 
WBC to lymphoid organs, including spleen.  
 
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility Criteria and Registration  
 
3.1 Patient Registration  
 
This is a multi -institution study between UCSD/Rady Children’s Hospital and Emory University/Children’s 
Healthcare of Atlanta. UCSD/Rady Children’s Hospital will be the coordinating site for this investigator initiated 
trial. 
 
Eligible patients will be registered by contacting the Clinical Research  Coordinator, Monday through Friday, 8:00 
am-5:00 pm  Pacific Standard Time by phone except  on holidays. Calls will be returned within one business day. 
The research coordinator will review preliminary eligibility by phone before forwarding a registration  packet to the 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 16 enrolling practitioner . The information requested in the registration packet must be completed. The signed 
informed consent statement along with the documentation confirming eligibility  must be faxed . Upon receipt of the 
completed registration  packet, the research coordinator  will assign a unique patient registration number and study 
subject number. Patients must be registered prior to starting any protocol therapy.   
 
Contact Person:  Mehrzad Milburn, RN,  BSN,  CCRC  
   Oncology Research Center  
   UCSD/Rady Children’s Hospital  
   3020 Children’s Way  MC 5128  
   San Diego, CA 92123   
   Phone: (858) 966 -8155  
   Fax: (858) 966 -8966  
 
 
Important note:  The eligibility criteria listed below are interpreted literally and cannot be waived.  Patient s 
must begin treatment within two weeks of study registration. Registration will be completed only after pathologic 
diagnosis is confirmed by central review (please see below).  
 
Between the two sites, w e anticipate enrolling up to 1 0-15 subjects per year , to achieve a total of 24 evaluable 
subjects . Thus we are confident that accrual can be completed within 2 -3 years.  The estimation is reflected by the 
number of patients with recurrent low grade glioma tumors that are treated  annually  at Rady Children’s Hospital  
and Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta.    
 
3.2 Inclusion Criteria  
3.2.1  Age   
Subjec ts must be between 0  – 21 years of age when enroll ed on this protocol.  
 
3.2.2    Diagnosis  
Subjec ts must have pathologically confirmed low grade glioma with histologic subtypes interpreted as WHO grade 
I and II including:  
-juvenile pil ocytic astrocytoma (JPA)  
-pleomorphic JPA  
-diffuse astrocytoma (fibrillary, gemistocytic, giant cell, or pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma)  
-subependymal giant ce ll astrocytoma (SEGA)  
-low grade oligoastrocytoma  
-low grade oligodendroglioma  
-pilomyxoid astrocytoma  
-low grade glioma NOS  
 
Tumors of all regions of the CNS, with appropriate histology are eligible for study. However patients with SEG A 
or tumors intrinsic to the optic nerve and involvement of the optic nerve  that cannot be biopsied/resected are 
eligible without histological confirmation.  
 
Subjec ts with neurofibromatosis type 1(NF1) are also eligible  (see appendix II for NF1 diagnostic crit eria). 
 
All pathologi c diagnoses  of subjects from all enrolling sites  will be confirmed with tissue block review  of 
previously obtained specimens  by Scott VandenBerg, M.D., Ph.D. This will be done in order to assure 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 17 uniformity in  the above subtypes for  these sometimes difficult to diagnose tumors.  Once consent is obtained, 
subjects’ tissu e/slides and corresponding  pathology report should be  forwarded for central review at UCSD.  
These samples should be  sent to:   
   
     Scott R. VandenBerg, M.D., Ph.D.  
Professor of Pathology  
 Director of Neuropathology  
University of California, San Diego  
Pathology, MC 0612  
BSB Room 2008  
9500 Gilman Drive  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0612  
Phone: 858 -822-2808   
 
3.2.3  Criteria  
Subjec ts must have demonstrated either tumor progression or recurrence by  any of the  radiographic criteria 
and/or clinical criteria as defined below:  
  
 a.  Subjec ts with progressive non -resectable disease regardless of location in the brain or spine are 
eligible for this study.  Patients with eviden ce of leptomeningeal dissemination are eligible for this 
study. Patients do not require biopsy/histologic confirmation at the time of progression or relapse.  
 
 b. Radiographic progression is defined as >40%  increase in the product of the three perpendicula r  
diameters of current tumor relative to the  baseline measurement  (defined as either the initial 
scan or scan at start of a previous therapy):  
length ( L) x width ( W) x transverse ( T) (current scan) > 1.4 x L x W x T (baseline  scan), or the 
development of any new sites of disease independent of the response of the initial tumor.  
See section 7.1.2 for methodology for tumor measurement.   
 
 c. Post radiation changes are often seen on post -treatment imaging studies, so that classi fication of a 
patient as having progressive disease may require several serial MRI’s if the child has received 
radiation within the preceding 12 months.  
  
 d. Tumor volume includes the entire tumor volume seen on gadolinium enhanced T1 MR imaging  
  plus non -enhancing abnormality seen on T2 or FLAIR.  Coronal and axial images will be evaluated.  
 
 e. All tumor cysts will be included in the tumor volume  
 
f.  Clinical progression without radiographic progression includes children with optic pathway gliomas 
who demonstrate sustained decrease in visual fields and/or acuity in three serial vision 
examinations.  Each of the vision examinations must be performed >2 weeks  apart.   
 
 g. Children with previously negative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology who show evidence of tumor 
cells in fluid obtained by lumbar puncture can be designated as having progressive disease in the 
absence of radiographic evidence of progression . 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 18 3.2.4  Performance Level and Life Expectancy  
 
Subjec ts must have a performance status of > 50% (Appendix I). Use Karnofsky for patients > 16 years of age 
and Lansky for patients  ≤ 16 years of age. Subjec ts must have a life expectancy of ≥ 8 weeks . 
 
3.2.5   Prior Therapy  
 
Subjec ts must have fully recovered from the acute toxic effects of all prior chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or 
radiotherapy prior to entering this study and meet time restrictions from end of prior therapy as stated below :  
 
a. Myelosuppressive chemotherapy : Subjec ts must have received the last d ose of myelosuppresive 
therapy at least 3 weeks prior to study re gistration or at least 6 weeks if therapy included  nitrosourea.  
b. Investigational / Biological agent: Subjec ts must have received the last dose of other investigational 
or biological agent >7 days prior to study registration . Subjec ts must not have received polyICLC in 
the past.  
c. XRT: Subjec ts must be ≥ 8 weeks since the completion of radiation therapy.  
d. Study specific limitations on prior therapy: There is no limit on the number of prior treatment 
regimens or received doses of radiation therapy.  
e. Growth factor(s): Subject s must not have rece ived any hematopo ietic growth factors within 7 days of 
study entry  or 21 days for pegfilgastrim . 
f. Prior Surgery: Subjec ts must be ≥ 2 weeks from prior surgery.  
g. Steroids: Subjec ts must be on a stable steroid dose for 7 days prior to study entry  if they are on 
steroid treatment . 
 
3.2.6  Organ Function Requirements  
All subjec ts must have ade quate organ function defined below when  starting on protocol.   
 
3.2.6 .1 Hematologic Function:  
  
a. Hemoglobin: > 8.0 gm/dl (may transfuse PRBCs)  
b. ANC: > 750/mm3,  Must be at leas t 7days after last dose of growth factor  
c. Platelet Count: > 50,000 (transfusion independent; ≥ 7 days from last transfusion)  
 
3.2.6 .2. Renal Function  defined as : 
  
 Creatinine clearance/GFR > 70 cc/min/1.73 m2 or  
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 19             Serum creatinine based on age/gender as follows:        
 
Age 
 Maximum Serum  
Creatinine (mg/dL)  
 Male  Female  
1 month to < 6 months  0.4 0.4 
6 months to < 1 year  0.5 0.5 
1 to < 2 years  0.6 0.6 
2 to < 6 years  0.8 0.8 
6 to < 10 years  1 1 
10 to < 13 years  1.2 1.2 
13 to < 16 years  1.5 1.4 
≥ 16 years  1.7 1.4 
The threshold creatinine values in this Table were derived from the Schwartz formula for 
estimating GFR (Schwartz et al. J. Peds, 106:522, 1985) utilizing child length and stature 
data published by the CDC.  
  
 
3.2.6 .3 Liver Function:  
 
a. Total bilirubin < 1.5 x ULN for age, AND  
b. SGPT (ALT) < 2.5x ULN  
c. SGOT (AST) < 2.5x ULN  
 
3.2.6 .4 Pulmonary Function:  
            
No evidence of dyspnea at rest, no exercise intolerance, and a pulse oximetry ≥ 94% if  
 there is clinical indication for determination.  
 
3.2.6 .5 Coagulation Function : 
 
            Normal PT and PTT at enrollment per institutional range  
 
3.2.6 .6 Reproductive Function : 
 
            Due to potential teratogenic effects of (poly -ICLC ), nega tive serum beta -HCG in females, and agreement  
            to the  use of effective contraception in males and females of childbearing potential, IS REQUIRED .  
 
 
3.3   Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.3.1.  Pregnant or lactating females.  Women of childbearing age will agree to use  
             contraception during the protocol.  
 
     3.3.2     Patients receiving other experimental immunotherapy.  
 
     3.3.3     Patients may not have fever (38.50C) within 7 days of enrollment.  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 20 3.3.4     No concurrent XRT or chemotherapy is allowed.  
 
3.3.5    Patients who, in the opinion of the investigator, may not be able to comply with the safety monitoring                 
requirements of the study.  
 
 
3.4   Regulatory  
 
      3.4.1 Informed Consent  
     All subjec ts and/or their parents or legal guardians must sign a wri tten informed consent document .   
     Written a ssent will be obtained from  patients  per institutional guidelines.  
 
      3.4.2 Protocol Approval  
               All institutional, FDA, and NCI requirements for human studies m ust be met includ ing institutional IRB  
               approval of the protocol.  
 
 
4.0 Study Treatment   
 
4.1 Treatment Schedule  
 
Children  will receive poly -ICLC 20 mcg/kg /dose  twice weekly IM (using Monday/ Thursday or Tuesday/Friday  
schedule if possible).  The first 2 doses will be administered in  the clinic under supervision.  
 
Vital signs will be monitored every 30 min utes for 2 hours after the first dose. For all subsequent doses 
administered at home, a t emperature  log will be kep t to document the temperature prior to study drug 
administration and  at two separate  time points after each  of the 8  dose s of study drug in cycle 1 . One temperature 
reading will be  assessed  between hours 2 -4 after study drug  administration  and one temperature reading will be  
assessed  at 12 hours after study drug  administration . After cycle 1, temperature will only be monitored on an as 
needed basis, such as if the subject is not feeling well . Subjects or their parents will  be instructed to use a log to 
record the temperature monitored at home  and any fever should be reported to the study team.  In some cases, at 
the discretion of the research team, subject or parent  will be allowed , after appr opriate teaching , to administer the 
study drug at home . The study drug will be dispensed to the subject/parent by the research pharmacy. The study 
drug will be dispensed in vials along with  labeled dose syringes in order to minimize errors in dosing.   
 
Total length of treatment will be two years.  Each cycle will be 28 days in length.  If subjects  demonstrate a 
response  to therapy  (see section 7.0) , treatment may be continued beyond two years  at the discretion of the 
principal investigator and pending drug availability. For statist ical analysis of toxicity , subject s will be divided into 
two separate cohorts (those with NF1 and t hose without NF1).  The subjects  in each of these cohorts will be 
treated and monitored identically throughout treatment.  
 
Subjects who travel to the coordinating or enrolling sites for protocol therapy may return home to the care of their 
primary pediatric oncologist after completing cycle 1 of therapy for standard of care management at the discretion 
of the study physician/ committee. Subjects will be seen and monitored by their  primary  treating  oncologist at the 
start of each cycle. For those subjects, a 3 month supply of study drug will be dispensed to the subject/family from 
their enrolling site. The enrolling site will con tinue to see the subject every 3 m onths for evaluation and will remain  
responsible for continued data  capture of all required information .    
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 21 4.2:   Dose modifications based on Toxicity  
 
If  AST/ALT > 10x ULN while on study , Poly ICLC will be discontinued until the AST/ALT are < 5x ULN ; the study 
drug will then be restart ed at 20 mcg/kg /dose  twice weekly  (the initial dose).    
If AST/ALT > 10x ULN  for a second time , hold study  drug until values < 2.5x ULN; then restart drug at  the reduced 
dose of 10 mcg/kg /dose  twice weekly . 
Study d rug will be stopped and subjec t will be off treatment for toxicity if AST/ALT do not decrease to < 5x  ULN 
during the  first episode and <2.5x ULN at second episode when drug is he ld for three  weeks .  
 
For the NF 1 cohort, consider restarting drug again at 5 mcg/kg /dose  twice weekly if toxicities recur  at the prior 
reduced dose of 10mcg/kg/dose.  
 
For all  other grade 3 or grade 4  toxicities the same dose modifications will be followed. The study drug will be held 
until resolution of these toxicities to ≤  grade 1. If the toxicity is not resolved within 3 weeks of the last dose of the 
study drug administration the subject will be ta ken off protocol therapy.  
 
 
4.3:  Concomitant Therapy  
 
Corticosteroids and anticonvulsants may be given as indicated clinically.  However, if the dose of steroids is 
increased while on therapy, MRI must be performed t o rule out disease progression. Acetaminophen may be 
given as needed to control poly -ICLC side effects.  A non -P450 inducing anticonvulsant will be used whi le on this 
study (see Appendix 3).  
 
Radiotherapy may not be given while on study to the lesions being  utilized as measurable disease  in order  to 
assess response.  Patients may enter on study after completion of involved field radiation therapy, however at 
least 8 weeks  should elapse after radiation, and scans should show residual disease prior to entry on  study.  
Chemotherapy is not  allowed .  
 
Antibiotics, blood products and general supportive care measures may be used as clinically indicated.  
Appropriate antibiotics, blood products, antiemetics, fluids, electrolytes and general supportive care are to be 
used as necessary and as per institutional guidelines. Give n the risk of  intratumoral hemorrhage with 
thrombocytopenia, a platelet transfusion should be considered if the platelet count is < 25,000/mm3. Higher 
transfusion parameters may be used if clinical ly indicated. All blood products will be leukocyte depleted and 
irradiated to prevent graft -versus -host disease.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 22 5.0 Required Observations  
All Pre -study Observations must  be done within 14 days of study entry.  
 
Observation  Pre-
Study   
Day 1 of 
Cycle 1  Day 15 of 
Cycle 1  Prior to 
subsequent 
cycles 2 -12 Prior to 
subsequent cycles 
13-24 End of 
therapy/Off 
Study  
History, VS, Physical  x x x x x x 
Performance Status1 x x x x x x 
Toxicity Evaluation     x x x x 
Neuro Evaluation  x x x x x x 
Concomitant Meds  x x x x x x 
CBCD, Platelets  x x x x x x 
PT/PTT  x x x x† x†   x† 
CMP w/Phos  x x x x x x 
Urinalysis3 x          
Serum Pregnancy3 x          
MRI-Brain/Spine **  x    Every 3 cycles 
starting with 
end of Cycle 3 ↑ End of Cycle 18 and 
24 only↑ x 
LP/CSF cytology*  x    Every 3 cycles 
starting with 
end of Cycle 32 End of Cycle 18 and 
24 only2 x2 
Biology -red & purple 
top blood samples   x x       
Data Collection 
Submission4 x   x x x 
  
1:Performance Status=Karnofsky if > 16 y/o or Lansky if ≤ 16 y/o   
 2: repeat only if cytopathology showed tumor cells at study entry  or disease progression   
 3: Repeat as needed for good clinical care  
4: Data Collection should be submitted monthly  
†: Repeat PT/PTT only if abnormal after Day 15  
↑ Repeat MRI Spine only if not normal pre study  
    
* Lumb ar Puncture/CSF cytology is not required if already done within 4 weeks of study entry.   
CSF will be obtained prior to initiation of therapy with Poly ICLC. If positive, CSF will be obtained at 3, 
6, 9, 12, 18, 24 months after study entry, as well as the time end of therapy/off study.  
 
MRI Brain/Spine should be obtained with and without gadolinium including pre T1, post T1, T2 and f lair 
sequences. B oth axial and either coronal or sagi ttal pre -post gadolinium  images should be obtained.  
MRI w ill be assessed at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24 months after starting the therapy  (at the end of those cycles) , as 
well as at the time end of therapy/off study or if subject is going off study prematurely.  
**MRI spine does not have to be repeated during the study if it was normal pre -study. It should be repeated 
at the time end of therapy/off study or if subject is going off study prematurely.  
A copy of the MRI images on a CD should be sent to the coordinating site.   
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 23 5.1:   Pretreatment Evaluation (must be performed within 14 days  of study entry)  
 
      A. History , vital signs  and physical examination , including n eurologic evaluation  and concomitant medication 
list 
      B.  CBC, differential, platelet count, PT/PTT  
      C.  AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, calcium, phosphorus, total bilirubin  
      D.  BUN, Cr, urinalysis  
      E. Disease evaluation with either MRI  of brain/ spine  and CSF cytology.  (LP is not required if already done 
within 4 weeks of study entry).    
      F.  Serum B -HCG in females of childbearing age  
G. Lansky Play Scale assessment for patients ≤ 16 years of age; Karnofsky score for patients >16 years old. 
(see Appendix I).  
H. Study entry form/eligibil ity check list to be filled out prior to starting treatment.  
 
5.2:  Evaluation during treatment  
 
      A. Disease evaluation  (including MRI) , if positive at study entry,  every 3 cycle s for the first 12 cycle s (to be 
done at the end of the cycle), then every 6 cycle s for as long as the subjec t remains on study . MRI spine 
does not have to be repeated if it was normal pre -study.  Disease status and events form is to be filled 
every 3 months  for the first 12 months and then every 6 months while subjec t is on study.  
      B.  History, vital signs, physical examination  and concomitant medication list at day 1 and day 15 of cycle 1 , 
and then  prior to each cycle (monthly  for as long as the patient remains on study).  
      C. Labs are to be obtain ed at day 1 and day 15 of cycle 1 , and then  prior to each cycle (m onthly for as long 
as the subjec t remains on study).  
 - CBC/differential, platelets  
 - Chemistry panel including: AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, calcium, phosphorus, total bilirubin,  
  BUN, Cr   
 - PT/PTT at Cycle 1 Day 1 and 15 , repeat further only if abnormal  
      D.  Neurologic assessment at each visit with scoring of overa ll exam compared to previous exam as follows: No     
change from previous exam; worsening from previous exam; improvement from previous exam.  
      E. Record at each visit if steroids are being given and if dose is same, lower, higher than at previous vis it.  
MRI required if steroid dose increased .   
      F.   Toxicity  monitoring  form and  Lansky Play Scale assessment for subjec ts ≤ 16 years of  age; Karnofsky 
score for subjec ts >16 years old. (see Appendix I ) at week 2 and  then prior to each  cycle.  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 24 5.3:   Evaluation at the end of therapy  or relapsed disease  
 
    A. Disease evaluation  (including MRI  brain and spine ) and lumbar puncture for CSF cytology (required only at 
time of disease progression)  with all studies  that were initially  positive at study entry   
    B. History,  vital signs,  physical examination , and concomitant medication list  
    C. Labs:   
 - CBC/diff erential, platelets  
 - Chemistry panel including  AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, calciu m, phosphorus, total bilirubin,     
  BUN, Cr  
 -PT/PTT, if still abnormal  
    D.  Neurologic assessment with scoring of overall exam compared to previous exam as follows: No change from    
 previous exam; worsening from previous exam; improvement from previous exam.  
   E.    Record if steroids are being given and if dose is same, lower , or higher than at previous visit.  
    F.   Toxicity monitoring form and Lansky Play Scale assessment for patients ≤ 16 years of age; Karnofsky score 
for patients >16 years old. (see Appendix I).  
   G.    If patient death occ urs, fill out death report  form. 
 
5.4:  Special laboratory specimens   
 
A. Biologic correlates  
 
1.  Blood Specimens  
 
Obtain 5ml of peripheral  blood in a red top tube at study entry and at  day 15 prior to the scheduled  dose of 
the study drug . Separate serum and freeze at -70C in four equal aliquots. Label each specimen with subject’s 
research identifier  and date drawn . These specimens will be sent to the lab identified on the next page.   
 
Obtain 10 ml of peripheral  blood in purple top tube, at study entry and at day 15 prior to the scheduled  dose of  
the study drug.  Label  each specimen with subject’s research identifier and date drawn. These specimens will 
be sent  to Dr. Donald L. Durden’s laboratory for isolation of  peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).  
Samples will be shipped  to the address  listed  below.   
    
Serum OAS and interferon , ,  levels will be measured by standard ELISA assays. Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMC) will be isolated by ficoll -hypaque density gradient separation and stored as pellets 
at –80 degrees C. Levels of PKR kinase, phosphorylation state of eIF2 , and th e induction of p21waf-1 will be 
determined in cell lysates by standard in vitro kinase and Western blot methods using phospho -specific 
antibodies as described by Williams (1999).  This evaluation will provide a surrogate marker for sensitivity of 
patient’s cells to known capacity of poly -ICLC to activate this serine/threonine kinase and to activate the p53 
tumor suppressor gene activity.  
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 25 Total RNA for  RNA sequencing or  microarray analysis of PBMCs before and after treatment  with poly -ICLC 
will be collected to determine differences in gene expression induced by poly -ICLC as index of somatic 
response to this agent. This will be compared to patient’s clinical response to poly -ICLC.  
Peripheral m ononuclear cells will also be studied by Fluorescence Activated Cel l Sorting to establish an 
immunophenotypic profile for each sample pre and post treatment with poly -ICLC. Regulatory T cells 
(Tregs), dendritic cells, mononuclear cells, macrophages, B/T cell subtypes, and pro -anti-inflammatory 
cytokines can also be analyz ed. This will also be tested to determine if these markers can serve as 
feasible additional biomarkers of disease and response.  
2. CSF Specimens  (optional)  
 
CSF will be obtained prior to initiation of th erapy with Poly ICLC . CSF will be obtained via lumbar puncture 
as part of clinical staging prior to study enrollment , if not already done within 4 weeks of study entry . CSF 
cytology will be evaluated for presence of tumor cells by an institutional pathologist using standard methods. 
Approximately 3 ml of CSF will be requested for proteomic analysis. The CSF will be spun at 400 -500 g for 
10 minutes to remove cellular contaminants. The first 2 ml of CSF supernatant will be aliquoted into four 
.500 ml units and frozen at -20 to -80 degrees Celsius to be us ed for proteomic analysis. Each tube must be 
labeled with the subject’s research identifier , the sample type and the time it was drawn.  
   
The remaining 1 ml of CSF will be aliquoted in 0.2 ml units and frozen at -20 to -80 degrees Celsius to be 
evaluated for cytokines. Each tube must be labeled w ith the subject’s research identifier , the sample type, 
site from where the sample was obtained, and the time it was drawn.  
 
All blood and CSF biologic  samples should be  sent on dry ice, along with a completed biol ogic specimen 
transmittal form to  Dr. Donald Durden’s laboratory located at the Moores Cancer Center at UCSD. Enrolling 
practitioners  should contact Donald Durden  at 858 -534-3355 to notify  him of specimen s ready for  shipment  
or pickup  and delivery : 
 
 
Donald L. Durden, MD PhD  
Moores UCSD Cancer Center RM 3312  
3855 Health Sciences Drive #0819  
University of California, San Diego  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0819  
ddurden@ucsd.edu  
858-534-3355  
 
 
Samples will only be received  Monday through Thursday.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 26 B. Laboratory analysis  
 
1. Proteomic Biomarker Evaluation  
 
Criteria for a successful proteomic methodology for identification of a usable biomarker include high throughput, 
reproducibility and toleration of real world collection and shipping conditions. In addition, such methods must be 
able to identify differenti ally expressed proteins in an unsupervised manner as well as provide information about 
specific proteins of interest. Currently, there is not a single mature technology available to meet all these criteria. 
Therefore, a combined approach will be employed i n this exploratory study to attempt to fit all of these 
characteristics and improve the body of knowledge about the utility of these strategies.  
 
All these approaches will require concentration of the samples using Centricon 3kD filtration and partial dep letion 
of IgG and albumin (Proteoprep Blue Albumin Depletion kit). Proteins can be precipitated using 15% trichloracetic 
acid, re -suspended in denaturing buffer and stored at -20 to -80 degrees Celsius until the time of analysis.  
 
The first component of th e proteomic approach will employ 2 -D gel electrophoresis to separated proteins in two 
dimensions according to their size and charge. The gels are then scanned and relative positions and intensities 
are quantitated by pixel reading software. Individual spot s are normalized to total signal and proteins that are 
found to be differentially expressed can be identified by in -gel digestion and MALDI -TOF-TOF mass spectrometry 
[Clin Chem 2005; 51:2031 -2042].  
 
The second approach to employ is LC -MS/MS in combination with stable isotope labeling. The entire sample is 
subjected to mass spectrometry after trypsin digestion. Individual proteins can be quantitated and identified from 
the peptides present in the digestion reaction. The protein complements contained in CSF f rom different disease 
states can then be compared.  
 
The third component is low mass fingerprinting. Peptides are isolated from the CSF by ultra -filtration. These 
peptides are interrogated by MALDI -TOF-TOF mass spectrometry and profiles of peaks are generat ed. Peptide 
profiles are analyzed by bioinformatics software after signal normalization and informative peaks that distinguish 
between known disease states are identified. Combinations of informative peaks are compiled and tested against 
“unknowns” to vali date their predictive power.  
 
2. ELISA for confirmation/correlation of target proteins  
 
CSF samples will be evaluated for expression of specific secreted proteins implicated in tumor progression, 
migration and response to therapy. These target proteins, de scribed above, have well -characterized, 
commercially available antibodies including VEGF, dFGF, attractin, SPARC and EGF.  
 
3. Interrogation of spinal fluid samples will be performed after investigators have obtained extramural funding to 
pay for the studie s.  If compelling evidence for biomarkers other than those described about becomes available 
as proteomics studies are completed in CSF of children with malignant tumors, inspection for these markers will 
be performed.   
 
 
5.5:  Pathology specimens  (optional)  
If the subjec t has available  fixed,  frozen and /or cryopreserved  tumor tissue  from a p rior tumor resection upon 
study entry it will be evaluated for genomics and other biomarkers by  study pathologist Scott VandenB erg. 
Samples should  be shipped or  picked up and delivered Monday -Friday to:  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 27 Scott R. VandenBerg, M.D., Ph.D.  
Professor of Pathology, Director of Neuropathology  
University of California, San Diego  
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0612  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0612  
Phone: 858 -822-2808   
 
Additional Consideration  
If a patient relapses or second look surgery and/or lumbar puncture is required while  the subject  is on study, the 
tissue and/or CSF may be obtained for additional analysis post tr eatment with Poly ICLC.  
 
 
6.0  DRUG INFORMATION  
Poly-ICLC is classified as an investigational new drug.  It is a synthetic complex of polyinosinic and polycytidylic 
acid, stabilized with polylysine and carboxymethyl cellulose.  The thermal denaturation point is 89.5o C, about 40o 
C above that of plain polyI -polyC; the resistance to hydrolysis is several times that of the parent compound, and it 
induces peak levels of about 5000 IU of interferon per ml of serum in monkeys given 2 mg/kg intrav enously.  
 
The current study will be done under IND #43984, held by Oncovir.  The drug to be used in this study is prepared 
and packaged in the GMP facility of Bioserv, Inc, San Diego, under the direction and under contract to Oncovir.  It 
is then tested fo r identity (RNAase resistance and thermal denaturation) bioactivity in primates, sterility and 
pyrogenicity before release for clinical experimental use.   
 
FORMULATION: Supplied in 1 ml vials of 2 mg/ml opalescent solution  
 
STORAGE:  Should be refrigerat ed but NOT FROZEN.  Stable at room temperature for 3 days.  
 
SOLUTION PREPARATION:  Solution is injected as supplied.  
 
ADMINISTRATION:  Administered as a single intramuscular injection twice per week.  
 
SIDE EFFECTS:  Discomfort at injection site, occasional malaise, myalgias, or fever. Rare transient leukopenia 
has been reported.  At higher intravenous doses, transient liver enzyme and BUN elevations, and leukopenia have 
been reported.  Idiosyncratic hypercoagulopathy has been reported in dogs at v ery high doses but has not been 
seen in humans.  
 
MAXIMAL TOLERATED DOSE: As reported in cancer trials,  250-300 m icrograms /kg. 
 
The drug  will be obtained from Oncovir.  
 
To obtain drug, call:                                                                                 
     Andres M Salazar, MD  
Oncovir, Inc  
3203 Cleveland Ave, NW  
Washington, DC, 20008  
Tel: 202-342-1726  
Fax: 202-248-2324  
Email: asalazar@oncovir.com ; asala zar@starpower.net  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 28 Drug Accountability:  
 
The research pharmacist at each participating site  will maintain records of all dispensed vials of study drugs. All 
unused vials will be returned to the manufacturer (Oncovir) at the completion of the study as well a s all the drug 
accountability forms.  A copy of these records will be kept in the study binder at the coordinating site.  
 
 
7.0 RESPONSE CRITERIA  
 
MRI Response Criteria:   Comparison of objective assessments are based on major changes in tumor size 
compared to the baseline scan. Determination of progressive disease is based on tumor measurements described 
below .  
 
Interpretation of anatomic (MRI) response rates in gliomas can be difficult.  Tumors may be non -enhancing, and 
certain area of enhancement may represent post -operative or radiation change. Shrinkage of enhancing lesions 
can also be seen for months after radiation alone. These factors may confound the MRI interpret ation of tumor 
respon se to poly -ICLC. Also in the Principal investigator’s previous experience, tumor regression or stabilization 
on MRI was seen at 12 and 52 months in some patients on poly ICLC.  Hence in the absence of clearly 
progressive disease (worsening neurological status, significant increase in tumor size on MRI), poly -ICLC should 
be continued for possible late benefits.  
 
7.1 EVALUATION CRITERIA  
 
7.1.1 Methodology to Determine Tumor Measurement  
 
All measureable tumors will be measured at eac h evaluation and will be used in the response assessment.  
Measurable Disease:  Bi-dimensionally measurable lesions with clearly d efined margins by MRI or CT scan . 
Evaluable Disease:  Uni-dimensionally measurable lesions, masses with margins not clearly defined.  
Non-Evaluable Disease:  Not Applicable for response evaluation  
 
For all measurable tumors, the 3 dimensional measurements: width (W), transverse (T), and length (L) 
measurement s need to be recorded (if length L can be measured), using either T1 or T2 MR weighted images 
(which ever gives the best estimate of tumor size). The following section describes the methodology.  
 
 
1. Longest diameter of the tumor should be selected in the  axial plane or the plane in which the tumor is best 
seen or measured, provided the same plane is used in follow ups.  
2. The longest measurement of the tumor (or width, W) should be determined.  
3. The 2 perpendicular measurements should be determined (tran sverse (T) measurement -perpendicular to 
the width in the selected plane, and the length (L) – tumor extent in the plane perpendicular to the selected 
plane).  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 29 The primary tumor response rate endpoint will be based on the 2 dimensional measurements (TxW) as in 
modified MacDonald criteria (section 7.1.2), which, in addition to radiographic scans, comprise elements of the 
steroid use. The response rate based on the 3 dimensional measurements (TxWxL) will be a secondary 
endpoint (section 7. 1.3). 
 
All lesions are to be measured at each evaluation; however, if there are too many measurable lesions to 
measure at each evaluation (i.e. more than 10), choose the largest two to be followed before a subject is 
entered on study.  The remaining lesion s will be considered evaluable for the purpose of objective status 
determination.    
 
7.1.2 Tumor Response Criteria on 2 Dimensional Measurements (per Modified MacDonald Criteria)  
 
a. Complete Response (CR): Complete disappearance of all measurable and evaluable disease. There are no 
new lesions and no evidence of non -evaluable disease.  All measurable, evaluable and non -evaluable lesions 
and sites must be assessed using the same techniques as baseline.  Patients must not be on any steroid s. 
 
b. Partial Response (PR): ≥ 50% decrease over baseline in the sum of products of perpendicular diameters of 
all measurable lesions. There is no progression of evaluable disease and no new lesions.  All measurable and 
evaluable lesions and sites must be  assessed using the same techniques as baseline. The steroid dose at the 
time of the scan should be no greater than the maximum dose during the first 8 weeks since initiation of 
therapy.  
 
c. Stable Disease (SD): Does not qualify for CR, PR, or progression.  All measurable and evaluable sites must 
be assessed using the same techniques as baseline. The steroid dose at the time of the scan should be no 
greater than the maximum dose used during the first 8 weeks since initiation of therapy.  
 
d. Progressive Disea se (PD): ≥ 25% increase in the sum of products of all measurable lesions over baseline 
using the same techniques as baseline, or clear worsening of any evaluable disease, or appearance of any 
new lesion/site, or clear clinical worsening or failure to retur n for evaluation due to death or deteriorating 
condition (unless clearly unrelated to this cancer).  
 
 
7.1.3  Tumor Response Criteria  Based on 3 Dimensional Measurements  
 
 
a. Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all measurable and evaluable tumors. There are no new 
lesions and no evidence of non -evaluable disease.  
 
b. Partial Response (PR): > 65% decrease in  the sum of  the product s of the three perpendicular diameters of  
the measurable  tumor s relative to the sum of products of initial baseline measurements - LxWxT (current scan) 
< 0.65 * LxWxT (initial scan) . There is no progression of evaluable disease and no new lesions.  
 
c. Stable disease (SD) : Neither sufficient decrease in the product of the three perpendicular diameters to 
qualify for partial response nor sufficient increase to qualify for progressive disease.  
 
d. Progressive Disease (PD) : >25% increase in the sum of product s of the three perpendicular diameters of the 
measurable  tumor s relative to the initial baseline measurement - LxWxT (current scan) > 1. 25* LxWxT (initial 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 30 scan) or the development of any new sites of disease. As post -radiation changes are often seen on post -
treatment imaging studies, classification of a patient as having progressive disease m ay require several serial 
MRIs . 
 
 
7.1.4    Response Assessment  
 
Tumor response will be assessed at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24 months after starting the therapy, as well as at the time of 
going off study if prematurely.  The overall response rate (ORR) , defined as the percent of evaluable subjects who 
experience a complete response  or partial response  or stable disease , will be determined. The primary endpoint 
will be progression  free survival rate  (per MacDonald Criteria)  at 6 months after starting therapy.  Secondary 
endpoints also include tumor  ORR at 6 months and 2 years after starting therapy and also the duration of the 
‘good’ response. The traditional overall response rate ( CR's and PR's only) will also be summarized.  
 
Each subjec t will be classified according to their “best response” for the purposes of analysis of treatment 
effect. Best response is determined from the sequence of the objective statuses described above.  
 
Any subject removed from study protocol because of unaccept able progression (see Section 8.1) will be 
counted as progressive disease in the efficacy analysis.  
 
 
 
8.0  CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM PROTOCOL THERAPY AND OFF STUDY  CRITERIA    
8.1 Criteria for Removal from Protocol Therapy  
  
a. Progressive disease  
  
Note:  Transient enlargement of enhancing disease with subsequent shrinkage has been reported during 
poly-ICLC treatment. Because of this, if the patient has progressive disease by the conventional definition 
above but does not have unacceptable progression  by the definitions below, the treating physician and 
patient have the options of continuing poly -ICLC treatment on this protocol or of discontinuing treatment.  
 
 b. Criteria for unacceptable progression:  See definitions of tumor progression outlined in section 7.1.3  
 
1. >50% increase in the product of the three perpendicular diameters of initial tumor relative to the initial 
baseline measurement – LxWxT (current can)> 1. 5 x LxWxT (initial scan), or the development of any new sites 
of disease independent of the response of the initial tumor.  Post radiation changes are often seen on post -
treatment imaging studies, so that classification of a patient as hav ing progressive disease may require several 
serial MRI’s if the child has received radiation within the preceding 12 months.  
 
2. Unacceptable worsening of neurological symptoms that cannot be controlled with corticosteroids.  
 
      3. Any other radiologic al or clinical evidence of worsening to the extent that the treating physician feels it is  
      not in the patient' s best interest to continue poly -ICLC.  
 
 c.   Physician determines it is in patient’s best interest.  
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 31  d.   Patient and/or parent/guardian refusal to continue or inability to comply with protocol  
 
 e. Grade 3 or 4 toxicity that does not resolve to Grade 1 within three weeks after interruption of therapy, or 
recurrent grade  3 or 4 toxicity at a reduced dose level (see section 4.2) . 
 
Note: If final analysis confirms a beneficial effect of poly -ICLC, and/or if tumor recurs after withdrawal  from 
poly-ICLC at the end of the 2 -year prescribed treatment period, participatin g subjects  may be offered 
continued treatment with poly -ICLC (subject to drug availability at that time).  
 
 f.   Completion of planned therapy.  
 
Subject s who are off protocol therapy are to be followed until they meet the criteria for Off Study (see below).  
Follow -up data will be required , unless consent is withdrawn , every 3 months for the first year, every 4 months 
for the second year, every 6 months for the third year, and then yearly thereafter  
 
8.2  Off Study Criteria   
 a.  Death.  
 b.  Lost to follow -up. 
 c.  Entry into another therapeutic study.  
 d.  Withdrawal of consent for any further data submission.  
 
 
9.0    STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
a. The primary goal of this trial is to obtain preliminary estimates of the ability of poly -ICLC to prevent or delay   
disease progression in subjec ts with recurrent or newly diagnosed low -grade gliomas. The primary endpoint will 
be progression free survival  rate at 6 months (PFS6) after starting therapy . Progression free survival is defined as 
the time from starting study therapy to tumor progression, tumor recurrence, death from any cause, or occurrence 
of a second malignant neoplasm.  Tumor assessment for the primary endpoint will be based on modified 
McDonald’s criteria (section 7.1.2) . Tumor assessment results obtained based on the 3D measurements will be 
considered secondary.  The overall response rate  (ORR) at 6 months will be a secondary endpoint. The ORR  will 
include complete response , partial response , and stable disease (see Section 7. 1.4). Time to progression will be 
documented for all patients who progress.  
 
b. The second goal is to further define the side effects and toxicity  of this regimen in these subjec ts. Secondary 
endpoints also include tumor ORR  at 2 years after starting thera py and also the duration of the  good response.  
Tumor response will be assessed at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24 months after starting the therapy, as well as at the time of 
going off study if prematurely.  Other secondary endpoints also include tumor response rates based  on 3 
dimension measurements as in section 7.1.3 at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24 months after starting the therapy , progression 
free survival and overall survival  over the course of the study . 
 
c. The third goal will be to examine a series of biochemical determinations ( e.g. serum OAS and interferon levels, 
PKR, phosphorylation state of eIF2a, p21waf-1) as surrogate markers for sensitivity of patients to poly -ICLC. These 
will be compared to clinical response data. A subset of the proteins involved in apopt osis and signaling pathways 
will be looked into specifically to assess the effect of the study treatment on these signaling pathway changes. The 
specific endpoints are:  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 32 • Association of baseline levels of proteins (such as OAS, interferon, PKR, phosphorylat ion state of 
eIF2a, p21waf-1 ) in serum, PBMC and/or cerebrospinal fluid  with tumor response status at 6 months 
after treatment with Poly -ICLC.  
• Association of baseline levels of proteins (such as OAS, interferon, PKR, phosphorylation state of 
eIF2a, p21waf-1 ) in serum, PBMC and/or cerebrospinal fluid  with progression free survival.  
• Association of changes in levels of proteins (such as OAS, interferon, PKR, phosphorylation state 
of eIF2a, p21waf-1 ) serum, PBMC and/or cerebrospinal fluid  from baseline with tumor response 
status at 6 months  after treatment  with Poly -ICLC.  
• Association of changes in levels of proteins (such as OAS, interferon, PKR, phosphorylation state 
of eIF2a, p21waf-1 ) in serum, PBMC and/or cerebrospinal fluid  from bas eline with progression free 
survival.  
9.1:    Study Design and Justification of Sample size  
 
9.1.1 This is a single arm study, to determine the radiographic progression free survival  (PFS) rate to poly -ICLC 
in the treatment of children with recurrent or progressive low grade gliomas. The primary endpoint is the 
progression free survival  status  at 6 months  (PFS6)  after starting therapy. The tumor response categories will 
include complete res ponse, partial response, stable disease or progressive disease , as assessed according to 
section 7.1.2 . 
 
Simon’s optimal two-stage design  will be used for this study (Simon, 1989). Suppose 50% is the 
uninteresting level, i.e., if the PFS6 rate is ≤ 50%, we will consider the new regimen as not promising. This 
50% baseline response rate  in the absence of  treatment  is from historical experience  (this rate was also used 
by the Everolimus study  which is a phase II study for recurrent or progres sive LLG in children ), also taking into 
account that this study patient population are more refractory . We will test the null hypothesis H0: p≤ 50% 
against the alternative hypothesis H1: p> 75%, where p is the PFS6 rate. The two stage design proposed below 
will have 80% power to reject the null and conclude that the true response rate is above 50%, if the true 
response rate is ≥ 75%, at 5% significance level.  
 
The study design  can be described in detail as follows:  
 
Stage 1 : Fourteen  subjec ts will be accrued; accrual will be held up until the PFS6 results for all the 14 subjec ts 
are known. The trial will be terminated at Stage 1 if ≤7 subjec ts ha ve a PFS6 response; otherwise it continues 
to Stage 2. Note that any subjec t who goes off study early due to toxicity , will be counted as a non -response  
(an intent to treat analysis) .  
 
Stage 2 : Nine more patients will be accrued. We will reject the therapy if among all the 23 (14+9) subjec ts, the 
number of patients who have a defined response is ≤ 15.  
 
Early stopping probability : Under this design, if the null hypothesis is true, the pr obability  of stopping the trial 
early  will be 61%.  
 
9.1.2 Interim analysis and early stopping for efficacy:  
The interim analysis will be conducted as soon as the first 14 patients have accrued and are evaluable for the 
primary outcome.  If ≤7 subjects had a defined response, the trial will be stopped early for lack of efficacy.  
 
9.1.3 Early stopping for safety and feasibility  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 33 The study will also be stopped any time for sa fety. If 3  or more  subjects have a grade 4 or  1 subject has grade 
5 toxicity probably or definitely treatment related toxicity while on therapy or within 3  months of f the therapy, 
the trial will be stopped early for lack of safety.   
 
Interim Monitoring for Feasibility  
Primary early monitoring for f easibility will be based on the short -term feasibility endpoint that at least 60% of 
doses are  administered to the subject, as assessed at 16 weeks. Less than 60% of doses administered  for any 
reason constitutes an unacceptable level of dosing . An acceptab le feasible  outcome would be the successful 
administration of the study therapy to 80 % or more of subjec ts at 16 weeks. Treatment compliance will be 
assessed in each cohort (children with or without NF1) when 4 patients have been accrued and completed the 
first 16 weeks of treatment. Failure to administer > 60% of doses in this interval in three out of the four patients 
will result in suspension of accrual to that cohort.  
 
9.1.4  Final analysis for the primary endpoint  
If the study continues, after all 23 subjects are evaluable for efficacy and safety the study data set will be 
locked.  Out of the total of 23 subjects, if the number of subjects with PFS6  is 16 or more, the conclusion will 
be that the trial has demonstrat ed a statistically significant improvement above a  50% PFS6 rate .  The final 
estimated PFS6 rate will also be presented, along with a lower 90% confidence interval.   
 
9.1.5 Definition of study population for analysis  
All subjects who undergo at least one dose of the study treatment will be included in the analysis population. If 
applicable, “Intention -to-treat” analyses will be performed for an endpoint. If the endpoints for a subject cannot 
be assessed (for example, a  subject drops  early prior to the 6 months assessments  due to toxicity ), it will be 
considered to be an event that does not favor the study therapy (e.g., disease progression for the primary 
outcome).    
 
9.1.6 Accrual and study duration  
All the 23 patients are expected to be accrued in 3 years and the total study duration will be about 5 to 5.5 years.  
 
 
9.2:   Analysis of Results  
 
9.2.1:   Analysis of anti -tumor activity  
The " best response" rate is defined as the percent of evaluable subject s who experience a CR or PR or SD  (see 
Section 7.1.2 ).  The best response rates as well as overall response rates  at 6 and 24 months  will be estimated 
and exact lower one sided  confidence interval s for the true response rate s will be presented (Jung , 2004 ). The 
duration of response for each subject that has tumor response will be summarized in a table.  The same analysis 
will be done for the tumor response rate based on 3 dimensi on measurements as in section 7.1.3.  
 
9.2.2:   Summary of toxicities and side effects  
All observed toxicities and side effects will be recorded on toxicity sheets and the data collection forms. Toxicity 
information including type, severity, time of onset and resolution, and probable association with the study drugs will 
be recorded. Toxicities will also be analyzed by NF1 status (NF1 vs. non NF1 subject cohorts). Tables will be 
constructed to sum marize the observed incidence by type of toxicity and severity.  
 
9.2.3:   Analysis of  Survival  
Overall survival and progression -free survival  rates  will be estimated using the Kaplan -Meier  method  (Kaplan, 
1958) .  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 34  
9.2.4:   Analysis of biochemical measures.  
Laboratory studies will be done on subjec t’s serum and peripheral blood drawn prior to  and at two weeks after 
starting  treatment with  Poly ICLC.  Levels and changes in the measurement of serum markers and proteins such 
as OAS, interferon , , , PKR kinase, eIF2a, and p21waf-1 will be determined via proteomic analysis. For each 
marker, a Fisher’s exact test or a Wilcoxon rank sum test will be used to assess the association of a baselin e 
protein level or changes from baseline against tumor response status at 6 months. A log rank test will be used 
if the outcome is progression free survival.   
All the p -values will be adjusted using the Benjamini & Hochberg method to control the false discovery rate 
(FDR) due to the fact that there may be thousands of proteins produced by proteomics.  A marker will be 
claimed significant at FDR≤ 0.05.  To assess the effect of the study treatment on signaling pathways such as 
the one controlling apo ptosis, paired t -tests will be used to compare if there are significant changes from 
baseline for the proteins involved in these pathways. To assess differential effects on these pathways between 
the subjec ts who had a response and those who did not, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) can be 
performed to  see if a pathway is significantly up - or down -regulated in the patients with a response. These 
analyses will help to understand how poly -ICLC limits tumor growth and ultimately to identify patients who wil l 
benefit most from this form of therapy if it is effective.   
  
 
10.0:   ADVERSE REACTION REPORTING AND TOXICITY CRITERIA  
 
The timely reporting of adverse drug reactions (including toxic deaths) is required by the Food and Drug 
Administration. Reactions defin itely felt not to be treatment related should not be reported.  However, a report 
should be submitted if there is any suspicion of drug effect or in the case of Serious Adverse Events.   The 
reporting of adverse reactions is i n addition to and does not supplant the reporting of toxicities as part of the data 
reporting for this study.    
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  Timely reporting of all serious adverse events or drug reactions (including toxic 
deaths) is required by the Food  and Drug Administration, regardless of attribution. The reporting of serious 
adverse reactions is in addition to and does not supplant the reporting of toxicities as part of the data reporting for 
this study.  
 
Adverse event is defined as any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding), symptom or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure 
regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or procedure (attr ibution of 
unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable or definite).  
A Serious Adverse event is any adverse event, occurring at any dose that is fatal or life -threatening, results 
in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, requires in -patient hospital ization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or is an important medical event.  
 
Relationship/attribution:  The Investigator will be asked to document his/her opinion of the relationship of the event 
to study med ication as follows:  
 
1) Unrelated :  The adverse event is clearly not related to the investigational agent(s).  
2) Unlikely :  The adverse event is doubtfully related to the investigational agent(s).  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 35 3) Possible :  The adverse event may be related to the inves tigational agent(s).  
4) Probable :  The adverse event is most likely related to the investigational agent(s).  
5) Definite :  The adverse event is clearly related to the investigational agent(s).  
 
10.1:  Reporting Adverse Drug Reactions Occurring with Investigational Agents  
 
Within 24 hours of recognition, co ntact the Prin cipal Investigator  or his design ee by telephone to verify the 
identification process and the existence of an adverse drug reaction or toxic death.  
 
The following data must be reported to the study PI:  
 
• Subjec t identification number  
• Presenting diagnosis, Description of event  
• Laboratory data  supporting event  
• Total and daily doses of suspected drug  
• Time of event  
• Type and grade of adverse event  
• Methods used to recognize and characterize the effect  
• Physician attribution/relationship of event to study drug (see above)  
 
The participating site must  then submit a completed adverse event case report form to the coordinating site.   
 
Within 10 days of the adverse event , a completed NCI Adverse Reaction Form for Investigational Agents with the 
NCI protocol number should be submitted to the  IRB for life threatening (Grade 4) and fatal known reactions 
(except Grade 4 myelosuppression) or any unexpected,  unanticipated Grade  2 and 3  reactions  that are possibly, 
probably, or definitely attributed to the study drug .   
 
A completed (NCI) Adverse Reaction Form for Investigational Agents should be sent electronically  or by FAX to  
the FDA (see Appendix IV for the electronic links).  Oncovir will be notified as soon as an adverse event form has 
been submitted.   
 
10.2:   Toxicity Criteria.  
The NCI Common Terminology  Criteri a for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  version 4 .0 will be used and  referenced .  
The site, measure, grade , relationship, action taken, and outcome  for all toxicities (grades 3 and 4  as well as any 
unexpected, unanticipated Grade 2 reactions that are possibly, probably, or definitely attributed to the stud y 
drug) are to be reported on  the appropriate toxicity monitoring and adverse  event  forms.  
 
10.3: Data Safety Monitoring  
 
10.3.1  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
This study will be monitored in a ccordance with the UCSD/Rady Children’s Hospital  plan for data and safety 
monitoring of Phase 1 and 2 stud ies. This study will use the UCSD Moores Cancer Center DSMB.  In brief, the 
role of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board is to protect the interests of patients and the scientific integrity for 
all Phase 1 and 2 studies. The DSMB consists of 7 members including a chair , a statistician,  and a pharmacist . 
The DSMB meets on a regular basis to review current study results, as well as data available to the DSMB 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 36 from other related studies. The DSMB will pro vide recommendations for each study reviewed to change the 
study or to continue the  study unchanged. Data and Safety Board reports for institutional review boards will be 
prepared.  
 
10.3.2 : Study Monitoring  
The Principal Investigator  will monitor the study regularly to validate subjects’ eligibility , evaluability, and any 
toxicities that are entered in  the study database. In addition, the study committee comprised of the coordinating 
site members and at least 2 members of the particip ating site via phone conference will discuss and review 
once a mont h the enrolled subjects, toxicities, and integrity of data collection.  
 
Monitoring of Source Documents:  
The participating site will submit case report forms and copies of necessary supporting clinical source 
documents to the coordinating site for review of data accuracy prior to data submission. This will occur at a 
monthly interval from the time of subject’s enrollment into the study.   
 
Additionally a member of the DSMB at the coordinating site will monitor the data collection and the source 
documentation of all subjec ts enrolled at the enrolling  sites. This monitoring will review protocol compliance, 
drug accountability , and adverse e vent reporting as well as regulatory compliance  annually.  
 
10.4:   FDA Annual Reporting   
 
Oncovir, the IND holder of the study drug, will submit an annual report to the FDA. This report will include de -
indentified aggregate data from this study as well as compiled NCI adverse event reports.  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 37 11.0:   REFERENCES  
 
Black K, K. Chen, et al. (1992). Inflammatory leukocytes associated with increased immunosuppression by 
glioblastoma.  Journal of Neurosurgery 77:120 -126. 
 
Blyth  CR, Still HA (1983). Binomial confidence intervals. Journal of the American Statistical Association 78:108 -
116. 
 
Brandsma D, Ulfman L, Reijneveld JC, Bracke M, Taphoorn MJB, Zwaginga JJ, Gebbink MFB, deBoer H, 
Loenderman L, Voest EE (2006) Constitutive integrin activation on tumor cells contricutes to progression of 
leptomeningeal metastases Neuro -Oncology 8:127 -136 
 
Carter W, D Strayer, et al (1987). Clinical, immunological, and virological effects of ampligen, a mismatched 
double -stranded RNA, in patients with AIDS or AIDS related complex. Lancet (June 6): 1286 -1292.  
 
Chebath J, M Revel (1992). The 2 -5 A System: 2 -5 A synthetases, isospecies and functions.  Interferons: 
Principles and Medical Applications. S. Baron, D. Copenhaver, F. Dianza ni, et al, Galveston, & U. Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston: 225 -236. 
 
Collins V, C James (1993). Gene and chromosomal alterations associated with the development of human 
gliomas.  FASEB Journal 7: 926 -930. 
 
Curran W, C Scott, et al. (1993). Recursive part itioning analysis of prognostic factors in three radiation therapy 
oncology group malignant glioma trials. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 85(9): 704 -710. 
 
Droller M (1987). Immunotherapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with polyinosinic -polycy tidylic acid.  J Urol 
137(2): 202 -206. 
 
Ewel C, W Urba, et al (1992). Polyinosinic -Polycytidylic acid complexed with poly -L lysine and 
carboxymethylcellulose in combination with interleukin 2 in patients with cancer: clinical and immunological effects.  
Cancer Research 52: 3005 -3010.  
 
Folkman J, Ingber D  (1992) Inhibition of angiogenesis.  Semin. Cancer Biol.  3: 89 -96. 
 
Galabru J, M Katze et al (1989). The binding of dsRNA an adenovirus VA1 RNA to the interferon induced protein 
kinase.  European Journal o f Biochemistry 178: 581 -589. 
 
Gendelman H, R Friedman et al. (1990). A selective defect of interferon -alpha production in human 
immunodeficiency virus infected monocytes.  J. Exp Med 172(11): 1433 -1442.  
 
Giantonio BJ, Hochster H, Blum R et al (2001). Toxicity and response evaluation of the interferon inducer Poly -
ICLC administered at low dose in advanced renal carcinoma and relapsed or refractory lymphoma: a report of two 
clinical trials of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Invest New Drugs 19(1) : 89-92. 
 
Hawkins M., M Levin et al (1985).  An ECOG phase I -II pilot study of Poly -ICLC in patients with metastatic 
malignant melanoma.  J. Biol Response Mod 4(6): 664 -668. 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 38 Helgi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N, Weller M, Kros JM, Hain fellner JA, Mason W, 
Mariani L, Bromberg JE, Hau P, Mrimanoff RO, Cairncross JG, Janzer RC, Stupp R (2005) MGMT gene 
silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma. NEJM : 352:997 -1003  
 
Jung, S.H. and K.M. Kim (2004), On the estimation of the binomial probability in multistage clinical trials . 
Statistics in Medicine, 23(6):881 -896. 
 
Kao CL, Chiou SH, Ho DM, Chen YL, Liu RS, Lo CW, Tsai FT, Lin CH, Ku HH, Yu SM, Wong TT (2005) 
Evaluation of plasma and cerebrospinal fluid osteopontin levels in pa tients with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid 
tumor. Am J Clin Pathol 123:297 -304 
 
Kaplan EL, Meier P (1958). Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations.  J.Am.Stat.Asso. 53:457 -
481. 
 
Katze MG (1992).  The war against the interferon -induced dsRNA -activated protein kinase, can viruses win?  
Journal of Interferon Research 12: 241 -248. 
 
Khwaja FW, Reed MS, Olson JJ, Brat DJ, Schmotzer BJ, Gillespie GY, Guha A, Groves MD, Pohl J, VanMeir 
EG Identification of protein biomarkers in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of astrocytoma patients.  J Neuro 
Oncol. Submitted  2006  
 
Koromilas A, S Roy et al  (1992). Malignant transformation by a mutant of the IFN -inducible dsRNA dependent 
protein kinase.  Science 257: 1685 -1689.  
 
Krown S, D Kerr et al  (1985).  Phase I trials of Poly -ICLC in advanced cancer.  J Biol Response Mod 4(6): 640 -
649. 
 
Leventhal, BG, Kashima, H, Levine, AS, Levy H.B (1981) . Treatment of recurrent laryngeal papillomatosis with an 
artificial interferon inducer (polyICLC)  J. Pediatrics 99:614 -616. 
 
Levine AS, Levy HB (1978). Phase I -II trials of poly IC stabilized with poly -L-lysine. Ca ncer Treatment Reports 
62(11): 1907 -1912.  
 
Levy H (1972). Interferon and interferon inducers in the treatment of neoplastic diseases. I Brodsky, S Kahn, J 
Moyer. Orlando, Grune & Stratton.  
 
Levy H (1987). Clinical studies with polynucleotides. The interfer on system, a current review to 1987.  S Baron, F 
Dianzani, G Stanton, W Fleishman.  Austin, University of Texas Press:  469 -475. 
 
Levy H, C Bever (1988). Immune modulating effects of poly -ICLC in mice, monkeys, and man.  Applied Bioactive 
Polymers.  C Carr aher, V Foster, New York, Plenum.  
 
Levy H, F Riley (1985).  Utilization of stabilized forms of polynucleotides.  Interferons and their applications.  S 
Baron, D Copenhaver, F Dianzani et al, Galveston, U. Texas Medical Branch, 65 -76. 
 
Levy H, Salazar AM: Interferon inducers, in Baron S, Copenhaver DH, Dianzani F, Fleishman WR, Hughs TK, 
Klimpel GR, Neisesel DW, Stanton GJ, Tyring SK (eds): Interferon: Principles and Medical Applications.  
Galveston, University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992, pp6 5-76. 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 39  
Malkin D, F Li et al (1990). Germ line P53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other 
neoplasms.  Science 250: 1233 -1238.  
 
Maluish AE, Reid JW, Crisp EA, Overton WR, Levy H, Foon KA, Herberman RB (1985): Immunomodulatory effect 
of poly -ICLC in cancer patients. J Biol Resp Modif 4:656 -663. 
 
Mellinghoff IK, Wang MY, Vivanco I, Haas -Kogan DA, Zhu S, Dia EQ, Lu KV, Yoshimoto K, Huang JH, Chute 
DJ, Riggs BL, Horvath S, Liau LM, Cavenee WK, Rao PN, Beroukhim R, Peck TC, Lee JC, Sellers WR, 
Stokoe D, Prados M, Cloughesy TF, Sawyers CL, Mischel PS. (2005) Molecular determinants of the response 
of glioblastomas to EGFR kinase inhibitors. NEJM 353:2012 -24 
 
Minks M, D West et al (1979). Structural requirements of dsRNA for the activat ion of the 2’5’ oligoA polymerase 
and protein kinase of interferon treated HeLa cells. J Biol Chem 254(20):  10180 -10183.  
 
Mundigers CMPW, Lippens RJJ, Hoogenhout J et al (1990). Astrocytoma in childhood: survival and performance. 
Pediatr Hematol Oncol 7:121 -128. 
 
Nakamura O, N Shitara et al. (1982). Phase I -II trials of Poly -ICLC in malignant brain tumor patients.  J. Interferon 
Res. 2(1): 1 -4. 
 
Omenn GS (2005) Exploring the human plasma proteome. Proteomics 5:3223 -3225  
 
Prasad, SR et al (2002) CT Tumor Measurement for Therapeutic Response Assessment: Comparison  
of Unidimensional, Bidimensional, and Volumetric Techniques —Initial Observations. Radiology  225:416 –419. 
 
Rettenmaier MA, Berman ML, DiSaia PJ (1986). Treatment of advanced ovarian cancer with poly -ICLC.  Gynecol 
Oncol 24:359 -361. 
 
Rogatko, A and Litwin, S,  (1996) Phase II studies: which is worse, false positive or false negative? JNCI, 88: 462.  
 
Rohlff, C (2001) Proteomics in neuropsychiatric disorders. Int J Neuropsychoparmacol 4:93 -102 
 
Rosenblum M, A Yung et al (1990).  Growth inhibitory effects of interferon -B but not interferon -a on human glioma 
cells:  correlation of receptor binding, 2’5’ oligoadenylate synthetase and protein kinase activity.  Journal of 
Interferon Research 10: 141 -151. 
 
Salazar AM, Morales J, Levy HB, de Jesus C, Sarin P, Hawkes C, Martin A 1990 (abstr). Intramuscular poly -ICLC 
in HIV infection: Preliminary findings. Neurology 40 [Suppl 1]: 238.  
 
Salazar A, H Levy et al (1996). Long -term treatment of malignant glioma s with intramuscular administered 
polyinosinic -polycytidylic acid stabilized with polylysine and carboxymethylcellulose:  an open pilot study.  
Neurosurgery 38: 1096 -1104.  
 
Salazar A, J Morales et al (1990). Intramuscular Poly -ICLC in HIV infection: Prelim inary findings.  Neurology 
40(suppl 1): 238.  
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 40 Samuel C (1992). The RNA -dependent P1/Eif -2a protein kinase.  Interferon: Principles and Medical Applications.  
S Baron, D Copenhaver, F Dianzani et al, Galveston, U. Texas Medical Branch, Galveston: 237 -249. 
 
Schroeder H, R Wenger et al (1989). Modulation of nuclear matrix associate 25 -oligoadenylate metabolism and 
RNAase L activity in H9 cells by HIV.  J. Biol Chem 264(10): 5669 -5673.  
 
Simon R (1989). Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Con trolled Clinical Trials 10:1 -10. 
 
Talmadge J, R Herberman et al (1985). Hypo responsiveness to augmentation of murine natural killer cell activity 
in different anatomical compartments by multiple injections of various immunomodulators including recombinant  
interferons and interleukin 2. J Immunol 135(4): 2483 -2491.  
 
Theriault R, G Hortobagye et al (1986). Evaluation of Poly -ICLC in metastatic breast cancer.  Cancer Treat Rep 
70(11): 1341 -1342.  
 
Warren KE, S Goldman et al (2011). Phase I Trial of Lenalidomide in Pediatric Patients With Recurrent, 
Refractory, or Progressive Primary CNS Tumors: Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium Study PBTC -018. J. Clin. 
Oncol. 29:324 -329. 
 
Williams , Bryan RG  (1999).  PKR; a sentinel kinase for cellular stress. Oncogene 18, 6112 -6120.  
 
Zheng PP, Luider TM, Pieters R, Avezaat CJ, va den Bent MJ, Sillevis Smitt PA and Kros JM (2003) 
Identfication of tumor -related proteins by proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid from patients with primary 
brain tumors.  J Neuropathol Exp Neuro 62:855 -62 
  
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 41 APPENDIX I  
 
     PERFORMANCE STATUS SCALES/SCORES    
            
PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA          
 Karnofsky and Lansky performance scores are intended to be multiples of 10     
            
ECOG (Zubrod)     Karnofsky     Lansky*    
Score  Description    Score  Description    Score  Description    
            
0 Fully active, able to carry on all  100 Normal, no complaints, no   100 Fully active, normal.   
 pre-disease performance    evidence of disease       
 without restriction.   90 Able to carry on normal   90 Minor restrictions in physically  
     activity, minor signs or    strenuous activity.   
     symptoms of disease.       
1 Restricted in physically           
 strenuous activity but   80 Normal activity with effort;   80 Active, but tires more quickly  
 ambulatory and able to carry   some signs or symptoms of       
 out work of a light or sedentary   disease.        
 nature, e.g., light housework,  70 Cares for self, unable to carry   70 Both greater restriction of and  
 office work.     on normal activity or do active    less time spent in play activity.  
     work.        
2 Ambulatory and capable of all  60 Required occasional   60 Up and around, but minimal  
 self-care but unable to carry out   assistance, but is able to care    active play; keeps busy with  
 about more than 50% of waking 
hours    for most of his/her needs.    quieter activities.   
  50 Requires considerable   50 Gets dressed, but lies around  
     assistance and frequent    much of the day; no active play,  
     medical care.     able to participate in all quiet play and 
activities.  
           
3 Capable of only limited self -care,  40 Disabled, requires special care   40 Mostly in bed; participates in  
 confined to bed or chair    and assistance.    Quiet activities.   
 more than 50% of waking   30 Severely disabled,   30 In bed; needs assistance even for  
 hours.     hospitalization indicated.    Quiet play.    
     Death not imminent.       
4 Completely disabled. Cannot  20 Very sick, hospitalization   20 Often sleeping; play entirely  
 carry on any self -care. Totally   indicated. Death not    limited to very passive activities.  
 confined to bed or chair.    imminent.        
    10 Moribund, fatal processes   10 No play; does not get out of bed.  
     progressing rapidly.       
            
 *The conversion of the Lansky to ECOG scales is intended for NCI reporting purposes only.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 42 APPENDIX II:  Criteria for Type 1 Neurofibromatosis:  
 
• Clinical diagnosis requires the presence of at least 2 of 7 criteria to confirm the presence of NF1. Many 
of these signs do not appear until later childhood or adolescence, and thus confirming the diagnosis 
often is delayed despite a suspicion of NF1. The 7 clinical criteria used to diagnose NF1 are as follows:  
o Six or more café -au-lait spots or hyperpigmented macules greater than or equal to 5 mm in 
diameter in children younger than 10 years and to 15 mm in a dults  
o Axillary or inguinal freckles  
o Two or more typical neurofibromas or one plexiform neurofibroma  
o Optic nerve glioma  
o Two or more iris hamartomas (Lisch nodules), often identified only through slit -lamp 
examination by an ophthalmologist  
o Sphenoid dysplasia  or typical long -bone abnormalities such as pseudarthrosis  
o First-degree relative (eg, mother, father, sister, brother) with NF1  
 
http://www.emedicine.com/neuro/topic248.htm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 43 APPENDIX I II: List of Anticonvulsants Based on CYP3A/4/5 Enzyme Induction  
 
 
Anticonvulsant drugs with little or no enzyme induction:  
ELIGIBLE for concomitant use in study.  
 
Generic Name    Trade Name  
Gabapentin    Neurontin   
Lacosamide    Vimpat   
Lamotrigine    Lamictal  
Levetiracetam    Keppra  
Tigabine    Gabitril  
Topiramate    Topamax  
Valproic Acid    Depakote, Depakene  
Zonisamide    Zonegran  
 
 
 
Enzyme inducting anticonvulsant drugs (EIACD):  
NOT ELIGIBLE for concomitant use in study.  
 
Generic Name   Trade Name  
Carbamazepine   Tegretol  
Felbamate    Felbatol  
Phenobarbital     Phenobarbital  
Phenytoin    Dilantin  
Primidone    Mysoline  
Oxcarbazepine   Trileptal  
Rufinamide    Banzel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poly-ICLC 10/22/2010  
 
Revised 3 -13-12 44  
 
APPENDIX IV : MED Watch Links  
 
 
Use the following links to download the MED Watch forms and instructions for adverse event reporting to the 
NCI. 
 
http://www.fd a.gov/downloads/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/DownloadForms/ucm082728.pdf  
  
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/DownloadForms/default.htm    - 
  
 