Sleep and Breathing in the General Population - Chemical Stimuli  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date – 02/06/2019  
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited via flyers, recruitment letters, and word of mouth. Additionally, hospital 
databases will  be searched to identify patients who completed polysomnography (PSG) studies at a 
sleep clinic and were diagnosed with CSA. Patients with no record of a previous PSG study or who 
underwent a PSG study earlier than 2  years at the screening date will have t o undergo an in -laboratory 
PSG study to determine eligibility. Furthermore, patients who underwent medical procedures, surgeries, 
or had changes in health conditions or active medication that may affect sleep following the most recent 
PSG, will also underg o an in -lab PSG study irrespective of the date of the previous PSG study.  Eligibility 
criteria include patients with an apnea –hypopnea index (AHI)≥15 and a central AHI (CAHI)≥5. Patients 
with OSA (AHI≥15) and narrow CO2 reserve (>−2.0  mmHg) will also be el igible due to their increased 
propensity to develop CSA [1]. Participants whose control night study does not meet the above criteria 
will be excluded. Additionally, patients with a history of severe respiratory, cardiac, renal, and 
neurologic disease and t hose with co -morbid sleep conditions will be excluded.  
 
Randomization and Study Procedures  
Eligible participants will  sign an informed consent and complet e an in -laboratory night study on 5  mg 
Zolpidem and a control night study with no medication. The dose  of Zolpidem of 5  mg was selected 
according to current FDA recommendations to avoid adverse effects [ 2]. The order of the night studies 
(Zolpidem and control) w ill be  randomized according to a randomized crossover study design. The 
randomization sequence f or treatment order w ill be  generated via Microsoft Excel. Participants and la b 
staff performing the night studies will not be blinded to the treatment order. Analysis of physiologic 
parameters and sleep studies scoring w ill be  performed by lab personnel an d reviewed by the principal 
investigator or a co -investigator, all of whom w ill be  blinded to the study treatment arm at the time of 
the scoring, analysis, and review. The study statistician will also be blinded .  
Night studies w ill be  scheduled based on participants’ availability and must  be within 6  months of each 
other. Zolpidem has a short elimination half -life, and a washout period for a single 5  mg dose is 
unnecessary. When possible, consecutive night studies w ill be scheduled . Participants w ill be  contacted 
by phone, and their medical records w ill be  reviewed during each sleep study to ensure that no changes 
in medical conditions or medications occurred.  
After the participant consents to take part of the study, the participant wi ll completed the Epworth 
Sleepiness Scale (ESS), the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) questionnaire, the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index 
(PSQI) questionnaire, and the Berlin questionnaire  which help us to assess their sleep patterns and daily 
functional outcome s.  
 
In-laboratory Night Studies   
As part of standard care, a polysomnography (PSG) is a test conducted record an individual’s sleep study 
along with audio and video recording. A PSG is a test conducted to study sleep and to diagnose a variety 
of sleep dis orders. A PSG is used not only to help diagnose a variety of sleep disorders, but also to learn 
whether adjustments to treatment plans are needed or if current treatment plan is effective. An 
enhanced PSG w ill be  performed during both nights includ ing electrooculography, surface 
electromyography, electrocardiography, and pulse oximetry (Carefusion, SomnoStar z4 Sleep System, 
San Diego, CA, USA) consistent with the technical criteria of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
(AASM) [ 3]. Additionally, a nasal  mask w ill be  connected to an in -line pneumotachometer (Hans 
Rudolph; model 3700A, Shawnee, KS, USA). An RSS 100HR Research Pneumotach System will acquire 
data (Hans Rudolph) to achieve airflow, pressure, and volume measurements. The end -tidal partial 
pres sure of carbon dioxide (PETCO2) w ill be  measured by connecting a tube placed in the nasal vestibule 
to a respiratory gas analyzer (CWE, Inc., GEMINI Respiratory Monitor, Ardmore, PA, USA). Airflow and 
PETCO2 w ill be  recorded by a PowerLab data acquisition system (AD Instruments, Inc., model 16SP, 
Colorado Springs, CO, USA). Tidal volume (VT) is derived by integrating the airflow channel, and minute 
ventilation (VE) is calculated by multiplying VT by breathing frequency (FB). Arterial oxygen saturation 
will be monitored by an ear clip oximeter (Ohmeda Medical Inc., Biox 3740, Laurel, MD, USA). PSG 
variables, including apnea, arousal, and desaturation indices, w ill all be  calculated during both nights. 
Sleep staging and arousals will be measured and scored acc ording to standard criteria using oximetry, 
EEG, EOG, and EMG and standard PSG methods.  
 
Physiologic parameters   
In addition to PSG, a noninvasive positive air pressure ventilation protocol w ill be  used to calculate the 
CO2 reserve and the controller gain.  The CO2 reserve is defined as the difference between the eupneic 
end-tidal CO2 pressure and the end -tidal CO2 pressure (PETCO2) induced by the ventilation protocol 
that is sufficient to trigger a central apnea as defined by the AASM. If we are not able to  acquire a period 
of stable eupneic breathing due to the persistence of spontaneous central events, we will administer a 
40% CO2 gas mixture balanced with nitrogen to stabilize breathing. The combination w ill be 
administered at 5 -min intervals in 0.5 L/min  increments. The volume per unit time of the mixture gas 
required to resolve central events w ill be  determined, and PETCO2 allowed to return to baseline. We 
will perform three 5 -min trials at the therapeutic volume per unit of the mixture gas separated by 
sufficient time to return to baseline PETCO2. Here, the CO2 reserve is defined as the difference between 
baseline PETCO2 and the PETCO2 during the administration of the gas mixture at which central events 
were resolved. Controller gain is calculated by div iding the difference in minute ventilation between the 
post -mechanical ventilation induced by the ventilation protocol and steady -state respiration by the 
difference in the end -tidal CO2 pressure between the mechanical ventilation and steady -state 
respirat ion. In participants administered the gas mixture as described above, the controller gain will not 
be calculated due to the absence of mechanical ventilation in that protocol. Steady -state plant gain is 
calculated from the ratio of end -tidal CO2 to minute ventilation during stable respiration. All physiologic 
parameters w ill be  calculated during non -rapid eye movement (non -REM) sleep in both the control and 
the zolpidem night studies.  
During both nights, a supraglottic catheter w ill be  inserted in the pati ent’s nostril to measure epiglottic 
pressure throughout the PSG portion of the night study. The epiglottic nadir pressure occurring 
immediately before cortical arousal and during an obstructive respiratory event is defined by the AASM 
mark one instance of effort sufficient to trigger the arousal. These instances w ill be  measured for all 
obstructive events followed by arousals during the PSG portion and averaged to produce the respiratory 
arousal threshold during REM and non -REM sleep.  
 
Outcomes   
The primar y endpoint is the frequency of respiratory -related arousals, or the respiratory arousal index 
(R-ArI). R -ArI represents the number per hour of arousals resulting from respiratory events. Clinical 
outcomes w ill also compared between the two -night studies an d included the total respiratory arousal 
index (ArI), AHI, and CAHI. The total ArI represents the number per hour of all arousals, whether 
spontaneous or due to a respiratory event. Lastly, physiologic outcomes, including the CO2 reserve, 
plant gain, contr oller gain, and arousal threshold, w ill be  calculated  and s leep and desaturation 
parameters will be  reported as well.  
 
Statistical analysis   
A crossover design is used to investigate the potential influence of sequence (the order of medication 
administrat ion) and period (the time of medication administration) on the effects of the two treatments 
(control and Zolpidem) on the clinical outcomes. The significance level w ill be  set at a p -value equal to or 
less than 0.05. For the primary endpoint and clinical outcomes, the difference between the control night 
and the intervention night w ill be calculated for each participant, and Grubb’s test may be utilized to  
identify outliers (alpha=0.05). Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS, SAS, and R.  