Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 1  
 
Title: A Randomized, Controlled Study of Ibandronate for the Prevention of Bone Loss in 
Patients  Who Have  Received Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplantation for Hematological 
Malignancies  or Hematological Disorders  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Huifang Lu, MD PhD  
 
 
Table of Contents  
Page  
 
1.0 Objective    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
 
 
2.0 
 Background    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 
 
4.0 Treatment/Study Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . .  4 
 
5.0 Statistical Consider ation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
 
5.1 Data and Protocol Management   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8 
 
5.2 Safety Monitoring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8 
 
5.3 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8 
 
5.4 Benefit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
 
5.5 Home Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 
6.0 References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 2  
 
Title: A Ra ndomized, Controlled Study of Ibandronate for the Prevention of Bone Loss in 
Patients Who Have Received Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplantation for Hematological 
Malignancies  or Hematological Disorders  
 
Principal Inve stigator:   Huifang Linda Lu, MD PhD  
Co-PI:    Richard Champlin, MD,  Robert Gagel, MD  
Collab orators:  Carmen Escalante, MD, Maria Cabanillas, MD, Xuemei Wang  
 Bela B Toth, MD , Lincy Lal, Pharm .D. PhD  
 William Murphy, MD, Beth Chasen, MD   
 
1.0 Objectives 
 
This study plans to address the following hypotheses:  
 
1.1 The addition of Ibandronate initiated immediately after the transplantation (21 to 60 
days) will prevent bone loss in patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation (BMT) with underlying hematologic malignancies  or hematological 
disord ers. 
 
1.2 BMT patients who require prolonged steroid and other immunosuppressive treatment 
for Graft versus Host Diseases (GVHD) have a higher rate of bone loss, which can 
be prevented or attenuated by Ibandronate.  
 
Specific objectives to test these hypotheses are:  
a. Primary Objective:  
1. To prospectively compare the bone mineral density changes of lumbar spine, femoral 
neck and total hip between patients randomly assigned to I bandronate and control  group 
over 12 months post bone marrow transplantation at the Uni versity of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center.  
b. Secondary Objectives:  
1.   To measure and compare the accumulated level of steroid used in both treatment and                       
control  groups. 
2. To collect and compare the level of serum C -terminal telopept ide (CT X) in both 
treatment and control  groups to monitor the bone turnover rate for the duration of the 
study. 
3. To conduct a cost -effectiveness analysis of participating patients for both outcomes on 
bone mineral density (measured data) and skeletal -related events (modeled data).  
4. To record incidence of bone fractures and the graft  rate in both treatment and control  
groups.  
 
 
2.0 Background  
 
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is performed with increasing frequency and for expanding indications, with the majority of patients surviving for many years.  In this context, bone loss is a 
common and serious post -transplant complication.  Bone loss, occurs early and most rapidly 
during the first three to six months after the transplantation, and is often more severe at th e 
femoral neck (1, 2).  The degree of bone loss can be severe enough to cause fractures.   Lower 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 3  
bone mineral density in femoral neck in this population has also been associated with avascular 
osteonecrosis (3).  
 
Osteoporosis developed after BMT has a comp lex mechanism involving both the direct effect of 
the transplanted bone marrow on the stromal cell compartment and the effects from 
immunosuppressive therapies (3).  As a result of the decreased osteoblast and increased osteoclast 
activity, there is both increased bone resorption and decreased bone formation.  After the 
transplantation, over 50% of BMT patients develop some form of Graft Versus Host Disease 
(GVHD), which requires prolonged use of glucocorticoid as well as other forms of 
immunosuppression.   In addition, BMT recipients may also experience some bone loss before the 
transplantation (4), that is related to their underlying disease and the modalities used to treat 
them.  Their prior treatment may result in a variety of effects associated with bon e loss, including 
glucocorticoid- induced decreases in bone formation and serum 1,25 -dihydroxyvitamin D3, or 
chemotherapy- induced hypogonadism.  Therefore patients with hematologic malignancies  or 
hematological disorders  undergoing bone marrow transplantati on are at high risk of bone loss.  
 
In a prospective, randomized 12- month study of Risedronate on bone mass and bone turnover in 
patients who had undergone allogeneic BMT at least 6 months before the treatment, spine and 
femoral neck bone mineral density (B MD) did not change significantly in patients on Risedronate 
and decreased in those taking placebo (5).   However, this study did not answer the question of whether bisphosphonates could prevent the rapid bone loss commonly seen during the first three 
months post -BMT.   In another uncontrolled observational study, three monthly intravenous 
Pamidronate infusions attenuated femoral neck bone loss in the first six months after allogeneic 
BMT (2).  In a recent randomized, controlled study in patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell 
transplantation, using Pamidronate initiated before the transplantation decreased the bone loss 
significantly at the lumbar spine, hip, and the femoral neck.  However there was still significant bone loss at the hip and femoral neck th at was not completely prevented by pamidronate, 
warranting the use of a more potent bisphosphonate for more durable maintenance of bone mass 
after transplantation (6).  
 
Ibandronate (Boniva) has been shown to significantly increase bone mineral density in t he lumbar 
spine and the hip bone in postmenopausal patients.  Compared to placebo, Ibandronate taken orally at 150 mg once monthly or 3 mg intravenously quarterly significantly increased bone 
mineral density and decreased the rate of new vertebral fractures (7).  Ibandronate is more potent 
than other bisphosphonates such as Pamidronate, Risedronate and Alendronate.  
 
So far there is no consensus on how to effectively prevent and treat osteoporosis associated with 
bone marrow transplantation.  As for steroid induced osteoporosis, the American College of 
Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Glucocorticoid- Induced Osteoporosis recommends 
obtaining a baseline measurement of bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and/or hip when initiating long -term (i.e., in a dose  of 5 mg/day or higher for more than 3 months) glucocorticoid 
therapy with longitudinal follow ups.  The committee also recommends bisphosphonates used in such patients in conjunction with calcium and vitamin D supplementation for the prevention of 
osteoporosis (8).  Such consensus has not been tested in cancer patients receiving BMT.  
 
Although there are known risk factors of osteoporosis associated with bone marrow transplantation and the subsequent immunosuppressive treatment, guidelines for the preventio n 
and effective treatment of bone loss in this high risk population are lacking. Data on whether therapy for osteoporosis treatment or prevention initiated around the time of the transplantation 
reduces fracture risk after transplantation is limited.  Bisp hosphonates, in particular, suppress 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 4  
bone resorption for up to 12 months after discontinuation of therapy.  Transplantation with 
immediate addition of bisphosphonates may prevent the accelerated bone resorption that develops 
immediately after transplantation and could theoretically mitigate post -transplant bone loss.  
Moreover, anti -resorptive therapy clearly increased bone mineral density and reduces fracture in 
other populations, including patients undergoing solid organ transplant.  Given such, this proposal 
is designed for the prevention of osteoporosis in this high risk population.  
 
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility  
 
The study eligibility requirements will include the following inclusion/exclusion criteria:  
 
3.1 Inclusion criteria:  
1) Age greater than or equal to 18 years.  
2) Patients with the diagnosis of hematologic malignancies  or hematological disorders , who 
are immediately post - allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.  
3) Female patients of childbearing potential (i.e. no hysterectomy, no loss of menses for 12 
consecutive mo nths), must be willing to use contraception.  
4) Negative pregnancy test in premenopausal patients.  
5) Patients with GVHD or infections can be entered only if they respond to treatment and 
become controlled.  
 
6) Dental considerations: patients with negative dental s creening for jaw osteonecrosis 0 -3 
months prior to their transplant and patients that do not have  a plan for  tooth extraction in 
the near future.  
 
3.2 Exclusion criteria:  
1) Patients with documented relapsed malignancy  or recurrence of the original 
hematological disorder  after the transplant, uncontrolled acute GVHD, or uncontrolled 
infection.  
2) Patients with hypocalcemia of less than 8.4 (corrected to account for the albumin level).  
3) Patients with hypercalcemia >12.2, due to a cause not related to their hematologica l 
malignancy  or hematological disorder  (i.e. hyperparathyroidism, multiple myeloma).  
4) Hypersensitivity to Ibandronate or other bisphosphonates.  
5) Pre-existing osteoporosis, defined as a bone density T -score of –2.5 S.D. or less.  
6) Renal insufficiency (calculated creatinine clearance < 30 ml/min). 
7) Patients already on bisphosphonates (over the past two years), calcitonin, anabolic 
steroids, or daily oral fluoride supplement.  
8) Myeloma patients who have previously been on bisphosphonates over the past two years 
and/o r have active bone lesions.  
9) If corrected calcium is above 10.3 and the iPTH is elevated or normal, the patient will be excluded from the study.   
10) Patients with a 25 -hydroxyvitamin D concentration <20 ng/ml and evidence of 
osteomalacia (low ionized c alcium and elevated intact PTH).  
11) Patients with recent tooth extraction with signs of incomplete healing or infection will be 
excluded.   
 
4.0 Treatment/study  Plan  
 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 5  
Patients who had hematological malignancies or hematological disorders  and underwent 
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation are eligible to participate i n the study.  Members of the 
research team  
will enroll eligible patients who meet the inclusion criteria in the study after obtaining agreement 
of their transplant physician.  Patients with GVHD or infect ions can be entered only if they 
respond to treatment and become controlled.   
 As part of standard care for pre- BMT work up, all patients will have their 25(OH) Vit D levels 
checked.  Patient with vitamin D deficiency (< 20 ng/ml) will be supp lemented to adequate level 
(>= 2 0 ng/ml).  
 
Patients will then be randomized into the following two groups: 1) treatment:  Ibandronate 3 mg 
intravenously over 15- 30 seconds for 4 doses at 0- 1.5, 3, 6, and 9 months free of charge; or 2) 
control: Patients will only recei ve daily oral calcium and vitamin D supplements.  Patient’s prior 
vitamin D supplement status will be considered as one of the randomization factor.  After 
entering the trial, all patients will receive 500 mg of elemental calcium carbonate and Vitamin D 
Analog 400 IU orally twice daily for 12 months to be taken at home during the trial.  Patients who 
do not tolerate the calcium pills provided by the trial are allowed to take another brand of calcium/vitamin D at home as tolerated with equivalent dosing.   Patients who are still on weekly 
Ergocalciferol have the option of holding their daily vitamin D 400 IU twice daily and must 
resume the daily vitamin D when they are off the weekly Ergocalciferol.  
 
BMD at lumbar spine, femoral neck and total hip will be dete rmined at baseline (up to 3 months 
prior to the transplant or prior to the enrollment) , 6, 12 months (+/ - 4 weeks) post transplants for 
all patients in both groups by DEXA at MDACC.  The change of BMD between baseline and 12 
months in both Ibandronate trea tment and control groups will be summarized and analyzed for 
statistical significance.   
 The members of the research team  will collect data and/or blood for the following:  
1. Bone turnover marker, the serum CTX will be measure d at baseline, 3, 6, and 12 m onths (+/ - 4 
weeks)  
 
2. Routine laboratory monitoring includes calcium, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, 
and creatinine at baseline and at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months (+/ - 4 weeks) post -transplant.  
 
3. Other factors affecting bone metabolism will be me asured which include 25(OH) Vit D and 
intact PTH levels at baseline (as part of pre- transplant workup, or prior to the enrollment ) and at 
the end of the trial. If a patient was found to have vitamin D deficiency 3 months  prior to the 
transplant and if a pa tient had  been on weekly  Ergocalciferol supplement, the patient will be 
eligible for this study and their vitamin D supplementation status will be considered as one of the randomization factor .  Patient had prior Ergocalciferol supplement are randomized to  either 
treatment or control group  following the stratum 1 of the Randomization Scheme, Appendix F.  
Patients with no prior Ergocalciferol supplement  are randomized according to the stratum 2 of the 
Randomization Scheme, Appendix F.  
 Sex hormones will be m easured at the baseline ( -/+ 8 weeks) and the 12 months ( -/+ 8 weeks) 
(Testosterone or Estradiol, FSH and LH).  Female patients who have documented laboratory  
values indicating postmenopausal state prior to the study entry will not be required to have new 
level s drawn. Female patients whose sex hormone levels showing menopausal state at baseline 
will not have repeat sex hormone study at the end of the trial.   Serum for future research will also 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 6  
be collected and banked at baseline and at 3, 6, 9, 12 months post transplant  for measurement s of 
cytokines and antibodies  involved in the metabolism of the bone and the development of GVHD 
after the trial.   Examples of future  cytokine measurements may include:  Osteoprotegrin (OPG), 
TNFa, Interleukin- 6, GM -CSF, and IG F-1.   
 
4. Incidenc e of fractures will be radiologically confirmed and compared between the two groups. 
Graft rate will be collected at 12 months for both groups  and analyzed for statistical difference.  
 
5.  Data collection for the pharmaco -economic benefi t model includes drug and administration 
costs via patient medical record databases and MDA Cost Accounting System. 
 
 
 
Table 1:  Summary of Treatment/study Plan  
 
Assessments  1 month  
(21-45 days ) 3 months  6 months  9 months  12 months  
Medicine (IV)  x x x x  
DEXA  
 (bone mineral density)  x  x  x 
Serum CTX  x x x  x 
Routine lab :  
Ca, Mg, albumin, Cr, Alk 
phos  x x x x x 
25 (OH)VitD,  intact PTH,
  x    x 
Sex Hormones  
Testosterone or Estradiol, 
FSH and LH (blinded and 
banked)  x    x 
Serum collection for future  
testing may include the 
following examples:  
Osteoprotegrin (OPG), 
TNFa, Interleukin- 6, GM -
CSF, IGF -1 (Banked)  x x x x x 
Graft rate and Fracture rate      x 
 
 
5.0 Statistical Consideration  
 
This is a randomized phase III trial to determine whether the use of Ibandronate significantly 
decreases the amount of bone loss in patients with BMT, compared to those in the control group.  Patients will be equally randomized to control or treat ment groups at baseline  All transplant 
patients will receive oral calcium 500  mg and vitamin D 400 IU twice daily throughout the trial.  
 The primary endpoint is the percent reduction in bone mineral density (BMD) of the lumbar 
spine, femoral neck, and total hip measured at 12 month relative to baseline, which we denote 
here as Diff _BMD.  Assuming that the mean Diff_BMD is 12% decrease in the control group and 
is 0.1% in the treatment (Ibandronate) group, a maximum of 120 patients (60 patients per group) 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 7  
will be needed in order to have an 80% power to detect this difference at a two -sided significance 
level of 0.05, assuming a common standard deviation of 0.23. Assuming a drop- out rate of 40% 
for the patients due to mortality and relapse in the first year, a maximum of 200 patients will be 
enrolled into the study. The total accrual pe riod will be 20 months, with 10 patients enrolled per 
month.   
 
Two interim analyses are planned for the primary endpoint of the percent reduction in BMD 
between baseline and 12 months, when 40 and 80 patients have been accrued into the study and 
followed for one year, respectively.  A Lan -DeMets spending function with O’Brian- Fleming 
stopping boundaries has been assumed. The two- sided Z -score cut -off values for rejecting the null 
hypothesis are +/ - 3.71 and +/ - 2.51 for the two interim looks, respectively.  
 
The change of BMD between baseline and 12 months will be summarized by treatment and 
control groups. Data will be transformed as appropriate to satisfy the normality assumption. A 
two-sample t -test on the transformed data or Wilcoxon rank -sum test will be performed to 
compare the two groups in terms of percent change of BMD from baseline to 12 months. 
 
The change of BMD between baseline and 6 months will also be summarized and the percent 
change in BMD over time will be plotted for all patients and by tr eatment group, respectively. A 
linear mixed -effect model will be fit for the data set to investigate if there is a treatment effect at 
different time points and if the pattern of BMD change over time differs between two groups.  
Similar analysis will also be performed for graft rate, serum C-telopeptide (CTX)  measured over 
time, as well as for cytokines associated with bone loss. The incidence rate of fracture will be 
estimated for each arm and will be compared between the two arms using Fisher’s exact test . 
 
The change of BMD between baseline and 12 months will also be summarized for patients with and without additional steroid treatment for GVHD after allogeneic bone marrow transplant 
separately. Wilcoxon rank sum test will be used to assess the difference in BMD change between 
patients with and without prolonged steroid and other immunosuppressant use for the treatment of 
GVHD, either in all patients or by treatment group.  A multiple linear model will be fit for the 
BMD at 12 months, adjusting for baselin e BMD and using steroid doses in GVHD, treatment as 
well as steroid use in GVHD and treatment interaction as predictors.  
 
We will summarize the change of BMD between baseline and 12 months by disease type (i.e., 
hematological malignancies vs. hematological  disorders). Wilcoxon rank sum test will be used to 
assess the difference in BMD change between patients with hematological malignancies and those with hematological disorders.  A multiple linear model will be fit for the BMD at 12 
months, using baseline B MD, disease type, treatment arm, as well as the interaction between 
disease type and treatment as covariates. The fitted model will help us address the question whether or not the treatment effect is similar in these two disease types.  
 Based on already published data (9) on risk of skeletal -related events (SRE) with ibandronate, 
modeling will be conducted to determine cost -effectiveness ratio of cost per SRE avoided, with 
sensitivity analysis.  Costs will include the potential cost of treating for SREs and the potential 
cost of treat ing adverse events due to i.v. I bandronate.  One -way sensitivity analysis varying the 
key assumption (SRE relative risk reduction rate from 0% to 50% in 5% intervals) over the base case will be conducted to determine if it might  impact the cost -effectiveness ratio.   
 Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio (ICER):   
 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 8  
1. (Cost treatment - Cost control) _____________________________  
(#SREs treatment  - #SREs control) 
 
2. (Cost treatment - Cost control) _____________________________  
(Mont hs free of SREs treatment  – Months free of SREs control) 
 
 
TreeAge Pro 2007 by TreeAge Software Inc., will be utilized for the cost -effectiveness 
calculations.  The analysis will compute per -patient costs and benefits for the 12 month study 
period, followi ng an intent -to-treat approach, and produce a cost -effectiveness ratio.  The primary 
outcomes are incremental cost per percent of reduction in BMD and incremental cost per patient 
within one or two SD of normal BMD.   
 
 
 
Two Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratios (ICER) will be calculated:  
 
1. (Cost treatment - Cost control) _____________________________  
(%BMD reduction treatment  - % BMD reduction control) 
 
2. (Cost treatment - Cost control) _____________________________  
(#Patients with normal BMD treatment  - #Patients with normal BMD control) 
 
 
5.1 Data and Protocol Management  
A standard procedure to ensure participant confidentiality will be established.  Personal 
identification information will be kept confidential and will be available only to the PI and 
relevant study stuff.  The study database will also be kept confidential and will be password 
protected.  The results of this study will be reported by group results only and no individual 
results will be reported.  
 
5.2 Safety Monitoring  
In addition, a safety monitoring rule will be implemented using the method of Thall, Simon and 
Estey (1995, 1996). We define the adverse event (AE) as “the percent reduction in BMD is 
greater than or equal to 15% from baseline to 6 months” and denote its probability as p.  The trial 
will be stopped if, for any arm, there is more than 95% chance that p is greater than 30%, ie, stop 
the trial if Prob (p >20% | data) > 0.95. For each arm, assuming a beta (1, 1 ) prior and applying 
the above stopping rule when every 10 patients have been t reated and evaluated after 1 -year 
follow -up, the stopping boundaries  are as follows:  The trial will be stopped if for any one of the 
two arms, [# patients with AE] / [# patients evaluated at 6  months] >=6/10, 10/20, 14/30, 17/40, 
21/50, 24/60.   
Osteonecro sis, primarily in the jaw, has been reported in patients treated with bisphosphonates. 
Most cases have been in cancer patients undergoing dental procedures, but some have occurred in patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis or other diagnoses. All patient s will have dental 
screening for jaw osteonecrosis at baseline and every 6 months thereafter.  Patients with recent 
tooth extraction and signs of incomplete healing and/or uncontrolled infection will be excluded.  
During the trial, any dental condition should be treated immediately but conservatively, avoiding 
any invasive surgical procedure.  
 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 9  
5.3    Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR)  Reporting    
 
All suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR) must be reported to Roche.  Any 
adverse event that is both serious and unexpected (SUSAR), as defined in, and in accordance with 
the time frame indicated in 21 CFR Part 312.  Adverse events will be deemed unexpected if not 
identified in the Safety Reference Document for Compound® (FDA app roved Package Insert / 
Investigator’s Brochure), and must be reported by the principal investigator to FDA and Roche by 
telephone or by fax.  For fatal or life -threatening SUSARs, principal investigator must notify 
FDA within 7 calendar days of becoming aw are of the event. The initial report must be 
followed by a completed FDA Form 3500A MedWatch Report faxed to FDA within 15 calendar 
days  of becoming aware of the event.  For Non- fatal/life -threatening SUSARs, principal 
investigator should notify FDA by fax using FDA Form 3500A MedWatch Report within 15 
calendar days  of becoming aware of the event. The completed FDA Form 3500 Medwatch 
Report should be simultaneously transmitted by fax directly  to Roche Pharma Development 
Medical Safety Central Operations (PD MS-COps) using the Roche Supported Trials Safety Fax 
Cover Sheet.  PDMS COps faxes receipt acknowledgement and MCN (Manufacture Control Number) to site.  The responsible Institutional Review Board should be notified in accordance with Good Clinical Practic e and all local laws and institutional regulations.  If a SUSAR occurs 
within the context of a multi- center clinical trial, the principle investigator must provide a copy of 
the completed FDA Form 3500A to all participating investigators within the timelin es outlined 
above .  The MedWatch form can be accessed at:  
http:/www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/MedWatch/.  
 
 
 
 
Contact Information:  
 FDA:  
 MEDWATCH  
5600 Fishers Lane  
Rockville, MD 20852- 9787  
Fax:  1- 800-FDA- 0178 (1- 800-332-0178)   
 
Roche:  
Pharma Development  Medical Safety Central Operations (PDMS – COps)     
Fax: 011 -44-1707 -373793  
 
The principal investigator will provide Roche PDMS COps with subsequent follow -up 
information as soon as it becomes available using the Roche Supported Trials Safety Fax Cover 
Sheet. The coversheet must have the Manufacturer Control Number (MCN) associated with the 
SUSAR, provided by PDMS COps upon receipt of the FDA Form 3500A MedWatch Report, and ensure that the follow -up box is checked. Roche may conduct an independent assessment of the 
SUSAR(s) and in such circumstances the principal investigator and participating institution will 
provide any additional information required to complete the assessment.  
 
5.4     Benefit  
 
Bone marrow transplantation is performed with increasing fre quency and success, with the 
majority of patients surviving for many years.  In this context, bone loss is a common and serious 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 10  
post-transplant complication.  Bone loss, occurs early and most rapidly during the first three to 
six months after the transplantation, and is often more severe at the femoral neck.  This study will 
address the issue of whether bisphosphonates given immediately following the transplant can 
prevent the early bone loss.   Since bone loss is tightly correlated with the fracture risk, early 
prevention of bone loss potentially prevent the fracture later in patient’s life.   
 
We plan on presenting our findings at national and international meetings and publishing these in peer-reviewed journals.  This work will contribute to the managemen t of post -transplant bone loss 
and may facilitate other intervention studies to address such issues.  
  
 
5.5    Home Care  
 Patients in treatment group receive Ibandronate once every three months.  If the patient is 
unable to receive it at MD Anderson, the P I or PI designated personnel will contact the 
patient's home MD directly to have the infusion done in their office.  
 
6.0 References  
 
1. Gandhi, M.K., Lekamwasam, S., Inman, I, Kaptoge, S., Sizer, L. Love, S., Bearcroft, 
P.W., Milligan, T.P., Price, C.P., Marcus, R.E., Comston, J.E. (2003).  Significant and 
persistent loss of bone mineral density in the femoral neck after hematopoietics stem cell 
transplantation: long -term follow - up of a prospective study.  Br J Haematol.  121(3):462-
8. 
2. Buchs, N., Helg, C., Collao, C., Chapuis, B., Slosman, D., Bonjour, J.P., Rizzoli, R. 
(2001). Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is associated with a preferential femoral 
neck bone loss.  Osteoporos Int. 12(10):880- 6. 
3. Tauchmanova, L., Serio, B., Del Puente, A., Ristano, A.M., Esposito, A., De Rosa, G., 
Lombardi, G., Colao, A., Rotoli, B., Selleri, C. (2002).  Long- lasting bone damage 
detected by dual -energy x -ray absorptiometry, phalangeal osteosonogrammetry, and in 
vitro growth of marrow stromal cells after allogeneic stem cell t ransplantation.  J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 87(11):5050- 65 
4. Schute, C., Beelen, D., Schaefer, U., Mann, K. (2000).  Bone loss in long -term survivors 
after transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells: a prospective study.  Osteoporos Int.   
11:344- 53. 
5. Tauchmano va, L., Selleri, C., Esposito, M., Do Somma, C., Orio, F. Jr, Bifulco, G., 
Palomba, S., Lombardi, G., Rotoli, B., Colao, A. (2003).  Beneficial treatment with 
risedronate in long -term survivors after allogeneic stem cell transplantation for 
hematological m alignancies.  Osteoporos Int .  14(12):1013- 9. 
 6. Grigg, A.P., Shuttleworth J, Reynolds, A.P., Szer J., Bradstock K., Hui C.,  Hermann R.,  
 and Ebeling P.R.  (2006)  Pamidronate Reduces Bone Loss after Allogeneic Stem Cell  
 Transplantation.  J Clin Endoc rinol Metab 91: 3835- 3843.   
7. Guay, D.R. (2006).  Ibandronate, an experimental intravenous bisphosphonate for 
osteoporosis, bone metastases, and hypercalcemia of malignancy.  Pharmacotherapy.   
26(5):655- 73. 
8. American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Glucocorticoid -Induced 
Osteoporosis.  (2001). Arthritis Rheum . 44:1496.  
9. Body J.J., Diel I.J., Lichinitser, et al. (2003).  Intravenous ibandronate reduces the 
incidence of skeletal complications in patients with breast cancer and bone metastases.  
Annal s of Oncology. 14:1399- 1405. 
  
Protocol# 2006- 0960 
March 8, 2010-  Revised  
Page 11  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  