Stepping Into Survivorship: Harnessing Behavioral Economics to 
Improve Quality of Life in Ovarian Cancer  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Version: January 3, 2018  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
1 
 
  
 
Section 1: Protocol Schema  
 
 
 
  

Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
2 
 
 SECTION 2: Body of Protocol  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 BACKGROUND AND  RATIONALE……………………………………………… ……. …………….……… .…….3  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES…………………………………………………………………………………………………… .…....4  
 
3.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT SELECTION  
3.1 Eligibility Criteria………………………………………………………………………… …...………………… .…….4  
3.2 Exclusion Criteria……………………………………………………………………………… ……………………...4  
 
4.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT ENTR Y 
4.1 Subject Recruitment and Enrollment… …………………………………………………………………………… ...5 
4.2 Subject Registration and Randomization………………………………………………………… ………………...5  
 
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
5.1 Design/Study Type…………………………………………………………………………………………… ……….6 
5.2 Selection of Ins truments……………………………………………………………………………………….... .......6 
5.3 Description of Interventions…………………………………………………………………………………… …....10 
5.4 Data Collection………………………………………………………………………………………………… …….12 
5.5 Description of Study Process…………………………………………………………………………………... .....12 
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Their Management………………………………………………………………… …….16 
 
6.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS…………………………………………………………………………………………..17  
 
7.0 REFERENCES……………………………………………………………………………………………………….20  
 
8.0 APPENDICES………………………………………………………………………………………………………. .23 
 
  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
3 
 
 1.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
The transition from active treatment to survivorship is one of the most challenging periods for ovarian 
cancer survivors.1 After completing intensive surgery and chemotherapy, survivors often transition to a 
surveillance period without further treatment and limited contact with their oncology team. Many survivors 
struggle to reintegrate into their “normal” lives, and  experience high rates of physical and emotional distress, 
fatigue, anxiety, and unmet needs due to disease - and treatment -related sequelae.2,3  
 Exercise has been shown to improve quality of life (QOL), fatigue, and mood, while reducing the risk of 
disease recurrence and cancer -related mortality in several cancers.4-7 In ovarian cancer, observational 
studies have documented associations between exercise and improved QOL,8-10 but studies have been 
limited by a reliance upon pa rticipants’ retrospective recall of activity levels and an inability to examine 
causality. Only 20% of survivors meet national guidelines for recommended levels of physical activity and 
40% report a drop in exercise in the year after diagnosis.11 Ovarian cancer survivors repor t an interest in 
participating in home -based, walking programs to increase physical activity.12 To date, however, few 
randomized trials have tested exercise interventions in ovarian cancer.11 We recently completed a pilot study 
of wearable accelerometers in ovar ian cancer patients at Dana -Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI).  Although 
increasing physical activity was not a primary endpoint, participants were enthusiastic about using wearable 
devices and spontaneously increased their step counts over a 3 -week period (3520 vs. 4374). These finding 
suggest that s martphone -based interventions coupled with wearable devices may offer a low -cost, scalable 
strategy to increase physical activity in patients with ovarian cancer.  
Smartphone -based health interventions have demon strated efficacy in  achieving sustained behavior 
change in contexts ranging from smoking cessation to physical activity,13-17 particularly when combined with  
insights from behavioral economics. Recently, Patel et al. (co -I) randomized healthy participants to a control 
group or a mobile health intervention that comb ined gamification (e.g., the use of non -financial micro -
incentives like points, levels, and badges)18,19 and social incentives (e.g., collaboration, accountability, and 
peer support) to increase physical activity. During the 3 -month study, participants in the intervention arm 
achieved physical activity goals at significantly greater rates (53% vs. 32%; P<0.001) compared with controls, 
and averaged nearly 1000 steps more per day (P<0.001).20 Differences persisted during the 3 -month fol low-
up period after the intervention ended (44% vs. 33%; P<0.001), suggesting that the behavior change may 
have been sustained through the strengthening of existing social networks. It is unclear whether this strategy 
can be successfully applied in less he althy populations, including cancer patients, to increase physical 
activity.  
We propose a study  to evaluate the efficacy of a social support -based gamification intervention vs. 
control to increase physical activity in ovarian cancer survivors. Prior to launching a full -scale RCT, we propose 
a 20-ovarian cancer survivor  + partner run-in phase of the social support -based gamification intervention to 
ensure the interventions’ feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness . Participants in the social 
support -based gamification intervention will choose a partner (family/friend) with whom to set collaborative 
physical activity goals and receive automated feedback through an NIH -funded software platform called Way to 
Health.21 All participants , including partners,  will use wearable devices to passively collect physical activity 
data. After completion of the 20 patient + partner run -in phase, we will test the the effi cacy of the  social 
support -based gamification intervention vs. contro l in 148  ovarian cancer survivors’ daily steps (primary 
outcome) and QOL , anxiety , and health care utilization  (secondary outcomes) at baseline, 14 and 26 weeks.  
 
  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
4 
 
 2.0 OBJECTIVES  
Preliminary Analysis  (20 ovarian cancer survivors + partners run -in) 
Objective:  To assess the feasibility and  acceptability of a gamification intervention designed to leverage social 
incentives and a wearable accelerometer in 20 survivors  + partners . 
• Hypot heses:  It will be feasible to recruit and retain participants and to deliver the intervention.  
• Hypothesis: Participants will perceive the intervention as acceptable , and effective in increasing 
their activity levels.  
Final Analysis  (RCT with 148 ovarian cancer survivors and 74 partners)  
Objective: To evaluate the effectiveness of a modified game -based intervention designed to enhance social 
incentives in increasing physical activity relative to control.  
• Hypothesis:  The game -based i ntervention will increase physical activity at 14 weeks compared with 
a wearable device.  
• Hypothesis:  The relative differences in activity between groups will persist at 26 weeks.  
Objective : To evaluate the effectiveness of a game -based intervention design ed to enhance social incentives 
in improving ovarian cancer survivors’ quality of life and mental health relative to control.  
• Hypothesis:  Participants in the game -based intervention arm will report significantly better quality of 
life and lower rates of anxiety or depression at 14 and 26 weeks, compared to those with a wearable 
device.  
A preliminary analysis will be conducted after the 20 -patient run -in of the intervention. The final analysis will 
take place after all patients have completed the study. The final analysis will exclude patients from the run -in 
phase, since this group of patients  will not undergo randomization.   
 
3.0 RESEARCH S UBJECT SELECTION  
 
3.1 Eligibility Criteria   
Patients will be eligible if they have newly diagnosed ovarian cancer and are ≤3 months of completing 
chemotherapy, read English, and do not have cognitive or visual impairments that would preclude participation.  
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Patients  will be excluded if they are already participating in an mHealth intervention, are unable to 
ambulate, do not have a smartphone to transmit data from the wearable tracker , or are unable to select a 
partner with a smartphon e to transmit data from the wearable tracker . 
 
 
 
 
4.0 RESEARCH SUBJECT ENTRY  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
5 
 
  
4.1 Subject Recruitment  and Enrollment  
 
4.11 Screening  & Recruitment  
Prior to obtaining informed consent, study staff will review the electronic medical records of patients  
who may meet eligibility criteria. These patients’ medical records will only be reviewed to confirm this 
protected health information (PHI), and it will only be shared with providers in the context of patients’ 
eligibility for the study.  
When an eligible pati ent is identified, study staff will contact the patient’s oncology provider to confirm 
she meets the eligibility criteria and to request permission to approach the patient to introduce the study. If 
the oncology provider deems the patient ineligible or too  distressed to participate in  a clinical study at this 
time, the patient will not be approached for inclusion.  
PHI will not be shared with anyone outside of the study team and patients’ oncology providers. All 
emails will be sent within the Partners firewall ; emails containing PHI that are sent outside the Partners 
firewall will be sent via  the HIPAA -compliant  “send secure .” A HIPAA waiver requesting permission to 
review the PHI of these select , potentially eligible  patients prior to consent during sc reening and 
recruitment has been submitted to justify this process.  
If the patient is approved to approach for enrollment, the research assistant (RA) will coordinate with 
the oncology provider to meet with the patient to discuss the study at the time of h er clinic visit.  
 
4.12 Informed Consent  
If a patient agrees  to learn more about the study, the RA will describe the study, review the consent 
form, answer any questions , and provide her  contact information. The RA will encourage patients  to take 
their time in deciding whether they want to participate in the study or not.  
If a patient  is interested in participating, the RA will obtain informed consent within the Way to Health 
platform, as in several other IRB -approved studies throughout th e United States  (e.g. University of 
Pennsylvania, Framingham Coho rt), in order to ensure that they are properly informed about the data being 
collected from the accelerometers and by the platform.  The partners of patients will also provide in -app 
consent v ia Way to Health. The text of the in -app informed consent is included as the single  informed 
consent form  for this study . 
If a patient is unsure if she would like to participate in the study, they will be offered the consent form to 
review and the contact information of study staff.  If no contact is made after a few days, t he RA will contact  
the patient . If the patient  decide s to participate, the patient  will enter the informed consent  process  along 
with a partner of their choosing . If a patient is not inte rested, the RA will thank her for considering, reassure 
the patient  that the process will have no  impact  on her care. No further interactions will occur with patients  
who either decline or prove ineligible for the study.  Patients will not be contacted afte r three unreturned 
voicemails.  
 
4.2 Subject Registration  and Randomization  
 
A member of the study team will register eligible patients  enrolled at Dana -Farber in the Clinical Trials 
Management  System (CTMS) OnCore. In order to minimize workflow disruptions for this social/behavioral 
protocol  because the intervent ion will typically begin immediately after informed consent , registrations will 
occur retrospectively (as per DF/HCC SOP REGIST -101a)  within 10 days of study enrollment  if possible . An 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
6 
 
 investigator will confirm eligibility criteria and a member of the study team will complete the protocol -specific 
eligibility checklist.  
 
As in the other  supportive care interventional trial currently underway in our research group  (DF/HCC 
Protocol 16 -477), the study team will r egister and r andomize applicable patients, rather than ODQ  doing so, 
because the intervent ion will typically begin immediately after informed consent. Randomization will be 
performed using a 1:1 ratio using a computer -generated random allocation sequence with blocks of 4 in order 
to maintain balance between study arms over time . Please refer to the protocol schema for details.  
 
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
5.1 Design/St udy Type  
 
We will enroll twenty ovarian cancer survivors and their partners (i.e. family member or friend) in a single -arm 
run-in of the accelerometer + gamification + social support intervention. Next, 148 consecutive patients who 
meet inclusion criteria will be randomized to one of two arms:  accelerometer only (arm 1), or accelerometer + 
gamification + social support (arm 2).  
After the first twenty patients complete the intervention, we will conduct a preliminary analysis  (n=20)  to assess 
our aims of feas ibility, acceptability, and perceived effectiveness.  
After all patients complete the study requirements, we wil l assess effectiveness outcomes  of physical activity, 
quality of life and mental health for patients randomized to the con trol arm and intervent ion arm of the study 
(n=148).  We will  exclude patients from the run -in phase from the final analysis since these patients will not 
undergo randomization. Our final analyses will provide preliminary estimat es of feasibility, acceptability, safety 
outcomes, scale scores, missing data, and participant  and physician feedback.  
5.2 Selection of Instruments  
 
5.21 Interviews and Surveys  
The following measures will be used in the study interviews and surveys , including the Participant 
Baseline Interview  (Appendix B ) and Participant Post -Baseline Interview  (Appendix C ).  
 
5.21a Global Health Status: EQ-5D-5L 
The EQ -5D is a standardized measurement of health status that has been used in a wide range of 
health conditions and treatments , includin g cancer patient populations .22 The EQ -5D-5L is the most  
recent 5 -level version that has proven validity and reliability in a range of patient g roups with chronic 
diseases23 and cancer .24 It is a 5 -item questionnaire (measuring mobility, self -care, usual activities,  
pain/discomfor t, and anxiety/ depression . Each dimension has three  levels of perceived problems: 1) no 
problems, 2) slight problems, 3) moderate problems 4) severe problems, and 5) extreme problems. 
Patients check the statement level that best describes their current health status in each dimension, 
which are then scored  to generate a patient’s unique health state. In the EQ -VAS, patients report a 
single index value of how good or bad their current health state is on a visual scale that ranges from 
worst imaginable at zero to best imaginable at one hundred. The EQ -5D-5L can be administered with 
little to no guidance and takes on ly a few minutes to complete . Upon scoring, the EQ -5D produces a 
composite score between 0 -1 (multiplied by 100 to generate a number between 0 -100), which 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
7 
 
 represents general health status, normalized for the US population .25 Lower scores represent worse 
quality of life, and a change of ≥6 is clinically significant in US ca ncer populations.26 
 
5.21b. Patient and Caregiver Anxiety and Depressive symptoms (HADS)  
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Sc ale (HADS) is a 14-item scale,27 measuring symptoms of 
anxiety and depression, which has been validated for screening for emotion al distress in cancer 
patients .28 A score of ≥8 indicates significant symptoms of anxiety or depression with goo d sensitivity 
and specificity.29 
 
5.21c Performance Status: ECOG PS  
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Perform ance Status (PS) assessment is a 
standard measurement that oncologists  often use  to assess a patient’s current functional level and 
eligibility for clinical trials. The scale ranges from 0 to 5 and the criteria for each grade is as follows: 0 = 
Fully activ e, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction; 1 = Restricted in physically 
strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light 
house work, office work; 2 = Ambulatory and capable o f all self-care but unable to carry out any work 
activities; up and about more than 50% of waking hours; 3 = Capable of only limited self-care; confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours; 4 = Completely disabled; cannot carry on any self-care; 
totally confine d to bed or chair; 5 = Dead .30  
The ECOG PS will allow clinicians  and participants to provide a standard evaluation of the 
participant’s performance status over time and with minimal bu rden. Participants will use the patient  
self-report version that has been used successfully in a study with ca ncer patients .31 We expect that it 
will take 1 -2 minutes to answer the question.   
 
5.21d Literacy Measures : Health Literacy and Numeracy  
Health literacy32 and numeracy  will be collected for all participants at baseline. We estimate that it 
will take participants  approximately 5 minutes to complete  all of the literacy measures . 
 
5.21e Demographic  Information  
Basic demographic information will be collected for all participants , including: age, marital status, 
race/ethnicity, education, household structure, income, and employment. The questions will only take a 
few minutes to complete.  
 
5.21f Self -reported Health Care Utilization  
Patients will be asked to self -report visits to their primary care doctors, oncologists, and other 
specialists during the time in which they are participating in the study using a validate d medical event 
form (Appendix D ). In addition, they will self -report laboratory tests, radiographic imaging, emergency 
department visits, hospitalizations, and length of visit.  
 
 5.21g  PROMIS 29  
Health -related quality of life will be assessed using the PROMIS -29, a non -disease -specific 
measure.33 The PROMIS 29 is composed of eight subscales. Participants will complete the physical 
function, fatigue, sleep disturbance, social roles/activites, pain interference, and pain intensity 
subscal es. In order to reduce survey burden on participants, the subscales on anxiety and depression 
will be omitted, since these constructs are captured in the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
8 
 
  
 5.21h Social Support Survey  
The Social Support Survey instru ment is a brief, multi -dimensional measure developed for 
patients in the Medical Outcomes Study, a two -year survey developed for patients with chronic 
conditions.34 The survey consists of four functional support scales (emotional/informational, tangible, 
affectionate, and positive social interaction); a composite, overall functional social support index can be 
calculated from the subscale items. Each subscale is reliable (Cronbach’s alpha > 0.91) and stable 
over time.34 
 
 5.21i Brief COPE  
The Brief COPE is a 28 -item measure developed to assess a broad range of coping 
responses .35 The Brief COPE has been validated in several populations including breast cancer 
patients and community samples.35 Subscales of the Brief COPE include use of emotional support, 
religion, and self -distraction, and individual subscales can be u sed independently . The Brief COPE will 
be administered to patients during the participant baseline interview.  
 
5.21j Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy/Gyne cologic Oncology Group -Neurotoxi city 
Questionnaire (FACT/GOG -NTx)  
 The Functional Assessment of  Cancer Therapy/Gynecologic Oncology Group -Neurotoxicity 
(FACT/GOG -Ntx) questionnaire assesses concerns associated with chemotherapy -induced 
neuropathy, and evaluates the impact of neuropathy on health -related quality of life.36 The FACT/GOG -
Ntx has been shown to be reliable and valid, and has been used in gynecologic and ovarian cancer 
patients .36,37 FACT/GOG -Ntx is included in the Functional Asessment of Chronic Illness Therapy 
(FACIT) Measurement System , a collection of health -related quality -of-life measures t argeted to 
chronically ill patients.  
 
5.21k NCCN FACT Ovarian Symptom Index -18 (NFOSI -18) 
 Symptom burden will be assessed using the NFOSI -18, a clinically -meaningful, ovarian cancer -
specific index reflec ting the symptoms rated as highest priority by clinical experts and women with 
ovarian cancer .38 The NFOS I-18 has high content validity39 and is reliable.40 
 
5.21l Herth Hope Index  
We will assess patients’ and caregivers’ hope using the Herth Hope Index, an abbreviated  
instrument used to assess hope in adults in clinical settings .41 The HHI is a twelve -item scale scored on 
an ord inal Likert -format scale from 1 to 4, where a score of 1 indicates “strongly disagree” and a score 
of 4 indicates “strongly agree.” The HHI is both reliable (alpha coefficient = 0.97) and valid .42 The HHI 
will be used  during the baseline and post -baseline interviews.  
 
5.21m Cancer Impact on Finances and Employment  
 The impact of cancer on  patients’ finances and employment will be assessed with three 
questions adapted from the Individualized Cancer Care study, which examined women’s breast cancer 
treatment e xperiences and decision making .43 Patients will be asked if they worked for pay during any 
of their treatment for ovarian cancer, how many days of work they have missed because of their cancer 
or cancer treatment, and about the financial impact of having cancer.  
 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
9 
 
 5.21n Assessment of Survivor Concerns  
 The Assessment of Survivor Concerns is a five -item questionnaire which measures fears about 
recurrence and health in cancer sur vivors.44 The ASC has high internal con sistency and validity, and is 
appropriate in both short -term and long -term survivor populations . 
 
5.21o Perceived Stress  Scale  
 The Perceived Stress Scale is a measure of the degree to which situations in an individual’s life 
are appraised as stressful .45 The Perceived Stress Scale has previously been used to assess global 
stress in cancer patient populations .46 A 4-item version of the scale will be used, in order to limit survey 
burden on participants.  
 
5.21p Cancer Self -Efficacy  
 Self-efficacy will be assessed by adapting items from the breast cancer self -efficacy scale  
(BCSC), a 12 -item measure with high reliability (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.89) and excellent content and 
construct validity.47 The BCSES assesses self -efficacy specifically in the context of cancer survivorship. 
Individual items will be modified to reflect ovarian cancer survivorship.  
 
5.21q Social Support and Exercise Survey  
The Social Support and Exercise Survey48 measures perceived social support specific to health -
related exercise behaviors. The measure specifically assesses the level of support individuals making 
health behavior changes, such as those suggested in this intervention (i.e exercise), felt they wer e 
receiving from family and friends.48 Separate assessment categories for “family” and “friends” will be 
combined into a single “family/friends ” column in order to account for variation in participants’ exercise 
partners.  
 
 5.21r Physical Activity Vital Sign  
The physical activity vital sign  (PAVS) is a clinical tool designed to  screen for physical activity in 
adults, which gauges adult moderate to vigorous physical activity levels.49 The PAVS consists of t wo 
questions: one asking how many days per week the subject engages in moderate to strenuous 
exercise, and the other asking for the number of minutes exercised each d ay. The product of these two 
numbers is used to calculate the total minutes per week of physical activity.  
 
 
5.22 Medical Chart Abstractions  
 
5.22a Health/Treatment Information  
Patients’  medical charts will be reviewed to abstract health and treatment related information, 
including  disease site,  comorbid health conditions , number of prior chemotherapy regi mens, and time 
since diagnosis.  
 
5.22b Call Log  
Per usual care, program nurses  in the Division of Gynecologic Oncology will docu ment participants’ 
phone calls with  clinical staff in participants’  electronic medical health records. Study staff will abstract 
information about these phone calls during a partic ipant’s enrollment . Data collected for each call will 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
10 
 
 include: date/time , incoming/outgoing, left message, reason for the call, symptoms documented, and 
the outcome . 
 
5.23 Six-Minute Walk Test  
 
The six -minute walk test50 is a measu re of functional capacity which measures the distance that a atient 
can quicky walk on a flat, hard surface in a period of six minutes. The self -paced six -minute walk test 
assesses the sub-maximal level of functional capacity.51 Because patients choose their own intensity of 
exercise, the six -minute walk test is a good proxy of the functional exercise level for daily physical 
activities since most ADLs are performed at sub -maximal levels of exertion.51 The six -minute walk test has 
excellent reliability and validity across a variety of populations, including geriatric and elderly  
populations .52 Patients will be asked to complete the six -minute walk test at baseline and post -baseline 
visits.  
 
5.24 Debriefing Interviews  
 Upon completion of the study requirements, patients and their partners will be asked to prov ide 
feedback on their experience in the intervention through a brief semi -structured interview. An interview guide is 
provided in Appendix F: Debriefing Interviews ; as is typical in semi -structured interviews, we may also explore 
additional themes that emerge over the course of the study and interviews. Debriefing interviews will be audio -
recorded (and transcribed if funds permit). R ecordings will be stored on secur e, HIPAA -compliant folders and 
in locked filing cabinets ; transcriptions will be performed locally at Dana -Farber or using a HIPAA -compliant 
transcription vendor . We will also debrief with referring clinicians/co -investigators on how to improve the study 
procedures.  
 
5.3 Description of Intervention s 
 
Participants in both the intervention and control arms of the study will receive a wearable accelerometer 
and their steps will be monitored passively by the Way to Health platform. In addition, p articipants in the 
intervention arm of the study will receive social support and gamification built into the Way to Health 
platform . 
 
5.31 Monitored Wearable A ccelerometer: Fitbit Charge 2  
 The Fitbit Charge  2 is an accelerometer that is worn on the wrist and tracks users’ heart rate 
continuously in addition to steps, distance, calories, and active minutes. The addition of an optimal heart 
rate sensor enables monitoring of the time that the tracker is being w orn (e.g., adherence).82, 83 Wrist -worn 
activity trackershave been shown to accurately measure heart rate when compared with 
electrocardiography,84, 85 have good test -retest reliability (intraclass correlations of 0.75 -0.95)81 but over 
count steps compared  with the gold standard ActivPAL in free -living conditions due to the variability in limb -
specific activities86 One of the advantages of the Fitbit Charge 2 is it allows for close monitoring of 
adherence to the device over time because of its continuous me asurement of heart rate. The 
disadvantages include: it is not as accurate as a hip -worn device,is dependent upon the user to recharge it 
every 3 days, and may be less accurate if the participant is dependent upon a device for ambulating (e.g., 
cane or walk er) or wears the device on her non -dominant arm. Data from the wearable accelerometer will 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
11 
 
 be monitored by the Way to Health Platfor m, and patients may also choose to view their steps though Fitbit  
app, which accompanies the accelerometers . 
 
5.32 Way to Health Platform  
The Way to Health platform is an automated information technology platform  developed at the 
University of Pennsylvania  that integrates wireless devices, clinical trial randomization and enrollment 
processes, messaging (text, e -mail or voice ), self -administered surveys, automatic transfers of financial 
incentives, and secure data capture for research purposes.21 Way to Health has been used  with patients in 
IRB-appro ved protocols  in prior b ehavioral intervention studies.59-61  The Way to Health platform will be 
used in both the control arm and interventional arm of our studies. In the control arm, patients will receive 
access to the Way to Health platform in order for the study team to receive their accelerometer data, and to 
process payments – however, none of the gamification features of the platform will be turned on for 
patients in the control arm. In the intervention arm, patients and their partners will have access to the Way 
to Health platform in order for the study team t o receive their accelerometer data and to process payments. 
Patients and their partners in the intervention arm will also have access to the gamification features of the 
Way to Health platform, as described in section 5.34. 
 
5.33 Control  
On Day 0, patients  in the control group will receive a wearable accelerometer  and the study’s research 
assistant will explain to them how to use the accelerometer . Control group participants will receive one 
follow -up phone call to resolve technical issues  (more if needed)  and will be contacted during the study if 
data is not being properly received or if they are nonadherent. Fitness tracker data will be monitored 
passively via the Way to Health Platform.  
 
5.34 Intervention   
 On Day 0, patients  receiving the intervention  will be given two wearable accelerometers, and the 
study’s research assistant will explain to them how to use the devices . Participants  will select a family 
member or friend to enhance social incentives by motivating the individual towards her goal by par ticipating 
in the intervention with them ,117 so the patient  will be asked to give the second fitness to a partner  with 
whom she wil l participate in the study.  After recording their steps passively for 2 weeks, patients  will be 
asked to set a step goal to i ncrease with their partner. The step goal should be of 33% to 50% higher than 
baseline or to choose their own goal (minimum ≥1500 steps greater than baseline).  Ovarian cancer 
survivors and their partners  will sign  a pre -commitment contract agreeing to try their best to achieve their 
daily step goal, which helps to motivate behavior change.62,63  Participants will also re ceive an exercise 
prescription ( Appendix E) which has been recommended in the care of midlife and older women64  and 
aims to motivate exercise behavior change .65  
At the start of each week, participants receive 70 points (10 for each day). Points are endowed to 
leverage loss aversion – a concept from prospect theory that reveals that individuals are more motivated by 
losses than gains.16 Each day participants are informed of their step count. If the step goal was achieved, 
they keep the points. However, each day the goal is not met, they are informed  that they lost 10 points. 
Points are replenished at the start of the week to levera ge the “fresh start effect.” Participants will be 
offered the opportunity to move up or down “levels” within the platform. At the end of the week, if the 
participant has ≥40 points, she will advance up one level. Levels include: blue (lowest), bronze, silver, gold, 
platinum (highest). If she has <40 points, she will drop down one level. This creates a sense of achievable 
goals (goal gradients) and longer -term loss avers ion.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
12 
 
  
5.4 Data Collection  
 
Table 1 specifies  the instrument  and intervention data collection timeline.  
Table 1. Instrument Data Collection  
 DAY  
Visit 
0 Visit 14 
wks Visit 
26 wks  INSTRUMENT  Participant Baseline Interview  ✓   
Participant Post -Baseline Interview   ✓ ✓ 
Six-Minute Walk Test  ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Debriefing Interview    ✓ 
Platform  Data    
 
Data obtained via i nterview s, survey s and chart abstractions will be stored on t he Harvard REDCap server  
and/or the Way to Health platform .  
 
Accelerometer  data will be stored with Way to Health. All Way to Health data is de -identified and stored in 
mySQL -based systems with appropriate information and environmental security, and de -identified data exports 
maintain data integrity and assures safeguards.  See se ction 5.55 for a detailed description of Way to Health’s 
data security and privacy measures.  
 
5.5 Description of Study Process  
 
5.51 Instrument Administration  
 
Participant Baseline Interview : 
• The RA will administer the survey to patients  via a guided  interview on Day 0 (Baseline Visit ). 
• Patients  will complete the interview  on the same day informed consent is obtained; if this is not 
possible, the RA and patient  will plan to complete it at a subsequent  clinic  visit or remotely . 
• Estimated time to completion: 45 minutes.  
 
Participant Post -Baseline Interview : 
• The RA will administer the interview  to patients , ideally  within +/ - 14 days of the projected assessment 
date (Post-Baseline Visit ). The flexible administration window accounts for variations in participants’  
schedules.  
• Estimated time to completion: 30 minutes.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
13 
 
 Chart Abstraction : 
• An RA will review patients’  medical charts to complete the chart abstractions  form at the time of 
participants’  baseline and post -baseline vis its.  
• Chart abstractions will , if possible, be completed within 10 days of participants’  study interviews . 
5.52 Intervention Administration   
5.52a Intervention Administration Overview  
The intervention will begin the day that a participant receives an accelerometer and enrolls in the study 
on the Way to Health platform. See the protocol schema for details.  
Control Arm : Participants assigned to the control arm will receive a wearable accelerometer and be 
enrolled in the Way to Health platform on “day 0.”  They will be asked to wear the wearable accelerometer daily 
for 14 weeks. Patients in the control arm will not receive social support or gamification in the Way to Health 
platform. Research assistants will be in contact with patients to resolve any technical issues they may be 
having and to address issues of nonadherence. At approximately 14 weeks after study enrollment, patients will 
be asked to complete an follow -up interview  (T1), be moved out of the “active intervention” phase and enter 
into the follow -up phase. During the follow -up phase, research assistants will be accessible for q uestions about 
technical issues. At approximately 26 weeks after study enrollment , patients will complete a second follow -up 
interview (T2) and their participation in the study will end.  
Intervention Arm:  Patients  assigned to the intervention arm will be enrolled in the Way to Health 
platform on “day 0.” They will receive two wearable accelerometers – one for themselves and one for a loved 
one – in order to leverage th e effects of social support on behavior change. Patients and their loved one will be 
asked to wear the wearable accelerometer daily for 14 weeks . Participants in the intervention arm will also be 
asked to sign a pre -commitment contract , receive an exercise  prescription,  receive “gamification” via the Way 
to Health platform, and select a step goal with their partner.  Research assistants will be in contact with patients 
to resolve any technical issues they may be having and to address issues of nonadherence. At approximately 
14 weeks after study  enrollment, patients will be asked to complete an follow -up interview (T1), be moved out 
of the “active intervention” phase and enter into the follow -up phase. During the follow -up phase, patients and 
their loved ones will still be able to access the Way to Health platform but the social support and gamification 
components  will be turned off . In follow -up, research assistants will be accessible for questions about technical 
issues and will monitor adherence via registered steps collected by Way to Health . At approximately 26 weeks 
after study enrollment, patients will complete a second follow -up interview (T2) and their participation in the 
study will end.  
 
5.52b Intervention Administration Timeline  
 
Baseline  
 
Instructional Session:  
• Study staff will instruct patients (and their partners, if applicable) on how to use the Way to Health 
Platform and fitness trackers , and assist patients in the initial setup of the new technology.  
 
Baseline Interview:  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
14 
 
 • Patients will be  asked to complete a baseline interview . Every attempt will be made to conduct 
these intervi ews in -person. However, if this is not possible, interviews w ill be conducted over the 
phone or through email or physical mail, depending on participant preference.  
Six-Minute Walk Test:  
• Trained study staff will administer the six -minute walk test to ovarian cancer survivors . 
 Intervention  
• Intervention Arm Only:  After recording their steps passively for 2 weeks, participants will be asked 
to set a step goal to increase with their partner. The step goal should be of 33% to 50% higher than 
baseline or to choose their own goal (minimum ≥1500 steps greater than baseli ne). Study  staff will 
ask patients and partners  to fill out a pre -commitment contract agreeing to try their best to achieve 
their daily step goal, which helps to motivate behavior change . Participants will also be given an 
exercise prescription.  
 
T1 
• Approximately 14 weeks after beginning to use the accelerometers and Way to Health platform, 
patients will complete a follow -up interview (T1).  
• Patients will transition from the “active” phase of the study to the “follow -up phase” of the study.  
o Control ar m: During the follow -up phase, research assistants will be accessible for questions 
about technical issues and will monitor adherence to the activity tracker via registered steps 
collected by Way to Health.  
o Intervention arm: During the follow -up phase, pat ients and their partners  will still be able to 
access the Way to Health platform with its social support and gamification components. 
However, in follow -up, research assistants will be accessible for questions about technical 
issues and will monitor adhere nce to the activity tracker via registered steps collected by 
Way to Health . 
• Trained study staff will administer the six -minute walk test to ovarian cancer survivors.  
 
 
T2 
• Approximately 26 weeks after beginning to use the accelerometers and Way to Health platform, 
patients will complete a follow -up interview (T2).  
• Following completion of the T2 interview, patients will be thanked for their study participation and 
their enro llment in the study will end. Patients and their partners  will be allowed to keep their 
wearable accelerometers.  
• Trained study staff will administer the six -minute walk test to ovarian cancer survivors.  
 
5.52c Intervention Administration Additional Concerns  
 
Platform  Use and Compliance:  
• Participants will be instructed to avoid adjusting the platform  settings to ensure data is collected. 
Participants will be contacted if the accelerometers or data collection via the platform is not working 
properly , or if there are issues with adherence . 
• Participants will have access to a research assistant to help resolve technical issues . 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
15 
 
 Tracking Devices:  
• The accelerometers assigned to each participant will be tracked according to the product serial 
number  and assigned unique ID  number .  
• Participants will be allowed to keep the accelerometers as a token of appreciation for their 
participation in the study, and to minimize potential transmission of skin infections (e.g. methicillin -
resistant Staphylococcus a ureus) between participants . 
 
5.53 Special Concerns  
 
5.53a Lost Accelerometers  
If a participant reports to study staff that they lost an accelerometer, study staff will provide a 
replacement, either in person or via mail, as soon as possible.  
 
5.53b Surveys  
Participants will be contacted in advance to complete their upcoming study survey. After three  
unreturned voicemails, they will not be contacted again for additional surveys.  
 
5.54 Compensation  
Ovarian cancer survivors  in both arms  will receive  gift cards valued at  $25 at 14-weeks, and $50 at 26 -
weeks if study requirements are completed, including post -baseline assessments and adherence to the 
accelerometers.  
 
5.55 Data Security & Privacy  
The data security and privacy of study participants is of  utmost importance, and we have taken 
stringent measures to protect our participants’ data.  The Penn Medicine Academic Computing Services 
(PMACS), based out of the University of Pennsylvania, will be the hub for the hardware and database 
infrastructure that will support the project. The PMACS provides a secure computing environment for a large 
volume of highly sensitive data, including clinical, genetic, socioeconomic, and financial information. Among 
the IT projects currently managed by PMACS are: (1) the capture and organization of complex, longitudinal 
clinical data via web and clinical applic ations portals from cancer patients enrolled in clinical trials; (2) the 
integration of genetic array databases and clinical data obtained from patients with cardiovascular disease; (3) 
computational biology and cytometry database management and analyses; (4) economic and health policy 
research using Medicare claims from over 40 million Medicare beneficiaries.  
All data for this project will be stored on the secure/firewalled servers of the PMACS Data Center, in 
data files that will be protected by multiple password layers. These data servers are maintained in a guarded 
facility behind several locked doors, with very limited physical access rights. They are also cyber -protected by 
extensive firewalls and multiple layers of communication encryption. Electronic  access rights are carefully 
controlled by University of Pennsylvania system managers. Our collaborators at the University of Pennsylvania 
use highly secure methods of data encryption for all transactions involving participants’ financial information 
using  a level of security comparable to what is used in commercial financial transactions. We believe this multi -
layer system of data security, identical to the system protecting the University of Pennsylvania Health Systems 
medical records, greatly minimizes t he risk of loss of privacy.  
We will take additional steps to minimize the risk of data security breaches by linking individually 
identifiable health information with participant ID numbers only in a password -protected Excel file that is stored 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
16 
 
 on Dana -Farber servers, protected by Partners IS infrastructure, and accessible only to members of the study 
team.  
 
5.6 Adverse Reactions and Their Management  
 
5.61 Reporting Adverse or Unanticipated Events  
Potential adverse events (AE) for this project are expected to be all non -medical in nature. There is 
small risk of physical injury. Participants could experience discomfort while wearing the Fitbit  on their wrist. 
Subjects may experience mild anxiety when answering survey questions about emotional issues or 
questi ons about coping challenges or difficulties related to discussing the subject matter. The PI will report 
unanticipated and serious adverse events to the IRB in a timely manner on an ongoing basis. For the 
purpose of this study a Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  is defined as an event that, as a direct result of the 
study, causes serious harm to the subject (e.g., hospitalization ).  
 
5.62 Anticipated Reactions  & Reaction Management  
Should participants become exceedingly upset, disoriented or fatigued or need to attend to matters of 
personal care during the surveys, study staff will ask the subject if they would like to take a break or 
reschedule the survey for another time. In the event that participants experience distress while completing 
surveys, we will follo w standard procedures used in our behavioral health intervention studies for 
counseling and referral. The PI will be notified immediately and participants will be provided with the pager 
numbers for both the study PI and the study psychiatrist  included in the consent form.  Dr. Ilana Braun, a 
DFCI psychiatrist, has agreed to serve as a psychiatrist on the study . Dr. Braun will  evaluate any 
participants  who are distressed f or risk of imminent danger and refer them to appropriate services if they 
are needed.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
17 
 
 6.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
6.1 Primary and Secondary Endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoints  
1) Preliminary Analysis: To assess the feasibility , acceptability and perceived effectiveness of the 
accelerometer + social support + gamification intervention in 20 ovarian cancer patients and their 
partners . 
2) Final Analysis: To compare the change in daily steps from baseline to the 14 -week intervention period 
between the intervention arm and control arm.  
 
Secondary Endpoints  
Preliminary Analysis:  
1) Comparing the change in daily steps from baseline to the 14 -week and 26 -week intervention periods.  
2) Comparing the change in quality of life (EuroQol EQ -5D index) and symptoms of anxiety and 
depression at baseline, 14 and 26 weeks.  
3) Comparing additional clinical and quality -of-life outcomes including functional capacity (6 -minute walk 
test), symptom burden (NFOSI -18), fear of recurrence (ASC) and others, at baseline, 14 and 26 weeks.  
 
Final Analysis:  
1) Comparing the change in daily steps from baseline to 26 weeks between the intervention arm and 
control arm.  
2) Comparing the change in quality of life (EuroQol EQ -5D index) and symptoms of anxiety or depression 
(HADS) at 14 and 26 weeks between the intervention arm and control arm.  
3) Comparing health care utilization at 14 and 26 we eks between the intervention and control arm.  
4) Comparing additional clinical and quality -of-life outcomes including functional capacity (6 -minute walk 
test), symptom burden (NFOSI -18), fear of recurrence (ASC) and others, at 14 and 26 weeks between 
the inte rvention and control arm.  
 
6.2 Sample Size and Statistical Power or Precisions   
Preliminary Analysis  
A convenience sample of 20 ovarian cancer survivors and 20 partners will be enrolled for the run -in portion of 
the study. Due to the limited sample size, statistical analyisis will be descriptive in nature.  
Final Analysis  
148 patients will be randomized 1:1 to one of the two arms – accelerometer only, or accelerometer + 
gamification + social support. For the outcome of change in steps, we will compare the c hange in daily steps 
from baseline to the 14 -week T1 time point between the intervention arm and control arm to conclude that the 
intervention is promising for further study.  We use 1000 steps as our threshold for powering statistical 
significance, which f or the avera ge person is about half a mile.  A priori power calculations assumed a baseline 
mean step count of 6000 steps in the control group with a standard deviation of 2000 steps, a 15% dropout 
rate, and a 2 -sided α of 0.05. It was estimated that a samp le of 148 participants (74 per arm) would ensure 
80% power to detect a 1000 step difference between the gamification + social support and control arms in the 
change in mean daily steps from baseline to the maintenance phase.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
18 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 Analysis Plan 
6.3a Preliminary  Analysis  (20 ovarian cancer survivors and 20 partners ) 
Feasibility:  We will record eligibility, approach, interest, enrollment, interview, follow -up rates, and reasons 
for non -participation at each stage. We will assess the completeness of the study measures. Definitions of 
adequate feasibility include: 1) ≥60% enrollment among eligible patients, 2) ≥70% adherence to the wearable 
accel erometer ≥4 days per week, and 3 ) ≥70% follow -up rate at 14-weeks among enrolled participants . 
Acceptability : Upon completion of the study, participants will be asked to rate two questions: 1) 
“Participating in this study placed a substantial burden on me” and 2) “I wish I had not agreed to participate in 
this study.” Response options will include: strongly disagr ee, disagree, agree, and strongly agree. Acceptability 
will be defined as ≤20% of participants answering agree or strongly agree to either question.  
Perceived effectiveness : Perceived effectiveness will be defined as  ≥70% of participants indicate that stu dy 
participation motivated them to increase their activity levels. . 
Exploratory outcomes:  Exploratory outcomes in the preliminary  analysis will include change in daily steps 
from baseline to 14 and 2 6 weeks, QOL, and mental health.  
6.3b Final Analysis  (74 patients in each arm)  
Change in steps:  The primary outcome will be the change in participants’ daily step counts from baseline to 
the end of the 14 -week intervention period. A secondary outcome will be the change in participants’ daily step 
counts fro m baseline to the 26 -week follow -up period.  
Quality of life:  A secondary outcome will be the change in the participants’ quality of life from the baseline 
to 14 - and 26 -week follow -up periods, as assessed with the NIH -funded Patient Reported Outcome Meas ure 
Information System (PROMIS) -29 scale .  
Mental health:  Another secondary outcome will be the change in the participants’ symptoms of anxiety and 
depression from the baseline to 14 - and 26 -week follow -up periods, as assessed  by the Hospital Anxiet y and 
Depression Scale (HADS).  Fitness 
tracker  Gamification / 
social support  Arm Sample size  
+ - 1 (Accelerometer only)  74 
+ + 2 (Accelerometer + 
gamification + social 
support)  74 
  Total  148 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
19 
 
 Additional clinical and QoL outcomes: We will assess changes in addition al clinical and quality of life  
outcomes, including functional capacity (6 -minute walk test), symptom burden (NFOSI -18), fear of recurrence 
(ASC) and others, a t 14 and 26 weeks between the intervention and control arm.  
 
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
20 
 
 7.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Beesley VL, Price MA, Webb PM, et al. Changes in supportive care needs after first -line treatment for 
ovarian cancer: identifying care priorities and risk fa ctors for future unmet needs. Psycho -oncology. 
2013;22(7):1565 -1571.  
2. Liavaag AH, Dorum A, Fossa SD, Trope C, Dahl AA. Controlled study of fatigue, quality of life, and 
somatic and mental morbidity in epithelial ovarian cancer survivors: how lucky are th e lucky ones? 
Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 
2007;25(15):2049 -2056.  
3. Bodurka -Bevers D, Basen -Engquist K, Carmack CL, et al. Depression, anxiety, and quality of life in 
patients with epithelia l ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2000;78(3 Pt 1):302 -308. 
4. Ballard -Barbash R, Friedenreich CM, Courneya KS, Siddiqi SM, McTiernan A, Alfano CM. Physical 
activity, biomarkers, and disease outcomes in cancer survivors: a systematic review. Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute. 2012;104(11):815 -840. 
5. Speck RM, Courneya KS, Masse LC, Duval S, Schmitz KH. An update of controlled physical activity 
trials in cancer survivors: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J Cancer Surviv. 2010;4(2):87 -100. 
6. Fong DY, Ho JW, Hui BP, et al. Physical activity for cancer survivors: meta -analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344:e70.  
7. Mishra SI, Scherer RW, Geigle PM, et al. Exercise interventions on health -related quality of life for 
cancer survivo rs. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012(8):CD007566.  
8. Beesley VL, Price MA, Butow PN, et al. Physical activity in women with ovarian cancer and its 
association with decreased distress and improved quality of life. Psycho -oncology. 2011;20(11):1161 -
1169.  
9. Smits A, Smits E, Lopes A, et al. Body mass index, physical activity and quality of life of ovarian cancer 
survivors: time to get moving? Gynecol Oncol. 2015;139(1):148 -154. 
10. Stevinson C, Capstick V, Schepansky A, et al. Physical activity preferences of  ovarian cancer survivors. 
Psycho -oncology. 2009;18(4):422 -428. 
11. Smits A, Lopes A, Das N, Bekkers R, Massuger L, Galaal K. The effect of lifestyle interventions on the 
quality of life of gynaecological cancer survivors: A systematic review and meta -analysis. Gynecol 
Oncol. 2015;139(3):546 -552. 
12. Stevinson C, Faught W, Steed H, et al. Associations between physical activity and quality of life in 
ovarian cancer survivors. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;106(1):244 -250. 
13. Halpern SD, French B, Small DS, et al. Rand omized trial of four financial -incentive programs for 
smoking cessation. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(22):2108 -2117.  
14. Volpp KG, Gurmankin Levy A, Asch DA, et al. A randomized controlled trial of financial incentives for 
smoking cessation. Cancer Epidemiol Bio markers Prev. 2006;15(1):12 -18. 
15. Patel MS, Asch DA, Rosin R, et al. Individual Versus Team -Based Financial Incentives to Increase 
Physical Activity: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. J Gen Intern  Med. 2016;31(7):746 -754. 
16. Patel MS, Asch DA, Rosin R, et  al. Framing Financial Incentives to Increase Physical Activity Among 
Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. Ann Intern Med.  2016;164(6):385 -394. 
17. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Rosin R, et al. A Randomized Trial of Social Comparison Feedback  and Financial 
Incentives to Increase Physical Activity. Am J Health Promot. 2016;30(6):416 -424. 
18. Miller AS, Cafazzo JA, Seto E. A game plan: Gamification design principles in mHealth applications for 
chronic disease management. Health Informatics J. 2016;22(2):184 -193. 
19. Brown M, O'Neill N, van Woerden H, Eslambolchilar P, Jones M, John A. Gamification and Adherence 
to Web -Based Mental Health Interventions: A Systematic Review. JMIR Ment Health. 2016;3(3):e39.  
20. Patel MS BE, Volpp KG, Fox CS, Small DS, Massaro JM, Lee JJ, Hilbert V, Valentino M, Taylor DH, 
Manders ES, Mutalik K, Zhu J, Wang W, Marabito JM. Effect of a game -based intervention designed to 
enhance social incentives to increase physical activity among families: The BE FIT Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
21 
 
 21. Asch DA, Volpp KG. On the Way to Health. LDI Issue Brief. 2012;17(9):1 -4. 
22. EuroQol G. EuroQol --a new facility for the measurement of health -related quality of life. Health Policy . 
1990;16(3):199 -208. 
23. Janssen MF, Pick ard AS, Golicki D, et al. Measurement properties of the EQ -5D-5L compared to the 
EQ-5D-3L across eight patient groups: a multi -country study. Qual Life Res . 2013;22(7):1717 -1727.  
24. Kim SH, Kim HJ, Lee SI, Jo MW. Comparing the psychometric properties of t he EQ -5D-3L and EQ -5D-
5L in cancer patients in Korea. Qual Life Res . 2012;21(6):1065 -1073.  
25. Sullivan PW, Ghushchyan V. Mapping the EQ -5D index from the SF -12: US general population 
preferences in a nationally representative sample. Med Decis Making . 2006;26(4):401 -409. 
26. Pickard AS, Neary MP, Cella D. Estimation of minimally important differences in EQ -5D utility and VAS 
scores in cancer. Health and quality  of life outcomes . 2007;5:70.  
27. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and depression scal e. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 
1983;67(6):361 -370. 
28. Vodermaier A, Millman RD. Accuracy of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale as a screening tool 
in cancer patients: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Supportive care in cancer : official journal of 
the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer. 2011;19(12):1899 -1908.  
29. Bjelland I, Dahl AA, Haug TT, Neckelmann D. The validity of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale. An updated literature review. J Psychosom Res. 2002;52(2):69 -77. 
30. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol . 1982;5(6):649 -655. 
31. Basch E, Iasonos A, Barz A, et al. Long -term toxicity monitoring via electronic patient -reported 
outcomes in patients receiving chemotherapy. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2007;25(34):5374 -5380.  
32. Wallace LS, Rogers ES, Roskos SE, Holiday DB, Weiss BD. Brief report: screening items to identify 
patients with limited health literacy skills. Journal of general internal medicine. 2006;21(8):874 -877. 
33. Craig BM, Reeve BB, Brown PM, et al. US valuation of health outcomes measured using the PROMIS -
29. Value in health : the journal of the International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes 
Research. 2014;17(8):846 -853. 
34. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med. 1991;32( 6):705 -714. 
35. Carver CS. You want to measure coping but your protocol's too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J 
Behav Med. 1997;4(1):92 -100. 
36. Calhoun EA, Welshman EE, Chang CH, et al. Psychometric evaluation of the Functional Assessment of 
Cancer Therapy/Gynecologic Oncology Group -Neurotoxicity (Fact/GOG -Ntx) questionnaire for patients 
receiving systemic chemotherapy. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2003; 13(6):741 -748. 
37. Huang HQ, Brady MF, Cella D, Fleming G. Validation and reduction of FACT/GOG -Ntx subscale for 
platinum/paclitaxel -induced neurologic symptoms: a gynecologic oncology group study. Int J Gynecol 
Cancer. 2007;17(2):387 -393. 
38. Jensen SE, K aiser K, Lacson L, Schink J, Cella D. Content validity of the NCCN -FACT ovarian 
symptom index -18 (NFOSI -18). Gynecol Oncol. 2015;136(2):317 -322. 
39. Jensen SE, Kaiser K, Lacson L, Schink J, Cella D. Content validity of the NCCN -FACT ovarian 
symptom index -18 (NFOSI -18). Gynecol Oncol. 2015;136(2):317 -322. 
40. Jensen SE, Rosenbloom SK, Beaumont JL, et al. A new index of priority symptoms in advanced 
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2011;120(2):214 -219. 
41. Herth K. Abbreviated instrument to measure hope: develo pment and psychometric evaluation. J Adv 
Nurs. 1992;17(10):1251 -1259.  
42. Chen JY, Tao ML, Tisnado D, et al. Impact of physician -patient discussions on patient satisfaction. 
Medical care. 2008;46(11):1157 -1162.  
43. Jagsi R, Abrahamse PH, Lee KL, et al. Tre atment decisions and employment of breast cancer patients: 
Results of a population -based survey. Cancer. 2017;123(24):4791 -4799.  
44. Gotay CC, Pagano IS. Assessment of Survivor Concerns (ASC): a newly proposed brief questionnaire. 
Health and quality of lif e outcomes. 2007;5:15.  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
22 
 
 45. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983;24(4):385 -396. 
46. Golden -Kreutz DM, Browne MW, Frierson GM, Andersen BL. Assessing stress in cancer patients: a 
second -order facto r analysis model for the Perceived Stress Scale. Assessment. 2004;11(3):216 -223. 
47. Champion VL, Ziner KW, Monahan PO, et al. Development and psychometric testing of a breast cancer 
survivor self -efficacy scale. Oncology nursing forum. 2013;40(6):E403 -410. 
48. Sallis JF, Grossman RM, Pinski RB, Patterson TL, Nader PR. The development of scales to measure 
social support for diet and exercise behaviors. Preventive medicine. 1987;16(6):825 -836. 
49. Greenwood JL, Joy EA, Stanford JB. The Physical Activity Vita l Sign: a primary care tool to guide 
counseling for obesity. Journal  of physical activity & health. 2010;7(5):571 -576. 
50. Enright PL. The six -minute walk test. Respiratory care. 2003;48(8):783 -785. 
51. ATS statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk tes t. American journal of respiratory and critical care 
medicine. 2002;166(1):111 -117. 
52. Bautmans I, Lambert M, Mets T. The six -minute walk test in community dwelling elderly: influence of 
health status. BMC geriatrics. 2004;4:6.  
53. Kurti AN, Dallery J. In ternet -based contingency management increases walking in sedentary adults. 
Journal of applied behavior analysis. 2013;46(3):568 -581. 
54. Evenson KR, Goto MM, Furberg RD. Systematic review of the validity and reliability of consumer -
wearable activity tracke rs. The international journal of behavioral nutrition and physical activity. 
2015;12:159.  
55. Wallen MP, Gomersall SR, Keating SE, Wisloff U, Coombes JS. Accuracy of Heart Rate Watches: 
Implications for Weight Management. PloS one. 2016;11(5):e0154420.  
56. de Zambotti M, Baker FC, Willoughby AR, et al. Measures of sleep and cardiac functioning during sleep 
using a multi -sensory commercially -available wristband in adolescents. Physiology & behavior. 
2016;158:143 -149. 
57. Kooiman TJ, Dontje ML, Sprenger SR, K rijnen WP, van der Schans CP, de Groot M. Reliability and 
validity of ten consumer activity trackers. BMC sports science, medicine and rehabilitation. 2015;7:24.  
58. Atallah L, Lo B, King R, Guang -Zhong Y. Sensor positioning for activity recognition using wearable 
accelerometers. IEEE transactions on biomedical circuits  and systems. 2011;5(4):320 -329. 
59. Kullgren JT, Troxel AB, Loewenstein G, et al. Individual - versus  group -based financial incentives for 
weight loss: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(7):505 -514. 
60. Sen AP, Sewell TB, Riley EB, et al. Financial incentives for home -based health monitoring: a 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of  general internal medicine.  2014;29(5):770 -777. 
61. Shaw PA, Yancy WS, Jr., Wesby L, et al. The design and conduct of Keep It Off: An online randomized 
trial of financial incentives for weight -loss maintenance. Clinical trials (London, England). 
2017;14(1) :29-36. 
62. Ariely D, Wertenbroch K. Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: self -control by precommitment. 
Psychological science. 2002;13(3):219 -224. 
63. Rogers T, Milkman KL, Volpp KG. Commitment devices: using initiatives to change behavior. Jama. 
2014;311(20):2065 -2066.  
64. Woodward MJ, Lu CW, Levandowski R, Kostis J, Bachmann G. The exercise prescription for 
enhancing overall health of midlife and older women. Maturitas. 2015;82(1):65 -71. 
65. Owens B. Exercise prescriptions endorsed. CMAJ : Canadi an Medical Association journal = journal de 
l'Association medicale canadienne. 2014;186(13):E478.  
 
 
  
Stepping Into Survivorship   January 3, 2018 | v3  
23 
 
 8.0 APPENDICES  
 
Recruitment/Enrollment:  
Appendix A: Opt -out card  (retired)  
 
Instruments:  
Appendix B: Participant Baseline Survey  
Appendix C: Participant Post -Baseline Survey  
Appendix D: Medical Event Form  
Appendix E: Exercise Prescription  
Appendix F: Debriefing Interview  Guide  