Study Ti tle: A Pilot Study Comparing Anti -Inflammatory Effects Of TXA Versus EACA In 
Pediatric Congenital Heart Surgery (TXAEACA) . 
 
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Date:  5/1/2017  
 
 
Patient Selection  
 
This pilot study  was conducted  with a prospective,  double blind,  randomized  control  parallel  block 
design. The study was conducted at a single, tertiary care center, Advocate Children’s Hospital 
in Oak Lawn, Illinois. The United States Food and Drug Administration currently approve neither 
TXA nor EACA for use in children,  thus investigational  new drug approvals  were  obtained for both 
drugs (number 127517). The study was approved by the hospital Institutional Review Board. 
Informed consent/assent  was obtained from all patients  prior to enrollment.  Patients  were  enrolled 
from February 2016 to October  2016.  
Inclusion criteria included children age 3 months to 17 years undergoing heart surgery 
requiring CPB and redo sternotomy. Patients were excluded if they were undergoing Fontan or 
Glenn procedures, had coagulation profile abnormality, renal insufficiency, chronic hepatopathy, 
immunosuppressant drug use within last 1 month, history of seizures within last 6 months or 
current antiepileptic medication use, or had a known allergy to EACA or TXA. Patients were randomly assigned to TXA or EACA group in a 1:1 ratio. Patient allocation was performed by 
study pharmacist using a computer -generated list. Patient, family, surgical team, and 
cardiovascular intensive care unit (CVICU) team were blinded to treatment group. All data were managed using REDCap electronic data capture tool (16).  
Parents  of all patients  eligible  for study  were  informed about  the research and sent a study 
packet including a copy of the consent and assent form (if applicable) for review. An investigator subsequently called the parents to explain the research study and answer questions. Documentation of informed consent/assent  was obtained prior to surgery  during the preoperative 
visit or on the day of surgery. Assent was obtained on all patients >7 years of  age. 
Perioperative Management of Patients  
 
Medications were prepared by the pharmacy. TXA (Mylan Institutional LLC) dosing strategy 
used an initial 31 mg/kg load at start of surgery, followed by 14 mg/kg/hr continuous infusion, 
and weight -dependent bolus dose after heparinization, pre- CPB (< 16kg: 45 mg; 16- 30 kg: 
90mg; > 30kg: 120mg) (13). EACA (Hospira, Inc.) dosing strategy used an initial 75 mg/kg load at start of surgery, followed by 75 mg/kg/hr continuous infusion, and 75 mg/kg bolus dose after 
heparinization, pre- CPB (14). To ensure study blinding, loading doses for both medications were  
prepared  in normal  saline  2 ml/kg  (0.9 % normal  saline,  Baxter).  Continuous  infusions  were 
prepared in normal saline such that 1 ml/kg/hr delivered desired dosage. Second bolus was 
prepared in normal saline 1 ml/kg. The drugs were made similar in appearance and volume. 
Operating room nurse administered the study drugs. Infusion was discontinued prior to leaving operating room or immediately upon CVICU  arrival.  
Consented patients had research -related blood draws (0.3 ml) at three time points: pre-  
CPB, post -CBP following protamine administration and 24 hours post -CPB. Blood samples were 
centrifuged  and separated plasma stored  at -70°C. At mid study,  30 samples  (3/patient)  were  sent 
to Eve Technology Lab (Calgary, Canada) where multiplex human cytokine assays were run in 
duplicate. Average of the values run in duplicate was used for calculations. For samples with 
values reported as out of range (due to level being below detection), the lowest detectable value was assigned for analysis. Biomarkers in the single 13 multiplex cytokine assay included granulocyte  macrophage  colony -stimulating  factor  (GM-CSF),  monocyte chemoattractant  protein-  
1 (MCP -1), TNFα, interferonγ  (IFN),  IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10β, IL-12, and IL-13. 
Same procedures were followed for remainder of the samples at the conclusion of the study.  
 
Standard Intra- Operative Protocol  
 
Patients received general anesthesia using sevoflurane, fentanyl and rocuronium. Once under anesthesia, arterial and central venous access was obtained. All patients received methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg; maximum dose 500 mg) after induction of anesthesia. Intra - 
operative monitoring included arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, systemic oxygen 
saturation, and cerebral and somatic (kidney) near -infrared spectroscopy. Surgical team and 
procedures remained constant during enrollment period, consisting of 3 surgeons (2 present in 
each surgery).  
Median sternotomy incision was performed on all patients. Heparin loading dose, 
maintenance and reversal were guided by Medtronic HMS Plus system. Post -heparinization, 
kaolin activated clotting time and heparin blood concentrations were measured at routine 
intervals. Standard, non- pulsatile, roller pump CPB, utilizing mild to moderate hypothermia (28 - 
32°C) with pH stat acid-base  management  was used.  CPB circuit  consisted  of Terumo  hard shell 
reservoirs, polypropylene membrane oxygenators, Medtronic tubing with Trillium coating and 
Medtronic Affinity arterial filters. Under full heparinization (activated clotting time >300 seconds), 
CPB was initiated.  The CPB circuit  was primed with Plasmalyte  A, 3000  U/L heparin and 15 mEq/L 
sodium  bicarbonate.  Mannitol  (0.5 gm/kg)  was added after initiation  of CPB and during rewarming. 
Packed red blood cells were added as needed to maintain a hematocrit >22%, in 25 ml 
increments,  paired with additional  Plasmalyte  A chasers  and hemofiltration.  Fresh frozen  plasma 
(FFP)  was given to patients  <7 kg (50 ml post-CPB initiation  and 50 ml during rewarming).  
Myocardial protection was obtained using cold blood cardioplegia, intermittent or continuous infusion, per surgeon’s request. A terminal warm reperfusion was used for all patients prior to aortic cross clamp removal. Hemoconcentration and modified ultrafiltration were used routinely. Protamine was given at conclusion of case.  
Standard Postoperative Protocol  
 
Patients were taken to a dedicated CVICU, staffed at all times by in- house pediatric 
cardiovascular  attending physicians.  Decision  for transfusion  was made  clinically  at the discretion 
of attending physicians.  
Duration of CPB, aortic cross clamp time, Society of Thoracic Surgeons -  European 
Association for Cardiothoracic  Surgery  mortality  category  (STAT  category)  and inotropic  score  for 
first 48 hours after surgery were used to compare surgical complexity between groups. Blood 
product utilization during and after surgery, and chest tube output for first 72 hours was 
documented.  
Statistical Analysis  
 
As this was a pilot study, sample size calculation was not performed. We recruited 20 patients, 
10 per study group. An interim analysis was performed for safety evaluation, after which no 
adjustments were made to study protocol.  
Between group  comparisons  were examined  using  independent  groups  Student’s  t-test or 
Mann- Whitney U tests when data were not normally distributed. Dichotomous variables were 
examined using Chi -square or Fisher exact test. Within group comparisons for change over time 
(pre-CPB,  post-CPB and 24 hour post-CPB)  were  tested  using Friedman test. A p value of <0.05 
was considered statistically significant. Adjustments for multiple comparisons were not made 
because of the explanatory nature of this  study.  