Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperative Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
  
 
Documentation Date: 6/30/2019  
 
IRB: 00039439  
 
NCT 03988751  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperative Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
  
Principal Investigator:   Clancy J. Clark, MD  
     Department of General Surgery  
Section of Surgical Oncology  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine  
Medical Center Blvd  
Winston -Salem, NC 27157  
cjclark@wakehealth.edu  
336-716-7207  
 
Staff:      Kathleen Cummins  
      
   
Biostatistician:  Fang -Chi Hsu, PhD  
 fhsu@wakehealth.edu    
  
Participating Institution(s):  Wake Forest University  
  
Version Date:    6/30/2019 
 
  
Confidential
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 3 of 16 
 Summary  
 
The proposed study will investigate the feasibility  of using the Wake Forest Real -time 
Location System (RTLS) in monitoring patient movement during their in -hospital 
postoperative recovery .  The study will involve patients who have  undergo ne surgery 
requiring inpatient admission to the 9CC surgical ward.   Actual patient movement will be 
monitored during their postoperative recovery and compared with data recorded by the 
Wake Forest location  system.  
1.0 Introduction and Background  
 
Early mobiliza tion after surgery can decrease  postoperative complications and 
length of stay. Recognizing  these  improved outcomes, c urrent enhanced -
recovery after surgery (ERAS) programs emphasize rapid mobilizatio n during the 
postoperative period even on the day of surgery. (1–3)  Unfortunately, patients 
face numerous real and perceived barriers to early mobilization including 
postoperative pain;  multiple intravenous catheters; drains; lines, and staff 
resource limitations.  Monitoring c ompliance with early mobilization programs r ely 
on patient self -report, progress notes, and nursing documentation,  all of which 
are unreliable.  Our team has used accelerometers  (Fitbit Zip and Kenz 
Lifecorder)  to monitor postoperative movement after major gastrointestinal 
oncology surgery (CCCWFU 0 2114).  Preliminary data from this study, 
demonstrates little to no movement by patients during their hospitalization.  
However, this may be an artifact of current accelerometer devices rather than 
lack of movement by patients.     
 
In an era of the Internet of T hings (IoT) and emerging  technologies , we 
recognized a unique opportunity to use the existing real -time location system  
(RTLS)  at Wake Forest Baptist Health to monitor patient movement during 
postoperative recovery. (4)  The Wake Forest Office of Enterprise Visibility  
developed at program  for the implementation of processes, supporting 
technologies, driving Service Excellence, Patient Safety and Satisfaction, 
Operational Excellence and Efficiency, and the Transformation of Healthcare 
Delivery (SPOT) .  The SPOT program installed the current  real-time location 
system through out Wake Forest Baptist Health initially to track high valued 
hospital assets.  RTLS is a complex system of various tags and badges, 
platforms (Wi -Fi, Inf rared, Ultrasound, and others), hardware 
infrastructure  (readers  & exciters) and other components (servers, middleware 
& end-user software). (5)  The Wake Forest RTLS solution consists of specialized 
fixed location sensors receiving wireless signals from small ID badges or tags 
attach ed to equipment or persons. Tags transmit a unique identifier in real -time 
that enable tracking.  The granularity of the RTLS program varies throughout the 
health system with room -level tracking capabilities in the wards of the Wake 
Forest Comprehensive Ca ncer Center.    
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 4 of 16 
  
The RTLS program at Wake Forest Baptist Health was introduced for asset 
tracking  and not developed for monitoring patient movement. Therefore, the 
reliability of this system is  unknown but has great potential for numerous quality 
improveme nt initiatives particularly focused on decreased postoperative 
complications and successful implementation of early recovery after surgery 
programs .   
2.0 Objectives  
 
The main objective of the proposed study is to i nvestigate the feasibility of using 
the Wake Forest RTLS to monitor movement  of hospitalized patients after 
surgery .   Preliminary data from this prospective  cohort study will help determine 
reliability, accuracy, sensitive and specificity of the RTLS syst em during the 
implementation of an in -patient postoperative exercise program .  
3.0 Aims  
 
3.1 Primary Aim  
 
3.1.1  To demonstrate the feasibility of using the Wake Forest RTLS t o 
track patient movement during the postoperative  period . 
 
3.2 Secondary Aims  
 
3.2.1  To evaluate  the accuracy of the RTLS to track distance and time 
traveled during a patient walk on the hospital ward .  
3.2.2  To characterize  daily movement (speed, steps, frequency, 
distance) of in-hospital post -surgery patients . 
3.2.3  To evaluate patient perspective on i n-hospital exercise programs.  
3.2.4  To characterize provider perspective on in -hospital exercise 
programs, monitoring patient movement, and reporting patient 
movement.  
3.2.5  To evaluate the accuracy of the RTLS to track patient movement at 
variable patterns of movemen t. 
3.2.6  To evaluate patient tolerance of continuous verses interval exercise 
program.  
3.2.7  To characterize subject readiness for discharge.  
4.0 Study Population  
 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 5 of 16 
 The proposed study is a prospective , observational  cohort study investigating 
the feasibility of using the Wake RTLS to monitor postoperative patient 
movement. All patients will be recruited from the surgical  ward of the Wake 
Forest Baptist Health (9cc).  All patients will have undergone elective surgical 
intervention with anticipated minimum of 24 hours hospitalization.  We plan to 
enroll 40 patients.   
 
All eligible subjects will be asked to participate in the study regardless of race, 
gender, age, or other characteristic except those outlined in the excl usion criteria 
below .   Patients who meet inclusion criteria will be asked to participate in the 
study by the study team after permission obtained from the treating provider.  I f 
they agree, informed consent will be obtained by a study team member.  
 
An add itional cohort of providers care for patients on 9cc including nurses, 
nursing assistants, physicians, advanced practice providers, physical therapists, 
occupational therapists, students and residents will be asked to participate in the 
study.  If they agr ee, informed consent will be obtained by a study team member.  
A maximum of 50 providers were be included in provider cohort.  
 
Given feedback from providers and findings through analysis of RTLS, the study 
recognizes the need to confirm the validity of RTL S during various ambulatory 
patterns.  This requires enrollment of an additional 2 2 patients.  This additional 
cohort --High Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) Cohort) --will be randomly 
divided into two cohorts: Group 1, Continuous Ambulation (n = 1 2), and Group 2, 
Interval Ambulation (n =10).   
 
4.1 Inclusion criteria  -- Patient  
 
4.1.1  Male or female patients between the ages of 18 and 90. 
4.1.2  Admitted to 9cc . 
4.1.3  Recovering from surgery .  
4.1.4  Ability to understand and the willingness to sign an IRB-approved 
informed consent document.  
4.1.5  Ability to understand and complete the study survey instruments in 
English.  
 
4.2 Exclusion criteria  -- Patient  
 
4.2.1  Non-surgical patient . 
4.2.2  Emergency surgical procedure.  
4.2.3  Anticipated discharge less than 24 hours.  
4.2.4  Unable to ambulate or ambulation not permitted by treating 
provider.  
4.2.5  Unable to understand and complete the study survey instruments in 
English.  
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 6 of 16 
 4.2.6  Post-operative complications that in the opinion of the study 
investigator would impair the ability of the patient to adhe re to the 
study procedures.  
 
4.3 Inclusion of women and minorities  
 
Men and women of all races and ethnicities who meet the above -
described eligibility criteria are eligible to participate in this study.  
5.0 Methods  
 
The proposed study will be completed on 9cc in Wake Forest Baptist Health .  
Study subjects will be recruit ed on 9cc in Wake Forest Baptist Health after 
approval from the treating physician.   Recruitment, consent, and data collection 
will be completed in the privacy of the patient’s room.  
 
The nature, purpose, and risks of all procedures and protocols will be explained to 
each participant prior to obtaining written consent.  All examiners are trained in the 
standardized conduction of all assessments before data collection.  Standardized 
written instructions will be provided.   
 
Subjects  will not be recruited for the observational study cohort  as this cohort is 
closed to enrollment .   
Enrollment will be limited to the additional the expanded HIIT Cohort  (n= 2 2).  Using 
random number generator,  eligible patients will be randomized into two groups: Group 
1, Continuous Ambulation (n = 1 2), and Group 2, Interval Ambulation (n =10). 
Assign ment  will be provided by the study coordinator.  The study PI will be 
blinded to this randomization.  
Provider participants will be enrolled if they are caring for patients on 9cc during the 
study period.  
 
5.1a Study timeline  (Observational Cohort)  
  
 Initial Visit  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  
Informed Consent  X    
Medical Record Review  X    
Vital Signs  X X X X 
Walking Assessment   X X X 
Fatigue Assessment   X X X 
Pain Assessment   X X X 
Walking Distance Measurement   X X X 
Step/Pedometer Evaluation1  X X X 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 7 of 16 
 Distribution of SPOT Badge  X    
Physical Activity in Hospital Survey     X 
1 Patients will wear a Fitbit ZipTM and Kenz Lifecorder EX Accelerometer for pedometer 
evaluation.  
 
5.1b Study timeline  (HIIT Cohort)  
  
 Initial Visit  Ambulatory Evaluation  
Informed Consent  X  
Medical Record Review  X  
Vital Signs  X X 
Walking Assessment   X 
Grip Assessment   X 
Pedometer Evaluation1  X 
Distribution of SPOT Badge2 na  
Patient  Survey   X 
1 Patients will wear a Kenz Lifecorder EX Accelerometer for pedometer evaluation  during 
walking assessment . 
2 SPOT badges are now worn by all inpatients at WFBH and no longer require badging 
specifically for this project.  
 
5.2 Informed consent  
 
Signed informed consent will be obtained from each subject.  The informed consent 
process will follow the procedures of the WFU Institutional Review Board.  The study 
team member  will explain the purpose, methods and extent of the study to 
prospective part icipants.  The potential participant is asked to read the informed 
consent form and ask questions.  The form is written in simple, easy to understand 
language.  We require study staff to review all of the key aspects of the study 
verbally with the potentia l participants. The staff will be provided with a structured 
checklist for this purpose. The study staff will question potential participants to 
ascertain whether s/he has understood the information.  Potential participants who 
are illiterate or have impai red vision must have the consent read to them, followed 
by review of the checklist, opportunity for questions, and discussion.  This process 
will take place in the patient’s private room  in 9cc of Wake Forest Baptist Health.   
For providers, the process wil l take place in the conference or workroom on 9cc of 
Wake Forest Baptist Health.  A copy of the signed and dated consent form will be 
given to participants, and the original document will be placed in subjects’ individual 
study files, which will be stored i n a secure location.  In compliance with the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Standards for Privacy 
of Individually Identifiable Health Information of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, we will access personal h ealth information only after obtaining 
informed consent.  
 
 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 8 of 16 
 5.3 Pedometer and Step Data  
 
The Fitbit ZipTM (Fitbit Inc., San Francisco, CA; www.fitbit.com) is a lightweight, 
portable pedometer device that contains a tri -axial accelerometer.  The device is 
commercially available to consumers and is considered a recreational device.  It is 
capable of tracking multiple measures of physical activity including steps and 
distance traveled.  Tracking data is stored on the device for several weeks and is 
capable of  being downloaded to a computer for analysis using USB or wireless 
connection.  The accuracy of the Fitbit OneTM and Fitbit UltraTM have been 
independently validated.15,16  The Fitbit device can be worn on various body 
locations (hip vs. pocket) and maintains a high level of accuracy.16   
 
The Kenz Lifecorder EX Accelerometer is an accurate and reliable research  grade 
activity monitor that, in addition to counting steps, calculates calories expended, 
monitors the intensity and duration of physical activity, computes basal metabolic 
rate (BMR) and stores 200 days of data.  Each participant’s height, weight, age, 
gender, as well as the time of day will be programmed into the device before given 
to the participant.  
 
Each participant will wear the pedometer devices during their daily walk with 
research staff .  Programming of the Fitbit ZipTM and Kenz Lifecorder EX 
Accelerometer will be  performed by research staff .  
 
The pedometer data will be stored in a secure, password -protected file behind 
the WFBH firewall.  
 
5.4 Patient Medical Record Review  
 
All participants will have medical records reviewed to d etermine specific details 
regarding their medical condition, diagnosis, co -morbidities, laboratory data 
(nutritional status), medications, social history, past operations, and operation. If 
barriers to successfully completing the study are identified, the participant may 
be dismissed from the study.  Relevant clinical data will be collected and stored 
in RedCap.   
 
5.5 SPOT /RTLS  Badges and Data  
 
All participants will wear a SPOT badge provided by the study team throughout the 
study period.  Research staff will stress that participants should wear the pedometer 
during the study period.  Participants will be asked to wear the activity monitors at all 
times except while bathing or showering. SPOT badge data is collected continuously 
by the SPOT team independent of the study team.  This is standard procedures for 
Wake Forest Baptist Health.  The study team will coordinate with the SPOT team to 
extract data specific for this study. The extracted data will be stored in secure, 
password -protect files  behind the WFBH firewall using excel files.   
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 9 of 16 
  
5.6 Walking Assessment  and Physical Activity Survey  (Observational 
Cohort)  
 
All participants will receive a visit by a study team member each day for maximum of 
3 days.  If discharge is less than 24 hours after enrollment, the participant will be 
excluded from study.  Study participants will be invited by a study team member to 
join them on a walk.  Time, distance, and duration will be determined by the patient.  
If nursing staff or treating provider determines that walking is not safe or 
inappropriate, walk will not be performed and rationale documented. If patient 
declines to wal k, rationale will be documented.  For all patients who decline, a 
second visit by a study team member will occur later in the day.  Participants will be 
encouraged to walk by study team members emphasizing the importance of walking 
after surgery.   Each par ticipant will complete a pre - and post -walk assessment 
including measurement of pain and fatigue.  Pre- and post -walk vital signs will be 
recorded.  Participants will also be asked to report number of walks completed in the 
last 24 hours along with distanc e traveled.  At completion of walk, the study team will 
record exact time of walk, distance, and duration.   At conclusion of walk 
assessment, the patient will complete a physical activity in hospital survey.    Survey 
data will be collected in the subject’ s private room.  
 
5.7 HIIT Cohort  
 
5.7.1 Physical Activity Survey  
 
Prior to the ambulator y session, the subject  will receive information 
regarding t he type of exercise they will be engaging in (continuous or 
HIIT). The subject will also complete a questionnaire regarding their 
current level of physical fitness to determine his/her qualitative baseline.  
 
5.7.2  Vital signs  
 
The subject’s heart rate, blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate will be 
collected before and after each ambulatory session.  
  
5.7.3 Grip Strength  
 
Grip strength will be measured as a baseline. Two trials will be measured 
and then averaged together for the right and left arm. This will provide a 
baseline objective measure of subject frailty.  
 
5.7.4 Ambulatory Session  
 
Each subj ect perform one ambulatory session during the study.  This will 
include walking 40 meters. Gait speed will be calculated using the speed 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 10 of 16 
 in which the subject walked 40 meters.  Alternative exercise (hand bike) 
will be provided if subject declines ambulatio n or unable to ambulate out of 
their room.  Demonstration of the hand bike will be provided by the study 
team member and subjects will be allowed to practice with the bike prior to 
exercise session.  For subjects unable to perform the ambulatory session, 
a study team member will return on a subsequent hospital day to complete 
this portion of the study.  If patient unable to perform the ambulatory 
session during their hospitalization or during the study period, the reason 
will be documented.   
 
1. Walking Continuous Training (Group 1) :  The total distance will be 
40 meters. Study team members will walk, support, and coach the 
subject to walk as slow as he/she wants.    
2. Walking Interval T raining  (Group 2) :  The subject will walk a total 
distance of 4 0 meters.  This distance will be divided into four 
intervals of 10 meters to equal the same measured distance as the 
continuous group. The subject will receive two minutes of rest 
between each interval and will be supported and coached to walk 
as fast as they can.   
3. Hand Bike Continuous T raining  (Group 1, alternative option until 
able to participate in ambulatory session) : The subject will be asked 
to bike for 5 minutes continuously with coaching “go as slow as you 
want.”  
4. Hand Bike Interval Training (Group 2, alternative option until able to 
participate in ambulatory session) : The subject will be asked to bike 
in 10 second intervals (“as fast as they want to go”) and rest for 50 
seconds for five rounds (i.e. every minute on the minute (EMOM).  
5.7.5   Perceived Exertion  
 
Subject perceived exertion will be evaluated at the beginning, at 20 
meters, and at the end of the ambulatory session using a standard RPE 
scale.  
 
5.7.6 Gait Speed  
 
Gait speed (meters/second) will be calculated at the end of each sess ion 
based on distance traveled over time.  
 
5.8  Provider Physical Activity Survey  
 
All provider participants will complete a physical activity survey  and repeat the 
survey after 30 days of providing care for patients on 9cc.  During the study period, 
patient mobility data will be available to providers.   
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 11 of 16 
 6.0 Outcome Measures  
 
6.1 Primary Outcome: Determine if the SPOT system can detect movement in 
and out of a patient’s room.   
 
6.2       Secondary Outcomes:  
6.2.1  Characterize patterns of patient movement after surgery.  
6.2.2  Characterize number of times of patient exits a room per day after 
surgery.  
6.2.3  Characterize distances traveled per time out of room per day after 
surgery.  
6.2.4  Characterize patient opinion regarding exercise after surgery.  
6.2.5  Characterize provider opinion regarding in -hospital exercise 
programs, monitoring patient movement, and reporting patient 
movement .  
6.2.6  Determine if the SPOT system can detect movement when a 
patient varies their ambulatory behavior.  
6.2.7  Characterize patient’s ability to tolerate various ambulatory 
intensities after surgery.   
6.2.8  Describe patient readiness for discharge.  
7.0 Analytic Plan  
 
7.1 Sample size 
 
40 subjects will be included in initial observational  study.  Preliminary tests 
of SPOT badges indicate sensitivity and specificity nearly 100% using 
controlled movements on 9cc. Assuming type I error of 0.05, a two -sided 
test, 20 subjects, the sensitivity or specificity under the null equal to 0, and 
prevale nce of 0.3, we have more than 90% power to detect the sensitivity 
of specificity under the alternative hypothesis equal to 0.9. If we use a 
range of prevalence from 0.1 to 0. 9, we still have more than 90% power.  
However, th e positioning of  SPOT badge may decrease the sensitivity and 
specificity of the movement readings. Review of preliminary survey data 
indicates significant variability in response indicating need for expansion of 
sample size for secondary study objectives.  With 40 subjects being 
recruite d, we will be sure to have enough power to demonstrate the 
feasibility of this study  and provide appropriate confidence intervals for 
future studies . 
 
For provider participants, a maximum of 50 respondents will be included in 
the study.  Based on staffing,  resource demands, and learner rotations, 
the exact number of respondents available may be lower than 50 
respondents.   With 50 subjects being recruited, we will be sure to have 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 12 of 16 
 enough power to demonstrate the feasibility of exercise and patient 
mobility m onitoring programs.  This number will also provide appropriate 
confidence intervals for future studies . 
 
For the additional HITT cohort, we will enroll a maximum of 2 2 subjects.   
This sample size will have sufficient power  to demonstrate the feasibility of  
this study  and provide appropriate confidence intervals for future studies .    
 
In total, targeted study enrollment will be 6 2 patients and 50 providers.  
 
7.2 Feasibility analysis  and statistics.  
 
The study team will also capture information from this pilot study that will 
be used to improve the efficiency of larger studies. We will evaluate the 
capabilities of the SPOT system to monitor patient movement.  Feasible 
study will be defined as more than  80% of badges assigned to the 
observational study participants  will detect movement in and out a room.  
All data will be descriptive in nature and will focus on patterns of 
movement and presence or absence of data.  Summary statistics such as 
means and sta ndard deviations will be calculated for continuous measures 
and counts and percentages  will be calculated for discrete measures. 
Agreement statistics, including kappa statistics, sensitivity,  and specify , 
will be calculated. Changes of pre - and post - vital signs wil l be calculated 
and graphical display will be performed to show the changes over time.  
The correlation between walking distance as well as pain and fatigue will 
be calculated each day. Mixed effects models will be used to study the 
association  over time.  Since the sample size is small, we are aware that 
the models may not be stable.  Thus, descriptive analysis will be our 
primary analysis.    
 
The additional HITT  study cohort will enable validation of SPOT system to 
capture out of room events  unde r various ambulatory patterns. This will 
build on the current cohort that validate d simple in and out of room events.  
Feasible study will be defined as more than 80% of badges assigned to 
participants detect movement in and out a room  during continuous an d 
interval movement patterns.  
 
7.3 Data management  
 
Clinical Data Collection F orm REDCap  
Tag Tracking  Data  Excel  
8.0 Potential Risks  
 
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 13 of 16 
 8.1 Wearable SPOT badges and activity monitors  
 
We are currently not aware of any risks associated with activity monitors, 
including the Fitbit, Kenz Lifecorder, or SPOT badges.  Pedometers are 
available to the public without restrictions and SPOT badges are deployed 
throughout WFBH and worn by medical staff.  Data collected on the 
pedometers are stored on the device and retrievable only by staff team 
members.  Downloaded data will be stored using a secure server in 
WFBH.  Data collected by the SPOT badge  is stored electronically  on a 
secure served manag ed by WFBH SPOT team .  If the SPOT badge  was 
to be lost by a participant, no data is retrievable from the device .   
 
8.2 Walk Assessment  
 
There is a risk of the participant losing their balance and falling associated 
with the walking after surgery.  In rare in stances, persons could 
experience leg or chest pain, heart palpitations, shortness of breath.  In 
very rare situations exercise can result in heart attack or sudden death. 
We will minimize this risk by: (1) safely escorting participants to chairs 
located a long the walking course should they become unsteady; (2) 
following them at a close distance; and, (3) being at their side should they 
need assistance. There is a risk that participants may experience muscle 
soreness or discomfort as a result of physical ac tivity.  However, walking 
is regarded as an important component of postoperative recovery.  
9.0 Confidentiality and Privacy  
 
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess 
study outcomes, minimizing to the fullest extent p ossible the collection of any 
information that could directly identify subjects, and maintaining all study 
information in a secure manner.  To help ensure subject privacy and 
confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collectio n 
form.  No patient identifying information  will be collected or stored.  Data access 
will be limited to study staff.  Data and records will be kept locked and secured, 
with any computer data password protected.  No reference to any individual 
participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise 
from the study.  
10.0 Data Safety and Monitoring  
 
The principal investigator will be responsible for the overall monitoring of the data 
and safety of study participants. The p rincipal investigator will be assisted by 
other members of the study staff.  
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 14 of 16 
 11.0 Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or 
Deviations  
 
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations 
or protocol changes will be pr omptly reported by the principal investigator or 
designated member of the research team to the IRB and sponsor or appropriate 
government agency if appropriate.
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 15 of 16 
 References  
1.  Hughes MJ, McNally S, Wigmore SJ. Enhanced recovery following liver surgery: a 
systematic review and meta -analysis. HPB (Oxford)  2014:699 –706. 
2.  Kehlet H, Slim K. The future of fast -track surgery. Br J Surg  2012.  
3.  Bradshaw BG, Liu SS, Thirlby RC. Standardized perioperative care protocols and 
reduced length of stay after colon surgery. J Am Coll Surg  1998;186:501 –6. 
4.  Chui M, Loffler M, Roberts R. (2016). Internet of Things (IoT). [WWW document]. URL 
http://www.mck insey.com/industries/high -tech/our -insights/the -internet -of-things  
5.  Centrak. (2016). Centrak RTLS Introduction. [WWW document]. URL 
http://www.centrak.com/intro -to-rtls/ 
6.  Hannan AL, Hing W, Simas V, et al. High -intensity interval training versus moderate -
intensity continuous training within cardiac rehabilitation: a systematic review and meta -
analysis. Open Access J Sports Med . 2018;9:1 -17. Published 2018 Jan 26. 
doi:10.214 7/OAJSM.S150596  
7. Gibala MJ, Little JP, Macdonald MJ, Hawley JA. Physiological adaptations to low -volume, 
high-intensity interval training in health and disease. J Physiol . 2012;590(5):1077 -84. 
8.  Kupst, M.J., Butt, Z., Stoney, C.M., Griffith, J.W., Sals man, J.M., Folkman, S., & Cella, D. 
(2015). Assessment of Stress and Self -Efficacy for the NIH Toolbox for Neurological and 
Behavioral Function. Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 28(5), 531 -544.  
9.  Asano, M, Miller, WC. Eng JJ. Development and psychometric pro perties of the 
ambulatory self -confidence questionnaire. Gerontology . 2007;53(6):373 -81. Epub 2007 
Jun 29.  
10.  Jones, D., Musselman, R., Pearsall, E. et al. “Ready to Go Home? Patients’ 
Experiences of the Discharge Process in an Enhanced Recovery After Surgery 
(ERAS) Program for Colorectal Surgery.” J Gastrointest Surg  (2017) 21: 1865.   
11. Reeve, Thomas E. et al. “Grip strength measurement for frailty assessment in patients 
with vascular disease and associations with comorbidity, cardiac risk, and sarcopenia.” 
Journal of Vascular Surgery , vol. 67: Issue 5 :1512 - 1520  
12.  Fulk GD, Combs S a, Danks K a, Nirider CD,  Raja B, Reisman DS. Accuracy of 2 activity 
monitors in detecting steps in people with stroke and traumatic brain injury. Phys Ther  
2014;94:222 –9. 
13.  Takacs J, Pollock CL, Guenther JR, Bahar M, Napier C, Hunt M a. Validation of the Fitbit 
One activity monitor device during treadmill walking. J Sci Med Sport  2013:1 –5. 
14.  Mammen, G., Gardiner, S., Senthinathan, A., McClemont, L., Stone, M., & Faulkner, G. 
(2012). Is this Bit Fit? Measuring the Quality of the Fitbit Step -Counter.  The Health & 
Fitness Journal of Canada , 5(4), 30 -39. https://doi.org/10.14288/hfjc.v5i4.144  
15.  Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, et al. A short physical performance batter y 
assessing lower extremity function: association with self -reported disability and prediction 
of mortality and nursing home admission. J Gerontol  1994;49:M85 –94. 
16.  Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF, et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent 
disab ility: consistency across studies, predictive models, and value of gait speed alone 
compared with the short physical performance battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  
Feasibility Assessment of the Wake Forest Real -time Tracking System for Monitoring 
Patient Movement during Postoperativ e Recovery: Part 2  
IRB 00039439  
 
Page 16 of 16 
 2000;55:M221 –31. 
17.  Simonsick EM, Montgomery PS, Newman AB, Bauer DC, Harris T. Measur ing fitness in 
healthy older adults: the Health ABC Long Distance Corridor Walk. J Am Geriatr Soc  
2001;49:1544 –8. 
18.  Vestergaard S, Patel K V, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L, Guralnik JM. Characteristics of 400 -
meter walk test performance and subsequent mortal ity in older adults. Rejuvenation Res  
2009;12:177 –84. 
19.  Tudor -Locke C, Burkett L, Reis JP, Ainsworth BE, Macera CA, Wilson DK. How many 
days of pedometer monitoring predict weekly physical activity in adults? Prev Med 
(Baltim)  2005;40:293 –8. 
20.  Middleton, Addie et al. “Walking speed: the functional vital sign.”  Journal of aging and 
physical activity  vol. 23,2 (2015): 314 -22. 
 
 
 