 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE): A novel 
technique for spinal cord imaging  
NCT Number:  02415244  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kenichi Ueda, MD  
Document Date: February 1, 2019  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE): A novel technique for spinal cord  imaging  
PI: Kenichi Ueda 
IRB ID #:  201206753  
Form Content  
I. Project  Introduction  
I.1 Project to be reviewed  by: 
IRB-01 
 
I.2 Project  Title:  
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE): A novel technique for spinal cord imaging  
 
I.3 Short Title  (optional):  
I.4 Provide  a short  summary  of the purpose  and procedures  of the study  proposed  in this IRB application. 
DO NOT include information on studies not proposed in this  application.  
Use LAY terminology  only.  This must  be easily  understandable  by IRB community  members  and 
nonscientists.  
DO NOT cut and paste  technical  abstracts  from  funding  applications  that may not be understood  by 
a general  audience.  
The aim of this prospective  observational  study  is to assess  whether  transesophageal  echocardiography  (TEE)  can be 
used to identify the structures within the vertebral foramen of the spinal column and to determine the range of 
spinal segments which can be visualized. Data will be collected from both pediatric and adult patients undergoing 
cardiothoracic and interven tional cardiac surgeries under general anesthesia. Because use of TEE is a standard 
surgical procedure and because TEE will already be in place to visualize the heart, no additional processes will be 
required  to collect  data, minimizing  patient  risk. TEE will be monitored  and controlled  by a trained  anesthesiologist  or 
TEE technician  and visualization  of the spinal  cord will be confirmed.  Real-time TEE images  will then be captured  and 
later graded by a trained sonographer as high, medium or low quality. Starting at the level of the tracheal 
bifurcation,  corresponding  to thoracic  vertebral  level T5 (Mirajalili  2012),  the TEE probe  will be advanced  cranially  to 
determine the spinal le vels visualized above T5 and caudally in order to determine the spinal levels below T5 that 
can be seen on TEE. At  each level seen on TEE,  pictures  will be taken  for confirmation.  
 
I.5 Specify  your research  question(s),  study  aims  or hypotheses  (do not indicate  "see protocol")  
The primary  outcome  is to identify  the spinal  column  and epidural  space  on real-time TEE image,  as well as to 
determine the range of spinal segments that can be visually spanned by  TEE. 
The secondary  outcomes  include  classification  of the captured  TEE image  as high, medium  or low quality  as 
determined by a trained  sonographer.  
H0: The null hypothesis is that the spinal cord and epidural space will not be visualized on real -time TEE image. 
H1: The alternative  hypothesis  is that the spinal  cord and epidural  space  will be successfully  confirmed  by real-time 
TEE image in all  individuals.  
To test this hypothesis,  both pediatric  and adult patients  undergoing  cardiothoracic  or interventional  cardiac 
surgeries under general anesthesia will be included in the study  population.  
 
I.6 Background  and significance  and/or  Preliminary  studies  related  to this project. 
(do not indicate "see  protocol")  
Transesophageal echocardiography is a semi -invasive, monitoring and analytic tool used to generate reproducible 
images  of the heart and mediastinum.  TEE is routinely  used in cardiothoracic  and interventional  surgeries  as well as 
in detecting  thromboses,  valvular  defects  and congenital  heart  disease.  There  has been expanding  utilization  of TEE 
outside  of cardiac  surgery  as a potential  haemodynamic  monitor  both intraoperatively  and postoperatively  (Pissarra 
2012). While TEE is not regularly used to visualize the spinal column, it can be done with relative ease when 
consciously attempted (Chitilian 2006). To our knowledge, this prospective observational study will be the first 
attempt  to deliberately  image  the structures  within  the vertebral  foramen,  to scan the spinal  segments  identified  by 
TEE and to classify  the TEE image  quality  by a trained  sonographer.  Given  the nearly  universal  use of TEE in cardiac 
surgical  operating  rooms,  in combination  with the low risk of complications(Daniel  1991),  potential  outcomes  include 
the use of TEE in the placement  of thoracic  epidural  catheters,  in identification  of spinal  cord trauma  or as a monitor 
of intraoperative perfusion and pressure surrounding the spinal cord (Godet 1994). This could lead to improved 
precision, success and safety of regional  anesthesia.  
 
I.7 Literature cited / references (if attaching a grant or protocol enter  N/A).  
1. Pissarra  F, Oliveira  A, Marcelino  P: Transoesophageal  echocardiography  for monitoring  liver surgery:  data from a 
pilot study. Cardiology research and practice 2012,  2012:723418.  
2. Chitilian  HV, Alston  TA, Avery  EG: Transesophageal  echocardiographic  bull's eye. Journal  of cardiothoracic  and 
vascular anesthesia 2006,  20(6):894 -895. 
3. Daniel WG, Erbel R, Kasper  W, Visser  CA, Engberding  R, Sutherland  GR, Grube  E, Hanrath  P, Maisch  B, Dennig  K 
et al: Safety  of transesophageal  echocardiography.  A multicenter  survey  of 10,419  examinations.  Circulation  1991, 
83(3):817 -821. 
4. Godet  G, Couture  P, Ionanidis  G, Gosgnach  M, Kieffer  E, Viars P: Another  application  of two-dimensional  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 Prsn COI COI  transesophageal  echocardiography:  spinal  cord imaging.  A preliminary  report.  Journal  of cardiothoracic  and vascular 
anesthesia 1994,  8(1):14 -18. 
 
II. Research  Team  
II.2  Team  Members  
UI Team Members   
 
 
Key  UI VAMC  Consent  
Name  E-mail College  Contact   Process 
Involvement  Deactivated  
 
Kenichi Ueda, MD  
 
Non-UI Team Members  
Name Institution Location FWA Role DHHS  Contact   
 
Key  
 
UI VAMC Consent Process Email 
 
Nothing found to display.  
 
II.3  The Principal  Investigator  of this study  is: 
Faculty  Prsn COI COI Involvement  
 
III. Funding/Other  Support  
III.1  Funding  Sources  
Type  Source Grant Title Name of PI on  Grant  
Departmental / PI Discretionary  
* new source name  
 
III.3  Does  any member  of the research  team  have  a financial  conflict  of interest  related  to this project  according  to 
the Conflict of Interest in Research  policy? If yes, please indicate which  membersbelow.  
Name  Has Conflict of Interest  
Kenichi Ueda,  MD No 
Do you want the IRB to give this project  
Regular (expedited or full board) review   
  
 
 
IV. Project Type   
IV.1  
 
IV.2  Enter  the date you will be ready  to begin  screening  subjects/collecting  data for this project.  (If you do 
not have a specified date, add "upon IRB  approval")  
6/25/2012  
 
IV.3  Are you requesting  a waiver  of informed  consent/authorization  (subjects  will not be given  any oral or 
written information about the  study)?  
No 
 
V. Other Committee  Review  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 V.1 Does  this project  involve  any substance  ingested,  injected,  or applied  to the body? 
Do not answer  yes, if the involvement  includes  a device,  wire,  or instrument  
No 
 
V.2 Are any contrast agents used for any purpose in this  study?  
No 
 
V.9 Will any subject  be asked  to undergo  a diagnostic  radiation  procedure  (including  radiographic,  nuclear 
medicine,  DEXA)?  
No 
 
V.14 Will any subject  be asked  to undergo  a radiation  therapy  procedure  (including  external  beam  therapy, 
brachytherapy, or nuclear medicine  therapy)?  
No 
 
V.20  Does  this project  involve  the deliberate  transfer  of recombinant  or synthetic  nucleic  acid molecules,  or DNA or 
RNA derived from recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules, into one or more human research 
participant?  
No 
 
V.21  Will any portion  of this project  be conducted  in the CRU,  or does  it use any CRU resources?  
No 
 
V.22  Will this project use any resource/patients of the  HCCC?  
No 
 
V.23  Will any part of this project be conducted on VAMC  premises?  
No 
 
V.24  Does this project involve VAMC patients or  records?  
No 
 
V.25  .a Will the study  involve  any of the following  activity  at UI Health  Care,  even  if subjects  or their  insurance  will 
not be billed for the item or service, and regardless of the study funding source (including studies with 
departmental or no  funding)?  
Proce dures,  tests,  examinations,  hospitalizations,  use of Pathology  services,  use of clinic  facilities  or 
clinical  equipment,  or any patient  care services,  including  services  conducted  in the Clinical  Research 
Unit;  or 
Physician  services  or services  provided  by non-physicians  who are credentialed  to bill (ARNPs,  Physician 
Assistants,  etc.)  
Yes 
 
V.26  The study involves nursing, nursing resources or evaluates nursing  practices.  
No 
VI. Subjects  
VI.1  How many adult subjects do you expect to consent or enroll for this  project?  
50 
 
VI.2  What is the age of the youngest adult  subject?  
18.0 
 
VI.3  What is the age of the oldest adult  subject?  
90.0 
 
VI.4  What is the percentage of adult male  subjects?  
50 
 
VI.5  What is the percentage of adult female  subjects?  
50 
 
VI.6  How many minor subjects do you expect to consent or enroll for this  project?  
50 
 
VI.7  What is the age of the youngest minor  subject?  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 0.0 
 
VI.8  What is the age of the oldest minor  subject?  
17.0 
 
VI.9  What is the percentage of minor male  subjects?  
50 
 
VI.10  What is the percentage of minor female  subjects?  
50 
 
VI.11  Will any of the minors enrolled be in foster care or Wards of the  court?  
No 
 
VI.13  Describe EACH of your subject  populations  
Include description of any control group(s)  
Specify the Inclusion/Exclusion criteria for EACH group  
Studies  under  IRB-03 enrolling  non veterans  as part of the subject  population  must  present  a compelling 
argument to the IRB for the inclusion of non -Veterans (e.g., insufficient number of Veterans; survey of 
VA employees; study of active duty military; study involving Veterans’ family members), and the 
research is relevant to the care of Veterans or active d uty military  personnel.  
The study  populations  will include  50 pediatric  patients  and 50 adult patients  scheduled  for cardiothoracic  or interventional 
cardiac  surgeries  under  general  anesthesia.  We will exclude  any patients  with known  esophageal  abnormalities,  lesions  or 
disease that would disqualify the patient for the use of TEE as standard procedure. We will also exclude any patients that 
come to the catheter laboratory exclusively for TEE exam as our study will only occur in patients already s cheduled to 
undergo TEE use in surgery or diagnostic procedure. This will ensure that our study occurs only as a part of standard 
procedure and will not lengthen time under anesthesia or time in the operating room. There is no control population 
needed.  
 
VI.14  Provide  an estimate  of the total  number  of subjects  that would  be eligible  for inclusion  in each  of your study 
populations (include your control population if  applicable)  
50 pediatric  patients  and 50 adult patients.  There  is no control  population  needed.  We expect  to complete  this study  in one 
year. 
 
VI.15  Describe  how you will have  access  to each  of your study  populations  in sufficient  number  to meet  your 
recruitment  goals.  
Outpatient  pediatric  and adult cardiac  surgery  patients  will be recruited  at the cardiology  clinics  when  patients  visit for the 
preoperative  evaluation.  Inpatient  cardiac  patients  will be identified  initially  by using  the EPIC operating  room schedule  on 
the day before  surgery.  We will have access  to these  populations  by working  within  the Department  of Anesthesiology,  and 
by monitoring the OR schedule for patients scheduled to undergo cardiothoracic or interventional cardiac diagnosis and 
surgeries. The use of TEE is standard procedure for visualizing the heart in these procedures. A trained TEE operator will 
be availab le to control and capture images. Patients will be recruited until data has been collected in 50 pediatric patients 
and 50 adult  patients.  
 
VI.16  Do you plan to recruit/enroll non -English speaking  people?  
No 
VI.18  Do you propose  to enroll  any of the following  in this study  as subjects? 
Employee  of the PI or employee  of a research  team  member  
Individual supervised by PI or supervised by member of research team  
Individual subordinate to the PI or subordinate to any member of the research team  
Student or trainee under the direction of the PI or under the direction of a member of the research team  
No 
 
VI.20  Will subjects provide any information about their  relatives?  
No 
 
VI.23  Will anyone  (other  than the subject)  provide  you with information  abou t the subject  (e.g.  proxy  interviews)?  
No 
 
VI.26  Is this project about  pregnant  women?  
No 
 
VI.27  Will this project involve  fetuses?  
No 
 
VI.28  Does  this project  involve  adult  subjects  who may be incompetent  or have  limited  decision -making  capacity  on 
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 initial enrollment into the study?  
No 
 
VI.32  Does  this project  involve  subjects  whose  capacity  to consent  may change  over the course  of the study?  
No 
 
VI.37  Does this project involve  prisoners as  subjects ? 
No 
 
VII. A. Project Description (A)  
Where will project procedures take place (check all that apply)?  
UIHC - Main Operating Rooms, Pediatric Catheter Labora tory, Pediatric and Adult Cardiac Surgery Clinics  
 
Is this project  also being  conducted  by other  researchers  at their  own sites  (e.g.  a multi -site collaborative 
project)?  
No 
 
VII.B.  Project Description  (B) 
VII.B.1  Does  this project  involve  any of the following: 
clinical  intervention  
pharmacologic intervention 
therapeutic intervention  
physiology studies (e.g. studying the functions of organs, tissues, or cells)  
Yes 
 
VII.B.2  Does  this project  involve  a drug  washout  (asking  subject  to stop taking  any drugs  s/he  is currently 
taking)?  
No 
 
VII.B.6  Will any subjects  receive  a placebo  in this study  when,  if they were  not participating,  they could  be 
receiving an FDA -approved treatment for their  condition?  
No 
 
VII.B.11  Is there  a separate,  written  protocol  that will be submitted  in addition  to this IRB New Project  form?  (Note:  a 
grant application is not considered to be a  protocol)  
No 
 
VII.B.18  Does this project involve testing the safety and/or efficacy of a medical  device?  
Yes 
 
VII.B.19  Describe  in detail  procedures  in place  for maintaining  device  shipment  and receipt  records:  
This device  is already  onsite  being  used in the UIHC Main Operating  Room  and Pediatric  Catheter  Laboratory  of 
alternative purposes, thus, no device shipping or receipt will  occur.  
 
VII.B.20  Who will be responsible for maintaining these shipment and receipt  records?  
N/A 
 
VII.B.21  Describe  in detail  procedures  in place  for tracking  use and disposition  of devices  described  in this study:  
N/A 
 
VII.B.22  Who will be responsible for maintaining these use and disposition tracking  records?  
N/A 
 
VII.B.23  Describe in detail procedures in place to limit access to authorized study personnel for the storage, 
control,  and dispensing  of the investigational  devices.  (For example,  investigational  devices  are kept in a 
locked  area away  from  approved  devices  or have  a keyed  interlock,  and only study  personnel  authorized 
to dispense the device have the  keys)  
N/A 
 
VII.B.24  Is the device FDA -approved for the way it will be used in this  study?  
No 
 
VII.B.25  Is there  an IDE (Investigational  Device  Exemption)  for this device  in this research  project?  
No 
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
  
VII.B.29  Indicate  the appropriate  FDA status  you and/or  the sponsor  are requesting  for the use of this 
device in this  study.  
Non-Significant Risk (NSR) device/software  
 
VII.B.31  Provide  a detailed  rationale  for why this device  meets  the FDA definition  of a Non- 
Significant Risk Device  (NSR)  
Because  it is not intended  as an implant  nor is it to be used in supporting  or sustaining  human  life. 
At this time it is not of substantial  importance  in diagnosing,  curing,  mitigating  or treating  disease.  
 
VII.B.32  Provide a summary of prior investigations with this  device.  
Transesophageal echocardiography is a semi -invasive, monitoring and analytic tool used to 
generate reproducible images of the heart and mediastinum. TEE is routinely used in 
cardiothorac ic and interventional surgeries as well as in detecting thromboses, valvular defects 
and congenital heart disease. There has been expanding utilization of TEE outside of cardiac 
surgery as a potential haemodynamic monitor both intraoperatively and postoper atively (Pissarra 
2012). While TEE is not regularly used to visualize the spinal column, it can be done with relative 
ease when consciously attempted (Chitilian 2006). To our knowledge, this prospective 
observational study will be the first attempt to deli berately image the structures within the 
vertebral foramen, to scan the spinal segments identified by TEE and to classify the TEE image 
quality by a trained sonographer. Given the nearly universal use of TEE in cardiac surgical 
operating rooms, in combinat ion with the low risk of complications(Daniel 1991), potential 
outcomes  include  the use of TEE in the placement  of thoracic  epidural  catheters,  in identification  of 
spinal  cord trauma  or as a monitor  of intraoperative  perfusion  and pressure  surrounding  the spinal 
cord (Godet 1994). This could lead to improved precision, success and safety of regional 
anesthesia.  
 
VII.B.33  Have  there  been  any prior  IRB reviews  (at UI or elsewhere)  and/or  determinations 
made with regard to this  device?  
Yes 
 
VII.B.34  Provide a discussion of these  reviews/determinations.  
Yes, as TEE is a standard  intraoperative  monitor,  multiple  studies  have demonstrated  a low 
rate of complications  associated  with TEE, deeming  it safe for use in surgery  (Daniel  1991).  
 
VII.B.35  Has the FDA made an assessment of risk with regard to this  device?  
No 
 
VII.B.36  Has this device/software  been  approved  by the FDA for another  indication  or in another  form 
from its use in this  project?  
Yes 
 
VII.B.37  Describe  differences  between  approved  device/software  and its use in this study:  
TEE is routinely used in cardiothoracic and interventional surgeries as well as in detecting 
thromboses,  valvular  defects  and congenital  heart disease.  In this study,  TEE will not be used in a 
similar manner but to visualize the spinal column as can be done with relative ease when 
consciously  attempted  (Chitilian  2006).  To our knowledge,  this prospective  observational  study  will 
be the first attempt to deliberately image the structures within the vertebral foramen, to scan the 
spinal segments identified by TEE and to classify the TEE image quality by a trained sonographer. 
Given  the nearly  universal  use of TEE in cardiac  surgical  operating  rooms,  in combination  with the 
low risk of complications(Daniel 1991). This could lead to improved precision, success and safety 
of regional  anesthesia.  
 
VII.C.  Project Description  (C) 
VII.C.1  Does this project involve any  research on genes or genetic  testing/research ? 
No 
 
VII.D.  Project Description  (D) 
VII.D.1  Check  all materials/methods  that will be used  in recruiting  subjects  (you  will need  to attach  copies  of all 
materials at the end of the  application):  
Use of any information  available  to the researchers  or their colleagues  because  this person  is a patient  OR use of any 
information  considered  to be Protected  Health  Information  (PHI)  OR review  of patient/clinic  records  - Operating  room 
schedule  
Referral  from colleague - Thoracic  surgery  physicians  and nurses  may identify  potential  patients.  Also, some  patients 
may be identified by Pre -Anesthesia Evaluation Clinic  staff. 
 
VII.D.2  List the individual  data elements  you will need  to access/use  from  the patient  or clinic  records  to 
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 identify potential subjects for recruitment  
We will need to access patient records to check the patient's eligibility for the study by checking their surgical 
procedure,  past medical  history,  counter  indications  for TEE use intra-operatively  (esophageal  trauma,  lesion  or 
disease) and  age. 
 
VII.D.3  Describe  why you could  not practicably  recruit  subjects  without  access  to and use of the information 
described  above  
Many patients may be unaware that they are eligible for the study becaus e they do not understand the routine use 
of TEE in the operating room. Also, patients coming to UIHC for this type of surgery come from all over Iowa and 
surrounding  states.  Recruitment  of eligible  patients  outside  of Iowa City for such a specific  study  population  would  be 
extremely  difficult.  
 
VII.D.4  Describe  why you could  not practicably  obtain  authorization  from  potential  subjects  to review  their 
patient or clinic records for recruitment  purposes.  
We could  not practicably  obtain  authorization  from potential  subjects  to review  their patient  or clinic records  because 
the population being studied is very specific. We would have to ask all patients who arrive in the thoracic surgery 
clinic for permission to review their charts in order to identify the possible pa rticipants  needed.  
 
VII.D.5  Describe plans to protect the identifiers from improper use or  disclosure  
The only people  who will have access  to the data collected  for this study  will be members  of the research  team.  After 
data collection, the data will be immediately transferred electronically to a password protected file on a password 
protected  computer  and paper  files will be kept in a locked  filing cabinet in a  locked  office.  
 
VII.D.6  Describe  plans  to destroy  identifiers  at the earliest  opportunity  consistent  with conduct  of the research 
Paper  identifiers  will be shredded  and electronic  identifiers  will be completely  cleared  from computers  at the earliest 
opportunity consistent with the conduct of this  project.  
 
VII.D.7  Does the research team agree that the requested information will not be reused or disclosed to any 
other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of the study, or for other 
research  for which  the use or disclosure  of the reques ted information  would  be permitted  by the HIPAA 
Privacy  Rule 
Yes 
 
VII.D.8  Will a member  of the research  team  discuss  the study  with the subject  in person  prior  to the subject  agreeing 
to participate?  
Yes 
 
VII.D.9  Describe the physical location where the consent process will take  place:  
In most cases the patients will be approached in the Thoracic Surgery Clinic, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit or 
Anesthesia  Pre-Surgical  Evaluation  Clinic  approximately  24 hours  before  surgery.  Patients  approached  in the Thoracic 
Surgery  Clinic  will recieve  a copy of the consent  form to take home  with them.  Those  patients  who are consented  the 
day of surgery will have 1 -5 hours before the surgery begins. Patients will be consented before they receive any 
sedation.  
 
VII.D.10  Will a member  of the research  team  discuss  the study  with the subject  by phone  prior  to the subject  agreeing 
to participate?  
Yes 
 
VII.D.11  Describe:  
If subjects  have questions  for the research  team they are able to contact  team members  by phone  as provided  on 
the consent.  
 
VII.D.12  Who will be involved  in the consent  process  (including  review  of consent  document,  answering  subjects' 
questions)?  
Name  Consent Process  Involvement  
Kenichi  Ueda,  MD Yes 
 
VII.D.15  Check all materials that will be used to obtain/document informed  consent:  
Consent Document  
 
VII.D.16  Are you requesting  a waiver  of documentation  of consent  (either  no subject  signature  or no written 
document)?  
No 
 
VII.D.19  Before  the subject  gives  consent  to participate  are there  any screening  questions  that you need  to directly  ask 
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 the potential subject to determine eligibility for the study?  
Yes 
 
VII.D.20  List any screening  questions  you will directly  ask the potential  subject  to determine  eligibility.  
We will ask if the subject  has any known  esophageal  abnormalities,  lesions,  disease  or other  issues  that would 
increase risks associated with transesophageal echocardiographic  imaging.  
We will ask the subject if they are pregnant or incarcerated.  
 
VII.D.21  Will you keep  a screening  log or other  record  that would  include  information  on people  who do not enroll 
in the  study?  
No 
 
VII.D.25  After  the subject  agrees  to participate  (signs  consent),  are there  any screening  procedures,  tests,  or studies 
that need to be done to determine if the subject is eligible to  continueparticipating?  
No 
 
VII.D.27  Discuss  how much  time a potential  subject  will have  to agree  to consider  participation  and whether  or not 
they will be able to discuss  the study  with family/friends  before  deciding  on participation.  
Use of TEE is standard  in cardiac  surgeries.  Patients  who are approached  in the Thoracic  Surgery  Clinic  will have at least 
24 hours to agree to consider participation in our study. These patients will recieve a consent for m to take home for 
further discussion. Patients who are approached on the day of surgery will have 1 -5 hours to agree to consider 
participation in the study. All patients will have the opportunity to discuss with family/friends before deciding on 
participa tion. 
 
VII.D.28  How long after the subject agrees to participate do study procedures  begin?  
Patients  who are consented  in the pre-operative  clinic will have at least 24 hours  between  agreeing  to participate  and their 
surgery.  Patients  who are consented  the morning  of surgery  will have between  one and five hours  from the time of consent 
until their surgery. Patients will be consented before they receive any  sedation.  
 
VII.D.29  Provide a description of the enrollment and consent process for adult  subjects  
Describe each study population separately including control population 
Include when recruitment and consent materials are used  
Use 3rd person  active  voice  “The  Principal  Investigator  will identify  subjects.  For example,  the principal 
investigator will identify potential subjects, the study coordinator will discuss the study with subjects 
over the telephone and schedule the first study visit,  etc...”  
Describe  the steps  that will be taken  by the research  team  to minimize  the possibility  of coercion  or 
undue influence during the consent  process  
We will identify  patients  who meet the inclusion  criteria  by reviewing  the pre-operative  clinic patient  list and operating 
room schedule. All patients will be consented in the same  manne r. 
In most cases we will approach the patients in the Thoracic Surgery Clinic, Pediatric Intensive Care Clinic or Anesthesia 
Pre-Surgical  Evaluation  Clinic  at least 24 hours  before  surgery.  We will introduce  ourselves  as members  of the anesthesia 
team. We will explain the study and standard TEE procedure, including benefits and risks to the the patient and provide 
them a copy of the consent document. The patients will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss their 
participation  with family  or friends.  Patients  will also recieve  a copy of the consent  form to take home  with them.  Patients 
who agree to participate will sign the consent document and will be provided with a copy of the consent. The consent 
document will contain contac t information that the patient may use to contact the research team with any questions or 
concerns.  
Those  patients  who are consented  the day of surgery  will be approached  by a nurse  and handed  a card which  states  that 
the patient  is elibible  to participate  in a research  study.  If they are interested  in participating,  a member  of the research 
team will explain the study to the patient. We will explain the study, including benefits and risks, to the the patient and 
provide them with a copy of the consent docu ment. The patients will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss 
their participation with family or friends. Patients who agree to participate will sign the consent document and will be 
provided  with a copy of the consent.  The consent  document  will contain  contact  information  that the patient  may use to 
contact  the research  team with any questions  or concerns.  Patients  will have between  one and five hours  after consent  is 
obtained  before their  surgery.  No sedation  will be  given  before  the consent  is obtained.  
Further,  in order  to minimize  the possibility  of coercion  or undue  influence  during  the consent  process,  potential  subjects 
will be reminded  that participation  is voluntary  and choosing  not participate  will not affect  their surgery/care  when  they 
discuss the consent for with the research  team.  
 
VII.D.30  Describe  how you will obtain  the consent  of the parents  or legal  guardians  for child/minor  subjects  in this 
study  
Describe  each  study  population  separately  including  control  population 
Include when recruitment and consent materials are  used  
Use FIRST  person,  and provide  detail  as to order  of events  
Describe  the steps  that will be taken  by the research  team  to minimize  the possibility  of coercion  or 
undue influence during the consent  process  
For children/minors who are too young to assent or consent on their own:  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
 We will identify  patients  who meet the inclusion  criteria  by reviewing  the pre-operative  clinic patient  list and operating 
room schedule. All patients or their guardians will be consented in the same  manner.  
In most cases we will approach the patient's guardian in the Thoracic Surgery Clinic, Pediatric Intensive Care Clinic or 
Anesthesia  Pre-Surgical  Evaluation  Clinic  at least 24 hours  before  surgery.  We will introduce  ourselves  as members  of the 
research study team. We will explain the study, including benefits and risks, to the the patient's guardian and provide 
them a copy of the consent document. Guardians will have the opport unity to ask questions and discuss the subject's 
participation  with family  or friends.  Guardians  will also receive  a copy of the consent  form to take home  with them.  
Guardians  who agree  to patient  participation  will sign the consent  document  and will be provided  with a copy of the 
consent.  The consent  document  will contain  contact  information  that the patient  or guardian  may use to contact  the 
research team with any questions or  concerns.  
Those patients who are consented the day of surgery will have their  guardian approached by a nurse and handed a card 
which  states  that the patients  is eligible  to participate  in a research  study.  If they are interested  in participating,  a member 
of the research  team will explain  the study  to the patient.  We will explain  the study,  including  benefits  and risks,  to the the 
patient and provide them with a copy of the consent document. The guardian will have the opportunity to ask questions 
and discuss their participation with family or friends. Guardians who agree to patient  participation will sign the consent 
document  and will be provided  with a copy of the consent.  The consent  document  will contain  contact  information  that the 
patient may use to contact the research team with any questions or concerns. Patients will have be tween one and five 
hours  after consent  is obtained  before  their surgery.  No sedation  will be given  before  the consent  is obtained.  
For children/minors who will sign an assent document or are old enough to sign a consent document:  
We will identify  patients  who meet the inclusion  criteria  by reviewing  the pre-operative  clinic patient  list and operating 
room schedule. All patients will be consented in the same  manner.  
In most cases  we will approach  the patient  and their guardian  in the Thoracic  Surgery  Clinic,  Pediatric  Intensive  Care Clinic 
or Anesthesia Pre -Surgical Evaluation Clinic at least 24 hours before surgery. We will introduce ourselves as members of 
the research  study  team.  We will explain  the study,  including  benefits  and risks,  to the the patient  and their guardian  and 
provide them a copy of the assent document. The patients will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss their 
participation with family or friends. Patients will also receive a copy of the assent form to take home with them. P atients 
who agree to participate will sign the assent document and will be provided with a copy of the assent. The assent 
document will contain contact information that the patient may use to contact the research team with any questions or 
concerns.  
Those  patients  who are assented  the day of surgery  will be approached  by a nurse  and handed  a card which  states  that the 
patients  is eligible  to participate  in a research  study.  If they are interested  in participating,  a member  of the research  team 
will explain the study to the patient. We will explain the study, including benefits and risks, to the the patient and provid e 
them with a copy of the assent document. The patients will have the opportunity to ask questions and discuss their 
participa tion with family or friends. Patients who agree to participate will sign the assent document and will be provided 
with a copy of the assent form. The assent document will contain contact information that the patient may use to contact 
the research  team with any questions  or concerns.  Patients  will have between  one and five hours  after consent  is obtained 
before their surgery. No sedation will be given before the assent is  obtained.  
 
VII.D.31  What  are the plans  for the assent  process  for children/minors  in this study?  (You  may choose  more  than one 
procedure if you have different child populations in your  study)  
Children/minors will sign an assent or consent document - 
No assent  procedure  because  some  or all of the children/minors  do not have the capability  to assent  or their 
capability is so limited that they cannot reasonably be consulted to provide assent  - 
 
VII.D.36  Provide  a detailed  description  and rationale  for each  of the procedures  chosen  above  and describe  the 
child/minor populations to which they apply in y our study.  
For those children/minors who are too young (younger than 7 years old) to assent on their own or their capability is so 
limited  they cannot  reasonably  do so, their parent  or guardian  will consent  on their behalf.  All procedures  and information 
will be explained  by a member  of the research  team and all questions  will be answered  before  consent  is obtained.  
For those  children/minors  that are old enough  to sign an assent  (7-12 years  old) or consent  (>12 years  old) document, 
they will also have all procedures and information explained by a member of the research team and will be given the 
opportunity to ask questions before assent/consent is  obtained.  
 
VII.D.37  Does  the study  include  any form  of deception  (e.g.,  providing  participants  with false  information,  misleading 
information, or withholding information about certain study  procedures)?  
Examples:  
Procedure  includes  a cover  story  that provides  a plausible  but inaccurate  account  of the purposes  of the 
research.  
Participants  will be provided  with false  information  regarding  the particular  behaviors  of interest  in the 
research.  
Procedures include a confederate pretending to be another participant in the study.  
Participants  will be told that the research  inclu des completion  of a particular  task,  when  in fact, that task 
will not be  administered.  
Study  is designed  to introduce  a new procedure  (or task)  that participants  are not initially  told about. 
If yes, a waiver of informed consent must be requested under question  IV.3.  
No 
 
VII.E.  Project Description  (E) 
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
  
VII.E.1  Will subjects be  randomized?  
No 
 
VII.E.3  Will any questionnaires,  surveys,  or written  assessments  be used  to obtain  data directly  from  subjects  in this 
study?  
No 
 
VII.E.5  Does this project involve creating any audiotapes, videotapes, or  photographs?  
No 
 
VII.E.6  Provide  a detailed  description  in sequential  order  of the study  procedures  following  the consent  process  - DO 
NOT cut and paste from the Consent  Document.  
Describe  study  populations  separately  if they will be participating  in different  procedures  - include  CONTROL 
population if  applicable.  
DESCRIBE:  
What subjects will be asked to do/what happens in the study (in sequential order) 
The time per iod over which procedures will occur  
The time commitment for the subject for individual visits/procedures 
Long -term followup and how it occurs  
The subjects  of the study,  scheduled  to undergo  cardiothoracic  or interventional  cardiac  surgeries,  will only be asked  to 
come to their surgery. The day of surgery the patients will not be required to do anything different from standard 
anesthesia  and surgical  practice  at the hospital.  Subjects  will come  to the operating  room suite and the usual  monitors 
(electrocardiogram, non -invasive blood pressure, and oxygen saturation) will be  placed.  
Following  the routine  induction  of anesthesia,  the Mini-Multi TEE probe  (Model  T6207  (21381A),  Philips,  Bothell,  WA, USA) 
will be advanced  to mid esophageal  level in order  to visualize  the heart,  this is standard  surgical  procedure  in these  cases. 
Rotation of the probe by approximately 180 degrees toward the descending aorta, with an increased gain and depth 
decreased  to 2-3 cm, will attempt  to allow for appreciation  of the spinal  cord and epidural  space.  Upon confirmation  of the 
structures within the vertebral foramen by a trained TEE operator, an images of the spine will be captured to be later 
graded as high, medium or low quality by a trained sonographer. The TEE probe will then be advanced caudally and 
intervertebral disc spaces will be counted in order to determine the number of spinal segments that can be spanned until 
an image can no longer be generated. This will take approximately ten minutes, but will occur while the patient is being 
prepared for surgery so no additio nal time in the operating room will be necessary. At this point, the TEE probe will be 
returned to mid esophageal level to visualize the heart and the operation will proceed as usual. When looking at patient 
medical records, we will only collect the follow ing data: height, weight, age, any known history of esophageal 
abnormalities, lesions or disease and current procedure. Ten minutes is the approximate additional time that may be 
required  intraoperatively  to observe  the spinal  cord on TEE but this will not extend  the time in the operating  room and thus 
no additional billing is required. No additional visits or extra time is required of the subject. There will be no necessary 
long-term follow up or data collection. When the patient leaves the operating room,  nothing additional is  required.  
 
VII.E.7  Will you attempt to recontact subjects who are lost to  follow -up? 
No - followup is not required in this study  
 
VII.E.9  Will subjects be provided any compensation for participating in this  study?  
No 
 
VIII.  Risks 
VIII.1  What are the risk s to subjects  including  
- emotional or  psychological  
- financial  
- legal or  social  
- physical?  
The care the patient will receive is standard practice at UIHC for thoracic or interventional cardiac surgeries and are 
necessary procedures regardless of this research study. Thus, no additional physical risk is involved. Patients may be 
under  slightly  elevated  emotional  stress  knowing  that they are part of a research  study.  There  is a very low risk of loss of 
confidentiality of the patient's medical information, yet this is unlikely as patients will be given identification numbers a t 
the earliest date pos sible and these will only be accessed by members of the research team. Only the data necessary to 
answer the research question will be collected upon reviewing patient information. There are no other known financial, 
physical or legal risks to the  patient.  
 
VIII.2  What have you done to minimize the  risks?  
If applicable to this study ALSO include:  
How you (members  of your research  team  at Iowa)  will monitor  the safety  of individual  subjects. 
Include  a description  of the availability  of medical  or psychological  resources  that subjects  might 
require  as a consequence  of participating  in this research  and how referral  will occur  if necessary 
(e.g. availability of emergency medical care, psychological counseling,  etc.)  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
  
Healthcare professionals will monitor the subject at all times during the operation. The patient will be reassured that 
although  they are participating  in the study,  everything  that happens  during  the case is already  standard  practice  at UIHC 
for thoracic  and cardiac  surgery  patients.  All patients  will be given  an identification  number  and be referred  to by such.  To 
prevent  loss of confidentiality  of the patient's  medical  information,  we will keep all records  used for this study  in a locked 
office or on password protected computer system. Only members of the research team will have access to the records 
used in this study.  No key will be kept as patients  will not need to be contacted  in the future.  
 
VIII.3  Does  this study  have  a plan to have  an individual  or committee  review  combined  data from  all subjects  on a 
periodic basis (such as summary or aggregate safety and/or efficacy  data)?  
No 
 
IX. Benefits  
IX.1  What  are the direct  benefits  to the subject  (do not include  compensation  or hypothesized  results)?  
There are no direct benefits to the subject.  
 
IX.2  What  are the potential  benefits  to society  in terms  of knowledge  to be gained  as a result  of this project?  
This novel confirmation method of visualizing the spinal cord and epidural space could be uti lized in the future to detect 
spinal  trauma,  vascular  events  surrounding  the spinal  cord or detect  hematoma.  It could  also be used in thoracic  epidural 
catheter placement to improve the safety and success rate of epidural analgesia and potentially improve future patient 
care. 
 
X. Privacy &  Confidentiality  
X.1 What are you doing to protect the  privacy  interests of the  subjects?  
To protect  patient  privacy,  researchers  will be conducting  the consent  and study  procedures  in a private  setting.  Further, 
the research team will only be collecting the information necessary to comple te the  study.  
 
X.2 Are you collecting the Social Security Number of any subjects for any  purpose?  
No 
 
X.4 How will information/data be collected and stored for this study (check all that  apply):  
Electronic records (computer files, electronic databases, etc.) - Electronic records will be kept on the password 
protected Anesthesia department server. The members of the research team will be the only people with access to 
the files. No records will be kept on personal computers. Further, patients will be assigned a unique identification 
number. They will always be referred to by this number. The patient's hospital number and day of surgery will be 
recorded, but will not be disclosed to anyone outside th e research team. We will record the hospital number only to 
access the patients' chart later if needed. The database that contains the identifiers will be password protected so 
that the only the investigators  needing  it can access  it. No unnecessary  patien t identifiers  will be recorded,  and those 
that are needed will be deleted at the earliest possible time. Only data necessary to collect for the study will be 
recorded.  
Name - Dave Griffiths  
Title - System Administrator and System Programmer II 
Universit y Job Classification - IT Security Officer  
Paper/hard copy records (hard copy surveys, questionnaires, case report forms, pictures, etc.) - Paper/hard copy 
records, including consent documents and any other material printed for the study, will be stored  in the primary 
invetigator's  office  in a locked  file cabinet.  Further,  patients  will be assigned  a unique  identification  number.  They will 
always  be referred  to by this number.  The patient's  hospital  number  and day of surgery  will be recorded,  but will not 
be disclosed to anyone outside the research team. We will record the hospital number only to access the patients' 
chart later if needed. The database that contains the identifiers will be password protected so that the only the 
investigators  needing  it can access  it. No unnecessary  patient  identifiers  will be recorded,  and those  that are needed 
will be deleted  at the earliest  possible  time. Only data necessary  to collect  for the study  will be recorded.  
 
X.5 Do the confidentiality  protections  indicated  above  allow  only members  of the research  team  to access  the 
data/specimens?  
Yes 
 
XI. Data Analysis  
XI.1  Describe  the analysis  methods  you will use, including,  if applicable,  the variables  you will analyze  
We are not planning  to compare  pediatric  vs adult rates,  we just want to observe  the ability  to image  the spinal  cord using 
TEE in this observational study. Thus, we will only use exploratory descriptive statistics for  analysis.  
 
XI.2  Provide the rationale or power analysis to support the number of subjects proposed to compl ete this study. 
Because  this is a novel  technique,  we have no base for the ability  to visualize  the spinal  cord via TEE. We assume  that fifty 
pediatric patients and fifty adult patients will provide adequate power to confirm that the spinal cord can adequately be 
observed on TEE  image.  
HawkIRB  
https://hawkirb.research.uiowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/forms.page?mode=pf&OID=26902851[9/24/2019  11:11:41  AM]   
  
XII. Future  Research  
XII.1  Do you wish  to keep  any information  about  subjects  involved  with this research  project  so that members  of 
the current  research  team  may contact  them  in the future  for your own research  projects?  
No 
 
XII.2  Do you wish  to keep  any information  about  subjects  involved  with this research  project  so that other  
researchers  may contact them for future  research?  
No 
 
XII.4  Does this project involve st oring any data, tissues or specimens for future  research?  
Yes – contribution for future use is mandatory for participation in the study  
 
New Project Form Attachments  
 
Attachment Name  Category  Ver Size  Attached  
Assent_Ueda.rtf  Consent & Assent 
Forms  3 47 k E 07/19/12  
Recordofconsent_Final.rtf  Consent & Assent 
Forms  2 57 k E 06/21/12  
Ueda_Prospectiveconsent_Final722012.rtf  Consent & Assent 
Forms  4 171 k E 07/19/12  
Ueda reviewer questions.pdf  Miscellaneous  1 71 k E 07/13/12  
AssuranceUedaTEE18Jun12.pdf  Assurance 
Document  1 74 k E 06/18/12  
 