CONFIDENTIAL  
1 BCH protocol  
TITLE:   Pilo
t Study of Metformin for P atients with Fanconi Anemia  
Co
ordinating Center:    Boston Children’s Hospital 
Pr
incipal Investigator  (PI): Elissa Furutani, MD  
Co-PI: A
kiko Shimamura, MD PhD 
Erica Esrick, MD  
Sta
tistician:  Edie Weller, PhD  
Shanshan Liu, MS 
Study
 Coordinator s: Ashley Galvin  
Project Ma nager: Ashley Kuniholm 
Responsible R esearch N urse: Maggie Malsch,  MSN, RN, CPHON 
Agent
 Supply:  Commercial ly available  
Protocol Type / Version # / Version Date: Version # 9 /  28 FEB 2020
NCT 03398824
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 2 ABSTRACT AND SCHEMA 
 
Fanconi Anemia (FA)  is an inherited bone marrow failure disorder characterized by  a DNA 
repair defect leading to exhaustion of hematopoietic progenitor cells manifesting as cytopenias with a predisposition to develop hematologic malignancies and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Some patients with FA also have congenital anomalies.
1 Studies have demonstrated 
that Fanconi Anemia patients have defects in homologous end joining and DNA repair and that this DNA repair defect is partially mediated by both endogenous and exogenous aldehyde 
toxicity.
2-6   
 
Allogene ic hematopoietic stem cell transplan tation is curative for hematologic complications of 
FA, though it cannot abrogate the increased risk of solid tumors. However, transplant is associated with man y complications including GVHD and ma y increase the risk of subsequent 
solid tumors, not all patients are candidates for transplant  due to medical co- morbidities , and 
some may not have suitable donors.
7,8  
 Aside from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, there are very few medical therapies that  
have been shown to improve hematopoiesis and peripheral blood counts in patients with Fanconi Anemia who have developed aplastic anemia or even mild cytopenias. While androgens can ameliorate cytopenias in patients with FA , only a subset of patients have a hematologic response, 
and long- term treatments are limited by side effects (transaminitis, virilization, risk of 
developing hepatic adenomas and carcinomas) as well as waning hematologic responses over time.
9 Safe and effective oral agents to treat the cytopenias are urgently needed for patients with 
FA.  
 Metformin (N,N -dimethylbiguianide) has been used widely for many decades and has a well -
characterized side effect profile. Initially this drug was developed for type II diabetes and insulin resistance; however, there has been recent renewed interes t in M etformin given its anti -oxidant 
effects and potential protective effects, as observational studies have demonstrated a decreased incidence of breast cancer, lung cancer, colorectal cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma in patients treated with Metformin , possibly through AMP-kinase activation and mTOR inhibition 
(summarized in  
10). Relevant to this study, Metformin has also demonstrated aldehyde 
scavenging capabilities. Recent preclinical models both in FA cell lines and in FA mice have demonstrated that Metformin  improved the platelet count and ANC in FA mice and that this may 
be mediated by increasing the percentage of cells in quiescence and by improving DNA repair, as Metformin treated fibroblast cells had decreased numbers of spontaneous radials and breakage.
11  
 Based on these data, we propose a single institution, open- label, single arm pilot study of 
Metformin in patients with Fanconi An emia and cytopenias with the primary endpoint of 
hematologic response. This study will also assess safety, tolerability, and the biologic effects of Metformin in patients with FA.   
  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 3  
 
 
 
  Metformin 
Initiation 
phase  Metformin 
Maintenance phase  
Clinic visit, labs, and marrow evaluation  
 
Clinic visit, labs, and PK samples (when available); otherwise, phone call and local labs  
 Local labs  
   
Phone call and drug diary review  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 Baseline  
1        2      3     4     5      6               7              8                9               10               11             12 Post 
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 4 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1. OBJECTIVES  5 
 1.1 Study Design 5 
 1.2 Primary Objective  5 
 1.3 Secondary Objectives 5 
 1.4 Exploratory Objectives 5 
2. BACKGROUND  6 
 2.1 Fanconi Anemia  6 
 2.2 Metformin 6 
 2.3 Rationale for evaluation of Metformin in Fanconi Anemia 8 
 2.4 Rationale for planned correlative studies 9 
 3.5 Overall summary of rationale 10 
3. PARTICIPANT SELECTION  11 
 3.1 Inclusion Criteria  11 
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria  12 
4. ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES  13 
 4.1 General Guidelines  13 
 4.2 Evaluable Patients 13 
5. TREATMENT PLAN  13 
 5.1 Treatment Regimen 13 
 5.2 Agent Administration  15 
 5.3 Study Visit Procedures 15 
 5.4 General Concomitant Medication and Support Care Guidelines 17 
 5.5 Criteria for Taking a Participant Off Protocol Therapy  18 
 5.6 Du ration of Follow Up  19 
 5.7 Schedule of Assessments  19 
6. HEMATOLOGIC RESPONSE CRITERIA  21 
7. ADVERSE EVENTS: LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  22 
 7.1 Adverse Event Management 23 
 7.2 Dose Modification 23 
8. DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS  25 
 8.1 Safety Monitoring 25 
 8.2 Stopping Rules Data 25 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  26 
 9.1 Study Design/Endpoints 26 
 9.2 Sample Size, Accrual Rate, and Study Duration 26 
 9.3 Interim Analysis 27 
 9.4 Pa tient Demographic and Baseline Characteristics  27 
 9.5 A
nalysis of Primary Endpoints 27 
 9.6 Analysis of Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 27 
 9.7 Analysis of Safety and Tolerability 27 
 9.8 Analysis of Exploratory Endpoints 28 
10. PUBLICATION PLAN  28 
11. REFERENCES  29 
12. APPENDIX A: Performance Status Scales     31 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 5 1. OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 Study Design 
 
This is a pilot pediatric single center  investi gator -initiated clinical trial in Fanconi Anemia.  
 
1.2 Primary Objective  
 
1.2.1 To evaluate the  hematologic response.   
 
1.3 Secondary Objective s 
 
1.3.1 To evaluate the hemoglobin, RBC transfusion requirements, platelet count , and 
absolute neutrophil count.  
1.3.2 To evaluate the hematopoiesis through evaluation of marrow cellularity and 
hematopoietic progenitor colony assays. 
 
1.3.3 To evaluate the safety  in Fanconi Anemia patients. 
 
1.3.4 To describe the pharmacokinetics in Fanconi Anemia patients.  
 
1.3.5 To describe the tolerability in this population at the target dose for 6 months duration.   
 
1.4 Exploratory Objectives 
 
1.4.1 To describe the change in aldehyde- mediated toxicities in peripheral blood and bone 
marrow samples before and after Metformin treatment (in collaboration with Dr. Jim 
Swenberg, University of North Carolina). 
 
1.4.2 To describe the changes in  chromosomal breakage (in collaboration with Li sa 
Moreau, DFCI Fanconi Anemia Center). 
 
1.4.3 To describe changes in micronuclei formation in a buccal swab assay . 
  
1.4.4 To describe changes in  CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell cycling. 
 
1.4.5 To describe fasting glucose and fasting insulin levels. 
 
1.4.6 To describe genotype:phenotype associations using whole exome sequencing and targeted gene analyses.  
  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 6 2 BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Fanconi Anemia  
 Fanconi Anemia  (FA) is an inherited  bone marrow  failure  disorder characterized  by a DNA 
repair  defect . FA patients have a high  risk of developing aplastic  anemia and have a 
predisposition to  develop malignancies including MDS, AML, and solid tumors, namely 
squamous cell carcinomas of the head, neck, GI tract, and vulva.  Many  patients  have congenital 
anomalies including renal  abnormalitie s, skeletal  dysplasias, and  skin abnormalities . Allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem  cell transplantation  can cure the hematologic complications of FA ; however, 
patients  who  undergo stem  cell transplantation  may  have an  increased  risk of developing solid  
tumors due to  the effects  of chemotherapy and radiation  used in transplant conditioning regimens 
as well  as the effects of  inflammation  from  mucosal damage and  from  GVHD .
1  Donor 
availability also limits transplant options for a subset of pa tients.  
 For patients unable or unwilling to undergo a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, androgens such as oxymethalone or danazol can improve blood counts in many patients with FA, though a subset of patients fail to respond or relapse after an initial response.  Patients on androgens remain at risk for leukemia.  Androgens are associated with significant side effects including transaminitis, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis, hepatic adenomas and carcinomas, and virilization. Hepatic complications of androgens may increase the risk of a subsequent hematopoietic stem cell transplant.  Safe oral agents to  treat bone marrow failure without increasing  the risk of 
malignancy and to  target  the underlying DNA repair  defect  are urgently needed.   
 In recent years, intensive scientific laboratory research by a collaborative group of leading FA 
investigators has identifi ed potential agents, including M etformin and TGF- β inhibitors, that 
improve hematopoiesis in vitro and in animal models while providing protection fro m DNA 
damage.  These promising  preclinical  findings need  to be studied in clinical trials to develop new 
treatments for FA patients.
   
 
2.2 Metformin  
 
Metformin  (N,N-dimethylbiguianide ) is an FDA approved drug with  a well -characterized  side 
effect  profile with low toxicity. Metformin was  initially  developed as a drug  for type II  diabetes 
and insulin resistance. There  has been  recent  renewed  interest in  Metformin  given its anti-
oxidant effects, and M etformin  has been demonstrated to decrease the incidence of cert ain types 
of solid tumors in patients taking this medication in observational studies . It has been 
hypothesized that these anti -cancer properties may be due to  AMP -kinase activation  and mTOR  
inhibition.6–9,10 In addition , 39% of patients  with FA on screening  had glucose and insulin 
handling abnormalities , making M etformin  an attractive  drug for  this patient population as 
Metformin  may  improve both hematopoiesis and  insulin  resistance in  this population.10 Although 
there have been rare instances of lactic acidosis with Metformin treatment, a Cochrane review from 2010 demonstrated that there were no cases of lactic acidosis from 347 comparative trials and cohort studies representing 70,490 patient- years of Metformin use.
25 
  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 7  
2.2.1 Preclinical pharmacology  and toxicity studies of Metformin  
 Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis studies:  
 Long-term carcinogenicity studies have been performed in rats (dosing duration of 104 weeks) and mice (dosing duration of 91 weeks) at doses up to and including 900 mg/kg/day and 1500 mg/kg/day, respectively. These doses are both approximately four times the maximum recommended human daily dose of 2000 mg based on body surface area comparisons. No evidence of carcinogenicity with M etformin was found in either male or female mice. Similarly, 
there was no tumorigenic potential observed with M etformin in male rats. There was, however, 
an increased incidence of benign stromal uterine polyps in female rats treated with 900 mg/kg/day. There was no evidence of a mutagenic potential of Metformin in the following in 
vitro tests: Ames test (S.  typhimurium), gene mutation test (mouse lymphoma cells), or 
chromosomal aberrations test (human lymphocytes). Results in the in vivo mouse micronucleus test were also negative. Fertility of male or female rats was unaffected by  Metformin when 
administered at doses as high as 600 mg/kg/day, which is approximately three times the maximum recommended human daily dose based on body surface area comparisons (Metformin  
label) . 
 
Pregnancy: Pregnancy Category B.  
 Nursing mothers: Studi es in lactating rats show that M etformin is excreted into milk and reaches 
levels comparable to those in plasma. Similar studies have not been conducted in nursing mothe rs (Metformin Label).  
 2.2.2 Prior clinical experience with Metformin  
 Pediatric studies for obesity are included in a meta -analysis of 5 studies which demonstrated that 
Metformin treatment led to a decrease in BMI by a mean of 1.42kg/m2 over placebo treatment. This meta- analysis did not demonstrate strong evidence of a treatment effect on fasting glucose. 
There most common side effect was gastrointestinal (20 -30%) and was more common in the 
treatment Metformin group as compared to the placebo groups (risk difference of 10- 14%).
12 
 Another systematic review and meta-analysis of 9 randomized controlled trials  for obesity in 
adolescents aged 12 to 19 on Metformin doses of 1000mg to 2000mg daily did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference in frequency of gastrointestinal adverse events in the Metformin group as compared to the placebo group.
13 This study also demonstrated a mean 
decrease in BMI by 1.42mg/m2 in the treatment group as compared to the placebo control group, and demonstrated decrease in hyperinsulinemia (-9.9uU/mL) in the treatment group as compared to the control group.  A recent systematic review details the studies of Metformin in obese non -diabetic children and 
adolescents.
14 A number of studies included in this review have documented the safety and 
tolerability of Metformin below 10 years of age.15-19 None of these studies demonstrated any 
change in the adverse effect profile when compared to patients older than the age of 10. The 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 8 most common side effects as in older patients were gastrointestinal side effects.  
 
Metformin has also been studied in a population of patients aged 6 to 17 years with weight gain associated with atypical antipsychotic medications, with doses of 500mg BID for children up to age 10 and 850mg BID for patients 10 to 17 years of age. Metformin decreased BMI z scores by -0.1 in the treatment group as compared to the control group and overall was well tolerated with 5 patients (out of 61 randomized patients) who discontinued treatment, 4 due to agitation and 1 due to sedation. Patients who received Metformin treatment had a nonsignificant higher incidence of gastrointestinal side effects, though these were experienced for significantly higher duration of treatment (25.1% versus 6.8%).
20 
 Metformin has also been tested in patients down to the age of 4 in assessing changes in markers of insulin resistance and inflamm ation . It was well tolerated other than diarrhea in 35.7% of the 
patients during week 1, which disappeared in all cases but one, and no patients discontinued the drug due to side effects. No other serious adverse events were noted.
21 
 Metformin has been tested in 10 non- diabetic pediatric patients with steatohepatitis with 500mg 
BID dosing for 24 weeks in a phase II clinical trial and demons trated statistically significant 
improvement in AST and ALT, liver fat, and insulin sensitivity as well as quality of life. Although 3/10 patients developed gastrointestinal side effects, all subjects subsequently tolerated Metformin treatment without GI s ide effects by 4 weeks. There were no episodes of acidosis.
22 
 Metformin has been demonstrated to decrea se cancer risk in adult patients with type II diabetes  
in a population- based  cohort study. Patients who had received more than 360 daily doses of 
Metformin monotherapy had a decrease in cancer risk by a hazard ratio of 0.4 [0.22-0.66], and 
patients who received more than 1080 defined daily doses of Metformin had a hazard ratio of 
0.27 [0.09-0.84].
23  
  
2.3 Rationale for evaluation of Metformin in Fanconi Anemia  
 
2.3.1 Preclinical activity of Metformin in Fanconi Anemia 
 
Our collaborators  at the Oregon Health  Sciences University  led by Dr . Markus Grompe 
extensively studied the effects  of M etformin  in an FA mouse model and in  FA patient- derived  
cells and determined  that M etformin  administration both improves hematopoiesis and reduces 
DNA damage . Their  data, which  was recently  published in Blood , is summarized  below .11  
 In this study, FANCD2-/- mice  were  fed Metformin  (roughly 65% of the maximum  dose in  
humans, or 300 mg/kg/day) for  6 months. Serial blood counts  demonstrated  improvement in  
platelet counts (p <0.05), hemoglobin (p <0.005), and WBC in the M etformin -treated  mice .  
 Since  marrow  failure  and cytopenias may be triggered  or exacerbated  by physiologic stress, the 
researchers tested  whether  Metformin  could protect  against hematologic abnormalities  in mice  
treated  with  poly(I:C), which  induces inflammation. Interestingly , Metformin provided some 
protection  from  the poly(I:C)-induced aplastic  anemia  when  compared  to treatment  with  placebo  
(p<0.01). Metformin -treated  FANCD2-/- mice  treated  with  poly(I:C ) demonstrated preservation  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 9 of spleen  colony formation ( CFU-S ) following transfer  of bone marrow  from  these mice  into 
irradiated  recipients . In contrast, the  FA mice  exposed to  poly(I:C ) without M etformin  had 
dramatically  reduced  ability  to form  CFU-S. This  experiment suggests that the hematopoietic 
stem /progenitor cells  are relatively  preserved  with  Metformin  treatment .  
 
Prior data suggest that Metformin may have tumor- protective effects.  To  assess potential  effects 
of Metformin  on tumorigenesis, the cancer -prone FANCD2-/- Tp 53+/- mice were treated  with  
Metformin  or placebo, and  followed for  tumor development and for  survival. The  FANCD2-/-
Tp53+/- mice  had a longer latency  period until tumor  formation ( first tumors were  found at  142 
days as compared  to 244 days ) and longer tumor- free survival time  (405 days as compared  to 
368 days), suggesting that Metformin  delays tumor formation  in FANCD 2-/- Tp 53+/- mice . This  
effect  was not observed in the FANCD2+/+ Tp 53+/- mice , suggesting that Metformin ’s effect  on 
tumor formation in  these  mice  might be specific to the FANCD2-/- mice .  
 The preclinical  data  generated  by our  colleagues at OHSU and  described  above suggest that  
Metformin  treatment  of FA  cell lines  in vitro  and FA mice  in vivo  improves hematopoiesis both  
at baseline and when  stressed  with  poly (I:C) administration  and may do so  through improvement 
in aldehyde handling, decreased  chromosomal  breakage and radial  formation , and increased  
quiescence. FA mice  have a modest improvement in  tumor free  survival with a Metformin  diet as  
compared  to a placebo  diet. 
 
2.4
 Rationale f or planned correlative studies  
 
The mechanisms causing  bone marrow failure in  patients  with  Fanconi Anemia  have largely 
been studied in murine models and patient- derived cells in vitro . Biomarkers of marrow failure  
in Fanconi Anemia  have not been  well  studied, and a descriptive study of biomarkers associated 
with treatment response may advance our understanding of marrow failure  in these  patients . 
Although the  basic science understanding of Fanconi Anemia  has progressed rapidly  over  the 
past decade , the clinical  treatment options have  not progressed at  the same rate . 
 The mechanisms promoting bone marrow failure in FA have been postulated to include 
aldehyde-mediated toxicity, stem cell exhaustion, and DNA damage.   The preclinical data with Metformin  suggests that  Metformin  may  be improving hematopoiesis in FA mice  and cell  lines 
by protecting against aldehyde-mediated toxicity, promotion of stem cell quiescence, and reduction of DNA damage.
11  
 
1) Both  guanine derivatives  of aminoguanidine and M etformin  were  able to protect FA -G 
patient  derived  lymphoblastoid cells from  exogenous formaldehyde and MMC  toxicity . A 
similar experiment in  which  endogenous formaldehyde levels  were  increased  by 
administering  a small  molecule  inhibitor of Adh 5 also  demonstrated similar results  in 
which  FA-A derived fibroblast  cells were  protected  from  chromosomal  breaks and radial 
formation by administration  of M etformin  (p<0.0001 and p<0.001). 
 
2) Metformin induced cell cycle quiescence of the HSC compartment in FANCD2-/- mice  
as compared  to control mice . It is  hypothesized that quiescence of stem  cells may  
decrease the harmful  effects of poly(I:C ) induced cycling of HSCs .  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 10  
3) FA patient cells  demonstrate high  rates  of radial chromosome formation and 
chromosomal breaks, and  treating  FA-A patient derived fibroblast  cells demonstrated 
decreased  radial and chromosomal  breakage formation  when  treated  with  Metformin  as 
compared  to placebo . Another guanidine derivative , aminoguanidine, was  also tested  and 
shown to  have a similar effect . 
 
Therefore, correlative studies will describe whether Metformin changes the quiescence of hematopoietic stem cells, leads to a change in the  expression of genes in the DNA damage 
pathway, alters the chromosomal breakage test results after treatment with MMC  or DEB, affects 
the formation of micronuclei in a buccal cell assay, and alters patients’ aldehyde handling.  
 
2.5 Overall summary of rationale 
 Since Fanconi  Anemia  is a rare disease, a small  prospective pilot study was chosen as the study 
design.  Although the small sample size and open -label single -treatment arm design of this study 
will not be able to definitively determine clinical benefit of Metformin treatment in this patient population, this study will provide additional information regarding safety, tolerability, and preliminary efficacy of Metformin in FA patients and may provide the basis for a larger controlled clinical trial.  
 As Metformin  would be used as a chronic medicine if  it improves hematopoiesis, it is necessary  
to assess safety and  tolerability  of this  medicine over several  months. As our goal is to improve 
the understanding of the mechanisms by which Metformin may improve hematopoiesis, biological correlative studies will be integrated into the clinical trial with blood and marrow 
collection and analysi s and may lead to additional hypotheses, which can in turn become the 
bases for additional potential therapies in this patient population. 
 There is u rgency to run this trial since M etformin is available for clinical use and could easi ly be 
given off-study, in which case safety and efficacy will remain unclear , and there is a high unmet 
medical need for safe and tolerable medical therapies for patients with FA and marrow failure as there are no established treatment options for marrow failure other than bone marrow transplantation, androgen therapy, or hematopoietic growth factor therapy. Metformin is anticipated to be safe and tolerable in this patient population given the prior published clinical experience using this medication in various patient population including pediatric patients with type I and II diabetes and  obesity, and Metformin is currently being used in trials for advanced 
solid tumors. The doses tested in this tri al are  doses which have either been FDA approved (ages 
10 years and older), or doses which have been previously tested and well tolerated (ages 6-10 years).  
  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 11 3 PARTICIPANT SELECTION  
  
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
3.1.1 Age > 6 years  and ≤  35 years  
 
3.1.2 Lansky/Karnofsky perf ormance status ≥ 50% for patients ≥16 years of age and Lansky ≥  
50% for patients <16 years of age (see Appendix A) 
 
3.1.3 Diagnosis requirement 
3.1.3.1 Participants must have a clinical diagnosis of Fanconi Anemia. 
 
3.1.3.2  Participants must have confirmed DEB/MMC testing to document diagnosis of Fanconi 
Anemia . 
 
3.1.4 Patients must have at least one of the following cytopenias:  
- Hemoglobin <10g/dL 
- Platelets <10 0k/uL 
- Absolute neutrophil count <1000/uL 
 3.1.5 Participants must have normal organ function as defined below:  
3.1.5.1   Hepatic Function 
• Total bilirubin    ≤ 1.5 x upper limit of normal for age  
• ALT/AST       ≤ 135 U/L  
 
3.1.5.2    Renal Function 
• A serum creatinine based on age/gender as follows:  
Age 
 Maximum Serum  
Creatinine (mg/dL)  
Male  Female  
1 to < 2 years  0.6 0.6 
2 to < 6 years  0.8 0.8 
6 to < 10 years  1 1 
10 to < 13 years  1.2 1.2 
13 to < 16 years  1.5 1.4 
≥ 16 years  1.7 1.4 
 
AND  
 
• Creatinine clearance ≥  60 mL/min/1.73 m2 for participants with creatinine levels 
above institutional normal  
3.1.5.3    Normal cardiac status as documented clinically, otherwise they will need an 
echocardiogram prior to enrollment   
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 12 3.1.5.4 Serum bicarbonate must be >17. 
 
3.1.5.5 Participants of child -bearing or child -fathering potential must agree to use adequate 
contraception (hormona l birth control; intrauterine device; double barrier method; or 
total abstinence) throughout their participation, including up until 30 days after last dose of Metformin.  
3.1.6 Ability to understand and/or the willingness of the patient (or parent or legally au thorized 
representative, if minor) to provide informed consent, documented using an institutionally approved informed consent procedure  
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.2.1 Patients  must not have undergone prior bone marrow transplantation. 
 
3.2.2 Patients must not have very severe aplastic anemia at the time of enrollment which would require bone marrow transplantation (as defined by at least 2 out of the following 3: ANC <200/uL, platelets <20k/uL, absolute reticulocyte count <40k/uL). If patients are not eligible for a tran splant and otherwise meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria, then they 
may enroll in this trial.  
 
3.2.3 Patients must not be taking any other concurrent medications to improve their hematopoiesis such as androgens or growth factors such as G -CSF, EPO, or TPO 
mime tics. If any of these prior therapies , including androgens, have been taken, the 
patient must wait 30 days before enrolling. 
 3.2.4 Pregnant participants  will not be entered on this study given that the effects of Metformin  
on the developing human fetus are unknown. 
 3.2.5 Breastfeeding mothers are not eligible because there is an unknown but potential risk for 
adverse events in nursing infants secondary to treatment of the mother with Metformin .   
 3.2.6 Patients must not have a h istory of allergic reactions attributed to compounds of similar 
chemical or biologic composition to Metformin . 
 
3.2.7 Patients must not have u ncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, 
ongoing or active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study requirements.  
3.2.8 Patients must not have p rior history of symptomatic hypoglycemia over the past year or 
hypoglycemia with glucose <50mg/dL on screening and baseline laboratory assessments. 
 3.2.9 Patients must not have t ype 1 diabetes mellitus . 
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 13 3.2.10 Patients must abstain from alcohol as part of this study.  
 
3.2.11 Patients must not have a d iagnosis of myelodysplastic syndrome or leukemia, or other 
concurrent malignancy undergoing treatment . 
 3.2.12 Patients must not have v itamin B12 deficiency . 
 3.2.13 Patients must not have G6PD deficiency . 
 
3.3 Inclusion of Children and Minorities  
 
Both m ale and female children  of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.
 
 
4 ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES  
 4.1 General Guideline s 
 
Eligibility screening: Available laboratory test results  which are standard of care, such as CBC 
with differential, chemistries, LFTs, and prior bone marrow aspirate/biopsies , will be carefully 
reviewed to determine the participant’s eligibility for the study prior to the patient signing consent (see section 3).  
 Baseline Assessments: Following the patient’s consent, baseline laboratory assessments will  be 
drawn and are detailed in Section 5.3 (study visit procedures) and section 5.7 ( schedule of 
assessments). An investigator will confirm eligibility criteria and will complete and sign the 
protocol- specific eligibility checklist.  If patients no longer meet eligibility criteria based on their 
baseline assessments, they will be considered screen failures. If one of these patients later meets 
eligibility criteria, the patient can be re- screened for enrollment. In these instances, the baseline 
and eligibility  tests would need to be repeated except for G6PD. 
 
Following enrollment, participants may begin protocol therapy and should begin protocol therapy with in 14 days. Issues that would cause treatment delays should be discussed with the 
Overall Principal Investigator (PI).   Specific baseline laboratory tests including CBC with 
differential, chem 10, and LFTs must be repeated prior to dosing on Day 1 if obtained >14 days prior to Day 1.  The rest of the Day 1 assessments are detailed in Section 5.3 (study visit 
procedures) and section 5.7 ( schedule of assessments). 
 
4.2 Evaluable Patients  
 
Patients will be deemed evaluable for hematologic response if they receive Metformin for at least one month in  duration or if they receive Metformin for any duration of time and discontinue 
therapy for reasons related to study drug.  
5 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 14 5.1 Treatment Regimen  
 
5.1.1 Pharmaceutical  
 Generic name: Metformin  
Supply: Commercially available, generic Route of administration: O ral 
Pharmacology: Metformin is a biguanide derivative  and is approved as an adjunct to diet and 
exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus Product formulation: Metformin 500mg immediate release tablets and Riomet (Metformin  HCl 
oral solution ) 500mg/5mL liquid wi ll be utilized for this study  
Storage: Tablets should be stored a t room temperature, 20-25°C, excursions permitted to 15-
30°C; liquid should be stored at controlled room temperature 15-30°C (59-86°F)  5.1.2 Overview of Treatment Regimen  
 Patients may begin therapy on any day of the week.  Each  dose  of Metformin  will be recorded  in 
a medication  diary  by patients ≥age 18, and by parents of patients <age 18. The  medication  diary  
will be returned  to clinic  staff  at the end of each  month. D ose modifica tions are described in 
Section 7.2.  Reported adverse events and potential risks are described in Section 7.   No 
investigational or commercial agents or therapies other than Metformin  may be administered 
with the intent to treat the participant's cytopenias. P artici pants may continue to receive 
Metformin for up to 6 months unless they satisfy the criteria for remo val from protocol therapy 
(see S ection 5.5). 
 
To minimize the risk of gastrointestinal upset, patients will increase the dose of Metformin over 
4 weeks as follows.  
 For patients ≥10 years of age :  
 Initiation Phase:  
Metformin will be initiated at a dose of 500mg/day, increased  by 500mg/day once a week up to 
2000mg/day.  
Timepoint  Dose  
Week 1  500mg qPM  
Week 2  500mg BID  
Week 3  500mg qAM, 1000mg qPM  
Week 4  through end of treatment  1000mg BID  
 Maintenance phase: Patients will continue on the maximum dose of 1000mg BID or otherwise maximum tolerate d dose for 6 months total duration. 
 For patients ≥6 years of age and <10 years of age : 
 Initiation phase: 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 15 Metfo rmin will be administered at a dose of 500mg/day and increased by 500mg/day once a 
week up to 1000mg/day. 
 
Timepoint  Dose  
Week 1  500mg qPM  
Week 2 through end of treatment  500mg BID  
 Maintenance phase: Patients will continue on the maximum dose of 500mg BID or otherwise maximum tolerated dose for 6 months total duration.  Dose Modification:  
For patients who have difficulty tolerating Metformin at any point during the initiation or maintenance phases due to gastrointestinal upset or other AEs specified in secti on 7, the dose 
will be decreased by 500mg/day until a tolerated dose is achieved.   Dose interruption: Patients must hold Metformin if they are NPO for any reason, have a period of prolonged fast more than 8 hours, a critical illness req uiring IV fluids, and/or  a gastrointestinal illness . The medication 
will be held until patient resumes regular PO intake.  
 Patients must hold Metformin for 24 hours prior to imaging scans which require contrast, such as CT scans. Patients may resume Metformin 24 hours after  the completion of the contrast 
administration.  
 Dose interruptions will typically occur for no more than 7 days and will be monitored.  
5.2 Agent Administration  
 
Metformin  is administered  orally with  food either  once or twice  daily  as specified  per dose level . 
 Metformin  is supplied as a 500mg pill and a 500mg/5mL liquid . 
 Metformin  is to be taken  with  meals (±30 minutes ) to minimize  GI upset .  If a participant  vomits 
a dose, the dose  will not  be repeated . 
 Each dose of Metformin  will be recorded in a medication diary by a parent if patient age <18 
years of age, or by the patient if ≥18 years of age .  The medication diary will be returned to  clinic 
staff at the end of month.  
5.3  Study Visit Procedures  
 
A total of 12 visits will be required in this study. Some visits are in person at Boston Children’s 
Hospital, and some visits will be  conducted over the phone with parents if <age 18 or with the 
patient if ≥18 years of age . 
 
Visits 1 and 11 must be performed at the study site (Boston C hildren’s Hospital).   For patients 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 16 who are able to travel to  Boston Children’s Hospital for visit 6, pharmacokinetic studies will be 
performed.  After initiation of study drug and prior to the end of therapy visit, subjects will be 
followed by their home physician or at Boston Children’s Hospital and have blood work performed locally for interim visits  as detailed below.  The research team will contact the family 
for the interim phone calls as specified for visits 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 to review drug dia ries and 
adverse events and confirm laboratory assessments to be performed.   
 5.3.1 Visit 1: Baseline  laboratory assessments – BCH visit  (Day -28 to -1) 
- Obtain informed consent 
- Medical history  
- Physical examination 
- Lansky/Karnofsky Performance Status  
- Height and weight 
- Vital Signs  
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count), 
chemistry  (chem 10, LFTs), vitamin B12, G6PD, blood glucose, insulin level , oral 
glucose tolerance test, IGFBP -1, chromosomal breakage test, iron studies, 
hemoglobin electrophoresis 
- Urinalysis  
- Serum or urine pregnancy test 
- Biomarker: bone marrow aspirate/biopsy  
- Biomarker: aldehyde analyses  
- Biomarker: buccal swab  
- Distribution of drug diary 
5.3.2 Visit 2 : Initiation of therapy (Day 1) 
- Drug administration : if the su bject does not live locally and cannot pick up the study 
drug from BCH, drug will be shipped to the subject’s home. Day 1 will be considered the day that the subject takes the study drug for the first time.  
5.3.3 Visit 3  – phone call  (Day 8 +/- 3 days)  
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.4 Visit 4  – phone call  (Day 15 +/- 3 days) 
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.5 Visit 5  – phone call (Day 22 +/- 3 days) 
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.6  Visit 6 – phone call and local labs or BCH visit   (Day 29 +/- 7 days) 
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count), 
chemistry  (chem 10, LFTs), blood glucose, insulin level.  Subjects able to travel to  
BCH for this visit will return to outpatient blood drawing at BCH  and will also have 
pharmacokinetic assessments performed at this time.  Subjects unable to travel to BCH for this visit will have their blood drawn at their primary clinician or an 
outside lab, and the report will be sent to BCH.  An in -person study visit is not 
needed at this time point. 
- Pharmacokinetic assessments: Will be performed for local patients at 0,  1, 2, 4, 6 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 17 hours post dose 
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.7 Visit 7  – phone call and local labs (Day 57 +/- 7 days)  
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count)  
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.8 Visit 8  – phone call and local labs (Day 85 +/- 7 days) 
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count) , 
chemistry  (chem 10, LFTs), blood glucose, insulin level 
- Urinalysis  
- Urine  pregnancy test 
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.9 Visit 9  – phone call and local labs (Day 113 +/- 7 days) 
-  Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count)  
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.10 Visit 10  – phone call and local labs (Day 141 +/- 7 days)  
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count)  
- Drug diary review 
- Advers e event assessment  
5.3.11 Visit 11: E nd of study treatment  – BCH visit  (Day 169 +/- 14 days) 
- Physical examination 
- Lansky/Karnofsky Performance Status  
- Height and weight  
- Vital Signs  
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count), 
chemistry  (chem 10, LFTs), vitamin B12, blood glucose, insulin level, oral glucose 
tolerance test, IGFBP -1, chromosomal breakage test, iron studies, hemoglobin 
electrophoresis 
- Urinalysis  
- Urine pregnancy test 
- Biomarker: bone marrow aspirate/biopsy  
- Biomarker: aldehyde analyses  
- Biomarker: buccal swab  
- Drug diary review 
- Adverse event assessment  
5.3.12 Visit 12 – phone call and local labs  (Day 197 +/- 7 days) 
- Laboratory assessments: hematology  (CBC with differential and reticulocyte count)  
- Adverse event assessment  
 
Additional labs may be performed as clinically indicated. 
 
5.4 General Concomitant Medication and Supportive Care Guidelines  
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 18 5.4.1 Concomitant Medications 
 
5.4.1.1 No other medication targeting hematopoiesis will be used concurrently, including androgens or hematopoietic stimulating agents such as EPO, G-CSF, or TPO agonists. 
           The use of furosemide is contraindicated.  
 5.4.1.2  The following medications should be used with caution: 
• Cationic dru gs that are eliminated by renal tubular excretion should be used with 
caution (amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, and vancomycin). 
• Other cationic transport-2 (OCT2)/multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE) inhibitors include ranolazine, vandetanib, dolutegravir, and cimetidine.  
• Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as topiramate 
• Nifedipine 
 
5.4.1.3  Patients m ust not be on any anti -neoplastic agents during the duration of this study. 
 5.4.1.4  Appropriate antibiotics, blood products  including transfusions , anti -emetics, fluids, 
electrolytes and general supportive care are to be used as clinically indicated . 
 
5.5 Criteria  for Taking a Participant Off Protocol Therapy  
 
Duration of therapy will depend on individual response, evidence of disease progre ssion , and 
tolerance.  Treatment may continue for up to 6 months from study entry and completion of planned follow-up, or until one of the following criteria applies:  
 
• Diagnosis of myelodysplastic syndrome or leukemia  
• Worsening of cytopenias as defined by one of the following, sustained over 8 weeks in duration: 
 
• Increase in transfusion requirement by two -fold 
 
• Decrease in hemoglobin by >1.5g/dL and absolute value <10g/dL 
 
• Platelet count <50% of baseline value and absolute value <100k 
 
• ANC <50% of baseline value and absolute value <1000  
 
• Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment  
 
• SAE or other toxicity  that meets criteria for removal from protocol therapy (see 
Section 7) 
 
• Participant demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to comply with the oral medication regimen and/or documentation requirements 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 19  
• Found to be ineligible, including participants who have repeat organ function 
laboratory at the baseline assessment which n o longer meet eligibility criteria.  
 
• Participant decides to withdraw from the protocol therapy  
 
• General or  specific changes in the participant's condition render the participan t 
unacceptable for further treatment in the judgment of the treating investigator  
 
• Withdrawal of consent for treatment or treatment and data submission  
 
• Death  
 The reason for taking a participant off study, and the date the participant was removed, must be documented in the case report form (CRF).  Participants  will be removed from the protocol therapy  when any of the se criteria apply. The 
reason for removal from protocol therapy and the date the participant was removed must be documented in the case report form (CRF).  In the event of unusual or life- threatening complications, treating investigators must immediately 
notify the Overall PI.     
5.6 Duration of Follow Up 
 
Participants will be followed for one month after study treatment is complete or until death, 
whichever occurs first.  Participants  removed from protocol therapy for unacceptable adverse 
event(s) will be followed until resolution or stabilization of the adverse event.  
 5.7 Schedule of Assessments  
 
 
Baseline disease assessments, such as bone marrow studies, must be performed within 28 days prior to starting study drug. 
 Study visits 2-5 should be within +/-3 days of, visits 6-10 and 12 should be within +/-7 days, and visit 11 should be performed within +/- 14 days of what is specified per protocol. 
 
 
  Visit Name  
Screening       
End of 
treatment  
Follow up 
Visit number  1 2+ 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 20 Day of cycle (+/ -3 days 
unless otherwise 
indicated) -28 to  -1 1  8 15 22 29  (+/ -
7 days)  57 (+/-7 
days) 85  (+/ -
7 days)  113 (+/-7 
days) 141 (+/-7 
days) 169 
(+/- 
14 
days) 197 (+/- 
7 
days) 
Obtain Informed Consent  X            
Demography  X            
Inclusion/exclusion 
criteria X            
Relevant medical history/current medical conditions  X            
Diagnosis of Fanconi Anemia  X            
Prior therapies  X            
Concomitant medications X            
Physical examination  X          X  
Lansky /Karnofsky 
Performance status  X          X  
Height  X          X  
Weight  X          X  
Vital signs  X          X  
Bloodwork X     X X X X X X X 
- Hematology (CBC with diff and retic)  X     X X X X X X X 
- Chemistry (chem 10, LFTs)  X     X  X   X  
- Vitamin B12 level  X          X   
- G6PD  X            
- Blood glucose  X     X  X   X  
- Insulin level  X     X  X   X  
- Oral glucose tolerance test  X          X  
- IGFBP-1 X          X  
- Chromosomal breakage test  X          X  
- Iron studies 
(TIBC, serum 
iron, ferritin)  X          X  
- Aldehyde 
analyses  X          X  
- Hemoglobin 
electrophoresis X          X  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 21 + Visit 2 is the day that the subject begins taking the study drug  
** To be completed if study visit 6 occurs at BCH  
*** To be completed if study visit 6 does not occur at BCH  
 
6 HEMATOLOGIC RESPONSE CRITERIA  
 
Hematologic improvement is based on modified MDS IWG criteria, which is listed below .24 
Improvement in counts should be sustained for at least two  month s and demonstrated by at least 
2 consecutive measurements to be considered a hematologic response  
 
Hematologic improvement  Response Criteria (responses must be sustained over a 
minimum of 8 weeks in duration)  
Erythroid response  
(pretreatment, <10g/dL) Hgb increase by ≥1.5g/dL for 
non-transfusion dependent patients  For patients who are 
transfusion dependent: Transfusion independence Only transfusions given for Hgb ≤8g/dL or for symptoms will be counted in the 
response evaluation  
Platelet response 
(pretreatment, <100k/uL)  If initially <20k/uL to start, 
then must increase to If initially ≥20k/uL to start, 
then must have an absolute Urinalysis (macroscopic)  X       X   X  
Serum or urine pregnancy 
test X       X   X  
Drug dispensation   X           
Pharmacokinetic samples        X 
**       
Buccal swab sample for 
micronuclei assessment  X          X  
Bone marrow aspirate/biopsy
 X          X  
- Aspirate for 
morphology X          X  
- Biopsy X          X  
- Karyotype  X          X  
- BMF/MDS 
FISH  X          X  
- Flow cytometry  X          X  
- CD34 HSPC cycling  X          X  
- Aldehyde 
analyses  X          X  
Drug diary/Drug 
administration  X  
Research team phone calls   X X X X 
*** X X X X  X 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 22 >20k/UL with an absolute 
increase of 100%  increase of >30k/UL  
Neutrophil response  
(pretreatment <1 000/uL) If initially <500/uL to start, 
then must increase to 
>500/uL with an absolute 
increase of >250/uL  If initially ≥500/uL to start, 
then must have an absolute increase of >500/uL 
Progression or relapse after 
HI* At least one of the f ollowing:  
Decrease in ANC by >50% from baseline and absolute value <1000, platelet count decrease by >50% from baseline and 
absolute value <100k, reduction in Hgb by ≥ 1.5g/dL and 
absolute value <10g/dL, or doubling in transfusion 
requirement  
 
7 ADVERSE EVENTS:  LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  
 
Principal Investigator will submit reports of unexpected SAEs and other unanticipated problems to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Boston Children’s Hospital and the Medical Monitor.  
 All serious adverse events regardless of attribution relative to study will be reported for review on an expedited basis.  Unanticipated Problems which are related or possible related to study participation and which are:  
1) non-serious AEs but which are unexpected (in terms of unanticipated nature, frequency, or severity) and are thought to represent an increased risk of harm to study participants 
2) events which are not AEs but which add risk to participants or others (e.g. breach of confidentiality) should be reported on an expedited basis.  
 
• Attribution  of the AE: 
- Definite – The AE is clearly related  to the study treatment.  
- Probable – The AE is likely related to the study treatment.  
- Possible – The AE may be related  to the study treatment.  
- Unlikely – The AE is doubtfully related to the study treatment. 
- Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT related  to the study treatment. 
 
• Seriousness  of the AE: 
An AE is to be classified as “serious” (SAE) if it meets any of the following criteria:  
 
Death of Patient  An event that results in the death of a patient.  
Life-Threatening  An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have resulted in 
immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been taken.  This does not 
include an event that would have been fatal if it had occurred in a more 
severe form.  
Hospitalization  An event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length of time.  
This does not include an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient 
facility.  
Prolongation of 
Hospitalization  An event that occurs while the study patient is hospitalized and prolongs the 
patient’s hospital stay.  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 23 Congenital 
Anomaly  An anomaly detected at or after birth or any anomaly that result in fetal loss.  
Persistent or 
Significant 
Disability/ Incapacity  An event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with the 
activities of daily living of a study patient.  Disability is not intended to 
include experiences of relatively minor medical significance such as 
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, or accident al trauma ( e.g., 
sprained ankle).  
Important 
Medical Event Requiring Medical or Surgical Intervention to Prevent Serious Outcome  An important medical event  that may not be immediately life -threatening or 
result in death or hospitalization, but based on medical judgment may 
jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes listed above ( i.e., death of patie nt, life -
threatening, hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, congenital 
anomaly, or persistent or significant disability/incapacity). Examples of such 
events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not 
result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.  
 
An AE that meets none of the above criteria is considered “non- serious”.   
 
NOTE:  Seriousness is independent of attribution or expectedness of the AE.    
• Expectedness of the AE:   In addition to term, grade, attribution , and seriousness , adverse 
events that have the potential to qualify for expedited reporting are to be designated as “expected ” or “unexpected”.  For the purposes of determining expectedness, all of the 
adverse events listed in S ection 7.2 are to be considered expected.   
  
7.1 Adverse Event Management  
 Toxicities will be assessed according to NCI’s CTCAE version 4.0.  
 Metformin is primarily associated with gastrointestinal side effects and if patients are not able to tolerate therapy based on these side effects, they will undergo a dose reduction. Management 
guidelines are listed below in the dose modification section 7.2. Metformin is rarely associated 
with lactic acidosis, in which case the drug will be discontinued and patients will receive appropriate clinical management.  
 Adverse events and toxicities will be captured both by planned laboratory studies at pre- specif ied 
timepoints (see study calendar) as well as by patient reporting. Patient interviews will be conducted weekly and drug diaries reviewed weekly during the initiation phase, and then monthly during the maintenance phase of treatment.   
 
7.2 Dose modification 
 
 
Gastrointestinal toxicities   
Grade  1 Continue to follow treatment plan in section 
5.1.2.  
Grade 2  Maintain study agent at current dose . If 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 24 resolves to grade 1 or less within 7 days, may 
increase Metformin dose as applicable.  
If does not resolve to grade 1 or less within 7 
days, decrease to last tolerated dose level. If patient is on 500mg daily, then discontinue 
study treatment.  
Grade 3  Decrease study treatment to last tolerated dose 
level.  
If toxicity does not resolve to grade 2 or less within 7 days, discontinue study treatment.  
If toxicity resolves to grade 2 or less within 7 days, may continue at lower dose level. Do not 
increase dose further.  
Grade 4  Discontinue study treatment . 
 Renal toxicities  
Estimated creatinine clearance <60ml/min  Hold stu dy drug until creatinine clearance 
>60ml/min and at steady state, then may 
resume at last tolerated dose level . 
Estimated creatinine clearance <30ml/min  Discontinue study treatment . 
 Metabolic toxicities  
Symptomatic hypoglycemia Grade 1  Hold study drug until symptoms resolve to 
<grade 1, then may resume at last tolerated 
dose level if symptoms resolve within 7 days.  
Hypoglycemia ≥Grade 2  Discontinue study treatment . 
Acidosis  ≥Grade 2  Discontinue study treatment . 
Electrolyte abnormalities  ≥Grade 3  Provide supportive care, hold study treatment 
until < grade 1. May resume at last tolerated 
dose or discontinue per investigator discretion.  
 Hematologic toxicities  
Grade 1 or 2  Continue to follow treatment plan in secti on 
5.1.2.  
Grade 3  Maintain study agent at current dose. 
Transfuse if clinically indicated . 
Grade 4  If patients meet criteria for worsening of 
cytopenias requiring removal of patient from study as defined in Section 5.5, then discontinue study drug. Otherwise, maintain study agent at current dose and transfuse if 
clinically indicated.  
 Other non-hematologic toxicities considered to be related to Metformin  
Grade 1  Continue to follow treatment plan in section 
5.1.2.  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 25 Grade 2  Maintain study agent at cur rent dose. If 
resolves to grade 1 or less within 7 days, may 
increase Metformin dose as applicable.  If 
patient is on 500mg daily, then discontinue 
study drug.  
Grade 3  Decrease study treatment to last tolerated dose 
level.  If patient is on 500mg daily, then 
discontinue study drug.  
If toxicity does not resolve to grade 2 or less within 7 days, discontinue study treatment.  
If toxicity resolves to grade 2 or less within 7 days, may continue at lower dose level. Do not 
increas e dose further.  
Grade 4  Discontinue study treatment . 
 
8 DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS  
 
Adverse event lists, guidelines, and instructions for AE reporting can be found in Section 7.  
8.1 Safety Monitoring  
 
The medical monitor will review and monitor toxicity and accrual data from this study. The 
medical monitor will be a clinical specialist with experience in hematology and who have no 
direct relationship with the study. Information that raises any questions about participant safety will be addressed with the Overall PI and study team.  The medical monitor  will review this protocol up to four times per year or more often if required 
to review toxicity and accrual data. Information to be provided to the committee may include: up-to-date participant accr ual; all grade 2 or higher unexpected adverse events that have been 
reported; summary of all deaths occurring within 30 days of intervention; any response information; audit results; and a summary provided by the study team. Other information (e.g. scans, laboratory values) will be provided upon request.   
8.2 Stopping Rules Data  
 
The study will be monitored to ensure that treatment related serious adverse events do not exceed the anticipated rate based on previous clinical studies. The study will be paused to accrual for review by the medical monitor, and may be terminated early if there are  any grade V toxicities 
considered to be probably or definitely related to Metformin. If there are ≥3/24 patients with 
non-hematologic non- GI grade IV event s that are attrib uted to be at least possibly related to 
Metformin which are observed during any point in the study, the study may be paused for accrual for evaluation by the medical monitor. Management for grade IV toxicities will be 
provided with guidance regarding holding medication and monitoring for resolution of toxicities 
(Section 7.2 ). 
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 26 9 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  
 
9.1 Study Design/Endpoints  
 9.1.1 Design  
 
This is a pilot study to assess the hematologic activity  and safety of Metformin in the Fanconi 
Anemia patient population.  
9.1.2 Endpoints  
 
Primary endpoint: 
The primary  endpoint is the proportion of subjects with a hematologic response. 
 
Secondary endpoints :   
• Secondary hematologic endpoints will evaluate change from baseline in : 
o hemoglobin  
o red cell transfusion requirements  
o platelet count 
o absolute neutrophil count 
o marrow cellularity  
o methylcellulose colony forming assays  
• Safety :  the proportion of subjects with adverse events by grade. 
• Tolerability : median number of dose interruptions , median number of discontinuations, 
and proportion of patients who are able to achieve maximum dose of Metformin.   
• Pharmacokinetics: pharmacokinetic profile and exposure of Metformin  
 
Exploratory  endpoints :  
Exploratory biomarkers will describe change from baseline in:  
• aldehyde- mediated damage 
• chromosomal breakage and radial  formation  in response to  DEB/ MMC  exposure  
• cell cycling in CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells  
• serum  insulin, fasting  glucose , and oral glucose tolerance  
• micronuclei formation in buccal swab samples 
 
9.2 Sample Size, Accrual Rate and Study Duration 
 
The total sam ple size is anticipated to be 2 4 patients. It is anticipated that without additional 
treatment, only 5% of patients would achieve a hematologic response. We would be interested in Metformin as a treatment in th is patient population if the hematologic response rate is 20% or 
higher. The trial will be single arm, one -stage trial.  The treatment will be considered promising if 
at least 3/22 subjects have a hematologic response. The probability of observing at least 3/22 responders is  at least  0.84 assuming the true response is >=20% and is <10% if the true response 
is <5%.  It is anticipated that we will need 24 patients to accrue 22 evaluable patients. Evaluable 
patients are defined in section 4.2. 
 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 27 It is anticipate d that an average of 1-2 patients  will enroll each month on study and the  study 
duration is anticipated  to be approximately 2 years. 
 
9.3 Interim Analysis  
 
Given that this is a pilot study of 24 patients, no interim analysis is planned.  
 The study accrual may be suspended if there are ≥3/24 patients with non-hematologic non- GI 
grade IV events that are attributed to be at least possibly related to Metformin which are observed during any point in the study, The probability of observing 3 or more events among 24 subject is equal to 0.89 if the observed rate is 20% and 0.12 if the observed rate is 5%.” 
 
9.4 Patient demographic and baseline characteristics  
 Patient demographic and baseline characteristics, including age, gender, medical history, FA subtype, prior therapy, and baseline hematologic values (hemoglobin, platelet count, absolute neutrophil count, transfusion requirements) will be summarized using descriptive statistics. For continuous variables, descriptive statistics (number (n), mean, standard deviation, standard error, median , range) will be provided. For categorical variables, patient counts and percentages will be 
provided.  
9.5 Analysis of Primary Endpoints  
 
Hematologic response will be defined by the modified MDS IWG criteria
24 which are provided 
in section 6.   Among evaluable patients (as defined in Section 4.2), hematologic response rate will be 
estimated  and will be reported along with 90% binomial confidence intervals. Estimated 
response rates for each individual hematologic lineage will also be reported for hemoglobin/transfusion requirements for RBCs, platelet count, and absolute neutrophil count will also be reported along with 90% binomial confidence intervals. The  time  to hematologic 
response and duration of hematologic response will be reported for responders.   
9.6 Analysis of Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 
 
Changes in marrow cellularity pre and post treatment will be determined by a hematopathologist categorically (improvement in marrow cellularity or no improvement) and will be reported as a point estimate with 90% binomial confidence intervals.  
 Changes in methylcellulose colony forming assays pre and post treatment will be assessed. Mean changes will be estimated with Student’s paired t -test for null hypothesis with binomial 
confidence intervals. 
 
9.7 Analysis of Safety and Tolerability  
 Any patient that received at least one dose of drug would be eligible for the safety set. The proportion of patients with each toxicity overall and by grade will be reported along with 90% 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 28 confidence interval. This will be reported for the toxicities that are at least possibly related and 
regardless of attribution. The proportion of patients who required at least one dose reduction, who required at least one dose delay, who completed therapy and achiev ed the goal dose 
(diabetes/obesity -related dosing) of M etformin  will be reported along with the 90% exact 
binomial confidence interval.  The median number of dose reductions and dose delays will also be reported.  
9.8 Analysis of Exploratory Endpoints 
 
Change in exploratory endpoints before and after treatment will be compared using a paired t- test 
for aldehyde- mediated damage, chromosomal breakage, and radial formation  in response to  
DEB/ MMC  exposure, micronuclei formation in buccal swab samples, percentage of cells in 
quiescence for cell  cycling in CD34+ hematopoi etic stem/progenitor cells , serum  insulin , fasting  
glucose, and oral glucose tolerance test . 
 
10 PUBLICATION PLAN 
 
The results are expected to be made public within 24 months of reaching the end of the study. The end of the study is the time point at which the last data items are to be reported .  The  initial 
release may be an abstract to be presented at a relevant scientific meeting . A full report of the 
outcomes should be made public no later than three (3) years after the end of the study. 
  
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 29  
REFERENCES  
 1. Hays L. Fanconi Anemia: Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management. Fourth Edition. Fourth ed: Fanconi Anemia Research Fund; 2014. 2. Kee Y, D'Andrea AD. Expanded roles of the Fanconi anemia pathway in preserving genomic stability. Genes Dev 2010;24:1680-94. 3. D'Andrea AD. Susceptibility pathways in Fanconi's anemia and breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1909- 19. 
4. Langevin F, Crossan GP, Rosado IV, Arends MJ, Patel KJ. Fancd2 counteracts the toxic effects of naturally produced aldehydes in mice. Nature 2011;475:53-8. 5. Hira A, Yabe H, Yoshida K, et al. Variant ALDH2 is associated with accelerated 
progression of bone marrow failure in Japanese Fanconi anemia patients. Blood 2013;122:3206-
9. 6. Wassenhove LDV, Mochly-Rosen D, Weinberg KI. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 in aplastic anemia, Fanconi anemia and hematopoietic stem cells. Mol Genet Metab 2016;119:28 -
36. 7. Bonfim C, Ribeiro L, Nichele S, et al. Long-term Survival, Organ Function, and Malignancy after Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Fanconi Anemia. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2016;22:1257- 63. 
8. Dietz AC, Mehta PA, Vlachos A, et al. Current Knowledge and Priori ties for Future 
Research in Late Effects after Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation for Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes: Consensus Statement from the Second Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium International Conference on Late Effects after Pediatric Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2017;23:726-35. 
9. Rose S, Kim M -O, Korbee L, et al. Oxandrolone for the treatment of bonemarrow 
failure in Fanconi Anemia. Pediatric Blood and Cancer 2014; 61:11-19. 
10. Zhang H-H, Guo X-L. Combinational strategies of metformin and chemotherapy in cancers. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2016;78:13026. 11. Zhang QS, Tang W, Deater M, et al. Metformin improves defective hematopoiesis 
and delays tumor formation in Fanconi anemia mice. Blood 2016;128:2774-84. 12. Park MH, Kinra S, Ward KJ, White B, Viner RM. Metformin for Obesity in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1743-5. 13. Bouza C, Lopez-Cuadrado T, Gutierrez- Torres LF, Amate J. Efficacy and safety of 
metformin for treatment of overweight and obesity in adolescents: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Facts 2012;5:753-65. 14. Brufani C, Crino A, Fintini D, Patera P, Cappa M, Manco M. Systematic review of metformin use in obese nondiabetic children and adolescents. Horm Res Paediatr 2013;80:78-85. 15. Srinivasan S, Ambler G, Baur L, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of metformin for 
obesity and insulin resistance in children and adolescents: improvement in body composition and fastin g insulin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:2074-80. 
16. Atabek M, Pirgon O. Use of metformin in obese adolescents with hyperinsulinemia: a 6-month, randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled clinical trial. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 
2008;21:339-48. 17. Mauras N, DelGiorno C, Hossain J, et al. Metformin use in children with obesity and normal glucose tolerance --effects on cardiovascular markers and intrahepatic fat. J Pediatr 
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 30 Endocrinol Metab 2012;25:33-40. 
18. Yanovski J, Krakoff J, Salaita C, et al. Effects of metformin on body weight and body composition in obese insulin- resistant children: a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes 
2011;60:477-84. 19. Kendall D, Vail A, Amin R, et al. Metformin in obese children and adolescents: the MOCA trial. J Clin Endoc rinol Metab 2013;98:322-9. 
20. Anagnostou E, Aman M, Handen B, et al. Metformin for Treatment of Overweight Induced by Atypical Antipsychotic Medication in Young People With Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA psychiatry 2016;73:928- 37. 
21. Gómez -Díaz R, Talavera J, Pool E, et al. Metformin decreases plasma resistin 
concentrations in pediatric patients with impaired glucose tolerance: a placebo -controlled 
randomized clinical trial. 61 2012;9. 22. Schwimmer J, Middleton M, Duetsch R, Lavine J. A phase 2 clinical trial of metformin as a treatment for non -diabetic paediatric non -alcoholic steatohepatitis. Alimet 
Pharmacol Ther 2005;21:871-9. 23. Lin H, Kachingwe B, Lin H, Cheng H, Uang Y, Wang L. Effects of metformin dose on cancer risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 6 -year follow -up study. 
Pharmacotherapy 2014;34:36-45. 24. Cheson BD, Greenberg PL, Bennett JM, et al. Clinical application and proposal for modification of the InternationalWorking Group (IWG) response criteria in myelodysplasia. 108 2006. 25.  Salpeter SR, Greyberg E, Paternak GA et al., Risk of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis with Metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 14:4.    
BCH IRB Protocol #:  P00026540 
Protocol Version Date: 28 FEB 2020 
 
  Page 31 APPENDIX A  P ERFORMANCE STATUS  SCALES/SCORES  
 
Performance Status Criteria  
Karnofsky and Lansky performance scores are intended to be multiples of 10. 
 
ECOG (Zubrod)  Karnofsky  Lansky*  
Score  Description  Score  Description  Score  Description  
0  Fully active, able to carry on all 
pre-disease performance 
without restriction.  100  Normal, no complaints, no 
evidence of disease  100  Fully active, normal.  
90  Able to carry on normal 
activity, minor signs or 
symptoms of disease.  90  Minor restrictions in physically 
strenuous activity.  
1  Restricted in physically 
strenuous activity but 
ambulatory and able to carry 
out work of a light or sedentary 
nature, e.g., light housework, 
office work.  80  Normal activity with effort; 
some signs or symptoms of 
disease.  80  Active, but tires more quickly  
70  Cares for self, unable to carry 
on normal activity or do active 
work.  70  Both greater restriction of and less 
time spent in play activity.  
2  Ambulatory and capable of all 
self-care but unable to carry out 
any work activities. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking 
hours  60  Required occasional assistance, 
but is able to care for most of 
his/her needs.  60  Up and around, but minimal 
active play;  keeps busy with 
quieter activities.  
50  Requires considerable 
assistance and frequent 
medical care.  50  Gets dressed, but lies around 
much of the day; no active play, 
able to participate in all quiet play 
and activities.  
3  Capable of only limited self-
care, confined to bed or chair 
more than 50% of waking hours.  40  Disabled, requires special care 
and assistance.  40  Mostly in bed; participates in 
quiet activities.  
30  Severely disabled, 
hospitalization indicated. 
Death not imminent.  30  In bed; needs assistance even for 
quiet play.  
4  Completely disabled. Cannot 
carry on any self -care. Totally 
confined to bed or chair.  20  Very sick, hospitalization 
indicated. Death not imminent.  20  Often sleeping; play entirely 
limited to very passive activities.  
10  Moribund, fatal processes 
progressing rapidly.  10  No play; does not get out of bed.  
 
 
 
 
 
This section only  to be edited by IRB office. 
   
 
                                           
 
 
Protocol Title: Pilot Study of Metformin for 
Patients with Fanconi Anemia  
 
Principal Investigator:  Elissa Furutani, MD  
 Co-Investigators: David Williams, MD, Akiko 
Shimamura, MD PhD and Erica Esrick, MD  
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
 
Use Plate or Print:  
 
MRN#:  
 
DOB:  
 
Subject’s Name:  
 
Gender:  
 
 
  
Page 1 of 15 
Please check one of the following:  _____ You are an adult participant in this study.  _____ You are the parent or guardian granting permission for a child in this study.   If the  participant is a child , the use of "you" refers to "your child."  
 This consent form gives you important information about a research study. A research study helps scientists and doctors learn new information to improve medical practice and patient care.  Participation in this research study is voluntary. You are free to say yes or no, and your decision will not impact the care you receive at Boston Children’s Hospital (BCH) . You can withdraw from the study at any time. A 
description of the study and its r isks, its potential benefits, and other important information are in this consent 
form.  Please read this consent form carefully  and take your time making a decision. The form may contain 
words that you do not understand. Please ask questions about anything you do not understand. We encourage you to talk to others (for example, your friends, family, or other doctors) before you decide to participate in this research study . 
 
How are individuals selected for this research study?  
You are being invited to participate in th is research study because you have Fanconi A nemia  and have not yet 
had an allogene ic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation . 
 
Why is this research study being conducted? 
Fanconi Anemia  (FA) is an inherited  bone marrow  failure  disorder characterized  by a DNA repair  defect . FA 
patients  have  a high risk  of developing bone marrow failure and certain types of cancer . Some  patients  have 
congenital anomalies including renal  abnormalities , skeletal  dysplasias, and  skin abnormalities . Allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem  cell transplantation  can cure bone marrow failure; however, there are risks associated with 
stem cell transplant , and some patients may not be candidates for a stem cell transplant.  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 2 of 15 
 For patients unable or unwilling to undergo a hematopoietic stem cell transplant,  some medications such as 
oxymethalone or danazol can improve blood counts in many patients with FA, though not all patients will respond, and some will lose their response over time.  Patients on these medications remain at risk for leukemia  
or other serious side effects.  In this study, we want to learn whether a medication called Metformin is safe and tolerable for people with Fanconi Anemia. We also want to find out if taking Metformin helps improve blood counts in people with Fanconi Anemia.  Metformin is a medication taken by mouth (a pill) once or twice a day.  Metformin is approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for glycemic control in adults and children as young as 10 years old with type 2 diabetes.  In this study, the use of Metformin is investigational.  This means the drug has not yet been approved 
by the FDA for the purpose we are studying: the treatment of Fanconi Anemia. 
 
Who is conducting this research study, and where is it being conducted? 
This single- site study is being done at Boston Children’s Hospital (BCH) . A grant from the Fanconi Anemia 
Research Foundation  will provide funding for this study. Dr. Elissa Furutani  is the principal investigator of this 
study.  Your health care provider may be a research investigator for this research and , as an investigator, is interested in 
both your clinical welfare and in the conduct of this study. Before entering this study or at any time during the research, you may ask fo r a second opinion about your care from another health care provider who is in no way 
associated with this project. You are not under any obligation to participate in any research project offered by your health care provider.
 If you choose not to participate or not to allow your child to participate, your care at 
BCH and/or with your heal th care provider will not be affected in any way at all.  
 
How many people will participate  in this research study ? 
Approximately 22-24 people will take part in this study at BCH . 
 
What do I have to do if I am in this research study?  
As a participant  in this study, you will be provided Metformin, come to Boston Children’s Hospital 2-3 times, 
go to a lab for a blood draw 5-7 times, have 8-9 phone calls with a research nurse, and you may take part in one pharmacokinetic assessment . Your participation will last about seven months: 6 months of receiving Metformin 
and then one follow-up phone call and blood draw approximately one month after  discontinuing the medication. 
Below are descriptions of what will happen at each study visit.  There is a schedule of visits after the 
descriptions.  
 
Visit 1  – Baseline/ Screening  (BCH Visit)  
At this visit, you will first be asked to review this consent form with the study doctor. 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 3 of 15 
 The Study Doctor will ask about your health and medical history and conduct a physi cal examination.  This 
includes a n overall assessment of your health  and the measurement of height, weight, blood pressure, heart rate, 
breathing rate, and temperature.  You will be asked to produce a urine sample (about 5-10 mL or 1-2 teaspoons) to check for any blood cells, glucose (sugar), proteins, or chemicals, as well as for biomarker analyses.  
 You will be asked to brush the inside of your cheek with a toothbrush to collect cells . These cells will be used to 
look for changes in how your cells look . Once this testing has been completed, the cells will be discarded.  
 You will be asked to give a blood sample for standard laboratory testing. Around 17.5 mL ( 3.5 teaspoons) will 
be collected to check the following:  levels of substances in the blood like chemicals, glucose, lipids (fats), 
minerals (like magnesium and calcium), iron,  and any abnormal proteins; kidney and liver function; and blood -
clotting ability . 
 You will be asked to have a pregnancy test performed, if applicable.  You will have a bone marrow. There are two parts to this test : an aspirate of liquid and a biopsy of solid bone 
marrow.  The test involves putting a needle into the marrow space of your hip bone and removing a small 
amount of bone marrow. Before the test, you will be given a shot to numb the area and reduce the pain, or in some cases, you will be given sedation so that you are asleep . A sample of the liquid bone marrow (about 4 mL 
or 1 teaspoon) will be removed with the syringe. This amount of bone marrow may be safely removed.  
Visit 2  (Start of Study Drug ) 
This visit will take place no more than 1 month after your baseline/screening visit and will involve the initiatio n 
of the study drug. If you do not live locally and cannot pick up the study drug from BCH, the study drug will be 
shipped to you. When you receive the study drug and take it for the first time, that day will be considered Day 1 of the study.   
Visits 3 -5 (Phone Calls ) 
A research nurse will call you each week.  The nurse will ask  you how you are feeling, if you have had any side 
effects from taking Metformin, and check if you are filling out your drug diary.  
Visit 6  (Phone Call and Blood Draw or BCH Visit)  
This visit will take place 1 month after you have started Metformin. You only need to have a blood draw. Around 3 mL ( 0.5 teaspoons)  will be collected to check the following: l evels of substances in the blood like 
chemicals, glucose, lipids (fats), minerals (like magnesium and calcium), iron, and any abnormal proteins; kidney and liver function; and blood- clotting ability.  You can come to BCH to have this blood drawn, or you 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 4 of 15 
can go to a lab that is more convenient to you if you do not live near BCH. If you want to have this blood drawn 
at a lab closer to you, the study team will discuss with you how to bring a request form to the lab and how the lab can send the report to BCH .  
 If you are able to come to BCH to for this visit, we would also like to have you give additional blood samples for pharmacokinetic testing. Pharmacokinetic testing looks at how your body processes the medication. This means that you would have a blood draw , take a dose of Metformin, and then have blood draws 1, 2, 4, and 6 
hours after the dose. This means you would give another 7.5mL (1.5 teaspoons) of blood.  ________ (initials) I agree to participate in this optional pharmacokinetic testing.  A research nurse will also call you this week  if you do not come to BCH. The nurse will ask you how you are 
feeling, if you have had any side effects from taking Metformin, and check if you are filling out your drug diary.  
Visit 7 (Phone Call and Blood Draw) 
A research nurse will call you a month later.  The nurse will ask you how you are feeling, if you have had any 
side effects from taking Metformin, and check if you are filling out your drug diary. 
 You will also be asked to have a blood draw of 2 mL (0.5 teaspoons ). You can come to BCH to have this blood 
drawn, or you can go to a lab that is more convenient to you if you do not live near BCH. 
 
Visit 8  (Phone Call and Blood Draw)  
This visit will take place 3 months after you have started Metformin. You will be asked to have a blood draw of 2 mL (0.5 teaspoons ). You can come to BCH to have this blood drawn, or you can go to a lab that is more 
convenient to you if you do not live near BCH.  You will be asked to produce a urine sample (about 5-10 mL or 1-2 teaspoons) to check for any blood cells, glucose (sugar), proteins, or chemicals, as well as for biomarker analyses.  
 You will be asked to have a pregnancy test performed, if applicable. 
 
A research nurse will also call you this week.  The nurse will ask you how you are feeling, if you have had any 
side effects from taking Metformin, and check if you are filling out your drug diary. 
 
Visits 9 and 10 (Phone Calls and Blood Draws) 
A research nurse will call you once a month.  The nurse will ask you how you are feeling, if you have had any 
side effects from taking Metformin, and check if you are filling out your drug diary. 
 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 5 of 15 
You will also be asked to have a blood draw each month of 2 mL (0.5 teaspoons ). You can come to BCH to 
have these blood draws, or you can go to a lab that is more convenient to you if you do not live near BCH. 
 
Visit 11  – End of Treatment (BCH Visit)  
This visit will take place 6 months after you have started Metformin. This is the last study visit, and you will stop taking Metformin. 
 
The Study Doctor will conduct a physi cal examination.  This includes an overall assessment of your health and 
the measurement of height, weight, blood pressure, heart rate, breathing rate, and temperature.  
 
You will be asked to produce a urine sample (about 5-10 mL or 1-2 teaspoons) to check for any blood cells, glucose (sugar), proteins, or chemicals, as well as for biomarker analyses.  
 You will be asked to brush the inside of your cheek with a toothbrush to collect cells. These cells will be used to look for changes in how your cells look. Once this testing has been completed, the buccal swabs will be discarded.  
 You will be asked to give a blood sample for standard laboratory testing.  Around 17.5 mL ( 3.5 teaspoons) will 
be collected to check the following: levels of substances in the blood like chemicals, glucose, lipids (fats), 
minerals (like magnesium and calcium), iron, and any abnormal proteins; kidney and liver function; and blood -
clotting ability  
 You will be asked to have a pregnancy test performed, if applicable.  You will have a bone marrow test. There are two parts to this test: an aspirate of liquid and a biopsy of solid bone marrow. The test involves putting a needle into the marrow space of your hip bone and removing a small amount of bone marrow. Before the test, you will be given a shot to numb the area and reduce the pain, or in some cases, you will be given sedation so that you are asleep . A sample of the liquid bone marrow (about 4 mL 
or 1 teaspoon) will be removed with the syringe. This amount of bone marrow may be safely removed. 
 
Visit 12 (Phone Call)  
 
A research nurse will call you one month after you stop taking Metformin. The nurse will ask  you how you are 
feeling, and if you still have any side effects from taking Metformin. 
 You will be asked to have a final blood draw of 2mL (0.5 teaspoons).  
Schedule of Study Visits/Phone Calls  
 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 6 of 15 
Study Visit  
Timeline Visit 1 
Screening Visit 2  Visit s 
3-5 
Phone 
Call Visit 6 1 month Visit 7 Phone Call 
Visit 8  
3 Month  Visits 
9-10 
Phone 
Call Visit 
11 
6 
month  Visit 
12 
Phone 
Call 
  Day 1  Weekly  Month 
1 Month 
2 Month 
3 Months 
4 & 5  Month 
6 Month 
7 
Consent /Assent  X         
Medical History  X         
Physical  Exam  X       X  
Blood Draw  X   X X X X X X 
Urine collection  X     X  X  
Cheek Swab  X       X  
Bone Marrow  X       X  
Medication Diary   X X X X X X X X 
Phone call with 
research nurse    X X X X X  X 
*Blood draw only if your baseline/screening visit occurred more than two weeks prior to you taking the study 
drug for the first time  
 
What are the risks of this research study? What could go wrong? 
Some procedures or treatments used in this research may present risks that are not well -known or understood. 
Therefore, there may be unforeseeable risks associated with participating in this research.  
 
Risks of the study drug : Metformin  
Here is a chart that explains most of the side effects of Metformin . 
 
Possible Risk/Side Effect  How often has it occurred?  How serious is it?  Can it be corrected?  
Diarrhea  About 50% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
Nausea/vomiting  About 25% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
Flatulence  About 12% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
Asthenia (low energy)  Less than 10% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
Indigestion  Less than 10% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
Abdominal Discomfort  Less than 10% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 7 of 15 
Headache  Less than 10% of patients experience this  Not serious  yes 
 A very rare, but very serious, risk of taking metformin is lactic acidosis, meaning acid builds up in the blood. Call a doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms, which could be signs of lactic acidosis: 
• Feeling cold in your hands or feet 
• Feel dizzy or lightheaded  
• Slow or irregular heartbeat  
• Feel very week or tired  • Unusual (not normal) muscle pain 
• Trouble breathing 
• Sleepy or drowsy 
• Fever 
 Lactic acidosis is most likely to happen when you are not eating. If you have to have a test (like a CT) or a fasting blood draw, or if you have a stomach bug, you should contact the study team and hold the doses of Metformin unti l you are able to resume eating normally . You should hold doses of Metformin 24 hours before 
and after any  imaging requiring contrast . 
 The drug to be used in this research study will not be given to you in a child resistant package. It must be stored  
out of the reach of children.  
I understand that the drug is not in a child resistant package and understand that I must make sure that it is stored safely and out of the reach of children. ______ (initials of /parent/guardian) 
 
Risks associated with bone marrow biopsy  
At least one of the bone marrow assessments performed during your participation in this study is standard of 
care, so it would be performed regardless of participation in the study. The Study Doctor will inform you in 
detail about the risks associated with this procedure.  In general, having an aspirate/biopsy can cause pain, 
swelling, bleeding and/or infection at the site where the needle penetrates through the skin. The likely risks and side effects of having a biopsy include: 
• Minor local bleeding or pain at the needle site, a swelling under the skin that contains blood, and sleepiness if the Study Doctor recommends a “pain killer” and/or medicine to help you relax.  
 Unlikely but serious risks and side effects from having a biopsy include: 
• Infection, serious bleeding, and, if the Study Doctor recommends a “pain killer” and/or medicine to help you relax, the following may occur: shortness of breath, slow heart rate, and low blood pressure. 
• You may be given sedation to make you sleep during this bone marrow biopsy. This sedation is 
optional, and you will sign a separate anesthesia consent form. That consent form will describe the risks 
of sedation in depth, but briefly, they are: shortness of breath, slow heart rate, and low blood pressure. You will be monitored for these risk s during the biopsy.  
 
Risks of an Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 8 of 15 
You will be required to fast for approximately 10 hours before your OGTT. This may make you feel hungry and lightheaded. We will try to get these tests do ne in the morning and then provide breakfast. The glucose solution 
you will need to drink may taste bad. 
 
Risks of blood draw  
Risks associated with a blood draw may include minor discomfort, bruising, fainting, and infection. When possible, we will draw bl ood at the time of a clinically -indicated procedure to reduce the number of needle 
sticks.  
 
Risks of cheek swab  
Risks associated with a check swab may include minor discomfort and unpleasant taste.  
 Reproductive Risks  
The effects of the drug being studied on the reproductive system (sperm, eggs) or to the developing fetus are 
unknown. For this reason, female participants taking the drug should not become pregnant. All participants 
must agree not to have sexual intercourse or  to use a reliable, effective birth control during the study. If you 
have a female partner who is able to become pregnant, one or both of you must use some form of effective birth control.  During the research, if your partner becomes pregnant, or if there is a chance that she is pregnant, you 
should contact the research investigator immediately so that we may provide medical assistance and counseling.  
 
Pregnancy testing will be performed before the research begins. The results of the pregnancy test are 
confidential and will be given to your child by one of the study nurses or doctors in private. We would not tell parent(s) or guardian(s) without your permission . However, under certain circumstances, we might be 
compelled to reveal this information. For example, if your life was at risk or if abuse was suspected, it may be necessary to inform your parent(s) or guardian(s) or relevant authorities . 
 If we be lieve it's necessary to tell a parent or guardian about a positive pregnancy test, we would ask permission 
from you. However, if we feel it is necessary to tell a pa rent/guardian without your permission we would first 
meet with you in private to discuss ou r concerns before divulging any information regarding pregnancy. During 
research, if you have a positive pregnancy test, we must withdraw you from the research.  This means that even 
if we do not reveal the results, parent(s) or guardian(s) may suspect that their child is pregnant despite our best 
efforts to maintain confidentiality.  If you become pregnant or if there is any chance that you are pregnant (late 
menstrual period), please contact the research investigator immediately so that we may provide medic al 
assistance and counseling.  
 
What are the benefits of this research? 
We do not know if participating in this study will benefit you. We hope to learn more about whether Metformin 
can help improve blood counts. The bone marrow assessments that you will ha ve during this study will provide 
information about how you may or may not be responding to Metformin treatment and also provide information 
on possible disease progression.  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 9 of 15 
 
Are there costs associated with this research? Will I receive any payments? 
Metfo rmin will be provided to you at no cost. You will receive a parking voucher for each study visit at Boston 
Children’s Hospital.  Other reasonable travel expenses can be reimbursed with prior approval from the research 
team.   More information about this reimbursement process can be found in the Metformin Study Participant 
Reimbursement Guide.  This research study will use a service called ClinCard® by the company Greenphire, www.greenphire.com, to manage all payments associat ed with your participation in study visits, your time, and travel related to 
participation in the study. ClinCard/Greenphire will provide documentation for filing your taxes (1099 form), to the hospital, and may ask for your name and social security number using a secure website to meet that federal requirement. Boston Children’s Hospital or the sponsor has contracted with ClinCard/Greenphire to provide this service, but Boston Children’s Hospital and ClinCard/Greenphire are separate entities and have no other relationship.  ClinCard/Greenphire is solely responsible for the security of any information you provide to them. 
  You will be issued a ClinCard, which is a specially designed debit card for clinical research onto which your funds will be loaded as appropriate. When a study visit is completed, funds will be loaded onto your card. The funds will be available within 1 day and can be used as you wish.  Research funds will pay for both of the bone marrow procedures that you will have at Boston Children’s Hospital.   When you have the monthly lab tests done at your local lab, this lab may bill your health insurer for 
routin e items and services you  would have received even if you did not take part in this research.  You will be 
responsible for payment of any deductibles and co-payments required by your insurer for this routine care or other billed care.  If you have any questions about costs to you that may result from taking part in the research, 
please speak with the research staff . 
 
We will offer you the care needed to treat any injury that directly results from taking part in this research. We 
reserve the right to bill your insurance company or other third parties, if appropriate, for the care you get for the injury. We will try to have these costs paid for, but you may be responsible for some of them. For example, if the care is billed to your insurer, you will be responsible for payment of any deductibles and co- payments 
required by your insurer.   Injuries sometimes happen in research even when no one is at fault. There are no plans to pay you or give you other compensation for an injury, should one occur. However, you are not giving up any of your legal rights by signing this form. If you think you have been injured or have experienced a medical problem as a result of taking part in this research, tell the person in charge of the research as soon as possible. The researcher's name and phone number are listed in this consent form. 
 
If you go to the Emergency Room or to another hospital or doctor, it is importa nt that you tell them that you are 
in this research.  If possible, you should give them a copy of this consent form. 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 10 of 15 
 
If I do not want to take part in this research, what are the other choices? 
If you do not join this research your doctor can discuss other healthcare choices with you. Your other choices 
may include: 
• Androgens such as oxymetholone or danazol   
• Allogene ic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation  
• Receiving Metformin off-label, meaning without participating in a research study  
• Joining a different research study  
 
Are there other things I should know about?  
If we find out about new information from this research or other research that may affect your health, safety or 
willingness to stay in this research , we will let you know as soon as possible. 
 Some of your blood and bone marrow samples will be sent to the Dana Farber Cancer Institute  Fanconi Anemia 
Center, University of North Carolina, and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. These institutions will perform some of the research tests for this study. Your samples will be sent with a code, so these other institutions will not be able to identify you. 
 
Why would I be taken off the study early?  
The research investigator may take you out of this study at any time. This would happen if: 
• The research is stopped. 
• You are not able to attend the research visits required.  
• You fail to follow the research requirements.  
• You need a treatment or medication that may not be taken while on the research or the research 
investigator feels it is in your best interest to be taken out of this research. 
 If this happens, the research investigator will tell you.  
Other information that may help you: 
Boston Children’s Hospital has developed a web- based, interactive educational program for parents called “A 
Parent’s Guide to Medical Research.” To find out more about research at Children’s, please visit the program at www.researchchildren.org
.  
 Boston Children’s Hospital is interested in hearing your comments, answering your questions, and responding to any concerns regarding clinical research. If you have questions or concerns, you may email IRB@childrens.harvard.edu
 or cal l (617) 355-7052 between the hours of 8:30 and 5:00, Monday through 
Friday . 
 
Who may see, use or share your health information?  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 11 of 15 
A copy of this consent form will be placed in your medical record. If you do not have a medical record at Boston Children’s Hos pital, one will be created for you. 
 Information collected during this research will become part of your medical record if the information is related 
to the care you receive at Boston Children's Hospital. Medical records are considered permanent records; therefore, information cannot be deleted from the record. Medical records are available to health care 
professionals at Boston Children's Hospital and may be reviewed by Hospital staff when  carrying out their 
responsibilities; however, they are required to maintain confidentiality in accordance with applicable laws and Hospital policies.  Information contained in your medical record may not be given to anyone unaffiliated with 
Boston Children's Hospital in a way that could identify you without written consent, except as required or permitted by law.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov
, as required by U.S. law. 
This w eb site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary 
of the results. You can search this w eb site at any time. 
 
Contact for Future Studies:  Your participation in any research is completely voluntary, and you should feel 
no pressure to participate if you are contacted about another research study. 
 
Please check and initial one  of the options below regarding future contact about other research done by us or 
other researchers we are working with (collabo rators).  
 
_______   Yes, I may be contacted about participating in other research projects studying  Fanconi Anemia  
or related conditions. I give permission for my contact infor mation (name and mailing address 
and/or phone number) to be given to other researchers working with the study investigator at Boston Children’s Hospital. 
 
_______  No, I do not want to be contacted about other research projects. Do not  give my contact 
information to  the staff of any other research studies.  
 
What should you know about HIPAA and confidentiality? 
Your health information is protected by a law called the Health Information Portability and Accountability act (HIPAA). In general, anyone who is involved in this research, including those funding and regulating the study, may see the data, including information about you. For example, the following people might see information about you:  
• Research staff at Boston Children’s Hospital involved in this study;  
• Medical staff at Boston Children’s Hospital directly involved in your care that is related to the research or arises from it;  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 12 of 15 
• Other researchers and centers that are a part of this study, including people who oversee research at that hospital; 
• People at Boston Children’s Hospital who oversee, advise, and evaluate research and care. This includes 
the ethics board and quality improvement program; 
• People from agencies and organi zations that provide accreditation and oversight of research;  
• People that oversee the study information, such as data safety monitoring boards, clinical research 
organizations, data coordinating centers, and others; 
• Sponsors or others who fund the research, including the government or private sponsors. 
• Companies that manufacture drugs or devices used in this research; 
• Federal and state agencies that oversee or review research information, such as the Food and Drug Administration, the Department of Health an d Human Services, the National Institutes of Health, and 
public health and safety authorities; 
• People or groups that are hired to provide services related to this research or research at Boston Children’s Hospital, including services providers, such as laboratories and others;  
• And/or your health insurer, for portions of the research and related care that are considered billable. 
 If some law or court requires us to share the information, we would have to follow that law or final ruling.  
 Some people or groups who get your health information might not have to follow the same privacy rules. Once your information is shared outside of Boston Children’s Hospital, we cannot promise that it will remain private. If you decide to share private information with anyone not involved in the study, the federal law designed to protect privacy may no longer apply to this information. Other laws may or may not protect sharing of private health information. If you have a question about this, you may contact the Boston Chil dren’s Hospital Privacy 
Officer at (857) 218 -4680, which is set up to help you understand privacy and confidentiality. 
 Because research is ongoing, we cannot give you an exact time when we will destroy this information. Researchers continue to use data fo r many years, so it is not possible to know when they will be done. 
 We will also create a code for the research information we collect about you so identifying information will not remain with the data and will be kept separately. The results of this rese arch may be published in a medical 
book or journal or be used for teaching purposes. However, your name or identifying information will not be used without your specific permission.  
 
Your privacy rights 
If you want to participate in this research study, you must sign this form. If you do not sign this form, it will not 
affect your care at Boston Children’s Hospital now or in the future , and there will be no penalty or loss of 
benefits.  You can withdraw from the study and end your permission for Boston Chi ldren’s Hospital to use or 
share the protected information that was collected as part of the research; however you cannot get back information that was already shared with others. Once you remove your permission, no more private health 
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 13 of 15 
information will be collected. If you wish to withdraw your health information, please contact the research team . 
 You may have the right to find out if information collected for this study was shared with others for research, treatment, or payment. You may not be allowed to review the information, including  information recorded in 
your medical record, until after the study is completed. When the study is over, you will have the right to access the information again. To request the information, please contact the Hospital’s Pr ivacy Officer at (857) 218-
4680.  
Contact Information  
I understand that I may use the following contact information to reach the appropriate person/office to address any questions or concerns I may have about this study. I know:
 
 I can call…   At…  If I have questions or concerns about … 
Principal Investigator:  Phone:  617-355-8246    General questions about the research  
  Research -related injuries or emergencies  
  Any research -related concerns or complaints  Elissa Furutani, MD  Pager:  617-355-6363  
Pager # 4847  
Study Coordinator  Phone:  857-218-3736   General questions about the study  
Ashley Galvin     Research -related injuries or emergencies  
  Any research -related concerns or complaints  
Institutional Review Board  Phone:  617-355-7052   Rights of a research participant  
 Use of protected health information.  
 Compensation in event of research -related injury  
 Any research -related concerns or complaints.  
 If investigator/ research contact cannot be 
reached.  
 If I want to speak with someone other than the Investigator, Research Contact or research staff.  
   
 
Documentation of Informed Consent and Authorization  
 I have read this consent form and was given enough time to consider the decision to participate in this research . 
 This research has been satisfactorily explained to me, including possible risks and benefits. 
 All my questions were satisfactorily answered.  
 I understand that participation in this research is voluntary and that I can withdraw at any time.  
 I am signing this consent form prior to participation in any research activities.  
 I give permission for participation in this research and for the use of associated protected health information as described above (HIPAA).  
 
 
 RESEARCH CONSENT FORM  
MRN: _________________________  
Pt Name: ______________________  
 
 
 
 
  
Page 14 of 15 
 
Parent/Legal Guardian Permission  (if applicable)  
If the child to be involved in this research is a foster child  or a ward of the state  please notify the 
researcher or their staff who is obtaining your consent.  
  
 __________________ ____________________________________________ _________________  
Date (MM/DD/YEAR)  Signature of Parent #1 or Legal Guardian  Relationship to child  
 
Child Assent  
 
 
 __________________ ____________________________________________  
Date (MM/DD/YEAR)  Signature of Child/Adolescent Participant    
 
 If child/adolescent’s assent is not  documented above, please indicate reason below (check one):  
 Assent is documented on a separate IRB-approved assent form 
 Child is too young 
 Other reason (e.g. sedated), please specify: ____________________________________________ 
 
Adult Par ticipant (if applicable)  
 
 
__________________ ____________________________________________  
Date (MM/DD/YEAR)  Signature of Adult Participant ( 18+ years)  
 
Research Investigator /or Associate’s Statement & Signature 
 I have fully explained the research escribed above, including the possible risks and benefits, to all involved 
parties (participant /parents/legal guardian as applicable) .  
 I have answered and will answer all questions to the best of my ability.  
 I will inform all involved parties of any changes (if applicable) to the research procedures or the risks and benefits during or after the course of the research.  
 I have provided a copy of the consent form signed  by the participant / parent / guardian and a copy of the 
hospital’s privacy notification (if requested). 
 
 
__________________ ____________________________________________ 
 
 
 R E S E A R C H C O N S E N T F O R M  
M R N: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
Pt N a m e: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
 
 
 
 
 
P a g e 1 5 of 1 5 Date ( M M/ D D/ Y E A R)   Si g nat ure of Rese arc h I n vesti g at or or Ass oci ate  
 
Wit ness St ate me nt & Si g n at ure  
A wit ness m ust be prese nt f or t he e ntire c o nse nt pr ocess i n t he f oll o wi n g sit uati o ns ( please c hec k t he a p pr o priate 
b o x)  
 T he i n di vi d ual ca n n ot rea d a n d t his c o nse nt d oc u me nt was r ea d t o t he partici pa nt or le gal re prese ntati ve, or  
 T he i n di vi d ual has certai n c o m m u ni cati o n i m pair me nts t hat li mit t he partici pa nt ’s a bilit y t o clearl y e x press 
c o nse n t or   
 Sit uati o ns w here t he I R B re q uests a wit ness be prese nt: please s pecif y _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
 
 I c o nfir m t hat t he i nf or mati o n i n t his c o nse nt f or m was acc uratel y e x plai ne d t o t he partici pa nt,  pare nt or le gall y 
a ut h orize d re prese ntati ve, t he i n di vi d ual a p peare d t o u n dersta n d t he i nf or mati o n a n d ha d t he o p p ort u nit y t o as k 
q uesti o ns, a n d t hat i nf or me d c o nse nt was gi ve n freel y. 
 
 
   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _          _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _              
      Date ( M M/ D D/ Y E A R)         Si g nat ure of Wit ness 
 
Or  
 
 T he i n di vi d ual is n ot E n glis h s pea ki n g a n d, t hr o u g h a n i nter preter, a s h ort f or m c o nse nt d oc u me nt was 
prese nte d orall y t o t he partici pa nt or le gal re prese ntati ve a n d t his c o nse nt d oc u me nt ser ves as  t he s u m mar y f or 
s uc h c o nse nt.  
 
I c o nfir m t hat t he i nf or mati o n i n t his c o nse nt f or m was prese nte d orall y t o t he partici pa nt, pare nt or le gall y 
a u t h orize d re prese ntati ve, i n a la n g ua ge t he y c o ul d u n dersta n d a n d t he i n di vi d ual ha d t he o p p ort u nit y t o as k 
q uesti o ns. 
 
 
   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _          _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _              
      Date ( M M/ D D/ Y E A R)         Si g nat ure of Wit ness  