i 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
I CARE for Vets: InC r
 easing Activity & RE covery for Vet erans with PTSD  
 
 
  
Study Protocol  Version 2.6, 10/20/21  
 
Funding Agency: VA RR&D 
 
Principal Investigator : Wei (Denise) Duan -Porter , MD, PhD 
  
  
ii 
 ABSTRACT  
Impacts: This project  will be a  key step forward in fulfilling the mission of VA RR&D to restore 
function and enable social reintegration for Veterans. Development of an intervention to increase 
physical activity may improve physical functioning for Veterans with posttraumatic stress di sorder 
(PTSD), thus addressing an important gap in existing care. If demonstrated to be efficacious in a 
future randomized trial, this intervention could be implemented throughout VHA to improve quality 
of life and enable a full recovery for many Veterans  with PTSD. Results from this study  may also 
advance our understanding of how to optimally incorporate mobile health technology (mHealth) 
with more traditional types of patient contacts, such as in- person visits and telephone calls. 
Effective use of mHealth  may offer greater flexibility for VHA clinics looking to implement new  
programs. Incorporation of mHealth may also increase access to clinical services for Veterans 
who reside far  from VHA facilities. 
 Background: One in ten Veterans seen in Veterans Health Administration (VHA) primary care 
clinics has PTSD . Individuals with PTSD are more likely to report impairments in physical 
functioning,  including health- related limitations in climbing stairs or performing common 
household tasks. As an essential  component of overall functioning and quality of life, physical 
functioning is an independent predictor of risk for  adverse health outcomes, including mortality. 
Mechanisms  underlying the association of PTSD and poor physical functioning are multifactorial, 
but a  key contributing factor  is likely persistent low levels of physical activity. Barriers to engaging 
in physical activity may include low perceived  behavioral control for making positive long- term 
lifestyle changes and personal attitudes about the harms (vs . benefits) of physical activity. Those 
with PTSD have reduced self -efficacy for behavioral change and less ability  to cope with setbacks, 
leading to greater difficulty with initiating and maintaining new health behaviors.  Individuals with 
PTSD are also more likely to have ongoing pain and fatigue, which may contribute to beliefs  about 
harmful effects of physical activity and lead to avoidance of activity. Current VHA outpatient 
programs are  primarily focused on addressing physical activity in the context of specific medical 
conditions (eg, obesity or  cardiovascular disease) , and there is a paucity of programs specifically 
tailored to the  unique needs of Veterans with PTSD. Development of effective programs to 
increase physical activity for Veterans with PTSD may therefore improve their physical functioning 
and represent an important  contribution to VHA efforts to enhance health and recovery for this 
population.  
 
Objectives/Aims: The overall objectives of this study  are to develop and pilot test a novel 
intervention aimed at initiating and maintaining higher levels of physical  activity for Veterans with 
PTSD.  
Aim 1 :
 Adapt graded exercise therapy  (GET)  and incorporate motivational interviewing and 
mHealth to increase physical activity  and improve physical functioning for Veterans with PTSD.  
Aim 2 : C onduct a pilot study to examine feasibility and acceptability of the intervention for a 
future randomized controlled trial.   
 
M
ethods . To increase physical activity for Veterans with PTSD, this project will combine  GET , 
motivational interviewing, and mobile health technology (mHealth) to address attitudinal and behavioral barriers particularly relevant for this group. First, we will work collaboratively with our 
Veteran Engagement Panel to adapt  GET protocols effective for non -PTSD populations (eg, 
adults with chronic pain or fatigue), and incorporate motivational interviewing and mHealth. We 
will then pilot test the intervention in 3 consecutive groups of 6-8 participants (total n=18- 24) and 
use concurrent mixed- methods to examine feasibility and acceptability.  Quantitative measures 
will include recruitment (proportion enrolled out of total eligible); attendance (proportion who 
attend 75% of in- person visits); and retention (proportion who complete data collection post -
intervention).  Qualitative assessments will involve semi -structured interviews on acceptability of 
iii 
 intervention components (eg, session formats and topics, usability of mHealth), and barriers and 
facilitators to attendance. At baseline, during and post -intervention, we will also assess overall 
and physical functioning using Veterans RAND 36- item,  6-minute walk, and 30- second sit to 
stand,  and collect additional data (PTSD symptoms, depression,  pain,fatigue,  and sleep quality) 
to inform a future randomized trial.  
 
iv 
 List of Abbreviations  
CCDOR........................................................ Center for Care Delivery & Outcomes Research  
CBT ............................................................. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy  
Co-I .............................................................. Co-Investigator  
ED ................................................................ Emergency Department  
GET ............................................................. Graded Exercise Therapy  
HSRD  .......................................................... Health Services Research and Development 
IRB ............................................................... Institutional Review Board 
mHealth  ....................................................... Mobile Health Technology  
MVAHCS  ..................................................... Minneapolis VA Health Care System  
NIH .............................................................. National Institutes of Health 
PACT  ........................................................... Patient Aligned Care Team (VA primary care staff)  
PCMHI ......................................................... Primary Care Mental Health Integration  
PCL-5 .......................................................... PTSD symptom checklist for the DSM -5 
PC-PTSD -5 .................................................. Primary Care Screen for PTSD for DSM -5 
PEG  ............................................................. Brief 3 -item Scale on Pain Intensity  & Interference  
PHQ -9 .......................................................... Patient Health Questionnaire-9 
PI ................................................................. Principal Investigator  
PSQI  ............................................................ Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  
PTSD  ........................................................... Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  
PT ................................................................ Physical Therapist  
RR&D  .......................................................... Rehabilitation Research and Development  
UMN ............................................................ University of Minnesota  
VA ................................................................ Department of Veterans Affairs  
VHA ............................................................. Veterans Health Administration 
VINCI  ........................................................... VA Informatics and C omputing Infrastructure  
VR-36 .......................................................... Veterans RAND 36- item Health Questionnaire  
WRAP………………………………………….. Wearables Research and Analytics Platform   
v 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1.0 Study Personnel  .............................................................................................................. 1  
2.0 Introduction  ..................................................................................................................... 1  
A. Overview & Conceptual Model ........................................................................................ 2  
B. Rationale for Intervention Components ............................................................................ 2  
1. Graded exercise therapy (GET)  ...................................................................................... 2  
2. Motivational interviewing and mobile health technology (mHealth)  .................................. 2  
C. Significance & Innovation ............................................................................................. 3  
3.0 Objectives  ....................................................................................................................... 3  
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ............................................................................................... 4  
A. Research Site: Minneapolis VA Health Care System (MVAHCS)  .................................... 4  
B. Principal Investigator  ....................................................................................................... 4  
5.0 Study Procedures  ............................................................................................................ 4  
A. Study  Design  ................................................................................................................... 4  
B. Development of Physical Activity Intervention .................................................................. 4  
1. Development of intervention manual and training procedures  ...................................... 4  
2. CCDOR Veteran Engagement Panel for PTSD research  ............................................. 5  
3. Adaptation of GET and integration with motivational interviewing  ................................ 5  
4. Mobile health technology (mHealth) ............................................................................. 6  
C.     Pilot Study to Evaluate Feasbility & Acceptability  ............................................................ 8  
1. Human Subjects Involvement & Characteristics.  .......................................................... 8  
2. Recruitment Procedures  .............................................................................................11 
3. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  .........................................................................................12 
4. Informed Consent Procedures  ....................................................................................12 
5. Quantitative Data & Analyses (Table 4)  ......................................................................12 
6. Qualitative Dat a & Analyses (Table 4) .........................................................................13 
7. Withdrawal of Subjects  ...............................................................................................14 
6.0 Reporting  ........................................................................................................................14 
7.0 References  .....................................................................................................................15 
Appendices  ...............................................................................................................................20  
 
1 
 1.0 STUDY PERSONNEL  
 
Principal Investigator /Study Chair :  
1. Wei (Denise) Duan- Porter , MD, PhD; wei.duanporter@va.gov , 612 -467 -5845 
 
2.0 INTRODUCTION 
 One in ten Veterans seen in VHA primary care clinics has posttraumatic stress disorder 
PTSD.1, 2 Individuals with PTSD are more likely to report impairments in physical functioning, 
including health- related limitations in climbing stairs or performing common household tasks.1, 3, 4 
As an essential component of overall functioning and quality of life,5, 6 physical functioning is an 
independent predictor of risk for adverse health outcomes, including mortality.7, 8 Although those 
with PTSD have higher prevalence of chronic medical conditions (eg, diabetes and heart disease) 
that may lead to limitations in physical functioning, these comorbidities do not account for the association between PTSD and poor physical functioning.
1, 3, 4 Mechanisms underlying the 
association of PTSD and poor physical functioning are multifactorial, but a key contributing factor is likely persistent low levels of physical activity .
9-11 Development of effective programs to 
increase physical activity for Veterans with PTSD may therefore improve their physical functioning and represent an important contribution to VHA efforts to enhance health and recovery for this 
population.  
 Individuals  with PTSD have low levels of physical activity,
9-11 and face unique and 
substantial barriers to increasing physical activity, compared to those without PTSD. Lack of physical activity leads to deconditioning and risk for further declines in physical functioning.
12, 13 
In applying the Theory of Planned Behavior,14, 15 we posit that barriers to engaging in physical 
activity for those with PTSD include low perceived behavioral  control  for making positive long-
term lifestyle changes and personal attitudes about the harms (vs. benefits) of physical activity.  
Those with PTSD have reduced self -efficacy for behavioral change and less ability to cope with 
setbacks,16, 17 leading to greater difficulty with initiating and maintaining new health behaviors.  
Individuals with PTSD are also more likely to have ongoing pain and fatigue,18-21 which may 
contribute to beliefs about harmful effects of physical activity and lead to avoidance of activity. 
Current VHA outpatient programs are primarily focused on addressing physical activity in the context of specific medical conditions (eg, obesity or cardiovascular disease). These programs 
were not designed for the particular challenges faced by those with PTSD and participation rates 
are lower for this group. For example, Veterans with PTSD were 20% less likely to participate in 
VHA MOVE program (f or weight loss) at recommended levels.
22 Among participants who attended 
sessions as recommended, achieving 6 -month goals was less likely for Veterans with vs. without 
PTSD.23 Despite these findings, a paucity of programs targeting physical activity have been 
specifically tailored to the unique needs of Veterans with PTSD. The few existing pilot studies of 
physical activity interventions for PTSD utilized mostly group exercises and did not show 
increas ed activity levels at home or improved functioning.24-26 Therefore, our long- term goal is to 
develop and implement effective interventions to increase physical activity,  improve physical 
functioning, and reduce risk for adverse health outcomes for Veterans with PTSD.   
  
2 
 A. Overview  & Conceptual Model   
 We will adapt GET and incorporate motivational interviewing and mHealth in a new 
intervention to increase physical activity (Aim 1), and conduct a pilot study to evaluate intervention 
feasibility and acceptability (Aim 2). The intervention applies GET to enhance perceived 
behavioral control,  and motivational interviewing and mHealth components to address unhelpful 
personal attitudes that are barriers to physical activity ( Figure 1). GET provides individualized 
assessments and instructions to build knowledge, and emphasizes setting small achievable increases in activity goals to boost confidence in ability to engage in physical activity. Together, 
these elements of GET lead to 
increased behavioral control for 
physical activity. Motivational 
interviewing  in a small group 
setting helps participants 
examine attitudinal barriers to 
engaging in activity and provides 
social support. mHealth  
components  include wearable 
devices to  reinforce positive 
attitudes about physical 
activity through real -time 
feedback on meeting individualized goals.  
 
B. Rationale for Intervention Components  
1. Graded exercise therapy (GET)  
 Randomized trials of GET have demonstrated efficacy for improving physical functioning 
for adults with chronic pain and/or fatigue symptoms.27, 28 Often delivered by physical therapists 
(PT), GET protocols involve individualized assessment of exercise capacity; coaching about appropriate types of physical activity; and collaborative deci sion-making between therapists and 
participants to set achievable goals for increasing activity (usually 10 -20% per week, focusing first 
on longer duration). Some interventions have included cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to directly address negative cognitions about physical activity ( eg, pain after exercise means 
damage is occurring to the body) and problematic behavioral patterns ( eg, cycles of intense 
activity followed by long periods of inactivity in response to increased symptoms).
29-32 CBT 
sessions often focused on time -based pacing, appropriate responses to bodily symptoms, and 
coping skills.  
  Some elements of existing GET interventions will be directly applicable to Veterans 
with PTSD, due to the high prevalence of pain and fatigue symptoms among those with PTSD. However, there may be certain barriers particularly relevant to individuals with PTSD (eg, 
avoidance of outdoor activities due to hypervigilance) that are not addressed by current GET 
protocols. Additionally,  past protocols required substantial clinic resources for weekly (or more 
frequent) in- person visits over several months, which limit feasibility for broad implementation. 
Extended duration of in- person visits may also reduce acceptability and uptake among those with 
PTSD.  Therefore, GET protocols need to be adapted for Veterans with PTSD and modified to 
improve feasibility for implementation in outpatient settings.  
2. Motivational interviewing and mobile health technology (mHealth)  
Motivational interviewing has been used to address a variety of health behaviors and can be 
effectively delivered both in- person  (individually and in groups) and by telephone.
33-37 It focuses 
on eliciting personal reasons and motivations for behavioral change and engages with participants’ ambivalence about change using a nonjudgmental stance. Recent studies have also shown that Figure 1. Conceptual Model of Intervention Com ponents 
and Effects on Physical Activity and Physical Functioning.  Physical 
ActivityPerceived 
Behavioral 
Control
Personal 
AttitudesPhysical 
Functioning
mHealthMotivational 
InterviewingGraded Exercise 
Therapy (GET)
3 
 mHealth (eg, wearable devices and smart -phone applications), combined with financial incentives, 
is effective for increasing physical activity.38, 39 Wearable devices enable remote collection of 
physical activity data, asynchronous follow -up by staff (via text messages or telephone calls), and 
individualized goal- setting. Thus, mHealth components may improve acceptabi lity among 
participants and feasibility for implementation in busy outpatient clinical settings, due to decreased 
need for in- person visits. mHealth and financial incentives to increase physical activity are realistic 
for implementation by VHA clinical services, as they would build on existing VHA investments in 
mHealth (eg, for mental health treatment and smoking cessation40, 41) and recent nationwide 
efforts to incorporate financial incentives in support of treatment for substance use disorders (ie, contingency management with financial rewards for abstinence and attendance of treatment 
sessions
42, 43).  
 
C. Significance  & Innovation 
 Successful completion of this study  will result in a tailored intervention to increase 
physical activity, and thereby improve physical functioning,  for Veterans with PTSD. If 
demonstrated to be effective, this intervention may also reduce risk for adverse health outcomes, including cardiovascular events and mortality. Thus, this project will be highly significant for 
advancing VHA clinical care by contributing to development of effective outpatient programs that 
improve health and quality of life for Veterans with PTSD. This will be a critical next step towards fulfilling VA RR&D’s mission to restore function and enable recovery for Veterans.  
 Result s from this project will also advance our understanding of how to optimally 
incorporate mHealth components with traditional patient contacts (in- person visits and telephone 
calls). Effective use of mHealth may offer greater flexibility for VHA clinics to implement new programs and increase access to these services for Veterans. Thus, this work will expand the applicability of VHA’s current investments in mHealth for clinical care.  
 This novel program may also help participants build confidence about their general ability 
to make positive changes related to health, thus increasing the likelihood they will engage in (and 
adhere to) mental health treatments. If such synergy is ultimately demonstrated, it will open a new 
direction for VA RR&D and VHA clinical care by indicating that interventions focusing on physical 
activity need to be more closely integrated with mental health services.  
 To address potential challenges with recruitment, acceptability and/or retention (often 
encountered by randomized trials evaluating new interventions
44, 45), this study  incorporates a 
novel patient engagement model. Stakeholder engagement can improve the relevance of research to end- users and uptake of findings.
46, 47 Patient engagement is also thought to increase 
the quality of assessment instruments and effectiveness of recruitment  strategies.48 We adapted 
an existing model of patient engagement49, 50 to address several noted barriers to effective 
stakeholder engagement.51 Our panel consists of Veterans with lived- experience of PTSD who 
participate in project -focused meetings. A core group of experienced investigators and research 
staff at CCDOR  organize and facilitate meetings to ensure they are focused and effective for both 
project investigators and Veteran stakeholders. Completion of this project will help establish the 
utility of our model of Veteran engagement for rapidly developing effective interventi ons with 
improved feasibility and acceptability.  
3.0 OBJECTIVES  
 T he overall objectives of this study are to develop and pilot test a novel intervention 
aimed at initiating and maintaining higher levels of physical activity for Veterans with PTSD.  
 
Aim 1: Adapt GET and incorporate motivational interviewing and mHealth to increase 
physical activity and improve physical functioning for Veterans with PTSD.  We will develop 
treatment manuals, training procedures for physical therapists (as interventionists), and  
processes for fidelity assessment.  
4 
  
Aim 2: Conduct a pilot study to examine feasibility and acceptability of the intervention 
for a future randomized controlled trial.  We will pilot test the intervention in 3 consecutive 
groups of 6- 8 participants (total  n=18- 24) and use concurrent mixed- methods to examine 
feasibility and acceptability.  We expect 75% attendance and retention, based on results from 
pilot studies of group exercise interventions for PTSD ( eg, retention of 76- 82%).25, 26 
4.0 RESOURCES AND P ERSONNEL  
A. Research Site: Minneapolis VA Health Care System (MVAHCS)  
Center for Chronic Disease Outco mes Research, MVAHCS , Minneapolis, MN.  Activities 
that take place at this site include the following:  
1. Data extraction  
2. Recruitment , obtaining informed consent,  and data collection, including interviews 
by trained staff, who are the study coordinator and co- investigators   
3. Intervention administration/delivery  
4. Data analysis  
 
B. Principal Investigator  
Wei Duan- Porter , MD, PhD 
a. Will have access to protected health information  
b. Will be involved in recruiting subjects; obtaining informed consent; 
supervising and administering interview procedures/conduct of interviews ,  
training and supervising providers in intervention delivery , and performing 
data analysis  
5.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
A. Study Design  
 This will be  a 2-year study. During the first 6 months, we will develop the intervention by 
adapting GET and incorporating motivational interview and mHealth components. In the next 18 
months, we will conduct a single- arm pilot with 3 groups (6-8 participants per group) to evaluate 
feasibility and acceptability.  
 
Table 1. Project Timeline  
 Year 1  Year 2  
Planned Activities  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Aim 1:  Adapt GET and incorporate motivational interviewing & mHealth  
Develop session formats, topics, and materials  X X X      
Work with CCDOR Veteran Engagement Panel to refine 
treatment manual, materials, and recruitment procedures   X       
Develop training procedures and fidelity assessments    X      
Establish processes for mHealth components and data    X      
Aim 2: Conduct pilot study to examine feasibility and acceptability  
Develop recruitment procedures with primary care and PCMHI 
staff  X X X      
Conduct groups 1 -3 (6-8 participants per group)     X X X X X 
Examine recruitment, attendance, retention, and acceptability     X X X X X 
Collect data on physical activity, physical functioning, PTSD 
symptoms, depression, pain, fatigue, and sleep quality     X X X X X 
B. Development of Physical Activity Intervention 
1. Development of intervention manual and training procedures  
5 
  The investigators will develop treatment manuals, training procedures for interventionists, 
and processes for fidelity assessment.  During months 1- 3 of the project, we will elaborate  session 
content and format. We will then present topics, formats, and communications materials to the 
Minneapolis VA Center for Care Delivery & Outcomes Research (CCDOR) Veteran Engagement 
Panel for PTSD research (see below).  In months 4 -6, we will incor porate Engagement Panel 
input, and develop protocols for training PT to deliver the intervention. Training procedures may 
include didactic sessions, role playing and mock video- conferencing sessions . 
   The proposed 4 -
month intervention will 
focus on initiation (months 
1-2) and maintenance 
(months 3- 4) of higher 
physical activity levels (Figure 2). In month 1, 
sessions will employ  GET 
and motivational inter -
viewin g to  provide intensive, 
personalized counseling, 
thereby  over-coming barriers 
to initiation . In  month 2, 
further gains in physical 
activity will be supported by 
weekly telephone contacts. Wearable devices  will be incorporated to reinforce benefits of 
achieving activity goals, and in months 3 -4, support maintenance of higher physical activity levels . 
 
2. CCDOR Veteran Engagement Panel for PTSD research  
 Our Engagement Panel is adapted from a previously developed model of patient 
engagement,
49, 50 and is comprised of 12 Veterans who have lived- experience with PTSD, 
including 6 men and 6 women of  diverse race and ethnicity, 25- 67 years old. The panel meets 
quarterly and more often, as requested to support ongoing projects. Meetings of 2 -3 hours are 
organized by the CCDOR Engagement Workgroup, with input from project teams on topics and goals. Meetings begin with a brief investigator presentation on overall project goals and 2 -3 key 
questions for panel members to address. Workgroup staff facilitate meetings, take detailed notes 
during meetings and review themes with project teams immediately afterwards. Investigators are 
also provided written summaries of key feedback. Co-I nvestigator  Meis will lead collaboration with 
the Veteran Engagement Panel on session formats and topics (eg, additional barriers to address), communication materials (eg, brochures and worksheets for activity planning), and recruitment 
procedures.  
3. Adaptation of GET and integration with motivational interviewing  
We will combine GET and motivational interviewing in individual meetings and group sessions to be delivered by a trained P T. 
  At the first individual meeting, participants will complete in -person baseline assessments, 
learn about intervention rationale and components, discuss their values and goals, describe preferences for types of physical activity ( eg, walking), and be introduced to mHealth components .    
Weekly group sessions in month 1 will involve closed cohorts of 6 -8 participants  and be conducted 
by video- conferencing (see Section 4b below). Based on our experience with motivational 
interviewing, chronic pain rehabilitation, and PTSD psychotherapies, th e group format should 
optimize development of relationships and support between participants, while also permitting personalized attention to motivations and barriers.  Additionally, groups may be particularly 
beneficial for individuals with PTSD, who are often isolated and have greater difficulty making  Figure 2. Timeline of Intervention Components and  
Activity Goals.  
GET & Motivational 
Interviewing
Activity Goal :Telephone Follow -up XX X XX XX0
X
Wearable DevicesMaintenance Initiation
1 mo 2 mo 3 mo 4 mo
6 
 use of existing social supports.52 Group  sessions have been effective in previous studies of GET 
interventions for non- PTSD populations.31 Each session will have 2 main discussion topics,  and 
incorporate approximately 30 minutes of group exercises. Proposed group session topics include 
time-based pacing, attitudes related to pain and/or fatigue after activity, improvement of sleep, 
and strategies to address other personal barriers.  At the  end of group sessions, participants will 
develop individualized plans for physical activity at home. Physical activity goals will take into account participants’ baseline levels of activity and exercise capacity, with gradual increases of 
10-20% per week,  focusing first on extending duration and then increasing intensity.  
 Additional individual follow -up will occur between weeks 1 and 2; between weeks 2 and 3; 
and after week 4. By video- conferencing or telephone, PT will assess progress with increasing 
activity, apply motivational interviewing techniques and tools ( eg, amplifying change talk and 
readiness rulers), and provide personalized troubleshooting as needed. PT will continue to use motivational interviewing in weekly follow -up telephone calls during month 2.  
Table 2. Goals and Content of Individual Meetings and Group Sessions 
  
4. Mobile health t echnology (mHealth)   
 a. Wearable fitness devices  
 Wearable devices  will provide daily feedback to participants on their physical activity and 
help improve personal attitudes about activity (Figure 1). Principal Investigator Duan- Porter and 
Co-Investigator Erbes will lead the incorporation of wearable fitness devices (ie, Garmin 
Vivosmart 4 ) and financial incentives. Wearable devices will be introduced to participants at the 
first individual meeting with PT, providing time for participants to troubleshoot technical issues 
before the first group session.  We will encourage participants to consistently wear the device on 
either right or left wrists (per their preference), and calibrate stride lengths.  
 Participants will receive  financial incentives to support their engagement with the wearable 
device and to add motivation for increasing their physical activity  (see section below on 
incentives).  During month 1, participants will determine their physical activity goals at the end of 
group sessions  and we will assist them with setting these goals in their devices.  In month 2, goals 
will be set during weekly telephone calls. In months 3 -4, wearable devices (and financial 
incentives ) will continue with no scheduled participant contacts or further increases in activity 
levels (Figure 2).  

7 
  To access physical activity and sleep data fr om wearable devices, we will work with a VA -
approved contractor (RTI International , Inc). Device companies routinely obtain and store these 
data in their databases, as part of standard service to users . RTI will use dummy email identifiers 
to create and maintain online accounts  through the device company  (eg, 
"icare001@gowrap.org") . Participants will use the  dummy email address  to register their devices 
with the company . Cross- referencing with identifying information is known only to VA study staff.  
Participant data will be accessed through these accounts, and after the study concludes , 
participants  will disconnect their devices  from the study accounts and no further data will be 
collected or  accessed. Participant s may choose to share other data through their devices, but RTI 
will only access physical activity ( eg, step counts and minutes of moderate intensity activity) and 
sleep data. No other data ( eg, participant name or location) will be obtained by RTI. All RT I staff 
with data access have been trained in HIPAA security and ethics of human subjects research.  
RTI will provide weekly data to the VA study team, and once obtained, these data will be 
stored behind the VA firewall (see section below on protection of participant privacy for full 
description of information security procedures).  VA study staff may review participants' physical 
activity and sleep data via the company  website, in order to provide feedback to participants on 
their progress.  RTI will also as sist with generating weekly activity summary progress reports for 
participants. These will include physical activity data t o provide updates on participants’  progress 
towards their activity goals ( eg, minutes of walking or biking per day ). The reports may  display 
physical activity data using graphs and other  figures available through the device company 
accounts (see Appendix 1). Additionally, reports will include messages of encouragement that are 
tailored to the participants’ progress that week (Table 3). Finally, we will provide a short summary 
statement of financial incentives they should expect ( eg, “You met your goals on 3 days during 
this past week. This means you will receive $6.”).  In all communications  with RTI (and materials 
sent by  them) , participants will be referred to by their dummy email & device identifier. RTI will 
not have access to any identifiable participant information.  
 
Table 3. Examples of Tailored Messages  
Group 1:  Meeting daily 
activity goals ≥  5 days 
per week  Group 2 :  Meeting daily 
activity goals 3- 4 days 
per week  Group 3:  Meeting daily 
activity goals 0- 2 days 
per week  
You are on the right track!  . You will be on your way to 
a healthier new you!  New activities can be 
challenging to do. Take it 
one day at a time!  
You are on your way to a 
healthier new you!  We know this is tough but 
keep at it!  We know it is not easy, but 
it is worth it! Tell a friend 
what you look forward to 
most!  
 
 b. Video -conferencing  
 Due to  the COVID -19 pandemic  and higher risk for group activities , we will conduct all 
group sessions and some individual meetings (see Appendix 2) via videoconferencing on Zoom , 
a VA and HIPAA compliant videoconferencing platform. VA ORD permits group meetings via 
platforms that are approved by the ISSO.  Zoom is included in the VA Technical Reference Model 
(TRM), a list of VA- approved technologies . We will audio- record some  sessions to assess 
intervention fidelity.  
 We will generate unique Zoom  meeting links for each participant's individual sessions and 
for group sessions.  Participants will be required to log into the videoconferencing platform  with 
the unique link. Meeting invitations will be sent from  a study -specific VA email address . The 
8 
 waiting room feature will be enabled for all meetings, so each participant will be let into a meeting 
by a study team member with host capabilities.  No PHI will be included in the subject line and 
recipents will only see their own email address .  
 c. Financial incentives  
 Financial incentives  for participants are tied to physical activity data from their wearable 
devices. After their baseline visit and before group session 1, they will receive $2 for each day that their devices record at least 500 steps . This is to help participants  develop the routine of 
consistently wearing their devices, syncing data, charging and other maintenance. After 
participants  begin setting activity goals ( eg,  group sessions 1- 4), they will receive $2 for  each day  
that they meet their  daily activity goal , giving  a maxium of $14 each week . Participants may need 
to record the activity on their wearable device to obtain the incentives . However, if an unforeseen 
device problem arises that prevents the participant from using the device, the participant will 
receive the incentives during the period  of the device issue.  Participants will have the option to 
receive incentives via direct deposit or debit card.  
 
C. Pilot Study to Evaluat e Feasbility & Acceptability  
 We propose to conduct a pilot study of 3 groups with 6- 8 participants each (total n=18 -
24). Based on our clinical and research experience with piloting group interventions, and number 
of participants in the active arm of recent pilot studies of group exercise interventions for PTSD,25, 
26 we expect that 3 groups will provide sufficient data on feasibility and acceptability to inform a 
larger study.  A control group will not be enrolled as examining efficacy is not appropriate at this stage,
53, 54 and our main goal is to evaluate feasibility and acceptability of the active intervention. 
Co-Investigator Vogsland will be the PT interventionist conducting in- person assessments, video-
conferencing sessions,  and telephone calls. We will use a concurrent mixed- methods approach 
to assess feasibility and acceptability, and anticipate making protocol modifications as 
appropriate. Data on physical activity, functioning, and symptoms will also be collected, to determine feasibility of outcomes assessments for a future randomized trial.  
 1. Human Subjects Involvement & Characteristics. 
 W e will screen Veterans being seen in -person or having virtual care appointments at 
MVAHCS primary care clinics for PTSD ( ie, ≥3 on Primary Care Screen for PTSD -5) and self -
reported health- related limitations in mobility ( ie, climbing several flights of stairs or walking 
several blocks). Exclusion criteria include ongoing suicidal ideation or psychosis ; medical 
contraindications to exercise ( eg, complete paraplegia) ; high degree of disability ( ie, impairments 
in ≥2 basic activities of daily living) ; plans to move out of the area permanently within 4 months; 
major neurocognitive impairment ( eg, dementia), schizophrenia; acute mental health crisis within 
the past 3 months (requiring an ED visit or hospitalization) ; and routinely completing 150 minutes 
or more of moderate to vigorous activity per week . We will not recruit prisoners, institutionalized 
individuals, or children. Our goal is to conduct 3 groups of 6 -8 participants each (18- 24 total).  
 Study participants will be asked to attend group  and individual sessions during the first 
month, to address attitudinal and behavioral barriers to increasing physical activity.  Most of these 
will occur by video -conferencing (see Section B).  Participants will be encouraged to safely and 
gradually increase their daily physical activity. At the baseline in-person visit , participants will be 
interviewed about personal goals and motivations for increasing physical activity, beliefs about pain and fatigue related t o activity, and specific barriers they have encountered in attempting to 
increase activity. Participants will also undergo assessments of physical functioning, PTSD and depressive symptoms, pain, fatigue, and sleep. During and after the intervention, parti cipants will 
be interviewed to evaluate feasibility and acceptability of intervention components.  
   
9 
 a. Data sources  
 There will be 3 sources of data for this study: 1) existing VA electronic medical record 
(EMR) data (from the VA Corporate Data Warehouse [CD W]) to confirm lack of medical 
contraindications to exercise and to capture baseline health status; 2) physical activity  and sleep  
data collected by wearable devices and accessed via RTI ’s Wearables Research and Analytics 
Platofrm ( WRAP ); and 3) participant assessments, including interviews on acceptability, self -
reported data (on physical activity, functioning, mental health symptoms, pain, fatigue, and sleep), 
6-minute walking distance, and 30-second sit to stand test. No biological specimens will be 
involved.  To obtain EMR information from CDW  for potential participants, we will use social 
security numbers (SSN) and full names.  Participant interviews will be audiorecorded and 
transcribed by the VA Health Services Research & Development (HSR&D)  Transcription Core at 
the Salt Lake City VA. No protected health information will be shared with non- VA entities.  
 
b. Potential r isk to participants  
 The pilot study proposed in Aim 2 will pose minimal risk to subjects, as the therapeutic 
risks are no greater than what may occur in routine clinical care. Individual attitudinal and behavioral barriers discussed during intervention  sessions are less likely to be of a sensitive 
nature, compared with therapy sessions for mental health conditions. There is a small risk of 
injury for participants as they increase their physical activity, but we anticipate recommendations will mainly be for low -intensity activity ( eg, walking) that are well within the 
range of normal functioning. Some participants may experience skin irritation related to wearing the fitness device. The main research risks are breach of confidentiality, lost time, and inconvenience associated with participating in a research study. There are no economic risks 
and minimal social or psychological risks of participating. Participants could potentially feel 
some stress or discomfort during interviews or responding to surveys, but most questions are 
not of an especially sensitive nature.   
 
c. Adequacy of p rotection from risks 
 The risk of psychological harm is minimal, as described above. Participants will be 
informed that they do not have to answer any question that makes them uncomfortable. Should participants report moderate to severe symptoms of depression or PTSD, we will discuss these 
results with p articipants and if they are not engaged in treatment, we will refer them to mental 
health resources at the Minneapolis VA. Intervention sessions will be conducted by an 
experienced PT who will also be trained in motivational interviewing techniques and tools. Risks associated with physical activity will be minimized, beginning with a thorough 
assessment of baseline activity levels and exercise capacity conducted by PT. The PT 
interventionist will also instruct participants on proper form and technique for physical activity, 
to help prevent injuries. Additionally, Veterans with clear medical contraindications to exercise 
will be excluded from participation.  We will teach and reinforce good practices for cleaning the 
wearable device and protecting skin ( eg, do not wear too tightly, dry devices as soon as 
possible after exercise). We will also follow all Minneapolis VA Research protocols related to 
COVID -19 precautions, including screening of participants via telephone before in- person 
assessments. 
 d. Confidentiality and protection of participant privacy  
 All study data will be stored behind the VA firewall on Minneapolis VA servers and on the 
VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) in accordance with VA -approved data 
security standards. The servers  are accessible only to designated, security -cleared, and trained 
personnel, and data are limited in terms of protected health information to the greatest extent possible. Data on both VINCI and CCDOR specific servers are organized by projects within 
designated folders for each principle investigator. Only personnel on the study team for a given 
10 
 project have access to a specific project folder. Approved study personnel must use Windows 
authentication or Personal Identity Verification (PIV) card to access project data. Thus, all data 
housed on these servers are secure, and access by unauthorized persons is highly unlikely.  
  All participants will be assigned randomly generated unique study identifiers that do not 
contain names or other personal identifying information. The crosswalk linking participants to 
their identifiers will be stored on secure VA servers (behind the VA firewall), and restricted to 
approved analysts who are part of the CCDOR Data Team  and study team . Electronic data ( eg, 
CDW  data, scanned surveys, interview transcripts) will be stored on secure VA servers and de-
identified as quickly as is  feasible.  
 Physical activity  and sleep data will be collected remotely  from wearable devices  (eg, 
number of steps taken, number of minutes  of physical activity, and number of minutes of sleep 
per day for each participant).  These data are transmitted  to databases  maintained by  the wearable 
device company,  per their established protocols  for all device users.  We will work with a VA-
approved contractor , RTI,  to access only the data specified above . No other  data (eg, participant  
name or  location)  will be obtained  by the contractor or stored  in their  databases.  Also contractor  
staff with access  to data have been trained in HIPAA security  and ethics  of human subjects  
research.  Physical activity data will be linked via dummy email  identifiers , and cross -referencing 
with identifying information is  known only  to VA study  staff. Data for  each participant  will be  
retrieved  weekly  by RTI and sent to VA study staff . Once obtained,  activity  data will be stored on 
secure VA servers  behind the VA firewall, using the same  procedures  as noted above for other  
participant  data.   
  Emails with meeting information will be sent from a study -specific VA email address. 
Recipients will not see other email addresses and will be asked not to reply to invitation emails.  
Encrypted emails with activity summary reports will be sent to each participant separately. I n all 
communications  with RTI , participants will be referred to by their dummy email or  device 
identifier.  
 
e. Potential benefits of research to s ubjects and o thers  
 Veterans participating in this study have the potential to increase their physical activity 
and improve their physical functioning. This may have additional significant health benefits, including reducing their risk for cardiovascular events. If this intervention is subsequently found 
to be effective, it will lead to improved functioning for many Veterans enrolled in VHA who have 
PTSD and limitations in functioning. Veterans participating in the pilot study will also have the potential to receive up to a total of $277 for financial incentives tied to meeting daily physical 
activity goals and for completing the final post -intervention assessments.  
 The proposed work will be an important step forward in fulfilling the mission of VA RR&D 
to restore function and enable social reintegration for Veterans. Development of an intervention 
to improve physical functioning for Veterans with PTSD will address an important gap in existing 
care. If eventually shown to be effective, this new intervention could be implemented throughout 
VHA to improve quality of life and enable a full recovery for many Veterans with PTSD. Results 
from the proposed work may also advance our understanding of how to optimally incorporate 
mHealth with more traditional types of patient contacts (ie, in- person visits and telephone calls). 
Effective use of mHealth may offer greater flexibility for VHA clinics looking to implement new programs. Incorporation of mHealth may also increase access to clinical services for Veterans 
who reside far from VHA facilities
. 
 
f. Data and s afety monitoring  plan 
 S afety Monitoring:  We do not expect any injuries or safety events to occur during the pilot 
study, as we will be encouraging increased physical activity after a thorough evaluation by an experienced PT interventionist. However, as safeguards, study staff will inquire about any new 
injury or health problem that may affect participants’ ability to engage safely in physical activity, 
11 
 at regular intervals during the intervention. Participants will also be instructed to contact study 
staff if any change in health status occurs in between scheduled study follow -ups. The 
investigative team includes general internal medicine physicians, in addition to the PT interventionist, who will help assess the full range of concerns regarding any changes in 
participant health status. If an injury is thought to be potentially related to the study, we will follow 
appropriate MVAHCS IRB policy for reporting and care of participants. 
 
 Accuracy and Integrity of Data—Secure Data Infrastructure:  VINCI is an HSR&D 
Resource Center that provides researchers a national view of VA patient data. VINCI is a research and development partnership and operational platform for health services research, epidemiology, decision support, and business intelligence. Partners include VA Office of Informatics and Analysis,  and Office of Information and Technology (OIT) Business Intelligence 
Service Line. VINCI brings together data sources and the analytical environment for performing studies, along with the expertise of data stewards such as VHA National Data Systems (NDS) and VA Information Resource Center (VIReC). New research projects are granted access to dynamic views or data snapshots that can be updated as needed. In addition to data storage, VINCI includes a cluster of servers with dedicated software for analysis, data processing, and extracting information from text.  VINCI is accessible from the VA intranet, providing VA 
researchers with a central, secure location to access data and the applications they need to select, transform, and analyze patient data.  
 C
CDOR also maintains several of its own secure virtual data servers that are protected 
behind the VA firewall. All individuals with administrative access privileges to the CCDOR servers have been screened and assigned a security clearance to work with patient level data. OIT Administrative access to the data is strictly limited to backing up server data, which prevents 
catastrophic loss of data. Backups of these servers occur regularly and are stored in a secure 
location.   
 2. Recruitment Procedures 
 Data coll ection  and recrui tment  will take place at MVAHCS. We will rely primarily on 2 
methods of identifying potentially eligible Veterans: 1) primary care staff referral and 2) self -
referral.  
 S
taff Referral : Referral s from primary care staff, including Primary Care Mental Health 
Integration (PCMHI) , will provide our first -line recruitment source, as this will closely model  how 
the patients would receive referrals  in typical clinic care . We will make announcements about 
the study in multiple settings and forums ( eg, announcements at team meetings, presentations 
at grand rounds). We will provide flyers and brochures to staff  and discuss the study with them. 
We will ask primary care staff to provide potentially eligible Veterans  (ie, positive on PTSD 
screen and without suicidal ideation, see detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria below ) with 
brochures about the pilot study . If a Veteran demonstrates interes t, primary care staff will either 
encourage Veteran to directly  call study coordinator (information in brochure) or ask for  
permission to share their  name and telephone number with the coordinator.   
 Self-R eferral : To facilitate self -referral, we will use study fliers and brochures 
strategically placed in appropriate clinic locations and make announcements to inform primary 
care staff about the study . Individuals who are self -referred to the study will reach out to study 
staff to express their interest directly.   
 Active Outreach: Due to decreased in- per son visits during the COVID pandemic (which 
limit opportunities for staff and self -referral s), we will  identify potentially eligible Veterans who 
have a positive screen for PTSD in the past 2 months through an administrative data pull and 
recruit these Veterans through mailed letters and telephone calls. We will send out letters 
introducing the study and providing contact information for individuals to opt out of further 
contacts. Starting 10 days  after the letter  is sent, we will make up to 3 calls (on at least 2 
12 
 different days) to provide more information about the study and conduct eligibility screening, 
for those who are interested.   
 3. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 To identify Veterans with PTSD symptoms and poor physical functioning who may benefit 
from the intervention, eligibility criteria are as follows  (Error! Reference source not  found. ): 
 I
nclusion: 1) ≥18 years old; 2) patient in primary care at MVAHCS; 3) score ≥3 on Primary 
Care PTSD Screen (PC -PTSD -5), which is routinely administered during primary care 
appointments (95% sensitivity and 85% specificity for PTSD diagnosis55); 4) “yes” to any of 3 
questions about health- related limitations from the Veterans RAND 36 -Item Healt h Survey (VR -
36),56, 57 as an indicator of impaired functioning; 5) has access to device (smart phone, tablet , or 
computer) that enables participation in videoconferenc ing; 6) has a smartphone or tablet that can  
support Garmin application; 7) has internet access  for videoconferencing.  
 E xclusion :  1) active suicidal ideation or psychosis; 2) medical contraindication to 
participation (eg, complete paraplegia); 3) self -reported impairments in 2 or more activities of daily 
living (ADLs) ; 4) plans to move out of area permanen tly within next 4 months; 5) major 
neurocognitive impairment (e.g., dementia); 6) schizophrenia; 7) acute mental health crisis within 
the past 3 months (requiring an ED visit or hospitalization) ; and 8) routinely completing 150 
minutes or more of moderate to vigorous activity per week . Individuals meeting these criteria may 
be unable to safely increase physical activity at home or not have a need for this program .  
 For  Veterans referred by primary care and PCMHI staff, the study coordinator  and/or 
principal investigator  will conduct further eligibility screening using the following sources: 1) review 
of m edical records for exclusion criteria (recent episodes of psychosis and medical 
contraindications to physical activity); 2) discussion with primary care provider for clarification 
about potential contraindications, as needed; and 3) telephone call to administer questions on 
mobility limitations, other health problems, and ADL impairments.  For Veterans who self -refer, the 
study coordinator will first complete the PC -PTSD -5 and screening questions for suicidal ideation. 
After completing screening for eligibil ity, the study coordinator will schedule Veterans for a phone 
call to obtain informed consent and provide additional information on the intervention.  
 4. Informed Consent Procedures 
 The study coordinator will schedule a tele phone call with Veterans to go ov er the informed 
consent form, HIPAA a uthorization form, and enrollment forms for financial incentives. We will 
also include other materials  to describe the study  (eg, FAQ document,  expectations  for 
confidentiality and privacy during group meetings , and troubleshooting Zoom ). We will mail 
potential participants these materials ahead of the phone call, instructing them n ot to sign any 
forms until the call. During the call, the study coordinator will provide a thorough overview of study 
participation, risks, benefits, alternatives, protections, and IRB and study staff contact information. We will emphasize the voluntary nature of study participation and provide the opportunity for 
questions about the study. The consent process will be conducted by the study coordinator, who 
is trained in the ethics of human subject research.  Those  who agree to participate will mail back 
signed informed consent and HIPAA a uthorization forms via prepaid stamped envelopes. Signed 
informed consent and HIPAA author ization forms will be received by the study team before 
collection of any participant data.  
 
5. Quantitative Data & Analyses ( Table 4) 
 Feasibility will be quantitatively assessed as  recruitment  (proportion enrolled out of total 
identified as eligible), attendance  (proportion who attend ≥ 75% of in- person visits),  and 
retention (proportion who complete  post-intervention assessments ). To determine feasibility, we 
will first evaluate recruitment and time needed to enroll participants. We anticipate approximately 
13 
 20 Veterans per month may be eligible (based on preliminary data noted above), and with 20% 
recruitment, we expect to complete enrollment for each group in 4- 6 weeks. We have set 
attendance and retention benchmarks at 75%, which are realistic estimates based on recent pilot studies of group exercise interventions for PTSD (participants attended an average of 78- 82% of 
sessions and overall retention were 76- 82%).
25, 26  
 Data on participant  physical activity  will be collected using both wearable devices and 
self-reported activity dairies. Physical functioning will be measured at baseline and post -
intervention using VR -36, 6-minute walk ,58, 59 and 30- second sit to stand.59, 60 Based on our clinical 
experience, these latter 2 tests can be feasibly administered to detect small but clinically relevant 
improvements in endurance and lower body strengt h. We will also assess  PTSD symptoms 
(PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 [PCL -5])61, 62; depression (Patient Health Questionnaire- 9 [PHQ -
9])63; pain (brief 3 -item scale on intensity and interference [PEG])64, fatigue (PROMIS 4 -item 
short form)65; sleep quality (PROMIS sleep disturbance and impairment)66, 67; self-efficacy  
(PROMIS general 4 -item68 and one item specific to physical activity); and social  support  for 
physical activity (1 item).  We will compare physical activity data  from wearable devices and self -
reported diaries, for  consistency and data quality for these different methods. For measures of 
physical functioning, PTSD and other symptoms, we will refine procedures for administering 
assessments and also confirm consistency and data quality.  
 
Table 4. Assessments during Pilot Study. 
  
 6. Qualitative Data & Analyses ( Table 4) 
 Qualitative assessment s will involve semi- structured interviews at the end of month 2 and 
post-intervention, to address acceptability  of intervention components, including session formats 
and topics and usability of wearable devices.  Month 2 interviews will also elicit  barriers and 
facilitators  to attendance.  Interviews will be audio recorded and transcribed.  We will use 
triangulation to integrate qualitative interview data with quantitative measures of attendance and retention. First, Drs.  Duan- Porter and Spoont will apply an established rapid approach for 
qualitative analysis to identify key themes.
69 This involves reviewing transcripts for the initial 3 -4 
interviews to develop templates that are then applied to summarizing subsequent transcripts. 
Summary  information will be further reviewed and analyzed using matrices to identify major 
themes for each main topic ( eg, acceptability of mHealth components). Then, a matrix will be BaselineDuring 
InterventionPost -
intervention
Feasibility &Acceptability
Recruitment, Attendance & Retention X X
Acceptability of intervention components 
(semi -structured interviews)X X
Barriers & facilitators to attendance (semi -
structured interviews)X
Physical Activity & Functioning
Wearable device physical activity & sleep data X
Self-reported physical activity diaries X X X
VR-36, 6 -minute walk, 30 -second sit to stand X X
Medical Conditions & Symptoms
Medical diagnoses, medications (EMR) X
PTSD symptoms (PCL -5) X X
Depressive symptoms (PHQ -8)
Pain (PEG) X X
Fatigue (PROMIS 4 -item) X X
Sleep Disturbance & Impairment (PROMIS) X X
Self-efficacy X X
Social support for physical activity X X
EMR=Electronic Medical Record; PCL -5=PTSD Checklist for DSM -5; PEG=3 -item scale on pain 
intensity and interference; PHQ -9=Patient Health Questionnaire -9; PROMIS=Patient Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System; PSQI=Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; VR -
36=Veterans RAND 36 Item Health Survey 
14 
 developed to compare themes for those who attended 75% of in -person visits with  those who did 
not. A similar matrix will compare themes for those who completed post -intervention assessments 
and those who did not.  
 
7. Withdrawal of Subjects  
 Participants can withdraw from the study at any point in time and for any reason by 
contacting study personnel in person, by telephone, or by mail, and requesting to withdraw. We 
anticipate termination of participation if:  
1. The participant becomes ineligible to participate  
2. The participant does not follow instructions from the researchers  
3. The study is unexpectedly suspended or canceled.  
6.0 REPORTING  
 Any change in a participant’s ability to engage in the physical activity program will be 
immediately reported by the PT interventionist to Dr. Duan- Porter, the Principle Investigator and 
communicated to the participant’s primary care team. If suicidal ideation is found upon initial eligibility screening by the study staff, they will immediately notify Dr. Duan- Porter , who will 
undertake appropriate evaluations and clinical referrals. If participants are noted to have severe 
or worsening PTSD and/or depression symptoms, they will be offered referrals for mental health 
treatment at MVAHCS. Notably, given the additional clinical expertise of Co- Investigators in 
rehabilitation medicine and mental health, this study team is well prepared to handle any potential 
health concerns that may arise.  
 
 
 
15 
 7.0 REFERENCES  
1. Magruder KM, Frueh BC, Knapp RG, et al. PTSD symptoms, demographic characteristics, 
and functional status among veterans treated in VA primary care clinics. Research Support, U.S. 
Gov't, Non -P.H.S. Journal of Traumatic Stress . Aug 2004;17(4):293- 301.  
2. E pidemiology Program DoVA. Post-Deployment Surveillance Report . 2015. Accessed 
7/29/19. https://www.publichealth.va.gov/docs/epidemiology/PDSR -Vol1-No1.pdf#  
3. Zatzick DF, Marmar CR, Weiss DS, et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder and functioning 
and quality of life outcomes in a nationally representative sample of male Vietnam veterans. Am 
J Psychiatry. Dec 1997;154(12):1690- 5. doi:10.1176/ajp.154.12.1690  
4. Byers AL, Covinsky KE, Neylan TC, Yaffe K. Chronicity of posttraumatic stress disorder 
and risk of disability in older persons. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non- U.S. Gov't  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non- P.H.S.  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H. S. JAMA Psychiatry . May 2014;71(5):540- 6.  
5. Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36- item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care. Jun 1992;30(6):473 -83.  
6. Hays RD, Marshall GN, Wang EY, Sherbourne CD. Four -year cross -lagged associations 
between physical and mental health in the Medical Outcomes Study. J Consult Clin Psychol. Jun 
1994;62(3):441 -9.  
7. Brock DB, Lemke JH, Branch LG, Evans DA, Berkman LF. Mortality and physical 
functioning in epidemiologic studies of three older populations. J Aging Soc Policy . 1994;6(3):21 -
37.  
8. Wei MY, Kabeto MU, Galecki AT, Langa KM. Physical Functioning Decline and Mortality 
in Older Adults With Multimorbidity: Joint Modeling of Longitudinal and Survival Data. J Gerontol 
A Biol Sci Med Sci . Jan 16 2019;74(2):226- 232. doi:10.1093/gerona/gly038 
9. Zen AL, Whooley MA, Zhao S, Cohen BE. Post -traumatic stress disorder is associated 
with poor health behaviors: findings from the heart and soul study. Health Psychol . Mar 
2012;31(2):194 -201. doi:10.1037/a0025989  
10. Hall KS, Hoerster KD, Yancy WS, Jr. Post -traumatic stress disorder, physical activity, and 
eating behaviors. Epidemiol Rev . 2015;37:103- 15. doi:10.1093/epirev/mxu011 
11. van den Berk -Clark C, Secrest S, Walls J, et al. A ssociation between posttraumatic stress 
disorder and lack of exercise, poor diet, obesity, and co- occuring smoking: A systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Health Psychol . 05 2018;37(5):407- 416. doi:10.1037/hea0000593 
12. Dodd S. Proper assessment soothes chronic pain. Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non -
P.H.S. Provider . Dec 1999;25(12):suppl 11 -2.  
13. Pinto RZ, Ferreira PH, Kongsted A, Ferreira ML, Maher CG, Kent P. Self- reported 
moderate- to-vigorous leisure time physical activity predicts less pain and disability over 12 months 
in chronic and persistent low back pain. Eur J Pain . Sep 2014;18(8):1190- 8. doi:10.1002/j.1532-
2149.2014.00468.x  
14. Ajzen I. The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process . 
1991;50(2):179 -211.  
15. Godin G, Kok G. The theory of planned behavior: a review of its applications to health-
related behaviors. Am J Health Promot . Nov -Dec 1996;11(2):87- 98. doi:10.4278/0890 -1171-
11.2.87  
16. Schnurr PP, Green BL. Understanding Relationships among Trauma, Posttraumatic 
Stress Disor der, and Health Outcomes. In: Schnurr PP, Green BL, eds. Trauma and Health: 
Physical Health Consequences of Exposure to Extreme Stress . American Psychological 
Association; 2004:247- 275:chap 10.  
17. Simmen -Janevska K, Brandstätter V, Maercker A. The overlooked relationship between 
motivational abilities and posttraumatic stress: a review. Eur J Psychotraumatol . 
2012;3doi:10.3402/ejpt.v3i0.18560 
16 
 18. Engel CC, Liu X, McCarthy BD, Miller RF, Ursano R. Re lationship of physical symptoms 
to posttraumatic stress disorder among veterans seeking care for gulf war- related health 
concerns. Psychosom Med . 2000 Nov -Dec 2000;62(6):739- 45.  
19. Gillock KL, Zayfert C, Hegel MT, Ferguson RJ. Posttraumatic stress disorder in primary 
care: prevalence and relationships with physical symptoms and medical utilization. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry . Nov -Dec 2005;27(6):392 -9. doi:10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2005.06.004  
20. Hoge CW, Terhakopian A, Castro CA, Messer SC, Engel CC. Association of posttraumatic 
stress disorder with somatic symptoms, health care visits, and absenteeism among Iraq war veterans. Am J Psychiatry. Jan 2007;164(1):150 -3. doi:10.1176/ajp.2007.164.1.150  
21. Beck JG, Clapp JD. A different kind of co -morbidity: Understanding posttraumatic stress 
disorder and chronic pain. Psychol Trauma. Jun 2011;3(2):101 -108. doi:10.1037/a0021263  
22. Maguen S, Hoerster KD, Littman AJ, et al. Iraq and Afghanistan veterans with PTSD 
participate less in VA's weight loss program than those without PTSD. J Affect Disord . Mar 
2016;193:289 -94. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.12.078  
23. Hoerster KD, Lai Z, Goodrich DE, et al. Weight loss after participation in a national VA 
weight management program among veterans with or without PTSD. Psychiatr Serv . Nov 
2014;65(11):1385 -8. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.201300404 
24. Rosenbaum S, Sherrington C, Tiedemann A. Exercise augmentation compared with usual 
care for post -traumatic stress disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. May 2015;131(5):350 -9. 
doi:https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/acps.12371  
25. Goldstein LA, Mehling WE, Metzler TJ, et al. Veterans Group Exercise: A randomized pilot 
trial of an Integrative Exercise program for veterans with posttraumatic stress. J Affect Disord . 
Feb 2018;227:345- 352. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2017.11.002  
26. Hall KS, Morey MC, Bosworth HB, et al. Pilot randomized controlled trial of exer cise 
training for older veterans with PTSD. J Behav Med. Jul 2019;doi:10.1007/s10865- 019-00073-w 
27. Larun L, Brurberg KG, Odgaard- Jensen J, Price JR. Exercise therapy for chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 04 2017;4:CD003200. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003200.pub7 
28. Bernard P, Romain AJ, Caudroit J, et al. Cognitive behavior therapy combined with 
exercise for adults with chronic diseases: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychol . 
05 2018;37(5):433- 450. doi:10.1037/hea0000578  
29. Smeets RJ, Vlaeyen JW, Hidding A, et al. Active rehabilitation for chronic low back pain: 
cognitive- behavioral, physical, or both? First direct post -treatment results from a randomized 
controlled trial [ISRCTN22714229]. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . Jan 2006;7:5. doi:10.1186/1471 -
2474-7-5 
30. O'Dowd H, Gladwell P, Rogers CA, Hollinghurst S, Gregory A. Cognitive behavioural 
therapy in chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomised controlled trial of an outpatient group 
programme. Health Technol Assess . Oct 2006;10(37) :iii-iv, ix-x, 1-121.  
31. van Koulil S, van Lankveld W, Kraaimaat FW, et al. Tailored cognitive- behavioural therapy 
and exercise training improves the physical fitness of patients with fibromyalgia. Ann Rheum Dis . 
Dec 2011;70(12):2131- 3. doi:10.1136/ard.2010.148577 
32. Zedlitz AM, Rietveld TC, Geurts AC, Fasotti L. Cognitive and graded activity training can 
alleviate persistent fatigue after stroke: a randomized, controlled trial. Stroke . Apr 
2012;43(4):1046 -51. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.632117  
33. Miller W, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Helping People Change. 3rd ed. The 
Guildford Press; 2013.  
34. Wagner C, Ingersoll K. Motivational Interviewing in Groups . Applications of Motivational 
Interviewing. The Guilford Press; 2013.  
17 
 35. Heckman CJ, Egleston BL, Hofmann MT. Efficacy of motivational interviewing for smoking 
cessation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Tob Control . Oct 2010;19(5):410 -6. 
doi:10.1136/tc.2009.033175 
36. Rubak S, Sandbaek A, Lauritzen T, Christensen B. Motivational interviewi ng: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. Br J Gen Pract . Apr 2005;55(513):305 -12.  
37. Burke BL, Arkowitz H, Menchola M. The efficacy of motivational interviewing: a meta -
analysis of controlled clinical trials. J Consult Clin Psychol. Oct 2003;71(5):843 -61. 
doi:10.1037/0022 -006X.71.5.843  
38. Patel MS, Asch DA, Rosin R, et al. Framing Financial Incentives to Increase Physical 
Activity Among Overweight and Obese Adults: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. Ann Intern Med . 
Mar 15 2016;164(6):385 -94. doi:10.7326/m15 -1635 
39. Chokshi NP, Adusumalli S, Small DS, et al. Loss -Framed Financial Incentives and 
Personalized Goal- Setting to Increase Physical Activity Among Ischemic Heart Disease Patients 
Using Wearable Devices: The ACTIVE REWARD Randomized Trial. J Am Heart Assoc . Jun 
2018;7(12)doi:10.1161/JAHA.118.009173  
40. Gould CE, Kok BC, Ma VK, Zapata AML, Owen JE, Kuhn E. Veterans Affairs and the 
Department of Defense mental health apps: A systematic literature review. Psychol Serv . Nov 
2018;doi:10.1037/ser0000289 41. Owen JE, Kuhn E, Jaworski BK, et al. VA mobile apps for PTSD and related problems: 
publi c health resources for veterans and those who care for them. Mhealth. 2018;4:28. 
doi:10.21037/mhealth.2018.05.07  
42. Petry NM, DePhilippis D, Rash CJ, Drapkin M, McKay JR. Nationwide dissemination of 
contingency management: the Veterans Administration init iative. Am J Addict . 2014 May -Jun 
2014;23(3):205 -10. doi:10.1111/j.1521 -0391.2014.12092.x  
43. DePhilippis D, Petry NM, Bonn -Miller MO, Rosenbach SB, McKay JR. The national 
implementation of Contingency Management (CM) in the Department of Veterans Affairs:  
Attendance at CM sessions and substance use outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend . 04 
2018;185:367 -373. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.12.020  
44. Bower P, Brueton V, Gamble C, et al. Interventions to improve recruitment and retention 
in clinical trials: a survey a nd workshop to assess current practice and future priorities. Trials . Oct 
2014;15:399. doi:10.1186/1745- 6215 -15-399 
45. Fogel DB. Factors associated with clinical trials that fail and opportunities for improving 
the likelihood of success: A review. Contemp  Clin Trials Commun . Sep 2018;11:156- 164. 
doi:10.1016/j.conctc.2018.08.001  
46. Conway PH, Clancy C. Charting a path from comparative effectiveness funding to 
improved patient -centered health care. JAMA . Mar 2010;303(10):985- 6. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.259 47. Concannon TW, Fuster M, Saunders T, et al. A systematic review of stakeholder 
engagement in comparative effectiveness and patient -centered outcomes research. J Gen Intern 
Med. Dec 2014;29(12):1692- 701. doi:10.1007/s11606- 014-2878 -x 
48. Brett J, Staniszewska S, Mockford C, et al. Mapping the impact of patient and public 
involvement on health and social care research: a systematic review. Health Expect . Oct 
2014;17(5):637 -50. doi:10.1111/j.1369 -7625.2012.00795.x  
49. Joosten YA, Israel TL, Williams NA, et al.  Community Engagement Studios: A Structured 
Approach to Obtaining Meaningful Input From Stakeholders to Inform Research. Acad Med. Dec 2015;90(12):1646 -50. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000794 
50. Joosten YA, Israel TL, Head A, et al. Enhancing translational r esearchers' ability to 
collaborate with community stakeholders: Lessons from the Community Engagement Studio. J 
Clin Transl Sci. Aug 2018;2(4):201 -207. doi:10.1017/cts.2018.323  
18 
 51. Forsythe LP, Ellis LE, Edmundson L, et al. Patient and Stakeholder Engagement in the 
PCORI Pilot Projects: Description and Lessons Learned. J Gen Intern Med . Jan 2016;31(1):13-
21. doi:10.1007/s11606- 015-3450-z 
52. Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the International Society for 
Traumatic Stress Studies . 2nd ed. The Guilford Press; 2009.  
53. Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The role and interpretation of pilot studies in clinical 
research. J Psychiatr Res. May 2011;45(5):626- 9. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.10.008  
54. Pilot Studies: Common Uses and Misuses. NIH: National Center for Integrative and 
Complementary Health. Accessed 8/21/19, 
https://nccih.nih.gov/grants/whatnccihfunds/pilot_studies  
55. Prins A, Bovin MJ, Smolenski DJ, et al.  The Primary Care PTSD Screen for DSM -5 (PC -
PTSD -5): Development and Evaluation Within a Veteran Primary Care Sample. J Gen Intern Med . 
10 2016;31(10):1206- 11. doi:10.1007/s11606 -016-3703-5 
56. Kazis LE, Ren XS, Lee A, et al. Health status in VA patients: results from the Veterans 
Health Study. Am J Med Qual . 1999 Jan -Feb 1999;14(1):28 -38. 
doi:10.1177/106286069901400105 
57. Kazis LE, Lee A, Spiro A, et al. Measurement comparisons of the medical outcomes study 
and veterans SF -36 health survey. Health Care Financ Rev . 2004;25(4):43 -58.  
58. Butland RJ, Pang J, Gross ER, Woodcock AA, Geddes DM. Two- , six-, and 12 -minute 
walking tests in respiratory disease. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) . May 1982;284(6329):1607 -8. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.284.6329.1607  
59. Benaim C, Blaser S, Léger B, Vuistiner P, Luthi F. "Minimal clinically important difference" 
estimates of 6 commonly -used performance tests in patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain 
completing a work -related multidisciplinary rehabilitation program. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 
Jan 2019;20(1):16. doi:10.1186/s12891 -018-2382-2 
60. Bohannon RW. Sit -to-stand test for measuring performance of lower extremity muscles. 
Percept Mot Skills . Feb 1995;80(1):163 -6. doi:10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.163  
61. Blevins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, Witte TK, Domino JL. The Posttraumat ic Stress 
Disorder Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5): Development and Initial Psychometric Evaluation. J 
Trauma Stress . Dec 2015;28(6):489 -98. doi:10.1002/jts.22059  
62. Bovin MJ, Marx BP, Weathers FW, et al. Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist 
for Diag nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -Fifth Edition (PCL -5) in veterans. 
Psychol Assess . 11 2016;28(11):1379 -1391. doi:10.1037/pas0000254  
63. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. J Gen Intern Med. Sep 2001;16(9):606 -13. doi:10.1046/j.1525- 1497.2001.016009606.x  
64. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ, et al. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a 
three -item scale assessing pain intensity and interference. J Gen Intern Med . Jun 2009;24( 6):733 -
8. doi:10.1007/s11606- 009-0981-1 
65. A Brief Guide to the PROMIS® Fatigue Instruments. Accessed 2/28/19, 
http://www.healthmeasures.net/images/PROMIS/manuals/PROMIS_Fatigue_Scoring_Manual.p
df 
66. A brief guide to the PROMIS® Sleep Disturbance instruments. Accessed 10/13/20, 
http://www.health m easures.net/images/promis/manuals/PROMIS_Sleep_Disturbance_Scoring_
Manual.pdf  
67. Yu L, Buysse DJ, Germain A, et al. Development of short forms from the PROMIS™ sleep 
disturbance and Sleep- Related Impairment item banks. Behav Sleep Med. Dec 2011;10(1):6-2 4. 
doi:10.1080/15402002.2012.636266  
68. A brief guide to the PROMIS® Self -Efficacy Instruments. 10/13/20, 
http://www.hea l thmeasures.net/images/PROMIS/manuals/PROMIS_Self_Efficacy_Managing_C
hronic_Conditions_Scoring_Manual.pdf  
19 
 69. Hamilton A. Qualitative Methods in Rapid Turn -Around Health Services Research. VA 
HSR&D. Accessed 9/3/19, 
https://www.hsrd.research.va.gov/for_researchers/cyber_seminars/archives/video_archive.cfm?
SessionID=780  
20 
 APPENDICES  
 
Appendix 1 : Example I CARE Participant weekly activity summary report  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 Appendix 2:  Detailed Outline of Topics and Goals for Sessions  
 
Week  Content and Goals  
0 Baseline In -Person Visit (95 min)  
• Assessments (30 min)  
o Survey—Functioning, mental health symptoms, sleep, pain, & fatigue*  
o Physical Performance—6- minute walk, 30 -second sit to stand, range of motion screen, 
strength screen, & 4 -stage balance test  
• Introduction to rationale & I CARE schedule (20 min)  
o Rating of perceived exertion (handout)  
• Motivational interviewing (20 min)  
o Identify values & beliefs about physical activity  
o Develop discrepancy between current behavior and values  
o Readiness rulers —confidence & importance  
• Introduction to device, activity logs & finan cial incentives (20 min)  
o Set up Garmin Vivosmart 4 & Garmin Connect Application  
o Instruct on completing activity logs & mailing back  
• Closing (5 min)  
0.5 Tech Prep Call  (Virtual via Zoom, 30 min ) 
• Mock session to introduce and troubleshoot Zoom platform issues  
 
1  Group Session #1 (Virtual via Zoom, 90 min)  
• Discussion #1 (30 min)  
o Introductions, establish ground rules for group meetings (Expectations & Guidelines 
Handout)  
o Elicit participant goals for physical activity & health (Readiness Rulers)  
• Group exercise (25 min)  
• Discussion #2 (15 min)  
o Participant experiences with group exercise, rating of perceived exertion  
o Graded steps to increase activity, time- based pacing (Graded Steps Handout)  
o I CARE video playlist, elicit other exercise options  
• Home exercise plan (15 min)  
o Plan for week #1 (Home Exercise Worksheet; Readiness Rulers)  
o Share goals with group  
o Closing (5 min)  
1.5 Individ ual Session #1 (Virtual via  Phone , 10-15 min ) 
• MI: 
o Readiness ruler  
o Self-efficacy, develop discrepancy  
o Amplify change talk, roll with resistance  
• Troubleshooting home activity plan  
o Review safe space in home  
o Address level of activity, correct positions, etc.  
2 Group Session #2 (Virtual via Zoom, 90 min)  
• Discussion #1 (30 min)  
o Elicit experiences with home activity goals (Self -Reflection Worksheet)  
o Physical activity, pain & fatigue (Activity, Pain & Fatigue Handout)  
• Group exercise (25 min)  
• Discussion #2 (15 min)  
o Participant experiences with group exercise 
o Brainstorm strategies to address challenges, emphasize change talk  
22 
 • Home exercise plan (15 min)  
o Plan for week #2 (Home Exercise Worksheet; Readiness Rulers)  
o Share goals with group  
o Closing (5 min)  
2.5 Individ ual Session # 2 (Virtual via Phone , 10-15 min)  
• Troubleshooting home plan  
• MI: Self -efficacy, amplify change talk, roll with resistance  
3 Group Session #3 (Virtual via Zoom, 90 min)  
• Discussion #1 (15 min)  
o Elicit experiences with home activity goals (Self -Reflection Worksheet)  
• Group exercise (25 min)  
• Discussion #2 (30 min)  
o Participant experiences with group exercise 
o Physical activity and sleep (Better Sleep Guidelines and Worksheet)  
• Home exercise plan (15 min)  
o Plan for week #3 (Home Exercise Worksheet; Readiness Rulers)  
o Share goals with group  
o Closing (5 min)  
4 Group Session #4 (Virtual via Zoom, 90 min)  
• Discussion #1 (20 min)  
o Elicit experiences with home activity goals (Self -Reflection Worksheet)  
o Elicit experiences with sleep changes (Better Sleep Worksheet)  
• Group exercise (25 min)  
• Discussion #2 (20 min)  
o Participant experiences with group exercise 
o Review physical activity, pain, fatigue, and sleep concepts  
• Home exercise plan (15 min)  
o Plan for next 4 weeks (Home Exercise Worksheet; Readiness Rulers)  
o Share goals with group  
• Closing statements (10 min)  
4.5 Individ ual Session # 3 (Virtual via Phone , 10-15 min)  
• Troubleshooting home activity plan for next month  
• MI: Self -efficacy, amplify change talk, roll with resistance 
 
5-8 Individ ual Session s #4-7 (Virtual via Phone,  10-15 min , weekly ) 
• Troubleshooting home activity plan  
• Gradually increase activity goals  
• MI: Self -efficacy, amplify change talk, roll with resistance  
16 Final In -Person Assessment ( 60 min) 
• Post-intervention  Assessments:  
o Physical functioning (VR -36,56,57 6-minute walk,58,59 and 30 -second sit to stand59,60)  
o Other study measures*  
• Disconnect Garmin Vivosmart 4 device from I CARE Study account  
*PTSD symptoms  (PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 [PCL -5]61,62); depressive symptoms  (Patient Health 
Questionnaire-8 [PHQ -8]63); pain (brief 3- item scale on intensity and interference [PEG]64); fatigue  
(PROMIS 4 -item fatigue short form65); sleep quality (PROMIS sleep disturbance and impairment)66, 67; self-
efficacy (PROMIS general 4- item68 and one item specific to physical activity); and social support for 
physical activity (1 item).   
 