VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
CIRB # 20-06: Evaluating the Use of Peer  Specialists  to Support  Suicide  Prevention 
Funding Agency:  RR&D Small Projects  in Rehabilitation Research  
Principal Investigator/Study  Chair:  Matthew  Chinman,  PhD 
Version 5.0, March 8, 2022  
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
Abstract  
 
Preventing suicide  is a top priority  for the Veterans  Health Administration (VHA).  Suicide 
prevention efforts for high-risk patients focus on clinical (e.g., mental health) and service use (e.g.,  
case  management)  factors. What has yet to be tested is an approach that targets  factors  in 
community living, as it is not only mental and physical illnesses that heighten suicide risk in  VHA 
patients, but also their struggles  with a sense  of self-worth, meaning, and social  connections in 
the community. To help VHA patients with high risk of suicide, this application proposes to adapt 
and test a promising approach called PREVAIL, which uses ‘Peer Specialists’  (i.e., Veterans with 
psychiatric disabilities who have been trained to help others with similar  conditions) as an adjunct 
to standard VHA care. This project proposes to use Intervention Mapping, a multi -method, 
systemati c approach using diverse stakeholders, to adapt and pilot PREVAIL. The VHA is the 
single, largest employer of Peer Specialists and research shows that they can enhance standard 
clinical care in mental health, physical health, and rehabilitative  outcomes. However, Peer 
Specialists have only just begun to be deployed in suicide prevention efforts. The primary aims of 
this study are to: 1) Use Intervention Mapping to identify which components of PREVAIL require 
adaptation to reduce suicidal ideation in high ri sk VHA patients  and to identify implementation 
strategies useful for the VHA system; and 2) Pilot test the feasibility and acceptability  of the 
adapted PREVAIL, rehabilitative measures, and suicide- related outcomes for use in a rigorous 
prospective study. Needs assessment interviews with diverse VHA staff, Peer Specialists, and 
patients will be conducted to inform the adaptation. Based on results  from the needs  assessment  
and the literature on suicide prevention, psychiatric rehabilitation, and peer -based approaches, 
a steering committee will help adapt  PREVAIL.  Twelve high suicide risk Veterans  with unipolar  
or bipolar  depression will participate in a 3-month “pre-pilot” and provide feedback on how the 
adapted PREVAIL may be revised.  After making any necessary modifications to the intervention, 
a second group of 12 high suicide  risk Veterans with unipolar or bipolar depression will be 
recruited to participate in a formal pilot test to further evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of 
recruitm ent, retention, and assessment procedures. Patients and Peer Specialists will be from the 
VA Connecticut Healthcare System. All participants  will receive standard VHA care from the 
Connecticut campuses  while  participating in this study. Participants will be assessed at baseline, 
post-intervention, and 3- month follow -up in their level of functional  impairment and community  
integration;  sense of hope, quality of life, meaning, and purpose; and self-views and social 
support. Chart reviews will  also be completed at 3-month follow -up to assess for changes in health 
care visits involving  suicidal behaviors. If acceptability (> 50% enrollment of eligible participants) 
and feasibility (> 70% of enrollees complete follow -up assessment) are demonstrated, this study 
will result in a  novel  rehabilitation- oriented suicide  prevention intervention to test in a fully-
powered randomized controlled efficacy  trial. 
 
  
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 2 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   List of Abbreviations 
 
 
 
Term  Abbreviation  
C-SSRS  Columbia-Suicide Severity  Rating Scale  
INQ Interpersonal  Needs  Questionnaire  
IM Intervention Mapping 
PRFs  Patient Record Flags  
PSs Peer  Specialists  
QIDS  Quick  Inventory  of Depressive  Symptoms  
Q-LES- Q-SF The Quality  of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire  
QPR  Questionnaire about the Process  of Recovery  
SCS Suicide Cognitions  Scale  
SDS 
 
SPC Sheehan Disability  Scale  
 
Suicide Prevention Coordinator  
TUCP  Temple University  Community  Participation  
VACT  VA Connecticut Healthcare System  
VHA Veterans  Health  Administration  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 3 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
 
 
 
 
Contents  
Protocol Title: Intervention Mapping to Develop a Peer -based Rehabilitation Intervention for  
High Suicide  Risk Veterans  ...................................................................................................................... 5 
1.0 Study  Personnel  ............................................................................................................................. 5 
2.0 Introduction  ...................................................................................................................................... 5 
3.0 Objectives  ........................................................................................................................................ 8 
4.0 Resources  and Personnel  ............................................................................................................. 9 
5.0 Study  Procedures  ......................................................................................................................... 11 
5.1 Study  Design .................................................................................................................................. 11 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  .................................................................................................................... 18 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  ..................................................................................................... 19 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  .......................................................................................................... 20 
5.5 Study  Evaluations  .......................................................................................................................... 22 
5.6 Data Analysis  .................................................................................................................................  23 
5.7 Withdrawal  of Subjects  ................................................................................................................. 24 
6.0 Reporting ....................................................................................................................................... 25 
7.0 Privacy  and Confidentiality  .......................................................................................................... 26 
8.0 References  .................................................................................................................................... 27 
 
        
 
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 4 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
 
Protocol  Title:  Intervention  Mapping  to Develop  a Peer- based  
Rehabilitation  Intervention  for High  Suicide  Risk  Veterans  
 
 
1.0 Study  Personnel  
 
In addition to the Principal Investigator, the study team is comprised of several co- 
Investigators across the three project/performance site locations: VA Pittsburgh 
Healthcare System, VA Connecticut  Healthcare System, and VA Ann Arbor  Healthcare 
System. 
 
 
2.0 Introduction  
 
Background and Rational  
 
Veteran suicide is a public health crisis: According to the most recent VA National  
Suicide Data Report: 2005- 2016,29 the Veteran suicide rate increased by 26%, as  
compared to 21% for  non-Veteran  adults. Although suicide rates  rose more  sharply  for 
non-VHA Veterans (26%) than for VHA patients (14%), the suicide rate among VHA  
patients is  higher  than Veterans  who are not receiving VHA care.  
 
Suicidal  ideation is a frequent  precursor  to non- fatal and fatal suicide attempts.30 Suicidal 
ideation is reported by 3% -52% of Veterans, depending on the time frame (e.g.,  past 
month vs. current)  and population  (e.g.,  general  community,  primary  care,  or urgent care 
psychiatric clinic).31-33 Similar rates for suicide attempts are reported by  Veterans  (2%-
48%).  Despite  increased relative  risk of suicide  among persons  expressing suicide  
ideation,  the absolute risk of suicide is low.34,35 
Care for high- risk Veterans features increased contact but lacks a focus on key life 
domains: VHA patients who attempt suicide, report serious suicidal ideation, or  exhibit 
other warning signs of acute suicide risk have a Patient Record Flag (PRF)  placed in 
their medical  record for no less than 90-days.  The VHA maintains  a list of 
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 5 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   
Figure  1: Conceptual  Model  of Peer  Specialist  Rehabilitation Intervention  active PRFs  to alert all staff that increased follow- up and case management  are 
required.36 Patients with PRFs must have at least 4 clinical contacts within the first 30  
days after the flag is placed or following discharge from the hospital. During these 30 
days, they must be also assessed four times . Clinical care focuses primarily on safety  
planning,  use of the Veterans  Crisis Line, stepped- up mental  health care,  and additional  
case management  support  from the Suicide  Prevention Coordinator,37 rather  than directly 
addressing needs in other life domains. Recent evaluations of the VHA suicide prevention 
initiatives observe deficits in tracking, safety planning, and care practices for  high suicide  
risk Veterans.38 
 
Peer  Specialists (PSs)  are a promising,  but untested,  adjunct  to suicide prevention: 
PS-based approaches involve being supported or mentored by a trained non-professional 
who is living with the same challenge.  PS models do not devalue clinical care but expand 
the sphere of interest and intervention to include rehabilitative tasks of building a life of 
self-respect, meaning, purpose, and connectedness in one’s  local community. These 
outcomes are achieved largely through offering empathy, hope,  and practical advice 
based on one’s personal experience of mental health recovery.39 PSs and similar models 
can enhance standard clinical care in mental health, physical  health multiple 
domains5,11,14,40 and rehabilitative outcomes,12,41 especially with increasing  sense of 
empowerment and engagement.  
 
PSs appear well suited to reduce certain psychosocial factors associated with suicide risk 
in VHA patients with PRFs. Research with Veterans show that feeling hopeless,  
shameful, or burdensome, or being disconnected from others and meaningful activities  
are predictive of suicide ideation and lower help- seeking behavior for mental health  
reasons.42 Concerns about stigma, trust, and empathy are critical barriers to disclosing  
suicidal ideation to VHA 
providers.43 Because  
PSs share patients’  
mental  health and 
military history, they may  
be particularly helpful in  
this respect as patients  
often feel more  
accepted,  connected,  
and hopeful  when  
working  with PSs than 
traditional         providers  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 6 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   (Figure 1).3,4 The VA National Strategy calls for peer services and testing of promising  
approaches  to assist  with suicide  prevention efforts.  One promising  approach is 
PREVAIL, a peer -based intervention developed for reducing suicidal ideation in adult  
civilians  recently  hospitalized for suicidal  thoughts  or behaviors.15 PREVAIL  was 
developed for non- Veterans and needs to be adapted to “fit” the needs of VHA patients  
and health care setting.  
 
Adapting PREVAIL involves identifying which components need to be tailored to 
target the rehabilitation needs of VHA patients and implementation context in the VHA: Intervention Mapping (IM)
16 is a systematic, multi -method approach to designing  
complex  interventions  and adapting them  to new populations  or settings.  IM uses  diverse 
stakeholder involvement and theory to understand barriers and facilitators to  
implementation at the patient -, provider -, and organizational - levels.  IM draws  on 
systems- based and participatory models to understand a health problem and its causes  
by including diverse stakeholders to plan an intervention that targets the most effective  
leverage points to improving health. Each step of IM involves multiple activities that are  
iterative and inform subsequent steps culmi nating in a novel approach to a problem. IM  
has been used successfully to develop and adapt a range of rehabilitative programs,  
including suicide prevention practices in primary care.44,45 In the VHA, similar multi -level 
approaches involving stakeholders have successfully yielded mental health and primary  
care programs19 as well as roll  out of PSs in mental  health.21 
 
Adapting interventions with IM involves identifying changes that need to be made to meet 
the needs of the new target population and to address differences between the original  
context  and the new one in which  it will be implemented.  These steps  include:  
(1) assessing organizational capacity (e.g., readiness to adopt a new program and role  
of new program  in existing  organizational  relationships);  (2) assessing  behavioral  
determinants (e.g., psychosocial factors that differ from original sample to produce the  
desired change)  and environmental  determinants  (e.g.,  key differences  in the 
organizational characteristics from those of the original sample); and (3) identifying  
indicated changes to essential elements (e.g., tailoring the content of format to fit the  new 
population).  We propose to use Intervention  Mapping to adapt  PREVAIL  to supplement 
the clinical care of VHA patients with PRFs for acute suicide risk using PSs  to increase 
hope, sense of purpose, and community connections as a mechanism to  reduce suicide  
ideation.  
 
Significance.  The VA’s National  Strategy  for suicide  prevention calls for the development 
of peer -to-peer services to help those at risk for suicide. Our proposal is  innovative  
because it proposes  using PSs in a new priority  arena,  suicide  prevention.  
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 7 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   This research has high impact because it seeks to reduce suicidal ideation among high  
suicide risk VHA patients. Our project is directly aligned with suicide prevention as a top 
priority  for the VHA as well as RR&D  major  priority  domains  for implementing  
interventions and techniques designed to maximize psychological recovery. Data from  
this project  will inform  the development  of an RR&D IIR proposal  testing the rehabilitative  
PS-based suicide  prevention intervention in a multi -site, randomized,  controlled trial. 
 
 
3.0 Objectives 
 
Study  Aims  
The specific  aims of  the study  are to: 
1) Use Intervention Mapping to identify which components of PREVAIL require 
adaptation to reduce suicidal ideation in high-risk VHA patients  and to identify  
implementation strategies  in the VHA system. 
2) Pilot test the feasibility and acceptability of the adapted PREVAIL, rehabilitative 
measures,  and suicide -related outcomes  for use in a rigorous  prospective study. 
 
Hypothesis  
These data will inform the development of an RR&D IIR proposal testing the  
PREVAIL adaptation in a multi -center, randomized, controlled trial.  The current  
intervention is innovative because it proposes using for the first time, VA Peer  
Specialists to improve rehabilitation of those who are suicidal.  This research has  
high impact because it seeks to reduce suicidal ideation among VHA patients  
flagged for high suicide  risk. 
 
 
 
 
4.0 Resources  and Personnel  
  
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 8 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   PRIMARY SITE:  VA PITTSBURGH HEALTHCARE SYSTEM  (VAPHS),  PITTSBURGH,  
PA 
The personnel  at this site include  the following:  
 
Principal Investigator: The PI will be responsible for overseeing all aspects of the study  
including development, management and integrity of the design, conduct, and reporting  
of the proposed research, achievement of  the project aims, and development  and 
maintenance of productive collaborative relationships with operational partners and co - 
investigators. They will lead the meetings of the monthly steering committee. They will  
also ensure budgetary compliance, and oversee data collection, data analysis, and the 
preparation  of all reports,  presentations,  and publications.  They  will monitor  the safety  of 
all participating human subjects. Finally, the PI  will lead several dissemination efforts  that 
include regular reports to Dan O’Brien- Mazza, MS, the National Director of Peer  Support 
in the VA; delivery of EES cyber - seminars to VA administrators and clinicians;  and 
publication  of interim  and final study  findings  via CHERP and MIRECC dissemination  
vehicles  and peer-reviewed publications.  
 
Co-Investigator: The Co- I will coordinate and manage the implementation and conduct  of 
the study and serve as the qualitative methodologist. They will coordinate the efforts  of 
the investigative team, develop the project manual of operations, develop the data  
tracking and management systems, assure the integrity of the data and protection of  
human subjects by directly  working  with the  Central IRB,  and help to manage the project  
budget.  As described in the proposal,  the Co-I will co-code 100%  of the qualitative data 
(from  the needs  assessment  and the interviews  from the pre- and formal  pilots)  and lead 
the analysis  of the qualitative  data.  They  will oversee the development  of documented 
coding audit trails and work with another Co- I to develop the qualitative codebooks. They 
will also contribute to the preparation of reports, presentations, and manuscripts  related  
to the project.  Finally,  they will serve  on the steering committee.  
 
Research Assistant:  In Years  1 and 2, they will be responsible for assisting  with preparing 
and submitting IRB documents for the Central IRB, at the Pittsburgh site, and helping with 
IRB documents at the other sites. They will also assist the Co- I and the transcriptionist  
with the qualitative  coding and analysis.  
 
Transcriptionist: A trained transcriptionist from the CHERP Qualitative Core who will  
transcribe verbatim  all the qualitative interviews.  
 
Transcriptionist - a Research Health Science Specialist in CHERP and a member of the  
Qualitative Core.  They will verify all transcripts  for accuracy.  
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 9 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
SITE #2: West  Haven,  Connecticut:  
 
Site PI/Co -Investigator: The Site PI/Co- I will oversee the training of and provide weekly  
supervision to the peer specialists who will participate in the intervention arm of the  
proposed pilot study.  They  will also work  closely  with the Connecticut  Suicide  Prevention 
Coordinator who will provide names of potential patient participants to be approached for 
recruitment  in the pilot study.  They  will facilitate  collaborative relationships with 
operational partners in different VA care settings serving participating patients  (e.g., acute 
care and outpatient  settings)  as well as with recruitment  of participants for the needs 
assessment interviews in Year 1. The Site PI/Co- I will also  assist  with preparing reports, 
presentations,  and publications.  
 
Co-Investigator: The Co- I will co -code 100% of the data from the interviews and co- lead 
the analysis of the qualitative data with another Co- I. They will assist with development  
of documented coding audit trails and work with another Co- I to develop the qualitative 
codebooks.  
 
Research Assistant (WOC): An experienced research assistant will be hired to work  
under the direction of the Site PI/Co- I and Co- I. They will start at 25% effort in the last 6  
months of year 1. They will meet with potential patient participants to discuss the study,  
including activities, potential risks, and benefits; complete the consent process, and 
administer questionnaires at baseline, postintervention, and follow -up for the pilot. They  
will also coordinate the completion of the qualitative interviews. They will also facilitate the steering committee meetings, sending out agendas, read- ahead documents, and  
taking and circulating minutes. Finally, they will coordinate project meetings of staff from  
the three sites.  
 
IPAs  
 
Interagency Personnel Agreement –  Yale University. The Co- I will oversee the day -to- 
day execution of the project activities in  Connecticut and serve as a liaison with the West  
Haven PI. This will involve  collaborating with them  in their direct  work  with the peer 
specialists and acting as the liaison between the Suicide Prevention Coordinator  who will 
provide names of potential patient participants and Yale research assistant who will 
approach participants for the consent process. The Co- I will also assist the PI with  the 
IRB process,  data analysis,  and preparation of reports,  manuscripts,  and publications. 
They will also conduct the qualitative interviews as part of the needs  assessment in the 
Intervention Mapping process and will also conduct the qualitative interviews  of those 
who participated in the pre and formal  pilots in  West  Haven.  
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 10 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
SITE #3: Ann Arbor,  Michigan  
Personnel  
Site PI/Co -I: They will provide expertise to the development and implementation of the 
pilot intervention. In addition to meeting with Pittsburgh and West Haven staff as part of  
regular  project  meetings,  the Co-I will also  be a member of  the steering committee.  
 
Consultants:  VA leadership and staff in the areas of Suicide Prevention, Peer Specialist  
Implementation, Behavioral Health, and other relevant areas will be invited to serve as  
consultants on the Steering  Committee.  
 
 
5.0 Study  Procedures  
 
5.1 Study  Design 
 
This study will be conducted in three phases.  The first phase will involve the use of  
Intervention Mapping to identify which components of PREVAIL require adaptation to 
reduce suicidal ideation in high-risk VHA patients  to identify  implementation strategies  in 
the VHA system. Needs  assessment  is the first step in IM. 
Needs  Assessment  
 
A Co -I will conduct a total of 12 interviews at the West Haven VHA site to learn more  
about: (1) attitudes toward PSs involvement in suicide prevention efforts, (2) current  
involvement of PSs in clinical care and safety planning, (3) PSs’ experiences working with 
persons with history of suicide ideation, (4) beliefs about how PSs can improve suicide 
prevention efforts, and (5) feedback on the focus, content, and process of the PREVAIL 
model . Interviews will be conducted with Veterans (n=3), PSs (n=3), and providers  from 
primary  care,  behavioral  health,  rehabilitation,  and emergency  department settings (n=4). 
The Co- I will also interview clinical directors (n=2). Interviews  will focus on current clinical 
practices involving peer specialists and suicide prevention services in terms of: (1) degree 
of perceived helpfulness; (2) perceived barriers; and (3)  areas  of value and possible  
improvement.  Information  from the interviews  will be used to identify  a range of potential  
barriers  to the effective  use of peer specialists  in suicide  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 11 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   prevention efforts and possible  changes  to PREVAIL.  
 
Analyses of needs assessment data:  Qualitative analyses of interviews from the needs 
assessment will be conducted with empirical phenomenological procedures used 
successfully by our team in previous studies.57 Verbatim transcripts of audio recordings  
from the interviews will be distributed to two of the Co- Investigators. Each researcher  will 
independently review, analyze, and code the transcripts for themes that characterize  
participants’ experiences. After creating a narrative summary using the participants’ own  
language, the Co- Investigators will review each of their summaries to compare/contrast  
the identified  themes  before coming to consensus  about  important  themes.  A synthesized 
report  will summarize the overarching themes.  
 
For Step #2 of the IM process, the steering committee will review the themes that were  
identified in the needs assessment interviews and data from the suicide prevention literature,  provided by the Co-I who conducted the interviews.  Preliminary  qualitative  
and quantitative data on the PREVAIL model have already provided support for  the logic 
model but identified minor modifications in the training and supervision provided to Peer 
Specialists. Based on information from the needs assessment interviews, the committee  
will help determine whether  further  refinements  are appropriate or unnecessary.  
 
 
Pre-and Formal  Pilot Testing  
 
Adaptation of PREVAIL: Steps #3 and #4 of the IM process will be completed during the 
monthly  steering committee  meetings.  As recommended for adapting interventions,1,8,58 
proposed changes to PREVAIL will based on stakeholder input from  the needs  
assessment  results,  literature reviews,  and guidance from the original  developer.  Based  
on a recent  meta -analysis  of evidence- based psychotherapies  adapted to new 
populations and settings, when changes are “discrete, well -defined, and based on sound 
theory  and an understanding of the population for which  the intervention is being 
adapted, they may result in better outcomes.” (p.409).59 To help inform  potential  changes  
to PREVAIL  for the Veteran population,  a Co-I will interview  the PSs one two occasions. 
First, a focus group will be held on the last day of training in the PREVAIL to solicit 
feedback on possible changes to the curriculum. A second focus  group will be conducted 
after PSs have delivered the intervention during the pre- pilot,  with the possibility of 
individual interviews helping to elucidate specific topics brought up during the focus group.  
The conceptual model co- developed by Dr. Pfeiffer will be refined as needed by  the needs 
assessment and steering committee, however, we do not anticipate any changes to this 
overarching structure based on preliminary feedback  from the  steering committee  and 
needs  assessment interviews.  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 12 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
The PREVAIL intervention consists of weekly interactions over the course of 3- months  
using a flexible approach to accommodate Veteran’s preferences and recovery needs  
over the course of the typical  duration of a PRF.  During  weeks  1 and 2 of the intervention,  
Veterans  meet  twice  weekly  with a PS. During  weeks  3 through 8, meetings are once 
weekly. During weeks 9 through 12, meetings typically occur once every other week. Over 
the course of the 3- month intervention, this approach bolsters  the development of a strong 
therapeutic alliance in the beginning (weeks 1- 2), followed  by active teaching and 
reinforcing new skills (weeks 3- 8), and then culminating with mastering new skills  and 
preparing the Veteran  for active  self-management  and sustained recovery.  For a small  
number  of PREVAIL  participants,  an additional  3 sessions were added over the span of 
the last 4 weeks to provide additional time to prepare for the end of the therapeutic 
relationship. A similar approach will be used for  the current  pilot.  
 
Meetings between PSs and Veterans will be approximately 45- 60 minutes and occur  
primarily in the community, home, clinic, by telephone, or VA -approved video calling  
platform  (e.g. VVC,  WebEx).  Session  content  will be rooted in PSs offering  
nonjudgmental empathic support, active listening, and constructive disclosure and role  
modeling. A primary focus will be helping patients with PRFs to identify and strengthen 
connections with informal supports and participation in activities in their community that  
will enable them  to feel  more  worthwhile  as individuals  and hopeful  about  their future.  
 
The PREVAIL model uses a 4- step process as a guide to their interactions with patients  
each of the weekly meetings: (1) Invite discussion about hope-  and belongingness - 
related topic; (2) Learn to find out more about what participants have already tried and  
what  participants  think  might  be helpful  or relevant  to their situation;  (3) Share  
suggestions  based on their personal  experience or knowledge;  and (4) Motivate  “change 
talk,” including how taking action might be  helpful, how  they might practically  go about  
implementing changes,  and whether  they have made a commitment  to change. The 
PREVAIL model also includes having PSs “check in” midway through the 3-month 
intervention to gauge the patient’s preference for more-  or less -structured conversations 
or sharing, and to remind participants they are half -way through the intervention so they 
anticipate and prepare for termination at  the 3-month point.  
 
The second phase will involve  pilot testing the feasibility  and acceptability  of the adapted 
PREVAIL, rehabilitative measures, and suicide- related outcomes for use in a rigorous 
prospective study. To mirror recommendations for adapting interventions and pilot studies 
to help prepare for larger trials,7,28 we will recruit 12 high suicide risk  Veterans  who will 
participate in a 3-month  “pre-pilot”  and provide feedback  on how the 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 13 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   intervention may be improved. Pre- testing adapted materials and using retrospective 
feedback from participants are recommended steps to identifying any further changes  
prior to further implementation.7,8 After making any necessary modifications, for the third 
phase or 3-month  “formal  pilot”,  we will recruit  a second group of 12 Veterans  who are 
at high suicide risk to further evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of recruitment,  
retention, and assessment procedures to be used in a future randomized trial. We will  
draw upon the support and existing resources at the VA Connecticut campuses, which  
house on the largest  PSs programs.  
 
Veterans in both the pre- pilot and formal pilot will each meet with research staff for a 
Baseline Visit,  Post-Intervention Visit,  and a 3- Month Follow -Up Visit.  All participants  will 
also be invited to participate in an in- depth qualitative interview shortly after their 3- month  
follow- up assessments to assess their views  of the intervention,  including  barriers,  
strengths,  and recommended changes.  All qualitative interviews  will be recorded and 
transcribed. During the interviews,  participants  will be encouraged to avoid using names. 
If any name is recorded, it will be omitted from the written transcript  (i.e., the transcript 
may read [name] in place of the actual name). Only the study team  will have access to 
data collected by questionnaires, interviews, and medical record data.  
 
Risks  and Risk Minimization  
Needs Assessment (Aim 1):  There are no foreseeable physical or medical risks in this  
portion of the project.  However, potential participants will be informed of the general  
nature of the study, what their involvement entails, the risks/benefits, and limitations to  
confidentiality prior to providing informed consent. The site PI for VA Connecticut and Co-
I will contact key staff and make arrangements for interviews.   Three Veterans will  be 
identified  pursuant  to a HIPAA waiver,  and a letter  will be mailed  to them  inviting  their 
participation.  
 
We will minimize risks to interview participants by thoroughly explaining to them that  
participation in the project is strictly voluntary and that the decision not to participate will  
have no bearing on their employment. Individual names of employment settings and  
associated responses will not be provided to any other agency. In reports, publications,  
or presentations using project research data, we will report the data in aggregate form  
and/or  change names  and disguise the identity  of any individual  we describe or quote 
for purposes  of illustration  or example.  
 
Pre-and Formal Pilot Testing (Aim 2): A potential risk to study participants is clinical  
deterioration of their mental  health and/or  an increase in suicidal thoughts  or behaviors  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 14 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   related to receiving the pilot intervention. This risk is anticipated to be minimal based on  
the outcomes of a R34 pilot study and ongoing R01 conducted by Co -I (developer of the  
PREVAIL model informing this project), where suicidal ideation improved for the whole 
population from baseline to 3 months, and no adverse events were attributed to study  
participation. Additionally, a 2018 paper2 reports no iatrogenic effects from two intensive  
suicide  research protocols  involving  Veterans.  
 
Another potential risk to study participants is loss of confidentiality related to self -report  
assessment data, medical record data, or audio recorded sessions or interviews. The risk 
of an inadvertent  breach of confidentiality  is minimal (see below  regarding protections  
against risk). Because of the  study  involves reducing suicide  risk, it is  necessary to obtain 
detailed information about past and current suicidal thoughts, plans  and behaviors. Loss 
of confidentiality may also occur in the event that the participant is  assessed by a study 
clinician to be imminent risk for harm to self or others therefore  requiring a breach of 
confidentiality to ensure safety of self or others (e.g., contacting a participant’s family 
member, law enforcement, or health care provider). Such a breach would only occur  if 
there is no reasonably  safe alternative.  The informed consent  process and documents 
will explain mandatory reporting requirements for information regarding intention to harm  
self or others  prior to  participating in the study.  
 
There is also a minimal risk of psychological discomfort to study participants from the  
questions  asked in the assessments.  Participants  may become anxious  or uncomfortable 
as a result of being asked personal questions. The study team members  conducting 
assessments are trained to respond to this emotional distress and to refer  the participant  
to their mental  health provider  or other  appropriate resources  as necessary.  All 
participants  are free to terminate the assessments at any time or refuse  to respond to 
any questionnaire item. Additionally, there is a popular misperception that  inquiring about 
suicidal thoughts, plans or prior behaviors coul d increase the likelihood that an individual 
will make a suicide attempt. Research has not found that suicide  assessments increase 
the risk of suicidal behaviors and this misperception has had the unfortunate 
consequence of decreasing research on potentially  suicidal individuals.  However, the 
study of individuals at elevated risk for suicide does require a clear set of  procedures to 
manage potential crisis situations. These are reviewed in detail in the  Data  Safety  and 
Monitoring plan.  
 
 
Data  Safety and Monitoring  plan 
 
Several steps will be taken to minimize the risk of breaches of confidentiality.  Unique  
identification numbers  will be assigned to all participants  who complete the initial  
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 15 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   screening session.  Chart reviews will be limited only to the data necessary for the  
research procedures (i.e., ICD codes for suicide ideation, self -harm). RAs completing  the 
review  will enter  abstracted data directly  into restricted -access databases  kept behind 
the VA firewall.  Data will be identified only by a unique study ID.  Every effort is  made to 
ensure that all study data are always confidential, in terms of staff training and data 
storage,  so that data cannot  be linked to a particular person.  
 
Unique  identification  numbers  will be assigned to all participants  who complete the initial  
screening sessions. Only individuals working on the actual data collection with the need  
to have access will be able to see the identifiers.  Only the participant code will appear  
on the assessment forms and fidelity forms.  All data forms and assessments will be coded 
with this number rather that with a name.  All paper forms will be stored in locked file 
cabinets. All identified data will be behind the VA Firewall, and only current VA study  staff 
will have access to this data on an as needed basis. Consent forms and participant  list 
sheets will be stored separately from data, in locked cabinets because they contain  
identifying  information and are linked  to the participant  ID. Only research team  members 
will have access to the data.   The identifiers will be maintained as long as  data collection 
activities are ongoing, and up to 5 years following the completion of the study.  Audio -
recordings made on an approved, encrypted recorder will not include participant names 
and will be uploaded to a secure, password- protected server and deleted from the 
recording device after transcription.  Transcriptions of audio- recordings  used for qualitative  
analyses  will be reviewed to ensure all identifiers  are deleted.  
 
To minimize discomfort from study assessments or participation in the Peer Specialist  
sessions, we will train study staff in assessment and therapy techniques that are non-  
threatening, empathic, yet professional. In addition, Peer Specialists will receive training 
prior to the pre -pilot on topics such as therapeutic boundaries, self -care/compassion  
fatigue, and vicarious trauma. During weekly supervision, Peer Specialists will receive  
mutual  support  and ongoing assistance  with a range of areas  including case 
conceptualization,  ensuring participant  safety  and self-care,  and maintaining  
rapport/engagement to minimize potential therapeutic impasses.  Peer Specialists will  
also be invited to share audio recorded segments from sessions to promote continued  
quality improvement. Study staff will also receive weekly supervision during the periods  
that baseline,  post-intervention,  and 3-month follow- up assessments  are being 
completed.  All study  staff will be provided with specific  suicide  risk management  protocols 
used in PREVAIL R34 in the case that a patient expresses severe distress or  clinical 
deterioration (discussed  below).  
 
The Site PI in cooperation with the Site PI/Co- I will be responsible for ensuring training  
and weekly  supervision to all research staff working  with participants  with regard to 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 16 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   procedures for managing potential clinical deterioration, suicidal crisis situations, and/or  
adverse events. This training will include information regarding evaluating warning signs  
of acute suicidal ideation,  planning,  or intent  that could occur  during contact  with 
participants, and means of addressing such issues. Peer specialists will inquire about  
suicidal ideation at every  encounter  (one visit per week)  with participants,  and participants  
complete self-report  measures  of suicidal  ideation at baseline,  postintervention, and 3-
month follow- up assessments conducted by RAs. In the case that a participant  indicates  
any level of suicidal  ideation or recent  attempt during encounters with any study staff 
(including peer specialists), a suicide risk management  protocol will be used. The protocol 
is based on the same approach used in the R34 and ongoing R01 evaluation of PREVAIL  
and utilizes  an algorithm  of scripted risk assessment questions and “action steps” 
dependent on the participant responses (See  Appendices A and B for peer specialist and 
research assistant versions, respectively).  Similar but separate protocols were developed 
because peer specialists will not ask as  many detailed questions as research assistants. 
This approach ensures peer specialists  stay out of a “risk assessment” role with the 
participants. For research assistants, they  will be provided a more detailed risk 
assessment algorithm that involves an additional  step for how to respond based on level 
of risk.  
 
Based on the level of risk determined by the algorithm, study staff may perform one or  
more of the following. In the presence of elevated acute suicide risk, several steps will  be 
taken to ensure participant safety (See Appendices A and B). First and foremost,  should 
the participant disclose suicidal plan and/or intent OR recent suicidal behavior  (e.g., 
suicide attempt or preparatory behavior in the past month) then the peer specialist  or 
research assistant will conduct a warm hand off to a licensed mental health provider  to 
further assess and intervene as appropriate (e.g., Safety Planning, hospitalization).  
Similarly, should the participant report these factors during a research interview on a self-
report assessment (e.g., QIDS or C -SSRS), a warm hand off to a licensed mental  health 
provider will be conducted. For lower, non- acute risk, steps taken by study staff  include: 
a) recommend the participant call or be transferred to the Veteran Crisis Line or  the VHA 
Psychiatric Emergency  Services  b) notify  the participant’s primary Mental  Health  clinician  
and/or  Suicide Prevention Coordinator  regarding a non-imminent  increase in suicide risk. 
When any suicidal ideation is reported, study staff will c) notify a  designated on-call study  
team  clinician  when  the suicide  risk management  algorithm  has been activated, and 
when any questions arise regarding risk management. The on-  call study clinician will be 
available via pager or cell phone at all times when there is  potential  contact  between 
study  staff (including  peer specialists)  and participants.  Additionally, health and social 
service resources will be provided to the participant. This  will include several  resources,  
including  suicide  prevention resources  which  the participant can access. This will  facilitate  
and enhance care on an ongoing  basis  among 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 17 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   this population.  
 
Participants will be instructed on how to contact the crisis hotlines, emergency services,  
or closest emergency  department  if they are experiencing a suicidal  crisis. Peer  specialists 
and study team members are not to further assess or manage suicide risk  beyond the 
established protocol. Participants will be instructed to contact their clinicians  or the Suicide  
Prevention Coordinator  All outgoing voicemail  messages  on VA Connecticut phone lines 
are mandated to include instructions on how to contact crisis  services. Due to policies  
associated with COVID- 19, most  meetings  between peer specialists and participants will 
occur onsite at VA facilities in person or via VA Video  Connect or WebEx during business 
hours. On the off chance of that meetings occur  outside of regular business hours; clinician 
back up will be prearranged. Written safety  procedures for conducting community -based 
meetings include use of public locations,  during daylight  hours,  and mandatory  call-in 
procedures.  In our prior research,  using such procedures  with similar  populations,  no 
incidents  where staff safety  concerns  became an issue occurred during follow -up 
assessments. All safety concerns w ill be reported immediately  to the PI. 
 
Fidelity to the PREVAIL model will be evaluated by ‘blinded’ raters independent of the  
research team  after participants  complete their post-intervention assessment  interview.  A 
20% random sample of audio recorded sessions will be assessed in terms of adherence 
to PREVAIL principles (i.e., interactions that follow the format of Invite, Share, Learn,  
Motivate)  and assessment  of suicidal  ideation as well as demonstration of general  support  
skills.  
 
Benefits  
It is believed that research participants may be helped in a number of ways. Participants  
who take part in the peer specialist pilot may benefit from an improved sense of hope and 
belongingness as the intervention establishes a supportive relationship and helps  restore 
community involvement. The peer specialists are trained and supervised to handle 
potential distress caused by participating in the intervention. The peer specialists  will have 
immediate “on call” access to a supervising mental health clinician at all times  they are 
meeting with a pilot participant. The pilot intervention is an adjunct to standard care VHA 
treatment,  including  assessments, admissions,  and referrals  if deemed appropriate by 
the clinical staff. The potential benefits for the research are expected to outweigh the risks 
to participants.  
 
Importance  of Knowledge to be Gained  
Veterans  account  for approximately  8% of the U.S. adult  population yet account  for 
roughly  14% of deaths  by suicide.  In fact, the age-adjusted suicide  rate in 2015 for VHA 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 18 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   Veterans was higher than both non- VHA using Veterans and non- Veterans. Preventing  
suicide is a top priority at the VA and new approaches to suicide prevention are critically  
needed as the VHA suicide  rate has not reduced despite multiple  VHA initiatives  put 
into place  over 10 years  ago. Randomized controlled trials  have shown  that peer 
specialists are effective in improving symptoms of depression, reducing the likelihood of  
psychiatric hospital readmission, increasing hopefulness, and improving quality of life.  
However,  the data are scant  on the effectiveness  of these approaches  in suicide  
prevention. Developing an effective intervention for preventing suicidal behaviors would  
represent a major advancement given the few existing effective VHA interventions to 
date. This study will add to the knowledge base in this critical area. Given the potential  
for this study to improve the quality of life for patients with varying levels of access to evidence- based mental  health services, the potential  benefits  outweigh the risks outlined 
above.  
 
5.2 Recruitment  Methods  
 
Recruitment -Aim 1 
We will recruit a diverse group of 12 individuals for the Needs Assessment phase of the  
project to inform the adaptation of PREVAIL.  This group will be comprised of Veterans  
(3), Peer Specialists (3), Providers from behavioral health, inpatient and outpatient  
psychiatry, and other relevant  departments (4),  and Clinical Directors  (2). 
 
We will obtain a waiver of HIPAA authorization to identify Veterans to participate in the Needs Assessment.  Once these Veterans are identified, they will be mailed a letter  
informing them  about  and requesting their participation in the Needs  Assessment 
interviews.  A member  of the study  team  will follow- up with a telephone call approximately 
one week after the letter is the sent.  The team members will attempt to  reach the Veterans 
by phone 3 times and will leave no more than two messages.  Providers, clinical directors, 
and Peer Specialists will either be sent an email or will be verbally  invited  in person to 
participate in the Needs  Assessment. 
 
Recruitment  for the Steering Committee  
The Steering Committee will be comprised of researchers and VHA leadership.   The site 
PI will identify appropriate VA staff and other providers and will contact them by  phone or 
email.  
 
Recruitment -Aim 2 
 
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 19 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   We will recruit 4-6 Peer  Specialists  who are currently  working  in VA Connecticut  
Healthcare System (VACT) to receive training in the PREVAIL model and to deliver the  
intervention for the pre- and formal pilot. All of the selected Peer Specialists have been  
trained and certified, with multiple years of clinical experience working with Veterans in  
recovery,  including  those who have been at  some point  ‘flagged’  for suicide  risk. 
 
We will include a sample of up to 24 VHA patients identified as being high- risk for  suicide 
at the VA Connecticut  Healthcare System (VACT)  to receive the pilot intervention as an 
adjunct to usual care. Patients will be considered high suicide risk if  they have a Patient 
Record Flag (PRF) in their medical chart for a recent suicide attempt,  serious suicidal 
ideation, or other warning signs of acute suicide risk. The VACT  Suicide  Prevention  
Coordinator  maintains  a list of patients  with active PRFs.  This population is targeted 
because they are at greatest risk for suicide and therefore most  in need of intervention.  
 
In addition to reaching out to Veterans on the high- risk list, we also will engage Veterans 
via the New Haven VA psychiatric Emergency Room, inpatient units, and individual New 
Haven clinicians. Specifically, we will engage with staff to find out if any Veteran has 
received a score on the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale Screen of 3 or greater in 
the last three months. This measure is used commonly in the VA. Such a score is known 
to be an optimal cut off score for identifying individuals who would likely attempt suicide. 
In a recent study of nearly 19000 patients, those scoring over the cut -off of ⩾ 3 had almost 
four times the odds of dying by suicide within 1 week and 1 month, respectively, and 
doubled the odds of dying within a year90. We will also engage with individual clinicians to 
assess whether any of their patients have recently received a score of ⩾ 3 on the 
Columbia measures. In addition, we will ask these staff about any Veteran who made a suicide attempt in the last three months. Thus, the additional recruitment criteria we are adding will be:  
• Any Veteran from the New Haven VA psychiatric Emergency Room, the New Haven 
inpatient units, or from individual New Haven clinicians who received a score on the 
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale Screen of 3 or greater in the last three 
months  
• Any Veteran from the New Haven VA psychiatric Emergency Room, the New Haven inpatient units, or from individual New Haven clinicians who made a suicide attempt within the last three months  
 
Each month, there are approximately 105 VHA patients with PRFs for suicide risk at the  
CT VA campuses.  In addition to those Veterans with a PRF, we also will be 
recruiting those Veterans with suicidal ideation or attempts.  This pool of Veterans should be sufficient  to recruit participants for the pre- pilot (n=12) and formal 
pilot (n=12). Assuming a 75%  retention rate (as achieved in Dr. Pfeiffer’s PREVAIL pilot)
15 
this will yield a final sample  of 18 patients  with outcome data at post-intervention and 3-
month follow- up. This sample size will yield reasonably precise estimates of feasibility in 
terms of actual rates  of recruitment, retention, compliance/fidelity to intervention, and 
completion of outcome  assessments. 
 
Once eligible Veterans are identified, they will be mailed a letter along with a study  
information sheet, inviting them to participate in Aim 2 of study. A member of the study  
team will follow- up with a telephone call approximately one week after the letter is the 
sent if they do not hear back from the Veterans.  The team members will attempt to  reach 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   the Veterans by phone 3 times  and will leave no more than two messages.  
 
Additionally, the site PI will work with providers of eligible Veterans seeking their help in 
recruiting these Veterans  into the study  and will also provide them  with a study  
information sheet. Once the provider identifies an eligible Veteran, they will discuss the  
study with the Veteran and if the Veteran is interested in hearing more about the study,  
the provider will call the study staff with the Veteran present or will share the number of  
the study staff with the Veteran so that they may call the study staff at their own 
convenience. In the event that the provider facilitates the phone call with study staff, the provider will step out of the room to give the Veteran a chance to learn more about the study. for this to occur. If a provider or research staff cannot reach the Veteran by  phone,  
they will follow -up with  a CIRB- approved letter as  described above.  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 20 of 36 
Payments  
Veterans who participate in the Needs Assessment interview will receive $25 for their  
time and effort.  Study  participants  will receive $25 upon  completion  of each assessment 
interview  (baseline,  post-intervention,  3-month follow- up), for a total of up to $75.  
Additionally, Veterans who participate in the one- time interview will receive $25 for their  
time and effort.  
 
5.3 Informed Consent  Procedures  
 
Veterans  
 
Needs  Assessment  
Pursuant to a Waiver of HIPAA Authorization, the site PI will identify three Veterans  
appropriate for the Needs Assessment in discussion with clinical providers.  Selected  
Veterans will be mailed a letter describing the participation and requesting that the Veteran respond about their interest by calling the number provided or mailing back the return  letter  in the stamped envelope provided.  If the Veteran is interested in participating 
in the Needs Assessment, a member of the research team will arrange a time to discuss 
the study with them and obtain their written consent.  The member of  research team  will 
then conduct the Needs  Assessment interview  following written  consent  or will schedule 
a mutually  agreed upon time to conduct  the interview.  
 
 
Pre-Pilot and Formal  Pilot 
 
A face -to-face meeting (interview and/or focus groups) will be held with Peer Specialists  
who have been selected to participate in the proposed study.  Research staff will obtain  
verbal consent, including the permission to obtain audio- recordings of interviews and/or  
focus  groups  conducted after they have completed training  in the PREVAIL  approach as 
well as after the  pre-pilot to inform  potential  modifications  to the intervention.  
 
A face- to-face meeting will be held for Veterans  who have been selected to participate  
in the pre- pilot and formal -pilot phases of the study.  Research staff will administer  written 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   informed consent (or Veteran assent along with consent of a conservator if  applicable)  
and HIPAA authorization,  including  the permission  to obtain audio- recordings, at the 
baseline visit. The ICF, HIPAA and other study materials will be submitted and approved 
by the CIRB prior to the start of any recruitment  for the pre-pilot or pilot.  
 
VA Staff  
 
Needs  Assessment  Staff Interviews  
Pursuant to a waiver of documentation of ICF for staff who are going to be interviewed  
for the Needs Assessment, a member of the research staff will read through the ICF for  
staff over phone, obtain verbal consent from the staff member, and record the name of  
the staff member  and date of consent  for tracking  purposes.  
 
Peer  Specialist  Interviews  and/or  Focus  Groups  
Pursuant to a waiver of documentation of ICF for Peer Specialists who are going  
to be interviewed via a 1:1 interview  and/or  focus  group following  their participation 
in the PREVAIL training as well as after the pre- pilot, a member of  the research 
staff will read through the ICF for staff over phone or via MS Teams,  obtain verbal 
consent from the staff member, and record the name of the staff  member  and date 
of consent  for tracking purposes.  
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria  for Aim 1 Veterans  
1. Experience  related to suicide  
2. Voluntary  informed consent  (must be able to be given by the 
patient)  
3. Age 18 and older  
4. Fluent  in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for Aim 1 Veterans  
1. Active  suicidal  flag or currently  hospitalized  
2. Pregnant  and/or  incarcerated 
3. Unable  to provide voluntary,  written  informed consent  for any 
reason (include incompetency)  
 
Inclusion Criteria  for Aim 1 Staff  
1. Voluntary  informed consent  
2. Age 18 and older  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 22 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   3. Peer  Specialists  with experience  related to suicide  (Peer  
Specialists  only)  
4. Staff members  with experience related to treating  Veterans  with 
experience related to suicide  (Staff members  only)  
5. Fluent  in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for Aim 1 Staff  
1. Unable to provide voluntary,  written  informed consent  for any 
reason 
Inclusion Criteria  for Aim 2 Veterans  
1. Voluntary informed consent (must be able to be given by the 
patient)  or voluntary  informed  assent  with consent  of a conservator  
if applicable 
2. Age 18 and older  
3. High suicide  risk evidenced by a Patient  Record  Flag in their 
medical  chart.  
4. Fluent  in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for Aim 2 Veterans  
1. Substantially cognitively impaired as indicated by a score of 10 or  
higher  on the Blessed  Orientation,  Memory,  Concentration (BOMC) 
Test 
2. Unable  to provide voluntary,  written  informed consent  for any 
reason (include incompetency)  
3. Determined by patient’s attending psychiatrist that the peer -based  
intervention is not appropriate due to unstable psychosis,  cognitive 
disorder,  or severe personality disorder  
4. Residing  outside of the VA Connecticut  catchment  area 
5. Pregnant  and/or  incarcerated 
 
Inclusion Criteria  for Aim 2 Peer  Specialists 
1. Voluntary  informed consent  
2. Age 18 and older  
3. Employed by the VA as a Certified  Peer  Specialist  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for Aim 2 Peer  Specialists 
1. Unable  to provide voluntary,  verbal  consent  for any reason 
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 23 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   2. Determined by Peer Specialists’ supervisor, attending 
psychiatrist, or other  clinician  that delivering the intervention 
is not appropriate due to prior trauma, clinical instability, or  
current  concerns  with suicide  risk 
 
  
5.5 Study  Evaluations  
 
Measures  
The measures  used to collect  data for Aims  1 and 2 include data from the CPRS record  
as well as several rehabilitation and depression & suicide variables described in further  
detail below. Additionally, a study -specific form will be used to collect information about  
age, sex, race,  ethnicity,  employment, education,  income,  and marital  status.  
 
Rehabilitation Variables  
Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS)64. The SDS uses 3 items to measure how much work,  
social life, and family life are impaired by mental health symptoms. The SDS has been 
widely  used in diverse  samples,65-67 including Veterans,68,69 and found to be 
psychometrically sound and sensitive to treatment effects.  
 
Temple University Community Participation scale (TUCP)71. The TUCP is a 26- item 
measure of community  inclusion  in the past month.  The TUCP has been used in 
previous  studies  with good reliability.71-74 
Questionnaire about the Process of Recovery (QPR)75. The QPR contains 15 items  
that measure connectedness, hope, identity, meaning, and empowerment.  The QPR  has 
demonstrated high internal  and convergent  validity  as well as sensitivity  to change.76,77 
 
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (Q -LES-Q- SF). The Q - 
LES-Q- SF consists of 16 items to assess life satisfaction in the past week.  The Q -LES- 
Q-SF has been used extensively with Veterans as part of the National Health and  
Resilience  in Veterans  Study  (NHRVS).  
 
Depression  and Suicide  Variables  
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 24 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms (QIDS)79. The QIDS  consists of 16 
questions to assess depression severity.  The QIDS has demonstrated high reliability,  
validity,  and sensitivity  to treatment  change,80, including among Veterans.81 
Columbia- Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)82. The C -SSRS is used to assess  
suicidal ideation (past 30 days) and behaviors (past 3 months).  Suicide ideation items  
include: (1) wish to be dead, (2) non- specific suicidal thoughts, (3) suicidal thoughts with 
methods, (4) suicidal intent, and (5) suicidal intent with plan.  The suicide behavior  
subscales include: (1) attempts (actual, aborted, interrupted), (2) preparatory behavior,  
and (3) non-suicidal  self-injurious  behavior.  We will also use two measures  of 
psychosocial variables that potentially mediate suicide risk and are hypothesized to be  
impacted by  PSs.  
 
Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire (INQ)83. The INQ uses 15 items to measure two 
underlying motives for suicidal desire (i.e., perceive burden and thwarted belonging).  The 
INQ has established validity  and reliability,84 including on Veterans.85 
Suicide Cognitions Scale (SCS)86.   The SCS contains 18 items that assess thoughts  
of unloveability, unsolvability, and unbearability.  The SCS has strong psychometric  
qualities in diverse samples (including Veterans) with incremental validity to predicting  
suicidal behavior  beyond depression,  INQ scores, prior attempts, and suicidal  
ideation.87,88 
 
5.6 Data  Analysis  
 
Per SPiRE protocol  and discussions  with an RR&D Scientific  Program  Manager,  
calculations for power and estimated effect size are not required because our proposal  
involves piloting a rehabilitation intervention with a small, high risk sample of VHA  patients  
(as opposed to determining effectiveness  in large samples  via inferential  statistical 
hypothesis  testing).  
 
Aim 1 
Qualitative analyses of interviews from the needs assessment will be conducted with  
empirical  phenomenological  procedures  used successfully by our team  in previous  
studies.57 Verbatim transcripts of audio recordings from the interviews will be distributed  
to the Co- Investigators. Each researcher will independently review, analyze, and code  
the transcripts for themes that characterize participants’ experiences. After creating a 
narrative summary using the participants’ own language, they will review each of their  
summaries  to compare/contrast  the identified  themes  before coming to consensus  about  
important  themes.  A synthesized report  will summarize  the overarching themes.  
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 25 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
Aim 2 
WOC employees from the Program for Recovery and Community Health (PRCH) will  
conduct  the data analysis  for this aim. In line with SPiRE guidelines  and 
recommendations  for pilot studies,28,89 our focus  will be on the feasibility  of the 
intervention and assessment of outcomes.  Therefore,  quantitative analysis  will be mostly  
descriptive  in nature (e.g.,  frequencies,  percentages,  means,  standard deviations)  and 
will focus  on the estimation of confidence intervals.  This includes  descriptive statistics on 
each of the measures at each assessment period, creation of  confidence- intervals, and 
visual plotting of data to observe potential trends in the data  associated with the 
intervention. Formal hypothesis testing will not be conducted as  comparisons of outcomes 
would be unreliable estimates of any true effect given the small sample size. Instead,  
analyses  will be used to evaluate the feasibility  of measuring the primary outcomes and 
potential mediators as well as to inform decisions  about power and sample sizes in a 
larger trial. Qualitative analyses of post -intervention interviews with Veterans will follow 
the same procedures as described for Aim #1.  Qualitative analysis of interviews and/or 
focus groups with Peers Specialists conducted after completing  the PREVAIL  training  
and the pre-pilot of the intervention will also  follow the same procedures  as described in 
Aim #1. 
 
 
  
 
5.7 Withdrawal  of Subjects  
 
As discussed in Section 5.1 of the protocol , the risk of clinical deterioration of mental  
health and/or an increase in suicidal thoughts or behaviors related to receiving the pilot  
intervention is anticipated to be minimal, therefore we believe that few participants will  
need to be terminated.  Participants who are hospitalized during the project will not be  
withdrawn,  but the intervention  will continue,  either  during their stay if medically  
appropriate,  or following  their discharge.  
 
If study staff becomes aware of Veterans who are incarcerated and/or become pregnant  
during the study period, the Veteran will be withdrawn from the study.  Other potential  
reasons for withdrawal include if a participant relocates out of state or misses the first  four 
scheduled sessions. Any participant may withdraw from the study at any time, as  stated 
in the ICF. If a participant  calls the research  staff to withdraw,  the staff member  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 26 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   will thank the Veteran for their participation and ask whether the Veteran would like to  
schedule a behavioral health appointment related to their study participation or decision 
to withdraw.  A note will be added to the Veteran’s medical record indicating their  decision  
to withdraw,  and the behavioral health provider  of record will be informed.  
 
 
6.0 Reporting  
 
Principal Investigators (PI), Co -investigators (Co- I), and all other study staff will monitor  
for adverse events (AE) and protocol deviations, and staff will notify the PI immediately  
of any AE or protocol deviation. CIRB guidelines will be strictly adhered to. The study  staff 
member and PI will discuss the event in its entirety: (e.g. what happened, what  caused it, 
if it was expected or unexpected,  any ways  to resolve or correct  the issue,  etc. The PI 
or project manager will file a report of all SAEs and protocol deviations with the Central 
Institutional Review Board (CIRB), and a copy of the report is kept on file in the project 
binder. When participants are consented into the study, they will be notified that they may 
leave the study at any time without repercussions to their regular care from the VA. In the 
event that a Veteran is incarcerated during the study they will be formally removed from 
the study and study staff will immediately notify the Central IRB  (CIRB)  of this  event.  
 
The Principal Investigator or site PI will be responsible for contacting the CIRB within 5  
working  days  about  any serious  unanticipated adverse events  or unanticipated problems 
involving risks to participants or others and completing any reports applicable.  As 
necessary,  either  the PI or Site PI will submit  Form  119 (CIRB Report  of Unanticipated 
Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems) to the CIRB, and submit a copy to 
the other site, thus assuring that all parts of the study are well informed about  any events  
or problems.  
 
They  will also provide a summary  report  about  adverse events  and unanticipated  
problems that did not require immediate reporting to the CIRB at the continuing reviews  
and at study closure. The VA Central IRB table of reporting requirements time frames  will 
be used in all cases.  
 
Due to the pilot nature of this study and small sample size, this study will not have a Data  
Monitoring Committee.  
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 27 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
 
Study  related questionnaires  will be identified  with unique ID numbers  for each participant 
and will be collected in paper format. After the written informed consent  process (Aims 1 
and 2) and the survey measures have been completed, the study  documents will be kept 
in a locked file cabinet, within the locked office, within a locked building, of the study staff. 
Coded interview data will be manually entered by research staff into a database that will 
be stored on a VA server located behind the secure firewall. Windows in tegrated security 
will be used for all computer access. At the VA, all  PCs, laptops, workstations, and remote 
devices are set to lock and are secured after  being left unattended for 5 minutes  or more,  
or by logging- off when the equipment  will be unattended for an extended period. User 
and role permissions will be defined at the computer, file, directory server and database 
level to ensure data security. Source documents with private information (e.g., consent 
document, payment form, etc.) will be stored in a locked file cabinet, within the locked 
office, within a locked building, of the research staff. Research records  may be released 
or disclosed if required by federal  law. Study participants will not be specifically identified 
in any publication of research results.  Records will be kept according to current  VA 
regulations.  
 
All local policies will be adhered to for information security purposes.  All identified data  
will be behind the VA Firewall, and only current VA study staff will have access to this  
data on an as needed basis. Research staff who leave the study will be removed from  
the study staff via the Study Staff Form and their access to the study drives and/or  
documents will also be terminated. If there is an improper use or disclosure of study  data,  
we will notify  the ISO  and Privacy  Officer immediately  of said occurr ence.  
 
All research records  will be maintained  in accordance with the Veterans  Health  
Administration (VHA) Records Control Schedule. Paper records will be disposed of  using 
methods deemed appropriate by the VAPHS Privacy Officer, and all electronic  data will 
be sanitized  using methods  rendered appropriate by the VAPHS ISO.  
 
 
7.1 Communication Plan  
 
The Principal Investigator ultimately will be responsible for monitoring the data and safety 
with involvement from all of the study investigators. They will ensure that all  relevant CIRB 
policies, procedures and stipulations are being followed. They also will be responsible for 
ensuring that other investigators and project staff adhere to the VA CIRB  policies  
including:  (1) all participants  will understand,  agree to and sign a written  consent form 
before participating; (2) strict adherence to a participant’ s right to withdraw  or refuse to 
answer  questions  will be maintained;  (3) the assessments  will be 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 28 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   completely confidential and no names will be associated with the assessment data; (4)  
consent  forms  and identifying information will be kept separate from the actual  participant 
data; (5) all identifying information (consents, tracking data) will be kept  locked at all times 
and computer files will be saved with passwords; (6) participants will  be informed in writing 
in the consent form how to contact the PI, the study coordinator,  and VA CIRB office  with 
any questions  and/or  concerns.  
 
The PI will directly supervise the data manager and the project coordinator and will be 
responsible for monitoring confidentiality procedures. Quality control and reliability of  
screening,  baseline and follow -up assessments  will be monitored by Dr. Chinman  
throughout the trial via regular meetings and observation of the project  coordinator  
conducting standardized assessments.  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 29 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
8.0 References 
 
1 Ehde, D. M. et al. Developing, testing, and sustaining rehabilitation interventions  
via participatory  action research. Arch.  Phys.  Med. Rehabil. 94, S30-S42  (2013).  
2 Affairs., U. S. D. o. V. National  Strategy  for Preventing Veteran Suicide: 2018- 
2028., (Office of Mental  Health and Suicide Prevention, 2018). 
3 Walker, G. & Bryant, W. Peer support in adult mental health services: A  
metasynthesis  of qualitative findings.  Psychiatric  Rehabilitation Journal  36, 28-34 
(2013). 
4 Vandewalle, J. et al. Peer workers’ perceptions and experiences of barriers to 
implementation of peer worker  roles  in mental  health services:  A literature review. 
Int. J. Nurs.  Stud. 60, 234-250 (2016). 
5 Chinman, M. et al. Peer  support services  for individuals  with serious  mental  
illnesses: assessing the evidence. Psychiatr. Serv.  65, 429-441 (2014).  
6 Fuhr, D. C. et al. Effectiveness of peer -delivered interventions for severe mental  
illness  and depression on clinical and psychosocial  outcomes: A systematic  review  
and meta-analysis. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 49, 1691-1702  (2014).  
7 Levati, S. et al. Optimisation of complex health interventions prior to a randomised  
controlled trial: a scoping review of strategies used. Pilot and Feasibility Studies 2 , 
17, doi:10.1186/s40814- 016-0058-y  (2016). 
8 Highfield, L., Hartman, M., Mullen, P. & Leerlooijer, J. in Planning health promotion  
programs: an intervention mapping approach. San Franscisco: John Wiley & Sons  
Ch. 10, 596-649 (2016). 
9 Chinman, M. et al. Early  experiences  of employing consumer -providers  in the VA. 
Psychiatr. Serv.  59, 1315-1321 (2008). 
10 Becker, D. R. Hiring Peers as Vocational Specialists. Psychiatr. Serv. 66, 337-337 
(2015). 
11 Lloyd-Evans, B. et al. A systematic  review  and meta-analysis  of randomised 
controlled trials of peer support for people with severe mental illness. BMC  
Psychiatry 14, 39 (2014). 
12 Gassaway, J. et al. Effects of peer mentoring on self-efficacy and hospital  
readmission  following inpatient rehabilitation of individuals  with spinal  cord injury:  a 
randomized controlled trial. Arch. Phys.  Med. Rehabil. (2017). 
13 Jones, M. & Gassaway, J. Peer -supported self-management to facilitate community  
re-entry after discharge from spinal cord injury rehabilitation: Engaging peers as  
change agents and research partners. Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 59, e128-e129 
(2016). 
14 Pfeiffer, P. N., Heisler, M., Piette, J. D., Rogers, M. A. & Valenstein, M. Efficacy of  
peer support interventions for depression: a meta-analysis. Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry  
33, 29-36 (2011). 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 30 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   15 Pfeiffer, P. N. et al. Development and pilot study  of a suicide prevention 
intervention delivered by peer support specialists. Psychol. Serv.,  
doi:10.1037/ser0000257 (2018. doi:10.1037/ser0000257). 
16 Bartholomew, L. K., Parcel, G. S. & Kok, G. Intervention Mapping: A Process for  
Developing Theory  and Evidence-Based Health Education Programs. Health Educ. 
Behav. 25, 545-563, doi:10.1177/109019819802500502 (1998). 
17 Hesselink, G. et al. Improving patient discharge  and reducing hospital  readmissions  
by using Intervention Mapping. BMC  Health Serv. Res. 14, 389 (2014). 
18 Désiron, H. A., Crutzen, R., Godderis, L., Van Hoof, E. & de Rijk, A. Bridging health 
care and the workplace: formulation of a return-to-work intervention for breast 
cancer patients using an intervention mapping approach. Journal of occupational  
rehabilitation 26, 350-365 (2016).  
19 Kirchner,  J. et al. Using  a multi -level  approach to implement a primary  care mental  
health (PCMH) program.  Families, Systems, & Health 28, 161 (2010). 
20 Hamilton, A. B. et al. Engaging multilevel  stakeholders  in an implementation trial of 
evidence-based quality improvement in VA women's health primary care. Transl. Behav. Med. 7, 478-485  (2017).  
21 Hamilton, A. B., Chinman, M., Cohen, A. N., Oberman, R. S. & Young, A. S. 
Implementation of consumer providers into mental health intensive case 
management teams. The journal of behavioral health services & research 42, 100- 
108 (2015). 
22 Chinman, M. et al. Early  experiences  of employing consumer -providers  in the VA. 
Psychiatr. Serv.  59, 1315-1321 (2008). 
23 Chinman, M., Young, A. S., Hassell, J. & Davidson, L. Toward the implementation 
of mental health consumer provider services. The Journal of Behavioral Health Services  & Research 33, 176 (2006). 
24 Davidson, L., Bellamy, C., Flanagan, E., Guy,  K. & O'Connell, M. A participatory  
approach to person- centred research: maximising opportunities for recovery. 
Person -Centred Healthcare Research. West Sussex: WILEY Blackwell , 69-83 
(2017)  
25 Pfeiffer, P. N. et al. Predictors  of suicidal  ideation among depressed veterans  and 
the interpersonal  theory  of suicide. J. Affect. Disord. 152, 277-281 (2014). 
26 Pfeiffer, P. N., Kim, H. M., Ganoczy, D., Zivin, K. & Valenstein, M. Treatment‐ 
Resistant Depression and Risk of Suicide. Suicide Life Threat. Behav. 43 , 356-365 
(2013). 
27 Schmutte, T., Olfson, M., Xie, M. & Marcus, S. C. Deliberate self-harm in older  
adults: A national  analysis  of U.S. emergency  department visits  and follow -up care. 
Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry  (In press).  
28 Moore, C. G., Carter, R. E., Nietert, P. J. & Stewart, P. W. Recommendations for  
planning pilot studies  in clinical  and translational  research. Clin. Transl. Sci. 4, 332- 
337 (2011). 
29 US Dept.  of Veterans  Affairs.  (2018).  VA National  Suicide  Data  Report:  
2005– 2015.  Available at 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 31 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/suicide_prevention/Suicide- Prevention - 
Data.asp . 
30 Dobscha, S. K. et al. Correlates  of suicide among veterans  treated in primary care: 
Case –control study of a nationally representative sample. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 29, 
853-860 (2014). 
31 Blosnich, J. R., Gordon, A. J. & Bossarte, R. M. Suicidal ideation and mental  
distress  among adults  with military  service  history:  results  from 5 US states, 2010. 
Am. J.  Public  Health 104, S595-S602 (2014). 
32 Ashrafioun, L., Pigeon, W. R., Conner, K. R., Leong, S. H. & Oslin, D. W. 
Prevalence and correlates of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts among 
veterans  in primary care referred for a mental  health evaluation. J. Affect.  Disord. 
189, 344-350, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.09.014 (2016). 
33 McClure, J. R. et al. Prevalence of suicidal  ideation and other suicide warning signs  
in veterans attending an urgent care psychiatric clinic. Compr. Psychiatry 60, 149- 
155, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comppsych.2014.09.010 (2015). 
34 Hubers, A. et al. Suicidal ideation and subsequent completed suicide in both 
psychiatric  and non- psychiatric  populations: a meta-analysis. Epidemiology  and 
psychiatric  sciences 27, 186-198 (2018). 
35 Franklin, J. C. et al. Risk factors  for suicidal  thoughts  and behaviors: A meta- 
analysis of 50 years  of research. Psychol. Bull. 143, 187-232 (2016). 
36 Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration (2008). VHA  
DIRECTIVE  2008-036: Use of Patient Record Flags  to Identify  Patients  at High 
Risk for Suicide.  
37 Department of Veterans  Affairs/Department of Defense. Clinical  Practice Guideline 
for Assessment  and Management of Patients  At Risk for Suicide. June 2013. 
38 Department of Veterans  Affairs  Office of the Inspector General  (2017). Evaluation 
of Suicide Prevention Programs in Veterans  Health Administration Facilities. Report 
No. 16-03808-215. Washington, DC. 
39 Stratford, A. C. et al. The growth of peer support: an international charter. Journal  
of Mental  Health, 1-6 (2017). 
40 Cabassa, L. J., Camacho, D., Vélez -Grau, C. M. & Stefancic, A. Peer-based health 
interventions for people with serious mental illness: a systematic literature review. 
J. Psychiatr.  Res. 84, 80-89 (2017). 
41 Hanks, R. A., Rapport, L. J., Wertheimer, J. & Koviak, C. Randomized controlled 
trial of peer mentoring for individuals  with traumatic  brain  injury  and their significant  
others. Arch. Phys.  Med. Rehabil. 93, 1297-1304 (2012). 
42 Pietrzak, R. H., Pitts, B. L., Harpaz ‐Rotem, I., Southwick, S. M. & Whealin, J. M. 
Factors  protecting against the development of suicidal  ideation in military  veterans.  
World  Psychiatry  16, 326-327 (2017). 
43 Ganzini, L. et al. Trust is the basis  for effective suicide risk screening and 
assessment  in veterans.  J. Gen. Intern. Med. 28, 1215-1221 (2013). 
 
 
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 32 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   44 Garba, R. M. & Gadanya, M. A. The role of intervention mapping in designing 
disease prevention interventions: A systematic review of the literature. PLoS One 
12, e0174438 (2017).  
45 Wolk,  C. B. et al. Developing implementation strategies  for firearm  safety  promotion 
in paediatric primary care for suicide prevention in two large US health systems: a 
study protocol for a mixed- methods implementation study. BMJ open 7 , e014407 
(2017). 
46 Chinman, M. et al. Provision  of peer specialist services in VA patient aligned care 
teams: protocol for testing a cluster randomized implementation trial. 
Implementation Science: IS  12, 57, doi:10.1186/s13012-017-0587-7  (2017). 
47 Chinman, M. et al. A cluster  randomized trial of adding peer specialists  to intensive  
case management teams in the Veterans Health Administration. The journal of 
behavioral health services &  research 42, 109-121  (2015). 
48 Chinman, M., Shoai, R. & Cohen, A. Using  organizational  change strategies  to 
guide peer support technician implementation in the Veterans Administration. 
Psychiatric  rehabilitation  journal  33, 269 (2010). 
49 Chinman, M. et al. (Am Psychiatric  Assoc,  2017). 
50 Tanaka, K. & Davidson, L. The Challenge of Social Inclusion: A Basis for Enclave 
Community  Approaches. Journal  of Psychosocial  Rehabilitation and Mental  Health 
4, 189-204, doi:10.1007/s40737-017 -0100-2 (2017). 
51 Davidson, L. et al. Enabling or engaging? the role of recovery  support services  in 
addiction recovery. Alcoholism  Treatment Quarterly 28, 391-416 (2010). 
52 O'Connell, M. J. et al. Outcomes  of a Peer  Mentor  Intervention for Persons  With 
Recurrent Psychiatric Hospitalization. Psychiatr. Serv. , appi. ps. 201600478 
(2018). 
53 Rowe, M. et al. A peer -support, group intervention to reduce substance use and 
criminality among persons with severe mental illness. Psychiatr. Serv. 58 , 955-961, 
doi:10.1176/ps.2007.58.7.955 (2007). 
54 Sells,  D., Black, R., Davidson, L. & Rowe,  M. Beyond generic  support: incidence  
and impact of invalidation in peer services for clients with severe mental illness. Psychiatr. Serv.  (2015). 
55 Chinman, M., McCarthy, S., Hannah, G., Byrne, T. H. & Smelson, D. A. Using 
Getting To Outcomes  to facilitate the use of an evidence-based practice  in VA 
homeless programs: a cluster -randomized trial of an implementation support 
strategy. Implementation Science 12, 34 (2017). 
56 Smelson, D. A. et al. A cluster randomized Hybrid Type III trial testing an  
implementation support strategy  to facilitate  the use of an evidence-based practice 
in VA homeless  programs. Implementation Science  10, 79 (2015). 
57 Davidson, L., Wieland, M., Flanagan, E. & Sells,  D. Using  qualitative methods  in 
clinical research. Handbook of research methods in abnormal and clinical  
psychology , 253-270 (2008). 
 
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 33 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   58 La Bash, H., Galovski, T. & Stirman, S. W. Adapting Evidence -Based 
Psychotherapies  While Maintaining Fidelity. Current Treatment Options  in 
Psychiatry , 1-12. 
59 Wiltsey  Stirman, S., Gamarra,  J. M., Bartlett, B. A., Calloway, A. & Gutner, C. A. 
Empirical examinations of modifications and adaptations to evidence‐based 
psychotherapies: Methodologies, impact, and future directions. Clinical 
Psychology: Science  and Practice 24, 396-420 (2017). 
60 Katzman, R. et al. Validation of a short Orientation-Memory -Concentration  Test of 
cognitive  impairment. The American journal of psychiatry (1983). 
61 Stiles, P. G., Poythress, N. G., Hall, A., Falkenbach, D. & Williams, R. Improving 
understanding of research consent disclosures  among persons  with mental  illness.  
Psychiatr. Serv.  52, 780-785 (2001). 
62 National Institute of Mental Health. (January, 2015). Notice Announcing Data 
Harmonization for NIMH Human Subjects Research via the PhenX Toolkit. 
Accessible at: https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT -MH-15-009.html . 
63 Glenn, C. R., Cha, C. B., Kleiman, E. M. & Nock,  M. K. Understanding Suicide Risk 
Within the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Framework: Insights, Challenges, and Future Research Considerations. Clinical Psychological Science 5 , 568-592 
(2017). 
64 Sheehan, D., Harnett-Sheehan, K. & Raj, B. The measurement of disability.  Int. 
Clin. Psychopharmacol., 89-95 (1996). 
65 González -Blanch, C. et al. Domain-specific associations between disability and  
depression, anxiety, and somatization in primary care patients. Psychiatry Res.  
269, 596-601 (2018). 
66 Mollayeva, T. et al. The relationship between insomnia and disability in workers  
with mild traumatic  brain  injury/concussion: Insomnia and disability  in chronic  mild 
traumatic  brain injury.  Sleep Med. 20, 157-166 (2016). 
67 Sheehan, D. V., Harnett- Sheehan, K., Spann, M. E., Thompson, H. F. & Prakash,  
A. Assessing remission in major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety  
disorder  clinical trials  with the discan  metric  of the Sheehan disability  scale. Int. 
Clin. Psychopharmacol. 26, 75-83 (2011). 
68 Lang, A. J. et al. Randomized controlled trial of acceptance and commitment 
therapy  for distress  and impairment in OEF/OIF/OND  veterans. Psychological  
Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy  9, 74 (2017). 
69 Peterson, A. L. et al. Intensive prolonged exposure therapy for combat-related 
posttraumatic  stress  disorder: Design  and methodology  of a randomized clinical  
trial. Contemp. Clin. Trials  72, 126-136 (2018).  
70 Sheehan, K. H. & Sheehan, D. V. Assessing  treatment effects  in clinical  trials  with 
the discan metric of the Sheehan Disability Scale. Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 23, 
70-83 (2008). 
71 Salzer, M. S., Brusilovskiy, E., Prvu- Bettger, J. & Kottsieper, P. Measuring 
community  participation  of adults  with psychiatric  disabilities:  Reliability  of two 
modes  of data collection.  Rehabil. Psychol. 59, 211 (2014).  
Version 4.0 Suicide Prevention Protocol Page 34 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   72 Burns -Lynch, B. & MUSA,  E. B. An empirical  study  of the relationship between 
community participation, recovery, and quality of life of individuals with serious  
mental illnesses. The Israel journal of psychiatry and related sciences 53, 46  
(2016). 
73 Salzer,  M. S., Kottsieper, P. & Brusilovskiy,  E. Intermethod reliability  and factors  
affecting recall with the Temple University Community Participation measure. 
Journal of Mental Health 24, 189-195, doi:10.3109/09638237.2015.1036976 
(2015). 
74 Terry, R., Townley, G., Brusilovskiy, E. & Salzer, M. S. The influence of sense of 
community  on the relationship between community  participation and mental  health  
for individuals with serious mental illnesses. J. Community Psychol. 47, 163-175 
(2019). 
75 Neil, S. T. et al. The questionnaire about the process of recovery (QPR): a 
measurement tool developed in collaboration with service  users.  Psychosis 1, 145- 
155 (2009). 
76 Williams,  J. et al. Psychometric  evaluation of the Questionnaire about the Process  
of Recovery  (QPR).  The British  Journal  of Psychiatry 207, 551-555 (2015). 
77 Law, H., Neil, S. T., Dunn, G. & Morrison, A. P. Psychometric properties of the 
questionnaire about the process  of recovery  (QPR).  Schizophr. Res. 156, 184-189 
(2014). 
78 Endicott, J., Nee, J., Harrison, W. & Blumenthal, R. Quality of Life Enjoyment and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire: a new measure. Psychopharmacol. Bull. (1993). 
79 Rush, A. J. et al. The 16 -Item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology  
(QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS -C), and self-report (QIDS -SR): a psychometric  
evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 54 , 573-583 
(2003). 
80 Weiss,  R. B., Aderka, I. M., Lee, J., Beard, C. & Björgvinsson, T. A comparison of 
three brief depression measures in an acute psychiatric population: CES -D-10, 
QIDS -SR, and DASS-21 -DEP. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral  
Assessment  37, 217-230 (2015). 
81 Surís,  A., Holder, N., Holliday, R. & Clem,  M. Psychometric  validation of the 16 item 
quick inventory of depressive symptomatology self-report version (QIDS -SR16) in  
military  veterans  with PTSD.  J. Affect. Disord. 202, 16-22 (2016). 
82 Posner, K. et al. Columbia-suicide severity  rating scale  (C-SSRS).  New York,  NY: 
Columbia University Medical Center  (2008). 
83 Van Orden, K. A., Witte, T. K., Gordon, K. H., Bender, T. W. & Joiner Jr, T. E. 
Suicidal desire and the capability for suicide: Tests of the interpersonal - 
psychological  theory  of suicidal  behavior  among adults. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  
76, 72-83 (2008). 
84 Hill, R. M. et al. Evaluating the Interpersonal  Needs  Questionnaire: Comparison of 
the reliability, factor structure, and predictive validity across five versions. Suicide 
Life Threat. Behav. 45, 302-314 (2015). 
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 35 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   85 Silva,  C. et al. Evidence  for the propositions  of the interpersonal  theory  of suicide 
among a military  sample. J. Clin. Psychol. 73, 669-680 (2017). 
86 Rudd, M. D., Schmitz, B., Mc Clenen, R., Joiner, T., Elkins, G., & Claassen, C. 
(2010). The Suicide Cognitions Scale: A Suicide -Specific  Measure of Hoplessness.  
87 Bryan, C. J. et al. Improving the detection and prediction of suicidal behavior  
among military personnel by measuring suicidal beliefs: An evaluation of the 
Suicide Cognitions  Scale.  J. Affect. Disord. 159, 15- 22 (2014). 
88 Ellis, T.  E. & Rufino, K. A. A psychometric  study  of the Suicide Cognitions  Scale  
with psychiatric  inpatients. Psychol. Assess.  27, 82 (2015). 
89 Leon, A. C., Davis,  L. L. & Kraemer,  H. C. The role and interpretation of pilot 
studies in clinical  research. J. Psychiatr. Res. 45, 626-629 (2011). 
90 Bjurebery, J., Dahlin, M., Carlborg, A., Edberg, H., Haglund, A., Runeson, 
B. Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale Screen Version: initial screening 
for suicide risk in a psychiatric emergency department. Psychol. Med. 1-9. 
(2021). 
 
                   
 
    
    
 
Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 36 of 36 
 
 
 
 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022   Version  4.0 Suicide Prevention  Protocol  Page 21 of 36 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    
 
 
 
VA Central IRB Panel 2  
Effective Date:  March 8, 2022    