 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  A randomized,  four-way,  cross- over outpatient  study  to assess the 
efficacy  of a dual-hormone  versus  insulin alone  closed -loop system  with exercise detection  
vs a predictive low glucose  suspend  system  vs current  care 
 
NCT:02862730 
Date:  2/1/17 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  A randomized,  four-way,  cross- over outpatient  study  to assess the 
efficacy  of a dual-hormone  versus  insulin alone  closed -loop system  with exercise detection  
vs a predictive low glucose  suspend  system  vs current  care 
 
 
STUDY  SITE:  Oregon Health  & Science  University  
3181 SW Sam Jackson  Park Rd 
Portland, OR 97239  
 
FUNDING : National  Institute  of Health  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:  Jessica R. Castle MD; Peter  Jacobs PhD 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  Joseph  El Youssef  MBBS  
 
Leah  Wilson  MD 
Kathy  Hanavan RN MSN  ANP -BC, BC- ADM  
Elena  Varlamov  MD 
 
Background:  
The risk of hypoglycemia  in type 1 diabetes increases considerably during exercise.  This risk 
stems from  increased  glucose  utilization  during exercise as well as increased  insulin sensitivity  
both during and after exercise.  As a result,  hypoglycemia  is a potential  barrier  to an active  
lifestyle  for individuals  with type 1 diabetes.  
 
Closed -loop systems are an emerging  technology that automate  hormone  delivery.  They  are 
quickly paving the way to revolutionize  the treatment  of type 1 diabetes.  Several  categories have  
emerged:  dual-hormone  (insulin  and glucagon)  closed -loop systems and closed -loop systems  
with insulin  only, one variety  of which  is the low glucose  suspend safety  feature now available  
from  Medtronic  (MiniMed  530G  with Enlite®).  Already, the benefit  of improved glycemic  
control  compared  to current  open- loop pump  therapy has been demonstrated  in several  trials.  Our 
group has shown  that a dual-hormone  system  effectively  manages  blood glucose  in a clinic  
setting  with great  progress  using glucagon to reduce hypoglycemic  episodes (1-3). Clinical  home  
studies  using  insulin  only closed -loop systems have  demonstrated  improved overall  glucose  
control  without  increasing  the risk of hypoglycemia  when  compared  to standard  open- loop 
therapy (4, 5). Haidar  recently  completed  a clinical  study comparing bi- and single -hormone  
closed -loop systems and standard  open- loop therapy. Their  group found  no difference in the 
proportion of time spent  in the target glucose  range  with single  vs double  hormone  closed -loop 
systems,  however  the number  of hypoglycemic  events  was reduced using a dual-hormone  
approach to manage  blood glucose  (6). Danne  has shown that sensor -augmented  pump  therapy  
with low glucose  suspend reduces the frequency of hypoglycemia  without  compromising safety  
(7). The purpose  of this study will be to further  delineate the most  effective approach towards  
engineering closed -loop systems.  
Our most  recent  inpatient  study, under  review  for publication, shows  that adjusting insulin  and 
glucagon delivery during closed -loop treatment  after exercise announcement  effectively  reduces  
mean  time glucose  is below  70 mg/dl  when  compared  to closed -loop control  without  
adjustments. In order  to prepare  for a future  home  study, the ability  to detect  and grade  physical  
activity  to appropriately  adjust  system  parameters is vital in helping to prevent  exercise- induced 
hypoglycemia  in the home  setting.  
 
The study described  within  this protocol  is designed to test the efficacy  of a new closed -loop 
algorithm  for managing blood glucose  in people  with type 1 diabetes before  and after exercise.  
The new algorithm  will have  3 modes:  a single  hormone  insulin  only mode,  a dual-hormone  
insulin  and glucagon mode  and an insulin only mode  with predictive  low glucose  suspend. The 
first two of these modes  use a Fading  Memory  Proportional  Derivative  (FMPD)  model  for dosing  
either  insulin  only or insulin  and glucagon within  an automated  closed -loop system  with insulin  
and glucagon delivery  adjusting every  5 minutes  based  on sensor  glucose  data.  The last         
mode  delivers  insulin  using the subject’s  own basal  profile(s) with a predictive  low glucose  
suspend feature.  The FMPD  closed -loop algorithms  include  an exercise detection  component  that 
includes  a reduction in insulin  delivery upon exercise detection, with the dual-hormone  system  
also increasing  glucagon delivery  upon detection. 3-axis accelerometry  data as well as heart  rate 
data will be collected  using the Zephyrlife  BioPatch. This data will be used in both FMPD  
systems to detect  exercise and automatically  trigger  algorithm  adjustments  to reduce  exercise-  
related  hypoglycemia  during and after exercise  in individuals  with type 1 diabetes.  A Zephyr  
BioPatch  will transmit heart  rate and accelerometry  values  to the APC for the purposes  of 
exercise detection  while  in the predictive  low glucose  suspend mode, but exercise detection  will 
not trigger  any hormone  delivery  changes  while  in this mode.  
 
Specific  Objectives:  
Primary  Objectives:  
• To determine  whether  a dual hormone  AP with an exercise detection  algorithm  out- 
peforms  a single  hormone  AP using exercise detection, a low glucose  suspend  algorithm  
and current  care as measured  by frequency  of hypoglycemia  across  all four arms  in free- 
living  conditions. 
• To determine  whether  a dual hormone  AP with an exercise detection  algorithm  out- 
peforms  a single  hormone  AP using exercise detection, a low glucose  suspend algorithm  
and current  care as measured  by percent  of time with sensed  glucose  between  70 – 180 
mg/dl  across all four arms.  
 
Secondary  Objective:  
• To determine  whether  a dual hormone  AP with an exercise detection  algorithm  out- 
peforms  a single  hormone  AP using exercise detection, a low glucose  suspend algorithm  
and current  care as measured  by other  glucose  metrics  across all four arms.  
 
 
Study  Hypothesis:  
Our hypothesis  is that use of a dual-hormone  artificial pancreas that automatically  detects  
exercise and adjusts  dosing based  on the exercise will reduce  exercise- induced hypoglycemia  
compared  with an insulin- only AP, a low-glucose  suspend AP and current  care.  
Endpoints  
Primary Endpoints:  
1. Percent  of time in hypoglycemia  (CGM  <70 mg/dL): across four arms  
o Period:  entire  study  
o Period:  start of exercise in clinic  until next meal  
 
2. Percent  of time in euglycemia  (CGM  70-180 mg/dL): across four arms  
o Period:  entire  study  
o Period:  start of exercise in clinic  until next meal  
 
Secondary  Endpoints:  (Time  duration:  Entire  study)  
1. Mean  sensed  glucose  
2. Number  of carbohydrate  treatments  
3. Percent  of time with sensed  glucose  <50 mg/dl  
4. Percent  of time with sensed  glucose  >180 mg/dl  
5. Number  of events  with capillary  blood glucose  (CBG)  <70 mg/dl  
6. Number  of events  with capillary  blood glucose  (CBG)  <50 mg/dl  
7. Total  amount  of insulin delivered  (in units/kg)  
8. Total  amount  of glucagon delivered  (in mcg/kg)  
 
 
Study  Type  
This is a single  center,  randomized, four treatment,  crossover  trial designed  to compare  the 
glucose  control  resulting  from  the use of (1) a dual-hormone  closed -loop system  with an exercise 
detection  algorithm  that adjusts  insulin and glucagon dosing, (2) a single -hormone  closed -loop 
system  with an exercise detection  algorithm  that adjusts  insulin dosing,  (3) a predictive  low 
glucose  suspend system  and (4) current  care using the subject’s own pump. 
Study  Population  
Study population will be adults  with type 1 diabetes,  ages 21 – 45 years of age. Older  subjects  
are excluded due to higher  risk of unrecognized coronary artery  disease.  Younger  subjects are 
excluded as it is appropriate  to assess safety  first in the adult  population. Twenty  one subjects 
will be recruited  to participate  in studies. 
 
Power  Analysis  
We estimate  that 21 subjects will allow  us to detect  an approximately 60% reduction from  a 
mean  of 11% of time in hypoglycemia  during the four hours  between  onset  of exercise and the 
next meal.  We simulated  data for three  treatment  conditions  in two steps:  First,  we used a 
random  draw  from  a binomial  distribution  for the probability  of having any hypoglycemic  event;  
then, given  that the event  occurred, we generated  total time in hypoglycemia  with uniform  
probability  from  a minimum  of five to a maximum  of 90 minutes  in multiples  of five, which  
mimics  the continuous  glucose  monitoring measurements.  These simulated  numbers  allowed  us 
to model  time in hypoglycemia  as a proportion of the total four hours  of observation using a 
generalized  linear  model  with a normal  distribution  and log link to constrain the estimates 
between  0 and 1. We used generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE)  with an exchangeable  
correlation  structure  and robust  variance  estimators  to model  the repeated  observations  on the 
same  individual;  we did not specify  a correlation  in the data generating phase, but partially  
randomized  the data to induce  a mild positive  correlation.  The assumptions  for probability of any 
hypoglycemic  event, minutes  in hypoglycemia, percent  of time in hypoglycemia, and correlation  
between  repeated  observations  were  informed  by our previous  study as well as other  published 
work(6, 8). We repeated  this simulation  500 times.  We found a significant  reduction in 80% of 
simulations  at the 0.05 level  of significance.  
 
Protocol  Summary:  
Subjects  will undergo four approximately 84 hour studies.  The first day of each study will be an 
approximately 12 hour inpatient visit to include  activities  of daily  living and an exercise period 
with 2 days spent  as an outpatient. The subject  will come  back  to the research  center  on the 
fourth day to complete  another  approximately  12 hour inpatient  visit to include  activities  of daily  
living  and an exercise period  followed by removal  of all devices.  In randomized order,  subjects 
will have  glucose  controlled  using the following systems:  1) dual-hormone  closed -loop system,  
2) insulin  only closed -loop system,  3) predictive  low glucose  suspend system  and 4) a current  
care arm. Both  of the closed -loop system  algorithms  have  an exercise detection  algorithm  that 
uses inputs  from  a heart  rate monitor  and accelerometer,  the Zephyrlife  BioPatch. After  exercise  
detection, insulin  is turned off for the first 30 minutes,  the total insulin  infusion rate is adjusted  
by an exercise multiplier,  and for the dual-hormone  system,  the target  glucose  for glucagon is 
increased  along with the maximum  dose of glucagon allowed.  The predictive  low glucose  
suspend system  will utilize  the patient’s  optimized  basal  rates,  correction  factor,  and carb ratio.  
The patient  will bolus  for meals and hyperglycemia  as usual  under  PLGS,  but will have the 
additional  safety  net of the pump  suspending insulin when  it predicts  a hypoglycemic  event. The 
Dexcom  CGM  system  will be used for all four arms.  The Tandem  t:slim  pumps  will be used for 
three  of the intervention visits,  the dual and single  hormone  arms  and the predictive  low glucose  
suspend arm. For the current  care arm, subjects will use their own insulin  and insulin  pump.  
 
Subjects  will arrive  at the CTRC at ~7am  at the start of intervention  visits.  Subjects  will eat 
breakfast,  lunch and dinner  in the research  center.  Subjects  will eat breakfast  at ~8:30am. After  
breakfast,  subjects will complete  activities  of daily  living  (sitting  on a chair,  lying on a bed, 
washing dishes,  sweeping  the floor,  etc.).  Subjects  will eat lunch at ~12pm. Subjects  will 
exercise for ~45 minutes  on a treadmill around 2pm. Subjects  will eat dinner  at ~6pm  and be 
discharged. See Figure  1 below.  The subject  will then go home for  Day 2 and Day 3 and return  
on Day 4 to complete another  12 hour inpatient  visit with the schedule  of activities  identical  to 
Day 1. 
Figure  1: Schematic  of Inpatient  Study  Flow  
 
 
 
During each study, the subject  will wear  one subcutaneous  DexcomTM G4 Share  or G5 
continuous  glucose  monitoring  (CGM)  system.  (For the current  care visit,  the subject  will use a 
blinded Dexcom  G4 Share  receiver  or G5). The CGM  system  will provide  sensed  glucose  data 
every  5 minutes.  The accuracy  of the sensed  data will be obtained by reference measurements of 
capillary  blood glucose. Sensed  glucose  data will be wirelessly  transmitted  from  the Dexcom  
Share  sensor  receiver  or G5 transmitter to the Nexus  5 master  controller every  five minutes. The 
controller for the dual and single  hormone  and predictive  low glucose  suspend modes  is a 
Google  Nexus  5 phone. The Dexcom  Share  sensor  receiver  or G5 transmitter and smart  phone  
will communicate wirelessly  via Bluetooth Low Energy (BTLE).  The smart  phone  will 
wirelessly  communicate  via BTLE to either  a single  t:slim  pump  for insulin  delivery  or two 
t:slim  pumps,  one used for automated insulin delivery and one for automated  glucagon delivery.  
 
A study investigator  or nurse  practitioner will be present  for study start-up, be on campus  and 
immediately  available via page  during both exercise periods  completed  at OHSU.  At all other  
times,  the study investigator will be on call. Other  personnel  on site during the inpatient  portion 
of the intervention  visits  will be a registered  nurse  and a study coordinator. The study 
investigators  also retain  the authority  to modify any aspects of the protocol  at his/her  discretion  if 
he/she  believes  the subject’s safety  is a concern.  
 
Subject  Criteria  
Inclusion  Criteria:  
1. Diagnosis  of type 1 diabetes mellitus  for at least 1 year.  
2. Male or female  subjects 21 to 45 years  of age. 
3. Physically  willing  and able to perform  45 min of exercise (as determined  by the 
investigator  after reviewing  the subjects  activity  level)  
4. Current  use of an insulin  pump.  
5. Lives  with another  person age 18 or older  who will be present  while  subject  exercises at 
home  and that can attend  the training  on using the system  with subject.  

6. Lives  within  20 miles  of OHSU.  
7.  A1C<10%  
8. Willingness  to follow  all study procedures,  including attending all clinic  visits.  
9. Willingness  to sign informed  consent  and HIPAA  documents.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
1. Female  of childbearing potential  who is pregnant  or intending to become  pregnant  or 
breast -feeding, or is not using adequate  contraceptive  methods. Acceptable contraception 
includes  birth control  pill / patch  / vaginal  ring, Depo -Provera, Norplant,                       
an IUD,  the double  barrier  method (the woman  uses a diaphragm  and spermicide  and the 
man uses a condom),  or abstinence.  
2. Any cardiovascular  disease,  defined as a clinically  significant  EKG  abnormality at the 
time of screening  or any history  of: stroke, heart  failure,  myocardial  infarction,  angina  
pectoris,  or coronary arterial  bypass  graft or angioplasty. Diagnosis  of 2nd or 3rd degree  
heart  block or any non-physiological  arrhythmia  judged by the investigator to be 
exclusionary. 
3. Renal  insufficiency  (GFR < 60 ml/min,  using the MDRD equation as report  by the 
OHSU laboratory). 
4. Liver  failure,  cirrhosis,  or any other  liver disease that compromises liver function as 
determined  by the investigator. 
5. Hematocrit of less than or equal  to 34%. 
6. Hypertensive  subjects with  systolic  blood pressure ≥ 160 mmHg  or diastolic  blood 
pressure ≥ 100 mmHg despite treatment  or who have  treatm ent-refractory hypertension 
(e.g. requiring four or more  medications).  
7. History  of severe hypoglycemia  during the past 12 months  prior  to screening  visit or 
hypoglycemia  unawareness as judged by the investigator.  Subjects  will complete  a 
hypoglycemia  awareness questionnaire  (included in Appendix). Subjects  will be 
excluded for four or more  R responses.  
8. Adrenal  insufficiency. 
9. Any active infection.  
10. Known  or suspected  abuse of alcohol, narcotics,  or illicit drugs. 
11. Seizure disorder. 
12. Active  foot ulceration.  
13. Severe peripheral  arterial  disease characterized  by ischemic rest pain or severe  
claudication.  
14. Major  surgical  operation within  30 days prior  to screening. 
15. Use of an investigational  drug within  30 days prior  to screening.  
16. Chronic  usage  of any immunosuppressive  medication  (such  as cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, sirolimus,  or tacrolimus).  
17. Bleeding disorder, treatment  with warfarin,  or platelet  count  below  50,000. 
18. Allergy  to aspart  insulin.  
19. Allergy  to glucagon.  
20. Insulin  resistance requiring more  than 200 units  per day. 
21. Need  for uninterrupted treatment  of acetaminophen. 
22. Current  administration  of oral or parenteral  corticosteroids.  
23. Any life threatening  disease,  including malignant  neoplasms  and medical  history  of 
malignant  neoplasms  within  the past 5 years  prior  to screening  (except  basal  and 
squamous  cell skin cancer).  
24. Beta blockers  or non-dihydropyridine  calcium  channel  blockers. 
25. Current  use of any medication  intended to lower  glucose  other  than insulin (ex. use of 
liraglutide).  
26. Diagnosis  of pheochromocytoma, insulinoma, or glucagonoma, personal  or family  
history  of multiple  endocrine  neoplasia  (MEN)  2A, MEN  2B, neurofibromatosis  or von 
Hippel -Lindau disease.  
27. History  of severe hypersensitivity  to milk protein.  
28. Current  use of any medication  with strong anticholinergic  properties,  such as 
antihistamines,  sleep  aids, and antidiarrheal medications.  
29. Current  use of indomethacin. 
30. Conditions  that may result  in low levels of releasable glucose  in the liver and an 
inadequate  reversal  of hypoglycemia  by glucagon such as prolonged fasting,  starvation  
or chronic  hypoglycemia  as determined  by the investigator.  
31. A positive  response  to any of the questions  from the Physical  Activity  Readiness 
Questionnaire  with one exception:  subject  will not be excluded if he/she  takes  a single  
blood pressure medication  that doesn’t  impact  heart  rate and blood pressure is controlled  
on the medication  (blood pressure is less than 140/90 mmHg).  See Appendix B. 
32. Any chest  discomfort  with physical  activity,  including pain or pressure,  or other  types  of 
discomfort.  
33. Any clinically  significant  disease or disorder  which  in the opinion of the Investigator  
may jeopardize  the subject’s  safety  or compliance  with the protocol. 
 
Subject  Recruiting: 
Subjects  will be recruited  from  OHSU clinics,  from  flyers  to be posted in approved places at 
OHSU or posted  on the web to the clinical  trials  page  for the OHSU Schnitzer  Diabetes Clinic,  to 
the Clinic’s  facebook group, electronic  newletter or from  the OHSU Subject  Recruitment   
website.  Handouts  will also be made  available to the Juvenile  Diabetes Research  Foundation staff 
based  in Portland and faculty  at Providence  and Legacy  to pass along to patients/participants   
who show  interest  in the study. Records  from OHSU  Schnitzer  Diabetes                                
Clinic  patients  may be screened  to find potential  subjects.  Subjects  will also be recruited  from  a 
list of subjects  who participated  in past OHSU studies  who have agreed  to be contacted  regarding 
future  studies  involving Drs. Castle or El Youssef, from  the OHSU diabetes research  registry  
and/or  www.clinicaltrials.gov . Non-english speaking  subjects will not be recruited  since  this 
protocol  would require  the use of medical  device s and mobile  software that do not have  non- 
english versions  available.  
 
Up to 50 subjects may be screened  in this study. Goal  enrollment  is 21 subjects.  Up to four 
subjects will be replaced  if needed, with a total enrollment of up to 25 subjects.  
Withdrawal  Criteria  
The subject  may withdraw  at will at any time or at the discretion  of the Investigator.  
 
A subject  must  be withdrawn  if the following  applies:  
1. Hypoglycemia  during the treatment  period  posing a safety  problem  as judged by the 
investigator.  
2. Hyperglycemia  during the treatment  period  posing a safety  problem  as judged by the 
investigator.  
3. Protocol  deviation that is related  to patient  safety  as judged  by the investigator. 
4. Substantial  and repeated  non-compliance  with trial procedures. 
5. Pregnancy.  
6. Intention  of becoming pregnant.  
7. Persistent  nausea  and/or  vomiting  thought  to be secondary to glucagon.  
8. Seizure or unconsciousness  associated  with hypoglycemia. 
 
Visit Procedures  
Screening  (Visit 1) 
Screening  will take place  within  12 weeks prior  to the 2 week  run-in period  (Visit 2). All 
screening  visits  will take place at OHSU’s  Oregon  Clinical Translational  Research  Institute  
(OCTRI)  outpatient  clinic  or at the Harold  Schnitzer  Diabetes  Health  Center.  VO 2max  testing  will 
take place  at the Human  Performance  Lab, which  is located  within  OHSU and is attached  to the 
main  hospital. A code  cart is on site within  the Human  Performance Lab and a code  team  is 
available by page  at all times.  Subjects  will be asked  to fast before  the screening  visit for 3 hours. 
Upon  arrival and prior  to any procedures, the consent  form  will be signed. A copy of the 
consent/authorization form  will be given to the subject.  The original  will be kept for the source  
document.  A capillary  blood glucose  (CBG)  will be obtained and measured  by a Contour  Next  
glucose  meter  and recorded  after consenting. Prior to measurement  of any blood samples,  the 
meter  will undergo quality control  testing  with two different glucose  levels,  one high and one 
low, and both values  must  fall within  the accepted  range  for a meter  to be used. After  the CBG is 
obtained,  the study investigator  may adjust  the subject’s basal  insulin  rate as necessary  in 
preparation  for VO 2max  testing  to avoid hypoglycemia.  
 
Study personnel  will review  medical  history, and medications.  Height, weight, pulse, and blood 
pressure will be obtained.  A study investigator will perform  a physical  examination, excluding  
breast  and pelvic  exams.  Females of child -bearing  potential  will take a urine  pregnancy test, 
which  must  be negative  to participate.  A venous  blood sample will be taken  for the following 
tests:  hemoglobin A1C,  complete  blood count, complete metabolic  set (including creatinine,  liver 
set, and electrolytes).  In addition, for subjects with signs  and symptoms  suggestive  of 
pheochromocytoma, fractionated  plasma  metanephrines will be measured.  An EKG will be 
performed. A study investigator  will assess inclusion/exclusion criteria  and review  the subject’s 
medical  record  for clarification  as needed. A three-digit subject  ID number  will be assigned  to the 
subject.  Subjects  will undergo VO 2max  testing  at the end of the screening  visit if all inclusion 
criteria  are met, and no exclusion criteria  are met, with the exception of blood test results  which  
will not be immediately  available.  A study investigator  will be present  for the entire  VO 2max  
testing  procedure. Additional  CBG samples will be taken  immediately  before  and after 
completion  of the VO 2max  test. Subjects  will be given juice  and the VO 2max  test will be delayed  
by approximately 1 hour for CBG values  of <80 mg/dL. Subjects will be given 15-20 grams  of 
carbohydrates  for CBG  values  of <70 mg/dL  at any point  during the screening  visit.  CBG values  
will be reviewed  by an investigator and subjects will be provided with a snack  after VO 2max  
testing  as needed to avoid post-testing  hypoglycemia. Subjects  that screen  fail by meeting  any of 
the exclusion  criteria  prior  to proceeding to the VO 2max  test will not complete  the VO 2max  test. 
 
Two Week  Run-in Period  (Visit 2) 
The two week  run-in period will take place within  6 weeks prior  to the first 84 hour treatment  
visit (Visit 3). After  arrival at the OHSU OCTRI  outpatient  clinic  or Harold  Schnitzer  Diabetes 
Health  Center  clinic,  women  of childbearing potential  will receive a urine  pregnancy test. This 
test must  be negative  before  further  participation  is allowed. Subjects  will receive training  during  
this visit on the following:  the t:slim  pump  and the Dexcom  G4 or G5 CGM  system.  
 
A certified  t:slim  pump trainer will instruct each subject  on how to use the Tandem  t:slim  insulin  
pump, adjust  their basal,  give meal  boluses  and corrections  and change  out the cartridges and 
infusion sets. Subjects  will also be shown  how to connect  the t:slim  pump  to the Nexus  5 smart  
phone  via Bluetooth. The time required  for this training  will vary, depending  on the experience   
of each subject,  but will be sufficient  to help him/her  become  comfortable  using the t:slim  pump  
and changing out the infusion set. If the subject  experiences difficulties  using the t:slim  pump  
during this two week  run in period, study staff will be available to educate  and support  this 
transition  by phone. Subjects  will switch  back  to using  his/her  own insulin  pump  at the end of the 
two week  run in period. Subjects  may be asked  to bring back  devices  after the two week  run-in 
period is complete.  
 
Subjects  will receive training  on how to use and calibrate  the Dexcom  G4 Share  or G5 CGM  
system  including changing out the sensor  every  7 days. The wire glucose  sensor  is sterile  and 
commercially  available from  DexcomTM and will be used for single  use only as directed  by the 
manufacturer.  Subjects  will be trained  to insert  the sensor  into the subcutaneous  tissue of the 
abdomen or flank  after appropriate  preparation  of the abdominal  skin as per the manufacturer’s  
directions.  The Dexcom  G4 Share  or G5 CGM  system  will be calibrated  at home  according to  
the manufacturer’s  directions. Subjects  will be clearly  instructed  to use capillary  glucose  levels,  
not sensed  glucose  values,  for the purpose  of managing their diabetes at home. Subjects  will be 
given a Dexcom  G4 Share  receiver  and transmitter or G5 transmitter and sensors  to insert  the day 
before  each treatment  visit along with a Contour  Next  meter  for measuring  their capillary  blood 
glucose  in order  to calibrate the Dexcom  Share  sensor  receiver  or G5. Subjects will be instructed  
to completely  avoid acetaminophen for all periods  when  wearing  the Dexcom  CGM  system.  
Additionally, subjects may be asked  to wear  an ActiGraph  wGT3X- BT or ActiGraph  GT9X 
activity  watch.  
 
84 hour  Treatment  Visits  (Visits  3-6) 
The subject  will be asked  to check  his/her  CBG before  driving  to the clinic  and to bring a snack  
in the car in case hypoglycemia  does occur  (in which case,  the subject  must  park and treat the 
hypoglycemia). After  the first treatment  visit,  the washout  period will be 7 to 45 days calculated  
from  the day of admission  to the research  center  until the start of the next admission. Subjects 
will be asked  to avoid vigorous  activity  within  the 24 hours  prior to all treatment  visits.  The 
subject  will arrive  at the research  center  at approximately  7am. 
 
A capillary  blood glucose  (CBG)  will be obtained and measured  by a Contour  Next  glucose  
meter  and recorded. A new meter  will be used for each subject.  When  they arrive,  subjects  will 
be given 15-20 grams  of oral carbohydrate  if the CBG reading  is less than 70 mg/dl. CBG values  
> 300 mg/dl  will be managed at the discretion  of the investigator  with a correction  bolus. Serum  
ketones  will also be  checked. If  serum ketones  are ≥ 0.6 mM,  the study will be rescheduled  and 
insulin  therapy will be guided by the onsite  investigator.  
 
During each treatment  visit,  glucose  will be controlled using either: 1) the single  hormone  insulin  
only mode  2) the dual-hormone  insulin  and glucagon mode,  3) the insulin only mode  with 
predictive  low glucose  suspend or 4) current  care using subject’s own insulin  pump.  The first 12 
hours  of the visit will be conducted in the OCTRI  inpatient  research  unit, the Harold  Schnitzer  
Diabetes Health  Center  or the Medicine Specialties clinic.  The subjects will then go home  for  
the remainder  of the intervention  period, returning  on the fourth  day to one of these locations  for 
the last 12 hours  of the visit.  A code cart is on site at all locations  and a code team  is available by 
page  at all times.  . 
 
Inpatient  Visit on Day 1 (12 hours)  
IV placement  for dual-hormone  insulin  and glucagon  mode study  visit only  
An 18-22 gauge  IV catheter  will be placed  for the inpatient  portion of one closed -loop 
intervention  visit (dual -hormone  closed -loop studies).  The IV cathether  will be placed  at least 
one hour before  noon. Starting  at noon, blood samples for pharmacokinetic  analysis of insulin  
and glucagon levels will be collected  every  15 minutes  until discharge from the unit at 7pm.  
Normal  saline will be infused  at a rate of ~25 ml/hr  to keep the IV catheter  patent. It is possible  
that the IV catheter  will not remain  patent  for the entire  7 hours, it which  case another  will be 
placed.  In a blood- sparing technique, venous  blood will be withdrawn  from  the IV catheter  using 
a double  stop- cock method. One side of the stop- cock is used to pull ~ 5 mL of saline- blood 
admixture.  The other  side of the stop- cock is used to pull approximately 2 ml for collection  with 
the saline- blood admixture  re-infused after collection. Heat will be applied to an IV catheter  site 
as needed  to facilitate  blood withdrawal.  There  will be up to 28 samples drawn  during the course  
of the study with approximately 2 mL per draw,  for a total of ~56 ml of blood per study. The 
visit requiring  an IV will occur  at the OCTRI  inpatient  research  unit. 
 
A t:slim  infusion pump  (Tandem®  Diabetes Care)  will be filled  with aspart  insulin  for three  of 
the four studies  (excluding the current  care arm),  but the dual-hormone  study will also have  a 
t:slim  pump  filled  with glucagon. The subjects will be instructed  to remove  his/her  own infusion 
set/pump once  study insulin  is being delivered. Each  pump  will be labeled  with a sticker  
indicating  either  "insulin" or "glucagon"  for clear  identification.  A glucagon hypokit  (GlucaGen,  
Novo- Nordisk)  will be reconstituted  with sterile  water  to a concentration  of 1.0 mg/mL.  The 
pumps  will be primed  and infusion  sets inserted  into the skin of the subject’s abdomen  or flank  
as directed  by the manufacturer.  Glucagon will be replaced  every  24 hours. The subject  will also 
wear  a Zephyr  heart  rate monitor  and accelerometer.  For male  subjects,  two small  areas may be 
shaved  on either  side of the sternum  to allow  proper  placement  of the Zephyr. Additionally, 
subjects may be asked  to wear  an ActiGraph  wGT3X- BT or ActiGraph  GT9X activity  watch.  
The ActiGraph  will be used in addition to the Zephyr  to collect  heart  rate and activity  data.  The 
Actigraph  will not be connected  to the APC system. See  Figure  2 below  for a diagram  of the 
system  design. 
 
 
Figure  2: Closed -loop Study Design  
 
 
The research  staff will initialize  the system  and begin the closed -loop study. With  the oversight  
of study staff,  the subject  will perform  a CBG  measurement  and use this measurement  to 
calibrate  the glucose  sensor  at the start of the closed -loop study. The subject  will be given an 
ample  supply of Contour  Next  BG strips  as well as supplies  to change  the insulin and/or  
glucagon reservoir.  The study investigator  will then depart  the subject’s room  at the research  
center  but remain  on call. 
 
During the 12 hour inpatient  visit,  study staff will complete a training  with each subject  and 
his/her  companion on using the Zephyr  BioPatch  heart  rate and accelerometer  and how to use the 
Nexus  5 controller  user interface which  includes:  entering  meals,  carb treatments,  blood glucose  
values  and ketone  levels,  addressing  alarms,  troubleshooting the devices connection to the phone  
via Bluetooth, and pausing the study.  The subject  will need to demonstrate  competency  in 
operating the system  as well as having emergency contact  numbers  available before  study staff 
leave the room.  Subjects  will also complete  training  on the proper  reconstitution  of the GlucaGen  
hypokit.  

 
A study coordinator  will be available at all times  for the dual and single  hormone  and predictive  
low glucose  suspend visits  with the ability  to monitor  the APC  remotely  via a cloud system  via 
the web in the event  of any issues.  The APC  will generate alarms  on the smartphone  as required. 
If the subject  does not appropriately  respond to the alarm  in the alotted  timeframe,  the 
coordinator  will be alerted  (see Appendix D). At that time,  the coordinator  will pull up the web- 
based  monitoring system.  An investigator will be assigned  to serve  as a back -up to the 
coordinator, and will also be available  on call at all times  during these three  visits.  The study 
investigator  and technician  may intervene  with a telephone  call or a personal  visit at any time.  
For example, staff will call to remind  the subject  to calibrate  the sensor.  
 
During the dual and single  hormone  and predictive  low glucose  suspend visits,  sensed  glucose  
data will be wirelessly  transmitted  via BTLE  from  the Dexcom  Share  sensor  receiver  or G5 
transmitter to the Google  Nexus  5 phone  every  five minutes.  The algorithm  will run on the 
Google  Nexus  5 phone  (predictive  low glucose  suspend, insulin  only closed -loop or insulin  and 
glucagon closed -loop). The smart  phone  will wirelessly  communicate  via BTLE  to a t:slim  pump  
to drive  insulin  delivery, and in the case of the dual-hormone  closed -loop system,  will also 
communicate with a second  t:slim  pump  for automated  glucagon delivery. 
 
During normal  operation, the sensor  will be calibrated  approximately every  12 hours.  If at any 
time that the study staff determines that a sensor  can no longer  be used, a new sensor  will be 
inserted,  which  will be calibrated  after two hours  and then used to run the closed -loop system.  
 
In order  to ensure  safety  and to assess sensor  accuracy,  the subject  will be asked  to check  their 
blood glucose  four times  during the day (typically  before  meals and at bedtime).  The subject  will 
be able to check  his/her  capillary  blood glucose  more  than 4 times  a day if they feel they need  to. 
Subjects  will also be asked  to check  capillary  blood glucose  immediately  before  exercise and 
when  exercise is completed. If the subject’s blood glucose  is < 70 mg/dl  or is experiencing 
symptoms  of hypoglycemia, he/she  will be instructed  to treat with 15-20 grams  of carbohydrates  
and repeatedly  check  blood glucose  every  15 minutes  until greater  than 70 mg/dl. Fruit  juice  and 
glucose  tablets will be available  for rescue treatment.  The study  investigator  retains  the authority  
to check  blood glucose  at more  frequent  time points  at his/her  discretion.  
 
All alarms,  including if sensor  glucose  is <70 mg/dL  without  exercise detection, will be populated  
on the smartphone. If the subject  does not appropriately respond to the alarm in the alotted  
timeframe,  the coordinator  will be alerted  (see Appendix D). At that time,  the coordinator         
will pull up the web-based  monitoring system.  A study coordinator  will be available at all times  
for the entire  duration the subject  is on the closed -loop system.  An investigator  will be assigned  
to serve as a back -up to the coordinator, and will also be available on call at all times  during the 
closed -loop intervention  visits.  The study investigator  and technician  may intervene  with a 
telephone  call or a personal  visit at any time.  If the subject  cannot  be reached  and sensor  glucose  
is below  50 mg/dl, the emergency  contacts provided by the subject  will be contacted.  If the alert 
is still unserviced  and study staff are unable  to reach  the subject  or either  of the emergency  
contacts,  emergency  medical  services  will be contacted. To facilitate  this, the Nexus  5 phone  will 
track  the subject’s location  and push GPS coordinates  to the cloud server  every  10 minutes.  
Cloud coordinates  will be pushed with a known, fixed  offset  to allow  for scrambling. 
 
Subjects  will eat a normal  breakfast  at ~8:30am  after admission.  Subjects  will complete  activities  
of daily  living.  These activities  may include:  
1) sitting  on a chair  or lying  on a bed, 
2) washing dishes  or folding laundry, 
3) sweeping  the floor  or vacuuming,  
4) organizing a room  or adjusting furniture  in a room,  
5) scrubbing the carpet  or the walls  and/or  
6) going up and down flights  of stairs.  
 
Each  activity  will be performed  between  5-15 minutes. Subjects  will perform  the activities  in the 
OCTRI  inpatient  unit, Harold  Schnitzer  Diabetes Health  Center  or Medicine Specialities clinic  or 
at the Point  of Care Lab in the Biomedical  Engineering department  at the CHH.  
 
Subjects  will eat lunch at ~12pm.  Subjects will warm -up for 5 minutes  then exercise for 
approximately 45 minutes  on a treadmill at ~2pm.  Subjects  will exercise  at the CTRC.  A code  
cart is on site within  the unit and a code team  is immediately  available by page  at all times.  For 
subject  safety,  capillary  blood glucose  must  be 80 mg/dl  or higher  to begin exercise.  Subjects  
will exercise at a fixed  intensity  level  to a target  heart  rate (±10%)  based  on the heart  rate 
achieved  at 60% of their VO 2max  determined  at screening. This protocol  will allow  the exercise  
to be graded according to each participant’s  relative  capacity.  The speed  and grade  of the 
treadmill will be adjusted  by trained  research  personnel  with a goal of keeping participants  
within  their target  heart  rate range  for the entire  45 minutes.  
 
During the exercise period, there  will be defined rules  for stopping exercise,  including:  
1) If the subject  feels unwell,  
2) If the subject  develops  hypoglycemic  symptoms,  such as excessive sweating,  
shaking/tremors, palpitations,  feelings  of dread  or panic, light-headedness,  nausea,  
difficulty  concentrating  or the like, 
3) If the subject  develops  chest  pain/pressure, 
4) If the subject  develops  undue  shortness  of breath  (SOB),  
5) Signs  of poor perfusion:  light-headedness,  confusion, ataxia,  pallor,  cyanosis,  nausea,  or 
cold and clammy  skin 
6) If the maximum heart  rate of the subject  (MHR)  is exceeded,  
7) For patient  preference.  
 
If the exercise is stopped  prematurely,  the duration of exercise  will be noted by the study staff 
and if the subject  is deemed  safe to participate  in future  studies,  the exercise will be stopped after 
that same  time duration for subsequent  studies.  For subject  safety,  if capillary  blood glucose  is < 
70 mg/dl  at any point  during the exercise period, the subject  will consume  15 g of carbohydrates  
and delay  completion  of exercise until blood glucose  raises above  80 mg/dl.  Since  insulin  will be 
turned off briefly,  exercise will be delayed  for subjects with ketones  above  0.6 mM to minimize  
hyperglycemia  until levels drop below  this threshold. 
 
Subjects  will eat dinner  at around 6pm.  After  dinner, the subject  will be discharged  from  the 
inpatient  unit to continue  the study at home.  
 
During normal  operation, the sensor  will be calibrated  approximately every  12 hours.  The sensor  
will also be recalibrated  if the sensor  becomes inaccurate.  An inaccurate sensor  is defined as 
either  (1) a sensor  whose  value  is 35% or more  different  than a CBG when  the CBG is greater  
than or equal  to 75 mg/dl  or (2) when  a sensor  is more  than 30 mg/dl  different than a CBG when  
the CBG is less than 75 mg/dl. Subjects  will be advised not to calibrate  if his/her  glucose  is  
rising  or falling  rapidly  (greater  than 2 mg/dl/min) or after administering  oral carbohydrates. 
Additional  calibrations  may be ordered at the discretion  of the investigator  on call. 
 
For subject  safety,  if a sensor  value  is not available or communication  with the insulin  pump  is 
lost for more  than 20 minutes,  the insulin  t:slim  pump will begin insulin  delivery  according to a 
pre-set basal  profile(s) inputted for the subject  at study start.  When  this occurs  for a lost sensor,  
the APC system  will also activate the predictive  low glucose  suspend feature if the last known 
sensor  value  was within  the range  of 70-140 mg/dl  and predicted  to fall below  90 mg/dl  within  
thirty  minutes  or if the sensor  glucose  is less than 70 mg/dl. Maximum  suspension time is 2 
hours. Prediction  of sensor  glucose  is based  on linear  regression  of the prior  ten minutes  of 
sensor  glucose  data.  When  communication with the pump  or sensor  is restored,  system  will 
automatically  resume,  updating the IOB accordingly. 
 
We are aware that there  is a risk of true hypoglycemia  occurring in the periods  of time between  
blood glucose  checks.  For this reason,  if the sensed  glucose  values  fall below  70 mg/dl,  the 
system  will prompt  the subject  to obtain a capillary  blood glucose  sample.  Daytime  glucose  
target  is 115 mg/dl  (nominal)  with nighttime  target  increased  to 140 mg/dl  (nominal) to account  
for sensor  drift.  
 
Meals  will be announced to the controller.  For each meal  during the inpatient  study, food items  
will be self-selected  from the hospital  menu.  The number  of grams  of carbohydrates  will be 
counted by the subject  and entered  in the controller.  Immediately  before  eating, each subject  will 
receive approximately 60% (nominal)  of his/her  typical  pre-meal  insulin  dose based  on their 
insulin  to carbohydrate  ratio.  The same self-selected  meal  will be offered  on subsequent  inpatient  
visits,  and in the event  a particular food item is not available,  a different item with a similar  
amount  of carbohydrate  will be provided. 
 
Subjects  will wear  a Zephyrlife  BioPatch  monitoring device  for collecting  heart  rate and 
accelerometry  data.  The Zephyr  transmits  this data to the Nexus  5 master  controller via 
Bluetooth. The APC system  will convert  the heart  rate and accelerometry  data into an estimated  
energy expenditure  to determine  if the subject  is exercising. Energy expenditure  (EE) is 
estimated  every  minute  using a time series  approach. This time series model  uses the inputs  of 
heart  rate (HR)  and physical  activity  (PA).  The EE estimation  is further  personalized  by 
incorporating  anthropometric  characteristics of the individual. If the communication is not 
working between  the Zephyr  and the Nexus  5 at the time of exercise during a visit,  exercise may 
be delayed  until communication is restored.  
 
The exercise threshold will be set to 4 METs/min for  every  subject  at the start of the study. If the 
corrected  MET value  is greater  than 4 METs  for a period of 5 consecutive  minutes  during the 
first exercise  period, exercise is considered  to be ongoing. An exercise dosing adjustment  
algorithm  will be used when  exercise  is detected  that has been previously tested  and published 
(9)  When  exercise is detected  while  in single  or dual-hormone  mode, and the subject  confirms  
he/she  is exercising,  insulin will be turned off for 30 minutes  (nominal) immediately  after 
detection  of exercise.  Subsequently, the insulin  infusion rate will be reduced  to 50% (nominal)  
for a period of 1 hour (nominal).  During use of the dual-hormone  closed -loop system,  the 
glucagon set point  during  exercise will also be set higher  to 110 mg/dl  (nominal).  This will result  
in glucagon being called  for at an earlier  point  with an increase in the amount  of glucagon 
delivered. Also,  the maximum amount  of glucagon allowed  to be delivered  in a 50 minute  time 
period will be increased  by double, which  will allow  for more  glucagon to be delivered  during 
and immediately  after exercise if glucose  levels are dropping  rapidly. The maximal  amount  of 
glucagon that can be delivered  in a 24 hour period will remain  unchanged. These adjustments  
will continue  during the same  period of time that insulin adjustments  are being made  (nominal  
1.5 hours)  after exercise.  After  the initial adjustment  in glucagon target,  the investigator will 
evaluate the subject’s response  to glucagon during exercise and may change  the target  further,  
within  the range  of nominal  values,  based  on whether  the subject  still went  hypoglycemic  (< 70 
mg/dl)  or hyperglycemic  (>180 mg/dl) within  3 hours  from the start of exercise.  
 
With  regards to the daytime  and nightime  glucose  target,  % of premeal  insulin  bolus  and exercise  
insulin  and glucagon adjustment  parameters:  these  are current  nominal  values  that may be 
adjusted  within  the FDA approved minimum  and maximum  range  for each adjustable  parameter.  
 
During predictive  low glucose  suspend mode, a Zephyr  BioPatch  will transmit heart  rate and 
accelerometry  values  to the APC for the purposes  of exercise detection,  but exercise detection  
will not trigger any changes in insulin  delivery  while  in this mode.  
 
We are aware  that there  is a risk of hyperglycemia  if the subject  stops  exercising  after a short  
time with continued adjustments  to insulin  or insulin/glucagon. Therefore,  an exercise 
cancellation  option is available  on the user interface  for up to 30 minutes  after the start of 
exercise that will revert  insulin and glucagon parameters to their nominal  values.  If exercise is 
not detected  by the algorithm  when  the subject  is actually  exercising, an exercise announcement  
button on the APC user interface will be used. 
 
The exercise detection  algorithm  will prompt  the participant if exercise is occurring prior  to 
adjusting dosing. For example,  if the participant’s  METs  exceed  a threshold of 4 METs,  the AP 
will detect  this and ask the participant if they are excercising.  If the participant acknowledges  
this and says “Yes”,  the AP will adjust  the dosing. If the participant says “No”,  this is 
considered  a false alarm  because the algorithm  has detected  exercise,  but the participant  was not 
actually  exercising.  Because these false alarms can be annoying to the participants,  the AP 
includes  an adjustable  exercise detection  threshold. The adjustable  exercise detection  threshold 
works  as follows:  
• At the start of the study,  the participants’ exercise detection  threshold will be set to 4 
METs.  
• On the first day of the study, when  the participant exercises at the hospital, the AP 
records  the participants’  METs  during exercise and also records  the participants’  METs  
during activities  of daily  living  and other  non-exercise events.  
• Based  on data from  this controlled  setting,  a “lower  bound MET”  for that subject  will be 
calculated  based  on a lower -bound confidence  interval set around their METs  recorded  
during exercise.  
• If that participants’ lower  bound MET during exercise is greater  than 4, their maximum  
allowable  exercise threshold value  (MAETV)  will be set to the lower  bound  MET.  
Otherwise,  the MAETV  will remain  at 4. 
• Every  time a false alarm  occurs  for detecting  exercise,  the participants’  exercise detection 
threshold will increase by 0.25 MET.  However,  the exercise detection  threshold will 
never  exceed  the MAETV  described  above. 
 
The Fading Memory  Proportional  Derivative  (FMPD)  algorithm  will determine  the insulin  and 
(when  applicable)  glucagon delivery  rates  for the closed -loop studies.  The FMPD  algorithm  
determines insulin  and glucagon delivery  rates based  on proportional  error,  defined as the 
difference between  the current  glucose  level  and the target level,  and the derivative  error,  defined 
as the rate of change  of the glucose. Each  of these errors  is calculated  over a time interval.  The 
“fading memory”  designation refers to weighting  recent  errors  more  heavily than remote  errors.  
This weighting provides  an adaptive  component  to the algorithm.  In simple  terms,  the insulin rate 
is increased  for high or rising  glucose  levels and glucagon is given for low or falling  glucose  
levels (at times  of impending hypoglycemia). Gain  factors determine  the degree  to which  
proportional  or derivative  errors  lead to changes  in hormone  delivery  rates.  There  are separate  
gain factors for proportional  and derivative  error for both insulin  and glucagon. Positive  
proportional  errors  (glucose  level  above  target) and positive  derivative  errors  (rising  glucose  
level)  call for an increase  in the insulin delivery  rate. 
 
When  in predictive  low glucose  suspend mode,  the system  will deliver  insulin  based  on the basal  
profile(s) entered  for each subject.  The subjects will manually enter  in boluses  for meals  and 
corrections  into the APC  user interface.  Using  this system,  the subjects will manage  their blood 
glucose  as they normally would.  The advantage  is that the system  is integrated  with a glucose  
sensor  to give advanced  diabetes control.  
 
The predictive  suspend feature will activate  when  the participants’  glucose  levels are in the range  
of 70-140 mg/dl  and if sensor  glucose  is predicted  to fall below  90 mg/dl  within  thirty  minutes.  
The predictive  suspend feature  will deactivate within  the range  of 70-140 mg/dl  if sensor  glucose  
is predicted  to rise above  120 mg/dl  within  thirty  minutes. If sensor  glucose  falls below  70 mg/dl, 
insulin  delivery  will remain  suspended. As long as sensor  glucose  is above  140 mg/dl, the 
predictive  suspend  feature will not activate.  Prediction  of sensor  glucose  is based  on linear  
regression  of the prior  ten minutes  of sensor  glucose  data.  During  the hours  of 7am-11pm  
(daytime),  maximum time of suspension is 120 minutes  within  any 150 minute  window.  During 
the hours  of 11pm -7am (nighttime),  a maximum of 180 minutes  of suspension time is allowed. 
During the predictive  suspend mode  arm of the study, subjects will not be allowed  to change  
their insulin  dosing prior  to the start of the exercise.  This is being done  to allow  for equal  
comparison  of dosing and subsequent  glucose  control  across the four arms.  
 
The algorithm  will push data up to a cloud server  for that can be monitored remotely  every 5 
minutes  for three  visits,  dual and single  hormone  and predictive  low glucose  suspend.  
 
Current  Care Arm Visit (1 Visit)  
The study procedures  for this visit are exactly  the same  as stated  in the above  protocol  with the 
following  exceptions:  1) the closed -loop system  will not be used to manage  blood glucose, 2) 
subjects will use their own insulin  pump and insulin,  3) subjects  will use his/her  own sensor,  if 
they typically  use one, 4) subjects will wear  a Dexcom  G4 Share  provided by the study with a 
blinded receiver  or G5 with blinded glucose  values,  and 5) studies will not be remote  monitored. 
The subject  will continue  to sample  capillary  blood glucose  as stated  above, but they will be able 
to check  at other  times  if they feel they need  to. The subject’s blood glucose  will be managed 
using insulin  pump  therapy on the subject’s own insulin pump, contacting his/her  provider  with 
any questions  or concerns.  Subjects  will wear  the Zephyr  Biopatch heart  rate monitor  for the 
duration of the study which  will be transmitting  data to the Nexus  5 smart  phone  controller.  The 
subject’s insulin  pump  will be downloaded after the current  care arm visit.  Subjects  will be given 
a glucose  and hypoglycemia  reporting  diary  to complete during the visit.  For subjects randomized  
to complete the current  care arm as his/her  last visit,  the subject  will be asked  to                     
come  in to the Diabetes Health  center  for one additional  visit in order  to download the full data 
set from his/her  pump.  
 
Discharge from  inpatient  unit 
At the completion  of the inpatient  visit,  subjects will be discharged  from  the unit. Capillary    
blood glucose  will be measured  with two consecutive blood glucose  measurements at least 15 
minutes  apart  prior  to discharge.  Subjects  will be given enough supplies  to continue  running the 
study while  at home  for 2 days. All IV catheters will be removed  before  discharge.  Subjects will 
be given an exercise diary  to record  the specifics of his/her  exercise on Day 3 at home.  After  the 
subject  is discharged on Day 1, he/she will return  home  for Day  2 and Day 3 and return  to OHSU 
on Day 4. 
 
We are aware  that there  is a risk of severe hypoglycemia  while  the subjects are at home.  The 
system  will alarm  if the sensed  glucose  values  fall below  70 mg/dl  without  exercise detection  
and below  85 mg/dl  with exercise detection,, prompting the subject  to obtain a capillary  blood 
glucose  sample.  Subjects  will be required  to live with at least one other  person age 18 or older  
and live within  20 miles  of OHSU. All  subjects will provide  two emergency  contacts to study 
staff and will be given an emergency  glucagon hypokit  if they don’t  already  have  one. 
 
In case of a system  error  that cannot  be corrected  immediately  with the subject  off campus, the 
subject  will be able to to pause  the APC system.  Pausing will allow  the tslim  pump  filled  with 
insulin  to begin basal  insulin  delivery  for a pre-set basal  profile(s) inputted for the subject  at the 
study start.  If there  is a pending meal  bolus  in the insulin  back log, the pause  mode  will be 
delayed  to allow  the bolus  to finish  delivering. Subjects will be able to give meal  boluses  and 
corrections  through the tslim  insulin  pump  while  in pause  mode.  When  the error is resolved, the 
participant can exit pause  mode  and the closed  loop system  can be resumed.  For subject  safety,  
when  the system  resumes  normal  insulin  delivery after being in pause  mode,  the system  will not 
allow  any boluses  to be entered  into the phone  controller for 15 minutes  so the APC can get the 
bolus  history from  the t:slim  insulin  pump.  If the subject  pauses the system,  this will be visible  
on the cloud  server  and may prompt  a telephone  call from  study staff to determine  the issue and 
the best way to resolve  it. 
 
Subjects  will be given  sufficient  blood glucose  testing  supplies, ketone  testing  supplies  and 
infusion sets/cartridges  for 2 days of closed -loop treatment  at home  as well as back  up supplies.  
Subjects  will continue  to change  out the glucagon every  24 hours. Whenever  possible, subjects  
will be asked  to have  a second person  verify  the identity  of the insulin  or glucagon pump before  
changing out the cartridge/infusion  set. Study  staff will check  in with the subject  each morning. 
The subject  may contact  study staff at any time during the outpatient  portion  of the visit.  
Subjects  will be asked  to perform  45 minutes  of an aerobic  exercise of his/her  choice  (excluding 
swimming)  on Day 3 while  at home.  Subjects  will be reminded to check  their blood glucose  
before  and after exercise.  For subject  safety,  capillary  blood glucose  must  be 100 mg/dl  or higher  
to begin exercise while  subject  is at home.  Subjects  will be required  to have a person age 18 or 
older  who attended  a training  session  on the system  present  while  the subject  exercises  at home. 
The companion will stay after the exercise until the subject’s CBG is > 100 mg/dl  or for 60 
minutes  after exercise is completed -whichever  is longer.  
 
Inpatient Visit on  Day 4 (12 hours)  
On the fourth day, subjects  will return  to the OCTRI  inpatient clinic,  the Harold  Schnitzer  
Diabetes Health  Center  or the Medicine Specialties  clinic  at 7am.  The procedures  for the second  
inpatient  visit on Day 4 are exactly  the same  as those  on Day 1 with two exceptions:  1) the 
closed  loop system  will already  be in progress, and 2) there  will not be an IV placed  during the 
dual-hormone  closed  loop study. 
 
After  completion  of the visit,  the single  or dual-hormone  closed -loop, predictive  low glucose  
suspend system  will be terminated  and the subject’s own insulin  pump  will be restarted.  The 
study investigator  will consult  with the subject  regarding appropriate  insulin  dosing for the 
remainder  of the day. The HR monitors,  infusion sets and Dexcom  sensor  will be removed  from  
the subject.  The infusion  sites and sensor  site will be inspected  for signs  of irritation  or infection. 
In addition, the sensor  will be inspected  for the possibility  of breakage  or fracture.  If there  is any 
evidence  of sensor  breakage,  it will be recorded. If an area of inflammation  of 1 cm or greater  
exists  around the point  of insertion,  a de-identified  photograph will be taken  of the area and the 
subject  will return  1-3 days later for a follow -up visit.  A capillary  blood glucose  value  will be 
taken  immediately  prior  to discharging the subject. Subjects  will be given oral carbohydrate  for 
values  below  85 mg/dl,  and will be given an insulin  bolus  if deemed  appropriate  by the study 
investigator  for values  above  150 mg/dl. 
If a study visit is stopped prematurely,  such as due to technical  problems, the subject  will be 
asked  if they can repeat  the study visit that was terminated  early  with additional  compensation 
provided. Repeating  the study visit will be optional. 
 
If multiple  subjects  have  inpatient  visits  on the same  day, the times  for admission,  meals,  
exercise,  daily  activities  and discharge will be moved  ahead  approximately one hour for the 
second  subject.  The timing  of all procedures  will remain  consistent  for all four visits  for each 
subject.  
 
Hypoglycemia Treatment  Guidelines  
• CBG  < 70 mg/dl 
o Give  15 grams  of oral carbohydrate. 
o Verify  that insulin  pump  is turned off. 
o Repeat  treatment  every 15 minutes  as needed to raise blood glucose  ≥70 mg/dl. 
• Presence of STUPOR,  LOSS  OF CONSCIOUSNESS,  or SEIZURE  
o Give  1 mg glucagon SC. 
o Verify  that insulin  pump  is turned off. 
o Further  management  per bedside  study  investigator.  
 
 
Hyperglycemia  Treatment  Guidelines  
If the sensed  glucose  is ≥ 300 mg/dl, the  subject  will be  instructed  to check  their blood glucose  
and to check  the insulin pump  for malfunction. This would  include  checking  for insulin  leaks,  
making sure infusion site is securely  adhered to skin, and for closed -loop studies,  making  sure 
there  are no error  messages on the phone  running  the algorithm.  
 
If either  the sensor  or capillary  blood glucose  value  is over 300 mg/dl  for more  than 2 hours  or is 
≥ 400 mg/dl  at any time,  the subject will be  instructed  to check  serum  ketones using the  Abbott  
Precision  Xtra meter  and to change  out the infusion set. If serum  ketones  are over 0.6 mM for  
two hours, the on call study investigator will instruct the subject  to administer  a correction  
insulin  dosage  by injection. In addition, the subject  will be encouraged to drink sugar -free 
liquids.  If serum  ketones  are above  1.5 mM at any time,  the study will be stopped and insulin 
will be administered  as directed  by the on call investigator.  
 
Cleaning  and Disinfecting  
All devices will be cleaned  and disinfected  between  subjects.  The smart  phone, Dexcom  G4 
Share  receiver  and transmitter or G5 transmitter,  heart  rate monitors  and t:slim  pumps  are 
cleaned  by study staff.  Technicians who are disinfecting  units  will wash  hands  thoroughly and 
wear  gloves.  All items  will undergo intermediate -level  disinfection  using SANI -CLOTH  AF3 
Germicidal  disposable  wipes.  The disinfectant  will be applied and allowed  to air dry. 
Technicians will dispose  of gloves  as biohazard waste and wash  their hands  immediately  after 
completing  disinfection. After  disinfection,  when  the units  are completely  dry, they will be 
placed  in a sealed  bag labeled  with the cleaning  method, date and initials  of technician  that 
performed  the disinfection. 
 
Stopping  Rules  
The closed -loop study will be stopped and open- loop control  will be resumed  under  the guidance  
of the on call study investigator  if any of the following  occur  after the first 4 hours  of the study:  
1) capillary  blood glucose  falls to < 40 mg/dl  at any time point, 2) capillary  blood glucose  
exceeds 400 mg/dl  on two occasions (60 min or more  apart  within  a 4 hour window),  3) capillary  
blood glucose  exceeds 400 mg/dl  on two occasions more  than 60 minutes  apart  but outside  of the 
4 hour window  and during that time,  the capillary  blood glucose  has not fallen  below  250 mg/dl, 
or 4) serum  ketones  are above  1.5 mM at any time.  
 
 
Statistical methods  
Primary  endpoint  
The primary  study endpoints  are percent  of time with sensed  glucose  < 70 mg/dl  and percent  of 
time with glucose  sensor  in target  range  of 70-180 mg/dl.  The hypothesis  to be tested  is the dual- 
hormone  closed -loop system  with exercise detection  reduces hypoglycemia  and increases time 
spent  in target  range  as compared  to an insulin  only closed -loop system,  a predictive  low glucose  
suspend system  or current  care.  Data will be analyzed  using generalized  estimating  equations, 
which  takes into account  correlated  data and repeated  measures.  
 
Secondary  endpoints  
Secondary endpoints  will be analyzed  using generalized  estimating  equations. A Bonferroni - 
Holmes  correction  for multiple  comparisons  will be applied only to the secondary endpoint  
analyses.  
 
 
Confidentiality  and Protection  of Human  Subjects  
RISKS  and BENEFITS  
Risks:  The risks  of the protocol  procedures  are considered minor. Nonetheless,  since pumps  and 
sensors used within  automated  glucose  control  systems are imperfect,  there  is a risk for 
hyperglycemia  and hypoglycemia  The single  and dual-hormone  mode  studies  will issue alerts  
and will be remote  monitored during each visit with unserviced  alerts  being pushed to the study 
coordinator  and investigator.  If sensed  glucose  goes below  70 mg/dl  or above  300 mg/dl  for 
these studies,  a capillary  blood glucose  check  will be required  A study investigator  will be on 
call at all times.  Though glucagon has been  shown to be effective  in avoiding hypoglycemia, it 
can sometimes cause nausea or vomiting when  given in high doses,  but is unlikely in the low 
doses  that will be delivered  under  this protocol. 
 
Risks  from  exercise include  falls,  sprains, bruises,  very low risk of bone  fractures  and head  
trauma.  The likelihood of significant  harm  is quite  low. 
Rarely,  there  can be allergic  responses to insulin  or glucagon, such as skin redness,  hives, itching  
of the skin, swelling  of the mouth, or breathing difficulties.  These reactions  are considered  very 
unlikely. 
 
There  is a small  risk of sensor  fracture,  and in such a case,  a piece of the sensor  could be left in 
the tissue after sensor  removal. For this reason,  the study investigator  will inspect  each removed 
sensor  for the possibility  of breakage  or fracture.  Any evidence  of sensor  breakage  will be 
recorded  and reported  to FDA and the sensor  company. 
 
Benefits:  The subject  may not directly  benefit  from being in this study;  however, their 
participation  may help to advance  automated  insulin  and glucagon delivery  technology. 
 
COSTS : 
Subjects  will receive $900 for completion  of all study visits.  If subjects withdraw  early  from the 
study, compensation  will be given as follows: $60 for visit 2 and $210 each for visits  3, 4, 5 and 
6. There  is no compensation for the screening  visit.  If a subject  is asked  to repeat  a study due to 
technical  problems, yhe/she  will receive an additional  $210. 
 
Monitoring  Entity: 
This investigation will be monitored by the principal  investigators,  Jessica Castle,  MD and Peter  
Jacobs,  PhD.  Drs. Jacobs and Castle have no commercial  interest  in any of the companies which  
manufacture any of the devices used in this study. Dr. Castle is an inventor  on patents  regarding  
the algorithms.  
 
Data  Collection: 
Subject  privacy will be protected  by using a three -digit identifying number  to code study 
documents. Study staff will record  data required  by the protocol  onto the Case Report  Forms  
(CRF).  Case  report  forms  (CRF)  for this study will be entered  into REDCAP,  a clinical  research  
electronic  data application designed to support  traditional case report  form  data capture for 
research  studies housed at Oregon Health  Science University  and administered  by the Oregon 
Clinical and Translation  Research  Institute  (OCTRI).  Investigators  and research  coordinator  will 
verify  that the procedures  are conducted according  to the approved protocol. All paper  source  
documents  will be kept in a locked cabinet  for a minimum  of five years.  Original,  completed  
CRF’s  will be kept with the PI in a designated repository. All data from  CRF’s  will subsequently 
be entered  into the authorized electronic  REDCAP  database.  
 
Recording  of Data:  
Investigators  and staff will record  data collected  during the clinical  trial on the CRF’s.  Case  
report  forms  (CRF)  for this study will be entered  into REDCAP,  a clinical  research  electronic  
data repository  housed at Oregon Health  Science University  and administered  by the Oregon 
Clinical and Translation  Research  Institute  (OCTRI).  The REDCAP  CRFs  will include:  
Screening  form 
Two Hour  Run- in and Training  Visit  
APC Verification  form 
Day 1 Inpatient  Dual -hormone  Closed -loop Study  Visit  
Day 1 Inpatient  Insulin  Only  Closed -loop Study Visit 
Day 1 Inpatient  Predictive  low glucose  suspend  Study visit 
Day 1 Inpatient  Current  Care Visit 
Notes  on Outpatient Visits  
Day 4 Inpatient  Dual -hormone  Closed -loop Study  Visit  
Day 4 Inpatient  Insulin  Only  Closed -loop Study Visit 
Day 4 Inpatient  Predictive  low glucose  suspend Study visit 
Day 4 Inpatient  Current  Care Visit 
Phone  Update  Form  
Adverse  Event  form   
Serious  Adverse Event  form  
Concomitant  Medications 
 
The Principal Investigators  may authorize  other  personnel  to make  entries  in the CRF.  
 
Monitoring  Procedures:  
 
This protocol  is written  in accordance with the principles  established  by the 18th World  Medical  
Assembly  General  Assembly  (Helsinki,  1964)  and amendments  and clarifications  adopted by the 
29th (Tokyo, 1975), 35th (Venice,  1983), 41st (Hong Kong, 1989), 48th (Somerset  West,  South 
Africa,  1996), 52nd (Edinburgh, 2000), 53rd (Washington, 2002), 55th (Tokyo, 2004),  59th 
(Seoul, 2008), and 64th (Brazil,  2013)  General  Assemblies.  The investig ator will ensure  that the 
study described  in this protocol  is conducted in full conformance  with those  principles,  the 
protocol, current  FDA regulations, ICH Good  Clinical Practices (GCP)  guidelines, Good 
Laboratory Practices (GLP)  guidelines, local  ethical  and regulatory requirements,  including the 
Federal  Food, Drug  and Cosmetic  Act, U.S. applicable  Code  of Federal  Regulations  (title 21), 
any IEC requirements  relative  to clinical  studies.  
 
Should a conflict  arise,  the investigator  will follow  whichever  law or guideline  affords  the  
greater  protection  to the individual  subject.  The investigator  will also ensure  thorough familiarity  
with the appropriate  use and potential  risks of use of the study device,  as described  in this 
protocol, prior  to the initiation  of the study.  
Unanticipated  problems  will be detected  by reviewing  descriptions  of known or foreseeable  
adverse events  and risks in the IRB- approved research  protocol  and the current  IRB approved 
consent  form,  any underlying  disease or conditions  of the subject  experiencing  the adverse event, 
a careful  assessment  of whether  the adverse event  is related  or possibly related  to the subject’s 
participation  in the study.  
 
Triggers  for reporting  unanticipated problems  are seizure,  hospitalization, death  or any other  
occurrence considered serious  by the PI. If ongoing monitoring  of the closed -loop studies reveals 
studies  repeatedly  being terminated  because of unresponsive  hyperglycemia  or repeated  serious  
hypoglycemia  (resulting  in altered  mental  status,  loss of consciousness,  or seizure)  believed  not 
amenable  to revisions  in control  system  parameter  tuning, then the study will be discontinued 
immediately.  If studies  in two subjects are stopped for severe hypoglycemia  or severe  
hyper glycemia, then the entire  study  will be halted. In addition, if there  is any unexpected event  
such as death  or patient  hospitalization, the studies  will be stopped until the root cause is 
evaluated.  
 
Any adverse  event  (AE)  and/or  unanticipated problem  (UP)  will be reported  to the investigator  
monitor  immediately  by one of the investigators.  Hypo-  and hyperglycemia  will not be 
considered  AEs unless  subject  has positive  ketones  or displays  symptoms  of hypoglycemia  such 
as: loss of consciousness,  slurred  speech,  hospitalization  or EMS services called.  One of the 
investigators  will always be on-call during the closed -loop studies  and will write  up a description  
of the adverse event/unanticipated problem. All reportable  new information (RNI)  will be 
reported  to the IRB within  five calendar  days after the PI learns of the event. RNI is any 
information that might  meet  the regulatory definition  of an unanticipated problem  involving risks 
to subjects or others  or serious  or continuing noncompliance  that might  impact  the criteria  for 
IRB approval. The report  will be submitted  to the IRB by the principal  investigator or study 
coordinator. A summary  of all UP's and adverse events, including those  that do not meet  the 
requirement  for RNI,  will be submitted  with the continuing review.  The FDA will be notified  of 
any unanticipated adverse event  related  to the use of the study  device.  Notification  will be made  
within  10 days after the Principal Investigator  becomes aware of the event.  
 
Confidentiality  Procedures:  
To protect  confidentiality,  standard  institutional practices will be followed as described  in the 
OHSU Information  Security  and Research  Data Resource Guide  
(http://ozone.ohsu.edu/cc/sec/isg/res_sec.pdf)  to maintain  the confidentiality  and security  of data 
collected  in this study. Study staff will be trained  with regard  to these procedures. Upon  
enrollment,  subjects will be assigned  with a three -digit code  that will be used instead  of their 
name,  medical  record  number  or other  personally identifying information. The key associating  
the code  and the subjects personnal  identifying  information  will be restricted  to the PI and study 
staff.  The key will be kept secure on a restricted  OHSU  network drive  in a limited  access folder.  
 
Electronic  files for data analysis  will contain only the subject  code. Access to data or blood 
samples is restricted  to study personnel  and requires  OHSU ID/password  authentication.  Paper  
files will be stored  in locked filing  cabinets  in restricted  access  offices at OHSU.  Electronic  data 
is stored  on restricted  drives  on the OHSU network or stored  on encrypted computers  as well as 
on the web-accessible REDCap  database housed on an OHSU  secure server.  User passwords  will 
be changed every  3 months  and a firewall will be enabled  at all times.  After  the study, source  
documents  will be maintained  at the participating  clinical  center  (or offsite  record  storage  
facilities) 2 years after a marketing  application  is approved for our group's  artificial  
pancreas/decision  support  device  or discontinuance  of pursuit  of marketing  approval. At the end 
of the study,  an electronic copy of the database will be provided on a CD for long- term storage  
under  lock.  
Appendix  A: Physical  Activity  Readiness Questionnaire  
 
 

Appendix  B: Devices  
Tandem  t:slim pump  
 
        
 
Dexcom  Share  Continuous  Glucose  Monitoring  System  which  includes  Sensor,  Sensor  
Receiver and Sensor  Transmitter  
 
 
  
  
Dexcom  G5 Continuous  Glucose Monitoring  System  
 
 
 

 
Google  Nexus  5 Smart  phone  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Custom  Engineered  Phone/Sensor  Receiver Case  
 
 
 

Contour  Next  EZ Blood  Glucose Meter  Abbott  Precision  Xtra  Meter  
 
 
 
  
 
        
 
Zephyrlife  BioPatchBiopatch  Heart  Rate  and Accelerometry  Monitoring  Device  
 
 
 

Appendix C: Hypoglycemia  Awareness questionnaire:This  survey item will be used to 
categorize awareness or having reduced  awareness of hypoglycemia.  
 
 
1. Check  the category  that best describes  you: (check  one only)  
   I always have symptoms when my blood sugar  is low (A) 
  I sometimes  have  symptoms  when  my blood sugar  is low (R) 
  I no longer  have  symptoms  when  my blood sugar  is low (R) 
 
 
2. Have  you lost some  of the symptoms  that used to occur  when  your blood sugar  was low?  
   Yes (R) 
  No (A) 
 
 
3. In the past 6 months  how often  have  you had moderate  hypoglycemia  episodes?  (Episodes  
where  you might  feel confused, disoriented, or lethargic  and were  unable  to treat yourself). 
   Never  (A) 
  Once  or twice  (R) 
  Every  other  month (R) 
  Once  a month (R) 
  More  than once a month (R) 
 
 
4. In the past year,  how often  have  you had severe hypoglycemia  episodes?  (Episodes  where  you 
were  unconscious  or had a seizure and needed  glucagon or intravenous  glucose?)  
   Never  (A) 
  1 time (R) 
  2 times  (R) 
  3 times  (R) 
  4 times  (R) 
  5 times  (R) 
  6 times  (R) 
  7 times  (R) 
  8 times  (R) 
  9 times  (R) 
  10 times  (R) 
  11 times  (R) 
  12 or more  times  (R) 
 
5. How often  in the last month  have  you had readings  < 70 mg/dl  with symptoms?  
 
   Never  
  1 to 3 times  
  1 time/week  
  2 to 3 times/week  
  4 to 5 times/week  
  Almost  daily 
 
6. How often  in the last month  have  you had readings  < 70 mgdl,  without  symptoms? R:  5<6, A: 
6<5; 
   Never  
  1 to 3 times  
  1 time/week  
  2 to 3 times/week  
  4 to 5 times/week  
  Almost  daily 
 
 
7. How low does your blood sugar  need to go before  you feel symptoms?  
 
∆ 60-69 mg/dl  (A) 
∆ 50-59 mg/dl  (A) 
∆ 40-49 mg/dl  (R) 
∆ < 40 mg/dl  (R) 
 
 
8. To what  extent  can you tell by your symptoms that your blood sugar  is low?  
   Never  (R) 
  Rarely  (R) 
  Sometimes  (R) 
  Often  (A) 
  Always  (A) 
 
Appendix  D: Alarm  Manager  Specifications  
 
If an alarm  is pushed to a study investigator,  it is repeated  every  5 minutes  until acknowledged.  
 
Alarm  
# Description  of 
Alarm  When  Alarm  is 
Considered  
Serviced  Instructions  for 
Subject  Alarm  
Refractory  
Period  
(minutes)  Alarm pushed  to 
Study  
Coordinator  Alarm pushed  to 
Study  Investigator  
2 ARD ≥ 35%  for BG 
≥ 75 Calibration  
detected  Sensor  inaccuracy  has 
been  detected,  please  
calibrate  sensors  with 
most  recent  blood 
glucose  value. 30 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
3 Relative  difference  
≥ 30 mg/dl  if CBG  
entered  is below  75 
mg/dl  Calibration  
detected  Sensor  inaccuracy  has 
been  detected,  please  
calibrate  sensors  with 
most  recent  blood 
glucose  value. 30 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
4 CBG ≤ 40 mg/dl  NA CBG  is low. 
Please treat with 30 g 
of carbs and recheck  
CBG in 15 minutes.  NA instantly  instantly  
5 CBG  < 70 mg/dl  
and Alert 4 is not 
active  Rescue  carb 
treatment  
identified  Blood  glucose  less 
than 70 mg/dL, treat 
with 15 g of carbs and 
recheck  in 15 min. 30 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
6 Sensor  < 70 mg/dl  
without  exercise  
detection  and <85 
mg/dl  with exercise  
detection  and no BG 
given  within  15 Blood  glucose  
value  is entered  Sensor  is less than 70 
mg/dL.  
Please check  blood 
glucose.  30 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
 
 minutes  and alert 5 
inactive       
7 CBG  >300  mg/dl  NA CBG  is greater  than 
300 mg/dl. Please  
change  the insulin 
infusion and check  
your ketones. NA instantly  instantly  
8 Sensor  glucose  ≥ 
300 mg/dl  and no 
BG given within  30 
minutes  and alert 7 
inactive  Blood  glucose  
value  is entered  Sensor  is greater  than 
300 mg/dl, please  
check  and enter  blood 
glucose, and check  
insulin  pump for 
malfunctions  30 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
9 Insulin  basal  failure  Autoservices  if 
pump  
communication is 
restored  Insulin  pump  
communication issue,  
please check  pump  
and contact  study 
physician 20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
10 Insulin  meal  bolus  
failure  Clears  itself  either  
after the meal  flag 
is older  than 
backlog of 15 
minutes  or there  is 
not a backlog of 
insulin  to deliver  Insulin  meal  bolus  
failed  to deliver, 
please contact  the 
study physician. 20 If refractory  
period expires  Coordinator  will call 
subject  and 
determine  issue  and 
consult  with 
investigator  to 
determine  if subject  
should give bolus 
open loop.  
11 Glucagon  delivery  
failure  Autoservices  if 
pump  
communication is 
restored  Glucagon  pump  
communication issue,  
please check  pump  
and contact  study 
physician 10 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
 
12 Sensor  calibration  
due Calibration  
detected  Sensor  calibration  due 
now, please check  
blood glucose  and 
calibrate  your 
receivers.  60 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
13 If Alert 4 or 5 was 
activated,  and no 
BG given in recent  
20 minutes  Blood  glucose  
value  is entered  Blood  glucose  check  
due now.  20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
14 Cloud  is not 
updating  Cloud  connection  
restored  There  is no connection  
of the phone  to the 
internet.  Please move  
back  into cell phone  or 
Wifi range. 60 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
15 User has sent a 
bolus  command to 
pump  when  not in 
"Pause Mode"  NA We have  detected  that 
you have  entered  a 
bolus  using the pump. 
Please only do this 
when  in "Pause  
Mode".  
Do not use the pump  
directly  when  the AP 
is running.  NA Instantly - 
coordinator  will 
call subject  and 
determine  reason  
for override  and 
consult  with 
investigator  to 
determine  if 
safety  is a 
concern.   
17 Sensor  out for > 20 
minutes  Autoservices  if 
sensor 
communication is 
restored  Sensor  has not been  
acquired  in 20 
minutes, please check  
transmitter.   
20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
18 Replace  Transmitter  Once  fires,  
disables all sensor  
alarms  for 120 
minutes.  Replace  transmitter  NA NA NA 
 
19 Sensor  Value  is 
Invalid  Autoservices  if 
sensor 
communication is 
restored  Sensor  value  is not 
reporting  correctly.  
Please check  sensor.   
20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
20 Replace  Sensor  Once  fires,  
disables all sensor  
alarms  for 120 
minutes.  Replace  sensor  NA NA NA 
21 Basal  insulin  
delivery  failure  Autoservices  if a 
successful  bolus  is 
given  Insulin  basal  delivery  
Failure,  please contact  
the study physician  20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
22 Glucagon  delivery  
failure  Autoservices  if a 
successful  bolus  is 
given  Glucagon  failed  to 
deliver,  please contact  
the study physician  20 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
23 Insulin  change  due 
every  72 hours  User must  press  
button to service-  
every  72 hours  Replace  Insulin  Fluid  120 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
24 Glucagon  change  
due every  24 hours  User must  press  
button to service-  
every  24 hours  Replace  Glucagon  
Fluid  120 If refractory  
period expires  If refractory  period  
expires  two or more  
times  in a row 
 
 
 
References  
 
1. Castle JR, Engle  JM, El Youssef  J, Massoud  RG, Yuen  KC, Kagan  R, Ward WK. Novel  use 
of glucagon in a closed -loop system  for prevention of hypoglycemia  in type 1 diabetes.  
Diabetes Care 2010 Jun;33(6):1282- 1287  
 
2. Jacobs PG, El Youssef  J, Castle J, Bakhtiani  P, Branigan D, Breen  M, Bauer  D, Preiser  N, 
Leonard G, Stonex T, Ward  WK.  Automated  control  of an adaptive  bihormonal, dual-sensor  
artificial pancreas and evaluation  during inpatient  studies.  IEEE Trans  Biomed  Eng 2014 
Oct;61(10):2569- 2581  
 
3. Jacobs PG, El Youssef  J, Castle JR, Engle  JM, Branigan DL, Johnson P, Massoud  R, Kamath  
A, Ward  WK.  Development  of a fully  automated closed  loop artificial  pancreas control  
system  with dual pump  delivery  of insulin  and glucagon. Conf  Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol 
Soc 2011;2011:397- 400 
 
4. Leelarathna L, Dellweg  S, Mader  JK, Allen  JM, Benesch  C, Doll W, Ellmerer M, Hartnell S, 
Heinemann  L, Kojzar  H, Michalewski  L, Nodale  M, Thabit  H, Wilinska  ME, Pieber  TR, 
Arnolds  S, Evans  ML, Hovorka  R, AP@home  Consortium. Day and night  home  closed -loop 
insulin  delivery  in adults  with type 1 diabetes:  Three -center  randomized crossover  study. 
Diabetes Care 2014 Jul;37(7):1931- 1937  
 
5. Thabit  H, Lubina -Solomon A, Stadler M, Leelarathna L, Walkinshaw  E, Pernet  A, Allen  JM, 
Iqbal  A, Choudhary P, Kumareswaran  K, Nodale  M, Nisbet  C, Wilinska  ME, Barnard  KD, 
Dunger  DB, Heller  SR, Amiel  SA, Evans  ML, Hovorka  R. Home  use of closed -loop insulin 
delivery  for overnight  glucose  control  in adults  with type 1 diabetes:  A 4-week,  multicentre,  
randomised  crossover  study. Lancet  Diabetes Endocrinol  2014 Sep;2(9):701- 709 
 
6. Haidar  A, Legault  L, Messier  V, Mitre  TM, Leroux  C, Rabasa- Lhoret  R. Comparison of dual- 
hormone  artificial pancreas,  single -hormone  artificial pancreas,  and conventional  insulin  
pump  therapy  for glycaemic control  in patients  with type 1 diabetes:  An open- label  
randomised  controlled  crossover  trial. Lancet  Diabetes Endocrinol  2015 Jan;3(1):17- 26 
 
7. Danne  T, Kordonouri  O, Holder  M, Haberland  H, Golembowski  S, Remus  K, Blasig  S, 
Wadien  T, Zierow  S, Hartmann  R, Thomas  A. Prevention of hypoglycemia  by using low 
glucose  suspend  function  in sensor -augmented  pump  therapy. Diabetes Technol  Ther 2011 
Nov;13(11):1129- 1134  
 
8. Diabetes Research  in Children  Network  (DirecNet) Study Group, Tsalikian  E, Kollman  C, 
Tamborlane  WB, Beck  RW, Fiallo -Scharer  R, Fox L, Janz KF, Ruedy KJ, Wilson  D, Xing 
D, Weinzimer  SA. Prevention of hypoglycemia  during exercise in children with type 1 
diabetes by suspending basal  insulin. Diabetes Care 2006 Oct;29(10):2200 -2204 
9. Jacobs PG, Resalat  N, El Youssef  J, Reddy R, Branigan D, Preiser  N, Condon J, Castle J. 
Incorporating  an exercise detection, grading, and hormone  dosing algorithm  into the 
artificial pancreas using accelerometry  and heart  rate. J Diabetes Sci Technol  2015 Oct 
5;9(6):1175- 1184  