Dexamethasone Intravitreal Implant (0.7mg) for 
the Treatment of Persistent Diabetic Macular 
Edema Following Intravitreal Anti -Vascular 
Endothelial Growth Factor Therapy (DIME Trial)  
 
 
 
NCT #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date of Document: 28 -OCT -2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY DESIGN  
DESCRIPTION OF THE S TUDY  
This is a pilot study of dexamethasone intravitreal implant (0.7mg) in 
subjects with clinical, angiographic and spectral -domain optical coherence 
tomography (SD OCT) evidence of persistent diabetic macular edema 
following int ravitreal anti -vascular endothelial growth factor (anti -vegf) 
treatment.  Forty patients will be enrolled in this study.  
 
Consented subjects will receive anti -vegf therapy (aflibercept, 
bevacizumab or ranibizumab) administered every 30 days ( ±7 days) 
durin g the run -in phase at baseline, month 1, and month 2. Subjects will 
receive the same anti -vegf medication throughout the run -in phase. 
Subjects with less than 10% reduction or any increase in central 1mm 
subfield thickness (CST) compared to baseline values  and CST is greater 
than 300 microns or subjects with any reduction in CST, but whose CST 
remains above 350 microns with concurrent and persistent DME as 
measured on SDOCT following the run -in phase, will be randomized 1:1 
to receive either dexamethasone i ntravitreal implant (0.7mg) or continue 
on the same anti -vegf therapy.   
 
Subjects randomized to dexamethasone intravitreal implant (0.7mg) will 
receive the initial treatment at Month 3 (visit 4) and Month 6 (visit 7) and 
are eligible to receive one additi onal dose at Month 9 (visit 10), Month 10 
(visit 11) or Month 11 (visit 12) for persistent or recurrent macular edema 
documented on SDOCT. If dexamethasone intravitreal implant (0.7mg) is 
administered at Month 10 (visit 11) or Month 11 (visit 12) an additi onal 
safety study visit will be required at one to two months following Month 12 
(visit 13). The investigator can withhold treatment with dexamethasone 
intravitreal implant (0.7mg) beginning at Month 9 if there is complete 
resolution of diabetic macular ed ema document on SDOCT.  
 
Subjects randomized to continue on anti -vegf therapy will receive 
intravitreal anti -vegf injections at Month 3 (visit 4) Month 4 (visit 5) and 
Month 5 (visit 6). Beginning at Month 6 (visit 7), subjects who have 
received 6 intravitreal anti -vegf injections and continue to present with 
persistent diabetic macular edema defined as less than 10%  reduction or 
any increase in CST compared to baseline values and CST is greater 
than 300 microns, will receive dexamethasone intravitreal implant (0.7mg) 
at Month 6 (visit 7) and Month 9 (visit 10). The follow -up period for all 
subjects will continue thro ugh 12 months from the baseline study visit.  
 
The primary outcome endpoint is 9 months from randomization (Month 12 
from day of enrollment). The total length of follow -up is 12 months. All 
subjects will make monthly visits for 12 months for evaluation of s afety 
and efficacy.  All subjects will have their first intravitreal injection at 
Baseline/Day 0 study visit. At subsequent visits, the subject will have a 
safety evaluation at the monthly scheduled follow -up visit prior to any 
intravitreal injection.   
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Mean change in CST and best corrected visual ac uity ( BCVA ) will be assessed by 
an unpaired Student’s t -test.  Total number of injections in each arm will be 
given as a number.  