 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing  Urinary  Tract  Infection  Rates  using  a Controlled  Aseptic  Protocol  for Catheter  Insertion  
PI: Christopher  Breed,  MD (Gynecologic  Oncology  Fellow)  
Faculty  Mentor:  Saketh  R. Guntupalli,  MD (Gynecologic  Oncology)  
COMIRB  #16-1096  
Version   21-Oct-2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
  
I. Hypotheses  and Specific  Aims:  Urinary  Tract  Infection  (UTI)  complications  following  catheter  use in 
surgical  patients  remains  high.   Using  an aseptic  protocol  has been  shown  to drastically  reduce  UTI 
incidence  by 50%.  [2] Reducing  UTIs  will prevent  extended  hospital  stays,  readmission,  and antibiotic  use 
associated  with this complication  and improve  cost-effectiveness  of care.  We hypothesize  that we can 
reduce  the incidence  of UTIs  after catheter  placement  with the implementation  of a QI protocol  to prevent  
excess  exposure  to the environment  exposure  of the catheter  before,  during  and after insertion.    
 
II. Background  and Significance:  
Infections  resulting  from  health -care complications  are the greatest  cause  of morbidity  and mortality  in 
hospitalized  patients  in the US. [1] Urinary  tract infection  (UTI)  is the most  common  health  care 
complication  following  surgery.  [2] Rates  are high,  causing  longer  hospital  stays,  readmissions,  and 
antibiotic  use.  Rates  at UCH  are near 40%,  high compared  to the national  standard.  About  15% of post-op 
complications  result  in extended  stays  or readmissions  and costly  antibiotic  treatments.  These  infections  
should  be preventable  with prophylaxis  and pre-treatment  protocols  but there  is no standard  protocol  at 
UCH  for minimizing  the risk of UTI infection.  We propose  a catheter  management  protocol  in which  the 
catheters  are treated  with betadine  and then inserted  while  remaining  protected  within  the plastic  sleeve,  
reducing  airborne/contact  exposures  to the catheter.  Betadine  is a topical  antiseptic  used in the prevention  
of infections.   It is widely  available  and a cost-effective  intervention.  Similar  aseptic  protocols  have  been  
tested  and implemented  in other  countries  however  we lag behind  in having  a systematic  protocol  for 
reducing  the incidence  of UTIs  complications. [2-4] A study  in rural -India  found  that antiseptic  techniques  
were  the best preventable  measure  for device -related  infections. [5] Patients  currently  receive  what  will be 
considered  standard  of care intra-operative  catheter  placement  which  involves  placement  of catheter  in a 
sterile  field,  drainage  to a closed  system  and shortest  possible  durati on of catheter  placement.   We 
hypothesize  that the implementation  of a controlled  antiseptic  protocol  to inserting  the urinary  catheter  will 
reduce  UTI rates  following  surgery.   
   
III.  Preliminary  Studies/Progress  Report:  
The Gynecologic  Oncology  service  performs  between  15-20 surgeries  per week.   There  are 5 providers  who 
would  require  training  in the protocol.   The providers  all have  similar  practice  patterns  as they pertain  to 
current  standard  of care catheter  placement.  Training  would  be relatively  straight  forward  and protocol  
adherence  is expected  to be high.   Adherence  can be monitored  on the service  by the principle  investigator.    
Faculty  Mentors  include  Dr. Guntupalli  who is an assistant  professor  in the department  of Obstetrics  
and Gynecology  at the UCH.  He serves  as the Principal  Investigator  for the Gynecologic  Oncology  
Group,  a national  research  consortium.  His research  has focused  on all gynecologic  cancer  sites and 
surgical  improvements.   
 
IV. Project  Design  and Procedures .  
a. Performance  Measurement.  The primary  outcome  is UTI within  14 +/- 2 days post-surgery.   A 
UTI is defined  as an infection  in any part of your urinary  system  which  may include  the kidneys,  
ureters,  bladder,  and urethra.   Most  infections  invol ve the lower  urinary  tract (bladder  and urethra),  
and are treatable  with antibiotics .  If a UTI spreads  to the kidney,  it can become  a more  serious  
complication . Women  are at a greater  risk of developing  a UTI than men are.  
Pre-operative  antibiotics  will be collected  to determine  if this directly  affects  the outcome  of a UTI.  
Visits  to the ED for urinary  pain,  incontinence,  or fever  will also be followed  for determination  of 
UTI.  Participants  will provide  a urine  sample  0-24 hours  before  surgery.   The samp le will be tested  
with a rapid  urine  analysis  (UA)  test.  This measure  was chosen  so that study  UAs results  are not to 
be confused  with standard  UAs conducted  with samples  collected  after catheter  placement.  
Participants  will be followed  up by research  staff ~24 hours  post-surgery  for a second  UA test.  A 
third  UA will be conducted  at the patients ’ post-op check.   At follow -up visits,  participants  will also 
be assessed  for symptoms  of UTI since  surgery  by assessment  of: urethral  discomfort,  suprapubic  
tende rness  or pelvic  pain,  sense  of urinary  urgency,  frequency  or dysuria,  fever,  antibiotic  use, and 
clinical  and laboratory  data suggesting  infection  (UA with +leukocyte  esterase  +/- nitrates,  urine  
culture  with >10^5  bacterial  colony  forming  units  per mL (CFU)).  Asymptomatic  bacteriuria  will 
be considered  a UTI for this study  (defined  as >10^5  CFU/mL  on urine  culture).   Patients  who are 
treated  with antibiotics  for UTI without  laboratory  data suggesting  infection  will be included  in UTI 
group.   For participa nts reporting  ED visits  prior  to 14 +/- 2 day visit,  ED reports  will be obtained  
and an assessment  will be made  regarding  the symptomatic  UTI diagnosis.   Those  meeting  these  
criteria  will be followed  with symptom  and laboratory  analysis.  All positive  UA test will be 
confirmed  by laboratory  analysis  for final diagnosis.   Results  of +leukocyte  esterase  +/‐ nitrites  will 
be considered  abnormal.   If a diagnosis  of UTI does not exist  in the patient  chart  outside  of study,  
the patient ’s clinical  picture  will be evaluated  independently  by 2 separate  care providers  to 
determine  if meeting  criteria  for UTI (symptomatic  bacteriuria  as defined  above).   If there  is 
discrepancy  a third  provider  will be the determining  opinion.  Participants  meeting  the primary  
endpoint  (UTI) will be discontinued  from  the study  following.    
 
Secondary  outcomes  include:  hospital  length  of stay, readmissions,  antibiotic  use at the time of 
surgery  and post-surgery.   Measures  of UTI,  and secondary  outcomes  will be collected  from  
observation  during study  visits  and from  the patient  medical  charts.,  If closed  drainage  system  was 
disrupted  during  placement  (to back  fill bladder  intra-operatively),  and method  of catheter  
discontinuation  (“fill and pull” versus  “pull and void” methods)  will be collected  for comparison  
between  the groups  for analysis  as a possible  confounding  variables.   
 
Additional  secondary  outcomes  to be evaluated  will include  patient  discomfort  with catheter,  
tolerability  of catheter,  length  of hospital  stay, and number  of post-operative  evaluations  required.   
A cost-analysis  will be performed  as a secondary  endpoint  based  on this cost factors  (length  of 
hospital  stay, readmission,  additional  clinic/ED  visits,  antibiotic  costs).   Costs  of hospital  days,  
clinic  visits,  other  appointments,  and antibiotics  will be standardized  for evaluation  based  on 
literature  for cost analysis  in gynecologic  oncology  literature.  
 
b. Target  population.  Women  undergoing  extended  surgery  lasting  >1 hour and requiring  urinary  
catheter  will be eligible  for enrollment.   All patients  will have  surgery  performed  by one of the trained  
Gynecologic  Oncologists  at the University  of Colorado  Hospital.    
Inclusion  criteria  will include:   
1)  women  18-89 years  of age  
2) admitted  for surgery  lasting  >1 hour and requiring  urinary  catheter,   
3) have  normal  urine  analysis  within  24 hours  pre-surgery,  and  
4)   able to provide  informed  consent.    
 
Women  with dialysis,  chronic urinary  infection,  and current  infection  will not be eligible  to participate.  
Women  who are pregnant  or breast  feeding  will not be included  in the study.   Men will not be included  
because  of their lower  incidence  of UTIs  compared  to our female  populat ion.   
 
The null hypothesis  is that there  will be no difference  in UTI rates  between  the standard  of care catheter  
placement  and the sterile  protocol  placement.   If we use the current  rates  of UTI after catheter  placement  
described  above  at 40%,  we would  need to enroll  100 patients  per arm (total  200) to see a 50% reduction  
in UTI rates  in the intervention  group  with an alpha  of 0.05 and a power  of 0.84.   The Gynecologic  
Oncology  services  averages  around  5 surgical  patients  who would  be eligible  for this study per week.   
We anticipate  needing  between  10-12 months  to complete  enrollment.  
 
c. Study  Design  and Research  Method.  We will conduct  a single -site Randomized  Control  Trial  
(RCT)  in order  to examine  the use of an aseptic  protocol  for catheter  insertion  during  gynecologic  
oncology  surgeries  for quality  improvement.   This study  will take place  at the UCH  inpatient  surgical  
unit of gynecologic  oncology.  The catheter  protocol  for QI will be conducted  in the operating  room  
prior  to surgery  and will not increas e prep time or operating  room  time.  Follow -up will be conducted  
during  standard  outpatient  care visits  and will also not increase  clinic  use time.  
 
The intervention  in this study  is a controlled  aseptic  pre-treatment  protocol  for catheter  use in the 
operat ing room  involving  dipping  the tip of the catheter  into betadine  prior  to insertion  and maintaining  
catheter  in the sterile  plastic  sleeve  during  preparation,  insertion  and post-operatively  to avoid  excess  
exposure  to the environment.  The Physician  perform ing the operation  will be responsible  for inserting  
the catheter.  Patients  with normal  UA pre-surgery  will be randomized  1:1 to one of two arms  prior  to 
surgery:   
 
1) Aseptic  protocol  for catheter  insertion  using  betadine  treated  catheter  and maintaining  plastic  
sleeve  on catheter  or  
2) SOC  catheter  insertion  in which  catheter  is inserted  right  out of package/non -treated  catheter.   
 
Prior  to study  initiation,  the PI will train providers  on the proper  use of the protocol.  Catheter  insertion  
procedures  will be documented  in the operation  note following  surgery.   Compliance  will be measured  
by adherence  to both betadine  use and maintenance  of plastic  sleeve.   Standard  of care practices  for 
infection  control  are to be conducted  by providers  on all participants.  This includes:  hand  hygiene,  
inserting  catheters  for appropriate  indications,  remove  catheters  when  no longer  needed,  maintain  a 
close  system  keeping  bag and tubing  below  the bladder.   
 
We will collect  general  patient  demographics  to assure  similarities  between  the randomized  groups.   
These  will include  age, race/ethnicity , BMI,  insurance  type,   diagnosis  (reason  for surgery),  history  of 
diabetes,  menopausal  status,  and smoking  status.  MRN  data will be collected  in order  to pull data 
directly  into the OnCore  data management  system.   
 
d.  Study  Procedures  
Participants will conduct the following study visits over 2 weeks . All costs associated with routine 
standard of care procedures for catheter insertions and diagnosing and treat ment of a UTI  will be the 
responsibility of the patient and/or their insurance provider.  All costs associated with procedures 
conducted for res earch only will be paid for by the research study.  
• Visit 1 Screening and Enrollment:  Potential participants will be screened and consented for 
study up to 30 days prior to their surgical procedure.  Inclusion/Exclusion criteria will be 
reviewed at the tim e of consent and baseline data including physical  exam, health history, 
clinical diagnosis and concomitant medications will be collected following consent.  A urine 
sample will be collected and analyzed 0-24 hours prior to procedure.  
• Visit 2 Randomization and Catheter Insertion:  Participants will be randomized to either the 
SOC catheter protocol or catheter  insertion inclu ding Betadine on the day of procedure.  
Standard protocol will be followed for cathet er preparation  and insertion.  Any adverse events 
following i nsertion will be  recorded. Pre-operative antibiotics will also be recorded.   
• Visit 3, 24 -hour post -op: Patients  will be assessed at 24 hours post -op in -patient.  A urine 
sample will be collected  and analyzed.  Any positive urine analysis will be further analyzed and 
confirmed by the UCH laboratory per SOC procedures.  Patients will be assessed for 
symptomatic signs of UTI and review of AEs following procedure .   
• Visit 4; 2 -week post op: Patients  will be assessed 2 -weeks post -op at their SOC post -op clinic 
visit.   A urine sample will be collected and analyzed.  Any positive urine analysis will be further 
analyzed and confirmed by the UCH laboratory per SOC procedures.  A physical exam will also 
be collected.  Patients will be assessed for symptomatic signs of UTI and review of  AEs and ED 
visits since the last visit.  Data including hospital stay, readmission, and antibiotic use will be 
collected.  Patient satisfaction  with catheter  procedure will also be collected. Patient will be 
finished with study following visit 4.  
  
e.  Description,  risks,  and justification  of procedures  and data  collection  tools:  
• Consent  and randomization:  Patients  will be randomized  to standard  of care intraoperative  
catheter  placement  versus  aseptic  protocol  for catheter  insertion  upon  providing  informed  
consent.   Randomization  will be performed  using  the REDCap  randomization  module  and will 
be performed  by the study  coordinator  or research  manager.  
• Urine  analysis  with urine  dip:  Patients  will be asked  to provide  a clean  catch  urine  sample  in 
provided  collection  cup prior  to surgery  (done  as standard  of care),  a catheter  collected  urine  
sample  at 24hrs  post-operatively  (research  procedure)  and another  clean  catch  specimen  at their 
2-week  surgical  follow -up (research  procedure).   This collection  and analysis  is low risk except  
for the possibility  of unnecessary  treatment  if abnormal  sample  is obtained.   Abnormal  samples  
will be correlated  with patient  history/ complaints  and confirmed  with formal  urine  analysis.   
Confirmation  of UTI would  also utilize  urine  culture.  The urine  analysis  by dip gives  a fast yet 
reliable  indicator  of urinary  tract infections.  Pre-operative/pre -randomization  allows  us to 
exclude  patients who may have  underlying  UTI prior  to initiation  of the study.   
• Catheter  placement:   The aseptic  protocol  involves  dipping  standard  catheter  in an aseptic  
betadine  solution  and leaving  a pre-existing  plastic  cover  in place  over the catheter  during  
insertion  and while  in place.   We do not anticipate  any added  risk of the aseptic  protocol  to the 
patient  although  patients  may experience  some  increased  irritation  due to the protective  plastic  
cover.  
 
Anticipated  Risks  
While  the study  anticipates  minimal  risks,  the following  outlines  any potential  minimum  risk to 
subjects:  
i. Breach  of Confidentiality:   Data  obtained  using  information  from  medical  records  poses  
minim al risk.  All procedures  in which  information  is being  obtained  will be conducted  per 
standard  of care.   There  is a risk that a patient’s  privacy  may not be protected.  This risk is 
uncommon.   
 
ii. Discomforts:   Persons  receiving  catheter  insertion  can anticipate  the following  risks:  
primarily  ascending  infection  of the urinary  tract.   This usually  presents  initially  with symptoms  
such as pain with urination,  urinary  urgency,  urinary  frequency,  abdominal  pain,  chills,  and/or  
fever.  As discussed  above  the number  of patients  with evidence  of clinical  (symptomatic)  and 
subclinical  (asymptomatic)  UTI has been  reported  to be as high as 40%.   Other  risks  of catheter  
placement  include  urinary  leakage  around  the catheter  and bladder  spasm/irritation  while  the 
catheter  is in place.   These  symptoms  usually  resolve  when  the catheter  is removed.   Uncommon  
risks  include  injury  to the bladder  or urethra,  urethral  narrowing  or urinary  stone  formation.   
Patients  in both arms  will be monitored  for these  risks  throughout  the study  period. The addition  
of Betadine  on the catherter  prior  to insertion  is not expected  to pose an increase  in the described  
risks  or discomforts.    
 
Participation  in this study  will not have  any influence  on the patient’s  current  treatment.  The study  
may inclu de risks  that are unknown  at this time.  
 
Event  reporting  
Adverse  Events  
An Adverse Event [AE] is defined as any unfavorable and unintended sign (including abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment 
or procedure, regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or procedure 
(attribution of unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable or definite).  An unanticipated event is defined 
as any adverse experience where th e nature, severity or frequency is not identified in the 
investigational brochure described in the application form or detailed in the consent form. This can 
also include non -compliance issues such as over enrollment of subjects without prior COMIRB 
approv al. 
 
Investigators  will report  the following  to COMIRB  within  5 days:  
• Adverse  events  which  in the opinion  of the principal  investigator  are both unexpected  and 
probably  or definitely  related  to the intervention/  drug or device.  
• Probably  related : In the opinion  of the PI, it is more  likely  than not that the adverse  event  is 
related  to the study  intervention.  
• Definitely  related : In the opinion  of the PI, it is very likely  that the adverse  event  is related  to 
the study  intervention  
• An unforeseen  development  that potentially  increases  the likelihood  of harm  to participants  or 
others  in the future.  
• Information  that indicates  a change  to the risks  or potential  benefits  of the research  
 
Adverse  events  that are deemed  not related  will be documented  in the study  AE log, subject  study  
charts,  and reported  to COMIRB  at the time of annual  review,  per their policy.  The PI will review  
AEs on an ongoing  basis .  
 
Anticipated  clinical  adverse  events  associated  with urine  catheter  is: urethral/bladder  irritation  
requiring  removal  of catheter  prematurely,  bladder  or urethral  injuries  related  to catheter  placement,  
folliculitis  of the genital  area,  change  in urine  color  and UTI infection.   Symptoms  of a UTI are 
anticipated  and include :  fever,  chills,  urethral  discomfort,  incontinence,  dark urine,  urinary  pain,  
suprapubic  tenderness  or pelvic  pain,  urinary  urgency,  frequency  or dysuria,  antibiotic  use, 
prolonged  hospital  stay or readmission  following  symptoms.  Severe  UTIs  may result  in spread  to 
the kidneys  and present  with abnormal  kidney  function  assessment.   
 
Anticipated  clinical  adverse  events  associated  with the use of Betadine  are as follows:  
• Common:  skin irritation  (burning,  redness,  or general  irritation)  
• Rare  but Severe:  severe  allergic  reaction  including  rash,  gives,  itching,  difficult  breathing,  
tightness  of the chest,  swelling  of the face,  lips or tongue.    
• Unlikely:  balance/hearing  problems,  hair bumps  (folliculitis),  change  in the amount  of urine  
 
There  are no known  contraindicated  medications  associated  with the use of Betadine.    
 
Serious  Adverse  Event   
A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence at any dose that:  
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening (defined as an event in w hich the subject was at risk of death at the time of 
the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were 
more severe)  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing hospitalization (see 
NOTE*: below for exceptions)  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
Is an important medical event, defined as a medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospital ization but, based on appropriate medical and scientific 
judgment, may jeopardize the subject or may require intervention (e.g., medical, surgical) to 
prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed above.  
Suspected transmission of an infectious agent (e.g., pathogenic or non -pathogenic) via the study 
treatment is an SAE.  
 
*NOTE: The following hospitalizations are not considered SAEs:  
• A visit to the emergency room or other hospital department lasting less than 24  hours that does 
not result in admission (unless considered an “important medical event” or a life -threatening 
event)  
• Elective surgery planned before signing consent  
• Admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical procedure  
• Routine health assessment requiring admission for baseline/trending of health status (e.g., 
routine colonoscopy)  
• Medical/surgical admission other than remedying ill health state that was planned before study 
entry. Appropriate documentation is required in these cases  
• Adm ission encountered for another life circumstance that carries no bearing on health status and 
requires no medical/surgical intervention (eg, lack of housing, economic inadequacy, caregiver 
respite, family circumstances, administrative reason)  
• Admission for  treatment of suspected/confirmed UTI as this is an anticipated risk and the 
primary outcome  
 
Participants  experiencing  a SAE  should  be discontinued  from  the study  and followed  per clinical  
standard  of care.   SAEs  should  be documented  on the AE CRF  and reported  to the IRB within  48 
hours  of notification  of event.    
 
There  are no known  reports  of serious  adverse  events  following  standard  practice  of urine  catheter  
insertion  or associated  with the use of Betadine.   
 
 
 
 
 
Data  Collection  and Confidentiality  
This study will obtain approval for conduct through the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review 
Board (COMIRB) for research involving human subjects.  All patients within the Gynecologic 
Oncology clinic at the University of Colorado Cancer C enter who meet the study criteria will be 
considered eligible for the study.  We will not include any vulnerable populations as defined by 
ethical guidelines. Potential participants will be screened by the PI/Co -I and the research team and 
approached for c onsent.  Consent will occur prior to the initiation of any study procedures at a 
scheduled clinic visit in the Gynecologic Oncology clinics of participating sites. Potential 
participants will be provided a private setting for in -person consent and will be adequately informed 
of the study intent, requirements, and potential risks and benefits.  Patients will also be informed 
that any participation is voluntary and will not affect any clinical care they are to receive. Research 
staff providing consent will be  certified in Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) and 
Human Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) trainings for ethics and human 
protection.  Patients will have time to review the consent and ask any questions prior to sig ning 
consent.  
 
Data Collection Tools  
Data  will be collected  using  clinical  research  forms  (CRFs)  followed  by entry  into the OnCore  
clinical  trials  management  system.  Research  coordinators  should  verify  all demographic  and health  
history  to the participant’s  medical  records  prior  to entry  into OnCore . OnCore  is a secure,  HIOAA  
compliant  management  system  available  to trained  investigators  on the UCD  network  server.  
OnCore  provide s: 1) secured  interface  for validated  data entry,  2) audit  trails  for tracking  data 
manipulations  and data storage  and export  procedures,  3) automated  export  procedures  for seamless  
data downloads  to common  statistical  packages,  and 4) a library  of all approved  regulatory  
documents  including  amendments  and consents . The University  of Colorado  Denver  Informational  
Technology  (IT) department  will provide  the host services  for OnCore . Data  extracted  from  the 
database  for analysis  will de-identified  and linked  to the original  source  using  only a coded  study  
number.   All analysi s will be conducted  using  SPSS  statistical  software  program.   
 
Study  documents  include  study  consent,  CRFs,  and a study  survey . A study  file should  be 
constructed  for each participant  for maintaining  these  documents.   All paper  records  will be securely  
stored in the locked  research  offices  with limited  access.  Study  databases  will be stored  on secure  
computers  of the research  team  and backed  by the secured  server  of the University  of Colorado  
Denver.    
 
Data  sources  will not be shared  with outside  instituti ons. Data  shared  among  the researchers  will be 
sent in encrypted  email  messages.   All data will be maintained  until completion  of study  and 
properly  stored  per federal  regulations  after completion  of study  analysis.   Any data remaining  on 
research  electron ic devices  (recording  devices,  computers  hard drives)  will be properly  destroyed  
with the assistance  of the University  IT department.   
 
 
V. Trial  Oversight  
The Principal  Investigator  will be responsible  for the conduct  of this study,  overseeing  participant  
safety,  executing  the data and safety  monitoring  (DSM)  plan,  and complying  with all reporting  
requirements  to local  and federal  authorities.  This oversight  will be accomplished  through  
additional  oversight  from  the Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  at the University  of 
Colorado  Cancer  Center  (CU Cancer  Center).   The DSMC  is responsible  for ensuring  data quality  
and study  participant  safety  for all trials  at the CU Cancer  Center.    A summary  of the DSMC’s 
activities  is as follows:  
• Conduct  of internal  audits  
• Ongoing  review  of all serious  adverse  events  (SAEs),  unanticipated  problems  (UAPs)  and 
reportable  adverse  events  (AEs)  
• Has the authority  to close  and/or  suspend  studies  for safety  or conduct  issues  
• May submit  recommendations  for corrective  actions  to the CU Cancer  Center’s Executive  
Committee  
 
Per the CU Cancer  Center  Institutional  DSM  Plan,  SAEs,  UAPs  and reportable  AEs are reported  
to the DSMC,  IRB and the sponsor  (if applicable)  per study  protocol.   All SAEs,  UAPs  and 
reportable  AEs are to be reported  to the DSMC  within  5 business  days of the Principal  
Investigator  receiving  notification  of the occurrence.  
 
Study  audits  conducted  by the DSMC  will consist  of a review  of the regulat ory documents,  
consent  forms,  and source  data verification.    
 
Documentation  of the audit  conducted  by the DSMC  will then need  to be submitted  to the IRB of 
record  at the time of the IRB’s continuing  review  of this trial. 
 
 Potential  scientific  problems:  
This study  proposes  the use of a simplified  peri-operative  catheter  insertion  protocol  aimed  at 
reducing  the rates  of urinary  tract infections  after catheter  placement.   If effective  this could  be 
represent  a low-cost, low-effort  intervention  however  obtain ing a clinically  meaningful  response  
may be the biggest  limitation  of this study.   Although  UTI rates  are relatively  high after post-surgical  
catheter  placement  and there  have  been  several  studies  showing  some  reductions,  there  are 
numerous  additional  studies which  have  failed  to show  a difference.   Our goal here is not to merely  
achieve  a statistically  significant  but rather  a clinically  meaningful  response.   We therefore  powered  
our study  to look for at least a 50% reduction  in the rate of UTI’s.   
 
Additionally,  there  is and will remain  practice  variations  in catheter  placement.   While  we hope  to find 
a difference  despite  these  differences,  it is possible  that the intervention  may give a false  impression  of 
improvement  simply  by focusing  attention  on a protocol.  While  it is difficult  to remove  confounding  
from  any study,  randomization  and analysis  adjustments  will be used to reduce  as much  as possible.  
 
VI. Data  Analysis  Plan:   
This study  will assess  a population  of patients  undergoing  extended  surger y requiring  catheter  
placement  to be performed  by the Gynecologic  Oncology  service.   De-identified  patient  data will be 
collected  into OnCore  and exported  to SPSS  for data analysis.   Initial  summary  statistics  will be 
performed  to report  the distribution  of the data,  including  variable  means,  medians,  proportions  and 
missing  data.    
 
An intent -to-treat analysis  will be conducted.   All participants  receiving  treatment  per protocol  will be 
included  in the final analysis.   If there  are any participants  who are randomized  but do not receive  the 
intended  treatment,  we will document  the reasons  for their being  withheld  treatment.     
 
For the primary  outcome  measure  of UTI rate at each of the time points  (24 hours  and 14 +/- 2 days),  
we will perform  a test of binom ial proportions  for testing  the null hypothesis  of no difference  between  
the treatment  arms.   Because  we are performing  tests at two time points,  we will adjust  for the multiple  
comparisons  using  Bonferroni ’s method.    
 
We will also explore  the association  between  treatment  arms  and other  covariates  (symptomatic  and 
demographics  factors)  using  bivariate  methods.  The particular  analysis  method  for testing  the 
association  between  them  will depend  on the distribution  of the covariates.  For example,  symptomatic  
presentation  variables  (fever,  pelvic  pain,  sense  of urgency  or dysuria,  and antibiotic  use) are 
categorical,  and their association  with treatment  arm will be evaluated  with a chi-square  statistic.  
 
For demographic  variables,  Student ’s t-test (for continuous  variables)  and chi-square  tests (for 
categorical  variables)  will be used to compare  the two treatment  arms.  Variables  found  to be significant  
in these  bivariate  analyses  will be included  in multivariable  analysis  using logistic  regression.  Logistic  
regression  models  will be used to identify  significant  independent  predictors  associated  with UTI 
occurrence  for each treatment  arm. We will fit separate  logistic  regression  models  for UTI occurrence  
at the two time points.  The logistic  model  will allow  for control  of study  covariates  simultaneously.  A 
p-value  of <0.005  will be used to demonstrate  statistical  significance.   IBM  SPSS  version  23 will be 
used for all statistical  analyses.  
 
Secondary  outcomes  will include  a cost-analysis  of the two treatment  protocols  and a patient  satisfaction  
query  in regards  to the catheter  procedure.   
• Cost-analysis:  The cost-effectiveness  of the interventions  will be assessed  using  hospital  stay, 
readmissions , clinic/ED  visits,  and antibiotic  costs  per patient  during  the study  period.   An 
estimate  of patient  care costs  will be derived  using  standard  cost data described  in the literature.   
The two groups  will be compared  in terms  of average  cost of treatment  with a 95% confidence  
interval  using  a Bayesian  statistic.   
• Satisfaction:  Patient  satisfaction  with the catheter  protocol  will be measured  using  a Likert -like 
scale  questionnaire .  Resp onses  between  the two groups  will be compared  using  a Mann -
Whitney -Wilcoxon  statistic.  
 
VII. Summarized  Knowledge  to be gained:  
This study  aims  to reduce  the incidence  of urinary  tract infections  in patients  undergoing  surgery  on the 
Gynecologic  Oncology  service  through  an aseptic  protocol  for placement.   Such  quality  improvement  
studies  are neede d to help reduce  complication  rates  and health -care costs.  
 
VIII . References:  
 
 
1. Septimus,  E.J. and J. Moody,  Prevention  of Device -Related  Healthcare -Associated  Infections.  
F1000Res,  2016.  5. 
2. Stephan,  F., et al., Reduction  of urinary  tract  infection  and antibiotic  use after  surgery:  a 
controlled,  prospective,  before -after  intervention  study.  Clin Infect  Dis, 2006.  42(11):  p. 1544 -51. 
3. Barbadoro,  P., et al., Catheter -associated  urinary  tract  infection:  Role  of the setting  of catheter  
insertion.  Am J Infect  Control,  2015.  43(7): p. 707-10. 
4. Amine,  A.E.,  M.O.  Helal,  and W.M.  Bakr,  Evaluation  of an intervention  program  to prevent  
hospital -acquired  catheter -associated  urinary  tract  infections  in an ICU in a rural  Egypt  hospital.  
GMS  Hyg Infect  Control,  2014.  9(2): p. Doc15.  
5. Singh,  S., et al., Surveillance  of device -associated  infections  at a teaching  hospital  in rural  
Gujarat --India.  Indian  J Med Microbiol,  2010.  28(4): p. 342-7. 