[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Feasibility of a personalized dosimetry-based treatment planning for
Radioembolization in the treatment of Secondary Malignancies in Liver
02 February 2021
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 1 of 12 
 Date: February 2, 2021 
Principal Investigator: Robert Hobbs, PhD 
Application Number: IRB00230836 
 
 
 
JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
 
  
 Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm A, insertin g the appropriate material 
in each. If a section is not app licable, leave heading in and i nsert N/A. 
 When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised), enter the dat e submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM IRB eForm A. 
 
*************************************************************** ************************************ 
Feasibility of a personalized dosimetry-based treatment plannin g for 
Radioembolization in the treat ment of Secondary Malignancies in  Liver  
 
1. Abstract 
 
Trans-arterial Radio-emboliza tion (TARE) therapy of liver neopl asia using 90Y-theraspheres has a 
long history (see Background sectio n). The device is FDA approv ed for the treatment of primary 
and secondary liver neoplasia, c linically performed under Human itarian Device Exemption 
protocols, previously app roved IRB00078140 / CR00021884. This p rotocol seeks to acquire the 
imaging information from additi onal 3-5 patients that will demo nstrate feasibility of a personalized 
dosimetry-based treatment planning for TARE.  The rationale for this proposed personalized 
90Y treatment planning is du e to a current clinical 
Therasphere dose calculation (as a targeted radioactive therapy ), and within radiopharmaceutical 
therapy (RPT) overall presents a s an opportunity gap. The curre nt TARE dose calculation suffers 
from an imprecise efficienc y characterization of the 90Y radiopharmaceutical therapy (RPT) in 
general; namely, that the activity  to treat the patient is not optimized to normal organ tolerated 
absorbed dose and tumor efficacy thresholds. The current amount  of activity to be administered is 
calculated from tissue volumetric s established from imaging, ei ther MRI or X-ray CT. The total 
volume of irradiated tissue is  considered as irrigated by the s upply hepatic artery selected for 
administration, including both liver tumor and normal tissue. F rom this volume determination, the 
activity necessary to deliver an a verage pre-determined safe ab sorbed dose (120 Gy) to the entire 
irradiated region is calculat ed and administered. We propose a more accurate personalized 
treatment planning technique  in a small group of patients. 
 As a generalization, RPT in the t heranostic paradigm, a quantit y of predetermined activity of a pre-
therapeutic surrogate is admini stered to the patient; 3D imagin g (SPECT/CT or PET/CT) is then 
acquired at several time points. T hen the individual patient’s pharmacokinetics are determined, the 
normal organ and tumor dosimetry a re performed and the optimal administered activity calculated 
that will deliver safe and effi cacious treatment for the indivi dual patient is determined, generally 
limited by the normal organ at risk maximum tolerated dose.   TARE presents a number of unique cha racteristics that enable a simpler version of this approach 
than is typical for most RPT . The method of hepatic intra-arter ial administration means that only 
the normal liver and lungs are th e potential organs at risk as the microspheres embolize and do not 
circulate systemically. The l ack of associated photons in the 
90Y decay chain means that a simple 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 2 of 12 
 activity-to-dose-rate conversion can be used. In addition, the embolization means that only a single 
imaging time point is necessary, as there is no redistribution of activity over time and the dose rate 
is converted to absorbed dose using the physical decay paramete rs of 90Y. These natural 
simplifications are already expl oited in the current volumetric  paradigm, where a 99mTc-macro 
albumin aggregate (MAA) surrogate and planar imaging are used t o determine the fraction of total 
activity that is shunted to the lung and where a derived conver sion factor is used t o convert activity 
to absorbed dose.  The technical weakness in TARE  planning is that the surrogate (
99mTc-MAA) has a different nature 
from the therapeutic device (90Y-theraspheres), and thus the re liability of the predictive qua lity of 
the surrogate is regarded as s uboptimal, albeit accepted in cur rent clinical practice and presents an 
opportunity for improvement. W ith precise advanced imaging reco nstruction and dosimetry, we 
have shown previously, it is possi ble to accurately and precise ly predict normal liver and tumor 
average 90Y-therasphere uptake and absorbed dose from 99mTc-MAA surrogate. This protocol 
seeks to acquire the imaging inf ormation from 3-5 patients that  will demonstrat e feasibility of 
future implementation of personal  dosimetry-based treatment pla nning for TARE.  
 The proposed changes to the exis ting clinical protocol for this  small cohort are:  
 1. A single SPECT/CT instead of t he current planar imaging will  be acquired of the surrogate 
99mTc-MAA;  
2. An additional single 3D imagi ng study (either SPECT/CT or PE T/CT, depending on machine 
availability) will be acquire d up to 12 hours post-administrati on of the therapeutic 90Y-
microspheres for comparison. The images in institutional PACS ( Carestream) will be de-identified, 
stored on JH OneDrive for analy sis, and analyzed with study par tners Radiopharmaceutical 
Imaging and Dosimetry, LLC (RAPID). 
 
2. Objectives: 
 
 To investigate whether the  dose predicted by pre-therapy 99mTc MAA SPECT predicts the dose to 
the liver from the 90Y microspheres as assess ed by post-therapy by either 90Y SPECT/CT or 
PET/CT. 
 3. Background (briefly describe pre -clinical and clinica l data, current exper ience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other rele vant information to justify t he research) 
 
Primary and secondary liver cancer patients are treated in this  institution under the HUD protocol 
IRB00078140 / CR00021884. More specifi cally, the group to be st udied are patients with secondary 
malignancies (e.g.: Colorectal can cer (CRC), which is the third  most common cancer diagnosed 
among both men and women in the US) . The American Cancer Societ y estimates that 
approximately 148,810 new cases of c olorectal cancer and 49,960  deaths were expected in 2008. 
Hepatic metastases are presen t in 15–25% of patients at present ation, and an additional 25–50% will 
develop liver metastases with in 3 years following resection of the primary tumor [1, 2]. In 
approximately half of these patien ts, metastatic disease is con fined to the liver, and 20% of all 
patients who die of metastatic co lorectal cancer h ave metastase s limited to the liver. 
 
Previously reports of Radioembolization used in CRC patients in clude Benson et al., [3] reported 
the results of the first prospective multi-institutional phase II study of TheraSphere
® in a heavily 
pretreated metastatic liver ne oplasia population.  One hundred- fifty one patients with liver 
metastasis (Colorectal n=61, neuroendocrine n=43 and other tumo r types n=47) were enrolled.  The 
primary endpoint was progression- free survival (PFS); secondary  end-points included safety; 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 3 of 12 
 hepatic progression-free surv ival (HPFS), response rate and ove rall survival.  Median PFS was 2.9 
month (CRC) and 2.8 month (other pr imaries).  PFS was not achie ved in the neuroendocrine group.  
Median survival was 8.8 mont hs (CRC) and 10.4 months (the other  populations).  Median survival 
for neuroendocrine patients had not been reached.  No new safet y issues were reported. In addition, 
treatment parameters includi ng dose delivery were reproducible among centers.  
 TheraSphere
® was recently evaluated in a cohort of seventy‐two patients wit h unresectable hepatic 
colorectal metastases who were tr eated at a targeted absorbed d ose of 120 Gy with a median 
delivered dose of 118 Gy [4]. TheraSphere® was well tolerated with a t umor response rate of 40.3%. 
The median time to hepatic pr ogression was 15.4 months, the med ian response duration was 15 
months, and the overall survival from the first TheraSphere® treatment was 14.5 months. The 
presence of unresectable metastatic lesions in the liver remain s a key cause of mortality in patients 
with colorectal cancer requiri ng intensive treatment [5]. 
 An expanded analysis was conducte d, which included patients fro m Mulcahy et al.
 [4], where 
subsequent outcomes in unresectabl e hepatic colorectal metastas es were reported by Lewandowski 
et al. in a cohort of two hundre d and fourteen (214) patients [ 6]. All patients w ere refractory to 
previous systemic/locoregional therapy.  As with Mulcahy et al. , decision to treat was determined 
by a multidisciplinary team of medical/surgical oncologists and  interventional radiologists.  The 
median radiation dose to the l iver was 122 Gy with no evidence of radiation induced liver disease or 
gastric ulceration although Grade  4 absolute lymphocyte and ALP  toxicities were observed in 5% 
and 3% of patients respectively.  Median overall survival was 4 3.0 months from diagnosis of 
primary tumor, 34.6 months from diagnosis of hepatic metastases  and 10.6 months from first 
TheraSphere® treatment.  The presence of ext rahepatic disea se (42%), poor p erformance status and 
poor liver function negatively aff ected survival outcomes follo wing TheraSphere® treatment. 
 
Johns Hopkins Hospital has been a n early and active participant  in various clinical trials and has an 
active RE program for the treatme nt of liver cancer. From July 16, 2001 through February 2015, a 
total of 363 TheraSphere treatme nts were performed, with simila r procedure volumes since. 
 We have recently performed a n IRB approved study comparing 
90Y PET and quantitative 
bremsstrahlung SPECT (QBSPECT) and a study in HCC to validate t he use of MAA imaging and 
CBCT tumor delineation to provide estimates of 90Y activity distribution i n normal organs and liver. 
Excellent agreement was obtai ned on a voxel, whole organ, and s ub-organ level. This work is 
published [7].  We have performed 3D dosimetric computations on MAA SPECT and 
90Y QBSPECT and PET 
images. The resulting 3D dose dist ributions were registered via  the CT images. We compared AD 
estimates in lung, treated norma l liver, and tumor volumes from  MAA imaging to from 90Y 
QBSPECT in 20 patients receiving l obar therapy for HCC. VOIs fo r the normal treated liver and 
tumor volumes were defined on CBC T (18 patients) or contrast-en hanced MR images (2 patients 
where CBCT was not available), whi ch were then r egistered to th e nuclear medicine images. Lung 
VOIs were defined in CT images for  the MAA and QBSPECT images. ADs in these 3 regions were 
computed and compared. For the l ung region, we also computed th e dose using standard planar 
imaging methods.   From these data, we observed tha t the MAA planar imaging overes timated the lung dose compared 
to the estimate from MAA SPECT in 9 out of 10 patients, with an  average overestimate by a factor 
of 4.2 ± 4.3 (range 0.96-12.7). In one patient, the planar esti mate of lung dose was 38 Gy, greater 
than the 30 Gy lung dose limit for TheraSphere, and thus requir ed reducing the administered 
activity. The MAA SPECT overestim ated the lung dose compared to  the dose estimated from 
90Y 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 4 of 12 
 QBSPECT in all cases: the 90Y dose was < 0.1 Gy for 7 out of  10 patients, and the MAA dose was 
larger than the 90Y dose by factors of 8.9, 32, and 5.2 for  the remaining cases. In the patient with a 
38 Gy lung dose estimated from MAA  planar imaging, the doses fr om MAA and 90Y SPECT were 
14, and 1.57 Gy, respectively. These data justify the use of MA A SPECT instead of planar imaging 
to estimate the lung dose, and indicate that MAA AD estimates p rovide a significant margin for 
error over the actual dose from 90Y. The differences can be expl ained by the presence of small 
particles or free Tc ( size <15 µm) in the MAA.  
 Most importantly from the sta ndpoint of being abl e to predict n ormal organ dose and therefore 
provide safe and effective treatm ent planning, we also compared  the tumor and treated normal liver 
doses estimated from MAA SPECT  with those from post-therapy 
90Y QBSPECT. The differences 
in the liver AD ranged from -8 t o 6% (mean 1% ± 6%), indicating  that the MAA can predict normal 
liver AD very accurately, even in extreme cases where the corre lation is not visually apparent. 
Moreover, as is consistent with e xperience from a wide range of  experience in all RPTs (refs), the 
average absorbed dose to the dose limiting normal organ (liver)  varied widely from patient to 
patient indicating th e potential for a significant safe increas e in potential activity administered 
(average of 60 %) and consequently  a proportionately higher abs orbed dose to the tumor and a 
probable increase in the chance  of tumor control (calculated as  99.8 % of tumor contro l probability 
vs. 72 % using the tumor control threshold of 235 Gy as establi shed by Garin et al. [8]).  
  
4. Study Procedures  
 
This is an observational treatment use protocol that will provi de IRB oversight and documentation 
of the clinical experience of pa tients undergoing treatment for  metastatic colorectal cancer in the 
liver using TheraSphere® under an HDE,  IRB00078140 / CR00021884. We pr oposed to enroll 3-5 
patients from this clinical t reatment group. Study participatio n involves an additional post-
treatment SPECT/CT or PET/CT scan (up to 12 hours post-treatmen t). Patients will be followed 
for treatment-related adverse expe riences for a minimum of 30 d ays after each treatment per 
clinical protocol.  Patients shall be screened to be  enrolled and, if eligible, the  physician and patient will discuss a 
standard of care TheraSphere
® treatment plan. The patient will be asked to provide consent i n 
accordance with IRB approval.  Prior to initial treatment, s tandard of care Shunt Study, the 
99mTc MAA SPECT/CT scan of the 
liver and lungs will be performed using standard institutional practices.  
 The TheraSphere
® dose will be ordered (per standard of care) and initial treatm ent scheduled.  
TheraSphere® treatment will be performe d in an outpatient setting.  
 
Following treatment, patients will remain at the hospital under  medical observation until the 
physician determines that they can safely be discharged to home . The patient will undergo an 
additional SPECT/CT or PET/CT scan of the liver and lungs which  is not part of the standard of 
care at up to 12 hours post-treatment. All patients will be eva luated 3-6 weeks post-treatment to 
assess clinical experience and adve rse experiences. Subsequentl y, patient status will be followed 
via communication with the refer ring physician to determine dis ease status and long term treatment 
outcome according to standa rd of care practice.  
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 5 of 12 
  
Patients will have 1-2 outpatient  visits for pre-treatment eval uation to determine initial eligibility to 
receive TheraSphere®, followed by a treatment visit fo r outpatient delivery of Ther aSphere®, and at 
least 1 follow-up visit 3-6 week s after initia l treatment. 
 
If more than one treatment is  given, additional follow-up visit s will occur after each treatment 
following institutional guidelines. Subsequent follow-up contac ts will be made with the referring 
physician.  Patients will be aske d to provide consent for medic al record review after treatment.  
 
No scheduled hospitalizations w ill be required for the study. D escription of the procedure 
(standard of care) is detaile d in previously approved IRB000781 40 / CR00021884,  
 
 
Pre-Treatment Evaluation 
The clinician will explain the pr ocedure and treatment options to the patient and, if the patient 
wishes to proceed with treatment, the patient will indicate the ir informed consent in accordance 
with JHU IRB requirements.  
 
Pre-treatment evaluation will include initial screening by hist ory, physical examination, laboratory 
and diagnostic studies (hepatic angiography and 99mTc MAA SPECT/CT). A treatment plan will be 
developed, dosage will be calculated, and the TheraSphere® dose vial will be ordered from Boston 
Scientific. 
 
Clinical and Laboratory Diagnostic Procedures 
A history, physical examination a nd clinical interview will be completed. The diagnostic laboratory 
studies usually performed with in 30 days of beginning TheraSphe re® treatment are:  
 Complete blood count with differe ntial and platelet count 
 Prothrombin Time/Partial Thromboplastin Time 
 Serum Chemistry Panel, including : Electrolytes, BUN, AST, ALT, Creatinine, LDH, Glucose, 
Alkaline Phosphatase, Albumin and Total Bilirubin; Serum alphaf etoprotein level (optional) 
 
Diagnostic Imaging Studies  
The following diagnostic radiograp hic studies may be performed:  
 Chest X-Ray: Standard views of t he chest may be taken (at discr etion of physician) 
 Computed Tomography Scanning or Magnetic Resonance Imaging or C one-beam Computed 
Tomography or Angiography of  the Abdomen/Liver 
 99mTc MAA SPECT/CT Scan 
 Post-therapy 90Y SPECT/CT or PET/CT scan 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 6 of 12 
  
CT/MR/CBCT/angiography scanning of  the liver will be performed and the images used to 
calculate the appropriate liv er volume for TheraSphere® dose determination. Reasonable attempts 
will be made to use the same imaging modality as that used for pre-treatment for all subsequent 
evaluations of the patient rel ated to dose determination. 
 
The dose is calculated as describe d below using the appropriate  reference liver volume and mass. 
Dosimetric techniques for TheraSphere® are discussed in detail in the  peer-reviewed literature.48-51 
The imaging scan also is used to document the location and size  of the hepatic lesion(s) and 
vascular anatomy (MRI only) where possible. 
 
Prior to first TheraSphere® treatment, a 99mTc MAA SPECT/CT scan will be performed to obtain a 
preliminary assessment of hepatic infusion and any potential ex trahepatic shunting or 
gastrointestinal flow. Lung Shunt  Fraction will be determined a s the ratio of total lung activity 
divided by administered activity. I f the entire lung cannot be imaged in a single scan, the measured 
activity concentration in the lungs will be used and scaled to the lung volume. 
 
If gastrointestinal flow is dete cted, steps will be undertaken (embolization, change in catheter 
position) to correct this flow, prior to TheraSphere® administration. If gastro intestinal flow cannot 
be corrected using established a ngiographic techniques, the pat ient may not receive TheraSphere® 
treatment. Only after extrahepati c exposure has been evaluated and the patient deemed to meet 
eligibility criteria, may TheraSphere® be administered. Comprehensive and exhaustive reviews of 
the angiographic and technical con siderations prior to TheraSph ere® have been published.48-51  
 
To be eligible to receive TheraSphere® treatment, the potential absorb ed dose to the lungs must be 
<30 Gy (<16.5mCi of injected act ivity) per single injection, an d < 50 Gy for multiple injections. 
Any uncorrected detectable gastroin testinal flow is a contraind ication to TheraSphere® treatment. 
 
Treatment Planning 
The principal clinician or Authorized User will formulate the i nitial treatment plan, indicating the 
number and sequence of planned TheraSphere® treatments. The clinician will assure that the patient 
understands the two-stage screening process that is necessary f or this treatment procedure. The 
physician and patient will discus s and agree on a contingency t reatment plan, including the option 
of no treatment, in the event tha t the patient is found ineligi ble to receive TheraSphere® after 
catheter placement. The Treatme nt Plan may be modified followin g initial treatment, based on 
clinical experience and patient r esponse to treatment. Treatmen t of a second target tissue will be 
timed to occur within 30-90 da ys of initial TheraSphere® treatment. Patients whose treatment plan 
includes subsequent tre atment with TheraSphere® must satisfy all applicable exclusion criteria 
again, prior to treatment.  
 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 7 of 12 
 TheraSphere® Dose Calculation 
The most commonly used target dose of TheraSphere®, within the approved dose range of 80-150 
Gy, is 110-120 Gy. Depending on the  timing of the product order  relative to the TheraSphere® 
production schedule, and the treat ment date proposed for the pa tient, it may be necessary to allow 
TheraSphere® to physically decay to the appropr iate targeted activity befor e injection.  
 
The amount of radioactivity req uired to deliver the dose to the  selected liver tar get is calculated 
using the following formula: 
 
Activity Required (GBq) = [Desired Dose (G y)][ Mass of Selected Liver Target (kg)] 
                                                                                                       49.8[1-F]0.99  
 
Where F is the fraction of inj ected activity deposited into the  lungs as measured by Tc-99m MAA 
SPECT, 49.8 is a conversion fact or and the 0.99 anticipates a r esidual activity of 1 %.  
 
In nearly all cases, more tha n 95% of the glass microspheres ar e delivered. Calculation of the 
average dose (Gy) to the treate d area delivered after injection  uses the following formula: 
 
Dose (Gy) =49.8[Injected Activity (GBq)][1-F][1-R] 
                                                                           Mass of Selected Liver Target (kg) 
 
Where F is the fraction of inj ected activity deposited into the  lungs as measured by Tc-99m MAA 
SPECT and R is the calcu lated residual [9].  
 
No blinding, placebo or non-treatm ent group exists; the researc h component only includes an 
additional SPECT/CT or PET/CT 0-12 hours after administration ( treatment). The patient may 
decline the extra scan at any poi nt of the procedure including after administration, which will not 
affect the therapy. The results of the post-implant scan will n ot affect the patient therapy. 
 
Data Analysis  
We propose to use the data obtaine d from the 3 patients partici pating in this study along with data 
from 17 patients available from a previous IRB-approved study t o assess the ability of 99mTc MAA 
SPECT/CT images to predict 90Y dose to the liver estimated from post-Therapy 90Y imaging. To 
do this, the MAA and 90Y images with be reconstructed a nd quantified to obtain 3D acti vity 
distribution images. Tumors a nd normal liver regions will be de lineated with the aid of CBCT and 
diagnostic CT or MRI images. We will use the average activities  in the tumors and normal liver 
parenchyma obtained in the M AA images to estimate the 90Y activity activity that would be 
delivered to each region. We will then apply 3D dosimetry metho ds [10, 11] to calculate the 
average doses to the tumors and normal liver parenchyma from bo th the 90Y images and the 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 8 of 12 
 estimated 90Y distribution obtained from the SPECT/CT images. We will then compare the dose 
estimates to these to tumor s and normal liver obtained by these  two methods.  
 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 Inclusion Criteria (per cu rrent clinical criteria) 
 The Diagnosis of secondary mali gnancy to the liver for patients  who have failed or are intolerant to 
other systemic or liver  directed therapies. A patient is considered to have failed other systemic or 
liver-directed therapies when, in the opinion of the referring phys ician, the patient has progression 
of disease after receiving standard approved therapi es. Specifically, if a patie nt has failed first line 
chemotherapy (or the standard approved therapies for secondary malignancy), in the time period 
designed to assess that particular regimen (at least 30 days), then they may be enrolled on this 
protocol.A patient is considered to  be intolerant to other systemic  or liver-directed therapies when, 
in the opinion of the referring physician, the patient is unable to tolerate appropriate 
chemotherapy.  Patients may have residual toxicity  from previous therapies (e.g., neuropathy from 
oxaliplatin), have performance status such that tr eatment with systemic therapies would result in 
excessive toxicity. 
 The histopathology confirmation c riterion may be waived in pati ents with a radiographically 
identifiable liver mass, known l aboratory or clinical risk fact ors for cancer or elevated tumor 
markers such as alphafetoprotein (AFP)
47 and clinical findings. Guide lines from the American 
Association for the Study of Liv er Diseases (AASLD) and the Eur opean Association for the Study 
of the Liver (EASL) describe i n detail the approach and algorit hm for diagnosing. 
 Patients with a diagnosis of met astatic cancer to the liver  
 Liver metastases are unresectable 
 Tumor replacement  70% of total liver volume base d on visual estimation by the In vestigator 
 Tumors are hypervascular base d on visual estimation by the Inve stigator 
 Target tumors are measurable us ing standard imaging techniques 
 ECOG Performance Status Score 0 - 2 
 Age ≥18 years 
 Life expectancy ≥3 months 
 >4 weeks since prior radiation, surgery or chemotherapy 
 Able to comprehend and provide written informed consent in acco rdance with institutional and 
federal guidelines 
    At least one month has elapse d since most recent prior cance r therapy with the following 
exception: 
o Chemotherapy may continue if th ere is eviden ce of progression i n the liver on 
treatment providing there is no cha nge in the chemotherapy regi men in the 1 month 
prior to TheraSphere treatment  and that any immediate chemother apeutic toxicity 
that could complicate TheraSphere  treatment is resolved. In thi s case, chemotherapy 
may continue after a minimum of 7 d ays following TheraSphere tr eatment for the 
purpose of controlling extrahepatic disease. 
 Patient is willing to participat e in the study and has signed t he study informed consent 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 9 of 12 
  
Exclusion Criteria 
Patients may not be treated with TheraSphere® if they have any of the following exclusions: 
 Any pre-treatment laboratory fi ndings within 15 days of treatme nt demonstrating liver dysfunction: 
 AST or ALT >5 times UNL 
 Serum creatinine 2.0 mg/dL, unless on dialysis 
 Serum total bilirubin  2.0 mg/dL 
 Albumin < 2.0 g/dL 
 Any history of hepatic  encephalopathy 
 Any contraindications to angiogr aphy and hepatic artery cathete rization such as: 
 History of severe allergy or int olerance to any contrast media,  narcotics, sedatives or atropine 
that cannot be corrected or premedicated 
 Bleeding diathesis, not correctab le by usual forms of therapy 
 Severe peripheral vascular diseas e that would preclude catheter ization. 
 Evidence of potential delivery of  greater than 30 Gy absorbed d ose of radiation to the lungs in a 
single injection, or greater than 50 Gy for multiple injections  
 Evidence of pulmonary insufficiency 
 Evidence of any detectable 99mTc MAA flow to the stomach or  duodenum, after application of 
established angiographic techniques to stop or mitigate such fl ow 
 Significant extrahepatic disease representing an imminent life- threatening outcome 
 Active uncontrolled infection 
 Significant underlying medical  or psychiatric illness 
 Co-morbid disease or condition th at would preclude safe deliver y of TheraSphere® treatment or, in 
the judgment of the physician, place the patient at undue risk 
 Pregnancy 
 Special Categories of Pat ients: Not applicable 
 Research in Mentally Disabled P eople: No.  All participants or legal guardians will be fully able to 
give informed consent.  
 
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices 
 
TheraSphere® consists of insoluble glass microspheres where 90Y is an integral constituent of the 
glass. The mean sphere diameter ranges from 20 to 30 µm.  Each milligram contains between 
22,000 and 73,000 microspheres.  TheraSphere® is supplied in 0.6 mL of s terile, pyrogen-free 
water contained in a 1.0 mL vee-bot tom vial secured within a 12  mm clear acrylic vial shield.  
TheraSphere® is available in six activit y sizes: 3 GBq (81 mCi), 5 GBq (135  mCi), 7 GBq (189 
mCi), 10 GBq (270 mCi), 15 GBq ( 405 mCi) and 20 GBq (540 mCi). TheraSphere® is also 
available in custom dose sizes  in increments of 0.5 GBq between  3 GBq and 20 GBq. 
 TheraSphere
® is delivered into the liver tumor through a catheter placed in to the hepatic artery. 
The hepatic artery provides th e main blood supply to the tumor in the liver, whereas the portal vein 
supplies blood to normal liver parenchyma. TheraSphere® is embolized within the tumor and 
exerts a local beta radiation rad iotherapeutic effect with rela tively limited concurrent injury to 
surrounding normal tissue. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 10 of 12 
  
Hepatic resection of liver metas tases is currently the only pot entially curative therapy. 
Unfortunately, curative resecti on is possible in less than 20% of those patients with metastases to 
the liver [4]. Over the past tw o decades, more frequent screeni ng and the introduction of new 
anticancer agents has resulted in decreases in the incidence an d mortality associat ed with colorectal 
cancer, inter alia . According to SEER data, the annua lized percent change in inci dence decreased 
2.5% between 1998 and 2008 while the a nnualized percent change in mortality was negative in 
every period analyzed between 1978 and 2007. 
 As an example of secondary malignancy, systemic therapies for C RC include cytotoxic agents 
(fluoropyrimidines, irinotecan, oxaliplatin) and targeted thera pies that inhibit tumor growth 
(vascular endothelial growth f actor and epidermal growth factor  targeting agents). The 
identification of the K RAS biomarker has further refined therap eutic options. Patients with CRC 
who fail first‐line chemother apy, typically an oxaliplatin base d therapies have a poor prognosis. 
According to a recent study by Peeter s et al, patients treated with second‐line FOLFIRI have a 
median PFS of 3.9 months (wild‐type KRAS) to 4.9 months (mutant  type KRAS). Adding 
panitumumab was shown to improve median PFS to 5.9 months in wi ld‐type KRAS patients and 
had no impact on PFS (median 5.0 months) in mutant‐type KRAS pa tients [12]. 
 While CRC metastatic to the liver  is considered Stage IV diseas e, advances in perioperative care, 
imaging and surgical techniques  have supported development of l iver‐directed therapies which may 
be used alone, in combination with  chemotherapy, or integrated with surgical approaches. 
 
Liver directed radiotherapy usi ng external beam radiotherapy to  the liver is limited by the higher 
sensitivity to radiation of norma l liver parenchyma versus tumo r and the subsequent risk of 
radiation induced liver disease . Localized delivery of radiatio n through radioembolization using 
90Y 
microspheres has shown encouraging results as a well-tolerated treatment with good response rates 
in an increasing body of literature [13].  
  
 
7. Study Statistics 
 
We propose to combine the studi es acquired here with those from  a previous study that included 
data from 17 patients. Statistical  Considerations. The goal is to test whether the pre-therapy 
estimate of liver dose is withi n 10% of that of the post-therap y estimates. Based on simulation and 
phantom experiments, we assume t hat the standard deviation for 90Y estimates of liver dose is 5%. 
A sample size of 20 will have 95% p ower to detect such a differ ence at a significance level of 0.05. 
  
 
8. Risks 
The medical risk of our study incl udes an additional SPECT/CT o r PET/CT post-administration as 
well as a SPECT/CT of the pre-therapeutic 99mTc-MAA. The estimated equivalent dose to the 
patient from these two scans is  on the order of 10-20 mSv or 10 -20 mGy. While this may in theory 
represent an increased stochas tic risk of cancer induction, the  value must be taken in comparison 
with the 120 Gy of absorbed dose fr om the therapy itself, a val ue ~ 10000 times higher than the 
absorbed dose from the diagnos tic 3D imaging scans; in fact the  dose from the scans represent 
about 0.1 % of the potential error  or variability in the dose a llowed in the treatment. 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 11 of 12 
 Minimization of this risk incl udes only obtaining one field of view per time point. Also, a low-dose 
CT scan appropriate for attenua tion correction will be performe d as part of the of SPECT/CT or 
PET/CT scans in order to reduce X-ray exposure. 
 
Legal risks include the exist ence of a patient key on the secur e department drive that is encrypted. 
This list is necessary for rec overing clinical data elements ne eded for study follow-up. After the 
study, all documents with the patient’s name will be destroyed except for the initial consent which 
will be maintained in a locked cabinet. The consent will be des troyed within one year of death of 
patient or after 3 years if los t to follow up. There are no fin ancial risks to the participants. 
 
9. Data Safety and Monitoring 
The SKCCC Compliance Monitoring Program will provide external m onitoring for JHU-affiliated 
sites in accordance with S KCCC DSMP (Version 6.0, 02/21/2019).  The SMC Subcommittee will 
determine the level of patient  safety risk and level/frequency of monitoring.  
 
10. Benefits 
Results from this study could be nefit society as they could be used to identify the pa tients with liver 
neoplasia who many benefit from per sonalized dosimetry-based tr eatment planning for TARE and 
therefore increased activit y and dose to the disease site. 
 
11. Payment and Remuneration 
The participants will not be com pensated for participation in t his study. 
  
 
12. Costs 
The cost for the additional post- implant PET/CT or SPECT/CT sca n will be paid for by the 
investigators. No additional costs will be incurred by the pati ent for the research component.  
  
13. References 
 
1. Fong, Y., et al., Treatment of colorectal cancer: hepatic metastasis.  Semin Surg Oncol, 1996. 12(4): p. 219-52. 
2. Steele, G., Jr. and T.S. Ravikumar, Resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. Biologic perspective.  Ann 
Surg, 1989. 210(2): p. 127-38. 
3. Benson, A.B., 3rd, et al., Radioembolisation for liver metastases: results from a prospective 151 patient multi-
institutional phase II study.  Eur J Cancer, 2013. 49(15): p. 3122-30. 
4. Mulcahy, M.F., et al., Radioembolization of colorectal hepatic metastases using yttrium-90 microspheres.  Cancer, 2009. 
115(9): p. 1849-58. 
5. Goldberg, R.M., et al., The continuum of care: a paradigm for the management of metastatic colorectal cancer.  
Oncologist, 2007. 12(1): p. 38-50. 
6. Lewandowski, R.J., et al., Twelve-year experience of radioembolization fo r colorectal hepatic metastases in 214 
patients: survival by era and chemotherapy.  Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging, 2014. 41(10): p. 1861-9. 
7. Yue, J., et al., Comparison of quantitative Y-90 SPECT and non-time-of-flight PET imaging in post-therapy 
radioembolization of liver cancer.  Med Phys, 2016. 43(10): p. 5779. 
8. Garin, E., et al., Dosimetry based on 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin SPECT/CT accurately predicts tumor response 
and survival in hepatocellular carcinoma patients treated with 90Y-loaded glass microspheres: preliminary results.  J 
Nucl Med, 2012. 53(2): p. 255-63. 
9. Salem, R. and K.G. Thurston, Radioembolization with 90Yttrium microspheres: a state-of-the-art brachytherapy 
treatment for primary and secondary liver malignancies. Part 1: Technical and methodologic considerations.  J Vasc 
Interv Radiol, 2006. 17(8): p. 1251-78. 
10. Hobbs, R.F., et al., 124I PET-based 3D-RD dosimetry for a pediatric thyroid cancer patient: real-time treatment 
planning and methodologic comparison.  J Nucl Med, 2009. 50(11): p. 1844-7. 
11. Prideaux, A.R., et al., Three-dimensional radiobiologic dosimetry: application of radiobiologic modeling to patient-
specific 3-dimensional imaging-based internal dosimetry.  J Nucl Med, 2007. 48(6): p. 1008-16. 
 
 
JHMIRB eFormA  01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 12 of 12 
 12. Peeters, M., et al., Randomized phase III study of panitumumab with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan 
(FOLFIRI) compared with FOLFIRI alone as second-line tr eatment in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.  J Clin 
Oncol, 2010. 28(31): p. 4706-13. 
13. Kennedy, A.S. and R. Salem, Radioembolization (yttrium-90 microspheres) for primary and metastatic hepatic 
malignancies.  Cancer J, 2010. 16(2): p. 163-75. 
 