[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
p. 2of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
SCHEMA
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
       
     
p. 3of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 OBJECTIVES 6
1.1 STUDY DESIGN 6
1.2 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE 6
1.3 SECONDARY OBJECTIVES 6
2 BACKGROUND 7
2.1 STUDY DISEASE (S) 7
2.2 IND AGENT 7
2.3 RATIONALE 7
3 PARTICIPANT SELECTIO N 16
3.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 16
3.2 INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES 19
4 REGISTRATION 19
5 TREATMENT PLAN 19
5.1 TREATMENT CRITERIA 19
5.2 AGENT ADMINISTRATION 20
5.3 GENERAL CONCOMITANT M EDICATION AND S UPPORTIVE CARE GUIDELINES FOR SUBJECTS ON STUDY DRUG 21
5.4 MEDICATIONS TO BE USED WITH CAUTION 22
5.5 GUIDELINES FOR IBRUTINIB MANAGEMENT WITH SURGERIES OR PROCEDURES 24
5.6 DURATION OF THERAPY 25
5.7 DURATION OF FOLLOW UP 25
5.8 CRITERIA FOR TAKING A PARTICIPANT O FF STUDY 26
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 26
6 DOSING DELAYS/DOSE M ODIFICATIONS 26
7 ADVERSE EVENTS:  LIS T AND REPORTING REQU IREMENTS 28
7.1 ADVERSE EVENT LIST FOR IBRUTINIB 31
7.2 EXPEDITED ADVERSE EVENT R EPORTING 35 
   
p. 4of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
8 PHARMACEUTICAL INFOR MATION 36
8.1 IBRUTINIB 36
9 STUDY CALENDAR 38
10 COROLLARY STUDIES 40
11 DATA REPORTING/REGUL ATORY REQUIREMENTS 41
11.1 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT COMPLETION 41
11.2 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 41
11.3 DATA SAFETY MONITORING 41
12 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS 42
12.1 STUDY DESIGN AND ENDPOINTS 42
12.2 SAMPLE SIZE JUSTIFICATION 44
12.3 INTERIM ANALYSIS 44
12.4 EFFICACY ANALYSIS 44
12.5 SAFETY ANALYSIS 45
12.6 SAMPLE SIZE, ACCRUAL RATE AND STUDY DURATION 45
13 ETHICS 45
13.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 45
13.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 45
13.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 45
14 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 46
15 PUBLICATION PLAN 46
16 REFERENCES 46
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF PRO -INFLA MMATORY AND CHEMO -ATTRACTANT CYTOKINE PA TTERNS 12
TABLE 2. IBRUTINIB DOSE MODIF ICATION GUIDANCE FOR CO-ADMINISTRATION W ITH CYP3A
INHIBITORS 23 
   
p. 5of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
TABLE 3. DOSE DE -ESCALATION S CHEDULE FOR TOXICITY 27
TABLE 4. DOSE MODIFICATION GU IDANCE FOR CHRONIC HEPATIC IMPAIRED SUB JECTS 28
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. A MODEL FOR THE IMMU NOPATHOGENESIS OF SA RS BASED ON SARS -COV -1 MODEL 9
FIGURE 2. SUMMARY OF THE MAIN MACROPHAGE POLARIZAT ION STATES OF ACTIVA TED
MACROPHAGES 10
FIGURE 3. PULMONARY FINDINGS F OR MICE TREATED WITH PHOSPHATE BUFFERED SALINE OR IBRUTINIB 
FOLLOWING LETHAL INT RANASAL CHALLENGE WI TH MOUSE -ADAPTED H1N 1 INFLUENZA 13
FIGURE 4. SURVIVAL AND WEIGHT LOSS OF C57BL/6 MICE INFECTED INTRANASAL LY WITH INFLUENZA A 
VIRUS 14
FIGURE 5. INFLAMMATORY CELLS O BSERVED IN BAL FLUID S AND CYTOKINE L EVELS FROM LUNG 
HOMOGENATES IN MICE TREATED WITH PHOSPHA TE BUFFERED SALINE O R IBRUTINIB 
FOLLOWING LETHAL INT RANASAL CHALLENGE WI TH MOUSE -ADAPTED H1N 1 INFLUENZA 15
FIGURE 6. ORDINAL SCALE FOR CL INICAL IMPROVEMENT 43
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 49
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 51
APPENDIX C. INHIBI TORS AND INDUCERS OF CYP3A 52
APPENDIX D. GUIDANCE ON POSSIBLE DRUG INTERACTIONS F OR IBRUTINIB AND MED ICATIONS THAT MAY BE
IN USE TO TREAT COVI D-19 53
APPENDIX E. CHILD -PUGH SCORE FOR SUBJECTS WITH LIVER IMPAIRMENT 54
APPENDIX F. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 55 
   
p. 6of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
1OBJECTIVES
1.1 Study Design
There is currently no standard of care for hospitalized patients experiencing coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID -19)infections beyond supportive care .  Numerous studies examining various study interventions 
are underway .  Discovering/providing treatment options for patients with moderate or severe COVID -19 
infection is a high priority, particularly for those with respiratory distress .  Exaggerated cytokine 
response triggered by Alveolar Type II cells and resident macrophages in response to severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2 (SARS -CoV-2)appears etiological for the pulmonary injury and 
respiratory failure associated with COVID -19 infection .  Ibrutinib blocks Toll -receptor signaling, and 
cytokines associated with SARS -CoV-2, including those fo und in Alveolar Type II (ACE2+) cells .  
Importantly, in a relevant experimental mouse model, ibrutinib protected mice subjected to lethal 
intranasal inoculums of mouse adapted H1N1 influenza and suppressed inflammatory cell recruitment 
and pathological cyt okines that overlapped with many of those observed in SARS -CoV-2 infected 
patients .  Based on this, it is hypothesized that Ibrutinib may potentially provide protection against lung 
injury .  Ibrutinib is an oral agent approved by the United States (US) Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), European Medicines Agency, and other global health authorities for the treatment of various B -
cell malignancies .  For those patients whose health care providers feel that they qualify to participate in 
this study, who meet inclusion/exclusion criteria and sign an associated consent form, they will be 
enrolled and randomized 1:1 in a randomized, placebo -controlled, double blinded study to receive 
either supportive care and placebo orsupportive care and ibrutinib for up to 28 days .  For subject s 
randomized to receive ibrutinib, the dose of ibrutinib will be 420 mg a day .  Approximately 46 subject s 
will be enrolled in this study .  Participating clinical sites must have the capability of implementing 
appropriate infection contro l measures to prevent infection of study staff and others who share the 
clinical site space.
1.2 Primary Objective
The primary objective of this study will be:
To evaluate the proportion of subjects alive and without respiratory failure at Day 28
1.3 Secondary Ob jectives
The secondary objectives of this study will be:
To determine if the addition of ibrutinib to supportive care reduces necessity for hospitalization, 
length of need for supplemental oxygen, mechanical ventilation in hospitalized subject s who 
present ed with COVID -19 related pulmonary distress requiring supplemental oxygen . 
 
 
p. 7of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
To assess the safety and tolerability of ibrutinib as an adjuvant therapy to supportive care in 
hospitalized subject s who presented with COVID -19 related pulmonary distress requirin g 
supplemental oxygen .
2BACKGROUND
2.1 Study Disease(s)
Subject s with confirmed COVID -19 infection by reverse transcriptase (RT )-polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) from nasopharyngeal swabs, who requires hospitalization and has been on supplemental oxygen 
for a duration of ≤5 days for pulmonary distress related to COVID -19 infection are eligible for this study .
2.2 IND Agent
Ibrutinib is an irreversible inhibitor of Bruton' s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) that is approved by the US .  FDA for 
the treatment of adult subject s with:
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) who have received at least 1prior therapy.
Accelerated approval was granted for this indicat ion based on overall response rate .  
Continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description 
of clinical benefit in a confirmatory trial.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/Small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).
CLL/SLL with 17p deletion
Waldenström 's macroglobulinemia (WM).
Marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) who require systemic therapy and have received at least 1prior 
anti- CD20 -based therapy.
Accelerated approval was granted for this indication based on overall response rate .  
Continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description 
of clinical benefit in a confirmatory trial.
Chronic graft versus host disease (cGVHD) after failure of 1or more lines of systemic therapy.
2.3 Rationale
COVID -19 is an infectious disease caused by SARS -CoV-2.1  Pulmonary failure is the main cause of 
mortality related to COVID -19 infection .2,3  Up to 80% of patients who require hospitalization for COVID -
19 in fection require supplemental oxygenation for an average of 13 days .4  Furthermore 30 -40% of 
those hospitalized for pulmonary distress may require mechanical ventilation.2,5  Therapies that block 
COVID -19 related lung injury and improve pulmonary function are therefore urgently needed. 
 
 
p. 8of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
SARS -CoV-2 binds via the ACE2 -receptor that is highly expressed on ACE2+ cells in the lung .6  ACE2+
cells constitute 5 -15% of the lung epithelium .  While Alveolar Type I cells are highly adapted for gas 
exchange, ACE2+ cells have a specialized role in innate immune response .7  ACE2+ cells express Toll -like
receptors (TLRs) and can trigger inflammatory cytokines and chemo -attractants in response to viral and 
bacterial pathogens that recruit and activat e other immune cells including macrophages and 
neutrophils .8-12  Highly relevant to coronavirus infection, expression of pro -inflammatory and chemo -
attractant cytokines interleukin ( IL)1-B, IL6, interferon -inducible protein 10 ( IP10/CXCL10 ), monocyte 
chemoattractant protein -1 (MCP -1/CCL2 ),and tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNF-a)were identified in the 
ACE2 +cells from autopsy tissue of SARS -CoV-1 infected patients, that appeared causally related to the 
acute lung injury and pathogenesis observed with SARS -CoV -1 (Figure 1).13  A similar profile of elevated 
cytokine leve ls of IL6, IL8, IP10/CXCL10 and MCP -1 was also reported in the plasma of SARS -CoV-1 
patients during the progressive and end stage of infection,14a profile more consistent with M1 polarized 
macrophage response ( Figure 2).15,16 
 
 
p. 9of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Figure 1. A Model for the Immunopathogenesis of SARS Based on SARS -Cov-1 Model
 
   
               
                    
                  
                
              
                
               
              
                
              
              
                 
                    
               
         
p. 10of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Figure 2. Summary of the Main Macrophage Polarization States of Activated 
Macrophages
SARS -CoV-1 shares 86% homology and has a similar pathogenetic mechanism to SARS -CoV-2.17,18  Similar 
to SARS -CoV-1 patients, SARS- Cov-2 patients that required intensive care showed elevated plasma levels 
of inflammatory cytokines and chemo -attractants such as IL2, IL6, IL7, IL10, granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor ( G-CSF) , IP-10/CXCL -10, MCP -1/CCL2, macrophage inflammatory protein ( MIP)-
1a/CCL3, and TNF -a.19  The importance of inflammatory cytokines to lung injury in SARS -CoV-2 infected 
patients has been suggested by reports of benefit with IL6 and IL6 -receptor blocking antibodies, and 
clinical trials to examine their use have been initiated ( [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], NCT043152 98).
In previous studies, we and others showed an important role for the TEC family member BTK, and its 
upstream activator, hematopoietic cell kinase ( HCK), a SRC family member in triggering TLR -mediated 
signaling.20-22  Both BTK and HCK can be triggered by MYD88, a TLR -adaptor protein that signal s for all 
Toll receptors except TLR3 in response to viral and bacterial pathogens, including coronaviruses .23  ATII 
 
   
  
 
   
    
  
   
   
       
 
 
  
    
    
   
          
        
           
          
           
          
        
         
       
        
       
       
       
        
          
p. 11of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
cells express TLRs, as do alveolar macrophages that coordinate inflammatory responses with ATII cells .8-
12  As components of TLR/MYD88 signaling, BTK and HCK can drive inflammatory cytokine production 
through ERK1/2 .24
In a tra nsgenic mouse model, overexpression of activated HCK promoted extensive pulmonary 
inflammation and enhanced innate immune response characterized by extensive eosinophilic and 
mononuclear cell infiltration within the lung parenchyma, alveolar airspaces, and around blood vessels, 
as well as marked epithelial mucus metaplasia in conducting airways .25  Lungs from these mice show 
areas of emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis, which together with inflammation resulted in altered lung 
function and respiratory distress, particularly in aging mice .25  Elevated le vels of TNF- a were also 
identified in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluids of these mice following lipopolysaccharide ( LPS)
challenge .  The pulmonary pathology findings from these mice show great overlap with those described 
in the lungs of patients with COVI D-19 infection which showed serous and fibrin exudation with alveolar 
infiltration consisting majorly of macrophages and monocytes .  The blood vessels of alveolar septum 
were also congested, edematous and widened, with modest infiltration of monocytes and 
lymphocytes.26,27
Ibrutinib is a highly potent, covalent inhibitor of BTK (biochemical IC 500.5 nM) .  Ibrutinib is also a potent 
reversible inhibitor of HCK (IC 5049 nM).22,28  The IC 50levels for BTK and HCK are well within the 
pharmacologically attainable dosimetry of orally administered ibrutinib, although HCK inhibition has not 
yet been demonstrated in patients under ibrutinib therapy, possi bly due to the rapid clearance .29  
Serially collected blood samples from patients with CLL, WM, and cGVHD on ibrutinib monotherapy 
showed marked reductions in pro -inflammatory and chemo -attractant cytokines that greatly overlapped 
with those reported elevated in the plasma of SARS- Cov-1 and SARS -COV -2 patients, and in ACE2+ cells 
from lung tissue of SARS -CoV-1 patients ( Table 1).13,14,19,30-32  In the iLLUMINATE randomized study, CLL 
subjects treated with ibrutinib immediately prior to infusion with ob inutuzumab also showed 
significantly decreased levels of inflammatory cytokines associated with infusion related reactions (a 
cytokine release syndrome).33 
 
 
p. 13of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Figure 3. Pulmonary Findings for Mice Treated with Phosphate Buffered Saline or 
Ibrutinib Following Lethal Intranasal Challenge with Mouse -Adapted H1N1 
Influenza
 
   
    
  
         
 
   
        
      
  
           
    
   
  
           
          
      
            
              
       
            
        
            
        
        
              
          
              
          
              
         
p. 14of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Mice treated with PBS also lost weight and died, whereas those treated with ibrutinib recovered their 
weight after a brief loss and all survived ( Figure 4).34  Notably, mice treated with ibrutinib also showed 
decreased inflammatory cell infiltration as well as pro -inflammatory cytokines in lung tissues t hat 
included pro -inflammatory and chemo -attractant cytokines such as IL1β, IL6, KC/CXCL1, TNF -a, and 
MCP -1 observed in SARS -Cov-1 and SARS -CoV-2 patients (Figure 5).34
Figure 4. Survival and Weight Loss of C57BL/6 Mice Infected Intranasally with 
Influenza A Virus
 
   
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
    
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
           
        
              
          
         
           
            
          
             
        
          
      
p. 15of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Figure 5. Inflammatory Cells Observed in BAL Fluids and Cytokine Levels from Lung 
Homogenates in Mice Treated with Phosphate Buffered Saline or Ibrutinib 
Following Lethal Intranasal Challenge with Mouse -Adapted H1N1 Influenza
The above findings support t he rationale that an exaggerated cytokine response triggered by Alveolar 
Type II cells and resident macrophages in response to SARS- CoV-2 is etiological for the pulmonary injury 
and respiratory failure associated with COVID -19 infection .  The importance of inflammatory cytokines 
to lung injury in SARS -CoV-2 infected patients has been suggested by reports of benefit with IL6 and IL6 -
receptor blocking antibodies, and clinical trials to examine their use have been initiated ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED], 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED], NCT043152 98).  The ability to block inflammatory cytokine production to limit pulmonary 
injury has been observed in patients with severe COVID -19 infections who received treatment with the 
IL6 blocking antibody Tocilizumab .
Ibrutinib blocks Toll -receptor signaling, and cytokines associated with SARS -CoV-2, including those found 
in Alveolar Type II (ACE2+) cells .  Importantly, in a relevant experimental mouse model, ibrutinib 
protected mice subjected to lethal intranasal inoculums of mouse adapted H1N1 influenza and 
suppressed inflammatory cell recruitment and pathological cytokines that overlapped with many of 
 
   
 
   
  
                       
                
      
       
      
 
           
 
         
      
     
   
  
  
       
 
      
    
             
             
         
                
                 
            
              
                
           
                   
               
     
p. 16of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
those observed in SARS -CoV-2 infected patients .  Ibrutinib may therefore protect against lung injury in 
patients with COVID -19 related pulmonary distress .
A ca se series of 6 patients being treated with ibrutinib for WM were recently published, which suggests 
that ibrutinib may protect against pulmonary injury in COVID -19 infected patients.35  Five of the 
6patients were on the recommended dose of 420 mg/day, while the sixth patient was on a reduced 
dose of 140 mg/day due to arthralgias.  The 5 patients on ibrutinib at 420 mg/day did not experience 
dyspnea and did not require hospitalization. Their clinical course was marked by steady improvement, 
with resolution or near resolution of COVID -19 related symptoms.  The 1 patient on the reduced dose of 
140 mg/day experience progressive dyspnea and hypoxia resulting in hospitalization.  Ibrutinib d osing 
was held upon hospital admission due to findings of bilateral ground glass opacities and a pleural 
effusion on chest CT.  Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and azithromycin were administered, however 
azithromycin was discontinued on hospital Day 3 due to QRS complex tachyarrhythmia.  Hypoxia 
worsened and fever persisted during HCQ.  Ibrutinib was restarted at 140 mg/day and tocilizumab 
400 mg on hospital Day 5 with improvement in oxygenation and reduction in C -reactive protein (CRP).  
Intravenous immunoglobuli n was administered on hospital Days 6 -10, with worsening hypoxia and 
increased CRP noted on hospital Day 10, and which required mechanical ventilation.  Given the lack of 
hypoxia in the other COVID -19 infected WM patients on full dose ibrutinib, the dose of ibrutinib was 
increased from 140 mg/day to 420 mg/day on hospital Day 11 and 12.  On hospital Day 12, the patient 
had a rapid improvement in oxygenation followed by successful extubation and maintenance of oxygen 
saturation of 94 -96% on 3 liters/min supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula.  The patient continued to 
improve, with oxygen saturation of 95% on room air and further decrease in CRP on Day 14, then was 
discharged home.  The authors suggest that ibrutinib may provide protection against lung inju ry and 
improve pulmonary function in hypoxic patients with COVID -19 due to the aforementioned modulation 
of inflammatory and chemo -attractants cytokines.
3PARTICIPANT SELECTION
3.1 Eligibility Criteria
Inclusion Criteria
1.Age >18 years
2.Willing and able to provide informed consent prior to study therapy, including by virtual 
consenting per hospital policy.
3.Subject requires hospitalization for COVID -19 infection 
4.Subject has Severe Acute Respiratory Synd rome Coronavirus (SARS -CoV) -2 infection 
confirmed by RT-PCR test before study entry.
5.Subject requires supplemental oxygen for pulmonary distress related to COVID -19 infection, 
has been on supplemental oxygen for no more than 5 days , and on breathing room air ha s
oxygen saturation levels of 94% or less.
6.Subject has radiographic evidence of pulmonary infiltrates. 
   
p. 17of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
7.Females of childbearing potential (FCBP) must use 1reliable form of contraception or have 
complete abstine nce from heterosexual intercourse during the following time periods related to 
this study :  1) while participating in the study; and 2) for at least 1 month after discontinuatio n 
of study drug .  FCBP must be referred to a qualified provider o f contraceptive methods if 
needed .  FCBP must have a negative serum pregnancy test a s of screening.
8.Men must agree to use a latex condom during treatment and for up to 3 months after the last 
dose of ibrutinib during sexual contact with a FCBP .
9.Adequate hematologic function defined as :
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) > 750 cells/mm3(0.75 ×109/L)
Platelet count > 50,000 cells/mm3(50 ×109/L)
Absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) > 500 cells/mm3
10.Adequate hepatic and renal function defined as:
Estimated creatinine clearance (CrCl) ≥30 mL/min (Cockcroft -Gault).
Bilirubin < 2.0 ×ULN (unless bilirubin rise is due to Gilbert 's syndrome or of non- hepatic 
origin) .
11.Must be within 10 days of confirme d diagnosis of COVID -19.
Key Exclusion Criteria
1.Respiratory failure at time of screening as defined per protocol with any of these following 
therapies: 
Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation
ECMO
High flow nasal cannula oxyg en at flow rates ≥30 L/min and fraction of delivered oxygen 
≥0.5 (Subjects are eligible if utilizing oxygen delivered by high -flow nasal cannula at flow 
rates < 30L/min or fraction of delivered oxygen < 0.5)
Non -invasive positive pressure ventilation
2.Unable to swallow capsules or malabsorption syndrome, disease significantly affecting 
gastrointestinal function, or resection of the stomach or small bowel, symptomatic 
inflammatory bowel disease or ulcerative colitis, or partial or complete bowel obstruc tion.
3.Ona BTK -inhibitor , anti -IL6, anti- IL6R, or Janus kinase inhibitor (JAKi).
4.Has received rituximab within 180 days from study entry.
5.Known bleeding disorders (e.g., von Willebrand 's disease or hemophilia).
6.Major surgery within 4 weeks of study entry.
7.Subjects in whom surgery is anticipated to be necessary within 72 hours.
8.History of stroke or intracranial hemorrhage within 6 months prior to enrollment. 
 
 
p. 18of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
9.Known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or active with hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
or hepatitis B virus (HBV).  Subjects who are positive for hepatitis B core antibody, hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg), or hepatitis C antibody must have a negat ive polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) result before enrollment.  Those who are PCR positive will be excluded.
10.Currently active, clinically significant cardiovascular disease, such as uncontrolled arrhythmia 
or Class 3 or 4 congestive heart failur e as defined by the New York Heart Association Functional 
Classification; or a history of myocardial infarction, unstable angina, or acute coronary syndrome 
within 6 months prior to randomization .
11.Asymptomatic arrythmias (e.g., NSVT, bradycardi a HR less < 50, or AV block, or any other 
atrial or ventricular arrythmia) and or history of ejection fraction < 40% on an echo.
12.Subjects receiving a strong cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 inhibitor with the exception of those 
receiving anti- fungal t herapy/prophylaxis ( Appendix C ).
13.Subjects with chronic liver disease and hepatic impairment meeting Child Pugh class C
(Appendix E ).  Note that clinical or laboratory changes attributed to acute liver dysfunction are 
not applicable to the evaluation of the Child -Pugh classification.
14.Female subjects who are pregnant, or breastfeeding, or planning t o become pregnant while 
enrolled in this study or within 1 month of last dose of study drug .  Male subjects who plan to 
father a child while enrolled in this study or within 3 months after the last dose of study drug .
15.Unwilling or unable to par ticipate in all required study evaluations and procedures.
16.Unable to understand the purpose and risks of the study and to provide a signed and dated 
informed consent form (ICF) and authorization to use protected health information (in 
accordanc e with national and local subject privacy regulations).
17.Vaccinated with a live, attenuated vaccine within 4 weeks.
18.Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >150 mm Hg).
19.History of interstitial lung disease.
20.Subjects on therapeutic anticoagulation at baseline.
21.Subject has history of malignancies, except:
Malignancy treated with curative intent and with no evidence of active disease present for 
more than 1 year prior to Screening and felt to be at low risk for recurrence by treating 
physician.
Subjects managed with localized radiation or hormonal therapy.
Adequately treated non -melanoma skin cancer or lentigo maligna without current evidence 
of disease.
Adequately treated cervical carcinoma in situ without current evidence of disease.
22.Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≥ 3.0 ×ULN, and total 
bilirubin > 2.0 ×ULN.
23.International normalized ratio ( INR) ≥ 1.5 ×ULN attributable to coagulation disorders. 
 
 
p. 19of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
24.Subject is co -enrolled in another interventional trial.
3.2 Inclusion of Women and Minorities
Both men and women of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.
4REGISTRATION
Participants will be registered and randomly assigned to their treatment arm as per procedures outlined 
in a separate document.
5TREATMENT PLAN
Subject s will be enrolled and randomized 1:1 in a randomized, placebo -controlled, double blinded study 
to receive either supportive care and placebo orsupportive care and ibrutinib for up to 28 days .  For 
subject s randomized to receive ibrutinib, the dose of ibrutinib will be 420 mg a day .  Approximately 
46subject s will be enrolled in this study .  Treatment for subject s on ibrutinib may be stopped at the 
discretion of the treating physician after 14 days if the subject is clinically stable and has been off 
supplemental oxygen for > 48 hours.
Nasogastric tube administration of ibrutinib is permitted for subject s unable to take ibrutinib /placebo
orally (see Pharmacy Manual for guidance) .  Dose de- escalation for toxicity is permitted (see Section 6).  
Subject s may receive any supportive care treatments and/or interv entions, however, infection 
prophylaxis -particularly for subject s receiving steroids, and dose modifications for cytochrome P450 
(CYP) 3A inhibitors may be necessary (see Table 2in Section 5.4and Appendix C ).See also Table 4for 
administration of ibrutinib to subject s with chronic hepatic impairment .  Drug guidance for dose 
modifications of ibrutinib related to agents that may be in use to treat COVID -19 infection are also 
provided in Appendix D .  If subject is on chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine frequent electrocardiogram 
(EKG)or telemetry m onitoring should be performed to monitor QT interval changes for subject s on 
ibrutinib/placebo .
Administration of ibrutinib /placebo therapy and dosing should be recorded in the subject' s medical 
record .  A diary will be provided for discharged subject s to record daily dosing as outpatients .
5.1 Treatment Criteria
Treatment should be withheld for adverse events (AE) as outlined below :
Grade 3 or 4 nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea (if persistent despite optimal antiemetic and/or 
antidiarrheal the rapy) related to ibr utinib.
Grade 4 or unmanageable nonhematologic Grade 3 toxicities related to ibrutinib
Neutrophil count ≤ 500/μL 
   
p. 20of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
In subjects without baseline thrombocytopenia:
Platelet count ≤50,000/μL in the presence of bleeding
Platelet count ≤25,000 μL without bleeding
For AEs that are felt to be related to worsening COVID -19 infection, the investigator may continue 
ibrutinib, however, in subjects with hepatic or cardiac dysfunction, bleeding, or multiple infections 
related to COVID -19 infection, the risks of c ontinuing ibrutinib may outweigh the potential benefit of 
continuing treatment with ibrutinib.
5.2 Agent Administration
Ibrutinib or placebo will be administered orally once daily .  Three capsules (each 140 mg) of ibrutinib or 
placebo are to be taken around th e same time each day with a glass of water.  The capsules should be 
swallowed intact and subjects should not attempt to open capsules or dissolve them in water .  For 
subject s who require nasogastric tube ( NGT )placement while on study, capsules may be admi nistered 
by opening the capsules, mixing with water, and flushing down the NGT (see Pharmacy Manual for 
details ).  Though the use of strong CYP3A inhibitors/inducers (see Appendix C ), and grapefruit and 
Seville oranges should be avoided for the duration of treatment, treatment with antifungal prophylaxis 
(e.g., voriconazole, posaconazole) is permitted; however, dose reductions are necessary (see 
Section 5.4).  See also Table 4for administration of study drug to subject s with chronic hepatic 
impairment .  If a dose is not taken at the scheduled time, it can be taken as soon as possible on the 
same day with a return t o the normal schedule the following day .  The subject should not take extra 
capsules to make up the missed dose.
Subject s will be treated for up to 28 days .  Treatment may be stopped at the discretion of the treating 
physician after 14 days if the subject is clinically stable and has been off supplemental oxygen for 
>48hours .  The dose of 420 mg/day of ibrutinib is the dose approved by the FDA for the treatment of 
subject s with CLL, WM, and cGVHD .  Subject s with these disorders receive ibrutinib until dis ease 
progression or prohibitive side effects which cannot be managed with dose reduction .  The dose chosen 
reflects daily dosing associated with reduced inflammatory and chemo -attractant cytokines observed in 
CLL, WM, and cGVHD subject s that are elevated in subject s with SARS -CoV-1 and SARS -CoV-2 infections 
and may be responsible for pulmonary injury (see Section 2.3).
Dose reductions for toxicity will be permitted (se e Section 6).
For hospitalized subject s, study drug will be administered by nursing staff .  For subject s discharged from 
the hospital, study drug will be self -administered, and participants will be instructed to write in a diary 
daily, documenting that the drug was taken and AEsexperienced .  Subject s should be instructed to take 
the study drug with a glass of water at approximately the same time each day .  Subject s taking study 
drug at home will be instructed on how to complete the diary by study staff prior to discharge .  If a dose 
is not taken at the scheduled time, it can be taken as soon as possible on the same day with a return to 
the normal schedule the following day .  The subject should not take extra capsules to make up the 
missed dose .  The missed dose will not be made up and must be returned at the next scheduled visit .  
The subject will be instruc ted to document missed drug doses in the study diary .  Furthermore, they will  
 
 
p. 21of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
be instructed to call their provider, the site or principal investigator if vomiting occurs or they have 
recurrence of their COVID -19 symptoms or any other AEsconsistent with the product label .  If the pills 
are vomited, this should be noted on the subject diary, but a replacement dose should not be taken that 
day.  All dosages prescribed and dispensed to the subject , and all dose changes during the study should 
be recorded .  Diaries will be collected at the end of the treatment period .  In the event of circumstances 
that prevent a discharged subject from returning to clinic, a tele -health visit is permitted .  Study staff will 
collect or coordinate with subject in the event of a t ele-health visit for the return of any unused drug 
and the study diary .  Unused drug will be counted and returned to the pharmacy to be destroyed .  A 
prescription for dispensing study drug for at home use, as detailed above, will be filled by the study 
pharmacy .  Medication labels will comply with US legal requirements and be printed in English .  The 
storage conditions for study drug will be described on the medication label .  Study drug will be provided 
by Pharmacyclics LLC /AbbVie Inc.  Ibrutinib or placeb o is formulated as capsules for oral administration 
and will be available for this study in 140 mg and 70 mg capsules.
Overdose
Any dose of study drug in excess of that specified in this protocol is considered to be an overdose .  Signs 
and symptoms of an overdose that meet any Serious Adverse Event criterion must be reported as a 
Serious Adverse Event in the appropriate time frame and documented as clinical sequelae to an 
overdose .  There is no specific experience in the management of ibrutinib overdose in subject s.  There 
are limited data on the effects of ibrutinib overdose .  No maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was reached in 
the Phase 1 study in which subjects received up to 12.5 mg/kg/day (1,400 mg/day) .  In a separate study 
1healthy subject who received a dose of 1,680 mg experienced reversible Grade 4 hepatic enzyme 
increases (AST and ALT) .  Refer to the IB for additional details about this case .  There is no specific 
antidote to ibrutinib.  Subjects who ingest more than the recommended dosage should be c losely 
monitored and given appropriate supportive treatment .
5.3 General Concomitant Medication and Supportive Care Guidelines 
for Subject s on Study Drug
Supportive care medications and intervention for COVID -19 infection, including use of a ventilator 
support as clinically indicated is permitted at the treating physician 's discretion .  Drug guidance for dose 
modifications of study drug related to agents that may be in use to treat COVID -19 infection are also 
provided in Appendix D .
Careful monitoring for signs and symptoms of bleeding are indicated, consistent with the safety profile 
of ibrutinib .  Anti- emetics are permitted if clinically indicated .  All concomitant medications during the 
treatment period should be recorded .  The following restrictions apply during the entire duration of the 
study:
If steroids are necessary, strongly consider treatment with an appropriate anti -fungal 
prophylaxis agent (e.g .,voriconazole /posaconazole) .  Consider the addition of anti -bacterial 
prophylaxis as clinically necessary.
Concomitant use of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine should be avoided if possible. 
   
p. 22of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Growth factors (i.e., G- CSF, GM -CSF, erythropoietin, platelets growth factors etc.) and 
transfusion support is permitted.  
Concomitant use of anti -platelet agents and anticoagulants should be avoided (if possible) due 
to the anti- platelet effects of ibrutinib, however their use may be clinically necessary.
The use of deep vein thro mbosis prophylaxis is permitted.  Participants receiving anti- platelet 
agents in conjunction with study drug should be observed closely for any signs of bleeding or 
bruising, and study drug should be withheld in the event of any Grade 2 or higher bleeding 
events until  ≤ Grade 1 .  Participants with any grade central nervous system bleeding should 
have treatment discontinued .  
Subjects requiring the initiation of therapeutic anticoagulation therapy (e.g. ,atrial fibrillation), 
consider the risks and benefits of continuing study drug treatment .  If therapeutic 
anticoagulation is clinically indicated, treatment with study drug should be held and not be 
restarted until the subject is clinically stable and has no signs of bleeding .  Subjects should be 
observed c losely for signs and symptoms of bleeding .  No dose reduction is required when study 
drug is restarted.
Supplements such as fish oils and vitamin E preparations should be avoided.
Use study drug with caution in subjects requiring other anticoagulants or me dications that 
inhibit platelet function.
Subject s with a history of hepatitis B and C viral infection and baseline negative PCR that 
develop elevations in liver function tests should be evaluated for viral reactivation.
Subjects cannot co -enroll in other interventional trials. Other interventions are acceptable, 
including remdesivir, and open -label compassionate use of therapies, such as convalescent 
plasma.
5.4 Medications to be Used with Caution
5.4.1 CYP3A Enzyme Inhibitors/Inducers
Ibrutinib is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 .  Concomitant use of ibrutinib and drugs that strongly or 
moderately inhibit CYP3A can increase ibrutinib exposure, and strong CYP3A inhibitors should be 
avoided .  Avoid grapefruit and Seville oranges during study drug administration as these contain 
moderate inhibitors of CYP3A .  Dose adjustment of study drug due to concomitant use of CYP3A 
inhibitors should follow Table 2as applicable. 
 
 
p. 23of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Table 2. Ibrutinib Dose Modification Guidance for Co- Administration with CYP3A 
Inhibitors
Co-administered DrugRecommended I brutinib or Placebo Dose for th e Duration of the 
Inhibitor Usea
Mild CYP3A inhibitors 420 mg once daily .  No dose adjustment required.
Moderate CYP3A inhibitors 280 mg once daily .
Voriconazole 200 mg twice daily
Posaconazole suspension 100 mg once 
daily, 100 mg twice daily, or 200 mg 
twice daily140 mg once daily .
Posaconazole at higher dosesb70 mg once daily.
Other strong CYP3A inhibitors Avoid concomitant use and consider alternative with less CYP3A 
inhibitory potential.
If these inhibitors will be used short -term (such as anti -infectives for 
7days or less), interrupt ibrutinib.
If the benefit outweighs the risk and long -term dosing is required 
(more than 7days) , reduce ibrutinib dose to 140 mg once daily for the 
duration of the inhibitor use.
CYP3A = cytochrome P450 isoform 3A; IV = intravenous
a. Monitor for adverse reactions and interrupt or modify dose as recommended (see Dosage and Administration).
b. Posaconazole at higher doses (posaconazole suspension 200 mg three times daily or 400 mg twice daily, posaconazole IV 
injection 300 mg once daily, posaconazole delayed -release tablets 300 mg once daily).
A list of common CYP3A inhibitors and inducers is provided in Appendix C .  For furt her information, 
please refer to the current version of the ibrutinib IB and examples of inhibitors, inducers, and 
substrates can be found at http://medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/main -table/.
This website is continually revised and should be checked fr equently for updates.
5.4.2 Drugs That May Have Their Plasma Concentrations Altered by Ibrutinib
In vitro studies indicated that ibrutinib is not a substrate of P -glycoprotein (P -gp) nor other major 
transporters, except organic cation transporter 2 ( OCT2 ).  The dihydrodiol metabolite and other 
metabolites are P -gp substrates .  Ibrutinib is a mild inhibitor of P -gp and breast cancer resistance protein 
(BCRP) .  Ibrutinib is not expected to have systemic drug -drug interactions with P -gp substrates .  
However, i t cannot be excluded that ibrutinib could inhibit intestinal P -gp and BCRP after a therapeutic 
dose .  There is no clinical data available .  To minimize a potential interaction in the GI tract, narrow 
therapeutic range P -gp substrates such as digoxin or met hotrexate, should be taken at least 6 hours 
before or after ibrutinib .  Ibrutinib may also inhibit BCRP systemically and increase the exposure of drugs 
that undergo BCRP -mediated hepatic efflux, such as rosuvastatin. 
   
p. 24of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Antiplatelet Agents and Anticoagulants 
Use ibrutinib with caution in subjects requiring anticoagulants or medications that inhibit platelet 
function.  In an in vitro platelet function study, inhibitory effects of ibrutinib on collagen induced platelet 
aggregation were observed .  Supplements su ch as fish oil and vitamin E preparations should be avoided 
during treatment with ibrutinib.  Bleeding events of any grade, including bruising and petechiae, 
occurred in subjects treated with ibrutinib .  See below for guidance on management of subject s to 
reduce risk of bleeding while on ibrutinib and requiring surgeries or procedures .  Subjects with 
congenital bleeding diathesis have not been studied.
5.5 Guidelines for Ibrutinib Management with Surgeries or Procedures
Ibrutinib may increase risk of bleeding w ith invasive procedures or surgery .  The following guidance 
should be considered in the perioperative period for subjects on study drug who require surgical 
intervention or an invasive procedure.
5.5.1 Minor Surgical Procedures
For minor procedures (e.g ., central venous catheter, arterial line placement) that are urgently needed 
and could result in bleeding, immediately stop study drug and consider transfusion with platelets just 
prior to procedure .  Study drug should be held for 24 hours after procedure .  If there is ongoing bleeding 
after the procedure, additional platelet transfusions can be administered and ibrutinib held to 24 hours 
after bleeding stops .  No drug hold or platelet transfusions are needed for routine venipunctures or 
peripheral intravenous line placement.
For subject s requiring endotracheal intubation, study drug should be temporarily stopped for 24 hours 
following intubation .  If there is evidence of bleeding at the time of the endotracheal intubation, a 
platelet transfusion sho uld be given as soon as possible .  If there is no evidence of bleeding during 
intubation, study drug may be resumed after 24 hours.
For subjects who require endotracheal intubation after enrollment on the trial, study drug may be 
continued if, in the opini on of the investigator, the subject appears to be benefiting from treatment and 
the risk of continuing therapy outweighs the risks associated with ibrutinib (e.g ., bleeding).
5.5.2 Elective Major Surgical Procedures
For any elective surgery or invasive pro cedure requiring sutures or staples for closure, study drug should 
be held at least 3 -7 days prior to the intervention (except for emergency procedures) and should be 
held at least 3 -7 days after the procedure and restarted at the discretion of the tre ating physician when 
the surgical site is reasonably healed without serosanguineous drainage or the need for drainage tubes .  
For less than 7 days hold prior to the procedure, consider a transfusion of platelets just prior to the 
procedure to decrease risk of bleeding.
5.5.3 Emergency Major Surgery Procedures
For emergency procedures that could result in bleeding, and require sutures or staples for closure, 
subject unblinding will be permitted .  For subject s on ibrutinib arm, transfusion with platelets prio r to  
 
 
p. 25of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
the procedure should be given and study drug held after the procedure for at least 3 days after the 
surgical procedure .  Consider also additional platelet transfusions peri -and post -operatively to reduce 
bleeding risk or active bleeding.
5.6 Duration of Therapy
Duration of therapy will depend on individual response, evidence of pulmonary disease progression and 
tolerance.  In the absence of treatment delays due to AEs, treatment may continue until 1of the 
following criteria applies:
Intercurrent illness that in the medical judgment of the treating physician prevents further 
administration of treatment .
Unacceptable AEs.
Subject demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to comply with the oral medication regimen 
and/or documentation requirements.
Subject decides to withdraw from the protocol therapy.
General or specific changes in the participant 's condition, including the development of atrial 
fibrillation that render the participant unacceptable for further treatment with study drug in the 
judgment of th e treating physician.
Study drug should be stopped in subject s experiencing Grade 4 toxicity, and not resumed .  
These subject s should be followed through to toxicity resolution to at least Grade 2 or less and 
study completion.
Treatment for subject s on ibrutinib may be stopped at the discretion of the treating physician 
after 14 days if the subject is clinically stable and has been off supplemental oxygen for 
>48hours.
For all subject s discontinuing from study treatment, the reason for discontinua tion should be 
recorded in the medical record.
Subjects will be removed from the protocol therapy when any of the se criteria apply.  The reason for 
removal from protocol therapy, and the date the participan t was rem oved, must be documented in the 
medical record.  Alternative care options will be discussed with the participant.
5.7 Duration of Follow Up
Participants will be followed for 8 weeks following start of therapy or until death, whichever occurs first .  
Subjects experiencing grade 4 toxicities at least possibly related to study drug will be followed until 
toxicity resolution to at least Grade 2 or less.  Participants removed from protocol therapy for 
unacceptable AEswill be followed until resolution or stabilization of the AE. 
 
 
p. 26of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
5.8 Criteria for Taking a Participant Off Study
Participants will be removed from study when any of the following criteria apply:
Lost to follow -up
Withdrawal of consent for data submission
Pregnancy
Death
The reason for taking a participant off study, and the date the participan t was removed, must be 
documented in the electronic case report f orm (eCRF) In addition, subjects who are lost to follow -up or 
withdraw consent must be reported to AbbVie immediately so they can potentially be replaced.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regardi ng protocol deviations.  If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified), the investigator is responsible for notifying independent 
ethics committee (IEC)/independent review board (IRB), regulatory authorities (as applicable), and 
AbbVie.
6 DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS
Dose delays and modifications will be made using above.  The descriptions and grading scales found in 
the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0 will be utilized for 
dose delays and dose modificatio ns.  A copy of the CTCAE version 5.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP 
website:  http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm .
In the case of toxicity, appropriate medical treatment should be used (including anti -emetics, 
antidi arrheals, etc.).  All AEs experienced by subjects that at least may be possibly related to ibrutinib 
will be collected from the time of the first dose of study treatment, through the end of therapy should 
be documented in the medical record.  If subjects c
ontinue to experience ibrutinib toxicity at the end of 
treatment, they may be contacted for additional assessments until the toxicity has resolved or is 
deemed irreversible.  Dose de -escalations for toxicity will be performed per Table 3.
Dosing will be held for any of the following conditions:
Grade 4 ANC (< 500/μL) .  Discontinue study drug .  Neutrophil growth factors may be used for 
ANC recovery.
Grade 3 Platelets (< 50,000/μL) in the presence of clinically significant bleeding events; or   
 
 
p. 27of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Grade 4 Platelets (< 25,000/μL) .  Discontinue study drug.  Platelet transfusions may be used for 
platelet recovery .
Grade 3 or 4 nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea ( if persistent despite optimal antiemetic and/or
antidiarrheal therapy); discontinue study drug for grade 4 nausea, vomiting or diarrhea .
Any other grade 4 toxicities and any unmanageable non- hematologic Grade 3 or higher 
toxicities .  Discontinue study drug.
For Grade 3 atrial fibrillation, consider the risks and benefits of restarting and continuing study 
drug .  If clinically indicated, the use of non -warfarin or vitamin k antagonist anticoagulants or 
antiplatelet agents may be considered for the thrombopro phylaxis of atrial fibrillation .  
Discontinue study drug for Grade 4 atrial fibrillation.
For subject s experiencing treatment emergent Grade 3 toxicities (e.g., ALT or AST > 5 ×ULN) related to 
study drug, hold study drug.  T reatment may be restarted if t oxicity resolves to baseline at the next 
lowest dose level per Table 3.
Table 3. Dose De -Escalation Schedule for Toxicity
Dose Level Study Drug
Level 1 –Starting Dose 420 mg/day (Days 1 -28)
Level 2 280 mg/day
Level 3 140 mg/day
Level 4 Discontinue
For AEs that are felt to be related to worsening COVID -19 infection, the investigator may continue study 
drug, however, in subject s with worsening hepatic or cardiac dysfunction, bleeding, or multiple 
infections related to C OVID -19 infection, study drug should be discontinued .
Any subject developing the following laboratory abnormalities should permanently discontinue study 
treatment:
ALT o r AST > 8 ×ULN
ALT or AST > 5× ULN for more than 2 weeks
ALT or AST > 3× ULN and ( total bilirubin ≥ 2 × ULN or INR > 1.5)
ALT or AST > 3× ULN with the appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right
Upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia (>5%)
For subjects with mild chronic liver impairment (Child -Pugh Class A), the recommended dose is 140 mg 
daily .  For subjects with moderate chronic liver impairment (Child- Pugh Class B), the recommended dose 
is 70 mg daily .  Monitor subjec ts for signs of ibrutinib toxicity .  It is not recommended to administer 
ibrutinib to subjects with severe hepatic impairment .  Subjects with clinically significant chronic hepatic  
   
p. 28of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
impairment at the time of Screening (Child -Pugh Class C) are excluded from study participation.  
Concomitant use of strong CYP inhibitors is not permitted in subjects with chronic hepatic impairment .  
Refer to Appendix E for Child -Pugh classification .  Please refer to Table 4for dose modifications due to 
chronic hepatic impairment.
Table 4. Dose Modification Guidance for Chronic He patic Impaired Subjects
Child Pugh Class A
(Mild hepatic impairment)*Child Pugh Class B
(Moderate hepatic impairment)Child Pugh Class C
(Severe hepatic 
impairment)
Ongoing at time 
of enrollment Develops during 
study Ongoing at time 
of enrollment Develops during 
study Develops during 
study 
Ibrutinib 
Dose 
(daily) 140 mg 1. Hold study drug 
until 
improvement 
to baseline.
2 Restart dose at
140 mg
3. Discontinue for 
recurrence70 mg 1. Hold study 
drug until 
improvement 
to baseline.
2. Restart dose 
at70 mg
3. Discontinue
for 
recurrenceDiscontinue study 
drug
* In the event that additional reduction is needed, ibrutinib should be held for non -hepatic toxicity until resolution.
7ADVERSE EVENTS :  LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment .  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended si gn (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the 
product.
Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
"special situations "such as accidental or intentional overdose, medication error, occupational or 
accidental exposure, off- label use, drug abuse, drug misuse, or drug withdrawal, all which must be 
reported whether associated with an AE or not .  Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is 
considered an AE .  Worsening in severity of a reported AE should be reported as a new AE .  Laboratory 
abnormalities and changes in vit al signs are considered to be AEs only if they result in discontinuation 
from study drug , necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, meets protocol -specific criteria
(Section 5.1and Section 6), and/or if the investigator considers them to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEs on a routine basis 
throughout the study .  All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion. 
   
p. 30of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity) .  Additionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event .
All AEs reported from the time of study drug administration until 30 days after discontinuation of study 
drug administration will be collected, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject .  In 
addition, study procedure -related serious an d nonserious AEs will be collected from the time the subject 
signs the study -specific informed consent.
The following definitions will be used for Serious Adverse Reactions (SAR) and Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR):
SAR Defined as all noxious and unintended responses to an IMP related to any dose 
administered that result in death, are life -threatening, require inpatient 
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, result in persistent or 
significant disability or incapa city, or are a congenital anomaly or birth defect.
SUSAR A suspected SAR :  refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where 
a causal relationship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the 
sponsor or the investigator, is not listed is the applicable Reference Safety 
Information, and meets 1of the following serious criteria :  results in death, is 
life-threatening, requires hospitalization or prolongation of an existing 
hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disab ility or incapacity, or is a 
congenital anomaly or birth defect .  All individually reported SARs are 
considered suspected.
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local requirements.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will rate the severity of each AE according to the NCI CTCAE Version 5.0.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of the 
study drug ( ibrutinib/matching placebo ): 
 
 
p. 31of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Reasonable 
Possibi lityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter con sideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site 
becomes aware of the pregnancy .  Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be 
discontinued (Section 5.8).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject or in the partner of a study subject, 
information regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
In the event of pregnancy occurring in a subject 's partner during the study, written informed consent 
from the partner must be obtained prior to collection of any such information .  AbbVie will provide a 
separate consent form for this purpose .  Pregnancy in a subject 's partners will be collected from the 
date of the first dose through 90 day s following the last dose of study drug.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is 
considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the 
event.
7.1 Adverse Event List for Ibrutinib
7.1.1 Risks
Bleeding -related events
There have been reports of hemorrhagic events in subjects treated with ibrutinib both with and without 
thrombocytopenia .  These include primarily minor hemorrhagic events such as contusion, epist axis, and 
petechiae; and major hemorrhagic events, some fatal, including gastrointestinal bleeding, intracranial 
hemorrhage and hematuria .  Use of ibrutinib in subjects requiring other anticoagulants or medications 
that inhibit platelet function may increa se the risk of bleeding .  In an in vitro platelet function study, 
inhibitory effects of ibrutinib on collagen induced platelet aggregation were observed .  A higher risk for 
major bleeding was observed with anticoagulant than with antiplatelet agents .  Cons ider the risks and 
benefits of anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy when co -administered with ibrutinib .  Monitor for signs 
and symptoms of bleeding.  Supplements such as fish oil and vitamin E preparations should be avoided .  
Subjects with congenital ble eding diathesis have not been studied.  See Section 5.4for guidance on 
concomitant use of anticoagulants, antiplatelet therapy and/or supplements .  See Section 5.5for 
guidance on ibrutinib management with surgeries or procedures. 
 
 
p. 32of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and cases of ventricular tachyarrhythmia including some fatal events, 
have been reported in subjects treated with ibrutinib, particularly in subjects with cardiac risk factors, 
hypertension, acute infections, and a previous history of cardiac arrhythmia .  Periodically monitor 
subjects clinically f or cardiac arrhythmia .  Subjects who develop arrhythmic symptoms (e.g., palpitations, 
lightheadedness, syncope, chest discomfort or new onset of dyspnea) should be evaluated clinically, and 
if indicated, have an E KG performed .  For cardiac arrhythmias whic h persist, consider the risks and 
benefits of ibrutinib treatment and follow the protocol dose modification guidelines .
Hypertension
Hypertension has occurred in subjects treated with ibrutinib .  Regularly monitor blood pressure in 
subjects treated with ib rutinib and initiate or adjust antihypertensive medication throughout treatment 
with ibrutinib as appropriate.
Cerebrovascular Accidents
Although causality has not been established, cases of cerebrovascular accident, transient ischemic 
attack, and ischemic stroke including fatalities have been reported with the use of ibrutinib in the post -
marketing setting, with and without concomitant atrial fibrillation and/or hypertension .  Regular 
monitoring and appropriate treatment of conditions that can contribute t o the occurrence of these 
events is recommended.
Cytopenias
Treatment -emergent Grade 3 or 4 cytopenias (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia) have been 
reported in subjects treated with ibrutinib.
Diarrhea
Diarrhea is the most frequently reported non -hematologic AE with ibrutinib monotherapy and 
combination therapy .  Other frequently reported gastrointestinal events include nausea, vomiting, and 
constipation .  These events are rarely severe and are generally managed with supportive therapies 
including antidiarrheals and antiemetics .  Subjects should be monitored carefully for gastrointestinal AEs 
and cautioned to maintain fluid intake to avoid dehydration .  Medical evaluation should be made to rule 
out other etiologies such as Clostridium difficile or other infectious agents .  Should symptoms be severe 
or prolonged, follow the protocol dose modification guidelines (see Section 6).
Infections
Infections (including sepsis, bacterial, viral, or fungal infections) were observed in subjects treated with 
ibrutinib therapy .  Some of these infections have been associated with hospitalization and death .  
Consider prophylaxis according to standard of care in subjects who are at increased risk for 
opportunistic infections .  Although causality has not been established, cases of progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy and hepatitis B reactivation have occurred in subjects treated with ibrutinib .  
Subjects s hould be monitored for signs and symptoms (fever, chills, weakness, confusion, vomiting and 
jaundice) and appropriate therapy should be instituted as indicated. 
 
 
p. 33of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Non -Melanoma Skin Cancer
Non -melanoma skin cancers have occurred in subject s treated with ibrut inib.  Monitor subject s for the 
appearance of non -melanoma skin cancer.
Rash
Rash has been commonly reported in subjects treated with either single agent ibrutinib or in 
combination with chemotherapy .  In a randomized Phase 3 study (PCYC -1112 -CA), rash occ urred at a 
higher rate in the ibrutinib arm than in the control arm .  Most rashes were mild to moderate in severity .  
Isolated cases of severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) including Stevens -Johnson syndrome (SJS) 
have been reported in subjects treat ed with ibrutinib.  Subjects should be closely monitored for signs 
and symptoms suggestive of SCAR including SJS .  Subjects receiving ibrutinib should be observed closely 
for rashes and treated symptomatically, including interruption of the suspected agent as appropriate .  In 
addition, hypersensitivity -related events including erythema, urticaria, and angioedema have been 
reported.
Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD)
Cases of interstitial lung disease (ILD) have been rarely reported in subject s treated with ibrutinib.  It 
may be difficult to separate from those of COVID -19.  Monitor subject s for pulmonary symptoms 
indicative of ILD, and if suspected to be ibrutinib related, discontinue therapy .  If symptoms develop, 
interrupt ibrutinib and manage ILD appropriate ly.  If symptoms persist, consider the risks and benefits of 
ibrutinib treatment and follow the protocol dose modification guidelines .
Pregnancy
Before study enrollment, subjects must agree to take appropriate measures to avoid pregnancy.  
However, should a pregnancy occur in a female study subject, consent to provide follow -up information 
regarding the outcome of the pregnancy and the health of the infant until 30 days old will be requested .  
A female subject must immediately inform their treating physicia n if she becomes pregnant from the 
time of consent to 30 days after the last dose of ibrutinib.  A male subject must immediately inform the 
treating physician if his partner becomes pregnant from the time of consent to 90 days after the last 
dose of ibruti nib.  Any female subjects receiving study drug(s) who become pregnant must immediately 
discontinue ibrutinib .  The Investigator should counsel the subject, discussing any risks of continuing the 
pregnancy and any possible effects on the fetus .  Although pr egnancy itself is not regarded as an AE, the 
outcome will need to be documented .  Any pregnancy occurring in a subject or subject 's partner from 
the time of consent to 30 days (or 90 days for male partners) after the last dose of study drug must be 
reporte d.  Any occurrence of pregnancy must be reported to AbbVie Pharmacovigilance , or designee, 
per SAE reporting timelines .  All pregnancies will be followed for outcome, which is defined as elective 
termination of the pregnancy, miscarriage, or delivery of the fetus .  Pregnancies with an outcome of live 
birth, the newborn infant will be followed until 30 days old by completing will need to be reported to 
AbbVie Pharmacovigilance per SAE reporting timelines .  Any congenital anomaly/birth defect noted in 
the i nfant must be reported as a serious adverse event. 
 
 
p. 34of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Other Malignancies
All new malignant tumors including solid tumors, skin malignancies and hematologic malignancies will 
be reported for the duration of study treatment and during any protocol specified fol low-up periods 
including post -progression follow -up for overall survival .  If observed, enter data in the corresponding 
eCRF.
 
   
       
    
      
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
    
    
   
       
   
              
    
       
      
         
     
      
     
      
     
     
     
      
     
     
    
   
  
    
      
   
   
   
     
    
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
           
                
         
           
     
                    
    
        
       
p. 36of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
The sponsor will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting 
for the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with Directive 2001/20/EC.
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local guidelines and the 
Investigator Brochure will serve as the Reference Safety Information (RSI) .  The RSI in effect at the st art 
of a DSUR reporting period serves as the RSI during the reporting period .  For follow -up reports, the RSI 
in place at the time of occurrence of the 'suspected 'Serious Adverse React ion will be used to assess 
expectedness.
8PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION
8.1 Ibrutinib
8.1.1 Description
Ibrutinib is 1 -[(3R)-3-[4-amino -3-(4-phenoxyphenyl) -1H-pyrazolo[3,4 -d]pyrimidin -1-yl]-1-piperidinyl] -2-
propen-1- one and has a molecular weight of 440.50 g/mole (anhydrous basis) .  Ibrutinib exhibited 18% 
to 23% oral bioavailability in rats and 7% to 11% oral bioavailability indogs .  The mean terminal half -life 
of ibrutinib after oral administration ranged from 1.7 to 3.1 hours in mice, 1 to 4.7 hours in rats, and 
3.3to 6.4 hours in dogs .  Preliminary results suggest a 1.5 -to2.5-hour half -life of ibrutinib in humans .  
The effects of renal and/or hepatic impairment on drug clearance are not known at this time .  In vitro 
studies have indicated that ibrutinib is metabolized extensively by CYP3A4.
8.1.2 Form
Ibrutinib is a white to off -white crystalline solid.  Ibrutinib has a single chiral center and is the 
R-enantiomer.  Ibrutinib product is manufactured for Pharmacyclics LLC by a contract manufacturer .  
Ibrutinib PO Hard Gelatin Capsule is an oral formulation containing micronized ibrutinib and the
following compendial excip ients :  microcrystalline cellulose (NF); croscarmellose sodium (NF); sodium 
lauryl sulfate (NF);  magnesium stearate (NF) .  The 140 mg strength contains 140 mg of the active 
ingredient, ibrutinib, adjusted for water content and purity in a size 0, gray, hard gelatin capsule .  The 70 
mg strength contains 70 mg of the active ingredient, ibrutinib, adjusted for water content and purity in a 
size 2, yellow ,hard gelatin capsule .  Capsules are packaged in high -density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles
with an inductio n seal and a child resistant screw top cap .  Each bottle is distributed by Pharmacyclics 
LLC/AbbVie Inc .  The number of capsules per bottle is indicated on the label .  The HDPE bottles are 
labeled with the appropriate information and intended for distribution to participants .  Empty HDPE 
bottles will not be supplied by Pharmacyclics LLC /AbbVie Inc .
8.1.3 Storage and Stability
The recommended storage condition for ibrutinib PO Hard Gelatin Capsule is at 15°C to 25°C [59° F to 
77° F] with excursions permitted to 30°C (86°F ).  Under these conditions, the drug product is expected to 
remain within specifications for at least 36 months .  Temperatures lower than 15°C or greater than 30°C 
must be reported to Pharmacyclics /AbbVie for evaluation of impact on product quality. 
 
 
p. 37of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
8.1.4 Handling
Qualified personnel, familiar with procedures that minimize undue exposure to themselves and the
environment, should undertake the preparation, handling, and safe disposal of the chemotherapeutic 
agent in a self -contained and protective environment .
If a drug shipment arrives damaged, or if there are any other drug complaints, a product complaint must 
be reported.  A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the 
product or to the medica l device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., pr inting illegible), missing components/product, device not working properly, 
or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event. Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
8.1.5 Availability
Ibrutinib will be supplied free -of-charge from Pharmacyclics LLC /AbbVie Inc for this study.
8.1.6 Administration
Ibrutinib should be self -administered daily by the participant or qualified hospital staff and should be 
taken at approximately the same time each day .  Ibrutinib is intended to be administered orally once 
daily with 8 ounces (approximately 240 mL) of water (avoid grapefruit juice a nd Seville orange juice 
products due to CYP450 3A4 inhibition) .  The capsules should be swallowed intact and participants 
should not attempt to open capsules or dissolve them in water.
If a dose is not taken at the scheduled time, it can be taken as soon a s possible on the same day with a 
return to the normal schedule the following day .  The subject should not take extra capsules to make up 
the missed dose .  The missed dose will not be made up and must be returned to the site at the next 
scheduled visit .  If the pills are vomited this should be noted on the diary, but a replacement dose 
should not be taken that day .  A study diary will be used to aid with study drug administration 
compliance for subjects taking drug in a non -hospital setting.
8.1. Accountab ility
The investigator, or a responsible party designated by the investigator, should maintain a careful record 
of the inventory and disposition of the study drug.  Each site will be responsible for maintaining drug 
accountability records and lot numbers d uring the study.
8.1.8 Destruction and Return
Unused ibrutinib capsules will be returned by the participant, collected and counted at each study visit 
and will be returned to pharmacy for destruction .  Unused supplies of ibrutinib will be destroyed 
according to institutional policies. 
 
 
p. 38of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
9STUDY CALENDAR
See study calendar below for screening and follow -up assessments.
Baseline
(Screening) Days 1 –281, 4Day 28
(±3 days)Follow- up Visit
(Day 5 8 ±7 days)
Informed Consent X
Demographics X
Current and complete
medical history (including 
days of symptom onset to 
study start , alcohol and 
tobacco history )X
Concurrent medication s 
(including supplements )X X X4X4
Physical exam including vitals X Daily while in hospital X4X4
Clinical status on 8-Point 
ScaleX Daily8X4,8X4,8
O2saturation and 
documentation of 
supplemental O 2,and 
mechanical/cardiopulmonary 
support (if any)X Daily while in hospital XAs clinically 
indicated4
Arterial blood gas As clinically 
indicatedAs clinically indicatedAs clinically 
indicatedAs clinically 
indicated
CBC with differential
(including INR at baseline) XEvery 7 days or more 
often, if clinically 
indicatedXAs clinically 
indicated4
Serum Chemistries, BUN, Cr
XEvery 7 days or more 
often if clinically 
indicatedXAs clinically 
indicated4
C-reactive protein, ferritinXX (Day 3 ± 1 day , 
Day 10 ± 1 day )
Corollary Studies per 
Section 10X2X2
(Day 3 ±1 dayand 
Day 10±1 day)X2X2
EKGX5X5X5 As clinically 
indicated 
   
p. 39of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Baseline
(Screening) Days 1 –281, 4Day 28
(±3 days)Follow- up Visit
(Day 5 8 ±7 days)
SARS -CoV-2 viral testing by 
RT-PCR by nasopharyngeal 
swabX X6
B-HCG7X
Radiological Evaluation X3As clinically indicated X3 As clinically 
indicated
Survival status X X X4X4
Adverse Events Related or 
Possibly Related to IbrutinibX X4X4
Reason for early study 
discontinuation (if applicable )
noted in medical recordX X
Ibrutinib or placebo (once 
daily)X X
Review subject diary (if 
applicable)X X
B-HCG = beta h uman chorionic gonadotropin ; BUN = blood urea nitrogen ; CBC = complete blood count; Cr = creatinine; 
CT = computed tomography; EKG =electrocardiogram; INR = international normalized ratio ; NGT = nasogastric tube ; 
RT-PCR =reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; SARS -CoV-2 = severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
1. Treatment for subject s may be stopped at the discretion of the treating physician after 14 days if the subject is clinically 
stable and has been off supplemental oxygen for > 48 hours or treatment may be discontinued for reasons outlined in 
Section 5.8.  In either case, Day 28 procedures (below) should be performed in the event of hospital discharge, applicable 
procedures for the Treatment Period should continue until Day 28 (either in hospital or via subject diary), and procedures 
under Day 28 should still be performed on Day 28 (± 3 days), regardless of when the subject stops receiving study drug.
2. Unless subject is unstable or blood draw is not possible .  See corollary studies in Section 10for research blood collection .
3. Chest x -ray and/or CT scan to be used to meet the criteria as determined by the PI. A similar modality of study may be 
used for follow -up unless medical resources are limited.
4. A tele -health visit with coordinated diary collection and/or return of ibrutinib is permitted prior to Day 28, at Day 28, and 
at Day 58 if circumstances prevent a clinic visit.  Lab draws and other assessments that may be clinically indicat ed will be 
performed through outpatient laboratory or radiology services, or other accessible facilities determined by the treating 
physician or study team unless it is not medically safe.
5. EKG assessments will be performed for all subject s at baseline, and daily thereafter for the first 3 days, on Day 7, and 
weekly thereafter while subject s are hospitalized and on study drug .  Serial EKGs are not needed for subject s on 
continuous telemetry during the time they are on telemetry.  EKGs should also beperfo rmed as clinically indicated.
6. Quantitative assessments are preferred, and same nostril as that used at baseline should ideally be used for testing should 
be used unless medically not possible (i.e. ,due to NGT tube insertion).
7. Required for female subjects of child bearing potential.
8. Clinical status on an 8 -point ordinal scale ( Figure 6) should be recorded taking into account limitations on activit ies and 
required supportive care (oxygen or ventilation) in hospital and on diary if discharged. 
   
p. 40of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
10COROLLARY STUDIES
Serial evaluations of inflammatory and chemo -attractant cytokines, IgM and IgG antibody titers to SARS -
CoV-2 will be performed as exploratory studies .  These studies will help inform if a clinically meaningful 
biomarker(s) for response can be identified, and to evaluate if ibrutinib as a BTK -inhibitor impacts 
humoral response to SARS- CoV-2.
Additional information on the collection, h andling/processing, disposition, and measurement methods 
will be provided in the central lab manual/separate document.
Sampling may not be possible for all collection times in those subjects who are medically unstable or 
inaccessible or if hospital resourc es preclude collection.  An allowance of ± 1 day is permitted for sample 
collection for Days 3, 10 due to medical reasons.  An allowance of ± 3 days is permitted for Day 28, and 
58 blood collections in the event of medical reasons or scheduling conflicts.
Cytokine Studies (Study Wide)
A magnetic multiplex enzyme -linked immunosorbent assays will be used for inflammatory and chemo -
attractant cytokine assessments that may include but not limited to: GMCSF, IL1B, IL2, IL6, IL7, IL8, IL10, 
IP10/CXCL10, MCP -1/CCL 2, MIP -1A/CCL3, MIP1B/CCL4, INF γ, IL12p40 and TNF -a (as per studies cited in 
Table 1) will be performed on samples from subject s on supportive care plus placebo or suppo rtive care 
plus ibrutinib .
Signaling Studies (Study Wide)
NanoString transcriptome analysis for innate and adaptive immune signaling to investigate immune cell 
types including T and B -cell subtypes and monocytes will be carried out on subject whole blood.
Serology for SARS -CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibody response (Study Wide)
The kinetics of SARS- CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibody response have not been reported .  Both IgM and IgG 
antibody responses were documented in patients with SARS -CoV-1 infection, with positivity noted 
1week after infection and peak IgM titers at 3 weeks, and a sustained IgG antibody response after 
Week3 that peaked at Week 12.36Serial evaluations of IgM and Ig G antibody titers will be performed 
by a central laboratory .Any remainder sample material not used in the above studies will be banked for 
future studies of other response biomarkers .
Statistical Plan for Corollary Studies
All efficacy endpoints will be assessed using corollary study data to identify potential predictors of 
change in the disease course .  These analyses are exploratory in nature and no alpha adjustment will be 
made to address multiplicity .  Mean cytokine and antibody titer changes from baseline between the 
ibrutinib treated and untreated controls will be analyzed using blocking model designs to account for 
known confounding factors such as age and gender . 
 
 
p. 41of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Handling of Samples
Collection tubes for corollary studies will be sourced from the Treon Laboratory at the Dana Farber 
Cancer Institute .  For corollary studies supply and replacement contact  (Treon 
Laboratory) at  or call .
For cytokine, NanoString, and serology studies , study sites will process locally until end of study or as 
directed by study sponsor.  Sites will utilize sample shipping kit and instructions provided by the sponsor 
to batch ship samples to central laboratory for testing.   Please refer to the central laboratory manual for 
additional information.
11 DATA REPORTING/REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Adverse event lists, guidelines, and instructions for AE reporting can be found in Sect ion 7(Adverse 
Events :  List and Reporting Requirements).
11.1 Source Documents and Case Report Completion
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ens ure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GC P), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).
11.2 Data Quality Assurance
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and r eliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
11.3 Data Safety Monitoring
An independent data monitoring committee (DMC) will review and monitor toxicity and accrual data 
from the study on an ongoing basis.  The safety and interim efficacy of the study will be monitored by 
the DMC as outlined in a separate DMC charter.  An early safety evaluation will occur by the DMC 
following the enrollment of 3 -6 subjects with at least 7 days of follow up and will continue in regular 
frequency approximately every 3 - 4 weeks until all subjects reach Day 28 or prematurely discontinue 
from study . 
   

p. 42of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
12 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
12.1 Study Design and Endpoints
A statistic al analysis plan (SAP) will be prepared and finalized prior to interim database lock.  This 
document will provide further details regarding the definition of analysis variables and analysis 
methodology to address all study objectives.  Any deviations in th e planned analysis as stated in the 
protocol will be delineated in the SAP.  Any deviations from the SAP will be reported in the clinical study 
report (CSR).  
Subject s will be randomized 1:1 to ibrutinib + supportive care vs .  placebo + supportive care , stratified 
by prescription for remdesivir.  As no standard for treatment of COVID -19 in pulmonary distress 
currently exists and new treatment options are urgently needed, this study will be exploratory in nature .
Primary Endpoint:  The primary endpoint will be the proportion of subjects alive and without respiratory 
failure at Study Day 28.
Secondary endpoints will include:
Change in the World Health Organization ( WHO )-8 point ordinal scale from baseline between 
the experimental and control arms at Study Day 14(Figure 6)
Median reduction in days spent on supplemental oxygen, with time on supplemental oxygen 
imputed to the maximum number of days on study drug (28) for all points following the death of 
a subjec t,
All-cause mortality at Study Days (7, 14, 21, and 28),
Proportion of subject s experiencing respiratory failure or death on Study Days (7, 14, 21, and 28)
Mechanical ventilation- free survival
Days on mechanical ventilation
Duration of hospitalization
Time to discharge
PaO2:FiO2 and/or oxygenation index, and
Safety and tolerability of ibrutinib as an adjuvant therapy to standard of care as assessed by 
treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs), serious adverse events (SAEs), related AEs, TEAEs 
by grade, and abnormal laboratory findings .  Type, frequency, seriousness and relatedness of 
TEAEs will be analyzed according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA ).  
Laboratory abnormalities will be analyzed according to NCI CTCAE v5.0. 
 
 
p. 43of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Respiratory failure is defined by clinical diagnosis of respiratory failure and initiation of 1of the 
following therapies:
1.Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation,
2.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation,
3.High- flow nasal cannula oxygen delivery (i. e., reinforced nasal cannula delivering heated, 
humidified oxygen with fraction of delivered oxygen ≥0.5 and flow rates of ≥30 L/min),
4.Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation,
5.Clinical diagnosis of respiratory failure with initiation of none of these m easures only when 
clinical decision -making driven is driven solely by resource limitation (these events must be 
formally collected as data and flagged, for purposes of sensitivity analyses).
These study endpoints are in alignment with other ongoing studies in COVID -19; in particular, many 
studies use a similar ordinal scale assessment ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) as in the first secondary 
endpoint .
Figure 6. Ordinal Scale for Clinical Improvement
ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; RRT = renal replacement therapy
 
   
    
      
   
      
    
     
   
      
 
     
    
    
 
    
   
 
   
p. 44of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
12.2 Sample Size Justification
Forty -six subject s will be randomized at an allocation of 1:1 to supportive care plus placebo or 
supportive care plus ibrutinib, stratified by prescription for remdesivir.   Baseline is asses sed at the time 
of randomization, which based on the acute nature of study subjects is likely to be on the same day as 
initiation of study drug .  The proportion of subject s alive, without respiratory failure at 28 days of 
control arm is assumed to be 60% and the experimental arm is assumed to 90%.  Forty -sixsubjects total 
are required to achieve ≥80% power with 1 -sided alpha =0.1.  Replacement may be implemented for 
subjects that withdraw consent or are lost to follow up prior to Day 28 .
12.3 Interim Analysis
One interim analysis using the gamma family spending function with a conservative boundary 
(parameter = –4) for futility (non- binding) will be conducted after 18 subjects are randomized and 
treated/followed for at least 28 days.  The DMC will revi ew and evaluate efficacy and safety results 
while the sponsor remains blinded .
In addition, an analysis to estimate the overall proportion and number of subjects alive and without 
respiratory failure will be conducted in a blinded fashion when approximatel y 70% of the planned 
subjects in the FAS population (i.e., 32 subjects) have completed the Day 28 Visit or died.  The objective 
of this analysis to re -estimate sample size if needed.  If the final sample size is increased > 20% from the 
initial sample size (i.e., final sample size > 56 subjects), then an additional interim analysis may be 
conducted after 46 subjects have completed the Day 28 visit or discontinued from the study.  The Lan -
Demets alpha spending function based on O 'Brien- Fleming boundary for s uperiority assessment and the 
gamma family spending function with a conservative boundary (parameter = –4) for non -binding futility 
assessment will be utilized at this interim analysis.  The DMC will review and evaluate efficacy and safety 
results while th e sponsor remains blinded.
12.4 Efficacy Analysis
All efficacy analyses will be performed using the Full Analysis Set (FAS) which will include all subjects 
who are randomized and received at least one dose of study drug. Subjects will be grouped according to
treatment as randomized. In addition, a supplemental analysis of the primary and secondary efficacy 
endpoints will be performed for the modified FAS which will include all randomized and dosed subjects 
who have assessment through Day 28 or die before Day 28.  All details of analysis methods will be 
described in the statistical analysis plan.
The primary analysis will occur after all subjects have completed the Day 28 Visit or prematurely 
discontinued study.  The data for the primary analysis will be locke d after data cleaning.  Data after the 
Day 28 Visit will be added to a new version of the database which will be cleaned and locked at the end 
of the study.  The sponsor will be unblinded at the primary analysis. 
 
 
p. 45of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
12.5 Safety Analysis
Safety data will be generated from the Safety Population which consists of all subjects receiving at least 
1dose of study drug (ibrutinib or placebo).   Subjects are assigned to a treatment group based on the 
treatment actually received, regardless of the treatment randomized.
Detailed tabulations of safety data ( AEs, clinical laboratory tests and other safety endpoints) will be 
summarized by treatment arm for the safety population.
12.6 Sample Size, Accrual Rate and Study Duration
Subjects will be randomized 1 :1 in a placebo -controlled, double blinded study to receive either 
supportive care and placebo orsupportive care and ibrutinib for up to 28 days .  For subject s randomized 
to receive ibrutinib, the dose of ibrutinib will be 420 mg a day .  Approximately 46 subject s will be 
enrolled in this study .  Subject s that withdraw consent or are lost to follow up from the study before 
Day 28 may be replaced .  Enrollment is anticipated to be complete within 3 -6 months of activation.  
The study is expected to be comple tewithin 6 -9 months after activation .
13 ETHICS
13.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and app roval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed 
consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In 
addi tion, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
13.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulation s, and guidelines governing clinical study 
conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  
13.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie. 
 
 
p. 46of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
14 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit.
15 PUBLICATION PLAN
Time to presentation or publication is ex pected within 6 -9 months after study activation .  Any formal 
presentation or publication of data from this trial may be published after review and comment by 
Pharmacyclics LLC/AbbVie Inc prior to any outside submission.  Pharmacyclics LLC/AbbVie Inc must
receive copies of any intended communication in advance of publication (3 days for presentational 
materials, abstracts, manuscripts).  These requirements acknowledge Pharmacyclics LLC/AbbVie's 
responsibility to provide peer input regarding the scientific content and conclusions of such publications 
or presentations.  The principal investigator shall have the final authority to determine the scope and 
content of resulting publications, provided such authority shall be exercised with reasonable regard for 
proprietary interests and not permit disclosure of confidential or proprietary information that belongs to 
Pharmacyclics LLC/AbbVie Inc.
16 REFERENCES
1.Guan WJ, et al.  Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China .  NEJM 2020; Feb 
28.  doi:  10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 .
2.Wang D, Hu B, Hu C ,et al.  Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus -Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China .  JAMA . 2020;323:1061 -69.
3.Bhatraju PK, et al.  Covid -19 in critically ill patients in the Seattle region -case series.  NEJM 2020.  
DOI:  10.1056/NEJMoa2004500.
4.Cao B, et al .  A trial of lopinavir -ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe Covid -19.  NEJM 
2020.
5.Wu C, et al .  Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Death in 
Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia in Wuhan, China .  JAMA 2020; Published 
online March 13, 2020.  doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.0994.
6.Hoffman M, et al.   SARS -CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a 
Clini cally Proven Protease Inhibitor .  Cell 2020 .  Mar 4 .  pii:  S0092 -8674(20)30229 -4.
7.Fujino N, et al .  isolation of alveolar epithelial type II progenitor cells from adult human lungs .  
Lab Invest .  2010; 91:363 -78.
8.Pechkovsky D, et al .  CCR2 and CXCR3 chemo kines are differentially expressed and regulated in 
human alveolar epithelial cells type II.  Resp .  Res.  2005;6:75.
9.Wang J, et al .  Differentiated human alveolar type II cells secrete antiviral IL -29 in response to 
influenza A infection .  J Immunology . 2009;182:1296 -304.
10.Thorley AJ, et al .  Innate immune responses to bacterial ligands in the peripheral human lung -
role of alveolar epithelial TLR expression and signaling .  PLOS ONE .  2011;6:e21827. 
 
 
p. 47of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
11.Chuquimia O, et al .  Alveolar epithelial cells are critic al in protection of the respiratory tract by 
secretion of factors able to modulate the activity of pulmonary macrophages and directly 
control bacterial growth .  Infection and Immunity . 2013;81:381 -89.
12.Werner JL, Steele C .  Innate receptors and cellular de fense against pulmonary infections .  J. 
Immunology .  193:3842 -50.
13.He L, et al .  Expression of elevated levels of pro -inflammatory cytokines in SARS -CoV-infected 
ACE2+ cells in SARS patients :  relation to acute lung injury and pathogenesis of SARS .  J.  
Pathology . 2006;210:288 -97.
14.Jiang Y, et al.  Characterization of cytokine/chemokine profiles of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome .  Am J Respir Care Med . 2005;171:850 -57.
15.Ley K .  M1 means Kill; M2 means Heal .  J. Immunology . 2017;199:2191 -93.
16.Atri C, et al.  Role of human macrophage polarization in inflammation during infectious diseases .  
Int J Mol.  Sci.  2018;19:1801.
17.Chan JF, et al .  Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human -pathogenic coronavirus 
isolated from a patient with atypical pneumoni a after visiting Wuhan .  Emerg Microbes Infect .  
2020; 9:221-36.
18.Heurich A, et al .  TMPSSR2 and ADAM17 cleave ACE2 differentially and only proteolysis by 
TMPSSR2 augments entry driven by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike 
protein .  J Virology . 2014;88:1293 -307.
19.Huang C, et al.  Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, 
China .  Lancet . 2020;395:565 -74.
20.Jeffries CA, et al .  Bruton 's tyrosine kinase is a Toll/interleukin -1 receptor domain -binding 
protein that participates in nuclear factor kappaB activation by Toll -like receptor 4 .  J Biol .  
Chem .  2003;278:26258 -64.
21.Yang G, et al .  A mutation in MYD88 (L265P) supports the survival of lymphoplasmacytic cells by 
activation of Bruton tyrosine kinase in Wald enström macroglobulinemia .  Blood . 
2013;122:1222 -32.
22.Yang G, et al .  HCK is a survival determinant transactivated by mutated MYD88, and a direct 
target of ibrutinib .  Blood . 2016;127:3237 -52.
23.Wang Y, Liu L .  The Membrane Protein of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 
Functions as a Novel Cytosolic Pathogen -Associated Molecular Pattern To Promote Beta 
Interferon Induction via a Toll -Like-Receptor- Related TRAF3 -Independent Mechanism .  mBio .  
2016;7(1):e01872 -15.  doi:  10.1128/mBio.01872 -15.
24.Chen JG, et al .  BTKCys481Serdrives ibrutinib resistance via ERK1/2 and protects BTKwild-typeMYD88 -
mutated cells by a paracrine mechanism .  Blood . 2018;131:2047 -59.
25.Ernst M, et al . Constitutive activation of the SRC family kinase HCK results in spo ntaneous 
pulmonary inflammation and an enhanced innate immune response .  JExpMed .  
2002;196:589 -604. 
 
 
p. 48of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
26.Tian S, et al.  Pulmonary Pathology of Early -Phase 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID -19) 
Pneumonia in Two Patients With Lung Cancer .  J Thoracic Oncology . 2020;Feb 28 .  pii:  S1556 -
0864(20)30132 -5.
27.Yao XH, et al.  A pathological report of three COVID -19 cases by minimally invasive autopsies .  
Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi .  2020 Mar 15;49(0):E009.
28.Available from:   https://lincs.hms.harvard.edu/db/datasets/20222/results?page=1
29.Byrd JC, et al .  Targeting BTK with ibrutinib in relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia .  N Engl J 
Med . 2013;369:32 -42.
30.Niemann CU, et al.  Disruption of in vivo Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Tumor–
Microenvironment Interactions by Ibrutinib –Findings from an Investigator -Initiated Phase II 
Study .  Clin Cancer Res .  2015;22:1572 -82.
31.Vos JM, et al. CXCL13 levels are elevated in patients with Waldenström macroglobulinemia, and 
are predictive of major response to ibrutinib.  Haematologica . 2017 ;102:e455.
32.Miklos D, et al.  Ibrutinib for chronic graft -versus -host disease after failure of prior therapy .  
Blood . 2017;130:2243 -50.
33.Greil R, et al .  Ibrutinib decreases obinutuzumab induced secretion of cytokines associated with 
infusion related reactions in patients with CLL :  Analysis from the ILLUMINATE study .  Proc .  
ICML 2019 (Hematological Oncology 37(2) :210-12.
34.Florence JM, et al .  Inhibiting Bruton' s tyrosine kinase rescues mice from lethal influenza 
induced acute lung injury .  Am J Physiol.  Lung Cell Mol .  Physiol.  2018;315:L52 -58.
35.Treon S, Castillo J, Skarbink A, et al.  The BTK -inhibitor ibrutinib may protect against pulmonary 
injury in COVID -19 infected patients.  Blood 2020:  e -pub ahe ad of print 2020/01/17; doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020006288 .
36.Li G, Chen X, Xu A .  Profile of specific antibodies to the SARS -Associated coronavirus.  N Engl J
Med.  2003;349 (5):508 -9. 
 
 
p. 49of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
ACE2+ Alveolar Type II
AE adverse event
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
AST aspartate aminotransferase
BCRP breast cancer resistance protein
BTK Bruton 's Tyrosine Kinase
cGVHD chronic graft versus host disease
CLL chronic lymphocytic leukemia
COVID -19 Coronavirus disease 2019
CrCl creatinine clearance
CRP c-reactive protein
CSR clinical study report
CT computed tomography
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
CYP cytochrome P450
DMC Data Monitoring Committee
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
EKG electrocardiogram
FDA Food and Drug Administration
GCP Good Clinical Practice
G-CSF granulocyte colony stimulating factor
HCK hematopoietic cell kinase
HCQ hydroxychloroquine
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration 
of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IL interleukin 
 
 
p. 50of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
ILD interstitial lung disease
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
IP10/CXCL10 interferon- inducible protein 10
IRB Institutional Review Board
LPS lipopolysaccharide
MCL mantle cell lymphoma
MCP -1 monocyte chemoattractant protein -1
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MTD maximum tolerated dose
MZL marginal zone lymphoma
NCI National Cancer Institute
NGT nasogastric tube
PBS phosphate -buffered saline
PCR polymerase chain reaction
P-gp P-glycoprotein
RT reverse transcriptase
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SARS -CoV-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2
SLL small lymphocytic leukemia
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TLR Toll-like receptors
TNF-a tumor necrosis factor alpha
ULN upper limit of normal
US United States
WHO World Health Organization
WM Waldenström 's macroglobulinemia 
 
 
p. 51of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M20 -310 (PCYC- 1150 -IM):  ibruti Nib in SARS CoV -2 induced Pulmonary Injury and Respiratory 
failur e(iNSPIRE)
Protocol Date:  06 July 2020
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Conference on 
Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) 
Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site 
location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being u sed for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investig ation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator 's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and em ployees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics commit tees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed) 
 
 
p. 52of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
APPENDIX C. INHIBITORS AND INDUC ERS OF CYP3A
NOTE:  Itraconazole and ketoconazole can be replaced with voriconazole for study subjects.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
    
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
p. 54of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
APPENDIX E. CHILD -PUGH SCORE FOR SUBJECTS WITH LIVER 
IMPAIRMENT
Measure 1 point 2 points 3 points
Total bilirubin, μmol/L (mg/dL) <34 (< 2) 34-50 (2 -3) >50 (> 3)
Serum albumin, g/L (g/dL) >35 (> 3.5) 28-35 (2.8 -3.5) <28 (< 2.8)
PT/INR <1.7 1.71 -2.30 >2.30
Ascites None Mild Moderate to Severe
Hepatic encephalopathy None Grade I -II (or suppressed 
with medication)Grade III - IV 
(or refractory)
INR = international normalized ratio; PT = prothrombin time
Points Class
5 - 6 A
7 - 9 B
10-15 C
Source : 
1.Child CG, Turcotte JG.  Surgery and portal hypertension .  In Child CG .  The liver and portal 
hypertension .  Philadelphia:Saunders .  1964;50 -64.
2.Pugh RN, Murray -Lyon IM, Dawson L, et al .  Transection of the oesophagus for bleeding 
oesophageal varices.  The British journal of surgery . 1973;60:646 -9. 
   
p. 55of 55
STUDY M20 -310 (PCYC -1150 -IM)  |  Version 3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
APPENDIX F. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 2.0 03 May 2020
Version 1.0 22 April 2020
The purpose of this Version is to make the following updates :
Increased number of potential study sites
Rationale:   To ensure that the study can be fully enrolled in a timely manner.
Revised eligibility criteria to allow subjects to be on oxygen therapy for up to 5 days, removed 
the 6 L limit on oxygen therapy, and clarified restrictions on concurrent malignancy.
Rationale:   To reduce burden around timing of enrollment to allow more subjects access to 
therapy.
Removed recommendation for subjects to avoid corticosteroid use.
Rationale: Based on recent publications and updates to standard of care for the treatment of 
COVID -19.
Adjusted resolution criteria for bleeding events
Rationale: Many low -grade bleeding events (e.g., petechiae, echymoses) are not expected to 
completely resolve immediately and pose little risk to subjects.
Revisions to ibrutinib stability descrip tion.
Rationale: Correction of error.
Updated details regarding the planned and potential interim analyses.
Rationale:  To allow for a potential additional interim analysis to be conducted in case of a 
relatively large increase in the final sample size.  A group sequential design is specified to 
provide strong control of the type 1 error rate at this potential analysis.
Updated drug interaction guidance for compounds that may be used to treat COVID -19.
Rationale: To align with evolving treatment standards for COVID -19.
Made minor clarification sto the study calendar.
Rationale :  To address questions from study sites.
In addition, minor clerical errors were corrected and edits for consistency within the document were 
made. 
 
 