 
  Version  03/28/202 3 
 
Atorvastatin  Treatment of Cavernous Angiomas with Symptomatic 
Hemorrhage Exploratory Proof of Concept  
(AT CASH  EPOC ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protoc ol 
March 29, 202 3 (IRB approved April 18, 202 3) 
 
Version 5.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  
 
 
Atorvastatin  Treatment of Cavernous Angiomas with 
Symptomatic Hemorrhage Exploratory Proof of Concept  
(AT CASH  EPOC )  
Phase I -IIa Randomized, Placebo -Controlled, Doub le-Blinded, 
Single -Site Clinical T rial 
 
 
Study C o-chairs: 
 
Issam Awad, MD, Professor of Neurosurgery and Neurology  (Principal Investigator)  
Neurovascular Surgery Program, University of Chicago  Medicine  
Chicago, Illinois  
 
Daniel Hanley  MD, Professor of Neurology, Brain Injury Outcomes Unit  
John s Hopkins University  Medical Institutions  
Baltimore, Maryland  
 
 
 
Supported by:  
 
Requested as an R01 Exploratory Clinical Trial from the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)  
[PAR -17-122] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sponsor of IND  Exemption : 
Issam Awad, MD  
 
Registration number ( clinical trials.gov):   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 2 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
    Page  
 
SYNO PSIS                   3  
                        
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES                  4  
2. BACKGROUND                                                                                                                4 
            2.1  Supporting data  
            2.2        Rationale   
3.   STUDY DESIGN                                                                                                                15 
            3.1   Patient  Population   
      3.2  Blinding  
      3.3              Randomization  
      3.4              Method of Dosing                                                                                                            
4 SELECT ION AND ENROLLMENT OF SUBJECTS                                                         17 
 4.1   Inclusion Criteria  
 4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
 4.3  Study Enrollmen t Procedures  
5.   STUDY INTERVENTION                                                                                                   19 
  5.1  Intervention , Administration, and Duration  
  5.2  Handling of S tudy Intervention  
  5.3  Concomita nt Intervention  
  5.4  Adherence Assessment  
6.   CLINICAL, LABORATORY  AND IMAGING EVALUATIONS                                           21 
 6.1  Schedule of Evaluations  
 6.2  Timing of Evaluations  
 6.3  Special Instructions and  Definitions of Evaluations  
 6.4  ROCK Activity Assay s 
 6.5  Detailed Imaging  Protocols  
  7.   MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE  EXPERIENCES              33 
  7.1   Role of the Trial Nurse  (TN) 
  7.2   Adverse Events M anagement  Protocol  
  7.3   Common Adverse E vents 
8.    CRITERIA FOR  INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION             40 
9.    STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS               40  
 9.1  General Design Issues  
  9.2  Outcomes  
  9.3  Sample Size and Accrual  
   9.4  Data Monitoring  
   9.5  Data Analyses  
10.   DATA COLLECTION, SITE MONITORING, AND ADVERSE EXPERIENCE               47    
             REPORTING  
 10.1 Records to be kept  
 10.2 Role of Data Management  
 10.3 Quality Assurance   
 10.4 Adverse Experience Reporting  
 11.   HUMAN SUBJECTS                                                                                                       60 
 11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent  
  11.2 Subject Confidentiality   
  11.3 Study Modification/ Discontinuation   
12.    PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS             60 
13.    REFERENCES  CITED               61 
 3 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
  
SYNOPSIS  
 
Study Title  
AT CASH  EPOC : Atorvastatin Treatment of Cavernous Angiomas with 
Symptomatic Hemorrhage , Exploratory Proof of Concept (AT CASH EPOC) Trial  
 
Objectives  
 The Primary Aim  of the study is to assess whether the proposed intervention pro-
duces evidence of QSM biomarker activity (indicative of reduced or increased lesional 
bleeding) during 2 years of prospective follow -up of cavernous angioma (CA) after a re-
cent symptomatic hemorrhage  (SH).  
 
Secondary A ims shall assess (1) a second biomarker (DCEQP permeability in 
lesion and brain), (2) Rho kinase ( ROCK ) activity on peripheral blood leukocytes and  on 
any excised lesion specimens during the course of the study , (3) clinical event rates, (4) 
adverse events, and (5) functional outcome s in placebo versus treatment; a nd (6) we 
shall query pre -specified subgroups .   
 
Design and Outcomes  
This phase I/II a randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blinded , single -site 
clinical trial is  designed to investigate a proof of concept  effect of  atorvastatin versus 
placebo on CA lesional  iron deposition  assessed by  validated quantitative susceptibility 
mapping ( QSM ) magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI) studies  in patients who suffered a 
sympto matic bleed  within the preceding  one year. Subjects will  also be assessed by 
lesional and brain vascular permeability MRI using dynamic contrast enhanced 
quantitative perfusion (DCEQP) and a number of laboratory and clinical evaluation tools. 
Subjects shall  be followed for 2 years from randomization , the period of highest likelihood 
of rebleed after a recent CA hemorrhage . Subjects shal l undergo clinical and MRI 
evaluation s at baseline, and at 12 and 24 months during  the study p eriod. Enrolled 
subjects and the treating team  shall be blinded to treatment  allocation.  
 
Interventions and Duration  
Enrolled subjects will be randomized 1-1 to atorvastatin (starting dose 80 mg PO 
daily) or placebo. D osing shall continue for the 24 -month  follow -up period  or until reaching  
a safety endpoint, whichever comes first. The study shall continue until  all enrolled 
subjects, includi ng those reaching safety endpoints, have undergone their 24 month (end 
of study) MRI and clinical assessment. Laboratory studies are also performed at 3 months 
after dose initiation. Dose de-escalation to 40 mg/day or identical placebo capsule shall 
be allowed at any time  during the course of the study , in the case  of pre -articulated side 
effects  or laboratory abnormalities at the initial dose . At the 12 and 24 -month  follow up 
visits, clinical evaluations, and lesional QSM, brain and lesional DCEQP permeability , and 
peripheral blood leukocyte ROCK activity  will be assessed  to det ermine  the response to  
atorvastatin  or placebo.  
 4 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
  
Sample Size and Population   
The study is designed to include 80 subjects, randomized 1:1 to receive either 
atorvast atin or placebo . Randomization is stratified to insure a balanced treatment 
allocation by gender. The sample size  was expanded by 37% to  accommodate a a highest 
possible estimate of missing data  and potential  attrition due to compliance, drug 
intolerance and safety endpoints , leaving at least 25 subjects in each of placebo and 
atorvastatin groups, which,  per power calculations , are needed  to detect a relevant 
difference in primary QSM biomark er. Sub jects will be enrolled at  the study investigator’s 
institution  where trial p reparations have been optimized . Case referrals will be 
encouraged through a regional referral Chicago -wide academic and clinical consortium , 
and through the Angioma Alliance.  
 At midpoint of the trial, futility analysis is planned, and adaptive  recalculation 
of sample size based on the actual observed primary outcome  and treatment effect.  
 
 
 
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
The Primary Aim  of the study is to assess whether the proposed intervention pro-
duces evidence of QSM biomarker activity (indicative of reduced or increased lesional 
bleeding) during 2 years of prospective follow -up after a recent symptomatic hemorrhage. 
The primary outcome is the mean percent change in QSM (called the change score) 
per year.  Reduced CA hemorrhage would be a signal proof of concept of potential ben-
efit, and increased hemorrhage a potential signal of risk. Primary analysis shall be based 
on intention to treat, and secondary an alysis shall examine treatment rendered, consid-
ering attrition and compliance. In cases with multiple lesions, QSM measurements in the 
lesion with initial SH (index lesion) shall be considered for the primary outcome assess-
ment.  
Secondary A ims shall assess (1) a second biomarker (DCEQP permeability in 
lesion and brain), (2) ROCK activity on peripheral blood leukocytes and  on any excised 
lesion specimens during the course of the study , (3) clinical event rates, (4) adverse 
events, and (5) functional outcome s in placebo versus treatment; a nd (6) we shall  query 
pre-specified subgroups .   
  
 
2. BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Supporting data  
A Common Lesion, an Uncommon Disease.  Cavernous angiomas (CAs) consist 
of clustered, giant, blood -filled capillary spaces (“caverns”), lined by endothelium, and 
separated by an amorphous matrix lacking mature vessel w all angioarchitecture  (1). CAs 
occur in a sporadic form, manifesting a solitary lesion or a cluster of lesions associated 
with a venous developmental anomaly (2). The disease is familial in 20 -30% of cases, 
 5 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 associated with multifocal lesions that develop over time throughout the patient’s brain 
(3). The familial form (OMIM #116860 ) exhibits a Mendelian autosomal dominant inher-
itance due to a heterozygous loss -of-function mutation in one of 3 genes ( CCM1 /KRIT1 , 
CCM2 /Malcavernin , and CCM3 /PDCD10 ) (4-10). Multiple cavernomas may also develop 
after cranial irradiation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the hallmark diagnostic mo-
dality for these lesions, including sequences revealing chronic and acute hemorrhage, 
and tiny occult lesions.  
CAs are often detected incidentally, or in association with seizures or non -specific 
neurologic symptoms (11-13). The prevalence of CA has been estimated at 0.46 -0.63% 
of the population based on consecutive imaging studies in the MRI era (14, 15). A 0.5% 
prevalence was confirmed by the detection of 131 CAs among 24,535 consecutive au-
topsies (16). The natural history of such lesions is exceedingly benign, with less than 
<0.5% annual risk of clinically significant hemorrhage, and there is evidence -based con-
sensus about not needing interventions beyond symptomatic management of such cases 
(17). But once a lesion has manifested a symptomatic hemorrhage (SH), its untreated 
clinical course is quite serious, with a 42.4% (CI 26.8 -58.0) rate of recurrent bleed or focal 
neurologic deficit within 5 years (17-19). The highest likelihood of rebleeding in CAs with 
SH is in the following 2 -3 years, with bleeding risk subsequently regressing to the low rate 
of asymptomatic lesions. CA with SH is hence a singular clinical entity, distinguish-
ing lesions impacting a patient’s life and meriting clinical intervention. The definition 
of SH in CA has been validated and adjudicated (20).   
Based on <10 -12% prevalence of SH among all CAs and assuming 0.5% of 325 
million Americans harbor a CA, it is projected that fewer than 162,500 to 195,000 patients 
are living with a cavernoma that has bled at least once. Another recent population -based 
study in Olmsted County, MN identified CAs in 0.41% of adults undergoing MRI for non -
clinical purposes. In that study, the prevalence of symptomatic disease was only 0.037% 
(21). This would translate to an estimated prevalence of 120,000 symptomatic CAs in the 
U.S population. A fraction of these would have had a recent SH. Thus, while overall CAs 
are common, those that are symptomatic and warranting therapeutic targeting, and par-
ticularly the CA with SH meet the rare disease definition of <200,000 affected Amer-
icans, by any estimate . 
An Umet Clinical Need and Consensus Regarding the Therapeutic Target.  CAs 
are typically observed expectantly, and surgically excised only after significant clinical 
sequelae  (typically one or more SH). Healthcare costs of hemorrhagic stroke can reach 
up to $27,400/case in the first 90 days (2007 dollars), excluding socioeconomic impact of 
lost productivity (22). 
Lesions in the brainstem and deep brain locations are more likely than other CAs 
to bleed (23), rebleed (19), and cause severe disability (18, 24). It is unclear if this greater 
propensity to SH simply reflects the clinical impact of bleeds in those locations, while 
lesions in less eloquent brain regions may bleed at similar rates but more likely without 
symptoms. While brain surgery for excision of  CA may benefit some patients, it can be 
associated with significant cost and morbidity. A typical craniotomy costs $37,438 in 2011 
dollars (25), excluding the cost of complications and morbidity. Surgical excision of CAs, 
particularly brainstem lesions, is associated with an alarming rate of surgical adverse 
events  (Figure 1)  (26). Hence, excision of CA is typically considered per current clinical 
6 AT CASH EPOC 
    
Version 4 
3/29/2023 practice and evidence-based guidelines only after one or more recurrent SHs, partic-
ularly in deep or brainstem locations (17, 27) . In a non-randomized population-based 
cohort study, lesion excision was  overall associated with signi ficantly worse functional 
outcomes and greater complications compared to conservative man agement (26). Stere-
otactic radiosurgery has been used to treat CAs but there is co ntroversy about its effec-
tiveness and concern about complications and radiation-induced genesis of new CA le-
sions (28, 29). 
The rates of development of a new CA (in familial cases), and o f first SH in asymp-
tomatic CAs, are far too low to allow meaningful testing or to compel primary prevention 
strategies.  CAs with recent SH, where surgical resection is not undertaken (mostly in 
deep and brainstem locations), are the most likely to be follow ed expectantly per current 
evidence based guidelines  (17), with clinical equipoise for testing novel therapies 
aimed at preventing re-bleeding . It would be desirable to develop a drug that stabi-
lizes the CA after a recent SH, and prevents recurrent bleeding . It would mitigate 
the costs and neurologic sequelae of re-bleeds and surgical res ection in many pa-
tients. Based on all natural history studies, the therapeutic benefit f or secondary preven-
tion (symptomatic re-bleed) would be greatest within 2-3 years after an SH (17-19). 
 
Figure 1. Incidence of adverse events after surgical treatment for CA . Note particularly high rate of morbidity in 
brainstem CAs, those reported wi th highest reported rebleed rat es, and greatest disability. From Moultrie et al (26). 

 7 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 2.2. Rational e 
Preliminary Studies: Mechanistic Rationale, Preclinical Studies and Bi-
omarker Validations  
Defective Endothelial Barrier and Chronic Bleeding as Hallmarks of CA Pathology . 
CAs invariably exhibit hemosiderin (and other non -heme iron) deposition indicat-
ing chronic hemorrhage (30, 31). Our group (32) and others (33, 34) documented that 
the endothelial cells (ECs) lining lesional caverns manifest a “leaky” phenotype, with a 
defective EC barrier . Loss of KRIT1 results in disruption of junctional integrity, resulting 
in increased endothelial permeability in vitro  (35) and in vivo (36). Loss of Malcavernin 
and PDCD10 has similar effects (36-38). Importantly, although familial CCM patients may 
be heterozygous  for CCM1, CCM2  or CCM3 mutations, the ECs within  CA lesions show 
loss of the relevant protein (39), due to a somatic mutation  of the remaining wild -type 
allele at the respective locus (40, 41). Similar somatic mutations have been described 
in sporadic CA lesions as familial ones (42), indicating that an identical disease 
pathway resulting in lesional loss of CCM protein underlies familial and sporadic 
CAs.  
CCM Gene Loss Results in Endothelial Permeability, Mediated by RhoA/ROCK 
Activation . The loss of any of the 3 disease genes in ECs activates the GTPase protein 
RhoA, and results in increased actin stress fiber, decreased EC lumen formation and 
increased permeability (36, 37, 43, 44). Recent evidence that CAs arise from endo-
thelial gain of MEKK3 -KLF2/4 signaling, also showed that this activity is upstream 
of RhoA , and that the causative effect on CA development is mediated via Rho ac-
tivation  (45). The activity of Rho kinase (ROCK), an effector of RhoA, is also increased 
in these systems, reflected by phosphorylated myosin light chain (pMLC), a critical target 
of ROCK (36, 43, 44). ROCK activation was demonstrated in surgically excised hu-
man CA lesion specimens from sporadic and all 3 familial genotypes  (36, 38, 42). 
ROCK Inhibition Reverses CCM -Related Cellular Phenotypes . Work from our 
group in collaboration with Ginsberg at UCSD demonstrated that ECs from Ccm1+/– or 
Ccm2+/– mice exhibit a generalized vascular leakage in vitro and in vivo that is reversed 
by fasudil, a specific  ROCK inhibitor (36). Others have reported that the vascular leakage 
in Ccm2+/– mice can be inhibited by statins which inhibit RhoA prenylation, a critical early 
step in RhoA/ROCK activation (37). Thus inhibition of ROCK is a potential therapeutic 
target, reversing CCM -related junctional instability in sporadic and familial lesions 
which harbor similar somatic mutations and robust ROCK activity  (42).  
Animal Models in the Heterozygous State Recapitulate the Human Disease . New 
opportunities to investigate CA pathogenesis arose from our discovery, and confirmation 
by Douglas Marchuk at Duke University and others, of biallelic somatic mutations in CA 
lesions (39-41). Based on the postulated two -hit Knudsonian mechanism, Marchuk and 
our team jointly developed a robust mouse model of CCM, recapitulating the human dis-
ease in the heterozygous state  (46-48). When crossed into a background of elevated 
somatic mutation load ( Trp53-/- or Msh2-/-), Ccm1, 2 or 3+/- (heterozygous) mice manifest 
a rich repertoire of lesions with histology, phenotypic signatures and ultrastructure identi-
cal to the human lesions. These models helped us characterize the burden of primordial 
and mature CCM lesions , and quantify lesional hemorrhage (integrated density of 
 8 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 non-heme iron accumulated in lesions).  We then hypothesized that in vivo  ROCK in-
hibition with Fasudil or statins would inhibit lesion development and hemorrhage.  
Fasudil but not Simvastatin Blunt CA Lesion Development. Both Decrease Hem-
orrhage in Murine Lesions . Our group was first to show that ROCK inhibitor fasudil pre-
vents CA lesion development in murine Ccm1 model (49). Further preclinical studies have 
confirmed these results in a larger cohort of mice using contemporaneous randomized 
treatment assignment versus placebo, and blinded outcome assessment per NINDS 
guidelines (50). Oral fasudil, administered at 100 mg/kg/day from 1 -4 months of age sig-
nificantly reduced the development of mature (multicavernous) CA lesions. Oral simvas-
tatin 40 mg/kg/day had no significant effect on lesion development. Both fasudil and 
simvastatin si gnificantly decreased non -heme iron deposits in CA lesions compared to 
placebo, indicating decreased lesional hemorrhage (51). Decreased iron burden by 
fasudil and simvastatin were also noted in the Ccm2  model. ROCK inhibition also signifi-
cantly decreased CCM iron leak after lesion development, when ROCK inhibitor was ad-
ministered for only 1 month, later in the mouse’s life.  
Atorvastatin Recapitulates the Benefits of Fasudil, Better Than Simvastatin . As 
simvastatin dose escalation is currently limited by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), we sought to test the more potent drug atorvastatin  (52) in our models, par-
ticularly since higher doses of atorvastatin have been  shown to effect more robust 
ROCK inhibition in humans  (53, 54). The same Ccm1+/-Msh2-/- mice were more recently 
treated with oral atorvastatin at 80 mg/kg/day for the same duration as with the prior ex-
periements, and these achieved significant robust inhibition of lesional development and 
hemorrhage, as with fasudil  (Figure 2). In these recent experiments, lesion burden was 
assessed by newer demonstrably more rigorous volumetric micro -CT technique (55). We 
then contemporaneously assessed pharmacologic ROCK inhibition in the more aggres-
sive Ccm3+/-Trp53-/-  model (38), with random treatment assignment to placebo, 
fasudil, simvastatin and atorvastatin , at the same doses and for the same duration as 
with the other genotypes. Atorvastatin again showed a significant and robust benefit 
in both lesion  development and hemorrhage, similar to fasudil, but better than 
simvastatin  (Figure 3). This is the first evidence of therapeutic benefit of ROCK inhibition 
in the most aggressive Ccm3 model. There were significantly fewer pMLC immunoposi-
tive ECs lining CA lesions, and fewer pMLC immunopositive leukocytes within the lesions 
in atorvastatin treated brains, consi stent with blunted ROCK activity (Figure 4).  Alto-
gether, these results establish a firm biologic premise of (1) therapeutic  benefit by 
atorvastatin similar to specific ROCK  inhibitor fasudil, and better than the lower 
potency simvastatin , and (2) effect of atorvastatin is associated with ROCK inhibi-
tion effect.   
There were neither deleterious effects on animal weights nor on the rate of attrition 
with any statin treatment of  murine models of all genotypes from weaning to 4 months of 
age. Animals which died before completing statin therapy, had no greater prevalence of 
cerebral hemorrhage than those taking placebo or fasudil. These preclinical results reas-
sure us that chronic statin therapy, including higher potency atorvastatin effecting 
ROCK inhibition, decreases iron leak in murine CA lesions, with no hint of in-
creased hemorrhage or attrition . Interestingly, while the benefit of fasudil was limited 
to male cohorts (51), there was significant benefit of atorvastatin (lesion burden and iron 
9 AT CASH EPOC 
    
Version 4 
3/29/2023 deposit) in both male and female mice in these latest studies .    
 
 
 
  
Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping (QSM) as  a Biomarker of CA Lesional Hemorrhage . 
Since iron deposit in lesions is modified by ROCK inhibitor and  statins in mice, the Awad group 
has recently applied a novel technique for assessing iron concentration in CA lesion s using 
C 
Figure 3 . ROCK inhibition in Ccm3+/-Trp53-/-  mu-
rine brains. Representative images show de-
creased (A) lesion burden by  micro-CT volumet-
rics. (B) non-heme iron deposition by Perl s staining 
with atorvastatin treatment, bar=100 Pm. (C) 
Fasudil and atorvastatin, but not simvastatin, de-
creased lesion burden (pink bars, left axis) com-
pared with placebo. All 3 drugs decreased non-
heme iron per brain (blue bar s, right axis), an effect 
most  robust with atorvastatin.  
 
A 
B
Figure 2 . Atorvastatin 80 mg/kg/day 
decreased lesion burden (pink bars, 
left axis) and non -heme iron (blue 
bars, right axis) compared with place-
bos in  Ccm1+/-Msh2-/-  mice. 
 
Figure 4. Chronic atorvastatin treatment 
significantly reduced the prevalence of 
pMLC (a marker of ROCK activity) im-
munopositive ECs li ning CAs, and leuko-
cytes within lesions in brains of Ccm3+/-
Trp53 -/- mice. Immunopostivity was as-
sessed by two observers blinded to treat-
ment assignment. 
C
 10 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 quantitative susceptibility 
mapping (QSM) on MRI . We 
published v alidations of the 
technique including  precise 
correlations of QSM with iron 
concentration in ferric, ferrous 
and ferumoxytol  phantom so-
lutions, and the  exact predi c-
tion by QSM of iron content  in 
excised CCM lesions assayed 
by mass spectroscopy (56). 
We later showed strong in-
terobserver agreement in 
QSM measurements in human 
CAs, stability of QSM in clini-
cally stable lesions, reproduci-
bility of QSM across MRI in-
strument platforms at two hos-
pitals, and greater lesional 
QSM in older patients and in 
cases with prior symptomatic 
bleeds (57). 
 In other pilot work we 
show significant correlation of 
mean lesional QSM in murine 
brains imaged ex vivo  in the human 3T MRI magnet, with histo logic iron densitometry of Perl s 
staining of the same lesions after brain sectioning (Figure 5). This demonstrates that difference s 
in QSM may be used to assess the same parameter of treatment effect  (lesional non -heme 
iron density ) impacted  in preclinical studies . The observed 87.8 -100% range of artorva statin 
treatment effect on Perl s iron stain intensity in Ccm1 and Ccm3 models (Figures 2 -3) would cor-
respond to an effect size of 0.043 to 0.151 ppm difference in mean lesional QSM.  
Linking QSM Change to Clinical Events in Longitudinal F ollow -up of Previously 
Stable Human CA s.   
Figure 5 . Correlation of mean lesional non -heme iron density on coronal 
hostologic images at largest lesion diameter (Y axis, log transformed), 
and mean lesional QSM by volumetric MRI at 3T (X axis, in ppm) in 
murine brains with CA lesions . At left are representative coronal 
histologic slices with H&E and Perl s stain, and a matched coronal MRI 
QSM image of the same lesion obtained ex vivo  prior to brain sectioning.  
 
Figure 6 . QSM changes during person -year epochs in  longitudinal follow -up of previously stable CA lesions . (Left) 
Lesions manifesting growth or symptomatic bleeding during follow -up exhibited a significant increase in QSM (+ 
44%, *p=0.01). (Center) Lesions which remained stable had  a slight significant decrease in QSM  (-3.2%, 
**p=0.003). In cases with multiple lesions, the unstable and stable lesions were analyzed separately. (Right) Re-
ceiver operating curve of sensitivity and specificity of QSM change in association clinical events.   

 11 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 We recently reported the first prospective assessment of QSM during longitudinal 
follow -up of human CCM subjects, and correlated paired QSM assessments during 1 -
year epochs with new clinical events (58). Among cases without recent bleeding or lesion 
growth within a year of the first measurement, CCM lesions that remained stable during 
longitudinal follow -up had a tiny average decrease ( -3.2%) in mean lesional QSM.  CCMs 
with demonstrated growth or symptomatic bleeding exhibited a significant increase 
(+44%) in mean lesional QSM  (Figure 6 ). Receiver operating curves (ROC) of QSM 
change in individual subjects demonstrated a sensitivity of 82.29% and specificity of 
88.89% at a + 5.81% threshold change,  highly significant (p = 0.0004) , with a mere 
+5.81% QSM change.  These results link a  robust  QSM change directly to clinical 
events, and define a threshold QSM change as a sensitive and specific biomarker 
event.   
QSM change and clinica l events in CAs after recent Symptomatic H emorrhage . In 
further pilot studies, we assessed lesional QSM  change during prospective follow-up of 
a pilot cohort of CA  patients with a clinical bleed within the prior year (meeting the 
proposed trial criteria ) (59). 
  Sixteen  subjects follow ed for 1 or  2 years (total  22 person-year epochs), underwent  
paired QSM assessments at the beginning and end of each person -year epoch.  Mean 
QSM in the index CA  hemorrhagic lesion increased by an ave rage of +7.93 % per person -
 
Figure 7. (Left) QSM measurements at the beginning and end of 22 person -year epochs of follow -up of cases with CA that 
had bled within 1 year, and followed for 1 -2 years. Cases underwent annual QSM, allowing paired measurements at the 
beginning and end of each person -year epoch. In cases with multiple lesions, only QSM measurements in the lesion with 
initial hemorrhage (index lesion) were considered herein. Paired measurements in red identify epochs with a recorded 
threshold QSM increase by >6% in the index lesion. (Right) Number of person -year epochs with and without threshold QSM 
change, and clinical events during these epochs. All clinical events occurred in the setting of > 6% increase in QSM (59).   
12 AT CASH EPOC 
    
Version 4 
3/29/2023 year epoch in the full cohort. Closer examination revealed 10/2 2 epochs with a docu-
mented threshold biomarker event (≥6% QSM increase). This was t wice as frequent 
as clinical events . No clinical event occurred without a threshold increase in QSM  
(Figure 7). A primary aim of the proposed trial shall explore whether the c hange in 
QSM is altered by statin treatmen t. A secondary aim shall explo re the relationship 
of QSM change to clinical events in statin and placebo treated subjects.  
 Quantitative Vascular Permeability in Lesi on and Brain as a Potential  Biomarker 
of Statin Therapy. Work by the New Mexico and Chicago groups demonstrated vascular  
hyperpermeability in human CA lesions, using dynamic contrast e nhanced quantitative 
perfusion (DCEQP) MRI technique with gadolinium (60, 61). Our g roup further showed 
that more permeable CA lesions by DCEQP are associated with gre ater mean QSM (60). 
And we recently demonstrated, as with QSM , that CAs that bleed during longitudinal 
surveillance also manifest significant increases in lesional pe rmeability  (mean 
change +85.9%; p = 0.005)  (58).   
Our group has also reported greater 
permeability in normal brain white matter far (WMF) from lesions in familial cases (con-sistent with germline hemizygosity of CCM 
genes in those patients), than in sporadic cases (whose normal brain is unaffected by CCM  genes) (62). Nine CA subjects, already 
taking statins for routine cardiovascular in-
dications unrelated to CA (5 familial, 4 spo-
radic), had lower mean WMF permeability 
than 60 cases not taking statins (34 familial, 26 sporadic) (Figure 8)  (62). This effect was 
observed in both sporadic and familial 
cases , and we can postulate that it may reflect 
ROCK inhibition by statin in background brain.  
No differences in lesional permeability 
were noted with statin exposure in this retro-spective cohort. Neither were cons istent effects on lesional pe rmeability noted in the first 
clinical trial of simvastatin (up to 40 mg/day) in familial pat ients with common Hispanic 
CCM1  mutation (trials.gov# NCT0176445) , performed by the New Mexico  group (interim 
results, CCM Investigators Workshop, Washington, DC, November 2 015). However, it 
remains unclear if there would be an effect of statins on perme ability of CA lesions 
after recent SH, where a large increase in mean lesional permea bility is demon-
strated (58), or whether higher statin doses would achieve grea ter permeability re-
ductions consistent with more robust ROCK inhibition (53, 54).  These results and 
critical knowledge gaps justify continued exploration of vascul ar permeability biomarker 
in association with a treatment m echanistically targeting ROCK mediated hyperpermea-
bility. The impact on lesional and brain vascular permeability of stati n, at doses 
effecting ROCK inhibition, shall be examined as a secondary aim  in the proposed 
trial.  
 
 
Figure 8. The effect of concomitant statin use on 
vascular permeability measured by DCEQP in 
white matter far from lesions (WMF). There was a 
trend towards lower WMF permeability  (Ki) in pa-
tients taking statins for cardiovascular disease 
than those not taking statins, in sporadic and fa-
milial CA subjects (P=0.07) (62).  
 13 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Translation to Human Therapies and the Choice of Drug and Dose  
Safety Considerations and Potential Translation to Human Therapies . Fasudil is a 
specific ROCK inhibitor (63) approved for human use in Japan with an intravenous dose 
of 90 mg/day, for a period of 2 weeks to prevent cerebral vasospasm after aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (64). Experience with more chronic administration of fasudil in 
man is limited, and serious adverse events have been reported (65). Because of the pau-
city of experience and questionable safety in chronic use, and the expired worldwide pa-
tent on the drug, there is currently no pathway for the approval of fasudil for chronic 
use in man.  The pharmaceutical industry is developing a number of potential ROCK1 or 
ROCK2 inhibitors for more specific targeting of peripheral and brain vasculature, respec-
tively. While a ROCK2 inhibitor might enhance therapeutic effects on brain vessels in-
cluding C As, and minimize peripheral side effects (more likely mediated by ROCK1), such 
drug has not been used in humans and is now undergoing preclinical development 
(R44NS095420 gran t with Awad as coPI). A pharma pipeline for safer or more effec-
tive chronic ROCK inhibitors will require several years before potential  Investiga-
tional New Drug (IND) and clinical trials in man.  
 Therapeutic clinical trials with statins have already been advocated in CAs based 
on statin inhibition of RhoA prenylation, a critical early step in RhoA/ROCK path-
way activation  (37, 66, 67). A clinical database at University of Chicago includes  24 hu-
man subjects with known CAs enrolled in Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved 
NINDS funded biomarker studies, who are receiving various statins for routine cardiovas-
cular indications unrelated to their CA disease  (atorvastatin 10 -80 mg; simvastatin 10 -60 
mg; lovastatin 80 mg). Among those patients followed for  247 lesion -years (T 2-weighted 
lesions > 4 mm counted), there was only 1  documented SH (0.4  SH per 100 lesion -years). 
This rate is substantially lower than 173 bleeds during 1,604 lesion -years  (T 2-weighted 
lesions > 4 mm) of follow -up of  statin naïve cases in the same database (10.7 SH per 
100 lesion -years). While this data does not control for treatment assignment or dose ef-
fect, it does not raise any concern about hemorrhage tendency among CA patients 
receiving statins  nor in comparison to bleed rates reported in the litera ture (18). Nor 
have there been any cases in the New Mexico trial (see below, and letter by Leslie Mor-
rison) nor any reported case in the published literature of CA hemorrhage after initiation 
of statin therapy (Search was performed on August 20th 2017 using MEDLINE p ortal for 
keywords “cerebral cavernous malformation”, “angioma” or “cavernoma” and “statin” or 
“atorvastatin” and “hemorrhage” or “bleeding”).  
Statins have been widely used and well tolerated in neurosurgical patients, includ-
ing (as with fasudil) for the treatment of vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (68). 
Statins have recently been reported to portend better outcome after intracerebral hemor-
rhage in man (69). In a meta -analysis of clinical trials of stroke prevention, including 
83,205 patients, there was no evidence of increased hemorrhagic risk with long term 
statin use (70). Two clinical trials of stroke prevention (but not all others) did suggest a 
potentially increased hemorrhage risk with statin in secondary analyses (70). In one 
study, preconditioning and possibly the early withdrawal of statin were observed to 
worsen cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (71). Two recent reports as-
sociated statin use with cerebral aneurysm rupture (72) and with cerebral microbleeds in 
patients presenting with intracerebral hemorrhage (73), without establishing causation. 
 14 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Considering all evidence class and level, current American Stroke Association guidelines 
on management and prevention of intracerebral hemorrhage include no restrictions on 
the use of statins in patients with hemorrhagic stroke (74). Altogether there is no hint of 
deleterious effects on statin -treated murine CA models (in fact statins resulted in de-
creased lesional hemorrhage), nor any suspected or reported harmful effects in humans 
with CA to date, These cautious enthusiasm and  concerns about other potentia lly 
harmful pleiotropic effects, create  a veritable equipoise, motivating a need for spe-
cific and careful study of statins in hemorrhagic CA (75).  
The Case for Atorvastatin as the Study Drug, at Doses Effecting ROCK Inhibition 
in Humans . A Phase I safety trial with simvastatin at dose up to 40 mg/day (trials.gov# 
NCT0176445) noted no deleterious effects in open label enrollment. At least one patient 
in that trial manifested a dramatic decrease in lesional and brain permeability upon init i-
ating statin therapy (See letter by Leslie Morrison). That trial was limited to familial cases 
with common Hispanic CCM1 mutation, and enrolled cases with largely sta ble CAs with-
out recent SH. It was not designed to explore higher statin doses effecting maximal 
ROCK inhibition , nor was it designed to include sporadic and familial cases after re-
cent SH . While that trial was underpowered, and a different case selection and enhanced 
biomarkers may have offered better sensitivity, the results argue for dose escalation or 
for testing another statin. Simvastatin limits dose escalation above 40 mg/day per current 
USFDA label.  Atorvastatin is approved for higher doses, twice as potent as simvastatin 
in measurable effects (52). Doses of atorvastatin of 40 -80 mg/day  are needed to 
achieve a robust pleiotropic ROCK inhibition effect, specifically assayed in human 
peripheral blood leukocytes  (53, 54). Rosuvastatin, which allows even higher dose es-
calation than atorvastatin has not been used as long or by as many patients as atorvas-
tatin.  A systematic review of atorvastatin tolerance and side effects at those doses 
was carefully considered in the design and safety monitoring plan of the proposed 
trial.   
Equivalency of Mouse Versus Human Atorvastatin Dose . In humans the dosage 
of statins varies between approximately 0.1 –1 mg/kg   bodyweight, while most studies in 
rodents have used doses of 1 –100 or even 500 mg/kg (76). An atorvastatin mouse dose 
of 80 mg/kg/day is equivalent to a calculated “human starting dose” of  44.8 mg/day ac-
cording to USFDA guidelines: Human starting dose = Mouse dose X 0.08 (Scaling factor) 
X 70 kg (Adult weight)  (77, 78). A plasma area under curve (0 -24 hours) profile for 
atorvastatin indicates that a human dose of 96 mg/day replicates the mouse dose of 80 
mg/kg/day (79). And per empiric evidence, at least 100 mg/kg/day dose is needed to 
decrease disease activity in a collagen induced arthritis murine model (80, 81) while 
atorvastatin at 40 mg/day decreases the disease activity score (DAS28) in arthritis pa-
tients (82, 83). And we noted ROCK inhibition effect in mice with atorvastatin 80 
mg/kg/day, an effect observed in humans at 40 -80 mg/day. Hence the atorvastatin dose 
of 80 mg/kg/day in our preclinical experiments corresponds to a human dose range 
of 40 -80 mg/day, commonly used in clinical practice and shown to achieve ROCK 
inhibition pleiotropic effect .  We propose to use these same doses in the proof of con-
cept trial.  
 
 
 15 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
  
 
 
3 STUDY DESIGN  
 
3.1 Patient Population  
The study will enroll 80 adult patients 18 -80 years of age (inclusive)  with untreated 
CAs of all genotypes who suffered an adjudicated symptomatic lesional hemorrhage (20) 
within one year of enrollment. The hemorrhagic lesion would need to have been consid-
ered for surgery, and ultimately not resected. We are hence specifically targeting deep 
and brainstem lesions with greatest risk of rebleeding in the subsequent 2 years, most 
likely to benefit from stabilizing vascular leak. Given identical somatic mutations and 
demonstrated lesional ROCK activity (38, 42), case s with sporadic and familial CAs  of all 
genotypes are included (except for post -irradiation cases). Inclusion and exclusion criteria 
are detailed in Protocol Section 4, aiming to exclude cases receiving prior statin therapy 
in any form or for any indication in the prior year, cases at hi gh risk for statin intolerance, 
cases where the hemorrhagic lesion has been treated with surgery or radiation, and other 
customary exclusions in similar trials. Children will not be enrolled, per Investigational 
New Drug (IND) exemption restriction for thi s trial.  
The Neurovascular Surgery Program at the U Chicago has an international reputa-
tion in CA clinical care and research ( www.uchospitals.edu/ccm)  and is the first recog-
nized Center of Excellence  by the Angioma Alliance ( www.angioma.org) . During the 
past 2 years (June 2015 - May 2017) the study PI’s clinic evaluated  171 CA patients, and 
149 cases, or 87% were enrolled in IRB approved clinical surveillance and bi-
omarker validation projects . Of these, 37 had suffered a SH during the prior year, 3 of 
whom were on statin therapy and 7 underwent surgery for lesion excision upon SH (in-
cluding a case on statin). Hence, 28 subjects (14/ year) would have met inclusion criteria, 
and at least 12 cases/ year would be enrolled in At CASH EPOC trial from current U 
Chicago case activity, based on our 87% enrollment record in IRB studies even without 
promised intervent ion. This in in addition to cases (“on the docket”) who bled in the year 
prior to trial launch.  
We plan to boost trial enrollment from Chicago Consortium  sites (see letters from 
NU, Rush UIC Neurosurgery Chiefs, and Chicago StrokeNet PI Dr S Prabhakhan) target-
ing >3 0 CA cases/year with SH for screening, but need only enroll 10 additional 
cases/year though these regional referrals  and other healthcare professionals in the 
Chicago Neurological Society (including all practicing neurosurgeons and neurologists 
serving a 9 million regional population within driving distance of our center). The Angioma 
Alliance  (see letter)  has  identified 48 CA cases througho ut the U.S. with SH in the prior 
year, not taking statins, whose lesion was not resected and who expressed willingness to 
travel for a trial. We target screening of 20 such cases but need only enroll 5 additional 
cases/year through this national referral  to meet our enrollment trarget.  
Our team has used similar Chicago consortia to recruit cases for the CLEAR and 
MISTIE trials. The Angioma Alliance has had a strong record of referring patients from 
outside Chicago and their enrollment in research studies at our site. We plan a city wide 
 16 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 seminar upon approval of the trial , and secured its funding from the Kluver Memorial 
fund at U Chicago, to present it to regional clinicians. Trial brochure (attached) and trial 
status updates  shall be e -mailed to members of the Chicago Neurological Society, to 
the Society of Neurological Surgeons (including all U.S. neurosurgery academic chairs 
and program directors) and to all registered CA patients in the Angioma Alliance every 6 
months. We intend to facilitate the enrollment and retention  of trial subje cts from out-
side the region, with stipends covering travel expenses for enrollment and follow -up visits. 
We note that there is no other ongoing clinical trial of a competing therapy.  
Back up no -cost plan of extending enrollments into year 4  can be considered, 
and a last resort option of enlisting another site with accredited biomarker validations, and 
a record of case enrollment through the CASH Trial Readiness network  (U01 
NS104157, 2017 -2022) also led by the trial PI. Retention is promoted  through 
scheduled calls every 3 months, and emails with trial status updates every 6 months to 
enrolled subjects.  
 
 3.2 Blinding   
The study is designed as a double -blind , placebo -controlled clinical trial. Enrolled 
subject s will be blinded to treatment rendered, as will  the PIs, outcomes assessors  
processing the radiological biomarkers , the trial staff at the Chicago site and the Data 
Coordinating Center  (DCC ) staff at the Baltimore site . Atorvastatin and placebo capsules 
will be formulated  by a third party pharmacy representing  two different doses of 
atorvastatin ( 40 and 80mg ) or placebo.  The Research Pharmacy at the Chicago site shall 
be informed electronically about the treatment allocation  (see Section 3.3 
Randomization) , and it shall dispense the appropriate drug or placebo  in a 6-month 
supply, given at enrollment then mailed by the study team biannually, one month ahead 
of expected date of exhausting the supply . Subjects in the treatment group will receive 
unlabeled  color coded capsules containing pulverized atorvastatin tablets in the 
designated dose s. Subjects in the control group will receive identical looking color coded 
capsules containing inactive filler. In the case of dose de -escalation, the Research 
Pharmacy shall be instructed about the decision to  lower  the dose, and it shall dispense 
capsules of different color indicating the lower dose, or identical colored placebo 
capsules, without breaking th e blind to the patient or research team.  
The Baltimore  statistician shall prepare safety reports including comparison of 
adverse events ( AEs) and interim outcome measures by treatment group labeled as A or 
B without identifying either as active treatment  (See Sections 9.4 on Data Monitoring and 
10.3 on Quality Assurance and Data and Safety Monitoring) . If a concern is raised about 
safety and the need to suspen d trial enrollment,  the independent medical safety monitor 
(IMSM) may request  to identify A or B  groups  as treatment or placebo . Individual subjects 
will not be identifiable in the safety  reports, maintaining the double -blinding if the trial is 
resumed .  
 
 17 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 3.3 Randomization  
Once a patient is determined to be potentially eligible for participation in the study, 
the site coordinator or a designated member of the study team at the Chicago site will 
enter the Inclusion/Exclusion information about the study subject into the VISION 
(Prelude Dynamics, Austin, Texas) web -based electronic case report form (eCRF) 
system. The VISION system will process these subject variables, determine eligibility and, 
if eligible, assign an identification number and treatment method to the patient. The 
randomization process is handled by an embedded software module  designed using SAS 
(v.9.4 or higher) . This module is part of the system and is invoked by the coordinator or 
investigator within the eCRF system. Randomization is triggered by the investigator or 
coordinator, via completion of a form in the eCRF, after all eligibility checks are performed. 
If the coordinator/investigator checks the randomize box and saves the form , the system 
will automatically set the enrollment date, assign a study ID and trigger the embedded 
randomization algorithm to determine the randomized treatment (including a  final check 
to make sure the subject meets all eligibility criteria ).  The site c oordinator is provided with 
a uniq ue, blinded electronic treatment  assignment number (randomized patient number) 
at the end of this process.  
Enrolled subjects are  randomized to the atorvastatin or placebo arm in a 1:1 
ratio.  Randomizati on shall be stratified by sex , with separate permuted bl ocks for 
each sex.  A unique treatment assignment number (randomized  subject  number) and its 
corresponding treatment group allocation will be generated. This shall be communicated 
electronically through to the Research Pharmacy in Chicago, to appropriately dispense 
the capsules containing active drug or placebo.  
 
3.4 Method of Dosing  
After randomization , enrolled subjects in both groups will be given unlabeled color -
coded  capsules to be taken once daily. In the absence of signs or symptoms o f statin -
related adverse events  (Table 2 ), subjects will be instructed to continue on the same 
regimen. The dose may be de -escalat ed based on subject’s tolerance . Subjects report ing 
adverse events per  pre-specified criteria  (Category B detailed below)  will be put onto the 
lower dose (40  mg/day) of atorvastatin , with a different color. Subjects random ized to the 
placebo arm will receive an equival ent supply of identical color  unlabeled capsules, 
devoid of the active ingredient, to be administered in the same fashion as the active drug. 
They will undergo the same evaluations , dose adjustment s, and follow up visits as the 
treatment cohort . 
 
 
4. SELECTION  AND ENROLLMENT OF SUBJECTS  
 
4.1  Inclusion Criteria  
 4.1.1  Age 18 -80 (inclusive) . 
 18 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 4.1.2  Asymptomatic, mild or moderate disability requiring some help but 
able to attend own bodily needs without assistance. Defined as 
modified Rankin score (mR S) 0 – 3. 
4.1.3 Diagnosis of CCM of any genotype supported by relevant imaging 
studies , where surgical resection is not performed after due 
consideration per current standard of care. .  
4.1.4 Symptomatic CCM bleeding event with in 1 year  prior to  enrollment.  
4.1.5 Must be willing /able  to travel to the study site for  study visits  
(baseline, 12 and 24  months)  over the course of the study . 
 
    4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
4.2.1  Pre-menopausal w omen who are breastfeeding, pregnant or likely 
to get pregnant during the study period.  
4.2.2   Prior surgical treatment of the hemorrhagic CCM lesion.   
4.2.3  Failure  to pass MRI safety screening (claustroph obic, metal 
implant , etc.). 
4.2.4  Known  allergy or intolerance to gadolinium.  
4.2.5  Severely  impaired renal function (eGFR < 60ml/min), active renal  
disease or status post -kidney transplants.  
4.2.6  Statin therapy, for any indication, for more than 7 continuous days 
or greater than 14 total days within 12 months preceding  
enrollment.  
4.2.7   Indication to use statin medication for current approved indication, 
unrelated to CCM . 
4.2.8  Known allergy or intolerance to statins . 
4.2.9  Liver dysfunction or active liver disease (including chronic viral 
hepatitis) defined as baseline serum transaminases levels twice the 
upper range of normal.  
4.2.10 Previous diagnosis of skeletal mu scle disorders of any cause 
(myopathy), or baseline creatine kinase levels  five times the upper 
range of normal.  
4.2.11 Currently treated with or likely to need treatment with one or more 
of prohibited medications listed in section 5.3. 
4.2.1 2 Active drug or alcohol use or dependence that, in the opinion of the 
site investigator, would interfere with adherence to study 
requirements.  
4.2.1 3 Serious illness (requiring systemic treatment and/or hospitalization) 
until subject either completes therapy or is clinically stable on 
therapy, in the opinion of the site investigator, for at least 30 days 
prior to study entry . 
4.2.1 4 Any other condition that the investigator believes would pose a 
significant hazard to the subject if the investigational therapy were 
initiated , including conditions resulting in or precipitating myopathy 
(e.g. HIV , uncontrolled hypothyroidism ). 
 19 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 4.2.1 5 In the investigator’s opinion, the patient is unstable, and would 
benefit from a specific intervention rather than treatment with 
atorvastatin . 
4.2.1 6 Inability or unwillingness of subject or legal guardian/representative 
to give written informed consent.  
4.2.1 7 No documentation of valid healthcare insurance.  
4.2.1 8 No medical record confirmation of a primary care physician  or other 
provider of ongoing medical care .  
4.2.19 Previous cranial irradiation  or radio surgical treatment . 
4.2.20 Use of  ritonavir  as an oral drug for COVID -19 
 
4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures   
4.3.1 Pre-screening:   
Local CA  Patients:  Patients under the care of the s tudy principal investigator 
will be pre -screened for eligibility. Pre -screening will include a review of medical 
records, prior imaging , and laboratory studies. Depending on the date of the last 
clinically symptomatic hemorrhagic event, eligible patients will be contacted and 
briefed about the study and if interested, will be invited to the screening /baseline  
visit. Subjects will be sent a copy of the consent form for their review prior to their 
first study visit. We estimate that at least 50% of subjects will come from this 
source.  
Referred CA  patients:  patients referred through the Angioma Alliance, other 
healthcare professionals , or self -referred will undergo pre -screening evaluation 
over the phone wi th the Trial Nurse (TN)  or coordinator  to determine eligibility for 
the trial. Patients meeting the pre -screening criteria will be sen t a copy of the 
consent form and will be asked to  send  a digital copy of their most recent MRI scan 
to confirm the ir diagnosis. Once diagnosis is confirmed by the study PI, subjects 
will be invited for the screening /baseline  research visit at the University of Chicago  
Medicine .   
4.3.2 Screening  and Enrollment :  
All potential subjects will be scheduled to meet with the principal 
investigator. The visit will involve detailed screening, including collection of medical 
history, prior and concomitant medications, and a neurological examinat ion to 
confirm  eligibility. Surgical resection will be considered in every case as an 
alternative to medical therapy, per current standard of care. As part of the 
screening, blood tests will be performed , which in  the case of successful 
enrollment , will serve as  baseline laboratory r esults (Section 6.3.6 ). With 
verification of eligibility criteria, informed consent will be finalized.  A travel stipend 
for each trial related visit will be provided to subjects  from outside the 
Chicago area who are required  to travel greater than 200 miles to the study 
center.  
  4.3.3 Baseline Imaging:  
 20 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Randomized subjects will undergo a baseline MRI,  which will  include 
special sequences utilized throughout the trial ( DCEQP  and QSM) . This will be 
pre-scheduled at the same time as the screening visit (particularly for subjects  
traveling from outside the Chicago area), or as soon as practical for local patients.  
 
 
5. STUDY INTERVENTION  
 
5.1 Intervention , Administration, and Duration  
Study drug will be administered orally as a single daily dose in the morning . 
Subjects in the treatment group will be st arted on their corresponding dose 80mg of 
atorvastatin  or placebo . Should the subject report an adverse event meeting pre -
specified criteria  (Adverse events Category B below) , he/she  will be put on the lower 
dose (40 mg) of drug  or matched colored placebo capsule . 
Administration of study drug shall continue once daily dose in the morning for 24 
total months with scheduled visits and repeat imaging at 12 and 24 months from 
enrollment, unless the subject reaches attrition or a safety endpoint before then. If 
new symptoms arise at any point after starting the study intervention subjects will be 
contacted by the study -designated TN for further assessment  and be  provide d with 
instructions  regarding continuation of study intervention based on the study adverse 
events m anagement protocol (Section 7 ). 
  
5.2 Handling of Study Intervention  
A third party pharmac y will be contracted to formulate and supply atorvastatin and 
placebo capsules for the trial. The Research P harmacy  at the University of Chicago  
will be responsible for storage, packaging and dispe nsing  the study drug in 
conjunction  with the research team.  
 
5.3 Concomitant Interventions  
5.3.1 Required Interventions  
• Daily oral admini stration of the study drug.   
• Laboratory blood testing at screening , 3, 12 and 24 months . Tests will 
include liver enzymes  and creati nine kinase  (to be repeated if clinically 
indicated ).  
• A total of three MRI scans involving special sequences for QSM and IV 
contrast material for DCEQP  acquisition.  IV contrast administration will be 
preceded by a blood test to check  renal function  as indicated per hospital 
policy.  
5.3.2 Prohibited Interventions  
The following drugs are contraindicated thro ughout the trial as they are 
associ ated with  increased risk of rhabdomyolysis when combined with 
statins. If clinical ly indicated  the decision  whether or not these medications 
can be taken  should be discussed with the study PI who will  weigh the 
risks and benefits of staying on  study drug.  
 21 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 • Cyclosporine  
• Fibrates  
• Niacin  
• Azol antifungals  
• HIV/HCV protease inhibitors  
• Macrolide antibiotics  
• Colchicine  
            5.3.3 Precautionary Interventions  
The following drugs interact with Atorvastatin. If unavoidable, extra 
measures should be put in place for closer monitoring.  
• OCP1 
• Antacids2 
• Digoxin3 
• Lipid lowering resins2 
• Rifampicin4  
• Grapefruit juice5 
• Calcium channel blockers6 
 
1 Values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol may be increased , co-administration of statins  and an oral 
contraceptive increased serum levels for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol. These increases should be 
considered when selecting an oral contraceptive for a woman taking atorvastatin . 
2Interfere with absorption of a torvastatin  from GI  tract 
3When multiple doses of atorvastatin and digoxin were co -administered, steady state plasma digoxin 
concentrations increased by approximately 20%. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately.  
4As well as other known activators of the  Cyt-P450(3A 4) isoform which metabolizes most statins in the liver. 
Interaction affects the pharmacokinetic properties of the drug leading to changes in serum concentration.  
5Contains one o r more components that inhibit Cyt -P450 (3a4) and can increase plasma concentrations of 
atorvastatin, especially with excessive grapefruit juice consumption (>1.2 liters per day).  
6Weak inhibitors of C yt-p(3a4) system  
 
5.4 Adherence Assessments  
 The team is in the process of evaluating  potential electronic monitoring devices, 
an eDiary and a smart bottle. Both devices are equipped with a SIM card and programmed 
to wirelessly transmit compliance data to the study database in real time. Both devices 
are linked to a closed loop electronic feedback sy stem that is programmed to set off 
reminders in escalating manner and ultimately notify the study team. In addition to 
compliance, these innovative monitoring systems will also allow subjects to notify the  
team early on of any adverse events or change in concomitant medications. All 
compliance data will be continuously recorded in the study database and will be used to 
guide decision -making. In addition, members of the research team in liaison with the loca l 
pharmacy will perform pill counts to confirm adherence at the time of follow up visits.  
In addition, the TN or research coordinagtor shall contact each subject for 
scheduled phone calls every three months (to be completed every 10 -14 weeks), with a 
structured questionnaire about compliance and tolerance.  
 
 
 22 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6. CLINICAL, LABORATORY AND IMAGING EVALUATIONS  
 
All enrolled subjects  will go through the same sch edule  of investigations and follow 
up visit s throughout the study period ( Table 1) . 
 
 
 
6.1 Schedule of evaluations  
Evaluation   V1  
Screening  
(0) V2 
Safety 
labs, 
Phone 
call 
(3m)  V3,4 
Phone 
call 
(6, 9m)  V5 
Follow up  
(12m)  V6-8 
Phone 
call 
(15,18,21
m) V9 
End of 
Study  
(24m)  
Informed consent  X      
Demographics  X      
Inclusion/Exclusion 
criteria  X      
CCM History  X      
Statin History  X      
Medical/Surgical History  X   X  X 
Prior and concomitant 
medications  X X X X X X 
Physical and Neurological 
Examination  X   X  X 
MMSE  X   X  X 
mRS  X X X X X X 
Euro -QoL-5D Scale  X   X  X 
Euro -QoL VAS  X   X  X 
Neuro -QoL X   X  X 
Intervention adherence/  
Adverse Events*   X X X X X 
MRI X   X  X 
Laboratory investigations        
• CBC  X      
• Renal functions  X X  X  X 
• LFTs  X X  X   
• TFTs  X      
• CK X X  X   
• Lipid profile  X   X  X 
• Hepatitis viral profile  X      
• HIV X      
• Pregnancy test  X      
Study intervention 
initiation/continuation 
assessment  X X X X X  
Randomization  X      
 
 23 AT CASH EPOC  
   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Table 1: AT CASH  EPOC trial, schedule of evaluations . 
*These are assessed at each follow -up, by a utomated weekly follow -up messages 
circulated by the electronic monitoring system , and in scheduled calls with each enrolled 
subject every three months (1 -0-14 weeks), as described in section 5.4
  
 24 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6.2 Timing of Evaluations  
  
6.2.1 Initial screening visit (V0 ) – up to 30 days prior to enrollment  
This visit may occur on the same day as the baseline visit (V2) at the discretion of 
the investigator. Subjects will undergo the following assessments and sign an 
informed consent form in order to be randomized into this study:  
• Informed consent  
• Obtain subject demographics  
• Eligibility criteria (inclusion/exclusion criteria)  
• Neurosurgical review (confirmation of diagnosis, date of last symptomatic 
hemorrhage, statin use, past medical and surgical history ) 
• Laboratory blood tests ( CBC, renal functions,  LFT, CK, lipid profile, HIV, 
hepatitis viral profile and  pregnancy test ) 
• Blood sample processed for ROCK activity assay on peripheral leukocytes, 
and plasma stored in biobank for future/ancillary biomarker studies.  
• Characterization of genotype in cases with multiple lesions, or referral to 
Angioma Alliance for genotyping through the Alliance’s program 
(www.angioma.org).  
6.2.2 Second screening visit (V1 ) – Baseline  
The screening visit (V0) and the baseline visit (V1 ) could occur on the same day at 
the investigator’s discretion. The following will be performed at the baseline visit prior 
to each subject receiving study treatment:  
• Eligibility criteria (inclusion/exclusion criteria)  
• Physical, neurological and mini -mental state examination  (MMSE)  
• Modified Rankin score (mRS)  
• Euro -QoL 5D, Euro -QoL VAS, Neuro -QoL SF Cog evaluations  
• MRI 
• Discuss results of MRI  
• Meeting with Trial Nurse   
• Evaluation for suitability of atorvastatin therapy  
• Randomization  
• Providing study monitoring device (eDiary/smart bottle)   
6.2.3 Three  month phone call and safety labs (V2)  
The 3 month visit (V2) will consist of a phone call from the Trial Nurse or coordinator 
as well as laboratory tests.  During the phone call, the TN or coordinator will collect 
information about the patient’s current mRS, concomitant medications, and any 
adverse events.  The following laboratory tests need to be completed as part of 
standard care at 3 months:  
• Renal function  
• LFT 
• CK 
  
 25 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6.2.4 Six and 9 month follow -up phonce call (V3 and V4)  
The 6 and 9 month visits will consist of a phone call from the Trial Nurse or 
coordinator to collect the following information:  
• Modified Rankin score (mRS)  
• Concomitant medications  
• Adverse events  
 
6.2.5  Twelve  month follow -up visit (V 5) – 12m +/- 4wks  
The following assessments will be performed on all subjects at 12  months from 
enrollment:  
• Laboratory blood tests (Renal functions, LFT, CK and lipid profile)  
• MRI with DCEQP and QSM  
• mRS  
• Euro -QoL 5D, Euro -QoL VAS, Neuro -QoL SF Cog evaluations  
• Intervention adherence/ adverse events review: review results of laboratory 
investigations, review study monitoring device (eDiary/smart bottle), manual 
pill count, elicit drug -related adverse events, full medical examination, MMSE, 
assess suitability for continuation of statin therapy.  
• Neurosurgical review: neurological examination, MMSE, discuss results of 
MRI, dose modification if necessary.  
• Blood sample processed for ROCK activity assay on peripheral leukocytes, 
and plasma stored in biobank for future/ancillary biomarker studies.  
 
6.2.6 Fifteen, 18, and 21 month follow -up phonce call (V6, V7, and V8)  
The 15, 18, and 21 month visits will consist of a phone call from the Trial Nurse or 
coordinator to collect the following information:  
• Modified Rankin score (mRS)  
• Concomitant medications  
• Adverse events  
 
6.2.7 End of study visit (V 9) – 24m +/ - 4wks   
The following interventions will be performed on all subjects at 24 months from 
enrollment:  
• Laboratory blood tests ( renal functions, LFT, CK and lipid profile)  
• Intervention adherence/ adverse events review: review results of laboratory 
investigations, review study monitoring device (eDiary/smart bottle) , manual 
pill count, elicit drug-related adverse events, full medical examination, MMSE, 
assess suitability for continuation of statin therapy  
• MRI with DCEQP and QSM  
• mRS  
• Euro -QoL 5D, Euro -QoL VAS, Neuro -QoL SF Cog evaluations  
  
 26 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 • Neurosurgical review: neurological exam ination , MMSE  and discuss results 
of MRI  
• Blood sample processed for ROCK activity assay on peripheral leukocytes, 
and plasma stored in biobank for future/ancillary biomarker studies.  
 
6.3 Special Instructions and Definitions of Evaluations  
 
6.3.1 Neurosurgical Evaluation  
Subjects will undergo a comprehensive neurological examination at every visit 
beginning with the  screening  visit (minus the 3 -month lab test as that is done with their 
own PCP) . Serial neurological examinations will objectively document subject’s 
neurological status and monitor for any new deficits or changes from baseline 
neurological status. The comprehensive neurological evaluation will include the Mini-
mental state examination  (MMSE) and documentation of Modified Rankin Score (mRS) , 
and a b aseline quali ty of life assessments ( Euro Quol 5D and Visual Analog Scale, and 
Neuro QOL Communications Short Form) .  
 
6.3.2 Confirmation of diagnosis and recent history  
Diagnosis of cerebral cavernous malformation is based on radiological imaging, 
which utilizes high -resolution MRI seq uences. Conventional sequences [ T1-weighted , 
T2-weighted , FLAIR and susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI)  sequences ] are helpful in 
diagnosing clinically  significant CCM lesions. Inactive lesions are depicted by regular to 
ovoid area >10 mm of homogenous signal loss surrounded by a hyperintense 
hemosiderin  (iron)  ring. Active lesions show evidence of blood at different ages within 
the lesion and are  best seen on T 1-weighted images , to be correlated with clinical 
symptoms (18) 
 
6.3.3 Informed Consent  
The informed consent process can begin at any time during screening but must be 
obtained prior to randomization. A signature on the consent form does not translate into 
enrollment in the study. The study center will document the informed consent process 
and the signing of  the consent form in a written progress note, place a signed copy of 
the consent form in the hospital medical record s, and keep the signed original consent 
form in the subject study binder  (paper or electronic) . A signed copy must be given to 
the subject as well.  Informed consent will include specific consideration of the alternative 
option of surgical lesion excision.  
 
6.3.4 Evaluating suitability for statin therapy  
This evaluation will be performed at screening, 3 and 12 months. These visits will 
include an evaluation of subjects’ tolerance to study drug, a review of any new 
symptoms, a complete physical examination, and an evaluation of lab results. Subjects 
will also be reminded about  the contraindications and precautions to statin therapy.  
 
  
 27 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6.3.5 MRI 
A magnetic resonance imaging protocol that includes  DCEQP and QSM 
sequences will be p erformed at baseline, 12 and 24 months from enrollment. The 
imaging protocol will be performed using  the 3T instrument, and involve s intravenous 
contrast injection and utilize s special FDA approved sequences directed at assessing 
lesional /brain  white matter permeability and iron deposition  as detailed in Section 6.5 . 
Prior to every MRI scan, subjects will have their renal functions checked if needed 
according to the local protocol.  
 
6.3.6 Laboratory tests  
These assessments w ill be performed at the baseline, 12 and 24 month  follow up 
visits prior to every MRI scan according to the study schedule ( Table 1) (84, 85). 
Assessments marked with an asterisk (*) will also be performed at the 3 month follow up 
visit as part of the subject’s local, routine care  to assess statin tolerance :  
• Complete blood count ( CBC ): performed as part of baseline blood tests and 
repeated only if clinically indicated  
• Renal functions *: Renal functions and electrolytes, performed at screening to 
determine subjects baseline renal function and safety of IV contrast material. 
Repeated prior to every scheduled MRI sc an and as clinically indicated. Could be 
substituted with pin -prick tests prior to IV contrast administration according to local 
protocol.  
• Liver function tests ( LFTs)*: liver transaminases, alkaline phosphatase and 
bilirubin  performed at  baseline and at 6 months from enrollment on all subjects.  
• Thyroid function tests ( TFTs ): performed  at screening and when investigating 
adverse events.  
• Serum creatine kinase ( CK)*: performed at baseline and at 6 months from 
enrollment on all subjects.  
• Lipid profile : Total cholesterol, HDL and LDL.  
• Hepatitis viral profile  
• HIV (Known cause of myopathy, which is one of the most common side effects of 
statins resulting in cessation of treatment).  
• Pregnancy test  
• Blood sample shall also be drawn for ROCK activity assay on peripheral 
leukocytes  as detailed in 6.4 below, and plasma freeze -stored for future or ancillary 
biomarker studies.    
6.3.7 Unscheduled  Evaluations  
The electronic feedback system will allow for the exchange of notifications between 
the subject and study team. Unscheduled evaluations could be in the form of a telephone 
call or an actual visit to the study center. Evaluations could be triggered by the subject 
in response to any potential adverse events or requested by the study team i f there are 
  
 28 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 any concerns about compliance or prohibited concomitant interventions. In  the event of 
a possible  drug-related adverse event an unscheduled visit will be arranged  wherein a 
clinical evaluation and /or other relevant investigations will be performed.  
 
6.3.8 Pregnancy  
Because of the unknown teratogenicity profile of the study drug, women of 
childbearing age are excluded from the trial  unless they are surgically sterilized or using 
a reliable method of contraception. In addition to formal laboratory testing at screening, 
negative pregnancy status will be confirmed for all women of childbearing potentia l prior 
to each MRI evaluation p er local institutional policy. P regnancy during  the trial will be 
considered a safety  endpoint;  drug administration shall cease but patient will be followed 
for the  duration of  the study . 
 
6.4 ROCK Activity Assays  
 
6.4.1 ROCK Activity on Peripheral Leukocytes   
 Our collaborator James Liao has shown that ROCK activity may be quantified in 
human leukocytes isolated from peripheral blood [by assessing the ratio of pMBS/glycer-
aldehyde -3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) protein], and that this activity is inhibited 
by statins (54, 86, 87). It is our intention to investigate whether ROCK activity in peripheral 
blood leukocytes is impacted by the treatment intervention at the proposed doses in CA 
subjects with recent hemorrhage. We have already performed these analyses in correla-
tion with brain permeability measurements and disease severity in CAs, in conjunction 
with prior exploratory developmental project  (R21NS087328 ), and  data from those stud-
ies has been published (88).  
In addition  clinical laboratory tests  to be performed at baseline, and at 12 and 24 
months follow -up visits (V1, V3 and V4 ), 5-10 ml of blood are collected into heparinized 
vacutainer tubes. Leukocytes are isolated from the blood and frozen at -86°C after fixing 
in 50% trichloroacetic acid/50 mM dithiothreitol. Cells are thawed and relative ROCK ac-
tivity in leukocytes is assessed by Western transfers as d escribed  by our collaborator 
James Liao (54, 86, 87, 89). Since ROCK phosphorylates MBS (MYPT1), relative ROCK 
activity will be assessed by the ratio of the intensity of pMBS staining/GAPDH staining. 
GADPH is chosen as reference since it was shown to be a more reliable internal control 
in Western blot analysis of leukocytes than other housekeeping proteins (90). For these 
quantitative assays, we shall use the pMBS antibody developed by our collaborator Liao, 
targeting the Thr853 of MBS site, known to be specific for only ROCK and not other ser-
ine/threonine kinases (91, 92). Lysophosphatidic acid -stimulated NIH3T3 fibroblast ly-
sates will be run on all gels as a positive control to standardize results between experi-
ments (89). We shall enter the  pMBS/GADPH ratio  in immunoblots for each subject/visit  
as “ROCK Activity on Peripheral Leukocytes” for subsequent secondary analyses as pro-
posed in the SAP, comparing placebo and intervention groups at baseline, and at 1 and 
2 year follow -up.  
 
  
 29 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6.4.2 Ancillary Biomarker and Lesional Studies   
Plasma Samples for Ancillary Studies . The plasma from the blood samples shall 
be stored at -86°C  for subsequent/ancillary biomarker studies (88, 93). Subjects enrolled 
in this trial will be consented for plasma biomarker studies under separately approved 
IRB protocol.  
ROCK Activity in Excised Lesions . Additional assessment of lesional ROCK ac-
tivity shall be performed on any excised lesion specimens  during the course of the 
study, as per current aim of ongoing program project studying signaling aberrations in CA 
(P01NS092521), and techniques published by our laboratory (36, 38, 42, 46, 49, 51, 94). 
Subjects enrolled in this trial who ultimately undergo lesion resection will be consented 
for these lesional studies under separately approved IRB protocol.  
.  
6.5 Detailed Imaging Protocols  
 
6.5.1  MRI Sequences for Characterizing the CA Lesion   
The following standard clinical shall be conducted on a 3T instrument for compa-
rability of sequences, consistent with evidence -based consensus recommendations for 
optimal imaging of cavernous angiomas (CA)  (17).  
Those shown below in BOLD  are specifically relevant to biomarker measurements 
of iron content by quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM), and permeability by dynamic 
contrast enhanced quantitative perfusion (DCEQP ). Note that the proposed DCEQP scan 
will image the first pass of the contrast agent normally injected for the clinically indicated 
purpose of post -gadolinium (Gd) anatomic imaging. It does not require additional contrast 
burden (in fact it uses a lower con trast dose than for routine clinical ind ications). We will 
require that all imaging be performed on a 3T MRI scanner and an 8-channel head coil to 
allow for parallel imaging.  
• Sagittal T 1-weighted sequence  
• Coronal T 2-weighted sequence  
• Axial VenBOLD  
• Axial diffusion -weighted sequence  
• Axial T 2-weighted sequence  
• FLAIR long TR  
• Axial T 1 -weighted sequence pre -Gd contrast  
• CCM Axial T 2*-weighted sequence  
• AIF Localizer 3D TOF -MRA  
• T1–weighted mapping SR -SPGR  
• DCE Multi -phase SR -SPGR +C  
 
The index CA with SH  shall be characterized by the  PI as to location (lobe, su-
perficial/deep based on distance of lesion epicenter < or > along a line between cortical 
surface and ventricle, basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, brainstem), and size (maximal 
diameter in mm on axial T 2- and T 1-weighted images). This information shall be entered 
on electronic data forms, referenced by subject number and scan date. In cases with 
  
 30 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 intra-lesional hemorrhage, the full lesion diameter shall be sized (including the “hemo-
siderin ring” on T 2–weighed sequences). In cases of extra -lesional hemorrhage, the max-
imum diameter of the CA and the hematoma shall be separately noted. These character-
izations of lesion size and location are well standardized clinically, with the prescribed 
sequences at 3T  field strength  (17). Lesion size will not be considered on gradient echo 
or susceptibility sequences where blooming effects may introduce errors.   
 
6.5.2  MRI Sequences for QSM and DCEQP Biomarker Measurements  
In addition to the standard clinical scans (i.e. those un -bolded above), research 
scans will involve 1 additional image acquisition for QSM and 3 acquisitions for DCEQP 
(those in bold  under MRI sequences above).  These are performed at baseline and at 
two follow -up scans. These prot ocols are adapted from protocol s previously published by 
many investigators, and they have been used and vetted extensively at The University of 
Chicago, included validations specifically in CA patients.  The same protocols are un det-
going multi -site validation  in conjunction with parallel CASH Trial Readiness Project 
(U01NS104157 ).  
 
Quantitative Susceptibility Map-
ping (QSM)   
A single three -dimen-
sional, multi -echo, T 2*-weighted, 
spoiled gradient echo sequence 
will be used for data collection and 
create of the QSM images  (Figure 
9). The imaging parameters are: 
3D, axial, FOV/matrix = 240 
mm/256x256; repetition time 
(TR)= 55 ms/5 echos times uni-
form spacing, flip angle = 15°; par-
titions = 120,1.0 mm.  
The stack will be oriented 
parallel to the corpus callosum 
before being repositioned in the 
S/I direction over the area of inter-
est. The protocol design allows 
coverage of most if not all of the 
brain; ensure the area of interest 
is covered.  
QSM images will be de -identified, extracted in DICOM format and post -processed 
at University of Chicago. The QSM images will be reconstructed using a morphology -
enabled dipole inversion (MEDI) algorith m (95, 96), as previously reported  (60). Inspec-
tion of image quality is performed immediately by the technician, and this non -contrast 
acquisition may be repeated in the unlikely event that motion artifacts are identified.  
 
Dynamic Contrast -Enhanced Quantitative Perfusion (DCEQP )  Localization for Whole H ead Coverage for  
Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping  
 
 
 
Figure 9:  Multi -echo T 2*-weighted images cover the whole brain 
and are used to quantify magnetic susceptibility in cavernous an-
giomas.  

  
 31 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 The DCEQP protocol consists of 
3 components that are run in se-
quence: (1) Arterial Input Func-
tion (AIF) Localizer (2) T 1-
weighted map and (3) Contrast 
Enhanced DCE dynamic scan.  
Arterial Input Function 
(AIF) Localizer:   A 3D Time -of-
Flight acquired at the level of  the 
lower brainstem and pons to 
cover the internal carotid arteries 
(Figure 10 , yellow box). The re-
constructed maximum intensity 
projection (MIP) images in both 
the coronal and sagittal views will 
be used to prescribe the slice to 
locating the artery for the AIF.  
After the AIF localizer is 
acquired to image the position 
and angulation of the internal carotid arteries, a saturation recovery gradient recalled se-
quence (SPGR) will be acquired both for an initial T 1-weighted measurement and for the 
subsequent dynamic imaging  (Figure 11 ). The prototypical acquisition parameters will be: 
echo time TE = 1.9 ms, repetition time TR = 3.9 ms, flip angle = 30°, field of view = 230 x 
182 mm2, slice thickness = 8 mm, matrix size = 96×61, SENSE factor = 2, centric order 
phase enc oding. The same base sequence is used for both the T1 -weighted mapping 
and the dynamic series part. The base sequence consists of two imaging slabs (stacks):  Arterial Input Function  Localizer  with Time -of-
Flight Magnetic Resonance A ngiogram  
 
 
 
Figure 10:  A Time -of-Flight magnetic resonance angiogram 
should cover the distal internal carotid artery and serves to aid in 
the prescription of the slices needed of proper acquisition of the 
arterial input function in the dynamic scans.  

  
 32 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Slab A - contains a single 
slice, used for locating the In-
ternal Carotid Artery (ICA) used 
for determining the AIF (arterial 
input function).  
Slab B - contains 4 slices 
covering the areas of interest in 
the brain. One of those slices 
should include coverage of the 
CASH lesion, and another the 
choroid plexus, to be used as 
an internal reference.  
Important:  The Slab A 
should be perpendicular (so the 
flow is perpendicular to the 
Slab A imaging plane) to the 
particular internal carotid artery 
(left or right) you wish to use for 
AIF. Please make a note during 
the data acquisition. Also, cau-
tion should be taken to avoid 
clinoid (c5) or petrous (c2) seg-
ments of the ICA.  
T1-weighted mapping : 
For the purposes of T 1-
weighted mapping, SPGR im-
ages should be acquired with 
the following inversion times 
Seven Time Delays (TD) val-
ues (120 ms, 300 ms, 600 ms, 
1000 ms, 2000 ms, 4000 ms and 10,000 ms). A single image stack shall be acquired for 
each TD.    
Dynamic Contrast -Enhanced (DCE) Scan:  The passage of the bolus of the con-
trast agent will be imaged using a saturation TD of 120 ms to minimize the effect of water 
exchange in such measurements  (97). A multi -phase, saturation recovery SPGR with 
identical coverage, localization and spatial resolution as the T 1-weighted mapping acqui-
sition should be acquired next. This multi -phase acquisition should fix the delay time (TD 
= 120 ms) and acquire 250 phases (i.e. time points) in conjunction with an injection of a 
T1-weighted shorting, Gd -based contrast agent.  Co -localization is critical in order to spa-
tially register the T 1-weighted map to the dynamic contrast kinetic scans.  
Contrast Injection : MRI -based contrast kinetic will be mapped with a dynamic T 1-
weighted scan acquired during the injection of the contrast agent which is normally used 
for post -Gd T 1-weighted imaging.  Specifics are:  
OMNISCAN ( gadodiamide) will be administered http://www.rxlist.com/omniscan -
drug.htm . Dosage will be based on the patient’s weight (see chart included at  Separate Slice Locations Prescribed for the  
Permeability Data and Arterial Input Function  
 
 
 
Figure 11:  Top: Use a sagittal localizer to cover the relevant anatomy 
containing the cavernous angioma and choroid plexus (Slab A: top 
slices). Angulate the lower slice (Slab B), used for the arterial input 
function based on the 3D time of flight from both sagittal  (lower left) 
and coronal orientations (bottom, right)  
 

  
 33 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 http://www.rxlist.com/omniscan -drug/indications -dosage.htm , use chart for 0.1 mMol/kg). 
The injection rate is performed using a computer controlled power injector through an 18 
gauge catheter placed in the antecubital vein. Injection and saline flush (15 ml) should 
both be at 4.0 ml/sec and initiated after the 9t h measurement (12 seconds after scan 
initiation) of the dynamic sequence (250 total,5:32 of total scan time). Since the scan will 
be performed as a part of routine clinical care with and without contrast, one half of the 
contrast agent for the permeability  scan. After the permeability scan is complete, we inject 
the remaining half -dose (i.e. an additional 0.1 mmol/kg by body weight, for a total dose of 
0.2 mml/kg ) and perform routine post -contrast clinical MRIs. If the scan is to be performed 
only for resea rch purposes, the remaining contrast need not be injected, and post -con-
trast sequences may be foregone.  
Notes : 
● The slice positions of the T 1-weighted mapping and the dynamic series need to be 
identical since a per -pixel based fit is performed during reconstruction  
● Try to the tell subject to remain as still as possible to eliminate motion artifacts during 
this long scan - no additional motion correction post -processing is currently performed.  
 
6.5.3  Data Export and Image Post -Processing  
The raw data (images) relevant  to biomarker postprocessing  will be de -identified and ex-
tracted in the classical (not Philips “enhanced”) DICOM format. The needed sequences 
are: 
  
• Axial VenBOLD,  
• Axial T 2-weighted TSE matrix  
• Axial T 2*-weighted  
• AIF TOF localizer (called fast inflow angio)  
• MIP fast inflow angio  
• All images from the T 1-weighted mapping scans for each inversion [i.e. delay time, 
TI (TI_00120 to TI_10000)]  
• Dynamic DCE images (called hperf120)  
 
Additionally, the single QSM sequence will be extracted in DICOM format.  The de -identi-
fied images shall be locally archived and uploaded into a secured shared server at the 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Center (MRIC) , traceable only  to the assigned trial  subject 
number and date of the scan. The University of Chicago Research Computer Center Mid-
way computer shall be used for the storage and  back up of raw imaging data, while  
deidentified calculated dynamic contrast enhanced quantitative perfusion (DCEQP) and 
quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) values are linked to enrolled sub ject number 
and submitted through the trial’s electronic case report forms (eCRP) t o the D ata Coordi-
nating Center.  
 
Image Post -Processing  
  
 34 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 All post -imaging processing wi ll be completed locally at the MR IC using an existing 
image reconstruction pipeline on a computer running MATLAB software (Mathworks, Na-
tick, MA). QSM images will be reconstructed by using a morphology -enabled dipole in-
version algorithm  (98), which generates the local susceptibility distribution by inverting 
the estimated tissue field map with prior information from the magnitude images. The 
tissue field map will be obtained by removing the background field induced by large sus-
ceptibility sour ces (i.e. air/tissue interface) from the field map derived from the gradient -
echo phase images  (60). Mean lesional susceptibility values will be generated by drawing 
a region of interest (ROI) around the lesion on the resulting QSM image in ImageJ for 
each slice in which the lesion is visible, then averaging all pixels within the ROIs for a 
lesion.  
Final permeability values will be calculated in MATLAB by applying the Patlak 
method voxel -wise, represented by the following equation: 𝐶𝑡(𝑡)
𝐶𝑎(𝑡)=𝐾𝑖∫𝐶𝑎(𝜏)𝑑𝜏𝑡
0
𝐶𝑎(𝑡)+𝑉𝑏, where 
each C t(t) is the concentration time -course of each voxel of tissue. The unidirectional in-
flux constant, K i, is estimated as the slope of the Patlak plot created by the above equa-
tion. This equation becomes valid after some time as the vascular phase vanishes, and 
data points from the first third of each time course are not included for this estimation. 
More de tailed discussions of the methodology have been published  (60).  
Lesional permeability values will be generated similarly to QSM. For DCEQP stud-
ies, in addition to the lesion of interest, ROIs will be taken for either the choroid plexus (if 
covered by the imaging stack) or normal -appearing white matter far (> 5 mm) from  the 
lesion, to be used as an internal reference value at follow up.  Permeability values for 
White Matter Far (WMF) shall be generated in regions of interest (ROI) covering 3.6 X 
3.6 mm (16 pixels or approximately 12.9 mm2/ROI based on 256 -256 matrix for a xial brain 
MR slices). WMF regions are chosen in brain  devoid of CA  lesions on any MR sequence, 
as far as possible from and always >16 mm from the border of a visualized lesion, includ-
ing the tiny SWI lesions.  
 
 
7. MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE EXPERIENCES  
 
           In the event of an adverse event (Table 2), the first concer n will be for the safety 
of the subject. Subjects will be closely monitored and are required to notify  the trial PI or 
designated TN of any new symptoms that occur  following treatment onset. Managed 
adverse events include all new symptoms, whether expected or unexpected, which are 
assessed by the TN, in consultation with the on-site statin expert physician,  to be 
reasonably or possibly related to the study intervention. All adverse events  that the study 
team is notified about  will trigger at least an unscheduled telephone evaluation. During  
the evaluation , a member of the study team will assess the seriousness of the reported 
event, its attributability to the study intervention and advise the subject re garding the 
treatment plan,  including whether to continue on the study drug (99, 100). Serious criteria, 
definitions, and guidance for reporting follow in section 10.4 : Adverse Experience 
Reporting.  
  
 35 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Historically, very low levels of low -density lipoproteins (LDL) have been 
sporadically associated with some detrimental effects. However, clinical trials on statin 
therapy have not demonstrated any substantial correlation between lower LDL levels and 
safety. There is no evidence that lowering low -density lipoprotein levels in people with 
normal cholesterol profile is inherently unsafe (101).  
7.1 Role of Trial Nurse (TN ) and Study C oordinator  
A trial nurse (TN)  working closely with th e PI (backed up and sharing call with a 
trained clinical research coordinator)  will be available 24 hours a day, 7 days per week 
on a special pager and cell phone, and shal l be the first portal of contact for study 
subjects . The TN  will also be responsible for following up  with subjects  in between 
scheduled visits  (in response ot calls by the subjects or at regular scheduled phone calls 
every three months). H/she will help  assess  attributability of any new symptom s to the 
study intervention (section 10.5) and instructing  subjects  when it is necessary to seek  
medical attention. The TN and study coordinator  shall be blinded to the study group 
allocation. They  will be supplied with management algorithms detailing  the standards of 
care in dealing with the most recognized side effects of the study intervention  (25, 102, 
103). The TN and coordinator  will be able to access subjects’ electronic case report form  
(eCRF) to track their course throughout the study and document  any events. The T N and 
study coordinator shall be overseen by and have unfettered access to the study PI 
regarding any trial related clinical questions. They  shall have direct access to the External 
Medical Safety Monitor (see below) in the absence of the PI.  
 
7.2 Adverse Event Management P rotocol  
Mild adverse events (Table  2, Category A) encountered by any subject regardless 
of assigned treatment will be recorded, relayed to the safety monitoring team and closely 
followed by the TN.  More concerning  adverse events (Category B) will be managed by 
withholding the study intervention for 2 -4 weeks pending resolution of symptoms or 
biochemical abnormalities . Subjects will then be re started  on the  lower dose  (40 mg/day)  
of the study intervention (atorvastatin or placebo). Depending on the dose  at which 
adverse events occurred , the process can be repeated, tapering the dose down to attrition 
as deemed appropriate by the PI in consultation with the external medical safety monitor 
(MSM) . Intolerable or potentially serious adverse events that recur or persist in spite of 
dose reduction, along with other serious adverse events listed in Section 8 will lead to 
unblinding and determination of endpoint for that subject in  the trial.  A statin expert 
physician consultant is available at the Chicago site t o advise regarding adverse event  
management in individual cases.  
 
7.3 Common Adverse Events  
 
7.3.1 CA hemorrhage    
Best care criteria defined by the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for 
management of ICH will be the standards of care for all general medical care in this 
protocol. Specifically, the guidelines a re (i) Stroke Council special writing group 
  
 36 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 guidelines for the management of ICH  (74), (ii) European Stroke Initiative (EUSI) 
Guidelines for the management of intracranial hemorrhage  (104), and (iii ) the AANS 
guidelines for management of elevated intracranial pressure  (105). Management may 
include blood pressure reduction, use of platelets and prothrombotic agents, and use of 
a surgical procedure. The care team is required to preserve life and functional outcomes 
in these instances. The management of each adverse event will be recorded and will be 
reviewed by the safety monitoring team .  
 
If a CA symptomatic bleed is verified as  per adjudicated criteria (20), including a 
rebleed of prior lesion or new bleed from another lesion , then a safety endpoint  will have 
been  reached, and the subject  will be  notified , and decision is made to cease the study 
intervention . Patients will remain in the study for the remaining scheduled follow -ups. 
The lesion that has hemorrhaged shall be consi dered f or treatment as per current 
guidelines and standards of care.  
 
7.3.2 Myositis/ Rhabdomyolysis .   
Skeletal muscle inflammation is a rare but well recognized adverse event in statin 
therapy. The severity of this inflammation ranges from mild myalgia to multi -organ 
system failure secondary to myoglobinuria ( Table  2). Management should follow 
standard  of care and is to be dictated by the PI based on symptom severity /degree of 
lab value elevation , in consultation with the on -site statin consultant . Management may 
include vigorous hyd ration, alkaliniz ation of urine, correcting electrolytes, and in extreme 
cases hemodiafiltration.  The decision to declare a safety endpoint  in the case of myositis , 
versus the decision to decrease the dose of drug will depend on severity of the myositi s 
as per established guidelines.  
 
7.3.3 Hepatotoxicity  
Drug -induced liver insult runs a spectrum from asymptomatic elevation of liver 
enzymes to acute fulminant  hepatitis.  However,  it is now well recognized that statin -
related hepatic adverse event s are exceptionally rare and unpredictable . Analysis of 
safety data pooled from 49 clinical trials of atorvastatin in 14,236 patients showed that 
persistent elevation  in hepatic transaminases  does not exceed 0.6%  (106). Statin -
induced liver insult almost invariably occurs in cases with pre-existing chronic liver 
disease (e.g. viral/ alcoholic hepatitis , etc.) or concomitant ingestion of hepatotoxic drugs 
(25, 102, 103). All subjects in this study will be screened for risk of hepatic toxicity prior 
to enrollment , as per current recommendations by both the  American College of 
Cardiology /American Heart Association  (ACC/AHA ) and FDA (107). The FDA has 
recently revised safety guidelines to remove the need for routine monitoring of liver 
enzymes in patients taking statins. To detect asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes, 
enrolled subjects will also have their liver enzymes checked at 3 months and  at each 
follow up visit. Additionally, s ubjects exhibit ing any evidence of liver dysfunction  at any 
point throughout the trial will undergo extensive hepatitis workup and further 
management in accordance with the trial adverse events ma nagement algorithms. 
(Table  2) 
 
  
 37 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 7.3.4 Other adverse events.  
Other  commonly reported adverse reactions (incidence ≥ 2% and greater than 
placebo) regardless of causality,  reported  in patients treated with atorvastatin in previous 
placebo -controlled trials, such as  nasopharyngitis, diarrh ea and urinary tract infection , will 
be individually reported and managed as elaborated in section 7.2.  
Table 2 below summarizes potential adverse events by body systems that have  
been reported with the study interventi on and other statin medications. 
  
 38 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Adverse Event 
Category  Mild AE  
(Category A)  Moderate AE  
(Category B)  Serious AE  
(Category C)  
General/Constitutional  
• Malaise / Fatigue  Tolerable/self -limited  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Pyrexia  38.0 - 39.0 degrees C (100.4 - 
102.2 degrees F). self -limited  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Allergic reactions  Erythema multiform  Mild self -limited classic allergic 
responses such as pruritis, 
hives or urticaria, cutaneous 
vasodilation (“flushing”), 
development of edema 
(peripheral or airway), 
peripheral vasodilation 
(hypotension), bronchospasm, 
and/or tachycardia.  Recurrence after dose 
reduction/Anaphylactic 
reaction/Steven -Johnson 
syndrome / Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis  
Muscular  
• Musculoskeletal pain  
(3.5%),  muscle spasm  
(3.6%),  arthralgia  (6.9%)  Tolerable/self -limited  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Joint swelling  Asymptomatic; clinical or 
diagnostic observations only.  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Incipient Myositis  CK < 3 x ULN,  no relevant 
clinical symptoms.  CK >3 x ULN Plus  new 
elevation of ALT, irrespective of 
musculoskeletal symptoms.  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Definite Myositis (0.08%)  
  Myalgia Plus markedly 
elevated serum creatine kinase 
>10 x ULN  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Rhabdomyolysis    Myositis Plus  evidence of new 
renal impairment +/ - other organ 
system failure  
  
 39 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Adverse Event 
Category  Mild AE  
(Category A)  Moderate AE  
(Category B)  Serious AE  
(Category C)  
• Tendon R upture    Tendon R upture  
GI/Hepatobiliary  
• Pharyngeal pain  (2.3%) , 
dyspepsia  (4.7%), nausea 
(4%), bloat ing, eructation, 
flatulence or d iarrhea  
(6.8%)  Tolerable, self -limited  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Hepatitis (0.6%)  Elevated Transaminases (ALT, 
AST):  <ULN - 3.0 x ULN, no 
relevant clinical symptoms.  Elevated Transaminases (ALT, 
AST):  >ULN - 3.0 x ULN, no 
relevant clinical symptoms.  Recurrence after dose reduction / 
ALT >3.0 ULN; >3 x ULN with the 
appearance o r worsening of  
fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right 
upper quadrant pain or 
tenderness, fever, rash, or 
eosinophilia  
• Acute Liver failure    Hepatitis plus abnormal plasma 
levels of ammonia, bilirubin, lactic 
dehydrogenase, and alkaline 
phosphatase  
• Cholestasis   Serum conjugated bilirubin >1.5 
x ULN; clinical jaundice.  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Pancreatitis    Severe abdominal pain; vomiting 
plus enzyme elevation (amylase 
200 above ULN with elevated 
lipase levels) or radiologic findings  
Nervous System  
• Dizziness, insomnia (3%),  
Depression , nightmare s Tolerable, self -limited  Intolerable/persistent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
  
 40 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Adverse Event 
Category  Mild AE  
(Category A)  Moderate AE  
(Category B)  Serious AE  
(Category C)  
• Cognitive impairment  1 points dr op in MMSE;  not 
interfering with work/school/life 
performance; specialized 
educational services/devices not 
indicated  >1 points drop in MMSE ; 
interfering with work/school/life 
performance; specialized 
educational services/devices not 
indicated  Persistence after dose reduction  
• Symptomatic Intracerebral 
Hemorrhage    New onset neurological sym ptoms 
Plus  intraparenchymal or 
intralesional hemorrhage 
confirmed on imaging studies  
Endocrine system  
• Hyperglycemia   New impaired glucose 
tolerance/glycemic control  Persistence after dose reduction  
Respiratory  
• Nasopharyngitis (8.3%)  Tolerable, self -limited  Intolerable/recurrent  Recurrence after dose reduction  
• Epistaxis  Mild episode, self -limited  Requiring medical attention, 
Recurrent episodes  Recurrence after dose reduction  
Genitourinary  
• Urinary tract infection 
(5.7%)  Simple cystitis  Recurrent cystitis 
/pyelonephritis  Recurrence after dose reduction  
 
Table  2: Statin -related adverse events .  
AEs are classified based on  body system, severity and reported incidences  (102, 103, 106-108) 
 
 
 
  
 41 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 8. CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
 
Atorvastatin/Placebo administration will be discontinued for any of the following 
reasons  (designated as serious AE s or Category C in the preceding Table  2):  
 
• Symptomatic intrace rebral hemorrhage ( ICH) whether primary, arising from 
index c avernous m alformation that previously ble d, or in other lesion , or other 
ICH of any kind   
• Severe allergic reaction  
• Rhabdomyolysis  
• Markedly elevated liver enzymes  
• Liver failure  
• Pancreatitis  
• Pregnancy  
• Intolerable adverse events  that persist or recur after serial dose reduction.  
• In the investigator’s judgment, withdrawal from the trial would be in the 
subject’s best interest (Drug interaction/glycemic control).  
• The subject or legal representative withdraws consent , or patient undergoes 
surgical resection or irradiation of CCM lesion, other brain surgery or 
irradiation for any cause.   
• Patient develops clinical indications for statin use for cholesterol or 
cardiovascular indications unrelated to CCM.    
If one or more of these events occur after commencing the study drug, the subject 
will be considered to have reached a safety en dpoint. Study drug or placebo shall be 
discontinued. All subjects reaching safety endpoints will be followed through the 24-month 
follow up visit as a part of the outcome assessment for the study . An attempt will be made 
to contact subjects who withdraw from the study or who are lost to follow up for safety 
evaluation. If these subjects wish not to cooperate there will be no additional follow up.    
 
 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
9.1 General Design Issues  
This shall be a double -blinded randomized, placebo -controlled, exploratory phase I -
IIa proof of concept clinical trial. It shall include adults age d 18-80 years with untreated 
CA of any genotype, who suffered a symptomatic lesional hemorrhage within the preced-
ing year. We plan to enroll 80 subjects during years 1 -3, specifically targeting cases 
whose hemorrhagic lesion was not resected, with greatest risk of rebleeding in subse-
quent 2 years. Inclusion and exclusion criteria aim to exclude cases receiving prior statin 
therapy in any form or for any indication in the past year, cases at high risk for statin 
intolerance, and other customary exclusions in similar trials. Ch ildren will not be enrolled, 
per IND Exemption restriction for this trial.  
Enrolled subjects will be blinded to treatment rendered, as will the investigators con-
ducting and reporting biomarker studies (including QSM, the primary outcome measure), 
  
 42 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 and PIs, the clinical personnel caring for the patient, and DCC staff. The  safety monitoring 
team  will have access to A/B treatment designations but will be blinded to which group A 
and B are assigned, unless a concern is raised and consideration to suspend enrollment 
in the trial . Atorvastatin and placebo capsules will be formulated by a third party pharmacy 
in two color coded tiers (green and blue) representing different doses of atorvastatin (40 
and 80 mg) or placebo. The 40 mg dose (or color matched pla cebo capsule) will be used 
in subjects who develop mild side effects on the initial dose target of 80 mg/day.  
After satisfying the screening criteria, patients will be assigned a subject number 
and randomized to the atorvastatin or placebo arm in a 1:1 ratio  (See section 3.3 Ran-
domization) . This will be implemented  upon subject enrol lment, and communicated to the 
Research P harmacy at the Chicago site  via the web -based  Electronic Data Capture  
(EDC ) system . Administration of study drug shall continue thereafter, at once daily oral 
dose for 24 months, with scheduled visits and repeat imaging at 12 and 24 months 
from enrollment , and follow -up calls quarterly, and weekly feed back on compli-
ance by electronic monitoring device . Safety endpoints include a symptomatic intra-
crania l hemorrhage, from the index CA  lesion or another source, or a serious adverse 
event ( SAE) necessitating drug discontinuation (Protocol Section 8). If new symptoms 
arise at any point after  starting the study or relevant laboratory test abnormalities, subjects 
will be contacted by the TN for further assessment and instructions regarding continuation 
of study intervention, dose de -escalation or discontinuation, based on the study adverse 
events management protocol  (See Protocol Section 7).  This approach is similar to that 
used in other statin trials (84, 85, 99, 100, 102, 106, 107, 109). 
 
9.2 Outcomes  
 
The primary outcome is the mean percent change in lesional QSM per year (called 
the change score). Each patient contributes two outcome measurements (at year 1 and 
year 2) based on intention -to-treat.  Evaluation of the intervention on this outcome will be 
performed as a time -averaged difference between two arms using a repeated measures 
analy sis implemented as a  linear mixed model , adjusted for gender  (110). Patients with 
outcome measurements in both periods will be included in the initial intention -to-treat 
analysis. In cases with multiple lesions, only QSM measurements in the lesion with initial 
hemorrhage (index lesion) shall be considered for the primary o utcome assessment.  A 
secondary analysis of the percent QSM change per year shall be conducted per treatment 
rendered for all patients with at least one annual epoch of measurements.  
 
Secondary outcomes shall include:  
• Changes in DCEQP vascular permeability measurements in the index le-
sion and in brain (white matter far from lesion),  
• Rates of QSM and DCEQP biomarker events, representing increases in in-
dex lesional QSM or DCEQP above previously articulated “biomarker 
thresholds” (58); rates of clinically overt hemorrhages in the index lesion per 
  
 43 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 adjudicated criteria; and rates of lesional expansion, defined as an increase 
in maximum lesion diameter on T 2-weighted  sequences by 2  mm or more . 
• Adverse event rates and serious adverse event rates , and drug compliance  
• Changes in functional outcome  (mRS, MMSE, Euro -QoL 5D, Euro -QoL 
VAS, Neuro -QoL evaluations ) 
• ROCK Activity Assay on Peripheral leukocytes ( pMBS/GADPH ratio  in im-
munoblots for each subject/visit)   
• Impact of sex, genotype and lesion location on primary and secondary out-
comes (pre specified subgroup analyses)  
 
9.3 Sample S ize and A ccrual  
 
9.3.1  Sample size and Treatment Effect Estimation  
Sample size calculations were based on providing sufficient power to test the pri-
mary hypothesis, that the proposed intervention impacts QSM biomarker activity (indica-
tive of reduced or increased lesional bleeding) during 2 years of prospective follow -up 
after a recent CA SH. The primary outcome is the mean % change in lesional QSM 
per year (called the change score) . Each patient contributes two outcome measure-
ments (at year 1 and year 2, i.e. epochs). Evaluation of the intervention on this outcome 
will be performed as a time -averaged difference between two arms using a repeated 
measures analysis implemented as a linear mixed model and intention -to-treat principle  
(110).  
Estimating a “First -in-Man” treatment effect on a biomarker  can be difficult 
when such effect is demonstrated mechanistically but the translation to a human effect 
size remains unknown  (111). Based on pilot data linking QSM change to clinical events, 
we propose a minimum, clinically meaningful and mechanistically plausible treat-
ment effect to be a 20% absolute difference in the mean change score. It would be 
“a minimum expected effect ”,  <1/2 the mean 44% QSM increase observed with CA bleed 
or growth during longitudinal 1 -year follow -up of previously stable lesions; and “ clinically 
meaningful ”, > 3X the threshold of QSM change associated with maximum sensitivity -
specificity on ROC analyses (58). The  absolute QSM effect size postulated herein is 
“plausible mechanistically ”. It would be 0.0068 ppm  [20% of 0.0340 ppm mean QSM 
change observed during follow -up of CA with SH (59)], 6-22 folds lower than the observed 
range of artorvastatin treatment effect on Perls stain intensity in Ccm1 and Ccm3  murine 
models (Figures 2, 3, 5 ).  
One-year %QSM change in 16 pilot study patients  (Figure 7) , followed for either 1 
or 2 years (22 patient -year epochs), was used to estimate the 1 -year/patient standard 
deviation and within -patient correlation of the primary outcome in trial candidates.  A sam-
ple size calculation was performed using a repeated mea sures analysis of two annual 
percent QSM change scores, assuming a two -tailed test, power = 0.9 and alpha = 0.05 
(112). The actual within person correction from the pilot data was estimated at approxi-
mately -0.6 (Spearman); however, as this was based on only 6 patients with two -year’s 
  
 44 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 worth of data, we chose the more conservative within person correlation of 0 for our sam-
ple size estimates. In addition, we assumed a common standard deviation of 30 for the 
mean percent change score, which to be conservative is about 20% larger than the s tand-
ard deviation in our pilot data. To detect a 20% absolute difference between the mean 
change score in each arm, based on two annual change scores measured per pa-
tient (at years 1 and 2), 25 patients per arm would be required . To detect a smaller or 
larger effect size, an absolute difference of 15% or 25%, 44 or 17 patients per arm would 
be required, respectively (Hintze 2014, PASS v13, NCSS, Kaysville, Utah, USA 
www.ncss.com) . The sample size was further expanded by 37.5% to accommodate the 
highest estimate of missing data from all causes as discussed below. Hence we shall aim 
to enroll 40 patients/arm, 80 total subjects . 
 
9.3.2  Potential Missing Data, Attrition and Premature Trial Endpoint  
We considered all potential causes of missing data and we developed strategies 
to minimize and mitigate them. In initial pilot studies, 34 of 177 (19%) QSM assessments 
in CA patients were unusable due to technical reasons (mostly patient movement during 
image acquisition). We eliminated this problem in the most recent 25 consecutive cases 
with specific patient instructions. We now implement a further step of reviewing the QSM 
acquisition, and rapidly processing it (10 minutes on local Matlab computer termin als in 
our laboratory). This allows us to repeat the QSM acquisition if needed, before proceeding 
with contrast injection for DCEQP measurements. This “chaperoned biomarker acquisi-
tion” reduces to virtually zero the rate of missing QSM measures (See letter  by Dr Chris-
toforidis and Protocol Section 6.5). We nevertheless project up to 10% missing biomarker 
data related to imaging (claustrophobia, etc.). We further project an additional 10% miss-
ing data due to imperfect follow -up, higher than that recorded in recent trials conducted 
by our teams (113, 114).  
Up to 20% of subjects randomized to atorvastatin (10% of trial subjects) might not 
tolerate the 80 mg/day dose. Many will continue the drug at the lower dose. In fact, seri-
ous side effects or intolerance of the lower dose are expected to result in attrition 
in less than 5% of cases , per extensive meta -analyses of trial experience with the study 
drug (See Protection of Human Subjects; and Protocol section 7.3). Another 20-30% of 
cases might reach a prespecified study endpoint  because of SH, and they would al so 
stop the drug before the end of the 2 -years follow -up. All subjects who stop the drug, and 
those with non -compliance as defined, will still be followed for the full 2 years with sched-
uled clinical and imaging assessments, and will be included in the primary analysis per 
intention -to-treat .  
To permit secondary analysis per treatment rendered, at the power and Type I 
error described above, we decided to expand the sample size by an ample 37.5%, 
factoring the highest combined estimates  of missing data and attrition.  
 
9.3.3  Futility Analysis  
Due to concerns that the treatment may not be effective in reducing QSM meas-
urements, we will perform a futility analyses once satisfactory primary outcome data  
(paired QSM assessment)  has been logged  on 50 of the planned 1 00 person -year epochs  
needed to test the trial hypothesis . At the point of the futility analysis, a mixture of patients 
  
 45 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 with two -year and one -year will be included in the data. Therefore, within person correla-
tions between year 1 and year 2 will be controlled for in the futility assessment. As we 
have powered the study to see a 20% difference in percent QSM change values be tween 
treatment arms, we will call the trial intervention futile if we see a difference in QSM 
change scores of 10% or less between treatment. The futility analysis will be performed 
using a linear mixed -effects model adjusted for gender, and a one -sided c onfidence in-
terval will be created around estimated regression coefficient from this model, which rep-
resents the mean group difference in the percentage change of QSM scores between 
treatment arms. In general, the futility analyses should not be too strict  so as not to over-
look a non -trivial effect size. Based on recommendations by Freidlin and Korn (115), we 
will consider a 99% one -side confidence on the difference in change scores between 
treatment groups. Under the futility analyses, three possible outcomes are possible: 1) 
the estimated group difference in change scores will be greater than 10%, 2) the  estimate 
difference will be less than 10%, but the 99% one -sided confidence interval will include 
7.5%, and 3) the estimate group difference will be less than 10% and the upper 99% 
confidence interval will exclude 10%. A recommendation to stop the trial woul d be 
made under scenario 3 , since this situation would indicate a 99% confidence that 
the true effect size is in fact less than 10%, and is therefore futile.  
 
 9.3.4  Adaptive Adjustments to  Sample size  
In addition to looking at the futility of the treatment effect, we will also assess the 
actual within person correlation in the year 1 and year 2 outcome measures, and the 
variance in the change scores within each arm. Since the sample size is strongly rel ated 
to these two statistics, estimating the true correlation and variances will allow us to pro-
pose adjustments to the sample size at the midpoint of the trial. A larger than expected 
correlation and/or a smaller than expected variance of the change score s will allow 
us to reduce the final sample size but still retain the same estimated power. We do 
not anticipate projecting a higher sample size than initially proposed, given our conserva-
tive assumptions regarding the within person correlation in the year 1 and year 2 outcome 
measures and  variance in the change scores.  
 
9.4 Data Monitoring  
 
Data safety and monitoring procedures will be in place before enrollment begins 
and monitoring will be performed on a regular basis throughout the subject accrual and 
treatment periods.  
 
9.4.1  Data and Safety Monitor ing Team 
The data and  safety monitor ing team  was discussed and approved by the NINDS 
staff. It will comprise  the local IRB , the trial’s safety compliance officer  (SCO)  (Section 
10.3.2), and an IMSM from outside the study and data management institutions, assisted 
by two ex ternal medical safety consultants  with expertise in CCM disease and in statin 
therapy respectively . The data and safety  monitoring team  will provide an ongoing  review 
  
 46 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 of the research, adjudicating adverse event s, performing interim safety and efficacy anal-
yses, and assessing progress towards achieving the goals of the study.  
Safety assessment will take place at the end of the first year, after 30 participants 
have completed 12 months of follow -up and again after 60 subjects have completed  12 
months  of follow -up. Additional  reviews will be decided on an ad hoc basis  based on the 
frequency of safety endpoints encountered during the trial . The Brain Injury Outcomes 
(BIOS ) statistician will provide the IMSM and the PI  relevant tables including information 
regarding demographics, rebleeding rates, AEs, SAEs, and radiological and laboratory 
abnormalities (CT scans, liver function, etc.), per treatment assignments labeled A and B 
without unblinding. In addition, the IMSM will be provided with a copy of the SAE forms 
received. Further information will be given to the IMSM up on his/her  request. The IMSM  
will provide written recommendation as to whether the study may continue , possible 
amendment(s)  to the protocol, or whether the study should be stopped. The final decision 
will rest with  the study PI , guided by  protocol mandated safety thresholds to  suspend and  
potentially revise or stop the trial  (see below) . Any protocol revision would require 
approval  by the IRB, and shall be discussed  with NINDS staff and external consultants  
prior to implementation . 
 
9.4.2  Safety Threshold  
While the proposed trial is underpowered to detect a significant difference in symp-
tomatic clinical rebleeding rates between groups, differential and absolute rates of 
hemorrhage in the placebo and treatment cohorts will be critically analyzed 
throughout the trial . Continuous monitoring will be initiated with the enrollment of the 
tenth subject in the study. A symptomatic brain hemorrhage from the index hemorrhagic 
CA lesion or another source  will be considered a safety endpoint for the respective sub-
ject. The natural hi story of untreated brainstem CA  demonstrates a 32.1% (CI 1 -59%) 
bleeding risk within two years after prior hemorrhage  (18), and our own pilot data of 14 
trial candidates undergoing biomarker studies showed 4 symptomatic rebleeds (28%) 
during 21 patient -years of follow -up (Figure 7 ). We will hence decide to implement a run-
ning safety threshold to  preemptively suspend trial enrollment for a full safety review if at 
any time, >40% of subjects in the treatment group suffer a symptomatic brain hem-
orrhage from the index CCM lesion or another source . Subclinical bleeding is likely 
more common, and the proposed trial is designed and powered to identify increased sub-
clinical iron leak in CCM lesions using our validated QSM biomarker, in addition to careful 
monitoring of clinically overt hemorrhages.  
9.5 Data analysis  
Exploratory analyses for quality assurance and understanding of missing data pat-
terns and distributions will be performed on the outcomes and all measurements to be 
used in the primary and secondary analyses. For the primary aim , a linear mixed model 
will be used that adjusts for gender to evaluate the difference between the two arms in 
the QSM change of the index hemorrhagic lesion per patient. Adjustment for gender is 
necessary because the patients will be randomized by gender stratification. Not control-
  
 47 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 ling for stratification variables can lead to upwardly biased standard errors and a de-
creased power (116). The model accounts for within -patient correlation between the 
measurements (117, 118). Patients with outcome measurements in both periods will be 
included in the initial intention -to-treat analysis. A secondary analysis of the percent QSM 
change per year shall be conducted per treatment rendered for all patients with at least 
one annual epoc h of measurements. Significance levels are assumed as per sample size 
calculations.  
To address secondary aims , each of the other outcomes will be analyzed with a 
similar approach, first per intention -to-treat sample in patients receiving two annual 
epochs of follow -up, and second by treatment -rendered in all patients with at least one 
annual epoch of measurements . To assess the difference in level of DCEQP permeability 
in lesion and brain between the two arms, a linear mixed model adjusted for gender as 
described for QSM will be used to evaluate the difference in percent change per year in  
lesional and WMF permeability. A similar adjusted linear logistic mixed model for the bi-
nary outcomes will be used to evaluate the difference between the two arms in the rates 
of symptomatic hemorrhage (per adjudicated definition), lesion expansion, and “ bi-
omarker event” (increase in QSM during an epoch above the pre -defined 6% threshold). 
To assess the difference of event rates for adverse events (AEs) per patient, an adjusted 
Poisson linear mixed model controlling for gender will be used to regress count  outcomes 
in order to evaluate the difference in AE event rates between the two treatment arms. The 
AEs will be assigned preferred terms per body systems according to the Medical Diction-
ary for Drug Regulatory Affairs (MEDDRA) classification of the WHO terminology. AEs 
(categorized by body system) and abnormal laboratory data will be summarized and com-
pared by treatment group. The compliance rate, general attrition rate and the attrition rate 
due to adverse events between the two groups shall also be compared. For analysis of 
leukocyte ROCK activity and functional outcomes (mRS, Euro QOL 5D and VAS, Neuro 
QOL Communication, and mini-MS score), an adjusted linear mixed model will be used 
to evaluate the difference in respective outcome score change per year between the two 
arms. We will report point -estimates, confidence intervals, and p -values for each analysis.  
Demographic and baseline data, including age, gender, ethnicity, age at symptom 
onset, number of prior hemorrhagic events, number of T 2-weighted lesions, number of 
susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) lesions, etc., will be summarized. As a secondary 
model, a linear mixed model that adjusts for those baseline factors shown to associated 
with the outcome will be created, and will consider  the constraints of a small numbers in 
the respective sub -cohorts. Presenting the mean, standard deviation, median, minim um 
and maximum with the total number of patients contributing values, will summarize con-
tinuous endpoints. Presenting the frequency or proportion of patients in each category 
will summarize categorical endpoints. For all analyses, biased effects in three p respeci-
fied subgroups shall be queried (male/female, sporadic/familial genotype, and brain-
stem/other lesion location). If the numbers of genotyped subjects allow, we will also com-
pare treatment effect in different genotypes among familial cases. Similar an alyses were 
recently performed by our team in the MISTIE II and CLEAR III trials (113, 114). 
 
Imputation of Missing Outcomes Data, and Sensitivity Analyses  
  
 48 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 As mentioned above, every effort will be made to minimize the number of patients 
will missing outcome measures. However, despite these best efforts, it is likely that some 
missing outcome data will be present in this data set. In order to account for these  missing 
outcome values, we will perform a sensitivity analyses that uses a Markov chain Monte 
Carlo (MCMC) model to impute several possible measures for patients missing the pri-
mary outcome.  
With multiple imputation (MI), we assume that the missing data points are missing 
at random (MAR) (119). We will use those baseline demographic variables, which are 
strongly associated with clinical outcome, to improve the missing outcome imputations. 
We will then generate an iteration series plot and autocorrelation function (ACF) plot for 
MCMC simulation.  We shall plan 20 imputations with a 98% relative efficiency to accom-
modate a worst -case scenario, where 37.5% of the outcomes data points are missing 
(120). To verify if the missing data points occur at random we will utilize a tipping -point 
approach (121) that will follow MI procedure for sensitivity analysis and estimation of the 
MI departure from the MAR assumption. We shall use the sensitivity analysis to recalcu-
late efficacy estimates from regression models described in the data analysis of the pri-
mary and secondary outcomes . This will help determine how sensitive efficacy estimates 
are under different assumed distributions for missing outcomes data. In other words, the 
results obtained by imputing missing data with several plausible outcomes will give a 
range of possible tre atment effects under different assumptions of missingness.   
We will have greater confidence in efficacy estimates if we obtain clinically and 
statistically significant results under the worst -case scenarios from the sensitivity anal-
yses (e.g. imputing no improvement in the QSM change scores for all patients with miss-
ing data in the active treatment arm).   In contrast, greater caution should be given to es-
timates of efficacy if results obtained from regression analyses are no longer clinically 
and statistically significant under extreme scenarios for the missing data.  SAS 9.4 (SAS 
Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) will be used for MI and sensitivity analysis.  
Analysis of Treatment C ompliance  
Treatment compliance is crucial to validate the study objectives. A compliance 
threshold of 90%  will be implemented  for proposed analyses per treatment rendered . 
Drug adherence will be rigorously monitored through an innovative electronic system that 
will provide continuously streamed real time data in addition to confirmatory manual pill 
count  at each follow up call and scheduled visits. Assessment of compliance is an integral 
component at every scheduled or unscheduled evaluation and will be based on the 
electronically acquired data as well as the missed doses log in the  case report form 
(CRF). A subject will be deemed noncompliant with the study interve ntion if he/she  misses 
more than 21  consecutive doses at any p oint, or accumulate a log of 75  missed doses 
throughout the study . Treatment compliance shall be compared in atorvastatin  versus 
placebo cases as one of the secondary aims of the study.  
 
  
 49 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 10. DATA COLLECTION, SITE MONITOR ING, AND ADVERSE 
EXPERIENCE REPORTING  
 
10.1 Records to Be Kept  
Participation in this study requires that original study documents be retained for a 
minimum of 2 years following the end of the trial.  This standard complies with U.S. FDA 
regulations (21 CFR §312.62[c]). Records must not be destroyed without first contacting  
the study investigator to ensure that the time limits defined in the regulations have been 
met.  
For the purposes of this section, “original study documents” are defined as:  
Subject records created at or available to the study center during the subject’s 
participation in the trial, or any other document that supports entries in the EDC 
system and represents the original source of that information, including but not 
limited to applicable sections of medical charts, patient corres pondence, laboratory 
data, pharmacy logs and drug accountability forms, as well as any forms or 
documents used to compile or maintain original subject data or study procedural 
information.  
All Essential Regulatory Documents [ as defined under Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) Regulations ] including: all material communications with the IRB; all 
communications that are related to study subjects or which otherwise document material 
study -related procedures or safety issues . All study documents should be uploaded to the 
source documents section of the database. The database will be used as the master 
repository for all site and Sponsor regulatory documents  
10.2 Role of Data Management  
The trial i nvestigator will permit trial related monitoring, audits, IRB review, and 
regulatory inspections by providing direct access to source data and documents . Data for 
each subject  will be reported and recorded on electronic case report forms. Electronic 
case report forms (eCRF) must be completed for every randomized subject .  
 
10.3 Quality Assurance  
AT CASH  EPOC  will have a robust safety and data monitoring program in full 
compliance with NIH policy of 10 -Jun-1998 as expanded by NINDS guidelines published 
14-Sep- 2011 in addition to compliance with all applicable U.S. and international GCP 
regulations. This progr am, designed to safeguard the well -being of study participants and 
to ensure scientific integrity, will include the following components:   
• Oversight by the DCC,  Clinical  Coordinating Center  (CCC ), and IRB  
• A dedicated independent medical  safety  monitor  (IMSM) and safety compliance 
officer;  
  
 50 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 • Automated data quality checks at the time of eCRF completion by the 
investigational site;  
• Dedicated independent data monitoring and quality assu rance ( QA) teams 
(Emissary International);  
The components of this multifaceted approach, including each dedicated team’s 
specific responsibilities, are discussed below.  
10.3.1. Data Coordinating Center (DCC)  
The DCC will provide an independent review of the research, interim safety and 
efficacy data, and progress towards achieving the goals of the study. To enable the CCC 
to properly manage the trial, the project leadership, and key personnel will jointly work  on 
a data monitoring plan early in the process. After the award but before the project begins, 
the CCC will  work  with the DCC to develop a detailed monitoring plan. The monitoring 
plan will describe the process for reporting adverse events to the IRB, IMSM , and NIH.  
 
Interim safety analyses will be prepared for the DCC on a pre -arranged schedule 
to evaluate efficacy and safety. Safety events will trigger a “suspend recruitment and 
review” by the DCC. Prio r to IMSM  report generation, the case report forms  will be 
finalized, data compiled, all requested analyses  conducted, and  suitable reports, tables 
and graphs  prepared . All deaths will be reviewed.  
10.3.2. Data and safety monitoring  
The study is designed as a single -site trial investigating one  minimal -risk 
intervention . Per approval by NINDS, subject s’ safety will be monitored b y the PI and 
safety monitoring team  as described above . The PI will be actively involved in reviewing 
the progress of each subject  and will notify the IRB as well as the  external IMSM and the  
NINDS program official about  adverse events and unexpected problems that may 
influence the ir decision to allow the trial to continue .   
Independe nt Medical Safety Monitor ( IMSM):   The study PI will nominate an 
independent experienced physician with relevant expertise who is not in affiliation with 
the study site at University of Chicago Med icine or the data coordinating center at Johns 
Hopkins University and has no conflict of interest. The IMSM will oversee ongoing 
monitoring of reports of SAEs in real time to ensure GCP  and to identify safety concerns 
quickly. The IMSM will also serve as a resource to the principal  investigator to provide  
advice about management of AEs/ SAEs but will not be involved in other aspects of the 
trial. The IMSM may suggest protocol modifications to prevent the occurrence of particular 
AEs. To maximize safety considerations, the IMSM will evaluate SAEs per treatment 
assignment s labeled A or B . In the event of unexpected SAEs or an unduly high rate of 
SAEs, the IMSM may request identification of A  or B as treatment versus placebo. And 
he/she will promptly contact the PI and the NINDS program officials.  The IMSM will be 
assisted by two designated external safety consultants, with expertise in CCM disease 
and in statin therapy respectively.  
  
 51 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Safety Compliance Officer  (SCO) : The study PI  and IRB require a process for 
timely communication of adverse events and complication rates to regulatory agencies. 
Thus, an essential component of this process is the safety compliance officer (SCO) . The 
SCO will have the day -to-day responsibility of ensuring that adverse events are promptly 
collected, medically reviewed by the PI or IMSM  and appropriately reported to regulatory 
agencies in compliance with GCP standards. The SCO  and the statistician at the 
Baltimore site shall be responsible for preparing  and communicating incoming documents 
and reports to the PI and IMSM . Inclusion/exclusion criteria, review -of-system reports, 
medical history, medical events, and radiographic imaging entries will be cross -checked 
and reviewed by applying real - time database algorithms, crosschecking sentinel dates 
and times, procedures, A Es, SAEs, and protocol timelines. As aggregate data reports 
and quarterly and annual progress reports are prepare d, the SCO  will query the TN and 
study coordinator  as needed and follow the  data entry tasks to completio n. The SCO  will 
serve as the liaison between the IMSM  and the PI and CCC  personnel to garner additional 
information as needed and to elicit agreement or disagreement of the CCC with the 
IMSM’s  assessment. The SCO  will manage the development and revision of trial 
protocols, Manual of Operations and Procedures (MOP), standard operating procedure 
(SOP) , and protocol working guidelines with the trial leadership.  
Reporting Dictionary and Data Standards: The SCO  will work closely with the 
trial vendors to develop the EDC systems and the corresponding paper CRFs , used for 
all safety -related events. The Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) 
dictionary has been adapted to allow for trial -specific reporting using standardized 
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) coding.  
10.3.3 Automated Data Quality Checks in the EDC System  
VISION® EDC System: The EDC system has a robust set of data quality checks 
that will be executed at the time of data entry at the investigational site. This includes the 
standard validations available with most EDC systems such as range checks (e.g., to fl ag 
a high liver function test as incompatible with  inclusion criteria , or to ensure a temperature 
is not an impossible value) and data format checks (to flag an invalid date). Additionally, 
our VISION platform will perform very sophisticated cross -form computed calculations 
that would not be available in lesser EDC systems. For example, VISION will conduct a 
series of verifications looking at lab values, demographics, etc. and give the site gu idance 
regarding the eligibility of the patient for randomization using complex cross -page 
computations. It will also detect when the CCC has made a protocol variance and present 
a list of such issues to the investigator and the monitoring team for evaluation and follow -
up. Consequently, our EDC system will handle much of the consistency, completeness, 
and logic checks immediately at the tim e of data collection that normally would have to 
be done by the monitoring team and/or offline using statistical analy sis that do not typically 
occur until weeks or months after the patient visit. This capability therefore will result in 
cleaner data that will be more likely to distinguish a treatment effect and significantly 
reduce the cost of, and delays for, monitoring  and data cleaning activities.  
10.3.4 Independent Data Monitoring and Quality Assurance Team  
  
 52 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 It is important to use an independent Contract Research Organization (CRO) for 
monitoring and quality assurance, to provide the highest level of integrity, industry - proven 
best practices, and professionally trained monitors. Our CRO, Emissary International , 
maintains a team of high -caliber, fully qualified  monitors in the U.S. This team will be 
responsible for near real -time review of the clinical data entered into our EDC system 
against source medical records (i.e., Source Document Verification or SDV) as  well as 
generation and resolution of the associated data queries.  
QA Monitoring Plan: In accordance with recently drafted FDA recommendation for risk -
based monitoring approaches, this trial will employ centralize d monitoring and an  EDC 
system to:  
• Replace on -site monitoring for activities that can be done better using centralized 
reviewers;  
• Verify source medical records remotely to ensure data integrity, reduce 
transcription errors, and identify any undocumented safety events;  
• Utilize EDC real -time data quality checks to assess range, consistency, and 
completeness of data at the time of entry; and  
• Employ frequent statistical analyses of study data to evaluate individual subject 
data for plausibility and protocol compliance.  
10.3.5 Data Flow for the Data Coordinating Center  
Correction of Automated Errors and Warnings: As data are entered, the EDC 
system will immediately generate automated warnings (yellow highlights) and errors (red 
highlights). Warnings will represent data that is outside expected limits, or where required 
data are missing. Errors will indicate conditions that are intolerable (such as an impossibly 
high body temperature) or that are unrealistic (such as an invalid date format).  
In keeping with FDA requirements for electronic systems, the EDC system will not 
force the investigator/coordinator to immediately change the entered data (as that could 
be misconstrued as encouraging data falsification) but instead simply provide feedback  
via on -screen messages and red/yellow field highlighting. Warnings may be unavoidable, 
due to patient -specific issues, but are documented nonetheless so that they can be 
discussed with the monitoring team. Conversely, red errors must be resolved before th e 
case form page can be advanced in the workflow (i.e., signed by the coordinator) so the 
data will be “clean” before it is exported for analysis.  
Additionally, the EDC system will generate external email notifications in response 
to specific entries,  such as immediately alert ing the CCC of a possible dose/colo r-code  
error or notify ing the safety officer of a new adverse event. The EDC system also 
produces various instantaneous reports that are useful for data quality and safety 
monitoring purposes by both the site staff and the CCC.  
Monitoring Team Source Document Verification and Data Integrity Review: 
Emissary’s teams of monitors will review the online case forms for completeness, logic, 
  
 53 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 and consistency, then verify the entered data against the uploaded source medical 
records and data collection worksheets. Routine queries identified in this process will be 
entered into the EDC system (triggering an automated notice to the site). The monit ors, 
working in conjunction with the DCC , will then work with the CCC personnel to obtain 
correction of all data errors and resolution of the corresponding queries.  
Reviews will include data from the entire course of each patient’s participation in the 
study. In accordance with a formal monitoring plan, this activity will include a review of all 
uploaded source documentation and will entail a 100% source verification of the primary 
safety and efficacy measures. Random sampling will be used to select secondary data 
for similar 100% source verification. Should the data accuracy for a patient exceed certain 
minimum expectations in this step, or if any material data integr ity or regulatory 
compliance issues are identified, additional data from a patient will undergo intensive 
monitoring.  
10.3.6 Other Components of Data Management Plan  
Randomization and Data Collection:  Each subject is assigned a  unique study 
number by the EDC after randomization . Data collection of compliance , concomitant 
medications, and adverse events will assess the subject’s clinical response to treatment 
as part of the clinical trial. This data will be used to assess compliance with the study 
protocol and intervention stopping rules.  
Protocol Compliance:  Procedures will be implemented to maximize adherence 
to the protocol ( smart bottles). Early review of data is made possible by real - time entry 
of data into a data base with validations and real -time monitoring. The study center  is 
required to report a protocol deviation within 24 hours of occurrence or as soon as it is 
discovered. If the QA monitor discovers an undocumented major deviation during a 
monitoring activity, the monitor will notify the CCC immediately. A CCC personnel  will 
report deviations as they are discovered to the local IRB in accordance with local 
requirements. Routine reporting of protocol deviations will be made to the NINDS and 
other regulatory agencies as required . 
FDA Guidance for Electronic Data Entry Compliance: The design and development 
of the electronic database system will reflect the FDA Guidance for Industry for 
Computerized Systems Used in Clinical Trials (April 1999) as well as the Electronic 
Records/Elect ronic Signatures rule (21 CFR part 11). A secure, computer generated, 
time- stamped electronic record will allow reconstruction of the course of events relating 
to the creation, modification, and deletion of an electronic record. Source documents will 
be retained to enable a reconstruction and evaluation of the trial. The system will ensure 
that all applicable regulatory requirements for record keeping and record retention in 
clinical trials are met with the same degree of confidence as are provided with pa per 
systems. Clinical investigators will retain the original copy of all source documents 
uploaded onto the eCRF. Query resolution correspondence will be maintained and eCRF 
edits will be tracked by the system. Changes to a required record will not obscure  the 
  
 54 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 original information. The record will clearly indicate the time a change was made and 
clearly provide a means to locate and read the prior information through the audit trail. 
This audit trail will be in compliance with the 21 CFR 11.10(e). The record, alo ng with 
supporting documentation, will also indicate who made the changes and when changes 
were made.  
Security measures will be in place to prevent unauthorized access to the system 
and data. To ensure that individuals have the authority to proceed with data entry, the 
system will be designed to verify the electronic signature (user ID and password) at the  
start of a user session. Each entry to an electronic record, including any change, will be 
made under the electronic signature of the individual making that entry. A separate 
electronic signature will not be required for each entry or change; a single ele ctronic 
signature will cover multiple entries or changes. Individuals who maintain the electronic 
record systems as well as the audit trail will carry the responsibilities to protect 
authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of electronic records. Audit  trails will be available 
at the study site or any other location where associated electronic study records are 
maintained. The system will be designed to contain the prompts, lookup values, cross -
field validations, flags, and on -line help to encourage con sistent use of clinical terminology 
and to alert the user in case that data entered are out of acceptable range. External 
safeguards will be in place to ensure that access to the computerized system and to the 
data is restricted to authorize  personnel. Servers will be stored in a physically secured, 
guarded data center.  
Security Measures:  Users at both centers  will be aware of system security 
measures and the importance of limiting access to authorized personnel. SOPs will be in 
place for handling and accessing the system to prevent unauthorized access. Access to 
the data at a clinical site will be restricted a nd monitored by the system through required 
log- on, security verification procedures, and audit trail. The data cannot be altered, 
browsed, queried, or reported via external software applications without entering th rough 
the protective software. Because the system will be largely through remote access, all 
data and applications used for the study will be logically and physically isolated in the 
servers in order to preclude unintended interaction with non -study use so ftware. These 
servers will be strictly monitored and maintained by designated administrators at an 
independent third party (e.g., only Prelude Dynamics, the contracted EDC vender, has 
password access to the database and only its contracted commercial data center, On - 
Ramp Systems both of Austin, Texas, has access to the physical hardware); neither 
remote sites nor any member of the project team will have the ability to change such 
logical security of the system. Written procedures describing contingency pla ns for 
continuing the study by alternate means in the event of hardware or facilities failures with 
alternate hardware or at an alternate site will be provided to each site. It should be noted 
that the data management procedures will reflect the advanced u se of computer and 
software technology; include database technology, and electronic file management 
principles; and therefore be of the highest possible standards achievable for data security 
and information integrity. Specifically, the data center is SAS -70 Type II compliant, 
  
 55 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 HIPAA -audited and certified for maintenance of banking, credit card, and protected health 
information (PHI).  
Backup Recovery:  Records will be backed up daily to prevent a catastrophic loss 
compromising the quality and integrity of the data. Data will be backed up onto digital 
media which will be stored at an offsite location. Backup and recovery logs will be 
maintained to facili tate an assessment of the nature and scope of data loss in the event 
of a system failure.  
Limited Access:  Each user will be assigned an individual account with a unique 
username and password. Any user will be locked out after 10 consecutive attempts, with 
any unauthorized access attempt recorded in a log file. Users will be required to exit the 
system upon le aving a workstation. The computer will automatically log off the current 
session when an idle period reaches 30 minutes. For short periods of inactivity, the 
automatic screensaver will be password protected to prevent unauthorized access to the 
system.  
Audit Trails:  All changes made to data in the electronic record are tracked and 
recorded in the audit trail. This audit trail will capture the date/time, the contents of the 
changes made, and the login id used to make the change. The audit trails will be created 
increm entally in chronological order, with prevention of overwrite, as such data 
overwriting is in violation of §11.10(e). Audit trail information will be reviewed by pre - 
authorized personnel if the need arises to verify the quality and integrity o f the data.  
Date and Time Stamps : All data will be saved on a central server carrying a time 
stamp, which will be documented in the audit trail. The EDC software will display the 
participating site's time zone. Individual users will be unable to change the time on the 
server.  
 
10.4 Adverse Experience Reporting  
 
10.4.1 Specification of Safety Variables : Safety  assessments will consist of 
monitoring and reporting adverse events (AEs) and  serious adverse events (SAEs), all 
events of death, and any study specific issue of c oncer n. 
  10.4.1 .1 Adverse Events  (AEs):  
Definition of AEs:  An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a 
patient entered into the study that does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with the study intervention . An adverse event can be any 
unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal lab finding), symptom, 
or disease temporally associated with the use of the study drug, whether or not 
related to the study drug. Adverse events will be triaged and managed at least 
  
 56 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 initially at the level of the TN. The investigator must follow adverse events to 
resolution whenever possible.  
AEs include the following:  
• AEs not previously observed in the subject that emerge during the protocol -
specified AE reporting period, including signs or symptoms associated with 
intracerebral hemorrhage, myositis, or organ dysfunction that were not 
present prior to the AE reporting p eriod.  
•  Complications that occur as a result of protocol -mandated interventions 
(e.g., contrast nephropathy).  
•  Preexisting medical conditions (other than the condition being studied) 
judged by the investigator to have worsened in severity or frequency or 
changed in character during the protocol -specified AE reporting period.  
 
10.4.1.2  Serious Adverse Events  (SAEs)  
Definition of SAEs: A serious adverse event is an adverse event that results in 
any of the  outcomes listed below.  They generally correspond to Categories B and 
C adverse events in Table . 2. 
•  Results in death (i.e., the AE actually causes or leads to death). Study 
investigator agrees to adhere to FDA -defined guidelines and submit an 
expedited report of any death that is related (even remotely) to study drug.  
•  Life threatening (i.e., the AE, in the view of the investigator, places the 
subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an AE that, had it 
occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.).  
•  Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs inpatient hospitalization.  
•  Persistent or significant disability or incapacity: a substantial disruption of 
a person’s ability to conduct normal life functions.  
•  Considered a significant medical event by the investigator based on 
medical judgment (e.g., may jeopardize the subject or may require 
medical/surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above).  
Compulsory SAE:  Certain AEs in the coding guide are defined as potentially 
serious SAEs if there is a medically qualifying factor. All AEs coded as a grade 4 or 5 will 
automatically require SAE reporting.  
 
  
 57 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 10.4.1.3  Medical events of interest (MEOI)   
Definition of M EOIs: MEOIs must be reported to the PI for safety monitoring team 
review . The AE dictionary, which drives the drop down lists on the AE screen in 
the EDC system, pre -specifies which events are defined as MEOIs. A MEOI may 
or may not satisfy the definition of a SAE but will be reported using the same SAE 
reporting screen in the  EDC system and will undergo the same review as a SAE. 
In summary, the MEOIs for the trial are as follows:  
• Myositis/  Rhabdomyolysis  
• Symptomatic Cerebral bleeding events  
• Liver dysfunction.  
• Pancreatitis.  
• Any AE deemed by the site PI or safety monitoring team  as possibly, 
probably, or related to the statin therapy.  
• Any AE requiring discontinuation of study intervention or withdrawal from 
follow -up  
 
10.4.2 Assessment of Adverse Events  
All AEs and SAEs whether reported by the subject, elicited  by study personnel 
during questioning, or detected through physical examination, laboratory test, or other 
means will be re corded  appropriately. Each reported AE or SAE will be described by its 
duration (i.e., start and end dates), regulatory seriousness criteria if applicable, suspected 
relationship to study drug administration, and actions taken.  
 
10.4.2.1 Attributability of AEs to the study drug:  The investigator in consultation 
with the MSM  will define whether the event is best described as UNRELATED, 
POSSIBLY related, PROBABLY related, or DEFINITELY related to the study drug 
according to the following definitions. To ensure consistency of AE and SAE causality 
assessments, investigators will apply the  following general guideline:  
Yes 
There is a plausible temporal relationship between the onset of the AE and the 
administration of the study drug, and the AE cannot be readily explained by the subject’s 
clinical state, concomitant illness or therapies; and/or the AE follows a known pattern  of 
response to the study drug; and/or the AE abates or resolves upon discontinuation of the 
study drug.  
  
 58 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 • Possibly Related:  The adverse event has a temporal relationship to the study 
drug. However, an alternative etiology may be responsible for the adverse event. 
Information on drug withdrawal may be lacking or unclear.  
• Probably Related: The adverse event has a temporal relationship to the study 
drug. The event is unlikely to be related to an alternative etiology. There is a 
reasonable response on withdrawal (de -challenge). Re -challenge information is 
not required.  
• Definitely Related:  The adverse event has a temporal relationship to the study 
drug and resolves when the study drug is discontinued. An alternative etiology is 
not apparent.  
 
No 
Evidence exists that the AE has an etiology other than the study drug (e.g., preexisting 
medical condition, underlying disease, concomitant illness or medication); and/or the AE 
has no plausible temporal relationship to the study drug administration  
• Unrelated:  There is evidence that the adverse event definitely has an etiology 
other than the study drug  
10.4.2.2 Unexpected AE definition:  Unexpected events are any adverse events 
in which the  specificity or severity is not consistent with the natural history of CCM without 
the test intervention. Unexpected will be defined as the specificity or severity of an event 
that is not consistent with the risk information described in this protocol.  
 
10.4.2.3 Adverse Event Reporting Period : The timeframe of reporting adverse 
events extends throughout the study period from  randomization until the end of the study 
follow -up period for each enrolled subject . Adverse events must be recorded in the 
medical chart and in the EDC system.  
 
10.4.2.4 Documentation : Documentation must include the event duration 
(start/stop). If a subject is discontinued early from study drug for any reason, CCC  
personnel must clearly report and document the circumstances and data leading to any 
discontinuation using the electronic case report forms. It must be determined if the reason 
for stopping study drug administration is an adverse event.  
 
  
 59 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 10.4.2.5 Follow up of ongoing AEs:  For any untoward event(s) the subject 
should be followed until the event resolves or is explained with the frequency of follow up 
designated by the investigator.  
10.4.2.6 Eliciting AEs during follow up visits : At each follow up visit, the subject 
will be asked about the occurrence of AEs since the last contact. AEs that were ongoing 
at the last contact will be updated with a stop date or confirmed as ongoing. This will 
continue until the end of study visit.   
A consistent methodology for eliciting AEs at all  subject evaluation time points will be 
adopted. This questionnaire will also be adopted for the automated weekly follow up 
messages circulated by the electronic monitoring system. Examples of non -directive 
questions include:  
• Have you been well since your last clinical visit?  
• Have you had any new health p roblems since you were last seen ? 
• Have you  had any recent weakness or altered sensat ion affecting your 
arms or legs?  
• Have you experienced any recent onset muscle or joint pain?   
• Have you noticed any changes in urine or stool color?  
• Have you had any unusual or unexpected worsening of your underlying 
medical condition?  
10.4.3 Specific Instructions for Recording Adverse Events : 
Investigators should use correct medical terminology/concepts when reporting AEs 
or SAEs. Avoid colloquialisms and abbreviations.  
 
Diagnosis vs. Signs and Symptoms  
If known at the time of reporting, a diagnosis should be reported rather than 
individual signs and symptoms (e.g., record only liver failure or hepatitis rather than 
jaundice, asterixis, and elevated transaminases). However, if a constellation of 
signs and /or symptoms cannot be medically characterized as a single diagnosis or 
syndrome at the time of reporting, it is ok to report the information that is currently 
available. If a diagnosis is subsequently established, it should be reported as 
follow -up inform ation.  
 
Deaths  
All deaths that occur during the protocol -specified AE reporting period, regardless 
of attribution, will be reported to  the safety officer. When reporting a death, the 
event or condition that caused or contributed to the fatal outcome should be 
reported as the single medical concept . If the cause of death is unknown and 
cannot be ascertained at the time of reporting, report “Unexplained Death.”  
 
  
 60 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Preexisting Medical Conditions  
A preexisting medical condition is one that is present at the start of the study. Such 
conditions should be reported as medical and surgical history. A preexisting 
medical condition should be re -assessed throughout the trial and reported as an 
AE or SAE on ly if the frequency, severity, or character of the condition worsens 
during the study. When reporting such events, it is important to convey the concept 
that the preexisting condition has changed by including applicable descriptors 
(e.g., “more frequent he adaches”).  
 
Hospitalizations for Medical or Surgical Procedures  
Any AE that results in hospitalizations or prolonged hospitalization should be 
documented and reported as an SAE. If a subject is hospitalized to undergo a 
medical or surgical procedure as a result of an AE, the event responsible for the 
procedure, not the  procedure itself, should be reported as the SAE. For example, 
if a subject is hospitalized to undergo coronary bypass surgery, record the heart 
condition that necessitated the bypass as the SAE.  
 
10.4.4 SAE Reporting   
Any alarming, serious, or unexpected adverse event, including death due to any 
cause, which occurs during this study, inclusive of the follow up period, and whether or 
not thought to be related to the test article, must be reported immediately (within 24 hours 
of learning of the event) to the trial PI , the IMSM  and to the local IRB as required. 
Completion of an SAE form for each SAE that occurs is required to formerly report the 
event to the trial PI. An expedited safety report will be u sed by the SCO  to notify the PI 
and IMSM  of each serious unexpected suspected adverse reaction , and a running total 
thereof . This protocol has a pre -specified monitoring plan for determining if subjects 
receiving the test article are at higher risk for mortality and will only report a death as an 
expedited safety report if there i s evidence of a causal relationship between the test article 
and the event resulting in death. In addition, an expedited safety report will be used to 
notify the PI and IMSM  if there is an imbalance between the arms suggesting there is a 
reasonable possibility that the test article caused any of the safety endpoints. Otherwise, 
the occurrence of these safety endpoints will be reported on an annual basis.  The study 
leadership will submit events meeting the following criteria as expedited Safety Reports 
accor ding to the guidance and timelines below. The completed case report will be emailed 
immediately upon completion to the PI and IMSM.  
 
Calendar Day Telephone or FAX Report:  
The study leadership will notify the IMSM  and the IRB for review of any fatal or 
life-threatening  adverse event that is unexpected  (as defined above) and assessed by 
the PI (in consultation with  the IMSM)  to be possibly, probably, or definitely related  to 
the test article. Such reports will be emailed or faxed within 7 calendar days of the study 
leadership first learning of the event. Relevant follow -up information will be submitted to 
all parties as soon as it becomes available.  
 
  
 61 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 Calendar Day Written Report:  
The study PI will notify the IMSM  and the IRB, in a written Safety Report, of any 
serious, unexpected  AE (as defined above) that is considered possibly, probably, or 
definitely related  to the test article. Such reports will be emailed or faxed within 15 
calendar days of the study leadership first learning of the event. Relevant follow -up 
information will be submitted to all parties as soon as it becomes available . 
 
Annual Written Report:  
The study leadership will notify the IMSM and his designated consultants  with a 
listing of all suspected serious adverse reactions which have occurred over this period 
and a report of the subjects’ safety. Written Safety Reports will include an Analysis of 
Similar Events in accordance with 21 CFR §312.32. All safety reports previously filed 
concerning similar events will be analyzed and the significance of the new report in light 
of previous, similar reports commented on.  Written safety reports with Analysi s of Similar 
Events will be submitted to the IMSM  within 15 calendar days of the study leadership first 
learning of the event.  
 
 
11. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed 
Consent  
This protocol and the sample inform ed consent document,  and any subsequent 
modifications will be reviewed and approved by the University of Chicago Medicine IRB,  
responsible for oversight of the study.  A signed consent form will be obtained from the 
subject. The consent form will describe the purpose of the study, the procedures to be 
followed, and the risks and benefits of participation.  A copy of the consent f orm will be 
given to the subject, parent, or legal guardian, and this process  will be documented in the 
subject’s record.  
11.2 Subject Confidentiality  
All laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, reports, and other records that leave 
the site will be identified only by the Study Identification Number (SID) to maintain subject 
confidentiality.  All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet.  All comput er entry and 
networking programs will be done using SIDs only.  Clinical information will not be 
released without written permission of the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by 
IRB, the NINDS, or the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP ). 
11.3 Study Modification/Discontinuation  
The study may be modified or discontinued at any time by the IRB, the NINDS, the PI, 
the OHRP, or other government agencies as part of their duties to ensure that research 
subjects are protected.  
 
  
 62 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
  
12. PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
 
Publication of the results of this trial will be governed by the policies and 
procedures developed by the study leadership.  Any presentation, abstract, or manuscript 
will be made available for review by the study leadership and the funding agency prior to  
submission.  
 
The results of the trial will be published regardless of its outcome. Publication 
regarding further analyses performed on the data will be by mutual agreement between 
the study leadership and the s tudy investigator s. 
 
The investigator s may publish or present at scientific meetings the results of this 
study, provided that confidential information is not disclosed, and only after obtaining 
advance written consent from the study leadership. Consent may be withheld at the sole 
discretion of  study leadership.  
 
In this regard, a copy of all public disclosures, including but not limited to 
publication manuscripts, abstracts, and seminar presentations  by any member of the 
investigative team , should be provided to  the study leadership , at least 30 days before 
the manuscript is submitted to the publisher or a presentation is made.  
 
 
 
13. REFERENCES  CITED  
 
1. Robinson JR, Jr., Awad IA, Masaryk TJ, Estes ML. Pathological heterogeneity of 
angiographically occult vascular malformations of the brain. Neurosurgery. 
1993;33(4):547 -54; discussion 54 -5. PubMed PMID: 8232794. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8232794  
2. Abdulrauf SI, Kaynar MY, Awad IA. A comparison of the clinical profile of 
cavernous malformations with and without associated venous malformations. 
Neurosurgery. 1999;44(1):41 -6; discussion 6 -7. PubMed PMID: 9894962. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9894962  
3. Gault J, Sain S, Hu LJ, Awad IA. Spectrum of genotype and clinical 
manifestations in cerebral cavernous malformations. Neurosurgery. 2006;59(6):1278 -
84; discussion 84 -5. doi: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000249188.38409.03. PubMed PMID: 
17277691. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17277691  
4. Gunel M, Awad IA, Anson J, Lifton RP. Mapping a gene causing cerebral 
cavernous malformation to 7q11.2 -q21. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 1995;92(14):6620 -4. Epub 1995/07/03. 
PubMed PMID: 7604043; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC41570. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7604043  
  
 63 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 5. Bergametti F, Denier C, Labauge P, Arnoult M, Boetto S, Clanet M, Coubes P, 
Echenne B, Ibrahim R, Irthum B, Jacquet G, Lonjon M, Moreau JJ, Neau JP, Parker F, 
Tremoulet M, Tournier -Lasserve E, Societe Francaise de N. Mutations within the 
programmed cell d eath 10 gene cause cerebral cavernous malformations. American 
journal of human genetics. 2005;76(1):42 -51. Epub 2004/11/16. doi: 10.1086/426952. 
PubMed PMID: 15543491; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1196432. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15543491  
6. Liquori CL, Berg MJ, Siegel AM, Huang E, Zawistowski JS, Stoffer T, Verlaan D, 
Balogun F, Hughes L, Leedom TP, Plummer NW, Cannella M, Maglione V, Squitieri F, 
Johnson EW, Rouleau GA, Ptacek L, Marchuk DA. Mutations in a gene encoding a 
novel protein cont aining a phosphotyrosine -binding domain cause type 2 cerebral 
cavernous malformations. American journal of human genetics. 2003;73(6):1459 -64. 
Epub 2003/11/19. doi: 10.1086/380314. PubMed PMID: 14624391; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC1180409. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14624391  
7. Denier C, Goutagny S, Labauge P, Krivosic V, Arnoult M, Cousin A, Benabid AL, 
Comoy J, Frerebeau P, Gilbert B, Houtteville JP, Jan M, Lapierre F, Loiseau H, Menei 
P, Mercier P, Moreau JJ, Nivelon -Chevallier A, Parker F, Redondo AM, Scarabin JM, 
Tremoulet M, Zerah M, Maciazek J, Tournier -Lasserve E, Societe Francaise de N. 
Mutations within the MGC4607 gene cause cerebral cavernous malformations. 
American journal of human genetics. 2004;74(2):326 -37. Epub 2004/01/24. doi: 
10.1086/381718. PubMed PMID: 14740 320; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1181930. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14740320  
8. Laberge -le Couteulx S, Jung HH, Labauge P, Houtteville JP, Lescoat C, Cecillon 
M, Marechal E, Joutel A, Bach JF, Tournier -Lasserve E. Truncating mutations in CCM1, 
encoding KRIT1, cause hereditary cavernous angiomas. Nature genetics. 
1999;23(2):189 -93. do i: 10.1038/13815. PubMed PMID: 10508515. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10508515  
9. Sahoo T, Johnson EW, Thomas JW, Kuehl PM, Jones TL, Dokken CG, 
Touchman JW, Gallione CJ, Lee -Lin SQ, Kosofsky B, Kurth JH, Louis DN, Mettler G, 
Morrison L, Gil -Nagel A, Rich SS, Zabramski JM, Boguski MS, Green ED, Marchuk DA. 
Mutations in the gene encodin g KRIT1, a Krev -1/rap1a binding protein, cause cerebral 
cavernous malformations (CCM1). Human molecular genetics. 1999;8(12):2325 -33. 
PubMed PMID: 10545614. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10545614  
10. Craig HD, Gunel M, Cepeda O, Johnson EW, Ptacek L, Steinberg GK, Ogilvy 
CS, Berg MJ, Crawford SC, Scott RM, Steichen -Gersdorf E, Sabroe R, Kennedy CT, 
Mettler G, Beis MJ, Fryer A, Awad IA, Lifton RP. Multilocus linkage identifies two new 
loci for a mendel ian form of stroke, cerebral cavernous malformation, at 7p15 -13 and 
3q25.2 -27. Human molecular genetics. 1998;7(12):1851 -8. PubMed PMID: 9811928. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9811928  
11. Robinson JR, Awad IA, Little JR. Natural history of the cavernous angioma. 
Journal of neurosurgery. 1991;75(5):709 -14. doi: 10.3171/jns.1991.75.5.0709. PubMed 
PMID: 1919692. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1919692  
12. Bos D, Poels MM, Adams HH, Akoudad S, Cremers LG, Zonneveld HI, 
Hoogendam YY, Verhaaren BF, Verlinden VJ, Verbruggen JG, Peymani A, Hofman A, 
Krestin GP, Vincent AJ, Feelders RA, Koudstaal PJ, van der Lugt A, Ikram MA, Vernooij 
  
 64 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 MW. Prevalence, Clinical Management, and Natural Course of Incidental Findings on 
Brain MR Images: The Population -based Rotterdam Scan Study. Radiology. 
2016;281(2):507 -15. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2016160218. PubMed PMID: 27337027. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27337027  
13. Al-Shahi R, Bhattacharya JJ, Currie DG, Papanastassiou V, Ritchie V, Roberts 
RC, Sellar RJ, Warlow CP, Scottish Intracranial Vascular Malformation Study C. 
Prospective, population -based detection of intracranial vascular malformations in adults: 
the Scott ish Intracranial Vascular Malformation Study (SIVMS). Stroke; a journal of 
cerebral circulation. 2003;34(5):1163 -9. Epub 2003/04/19. doi: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000069018.90456.C9. PubMed PMID: 12702837. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12702837  
14. Morris Z, Whiteley WN, Longstreth WT, Jr., Weber F, Lee YC, Tsushima Y, Alphs 
H, Ladd SC, Warlow C, Wardlaw JM, Al -Shahi Salman R. Incidental findings on brain 
magnetic resonance imaging: systematic review and meta -analysis. Bmj. 
2009;339:b3016. doi: 10.1 136/bmj.b3016. PubMed PMID: 19687093; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2728201. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19687093  
15. Katzman GL, Dagher AP, Patronas NJ. Incidental findings on brain magnetic 
resonance imaging from 1000 asymptomatic volunteers. JAMA. 1999;282(1):36 -9. 
PubMed PMID: 10404909. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10404909  
16. Otten P, Pizzolato GP, Rilliet B, Berney J. [131 cases of cavernous angioma 
(cavernomas) of the CNS, discovered by retrospective analysis of 24,535 autopsies]. 
Neuro -Chirurgie. 1989;35(2):82 -3, 128 -31. PubMed PMID: 2674753. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2674753  
17. Akers A, Al -Shahi Salman R, I AA, Dahlem K, Flemming K, Hart B, Kim H, 
Jusue -Torres I, Kondziolka D, Lee C, Morrison L, Rigamonti D, Rebeiz T, Tournier -
Lasserve E, Waggoner D, Whitehead K. Synopsis of Guidelines for the Clinical 
Management of Cerebral Cav ernous Malformations: Consensus Recommendations 
Based on Systematic Literature Review by the Angioma Alliance Scientific Advisory 
Board Clinical Experts Panel. Neurosurgery. 2017;80(5):665 -80. doi: 
10.1093/neuros/nyx091. PubMed PMID: 28387823. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28387823  
18. Al-Shahi Salman R, Hall JM, Horne MA, Moultrie F, Josephson CB, Bhattacharya 
JJ, Counsell CE, Murray GD, Papanastassiou V, Ritchie V, Roberts RC, Sellar RJ, 
Warlow CP, Scottish Audit of Intracranial Vascular Malformations (SAIVMs) 
collaborators.  Untreated clinical course of cerebral cavernous malformations: a 
prospective, population -based cohort study. The Lancet Neurology. 2012;11(3):217 -24. 
doi: 10.1016/S1474 -4422(12)70004 -2. PubMed PMID: 22297119; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC3282211. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22297119  
19. Horne MA, Flemming KD, Su IC, Stapf C, Jeon JP, Li D, Maxwell SS, White P, 
Christianson TJ, Agid R, Cho WS, Oh CW, Wu Z, Zhang JT, Kim JE, Ter Brugge K, 
Willinsky R, Brown RD, Jr., Murray GD, Salman RA, Cerebral Cavernous Malformations 
Individual Patient Data Meta -analysis Collaborators . Clinical course of untreated 
cerebral cavernous malformations: a meta -analysis of individual patient data. The 
Lancet Neurology. 2016;15(2):166 -73. doi: 10.1016/S1474 -4422(15)00303 -8. PubMed 
  
 65 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 PMID: 26654287; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4710581. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26654287  
20. Al-Shahi Salman R, Berg MJ, Morrison L, Awad IA, Angioma Alliance Scientific 
Advisory B. Hemorrhage from cavernous malformations of the brain: definition and 
reporting standards. Angioma Alliance Scientific Advisory Board. Stroke; a journal of 
cerebral ci rculation. 2008;39(12):3222 -30. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.515544. 
PubMed PMID: 18974380. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18974380  
21. Flemming KD, Graff -Radford J, Aakre J, Kantarci K, Lanzino G, Brown RD, Jr., 
Mielke MM, Roberts RO, Kremers W, Knopman DS, Petersen RC, Jack CR, Jr. 
Population -Based Prevalence of Cerebral Cavernous Malformations in Older Adults: 
Mayo Clinic Study of Agin g. JAMA neurology. 2017;74(7):801 -5. doi: 
10.1001/jamaneurol.2017.0439. PubMed PMID: 28492932. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28492932  
22. Christensen MC, Morris S. Association between disability measures and short -
term health care costs following intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 
2008;9(3):313 -8. doi: 10.1007/s12028 -008-9124 -5. PubMed PMID: 18696272. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18696272  
23. Porter PJ, Willinsky RA, Harper W, Wallace MC. Cerebral cavernous 
malformations: natural history and prognosis after clinical deterioration with or without 
hemorrhage. Journal of neurosurgery. 1997;87(2):190 -7. doi: 
10.3171/jns.1997.87.2.0190. PubMed PMID:  9254081. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9254081  
24. Robinson JR, Jr., Awad IA, Magdinec M, Paranandi L. Factors predisposing to 
clinical disability in patients with cavernous malformations of the brain. Neurosurgery. 
1993;32(5):730 -5; discussion 5 -6. PubMed PMID: 8492847. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8492847  
25. Health, United States, 2013: With Special Feature on Prescription Drugs. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2014 May.  
26. Moultrie F, Horne MA, Josephson CB, Hall JM, Counsell CE, Bhattacharya JJ, 
Papanastassiou V, Sellar RJ, Warlow CP, Murray GD, Al -Shahi Salman R, Scottish 
Audit of Intracranial Vascular Malformations (SAIVMs) steering committee and 
collaborators.  Outcome after surgical or conservative management of cerebral 
cavernous malformations. Neurology. 2014;83(7):582 -9. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.0000000000000684. PubMed PMID: 24994841; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4141991. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24994841  
27. Gross BA, Batjer HH, Awad IA, Bendok BR, Du R. Brainstem cavernous 
malformations: 1390 surgical cases from the literature. World Neurosurg. 2013;80(1 -
2):89 -93. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2012.04.002. PubMed PMID: 22484766. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22484766  
28. Pham M, Gross BA, Bendok BR, Awad IA, Batjer HH. Radiosurgery for 
angiographically occult vascular malformations. Neurosurg Focus. 2009;26(5):E16. doi: 
10.3171/2009.2.FOCUS0923. PubMed PMID: 19408994. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19408994  
29. Golden M, Saeidi S, Liem B, Marchand E, Morrison L, Hart B. Sensitivity of 
patients with familial cerebral cavernous malformations to therapeutic radiation. Journal 
  
 66 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 of medical imaging and radiation oncology. 2015;59(1):134 -6. doi: 10.1111/1754 -
9485.12269. PubMed PMID: 25565562; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4437719. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25565562  
30. Gault J, Sarin H, Awadallah NA, Shenkar R, Awad IA. Pathobiology of human 
cerebrovascular malformations: basic mechanisms and clinical relevance. 
Neurosurgery. 2004;55(1):1 -16; discussion -7. PubMed PMID: 15214969. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15214969  
31. Vymazal J, Brooks RA, Baumgarner C, Tran V, Katz D, Bulte JW, Bauminger R, 
Di Chiro G. The relation between brain iron and NMR relaxation times: an in vitro study. 
Magnetic resonance in medicine : official journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance 
in Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine. 1996;35(1):56 -61. PubMed 
PMID: 8771022. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8771022  
32. Wong JH, Awad IA, Kim JH. Ultrastructural pathological features of 
cerebrovascular malformations: a preliminary report. Neurosurgery. 2000;46(6):1454 -9. 
PubMed PMID: 10834648. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10834648  
33. Clatterbuck RE, Eberhart CG, Crain BJ, Rigamonti D. Ultrastructural and 
immunocytochemical evidence that an incompetent blood -brain barrier is related to the 
pathophysiology of cavernous malformations. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and 
psychiatry. 2 001;71(2):188 -92. Epub 2001/07/19. PubMed PMID: 11459890; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC1737494. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11459890  
34. Tu J, Stoodley MA, Morgan MK, Storer KP. Ultrastructural characteristics of 
hemorrhagic, nonhemorrhagic, and recurrent cavernous malformations. Journal of 
neurosurgery. 2005;103(5):903 -9. doi: 10.3171/jns.2005.103.5.0903. PubMed PMID: 
16304995. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16304995  
35. Glading A, Han J, Stockton RA, Ginsberg MH. KRIT -1/CCM1 is a Rap1 effector 
that regulates endothelial cell cell junctions. The Journal of cell biology. 
2007;179(2):247 -54. Epub 2007/10/24. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200705175. PubMed PMID: 
17954608; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2064761. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17954608  
36. Stockton RA, Shenkar R, Awad IA, Ginsberg MH. Cerebral cavernous 
malformations proteins inhibit Rho kinase to stabilize vascular integrity. The Journal of 
experimental medicine. 2010;207(4):881 -96. Epub 2010/03/24. doi: 
10.1084/jem.20091258. PubMed PMID: 20308363; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2856024. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20308363  
37. Whitehead KJ, Chan AC, Navankasattusas S, Koh W, London NR, Ling J, Mayo 
AH, Drakos SG, Jones CA, Zhu W, Marchuk DA, Davis GE, Li DY. The cerebral 
cavernous malformation signaling pathway promotes vascular integrity via Rho 
GTPases. Nature medicine. 2009; 15(2):177 -84. Epub 2009/01/20. doi: 
10.1038/nm.1911. PubMed PMID: 19151728; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2767168. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19151728  
38. Shenkar R, Shi C, Rebeiz T, Stockton RA, McDonald DA, Mikati AG, Zhang L, 
Austin C, Akers AL, Gallione CJ, Rorrer A, Gunel M, Min W, Marcondes de Souza J, 
Lee C, Marchuk DA, Awad IA. Exceptional aggressiveness of cerebral cavernous 
malformation disease as sociated with PDCD10 mutations. Genet Med. 2015;17(3):188 -
  
 67 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 96. doi: 10.1038/gim.2014.97. PubMed PMID: 25122144; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4329119. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25122144  
39. Pagenstecher A, Stahl S, Sure U, Felbor U. A two -hit mechanism causes 
cerebral cavernous malformations: complete inactivation of CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 in 
affected endothelial cells. Human molecular genetics. 2009;18(5):911 -8. Epub 
2008/12/18. doi: 10.1093/hm g/ddn420. PubMed PMID: 19088124; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2640205. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19088124  
40. Gault J, Shenkar R, Recksiek P, Awad IA. Biallelic somatic and germ line CCM1 
truncating mutations in a cerebral cavernous malformation lesion. Stroke; a journal of 
cerebral circulation. 2005;36(4):872 -4. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000157586.20479.fd. 
PubMed PM ID: 15718512. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15718512  
41. Akers AL, Johnson E, Steinberg GK, Zabramski JM, Marchuk DA. Biallelic 
somatic and germline mutations in cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs): evidence 
for a two -hit mechanism of CCM pathogenesis. Human molecular genetics. 
2009;18(5):919 -30. Epub 2008/ 12/18. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn430. PubMed PMID: 
19088123; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2640209. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19088123  
42. McDonald DA, Shi C, Shenkar R, Gallione CJ, Akers AL, Li S, De Castro N, Berg 
MJ, Corcoran DL, Awad IA, Marchuk DA. Lesions from patients with sporadic cerebral 
cavernous malformations harbor somatic mutations in the CCM genes: evidence for a 
common bioch emical pathway for CCM pathogenesis. Human molecular genetics. 
2014;23(16):4357 -70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu153. PubMed PMID: 24698976; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC4103679. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24698976  
43. Borikova AL, Dibble CF, Sciaky N, Welch CM, Abell AN, Bencharit S, Johnson 
GL. Rho kinase inhibition rescues the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation 
phenotype. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2010;285(16):11760 -4. Epub 
2010/02/26. doi: 1 0.1074/jbc.C109.097220. PubMed PMID: 20181950; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2852911. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20181950  
44. Crose LE, Hilder TL, Sciaky N, Johnson GL. Cerebral cavernous malformation 2 
protein promotes smad ubiquitin regulatory factor 1 -mediated RhoA degradation in 
endothelial cells. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2009;284(20):13301 -5. Epub 
2009/03/26. do i: 10.1074/jbc.C900009200. PubMed PMID: 19318350; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2679429. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19318350  
45. Zhou Z, Tang AT, Wong WY, Bamezai S, Goddard LM, Shenkar R, Zhou S, 
Yang J, Wright AC, Foley M, Arthur JS, Whitehead KJ, Awad IA, Li DY, Zheng X, Kahn 
ML. Cerebral cavernous malformations arise from endothelial gain of MEKK3 -KLF2/4 
signalling. Nature. 201 6;532(7597):122 -6. doi: 10.1038/nature17178. PubMed PMID: 
27027284; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4864035. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27027284  
46. McDonald DA, Shenkar R, Shi C, Stockton RA, Akers AL, Kucherlapati MH, 
Kucherlapati R, Brainer J, Ginsberg MH, Awad IA, Marchuk DA. A novel mouse model 
of cerebral cavernous malformations based on the two -hit mutation hypothesis 
recapitulates the human di sease. Human molecular genetics. 2011;20(2):211 -22. Epub 
2010/10/14. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq433. PubMed PMID: 20940147; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC3005897. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20940147  
  
 68 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 47. Plummer NW, Gallione CJ, Srinivasan S, Zawistowski JS, Louis DN, Marchuk 
DA. Loss of p53 sensitizes mice with a mutation in Ccm1 (KRIT1) to development of 
cerebral vascular malformations. The American journal of pathology. 2004;165(5):1509 -
18. Epub 2004/10 /29. doi: 10.1016/S0002 -9440(10)63409 -8. PubMed PMID: 15509522; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1618670. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15509522  
48. Shenkar R, Venkatasubramanian PN, Wyrwicz AM, Zhao JC, Shi C, Akers A, 
Marchuk DA, Awad IA. Advanced magnetic resonance imaging of cerebral cavernous 
malformations: part II. Imaging of lesions in murine models. Neurosurgery. 
2008;63(4):790 -7; discussion 7 -8. Epub 2008/11/05. doi: 
10.1227/01.NEU.0000315862.24920.49. PubMed PMID: 18981891; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2844241. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18981891  
49. McDonald DA, Shi C, Shenkar R, Stockton RA, Liu F, Ginsberg MH, Marchuk 
DA, Awad IA. Fasudil decreases lesion burden in a murine model of cerebral cavernous 
malformation disease. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 2012;43(2):571 -4. Epub 
2011/10/29 . doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.625467. PubMed PMID: 22034008; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3265629. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22034008  
50. Landis SC, Amara SG, Asadullah K, Austin CP, Blumenstein R, Bradley EW, 
Crystal RG, Darnell RB, Ferrante RJ, Fillit H, Finkelstein R, Fisher M, Gendelman HE, 
Golub RM, Goudreau JL, Gross RA, Gubitz AK, Hesterlee SE, Howells DW, Huguenard 
J, Kelner K, Koro shetz W, Krainc D, Lazic SE, Levine MS, Macleod MR, McCall JM, 
Moxley RT, 3rd, Narasimhan K, Noble LJ, Perrin S, Porter JD, Steward O, Unger E, Utz 
U, Silberberg SD. A call for transparent reporting to optimize the predictive value of 
preclinical resear ch. Nature. 2012;490(7419):187 -91. doi: 10.1038/nature11556. 
PubMed PMID: 23060188; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3511845. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23060188  
51. Shenkar R, Shi C, Austin C, Moore T, Lightle R, Cao Y, Zhang L, Wu M, 
Zeineddine HA, Girard R, McDonald DA, Rorrer A, Gallione C, Pytel P, Liao JK, 
Marchuk DA, Awad IA. RhoA Kinase Inhibition With Fasudil Versus Simvastatin in 
Murine Models of Cerebral Ca vernous Malformations. Stroke; a journal of cerebral 
circulation. 2017;48(1):187 -94. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.015013. PubMed PMID: 
27879448; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5183488. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27879448  
52. Weng TC, Yang YH, Lin SJ, Tai SH. A systematic review and meta -analysis on 
the therapeutic equivalence of statins. Journal of clinical pharmacy and therapeutics. 
2010;35(2):139 -51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365 -2710.2009.01085.x. PubMed PMID: 20456733. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20456733  
53. Rawlings R, Nohria A, Liu PY, Donnelly J, Creager MA, Ganz P, Selwyn A, Liao 
JK. Comparison of effects of rosuvastatin (10 mg) versus atorvastatin (40 mg) on rho 
kinase activity in caucasian men with a previous atherosclerotic event. The American 
journal of cardiology. 2009;103(4):437 -41. Epub 2009/02/07. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.10.008. PubMed PMID: 19195498; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2673911. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19195498  
54. Nohria A, Prsic A, Liu PY, Okamoto R, Creager MA, Selwyn A, Liao JK, Ganz P. 
Statins inhibit Rho kinase activity in patients with atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis. 
2009;205(2):517 -21. Epub 2009/01/27. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.12.023. 
  
 69 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 PubMed PMID: 19167712; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2717178. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19167712  
55. Girard R, Zeineddine HA, Orsbon C, Tan H, Moore T, Hobson N, Shenkar R, 
Lightle R, Shi C, Fam MD, Cao Y, Shen L, Neander AI, Rorrer A, Gallione C, Tang AT, 
Kahn ML, Marchuk DA, Luo ZX, Awad IA. Micro -computed tomography in murine 
models of cerebral cavern ous malformations as a paradigm for brain disease. Journal of 
neuroscience methods. 2016;271:14 -24. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2016.06.021. PubMed 
PMID: 27345427; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5003657. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27345427  
56. Tan H, Liu T, Wu Y, Thacker J, Shenkar R, Mikati AG, Shi C, Dykstra C, Wang Y, 
Prasad PV, Edelman RR, Awad IA. Evaluation of iron content in human cerebral 
cavernous malformation using quantitative susceptibility mapping. Investigative 
radiology. 2014;49( 7):498 -504. doi: 10.1097/RLI.0000000000000043. PubMed PMID: 
24619210; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4254705. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24619210  
57. Tan H, Zhang L, Mikati AG, Girard R, Khanna O, Fam MD, Liu T, Wang Y, 
Edelman RR, Christoforidis G, Awad IA. Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping in Cerebral 
Cavernous Malformations: Clinical Correlations. AJNR American journal of 
neuroradiology. 2016;37(7 ):1209 -15. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A4724. PubMed PMID: 
26965464; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4947004. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26965464  
58. Girard R, Fam MD, Zeineddine HA, Tan H, Mikati AG, Shi C, Jesselson M, 
Shenkar R, Wu M, Cao Y, Hobson N, Larsson HBW, Christoforidis GA, Awad IA. 
Vascular permeability and iron deposition biomarkers in longitudinal follow -up of 
cerebral cavernous malforma tions. Journal of neurosurgery. 2017;127(1):102 -10. doi: 
10.3171/2016.5.JNS16687. PubMed PMID: 27494817. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27494817  
59. Zeineddine HA, Girard R, Cao Y, Hobson N, Fam MD, Stadnik A, Tan H, Shen J, 
Chaudagar K, Shenkar R, Thompson RE, McBee N, Hanley D, Carroll T, Christoforidis 
GA, Awad IA. Quantitative susceptibility mapping as a monitoring biomarker in cerebral 
cavernous m alformations with recent hemorrhage. Journal of magnetic resonance 
imaging : JMRI. 2017. doi: 10.1002/jmri.25831. PubMed PMID: 28791783. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28791783  
60. Mikati AG, Tan H, Shenkar R, Li L, Zhang L, Guo X, Larsson HB, Shi C, Liu T, 
Wang Y, Shah A, Edelman RR, Christoforidis G, Awad I. Dynamic permeability and 
quantitative susceptibility: related imaging biomarkers in cerebral cavernous 
malformations. Stroke ; a journal of cerebral circulation. 2014;45(2):598 -601. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.003548. PubMed PMID: 24302484; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC4351041. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24302484  
61. Hart BL, Taheri S, Rosenberg GA, Morrison LA. Dynamic contrast -enhanced MRI 
evaluation of cerebral cavernous malformations. Transl Stroke Res. 2013;4(5):500 -6. 
doi: 10.1007/s12975 -013-0285 -y. PubMed PMID: 24323376; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC3939060. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24323376  
62. Mikati AG, Khanna O, Zhang L, Girard R, Shenkar R, Guo X, Shah A, Larsson 
HB, Tan H, Li L, Wishnoff MS, Shi C, Christoforidis GA, Awad IA. Vascular permeability 
  
 70 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 in cerebral cavernous malformations. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : 
official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 
2015;35(10):1632 -9. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.98. PubMed PMID: 25966944; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC4640319. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25966944  
63. Yamaguchi H, Kasa M, Amano M, Kaibuchi K, Hakoshima T. Molecular 
mechanism for the regulation of rho -kinase by dimerization and its inhibition by fasudil. 
Structure. 2006;14(3):589 -600. Epub 2006/03/15. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.11.024. 
PubMed PMID: 1653124 2. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16531242  
64. Suzuki Y, Shibuya M, Satoh S, Sugimoto Y, Takakura K. A postmarketing 
surveillance study of fasudil treatment after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Surgical neurology. 2007;68(2):126 -31; discussion 31 -2. doi: 
10.1016/j.surneu.2006.10.037. PubMed PMID:  17586012. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17586012  
65. Ishihara M, Yamanaka K, Nakajima S, Yamasaki M. Intracranial hemorrhage 
after intra -arterial administration of fasudil for treatment of cerebral vasospasm following 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: a serious adverse event. Neuroradiology. 2012;54(1):73 -5. 
doi: 10 .1007/s00234 -011-0856 -0. PubMed PMID: 21431852. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21431852  
66. Li DY, Whitehead KJ. Evaluating strategies for the treatment of cerebral 
cavernous malformations. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 2010;41(10 
Suppl):S92 -4. Epub 2010/10/12. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.594929. PubMed 
PMID: 20876517; PubMed Central  PMCID: PMC3409848. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20876517  
67. Patterson C. Torturing a blood vessel. Nature medicine. 2009;15(2):137 -8. doi: 
10.1038/nm0209 -137. PubMed PMID: 19197284. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19197284  
68. Sugawara T, Ayer R, Zhang JH. Role of statins in cerebral vasospasm. Acta 
Neurochir Suppl. 2008;104:287 -90. PubMed PMID: 18457003; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2743544. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18457003  
69. Biffi A, Devan WJ, Anderson CD, Ayres AM, Schwab K, Cortellini L, Viswanathan 
A, Rost NS, Smith EE, Goldstein JN, Greenberg SM, Rosand J. Statin use and outcome 
after intracerebral hemorrhage: case -control study and meta -analysis. Neurology. 
2011;76(18):1 581-8. Epub 2011/04/01. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182194be9. PubMed 
PMID: 21451150; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3100126. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21451150  
70. Amarenco P, Labreuche J. Lipid management in the prevention of stroke: review 
and updated meta -analysis of statins for stroke prevention. The Lancet Neurology. 
2009;8(5):453 -63. doi: 10.1016/S1474 -4422(09)70058 -4. PubMed PMID: 19375663. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19375663  
71. Singhal AB, Topcuoglu MA, Dorer DJ, Ogilvy CS, Carter BS, Koroshetz WJ. 
SSRI and statin use increases the risk for vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Neurology. 2005;64(6):1008 -13. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000154523.21633.0E. PubMed 
PMID: 15781818. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15781818  
72. Yoshimura Y, Murakami Y, Saitoh M, Yokoi T, Aoki T, Miura K, Ueshima H, 
Nozaki K, Group SSSR. Statin use and risk of cerebral aneurysm rupture: a hospital -
  
 71 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 based case -control study in Japan. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2014;23(2):343 -8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2013.04.022. PubMed PMID: 23697760. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23697760  
73. Haussen DC, Henninger N, Kumar S, Selim M. Statin use and microbleeds in 
patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2012;43(10):2677 -81. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.657486. PubMed PMID: 22829545. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22829545  
74. Hemphill JC, 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, Becker K, Bendok BR, 
Cushman M, Fung GL, Goldstein JN, Macdonald RL, Mitchell PH, Scott PA, Selim MH, 
Woo D, American Heart Association Stroke C, Council on C, Stroke N, Council on 
Clinical C. Guidelines for th e Management of Spontaneous Intracerebral Hemorrhage: A 
Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 2015;46(7):2032 -60. doi: 
10.1161/STR.0000000000000 069. PubMed PMID: 26022637. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26022637  
75. Eisa-Beygi S, Wen XY, Macdonald RL. A call for rigorous study of statins in 
resolution of cerebral cavernous malformation pathology. Stroke; a journal of cerebral 
circulation. 2014;45(6):1859 -61. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005132. PubMed 
PMID: 24803598. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24803598  
76. Bjorkhem -Bergman L, Lindh JD, Bergman P. What is a relevant statin 
concentration in cell experiments claiming pleiotropic effects? British journal of clinical 
pharmacology. 2011;72(1):164 -5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365 -2125.2011.03907.x. PubMed 
PMID: 21223360; Pu bMed Central PMCID: PMC3141200. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21223360  
77. Reigner BG, Blesch KS. Estimating the starting dose for entry into humans: 
principles and practice. European journal of clinical pharmacology. 2002;57(12):835 -45. 
PubMed PMID: 11936701. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11936701  
78. USFDA. Estimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for 
Therapeutics in Adult Healthy Volunteers.  Guidance for Industry, 2005. Available from: 
https:// www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidances/ucm078932.pdf . 
79. USFDA. LIPITOR® (atorvastatin calcium) tablets, for oral use.  drugs@fda Label  2017. 
Available from: 
https:// www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/020702s067s069lbl.pdf . 
80. Vandebriel RJ, De Jong HJ, Gremmer ER, Klungel OH, Tervaert JW, Slob W, 
Van Der Laan JW, Van Loveren H. Statins accelerate the onset of collagen type II -
induced arthritis in mice. Arthritis research & therapy. 2012;14(2):R90. doi: 
10.1186/ar3814. PubMed PM ID: 22537858; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3446464. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22537858  
81. Palmer G, Chobaz V, Talabot -Ayer D, Taylor S, So A, Gabay C, Busso N. 
Assessment of the efficacy of different statins in murine collagen -induced arthritis. 
Arthritis and rheumatism. 2004;50(12):4051 -9. doi: 10.1002/art.20673. PubMed PMID: 
15593180. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15593180  
82. Sarabi ZS, Saeidi MG, Khodashahi M, Rezaie AE, Hashemzadeh K, Khodashahi 
R, Heidari H. Evaluation of the Anti -inflammatory Effects of Atorvastatin on Patients with 
Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Electronic physician. 2016;8(8):2700 -
  
 72 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 6. doi: 10.19082/2700. PubMed PMID: 27757177; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC5053448. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27757177  
83. Mowla K, Rajai E, Ghorbani A, Dargahi -Malamir M, Bahadoram M, Mohammadi 
S. Effect of Atorvastatin on the Disease Activity and Severity of Rheumatoid Arthritis: 
Double -Blind Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of clinical and diagnostic research : 
JCDR. 2 016;10(5):OC32 -6. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2016/16538.7814. PubMed PMID: 
27437268; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4948444. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27437268  
84. McKenney JM, Davidson MH, Jacobson TA, Guyton JR, National Lipid 
Association Statin Safety Assessment Task F. Final conclusions and recommendations 
of the National Lipid Association Statin Safety Assessment Task Force. Am J Cardiol. 
2006;97(8A):89C -94C. d oi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.02.030. PubMed PMID: 16581336. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16581336  
85. FDA. FDA Drug Safety Communication: Important safety label changes to 
cholesterol -lowering statin drugs 2012. Available from: 
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm293101.htm   
86. Liu PY, Liu YW, Lin LJ, Chen JH, Liao JK. Evidence for statin pleiotropy in 
humans: differential effects of statins and ezetimibe on rho -associated coiled -coil 
containing protein kinase activity, endothelial function, and inflammation. Circulation. 
2009;1 19(1):131 -8. Epub 2008/12/17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.813311. 
PubMed PMID: 19075102; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2745913. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19075102  
87. Nohria A, Grunert ME, Rikitake Y, Noma K, Prsic A, Ganz P, Liao JK, Creager 
MA. Rho kinase inhibition improves endothelial function in human subjects with 
coronary artery disease. Circulation research. 2006;99(12):1426 -32. Epub 2006/11/11. 
doi: 10.1161/01 .RES.0000251668.39526.c7. PubMed PMID: 17095725; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC2666070. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17095725  
88. Girard R, Khanna O, Shenkar R, Zhang L, Wu M, Jesselson M, Zeineddine HA, 
Gangal A, Fam MD, Gibson CC, Whitehead KJ, Li DY, Liao JK, Shi C, Awad IA. 
Peripheral plasma vitamin D and non -HDL cholesterol reflect the severity of cerebral 
cavernous malformatio n disease. Biomarkers in medicine. 2016;10(3):255 -64. doi: 
10.2217/bmm.15.118. PubMed PMID: 26861901; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4926533. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26861901  
89. Liu PY, Liao JK. A method for measuring Rho kinase activity in tissues and cells. 
Methods in enzymology. 2008;439:181 -9. Epub 2008/04/01. doi: 10.1016/S0076 -
6879(07)00414 -4. PubMed PMID: 18374165; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2615566. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18374165  
90. Yu HR, Kuo HC, Huang HC, Huang LT, Tain YL, Chen CC, Liang CD, Sheen JM, 
Lin IC, Wu CC, Ou CY, Yang KD. Glyceraldehyde -3-phosphate dehydrogenase is a 
reliable internal control in Western blot analysis of leukocyte subpopulations from 
children. Anal Bioche m. 2011;413(1):24 -9. Epub 2011/02/03. doi: 
10.1016/j.ab.2011.01.037. PubMed PMID: 21284931. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21284931  
91. Grassie ME, Moffat LD, Walsh MP, MacDonald JA. The myosin phosphatase 
targeting protein (MYPT) family: a regulated mechanism for achieving substrate 
  
 73 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 specificity of the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase type 1delta. Archives of 
biochemistry and biophysics. 2011;510(2):147 -59. Epub 2011/02/05. doi: 
10.1016/j.abb.2011.01.018. PubMed PMID: 21291858. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21291858  
92. Muranyi A, Derkach D, Erdodi F, Kiss A, Ito M, Hartshorne DJ. Phosphorylation 
of Thr695 and Thr850 on the myosin phosphatase target subunit: inhibitory effects and 
occurrence in A7r5 cells. FEBS letters. 2005;579(29):6611 -5. Epub 2005/11/22. doi: 
10.1016/ j.febslet.2005.10.055. PubMed PMID: 16297917. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16297917  
93. Girard R, Zeineddine HA, Fam MD, Mayampurath A, Cao Y, Shi C, Shenkar R, 
Polster SP, Jesselson M, Duggan R, Mikati AG, Christoforidis G, Andrade J, Whitehead 
KJ, Li DY, Awad IA. Plasma Biomarkers of Inflammation Reflect Seizures and 
Hemorrhagic Activity o f Cerebral Cavernous Malformations. Translational stroke 
research. 2017. doi: 10.1007/s12975 -017-0561 -3. PubMed PMID: 28819935. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28819935  
94. Shi C, Shenkar R, Zeineddine HA, Girard R, Fam MD, Austin C, Moore T, Lightle 
R, Zhang L, Wu M, Cao Y, Gunel M, Louvi A, Rorrer A, Gallione C, Marchuk DA, Awad 
IA. B -Cell Depletion Reduces the Maturation of Cerebral Cavernous Malformations in 
Murine Model s. Journal of neuroimmune pharmacology : the official journal of the 
Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology. 2016;11(2):369 -77. doi: 10.1007/s11481 -016-
9670 -0. PubMed PMID: 27086141. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27086141  
95. Liu T, Liu J, Rochefort Ld, Spincemaille P, Khalidov I, Ledoux JR, Wang Y. 
Morphology Enables Dipole Inversion (MEDI) from a Single -Angle 
Acquisition:Comparison with COSMOS in Human Brain Imaging. Magnetic Resonance 
in Medicine. 2011;66(3):777 -83. Epub Ap ril 4, 2011. doi: 10.1002/mrm.22816.  
96. Liu T, Khalidov I, Rochefort Ld, Spincemaille P, Liu J, Tsiouris A, Wang Y. A 
novel background field removal method for MRI using projection onto dipole fields 
(PDF). NMR in Biomedicine. 2011;24(9):1129 -36.  
97. Larsson HB, Courivaud F, Rostrup E, Hansen AE. Measurement of brain 
perfusion, blood volume, and blood -brain barrier permeability, using dynamic contrast -
enhanced T(1) -weighted MRI at 3 tesla. Magnetic resonance in medicine : official 
journal of the Socie ty of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine / Society of Magnetic 
Resonance in Medicine. 2009;62(5):1270 -81. Epub 2009/09/26. doi: 
10.1002/mrm.22136. PubMed PMID: 19780145. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19780145  
98. Liu T, Khalidov I, de Rochefort L, Spincemaille P, Liu J, Tsiouris AJ, Wang Y. A 
novel background field removal method for MRI using projection onto dipole fields 
(PDF). NMR in biomedicine. 2011;24(9):1129 -36. doi: 10.1002/nbm.1670. PubMed 
PMID: 21387445;  PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3628923. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21387445  
99. Pasternak RC, Smith SC, Jr., Bairey -Merz CN, Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Lenfant 
C, American College of C, American Heart A, National Heart L, Blood I. 
ACC/AHA/NHLBI Clinical Advisory on the Use and Safety of Statins. Stroke. 
2002;33(9):2337 -41. PubMed PMID: 1 2215610. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12215610  
  
 74 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 100. Golomb BA, Evans MA. Statin adverse effects : a review of the literature and 
evidence for a mitochondrial mechanism. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2008;8(6):373 -418. 
doi: 10.2165/0129784 -200808060 -00004. PubMed PMID: 19159124; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC2849981. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19159124  
101. LaRosa JC, Pedersen TR, Somaratne R, Wasserman SM. Safety and effect of 
very low levels of low -density lipoprotein cholesterol on cardiovascular events. The 
American journal of cardiology. 2013;111(8):1221 -9. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.12.052. PubMed PMI D: 23375731. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23375731  
102. Mancini GB, Baker S, Bergeron J, Fitchett D, Frohlich J, Genest J, Gupta M, 
Hegele RA, Ng D, Pope J. Diagnosis, prevention, and management of statin adverse 
effects and intolerance: proceedings of a Canadian Working Group Consensus 
Conference. Can J Cardi ol. 2011;27(5):635 -62. Epub 2011/10/04. doi: 
10.1016/j.cjca.2011.05.007. PubMed PMID: 21963058. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21963058  
103. Rallidis LS, Fountoulaki K, Anastasiou -Nana M. Managing the underestimated 
risk of statin -associated myopathy. International journal of cardiology. 2012;159(3):169 -
76. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.07.048. PubMed PMID: 21813193. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21813193  
104. European Stroke Initiative Writing C, Writing Committee for the EEC, Steiner T, 
Kaste M, Forsting M, Mendelow D, Kwiecinski H, Szikora I, Juvela S, Marchel A, Chapot 
R, Cognard C, Unterberg A, Hacke W. Recommendations for the management of 
intracranial ha emorrhage - part I: spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage. The 
European Stroke Initiative Writing Committee and the Writing Committee for the EUSI 
Executive Committee. Cerebrovascular diseases. 2006;22(4):294 -316. doi: 
10.1159/000094831. PubMed PMID: 1 6926557. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16926557  
105. Brain Trauma F, American Association of Neurological S, Congress of 
Neurological S, Joint Section on N, Critical Care AC, Bratton SL, Chestnut RM, Ghajar 
J, McConnell Hammond FF, Harris OA, Hartl R, Manley GT, Nemecek A, Newell DW, 
Rosenthal G, Schouten J , Shutter L, Timmons SD, Ullman JS, Videtta W, Wilberger JE, 
Wright DW. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. VI. 
Indications for intracranial pressure monitoring. Journal of neurotrauma. 2007;24 Suppl 
1:S37 -44. doi: 10.1089/n eu.2007.9990. PubMed PMID: 17511544. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17511544  
106. Newman C, Tsai J, Szarek M, Luo D, Gibson E. Comparative safety of 
atorvastatin 80 mg versus 10 mg derived from analysis of 49 completed trials in 14,236 
patients. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97(1):61 -7. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.07.108. PubMed 
PMID: 16377285. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16377285  
107. Katz DH, Intwala SS, Stone NJ. Addressing statin adverse effects in the clinic: 
the 5 Ms. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2014;19(6):533 -42. doi: 
10.1177/1074248414529622. PubMed PMID: 24770611. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24770611  
108. pfizer. Lipitor Drug insert: Full Prescribing Information. 2012.  
  
 75 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 109. Gillett RC, Jr., Norrell A. Considerations for safe use of statins: liver enzyme 
abnormalities and muscle toxicity. Am Fam Physician. 2011;83(6):711 -6. PubMed 
PMID: 21404982. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21404982  
110. Varosanec M, Uher T, Horakova D, Hagemeier J, Bergsland N, Tyblova M, Seidl 
Z, Vaneckova M, Krasensky J, Dwyer MG, Havrdova E, Zivadinov R. Longitudinal 
Mixed -Effect Model Analysis of the Association between Global and Tissue -Specific 
Brain Atrophy and Les ion Accumulation in Patients with Clinically Isolated Syndrome. 
AJNR American journal of neuroradiology. 2015;36(8):1457 -64. doi: 
10.3174/ajnr.A4330. PubMed PMID: 26113068. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26113068  
111. Chow SC, Shao J, Wang H. Sample size calculations in clinical research. New 
York: Marcel Dekker; 2003.  
112. Liu H, Wu T. Sample Size Calculation and Power Analysis of Time -Averaged 
Difference. Journal of Modern Applied Statistical Methods. 2005;4(2):434 -45.  
113. Hanley DF, Lane K, McBee N, Ziai W, Tuhrim S, Lees KR, Dawson J, Gandhi D, 
Ullman N, Mould WA, Mayo SW, Mendelow AD, Gregson B, Butcher K, Vespa P, 
Wright DW, Kase CS, Carhuapoma JR, Keyl PM, Diener -West M, Muschelli J, Betz JF, 
Thompson CB, Sugar EA, Yen okyan G, Janis S, John S, Harnof S, Lopez GA, Aldrich 
EF, Harrigan MR, Ansari S, Jallo J, Caron JL, LeDoux D, Adeoye O, Zuccarello M, 
Adams HP, Jr., Rosenblum M, Thompson RE, Awad IA, CLEAR III Investigators.  
Thrombolytic removal of intraventricular ha emorrhage in treatment of severe stroke: 
results of the randomised, multicentre, multiregion, placebo -controlled CLEAR III trial. 
Lancet. 2017;389(10069):603 -11. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(16)32410 -2. PubMed 
PMID: 28081952. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28081952  
114. Hanley DF, Thompson RE, Muschelli J, Rosenblum M, McBee N, Lane K, 
Bistran -Hall AJ, Mayo SW, Keyl P, Gandhi D, Morgan TC, Ullman N, Mould WA, 
Carhuapoma JR, Kase C, Ziai W, Thompson CB, Yenokyan G, Huang E, Broaddus 
WC, Graham RS, Aldrich EF, Dodd R, Wijm an C, Caron JL, Huang J, Camarata P, 
Mendelow AD, Gregson B, Janis S, Vespa P, Martin N, Awad I, Zuccarello M, MISTIE 
Investigators . Safety and efficacy of minimally invasive surgery plus alteplase in 
intracerebral haemorrhage evacuation (MISTIE): a ra ndomised, controlled, open -label, 
phase 2 trial. The Lancet Neurology. 2016;15(12):1228 -37. doi: 10.1016/S1474 -
4422(16)30234 -4. PubMed PMID: 27751554; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5154627. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27751554  
115. Freidlin B, Korn EL. Monitoring for lack of benefit: a critical component of a 
randomized clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(4):629 -33. doi: 
10.1200/JCO.2008.17.8905. PubMed PMID: 19064977; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2645857. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19064977  
116. Kahan BC, Morris TP. Improper analysis of trials randomised using stratified 
blocks or minimisation. Statistics in medicine. 2012;31(4):328 -40. doi: 
10.1002/sim.4431. PubMed PMID: 22139891. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22139891  
117. Brown H, Prescott R. Applied mixed models in medicine. 2nd ed. Chichester, 
West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons; 2006, Chapter 6.  
  
 76 AT CASH EPOC   
   
 
Version 4  
3/29/2023  
 118. Diggle P, Liang K -Y, Zeger SL. Analysis of longitudinal data. New York, New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1994, Chapter 2.  
119. Little RJ, Rubin DB.  Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. Second ed. Hoboken, 
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2002. p. 12.  
120. Rubin DB.  Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons; 1987. p. 114.  
121. Liublinska V. Sensitivity Analyses in Empirical Studies Plagued with Missing 
Data. Doctoral dissertation. 2013. https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/11124841  
 