Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 1  of 31 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
N-Acetylcysteine for Youth Cannabis Use Disorder  
 
Study Protocol  
 
NCT0305537  
 
Most recent IRB -approved protocol dated April 14, 2022   
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 2  of 31 
 PROTOCOL TITLE:  N-Acetylcysteine for Youth Cannabis Use Disorder  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Kevin M. Gray, M.D.  
 
OBJECTIVES/SPECIFIC AIMS  
Cannabis use is particularly prevalent and problematic among youth, who are more likely than adults to 
initiate cannabis use, develop cannabis use disorder (CUD), and suffer lasting adverse cannabis -related 
consequences.   Despite the clear need for youth -targeted cannabis cessation treatments, established modalities 
offer limited efficacy, with very few youth achieving sustained cannabis abstinence.   
Among the most promising emerging youth -targeted cannabis cessation treatments is the over -the-counter 
antioxidant medication N-acetylcysteine (NAC).  Our team previously demonstrated superior NAC versus 
placebo (PBO) abstinence outcomes in youth with CUD who concurrently received the behavioral treatment 
contingency management ( CM).  In order to optimally translate NAC to real -world clinical practice, f urther work 
is now needed to evaluate if  NAC is efficacious independent of CM.  
We propose a 12- week randomized placebo -controlled  trial of NAC for CUD in youth ( N=192).  Participants 
will be randomized to  double- blind NAC or PBO, yielding two equally -allocated treatment groups.  All participants 
will receive brief weekly cannabis cessation counseling and medication management.  The primary efficacy 
outcome will be the proportion of negative urine cannabinoid tests during the 12 -week active trea tment, 
compared between groups.  We will also assess cognitive task performance at baseline, during treatment, and 
after treatment, examining changes in performance among participants who achieve abstinence versus those 
that do not.  
• Specific Aim 1 . Compare the effect  of NAC versus PBO , added to brief weekly cessation counseling and 
medication management,  on cannabis cessation in youth with CUD.  
o Hypothesis 1: NAC participants will have a higher proportion of negative urine cannabinoid tests 
during treatment than PBO participants. 
• Specific Aim 2. Examine the impact of cannabis cessation on cognitive task performance.  
o Hypothesis 3 : Participants who achieve abstinence will demonstrate significant improvement in 
attention, processing speed, verbal declarative memory, and cognitive control, compared to those 
who continue to use cannabis.  
It is important to identify for whom NAC is likely to be an effective treatment. NAC is thought to normalize 
extracellular glutamate levels which may reduce compulsive cannabis use when exposed to cues. Purportedly through anti -inflammatory effects, NAC also has the potential to improve mood and reduce depressive 
symptoms. Many individuals report motivation to use cannabis to alleviate stress and other aversive affective 
states. Thus, NAC may also indirectly influence cannabis use through improvement in moo d, particularly for 
adolescents who use cannabis in response to negative affect/stress. However, adolescents may be unaware of 
what drives their substance use. Shrier and Scherer (2014) found that adolescents provided different motives 
before and after use  for 20% of all reported episodes of cannabis use. These adolescents reported their motives 
near in time to their actual cannabis use; therefore, we may expect that adolescents have even more difficulty 
when asked to retrospectively report motives or antec edents for cannabis several days or weeks later. In a two-
week study of 18 -21 year olds who regularly use cannabis, craving and cannabis use is measured in real -world 
contexts. Therefore, we can gain insight into whether an adolescent’s craving increases w hen they are exposed 
to stress/negative affect or cannabis cues, suggesting that cues and/or stress may be a personalized risk factor for use. Individuals are given information on potential treatment studies following participation in this two week 
protocol, including the current treatment protocol. All participants beginning the current protocol will be asked if 
they participated in the two -week study and whether they would like to sign a release of information, allowing 
their data to be combined across st udies. Combining data from these two protocols will allow us to examine the 
following research aim:  
• Exploratory Aim: Estimate for whom NAC is likely to be effective at reducing cannabis use.  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 3  of 31 
 o Hypothesis 1: Adolescents who display increased cue -induced or negative affect -related 
craving in the two -week trial will show greater reduction in quantitative urine cannabinoid tests 
with NAC, as compared to placebo.  
The identification of NAC as potential treatments for youth CUD is an important development, but to  optimize 
translation to real -world practice and enhance youth CUD outcomes, this trial is critical.  At present, it is unclear 
whether NAC requires a CM platform for efficacy, and regardless of psychosocial/behavioral treatment platform, 
the initial positive trial of NAC requires replication .  The proposed study is designed with adequate power to 
evaluate the effect of NAC versus PBO on cannabis cessation. Further, the trial is positioned, regardless of 
between- group efficacy outcomes, to carefully examine potential cognitive task performance improvement with 
early abstinence achieved during treatment.  Given the clear demonstration of potentially lasting adve rse 
cognitive effects of frequent youth cannabis use, and given the central role of learning and academic 
achievement in this developmental phase, it is important to assess what domains of cognition may acutely 
improve during successful cannabis cessation treatment engagement.  
This proposed trial is the clear “next step” in the assessment of NAC as a youth CUD treatment, and is 
positioned to inform researchers, clinicians, and the general public, addressing a critical need for optimization of 
youth CUD treatment.  
 
BACKGROUND – Research Strategy  
A. SIGNIFICANCE  
Youth Cannabis Use: Prevalence and Implications  
Youth are more likely than adults to initiate cannabis use, develop cannabis use disorder (CUD), and suffer 
potentially lasting adverse consequences of use (1,2).  Amid evolving cannabis -related policies in the United 
States (e.g., state -level legalization  for medical and recreational use), youth perceptions of cannabis -related 
harms are decreasing and rates of use are increasing.  Currently, 44% of high school seniors have tried cannabis, 
21% are current users, and 6% use daily (3).  
Adolescence is a critical period of brain development.  In the context of rapid neurobiological changes, the 
brain may be particularly susceptible to environmental influences, including drugs of abuse (4).  Cannabinoid 
(CB 1) receptors are widely distributed in areas involved in cognition, emotion, and habit formation (5,6).  
Stimulation of these receptors by endocannabinoids during adolescence is known to affect the release of other neurotransmitters (7), influence short - and long- term synaptic plasticity ( 8,9), and contribute to neural 
development via influence on gene expression (10).  Frequent use of cannabis during adolescence may interfere 
with these developmental processes by overstimulation of cannabinoid receptors, leading to potentially lasting 
adverse effects on behavior, emotion, and cognition (11).  
Consistent with emerging neurobiological findings, a  confluence of evidence suggests that heav y use and 
early initiation (during childhood/adolescence) are associated with generally poorer  outcomes among cannabis 
users (2).  In a dose -dependent manner, adolescent cannabis use is associated with adverse academic (12 -13), 
cognitive (14 -16), occupational (13), psychiatric (17 -20), and substance use (21) outcomes.  
The adverse effects of cannabis use on cognition and learning may have lifelong implications (15), as 
scholastic achievement in adolescence is a particularly important predictor of adult success (22).  Among the most important benefits of youth -focused can nabis cessation treatment may therefore be recovery of cognitive 
performance and academic achievement.  While research to date has helped identify cognitive domains most 
affected by heavy cannabis use during adolescence (e.g., attention, declarative memory , cognitive control) (16), 
little work has focused on identifying domains that may be most likely to recover with acute abstinence in the 
context of treatment (23), versus those that may persist even with extended abstinence (15).  
Limitations in Current Treatments 
Treatment development for youth CUD has, to date, focused almost exclusively on psychosocial treatments.  
Trials of motivational enhancement therapy, cognitive- behavioral therapy, community reinforcement therapy, 
and family therapy have revealed similarly modest outcomes , with very few youth achieving sustained abstinence 
(24-27), echoing results in the larger literature involving psychosocial treatments for youth substance use in 
general (28,29).  The behaviora l treatment contingency management (CM) may im prove outcomes when added 
to psychosocial treatments, but it has not consistently translated into clinical practice (30 -40). Significant efforts 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 4  of 31 
 are needed to enhance outcomes for youth with CUD, and development and refinement of new approaches is 
critical. 
The Potential Role of Pharmacotherapy: N -Acetylcysteine  
In the last decade, efforts to develop potential pharmacotherapies for CUD have expanded, though nearly 
all of this work has focused solely on adult cannabis users (41).  Several human laboratory studies have been 
conducted to screen for medication effects  on cannabis craving, withdrawal symptoms, and self -administration, 
yielding mixed results (42 -53).  A smaller number of pilot/proof -of-concept randomized controlled trials have 
been conducted, also yielding mixed results (54- 58).  Only a handful of trials  with adequate power to evaluate 
intent -to-treat efficacy outcomes have been conducted, and almost all have yielded negative findings (59 -61).  
Among these, only one youth -focused trial of N-acetylcysteine (NAC), an N-acetyl pro- drug of the naturally 
occurring amino acid cysteine , has demonstrated statistically significant intent -to-treat positive efficacy findings 
(62). Youth randomized to receive NAC had more than twice the odds of submitting negative urine cannabinoid tests during treatment than those randomized to receive plac ebo (see Preliminary Studies below); all participants 
in that trial received CM, regardless of treatment randomization group.  A replication trial (NAC versus placebo, added to CM) in adults was recently completed, with the primary manuscript currently und er review for publication 
(UG1DA013727 —CTN0053, PI: Gray) (see Preliminary Studies below)  (63). 
Interest in NAC emerged from preclinical work implicating glutamate dysregulation as an important factor in 
addictive processes across substances of abuse (64).  Among potential glutamate -targeted pharmacotherapies , 
NAC is a particularly strong candidate (65 -67).  NAC administration stimulates cystine -glutamate exchange, 
thereby increasing non -synaptic glial release of glutamate ( 68).  The NAC -induced increase in extracellular 
glutamate stimulates inhibitory presynaptic metabotropic glutamate autoreceptors,  thereby reducing vesicular 
glutamate release and, in turn, reducing the reinstatement of drug seeking in animal models ( 68-70).  Since drug 
self-administration down -regulates the cystine -glutamate exchanger ( 71), the up- regulation of the exchanger via 
NAC administration directly normalizes a drug -induced pathology  (72).  This NAC -induced normalization has 
been shown to provide enduring protection from relapse, even after NAC is no longer present, in multiple studies 
(73-75).  A recent study has also shown that NAC reduces drug seeking both early and late in the development 
of addictive behaviors (76).  While most preclinical work in this area has focused on cocaine, studies involving nicotine, heroin, and alcohol have yielded consistent findings, suggesting  that NAC may play a potential 
therapeutic role across substances (77 -80). 
NAC is available over -the-counter as an inexpensive supplement and it has a well -established pediatric and 
adult safety record over decades of clinical use (81,82), positioning it as a highly accessible, acceptable, and 
affordable pharmacotherapy for youth . 
The Need to Parse the Effects of N -Acetylcysteine and Contingency Management on Abstinence Outcomes  
Our prior work demonstrated that NAC yielded superior abstinence outcomes compared to placebo in the 
context of youth with CUD receiving CM (See C1. Preliminary Studies) (62).  This was a critical advance in youth 
CUD treatment development, but it left sev eral unaddressed questions.  If clinicians wish to recommend NAC, 
must it be utilized in the context of a CM intervention?  It is possible that both NAC and CM possess significant independent treatment effects, such that either can be implemented on its ow n with positive outcomes.  However, 
NAC has not yet been tested outside of the context of a CM platform, and we do not yet know whether CM is 
necessary for NAC to exert its effects on abstinence.  It is possible that there is synergy between these 
interven tions, which would support their implementation as a combination treatment approach.  An adequately 
powered randomized controlled trial is needed to determine main effect of NAC outside of the context of a CM 
platform , and to compare the effects of combine d versus singular treatments.  This would provide necessary 
clarity to clinicians wishing to employ NAC and/or CM interventions to optimize abstinence outcomes among 
youth with CUD. 
B. INNOVATION  
NAC is among the most promising potential pharmacotherapies for youth CUD, and a trial to (a) replicate 
prior positive findings, and (b) test outside of the context of a CM platform, is strongly indicated .  Particularly 
important is an innovative trial that is designed and powered to address a variety of clinically relevant questions. 
We endeavored to echo the general design features of our prior trial of NAC versus placebo, added to CM, with 
select enhancements.  In the proposed trial, NAC will be compared to PBO, each without a CM platform.  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 5  of 31 
 Extension to 12 weeks of active treatment provides more clinical exposure and opportunity to yield treatment 
response, and also provides consistency with typical FDA standards of 12 -week active treatment courses in 
pharmacotherapy trials.  Extending post -treatment follow- up to six months from randomization allows for 
improved examination of the potential for lasting cessation effects of the interventions (83).  Abstinence criteria 
are based on objective biological verification, and we will additionally gath er detailed quantitative cannabis use 
self-report (84 -85).  Recruitment and retention will be bolstered by several well -established techniques our team 
has used successfully across multiple trials of youth CUD and other substance use disorders.  The propos ed 
sample size was chosen based upon consistently conservative estimates from prior relevant research, thereby 
ensuring sufficient power for hypothesis testing. 
The proposed trial of NAC is timely and supported by the research team’s experience with these 
interventions.  We have already been granted Investigational New Drug (IND) approval #078927 from the FDA for youth CUD research with NAC.  Aside from our prior NAC trial, to our knowledge, no other adequately 
powered trials of any pharmacotherapy for CUD in any age group have yielded positive intent -to-treat 
cessation/abstinence efficacy findings, indicating that further work with NAC should be prioritized.  The proposed 
trial will directly impact real -world practice by providing clear information regarding the efficacy of NAC (e.g., 
whether prior positive NAC versus PBO findings can be replicated, and whether a CM platform is necessary for 
NAC to exert its effects on abstinence outcomes).  Regardless of the results yielded, the innovative approach of the proposed trial will address multiple key gaps in the treatment evidence base in an area of considera ble public 
health concern.  
C. APPROACH 
C1. Preliminary Studies C1a. Prior NAC t rial for y outh CUD 
Our research team recently completed a double -blind randomized placebo- controlled trial of NAC for youth 
CUD (62).  Treatment- seeking youth with CUD ( N=116) were randomized, in 1:1 parallel group allocation, to 
receive a double -blind 8- week course of NAC (1200 mg) or placebo  (PBO) twice daily, added to a CM 
intervention and brief (≤10 minute) weekly cessation counseling.  A post -treatment follow- up visit occurred 4 
weeks after treatment conclusion .   
The primary study hypothesis was that participants randomized to NAC would have higher odds than those 
randomized to placebo to submit negative weekly urine cannabinoid tests (UCTs) during treatment .  An intent -
to-treat (ITT) approach including all randomized participants was used.  In all analyses, participants lost to follow 
up or absent for visits were coded as having a positive UCT at every missed visit.  
The proportion of negative UCTs in the NAC and 
PBO groups at each visit  (ITT sample)  is shown in 
the adjoining figure.  Though there was no group 
difference in baseline years of cannabis use , this 
variable was an independent predictor of positive 
UCT during treatment  (p=0.007) and was therefor e 
covaried in the model.  Participants randomized to 
NAC had more than double the odds of negative 
UCTs during treatment, compared with those 
randomized to PBO.  In the adjusted model,  the 
relationship between treatment  and the odds of a 
negative UCT was OR=2.4 (95% CI: 1.1- 5.4), 
p=0.021. Through the final treatment visit, 40.9% 
(190/464) of the UCTs among participants in the 
NAC group were negative, compared to 27.2% 
(126/464) among those in the PBO group, per ITT analysis, assuming any missing urine was positive for 
cannabinoids.  At the post -treatment follow- up visit (four weeks after medication discontinuation), 19.0% (11/58) 
of the UCTs among participants in the NAC group were negative, compared to 10.3% (6/58) among those in the 
PBO group.  While still numerically favoring NAC, the overall treatment effect lost statistical sign ificance at post -
treatment follow- up (OR=2.2 [95% CI: 0.7 -6.5], p=0.155), though the trial was not powered for this outcome.    
0102030405060
BL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 FUStudy WeeksProportion (%) of Negative Urine 
Cannabinoid Tests Placebo NAC 
 
Negative Urine Cannabinoid Test (%) 
 
NAC (n=58)       8.6      31.0    39.7     43.1     44.8    41.4     43.1     39.7    44.8                 19.0 
Placebo (n=58) 10.3     17.2     29.3     29.3     31.0    27.6     25.9     24.1    32.8                 10.3 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 6  of 31 
 Models were examined for the possibility of  confounding and effect modification of age, weight , gender , and 
number of previous cannabis quit attempts.  None of the variables tested were significant confounders or effect 
modifiers (all p>0.60).  
A post hoc sensitivity analysis was performed on odds of negative UCTs during treatment, using multiple 
methods to manage missing data and participant dropouts.   In addition to the ITT approach noted above ( n=116), 
a modified ITT analysis that examined participants who received at least one dose of study medicatio n (n=106) 
and a per -protocol analysis using available data  (n=varying) were performed.  Using a modified ITT analysis, 
participants in the NAC group had 2.2 times the odds of submitting negative UCTs, compared to those in the 
PBO group (OR=2.2 [95% CI: 1.1 -4.5], p=0.04) during the treatment phase of the study.  When only examining 
available data (per -protocol analysis), participants in the NAC group had 2.4 times the odds of submitting 
negative UCTs than those in the PBO group (OR=2.4 [95% CI: 1.1 -4.5], p=0.04).  Finally, combinatorial graphical 
methods for assessing the impact of missing data on significance of findings were also employed, in which every 
permutation of missing data assignment was co nsidered, and a subsequent logistic regression performed (86).  
For the majority of missing data assignments that could be reasonably expected, the odds ratio was still significant.  I n general , the selection of missing data handling had little  effect on analytic outcomes . 
Additional secondary analyses were conducted to explore end -of-treatment outcomes, using a sample 
restricted to participants with positive urine cannabinoid tests at baseline ( n=105).  While the study was not 
powered for these outcomes, it was felt that these were particularly relevant to evaluate meaningful clinical 
impact of the intervention. We additionally explored abstinence outcomes via the Number of Beyond -Threshold 
Weeks of Success (NOBWOS) Analysis Method ( 87), quantitative self -reported cannabis use, and cumulative 
days abstinent during treatment (self -report) , all among participants with positive baseline urine cannabinoid 
testing ( n=105) .  We also examined concordance between UCT and self -report within the data set , yielding 88% 
agreement  in the end -of-treatment outcome measure . 
Every efficacy outcome approach explored, inclusive of both UCT and self -report data sets, consistently 
yielded findings numerically favoring NAC over placebo.  Statistically significant differences were noted in the study’s a priori  outcome analysis (odds of negative weekly UCT over the course of treatment) and in the end -of-
treatment binary UCT outcomes (last 2 weeks [OR 2.55, p=0.036] and last 4 weeks [OR 2.59, p=0.045]).  The 
study was powered only for the a priori  outcome, so lack of statistical signif icance for some of the 
secondary/exploratory outcomes may be attributed to low power/limited sample size.  Odds ratios were greater than 2 for all end -of-treatment (last 2 and last 4 weeks) UCT and self -report outcomes (aside from those 
assuming the extremely unlikely case that all missing data were negative/abstinent).  Furthermore, there was 
strong agreement between UCT and self -report.  Overall, findings demo nstrate consistently favorable outcomes 
for NAC versus PBO  across a wide variety of approaches. 
C1b. Prior NAC trial for adult CUD –  youth subgroup results  
Our team recently completed a multisite trial ( N=302) of NAC versus PBO, added to CM, for CUD in adults ages 
18-50 (UG1DA013727 —CTN0053 ).  While that trial failed to detect an overall differential NAC versus PBO 
treatment effect, post hoc exploration within participants ages 18 -21 (overlapping age group with the prior 
adolescent NAC, added to CM, trial) revealed numerical advantage of NAC over PBO with a magnitude remarkably 
consistent with that of the prior adolescent trial (OR=2), 
suggesting that response to NAC may potentially be age-
dependent.  Whether this may be due to developmental 
differences in the course and phenomenology of CUD,  
differential effects of NAC based on stages of brain 
development, potential need for dose adjustment based on age, and/or other factors remains unclear, and is deserving 
of further examination. In light of these discrepant findings, a 
replication trial of NAC in adolescents with CUD is indicated.  
C1c. Experience with cognitive task performance assessments in youth with CUD 
 0510152025303540
BL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12Percentage of Negative Urine Cannabinoid Tests
WeekNAC+CM -18-21 (n=35)
Placebo+CM -18-21 (n=23)
NAC+CM -22-50 (n=118)
Placebo+CM -22-50 (n=126)
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 7  of 31 
 Participants in our prior trial of NAC for youth CUD completed serial cognitive task performance assessments, 
demonstrating improvement in multiple  cognitive domains (verbal memory, psychomotor performance) among 
participants who achieved abstinence during the trial, compared to those who continued using cannabis ( 23).  
We plan to utilize the same comprehensive cognitive task battery in the proposed trial, and the enhanced sample 
size will allow for significantly more power to carefully assess cognitive out comes with abstinence versus 
continued use, and to (in exploratory fashion) examine potential relationships between NAC and PBO  and 
cognitive outcomes.  
C2. Research Team  
The investigative team, uniquely experienced with pharmacotherapy trials for youth substance use disorders 
(SUD), is ideally suited to undertake this study.  In addition to having completed prior trial s of NAC versus PBO, 
added to CM, for youth CUD (62)  and adult CUD (UG1DA013727 —CTN0053) , the team has also conducted 
multiple pharmacotherapy trials targeting youth tobacco use disorder (88 , U01 DA031779 ), and is experienced 
with serial cognitive task performance assessment within a CUD treatment trial (23).  The multidisciplinary team 
is led by a board -certified child and adolescent psychiatrist with specific expertise in clinical trials targeting youth 
SUD.  Each team member possesses expertise vital to the successful completion of the study.  
The study will be conducted at a nationally recognized SUD treatment research center, assuring the ability 
to efficiently complete the project while maintaining the highest quality of protection of human participants and 
data integrity. 
C3. Design and Methods of Current Proposal 
C3a. Overview  
We propose a 12- week trial of N -acetylcysteine ( NAC) for cannabis use disorder (CUD) in youth ( N=192).  
 
 
 
 
C3b. Participants and Feasibility of Recruitment and Retention  
Recruitment Strategies  
Youth ( 200 consented/screened for a power analysis N=192) will be recruited from the community, schools, 
and clinical settings.  We have an aggressive plan for recruitment and are confident that our previously 
established strategies will ensure success.  Assuming an initial 3-month period for study setup, per -participant 
study duration of 6 months, and a concluding 3-month period for data analysis and publication, we anticipate a 
recruitment window of 48 months.  To meet the recruitment goal, we must enroll  6 participants per month, which 
is feasible and realistic.   
Our confidence in successful recruitment stems from a complement of strategies developed over years of 
experience with randomized controlled trials of pharmacotherapies and behavioral treatments for youth 
substance use disorders .  We have had consistent success via multimedia and internet advertisements, 
longstanding partnerships with local schools (including the Charleston County School District [enrollment 
>48,000 ] and the College of Charleston [enrollment  >11,000]), referrals from clinics, and respondent -driven 
sampling/participant  peer referral.  
In our prior trial of NAC versus PBO, added to CM, for youth CUD (R01DA026777), we combined the above 
strategies, enrolling 7.5 participants per month, demonstrating consistent recruitment success achieved by  
combining a number of innovative, aggressive strategies  (62).  We are currently using similar methods for a 
youth (same age range) tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy trial (U01DA031779), remaining consistently on 
track for  goal enrollment.  
 
Consent & 
Eligibility 
Assessment  
Weeks 1 -12  
NAC 1200 mg or placebo twice daily 
Weekly urine testing, cessation counseling, and medication management  
 Wk 16  
Start m edication  
 End of treatment  
 
Post-treatment  
 Randomization  
NAC  
n=96 
PBO  
n=96 
Wk 26  
Cognitive task performance assessment  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 8  of 31 
 For the proposed study, we plan to continue our established combined approach, which we are confident will 
be successful .  In the event that we encounter unforeseen recruitment difficu lty, we will broaden our school 
partnerships to other nearby school districts and private schools .  We can additionally utilize strategies that have 
been successful for other MUSC studies, including (a) advertising on billboards along area highways, (b) 
establishing research clinics in existing suburban/rural MUSC clinics, and (c) establishing additional sites within 
the Southern Consortium  node of the NIDA Clinical Trials Network . 
Additionally, a Youth Collaborative of adolescent substance use studies within the Division has been 
developed that will not only allow for the cost sharing needs of advertising and study promotion but also make the 
process of identifying opportunities at MUSC easier for participants, parents/family, and community partners.  By 
marketing a central point of contact for interested parties to seek additional information, callers can be triaged to the appropriate study or directed to clinical services based on their expressed interest level and/or prescreen 
outcomes.  This is particularly appropriate for incorporation since there is a high likelihood of polysubstance use.  
By streamlining the referral process, it lessens the burden on the caller to duplicate the ir efforts and potentially 
become fatigued and disillusioned with the process and ultimately not receive the service delivery that they desire. 
Retention Strategies  
Retention, like recruitment, is a considerable challenge in youth CUD  studies. Given intent -to-treat analysis 
(including all randomized participants and assuming that participants are using cannabis  at each missed visit), 
poor retention may result in an underestimate of treatment effects.  It also limits participant exposure to treatment, 
which further attenuates treatment effects.    
Our team has been successful with optimizing participant retention via a number of well-established  
strategies.  Our research clinic is centrally located and open for extended (including after -school) hours, with 
free parking immediately in front of the building.  We maintain active communication with participants between visits via their preferred mode  of contact (e.g., text message, telephone, e -mail).  We also strictly maintain 
confidentiality, a particularly significant issue in studies focused on inter ventions for illicit substance use in 
youth.  The PI is a board -certified child, adolescent, and general psychiatrist, well versed in managing 
communication with youth and parents/guardians while maintaining appropriate bounds of confidentiality and 
managing issues of safety; the resultant trust and ra pport supports participant adherence and retention.  
Additionally, we strive to reinforce participants appropriately for attending visits and completing study 
procedures.  It is clear that higher magnitude rei nforcement is associated with significantly improved retention 
(89-91), and cash rewards (relative to gift cards or other tokens) are associated with improved session 
attendance (92).  Adult and youth studies reveal that high -magnitude rewards are generall y not used to 
purchase cannabis or other substances of abuse (92,93).  Participants will be compensated $20 for each visit 
attended, with an additional $20 each for lengthier visits involving cognitive task performance assessment 
(screening/assessment, ran domization, mid- treatment, end -of-treatment, and last post -treatment follow- up 
visit).  In the event of a vis it being comp leted remotely, participants will receive the same compensati on rate for 
completing all visit needs, to include the at home collection and return of a urine sample.  If urine needs are not possible (either participant declines or collection/storage is not feasible, the participant will receive $10 for the 
remote visi t.  If an Unscheduled Visit is required during study participation, the participant will be compensated 
$10/visit for time and travel demands. If the participant is enrolled directly from the Youth Collaborative Intake 
(PRO 94743) with data from that protocol being utilized for the current aims, this study may be responsible for 
the $40 Intake Screening compensation. Payments will be made in cash or via ClinCard.   
In our prior NAC trial, with the above -mentioned strategies in place, among participants presenting for ANY 
visits after medication initiation, 84% completed the entire course of treatment.  We maintain similar success in our ongoing youth tobacco cessation pharmacotherapy trial (U01DA031779).  
Inclusion Criteria 
a) Age 13  – 21 years 
b) Must be able to understand the study and provide written informed consent ( for participants under 18 
years old, a parent/legal guardian must be able to provide consent and the participant must be able to provide assent)  
c) Must meet current (within last 30 days) DSM- 5 criteria for cannabis use disorder  
d) Must express interest in treatment for cannabis use disorder  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 9  of 31 
 e) Must submit a positive urine cannabinoid test during screening  
f) Females must agree to use appropriate birth control methods during study participation: oral 
contraceptives, contraceptive patch, barrier (diaphragm or condom), levonorgestrel implant, 
medroxyprogesterone acetate, complete abstinence from sexual intercours e, or hormonal contraceptive 
vaginal ring  
g) Must have successfully completed the YC Intake Protocol (PRO# 94743) within  approximately 30 days 
of formal study screening  
Exclusion Criteria  
a) Allergy or intolerance to N-acetylcysteine  
b) Females who are pregnant , contemplating pregnancy over the next 6 months,  or lactating 
c) Current use of N-acetylcysteine or any supplement containing N-acetylcysteine (must agree not to take 
any such supplement throughout study participation) 
d) Use of carbamazepine or nitroglycerin within 14 days of randomization  or expectation of future use during 
protocol participation 
e) Current enrollment in treatment for cannabis use disorder  or expectation of other treatment during 
protocol participation 
f) Any use of synthetic cannabinoids (such as K2/Spice) in the 30 days prior to screening  or expectation of 
future use during protocol participation  
g) Current moderate or severe substance use disorder, other than cannabis or tobacco  
h) Medical  history of severe asthma (uncontrolled with medication ) 
i) History of seizure disorder  
j) Any other medical or psychiatric condition or other significant concern that in the Investigator’s opinion 
would impact participant safety  or compliance with study instructions, or potentially co nfound the 
interpretation of findings  
Age Range  
The participant age range for the proposed study (1 3-21 years old) was chosen for multiple reasons.  Broad 
agreement exists to support this range.  The Maternal Child Health Bureau defines adolescence as age 11 -21, 
and the Center for Disease Control and Prevention defines it as ages 10 -24. Given considerable development al 
variability from age 10 -24, though, a sample inclusive of this range might be overly heterogeneous.  Additionally, 
while many youth  initiate cannabis use between ages 10 -13, few exhibit sufficient symptoms of cannabis use 
disorder to merit study inclusion (only 1% of 8th graders use cannabis daily ) (3).  Given the potential identification 
of individuals 22 -24 as adults, we opted to exclude this age range as well.  Additionally, our prior trial of NAC 
versus PBO, added to CM, for youth CUD included ages 14 -21, and sample consistency between that study and 
the proposed trial will help avoid confounding of between -study outcome comparisons . 
We do recognize that the developmental context varies considerably even within the narrowed range of 1 3-
21.  To address this, we plan to stratify randomization by age  (at time of randomization) , ensuring that equivalent 
proportions of those age 13-18 and those age 19- 21 are represented in the treatment randomization groups.  
Given our prior success,  we anticipate recruiting similar proportions of youth across these strata , and will adjust 
strategies if the proportions become skewed.  This stratified approac h will convey the added opportunity to 
compare outcomes (in exploratory fashion) between younger and older adolescents.  
C3c. Intake and Randomization  
Pre-Screening Assessment  
Individuals responding to recruitment materials or otherwise referred to the study will be pre -screened on the 
phone or in person to ascertain preliminary eligibility status.  A series of questions will determine preliminary 
eligibility, and formal  screening appointments will be scheduled for those who meet these eligibility criteria .  No 
information obtained during the pre -screening will be used as research data.   All study related procedures will 
take place either on the MUSC campus within the designated office areas of the Addiction Sciences Division 
located at 125 Doughty Street, Suite 190, or remote/ hybrid  via doxy.me, WebEx, or Zoom.  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 10 of 31 
 Informed Consent Procedures  
Prior to the initiation of any study procedures, written informed consent and HIPAA authorization will be 
obtained by the designated research staff.   Informed consent/assent may be obtained remotely via REDCap  and 
doxy.me,  WebEx, or Zoom. Parents/guardians of participants under 18 years old will participate  with the 
adolescent in the screening, evaluation, and informed consent/assent procedure.  Participants 18 years and 
older will be able to provide their own informed consent.  The informed consent process will include a thorough 
discussion of potential risks associated with participation, including potential adverse effects of study medication. The complex issues of informed consent and assent , and related limitations of confidentiality, as they apply to 
adolescents and their paren ts/guardians, are understood by the PI and will be communicated clearly during the 
telephone screening and assessment visit.  In the case of adolescents in South Carolina Department of Social 
Services custody, state guidelines regarding consent for clinica l research participation will be followed.  
Potential participants (and parents/guardians, as appropriate) will be given a copy of the IRB -approved 
consent form and asked to read  the document with ample opportunity to take their time in its review.  The 
participant (and parent/ guardian, as appropriate) will have the consent document s reviewed with delegated study 
personnel and have all questions and concerns addressed to their satisfaction.  Anyone who cannot demonstrate 
appropriate understanding of the study or who expresses an unwillingness to parti cipate in the protocol will be 
ineligible to participate and will be assisted in finding other treatment resources.  Those who demonstrate 
understanding of the study and voluntarily agree to participate will be asked to sign the informed consent form 
and proceed with the screeni ng assessments.  As part of the informed consent procedures, participants will be 
asked to provide or decline consent to be contacted for future studies.  Copies of the signed consent documents 
will be given to the participants for th eir reference and resource.  
Screening/Baseline Assessment  
After consenting to participate in the study, participants w ill start the screening/baseline assessment  phase.   
Ideally, the screening/baseline assessment  procedures will be completed in one visit , but they can be completed 
in more visi ts if necessary.  Participants will provide general demographic information and complete a locator 
form to optimize between -visit contact and communication.  The comprehensive assessment will include a 
medical history and physical examination, urine drug t esting, semi -structu red psychiatric diagnostic interview 
(94,95), and detailed assessment of cannabis and other substance use history.  Should a participant have screen 
failed for protocol # 80921, N -Acetylcysteine for Youth Alcohol Use Disorder, the data/information that was 
completed as part of that protocol could be incorporated into this protocol if the participant presented as a likely 
eligible candidate.  Additionally, the data collected as part of successful completion of protocol #94743, Youth 
Collaborative Assessment: Y outh Treatment Trends, may also be incorporated as part of the inclusionary 
requirement. The participant would need to confirm interest and consent to such participation and data sharing.  
The screening procedures of these protocols closely mirror each other and this data sharing would remove the 
need for duplication of procedures as well as u ndue burden and testing fatigue.    
Randomization  
Following completion of screening /baseline assessments and determination of study eligibility, participants 
who return for the randomization visit and continue to be eligible will be randomly assigned , in double- blind 
fashion,  to one of two conditions (NAC or PBO)  for 12 weeks of treatment.  Random assignment will be on a 1:1 
ratio.  Randomization will be stratified by age (≤18 versus ≥19) and by current tobacco /nicotine use status 
(yes/no) .  The age stratification will ensure that both younger and older adolescents will be equally represented 
across groups.  The tobacco  use stratification will help equalize dist ribution across treatment groups, as co-
occurring tobacco use may impact cannabis use disorder treatment outcomes.  We considered additional 
stratification variables (e.g., gender, severity of cannabis use disorder, history of attention -deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder), but, amid concern over  excessive division of participants among multiple cells, judged that these could 
be adequately explored as covariates during efficacy analyses.   
Mr. Baker, the study statistician , will generate the randomization schedule using balanced blocks of varying 
sizes within strata to ensure lack of predictability along with relative equality of assignment across treatment 
groups.  Randomization assignments will not be conveyed to staff or participants.   Mr. Baker  will review 
randomization data on a regular basis to ensure that the scheme is being implemented according to plan.   A 
randomization slot, once used, will not be re -allocated.  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 11 of 31 
 C3d. Treatment 
Psychosocial Intervention  
All participants will receive psychosocial intervention in the form of brief weekly non -manualized skills -based 
cannabis cessation counseling (designed to match the intervention provided in the prior NAC trial, and to mimic 
what may be feasibly conducted i n a busy clinical practice setting).  
Pharmacological Intervention  
Consistent with our established procedures, United States Pharmacopeia ( USP)  grade NAC powder will  be 
encapsulated in 600 mg quantities (two 600 mg capsules per dose).  Matched placebo capsules will also be 
prepared.  All capsules will be packaged in blister packs, with individual labels for time/date of each dose (e.g., 
Tuesday morning October 5th).  This date - and time- labeled blister pack method has demonstrated superior  
participant adherence, compared to traditional packaging, and offers the additional advantage of tracking the 
timing of any missed doses ( 96-99).  We successfully used identical methods for medication/placebo preparation 
and dispensing in our prior NAC versus PBO, added to CM,  study . 
If assessment procedures reveal that a participant meets inclusion criteria  and none of the exclusion criteria , 
the participant will be randomized to NAC or matched placebo in a double- blind fashion .  The participant will be 
given or mailed  a supply of medication, with instruction to take 1200 mg twice daily, in approximately twelve -
hour intervals.  This dose was chosen due to its demonstrated tolerability and evidence of effect on cannabis 
use in our prior trial.   Subsequent medication supply will be given  out or mailed a week in advance to decrease 
the risk of the participant running out of study medication.  Participants will be expected to continue taking study medication until they complete the End of Treatment Visit.  
Study personnel will review daily reports and uploaded medication -taking videos (see C3e. below), and 
perform pill counts weekly throughout treatment to monitor medication adherence .  Medication tolerability and 
effects will be systematically assessed.  Medication supply will be refreshed for ongoing use over the following 
week.  Participants will be encouraged to contact study personnel between visits to address any immediate 
concerns regarding adverse effects.  If a participant experiences intolerable med ication -related adverse effects 
at any point during the study, a dose reduction to 600 mg twice daily may be undertaken.  The dosage may be 
increased back to 1200 mg twice daily at the discretion of the medical clinician.  However, i f a participant is 
unable to tolerate the reduced dose, medication will be discontinued, and the participant will continue to compete 
study visits . 
Post- Treatment Follow -Up 
Post-treatment follow- up visit s will be conducted at  approximately 16 weeks and 26 weeks from initial 
randomization .  Should a participant determine to withdraw from ongoing study participation or it is determined 
by the PI/medical clinicians that the discontinuation is in the best interest for the participant, an Early Termination 
visit (following the schedule of events for a Week 26 visit) will be completed.  If the participant does not wish to return for a final visit, a “phone visit” will be completed to gather bas ic health and safety details in addition  to 
current cannabis status.   
Incidental Visits 
Unscheduled Visits / Meetings – Unforeseen incidents may occur that would require a participant to return to 
the off ice or set up a remote meeting  outside of the routine  schedule of events.  Such incidents could include:  
technological issues with loaned study equipment, medication dispensation if medication become s 
lost/damaged, or an AE that requires immediate attention for proper assessment.  It is not expected that these brief visits (likely 15 minutes in duration)  would occur with any frequency and the majority of study participants 
would not require  the additional meeting /return to the office . 
Remote Visits – All visits can be conducted entirely remotely via REDCap and WebEx  or Zoom.  The 
participant will receive a shipment in the mail with the supplies required to complete an offsite/at home urine 
collection should they be willing to follow the proper collection and storage of a sample . Study medication will 
also be shipped in proper packing with tracking to protect medication as well as participant privacy. Prior to  the 
mailing of  any materials, ongoing participant interest in continued study pa rticipation will be confirmed, dosing 
instructions and safety needs will be reviewed, and depending on the ability to physically return study medication/blister packs, appropriate destruction measures will be provided.  If such remote measures are 
employed, participants will be directed to have more extended visualization of their medication blister packs in 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 12 of 31 
 their video recording of study medication dosing to allow study personnel to properly monitor medication 
accountability.  
 
 
C3e. Instruments/Measures/Materials  
Clinical Assessments  
Timeline Follow -Back, inclusive of detailed quantification of cannabis use, will be conducted at baseline and 
throughout the trial to characterize self -reported cannabis and other substance use (84,85,106) . The MINI 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview will be conducted at the initial assessment visit to evaluate for psychiatric 
and substance use disorders (94 -95).  Throughout the study, a variety of self -report clinical measures will be 
collected, including Current Quality of Life ( 107), Marijuana Prob lem Scale (10 8), Marijuana Craving 
Questionnaire (10 9-111), Cannabis Withdrawal Scale ( 112), Obsessive Compulsive Drug Use Scale ( 113), Beck 
Depression Inventory  (114), Beck Anxiety Inventory ( 115), ADHD Rating Scale ( 116), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality 
Index ( 117), Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (11 8), and Short UPPS -P Impulsivity Scale ( 119).  Suicidality will be 
evaluated using the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale ( 120).  Among tobacco users, nicotine dependence 
will be assessed via the Modified Fagerström  Tolerance Questionnaire  (mFTQ ) (121) . For those using electronic 
cigarettes (e -cigs), nicotine dependence will be assessed via the Penn State Electronic Cigarette Dependence 
Index (122).  Additionally, a clinician completed CUD Outcomes assessment will be completed.   Adverse events 
will be documented, rated for severity and relatedness, coded in Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
(MedDRA) terms, and managed/reported appropriately via established procedures (see Human Subjects 
section).  To evalua te penetration of the blind, participants and the primary study personnel who interact with the 
participant will be asked at multiple time points whether they think the participant is receiving NAC or PBO.  
Participants will be asked to complete daily report surveys through REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture –  a secure, web- based application designed exclusively to support data capture for research studies ) 
during the study. The daily report will ask about marijuana and any other drug or alcohol use on the day prior, 
as well as (during the 12 weeks of treatment) times of medication dosing. Participants will be asked to begin 
completing daily reports following  their screening visit. Links to access the d aily report will be sent to participants 
through their mobile phone and their email address.  Participants may complete daily reports on either their 
smartphone or on a computer.  
During the 12 weeks of treatment, participants will be asked to record and upload twice -daily videos of 
medication -taking at home or in a private location of their choosing.  These videos  will be taken remotely and 
submitted via REDCap surveys to confirm medication adherence . Participants may use their personal mobile 
phones for video submission.  If they do not have a smartphone, one will be loaned to them during the first week 
of study. Video submissions may only be completed on a smartphone (cannot be co mpleted on a computer).  A 
survey link will be sent to the participant via text message.  Video capture will occur as part of the R EDCap 
survey.  Videos are automatically stored on Android smartphones, and participants will be informed of that so they can delete the files, if necessary.  Participants using iPhones (and using loaner iPhones from our group) 
will not have stored videos on their phone and nothing will need to be deleted.  
Laboratory Tests 
Urine pregnancy tests will be conducted with female participants.  Weekly urine samples will be tested both 
qualitatively via dipstick as well as analyzed by the laboratory for quantitative urine cannabinoid level (with cutoff 
of <50 ng/mL signifying a cannabinoid -negative urine).  Quantitative urine creatinine will also be obtained, to 
allow for evaluation of creatinine- normalized urine cannabinoid  levels for quantitative comparisons ( 123,124). 
 
 
Cognitive Task Performance Assessments  
CNS Vital Signs, a computer -administered battery of performance tests, assessing subtle changes in mental  
acuity, learning and memory, psychomotor speed, complex attention, impulsivity, planning and sequencing, and 
other aspects of performance, will be administered at baseline, during treatment, at treatment conclusion, and 
at post -treatment follow- up (125). A training/practice session will be conducted during screening.  The 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 13 of 31 
 performance battery, validated among adolescents, requires approximately 45 minutes to complete and includes 
the following components: Verbal Memory Test (Part 1), Visual Memory Test (Part 1), Finger Tapping Test, 
Symbol Digit Coding, Stroop Test, Shifting Attention Test, Continuous Performance Test, Perception of Emotions 
Test, Reasoning Test, Four Part Continuous Performance Test, Dual Task Test, Verbal Memory Test (Part 2), 
Visual Memory Test (Part 2) .  We have utilized this battery in our prior work with NAC and CM in youth with CUD, 
demonstrating evidence of performance changes in some cognitive domains with abstinence versus continued 
use (23), though the proposed trial will provide superior power t o assess a variety of cog nitive outcomes.  
 
For a subset of participants having participated in PRO#82347 – Cannabis Use in Adolescents’ Natural 
Environments (CANE), that have consented to shared linked data , the study data sets will be combined to 
investigate predictors of treatment outcome in the present study.  Specifically, measures from the CANE study of cue- induced or negative affect -related craving will be examined as predictors of reduction in quantit ative urine 
cannabinoid test results during treatment in the present study.
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 14 of 31 
 Study Timetable  
 SC Double -Blind Medication Phase FU 
Week à       SC 0ø 1 2 3 4 5 6& 7 8 9 10 11 12 16 26/ET  
Informed Consent  X                
Locator Form and Updates  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Demographics  X ꜝ⌂                
“Study Motivation”                 X 
Technology Survey    X              
Beliefs about Medications & Medication 
Adherence Video Feedback Form               X  X> 
Medical Assessments                  
History and Physical  X%ꜝ                
Height, Weight, Blood Pressure, and 
Pulse  X%ꜝ       X      X  X 
Adverse Events  X% X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Prior/Concomitant Meds  X%ꜝ X$ X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Penetration of Blind Assessment         X      X  X 
Clinical Global Impression of Severity 
Scale (CGI -S) X%       X      X  X 
Psychological Assessments                  
M.I.N.I.  X%ꜝ⌂                
CUD Outcomes  X       X      X  X 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale  Xꜝ                
Short UPPS- P Impulsivity Scale  Xꜝ⌂                
Current Quality of Life  Xꜝ X      X      X X X 
Beck Depression Inventory  Xꜝ X      X      X X X 
Beck Anxiety Inventory  Xꜝ X      X      X X X 
ADHD Rating Scale   X      X      X X X 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  Xꜝ⌂ X      X      X X X 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  Xꜝ X$      X      X X X 
Cognitive Task Performance Testing  X#ꜝ X      X      X  X 
Substance Self -Report                  
Cannabis and Other Substance Use 
History  Xꜝ⌂                
Cannabis Quantification  X                
TLFB/Substance Use Daily Reports  X%ꜝ⌂ X$ X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Cannabis Withdrawal Scale  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Marijuana Craving Questionnaire  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Marijuana Problem Scale  X       X      X X X 
Obsessive Compulsive Drug Use Scale  X       X      X X X 
Modified Fagerstr öm Tolerance 
Questionnaire (mFTQ)  and/or Penn 
State Electronic Cigarette Dependence 
Index  X⌂ꜝ                
Motivation and Confidence to Quit X X               
Lab Samples/Testing                  
Urine drug test  (dipstick)  X^ꜝ⌂ X^ X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Urine Cannabinoids & Creatinine  assay  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Urine Pregnancy Test‡ X⌂ X$ X* X* X* X* X* X X* X* X* X* X* X   
Psychosocial Procedures                  
Medication  Adherence Assessment  
(Pill Count , Daily Reports , and REDCap 
Video  Review)    X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Cessation Counseling/  
Medication Management   X X X X X X X X X X X X    
Medication Dispensation   X X X X X X X X X X X X    
Estimated Visit Length (hours)  à 2-3 1.5 .75 .75 .75 .75 .75 1.5 .75 .75 .75 .75 .75 1.5 1 1.5 
 
 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 15 of 31 
 SC=Screening/Assessment, FU=Follow -Up, ET=Early Termination  
ø the week 0 visit is the Randomization Visit , ‡ females only,  * PRN for safety/precautionary measure , ^ Urine drug test  should be performed at screening/baseline 
and again before randomization to ensure eligibility, $ should be completed prior to randomization to ensure eligibility.   & If week 6 visit is missed, assessments that 
are only completed at that visit should be performed at the next attended visit, as long as the window for the end -of-treatment (week 12) visit has not yet opened. % 
These assessments may be performed at the randomization (week 0) visit, as long as they occur prior to randomization to ensure eligibility. # Training/practice 
cognitive task performance session.  ; ꜝ data sharing of completed protocol procedures from PRO# 80921 as a result of screen failure , > at ET if completed during 
treatment phase of protocol ; ⌂ data sharing of completed protocol procedures from PRO#94743  
C3f. Statistical Methods  
Power and Sample Size  
This study is powered on the hypothesis that there is a clinically significant difference in proportions of 
negative urine cannabinoid tests (UCTs) among participants receiving NAC versus PBO . 
Our previous findings demonstrated  proportions  of negative UCTs of 41% with NAC+CM and 27% with 
PBO+CM, but given that CM is itself a powerful treatment, we anticipate more modest proportions without a CM 
platform  (62). Based on our other prior work using pharmacotherapy without a CM platform , we anticipate the 
proportion of negative UCTs in the PBO  group will be between 6% and 10% ( 61). Although we have no prior 
clinical results for estimates of the efficacy of NAC alone, we anticipate that it will be at least as efficacious as 
CM in the proportion of negative UCTs (~ 27%), resulting in an overall anticipated effect o f NAC versus PBO of 
25% vs. 10%.  With 12 weekly observations taken on each participant, a conservatively estimated autocorrelation 
as high as ρ=0.90, and a first order autoregressive covariance pattern, we will have greater than 80% power with 
two-sided α=0.05 to dete ct the stated difference of 15% in proportions of negative UCTs with 67 participants per 
treatment group ( n=134 total).  Based on performance of past studies, we anticipate a 30% attrition rate during 
the study treatment period.  The inflated samples size of 96 randomized participants per group ( N=192 total) will 
thus provide superior power to detect the stated difference in the main effect of NAC versus placebo in the 
presence of up to a 30% attrition rate.  
Based on our previous research we anticipate approximately 25% percent of participants will have negative 
UCTs at cognitive task performance assessment  visits (23).  Similarly, our data indicate that negative UCTs were 
associated with increased verbal memory and psychomotor speed scores at both 4 and 8 weeks during a 
cannabis cessation trial using NAC  + CM versus CM alone ( Cohen’s d=0.90 and d=0.60; respectively).  The 
randomized samp le size of N=192 will provide superior power (99% and 82%,  respectively) with an adjusted 
α=0.01, to detect similar effect sizes across cognitive outcome measures taken at mid-treatment, end -of-
treatment , and post -treatment follow- up.  
Statistical Analysis  
Categorical clinical and demographic variables will be assessed by chi -square tests of independence, while 
continuous variables will be assessed using Student’s t-test.  In addition to baseline group differences, 
preliminary analysis of baseline characteristics with cannabis use outcomes of interest will examine significant 
correlates of abstinence in the study population.  Characteristics found to be significantly  associated with 
cannabis use outcomes will be included as covariates in the initial stages of  model development.  The primary 
measure of interest will be the proportion of self -reported abstinence confirmed with negative weekly UCTs (<  
50 ng/mL) during the 12 weeks of active treatment.   The m ain effect of NAC on negative weekly UCTs will be 
assessed with a repeated measure logistic regression using a general esti mating equations framework (GEE) 
(126).  Models will be computed both unadjusted and adjusted for significant covariates and confounders found 
in the preliminary analysis.  Working correlat ion structures will be independently compared using the quasi -
likelihood under the independence model criterion statistic ( 127).  All randomized participants will be included in 
the primary analysis (intent -to-treat; ITT) and participants will be deemed non -abstinent at any missed visit (drop-
out/loss- to-follow up included).  Model ba sed means will be used to construct the pairwise comparisons of groups 
(NAC versus  PBO).  In addition to the longitudinal analysis of negative UCT rates during treatment, rates  will be 
compared between treatment groups at each post -treatment follow- up visit using logistic regression models.  
Similarly, creatinine adjusted cannabinoid levels will be examined between groups over the course of the treatment and at the post -treatmen t follow -up visits using linear mixed effects models.  We will also, in exploratory 
fashion, examine group differences in other cannabis -related outcomes (e.g., self -reported cannabis use 
[Timeline Follow -Back], craving [Marijuana Craving Questionnaire], w ithdrawal [Cannabis Withdrawal Scale], 
and associated problems [Marijuana Problem Scale]).  In distinct models, the effect of co -occurring tobacco use 
disorder on cannabis cessation outcomes will be examined.  The main effect of co -occurring tobacco use 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 16 of 31 
 disorder , as well as the interaction between tobacco use disorder and each treatment assignment (NAC and 
CM), will be added to the primary efficacy model.   
Cognitive task performance will be assessed  at pre- treatment, mid- treatment, end -of-treatment, and post -
treatment follow- up.  Task performance at the post -baseline time points will be compared between those who 
have and have not achieved abstinence at that time points using generalized linear mixed models with outcome 
appropriate distributions (Gaussian, Poisson, etc.).  In addition to a binary indicator of UCT at each cognitive 
task measure visit, duration of abstinence will be examined as a predictor of c ognitive performance.  In 
exploratory fashion, we will also assess potential NAC versus PBO effects on cognitive task performance, as NAC possesses potential cog nitive enhancing properties ( 128). 
All analysis will be conducted using SAS version 9. 4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). 
Missing Data and Attrition  
Missing data in longitudinal studies can be a very problematic feature but can be mitigated through study 
design considerations. Attrition may introduce bias in the treatment group parameter estimate and reduce power, 
precision, and generalizability.  In order to minimize missing data and study attrition, study simplification and 
enhanced communication between study coordinators and participants will be emphasized.  We will make every 
effort to prevent attrition, e.g., telephone/text /e-mail reminders prior to visits, meeting with participants in 
community if needed, and reinforcing attendance at each visit.  However, these methods do not ensure that all 
data will be collected and appropriate analysis methods will be employed to accommodate missing data.  Mixed -
effects models yield valid inferences assuming ignorable attrition (i.e., attrition is accounted for by covariates or 
the dependent variable measured prior to dropout).  We propose a sensitivity strategy to examine the ignorability 
assumption. A pattern mixture model will be used to examine treatment response among participants with 
various dropout patterns and will be implemented in the mixed -effects framework  (129-131) in which participants 
are classified by attrition pattern (e.g., early dropout, middle dropout, late dropout, completer).  In addition, in 
keeping with the ITT Principle, we will make every effort to continue assessments for the entire course of 
randomized treatment, even among those who fail to adhere to randomized assignment or stop par ticipating in 
the study assigned intervention.   
C3g. Clinical Management Issues  
Subject Discontinuation/Stopping Rules  
Every effort will be made to retain participants in the trial.  If a participant experiences intolerable adverse 
effects with study medication that are not remedied by a dose reduction, the medication may be discontinued 
while the participant continues to participate in all non -medication study interventions and procedures.  
Clinical Deterioration “Rescue” Plan  
A clinical deterioration “rescue” plan will be in place for participants that experience psychiatric or substance 
use deterioration during the study.  Symptoms will be monitored closely throughout the trial to assess for 
deterioration.  Appropriate intervention will be arranged for any participant demonstrating gross clinical 
deterioration.  The rescue measures will include immediate assessment by the medical clinician  for a 
comprehensive psychiatric and substance abuse evaluation and referral for  appropriate clinical intervention .  The 
PI has full medical and psychiatric admitting privileges at the MUSC Medical Center.  
Referral for Participants Needing Continuing Treatment  
At the end of study  participation, if a participant requires or requests continuing treatment for CUD, an 
appropriate treatment referral  will be made . 
C3h. Operational Plan and Research Timetable  
Funding for five years is requested. The first three months will be used for training personnel, submitting 
regulatory documents, and preparing for study initiation. Fifty -four months will be needed for participant 
recruitment ( 48 months) and data collection (additional 6 months for last enrolled participants). The final three 
months will be used for data analysis and manuscript preparation. At a targeted recruitment rate of 4 participants 
per month, an adequate sample will be obtained within the time allotted.  
C4. Conclusion  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 17 of 31 
 Youth are more likely than adults to initiate cannabis use, develop CUD, and experience potentially lasting 
and impairing cannabis -related adverse consequences.  Currently disseminated treatments for youth CUD 
convey generally small to modest effect sizes,  with very few youth achieving sustained abstinence, indicating 
that work is needed to enhance treatments to address the public health burden of youth CUD.  The most 
promising youth CUD pharmacotherapy to emerge from research is NAC, but to date it has  not been evaluated 
without an embedded CM platform .  The proposed trial addresses this issue in a manner that allows evaluation 
of the main effect of NAC, outside of the context of CM .  This work is a critical step in optimizing treatments to 
disseminate into real -world practice.  The multidisciplinary research team, uniquely experienced with NAC n this 
population, is ideally suited to conduct this trial, and is dedicated to contributing to the evidence base to address 
the serious issue of yout h CUD.  
  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 18 of 31 
 Human Subjects Research  
1. Risks to Human Subjects  
1.1 Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
The PI and Co -Is have all completed the University of Miami computer -based CITI Human Subjects Research 
Education Course.  A total of 200 male and female youth between 1 3 and 21 years old with cannabis use disorder  
will be recruited over 48 months  for a target sample size of 192 .  The sample size was determined based on 
statistical power analysis (Section C3f).  Participants will be recruited from the local community.  A multimedia 
advertisement campaign will be used  for study recruiting.  The inclusion/exc lusion criteria are as follows:  
Inclusion Criteria 
• Age 13  – 21 years 
• Must be able to understand the study and provide written informed consent ( for participants under 18 
years old, a parent/legal guardian must be able to provide consent and the participant must be able to 
provide assent)  
• Must meet current (within last 30 days) DSM- 5 criteria for cannabis use disorder 
• Must express interest in treatment for cannabis use disorder  
• Must submit a positive urine cannabinoid test during screening  
• Females must agree to use appropriate birth control methods during study participation: oral 
contraceptives, contraceptive patch, barrier (diaphragm or condom), levonorgestrel implant, 
medroxyprogesterone acetate, complete abstinence from sexual intercours e, or hormonal contraceptive 
vaginal ring  
• Must have successfully completed the YC Intake Protocol (PRO# 94743) within approximately 30 days 
of formal study screening  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Allergy or intolerance to N-acetylcysteine  
• Females who are pregnant , contemplating pregnancy over the next 6 months,  or lactating 
• Current use of N-acetylcysteine or any supplement containing N-acetylcysteine (must agree not to take 
any such supplement throughout study participation) 
• Use of carbamazepine or nitroglycerin within 14 days of randomization or expectation of future use during 
protocol participation 
• Current enrollment in treatment for cannabis use disorder  or expectation of other treatment during 
protocol participation 
• Any use of synthetic cannabinoids (such as K2/Spice) in the 30 days prior to screening  or expectation of 
future use during protocol participation.  
• Current moderate or severe substance use disorder, other than cannabis or tobacco  
• Medical  history of severe asthma (uncontrolled with medication ) 
• History of seizure disorder  
• Any other medical or psychiatric condition or other significant concern that in the Investigator’s opinion 
would impact participant safety or compliance with study instructions, or potentially cofound the 
interpretation of findings   
Demographics  
United States Census data from 2013 reveal that the population in South Carolina is 68.3% White (63.9% White, 
not Hispanic or Latino), 27.9% Black or African American, and 5.3% Hispanic or Latino.  No other minority group 
comprises more than 2% of the popu lation. Among a nationally representative sample of individuals meeting 
criteria for cannabis use disorder within the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions 
(NESARC), 37% were female (132 ). In our prior placebo -controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine, added to 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 19 of 31 
 contingency management, for youth cannabis use disorder, 27% of enrolled participants were female, 13% were 
Black or African American, and 1.7% were Hispanic or Latino (62).  Given these numbers, we anticipate enrolling 
a sample that is a) 68% male and 32%  female, b) 80% White, 20% Black or African American, and 3% Hispanic 
or Latino. 
1.2 Sources of Materials  
Research materials obtained from participants include responses to questionnaires, psychiatric and physical 
examination results, and urine tests (drug metabolites, creatinine, and pregnancy) .  Materials will be obtained 
specifically for research purposes.  There will be no use of existing specimens, records, or data.  Every effort will 
be made to maintain participant confidentiality, in accordance with HIPAA.  
1.3 Potential Risks 
Questionnaires and interviews are all non -invasive and, as such, involve minimal physical risk to participants.  
Potential risks incurred by participants include:  
1. Adverse events related to study medication  
2. Loss of confidentiality 
1.31 Adverse events related to study medication  
N-acetylcysteine  has a generally benign adverse effect profile.   A meta- analysis of studies evaluating long -
term oral treatment with N-acetylcysteine  for prevention of chronic bronchitis found that N-acetylcysteine  was 
well tolerated, with generally mild, most commonly gastrointestinal adverse effects that did not require treatment interruption ( 82).  Our experience to date with N-acetylcysteine at the same dose proposed in this trial in youth 
with cannabis use disorder suggests a benign adverse event profi le (62). 
Some patients who have taken intravenous N-acetylcysteine  for the treatment of acetaminophen overdose 
have had more serious reactions.  Allergic reactions have occurred in about 5% of patients taking intravenous N-acetylcysteine  (133).  These reactions may be mild, consisting of flushing, rash, and itching.  Less common 
side effects include trouble breathing, low or high blood pressure, fever, and hives.  If untreated, such a reaction 
could lead to death.  Even more rare serious side effects of intravenous N-acetylcysteine  are irritability, 
confusion, and seizures.  These reactions (severe allergic reaction or seizures) have never been reported whe n 
N-acetylcysteine  is taken orally , as it will be in this study.   As a precaution, the medical clinician team will remain 
highly attentive to the issue of asthma, and will exclud e potential participants with severe asthma as defined by 
those uncontrolled by medication.  We will also exclude individuals with a history of seizure disorder.  
1.32 Loss of confidentiality 
Any communication of personal information carries the potential risk of breach of confidentiality.  
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
2.1 Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Recruitment of the participants will be from the local  community. The Medical University of South Carolina 
(MUSC) Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved Informed Consent (IC) will be obtained prior to the initial 
assessment.  The consent will be explained orally and in the written form, and will be documen ted by the 
signature of the participant on the IC.  For participants under 18 years old, a parent/legal guardian will provide 
consent and the participant will provide assent.  The consent document will contain a thorough review of potential 
risks associated with trial participation, including potential medication -related risks.  
For re-consenting purposes for those participants under 18 years of age whose parent/legal guardian is not 
available to attend a study visit, we would conduct the re -consent process over the phone. We understand  the 
importance of parental/guardian presence in the initial consenting procedures of study participation due to potential risks associated with study medication.  The issue that may arise, however, is that  it may become 
intrusive and demanding for them to return for a re- consent need when in most ca ses the IC revisions are minor 
and generally  editorial and administrative in nature.  We would not want their child’s study participation to 
potentially negatively impact the parent/guardian’s employment, nor do we want such a need to be a barrier in 
the child’s study participation.   
The process that study personnel would follow includes:  Discussion with the parent/guardian by 
trained/approved study personnel would be completed prior to the next scheduled visit where a re -consent is to 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 20 of 31 
 take place.  When possible, study personnel will have forwarded the new ICF (electronic or hard copy) to the 
parent /guardian  so he/sh e could have the document in front of him/her during the re -consent discussion.  Study 
personnel would clearly document the conversation detailing the changes in the ICF.  If the parent/legal guardian 
expresses understanding of the study changes and approves the child’s continued participation and the ICF is 
available to the parent/legal guardian, he/she will sign and date the  ICF accordingly, returning it for the minor’s 
assent and study personnel’s signature at the subsequent visit. If the parent/legal guardian does not have access 
to the ICF at the time, then the document will be sent home with the minor after their next completed study visit 
where the assent and staff’s signature was obtained.  The parent will sign the form accordingly and it will be 
returned to the study site at the following study visit.  A copy of the fully signed document would be provided to 
the parent/ legal guardian either by hardcopy (postal mail or minor’s delivery) or electronically (email or fax) per 
the parent/legal guardian’s preferred method.  If the parent/legal guardian does not feel comfortable with the 
changes, requesting to have additional in person discussion with study personnel, then the minor’s next visit 
would be cancelled/rescheduled for a date when the parent/legal guardian is able to attend the visit.  At that time, 
routine in person / remote consenting procedures would occur.   
Absence of Coercion: Participation in the study is voluntary. All participants will be compensated $40 for the 
completion of initial assessment, $40 each for completion of the other study visits that include cognitive task 
performance assessment, and $20 each for study visits completed that do not include cognitive task performance 
assessment. Participants will also be eligible for as much as $20 per week during the twelve weeks of active 
treatment for completion of remote data entry via smartphone, including video uploads confirming twice -daily 
medication adherence.  A bonus of $40 is available for reaching and completing Week 1 2 to address the use of 
the participant’s personal phone or for the safe return of loaned study equipment.  $20 will be available to those 
participants who do not reach and complete Week 12 in exchange for their personal phone use or the return of 
study equipment.  Participants will be eligible for a maximum of $ 700 for uninterrupted complet ion of all study 
visits and tasks. The informed consent agreement that will be read to each volunteer (and parent/guardian as 
applicable) prior to enrollment in the stud y explains the following:  
a) Compensation is supplied at each study visit.  
b) Participants may discontinue participation in the study at any point.  
c) Withdrawing from the study will not result in any adverse consequences to the participants.  
2.2 Protection Against Risk 
2.21 Adverse events related to study medication  
The informed consent process will be used to thoroughly educate participants and parents/guardians about 
potential medication -related risks, including adverse events.  This discussion will include thorough review of 
adverse events associated with oral N-acetylcysteine treatment.  Rigorous screening procedures and strict 
exclusion criteria are designed to exclude potential participants at elevated risk for adverse events.  The study medical clinician will conduct serial adverse events monitoring as part o f medication management.  Participants 
and parents/guardians will have access to the study medical clinician 24 hours, 7 days a week for emergencies.   
Participants experiencing intolerable adverse events will have the opportunity to reduce dose or discontinu e 
medication altogether, while remaining in the study for ongoing monitoring.  The PI has full hospital admitting 
privileges in the event of an adverse event requiring hospitalization.  Urine pregnancy tests will be conducted at 
baseline and serially durin g treatment for female participants.  
2.22 Loss of confidentiality 
The research team has established procedures in place to minimize the risk of any confidentiality breach.  
Participant records are stored in locked files within locked offices that are locked during holidays, weekends, and 
non-working hours.  Information c ontained in computer databases is password protected, maintained by 
participant number only, and devoid of specific identifiers.  No specific or general participant information will be 
left in public access areas, and no oral communication regarding partic ipants with identifiers will be made in any 
public areas.  Research staff members have had extensive training in HIPAA regulations and in maintaining confidentiality. 
 
 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 21 of 31 
  
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Participants and Others / Importance of the 
Knowledge to be Gained 
Despite considerable public health implications, insufficient research has focused on optimizing efficacious 
youth cannabis use disorder treatments.  Testing N-acetylcysteine will fill a critical evidence gap, providing key 
information to guide clinical practice.  
Participants in this study, regardless of randomization to active or placebo medication, will benefit by 
receiving a) comprehensive medical and psychiatric evaluation, and b) weekly cannabis cessation counseling 
throughout active treatment.  
 
4. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
This section is based on the recommendations in NIDA’s “Guidelines for Developing a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan.”  
4.1 Summary of the Protocol 
This application proposes a randomized controlled trial ( N=192) of N-acetylcysteine for youth cannabis use 
disorder.  Treatment -seeking youth with cannabis use disorder will be recruited from the local community, and 
enrolled participants will be randomized to receive a 12 -week course of N-acetylcysteine or placebo, added to 
weekly cannabis cessation counseling and medication management.  The primary efficacy outcome of interest 
is the proportion of negative urine cannabinoid tests during treatment, compared by treatment group. Cognitive 
task performance will be assessed pr ior to, during, and after treatment, to investigate whether participants 
achieving abstinence exhibit cognitive task performance improvement relative to participants who do not achieve 
abstinence.  Inclusion and exclusion criteria are outlined above.  Power and sample size calculations are in 
Section C3f.  
4.2 Trial Management  
All aspects of the study will be run through the MUSC Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
where the PI holds his faculty appointment.  The target population is described in Section C3b, Human Subjects  
Section 1.1, and the adjoining Planned Enrollment Table.  The timetable is as follows:  
 Year 1 
(months)  Year 2 
(months)  Year 3 
(months)  Year 4 
(months)  Year 5 
(months)  
Refine all procedures  1-3     
Procure supplies  1-3     
Refine recruitment methods  1-3     
Train Personnel  1-3     
Study Enrollment       
   Cumulative N to enroll* (36) (84) (132) (180) (192) 
   First Participant Enrolls   4     
   First Participant Completes  10     
   Last Participant Enrolls      51 
   Last Participant Completes     57 
Data Analysis      58-60 
Manuscript Preparation      58-60 
All numbers reflect months within total study duration (*with the exception of cumulative N) 
4.3 Data M anagement and Analysis  
Data will be collected by the appropriate individual (research assistant, PI, Co -I) using standardized paper 
forms and will only be identified with the study’s ID of the participant. The codes linking the name of the participant 
to the study ID will be kep t confidential in a n electronic file password protected by research staff .  Collected forms 
will be securely transported to the PI’s data entry center.  Research assistants will enter data in REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), a secure, web -based application designed exclusively to support data 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 22 of 31 
 capture for research studies. REDCap provides: 1) an intuitive interface for data entry (with data validation); 2) 
audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless 
data downloads to common stati stical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R); 4) procedures for importing data from 
external sources; and 5) advanced features, such as branching logic and calculated fields. These procedures are effective in minimizing data entry errors (e.g., missing or errant data). When possible, participant direct entry 
into REDCap (rather than paper forms) will be utilized.  The data analysis plan is outlined in Section C3f.   
4.4 Quality Assurance 
Accuracy and completeness of the data collected will be ensured by weekly review.  A 10% random sample 
of the primary source document will be crosschecked with the database on a quarterly basis.  If inaccuracies 
exceed 4%, then a second 10% will be randoml y chosen for audit.  The REDCap system does not accept outliers, 
illogical response patterns, etc. The PI and program coordinator will have weekly meetings with the research 
assistants to discuss qualitative comments received during data collection and any  problems in data collection 
or entry. The statistician will periodically examine the database for potential irregularities. Initial data analyses 
will examine distributions of variable scores and comparability of baseline characteristics across conditions in 
case analyses need to be adjusted for these. Confidentiality protections are outlined above.  
4.5 Regulatory Issues 
Prior to the start of the study, the protocol will be registered on the clinical trials registry (clinicaltrials.gov). 
All serious adverse events will be reported to the MUSC Institutional Review Board (IRB) within 24 hrs. Follow -
up of all serious adverse events will be reported as well. All adverse events are reviewed weekly by the PI and 
yearly by both the D ata and Safety Monitoring Board ( DSMB; see 4.9) and the IRB. Any significant actions taken 
by the local IRB, including significant protocol changes, w ill be relayed to NIDA. We anticipate the serious 
adverse event rate to be extremely low. If monitoring indicates otherwise, we will convene a special meeting of 
the DSMB.  
4.6 Trial Safety 
The potential risks and benefits and methods to minimize these risks are outlined in Sections 1.3 and 2.   
Guidelines have been developed for managing and reporting of adverse events (AEs), including serious adverse 
events (SAE; defined as any untoward med ical occurrence that results in death, is life -threatening, requires or 
prolongs hospitalization, causes persistent or significant disability/incapacity, results in congenital 
anomalies/birth defects, or in the opinion of the investigators represents other significant hazards or potentially 
serious harm to research subjects or others).  Dr. Gray will serve as the Program Manager for AEs.  The Adverse 
Event Log will be used to document all AEs.  If an AE is non -serious (self- limited with no intervention need ed), 
no further action will be necessary.  However, in the case of a serious, unresolved event, an AE follow -up log 
will be completed. The clinician will then call Dr. Gray with initial reports within 24 hours of the start of the SAE.  The clinician will r ecord the information on SAE Notification Form.  The clinician  will forward hard copies of the 
complete report (SAE Notification Form, Concomitant Medication Log, and AE Log) to Dr. Gray, who will, in turn 
notify the IRB, DSMB, and NIH about the SAE.  Additionally, Dr. Gray will communicate summary reports of 
DSMB di scussion of the SAE, or any deliberations of IRB regarding the review of the SAE or the trial itself, to 
NIH.  If the event is “Serious, Unexpected and Associated” (an SAE is considered unexpect ed if it is not described 
in the Package Insert), Dr. Gray will complete Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Form 3500A and will forward 
it to the FDA.  Dr. Gray also will inform the IRB and the study participants (and parents/guardians, as appropriate) 
about  the SAE. In all of these reviews and reports, strict patient confidentiality will be maintained.  
AEs will be coded on a weekly basis using Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) rules and 
entered into a database. For each weekly study meeting, the research assistants will prepare a summary of all 
AEs, including their severity and presum ed relation to study medication. The PI will review this at the weekly 
study meeting (or before if more urgent).  
Study procedures will follow as much as possible the FDA’s Good Clinical Practice Guidelines .  We will 
encourage participants (and parents/guardians as appropriate) to notify their physicians that a) they are in a 
randomized controlled research study evaluating N-acetylcysteine and contingency management for youth 
cannabis use disorder , and b) the physician should contact the PI directly if the physician  has any questions.  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 23 of 31 
 The research assistants will be instructed not to reveal whether a person is a participant in the study and will 
report to the PI any outside requests for information about a participant or any breaches in confidentiality. All 
requests by participants’ phy sicians and other medical providers will be referred directly to the PI.  
4.7 Trial Efficacy  
The DSMB (see 4.9) may request a blinded interim efficacy report (blinded to the PI and research team) for 
review while the trial is ongoing.  Final (fully unblinded) efficacy analysis will occur after all participants have completed all visits.  
4.8 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan Administration 
The PI will be responsible for monitoring the trial. The statistician will examine the outcomes database 
quarterly for missing data, unexpected distributions or responses, and outliers. The PI will weekly check the adverse event database prepared by the re search assistants immediately prior to the lab meeting to a) see if 
any particular MedDRA categories are being endorsed more frequently than anticipated, and b) determine if any adverse event  symptom checklist scores are higher than expected. A DSM report will be filed with the IRB and 
NIDA on a yearly basis, unless greater than expected problems occur. The report will include participant characteristics, retention and disposition of study participants, quality assurance issues and reports of adverse 
events, significant/unexpected adverse events and serious adverse events. We will report efficacy at the end of the trial. 
4.9 Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
We will create a DSMB, comprised of multidisciplinary faculty with expertise in pharmacotherapy and 
behavioral treatment trials (youth  and/or addiction- related). The DSMB will meet annually (more frequently as 
needed for emergent situations) to review any AEs related to the study, as well as review any data management 
related errors. The board may be called at any point if needed for ser ious adverse events, etc. Modification will 
be made in the procedures and/or the protocol if necessary base d on the findings of the board.  
  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 24 of 31 
 References  
1. Chen , C. Y., & Anthony , J. C. (2003) . Possible age -associated bias in reporting of clinical features of drug 
dependence: epidemiological evidence on adolescent -onset marijuana use. Addiction, 98 , 71-82. 
2. Volkow, N. D., Baler, R. D., Compton, W. M., & Weiss, S. R. (2014). Adverse health effects of marijuana use. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 370 , 2219- 2227.  
3. Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., Schulenberg, J. E., & Miech, R. A. (2015). Monitoring the Future 
national survey results on drug use, 1975 –2014: Volume 2, College students and adults ages 19 –55. Ann Arbor: 
Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan.  
4. Spear, L. P. (2000). The adolescent brain and age -related behavioral manifestations. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 24 , 417- 463. 
5. Herkenham , M., Lynn , A. B., Little , M. D., Johnson , M. R., Melvin,  L. S., de Costa , B. R., & Rice,  K. C. (1990) .  
Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain.  Proceedings of the  National Acad emy of  Sciences of the United 
States of  America, 87 , 1932- 1936.  
6. Rubino, T., & Parolaro, D. (2015). The impact of exposure to cannabinoids in adolescence: Insights from 
animal models. Biological Psychiatry . pii: S0006- 3223(15)00643- 5. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.07.024. 
7. Wilson, R. I., & Nicoll, R. A. (2002).  Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain.  Science, 296 , 678- 682. 
8. Freund , T. F., Katona,  I., & Piomelli,  D. (2003) .  Role of endogenous cannabinoids in synaptic signaling.  
Physiological  Reviews, 83 , 1017- 1066.  
9. Kreitzer,  A. C., & Regehr , W. G. (2002) .  Retrograde signaling by endocannabinoids.  Current Opin ion in  
Neurobiology, 12 , 324- 330. 
10. Fernández -Ruiz,  J., Gómez,  M., Hernández , M., de Miguel , R., & Ramos,  J. A. (2004) .  Cannabinoids and 
gene expression during brain development.  Neurotox icity Research, 6 , 389- 401. 
11. Rubino , T., & Parolaro , D. (2008) .  Long lasting consequences of cannabis exposure in adolescence.  
Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 286 , S108 -S113. 
12. Pope, H. G. Jr, Gruber, A. J., Hudson, J. I., Cohane, G., Huestis, M. A. & Yurgelun -Todd, D. (2003). Early -
onset cannabis use and cognitive deficits: What is the nature of the association? Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 
69, 303- 310. 
13. Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2015). Psychosocial sequelae of cannabis use and 
implications for policy: Findings from the Christchurch Health and Development Study. Social Psychiatry and 
Psychiatric Epidemiology . [Epub ahead of print]  
14. Jager, G., & Ramsey, N. F. (2008). Long- term consequences of adolescent cannabis exposure on the development of 
cognition, brain structure and function: An overview of animal and human research. Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 1 , 114 -
123. 
15. Meier, M. H., Caspi, A., Ambler, A., Harrington, H., Houts, R., Keefe, R. S., McDonald, K., Ward, A., Poulton, R., & Moffitt, T. E. (2012). Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological decline from childhood to midlife. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109 , E2657 -E2664. PMCID: 
PMC3479587  
16. Randolph, K., Turull, P., Margolis, A., & Tau, G. (2013). Cannabis and cognitive systems in adolescents. 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 3 , 135- 147. 
17. Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Swain -Campbell, N. (2002). Cannabis use and psychosocial adjustment 
in adolescence and young adulthood. Addiction, 97 , 1123- 1135.  
18. Patton, G. C., Coffey, C., Carlin, J. B., Degenardt, L, Lynskey, M. & Hall, W. (2002). Cannabis use and mental 
health in young people: Cohort study. British Medical Journal, 325 , 1195- 1198.  
19. Hayatbakhsh, M. R., Najman, J. M., Jamrozik, K., Mamun, A. A., Alati, R., & Bor, W. (2007). Cannabis and 
anxiety and depression in young adults: A large prospective study. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46 , 408- 417. 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 25 of 31 
 20. Moore, T. H., Zammit, S., Lingford -Hughes, A., Barnes, T. R., Jones, P. B., Burke, M., & Lewis, G. (2007). 
Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: A systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319-
328. 
21. Patton, G. C., Coffey, C., Lynskey, M. T., Reid, S., Hemphill, S., Carlin, J. B., & Hall, W. (2007). Trajectories 
of adolescent alcohol and cannabis into young adulthood. Addiction, 102 , 607- 615. 
22. Roisman , G. I., Masten , A. S., Coatsworth , J. D., & Tellegen , A. (2004) .  Salient and emerging developmental 
tasks in the transition to adulthood.  Child Development, 75 , 123- 133. 
23. Roten, A., Baker, N. L., & Gray, K. M. (2015). Cognitive performance in a placebo -controlled 
pharmacotherapy trial for youth with marijuana dependence. Addictive Behaviors , 45, 119- 123. PMCID: 
PMC4373963  
24. Dennis, M., Godley, S. H., Diamond, G., Tims, F. M., Babor, T., Donaldson, J., Liddle, H., Titus, J. C., Kaminer, Y., Webb, C., Hamilton, N., & Funk, R. (2004). The Cannabis Youth Treatment (CYT) Study: Main findings from two randomized trials. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 27 , 197- 213. 
25. Hendriks, V., van der Schee, E., & Blanken, P. (2011). Treatment of adolescents with cannabis use disorder: 
Main findings of a randomized controlled trial comparing multidimensional family therapy and cognitive 
behavioral therapy in The Netherlands. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 119 , 64-71. 
26. Walker, D. D., Stephens, R., Roffman, R., Demarce, J., Lozano, B., Towe, S., & Berg, B. (2011). Randomized 
controlled trial of motivational enhancement therapy with nontreatment -seeking adolescent cannabis users: A 
further test of the teen marijuana ch eck-up. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 25 , 474- 484. PMCID: 
PMC3177997  
27. Rigter, H., Henderson, C. E., Pelc, I., Tossmann, P., Phan, O., Hendriks, V., Schaub, M., & Rowe, C. L. 
(2013). Multidimensional family therapy lowers the rate of cannabis dependence in adolescents: A randomised 
controlled trial in Western European out patient settings. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 130 , 85-93. 
28. Waldron, H. B., & Turner, C. W. (2008). Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for adolescent substance 
abuse. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 37 , 238- 261. 
29. Hogue, A., Henderson, C. E., Ozechowski, T. J., & Robbins, M. S. (2014). Evidence base on outpatient behavioral treatments for adolescent substance use: Updates and recommendations 2007 -2013. Journal of 
Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 43 , 695- 720. 
30. Dutra, L., Stathopoulou, G., Basden, S. L., Leyro, T. M., Powers, M. B., & Otto, M. W. (2008). A meta -analytic 
review of psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165 , 179- 187. 
31. Krishnan -Sarin, S., Duhig, A. M., McKee, S. A., McMahon, T. J., Liss, T., McFetridge, A., & Cavallo, D. A. 
(2006). Contingency management for smoking cessation in adolescent smokers. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 14 , 306- 310. 
32. Krishnan -Sarin, S., Cavallo, D. A., Cooney, J. L., Schepis, T. S., Kong, G., Liss, T. B., McMahon, T. J., Nich, 
C., Babuscio, T., Rounsaville, B. J., & Carroll, K. M. (2013). An exploratory randomized controlled trial of a novel high- school -based smoking cessation intervention for adolescent smokers using abstinence -contingent 
incentives and cognitive behavioral therapy. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 132 , 346- 351. PMCID: 
PMC3748248  
33. Morean, M. E., Kong, G., Camenga, D. R., Cavallo, D. A., Carroll, K. M., Pittman, B., & Krishnan -Sarin, S. 
(2015). Contingency management improves smoking cessation treatment outcomes among highly impulsive adolescent smokers relative to cognitive beha vioral therapy. Addictive Behaviors, 42 , 86- 90. PMCID: 
PMC4285343  
34. Kamon, J., Budney, A., & Stanger, C. (2005). A contingency management intervention for adolescent 
marijuana abuse and conduct problems. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
44, 513- 521. 
35. Carroll, K. M., Easton, C. J., Nich, C., Hunkele, K. A., Neavins, T. M., Sinha, R., Ford, H. L., Vitolo, S. A., 
Doebrick, C. A., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2006) . The use of contingency management and motivationa/skills -building 
therapy to treat young adults with marijuana dependence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 
955-966. PMCID: PMC2148500  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 26 of 31 
 36. Stanger, C., Budney, A. J., Kamon, J. L., & Thostensen, J. (2009). A randomized trial of contingency 
management for adolescent marijuana abuse and dependence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 105 , 240- 247. 
PMCID: PMC2763939  
37. Stanger, C., Ryan, S. R., Scherer, E. A., Norton, G. E., & Budney, A. J. (2015). Clinic - and home- based 
contingency management plus parent training for adolescent cannabis use disorders. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 54 , 445- 453. PMCID: PMC4443272  
38. Stewart, D. G., Felleman, B. I., & Arger, C. A. (2015). Effectiveness of motivational incentives for adolescent 
marijuana users in a school -based intervention. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 58 , 43-50. 
39. Kaminer, Y., Burleson, J. A., Burke, R., & Litt, M. D. (2014). The efficacy of contingency management for 
adolescent cannabis use disorder: A controlled study. Substance Abuse, 35 , 391- 398. 
40. Wulfert, E., Block, J. A., Santa Ana, E., Rodriguez, M. L., & Colsman, M. (2002). Delay of gratification: Impulsive choices and problem behaviors in early and late adolescence. Journal of Personality, 70 , 533- 552. 
41. Marshall, K., Gowing, L., Ali, R., & Le Foll, B. (2014). Pharmacotherapies for cannabis dependence. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12:CD008940 . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008940.pub2.  
42. Haney, M., Ward, A. S., Comer, S. D., Hart, C. L., Foltin, R. W., & Fischman, M. W. (2001). Bupropion SR worsens mood during marijuana withdrawal in humans. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 155 , 171- 179. 
43. Haney, M., Hart, C. L., Ward, A. S., & Foltin, R. W. (2003). Nefazodone decreases anxiety during marijuana 
withdrawal in humans. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 165 , 157- 165. 
44. Haney, M., Hart, C. L., Vosburg, S. K., Nasser, J., Bennett, A., Zubaran, C., & Foltin, R. W. (2004). Marijuana withdrawal in humans: Effects of oral THC or divalproex. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29 , 158- 170. 
45. Budney, A. J., Vandrey, R. G., Hughes, J. R., Moore, B. A., & Bahrenburg, B. (2007). Oral delta- 9-
tetrahydrocannabinol suppresses cannabis withdrawal symptoms. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 86 , 11-19. 
46. Huestis, M. A., Boyd, S. J., Heishman, S. J., Preston, K. L, Bonnet, D., Le Fur, G., & Gorelick, D. A. (2007). Single 
and multiple doses of rimonabant antagonize acute effects of smoked cannabis in male cannabis users. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl), 194 , 505 -515. PMCID: PMC2689519  
47. Haney, M., Hart, C. L., Vosburg, S. K., Comer, S. D., Reed, S. C., & Foltin, R. W. (2008). Effects of THC and 
lofexidine in a human laboratory model of marijuana withdrawal and relapse. Psychopharmacol (Berl), 197 , 157-
168. PMCID: PMC3372576   
48. Winstock, A. R., Lea, T., & Copeland, J. (2009). Lithium carbonate in the management of cannabis withdrawal in humans: An open -label study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 23 , 84-93. 
49. Cooper, Z. D., & Haney, M. (2010). Opioid antagonism enhances marijuana’s effects in heavy marijuana smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 211 , 141- 148. PMCID: PMC2923559  
50. Haney, M., Hart, C. L., Vosburg, S. K., Comer, S. D., Reed, S. C., Cooper, Z. D., & Foltin, R. W. (2010). 
Effects of baclofen and mirtazapine on a laboratory model of marijuana withdrawal and relapse. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl), 211 , 233- 244. PMCID: PMC3323354  
51. Vandrey, R., Smith, M. T., McCann, U. D., Budney, A. J., & Curran, E. M. (2011). Sleep disturbance and the effects of extended -release zolpidem during cannabis withdrawal. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 117 , 38-44. 
PMCID: PMC3119729  
52. Haney, M., Cooper, Z. D., Bedi, G., Vosburg, S. K., Comer, S. D., & Foltin, R. W. (2013). Nabilone decreases marijuana withdrawal and a laboratory measure of marijuana relapse. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38 , 1557-
1565. PMCID: PMC3682150  
53. Haney, M., Ramesh, D., Glass, A., Pavlicova, M., Bedi, G., & Cooper, Z. D. (2015). Naltrexone maintenance 
decreases cannabis self -administration and subjective effects in daily cannabis smokers. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 40 , 2489- 2498.  
54. Levin, F. R., McDowell, D., Evans, S. M., Nunes, E., Akerele, E., Donovan, S., & Vosburg, S. K. (2004). Pharmacotherapy for marijuana dependence: A double -blind, placebo -controlled pilot study of divalproex 
sodium. American Journal on Addictions, 13 , 21-32. 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 27 of 31 
 55. Carpenter, K. M., McDowell, D., Brooks, D. J., Cheng, W. Y., & Levin, F. R. (2009). A preliminary trial: Double -
blind comparison of nefazodone, bupropion- SR, and placebo in the treatment of cannabis dependence. 
American Journal on Addictions, 18 , 53-64. 
56. McRae- Clark, A. L., Carter, R. E., Killeen, T. K., Carpenter, M. J., Wahlquist, A. E., Simpson, S. A., & Brady, 
K. T. (2009). A placebo -controlled trial of buspirone for the treatment of marijuana dependence. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 105 , 132- 138. PMCID: PMC2789590  
57. McRae- Clark, A. L., Carter, R. E., Killeen, T. K., Carpenter, M. J., White, K. G., & Brady, K. T. (2010). A 
placebo -controlled trial of atomoxetine in marijuana -dependent individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. American Journal on Addictions, 19 , 481- 489. PMCID: PMC3019094  
58. Mason, B. J., Crean, R., Goodell, V., Light, J. M., Quello, S., Shadan, F., Buffkins, K., Kyle, M., Adusumalli, 
M., Begovic, A., & Rao, S. (2012). A proof -of-concept randomized controlled study of gabapentin: Effects on 
cannabis use, withdrawal and exe cutive function deficits in cannabis -dependent adults. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 37 , 1689- 1698. PMCID: PMC3358737  
59. Levin, F. R., Mariani, J. J., Brooks, D. J., Pavlicova, M., Cheng, W., & Nunes, E. V. (2011). Dronabinol for 
the treatment of cannabis dependence: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 116 , 142- 150. PMCID: PMC3154755  
60. Levin, F. R., Mariani, J., Brooks, D. J., Pavlicova, M., Nunes, E. V., Agosti, V., Bisaga, A., Sullivan, M. A., & Carpenter, K. M. (2013). A randomized double -blind, placebo -controlled trial of venlafaxine -extended release for 
co-occurring cannabis dep endence and depressive disorders. Addiction, 108 , 1084- 1094. PMCID: PMC3636166  
61. McRae -Clark, A. L., Baker, N. L., Gray, K. M., Killeen, T. K., Wagner, A. M., Brady, K. T., DeVane, C. L., &  
Norton, J. (in press). Buspirone treatment of cannabis dependence: A randomized, controlled trial. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence . 
62. Gray, K. M., Carpenter, M. J., Baker, N. L., DeSantis, S. M., Kryway, E., Hartwell, K. J., McRae -Clark, A. L., 
& Brady, K. T. (2012). A double -blind randomized controlled trial of N-acetylcysteine in cannabis -dependent 
adolescents. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169 , 805- 812. PMCID: PMC3410961  
63. McClure, E. A., Sonne, S. C., Winhusen, T., Carroll, K. M., Ghitza, U. E., McRae -Clark, A. L., Matthews, A. 
G., Sharma, G., Van Veldhuisen, P., Vandrey, R. G., Levin, F. R., Weiss, R. D., Lindblad, R., Allen, C., Mooney, L. J., Haynes, L., Brigham, G. S., Sparenborg, S., Hasson, A. L ., & Gray, K. M. (2014 ). Achieving Cannabis 
Cessation – Evaluating N-acetylcysteine Treatment (ACCENT): Design and implementation of a multi -site, 
randomized controlled study in the National Institute on Drug Abuse Clinical Trials Network. Contemporary 
Clinical Trials, 39 , 211- 223. PMCID: PMC4185187  
64. Gass, J. T., & Olive, M. F. (2008). Glutamatergic substrates of drug addiction and alcoholism. Biochemical 
Pharmacology, 75 , 218- 265. PMCID: PMC2239014  
65. Kalivas, P. W., Lalumiere, R. T., Knackstedt, L., & Shen, H. (2009). Glutamate transmission in addiction. Neuropharmacology, 56 Suppl 1 , 169- 173. PMCID: PMC3280337  
66. Olive, M. F., Cleva, R. M., Kalivas, P. W., & Malcolm, R. J. (2012). Glutamatergic medications for the treatment of drug and behavioral addictions. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 100 , 801- 810. PMCID: 
PMC3154511  
67. McClure, E. A., Gipson, C. D., Malcolm, R. J., Kalivas, P. W., & Gray, K. M. (2014). Potential role of N-
acetylcysteine in the management of substance use disorders. CNS Drugs, 28 , 95-106. PMCID: PMC4009342  
68. Baker, D. A., McFarland, K., Lake, R. W., Shen, H., Tang, X. C., Today, S., & Kalivas, P. W. (2003). 
Neuroadaptations in cysteine -glutamate exchange underlie cocaine relapse. Nature Neuroscience, 6 , 743- 749. 
69. Moran, M. M., McFarland, K., Melendez, R. I., Kalivas, P. W., & Seamans, J. K. (2005). Cystine/glutamate 
exchange regulates metabotropic glutamate receptor presynaptic inhibition of excitatory transmission and 
vulnerability to cocaine seeking. Journal of Neuroscience, 25 , 6389- 6393. PMCID: PMC1413952  
70. Madayag, A., Lobner, D., Kau, K. S., Mantsch, J. R., Abdulhameed, O., Hearing, M., Grier, M. D., & Baker, 
D. A. (2007). Repeated N-acetylcysteine administration alters plasticity -dependent effects of cocaine. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 27 , 13968 -13976. PMCID: PMC2996827  
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 28 of 31 
 71. Kau, K. S., Madayag, A., Mantsch, J. R., Grier, M. D., Abdulhameed, O., & Baker, D. A. (2008). Blunted 
cystine- glutamate antiporter function in the nucleus accumbens promotes cocaine- induced drug seeking. 
Neuroscience, 155 , 530- 537. PMCID: PMC2614296  
72. Moussawi, K., Pacchioni, A., Moran, M., Olive, M. F., Gass, J. T., Lavin, A., & Kalivas, P. W. (2009). N-
acetylcysteine reverses cocaine -induced metaplasticity. Nature Neuroscience, 12 , 182- 189. PMCID: 
PMC2661026  
73. Amen, S. L., Piacentine, L. B., Ahmad, M. E., Li, S. J., Mantsch, J. R., Risinger, R. C., & Baker, D. A. (2011). 
Repeated N-acetyl cysteine reduced cocaine seeking in rodents and craving in cocaine -dependent humans. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 36 , 871- 878. PMCID: PMC3052624  
74. Moussawi, K., Zhou, W., Shen, H., Reichel, C. M., See, R. E., Carr, D. B., & Kalivas, P. W. (2011). Reversing cocaine- induced synaptic potentiation provides enduring protection from relapse. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 , 385- 390. PMCID: PMC3017187  
75. Reichel, C. M., Moussawi, K., Do, P. H., Kalivas, P. W., & See, R. E. (2011). Chronic N-acetylcysteine during 
abstinence or extinction after cocaine self -administration produces enduring reductions in drug seeking. Journal 
of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 337 , 487- 493. PMCID: PMC3083102  
76. Murray, J. E., Everitt, B. J., & Belin, D. (2012). N-acetylcysteine reduces early - and late -stage cocaine 
seeking without affecting cocaine taking in rats. Addiction Biology, 17 , 437- 440. 
77. Ozaras, R., Tahan, V., Aydin, S., Uzun, H., Kaya, S., & Senturk, H. (2003). N-acetylcysteine attenuates 
alcohol -induced oxidative stress in rats. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 9 , 791- 794. 
78. Zhou, W., & Kalivas, P. W. (2008). N-acetylcysteine reduces extinction responding and induces enduring 
reductions in cue - and heroin- induced drug -seeking. Biological Psychiatry, 63 , 338- 340. PMCID: PMC2709691  
79. Knackstedt, L. A., LaRowe, S., Mardikian, P., Malcolm, R., Upadhyaya, H., Hedden, S., Markou, A., & 
Kalivas, P. W. (2009). The role of cystine -glutamate exchange in nicotine dependence in rats and humans. 
Biological Psychiatry, 65 , 841- 845. PMCID: PMC2756612  
80. Ramirez- Niño, A. M., D’Souza, M. S., & Markou, A. (2013). N-acetylcysteine decreased nicotine self -
administration and cue- induced reinstatement of nicotine seeking in rats: Comparison with the effects of N-
acetylcysteine on food responding and food seeking. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 225 , 473- 482. PMCID: 
PMC3697766  
81. Smilkstein, M. J., Knapp, G. L., Kulig, K. W., & Rumack, B. H. (1988). Efficacy of oral N-acetylcysteine in the 
treatment of acetaminophen overdose. Analysis of the national multicenter study (1976 to 1985). New England 
Journal of Medicine, 319 , 1557- 1562.  
82. Grandjean, E. M., Berthet, P., Ruffman, R., & Leuenberger, P. (2000).  Efficacy of oral long -term 
N-acetylcysteine in chronic bronchopulmonary disease: A meta -analysis of published, double -blind, placebo -
controlled clinical trials.  Clinical Therapeutics, 22 , 209- 221. 
83. Hughes, J. R., Keely, J. P., Niaura, R. S., Ossip -Klein, D. J., Richmond, R. L., & Swan, G. E. (2003) . 
Measurements of abstinence in clinical trials: Issues and recommendatio ns. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 5, 
13-25. 
84. Gray, K. M., Watson, N. L., & Christine, D. K. (2009). Challenges in quantifying marijuana use. American 
Journal on Addictions, 18 , 178- 179. PMCID: PMC2688383  
85. Mariani, J. J., Brooks, D., Haney, M., & Levin, F. R. (2011). Quantification and comparison of marijuana 
smoking practices: Blunts, joints, and pipes. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 113 , 249- 251. PMCID: 
PMC3025094  
86. Hollis, S. (2002).  A graphical sensitivity analysis for clinical trials with  non-ignorable missing binary outcome. 
Statistics in Medicine, 21, 3823- 3834.  
87. McCann, D. J., & Li, S. H. (2012). A novel, nonbinary evaluation of success and failure reveals bupropion 
efficacy versus methamphetamine dependence: Reanalysis of a multisite trial. CNS Neuroscience & 
Therapeutics  18,414- 418. 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 29 of 31 
 88. Gray, K. M.,  Carpenter, M. J., Baker, N. L., Hartwell, K. J., Lewis, A. L., Hiott, D. W., Deas, D., & Upadhyaya, 
H. P. (2011). Bupropion SR and contingency management for adolescent smoking cessation. Journal of 
Substance Abuse Treatment, 40, 77- 86. PMCID: PMC2997899  
89. Sinha R, Easton C, Renee -Aubin L, Carroll KM . Engaging young probation -referred mari juana -abusing 
individuals in treatment: A pilot trial. The American Journal on Addictions.  2003;12:314- 323. 
90. Carroll, K. M., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2007). A perfect platform: Combining contingency management with 
medications for drug abuse. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 33 , 343- 365. PMCID: PMC2367002  
91. Ledgerwood, D. M., Alessi, S. M., Hanson, T., Godley, M. D., & Petry, N. M. (2008) . Contingency 
management for attendance to group substance abuse treatment administered by clinicians in community clinics. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 41 , 517- 526. PMCID: PMC2606605  
92. Festinger DS, Marlowe DB, Dugos h KL, Croft JR, Arabia PL.  Higher magnitude cash payments improve 
research follow- up rates without increasing drug use or perceived coercion.  Drug and Alcohol Depend ence. 
2008;96: 128-135. PMCID: PMC2475801  
93. Cavallo, D. A., Nich, C., Schepis, T. S., Smith, A. E., Liss, T. B., McFetridge, A. K., & Krishnan- Sarin, S. 
(2010). Preliminary examination of adolescent spending in a contingency management based smoking cessation 
program. Journal of Child and Adolescent Substance Abuse, 19 , 335- 342. PMCID: PMC2928574  
94. Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Harnett -Sheehan, K., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., Hergueta, T., Baker, 
R., & Dunbar, G. (1998) . The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and 
validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD- 10. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 
59, S22 -S33. 
95. Sheehan, D. V., Sheehan, K. H., Shytle, R. D. , Janavs, J., Bannon, Y., Rogers, J. E., Milo, K. M., Stock, S. 
L., & Wilkinson, B. (2010) . Reliability and validity of the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview for Children 
and Adolescents (MINI -KID).  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71 , 313- 326. 
96. Wright , J. M., Htun,  Y., Leong , M. G., Forman,  P., & Ballard , R. C. (1999).  Evaluation of the use of calendar 
blister packaging on patient compliance with STD syndromic treatment regimens. Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases , 26, 556- 563. 
97. Huang , H. Y., Maguire,  M. G., Miller , E. R. 3
rd, Appel , L. J. (2000) . Impact of pill organizers and blister packs 
on adherence to pill taking in two vitamin supplementation trials. American Journal of Epidemiology, 152, 780-
787.  
98. Simmons,  D., Upjohn,  M., & Gamble , G. D. (2000).  Can medication packaging improve glycemic control and 
blood pressure in type 2 diabetes? Results from a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care, 23, 153- 156. 
99. McRae- Clark, A. L., Baker, N. L., Sonne, S. C., DeVane, C. L., Wagner, A., & Norton, J. (2015). Concordance 
of direct and indirect measures of medication adherence in a treatment trial for cannabis dependence. Journal 
of Substance Abuse Treatment, 57, 70- 74. PMCID: PMC4561011  
100. Budney, A. J., Moore, B. A., Rocha, H. L., & Higgins, S. T. (2006). Clinical trial of abstinence -based vouchers 
and cognitive- behavioral therapy for cannabis dependence. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 74 , 
307-316. 
101. Kadden, R. M., Litt, M. D., Kabela -Cormier, E., & Petry, N. M. (2007). Abstinence rates following behavioral 
treatments for marijuana dependence. Addictive Behaviors, 32 , 1220- 1236. PMCID: PMC1903379  
102. Roll, J. M., & Higgins, S. T. (2000). A within -subject comparison of three different schedules of reinforcement 
of drug abstinence using cigarette smoking as an exemplar. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 58 , 103- 109. 
103. Croft, J. R., Festinger, D. S., Dugosh, K. L., Marlowe, D. B., & Rosenwasser, B. J. (2007). Does size matter? 
Salience of follow -up payments in drug abuse research. IRB, 29 , 15-19. 
104. Olmstead, T. A., & Petry, N. M. (2009). The cost -effectiveness of prize -based and voucher- based 
contingency management in a population of cocaine - or opioid -dependent outpatients. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 102 , 108- 115. PMCID: PMC2679219  
105. Hertzberg, J. S., Carpenter, V. L., Kirby, A. C., Calhoun, P. S., Moore, S. D., Dennis, M. F., Dennis, P. A., Dedert, E. A., & Beckham, J. C. (2013). Mobile contingency management as an adjunctive smoking cessation 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 30 of 31 
 treatment for smokers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 15 , 1934- 1938. PMCID: 
PMC3790624  
106. Sobell,  L. C., Sobell , M. B., Leo,  G. I., & Cancilla , A. (1988) . Reliability of a timeline method:  assessing 
normal drinkers' reports of recent drinking and a comparative evaluation across several populations. British 
Journal of Addictions,  83, 393- 402. 
107. https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/index.php?pageLink=browse.protocols&id=180300  
108. Stephens, R. S., Roffman, R. A., & Curtin, L. (2000).   Comparison of extended versus brief treatments for 
marijuana use.   Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68 , 898- 908. 
109. Heishman, S. J., Singleton, E. G., & Liguori, A. (2001). Marijuana craving questionnaire:  development and 
initial validation of a self -report instrument. Addiction,  96, 1023- 1034.  
110. Heishman, S. J., & Singleton, E. G. (2006). Assessment of cannabis craving using the Marijuana Craving 
Questionnaire. Methods in Molecular Medicine, 123 , 209- 216. 
111. Heishman, S. J., Evans, R. J., Singleton, E. G., Levin, K. H., Copersino, M. L., & Gorelick, D. A. (2009). 
Reliability and validity of a short form of the Marijuana Craving Questionnaire. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 
102, 35- 40. 
112. Allsop, D. J., Norberg, M. M., Copeland, J., Fu, S., & Budney, A. J. (2011). The Cannabis Withdrawal Scale 
development: Patterns and predictors of cannabis withdrawal and distress. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 119 , 
123-129. 
113. Franken, I. H., Hendriksa, V. M., & van den Brink, W. (2002). Initial validation of two opiate craving 
questionnaires the obsessive compulsive drug use scale and the desires for drug questionnaire. Addictive 
Behaviors, 27 , 675- 685. 
114. Richter, P., Werner, J., Heerlein, A., Kraus, A., & Sauer, H. (1998). On the validity of the Beck Depression 
Inventory. A review. Psychopathology, 31 , 160- 168. 
115. Steer, R. A., Kumar, G., Ranieri, W. F., & Beck, A. T. (1995). Use of the Beck Anxiety Inventory with 
adolescent psychiatric outpatients. Psychological Reports, 76 , 459- 465. 
116. DuPaul GJ, Power TJ, Anastopoulos AD, Reid R. ADHD Rating Scale --IV: Checklists, Norms, and Clinical 
Interpretation. Bethlehem, PA: Guilford Publications; 1998.  
117. Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F. 3rd, Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., & Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Research, 28 , 193- 213. 
118. Patton,  J. H., Stanford,  M. S., & Barratt , E. S. (1995) .  Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale.  
Journal of  Clinical  Psychology, 51 , 768- 774. 
119. Lynam, D. R., Smith, G. T., Whiteside, S. P., & Cyders, M. A. (2006). The UPPS -P: Assessing five 
personality pathways to impulsive behavior. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University.  
120. Posner, K., Brent, D., Lucas, C., Gould, M., Stanley, B., Brown, G., Fisher, P., Zelazny, J., Burke, A., 
Oquendo, M., Mann, J . (2007)  Columbia -Suicide  Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS).  
121. Prokhorov , A. V., De Moor, C., Pallonen, U. E., Hudmon,  K. S., Koehly, L., Hu, S.  (2000).  Validation of the 
modified Fagerstr öm tolerance questionnaire with salivary cotinine among adolescents. Addictive Behaviors, 25 , 
429-433. 
122. Foulds J, Veldheer S, Yingst J, Hrabovsky S, Wilson SJ, Nichols TT, Eissenberg T. (2015). Development 
of a questionnaire for assessing dependence on electronic cigarettes among a large sample of ex -smoking E-
cigarette users. Nicotine and Tobacco Research;17(2 ); 186- 92. 
123. Huestis, M. A., & Cone, E. J. (1998). Differentiating new marijuana use from residual drug excretion in 
occasional marijuana users.  Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 22 , 445- 454. 
124. Schwilke, E. W., Gullberg, R. G., Darwin, W. D., Chiang, C. N., Cadet, J. L., Gorelick, D. A., Pope, H. G., & 
Huestis, M. A. (2011). Differentiating new cannabis use from residual urinary cannabinoid excretion in chronic, 
daily cannabis users. Addiction, 106 , 499- 506. 
125. Gualtieri, C. T., & Johnson, L. G. (2006). Reliability and validity of a computerized neurocognitive test 
battery, CNS Vital Signs. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 21 , 623- 643. 
Version 2 6, Date: 14APRIL 2022  
 
Page 31 of 31 
 126. Zeger, S. L., & Liang, K. Y. (1986). Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and continuous outcomes. 
Biometrics, 42 , 121- 130. 
127. Pan, W. (2001). Akaike’s information criterion in generalized estimating equations. Biometrics, 57 , 120- 125. 
128. Prakash, A., Kalra, J. K., & Kumar, A. (2015). Neuroprotective effect of N-acetyl cysteine against 
streptozotocin -induced memory dysfunction and oxidative damage in rats. Journal of Basic and Clinical 
Physiology and Pharmacology, 26 , 13-23. 
129. Little, R. J. A. (1993). Pattern -mixture models for multivariate incomplete data. Journal of the American 
Statistical Association, 88 , 125- 134. 
130. Little, R. J. A. (1995). Modeling dropout mechanism for multivariate incomplete data. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, 90 , 1112- 1121.  
131. Hedeker, D., & Gibbons, R. D. (1997). Application of random -effects pattern -mixture models for missing 
data in longitudinal studies. Psychological Methods, 2 , 64-78. 
132. Khan, S. S., Secades- Villa, R., Okuda, M., Wang, S., Pérez -Fuentes, G., Kerridge, B. T., & Blanco, C. 
(2013). Gender differences in cannabis use disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey of Alcohol 
and Related Conditions. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 130 , 101- 108. PMCID: PMC3586748  
133. Bailey , B., & McGuigan , M. A. (1998).  Management of anaphylactoid reactions to intravenous N-
acetylcysteine.  Annals of  Emerg ency Medicine, 31 , 710- 715. 
 