CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
3
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Title Page Updated title to include IBS -C participants .
Added the EudraCT number .Toalign with changes in the 
protocol
To reflect current information
Section 1.1 Synopsis All relevant changes made below in subsequent sections in the body of the protocol 
have been carried up to the synopsis .To align with the body of the 
protocol
Sectio n 1.3 Schedule of 
Activities (SoA)Table 1- 1 was edited to include IBS -C participants .
Anassessment of Rome III criteria at EOT w as added for all participants .
The follow ing text was added to footnote ‘e’: ‘Prior to dosing, the investigator or 
appropriate site staff member will assess if Rome IV criteria for Child/Adolescent 
FC (FC and IBS -C participants) or Rom e IV criteria for Child/Adolescent 
IBS (IBS -C participants) was met and record the outcome in the e CRF .’
Afecal impaction assessment at Randomization (Visit 3) was added for all 
participants . The footnotes have been updated accordingly.
Footnote ‘l’ has been updated for clarity.
Footnote ‘u’ has been added: ‘Additional unscheduled visits may be allowed at the 
discretion of the investigator with approval from the sponsor’ .For clarification and update to 
include IBS -C participants in 
the study
To assess pa rticipants for 
fulfilling R omecriteria at both 
screening and at end of treatment as an ‘other’
efficacy endpoint .
To update to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
To ensure participants didn’t 
have fecal impaction prior to 
receiving study intervention
For clarification
To allow  additional visits for 
participants if needed
Section 2 Introduction Text added to include the pediatric Phase 2 study LIN- MD-63 results in the 
introduction.To reflect current information
Section 2.1 Study Rationale Text added todescrib e the IBS disease and prevalence andthe lack of any 
approved therapy for IBS -C in pediatric patients .
Added a summary of results forPhase 2 dose ranging study LIN -MD-63 
evaluating linaclotide in pediatric IBS-C participants .
Added t he primary objective of LIN -MD-64 for IBS -C participants .Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
4
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 2.2.1 Adult Linaclotide 
ProgramText added to include the recently comp leted Phase 3b study MCP -103-312. To reflect current information
Section 2.2.2 Pediatric Linaclotide ProgramAsummary of results for the recently completed LIN -MD-63 study in pediatric 
IBS-C participants was added.To reflect current information
Section 2.2.3.2 GC-C mRNA ExpressionCorrected t he study number for Study MCP -103-311. Correction of typo
Section 2.3 Benefit/Risk Text added toinclude the IBS -C population. Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 3 Objectives and EndpointsAdded the objective and primary and secondary endpoints for IBS -C participants .Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 4.1 Overall Design Added the study design for IBS -C participants .
Added text regarding the addition of an optional interim analysis for futility in FC 
participants .Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
To address potential 
enrollment issues with the 
pediatric FC population
Section 4.1.1 Clinical HypothesesAdded a clinical hypothesis for treatment of IBS -C participants with linaclotide. Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 4.2 Scientific Rationale for Study DesignAdded a scientific rationale for the study design for IBS -C participants . Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 4.3 Justification for DoseAdded a justification for the doses chosen for IBS -C participants . Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Sections 5.1 Inclusion Criteria Edits were made to inclusion criteria 1.01, 1.02, 2.01, and 4. 02 to add IBS- C 
participants and/or to add clarity. 
Inclusion c riteri a2.011 and 2.012 for IBS -C participants were added.For clarification and to 
include IBS -C participants
Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
5
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 5.2 Exclusion Criteria Edits w ere made to exclusion criteria 1.01, 1.05, and 1.11 to add IBS- C 
participants and/or to add clarity. 
Exclusion criterion 1.04 was revised to add a fecal impaction assessment at Visit 3.
‘Vital sign assessment ’ was included in exclusion criteria 1.07 .
Criterion 1.13 w as removed.For clarification and to 
include I BS-C participants
To ensure participants didn’t 
have fecal impaction prior to 
dosing
For clarification
Updated eligibility criteria to 
be more inclusive for 
enrollment
Section 5.3 Lifestyle ConsiderationsAdded lifestyle considerations for IBS -C participants .
Reorganized habits by all participants, FC participants, and IBS -C participants .For clarification and update to 
include IBS -C participants in 
the study
Section 6 Study Intervention Added text onthe randomization and dosing of IBS- C participants. Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 6.1 Study Intervention AdministeredAdded text onthe study intervention administered to IBS -C participants . Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 6.3 Measures to 
Minimize Bias: Randomization 
and BlindingAdded text on the randomization of FC and IBS -C participants being carried out 
separately .
Revised the study number from 301 to 364 .
Revised the site number from 00001 -99999 to 10001 -19999 .Update to include IBS -C 
participants in the study 
To reflect what’s being used in the study
Section 6.3.1 .2Unblinding Added text on the separate database locks and unblinding procedures for FC and 
IBS-C participants .Updated to include IBS -C 
participants in the study
Section 6.5.1 Prohibited InterventionsAdded l inaclotide to the list of prohibited medicines with a 14 -day washout period .To provide additional clarity
Section 6.5.2 Rescue Medication Added a statement clarifying the use of rescue medication with regard to Visit 3 
(Randomization Visit ).For clarification
Section 6.6 Dose Modification Added the dose modifications permitted for IBS -C participants . Updated to include IBS -C 
participants
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
6
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 7.1.1 Removal of 
Individual Participants from Therapy or AssessmentTwo criteria have been moved from ‘participant may be discontinued’ to 
‘participant must be discontinued’ .
Text referring to signs of drug -induced liver injury wasmoved to new ly added 
Appendix 9: Liver Safety: Suggested Actions and Follow -up Assessments .To further ensure participant 
safety
To align with the liver 
appendix template
Section 8 Study Assessments and ProceduresThe follow ing text was added: ‘Additiona l details regarding study conduct 
during the novel coronavirus pandemic are provided in Appendix 11 .
’To add a reference to newly 
added Appendix 11
Section 8.1 Efficacy AssessmentsInformation regarding the efficacy assessments for IBS-C participants hasbeen 
added and changes made to clarify what pertains to FC participants versus IBS -C 
participants.
The following text was deleted: ‘ The relationship of the caregiver to the participant 
should be recorded in the eCRF .’For clarification and update to inclu de IBS -C participants in 
the study
To reflect current information
Section 8.1.1 Efficacy Assessments in FC ParticipantsReplaced ‘parameter’ with ‘endpoint’ as needed . For clarification
Section 8.1.1.2 Secondary Efficacy AssessmentRevised text to reflect the text in the current eDiary. To align with the current 
eDiary
Section 8.1.1.3 Additional Efficacy AssessmentsAdded an assessment of modified Rom e III criteria at the end of the study 
intervention period .To assess FCparticipants for 
fulfilling modified RomeIII
criteria at both screening and at end of treatment as an ‘other’ efficacy endpoint
Section 8.1.2 Efficacy Assessments in IBS -C 
ParticipantsAdded the efficacy assessments that will be performed for IBS -C participants . Updated to include IBS -C 
participants.
Section 8.2.1 Physical ExaminationsThe follow ing text was removed: A complete physical examination will be done at 
screening and at the EOT Visit by a professionally trained physician or health 
professional listed on F orm FDA 1572 or the Delegation of Authority log and 
licensed to perform physical examinations .
Added a fecal impaction assessment at randomization (Visit 3) prior to dosing for 
all participants .To align with current Allergan template 
To ensure participants don’t 
have fecal impaction prior to 
receiving study intervention
Section 8.2.2 Vital Signs Removed b ullet 2 from the procedure for obtaining vital signs. For clarification
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
7
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 8.2.3 
ElectrocardiogramsRevised text to clarify method for r ecording ECGs . To reflect current information
Section 8.3.4 Follow -up of AEs, 
SAEs, and AESIsInserted ‘etiology’ in the following sentence: All AE/ SAE and non -serious AESIs 
will be followed until resolution, stabilization, the event ’setiology is otherw ise 
explained, or the participant is lost to follow -up.
Deleted the following text as this information is presented in Appendix 3: Adverse 
Events :
If a follow up visit is deemed necessary for appropriate safety surveillance, it will take 
place w ithin 30 days of the final protocol defined study visit .For clarification
Toalign with current Allergan 
template
Section 8.3.6 Pregnancy Added text regarding genetic abnormalities . To align with current 
Allergan template
Section 8.3.7 Potential Hy’s LawCasesDetails regarding liver safety assessments and follow -up for potential Hy’s law 
cases were moved to newly added Appendix 9: Liver Safety: Suggested Actions 
and Follow -up Assessments .To align with the liver 
appendix template
Section 9 Statistical ConsiderationsText added to indicate that this study involves two independent parallel parts, one 
for FC participants and one for IBS -Cparticipants ,and that database locks will be 
performed separately for FC and IBS -C participants .
Section numbers were updated throughout to delineate statistical sections for each 
disease population ,andcorresponding section references were updated 
accordingly.
Text added throughout Section 9 to clarify what information corresponds to FC 
participants versus IBS -C participants .For clarification and update to 
include IBS -C participants in 
the study
Section 9. 1.3Sample Size 
Determination -FC ParticipantsA brief description wasadded of the sample size to be targeted for FC participants 
if an optional interim analysis for futility is performed.To provide information 
regarding sample size for the optional interim analysis
Section 9 .1.5.1.1 Efficacy 
Analysis EndpointsThe other efficacy endpoint of ‘Time to the first SBM after the first dose of study 
intervention’ has been changed to ‘Time to the first report of SBM after the first 
dose of study intervention’ to more accurately reflect the endpoint.
Added t he other effi cacy endpoint of ‘ Proportion of participants who no longer 
fulfill modified R omeIII criteria for functional constipation at the end of the 
study intervention period .’For clarification
To assess whether 
participants meet Rome III 
criteria at the end of the 12 -
week study intervention period . 
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
8
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 9.1.5.2.2 Clinical 
Laboratory AssessmentsThe follow ing text was added: ‘The numerator will be the total number of 
participants with available non -PCS baseline values and at least 1 PCS 
postbaseline value …’For clarification
Section 9. 2Statistical 
Considerations for IBS -C 
ParticipantsAdded i nformation regarding the statistical analyses that will be performed for 
efficacy and safety data for IBS- C participants .Updated to include IBS -C 
participants
Section 9. 3Interim Analyses Details of the optional interim analysis strategy for FC participants were added. Updated to include an 
optional interim analysis for FC participants
Section 10.1.6.3 DSMB Added ‘or ad hoc if needed’. For clarification
Section 10.2 Appendix 2: Clinical Laboratory Tests%Reticulocytes wasremoved from Table 10 -1.
Footnote ‘a’ was revised to refer to Appendix 9: Liver Safety : Suggested Actions 
and Follow -up Assessments for liver chemistry stopping criteria and required 
actions and follow -up assessments .
Footnote ‘b’ was moved from Routine Urinalysis to the second bullet under Other
Screening Tests .To reflect what’s being assessed in the study
To align with the liver 
appendix template 
For clarification
Section 10.3 Appendix 3: 
Adverse EventsText regarding reporting of potential Hy’s Law cases was moved to new ly added 
Appendix 9 : Liver Safety: Suggested Actions and Follow -up Assessments .
A section title was revised from ‘SAE Reporting’ to ‘SAE Reporting to Sponsor 
orDesignee Within 24 Hours ’.For clarity and to align with 
the liver appendix template
Section 10.4 Appendix 4: AbbreviationsUpdated to align with new abbreviations used in the body of the protocol . To align with changes in the 
protocol
Section 10.6 Appendix 6: Study 
Tabular SummaryUpdated t he study tabular summary to include information regarding IBS -C 
participants in the study.Updated to include IBS -C 
participants
Section 10.7 Appendix 7 : 
Contraceptive Guidance and 
Collection of Pregnancy 
Informa tionThe description of the pregnancy testing sensitivity was revised as shown below :
‘Pregnancy testing with a sensitivity of 5, 10, ≤25 mIU/mL will be performe d’.For clarification and to reflect 
the sensitivity of the assay 
currently being used in the 
study
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
9
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Protocol Section(s) Description of Change s Rationale for Changes
Section 10.9 Appendix 9 : Liver 
Safety : Suggested Actions and 
Follow -up AssessmentsAppendix 9: Liver Safety : Suggested Actions and Follow -up Assessments was 
added. With the ad dition of the new Appendix 9, the subsequent Appendix has 
been moved to Appendix 10andall section numbering and references have been
changed accordingly .To provide liver safety 
information in a consolidated
location and to align with the 
liver appendix template
Section 10.10.1 Screening 
Period (Visit 1)The following procedure w as added tothe Screening Visit: ‘Complete Rome III 
assessment ’.
Lumbosacral was added to the physical exam .
Information regarding lifestyle modifications was updated to include IBS-C 
participants and clarify the modifications for each population .To assess pa rticipants for 
fulfilling R omeIII criteria at 
screening
For clarification
For clarification and update to 
include IBS -C participants in 
the study
Section 10.10.2 Preintervention 
Period (Visit 2)The follow ing text was removed: ‘ If fecal impaction is documented during an 
optional repeat physical examination, the Study Physician must be notified’ .
Text regarding the use of rescue medication was added .For clarification
Section 10.10.3 Randomization (Visit 3, Day 1)A fecal impaction assessment was added to the randomization visit ( Visit 3 ) as 
shown below:
‘Perform a fecal impaction assessment prior to random ization. If fecal impaction 
is present, the parti cipant will not be eligible for the study. ’To ensure participants don’t 
have fecal impaction prior to receiving study intervention
Section 10.10.7 Week 12/EOT Visit (Visit 7)Lumbosacral was added to the physical exam .
The following procedure w as added to the EOT Visit: ‘Complete Rom e III 
assessment .’For clarification
To assess pa rticipants for 
fulfilling ROME III criteria at 
theend of treatment as an 
‘other’ efficacy endpoint.
Section 10.11 Appendix 11: 
Study Conduct During the Novel 
Coronavirus Pan demicAppendix 11: Study Conduct During the Novel Coronavirus Pandemic was added .To provide information on 
study conduct during the novel coronavirus pandemic
Section 10.12 Supporting Information from the Adult Linaclotide ProgramResults from recently completed study MCP -103-312 w ere added to Table 10 -3. To reflect current information
Section 11 References References for IBS and statistical analyses for the interim analysis were added . To reflect current information
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
20
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.01.3. Schedule of Activities (SoA)
Table 1–1 Schedule of Activities for FC and IBS -C P articipants
Study Periods (Duration)Screening (14-28 
Days)Preintervention
(14-21 Days)Study Intervention Period
(12 weeks)Postintervention
(1 week)
Study VisituScreening Preintervention Randomization Week 2 Week 4 Week 8Week 12 Visit/
End of Treatment
(EOT)aEnd of Study
(EOS) Visitb
Visit Number 1 2 3 45 6 7 8
Study Day -49 to -22 -21 to -14 1 15 (± 2) 29 (± 2) 57 (± 2) 85 (+ 3)cEOT +7 (+7)
Parent/Caregiver Consent/ AssentdX
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria X X X
Rome III Assessment X X
Assess Rome IV statuseX
IWRS X X XfXX X
Medical History X
Lifestyle Modification Information 
Given to Participant/ Caregiverg X
Physical ExaminationhX X
Fecal Impaction AssessmentiX XjXk
Height X X
Vital Signs and Postural Vital SignslX X X XX X X X
ECG X X
Clinical Laboratory TestsmX X X
Serum Pregnancy TestsnX
Urine Pregnancy TestsoX X X X
Urine Drug ScreenpX
AE Evaluation X X X XX X X X
Prior and Concomitant Medications X X X XX X X X
Rescue Medication DispensedqX X XX X X
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
21
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Study Periods (Duration)Screening (14-28 
Days)Preintervention
(14-21 Days)Study Intervention Period
(12 weeks)Postintervention
(1 week)
Study VisituScreening Preintervention Randomization Week 2 Week 4 Week 8Week 12 Visit/
End of Treatment
(EOT)aEnd of Study
(EOS) Visitb
Visit Number 1 2 3 45 6 7 8
Study Day -49 to -22 -21 to -14 1 15 (± 2) 29 (± 2) 57 (± 2) 85 (+ 3)cEOT +7 (+7)
eDiary and Instructions Given to 
Participant/ CaregiverrX
eDiary Com pliancerX XX X X X
eDiary Eligibility ReportfX
Study Intervention Administered on Site
sX
Study Intervention Dispensed X XX
Study Intervention and Rescue 
Medication Compliance and 
AccountabilityXsXX X X Xt
AE = adverse event; ECG = electrocardiogram; eDiary = electronic diary: refers to the participant- or interviewer -administered version of the PRO diary on a handheld electronic 
device; IWRS = interactive Web response system; PRO = patient reported outcome.
aStudy procedures for screening in LIN-MD -66 can be combined with End of Treatment (EOT)/Week 12 Visit (Visit 7) for Study LIN- MD-64.
bParticipants who rollover to the long-term safety study, LIN-MD -66, before the EOS Visit (Visit 8) are not required to have this visit.
cParticipants must complete at least 12 weeks (84 days) of study intervention before arriving at the study site for the EOT/ Week 12 Visit (Visit 7) . All randomized participants 
who prematurely discontinue from the study intervention, regardless of cause, should complete assessments at this EOT/Week 12 Visit (Visit 7). 
dThe parent/guardian/legally authorized representative must provide written informed consent andthe participant must provide assent before the participant’s enrollment in the 
study. If a parent or legal guardian is also the participant’s caregiver, he or she will be asked to sign a combined parent and caregiver written informed consent. Caregivers 
other than parent or legal guardian must provide written informed consent.
ePrior to dosing, the investigator or appropriate site staff member will assess if Rome IV criteria for Child/Adolescent FC (FCand IBS -C participants) or Rome IV criteria for 
Child/Adolescent IB S (IBS-C participants) was met and record the outcome in the eCRF. Eligibility for the study is not based on this assessment.
fEligibility report must be run prior to randomization.
gDuring the Screening Period, participants and their caregivers will receive information regarding lifestyle modifications (refer to Section 5.3for details). There should be at 
least a 2-week interval between discussing the lifestyle modifications during the Screening Period and the participant’s entry into the Preintervention Period.
hPhysical examinations will be performed by medically qualified site personnel and may be repeated at the investigator’s discretion. If fecal impaction (as defined in footnote i ) 
is documented during an optional repeat physical examination, the Study Physician must be notified.
iFecal impaction is defined as a hard mass in the lower abdomen identified on physical examination or a dilated rectum filled with a large amount of stool on rectal 
examination. If a rectal examination is performed, the medically qualified site personnel should assess for and document the presence of anal wink and normal anal tone.
jA fecal impaction assessment is only performed at the Preintervention Visit (Visit 2) if a fecal impaction was documented during the fecal impaction assessment at Screening 
(Visit 1). If there is no fecal impaction at the Preintervention Visit (Visit 2) (as defined in footnote i above), the participant may enter the Preintervention Period after adhering 
to any washout requirements. If fecal impaction is present upon re-examination, the participant will not be eligible for t he study. 
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
22
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0kA fecal impaction assessment is performed at the Randomization Visit (Visit 3) after eDiary eligibility is confirmed and prior to randomization. If there is no fecal impaction 
at the Randomization Visit (Visit 3) (as defined in footnote i above), the participant is eligible for randomization. If fecal impaction is present upon examination, the 
participant will not be eligible for the study .
lVital signs include temperature , respiratory rate, and weight. Postural vital signs (supine and standing) include pulse rate and systolic and diastolic blood pressure. At all 
visits, postural vital signs must be obtained after participant s have been in a supine position for at least 2 to 3 minutes, followed by a standing position for at least 1 minute. 
Temperature may be recorded as oral, rectal or tympanic (ear). If possible, temperature should be obtained using the same method at each visit.
mClinical laboratory tests consist of clinical chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis. All laboratory tests requiring blood draws should be collected at the same time.
nSerum pregnancy test will be obtained for female participants of childbearing potential. 
oUrine pregnancy test will be obtained for female participants of childbearing potential. A negative urine pregnancy test is required prior to dosing at the Randomization Visit 
(Visit 3) and prior to study intervention dispensing at Week 4 (Visit 5) andWeek 8(Visit 6) . 
pA urine drug screen will be obtained at Screening (Visit 1) for all participants 12to 17 years of age and only if deemed necessary by the investigator for participants 6 to 
11years of age. Urine drug screens may be repeated at the investigator’s discretion at any time during the study.
qProtocol -permitted rescue medication will be dispensed in IWRS where applicable. Participants may choose a different protocol-permitted rescue medication at any 
subsequent visit , where available . Additional protocol -permitted rescue medications may be dispensed as needed at any subsequent visit , where available.
rAt the Preintervention Visit (Visit 2), participants and parents/caregivers will be trained on the use of the eDiary device and instructed to complete both morning and evening 
assessments daily. At subsequent visits, study site staff will veri fy participant compliance with the eDiary device and remind participants to complete their morning and 
evening assessments daily. The global severity items will be completed beginning at the Preintervention Period through End-of -Study, and the global chang e items will be 
completed beginning at Randomization through End- of-Study .
sStudy intervention will be administered at the study site during the Randomization Visit (Visit 3) after running theEligibility report and confirming the participant has fasted 
for at least 2 hours . IWRS will be contacted to obtain the study intervention (bottle number) to be dispensed. Participants may eat 30 minutes after dosing (the requirement for 
study intervention to be administered 30 minutes prior to the meal will not apply for the first dose). 
tProtocol -permitted rescue medications only.
uAdditional unscheduled visits may be allowed at the discretion of the investigator with approval from the sponsor.
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
131
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.010.12. Supporting Information from the Adult Linaclotide Program
Table 10-3 Summary of Studies in the Linaclotide Adult Program Conducted in North America
Study Number Study Design/Study Population Major Conclusions
MCP -103-312 Phase 3b, randomized, double- blind, 
placebo -controlled, parallel -group trial 
of linaclotide 290 μg administered orally 
for 12 weeks followed by a 4 -week 
randomized withdrawal period in 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome with constipationLinaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement in Overall Change fromBaseline in Abdominal Score Throughout the Treatment Period compared with placebo for the primary analysis of the primary endpoint (p<0.0001) , as w ell as for 
the secondary time-course analysis of the primary endpoint (p<0.0005 at all w eeks).
Linaclotide showed statistically significant improvements compared with placebo for
the secondary endpoints of Change from Baseline in 12 -week Abdominal Score 
(comparison of cumulative distribution function curves) and 6/12 Week Abdominal 
Score Responder (both p<0.0001).
Statistically significant improvement in abdominal score w ith linaclotide versus 
placebo w as observed w ithin the first week of dosing and was sustained over the 12 -
week T reatment Period.
Diarrhea w as the most commonly reported TEAE during the trial. During the 
treatment period, 4.6% of linaclotide patients reported at least 1 episode of diarrhea, 
compared with 1.6% of placebo patients; this represented a lower diarrhea rat e than 
previously observed in linaclotide trials.
LIN-MD-31 Phase 3 study multicenter, randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled, 
parallel -group study in adults with IBS-
C com paring one dose (266 μg) of 
linaclotide with placebo. Included a 4 -
week double blind, randomized 
withdrawal period immediately 
following the 12 -week treatment period 
to assess the potential for rebound 
worsening of bowel or abdominal 
symptomsLinaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement versus placebo for all 4 
primary efficacy parameters controlling for multiplicity: 9/12 Week APC 3+1 
responder (p = 0.0004), 9/12 Week CSBM 3+1 responder (p < 0.0001), 9/12 Week 
abdominal pain responder (p = 0.0262), and 6/12 Week APC +1 responder (p=<0.0001).
Linaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement versus placebo for each of 
the 10 secondary efficacy parameters (all p -values statistically significant controlling 
for multiplicity). The results were observed within the first week of dosing and w ere 
sustained ove r the 12 -week treatment period.
There w as no evidence of a rebound effect when linaclotide treatment was withdrawn.
Diarrhea w as the most frequently reported TEAE during the trial. In the treatment 
period, 79 (19.5%) of 406 patients treated with linaclotid e reported at least 1 episode 
of diarrhea compared to 14 (3.5%) of 396 patients treated with placebo.
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
132
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Study Number Study Design/Study Population Major Conclusions
MCP -103-302 Phase 3 random ized, double blind, 
placebo -controlled, parallel -group study 
of linaclotide administered orally for 26 
weeks in adults with IBS -CSafety and efficacy of linaclotide 290 µg administered as a solid oral capsule for 12 or 26 w eeks: Results showed improvement in abdominal and bow el symptoms at 12 
weeks that was maintained throughout 26 weeks of treatment. Diarrhea w as the most 
frequently reported TEAE during the study.
Linaclotide showed a statistically significant difference from placebo for each of the 4 
primary efficacy parameters (p < 0.0001 for all 4 parameters): 9/12 w eek APC 3+1 
Responder, 9/12 w eek CSBM 3+1 Responder, 9/12 w eek Abdom inal Pain Responder, 
and 6/12 w eek APC +1 Responder, all of which were statistically significant 
controlling for multiplicity.
Differences in linaclotide versus placebo were observed within the first week of dosing and w ere sustained over the 26 -week Treatment Period.
Diarrhea w as the most common TEAE reported during the trial. During the Treatment 
Period, 79 (19.7%) of 402 linaclotide patients reported at least 1 episode of diarrhea, compared to 10 (2.5%) of 403 placebo patients.
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
133
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Study Number Study Design/Study Population Major Conclusions
LIN-MD-01 Phase 3 multicenter, randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled, parallel -group, 
multiple- dose, 12 -week trial com paring 2 
doses of linaclotide with placebo in adults 
with CICLinaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement compared with placebo for 
the primary efficacy parameter, 12 -week CSBM overall responder, at both the 266 -
and 133 -μg/day doses (p = 0.0012 and p < 0.0001, respectively, statistically 
significant after controlling for multiplicity).
The odds of linaclotide patients being 12 -week CS BM overall responders are 
approximately 3 to 4 times those of patients receiving placebo.
Linaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement compared with placebo for each of the secondary efficacy parameters at both the 266 -and 133 -μg/day doses (all 
p-values statistically significant after controlling for multiplicity).
For most parameters, improvements versus placebo were observed for both doses of 
linaclotide within the first week, often on the first day of dosing, and were sustained 
over the 1 2-week treatment period.
None of the patients tested had quantifiable serum levels of linaclotide or its primary metabolite (MM- 419447), supporting previous clinical studies that demonstrated that 
linaclotide is minimally absorbed.
Diarrhea w as the most frequently reported TEAE during the trial. In the treatment 
period, 72 (17.2%) of 418 linaclotide patients reported at least 1 episode of diarrhea compared with 6 (2.8%) of 215 placebo patients. Diarrhea incidence was not dose related; 42 (19.7%) and 30 (14.6%) patients in the 133 -and 266- μg/day linaclotide 
groups, respectively, experienced TEAEs of diarrhea. 
There w ere no clinically meaningful differences between placebo and linaclotide 
groups in the mean or change from baseline QT interval (corrected by either Bazett’s 
or Fridericia’s formula). Overall the data indicated that linaclotide does not adversely 
affect the ECG of linaclotide -treated adult participants.
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
134
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Study Number Study Design/Study Population Major Conclusions
MCP -103-303 Phase 3, Random ized, Double -blind, 
Placebo -controlled, Parallel -group, Trial 
of Linaclotide Administered Orally for 12 
Weeks Followed by a 4 -Week 
Randomized Withdrawal Period in 
adults with CICLinaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement from placebo for the primary efficacy parameter, 12 -week CSBM Overall Responder, at both the 133 and 
266 µg doses. The odds of being a 12 -week CSBM Overall Responder are 
approximately 7 times higher in patients on linaclotide than in patients on placebo.
Linaclotide showed a statistically significant improvement from placebo for each of 
the secondary efficacy parameters at both the 266 and 133 µg doses (all p -values 
statistically significant after controlling for multiplicity).
The results were robust and consistent across the primary and secondary efficacy 
parameters.
No patient had quan tifiable plasma levels of linaclotide or its primary metabolite 
(MM- 419447), supporting previous clinical studies that demonstrated that linaclotide 
is minimally absorbed.
Diarrhea w as the most common TEAE reported during the study. In the Treatment 
Period , diarrhea was reported by 27 (12.4%) and 30 (13.8%) patients in the 133 and 
266 µg linaclotide groups, respectively, compared to 14 (6.7%) placebo patients.
No rebound of constipation symptoms was observed and there was no evidence of 
withdrawal symptoms in the RW Period.
LIN-MD-02 Multicenter, open -label study exam ining 
the long -term  (78-week) safety of 
linaclotide in adult participants with 
CIC and IBS -C who com pleted 1 of the 
linaclotide Phase 2 or 3 studies or the Pretreatm ent Period of 1 of the Phase 3 
double- blind studies, but failed to meet 
specific inclusion or exclusion criteria to 
be randomizedAs observed in previous studies with linaclotide, diarrhea was the most frequently
reported TEAE during the study, with 524 (33.7%) of 1554 patients repor ting at least 
1 episode of diarrhea. Most of the TEAEs were reported as mild or moderate and unrelated to linaclotide.
The incidence of SAEs was low for both the CC Safety and IBS- C Safety Populations 
(with 5.9% and 5.5% of patients, respectively) reportin g 1 or more SAEs over the 
duration of the 18 month study)
MCP -103-305 Multicenter, open -label, long- term  safety 
study of oral linaclotide in adult participants with CIC and IBS -C who 
completed 1 of the linaclotide Phase 2 or 
3 studies or the Pretreatm ent Period of 1 
of the Phase 3 double-blind studies, but failed to m eet specific inclusion or 
exclusion criteria to be random izedAs observed in previous studies with linaclotide, diarrhea was the most common TEAE.
Reduction in linaclotide dose from 290 µg to 145 µ g seemed to enable patients to 
remain in the study when they might otherwise have withdrawn
The incidence of SAEs was low for both the CC Safety and IBS- C Safety Populations 
(with 6.8% and 5.0% of patients, respectively reporting one or more SAEs over the 
duration of the 18 month study). The nature of the SAEs did not raise any safety concerns regarding treatment with linaclotide.
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol LIN-MD-64, Amendment 1
Linaclotide
135
GRD -CLN -T-01-01 v2.0Study Number Study Design/Study Population Major Conclusions
LIN-MD-04 Randomized, double -blind, placebo 
controlled, parallel -group, study of 
linaclotide at doses of 145 µg/day a nd 
290µg /day, adm inistered orally for 12 
weeks to adult participants with CIC 
and prominent abdominal bloating at baseline (ie, bloating ≥ 5.0 on an 11 -point 
numerical rating scale)Patients treated with linaclotide 145 μg/day met the primary efficacy endpoint of 3 or more CSBMs per w eek and an increase of 1 or more CSBMs per w eek from  baseline 
for at least 9 of 12 w eeks compared with placebo -treated patients. 
The odds of being a 9/12 -week CSBM 3 + 1 responder were approximately 2.2 times 
higher for patients treated with linaclotide 145 -μg/day than for patients who were 
treated w ith placebo.
Patients with prominent abdominal bloating at baseline experienced improvement in their bloating symptoms within the first week of treatment with linaclotide 145 -and 
290-μg/day relative to placebo treatment and the improvement was sustained for the 
duration of treatment.
Diarrhea w as the most common TEAE reported among linaclotide- treated patients in 
this study; however, none of the observed TEAEs of diarrhea had serious sequelae.
MCP -103-309 Phase 3 random ized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled, parallel -group study 
of linaclotide at doses of 72 µg/day and 
145µg/day was adm inistered orally for 
12 weeks in adults with CIC at baseline.Overall, once -daily linaclotide 72 µg show ed statistically significant improvement in 
CIC symptoms compared with placebo during the Treatment Period, with treatment 
effects that were similar to the linaclotide 145 µg dose.
Consistent with the established linaclotide AE profile, diarrhea was the most common
TEAE reported during the study and was experienced by 19.2% and 22.1% of patients 
in the linaclotide 72 µg and 145 µg groups, respectively, compared with 7.0% in the placebo group. Diarrhea was mostly mild to moderate in severity
Approval Date: 05-Jun-2020 15:39:03 (GMT)