PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 i  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Posterior Foss a Decompression with or 
without Duraplasty for Chiari type I 
Malformation with Syringomyelia   
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 ii  
 
FULL PROTOCOL TITLE  
 
Posterior Foss a Decompression with or without Duraplasty  for 
Chiari type I Malformation with Syringomyelia  
 
  
Study Chairman or Principal Investigator:   
  
David D. Limbrick, Jr., MD, PhD  
T.S. Park  Professor of Neurological Surgery  and Pediatrics  
St. Louis Children’s Hospital  
Wash ington University School of Medicine  
 
 
   
Supported by:  
  
Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute  
CER -1503 -29700  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 iii Table of Contents  
Page  
 
Study Team Roster ………………………………………………………………………… ...1 
 
Participating Study Sites …………………………………………………………………… ..4 
 
1. Study objectives ……………………………………………………………………… .7 
 
1.1 Primary Objective ……………………………………………………………… ...7 
 
1.2 Secondary Objectives …………………………………………………………… ..7 
 
2. Background and Rationale ………………………………………………………… ...8 
 
2.1 Background on Condition, Disease, or Other Primary Study Focus ………… ..8 
 
2.2 Study Rationale …………………………………………………………………… 9 
 
3. Study Design ………………………………………………………………………… ..11 
 
4. Selection and Enrollment of Participants …………………………………………… 12 
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria ………………………………………………………………… .12 
 
4.2 Exclusion C riteria ………………………………………………………………… 12 
 
4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures …………………………………………………… .13 
 
4.4 Subject Recruitment ……………………………………………………………… .13 
 
4.5 Parental Permission and Child Assent …………………………………………… 13 
 
4.6 Randomization and Treatment Allocation ……………………………………… .13 
 
5. Study  Interventions …………………………………………………………………… .14 
 
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration …………………………………… .14 
 
5.2 Handling of Study Interventions …………………………………………………. .14 
 
5.3 Concomitant Interventions ……………………………………………………… ...15 
 
  5.3.1 Allowed Interventions …………………………… ……………………… 15 
 
  5.3.2 Required Interventions ………………………………………………….. 15 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 iv  
  5.3.3 Prohibited Interventions ………………………………………………… 15 
 
5.4 Adherence Assessment …………………………………………………………… ..15 
 
6. Study Procedures ……………………………………………………………………… .15 
 
6.1 Schedule of Evaluation …………………………………………………………… ..15 
 
6.2 Description of Evaluation ………………………………………………………… .16 
 
6.2.1 Screening of Evaluation …………………………………………………… 16 
 
6.2.2 Enrollment, Baseline, and/or Randomization …………………………… .17 
 
6.2.3 Follow -up Visits …………………………………………………………… .18 
 
6.2.4 Completion/Final Evaluation ……………………………………………… 19 
 
7. Safety Assessments …………………………………………………………………… ...20 
 
7.1 Specification of Safety Parameters ……………………………………………… .. 21 
 
 7.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety  
       Parameters ………………………………………………………………………… ..23 
   
  7.2.1 Prelimina ry Data………………………………………………………….2 3 
 
7.2 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events …………………………………… ..26 
 
7.3 Reporting Procedures ……………………………………………………………… 31 
 
7.4 Follow -up for Adverse Events …………………………………………………… ...32 
 
7.5 Safety Monitoring ………………………………………………………………… ..32 
 
8. Intervention Discontinuation ………………………………………………………… ..32 
 
9. Statistical Consideration ……………………………………………………………… .33 
 
9.1 General Design Issues ……………………………………………………………… 33 
 
9.2 Sample Size and Randomization ………………………………………………… ..34 
 
9.3 Interim Analyses and Stopping Rules …………………………………………… ..34 
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 v 9.4 Outcomes ………………………………………………………………………… …35  
 
9.5 Data Analysis …………………………………………………………………… …..35 
 
10. Data Collection and Quality Assurance ………………………………………………… ...39 
 
 10.1 Data Collection Forms …………………………… ……………………………… .39 
 
 10.2 Data Management ………………………………………………………………… 39 
 
 10.3 Quality Assurance ………………………………………………………………… 40 
 
  10.3.1 Training ………………………………………………………………… .41 
 
  10.3.2 Quality Control Committee …………………………………………… .41 
 
  10.3.3 Metrics ………………………………………………………………… ...41 
 
  10.3.4 Protocol Deviations …………………………………………………… ...43 
 
10.3.5  Monitoring ……………………………………………………………… 43 
 
11. Participant Rights and Confidentiality ……………………………………………….. 43 
 
 11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review ………………………………………. 46 
 
11.2 Informed Consent Forms ………………………………………………………… 46 
 
11.3 Participant Confidentiality ……………………………………………………… .47 
 
11.4 Study Discontinuation …………………………………………………………… .47 
 
12. Committees …………………………………………………………………………… ...47 
 
13. Publication of Research Findings …………………………………………………… ...47 
 
14. References ……………………………………………………………………………… .49 
 
15. Supplement/Appendices ………………………………………………………………. .53 
 
 
 
 
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 1 STUDY TEAM ROSTER  
Research Team 
Member  Role in 
Study  Stakeholder 
Grouping  Responsibilities  
David D. Limbrick, 
Jr., M.D., Ph.D.  P.I. Clinician/  
Physician  Oversees design, implementation, and 
conduct of entire study.  Supervises the 
conduct of human subjects research, 
protects rights, safety and welfare of 
subjects.  Reviews and submits interim and 
final reports on study. Leads meetings of 
the Investigators Committee.  Responsible 
for research partners, stakeholders, and 
patient partners input during study 
meeting. Reviews and presents data to the   
DSMB. Ove rsees dissemination of study 
results with all members of the 
Investigators Committee.  
Chevis Shannon, 
Ph.D.  Co-P.I. Research  
Stakeholder  Serves as a liaison to patient advocacy 
groups. Oversees training and oversight of 
the quality of life instrument and study 
aim. Participates as a Site PI. Serves as a 
member of the Dissemination Committee. 
Participates in the development and 
writing of presentations and study 
manuscripts.  
James Torner, Ph.D.  Co-P.I. Research  
Stakeholder  Oversees Data Coordinating Center.  
Responsible for data analysis and 
interpretation.  Participates in the writing 
of the development of presentations and 
study manuscripts. Assists with the 
preparations and presentation of reports for 
the DSMB.  
Gerald Tuite , M.D.  Co-I Clinician/  
Physician  Serves as a liaison to patient advocacy 
groups. Oversees training and oversight of 
the quality of life instrument and study 
aim. Participates as a Site PI. Serves as a 
member of the Dissemination Committee. 
Participates in the writing of the 
deve lopment of presentations and study 
manuscripts.  
Emine Bayman, Ph. 
D.   Co-I Research  
Stakeholder  Performs data analysis and assists with 
interpretation.  Participates in the writing 
of the development of presentations and 
study manuscripts. Assists with the 
preparations and presentation of reports 
for the DSMB.  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 2 T.S. Park, M.D.  Co-I Clinician/  
Physician  Oversees the network and its resources.  
Serves as ad ministrative leader and s tudy 
advisor. Facilitates the annual PRSRC 
meeting.  
Michael Kelly, M.D.  Co-I Clinician/  
Physician  As a spinal deformity expert, is responsible 
for interpretation of all spinal deformity x -
rays and the determination of 
progression/stability/improvement of 
deformity after surgery.  
Hailey Vance, P.N.P.  Co-I Clinician/  
Nurse 
Practitioner  As a first point of contact for patients, 
provides important insight into concerns of 
patient/family members at all stages, from 
diagnosis through the post -operative 
period. Attends annual investigator 
meeting and participates on Investigator 
Committee calls.  Assists in dissemination 
of study results.  
Elaine Kennedy  Co-I Clinician/  
Nurse 
Practitioner  As a first point of contact for patients, 
provides important insight into concerns of 
patient/family members at all stages, from 
diagnosis through the post -operative 
period. Attends annual investigator 
meeting and participates on Investigator 
Committee calls.  Assists in dissemination 
of study results.  
Thanda Meehan  
R.N. , B.S.N.   Co-I Clinician/  
Research 
Nurse  Ensures all study site surgeons and 
research coordinators are trained on the 
study protocol and procedures. Fields 
questions and assists with day -to-day 
issues for PRSRC (e.g. data entry, registry 
function). Organizes all study documents 
and coordinates efforts of multiple sites.  
Samuel Reeves  Co-I Patient 
Partner/  
Family  Inspirational leader of PRSRC.  
Participates in study design, 
implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Provides input 
from a patient’s or family’s perspective 
about all st udy decisions. Ensures patient -
centeredness of outcomes.  Participates in 
all Investigator Committee meetings.  
Lisa Reynolds  Co-I Patient 
Partner /  
Family  Participates in study design, 
implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Provides input 
from a patient’s or parent’s perspective 
about all study decisions. Ensures patient -
centeredness of outcomes.  Participates in 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 3 all Investigator Committee me etings.  
Facilitates approachable language for 
social media posts, press releases and 
website blogs.  
Gina Tramelli  Co-I Patient 
Partner /  
Family  Participates in study design, 
implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Provides input 
from a patient’s or parent’s perspective 
about all study decisions. Ensures patient -
centeredness of outcomes.  Participates in 
all Investigator Committee meetings.  
Facilitates approachable language for 
social media posts, press releases and 
website blogs.  
Dorot hy Poppe  Co-I Patient 
Partner/  
Patient 
Advocate  C.E.O. of Chiari and Syringomyelia 
Foundation.  Participates in study design, 
implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Ensures patient -
centeredness of outcomes.  Participates in 
all Investigator  Committee meetings.  
Assists with coordination of patient focus 
groups and dissemination of results.  
Rick Labuda  Co-I Patient 
Partner/  
Patient 
Advocate  Executive Director, Conquer Chiari patient 
advocacy group.  Participates in study 
design, implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Ensures patient -
centeredness of outcomes.  Participates in 
all Investigator Committee meetings.  
Responsible for social media posts, press 
releases and website blogs.  
Jacob Greenberg, 
M.D., M.S.C.I.  Consultant  Clinician/  
Researcher  Participates in study design, 
implementation, conduct, and 
dissemination of results. Participates in the 
interpretation and refinement of clinical 
outcomes metrics. Participates in the 
writing of the development of 
presentat ions and study manuscripts.  
Angela Eschmann, 
R.N.  Consultant  Clinician/  
O.R. Nurse  As the resource nurse and leader of the St. 
Louis Children’s neurosurgical operating 
room staff, provides input regarding 
operative conditions potentially 
contributing to surgical complications.  
Toni Goelz  Consultant  Clinician/  
Physical 
Therapist  Provides unique perspective and insight 
into assessment and treatment of physical 
limitations related to CM+SM.  Participates 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 4 in study design, implementation, conduct, 
and dissemination of results.  
 
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES   
Sites  Principal Investigators  
All Children's Hospital  Tuite, Gerald , Jallo,  George  
Arkansas Children’s Hospital/University of 
Arkansas School of Medicine  Albert , Greg  
Arnold Palmer Hospital -Orlando  Health  Olavarria, Greg  
Boston Children's Hospital  Stone, Scellig  
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta  Chern, Joshua  
Children’s Hospital at Dartmouth -Hitchcock/ 
Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine  Bauer , David  
Children ’s Hospital Colorado  O’Neill, Brent  
Children ’s Hospital of Birmingham  Johnston, James  
Children’s Hospital of New York -
Presbyterian/ Weill Cornell/Cornell 
University Medical College  Greenfield , Jeffrey  
Children ’s Hospital of Phoenix  Adelson, David  
Children ’s National Medical Center  Keating , Robert  
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia  Heuer, Greg  
Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital  Mangano, Francesco  
Columbia University  Anderson, Richard  
Dell (Seton) Children’s Medical Center  George, Timothy , Tyler -Kabara, Elizabeth  
Gillette Children’s Hospital Minnesota  Graupman , Patrick  
John Hopkins Children’s Center / Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine  Jackson , Eric  
Levine Children’s Hospital/Carolinas Medical 
Center  Wait , Scott  
Los Angeles Children ’s Hospital  McComb, J. Gordon  
Lurie Children ’s Hospital of Chicago  Alden, Tord  
Mayo  Clinic Children’s Hospital  Daniels , David  
Miami Children ’s Hospital  Bhatia, Savjiv , Ragheb, John  
MUSC Children’s Hospital/Medical 
University of South Carolina School of 
Medicine  Eskandari , Ramin  
Oregon Health & Science University  Selden, Nathan  
Pennsylvania State University  Iantosca, Mark  
Pittsburgh Children ’s Hospital  Tamber, Mandeep, Greene , Stephanie  
Primary Children ’s Hospital  Brockmeyer,Doug  
St. Louis Children ’s Hospital  Limbrick, David  
Seattle Children ’s Hospital  Ellenbogen, Richard  
Stanford University  Grant, Gerald  
Texas Children ’s Hospital  Whitehead, Bill  
The Children’s Hospital at OU Medical  Mapstone, Timothy , Gross, Naina  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 5 Center/ Oklahoma University College of 
Medicine  
Nationwide Children ’s Hospital  Leonard, Jeffrey  
University of Florida HSC -Jacksonville  Aldana , Philipp  
University of Iowa  Menezes, Arnold  
University of Michigan  Maher, Cormac  
University of Texas – Houston  Shah, Manish  
University of Minnesota  Guillaume, Dan  
University of Vermont Children’s Hospital/ 
University of Vermont College of Medicine  Durham , Susan  
University of Wisconsin  Iskandar, Bermans  
Vanderbilt University  Shannon, Chevis  and Wellons, Jay  
Wake Forest University  Couture, Daniel  
 
Study Title  
Posterior Foss a Decompression with or without Duraplasty for Chiari type I Malformation with 
Syringomyelia: A prospective, cluster randomization trial of up to 238  subjects recruited from 36 
centers of the Park -Reeves Syringomyelia Research Consortium  as well as an addit ional 8 research 
centers . 
  
Objectives  
Children with Chiari type I malformation (CM) and syringomyelia (SM), a ‘rare disease’, may 
suffer debilitating pain, spinal deformity, neurological deficits (myelopathy, weakness, sensory 
loss, and impaired gait), and a diminished quality of life (QOL) [1 -3].  CM+SM is treated with 
neurosurgical decompression of the craniovertebral junction with either of two technical 
variations: 1) posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD), the gold standard operation, 
which involves intradural microsurgical d issection and duraplasty; or 2) extradural posterior fossa 
decompression (PFD), in which the dura is not opened.  The Central Hypothesis of this proposal 
is that, compared with PFDD, PFD  will be associated with fewer surgical complications and 
less harm to  patie nts, yet will provide non -inferior  clinical improvement and syrinx 
regression.  With a more favor able risk profile and non -inferior  clinical outcomes, patients 
undergoing PFD will experience superior QOL.   We will conduct a prospective, cluster 
rando mized controlled trial of PFD versus PFDD in order to test this hypothesis and achieve the 
following Specific Aims:  
 
Specific Aim 1:  Determine if PFD is associated with fewer surgical complications and less harm 
to patients than PFDD.  
Hypothesis: PFD will be associated with fewer surgical complications and less potential harm to 
patients than PFDD.     
Anticipated Outcome:  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) -related complications ≤6 months (e.g. CSF 
leak, pseudomeningocele, aseptic meningitis, infection, and hydroce phalus ) and requirement for 
additional surgery for wound revision or CSF diversion will be lower after PFD compared with 
PFDD.  
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 6 Specific Aim 2:   Determine if PFD provides non -inferior clinical improvement and syrinx 
regression compared to PFDD.   
Hypothesis:  Clinical improvement and syrinx regression provided by PFD will be non -inferior 
compared to those provided by PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome:   Clinical symptoms, neurological function, and syrinx regression ≤12 
months will be non -inferior following PFD when compared with PFDD.  Rates of revision 
decompression surgery (PFD or PFDD) and progression of spinal deformity ≤12 months after PFD 
also will be non-inferior to PFDD.  
 
Specific Aim 3:   Determine if PFD is associated with superior QOL compared with  PFDD.  
Hypothesis:  With fewer surgical complications, PFD will be associated with superior QOL 
compared with PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome: PFD will have superior QOL and will show improvements in overall QOL 
over time (≤12 months post -operatively) compared t o PFDD.  In particular, both physical metrics 
(evaluated by pain frequency, pain severity and non -pain symptoms) and psychosocial metrics will 
improve at a higher rate and in a shorter period of time after PFD compared to PFDD.  
 
Design and Outcomes   
This will be a cluster  randomized control trial of up to 238 patients  (see section 9.5 data analysis, 
re-estimation in  power calculations section below) recruited from the 36 centers of the Park -
Reeves Syringomyelia Research Consortium (PRSRC)  as well as an additional  8 research centers .  
Randomization will occur at the center level with standardized surgical technique, and data will 
be recorded in the PRSRC prospective registry.  In order to examine the main  comparative 
effectiveness research (CER ) question of surgical complications and potential harm to patients 
(Aim 1), intra -operative complications and short (≤6 months) and long -term (6 -12 months) 
postoperative complications will be recorded for both PFD and PFDD.  For Aim 2, clinical 
sympto ms, neurological function, and modified Chicago Chiari Outcome Scale (mCCOS) [22] 
scores will be measured pre -operatively and longitudinally at ≤6 weeks , 3-6 months , and 12 ±2 
months after surgery.  MRIs  will be obtained (at a minimum) ≤ 6 months pre-operat ively  and 122 
months post -operatively  to compare the effect of surgery on syrinx size and spinal deformity.  In 
order to test Aim 3 hypothesis, QOL will be assessed at the same time points using the Chiari 
Health  Index Pediatrics (CHIP), and the Health Ut ilities -3 (HUI -3), holistically evaluating patients 
across psychosocial and physical dimensions . 
Interventions and Duration  
This study will compare the outcomes of PFDD vs PFD.  The study will occur over a five year 
period.  The enrollment period will last for two years  and 8 months .  Data collection for each 
participant is for the primary analysis is  to be one year and will be structured in the following 
manner : 
- Pre-operative  (the initial outpatient neurosurgery visit prior to decompression)  including  
CHIP & HUI -3 QOL questionnaire  
- Intra -operative  
- Post-Operative  
- ≤6 weeks  post-operation  including CHIP & HUI -3 QOL questionnaire  
- 3-6 month s post-operation  including CHIP & HUI -3 QOL questionnaire  
- 12±2month s post-operation  including CHIP & HUI -3 QOL question naire  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 7 - Data related to additional outpatient neurosurgery visits that occur during the one year 
collection period  will also be collected.  
MRI of the  brain and cervical  and thoracic  spine are requir ed prior to PFD or  PFDD .  Pre -operative 
lumbar spine MRI will be left to the discretion of the surgeon.  MRI of the cervical and thoracic 
spine are required 12±2  months  post-operatively .   
- Imaging not required for study but included for r eview if available during the 1 -year +/- 2 
month study collection period:  
o Additional MRI s of the brain  or cervical , thoracic , or lumbar  spine  obtained for  the 
clinical care of the patient , including those performed  due to: 
 Revision/redo decompression  
 Syrinx fenestration or syrinx shunt  
 Spinal Fusion  
o CT of the brain  or cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine  
o “Long cassette” or “scoliosis” X -rays  and X-rays of the cervical, thoracic, and 
lumbar spine  
 
Sample Size and Population  
Overall sample size during the two year s and 8 months  enrollment period is 148 participants. Of 
this total, approximately 74 will have a PFD and  approximately  74 will have PFDD .  Participants 
will be between the ages of  0-21 years old  and diagnosed with CM+SM without bias to gender, 
race, or ethnicity.  
 
1. STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
1.1 Primary Objective  
 
Specific Aim 1:  Determine if PFD is associated with fewer surgical complications and less harm 
to patients than PFDD.   
Hypothesis:  PFD will be associated with fewer surgical complications and less potential harm to 
patients than PFDD.   
Anticipated Outcome:  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) -related complications ≤6 months (e.g. CSF 
leak, pseudomeningocele, aseptic meningitis, infection, hydrocephalus), and the requirement fo r 
additional surgery for wound  revision or CSF dive rsion will be lower after PFD compared with 
PFDD.  
 
1.2 Secondary Objectives  
 
Specific Aim 2:   Determine if PFD provides non -inferior clinical improvement and syrinx 
regression compared to PFDD.   
Hypothesis:  Clinical improvement and syrinx regression provided by PFD will be non -inferior 
compared to those provided by PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome:   Clinical symptoms, neurological function, and syrinx regression ≤12 
months will be non -inferior following PFD when co mpared with PFDD.  Rates of revision 
decompression surgery (PFD or PFDD) and progression of spinal deformity ≤12 months after PFD 
also will be non-inferior to PFDD.  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 8  
Specific Aim 3:   Determine if PFD is associated with superior QOL compared with PFDD.  
Hypo thesis:   With fewer surgical complications, PFD will be associated with superior QOL 
compared with PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome: PFD will have superior QOL and will show improvements in overall QOL 
over time (≤12 months post -operatively) compared to PFDD.  In  particular, both physical metrics 
(evaluated by pain frequency, pain severity and non -pain symptoms) and psychosocial metrics will 
improve at a higher rate and in a shorter period of time after PFD compared to PFDD.   
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE   
2.1 Background o n Condition, Disease, or Other Primary Study Focus  
Chiari type I malformation (CM) and syringomyelia (SM) are closely associated but incompletely 
understood disorders of the craniovertebral junction and spinal cord, respectively (Fig. 1). 
Syringomyelia (SM ) is a potentially debilitating neurological condition characterized by the 
abnormal accumulation of fluid within the spinal cord and is observed most commonly in the 
setting of CM [1].  SM is classified as a ‘rare disease’ by the Office of Rare Diseases of the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), with an estimated 7 -9 new cases/year/100,000, and about 40,000 people 
currently affected in the United States [2-6].  Children with CM+SM frequently s uffer chronic 
pain, including headaches and spinal cord dysesthesias, spinal deformity, and neurological deficits 
such as sensory loss or weakness [7-10].  Left untreated, these symptoms may progress to result 
in debilitating paralysis, progressive scoliosis requiring surgical correction, sexual dysfunction, or 
bladder and bowel incontinence.  High cervical or brainstem  SM may result cranial nerve 
dysfunction, respiratory failure, or apnea.  Fortunately, progression of disease is gradual and may 
be halted —and in some cases reversed —with effective neurosurgical treatment [9-13].   
 
While it is widely recognized that surgical 
decompression of the craniovertebral junction 
provides symptomatic improvement and syrinx 
regression in up to 80 -90% of patients with 
CM+SM [7, 9, 10, 12, 13], the optimal surgical 
technique remains highly controversial. The 
fundamental difference between the two major 
operative approaches for treating CM+SM is the 
surgical opening of the dura mater, the thickest and 
strongest of the three linings of th e central nervous 
system.  Opening the dura  in this region provides 
access to the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cisterns, the 
surface of the cerebellar tonsils, the foramen of 
Magendie (the opening of the 4th ventricle), the brainstem, and the spinal cord.  In  cases when the 
dura is opened, a duraplasty is performed, which involves an expansile closure of the dura, 
typically with graft material. Many surgeons fervently believe that opening the dura, with or 
without intradural microsurgical dissection, followed by duraplasty is critical to restoring normal 
cerebrospinal fluid hydrodynamics at the craniovertebral junction (CVJ) and permitting reduction 
in the SM size.    
Figure 1.  Schematic drawing (left) and T2 -weighted 
sagittal MRI (right) demonstrating Chiari type 1 
malformation (CM -1) and syringomyelia.  

PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 9 2.2 Study Rationale  
Syringomyelia is a rare disease associated with substantial, lifelong disability , ranging from 
chronic pain to debilitating paralysis, spinal deformity, and death from respiratory failure  [14].  
While some types of SM are not treatable, CM -associated SM is readily treated by neuro surgical 
decompression of the craniovertebral junction, which provides symptomatic improvement and 
syrinx regression in up to 90% of patients [15].  However, the optimal surgical technique —one 
that effectively eliminates symptoms and prevents disability while minimizing complications and 
harm to patients —remains unc lear.  The debate over which surgical technique, PFDD or PFD, to 
recommend to patients is among the most controversial topics in pediatric neurosurgery [16], and 
currently these decisions are being  made in the absence of evidence about the comparative 
effectiveness of PFDD or PFD .    
 
Termed posterior fossa decompression with 
duraplasty (PFDD), this combination of 
procedures is considered the ‘gold 
standard’ operation for CM+SM (Fig. 2).  
However, opening the dura carries a 
significant risk to patients (Table 1); a 
recent meta -analysis of numerous 
retrospective clinical series demonstrated surgical complications noted in 18.5% of patients who 
underwent PFDD (range 8.3 -66.7%, Table 2).  Due to this alarmingly high rate of complications, 
there has been increasing interest in recent years i n extradural posterior fossa decompression 
without dural opening or duraplasty  (PFD).  PFD markedly reduces the surgical risks of PFDD, 
but its efficacy remains unclear, and patients who undergo PFD may experience inferior resolution 
of symptoms and may be  more likely to require revision decompression surgery (Table 2).  
However, available data are derived primarily from single -center retrospective analyses [17-25], 
and at present, the choice of PFD or PFDD is largely based on surgeon preference or sur geon 
experience rather than medical evidence [26]; no evidence -based guidelines exist.  The current 
study proposes to  address this critical gap  in the management of CM+SM to compare  the 
risk of harm to patients, the effectiveness, and the change in QOL associated with PFDD 
versus PFD .  
 
 
Table 1.  Common surgical complications after PFDD or PFD.  
Surgical Complication  Surgical Procedures for 
Complication Management  
Pseudomeningocele  Oversewing of Wound  
CSF Leak  Wound Revision  
Chemical Meningitis  External CSF Drainage  
Hydrocephalus  Req. for CSF Shunt  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 10 Figure 2.   Surgical techniques for decompression for CM+SM. A, Planned areas of bone removal from the suboccipital region of the skull and C1 
lamina. B, After bony  decompression , the constricting epidural band at the level of the foramen magnum is resected.  This is the end of the operation 
for the extradural poster ior fossa decompression (PFD). If posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) is performed, the dura is opened 
sharply, exposing the cerebellar tonsils, brainstem, and upper spinal cord ( C).  After microsurgical dissection, the dura is sewn closed  with a dural graft 
(D). 
Table 2.   Summary of existing literature comparing PFD and PFDD for CM+/ -SM. 
 N value  % Clinical 
Improvement  % Syrinx 
Improvement  % CSF -related 
Complications  % Req. Repeat 
Decompression  
Article  PFDD  PFD PFDD  PFD PFDD  PFD PFDD  PFD PFDD  PFD 
Munshi (2000)  21 11 85.7 72.7 100 50.0 66.7 0 0 18.2 
Ventureyra (2003)  8 8 100 62.5 100 0 NR NR --- --- 
Navarro (2004)  53 56 62.3 72.2 NR NR 34.0 3.6 9.4 14.3 
Limonadi (2004)  12 12 OR 1.5*  OR 1.7*  100 --- 8.3 0 NR NR 
Yeh (2006)  85 40 97.6 90.0 85.0 66.7 10.0 0 5.9 0 
Galarza (2007)  40 20 79.2 33.3 77.7 40.0 NR NR NR NR 
Mutchnick (2010)  64 56 NR NR NR NR NR NR 3.1 12.5 
Litvack (2013)  47 63 91.4 90.0 NR NR 19.2 0 0 1.6 
Lee (2014)  36 29 CCOS  
14.6**  CCOS  
14.7**  76.9 100 19.4 0 2.8 6.9 
           
Meta -Analysis  
Durham (2008)  316 266 78.6 64.6 87.0 56.3 18.5 1.8 2.1 12.6 
    p-value  NA p=0.12  p=0.56  p=0.0003  p=0.01  
*Odds Ratio (OR) reported; **Chicago Chiari Outcome Scale (CCOS) reported; NR=Not reported; NA=Not Applicable  
 
 
The current study —which has been guided by patients and families, patient advocacy 
organizations, physician and non -physician stakeholders, and supported by the American 
Association of Neurologic Surgeons (AANS), the Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS) , 
and the Joint AANS/CNS Pediatric Section —is designed to  address this critical gap  in the 
management of CM+SM by comparing the risk of harm, eff ectiveness, and impact on QOL 
between  PFDD and PFD.  
 
The information that will be obtained from this study is of paramount importance to patients and 
families who are faced with making critically important and consequential healthcare decisions at 
a time of extreme duress.  Patients and f amilies are often overwhelmed to learn  that they have a 
complex and progressi ve neurological disorder with long -term implications for their health. This 
shock is often compounded by disappointment upon learning that there are significant unknowns 
in the treatment of their condition — “Which surgery should we choose?”  “Which has hig her 
risks?”  “Which is more likely to harm my child?”  “Is one more likely to help my child?”  “I 
don’t want them to suffer through this more than once.”   Right now, these questions are 
unanswerable; the current study will help patients and families to ans wer these questions and  make 
informed healthcare decisions about how best to help their children whi le minimizing the risk of 
harm .  In designing this study with patient partners a nd advocacy groups, this was a  resounding 
priority for research in CM+SM.  
 
This study will have tremendous impact by identifying the surgical approach (PFDD or PFD) that: 
1) minimizes surgical complications and potential harm to patients; 2) maximizes symptomatic 
relief and syrinx resolution; and 3) provides the highest Quality o f Life (QOL) for patients.   The 
results of this study will transform  management of this disorder in real and substantial ways that 
are critically important to patients and families, stakeholders, and clinicians  by: 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 11 1. Addressing the knowledge gap in treating CM+SM: No high quality evidence -based 
data exist for the treatment of CM+SM.  The results of this study will enable us  to 
establish best neurosurgical practices to improve healthcare delivery and 
outcomes for CM+SM by minimizing patient harm while maximizi ng 
symptomatic relief and QOL.  
2. Assist patients and families with difficult healthcare decisions: The information 
provided through this study will create a paradigm shift away from the current 
reliance on individual surgeon preferences and experiences. In i ts place, these 
results will enable patients and families to appreciate the rationale, risks, and 
benefits of the various surgical strategies for CM+SM so that they can make 
informed, consequential decisions regarding their own healthcare . 
3. Understand the impact of CM+SM, both acutely and chronically, on QOL in children.  
To date, nearly all CM+SM studies have focused on physician assessment of clinical 
outcomes in CM+SM.  By employing disease -specific, patient -centered QOL 
instruments, this study will provide entirely novel, rigorously determined insights 
into the impact of CM+SM on QOL in children and how QOL changes in the 
short - and long -term after surgery.  
3. STUDY DESIGN  
SPECIFIC AIMS  
Children with Chiari type I malformation (CM) and syri ngomyelia (SM), a ‘rare disease’, may 
suffer debilitating pain, spinal deformity, neurological deficits (myelopathy, weakness, sensory 
loss, and impaired gait), and diminished quality of life (QOL) (2, 7, 8, 27).  CM+SM is treated 
with neurosurgical decomp ression of the craniovertebral junction with either of two technical 
variations: 1) posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD), the gold standard operation, 
which involves intradural microsurgical dissection and duraplasty; or 2) extradural poste rior fossa 
decompression (PFD), in which the dura is not opened.  The Central Hypothesis of this proposal 
is that, compared with PFDD, PFD will be associated with fewer surgical complications and 
less harm to patie nts, yet will provide non -inferior  clinica l improvement and syrinx 
regression.  With a more favor able risk profile and non -inferior  clinical outcomes, patients 
undergoing PFD will experience superior QOL.   We will conduct a prospective, cluster 
randomized controlled trial of PFD versus PFDD in ord er to test this hypothesis and achieve the 
following Specific Aims:  
Specific Aim 1:  Determine if PFD is associated with fewer surgical complications and less harm 
to patients than PFDD.  
Hypothesis: PFD will be associated with fewer surgical complications and less potential harm to 
patients than PFDD.     
Anticipated Outcome:  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) -related complications ≤6 months (e.g. CSF 
leak, pseudomeningocele, aseptic meningitis, infection, and hydrocephalus) and requirement for 
additional surgery for wound revision or CSF diversion will be lower after PFD compared with 
PFDD.  
 
Specific Aim 2:   Determine if PFD provides non -inferior clinical improvement and syrinx 
regression compared to PFDD.   
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 12 Hypothesis:  Clinical improvement and syrinx regression provided by PFD will be non -inferior 
compared to those provided by PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome:   Clinical symptoms, neurological function, and syrinx regression ≤12 
months will be non -inferior followin g PFD when compared with PFDD.  Rates of revision 
decompression surgery (PFD or PFDD) and progression of spinal deformity ≤12 months after PFD 
also will be non-inferior to PFDD.  
 
Specific Aim 3:   Determine if PFD is associated with superior QOL compared wi th PFDD.  
Hypothesis:  With fewer surgical complications, PFD will be associated with superior QOL 
compared with PFDD.  
Anticipated Outcome: PFD will have superior QOL and will show improvements in overall QOL 
over time (≤12 months post -operatively) compared  to PFDD.  In particular, both physical metrics 
(evaluated by pain frequency, pain severity and non -pain symptoms) and psychosocial metrics will 
improve at a higher rate and in a shorter period of time after PFD compared to PFDD.  
4. SELECTION AND ENROLL MENT O F PARTICIPANTS.  
This study will leverage the unique resources of the Park-Reeves Syringomyelia Research 
Consortium (PRSRC) , a U.S.-based  network of  major children’s hospitals, each  with a high -
volume pediatric  neurosurge ry and orthopedic surgery center.  For the curren t study,  additional  
PRSRC sites have been recruited and agreed t o participate, (please refer to Appendix I for a full 
listing of the structure of the PRSRC).  Due to the highly specialized pediatric neurosurgical care 
required for the manage ment of CM+SM, each site serves as a regional referral center for this rare 
condition, and the demographics of patients cared for at each site are thus representative of the 
demographic distribution of each region . 
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria   
1) Age ≤21 years old  
2) Chiari malformation type I  with ≥5 mm tonsillar ectopia  
3) Syrinx  diameter  (recorded as the greatest antero -posterior or transverse diameter)  3-9 mm 
4) MRI of  the brain and cervical and thoracic spine  are required prior to surgery and  available 
to be shared with the DCC  
4.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
1) Syrinx <3 mm and/or ≥10  mm 
2) Neuro -imaging demonstrating basilar invagination  (position of the superior tip of  
 dens 5 mm above Chamberlain’s line)  
3) Neuro -imaging demonstrating  clival canal angle <120°  
4) Prior PFD, PFDD, or other surgery at the craniovertebral junction  
5) CM+SM secondary to other pathology (e.g. a tumor)  
6) Unable to share pre-decompression MRI of the brain and cervical and thoracic spine  
7) Patients who do not w ish to p articipate  
 
4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures   
Potential participants will be identified, screened, and recruited thro ugh the clinical practices of 
48 participating sites.  In this trial, the randomization unit will be the PRSRC center; therefore, the 
same intervention will be used for all qualifying patients enrolled at each center.  If a surgeon in a 
PRSRC center strongly believes that a patient shoul d undergo a certain procedure (PFDD or PFD) 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 13 and should not be randomized, that patient will be excluded from the study.   Effective 
randomization will occur through the random distribution of patients to centers employing each 
procedure (PFDD and PFD).    
 
Barriers to enrollment  will be addressed by monthly review of each site’s screening  log and 
REDCap screening/enrollment tool , which includes individuals who were eligible for enrollment, 
but were not enrolled in the study. These logs  (see Appendix III) RED Cap results will be supplied 
by St. Louis Children’s Hospital/Washington University -St. Louis and will be reviewed to assure 
that each participating hospital is enrolling subjects actively  and without significant bias. If study 
enrollment is slowe r than an ticipated, more ancillary PRSRC sites  will be added .  PRSRC has been 
approached by numerous other pediatric neurosurgical centers, and adding more ancillary sites is 
readily feasible.   
 
4.4 Subject Recruitment  
When the clinical site coordinator and/or inve stigator becomes aware of a patient who is 
potentially eligible for enrollment into the study, patient eligibility will be confirmed, and the study 
investigator or coordinator will approach the child’s parent/guardian and/or the patient (as 
applicable) to offer participation.  Each center will maintain a screening log and complete a 
REDCap screening/enrollment tool for any participants who are eligible for enrollment, but are 
not enrolled into the study.  These data will be reviewed to assure that each participating center is 
enrolling subjects without significant bias.  
 
4.5 Parental Permission and Child Assent  
After determining that a subject is eligible, the site investigator or designee will approach the 
parent/gu ardian to offer participation for their child in the study.  The parent/guardian will be 
informed about the objectives of the study and the potential risks and benefits of trial participation.  
If the parent/guardian refuses permission for their child to p articipate, then all clinical care will be 
provided to the child in accordance usual institutional practice.  Assent will be obtained for patients 
meeting age requirements for assent.   Informed consent /assent  will be obtained in the relatively 
focused atmo sphere of a clinic  or similar  room rather than the more chaotic pre -operative holding 
area just before surgery . 
 
 
4.6 Randomization and Treatment Allocation  
A cluster randomized controlled trial (C -RCT) will be conducted to compare the two major 
neurosurgical treatments for CM+SM, PFDD and PFD.  The cluster size is expected to be  on 
average  6 participants per center.  In order to participate, PRSRC centers with multiple pediatric 
neurosurgeons were given the option of complying with the treatment allocation and following a 
standardized procedure or selecting a single study neurosurgeon for the group.  If the latter scenario 
was chosen, the group had to agree that all CM+SM patients referred to that center must be treated 
by the study neurosurgeon.  For cluster randomization, a computer -generated randomization 
sequence will be generated independently by the study statistician.  All eligible participants within 
each cluster will then be approached for informed consent for the purposes of data collecti on for 
the trial.   
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 14 5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration   
The inter vention performed will either be a PFD or PFDD .  It will be predetermined, based on 
cluster randomization, which procedure each center performs on their respective participants.  A 
computer -generated randomization sequence will be generated independently by the study 
statistician. The surgery will occur in each respective center’s operating room.  With the exception 
of uniformly receiving the designated ce nter intervention, all research participants will receive 
usual clinical care in accordance with institutional practice and judgment.  Clinical care will 
include at a minimum an initial clinical evaluation by a participating pediatric neurosurgeon, 
surgica l treatment (PFDD or PFD) and associated perioperative care, and routine post -operative 
care with prescribed follow -up clinical assessments at ≤6 weeks , 3-6 months , and 12 months (+/- 
2 months = 10 -14 months) after surgery . Patients will be given the oppor tunity to re -consent into 
a study extension where any visits occurring within 5 years postoperativ ely will be documented, 
and the QOL questionnaires may be given annually.   Research data will be collected at all stages 
by trained study research assistants/ coordinators with strict oversight by site investigators using 
standard data collection forms.  Neuro -imaging is a critical element of the trial, required both for 
enrollment and to monitor treatment efficacy .  As such,  MRI of the brain and cervical and th oracic 
spine are required prior to surgery.  Pre -operative lumbar spine MRI will be left to the discretion 
of the surgeon.  MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine are required 12 months (+/-2 months = 10 -
14 months) post-operatively.   These are required fo r clinical care of CM+SM patients, regardless 
of participation in the study, and funding is not requested for these examinations. MRI of the 
lumbar spine, CT of the brain or cerv ical/thoracic/lumbar spine, “long cassette” or “scoliosis” X -
rays, and/or  X-rays of the cervical/thoracic/lumbar spine are not required but , will be reviewed if 
obtained.  In the case where the patient returned outside the window  for primary analyses,  a 
secondary analysis will include those visits up to 24 months.  
 
Each center wi ll be informed which arm they have been randomized to before enrollment occurs.  
Therefore, every potential participant/family will be aware of which procedure would be 
performed if s/he agreed to participate.   If the procedure is not an appropriate fit f or a particular 
patient or, the patient/family is not comfortable with the predetermined procedure, the patient will 
not be enrolled and they will be offered standard of care treatment by the clinical team at that 
center  
 
 
5.2 Handling of Study Interventions   
All pediatric neurosurgeons involved in the study have complet ed both an accredited neurosurgery 
residency  and a 1 -year subspecialty fellowship in pediatric neurosurgery at a program accredited 
by the Accreditation Council for Pediatric Neurosurgery Fellow ships (ACPNF)  or by The 
American Osteopathic Association (AOA)  and are either certified or eligible for certification by 
both the American Board of Neurological Surgeons (ABNS) and the American Board of Pediatric 
Neurological Surgery (ABPNS)  or the America n Osteopathic Board of Surgery (AOBS).   Prior to 
participating in the study, each  pediatric neurosurgeon must  submit documentation veri fying that 
s/he has performed ≥2 0 PFDD/PFD cases at the level of atte nding pediatric neurosurgeon or that 
that s/he perfo rmed ≥5 PFDD/PFD cases in the year preceding the participation in the study; and 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 15 3) review two videos showing the study -approved operative technique for PFDD and PFD in step -
wise fashion.  As detailed in the videos, PFDD and PFD both begin with a midline p osterior 
suboccipital incision extending from the level of the inion inferiorly. Suboccipital craniectomy ± 
cervical laminectomies are performed based upon the level of tonsillar position on the pre -
operative MRI.  The posterior atlanto -occipital membrane and any additional constricting epidural 
bands are then dissected off the dura and bisected.  For PFD, the operation is complete (dural 
scoring or splitting is permitted), and wound closure is initiated.  For PFDD, the dura is then incised 
and retracted fo r microsurgical dissection. Intradural maneuvers are performed at the surgeon’s 
discretion based on the intra -operative findings, but may include exploration/fenestration of an 
arachnoid veil, lysis of adhesions, or tonsillar reduction.  Following the intr adural dissection, the 
duraplasty is performed with autologous graft or dural substitute, and the wound is closed in 
standard fashion.  Dural opening without subsequent dural closure is not permitted for PFDD or 
PFD.  
5.3 Concomitant Interventions    
5.3.1 Allowed In terventions  
Medications or other treatments may be administered per usual institutional clinical 
practice.  PFD or PFDD must follow the procedural guidelines outlined in this protocol.   
5.3.2 Required Interventions  
There are no required interventions outside of  the PFD or PFDD procedure itself.  
5.3.3  Prohibited Interventions  
PFD or PFDD must be in accordance with the  procedural guidelines outlined in this 
protocol.   For the purposes of this study, PFD performed with dural opening but no dural 
closure is not permitted .  Similarly, cases requiring c oncomitant  cervical or occipito -
cervical fusion or upfront direct syrinx surgery (syrinx fenestration or shunt) are not 
permitted.  
5.4 Adherence Assessment  
Periodic quality assurance checks will be performed primarily via remote  monitoring by 
reviewing a random subset of operative notes  at each participating site . 
 
 
 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES   
6.1 Schedule of Evaluation  
 
Assessment  Initial Visit  <6 Weeks 
Follow -Up 
Visit  3-6 Month 
Follow -up 
Visit  12 Month 
Follow -up 
Visit  14 months to 
5 years 
postoperative  
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria  X     
Cluster Randomization  X     
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 16 Informed Consent Form  X     
Demographics  X     
Presenting Symptoms  X     
Childhood History  X     
Developmental History  X     
Allergies  X     
Concomitant Medications  X     
Family History  X     
Social History  X     
General Exam  X     
Musculoskeletal Exam  X     
Initial Radiology  X     
Diagnosis  X     
Clinical Course of 
Treatment  X X X X Optional  
Complications  X X X X Optional  
Pt Status  X X X X Optional  
CHIP  X X X X Required  
HUI-3 QOL  X X X X Required  
Follow -up Symptoms   X X X Optional  
Follow -up Medications   X X X Optional  
Follow -up General Exam   X X X Optional  
Follow -up Neurological 
Exam   X X X Optional  
Follow -up Musculoskeletal 
Exam   X X X Optional  
Follow -up Radiology   ^ ^ X Optional  
Additional 
Neurological/Orthopedic  
Exam   X X X Optional  
^ Any subsequent pre -operative images (Brain/spine MRI/CT/X -rays) will be shared , including  in the   
   following scenarios:  
 - Revision/redo decompression  
  - Syrinx shunt or fenestration  
- Spinal Fusion  
6.2 Description of  Evaluations   
6.2.1 Screening Evaluation  
Screening evaluations and associated studies for determining eligibility must be 
completed within 6 months of study entry.  
 
 Inclusion Criteria   
1) Age ≤21 years old  
2) Chiari malformation type I with ≥5 mm tonsillar ectopia  
3) Syrinx  diameter (recorded as the greatest antero -posterior or transverse diameter) 3 -9 
mm. 
4) MRI of  the brain and cervical and thoracic spine  are required prior to surgery and  
available to be shared with the DCC  
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 17  Exclusion Criteria  
1) Syrinx <3 mm and/or ≥10 mm  
2) Neuro -imaging demonstrating basilar invagination (position of the superior tip of  
      dens 5 mm above Chamberlain’s line)  
3) Neuro -imaging demonstrating  clival canal angle <120°  
4) Prior PFD, PFDD, or other surgery at the craniovertebral junction  
5) CM+SM secondary to other pathology (e.g. a tumor)  
6) Unable to share pre -decompression MRI of the brain and cervical and thoracic spine  
7) Patients who do not w ish to participate  
 
Consenting Procedure  
Informed consent will be obtained in the relatively focused atmosphere of a clinic or 
similar room rather than the more chaotic pre -operative holding area just before surgery.  
 
When a clinical site investigator and/or rese arch coordinator identifies a candidate for the 
study, patient eligibility will be confirmed, and the study investigator or coordinator will 
approach the individual to offer participation. After a thorough discussion to inform the 
patient and family of the  rationale and objectives of the study and the risks, benefits, and 
alternatives to participation, written informed consent will be obtained from a parent or 
legal guardian (patient <18 years of age) or the patient themselves (patient ≥18 years of 
age).  A dditionally, assent will be obtained for patients of appropriate age, according to 
individual institutional practices.  If study participation is declined, then all clinical care 
will be provided to the child in accordance with institutional practice and j udgment.  Each 
center will maintain a log of any individuals who are eligible for enrollment, but are not 
enrolled in the study. These logs will be reviewed to assure that each participating hospital 
is enrolling subjects without significant bias. In uncer tain cases, adjudication of patient 
eligibility will be performed by a committee blinded to intervention and outcome and 
considering only the information available at the time of enrollment.  Patients will be 
offered the opportunity to re -consent to partici pate in continued data collection for five 
years post -operatively.  
 
6.2.2 Enrollment, Baseline, and/or Randomization  
Enrollment  
In order to allow participants and their families the opportunity to make an informed 
decision about participating in the study , the consent and assent shall be reviewed and 
signed prior to surgery .  Enrollment may occur in one of the follow manners: 1) the 
participant signs the consent ( participant 18 years ); 2) at least one parent/legal guardian 
signs the consent (participant less than 18 years old ); or 3) participant  less than 18 years 
old co -signs the con sent with at least one parent/legal guardian  (requires that the 
participant is able to read the consent and understands and agrees with it; this may vary 
by the  institution’s lo cal IRB’s guidelines) .  For those participants who are unable to read 
and understand the consent , but are able to read, understand, and agree with the assent , 
that document  will be signed based on the IRB guidelines.    
 
Baseline Assessments  
Baseline assessment d ata to be collected at the initial visit includes the following:  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 18 o Demographics  
o Symptoms  
o Childhood History  
o Developmental History  
o Allergies  
o Concomitant Medications  
o Family History  
o Social History  
o General Exam  
o Neurological Exam  
o Musculoskeletal Exam  
o Radiology  
 Brain and c ervical  and thoracic spine MRI  
 MRI of the lumbar spine, CT of the brain or cervical/thoracic/lumbar 
spine, “long cassette” or “scoliosis” X -rays, and/or  X-rays of the 
cervical/thoracic/lumbar spine are not required but will be reviewed  if 
obtained.  
o Diagnosis  
o Clinical Course of Treatment  
 PFD or PFDD  
o Complications  
o CHIP  
o HUI-3 QOL  
o Patient Status  
o Additional Neurological/Orthopedic surgery (if applicable)  
 
Randomization  
Individual trial centers will be randomized to perform either PFDD or PFD.  In order to 
participate, trial centers with multiple pediatric neurosurgeons were given the option of 
complying with the treatment allocation and following a standardized procedure or 
selecting a s ingle study neurosurgeon for the group.  If the latter scenario was chosen, the 
group had to agree that all CM+SM patients referred to that center must be treated by the 
study neurosurgeon.  For cluster randomization, a computer -generated randomization 
sequence will be generated independently by the study statistician  before the respective 
participating site enrolls a participant .  All eligible participants within each cluster will then 
be approached for informed consent for the purposes of data collection for the trial. Each 
participant/guardian will know the randomized treatment selection at the time of the 
informed consent process.  
6.2.3 Follow -up Visits    
Data to be collected at follow -up visits includes the following:  
 ≤ 6 weeks  postoperative  visit: 
o Clinical Course of Treatment  
 Any o rthotic s  
 Decompression  
 Any fusion or syrinx surgery  
o Complications  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 19 o CHIP  (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o HUI-3 QOL (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o Patient Status  
o Follow-up Symptoms  
o Follow -up Medications  
o Follow -up General Exam  
o Follow -up Neurological Exam  
o Follow -up Musculoskeletal Exam  
o Follow -up Radiology Exam (if applicable)  
o Additional Neurological/Orthopedic Surgery  
  
 3-6 months postoperative  visit: 
o Clinical Course of Treatment  
 Any orthotics  
 Decompression  
 Any fusion or syrinx surgery  
o Complications  
o CHIP  (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o HUI-3 QOL  (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o Patient Status  
o Follow -up Symptoms  
o Follow-up Medications  
o Follow -up General Exam  
o Follow -up Neurological Exam  
o Follow -up Musculoskeletal Exam  
o Follow -up Radiology Exam (if applicable)  
o Additional Neurological/Orthopedic Surgery  
 
6.2.4 Completion/ Final Evaluation        
Data to be collected at the final v isit (12 +/ - 2 months  postoperative ) includes the  
following:  
 12 ±2  months postoperative visit : 
o Clinical Course of Treatment  
 Any orthotics  
 Decompression  
 Any fusion or syrinx surgery  
o Complications  
o CHIP  (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o HUI-3 QOL  (if > 1 visit during this period only collect for 1st visit)  
o Patient Status  
o Follow -up Symptoms  
o Follow -up Medications  
o Follow -up General Exam  
o Follow -up Neurological Exam  
o Follow -up Musculoskeletal Exam  
o Follow -up Radiology Exam  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 20  MRI of the cervical (including craniovertebral junction) and 
thoracic spine MRI  
 MRI of the brain or lumbar spine, CT of the brain or 
cervical/thoracic/lumbar spine, “long cassette” or “scoliosis” X -
rays, and X -rays of the cervical/thoracic/lumbar spine are not 
required  but will be reviewed if obtained.  
o Additional Neurological/Orthopedic Surgery  
7. SAFETY  ASSESSMENTS  
Complications will be recorded at the following time points:  
o Intra -operatively  
o ≤ 6 months after initial PFD or PFDD  
o 6-12 (+/- 2 months)  months after initial PFD or PFDD  
 
**For definitions of complication s for this trial , see Section 7.1.  
 
Known potential complications include the following:  
o Intra -operatively  
 Vascular injury  
 Hemorrhage requiring evacuation  
 Neurologic Injury  
 Cranial nerve injury or palsy  
 Weakness  
 Sensory Changes  
 Bowel Dysfunction  
 Bladder Dysfunction  
 Death  
 
o Complications ≤ 6 months after PFD or PFDD  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 CSF Leak  
 Hydrocephalus  
 Infection  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Cervical instability  
 Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 
Other unexpected complications that are related to the surgery and other adverse events 
that occur that are not related to the surgery will be recorded for the first 6 months.  
 
o Complications > 6 months after PFD or PFDD  
 Cervical instability  
 Infection  
 Hydrocephalus  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 21  Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 
Other unexpected complications that are related to the surgery will be recorded at the 
time interval of >6 months postoperatively.  
 
Possible interventions for known complications are as foll ows:  
o Intra -operative  complications  
 Evacuation of  hemorrhage  
 Open or endovascular repair vascular injury  
o ≤ 6 months postoperative  complications  
 External drainage for the following:  
 Hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Infection  
 Shunt malfunction /infection  
 Simple over -sewing of wound for CSF leak  
 Surgical revision in operating room for the following:  
 CSF leak  
 Infection  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Lumbar puncture and steroids for the following:  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Shunt placement  for hydrocep halus  
 Cervical collar and/or fusion for cervical instability  
 Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
 
o > 6 months postoperative  complications  
 Surgical revision in operating room for the following:  
 Infection  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Lumbar puncture for true meningitis  
 Shunt placements for hydrocephalus  
 Cervical collar and/or fusion for cervical instability  
 Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
7.1 Specification of Safety Parameters  
The presence of any of the following items will be considered as a poor outcome (harm to 
patients).  
 Intra -operative Complication  
o Vascular injury  resulting in dissection or stroke  
o Intracranial h emorrhage  requiring return to surgery for evacuation  
o Neurological injury  
 Cranial nerve deficit  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 22  New weakness  
 Sensory loss  
 Bowel or bladder dysfunction  
o Death 
 Complications ≤ 6 months after PFD or PFDD  
 Pseudomeningocele : an e xtradural and/or subcutaneous fluid collection 
resulting in discomfort or p ain, limitation of movement, or CSF leak .  
Radiological evidence of fluid collection alone is not sufficient for 
diagnosis of pseudomeningocele.  
 CSF Leak  
 Hydrocephalus : requires external drainage, shunting, or endoscopic 3rd 
ventriculostomy.  
 Infection : clinical diagnosis that may include fever, wound drainage, 
dehiscence, or elevated laboratory parameters  in association with 
antibiotic treatment ± surgical debridement . 
 Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis : clinical diagnosis prompting medical 
treatment (e.g. steroids); lumbar puncture and analysis of  CSF cell profile 
not required but will be tracked if available.  
 True meningitis : lumbar puncture and positive cultures required.  
 Cervical instability  
 Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 Need for interventions  for complication management <6 months  after initial PFDD 
or PFD  
 External drainage for the following:  
 Hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Infection  
 Shunt malfunction/infection  
 Simple over -sewing of wound for CSF leak  
 Surgical revision in operating room for the following:  
 CSF leak  
 Infection  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Lumbar puncture and steroids for the following:  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt or 
endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus.  
 Cervical collar and/or fusio n for cervical instability  
 Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
 Complication ≤ 12 (+/- 2 months ) months after initial PFDD or PFD  
o Pseudomeningocele: an e xtradural and/or subcutaneous fluid collection resulting 
in discomfort or pain, limitation of movement, or CSF leak.   Radiological 
evidence of fluid collection alone is not sufficient for diagnosis of 
pseudomeningocele.  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 23 o CSF leak  
o Hydrocephalus : requires external drainage, shunting, or endoscopic 3rd 
ventriculostomy.  
o Infection: clinical diagnosis that may incl ude fever, wound drainage, dehiscence, 
or elevated laboratory parameters in association with antibiotic treatment ± 
surgical debridement.  
o Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis: clinical diagnosis prompting medical treatment 
(e.g. steroids); lumbar puncture and analysis of CSF cell profile not required but 
will be tracked if available.  
o True meningitis: lumbar puncture and positive cultures required.  
o Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 
 Need for interventions  for complication management ≤12  (+/- 2 months ) after initial 
PFDD or PFD  
 External drainage for the following:  
 Hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Infection  
 Shunt malfunction/infection  
 Simple over -sewing of wound for CSF leak  
 Surgical revision in operating room for the following:  
 CSF leak  
 Infection  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Lumbar puncture and steroids for the following:  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt or 
endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus.  
 Cervical collar and/or fusion for cervical instability  
 Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
 
7.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety Parameters  
Complications and adverse events will be captured starting with intra -operative period and will 
continue for o ne year postoperative ly.  Additional surgeries, such as a decompression 
redo/revision, fusion surgery, anterior/ ventral decompression, syrinx shunt, and syrinx 
fenestration will also have surgical complications and adverse events monitored and recorded 
for the one year collection period.  
 
7.2.1 Preliminary Data   
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 24 The Park-Reeves 
Syringomyelia Research 
Consortium (PRSR C) is a 
U.S.-based network of 36  
major pediatric 
neurosurgery centers 
focused on improving the 
care of children with 
CM+SM.  The largest 
research effort for CM+SM 
to date, PRSRC began 
enrolling patients bo th 
retrospectively and 
prospectively in 2011.  
Through the PRSRC, 
comprehensive clinical and 
radiographic data have been 
obtained on >600 CM+SM 
patients. Table 3 
summarizes the post -
operative complications 
observed in 589 subjects 
with complete data who 
underwent PFDD or PFD 
since 2011, as support for 
PFD has grown. Within the 
PRSRC, rates of 
complications are remarkably consistent with those reported in the meta -analysis by Durham and 
Fjeld -Olenec in 2008 (Table 2) [27], with complications noted in 17.8% following PFD D versus 
2.7% after PFD.  In addition, a corrective neurosurgical procedure for complication management 
was needed more often after PFDD compared to PFD (10.1% versus 2.7%).  However, repeat 
decompression surgery for persistent disease was required in only  5.0% of PFDD cases versus 
12.3% after PFD.  
In planning a clinical trial for CM+SM, it is important to select appropriate inclusion 
criteria for study patients in order to: 1) enhance homogeneity in disease severity among study 
participants; 2) permit appropriate comparisons across participants and groups; and 3) ensure 
clinical equipoise among treating physicians.  With this goal in mind, our group recently created 
the Chiari Severity Index, or CSI, a pre -operative instrument that stratifies children w ith CM+/ -
SM based on their probability of postoperative improvement [12].  The CSI was developed in 
conjunction with patient and families and uses their input as a critical arbiter of outcome.  Two 
advanced methodologies, sequential sequestration and conjunctive consolidation, were used to 
identify ke y clinical and radiographic predictors of clinical outcome and then to integrate them 
into one useful CSI (Fig. 3).  Table 3.  Complications and Need for Repeat Surgical Decompression for 
CM+CM in the Park -Reeves Syringomyelia Research Consortium.  
    
 PFDD  PFD  
 n % n % 
Surgical Complications   
    
Vascular Injury  1 0.20%  0 0% 
Pseudomingocele  28 5.4%  1 1.4%  
CSF Leak  20 3.9%  1 1.4%  
Infection  2 0.4%  0 0% 
Chemical Meningitis  24 4.7%  0 0% 
Hydrocephalus  15 2.9%  0 0% 
Cervical Instability  2 0.40%  0 0% 
Total  92 17.8%  2 2.7%  
     
Surgical Procedures for 
Complication Management      
Oversewing of Wound  6 1.2%  1 1.4%  
Wound Revision  13 2.5%  1 1.4%  
External CSF Drainage  22 4.3%  0 0 
Shunt Required  10 1.9%  0 0% 
Req. for Cervical Fusion  1 0.20%  0 0% 
Total  52 10.1%  2 2.7%  
 
    
 PFDD  PFD  
 n % n % 
Repeat Decompression 
Surgery (PFDD or PFD)  26**  5.0%  9 12.3%  
*n=589 total.  Imbalance in PFDD (n=516) vs PFD (n=73) results from the epoch of 
enrollment (2002 -2014); PFD only offered routinely since 2010).  
**One patient had 3 repeat decompressions.  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 25 We also recently completed a 
systematic review of outcome methods 
used in studies of CM+SM and noted that 
studies of CM+SM were significantly 
impeded by inconsistent and limited 
methods of evaluating clinical 
outcomes [28]. The majority of papers used 
a clinician’s “gestalt” impression of 
symptomatic improvement (Fig. 4).  Only 3 
papers used scales validated in patients 
with CM+/ -SM, and only 7 articles 
incorpora ted patient -response instruments.  
Our review emphasized the need for 
CM+SM -specific patient -based 
instruments to improve research in this field [28]. 
The Chiari Health Index in Pediatrics (CHIP) wa s developed in response to the deficiencies 
noted in our systematic review and addresses the following criteria: 1) it focuses on the complaints 
most important to CM + SM patients; 2 ) it relies on patient involvement in answering the 
questions; 3) it is ag e-appropriate; and 4) and it helps inform clinical decision making regarding 
the treatment and management of these patients [29].  As with o ther Health -Related QOL 
(HRQOL) inventories, the CHIP was designed to be discriminative, evaluative, and predictive [30, 
31].  A single 45 -item form, the CHIP can be completed by a parent only, a child o nly, or a parent 
and child together.  
Psychometric research methodologies, 
including item generation and development, 
evaluation of construct validity, test -retest 
reliability, an d confirmatory factor analysis were 
used in the development and validation of the 
CHIP (Table 4).   The number of items for each 
component is as follows: pain frequency 5, pain 
severity 5, non -pain symptoms 11, and 
psychosocial characteristics 24.  In our initial 
studies, we have demonstrated that the CHIP is a 
feasible, reliable, and valid assessment of 
HRQOL in pediatric CM + SM patients. In 
particular, each domain and the overall HRQOL tool showed strong feasibility (i.e. the practical 
ability of partici pants to complete the survey) and internal consistency within their respective 
domain (α ≥ 75%), a measure of reliability of the test [32]. In addition, the physical (r = 0.73) and 
psychosocial components (r = 0.94), as well as overall HQROL score (r = 0.83), had high test -
retest reliability, even over a median test -retest interval of 70 days. Finally, we demonstrated the 
construct validity of the CHIP by showing the correlation between CHIP scores and concurrent 
HUI-3 scores within similar domains [32].  
 
Table 4.    Chiari Health Index for Pediatrics ( CHIP) Instrument Characteristics  [29]. 
 Mean±SD  Range  Floor 
effect  Ceiling 
effect  Feasibility  
(% complete)  Consistency 
(Cronbach’s α) Test Re -test 
Reliability 
(Pearson’s r)   
 
 
Figure 3 . The Chiari Severity Index, or CSI, was developed using sequential 
sequestration of pre -operative clinical and radiographi c parameters, 
followed by  conjunctive consolidation  of independent clinical and 
radiographic indices via [12]. Syrinx size was the only radiographic measure 
associated with clinical outcome, with a critical threshold of 6 mm diameter.  
 
Figure 4.   Systematic review of outcome methods used in 74 CM+/ -
SM studies revealed inconsistent and limited methods of evaluating 
clinical outcomes; a majority of papers relied on clinician ‘gestalt’ 
assessments rat her than CM+SM -specific, patient -based 
instruments. [28] 

PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 26 Physical  0.66±0.20  0.27-1.00 0% 2% 84% 0.89 0.73 
Pain Frequency  0.59±0.26  0.00-1.00 2% 7% 100%  0.84 0.62 
Pain Severity  0.69±0.20  0.19-1.00 0% 7% 95% 0.75 0.83 
Non-Pain 0.82±0.17  0.32-1.00 0% 22% 87% 0.85 0.83 
Psychosocial  0.68±0.17  0.29-0.97 0% 0% 85% 0.92 0.94 
Overall HRQOL  0.66±0.18  0.33-0.97 0% 0% 75% 0.92 0.83 
 
7.2 Adverse Events  and Serious Adverse Events  
SAFETY  ASSESSMENTS  
Complications will be recorded at the following time points:  
o Intra -operatively  
o ≤ 6 months after initial PFD or PFDD  
o 6-12±2 months after initial PFD or PFDD  
 
The following definitions are provided for clarification:  
o Pseudomeningocele: an extradural and/or subcutaneous fluid collection resulting 
in discomfort or pain, limitation of movement, or CSF leak.  Radiological 
evidence of fluid collection alone is not sufficient for diagnosis of 
pseudomeningocele.  
o Hydrocephalus: requires external drainage, shunting, or endoscopic 3rd 
ventriculostomy.  
o Infection: clinical diagnosis that may include fever, wound drainage, dehiscence, 
or ele vated laboratory parameters in association with antibiotic treatment ± 
surgical debridement.  
o Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis: clinical diagnosis prompting medical treatment 
(e.g. steroids); lumbar puncture and analysis of CSF cell profile not required but  
will be tracked if available.  
o True meningitis: lumbar  puncture and positive cultures required.  
 
Known potential complications include the following:  
o Intra -operatively  
 Vascular injury  
 Hemorrhage requiring evacuation  
 Neurologic Injury  
 Cranial nerve injury or palsy  
 Weakness  
 Sensory Changes  
 Bowel Dysfunction  
 Bladder Dysfunction  
 Death  
 
o Complications ≤ 6 months or 6 -12±2 months after PFD or PFDD  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 27  Pseudomeningocele  
 CSF Leak  
 Hydrocephalus  
 Infection  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Cervical instability  
 Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 
Possible interventions for known complications are as follows:  
o Intra -operative complications  
 Evacuation of hemorrhage  
 Open or endovascular repair vascular injury  
o ≤ 6 month or 6 -12±2 month postoperative complica tions  
 Hydrocephalus  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt  
 Endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak:  
 Over -sewing of wound  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Percutaneous drainage  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Infection  
 Bedside debridement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room.  
 Shunt ma lfunction/infection  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt externalization or removal with or without external 
ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt revision in the operating room  
 Chemical meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 Steroids  
 Bacterial meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 IV antibiotics  
 Cervical instability  
 External orthosis (e.g. cervical collar, halo vest)  
 Surgical fusion  
 Cerebellar ptosis  
 Cerebellopexy  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 28  
Separate from these complications, other unexpected complications that are related to the surgery 
and other adverse events that occur that are not related to the surgery will be recorded for the < 6 
month and 6 -12 (+/- 2 months)  month time intervals. Such events will be reported by site 
investigators.  For inclusion of all followed patients i n the case where the patient returned outside 
the planned study follow -up window , a secondary analysis will include those visits up to 24 
months.  
Specification of Safety Parameters  
The presence of any of the following items will be considered as a harm to pat ients.  
 
 Intra -operative Complication  
o Vascular injury  resulting in dissection or stroke. Dissection will be diagnosed via 
angiographic imaging (CT angiogram, MR angiogram, catheter angiogram) and 
stroke via CT or MRI imaging.  
o Intracranial h emorrhage  requiring return to surgery for evacuation  
o Neurological injury resulting in:  
 Cranial nerve deficit  
 New weakness  
 Sensory loss  
 Bowel or bladder dysfunction  
o Death  
 Complications ≤ 6 months after PFD or PFDD  
See definitions above . 
 Pseudomeningocele  
 CSF Leak  
 Hydrocephalus  
 Infection  
 Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis  
 Bacterial meningitis  
 Cervical instability  
 Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
 Interventions  for complication management <6 months after initial PFDD or PFD  
 Hydrocephalus  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt  
 Endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak:  
 Over -sewing of wound  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the ope rating room  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Percutaneous drainage  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Infection  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 29  Bedside debridement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room.  
 Shunt malfunction/infection  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt externalization or removal with or without external 
ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt revision in the operating room  
 Chemical meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 Steroids  
 Bacterial meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 IV antibiotics  
 Cervical instability  
 External orthosis (e.g. cervical collar, halo vest)  
 Surgical fusion  
 Cerebellar ptosis  
 Cerebellopexy  
 
 Complication 6-12 (+/- 2 months)  months after initial PFDD or PFD  
o Pseudomeningocele  
o CSF leak  
o Hydrocephalus  
o Infection  
o Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis  
o Bacterial  meningitis  
o Cervical instability  
o Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
o  
 
 Interven tions  for complication management  6-12 (+/-2 months)  months after initial 
PFDD or PFD  
 Hydrocephalus  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt  
 Endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak:  
 Over -sewing of wound  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Percutaneous drainage  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Infection  
 Bedside debridement  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 30  Surgical revision in the operating room  
 Shunt malfunction/infection  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt externalization or removal with or without external 
ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Shunt revision in the operating room  
 Chemical meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 Steroids  
 Bacterial meningitis  
 Lumbar puncture  
 IV antibiotics  
 Cervical instability  
 External orthosis (e.g. cervical collar, halo vest)  
 Surgical fusion  
 Cerebellar ptosis  
 Cerebellopexy  
 
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
 
Adverse Event Reporting  
All adverse events will be evaluated as to whether their occurrence was exp ected or unexpected.  
For this study, expected  AEs include the following common  surgi cal complications ( see above for  
definitions ): 
- Pseudomeningocele  
- CSF leak  
- Infection  
- Chemical meningitis  
- Bacterial meningitis  
- Hydrocephalus  
- Need for surgical procedure for complication management  
 Oversewing of wound  
 Bedside debridement  
 Surgical revision in the operating room  
 External ventricular or lumbar drain placement  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt  
 Endoscopic third ventriculostomy for hydro cephalus  
 Shunt revision in the operating room  
 
Unexpected  AEs will include uncommon surgical complications and AEs which may be unrelated  
to the study intervention:  
- Clinically significant intracranial hemorrhage  
- Skull fracture  
- Position ing/pressure sores  
- Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
- Cervical instability  
- Urinary tract infection  
- Need for surgical procedure for complication management  
 Evacuation of hematoma  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 31  Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
 Cervical or occipital -cervical fusion  
- Deep venous t hrombosis  
- Unsolicited  complications related to decompression surgery  
- Unsolicited  complications not related to decompression surgery  
 
Data Collection Procedures for Adverse Events  
After enrollment, AEs , whether expected or unexpected, will be recorded according to the date of  
first occurrence, severity, duration, and any treatment prescribed.   Any medical condition present  
at the time of enrollment, which remains unchanged or improved, will not be recorded as an  
adverse event on the Adverse Events Log.  All study subjects will be monitored for adverse events  
from the time of enrollment until the time of discharge from the hospital and at each follow -up  
evaluation.  Adverse events for subjects who withdraw from the study will be monitored and 
reported un til the point of study withdrawal.  
 
 Serious Adverse Events  
Serious adverse events (SAEs) will be defined as untoward medical occurrences that 
result in a life -threatening change of condition, require further inpatient hospitalization, 
or result in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or death.  In the current study, 
SAEs will include the following:  
- Intra -operative vascular injury or stroke  
- Neurological injury (cranial nerve deficit, new weakness, sensory loss, bowel or  
bladder dysfunction ) 
- Visceral injury  
- Pulmonary embolism  
- Pneumothorax  
- Need for unexpected re-intubation  
- Cardiopulmonary arrest  
- Death  
- Unsolicited SAEs related to decompression surgery  
Unsolicited SAEs not related to decompression surgery  
7.3  Reporting Procedures  
Reporting Procedu res 
The PI of the Study , Dr. Limbrick, will act as the medical monitor for the study. If Dr. 
Limbrick is unavailable, a qualified physician will be designated to fulfill this function.  SAEs 
will be reported by the clinical site investigator to the Clinical and Data Coordinating  Centers 
(CCC and DCC) within 24 hours.  The DCC will report all events that are classified as serious, 
unexpected, and study -related to the study Steering Committee, and the DSMB, by fax or 
telephone, within 3 calendar days of receiving the report from th e clinical site.  A written 
report will be sent to the DSMB within 15 calendar days and these reports will be sent to 
clinical investigators for their submission to their respective IRBs.  The DSMB will also 
review all AEs (not necessarily serious, unexpec ted, and study -related) during scheduled 
DSMB meetings.  The DCC will provide written summary of the DSMB’s periodic review of 
AEs to clinical site investigators for submission to their respective IRBs.  
 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Reporting  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 32 SAEs that  are judged to be related to participation in the study will be reported to site 
investigators at all participating clinical centers.  Each site investigator will need to report 
these to the site’s local IRB.  Each IRB will assess the impact  of these repor ts on its judgement 
to allow the study to continue at the respective site.  After each DSMB meeting, the DSMB 
report indicating approval to continue the study will be provided to each participating clinical 
center, and should be included in the annual IRB renewal materials.  This DSMB 
recommendation will be based on DSMB examination of all SAEs that have been reported, 
review of interim reports, and ongoing validity and scientific merit of the study.  
7.4 Follow-up for Adverse Events  
Data Collection Procedures f or Adverse Events  
All study subjec ts will be monitored for adverse eve nts.  A dverse events, whether expected or 
unexpected, will be recorded according to the time frame o f first occurrence.  Time frames are 
distinguished as intra-operative, ≤6 months, and >6 months.  Each time the participant returns for 
an outpatient neurosurgery visit, s /he will be queried by the study  staff for adverse even ts.  Details 
of an event should be investigated and study documentation supported with the related medical 
records.  Interventions related to the adverse event will be noted in the study database per the Data 
Elements .  Any medical condition present at the time of enrollment, which remains unchanged or 
improved, will not be recorded as an adverse  event.   
7.5 Safety  Monitor ing  
Data Safety Monitoring Board  
An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) comprised of  two pediatric neurosurgeons 
with relevant expertise in CM+SM, a biostatistician, a clinical ethicist, and a patient partner  will 
assess and monitor the safety  of the trial .  The purpose of the DSMB is to advise the funding 
agency ( PCORI ), the study  Principal Investigator (Dr. Limbrick), and the Investigators Committee 
regarding the continuing safety of study participants and the continuing validity and scientif ic 
merit of the study.  The DSMB is responsible for monitoring accrual of study subjects, adherence 
to the study protocol, assessment of data quality, performance of individual clinical sites, review 
of serious adverse events and other subject safety issue s, and review of formal interim statistical 
analyses of treatment efficacy.  The DCC will send reports relating to these topics to DSMB 
members 10 days prior to each DSMB meeting.  Based on prospectively defined guidelines to be 
outlined in the DSMB charte r, the DSMB should recommend whether or not to terminate 
enrollment in the study because of potential safety concerns or high evidence of efficacy.  The 
DSMB will also have the option to recommend stopping the study due to low likelihood of finding 
an effe ct if the trial continues (futility), or if the risks/benefit ratio is not favorable. Each DSMB 
meeting will result in a summary report that will be provided to the Investigator Committee, 
PCORI, and each local IRB.  
8. INTERVENTION DISCONT INUATION  
For the p urposes of this trial, the intervention is either of two technical variants of surgical 
decompression for CM+SM, PFD or PFDD.  While it is possible that intra -operative factors that 
could influence a surgeon’s plan to carry out the intended procedure (PFD or PFDD), this would 
be highly unlikely.  Nevertheless, if the surgical technique is aborted or changed during the 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 33 procedure, participants will be followed per study protocol  with all associated clinical care and 
data collection.  
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS   
9.1 General Design Issues   
The Central Hypothesis of this proposal is that, compared with PFDD, PFD will result in fewer 
surgical complications and thus less harm to patients within 12 (+/- 2 months ) months of 
surgery. With a more favorable risk profile and non-inferior effect on clinical outcome and 
syrinx size compared with PFDD, PFD will be associated with superior QOL . In the case 
where the patient returned outside  planned study follow -up window , a secondary analysis will 
include those visits up to 24 mon ths. 
 
This study is designed as a cluster randomized controlled trial (C -RCT) of the two major 
neurosurgical treatments for CM+SM: posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) and 
extradural posterior fossa decompression (PFD).  This design was cho sen with input from site 
investigators (neurosurgeons) in order to obtain participation from a large number of pediatric 
neurosurgeons and reduce crossovers and non -participation resulting from physician bias. While 
there is inherent individual surgeon bia s, clinical equipoise exists across the field; this is 
underscored by the participation of >50% of the pediatric neurosurgeons in the United States in 
this RCT and support of this study by the AANS, the CNS, and the Joint AANS/CNS Pediatric 
Section . 
 
Speci fic Aim 1:  Determine if PFD is associated with fewer surgical complications and less harm 
to patients than PFDD.  
Hypothesis: PFD will be associated with fewer surgical complications and less potential harm to 
patients than PFDD.     
Anticipated Outcome:  Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) -related complications ≤6 months (e.g. CSF 
leak, pseudomeningocele, aseptic meningitis, infection, and hydrocephalus) and requirement for 
additional surgery for wound revision or CSF diversion will be lower after PFD compared with 
PFDD.  
 
Specific Aim 2 : Determine if PFD provides non -inferior clinical improvement and syrinx 
regression compared to PFDD . 
Hypothesis:  Clinical improvement and syrinx regression provided by PFD will be non -inferior 
compared to those provided by PFDD.  
Antic ipated Outcome:  Clinical symptoms, neurological function, and syrinx regression ≤12 
months will be non -inferior following PFD when compared with PFDD. Rates of revision 
decompression surgery (PFD or PFDD) and progression of spinal deformity ≤12 months afte r 
PFD also will be non -inferior to PFDD.  
 
Specific Aim 3 :  Determine if PFD is associated with superior QOL compared to PFDD.  
Hypothesis:  With fewer surgical complications, PFD will be associated with superior QOL 
compared with PFDD.   
Anticipated Outcome:  PFD will have superior  QOL and will show improvements in overall 
QOL over time (≤12 months post -operatively) compared to PFDD.  In particular, both physical 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 34 metrics (evaluated by pain frequency, pain severity and non -pain symptoms) and psychosocial 
metric s will improve at a higher rate and in a shorter period of time after PFD compared to 
PFDD.   
9.2 Sample Size and Randomization  
9.2.1 Treatment Assignment Procedures  
This study is designed as a cluster randomized controlled trial (C -RCT) of the two major 
neurosurgical treatments for CM+SM: posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) 
and extradural posterior fossa decompression (PFD).  This design was chosen with input from 
site investigators (neurosurgeons) in order to obtain participation from a large number of 
pediatric neurosurgeons and reduce crossovers and non -participation resulting from physician 
bias.  During extensive discussions with PRSRC investigators and patient partners, there was 
significant concern for selection bias due to crossove rs and selective enrollment if individual 
patients were randomized, a known problem in surgical trials [33].  Site investigators felt that 
having their entire practice randomized to one technique would  increase surgeon comfort and 
experience with that approach, thereby decreasing tendencies for biased enrollment. 
Consequently, individual PRSRC centers will be randomized to perform either PFDD or PFD.  
In this design, PRSRC centers will be serve as the u nit of inference for comparing PFDD and 
PFD, and the cluster size is expected to be 6 per center.  For cluster randomization, a 
computer -generated randomization sequence will be generated independently by the study 
statistician.  Overall sample size of up to 238  participants will be enrolled. Approximately 
50%  participants per procedure over the  enrollment  period . 
 
Potential participants will be identified, screened, and recruited thro ugh the clinical practices 
of 36 participating PRSRC sties  in addition to 8 other sites .  In this trial, the randomization 
unit will be the PRSRC center; therefore, the same intervention will be used for all qualifying 
patients enrolled at each center.  If a surgeon in a PRSRC center strongly bel ieves that a pati ent 
should  undergo a certain procedure (PFDD or PFD ), the patient will not be randomized . 
Effective randomization will occur through the random distribution of patients to centers 
employing each procedure (PFDD and PFD).  
9.3 Interim analyses  and Stopping Rules   
The Posterior Fossa Decompression with or without Duraplasty for Chiari type I 
Malformation with Syringomyelia  study will appoint an independent Data Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) of  members.  T he DSMB will meet once prior to the star t of the study, and will 
approve the final protocol prior to its impl ementation.  Additionally,  the DSMB will establish 
a charter to guide its function. The charter would include rules of procedure, definitions of a 
meeting quorum, and information about me eting logistics.   
 
The purpose of the DSMB is  to advise PCORI, the  Principal Investigator (Dr. Limbrick), and 
the Investigators Committee regarding the continuing safety of study participants and the 
continuing validity and scientific merit of the study. The DSMB is responsible for monitoring 
accrual of study subjects, adherence to the study protocol, assessment of data quality, 
performance of individual clinical sites, review of serious adverse events and other subject 
safety issues, and review of formal interim statistical analyses of treatment efficacy.  The DCC 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 35 will send reports relating to these topics to DSMB members 10 days prior to each DSMB 
meeting.  Based on prospectively defined guidelines to be outlined in the DSMB charter, the 
DSMB should recom mend whether or not to termin ate enrollment in the Posterior Fossa 
Decompression with or without Duraplasty for Chiari type I Malformation with Syringomyelia  
study  because of potential safety concerns or high evidence of efficacy.  The DSMB will also 
have the option to recommend stopping the study due to low likelihood of finding an effect if 
the trial continues (futility), or if the risks/benefit ratio is not favorable. Each DSMB meeting 
will result in a summary report that will be provided to the Investig ator Committee, PCORI, 
and each local IRB .  
9.4 Outcomes  
The goal of this study is to supply patients and families with the information about the risks 
and benefits of PFDD and PFD that they feel  are most important in making informed  clinical 
decisions .  As s uch, t he primary outcome  of interest is reduction in harm  to patients, measured 
as surgical complications  and/or requirement for reoperation for complication management 
≤12 (+/- 2 months)  months after initial PFDD or PFD.  Complications and reoperation are 
associated with additional pain as well as emotional and psychological stress, longer hospital 
stays, and lost time from school/work.   Secondary outcomes focus on efficacy outcomes and 
will include: 1) compa rison of pre -operative symptoms and  neurological deficits  at ≤6 weeks , 
3-6 months , and 12  (+/- 2 months)  months after surgery  and syrinx size  and spinal alignm ent 
(coronal and sagittal Cobb angles) at 12 (+/- 2 months)  months after sur gery; and  2) assessment 
of QOL (including psychosocial and physical dimensions) at baseline, ≤6 weeks , 3- 6 months , 
and 12  (+/- 2 months)  months after surgery. This outcome will be evaluated using the CHI P 
and the HUI -3 QOL instruments.  
 
Because this is a surgical trial, an Adjudication Committee, consisting of two pediatric 
neurosurgeons and one pediatric neuroradiologist and independent of the design and conduct 
of the trial, will adjudicate the primary outcome measure.  The committee wi ll review the 
primary endpoint based on a blinded review of clinical notes, data forms and imaging studies.  
Decisions by the adjudication committee will determine final outcomes. Consensus definitions 
of CSF -related complications following neurosurgery ha ve been developed [34]. These 
definitions have been reviewed and approve d by the neurosurgeons participating in the study, 
and will be used in this trial. Likewise, the extent of syrinx resolution following surgery will 
be determined by centralized review of blinded imaging studies.  By contrast, treatment failure 
(i.e. need f or revision PFDD or PFD) will be determined individually by the treating surgeon 
in consultation with the patient/family, since such decisions are inherently subjective and based 
both on the surgeon’s level of concern and the patient’s discomfort and relat ive acceptance to 
the inherent risks of surgery (either PFD or PFDD).  
9.5 Data Analyses    
A Priori  Plans for Data Analysis  
Descriptive Statistics  
Using CONSORT guidelines for cluster -randomized trials, 53 We will present descriptive statistics,  
for continuous variables the m ean (+/-standard deviation) or  median (minimum, maximum ) values  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 36 and for categorical variables the frequencies and proportion  for each  cluster; These presentations 
will be  carried out at baseline and at 12 -month follow -up. We will provide  reasons for dropouts.  
 
 
Final Comparative  Analysis  
 
Planned sensitivity analyses to determine the impact of key assumptions : Due to the fact that each 
patient in a given center will be assigned to the same procedure, it is possible to observe  unequal 
overall sample sizes for each procedure. The initial analysis plan is to give equal weights to all 
clusters. If there is imbalance in the prognostic factors, we will use weighted analyses where the 
cluster -level summary score is weighted inversely  proportional to the reciprocal of its estimated 
varianc e. 
 
Comparison methods  
 
The primary outcome is a binomial outcome measured as a surgical complication and/or 
requirement for reoperation for complication management ≤ 6 months after initial PFDD or PFD . 
To account for within cluster correlation , possibly variable cluster size and the relatively small 
number of clusters  in this cluster randomized trial, generalized estimating equations ( GEE ) with 
small -sample correction or random effect logistic regressi on will be used for the primary analysis 
of this cluster randomized trial [35, 36].  
 
Secondary outcomes include Treatment Efficacy variable s and Quality of Life variables. 
Continuous variables measured at 3 time points over the 12 (+/- 2 months) month follow -up will 
be analyzed using longitudinal analysis with linear mixed models including the random cluster 
effect. Binomial and ordinal data will be analyzed using GEE methods accounting for cluster.  In 
the case where the patient returned outside the planned study follow -up window , a secondary 
analysis will include those visits up to 24 months.  
 
Missing data : Based on PRSRC data  and early data from this trial , loss to follow -up rate is  expected 
to be low (< 2%). To prevent missing data, we will meet with patients at 1 month, 3 -6 months and 
at 12 +/-2 months after the procedure. Every effort, including phone call reminders to patients, will 
be made  to decrease loss to follow -up. Loss to follow -up, missing data, and the reasons leading to 
loss of follow -up or data will be recorded .  In case of missing data, we will impute missing dat a 
using different methods . Because of the repeated measures nature o f the data, the ‘last observation 
carried forward’ method will be utilized [37].  In addition, Buck’s method, which is the extended 
version of regression imputation, will be used [38]. The Buck’s imputation will be based on the 
observed values of patient’s age, CM (≥  5mm tonsillar ectopia), syrinx diameter, and pre -operative 
comorbidities.  In addition to the overall rates of missing data for each procedure, because of the 
cluster randomized trial, we will also monitor the missing data within each cluster and center a nd 
report the discrepancy between the loss to follow -up rates for each procedure. Special attention 
will be given and separately reported if the entire clus ter is loss to follow -up.  As a sensitivity 
analysis for the missing data, study results will be compared for the following three conditions: 1) 
patients with missing primary outcome variable are excluded from analyses; 2) results with last 
observation carried forward, and 3) res ults with Buck’s method. Robustness of the results under 
each scenario will be assessed .  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 37  
Heterogeneity  of Treatment Effect (HTE) : As an exploratory analyses, to assess if the procedure is 
most beneficial for a specific subgroup, the heterogeneity of the effect of performing PFDD vs 
PFD will be assessed within the following pre -determined subgroups based on: 1) patient age at 
the time of surgery (<5 years, 5 -12 years, 13 -18 years); 2) CM status (5 -12 mm tonsillar ectopia, 
>12 mm tonsillar ectopia) [39]; 3) syrinx diameter  (3-6 mm, 7 -9 mm) ; and 4) preoperative 
hydrocephalus or  neuromuscular disease, two comorbidities associated with increased morbidity 
following pediatric CM +/ - SM surgery [40]. Demographic and comorbidity data will be collected 
by trained study research assistants/ coordinators with strict oversight by site investigators using 
standard data collection forms.  As the 5th subgroup, the effect of surgeon’s experience on the 
occurrence of surgical complications and requirements for re -operations for complications for each 
procedure during the 1st vs 2nd year of the award period will be assessed.  For HTE analysis, the 
test of procedure (PFD vs PFDD) by subgroup effect (such as age) interaction will be performed 
to assess the homogeneity of the procedure effect within each subgroup. If the test of interaction 
indicates a significant interaction for  any subgroup, then, Gail and Simon’s test of qualitative 
interaction will be performed [41].   All pre -specified subgroup analyses (patient’s age, CM status, 
syrinx diameter, comorbidity, and surgeons’ experience) will be reported regardless of observing 
a statistically significant or not -significant effect.  
 
Sub-analysis by Syrinx size (3 -6 mm, 7 -9 mm):   A planned subgroup analysis for the syrinx 
diameter will be performed. Each of the three specific aims will be separately analyzed  within the 
syrinx diameters of 3 to 6 mm and 7 to 9 mm for exploratory purposes. The test of interaction will 
be used to assess if the treatment effect is homogeneous within each of the syrinx size subgroups 
(3- 6 mm vs 7 -9 mm). If the test of interaction indicates heterogeneity, using the whole 3 to 9 mm 
syrinx diameter  range , analyse s will be performed, to identify,  if any, a cut -off point to propose 
using one surgical method over the other. For example, whether  the PFD is associated with greatly 
fewer surgical complications when the syrinx diameter is less than 5mm, but surgical comp lication 
rates are similar for PFD and PFDD when the syrinx diameter is ≥6 mm will be examined.    
  
Aim 1: Sample Size Recalculation (November 29, 2017)  
The original sample size calcul ation was performed based on  surgical complica tion rates (≤12 
months) f rom Park-Reeves Syringomyelia Research Consortium (PRSRC) estimates  (17.8% in 
PFDD and 2.7% in PFD cases ). We originally did not have an estimate for the ICC. Based on the 
literature, we assumed ICC of 0.05 i n our calculations [43]. The overall sample size of enrolled 
patients would be 238 patients, approximately 119 patients per procedure over the two years  of 
enrollment.  
In preparation for our PFD trial annual meeting on November 2 9, 2017 , we performed a sample 
size re -calculation, using  the ICC observed f rom the 47 patients enrolled in the  study and for which 
complete data was available as of November 2 8, 2017. It should be noted that the data was only 
used to  calculate the ICC;  no interim analyses were performed. The ICC based on the first enrolled 
47 patients was 0.000059, much smaller than what  was assumed (0.05) for the or iginal sample size 
calculation. However, we expect this ICC estimate to change with more enrollments.  
Enrollmen t in the trial has increased over time and continues to do so (for example, 10 patients 
were enrolled in both Nove mber and December, 2017 and the total trial enrollment is now 83). 
However,  when calculated at the time of the annual meeting at the end of November 2017, the 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 38 average accrual rate , calculated over the entire 19 -month period  of the study , was 6 patients per  
month. Thus,  using the  conservative projection of 6 patients per month over the course of a n 
enrollment extension  ending 12/1/2018, we expect the total number of subjects  to be at least 145 
(73 + 12 x 6).  (73 was the total enrollment when these calculatio ns were made at the end of 
November; however, as noted above, 10 patients were recruited in December.)  
Based on the enrolled 47 patients i n the database with complete data as of 11/28/17 , the average 
cluster size is 2.9. If we assume each center  enroll s 3 more patients over the enrollment extension , 
the average cluster size increases to 5.9. With the current ICC estimate of <0.01 and using the 
original estimates for the complication rates ( 17.8% in PFDD and 2.7% in PFD ), with the projected 
sample size of 14 5, we can still reach 84% power by enrolling patients from 24 centers with 
an average cluster size of 6.  The s ame power level can also be achieved by enrolling patients from 
30 centers with an average cluster size of 5.  
It should be noted that it is assume d that the average cluster size is 6 in all centers for these 
calculations. The design effect (DE) concept is used in cluster randomized trials to inflate the 
sample size of the study, compared to the traditional randomized trials [44]. When cluster size is 
fixed, DE = 1 + (m - 1) x ICC; where m is the average cluster size and ICC is the intrac lass 
correlation coefficient. In other words, the sample size of the study can be calculated by traditional 
methods, and should be multiplied by the DE. Under the assumption that m = 6 and ICC = 0.01, 
DE becomes 1.05. To compare 17.8% vs 2.7% surgical comp lication rates for a ( not clustered ) 
randomized trial, with 84% power, and 0.05 type I error rate, we would need to enroll 136 patients 
total. This is also listed in the sample size calculator above under the “unadjusted box”. For a DE 
value of 1.05, this sample size should be multiplied by 1.05 to find the sample size of a cluster 
randomized trial to reach same power. Therefore, the sample size of the clustered randomized trial 
would be 136 x 1.05 = 142.8 ~143.   
 The variable cluster size is common in clu ster randomized trials. Eldridge et al considered the 
effect of variable cluster size on the sample size calculation for cluster randomized trials [45]. 
They showed that the DE value can be calculated for variable class sizes. DE’ = 1 + {(cv2 +1) m -
1} x ICC; where cv is the coefficient of variation of cluster si zes (standard deviation of cluster 
sizes divided by the mean cluster size). The cv is 1.08 for our study. If we use the current average 
cluster size of m = 2.9, DE’ becomes 1.06. In other words, the sample size of the study should be 
inflated to 136 x 1.06  = 144.16~145 to reach 84% power. This assures us that our planned sample 
size of 145 patients will allow us to reach 84% power even if our cluster sizes will not be fixed at 
6.  
It should be noted that, as of March 6th 2018, only 1 of 100 enrolled patient s was lost to follow -
up.  However, to account for a potential 2% loss to follow up on the 145 subjects needed (72 per 
group), we will recruit a minimum of 148 subjects total (74 per group)  and up to 238,  over the 
entire trial enrollment period, which is pr oposed to be extended to December 31, 2018.  
 
 
 Aim 1: Power Calculat ions 
For the purpose of sample size estimation, data from in the Park -Reeves Syringomyelia Research 
Consortium (PRSRC) were analyzed (ambispective enrollment, n=589 subjects with complete 
data); specifically, surgical complications ≤12 months were used to calculate the sample size. In 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 39 this dataset, surgical complications were noted in 17.8% of PFDD cases and 2.7% of PFD cases.  
This is consistent with reported values from a recent meta -analysis, where the rates for CSF -related 
complications for PFDD and PFD were 18.5% and 1.8%, respectively [27], as we ll data reported 
in case series [17, 25] and a systematic review [42].  We expect to observe a similar difference in 
PFDD versus PFD cases in the proposed study. Because of the clustered randomized nature of the 
trial, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) should be taken into account. The ICC is d efined 
as the proportion of the between cluster (PRSRC center) variation to the total variation. Since the 
cluster sizes are small (6 pe r center), and we have a large number of cent ers available for 
enrollment (4 8 total), the effect of ICC on sample size will be small. Thus, using the PRSRC values 
of 17.8% for PFDD and 2.7% for PFD, and assuming equal number of subjects per group and two -
sided type I error rate of 0.05, to reach 90% power, 36 centers averaging  6 subjects per center will 
be required for the trial assuming the ICC is 0.05. To account for 2% dropout rate, we will recruit 
48 centers with a cluster size  averaging 6 subjects. Therefore, overall sample size of enrolled 
patients will be 148 patients, approx imately 74 patients per procedure over the enrollment  period . 
These numbers are achievable, as our data suggest  there is  >500 potential study candidates across 
the 4 8-center network over two years.  
 
 
Aim 2: Non-Inferiority Margins  and Power  
The non-inferiority  margins for this trial were determined in conjunction with a panel of experts 
on CM+SM and related treatment (the Park -Reeves investigators), our non -physician stakeholder 
partners, and our patient partners, Gina Tramelli, Elizabeth O’Keefe , Lisa Reynolds, Sandy Spears, 
Sam Reeves, Dorothy Poppe, and Rich Labuda.  Using a clinical, Delphi -type approach [46] for 
the complex measure of clinical improvement, the research team agreed upon a non -inferiority 
margin of no more than 20% lower response for PFD from the PFDD group.   The clinical 
improvement rate for the PFDD group was provided as 78.6% in the Durham study [27].  Thus, 
with the sample size of  72 subjects per group (after an assumed 2% dropout), we  conclude d non-
inferiority of the PFD to PFDD with a margin of 0. 17 units  (α=0.05, 80% power) . This corresponds 
to clinical improvement rate of 61.6% in the PFD g roup. It was shown in the Durham study that 
the clinical improvement following PFD was 64.6%.  
 
Determine if PFD provides non -inferior clinical improvement compared to PFDD  (Non-inferiority Design ) 
Outcome  PFDD  PFD  Data 
Source  Non-inferiority 
Margin  α-level  Subjects 
per group  Power  
Clinical 
Improvement  44/56 (78.6%)  51/79 (64.6%)  Durham 
[27] 0.17 0.05 72 80% 
For these calculations , the drop -out rate is assumed to be 2%, and  the one -sided type I error rate is 0.05.  
 
After determination with the Delphi method, the non -inferiority margin was subsequently 
confirmed as appropriate using Rothman’s 95 -95 approach [47, 48] and the FDA guidelines for 
selecting the non -inferiority margin for non -inferiority clinical trials [49].    Using these  method s, 
the non -inferiority margin was est imated using the effect of the standard treatment  (PFDD) from 
Durham’s  meta -analysis  [27], with t he lower 1 -sided 95% confidence inter val for the random -
effects meta -analysis calculated to  be used as a non -inferiority margin.  When the data from the 
PFDD group from t he Durham study was used for the clinical improvement outcome, the 95% 
lower 1 -sided confidence interval  from the random effects model was calculated as 0.611.  In our 
proposal, we defined the non -inferiority margin as the difference between the rates. For  the clinical 
improvement outcome, this corresponds to the non -inferiority margin of 0.786 – 0.611 = 0.175 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 40 units.  Therefore, our recommended non -inferiority margin of 0. 17 units , for the clinical 
improvement outcome , is smaller than the FDA -recommended la rgest acceptable non -inferiority 
margin of 0.175 units . 
 
In contrast to clinical improvement, syrinx regression is an objectively measurable and easily 
quantifiable outcome.  It is measured by comparing syrinx size on MRI scans obtained before and 
after su rgery.  When the effective sample size is 68 subjects per group , and assuming 89.1% syrinx 
regression rate in the PFDD group  [27], the non -inferiority margin is 0. 135 units to reach 81% 
powe r.  A non-inferiority margin of 0.135 units  represents no more than 13.5% reduction from the 
PFDD group in terms of syr inx regression.  Note that  a one -sided type I error rate of 0.05 was 
assumed, and the ‘Two group test of equivalence in proportions’ option in nQuery Advisor was 
used.  
 
Determine if PFD provides non -inferior  syrinx regression compared to PFDD  (Non-inferiority Design ) 
Outcome  PFDD  PFD  Data 
Source  Non-inferiority 
Margin  α-level  Subjects 
per group  Power  
Syrinx 
Regression  261/293 
(89.1%)  31/38 (81.2%)  Durham 
[27] 
and PR SRC  0.135 0.05 72 81% 
For these calculations, the drop -out rate is assumed to be 2%, intra -class correlation coefficient is 0.05, and the one -
sided type I error rate is 0.05 .  
 
Aim 3: Power Calculations  
Based on preliminary data using the  Chiari Health Index in Pediatrics (CHIP) [50], we observed a  
0.12± 0.16 unit imp rovement  in Quality of Life (QOL) scores  following PFDD .  Our sample size 
of 72/group  (effective sample size of 68/group)  will provide 82% power to detect a 0.20± 0.16 unit 
improvement in CHIP  QOL scores following PFD ( α =0.05).  Both from an analytical sta ndpoint 
and from the view of PRSRC investigators and our patient partners, this value represents both a 
significant and meaningful increase in QOL . 
10. DATA COLLECTION  AND QUALITY ASSURAN CE 
10.1 Data Collection Forms   
The DCC will create source documents and disseminate them to all of the participating centers.  
Ultimately, the data on the source documents will be transcribed to an electronic database 
created by the DCC.   Similarly, imaging will be uploaded to a separa te electronic platform, the 
Central Neuroimaging Database Archive (CNDA).  This platform is maintained and managed at 
Washington University -St. Louis.  
10.2 Data Management   
The DCC will monitor each site’s data and interpret the respective imaging.  The University  of 
Iowa will oversee the DCC and process data in the following manner:  
o Data Management  
 Design and modify data dictionary (the information that is being collected)  
 Design and modify SQL Server database  
 Quality Control  
o Retrieval and Reports  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 41  Assist  in preparation of data quality reports  
 Assist in preparation of progress reports  
o Design and Analysis  
 Consult with investigators in design and analysis of research questions  
10.3 Quality Assurance  
10.3.1  Training  
All pediatric neurosurgeons involved in the study have  complet ed both an accredited neurosurgery 
residency  and a 1 -year subspecialty fellowship in pediatric neurosurgery at a program accredited 
by the Accreditation Council for Pediatric Neurosurgery Fellowships (ACPNF) ) or by The 
American Osteopathic Associa tion (AOA)  and are either certified or eligible for certification by 
both the American Board of Neurological Surgeons (ABNS) and the American Board of Pediatric 
Neurological Surgery (ABPNS)  or the American Osteopathic Board of Surgery (AOBS) .  Prior to 
participating in the study, each  pediatric neurosurgeon must  submit documentation veri fying that 
s/he has performed ≥2 0 PFDD/PFD cases at the level of atte nding pediatric neurosurgeon or that 
that s/he performed ≥5 PFDD/PFD cases in the year preceding the participation in the study; and 
3) review two videos showing the study -approved operative technique for PFDD  and PFD in step -
wise fashion.   As detailed in the videos, PFDD and PFD both begin with a midline posterior 
suboccipital incision  extending from the level of the inion inferiorly.  Suboccipital craniectomy ± 
cervical laminectomies are performed based upon the level of tonsillar position on the pre -
operative MRI.  The posterior atlanto -occipital membrane and any additional constricti ng epidural 
bands are then dissected off the dura and bisected.  For PFD, the operation is complete (dural 
scoring or splitting is permitted), and wound closure is initiated.  For PFDD, the dura is then incised 
and retracted for microsurgical dissection. I ntradural maneuvers are performed at the surgeon’s 
discretion based on the intra -operative findings, but may include exploration/fenestration of an 
arachnoid veil, lysis of adhesions, or tonsillar reduction.  Following the intradural dissection, the 
durapl asty is performed with autologous graft or dural substitute, and the wound is closed in 
standard fashion.  Dural opening without subsequent dural closure is not permitted for PFDD or 
PFD. Periodic quality assurance checks will be performed by reviewing a s ubset of operative notes 
from randomly selected participating surgeons.  
 
The DCC will have a representative train each participating site’s research personnel how to collect 
data on source documents; transcribe them to the electronic database; and instructions on how to 
upload imaging to the Central Neuroimaging Data Archive.  Training will be documented and 
must be completed before access is granted to the respective portal.  
10.3.2   Quality Control Committee  
The DSMB is responsible for monitoring accrual  of study subjects, adherence to the study 
protocol, assessment of data quality, performance of individual clinical sites, review of serious 
adverse events and other subject safety issues, and review of formal interim statistical analyses of 
treatment effi cacy.  The DCC will send reports relating to these topics to DSMB members 10 
days prior to each DSMB meeting.   
 
Members of the DSMB will include a pediatric neurosurgeon with relevant expertise in CM+SM, 
a neuroradiologist, a biostatistician, a clinical e thicist, and a patient partner (Sandy Spears).   
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 42 10.3.3   Metrics  
Primary Outcome : measured as a binary (yes/no) variable. The presence of any of the following 
items will be considered as a poor outcome (harm to patients):  
o Intra -operative Complication  
 Vascular injury  resulting in dissection or stroke  
 Intracranial  hemorrhage  requiring return to surgery for evacuation  
 Neurological injury ( new cranial nerve deficit,  weakness, sensory loss, 
bowel or bladder dysfunction)  
 Death  
o Complication ≤12  (+/- 2 months)  months a fter initial PFDD or PFD  
 Pseudomeningocele : extradural and/or subcutaneous fluid collection 
resulting in discomfort or pain, limitation of movement, or CSF leak.  
Radiological evidence of fluid collection alone is not sufficient for 
diagnosis of pseudomeni ngocele.  
 CSF leak  
 Hydrocephalus : requires external drainage, shunting, or endoscopic 3rd 
ventriculostomy  
 Infection: clinical diagnosis that may include fever, wound drainage, 
dehiscence, or elevated laboratory parameters in association with antibiotic 
treatment ± surgical debridement.  
 Chemical (or aseptic) meningitis : clinical diagnosis prompting medical 
treatment (e.g. steroids); lumbar puncture and analysis of CSF cell profile 
not required but will be tracked if available.  
 Cervical instability  
 Cerebellar ptosis with intractable headaches  
o Need for surgical procedures for complication management ≤ 12 (+/- 2 mon ths)  
months after initial PFDD or PFD  
 External drainage  for the following:  
 Hydrocephalus  
 CSF leak  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Infection  
 Shunt malfunction/infection  
 Simple over -sewing of wound for CSF leak  
 Surgical revision in operating room for the following:  
 CSF leak 
 Infection  
 Pseudomeningocele  
 Lumbar puncture and steroids for the following:  
 Chemical meningitis  
 True meningitis  
 Implantation of ventriculo -peritoneal or other permanent shunt or 
endoscopic 3rd ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus.  
 Cervical collar and/or fusion for cervical instability  
 Cerebellopexy for cerebellar ptosis  
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 43 Secondary Outcomes : 
o Treatment Efficacy, measured ≤6 weeks , 3-6 months , and 12  (+/- 2 months )  
months after surgery:  
 Status of clinical symptoms  
 Status of neurological findings  
 Syrinx diameter  (in mm)  
 Spinal alignment (coronal and sagittal  Cobb angle s) 
 Need for revision of PFDD or PFD  
o Quality of life, measured ≤6 weeks , 3-6 months , and 12  (+/- 2 months )  months  
after surgery : 
 Chiari Health Index in Pediatrics (CHIP)  
 HUI-3.  
10.3.4  Protocol  Deviations  
Protocol deviations will be reported to the local IRB per the respective institution’s 
guidelines.  
10.3.5  Monitoring  
The DCC  will monitor data quality primarily through the use of remote monitoring 
activities. Remote monitoring involves detailed review of the data entered by the Clinical 
Center and consultations with the Clinical Center investigator and/or research 
assistant/ coordinator to review safety and data q uality. This may require uploading de -
identified copies of specific parts of the medical record, patient study file, regulatory 
documentation, or other source documents to the DCC staff who will review those 
materials against the data recorded in the elect ronic data capture system. This helps assure 
protocol compliance and accurate data collection. The DCC may conduct more remote 
monitoring activities early in the trial to assure protocol compliance and identify any 
training issues that may exist. Safety of  subjects will be monitored and ensured in 
accordance with the DSMB plan. The medical record and study files (including informed 
consent, permission, and assent documents) must be made available to authorized 
representatives of the DCC, upon request, for s ource verification of study documentation. 
In addition, medical information and data generated by this study must be available for 
inspection upon request by representatives of the IRB for each study site.  
11. PARTICIPANT  RIGHTS AND CONFIDEN TIALITY   
Candidates  for participants in the proposed study, “ Posterior Foss Decompression with or 
without Duraplasty for Chiari type I Malformation with Syringomyelia ” are between the 
ages of day -of-life 1 through 21 years.  Children are a vulnerable population, and it is 
critical that their protection be given the utmost consideration. We will conduct our 
research under the most stringent guidelines, the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) 
guidelines.  In a multi -institutional study setting, the protection of children becomes more 
complex and involves multiple research institutions with their respective institutional 
review boards (IRBs), the funding agency (PCORI), the data safety monitoring board 
(DSMB), Park-Reeves Syringomyelia Research Consortium (PRSRC) investigators, and 
the PRSRC Research Advisory Board, which will serve as the study steering co mmittee  It 
is paramount that t he PI  and the DCC  ensure that these entities work in collaboration to 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 44 protect pediatric subjects and verify that the  study is fully  compliant with all reg ulatory 
and ethical requirements and policies.  
 
Patient partner and mother of a CM+SM patient, Sandy Spears, will serve as a patient 
representative on the study’s Data Safety and Monitoring Board.  In doing so, she will 
help to ensure that the safety and rights of study participants is protected throughout the 
duration of the study.  
  
The DCC will provide training for clinical site investigators and designees regarding study 
procedures and GCP.  The following measures are designed to protect against risk.  
 
Risk due to loss of confidential information  
Risk due to loss of confidential information is mi tigated by several factors.  All 
evaluation forms and reports will be identified only by a coded number to maintain 
patient confidentiality.  All records will b e kept in a locked/password protected 
computer.  Clinical information will not be released without the written permission of 
the parent or legal guardian, except as necessary for monitoring by the funding agency, 
the DCC, or other governmental regulatory b odies.  Specifics pertaining to this study 
for risks due to loss of confidential information are detailed below.  
 
PRSRC Registry E lectronic Database (EDB)  
Data for this study will be entered into the electronic database system maintained by 
the DCC .  The server facility is locked and separately secured from the remainder of 
the DCC.   Its entry and exit access to the building is monitored by cameras, additional 
key codes, and security personnel year round.   The DCC coordinates its network 
infrastruct ure and security with the ITC (Information Technology Center) information 
systems at Washington University -St. Louis.   This provides effective firewall 
hardware, automatic network intrusion detection, and the expertise of dedicated 
security experts working  at the University.   Network equipment includes multiple 
firewalls, routers, and high -speed switches.   User authentication is centralized with four 
Windows 2012R2 domain servers.   Communication over public networks is encrypted 
with virtual point -to-point sessions using secure socket layer (SSL) or virtual private 
network (VPN) technologies.   Both access methods providing at least 128 bit 
encryption.   All DCC Web -based systems use the SSL protocol to transmit data 
securely over the internet.   Direct access to DCC machines is only available while 
physically located in the DCC offices, or via a VPN client.  All network traffic is 
monitored for intrusion attempts, security scans are regularly run against the servers, 
and IT staff is automatically notified of in trusion alerts.   Security is maintained with 
Windows 2012R2 user/group domain -level security.   Users are required to change their 
password every 90 days, and workstations time out after 5 minutes of inactivity.   All 
files are protected at group and user le vels.  Database security is handled in a similar 
manner with group -level access to databases, tables, and views in Microsoft SQL 
Server.    
 
The investigators and staff of the  DCC are fully committed to the security and 
confidentiality of data collected for  the study.   All personnel involved with the DCC 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 45 have signed confidentiality agreements concerning data encountered in the course of 
their daily work.   All personnel (including administrative staff) have received Human 
Subjects Protection and Health Inform ation Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) education.   All users are required to sign specific agreements concerning 
security, confidentiality, and use of our information systems before access is provided.  
 
Centralized Neuroimaging Data Archive (CNDA ) 
The Centralized Neuroimaging Data Archive (CNDA) is an imaging informatics 
platform that provides secure data management services for Washington University – 
St. Louis and collaborating investigators.  The CNDA’s services include automated 
archiving of r esearch imaging studies from all of the University’s scanners, automated 
quality control and image processing routines, and secure web -based access to acquired 
and post -processed data. The CNDA currently stores over 60,000 individual sessions, 
representing  data from a wide range of multi -site and in -house studies.  It also manages 
thousands of non -imaging experiments, including neuropsychological, clinical, 
biomarker, and behavioral data.  The CNDA is built on XNAT [51, 52], a widely used 
open source imaging informatics platform designed to facilitate common data 
management and productivity tasks for neuroimaging and associated data. Notable 
features include: 1) support for a range of image upload/download methods, including  
DICOM, web services, and web browsers; 2) an extensible data model that simplifies 
the incorporation of new data types by automatically generating the necessary database 
tables and relations, user interface components, and search engine plug -ins; 3) quali ty 
control modules and audit trails, including a virtual quarantine that houses uploaded 
data until authorized users have validated them and a complete history profile that 
tracks all changes made to the managed data; 4) a secure web -based user interface f or 
data entry and access; 5) a sophisticated search engine that builds queries across data 
types; 6) an online image viewer that supports a number of common neuroimaging 
formats, including DICOM and Analyze; and 7) a pipeline engine for automating image 
processing routines.   
 
The CNDA is widely used to support studies that include geographically dispersed data 
acquisition sites and analysis teams.  Example studies include the Dominantly Inherited 
Alzheimer Network (DIAN), a 15 -site study of inherited Alzheimer’s disease that 
includes PET, MR, neuropsychological, clinical, and tissue data; the Park -Reeves 
Syringomyelia Research Consortium  a 36 -site study of Chiari m alformation  and 
syringomyelia  in subjects under 21 years of age, including MR, CT and CR data; and 
INTRUST, a 10 -site study of traumatic brain injury and post -traumatic stress disorder 
in combat veterans.  Scans are uploaded using a user friendly web -based tool that 
removes identifiers from the image file metadata and transfers the files to th e CNDA 
over an encrypted protocol.  
 
The CNDA implements a number of features and procedures to ensure the security and 
integrity of the data it hosts and full HIPAA compliance. All data coming into and out 
of the CNDA are transmitted over secure channels u sing SSL.  All data are stored on a 
level 5 RAID device with disaster recovery and offsite backup. Snapshots of the 
relational database are taken nightly, enabling reconstruction of the database from any 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 46 time point in the study.   Access to study data is r estricted to authorized users who are 
assigned specific access privileges (create, read, edit, delete) according to their role in 
the study.  All logins and access to data are tracked in the internal audit system.  
 
The CNDA offers a number of features to m onitor and maintain the quality of 
acquired data.  As data are uploaded to the system, sequence details (e.g. flip angle, 
repetition time) can be validated against a study specific protocol to ensure that the 
acquisition is compliant. Noncompliant scans ar e flagged in the system for immediate 
follow -up.  Automated image analysis routines are then executed to determine overall 
image quality specific to the acquisition type.  For fMRI, for example, signal to noise 
and subject movement histograms are generated .  The CNDA also supports 
radiological evaluation and manual quality assessments that can be optionally used by 
studies. The output from these routines is available to users in web -based reports and 
is flagged when key values fall outside acceptable limits . 
  
11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review   
This protocol and the informed  consent document and any subsequent modifications will 
be reviewed and approved by the IRB or ethics committee responsible for oversight of the 
study .   
11.2 Informed Consent Forms  
The consent form will include the following:  
o Purpose statement  
o Participant commitment  
o Costs  
o Risks  
o Benefits  
o Disclosure of alternative  
o Statement of confidentiality  
o Study contact information  
 
When a clinical site investigator and/or research coordinator identifies a candidate for the 
study, patient eligibility will be confirmed, and the study investigator or coordinator will 
approach the individual to offer participation. After a thorough discu ssion to inform the 
patient and family of the rationale and objectives of the study and the risks, benefits, and 
alternatives to participation, written informed consent will be obtained from a parent or 
legal guardian (patient <18 years of age) or the pati ent themselves (patient ≥18 years of 
age).  Additionally, assent will be obtained for patients of appropriate age, according to 
individual institutional practices.  If study participation is declined, then all clinical care 
will be provided to the child in  accordance with institutional practice and judgment.   
11.3 Participant Confidentiality   
Each center will be responsible for coding data prior to entry in the PRSRC  database.  Each 
center will be required to demonstrate IRB approval from their own university o r 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 47 institution.  The electronic database and CNDA is  password -protected.  For s ubjects 
enrolled at Washington University -St. Louis , we will maintain a key with the de -
identification and coding information in a locked office.  
 
All rec ords related to a participant’s  research will be stor ed in locked f iling cabine ts or on 
comput ers protected with p asswo rds. The participant’s  identi ty on these records will be 
indicated by  a case  numb er rather than by n ame, and the informati on linking these case 
numbers with the participant’s  identity will be kept separate from the re search records. The 
participant will not be ide ntified by name in any publ ication of the research  resul ts. 
 
All data collected will be entered into the PRSRC Registry Electronic Database (EDB ). 
This EDB was created in 2011 and has been used for collection of prospective, multicenter 
clinical and radiographic patient data since 2012.   PRSRC privacy and confidentiality 
principles have been maintained in accordance with the PCORI Standards for D ata 
Registries, HIPAA regulations, Good Clinical Practice guidelines, and the Washington 
University -St. Louis  Human Research Protection Office.  Each PRSRC site and PRSRC 
ancillary site shares a detailed data use agreement with Washington University -St. Lo uis.  
Prior to accessing the PRSRC Registry EDB, PRSRC investigators and coordinators from 
each site must demonstrate IRB approval by their own institution and undergo an online 
training and privacy/confidentiality module.  A coded, limited  data set may then be entered, 
with the key to the code maintained at each collaborating site. This information will only 
be kept onsite at each institution and will only be available to key personnel of this study, 
data monitors and IRB officials as needed. At the conc lusion of the study, the de -identified 
data will be retained indefinitely by the P.I. The data with PHI will be destroyed at the 
conclusion of the study. The PRSRC, PCORI, this institution, the Principal Investigator , 
and his /her staff will comply with any  and all laws regarding the privacy of such 
information.  
11.4 Study Discontinuation  
The study may be discontinued at any time by the Principal Investigator, David Limbrick, 
MD, PhD; the IRB,  the OHRP, the FDA, or other government agencies as part of their 
duties to ensure that research participants are protected .  
12. COMMITTEES  
Below are the list of committees involved with the research study.  See appendix II. 
o Dissemination Committee  
o PRSRC Research Advisory Board  
o PRSRC Research Team  
o Study Steering Committee  
o Data  Safety and Monitoring Board  
o Adjudication Committee  
13. PUBLICATION OF RESEA RCH FINDINGS  
A Dissemination Committee  has been created to monitor the efficacy of efforts aimed at disseminating 
study progress and research results.  This committee will include Drs . Limbrick (study PI) and 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 48 Shannon (Co -PI), Dr. T uite (Site PI and key personnel), as well as Haley Vance (Co -I, certified 
pediatric nurse practitioner -acute care, non -physician stakeholder)  and Elaine Kennedy (Co -I, certified 
pediatric nurse practitioner, non-physician stakeholder) and the leaders of our patient advocacy group 
partners, Mr. Labuta and Ms. Poppe (both Co -Is).  The Dissemination Committee will also include 
patient partners and Co -Is, Ms. Reynolds and Ms. Tramelli.  Finally, as study results b ecome available, 
the PRSRC will convene a consensus conference to discuss the results and their implications for 
clinical practice and patient education, and to draft evidenced -based guidelines for the surgical 
treatment of CM+SM.  
 
A data sharing procedure  has been developed by the research team in accordance with PCORI 
guidelines to facilitate the use of these data by other researchers.   All code books, statistical 
programming code, and a  cleaned, de -identified copy of the final data set will be made avail able to 
other researchers if requested within 9 months of the final analysis.   Likewise, datasets will be 
provided to any peer -reviewed journal requesting this information in support of manuscripts that 
resulted from the project.  Researchers requesting acc ess to the data will be directed to the Washington 
University Chiari website ( https://chiari.wustl.edu )  where a description of the available data and the 
data release policy will be posted.   The researchers will th en submit a short propos al (no more than 5 
pages) to Dr. Limbrick,  principal investigator.   This proposal would then be reviewed by the PI, the 
research team and patient partners.   If there are concerns about confidentiality arising from the project, 
data will not be released.   Assuming that confidentiality can be maintained, the committee will make 
every effort to sh are data and will only deny  requests under the following conditions:  
1. The central purpose of the study is not research or evaluation.  
2. The  research goals are not feasible using the current study data.  
3. The proposed research involves data that may compromise the privacy or confidentiality of 
individuals, providers or institutions.  
4. The data processing necessary to produce the requested fi les places an unusually heavy burden 
on the data processing staff.  
5. The requestors have not demonstrated the necessary experience and expertise required to carry 
out the  proposed research.  
 
If there are specific concerns raised during the review process,  the reviewer’s comments will be sent 
to the requestor and the requestor will be given the opportunity to respond to these comments and 
resubmit his/her proposal. Any manuscripts or publications that result from the use of PRSRC data by 
other research team s will be reviewed by the PRSRC investigators to insure patient and provider 
confidentiality.   This last review is not intended for scientific purposes, only to protect confidentiality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 49  
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES References Cited  
 
1. (NINDS), N.I.o.N.D.a.S. NINDS Syringomyelia Information Page . 2015.  
2. Research, O.o.R.D. Syringomyelia . 2009.  
3. Di Lorenzo, N. and F. Cacciola, Adult syringomyelia.  Classification, pathogenesis, and 
therapeutic approaches.  J Neurosurg Sci, 2005. 49(3): p. 65 -72. 
4. Heiss, J.D., et al., Elucidating the pathophysiology of syringomyelia.  J Neurosurg, 1999. 
91(4): p. 553 -62. 
5. Small, J.A. and P.H. Sheridan, Research priorities for syringomyelia: a National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke work shop summary.  Neurology, 1996. 46(2): p. 
577-82. 
6. Brickell, K.L., et al., Ethnic differences in syringomyelia in New Zealand.  J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry, 2006. 77(8): p. 989 -91. 
7. Arnautovic, A., et al., Pediatric and adult Chiari malformation Type I  surgical series 
1965 -2013: a review of demographics, operative treatment, and outcomes.  J Neurosurg 
Pediatr, 2015. 15(2): p. 161 -77. 
8. Fernandez, A.A., et al., Malformations of the craniocervical junction (Chiari type I and 
syringomyelia: classification,  diagnosis and treatment).  BMC Musculoskelet Disord, 
2009. 10 Suppl 1 : p. S1.  
9. Hida, K., et al., Pediatric syringomyelia with chiari malformation: its clinical 
characteristics and surgical outcomes.  Surg Neurol, 1999. 51(4): p. 383 -90; discussion 
390-1. 
10. Mueller, D. and J.J. Oro, Prospective analysis of self -perceived quality of life before and 
after posterior fossa decompression in 112 patients with Chiari malformation with or 
without syringomyelia.  Neurosurg Focus, 2005. 18(2): p. ECP2.  
11. Tisell, M ., J. Wallskog, and M. Linde, Long -term outcome after surgery for Chiari I 
malformation.  Acta Neurol Scand, 2009. 120(5): p. 295 -9. 
12. Greenberg, J.K., et al., The Chiari severity index: a preoperative grading system for 
Chiari malformation type 1.  Neuros urgery, 2015. 76(3): p. 279 -85. 
13. Vakharia, V.N., M.R. Guilfoyle, and R.J. Laing, Prospective study of outcome of foramen 
magnum decompressions in patients with syrinx and non -syrinx associated Chiari 
malformations.  Br J Neurosurg, 2012. 26(1): p. 7 -11. 
14. Batzdorf, U., Primary spinal syringomyelia. Invited submission from the joint section 
meeting on disorders of the spine and peripheral nerves, March 2005.  J Neurosurg Spine, 
2005. 3(6): p. 429 -35. 
15. Tubbs, R.S., et al., The pediatric Chiari I malform ation: a review.  Childs Nerv Syst, 
2007. 23(11): p. 1239 -50. 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 50 16. Wellons, J.C. and M.D. Smyth. Neurosurgical Face Off: Durotomy and Duraplasty 
Versus No Durotomy and Duraplasty . in Annual Scientific Meeting of the American 
Association of Neurological Surge ons. 2013. New Orleans.  
17. Munshi, I., et al., Effects of posterior fossa decompression with and without duraplasty 
on Chiari malformation -associated hydromyelia.  Neurosurgery, 2000. 46(6): p. 1384 -9; 
discussion 1389 -90. 
18. Ventureyra, E.C., H.A. Aziz, a nd M. Vassilyadi, The role of cine flow MRI in children 
with Chiari I malformation.  Childs Nerv Syst, 2003. 19(2): p. 109 -13. 
19. Navarro, R., et al., Surgical results of posterior fossa decompression for patients with 
Chiari I malformation.  Childs Nerv Sy st, 2004. 20(5): p. 349 -56. 
20. Limonadi, F.M. and N.R. Selden, Dura -splitting decompression of the craniocervical 
junction: reduced operative time, hospital stay, and cost with equivalent early outcome.  J 
Neurosurg, 2004. 101(2 Suppl): p. 184 -8. 
21. Yeh, D.D., B. Koch, and K.R. Crone, Intraoperative ultrasonography used to determine 
the extent of surgery necessary during posterior fossa decompression in children with 
Chiari malformation type I.  J Neurosurg, 2006. 105(1 Suppl): p. 26 -32. 
22. Galarza, M., S.  Sood, and S. Ham, Relevance of surgical strategies for the management 
of pediatric Chiari type I malformation.  Childs Nerv Syst, 2007. 23(6): p. 691 -6. 
23. Mutchnick, I.S., et al., Decompression of Chiari malformation with and without 
duraplasty: morbidit y versus recurrence.  J Neurosurg Pediatr, 2010. 5(5): p. 474 -8. 
24. Litvack, Z.N., R.A. Lindsay, and N.R. Selden, Dura splitting decompression for Chiari I 
malformation in pediatric patients: clinical outcomes, healthcare costs, and resource 
utilization.  Neurosurgery, 2013. 72(6): p. 922 -8; discussion 928 -9. 
25. Lee, A., et al., Comparison of posterior fossa decompression with or without duraplasty 
in children with Type I Chiari malformation.  Childs Nerv Syst, 2014. 30(8): p. 1419 -24. 
26. Rocque, B.G., et a l., Treatment practices for Chiari malformation type I with 
syringomyelia: results of a survey of the American Society of Pediatric Neurosurgeons.  J 
Neurosurg Pediatr, 2011. 8(5): p. 430 -7. 
27. Durham, S.R. and K. Fjeld -Olenec, Comparison of posterior foss a decompression with 
and without duraplasty for the surgical treatment of Chiari malformation Type I in 
pediatric patients: a meta -analysis.  J Neurosurg Pediatr, 2008. 2(1): p. 42 -9. 
28. Greenberg, J.K., et al., Outcome methods used in clinical studies of Chiari malformation 
Type I: a systematic review.  J Neurosurg, 2015. 122(2): p. 262 -72. 
29. Shannon, C.N., et al., The Chiari Health Index for Pediatrics.  J Neurosurg Pediatr, 2015. 
In Press . 
30. Guyatt, G.H., B. Kirshner, and R. Jaeschke, Measuring health status: what are the 
necessary measurement properties?  J Clin Epidemiol, 1992. 45(12): p. 1341 -5. 
31. Kirshner, B. and G. Guyatt, A methodological framework for assessing health indices.  J 
Chronic Dis, 1985. 38(1): p. 27 -36. 
32. Carmines, E.G. and R.A. Zel ler, Reliability and Validity Assessment.  Quatitative 
Applications in the Social Sciences.  Vol. 17. 1979, Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications.  
33. Weinstein, J.N., et al., Surgical vs nonoperative treatment for lumbar disk herniation: the 
Spine Patient Ou tcomes Research Trial (SPORT) observational cohort.  JAMA, 2006. 
296(20): p. 2451 -9. 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 51 34. Drake, J.M., et al., Consensus definitions of complications for accurate recording and 
comparisons of surgical outcomes in pediatric neurosurgery.  J Neurosurg Pediatr, 2012. 
10(2): p. 89 -95. 
35. Huang, S., M.H. Fiero, and M.L. Bell, Generalized estimating equations in cluster 
randomized trials with a small number of clusters: Review of practice and simulation 
study.  Clin Trials, 2016. 13(4): p. 445 -9. 
36. Peters, T.J., e t al., Comparison of methods for analysing cluster randomized trials: an 
example involving a factorial design.  Int J Epidemiol, 2003. 32(5): p. 840 -6. 
37. Little, R.J.A. and D.B. Rubin, Statistical Analysis With Missing Data . Second Edition ed. 
2002, Hobok en, N.J.: Wiley.  
38. Buck, S.F., A method of estimation of missing values in multivariate data suitable for use 
with an electronic computer.  J Roy Statist Soc, 1960. 22: p. 302 -6. 
39. Godzik, J., et al., Relationship of syrinx size and tonsillar descent to  spinal deformity in 
Chiari malformation Type I with associated syringomyelia.  J Neurosurg Pediatr, 2014. 
13(4): p. 368 -74. 
40. Greenberg, J.K., et al. Population -Based Analysis of Complications Associated with 
Chiari Malformation Type 1 Surgery in Childre n. in AANS/CNS Joint Section on 
Pediatric Neurosurgery . 2014. Amelia Island, Florida.  
41. Gail, M. and R. Simon, Testing for Qualitative Interactions between Treatment Effects 
and Patient Subsets.  Biometrics, 1985. 41(2): p. 361 -372. 
42. Hankinson, T., R.S. Tubbs, and J.C. Wellons, Duraplasty or not? An evidence -based 
review of the pediatric Chiari I malformation.  Childs Nerv Syst, 2011. 27(1): p. 35 -40. 
43. Campbell, M.K., P.M. Fayers, and J.M. Grimshaw, Determinants of the intracluster 
correlation coefficient in cluster randomized trials: the case of implementation research.  
Clin Trials, 2005. 2(2): p. 99 -107. 
44. Campbell, M.K., et al., Sample size calculator for cluster randomized trials.  Computers 
in Biology and Medicine, 2004. 34(2): p. 113 -25. 
45. Eldridge, S.M., D. Ashby, and S. Kerry, Sample size for cluster randomized trials: effect 
of coefficient of variation of cluster size and analysis method.  Int J Epidemiol, 2006. 
35(5): p. 1292 -300. 
46. Schumi, J. and J.T. Wittes, Through the  looking glass: understanding non -inferiority.  
Trials, 2011. 12: p. 106.  
47. Rothmann, M., et al., Design and analysis of non -inferiority mortality trials in oncology.  
Stat Med, 2003. 22(2): p. 239 -64. 
48. Rothmann, M.D. and H.H. Tsou, On non -inferiority a nalysis based on delta -method 
confidence intervals.  J Biopharm Stat, 2003. 13(3): p. 565 -83. 
49. Administration, U.S.D.o.H.a.H.S.F.a.D., Guidance for Industry Non -Inferiority Clinical 
Trials , U.S.D.o.H.a.H.S.F.a.D. Administration, Editor. 2010: Rockville, MD. 
50. Ladner, T.R., et al., Health -related quality of life in pediatric Chiari I malformation: the 
Chiari Health Index for Pediatrics (CHIP).  J Neurosurg Pediatr, In Press.  
51. Marcus, D.S., et al., The open -source neuroimaging research enterprise.  J Dig it Imaging, 
2007. 20 Suppl 1 : p. 130 -8. 
52. Marcus, D.S., et al., The Extensible Neuroimaging Archive Toolkit: an informatics 
platform for managing, exploring, and sharing neuroimaging data.  Neuroinformatics, 
2007. 5(1): p. 11 -34. 
53. Campbell MK, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. CONSORT statement: extension to cluster  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 52 randomised trials. BMJ 2004;328:702 -708. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 53 14. SUPPLEMENTS/APPENDIC ES 
Appendix I  
 
Participating Sites  
Sites  Principal Investigators  
All Children's Hospital  Tuite, Gerald , and Jallo, George  
Arkansas Children’s Hospital/University of 
Arkansas School of Medicine  Albert , Greg  
Arnold Palmer Hospital -Orlando Health  Olavarria, Greg  
Boston Children's Hospital   Scellig, Stone  
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta  Chern, Joshua  
Children’s Hospital at Dartmouth -Hitchcock/ 
Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine  Bauer , David  
Children ’s Hospital Colorado   O’Neill, Brent  
Children ’s Hospital of Birmingham  Johnston, James  
Children’s Hospital of New York -
Presbyterian/ Weill Corne ll/Cornell 
University Medical College  Greenfield , Jeffrey  
Children ’s Hospital of Phoenix  Adelson, David  
Children ’s National Medical Center  Keating, Robert  
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia   Heuer, Greg  
Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital   Mangano, Francesco  
Columbia University  Anderson, Richard  
Dell (Seton) Children’s Medical Center  George, Timothy, and Tyler -Kabara, 
Elizabeth  
Gillette Children’s Hospital Minnesota  Graupman , Patrick  
John Hopkins Children’s Center/ Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine  Jackson , Eric  
Levine Children’s Hospital/Carolinas Medical 
Center  Wait , Scott  
Los Angeles Children ’s Hospital   McComb, J. Gordon  
Lurie Children ’s Hospital of Chicago  Alden, Tord  
Mayo  Clinic Children’s Hospital  Daniels , David  
Miami Children ’s Hospital   Bhatia, Savjiv, Ragheb, John  
MUSC Children’s Hospital/Medical 
University of South Carolina School of 
Medicine  Eskandari , Ramin  
Oregon Health & Science University  Selden, Nathan  
Pennsylvania State University  Iantosca, Mark  
Pittsburgh Children ’s Hospital  Tamber, Mandeep, and Greene , Stephanie  
Primary Children ’s Hospital  Brockemeyer,Doug  
St. Louis Children ’s Hospital  Limbrick, David  
Seattle Children ’s Hospital  Ellenbogen, Richard  
Stanford University  Grant, Gerald  
Texas Children ’s Hospital   Whitehead, Bill  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 54 The Children’s Hospital at OU Medical 
Center/ Oklahoma University College of 
Medicine   Mapstone, Timothy, Gross, Naina  
Nationwide Children ’s Hospital  Leonard, Jeffrey  
University of Florida HSC -Jacksonville  Aldana , Philipp  
University of Iowa  Menezes, Arnold  
University of Michigan  Maher, Cormac  
University of Texas – Houston  Shah, Manish  
University of Minnesota  Guillaume, Dan  
University of Vermont Children’s Hospital/ 
University of Vermont College of Medicine  Durham , Susan  
University of Wisconsin  Iskandar, Bermans  
Vanderbilt University  Shannon, Chevis  and Wellons, Jay  
Wake Forest University  Couture, Daniel  
 
 
 
 
Appendix II  
PRSRC Dissemination Committee  
Dr. David Limbrick  PI 
Dr. Chevis Shannon  Co-PI 
Ms. Haley Vance  Nurse Practitioner  
Ms. Elaine Kennedy  Nurse Practitioner  
Mr. Rick Labuda  Patient Partner  
Ms. Dorothy Poppe  Patient Partner  
Ms. Lisa Reynolds  Patient Partner  
Mrs. Gina Tramelli  Patient Partner  
 
PRSRC Research Advisory Board  
Ralph Dacey Jr, MD  Washington University  
Robert Dauser, MD  Baylor University  
Bermans Iskandar, MD  Univ. of Wisconsin -Madison  
Lawrence Lenke, MD  Columbia University  
Robert McKinstry, MD, PhD  Washington University  
Arnold Menezes, MD  University of Iowa  
W. Jerry Oakes, MD  University of Alabama  
Sandra Reeves Spears  Houston, Texas  
James Torner, PhD  University of Iowa  
 
PRSRC Research Team  
Dr. David Limbrick  PI 
Dr. Chevis Shannon  Co-PI 
Dr. James Torner  Co-PI 
Dr. Emine Bayman  Co-PI 
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 55 Dr. T.S. Park  Co-PI 
Dr. Michael Kelly  Co-PI 
Ms. Haley Vance  Co-PI 
Ms. Elaine Kennedy  Co-PI 
 Ms. Thanda Meehan  Co-PI 
Mr. Samuel Reeves  Patient Partner  
Ms. Lisa Reynolds  Patient Partner  
Mrs. Gina Tramelli  Patient Partner  
Mr. Rick Labuda  Patient Partner  
Ms. Dorothy Poppe  Patient Partner  
Dr. Jacob Greenberg  Clinician/Research Consultant  
Ms. Angela Eschmann  Clinician/OR Nurse Consultant  
Ms. Toni Goelz  Clinician/Physical Therapist Consultant  
 
 
 
Steering Committee  
Ralph Dacey Jr, MD  Washington University  
Lawrence Lenke, MD  Columbia University  
Robert McKinstry, MD, PhD  Washington University  
Arnold Menezes, MD  University of Iowa  
Sandra Reeves Spears  Houston, Texas  
James Torner, PhD  University Of Iowa  
Gerald Tuite, MD  All Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of South Florida College of Medicine  
Taryn Bragg, MD  
Bermans Iskandar, MD  American Family Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of Wisconsin School of Medicine  
Daniel Guillaume, MD  Amplatz Children's Hospital/  
Univ. of Minnesota School of Medicine  
Benjamin Warf, MD  Boston Children’s Hospital / 
Harvard Univ. School of Medicine  
Daniel Couture, MD  
Alexander Powers, MD  Brenner Children’s Hospital  
Wake Forest Univ. School of Medicine  
Joshua Chern, MD, PhD  Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta/  
Emory Univ. School of Medicine  
James Johnston, MD  
W. Jerry Oakes, MD  Children’s Hospital of Birmingham/  
Univ. of Alabama -Birmingham  
Todd Hankinson, MD, MBA  Children’s Hospital of Colorado/  
Univ. of Colorado School of Medicine  
Stephanie Greene , MD  Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh/  
Univ. of Pittsburgh School of Medicine  
Bruce Kaufman, MD  Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin/  
Medical College of Wisconsin  
Manish Shah, MD  Children’s Memorial Hermann Hospital/  
Univ. of Texas School of Medicine  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 56 Robert Keating, MD  Children’s National Medical Center/  
George Was hington U. School of Medicine  
Karin Bierbrauer, MD  
Francesco Mangano, DO  Cincinnati Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of Cincinnati School of Medicine  
Cormac Maher, MD  CS Mott Children’s Hospital  
University of Michigan School of Medicine  
Lissa Baird, MD  
Nate Selden, MD  Doernbecher Children’s Hospital  
Oregon Health & Science University  
Herbert Fuchs, MD, PhD  Duke Children’s Hospital  
Duke Univ. School of Medicine  
Paul Klimo, MD  LeBonheur Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. Tennessee School of Medicine  
J. Gordon McComb, MD  
Mark Krieger, MD  Los Angeles Children’s Hospital/  
USC School of Medicine  
Gerald Grant, MD  Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital  
Stanford University School of Medicine/  
Tord Alden, MD  Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago/  
Northwestern Univ. Medica l School  
David Daniels , MD  Mayo Eugenio Litta Children’s Hospital  
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine  
Toba Niazi, MD  
John Ragheb, MD  Miami Children’s Hospital/  
University of Miami School of Medicine  
Richard Anderson, MD  Morgan Stanley Children’s Hospital/  
Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons  
Jay Wellons, MD  
Chevis Shannon, MBA, MPH, DrPH  Monroe Carrell Jr. Children’s Hospital  
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine  
Jeffrey Leonard, MD  Nationwide Children’s Hospital/  
The Ohio State Univ.  College of Medicine  
Mark Iantosca, MD  Penn State Hershey Children’s Hospital/  
Pennsylvania State School of Medicine  
David Adelson, MD  Phoenix Children’s Hospital/  
Barrow Neurological Institute  
Doug Brockmeyer, MD  Primary Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of U tah School of Medicine  
Jeffrey Ojemann, MD  
Richard Ellenbogan, MD  Seattle Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of Washington School of Medicine  
Prithvi Naryan, MD  St. Christopher Children’s Hospital  
David Limbrick, MD, PhD  St. Louis Children’s Hospital/  
Washington Univ. School of Medicine  
William Whitehead, MD  
Robert Dauser, MD  Texas Children’s Hospital/  
Baylor Univ. School of Medicine  
Greg Albert, MD  Arkansas Children’s Hospital/  
Univ. of Arkansas School of Medicine  
David Bauer, MD  Children’s Hospital  at Dartmouth -Hitchcock  
Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 57 Jeffrey Greenfield, MD  Children’s Hospital of New York -
Presbyterian/Weill Cornell/  
Cornell University Medical College  
Michael Partington, MD  Gillette Children’s Hospital  
Minnesota  
Eric Jackson,  MD Johns Hopkins Children’s Center  
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine  
Scott Wait, MD  Levine Children’s Hospital/  
Carolinas Medical Center  
Ramin Eskandari, MD  MUSC Children’s Hospital/  
Medical Univ. of South Carolina  
School of Medicine  
Amanda Yaun, MD  The Children’s Hospital at OU Medical 
Center  
Oklahoma Univ. College of Medicine  
Susan Durham, MD  Univ. of Vermont Children’s Hospital  
Univ. of Vermont College of Medicine  
 
 
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Board  
 
 
  Name  Position  Affiliation  Role  
Philippe  Mercier  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  St. Louis University  Chair  
Ken Schechtman  Biostatistician  Washington University  Member  
Alison Antes  Clinical/research 
ethicist  Washington University  Member  
Sandy Spears  Patient Partner  Patient/Family Partner  Member  
Alex Weil  Pediatric  
Neurosurgeon  CHU Sainte -Justine 
Hospital  Member  
Tammy Bethel -
Anderson  Data Monitor  Washington University  Executive 
Secretary (non -
voting member)  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 58  
Adjudication Committee  
 
 
 
  Name  Position  Affiliation  Role  
Patrick McDonald  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  Winnipeg Children’s 
Hospital  Chair  
Sumit Pruthi  Pediatric 
Neuroradiologist  Monroe Carre ll Children’s 
Hospital  
Vanderbilt University  Member  
Michael Levy  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  Rady Children’s Hospital  
UCSD School of Medicine  Alternate  
Tim Vogel  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  North Jersey Brain and 
Spine Center/ Hackensack 
University Medical Center  Alternate  
Gary Tye  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  Virginia Commonwealth 
University  Alternate  
Anthony Wang  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  UCLA Medical Center  Alternate  
Sandeep Sood  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  Pediatric Neurosurgery 
Group, Detroit Michigan &  
Wayne State University  Alternate  
Krystal Tomei  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  UH Rainbow babies & 
Children ’s Hospital  
Case Western Reserve 
University  Alternate  
Jay Rivera -
Cambria  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  University of Utah/Primary 
Children’s Hospital  Alternate  
Dale Swift  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  UT Southwestern  Alternate  
Catherine A. 
Mazzola  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  New Jersey Pediatric 
Neuroscience Institute  Alternate  
John Collins  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  New Jersey Pediatric 
Neuroscience Institute  Alternate  
Alex Weil  Pediatric 
Neurosurgeon  CHU Sainte -Justine and 
Center hospitalier de 
l'Université de Montréal  Alternate  
PCORI CER -1503 -29700  
Version 6 March 01, 2021 
 59 Appendix III  
 
Screening Log  
 
Institution:_______________________  
PI:______________________________  
Site Number:__________  
 
Instructions:  
Column 1: Enter subject number (start with 001, 002, 003, etc.).  
Column 2: Document reason not consented even though eligible.  
Column 3: The researc her entering this information acknowledges with his/her initials.  
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   