VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  1 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beige Fat, Energy, and the Natriuretic Peptide 
System  
 
 
Talat Alp Ikizler, M.D. FASN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  2 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Hum an Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusi on Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discont inuation  
10.0  Statistical Conside rations  
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  3 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 1.0 Background  
 
Obesity and obesity -related complications are leading causes of morbidity 
and mortality among Veterans . Obese individuals experience a markedly  increased 
risk of cardiovas cular and metabolic (“cardiometabolic”) diseases – including diabetes, 
hypertension, and coronary artery disease. The rising prevalence of these problems 
despite current therapies supports that obesity is a multifactorial disease  and highlights 
the need for  novel approaches to treat obesity -related cardiometabolic dysfunction.  
Evidence from genetic studies in animals and humans indicate that the 
natriuretic peptide (NP) system may protect against cardiometabolic risk. The 
NPs are cardiac derived hormones, cl assically recognized for their role in the regulation 
of blood pressure and volume status. In recent years, animals studies and human 
genetic investigation have demonstrated that higher genetically -determined NP levels 
protect a gainst  development of hyper tension, obesity, Type 2 diabetes, and metabolic 
syndrome.1, 2 Further, administration of B -type natriuretic peptide (BNP) to wild -type 
mice leads to increased thermogenic gene expressio n in brown as well as white adipose 
depots, increased energy expenditure, and reduced fat accumulation.3 The increase in 
thermogenic gene expression in white adipose tissue reflects the development of 
“brown -like” or “beige” adipose tissue (a  process referred to as “beiging”) . Brown and 
beige adipose tissue increase energy expenditure by dissipating energy as heat 
(thermogenesis) through the actions of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1).4  Promoting the 
development of a beige adipose phenotype could potentially lead to increases in energy 
expendi ture, promote weight loss, a nd improve insulin sensitivity in obesity . 
NP levels are lower in obese compared with lean individuals,5 and in black 
compared with white individuals,6, 7 in human epidemio logic investigations.  
This suggests that low circulating NP levels may reflect a relative NP deficiency in obese 
and black individuals. As the NP system appears to protect against cardiometabolic risk, 
a relative NP deficiency c ould contribute to adverse c ardiometabolic outcomes observed 
in obese and black individuals. Whether a relative NP deficiency in these groups is 
associated with reduced thermogenic gene expression and lower energy expenditure is 
not well understood . 
 
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
NP levels differ by obesity status and race in epidemiologic studies, and NPs 
appear to promote “beiging” of adipose tissue in animals. However, whether 
gene expression of beige adipose tissue differs by obesity status and race has  
not been established in hum ans. Human mechanistic studies investigating the 
relationships of beige adipose tissue markers with obesity status, race, and the 
natriuretic peptide system are limited. We propose an innovative physiologic study in 
which we wil l quantify adipose tissue ge ne expression and energy expenditure in states 
of relative NP deficiency in humans, namely in obese and black individuals. Our 
overarching postulate is that obese and black individuals have NP deficiencies that 
contribute to les s beige adipose tissue and l ower energy expenditure.  Thus, we propose 
the following aims:  
 
 
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  4 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 Aim 1: Determine whether beige adipose tissue markers differ between 
obese and lean individuals.  
We plan to enroll and conduct subcutaneous adipose biopsies on approximately  155 
adult partic ipants (aged 18 -55 years ; approximately 50 le an and 105 obese 
participants ).  We will quantify expression of genes indicative of “beiging” in 
subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies and determine whether gene expression differs 
based on obesity status. In a s econdary analysis, we will determine whether these 
beige adipose tissue markers differ by race.  
 
Aim 2: Determine whether beige adipose tissue markers and energy 
expenditure are associated with natriuretic peptide receptor expr ession in 
adipose tissue and  circulating natriuretic peptide levels. We w ill examine these 
associations in approximately 155 adult participants, as described in Aim 1.  
Secondary Aims:  
-Determine whether adipose tissue gene expression profiles suggestive of beiging 
differ by race.  
-Determine whether obesity -related difference s in beige fat are attributable to 
differences in NP markers . 
  -Examine associations of adipose tissue pheno types with cardiometabolic parameters . 
 
 
3.0 Anima l Studies and Previous Human  Studies  
 
The natriuretic pe ptide (NP) system and metabolism  
 
The NP system is classically known for its role regulating blood pressure and 
volume status . In response to increased ca rdiac wall stress, the heart secretes atrial 
natriuretic peptide (ANP) and  BNP, which both cause natri uresis, vasodilation, and 
inhibition of the renin -angiotensin -aldosterone system. Thus, the biologic actions of the 
NPs serve to reduce blood pressure. Bo th ANP and BNP bind to their target receptor, 
NPR-A, and are cleared by th e clearance receptor, NPR -C.1 NP receptors are widely 
present throughout the cardiovascular system, as well as in adipose tissue, skeletal 
muscle, liver, brain, and gut.  
Although the NP  system is classically known  for its role in blood press ure 
regulation, recent studies have shown that NPs have important metabolic 
actions as well . Administration of NPs stimulate lipolysis in animals and huma ns.8-11 
Transgenic mice that ove rexpress BNP are protected a gainst weight gain, visceral fat 
accumulation, and insulin resistance induced by high -fat diets.1 Moreover, Bord iccia et 
al. demonstrated in wild -type mice th at BNP administration over 7  days significantly 
increase s energy expenditure and oxygen consumption.3 The increases in energy 
expenditure and oxygen consumption appear to be mediated by increased expression of 
thermogenic genes (including UCP 1) in brown adipose tissue, as well as white adipose 
tissue.3 The increase in thermogenic gene expression in white adipose tissue reflects t he 
development of beige fat.  
 
 
 
 
The NP system , obesity, and cardiometabol ic risk  
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  5 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
  
The NP system may p rotect against cardiometabolic risk. In humans, a common 
genetic variant resulting in ~10 -20% higher NP concentrations (still within the 
physiologic range ) is associated with lower prevalence of hyper tension (by 15%),2 
obesity (by 46%), and metabolic syndrome (by 42%), and a lower risk of developing 
Type 2 diabetes (by 12%).12, 13 Moreover, this genetic variant that cau ses higher NP 
levels is asso ciated with favorable cardio vascular biomarkers and a lower prevalence of 
myocardial infarction.12 Conversely, humans with a genetic variant  leading to lower NP 
levels exhibit higher ris k of hypertension, future T2 DM,12, 13 and evidence of adverse 
cardiac remodeling.14 These data strongly suggest that the NP sy stem may protect 
against cardiometabolic risk.  
 
Obese and black individual s have low circulating NP le vels,5 which appears to 
reflect a relative “NP deficiency.” Multiple large cohort studies have demonstrated 
that NP levels are lower in obese compared with le an individuals,5 and in black 
compared with white individuals.6, 7 Obese and black individuals have a propensity 
toward hypert ension, which would be expected to cause highe r circulating NP 
concentrati ons. Thus, the lower NP conc entrations in obese and black individuals are 
physiologically inappropriate and likely reflect a relative NP deficiency. As the NP system 
appears to prote ct against cardiometabolic risk, a relative NP  deficiency could raise 
susceptibility to the adverse ca rdiometabolic outcomes observed in obese and black 
individuals. The reasons for the low NP levels in obese and black individuals are not 
entirely known.  One proposed mechanism for the low NP concentr ations in obesity is 
enhance d NP clearance in adipose ti ssue. Obese individuals have been found to have 
higher expression of the NP clearance receptor in adipose tissue compared with lean 
individuals.15 Despite the se associations, thermogenic  gene expression in adipose tissue 
and whole body energy expenditure in these relatively NP deficient groups are not well 
characterized and understood.  
 
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
We will enroll and conduct subcutaneous adipose  biopsies on approximatel y 155 
participant s (approxim ately 50 lean subjects (18. 5≤BMI<25 kg/m2) and approximately 
105 obese subjects (BMI≥30 kg/m2)). Full eligibility criteria are listed below.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Men and women ages 18 -55 years  
• Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥18.5 and <25 kg/m2 (lean), or BMI ≥30 kg/m2 
(obese)  
 
Exclusion Cr iteria:  
• Significant pulmonary, liver, or renal disease  
• Heart failure (any type) , unstable coronary artery disease  currently, or history 
of significant cardiac event or stroke within 12 months  
• Diabetes Mellitus (Types 1 and 2)  
• Thyroid dysfunction  
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  6 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 • Active ma lignancy  
• Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease, hepatitis, 
rheumatoid arthritis  
• Current use of medications likely to affect energy homeostasis, including 
amphetamines and beta blockers , and significant use of systemic 
glucocorti coids 
• Currently pregnant or breastfeeding, or unwilling to avoid becoming pregnant or 
breastfeeding during study duration  
• Significant claustrophobia that would prevent the use of the metabolic cart as 
part of the study protocol  
• Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) ≥6.5%  
• Liver Function Tests (LFTs) elevated >3x upper limit of normal  
• Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (eGFR) <40 ml/min  
 
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
Recruitment will take place at Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (TVHS) outpatient 
clinics, community -based outpatient clinics, veteran centers, veteran service 
organizations,  Fort Campbell,  and Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC).  All 
patients coming for outpatient services at TVHS may be considered.  We will place IRB 
approved flyers and brochures in t arget clinics, veteran centers,  Fort Campbell,  and 
community boards (electronic and physical) with basic study information and study team 
contact information for potential subjects to signal potential interest.  Working with the 
VA Public Affairs office, w e will utilize their advertisement services such as waiting lobby 
TV advertisements, VA web homepage announcements, newspaper , and email 
distribution lists to veterans . A link may also be posted on My HealtheVet. We will also 
screen medical records in CPRS  system  (including data linked to CPRS through JLV and 
VISTA) .  VA subjects, once identified through the CPRS system, will be sent recruitment 
letters about participation in the study. The recruitment letters may be followed by a 
phone call to the particip ant.  Study personnel may also approach possible study 
participants in clinic once permission is received by that subject’s provider. Providers and 
clinic teams members within the VA or non -VA medical centers may also send referrals 
to the study team. Subjects may also be recruited using My HealthEVet and the VINCI 
system. S ubjects may also be recruited via the Vanderbilt Broadcast email system 
(research.notifications@vanderbilt.edu ). ResearchMatch.org may be utilized as a 
recruitment tool for this protocol .  ResearchMatch.org is a national electronic, web -
based recruitment tool that was created through the Clinical & Translational Science 
Awards Consortium in 2009 and is maintained at Vanderbilt University as an IRB -
approved data repository. Study personnel  may also use a VA -issued phone to 
communicate with recruited subjects (including phone calls and text messages for 
appointment reminders and logistical information). Text messages will not include any 
patient identifiers.   
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  7 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 Due to recruitment setbacks rel ated to COVID -19, some samples and data previously 
collected from another study, Cardiovascular Effects of GLP -1 Receptor Activation (P.I., 
Dr. J. Matthew Luther ( Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC)  IRB# 170213, 
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03 101930) will be  included to help meet our enrollment 
goals for the obese subject population. In this prior study ( VUMC IRB# 170213), obese 
individuals underwent the same study procedures that we are performing in the present 
study as outlined below (subcut aneous adipose tissue biopsy, indirect calorimetry, DXA 
body composition scan), and thus the samples/data have already been collected. These 
samples were of similar inclusion criteria as the currently recruiting study, with the 
minor adjustment of age crit eria of up to 65 years of age.  For the prior study ( VUMC 
IRB#170213), subjects signed a consent form which indicated their consent for their 
samples/data to be used for future research.  Samples provided from this study will be 
de-identified for our use. There are approximately 122  obese  individuals from this prior 
study with available  baseline samples/data relevant  to any  of our en dpoints , of whom 
approximat ely 80 individuals have adipose biopsy data ( our primary endpoi nt). The 
inclusion of these samples wi ll enable us to analyze baseline data for approximately 105 
obese subjects with adipose b iopsy data  (primary endpoint)  (from the subjects that we 
are able to personall y recruit, as well as the previously collected samples /data from the 
prior study).  
 
 
6.0 Stud y Procedures  
 
Screeni ng Visit  
After informed consent has been obtained, the subject’s medical history and medications 
will be discussed and documented. A physical exam, inc luding measurement of height, 
weight, and vital signs, will be performed.  Blood wil l be collected for a comprehensive 
metabolic panel, complete blood count (CBC), Hemoglobin A1c, thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH), and free T4. A urine or serum pregnancy t est will be completed on 
female subjects of child -bearing potential. Whenever possib le, we will combine t hese 
research screening tasks and procedures with standard of care tasks and procedures to 
decrease the burden placed on the patient. This information will be acceptable from 
standard of care visits as far back as 6 months prior to the  day the patient is i dentified 
as a possible candidate. Even if the patient has had these assessments completed 
during a standard of care visit, it is up to the discretion of the Princip al Investigator to 
use them or require an updated set of assessments. The Study Investigato r may also 
request a second screening blood draw to confirm eligibility. Inclusion/exclusion criteria 
will be reviewed to confirm that the subject meet s study eligibility requirements.   
Patients may be a sked to stop spironolactone and eplerenone , if the pa rticipant is using 
them for co smetic or excessive hair growth,  4-6 weeks prior to the study visit at 
Vanderbilt’s CRC , as these medications may affect the results of aldosterone and ren in.   
 
Study Visit  
 
Subjects will arrive at the Vanderbilt Clinical Res earch Center ( CRC) after having fasted 
for at least 8 hours. We will collect a urine sample, including urine sodium and 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  8 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 creatinine . Women of childbeari ng potential will undergo a pregnancy test. Subjects will 
then lie supine (flat on t heir back).  A fter ap proximately 30 minutes of lying supine , 
baseline resting energy expenditure will be assessed using indirect calorimetry 
(metabolic cart, described belo w).  At the completion of the metabolic cart , and while 
subject is still lying supin e, we will collect a blood sample, including basic metabolic 
panel, measurements of NPs and measurements of the RAAS system ( renin and 
aldosterone), insulin, glucose, and m arkers of lipolysis (glycerol, free fatty acids).  
Subjects will then undergo a subc utaneous fat biopsy, as described below.  
Subsequently gene expression will be assessed  for markers of “beiging” (including 
UCP1), as well as other  cardiometabolic pathways  including the natriuretic peptide 
pathways. Protein expression and histology may al so be assessed if suf ficient tissue is 
obtaine d.  Subjects will also undergo a dual -energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan to 
assess body composition.  In the event of sche duling issues, the DXA scan may be 
performed within about 2 weeks before or after th e main study visit. Subjects will need 
to remain lying supine for the majority of the study visit (about 2 hours, before and 
during the metabolic cart, blood draw, and fat biopsy).  
 
For women, these study visits will be scheduled to coincide with the foll icular phase of 
the m enstrual cycle to minimize the impact of hormonal changes on energy expenditure 
(EE) and on measurements of renin -angiotensin -aldosterone (RAAS) system .   
 
Other study procedures  
 
Phlebotomy : Blood draws will occur as outlined above.  
 
Subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsy:  Participants will undergo percutaneous 
subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies on the abdomen (peri -umbilical region). This 
procedure will be performed by a trained study physician or nurse practitioner. With 
the subject la ying in a supine posi tion, an approximately 10  cm diameter area will be 
cleaned with a chlorhexidine swab lateral to the umbilicus. A fenestrated sterile drape 
will be plac ed to establish the sterile field. Approximately 20 ml of 1% lidocaine will be 
applied to anesthetize the  skin. A small (approximately 0.5 cm) incision is made 
through the skin with a scalpel, within a few centimeters lateral to the umbilicus. Upon 
examina tion of the pa rticipant ’s body habitus, the trained proceduralist may choose to 
first infiltrate normal s aline into the subcutaneous adipose tissue if the  proceduralist 
feels that this may improve the success of obtaining sufficient  adipose  tissue.  Then, a  
TULIP 2.7mm liposuction cannula with a syringe attached is inserted and moved 
parallel to the skin at a rate of approximately 1 Hz without breaking suction and with a 
twisting motion. The sampling continues until a goal of approximately 10 ml of tissue 
(approximately 9.5 g) is collected. The syringe is then removed, antibiotic ointment 
applied, a steri -strip is placed, and the incision is covered with an adhesive bandage. 
The tissue will be rinsed from blood . Then, tissue samples will either be placed  
imme diately in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 degrees Celsius until analysis , or 
processed immediately . The bandages will be removed after 24 hours, and steri -strips 
are left in place until they fall off.  
 
Indirect Calorimetry (Metabolic Cart):  Resting ener gy expenditure will be determined by 
indirect calorimetry, using a metabolic cart (a  ventilated hood syst em). 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  9 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
  
Hemodynamic monitoring (blood pressure monitoring and heart rate monitoring by 
cardiac telemetry):  We will monitor heart rhythm and rate during t he study. This will be 
done by placing sticky pads (electrodes) on the chest. The st icky pads are connect ed to 
wires (leads) that hook up to a machine and display heart rhythm, rate and blood 
pressure.  
 
Substrate oxidation (lipid oxidation and carbohydrate  oxidation) : Respiratory exchange 
ratio will be determined  using VO2 and VCO2 measur ements, which is dete rmined via 
indirect calorimetry, and collected at the same time points as energy expenditure.  
 
Biomarkers:  Blood, urine, and tissue samples will be co ded for subject confidentiality.  
These samples will be measured for a wide array of  cardiometabolic para meters and 
inflammatory markers . Possible techniques include RNAseq and  metabolomics 
techniques. Additional samples will be frozen and stored for possi ble future 
investigation.  
 
Table Of Events:  
Procedure  Screening Visit  Main Study Vi sit 
Informed Consent  X  
Medical History & 
Physical exam  X  
Vital Signs, height, 
weight  X X 
Pregnancy test  X X 
Clinical Laboratory 
sample collection  X X 
Fat Biopsy   X 
Metabolic Cart   X 
DXA scan   X 
 
 
7.0 Risks  
 
Fasting : Inconvenience and hypovolemia. T o minimize risks of h ypovolemia, subjects will 
be instructed to drink plenty of fluids the day before the visits, and we will measure 
subjects’ blood pressure and heart rat e upon arrival for their study visits and during the 
study visits. Also, there is a potential risk of hyp oglycemia while fasting. However, the 
risk of hypoglycemia in healthy individuals while fasting for this amount of time is low. 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  10 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 Subjects will be monito red for signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia throughout the 
study visits.  
 
Phlebotomy : The risks associated  with phlebotomy in healthy individuals are minimal. 
Risks include pain, bruising, inflammation, and rarely fainting and infection. Other 
possible risk s include low fluid status in the body and anemia (low blood counts). Risks 
will be minimized by excludin g subjects with anemia or history of hypotension. Subjects 
will be advised to drink plenty of the fluids the night before the study visit, and after th e 
study visit.  
 
Hemodynamic monitoring (blood pressure monitoring  and heart monitor ing by cardiac 
teleme try): A non -invasive technique with no symptoms aside from possible minimal 
discomfort.  
 
Percutaneous subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsy:  The biopsy pr ocedure will be 
performed by a study physician or nurse practitioner trained in this  technique. The 
percu taneous subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsy procedure is associated with low risk. 
Possible risks of the biopsy procedure include pain, local skin irrit ation, bleeding, 
bruising, and hematoma at the site. There is potential risk for loc al or systemic infect ion, 
more severe bleeding, or a small scar; however, the risk of these events is extremely 
low.  
Lidocaine : May cause local discomfort during injection , or a rash, redness or soreness at 
the injection site. In rare cases, lidocaine cou ld potentially cause hypersensitivity 
reactions, confusion, or induce a transient alteration in heart rhythm; to reduce this risk, 
suction will be applied to the syringe pr ior to injection to ensure the lidocaine is not 
being injected into a vessel.  
Metabo lic cart:  This is a n on-invasive technique which involves placing a ventilated hood 
over the subject’s head for approximately 30 minutes.  The technique carries no risks 
other than possible minimal discomfort.  Subjects with history of claustrophobia will be 
excluded from the study.  
Dual Energy X -ray Absorptiometry (DXA):  Radiation risk is very minimal. DXA uses very 
low dose radiation, and the expected total exposure for e ach participant is in the range 
of 7 millirem, which is equivalent to approximately 9 days of background radiation.  
Subjects will be offered lunch after completing study procedures that must be performed 
in a fasted state (metabolic cart, blood draw, and abdominal fat biopsy).  
 
 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems invol ving Risk 
to Particip ants or Others  
 
Participants should and will be instructed to notify study personnel regarding any 
adverse events or unanticipated problems. Adverse ev ents will be reported to the IRB 
per IRB policy. Also, a ll serious and unanticipated  adverse events or pr oblems involving 
risks to subjects that may possibly be or are known to be related to the research activity 
will be reported promptly to the IRB office  per IRB policy.  
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  11 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 A Data Safety Monitor will monitor the study. The Data Safety Mon itor will provide 
ongoing evaluation of studies’ progress including patient accrual and retention and 
monitoring of adverse events. Reports will be submitted to the Data Sa fety Monitor  for 
review approximately every 12 months.  
 
 
 
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontin uation  
 
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time and should notify study personnel  in 
writing  if they wish to withdraw from the study. Subjects may request their bi ological 
samples to be destroyed at any time. However, any data or biological sample s that have 
already b een used for research cannot be destroyed.  
 
Subjects may be discontinued from the study at the discretion of the investigators’ 
(possible reasons list ed below).  
 
Possible reasons for withdrawal/discontinuation from study include, but  are not limited 
to: 
• Noncompliance with procedures  
• Decision by participant/participant withdraws consent  
• Loss to follow -up 
• Change in patient’s health status that makes them  no longer eligible for study.  
• Development of a significant medical condition specif ied in the exclusion criteria  
• In female subjects, becoming pregnant during study  
• Significant adverse event deemed by investigator to preclude continued 
participation  
 
 
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
 
Sample size justification : A total of 100 subjects will prov ide 80% power to dete ct a 
minimum difference between lean and obese groups of 0.7 units of UCP1 mRNA 
expression normalized for housekeeping gene mRNA gene expression (prima ry analysis ). 
This represents a metabolically meaningful difference of approximately  0.45 standard 
deviat ions between lean and obese groups. These calculations are based on a Type 1 
error rate of 0.05, and interindividual variations in UCP1 gene expression  reported in 
prior studies.16  Since there  is only 1 main study  visit, dropouts should not be an issue in 
this study. However, there is a low likelihood that some adipose tissue samples may be 
inadequate quantity o r quality.  Even if some adipose tissue samples are of insufficient 
quantity or qual ity, a sample size of  80 would still provide 80% power to detect a 
minimum difference between groups of 0.75 units in UCP1 normalized mRNA expression, 
which represents  a metabolically meaningful difference of approximately 0.48 standard 
deviations between lean and obese groups . 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  12 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 Of note, th e above  sample size calculation  was based on the original enrollment goal of 
100 subjects. Now that we have the benefit of including some samples from a previously 
completed study, our statistical power to answer our scien tific questions will be 
improved.  
Statistical Analysis : The primary analysis will determine whether adipose tissue gene 
expression of UCP1 differs between lean and obese i ndividuals. To assess this, we will 
use multivariable linear regression, with UCP1 g ene expression as the  outcome variable, 
and BMI as the independent variable. The multivariable linear regression will be 
adjusted for covariates that may impact markers of beige adipose tissue, including age 
and sex. The null hypothesis is that UCP1 gene e xpression will not di ffer based on BMI. 
Secondary analyses include whether UCP1 gene expression differs by race and whether 
expression of additional “beiging” markers  differ by obesity status.  Like the primary 
analysis, the secondary analyses are analyzin g a continuous outcom e variable.  Thus, 
the statistical approach for the secondary analyses will be similar to that described for 
the primary analysis . 
 
 
11.0  Privacy/Confidenti ality Issues  
 
Strict confidentiality will fully be maintained possible  by the resear ch team, including 
keeping all data in a secure location. All specimens will be de -identified and coded after 
they are obtained,  and the code key kept in a secure location.  Only study personnel will 
access to the data and specimens. Samples may be shared w ith third parties out side of 
the VA and Vanderbilt for future testing but will remain anonymous to the recipient.  
Subjects may contact the principal investigator at any ti me to request that samples be 
destroyed.  However, any data or biological samples th at have already been used for 
research cannot be destroyed.  
 
The Research Electronic Data Capture ( REDCap)  database is a secure web application 
housed on the TVHS VA secure d computer network and is password protected. REDCap 
offers secure institutional dat a hosting and include s full audit -trails in compliance with 
HIPAA security requirements. Only members of the study team will have access to this 
database.   
 
Adverse event reports and annual summaries will not include subject -identifiable 
material but only  the assigned study i dentification numbers.  
 
 
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
Anticipated study duration is 40 months. Research data will be maintained by the PI 
after stud y closure. After study closure, research data will be maintained for a minimum 
of 6 years and possibly in definitely. Data will be stored on a secure computer network in 
a password -protected database. Only members of the study team will have access. 
Pertine nt paper documentation will be kept in locked office and only study personnel  will 
have access. Only pers onnel directly involved with the study will have access to source 
data and the electronic database.  
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  13 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  14 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
  
References  
 
1. Miyas hita K, Itoh H, Tsujimoto H, Tamura N, Fukunaga Y, Sone M, Yamahara K, 
Taura D, Inuz uka M, Sonoyama T and  Nakao K. Natriuretic peptides/cGMP/cGMP -
dependent protein kinase cascades promote muscle mitochondrial biogenesis and 
prevent obesity. Diabetes . 2009; 58:2880 -92. 
2. Newton -Cheh C, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Levy D, Bloch KD, Surti A, Guiduc ci C, 
Kathiresan S, B enjamin EJ, Struck J, Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Blankenberg S, Kee 
F, Nilsson P, Yin X, Peltonen L, Vartiainen E, Salomaa V, Hirschhorn JN, Melander  O and 
Wang TJ. Association of common variants in NPPA and NPPB with circulating nat riuretic 
peptides and  blood pressure. Nat Genet . 2009;41:348 -53. 
3. Bordicchia M, Liu D, Amri EZ, Ailhaud G, Dessi -Fulgheri P, Zhang C, Takahashi N, 
Sarzani R and Collins S . Cardiac natriuretic peptides act via p38 MAPK to induce the 
brown fat thermogenic program in mouse and human adipocytes. J Clin Invest . 
2012;122:1022 -36. 
4. Cannon B and Nedergaard J. Brown adipose tissue: function and physiological 
significance. Physiol  Rev. 2004;84:277 -359. 
5. Wang TJ, Larson MG, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Leip EP, Wilson P W and Vasan RS. 
Impac t of obesity on plasma natriuretic peptide levels. Circulation . 2004;109:594 -600. 
6. Gupta DK, Claggett B, Wells Q, Cheng S, Li M, Maruthur N, Selvin E , Coresh J, 
Konety S, Butler KR, Mosley T, Boerwinkle E, Hoogeveen R, Ballantyne CM and Solomon 
SD. Racia l differences in circulating natriuretic peptide levels: the atherosclerosis risk in 
communities study. J Am Heart Assoc . 2015;4.  
7. Gupta DK, de Lemos  JA, Ayers CR, Berry JD and Wang TJ. Racial Differences in 
Natriuretic Peptide Level s: The Dallas Heart S tudy. JACC Heart Fail . 2015;3:513 -519. 
8. Polak J, Kotrc M, Wedellova Z, Jabor A, Malek I, Kautzner J, Kazdova L and 
Melenovsky V. Lipolytic effects of  B-type natriuretic peptide 1 -32 in adipose tissue of 
heart failure patients compare d with healthy contro ls. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology . 2011;58:1119 -25. 
9. Birkenfeld AL, Boschmann M, Moro C, Adams F, Heusser K, Franke G, Berlan M, 
Luft FC, Lafontan M and Jordan J. Lipid mobilization with physiological atrial natriuret ic 
peptide concentrat ions in humans. JClinEndocrinolMetab . 2005;90:3622 -3628.  
10. Birkenfeld AL, Budziarek P, Boschmann M, Moro C, Adams F, Franke G, Berlan M, 
Marques MA, Sweep FC, Luft FC, Lafontan M and Jordan J. Atrial natriuretic peptide 
induces postp randial lipid oxidati on in humans. Diabetes . 2008;57:3199 -204. 
11. Sengenes C, Zakaroff -Girard A, Moulin A, Berlan M, Bouloumie A, Lafontan M and 
Galitzky J. Natriuretic pe ptide-dependent lipolysis in fat cells is a primate specificity. Am 
J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol . 2002;283:R257 -65. 
12. Cannone V, Boerrigter G, Cataliotti A, Costello -Boerrigter LC, Olson TM, McKie 
PM, Heublein DM, Lahr BD, Bailey KR, Averna M, Red field MM, Rodeheffer RJ and 
Burnett JC, Jr. A genetic variant of the atrial natriure tic peptide gene is a ssociated with 
cardiometabolic protection in the general community. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology . 2011;58:629 -36. 
13. Jujic A, Nilsson  PM, Engstrom G, Hedblad B, Melander O and Magnusson M. 
Atrial natriuretic peptide a nd type 2 diabetes de velopment --biomarker and genotype 
association study. PLoS One . 2014;9:e89201.  
VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37212  
Protocol Version  #: 12  15 
Protocol Date:  07/21/2023  
 14. Vasan RS, Glazer NL, Felix JF, Lieb W, Wild PS, Felix SB, Watzinger N , Larson 
MG, Smith NL, Dehghan A, Grosshennig A, Schillert A, Teumer A, Schmidt R, K athiresan 
S, Lumley T , Aulchenko YS, Konig IR, Zeller T, Homuth G, Struchalin M, Aragam J, Bis 
JC, Rivadeneira F, Erdmann J, Schnabel RB, Dorr M, Zweiker R, Lind L, Rodehef fer RJ, 
Greiser KH, Levy D, Haritunians T, Deckers JW, Stritzke J, Lackner KJ, Volke r U, 
Ingelsson E, Kul lo I, Haerting J, O'Donnell CJ, Heckbert SR, Stricker BH, Ziegler A, 
Reffelmann T, Redfield MM, Werdan K, Mitchell GF, Rice K, Arnett DK, Hofman A, 
Gottdiener JS, Uitterlinden AG, Meitinger T, Blettner M, Friedrich N, Wang TJ, Psaty BM , 
van Duijn CM, Wichm ann HE, Munzel TF, Kroemer HK, Benjamin EJ, Rotter JI, Witteman 
JC, Schunkert H, Schmidt H, Volzke H and Blankenberg S. Genetic variants associated 
with cardiac structure and function: a meta -analysis and replication of genome -wide 
association data. Jama. 2009;302:168 -78. 
15. Kovacova Z, Tharp WG, Liu D, Wei W, Xie H, Collins S and Pratley RE. Adipose 
tissue natriuretic peptide receptor expression is rel ated to insulin sensitivity in obesity 
and diabetes. Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2016;2 4:820 -8. 
16. Finlin BS, Memetimin H, Confides AL, Kasza I, Zhu B, Vekaria HJ, Harfmann B, 
Jones KA, Johnson ZR, Westgate PM, Alexander CM, Sullivan PG, Dupont -Versteeg den 
EE and Kern PA. Human adipose beiging in response to cold and mirabegron. JCI 
Insight . 2018;3.  
 