   
 
1 | Page 
 
   
AlcHepNet  Consortium  
Clinical Study Protocol  
 
Protocol Title   
  
 
 
 
ALCOHOLIC HEPATITIS NETWORK OBSERVATIONAL STUDY   
 
Protocol Number  
AlcHepNet 01  
Version 3: March 9, 2021  
 
Primary Sponsor  
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
 
 
Participating Sites 
Indiana University, IN (PI: Kavish Patidar ) 
University of Louisville affiliated hospitals in Kentucky (PI: Craig  McClain),  
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center  (PI: Gyongy i Szabo), 
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (PI: Vijay  Shah), 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio (PI: Srinivasan  Dasarathy), 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in Pennsylvania (PI: Ramon Bataller),  
University of Texas at Southwestern in Dallas, Texas (PI: Mack  Mitchell), 
Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia (PI: Arun Sanyal)  
 
 
   
    
 
GCP Statement:  This study will be performed in compliance with GCP,  
including the archiving of essential documents.  
 
   
 
2 | Page 
 
  
  SPONSOR’S approval of the protocol  
 Reviewed and Approved by:  
    _____________________________                        ______________________  
Samer Gawrieh, MD            Date  
 Primary Investigator (Indiana University)  
     Investigator’s Affirmation  
 I have received and read the current version of the AlcHepNet -01 protocol.  I understand 
that no  data are to be made public or published without prior knowledge and written 
approval by the AlcHepNet Steering Committee.  By my signature below, I hereby attest 
that I have read, understood and agreed to abide by all the conditions, instructions and 
restrictions contained in protoc ol AlcHepNet - 01 and in accordance with Good Clinical 
Practice (CPMP/ICH/ 135/95), 21CFR Part 312 and all appl icable regul atory 
requirements. I acknowledge that the Steering Committee of the AlcHepNet Consortium 
has the right to discontinue this observational trial at any time . 
 
   ______________________________  
Investigator’s Name (Printed)  
  ______________________________        _______________________  
Investigator’s Signature         Date  
       
   
 
3 | Page 
 
  
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 Page 
Number  
Ethical Conducts of the Study and Regulatory Requirements  7 
Executive Summary  8 
Key Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  10 
Research Strategy  13 
Study Procedures  16 
Management and Storage of Biosamples  22 
Participant Compensation  22 
Participant Recruitment  22 
Development and Management of Data Collection  
 22 
Statistical Analysis  23 
Reporting Adverse Events  
 24 
Length of Study  
 24 
 
  
Tables 
 
Table 1:   Abbreviations  
Table 2:   Study procedures during the baseline and follow up visit  
  
   
 
4 | Page 
 
 Table 1: Abbreviations 
 
 
AASLD  American Association for the Study of Liver Disease  
AAH Acute alcoholic Hepatitis  
AE(s)  Adverse event(s)  
AGA  American Gastroenterological Association alcoholic hepatitis  
  
AH Alcoholic Hepatitis  
AKI Acute kidney injury  
ALT Alanine aminotransferase  
ALP Alkaline Phosphate  
AST Aspartate aminotransferase  
AUDIT  Alcohol use disorder identification test  
BL Baseline  
BMP  Basic metabolic panel  
BP Blood pressure  
BUN  Blood urea nitrogen  
CBC  Complete blood count  
CFR Code of federal regulations  
CLDQ  Chronic liver disease questionnaire  
CRA  Clinical research associate  
CRF Case report form  
DCC  Data coordinating center  
DCC -IU Data coordinating center -Indiana University  
dL Deciliter(s)  
DSMB  Data and safety monitoring board  
ER Emergency room  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
   
 
5 | Page 
 
 GCP  Good clinical practice  
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus  
HIV RNA  Human immunodeficiency virus ribonucleic acid  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICU Intensive care unit  
IgM Immunoglobulin M  
IRB Institutional review board  
IU/L international units per liter  
IV Intravenous  
MAP  Mean arterial pressure  
MELD  Model for end stage liver disease  
mg Milligram(s)  
mL Milliliter(s)  
mm Hg  Millimeter of mercury  
mmol/l  Millimoles per liter  
NAFLD  Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease  
NASH  Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis  
NDB  Nutritional database  
NIAAA  National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
NIH National Institute of Health  
PBC Primary biliary cirrhosis  
SAE Serious adverse event  
U/L Units per liter  
ULN Upper limit(s) of normal  
US United States (of America)  
Vs Versus  
WBC  White blood cell  
   
 
6 | Page 
 
 WIRB  Western Institutional Review board  
 
 
  
7 | Page 
 
  
1. ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY AND REGULATORY  
REQUIREMENTS  
 
1.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
The study protocol and any amendments will be reviewed by Western Institutional 
Review Board (WIRB). WIRB will review the informed consent form, their updates (if any), and any written materials given to the subjects. A list of all IRB and contact information will be included in the study  report.  
1.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
This study will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki, in compliance with the approved protocol, GCP and applicable regulatory requirements.  
1.3 Subject Information and Consent  
The investigator will obtain a freely given written consent from each subject or 
authorized representative after an appropriate explanation of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, potential hazards, and any other aspects of the study that are relevant to the subject's decision to participate. The consent form must be signed and dated by the subject before he/she is exposed to any protocol -specific procedure.  
The investigator will explain that the subjects are completely free to refuse to enter the study or to withdraw from it at any time, without any consequences for their further care and without the need to justify.  
The patient will receive a copy of the patient information and the signed informed consent.  
The patient will be informed if information becomes available that may be relevant to his/her wil lingness to continue participation in the study.  
Each subject will be informed that a monitor or a health authority inspector, in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements, may review the portions of their source records and source data related to  the study. Data protection and 
confidentiality will be handled in compliance with local laws . 
  
8 | Page 
 
 2. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Title 
ALCOHOLIC HEPATITIS NETWORK OBSERVATIONAL STUDY 
 
Study Type 
Prospective, observational study  
 
Investigational Sites Indiana University in Indianapolis, IN, University of Louisville affiliated hospitals in 
Louisville, KY, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in Boston, MA, Mayo 
Clinic in Rochester, MN, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, in Cleveland, OH, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center in Pittsburgh, PA, University of Texas at Southwestern in Dallas, TX, and Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, VA.  
 
Planned Number of Patients 
Approximately 1260 (720 subjects with alcoholic hepatitis (AH), 360 heavy drinkers 
without significant liver disease, and 180 healthy controls) will be enrolled.  
 
2.1 Objectives  
 
Primary Objective: To collect and store clinical data to facilitate investigations of the 
epidemiology, diagnosis, pathophysiology, natural history, and treatment of alcoholic  
hepatitis.  
 
Secondary Objective: To develop a bio- specimen bank comprised of plasma, serum, 
PBMC, saliva, DNA, urine, stool, liver biopsy and other biological specimens obtained from patients with alcoholic hepatitis, heavy drinkers without clinical liver disease, and healthy subjects to support translational research in the pathophysiology of alcoholic hepatitis . 
 
2.2
 Methodology  
 
Screening phase:  Subjects will be assessed for the eligibility criteria and a written 
informed consent will be obtained from the eligible subjects.  
Study phase:  Subj ects will undergo history taking, physical examination, 
questionnaire administration, and laboratory tests.  Biosamples including 
serum/plasma, peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMC) (at select sites), genomic DNA, stool samples (when available), urine, saliva  (until an adequate number of samples 
are collected from all sites) , and liver tissue (when available) will be obtained.  
Follow up phase: Al
 coholic hepatitis subjects will be followed for 24 weeks in study 
and then every 24 weeks for a maximum of 5 years, Heavy drinking controls for 24 weeks, and healthy controls subjects for 1 day (at initial meeting for baseline).  
 
 
  
9 | Page 
 
 2.3 Duration of the study 
Up to 5 years  
 
2.4 Biosample Repository 
 
Plasma/serum  
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) (collected at select sites)  
Genomic  DNA  
Urine (when available)  
Saliva  (until an adequate number of samples are collected from all sites)  
Liver tissue (when available)  
Stool (when available)  
 
 
 
  
10 | Page 
 
  
3. KEY INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
CASES: Heavy drinkers with alcoholic hepatitis  
Inclusion criteria  
1. A clinical diagnosis of alcoholic  hepatitis as defined by the NIAAA pan- consortia 
for AH:  
a) Onset of jaundice (defined as serum total bilirubin >3 mg/dL) within the prior 8 
weeks to screening visit  
b) Regular consumption of alcohol with an intake of > 40 gm daily or >280gm weekly on average for women and > 60 gm daily or >420gm weekly on average for men for 6 months or more, with less than 8 weeks of abstinence before 
onset of jaundice  
c) AST > 50 IU/l  
d) AST:ALT > 1.5 and both values < 400 IU/l  
e) and/or histological evidence of AH*  
2. Serum total bilirubin >3 mg/dL 
3. Subject or guardian ability to understand and willingness to provide written consent  
4. Age greater or equal to 21 years  
5. Re-enrolment of an alcoholic hepatitis donor is permissible up to 4 times if the 
donor presents with a new episode of alcoholic hepatitis 24 weeks or longer after 
the most recent enrolment  in the study  
 
Exclusion criteria  
1. Liver disease significantly caused by hemochromatosis, autoimmune liver disease,  
Wilson disease, and acute viral  hepatiti s (NOTE: The presence of chronic hepatitis 
C, hepatitis B,  HIV, or stage 1 (one lesion <2 cm) HCC  is not exclusion  to 
participation)  
2. Pregnant or breast  feeding  
3. Received liver transplant  
4. Based on the judgment of the investigator, subject is not capable of understanding 
or complying with the study requirements  
 
CONTROLS: Heavy drinkers without significant liver disease  
 Inclusion criteria  
1. History of chronic alcohol consumption sufficient to cause liver damage. Generally, 
this is considered to be >40 g/day or >280g/week on average for women and >60 g/day or >420 g/week on average for men, for 6 months or more, with less than 8 weeks of absti nence. Judgement about chronic  alcohol consumption will be made 
by the site investigator.  
2. Subject or guardian ability to understand and willingness to provide written consent  
3. Age greater or equal to 21 years  
 
Exclusion criteria  
1. Past evidence of alcoholic liver disease, defined as a bilirubin > 2.0 mg/dL, an AST 
> 1.5 ULN,  and any hospital admission for liver disease, or the presence of 
  
11 | Page 
 
 esophageal varices  or ascites (at any time in the past)  
2. Liver disease significantly caused by hemochromatosis, autoimmune liver disease,  
Wilson disease, NAFLD, and acute viral hepatitis (NOTE: The presence of chronic 
hepatitis C, hepatitis B, or HIV is not exclusion to participation.)  
*I ndividuals with a diagnosis of Gilbert’s can have total bilirubin up to 3.0 mg/dL and 
still be  eligible for participation.  
 
3. Alcohol intake at less than 40 g/day or 280g/week on average for women and 60 g/day  or 420 g/week on average for men for longer than the past 28 days  
4. If liver stiffness has been assessed within the prior 90 days, then stiffness suggesting fibrosis of F1 or greater is excluded. For Fibroscan, this is a fibrosis score >7.0 kPa. 
5. Received liver transplant  
6. Pregnant or breast  feeding  
7. Any of the following laboratory abnormalities within 90 days prior to signing the consent.  
a) Total bilirubin:  >ULN*  
b) INR: >  1.4 
 
Healthy Controls 
 
Inclusion criteria  
1. AUDIT -C scores of <4 for men and <3 for women (signifying no alcohol  misuse)  
2. Abstinent (consumption of less than one standard drink/week) during the 6 months prior to  enrolment  
3. Ability to understand and willingness to provide written consent.  
4. Age greater or equal to 21 years  
Exclusion criteria  
1. Clinical history  or laboratory  evidence of liver disease including  alcoholic  liver 
disease, NAFLD, hemochromatosis, alcoholic hepatitis, autoimmune liver disease, Wilson disease, hepatitis C, or hepatitis  B. 
2. Presence of diabetes (requiring treatment with oral agents or  insulin).  
3. Significant heart disease (prior history of heart disease, other than hypertension)  
4. Chronic lung disease (requiring chronic  treatment)  
5. Immune related conditions (such as Crohn’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, severe psoriasis,  etc.) 
6. Known infection with HIV 
7. Presumed infection, or use of antibiotics or other medications (e.g., corticosteroids)  
that would affect immune function, within the past 14 days  
8. BMI>35  
9. Current or known history of cancer (except in situ carcinoma of the cervix or adequately treated basal  or squamous  cell carcinoma of the skin) within  5 years  
prior to enrollment  
10. Received liver transplant  
  
12 | Page 
 
 11. Pregnant or breast  feeding  
12. Any of the following laboratory abnormalities within 90 days prior to signing the 
consent.  
a. Hemoglobin: < 10 g/dL 
b. Conjugated bilirubin: > ULN  
c. INR: >  1.4 
d. AST:  >40  IU/mL  
e. ALT:  >40 IU/mL  
13. Based on the judgment of the investigator, subject is not capable of complying with the study  requirements  
  
  
13 | Page 
 
  
4. RESEARCH STRATEGY  
 
4.1 Background and Significance 
 
Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is a complex disorder and its pathogenesis is a multi -
step and multi -factorial process that progresses through a series of histopathological 
changes [1]. More than 90% of drinkers develop alcoholic steatosis which is reversibl e 
upon abstinence.  
However, if alcohol abuse continues, the disease may progress to alcoholic hepatitis 
(AH) , advanced fibrosis, and cirrhosis in up to 10- 15% of heavy drinkers [2;3]. It is 
completely unknown why some heavy drinkers develop AH and what determines the severity of the condition. These questions can only be answered by studying sufficient numbers of patients with AH as well as heavy drinkers at risk for AH, and developing clinical studies testing basic pathophysiological  mechanisms.  
 
While alc oholic steatosis is a reversible condition, AH is associated with significant 
morbidity and mortality [4;5]. In mild cases, patients may recover with conservative medical management and alcohol abstinence. Those with more severe cases of AH; however, have a high mortality rate [6;7]. Using the National Inpatient Sample data, we reported that AH accounted for 0.7% of all inpatient admissions in the United States. The average length of stay (LOS) was 7 days and nearly 7% died during hospitalization. Of importance, hospitalized AH patients result in significant healthcare cost and utilization [8]. The average total charges during hospitalization for AH were $37,769; which was higher than that from acute myocardial infarction (~$16,200), acute cerebrovascular disease (~$11,100), and acute pancreatitis ($9,870). Costs per hospitalization and cost adjusted for LOS were higher in those who died during the hospital stay, presumably from more severe forms of AH ($84,642 and $11,754/day, respectively) [8]. These data were obtained during a period of time when current best therapy (corticosteroids or pentoxifylline) was in broad use [9]; thus, they confirm the disease burden of AH in the US and attest that better understanding of pathogenesis and treatment of AH are urgently needed to improve patients’  outcome.  
 
The collection of clinical information and biosamples in subjects with AH are very crucial to pursue research and advance the science in the field of alcoholic liver disease. The current protocol provides a system to uniformly obtain demographics, clinical information, and biological samples from AH subjects and well -matched 
controls with heavy alcohol use without clinical presentation of AH and heathy controls for future investigations. In addition, they will serve as the potential subjects to be enrolled in the future clinical trials of the AlcHepNet consortium.  
  
  
14 | Page 
 
  
4.2  Study Objectives 
 
Primary Objectives: To collect and store clinical data to facilitate investigations of the 
epidemiology, diagnosis, pathophysiology, natural history, and treatment of alcoholic 
hepatitis.  
 
Secondary Objectives: To develop a bio -specimen bank comprised of plasma,  
serum, PBMC, saliva, stool, urine, liver biopsy,  DNA, and other biological specimens 
obtained from patients with alcoholic hepatitis, heavy drinkers without clinical liver disease, and healthy subjects to support translational research in the pathophysiology of alcoholic hepatitis . 
 
4.3 Research and study procedures  
 
4.3.1 Target enrollment:  
 
90 patients with AH, 45 Heavy drinkers without significant liver disease and 22- 23 
healthy controls  will be enrolled at each site. They will be followed for 24 weeks 
following their enrollment. The cohort will be characterized demographically, anthropometric ally, clinically, through laboratory tests, and histologically wherever 
applicable.  
 
4.3.2 Definitions : 
 
Subjects with AH : We plan to enroll 720 patient with AH . The diagnosis of AH will be 
established on published criteria [6;10] and  this  is  based  on  history  of  heavy  
alcohol  consumption  (defined  as >40 g/day  or >280g/week on average for women 
and >60 g/day or >420 g/week on average for men for 6 months or more, with less 
than 8 weeks of abstinence before onset of jaundice) , clinical evaluation and 
appropriate laboratory testing (as defined as total bilirubin > 3 mg/dL and AST > 40 U/L). When the diagnosis of AH remains in question, a liver biopsy (if cli nically feasible 
and subject has no contra- indications) will be required. A sizable proportion of 
individuals with AH have co -existing viral hepatitis or HIV, and there is an unmet need 
in terms of understanding the nature of their liver disease and to develop suitable therapies. Therefore, we plan to enroll patients with AH in special population infected with chronic HBV, chronic HCV, or HIV.  
 
Heavily Drinking Controls: We plan to enroll 360 heavy drinking controls without 
significant evidence of liver disease at the time of recruitment. For this application, heavy alcohol drinking will be defined as >40 g/day or >280g/week on average for women and >60 g/day or >420 g/week on average for men  for 6 months or more, with 
less than 8 weeks of abstinence before onset of jaundice. Heavy drinkers, who have just become abstinent within prior 2 weeks, including those we convince to seek alcohol abuse/addiction treatment as part of the recruiting process,  are eligible for 
enrollment. The study team (investigators -coordinators) will emphasize to both 
  
15 | Page 
 
 alcoholic hepatitis subjects and heavy drinking subjects the importance of abstinence 
from alcohol and encourage them to seek an alcohol abuse/addiction treatment. We envision that some of these subjects will maintain sobriety and can serve to demonstrate the results of withdrawal from alcohol; some will relapse to drinking, and resemble non- treatment seeking heavy drinkers over 24 weeks. Control subjects must 
meet the following criteria: (INR < 1.4 and total bilirubin levels must ≤ULN (If bilirubin is increased due to a suspected Gilbert’s Syndrome, patient may be still be enrolled; (2) no prior history of known alcoholic liver disease; and (3) absence of hepatosplenomegaly (from physical examination or radiographic imaging) or stigmata of liver  disease.  
 
Healthy Controls: Approximately 180 healthy donors will be recruited to serve as a 
comparison group.   
 
4.
3.3 Recruitment of Subjects wi th AH:  
 
Subjects with AH will be site specific.  
 
4.3.3 Recruitment of  controls:  
 
Heavy drinking controls and Healthy Controls will be site specific.  
 
4.3.4 Matching strategies 
 
We will perform approximate frequency matching for recruiting control subjects using age, gender and race.  The purpose of frequency matching is to ensure similar enough distributions between case and control groups to allow for appropriate statistical adjustment in the analyses. For every 30 heavy drinking controls the Data  
Coordinating Center (DCC) will evaluate the distribution of age (categories: 20- 40, 41-
60, 61- 80, >80), gender, race (whites, blacks, others) overall and at each site. We will 
then compare that to the distributions of already recruited cases to determine if the distributions in age, gender, and race are similar. If the controls differ markedly, the DCC will instruct the coordinators to concentrate on recruiting the underrepresented groups in the control cohorts. The distribution of matching variables in the case and control groups will be re- examined periodically (approximately every 30 heavy drinking 
controls) and the control subjects will be recruited based on the updated distributions of demographic variables, as needed.
 
 
4.3.5 Variables and Data to be c ollected:  
 
We will collect the following clinical details from subjects with AH and their controls (as appropriate). The detailed data collection and the questionnaires that we will use 
are outlined in the case report form (CRF).  
a) Demographics and anthropometric measures: These variables characterize the 
study cohort.  
b) Medical History:  D etailed past medical history including prior history of AH. Specific 
  
16 | Page 
 
 attention will be paid to collecting family history of alcohol abuse and alcoholic liver 
disease and history of bariatric  surgery.  
c) M edicinal history: A medication review of prescription and over the counter 
medications wi ll be completed 
d) Detailed alcohol consumption history:  W e will use AUDIT, AUDIT -C and Time Line 
Follow- Back Questionnaires (TLFB) for quantifying alcohol consumption [11;12].  
e) Quality of life:  W e will use the Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire (CLDQ) for 
quantifying quality of life.  
f) Signs and symptoms associated with liver disease and routine laboratories. These 
include the presence of ascites, jaundice, varices, and hepatic encephalopathy. 
Additionally, the subject’s HBV, HCV and HIV status will be recorded, if  available.  
g) D iscriminant factor (DF), Model for End Stage Liver disease (MELD) score, and 
Child - Pugh score will be calculated [7].  
 
5. STUDY PROCEDURES 
 
The study consists of two parts, a baseline phase and a follow -up phase.  
 
5.1Baseline Phase  
 
All subjects: 
Patients will sign the consent and data will be collected on demographics, ethnicity, 
clinical characteristics, alcohol history, anthropometric measures, biosamples (Plasma/serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cells [at select sites], genomic DNA,  
urine [whe n available] , stool  [whe n available] , saliva and liver tissue [where available] 
will be collected and stored).  
 
5.2 Follow up visits  
 
Alcoholic hepatitis cases: will be seen at (week 4), (week 12), (week 24). During these 
follow- up visits, data on clinical characteristics, alcohol use, and biosamples will be 
obtained. If a patient misses a follow -up visit, the patient will be called and the data 
will be collected from their medical records (if available).  Cases will then be followed 
until the end of study after their final visit (week 24) by checking their medical record. 
Vitality status will also be checked via National Death Index to ensure survival status could be collected for subjects who could not be followed through medical record review.  
 
Heavy drinking controls without significant liver disease:  The second part consists of 
a follow- up visit during week 24, data on clinical characteristics, alcohol use, and 
biosamples will be obtained.  
 Healthy Controls:  Ther
 e will be no follow- up visits
  
17 | Page 
 
  
Table 2. Study procedures during the baseline and follow up visit.  
 
 
Procedures  Baseline1 Week 4 
(D15 - 
D56)  Week 12 
(D57 - D 
126) Week 24  
 
(D127 - D 252)  Every 24 weeks 
for a maximum  
of 5 years  
Source of data  Patient visit  
& medical 
records  Patient visit , 
medical records  
±phone call Patient visit, 
medical records  
±phone call Patient  visit, 
medical records  
±phone call Medic
al Records  
Group  AH, Drinking 
Controls, and Healthy 
Controls  AH AH AH and 
Drinki
ng 
Contro
ls AH 
Informed Consent  X     
Demographics  X     
Anthropometric 
measurements  X    X    X    X  
Vital Signs  X X X X  
Medical history  X     
Alcohol use History   X X X X  
Questionnaires3 X   X   X   X  
Con-Med Review  X X X X  
Events of Special 
Interest5  X X X  
General PE  X     
PE (liver -related)   X X X  
Blood tests and other procedures  
Hepatic Function  X X X X  
Basic metabolic panel  X X X X  
Hematology/CBC  X X X X  
Coagulation/INR  X X X X  
Infection screen2 X     
Imaging/X -ray2 X     
Endoscopy2 X     
Fibroscan or other4 X   X  
Pregnancy Test, Urine  X X X X  
Research  Specimen Collection + 
Plasma  X X X X  
Serum  X X X X  
Stool  (when available)    X    X    X   X  
Saliva6   X    X   
Urine  (when available)  X X X X  
Liver Biopsy (when 
available)    X    X    X    X  
PBMC (optional by site)    X    X    X    X  
DNA (if patient consents)  X     
Survival, from medical 
records, phone call or 
death indices      X 
1For patients with AH, data obtained prior to start of treatment for AH. If patient did not receive 
specific treatment for AH, then data obtained as early as possible after admission to hospital.  
2Data will be recorded only if it has been obtained as standard of care.  
3 Questionnaires include timeline follow back (TLFB), AUDIT - C, AUDIT, and  Chronic Liver Disease 
Questionnaire. TLFB will be the onl y questionnaire done at follow -up visits   
 4Assessment of liver fibrosis includes Fibroscan, ARFI, MRE and others, and will be recorded if they were 
performed as SOC.  
  
18 | Page 
 
 5 Events of special interest include complications of liver disease, such as variceal bleeding, new/worsening  
hepatic encephalopathy, acute kidney injury, new/worsening ascites, and infections.  
6 Saliva will only be collected until an adequate number of samples are collected from all sites. 
           + Specimen collection at baseline can be collected and processed 24-48 hours after enrollment  
 
  
  
19 | Page 
 
 5.2.1 Baseline Evaluations:  
 
Prospectively  enr olled  patients  will undergo  baseline evaluations. The below 
procedures/evaluations will be performed during the baseline phase:  
 
•
 Obtain Consent  
• Verify Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
• Obtain Background Information  
- Patient Profile (age, gender, race, ethnicity,  etc.) 
- Complications of Liver  Disease  
- Physical Examination  
- Medication Review  
- Family history of alcohol use/  complications  
- Liver Biopsy  History  
- History of alcoholism  counselling/treatment  
• Anthropometric Measurements  
• Vitals  
• Timeline Follow back  
• AUDIT/AUDIT -C 
• Chronic Liver Disease Questionn aire 
• Collect all samples below as outline in Table 2 
• Collection  of 60 mls of blood for research (Plasma/Serum and peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells [at select sites])  
• Collection of 15 mls of blood for standard biochemistry tests (CBC, Platelet count, 
INR and CMP) if not already completed as standard of care.  
• Collection of saliva  
• Collection of a urine sample (when available)  
• Collection of stool sample (when available)  
• Collection of liver tissue (when available)  
• P erform a Laboratory Examination All Subjects:  
An examination of the medical record for laboratory results of the following tests will 
be conducted. If the laboratory tests have been completed as standard of care within 
the timeframe specified, those results will be used. If laboratory results are not available, these tests will be completed as part of the baseline phase.  
 
Within 30 days of visit : 
- Complete Blood Count (CBC)  
- Hepatic Function  
- International Normalized ratio (INR)  
- Basic metabolic panel (BMP)  
 
Optional tests : (data collected only if completed as standard of care within the 
timeframe  specified):  
• Infection screen 
• I maging/X -ray 
  
20 | Page 
 
 • Endoscopy  
• Fibroscan  
 
5.2.2 Follow -up visits evaluations:  
 
Alcoholic hepatitis subjects and heavy drinkers without clinical liver disease controls 
will also be seen for a follow -up visit at  week 4, 12,  and 24 from the date of their 
“baseline visit”. At the follow -up visit the below  procedures/evaluations will be 
performed.  
• Physical Examination  
• Medication Review  
• History of alcoholism  counselling/treatment  
• Review of complications of liver  disease  
• Laboratory  examination 
• Anthropometric  Measurements  
• Vitals  
• Timeline Follow  back  
• Collect all samples below as outlined in Table 2 
• Collection of 60 mls  of blood for research(Plasma/Serum and peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells [at select  sites]) 
• Collection  of 15 mls of blood for standard biochemistry  tests  (CBC,  Platelet  count, 
INR and CMP) if not already completed as standard of  care.  
• Collection of saliv a 
• Collection of a urine sample (when available)  
• Collection of stool sample (when available)  
• Collection of liver tissue (when available)  
• P erform a Laboratory Examination All Subjects:  
An examination of the medical record for laboratory results of the following tests will 
be conducted. If the laboratory tests have been completed as standard of care within 30 days of the visit, those results will be used. If laboratory results are not available, these tests will be completed as part of the follow up visi t. 
 
- Complete Blood Count  (CBC)  
- Hepatic  function 
- International Normalized ratio (INR) 
- Basic  metabolic  panel (BMP)  
 
Optional tests : (data collected only if completed as standard of care within the 
timeframe  specified):  
• Infection screen 
• I maging/X -ray 
• Endoscopy  
• Fibroscan  
 
 
  
21 | Page 
 
  5.2.3 Exemptions to the Eligibility  Criteria : 
 
Exemptions may be allowed on a case by case basis for individuals narrowly missing 
the eligibility criteria. Exemptions may be sought either for cases or controls. Requests for exemptions should be initiated by the clinical center PI using an Exemptions Form which explains the rationale for seeking the exemption. Each request for the exemption will be reviewed by two investigators not associated with the site requesting the exemption. An exemption will be granted only if both reviewers agree to allow the exemption.  
  
  
22 | Page 
 
  
1. MANAGEMENT AND STORAGE OF  BIOSAMPLES:  
 
Plasma/serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, genomic DNA,  saliva,  urine (when 
available) , stool samples  (when available) , and liver tissue (where available) will be 
collected at individual sites and shipped on a quarterly basis to be stored at the AH 
Tissue Bank at the University of Massachusetts until they are needed for translational studies,  or the study is complete.  
 
2. PARTICIPANT COMPENSATION  
 
Participant compensation is site specific.  
 
3. PARTICIPANT RECRUITMENT  
 Avenues of recruitment will be site specific  for example: website, flyers, social media, 
craigslist, studykik, newspaper, and newsl etters.  
 
4. DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF DATA COLLECTION  
 
The data coordinating unit will be operated under the auspices of the Indiana CTSI 
Dr. Barry Katz from the Department of Biostatistics, with an MS level biostatistician and an experienced data manager will run the data coordinating unit. The data coordinating unit will work with the steering committee and other study personnel, and 
will be responsible for establishing and/or conducting the following:  
 
• Configure and set up the prospective, multicenter, observational study of 
patients with well characterized AH and suitable controls, within the 
CTMS/EDC as well as each of the smaller studies to be carried out by the consortium;  
• Design specific case report forms and set up patient calendar and schedule;  
• Review and test the system for the large prospective observational study and 
each of the smaller studies configured within the CTMS/EDC;  
• Define and develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) such as a process 
for paper - based or electronic data capture including instructions for data entry 
for participating sites, quality control procedures, data dictionary standards, 
reporting AEs/SAEs,  etc.; 
• Develop and implement study -specific quality assurance procedures to ensure 
data integrity;  
• Write a data monitoring plan for the observational study and the randomized  
studies;  
  
23 | Page 
 
 • Establish a process to facilitate/conduct audits for participating sites; audits will 
be done electronically and/or in person at the site, as  needed;  
• Provide appropriate training and/or educational material to project team 
members on specific aspects of each clinical study including data management 
and statistics; 
• Prepare an implementation (“go live”) plan for each study and facilitate this  plan;  
• In collaboration with the site study coordinators, provide assistance in the 
oversight of screening, enrollment, randomization, and data collection; this includes monitoring patient recruitment, compliance with visit schedules and  
retention.  
• Coordinate periodic protocol review visits to sites on as needed basis; 
• Monitor of study sites to ensure accurate execution of  protocols;  
• Prepare and distribute data reports to summarize performance of participating  
sites; 
• Prepare data monitoring, performance and safety reports for interim monitoring 
by the steering committee, DSMB, or governmental  agency;  
• Submit DSMB reports of adverse events to IRBs;  
• Perform final data audits and any necessary edits and prepare files for  analysis;  
• Coordinate data analysis with study and/or site deadlines;  
• Perform appropriate statistical analyses and provide overall coordination for 
preparing the analysis and results needed for submitting abstracts and manuscripts  
• Implement plans for final disposition of study  data 
• Monitor for adherence to agreed- upon patient close- out procedures  
 
10. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
Subjects’ demographics, anthropometric measurements, medical history, alcohol consumption, lab test results, MELD score, quality of life, and other variables will be summarized by groups (case vs. control groups) and by visits. Mean and 95% confidence intervals will be calculated for continuous variables for each group. Proportion and frequency will be used to describe the categorical variables by groups. Two-sample t -tests will be used to compare the continuous variables and Chi -square 
tests will be used to compare the categorical variables by groups at each visit. Appropriate nonparametric test will be used if there is normal assumption violation. All the tests will be performed using SAS 9.3(Cary,  NC). 
 
More  importantly, this aim serves as the backbone for conducting future clinical, 
mechanistic, biomarker discovery, therapeutic, and natural history studies. After a 
  
24 | Page 
 
 structured process of requesting ancillary study proposals from consortium 
investigators, submitted proposals will be assessed for feasibility and scientific merit. For studies selected, a formal statistical plan will be developed that will include statistical models and methods to be used to address each specific aim of the study. Methods may be simple parametric or nonparametric methods for two- group 
comparisons such at t -tests or rank tests or may involve complex multivariable 
methods such as linear, logistic, or Poisson regression modeling. Each proposal  must 
specify the primary and secondary outcomes. Sample size calculations associated with the primary analysis must be given, including clear specification of the outcome measure, error rates (Type I / II), minimal clinical important difference, and statistical power of at least 0.8. The expect amount and methods for dealing with missing data must be specified. Questions requiring longitudinal data analyses should apply statistical methods that account for, as applicable, time to events, repeated measurements, counts, or other discrete measurements. For time to event data, Cox proportional hazards regression model with appropriate covariates will be used. For hypotheses involving repeated measurements or discrete events, we will use either generalized linear models with generalized estimating equat ions or multilevel 
generalized linear mixed models with random  coefficients.
 
 
11. REPORTING OF ADVERSE  EVENTS 
 
Reporting of adverse events, unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others, and noncompliance will be reported to the Data Monitoring and Safety Board (DSMB), Western Institutional Review Board (IRB) and institutional IRBs when applicable per its Standard Operating Procedures.  
 
12. LENGTH OF  STUDY 
 
We anticipate that we can accomplish the target enrollment within the 5 years of funding cycle. 