  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  1 of 6 
 
 
Instructions  and Notes : 
 Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not be applicable to your research. If so, mark as “NA”.  
 When you write a protocol, keep an electronic copy. You will need a copy if it is necessary to make changes.  
 
1 Protocol Title  
Include the full protocol title:  Ecological Momentary Determinants of Sedentary Behavior  
 
2 Background and Objectives  
Provide the scientific or scholarly background for, rationale for, and significance of the research based on the existing literature and how will 
it add to existing knowledge.  
 Describe the purpose of the study.  
 Describe any relevant preliminary data or case studies.  
 Describe any past studies that are i n conjunction to this study.  
The unique attributes of sedentary behavior ( SB) (e.g., ubiquitous, habitual, socially -reinforced) and its link to 
cardiometabolic health risk have led to several studies aimed at understanding the correlates of SB . However, these 
studies have primarily focused on “static” correlates (e.g., built environment, income status, educational attainment, 
etc.) and have largely ignored the complex situational, contextual, and dynamic “in the moment” factors that can 
influen ce SB.  
 
The development of smart phone apps and wearable devices (e.g. Fitbit, apple watch, jawbone, etc.) within the 
technology industry has resulted in an increase in personal notifications to  stand or move more during the workday . 
These prompts may vary in medium (phone, email, watch), delivery (textual, visual, sound, vibration) and content 
(personalized, generic, short, long, motivational, educational, feedback). However, the extent to which these prompts 
actually reduce SB is not fully understood.  
 
The overall objective  of this set of exploratory studies  is to understand the personal, behavioral, environmental, and 
contextual factors that underpin SB and to systematically test a series of contextual prompt characteristics that may 
lead to subsequen t change in SB.  
 
The primary aims are:  
 
Aim 1. Using Ecological Momentary Assessment ( EMA ), we will determine which personal (e.g. fatigue, mood, and stress 
level), behavioral (e.g. watching TV, working at desk, and eating meals), environmental (e.g. being at home or work, time 
of the day, and weather) and contextual factors are associated with  SB. We will identify the combination of factors most 
likely to precede and proceed short (<30 min) and long (≥30 min) bouts of SB.  
 
Aim 2. Using a micro -randomized screening experiment, we will identify efficacious behavioral strategies to produce an 
acute (within 5 min of receiving the prompt) reduction in SB based on three factors : (a) behavioral target (sit -to-stand vs. 
sit-to-light physical activities (LPA)); (b) social effects  (group  vs. individual ); and (c) content (Target set vs. No target set ). 
Our primary outcome will be a change from a sitting behavior to a standing behavior within 5 minutes of receiving the 
prompts.  Furthermore, we will look at overall stand time (minutes), steps . 
3 Data Use  
Describe how the data will be used.   Examples include:  
 Dissertation, Thesis, Undergraduate honors project  
 Publication/journal article, 
conferences/presentations  
 Results released to agency or organization   
 
 Results released to participants/parents  
 Results released to employer or school  
 Other (describe)  
Data will be used for publications and conference presentations.  
  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  2 of 6 
 
 
4 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in your final study sample. If you are conducting data analysis only describe 
what is included in the dataset you propose to use.  
Indicate specifically whether you will target or exclude each of the following special populations:  
 Minors (individuals who are under the age of 18)  
 Adults who are unable to consent  
 Pregnant women  
 Prisoners  
 Native Americans  
 Undocumented individuals  
Inclusion criteria:  
Full-time employees, males or females, ages 18 -65, with sedentary working habits  (as indicated by >7 hrs/day of sedentary time at work in the 
Sedentary Behavior Q uestionnaire) , and are willing to engage in the study assessment and intervention for 10 weeks.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
Non-ambulatory, pregnant, non -English speaking, diagnosis  of psychiatric problems or taking psychiatric medications, and a medical history that 
prohibits prolonged standing.  
 
5 Number of Participant s 
Indicate the total number of participan ts to be recruited and enrolled : 20 
 
6 Recruitment Methods  
 Describe who will  be doing the recruitment of participants.  
 Describe when, where, and how potential participants will be identified and recruited.  
 Describe and attach materials that will be used to recruit participants ( attach documents or recruitment script with the appl ication).  
Participants will be employees of the Parking an d Transit Services (PTS)  at ASU , recruited in person by members of the research team. We have 
already established contact with PTS and they have expressed their support to this project (see supplemental document for letter of support).  
7 Procedures Involved  
Describe all research procedures being performed, who will facilitate the procedures, and when they will be performed. Descri be procedures 
including:  
 The duration of time participants will spend in each research activity.  
 The period or span of time for the collection of data, and any long term follow up.  
 Surveys or questionnaires that will be administered (Attach all surveys, interview questions, scrip ts, data collection forms, and 
instructions for participants to the online application).  
 Interventions and sessions (Attach supplemental materials to the online application).  
 Lab procedures and tests and related instructions to participants.  
 Video or aud io recordings of participants.  
 Previously collected data sets that that will b e analyzed and identify the data  source (Attach data use agreement(s) to the online 
application).  
  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  3 of 6 
 
 
This 10-week study has 2 main parts: ( A) an EMA study and ( B) a Screening exper iment. Twenty pa rticipants will be recruited for the 
study .  
 
Prior to the start of the study, participants will first have to complete an initial online screening survey to determine  eligib ility. All 
eligible participants will be requested to complete an online consent and depending on their smartphone operating system, will be 
sent instructions (see appendix D, E, F, and G) on how to download the smartphone apps that will be used in the study:  
 
Smartphone App  OS Description  
PACO  Android or 
iOS An open -source app designed that will be used to deliver EMA questions 
randomly throughout a participant’s workday.  
Daynamica  Android  An app designed to collect user activity and travel data using raw smartphone 
accelerometer and GOS data.  
Prox iOS An iOS app designed to capture real -time indoor (office) location through 
proximity sensors deployed around the workplace.  
 
Eligible and consented participants will be invited to a one -hour orientation  session where they will be given detailed i nformation 
about the study, along with answering any questions or concerns they may have. During this visit, proximity sensors will also be 
deployed to various key areas in the workplace (i.e., participant’s desk, lobby, kitchen, and conference rooms).  
 
Timeline:  
 
 
 
Throughout Parts A and B (weeks 1 -10):  
 
All participants in both part A and B will be asked to complete daily logs that will ask them of the time they went to work a nd got off of 
work the previous day, sleep time of the previous night and the time they woke up , and any work -related meetings that they had the 
previous day . In addition, they will be asked to complete a battery of assessment (see appendix A for list of questionnaires) at three 
time points in the study: at we ek 1, 7, and 10.  Participants will also be asked to wear the activPAL device on their thigh as an 
objective measure of sedentary and physical activities. They will be asked to wear the device continuously throughout the stu dy 
except for the interview weeks  (week 5 and 6). The activPAL will be dropped off every Monday morning and picked up every Friday 
of the same week.  
 
Part A (Weeks 1 -4): 
 
For part one, all eligible participants will be asked to download a mobile app , pre-programmed to collect ecological constructs. 
Proper instructions on how to use this app and what to expect in the following week s will be given and any questions from the 
participant s will be addressed (15 mins).   
  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  4 of 6 
 
 
 
Participants will receive  3 random EMAs  (Appendix B) per day throughout the 4 -week study. EMAs will only be sent during work 
hours ( 9AM-5PM). A total of 1 200 EMA observations (3x/day x 20 work  days x 20 participants)  will be collected . 
 
Part B (weeks 5 -9): 
 
Participants will be randomized to either receive or not to receive  prompts every work hour (8 per day ) via email , for 4 weeks.  A total 
of 80 p rompts will be sent to participants over a 4 -week period during their work hours  (9AM-5PM)  on workdays.   
8 Compensation or Credit  
 Describe the amount and timing of any compensation or credit to participants.  
 Identify the source of the funds to compensate participants   
 Justify that the amount given to participants is reasonable.  
 If participants are receiving course credit for participating in research, alternative assignments need to be put in place to  avoid 
coercion.   
For part A of the study, participants who complete  the entire 4 -week will receive a $20 gift card as  compensation for  their time and 
effort. In addition, participants will receive an additional $10 for completing at least 80% of the EMA questionnaires for that 2-week 
period (24 out of 30 EMAs), for up to $ 20 of additional compensation for the entire 4 weeks of part A . For part B of the study, all 
participants who complete part B will be compensated with a $20 gift card . Furthermore, participants will also receive feedback on 
their physical activity behaviors gleaned from the activPAL device.  
9 Risk to Participants  
List the reasonab ly foreseeable risks, discomforts, or inconveniences related to participation in the research. Consider physical, 
psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  
The proposed study presents no major risk for physical injury and does not involve any inva sive procedures. However, minor 
complications could still potentially arise:  
 
 Potential risks to participants include possible physical discomfort that may occur due to participation in a program focused  
specifically on increasing walking/reducing sitting time at the workplace, although standing/walking behaviors are totally 
volunta ry.  
 
 Participation in the study may cause some participant burden from the assessment questionnaires and prompts designed 
to reduce sedentary activity that they will be receiving multiple times per day (3/day). As these text messages  will be sent 
randomly  throughout the study period, it can cause disruption in the normal daily activities of the participants. However, 
these questionnaires are designed to be short (<1 min to complete) and easy to answer.    
 
 Any collected data (demographic information, answe rs to questionnaires, etc.) will be at risk for divulgation. Each 
participant will be assigned a participant ID number immediately after enrollment. All collected data will be stored a secure  
ASU storage drive, which is only accessible to the researcher.  
 
10 Potential Benefits to Participants  
Realistically describe the potential benefits that individual participants may experience from taking part in the research. I ndicate if there is no 
direct benefit . Do not include benefits to society or others.  
While no benefits to the participants in the study can be guaranteed, it is possible that participating in the study will help the 
individuals to  be aware of their physical activity behavior and develop strategies to decrease their sedentary behavior at the 
work place.  
 
  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  5 of 6 
 
 
11 Privacy and Confidentiality  
Describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects’ privacy interests. “Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on with 
whom they interact or to whom they provide personal information. Click here for additional guidance on ASU Data Storage Guidelines.  
Describe the following measures to ensure the confidentiality of data:  
 Who will have access to the  data?  
 Where and how data will be stored (e.g. ASU secure server, ASU cloud storage, filing cabinets, etc.)?  
 How long the data will be stored?  
 Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use, and transmission. (e.g., training, authorization of 
access, password protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of confidentiality, and separation of identifiers an d data, 
etc.).  
 If applicable, how will audio or video recordings will be managed and secured. Add the duration of time these recordings will be 
kept.  
 If applicable, how will the consent, assent, and/or parental permission forms be secured. These forms should separate from th e 
rest of the study data. Add the duration of time these forms will be kept.  
 If applicable, de scribe how data will be linked or tracked (e.g. masterlist, contact list, reproducible participant ID, randomized ID, 
etc.).  
If your study has previously collected data sets, describe who will be responsible for data security and monitoring.  
All staff will have taken the required online human subjects course on this topic. In addition, this topic will be regularly addressed 
during weekly staff meetings where staff will be encouraged to ask questions pertaining to this issue. All participants w ill receive a 
randomly assigned research ID number. A "key" will be maintained which links the participants to the previous identification.  The key 
will be maintained electronically (with regularly scheduled data backups), using data encryption procedures and stored on University 
maintained servers with electronic firewall protection. "Strong" computer passwords will be required to gain access to the ke y; 
passwords will be changed routinely. The PI and other senior level staff will have access to the key (m aintained electronically). 
These data will be password protected.  
 
The local smartphone data will be stored in an SQLite database, which is an industry -standard data management strategy that  
encrypts data and is not accessible to other s. 
 
The master list will be destroyed immediately after data are linked. The data will be de -identified.  Data will be retained up to a five 
years after the final publication from this work  and any paper files will be shredded prior to disposal. Electronic files will be delete d 
from all storage sites including back -up drives.  
  
12 Consent Process  
Describe  the process and procedures process you will use to obtain consent. Include a description of:  
 Who will be responsible for consenting participants?  
 Where will the consent process take place?  
 How will consent be obtained?  
 If participants who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the process to ensure that the oral and/or written inform ation 
provided to those participants will be in that language. Indicate the language that will be used by those obtaining consent.   
Translated consent forms should be submitted after the English is approved.  
  
SOCIAL BEHAVIORAL INSTRUCTIONS  AND TEMPLATE  
NUMBER  DATE  PAGE  
HRP -503a  12/21/2017  6 of 6 
 
 
A short c onsent will be obtained before the individual completes the  initial screening form online  (see attachment) to determine  
eligibili ty for the study. Any identifying information obtained during this time will be retained only if the participant is eligible.  If 
participant is eligible and interested, c onsent  for further study participation  will be obtained  virtually  through th e use of Qualtrics.  
 
During this  consent process, individuals will specifically be asked to consent to allow the research team to gather location data as it 
is a particularly personal type of data being collected. Participants will a lso be asked if they h ave jailbroken  their phone and to 
acknowledge, in writin g that their phone is not jailbroken . If it is, participants will be informed of the added data security risks and 
asked to initial their consent to participate, knowing this added data security risk.  Rooting or Jailbreaking involves allowing the user 
of the smartphone added privileges to the phone, similar to running programs as administrators in Windows. With a rooted (or 
jailbroken) phone you can run apps that require access to certain system settin gs. Note, rooting/jailbreaking a phone is a fairly 
lengthy process and thus, if the participant purchased the phone from a normal channel, such as from a cell phone company, an d 
did not actively root/jailbreak their phone, then it is highly unlikely that t he phone is rooted/jailbroken. Participants will also be told 
that they have the right to revoke access to these data any time during the research process.  
 
13 Training  
Provide the date(s) the members of the research team have completed the CITI training for human participants. This training m ust be taken 
within the last 4 years. Additional information can be found at: Training . 
CITI Training : 
 
 Matthew Buman completed on  09/25/13  
 Meynard John Toledo completed on  07/26/13  
 Sarah Mullane completed on 04/09/13  
 Eric Hekler completed on 09/29/2011  
 Sayali Phatak completed on 5 0/27/2014  
 Elizabeth Korinek completed on 04/17/2015  
 Kirti Das completed on 02/24/15  
 
  