 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Version 11 .0 
October 7. 2015  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 iMCC Protocol #: 17089  
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors  
 
Principal Investigator: Nagi Kumar, PhD, RD, FADA 
 Senior Member/Professor 
 Director, Cancer Chemoprevention 
 Moffitt Cancer Center &Research Institute 
 12902 Magnolia Drive 
 Department of Population Sciences −MRC −216 
 Tampa, FL 33612  
 (813) 745 6885 
 (813) 745 7185 fax 
 Nagi.Kumar@moffitt.org  
 
MD PI: Susan Minton, D.O. 
 Women’s Oncology 
 Moffitt Cancer Center &Research Institute 
 12902 Magnolia Drive 
 Department of Population Sciences −MRC −216 
 Tampa, FL 33612  
 Susan.Minton@moffitt.org  
 Primary Site Moffitt Cancer Center   
12902 Magnolia Drive 
 Department of Population Sciences 
 Tampa, FL 33612  
     
Co Investigators:  John Arrington, M.D. 
 David Evans, Ph.D. 
 Heather Jim, Ph.D. 
 Roohi Ismail-Khan, M.D. 
 Hyo Sook Han, M.D. 
 Hatem Soliman, M.D. 
 Loretta Loftus, M.D. 
 Julie Djeu, Ph.D. 
 
Collaborating Institution: University of South Florida  Paula Bickford, PhD  
 Brent Small, PhD 
  
Biostatistician:  Brent Small, PhD 
 Brent.Small@moffitt.org 
 
Clinical Research Coordinator : 
Adaixa Padron  
  Yvelise Rodriguez  
   
 
Data Manager:  Karen Diaz, CCRP  
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 iiIND Sponsor: Nagi Kumar, Ph.D. 
 Moffitt Cancer Center &Research Institute 
 Tampa, FL 33612 
  
Agent(s)/Supplier :  Anthocyanins (VitaBlue) & Lovaza (GSK) 
 
Original Protocol Date: October 3, 2012 
 
Protocol Amendment Date:  February 14, 2013 (Amendment 1) 
 May 20, 2013 (Amendment 1.1) 
 June 25, 2013 (Amendment 1.2) 
 July 16, 2013 (Amendment 2) 
 January 30, 2014 (Amendment 3) 
 February 10, 2014 (Amendment 3.1) 
 March 5, 2014 (Amendment 4) 
 April 4, 2014 (Amendment 5) 
 April 8, 2014 (Amendment 5.1) 
 May 1, 2014 (Amendment 6) 
 July 16, 2014 (Amendment 7) 
 November 17, 2014 (Amendment 8) 
 January 22, 2015 (Amendment 9) 
 February 25, 2015 (Amendment 10) 
 October 7, 2015 (Amendment 11) 
 Monitoring/Regulatory: Moffitt Cancer Center  
 
  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 iiiCONFIDENTIAL 
 This document is confidential and the property of  the Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute. 
No part of it may be transmitted, reproduced, published, or used by other persons without prior written authorization from the study sponsor. 
 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 ivSCHEMA 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors 
 
Screening (In person): 
(a) Within 6 months of  completing neoadjuvant or  adjuvant treatment with anthracyclines and/or 
taxanes + or – radiation therapy (subjects on concurrent endocrine therapy (TAM, Aromatase 
inhibitors are also eligible to participate as this is  standard of care for this patient population); (b) No 
evidence of dementia (MMSE >=23) but some eviden ce of cognitive impairment (each subject will be 
required to answer in the affirmative: ‘do you have  problems with memory and attention since having 
chemotherapy, and do you believe chemotherapy contributed to the problems?’); (c) Collect blood for  
CBC/CMP/PT/PTT, LDL and antioxidant and biomarke rs of inflammation; (d) Conduct Mini-Mental 
Status Exam 
If\yes- 
↓ 
Baseline/Randomization (In person):  
(a) Confirm eligibility based on screening tests; (b) Obtain baseline food records; (c) Complete 
Demographic and Godin Leisure-Time Exercise Questionnaires; (d) Conduct battery of cognitive 
tests including Weschler Test of Adult Reading, Hopkins Verbal Learning Test, Revised (Form 1), 
COWA (T1), Color Trails, Part 1 & 2,  Digit Sp an (Subset of WMS-IV), Symbol Digit Modalities 
Test, Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised  (Form 1), and Rey Complex Figure Copy; (e) 
Patient’s Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory (PAOFI); (f) Structural and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI/fMRI); (g) Complete questionnaires for symptoms of 
fatigue and depression (PHQ-9 and FSI); (h) Randomize and supply partic ipant with one-month 
supply of nutritional supplement (COGNUTRIN) or placebo (n=20/arm), multivitamin, and study 
agent intake and symptom logs 
↓ 
Intervention: 
 One of 2 arms, self-administration of nutritional supplement (COGNUTRIN) or placebo for 3 months 
 plus multivitamin 
↓ 
Weeks 3, 7, & 11: 
Remind patient to complete diet records and schedule monthly visits 
↓ 
Weeks 4 & 8 (+/- 7 days) (In person): 
(a) Collect blood for CBC, CMP, PT/PTT; (b) Coll ect unused nutritional supplement/ placebo, 
multivitamin, and  completed study agent intake and symptom log form; (c) Collect completed diet survey; (d) Supply  participant with new one-mont h supply of nutritional supplement or placebo and 
study agent intake  and symptom logs 
↓ 
Week 12, 3 months or 90 days (+/- 7 days): End of Intervention (In person): 
(a) Collect blood for CBC/CMP/PT/PTT,LDL  & biomarkers (inflammation/antioxidant); (b) Collect unused nutritional supplement or placebo, multivitamin, and completed study agent intake and symptom log forms; (c) Collect completed diet su rvey; (d) Complete Godin Leisure-Time Exercise 
Questionnaire; (e) Conduct battery of cognitive tests Hopkins Verbal Learning Test, Revised (Form 
2), COWA (T2), Color Trails, Part 1 & 2,  Digit Span (Subset of WMS-IV), Symbol Digit Modalities 
Test, Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised (F orm 2), and Rey Complex Figure Copy; (f) Patient’s 
Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory (PAOFI); (g) Structural and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI/fMRI); (h) Comple te questionnaires for symptoms of fatigue and 
depression (PHQ-9 and FSI) 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 v↓ 
 
Post-intervention Follow-up: (7 +/- 3 days post-treatment):  
Telephone contact to assess signs and symptoms and concomitant medications occurring post-treatment  
 
 
 
Endpoints: 
 
Primary:  Changes in cognitive function: Number of  impaired neuropsychological tests after 3 months 
of intervention with COGNUTRIN vs. placebo. Safety (Primary): Incidence and severity of 
adverse events 
 Secondary:  Changes in self-report measures of cognitive function. Changes in structural and resting-state 
  functional magnetic resonance imaging (fM RI) after 3 months of intervention with 
  COGNUTRIN vs. placebo. Changes in symptoms of  depression and fatigue with 
 COGNUTRIN vs. placebo.
  
 
Other:   Changes in inflammatory and oxidative stress biomarkers from serum and plasma cytokine 
panel including IL1, IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12, GMCSF (Millipore Milleplex system) after 3 months of intervention with COGNUTRIN vs. placebo 
 
   
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 viTable of Contents 
 
COVER PAGE……………………………………………………………………………………... i 
 
SCHEMA…………………………………………………………………………………………… 
iv 
 
1  BACKGROUND…………………………………………………………………………………  
1 
    1.1  Disease Backgro und………………………………………………………………………... 1 
 1.2  Etiology of Cognitive Impairment in  Breast Cancer Patients Treated with  
           Chemotherapy………………………………………………………………………………. 
1 
1.3  Current interventions for the Treatment for Chemotherapy-induced Cognitive      
           Impairment………………………………………………………………………………….  
1 
    1.4  Polyphenolic Antioxidants Agen ts and Cognitive Performance………………………… 2 
    1.5  Anti-inflammatory agents (n-3 fatty Acids) and Cognitive Function…………………… 3 
    1.6  Structural and Functional Imaging Markers of Cognitive Function…………………… 4 
    1.7  Rationale……………………………………………………………………………………. 4 
 
2  OBJECTIVES……………………………………………………………………………………  
4 
    2.1  Pilot Trial Primary Objectives…………………………………………………………….. 4 
 
3  SUMMARY OF STUDY PLAN………………………………………………………………...  
5 
 
4  PARTICIPANTION SELECTION…………………………………………………………….  
6    
    4.1  Inclusion Criteria…………………………………………………………………………… 7 
    4.2  Criteria for Exclusion………………………………………………………………………. 7 
    4.3  Anticipated problems with s ubject recruitment and retention………………………….. 8 
 
5  PHARMACEUTICAL INFORM ATION……………………………………………………...  
9 
    5.1  COGNUTRIN………………………………………………………………………………. 9 
           5.1.1  VitaBlueTM …………………………………………………………………………… 9 
           5.1.2  Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl ester s)……………………………………………….. 9 
    5.2  Rationale for Dose Selection and Administration………………………………………. 10 
           5.2.1  Study Agent……………………………………… …………………………………... 10 
           5.2.2  Blueberry anthocyanins (VitaBlueTM)……………………………………………… 10 
    5.3  Availability………………………………………………………………………………….. 10 
    5.4  Agent Distribution………………………………………………………………………….. 11 
    5.5  Agent Accountability……………………………………………………………………….. 11 
 5.6  Packaging and Labels……………………………………………………………………… 11 
    5.7  Drug Storage of Cognutrin (VitaBlueTM) and n-3 fatty acids…………………………… 11 
    5.8  Registration and Randomization………………………………………………………….. 11 
    5.9  Blinding and Unblinding Methods………………………………………………………. 12 
 
6  AGENT ADMINISTRATION………………………………………………………………….  
12 
    6.1  Dose Regimen and Do se Groups…………………………………………………………... 12 
           6.1.1  Placebo Group……………………………………………………………………….. 12            6.1.2  Nutritiona l Supplement Group (NS)……………………………………………….. 12 
    6.2  Agent Administration………………………………………………………………………. 12 
    6.3  Contradictions………………………………………………………………………………. 13 
    6.4  Concomitant Medications………………………………………………………………….. 13 
    6.5  Dose and Toxicity Ma nagement.…………………………………………………………... 13 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 vii    6.6  Adherence/Compliance…………………………………………………………………….. 16 
    6.7  Agent Destruction/Di sposal………………………………………………………………... 16 
 
7  CLINICAL EVALAUTIONS…………………………………………………………………..  
16 
    7.1  Schedule and Sequence of Data Collection……………………………………………….. 16 
    7.2  Evaluations during Screening visit………………………………………………………. 18 
    7.3  Evaluations During Baseline/Randomization Visit……………………………………..... 18 
    7.4  Evaluations During Study Intervention…………………………………………………... 19 
    7.5  Evaluations at Completion of Study Intervention…..…………………………………... 19 
  7.6  Post-intervention Follow-Up Period……………………………………………………... 19 
7.7 Methods for Clinical Pro cedures………………………………… …………………...... 19 
           7.7.1  Demographic Data……………..…………………………………………………….. 19 
           7.7.2  Anthropometric Measurements……………………………………………………. 20
          7.7.3  Physical Activity (PA)………………………………………………….…..………. 20 
           7.7.4  Dietar y Intake………………………………………………………………………... 20 
           7.7.5  Functional Markers (East ern Cooperative Oncology Group:  ECOG)………….. 20 
           7.7.6  Study Agent Intake and Symptom Log…………………………………………….. 20 
           7.7.7  Pill Counts……………………………………………………………………………. 20 
           7.7.8  Adverse Events Monitoring ……………………………….………………………... 20 
           7.7.9  Assessment of Cognitive Performance……………………………………………… 21
           7.7.10  Self-Report Measures……………………………………………………………  22 
            7.7.10.1  Depressive Symptomatology………………………………....... 22 
           7.7.10.2  Fatigue Symptomatology……………………………………… 22 
   7.7.10.3  Subjective Cognitive Function………………………….. 23 
           7.7.11  Safety Markers……………………………………………………………………… 23 
           7.7.12  Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress……………………………………………………. 23 
           7.7.13  Inflammatory Markers – Cytokines………………………………………………. 24 
7.7.14  Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Structural and Resting-state functional MRI…. 24 
 
8  CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AND ENDPOINT DEFINITION………………………..  
26 
    8.1  Primary Endpoint ………………………………………………………………………….. 26 
    8.2  Secondary Endpoin ts………………………………………………………………………. 26 
    8.3  Off Agent Criteria………………………………………………………………………….. 27 
    8.4  Off Study Criteria…………………………………………………………………………... 27 
 
9  SPECIMEN MANAGEMENT………………………………………………………………….  
27 
    9.1  Blood Samples………………………………………………………………………………. 27 
 
10  REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS…………………………………………………………. 
28 
      10.1  Adverse Events (AEs)……………………………………………………………………. 28 
               10.1.1  Re portable AEs…………………………………………………………………... 28 
               10.1.2  Data Elements……………………………………………………………………. 28 
               10.1.3  Severity of AEs…………………………………………………………………… 28 
               10.1.4  Assessment of Relationship of AE to Treatment………………………………. 29 
               10.1.5  Follow-up of AEs………………………………………………………………… 29 
      10.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)………………………………………………………... 29 
 
11  STUDY MONITORING……………………………………………………………………….  
30 
      11.1  Data Management……………………………………………………………………….. 30 
      11.2  Case Report Forms………………………………………………………………  30 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 viii      11.3  Source Documents……………………………………………………………………….. 30 
      11.4  Data and Safety Monitoring…………………………………………………………….. 30 
      11.5  Sponsor or FDA Monitoring.…………………………………………………………..... 30 
      11.6  Record Retention................................................................................................... .......... 30 
 
12  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATION………………………………………………………….  
30 
    12.1  Study Design/Endpo ints…………………………………………………………………...  30 
    12.2  Sample Size/Accrual Rate………………………………………………………………… 30 
    12.3  Randomization and St ratification………………………………………………………... 31 
    12.4  Primary Endpoin t…………………………………………………………………………. 31 
    12.5  Secondary Endpo ints……………………………………………………………………... 31 
    12.6  Evaluation of To xicity…………………………………………………………………….. 32 
    12.7  Evaluation of Re sponse………………………………………………………………….... 32 
 
13  ETHNICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS………………………………….  
32 
     13.1  Form FDA 1572…………………………………………………………………………... 32 
     13.2  Other Required Documents……………………………………………………………… 32 
     13.3  Informed Consent………………………………………………………………………… 32 
     13.4  Confidentiality……………………………………………………………………………. 33 
     13.5  Other………………………………………………………………………………………. 33 
 
14  REFERENCES…………………………………………………………………………………  
34 
 
 
  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 11 BACKGROUND 
 1.1 Disease Background   
Cognitive Impairment in Breast Cancer Survivors.  Treatment-related neurocognitive impairment related to cancer 
treatment is most frequently reported in breast cancer patie nt population who comprise 22% of the 11 million survivors 
today in the US. 
1 It is estimated that most of these women will be diagnosed with stage I to III disease, and a significant 
proportion will be treated with chemotherapy. Although the bene fits of adjuvant chemotherapy are well established, many 
cancer survivors are at risk for developi ng physiological and psychological late effects of cancer treatment that might lead 
to premature mortality and morbidity2 and compromise their quality of life.  One of the most common adverse effects 
reported by breast cancer patients after treatment is “chem obrain”, a phenomenon of cognitive impairment (CI) that is 
reported in 30-75% of patients treated with chemothera py for breast and other cancers and lasting anywhere from 6 
months to ten years.3-6 Although most standard chemotherapy regimens at standardized doses appear to not cross the 
blood-brain barrier, even mild toxicity to the Central Nervous System (CNS) has been shown to produce significant 
changes to cognitive function (CF).64 Additionally, although it was first thought th at CI that is chemotherapy-induced is 
acute and reversible suggesting a transient nature of th is phenomena, more recent studies have revealed cognitive 
impairment (CI) to be progressive and lasting anywhere from 6 months to 10 years post treatment in breast cancer 
survivors.2-6  Irrespective of baseline CF or type and duration of chemotherapy, there is consistent evidence of CI in 
patients receiving cytotoxic drugs for cancer treatment. 
 
1.2  Etiology of Cognitive Impairment in Brea st Cancer Patients Treated with Chemotherapy.   Several studies4-
10 in the past few years have hypothesized this phenomena of “Chemobrain” to be multifactorial and contributed by one or 
more of the following mechanisms - vascular injury, leukoencephalopathy, oxidative damage, cytokine-induced 
inflammatory response, direct injury to neuron, autoimmune responses, chemot herapy-induced anemia, abrupt steroid 
hormone deficit, hypothyroidism and the presence of the apolipoprotein gene.3, 7-9  We have reported prevalence of 
chemotherapy-induced loss of thyroid function8 which has been associated to decrements in working memory, and 
intentional and executive disturbances simila r to those observed in breast cancer surv ivors. In addition to the biological 
plausibility, others have proposed psycho-social factors such  as stress, anxiety, depression, fatigue, age, social support, 
education level and intelligence as other influential factors to CI.8 This study clearly demonstrates the multi-factorial 
nature of the etiology of this phenomenon and establishes th e need for multifaceted approaches to the treatment as we 
have proposed in this trial.  
 1.3 Current interventions for the Treatments for Chemotherapy-induced Cognitive Impairment.  Studies that 
hypothesize that CI may be attributed to symptoms of anemia have studied pharmacological interventions to treat anemia 
with recombinant human erythropoietin.
55 Although these studies have demonstrat ed an increase in hemoglobin levels, 
decreased fatigue and improved CF in those cancer patients w ith anemia, the small sample sizes, use of cohorts with 
various cancers and treatment regimens a nd short duration of interventions fail to  provide meaningful data as to the 
efficacy of this intervention.  In addition, new trials have provided further evidence against long-term use, cost-
effectiveness and side-effects with these agents, particularly  thrombic events.  Others have evaluated psycho stimulant 
methylphenidate53-54 in brain tumor patients and other adults, including breast cancer patients for treatment-related CI and 
observed significant improvements in CF compared to a place bo group.  However, the long -term safety of these agents, 
including impact on neurochemistry and the amphetamines-like e ffects continue to be a concern. Most promising,  is a 
single arm pilot study of a brief cognitive-behavioral treatme nt aimed at managing cognitive dysfunction associated with 
adjuvant chemotherapy (Memory and Attention Adaptation Training; MAAT) 52, which  reported that participants 
reported high treatment satisfaction and rated MAAT as helpful in improving abilit y to compensate for memory problems. 
With the recent understanding of the multi-factorial etiology of  CI, similar to those observed in CI related to aging and 
associated diseases, these structured CT stra tegies that have already demonstrated efficacy in aging and diseases related to 
CI, appear to offer promise for the treatment of chemotherapy -induced CI.  Over the past 25 years, several studies have 
demonstrated that among relatively healthy, older adults w ithout dementia, cognitive abilities can be enhanced through a 
variety of cognitive intervention techniques. 12-16-18, 27   These cognitive training techniques are particularly promising in 
that transfer of training and have been demonstrated to performance of Timed Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
TIADL, 19-20, safer on-road driving performance 21, and maintained health-related quality of life 22-23. Research has 
indicated that individuals, who exhibit slowed cognitive sp eed of processing as measured by UFOV, are most likely to 
benefit from and experience transfer of speed of processing training to functional outcomes 18.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 21.4 Polyphenolic Antioxidants Agen ts and Cognitive Performance.  
Oxidative stress and inflammation contribute to several organ toxicities, including neurotoxicities, after common breast 
cancer chemotherapy regimen. Doxorubicin and other plati num-based therapies have be en documented to cause the 
generation of free radicals and the induction of oxidative stress, associated with cellular injury.90  Although the debate 
continues as to the safety of antioxidant use during chemothera py to reduce oxidative stress, the utility of these agents to 
ameliorate treatment-induced consequences post cancer treatme nt, including CI has not been examined.  Much of the 
work using antioxidant agents in treating CI comes from the aging literature.  However, interventions to treat CI using 
antioxidant therapies with Vitamins A, C and E have b een disappointing as a treatment fo r markers of CI in cancer 
survivors, similar to those observed in the aging literature.56-61 Non-vitamin phytochemicals  such as polyphenols, which 
are the most abundant antioxidants in our diets have been shown to possess strong anti-inflammatory properties, as well as 
stronger antioxidant activity,27, 36-38,48-51,65-84 as compared to traditional antioxidant vitamins that have never been tested 
before to improve CI in this cohort.   
 Antioxidants, such as polyphenols, not only scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS)
91-92 but are also involved 
in modification of protein kinases, apoptosis signaling, and regulating signal trans duction via modification of 
cellular redox reactions.
33,86 Our group has shown that 
single and combination pol yphenolic compounds have 
demonstrated improvements on cognitive tasks such as the Morris water maze, radial arm maze (water and land), 
t-maze passive and active avoidance tasks, as well as 
classical eye blink conditioning tasks. Dr. Bickford
48 
established the precedent for cognitive improvement in normal aging rats with dietary supplementation of foods 
high in ORAC (Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity).  A co mbination of plant polyphenols containing a standardized 
formulation of grape, green tea and rich in blueberry extr act  (NT-020) (Fig 1) increase actions on the progenitor cell 
populations and to reduce inflammation and oxidative stress to protect primary neuronal cultures as well as microglial cell 
cultures from oxidative stress, in addition to  neuroprotective and neurogenic effects.
26, 36, 48-51, 93-98  In a recent experiment, 
we examined the impact of this combination polypheno lic formulation rich in BB anthocyanins (NT-020) on Morris 
Water Maze performance among young anim als (n =10), as well as older animals who received treatment of NT-020 (n = 
13) or a control diet (n – 13) for 3 weeks prior to behavioral  testing.  All animals were tested on the Morris Water Maze 
test, four trials per day for five days.  Figure 2 on the top left shows learning on day 5, based upon the cumulative distance 
for individual rats on the last day of testing.  The animals in the NT-020 arm of study exhi bited lower cumulative distance, 
as compared to the older control animals (p < .05).  Fu rther, there was much less variability among the treated old 
animals, as compared to the control animals.  We then examined the brains of these rats for neurogenesis and markers of inflammation using unbiased serological measures.  As can be seen in Figure 2, there was a significant increase in the 
numbers of Ki67 and DCX labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of the NT-020 rats that was accompanied by a decrease in 
OX6 (MHC Class II) positive microglia indicating that there was a reduction in inflammatory mediators.  
 Plant-derived compounds known as flavonoids may exert par ticularly powerful actions on mammalian cognition and may 
reverse age-related declines in memory and learning. In par ticular, evidence suggests that foods rich in three specific 
flavonoid sub-groups, the flavanols, anthocyanins 
114-116 and/or flavanones, possess the greatest potential to act on the 
cognitive processes. For example, their specific interactions within the ERK and PI3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways, at 
the level of receptors or kinases, have been shown to increase the expression of neuroprotective and neuromodulatory proteins and increase the number of, and strength of, connections between neurons. Their effects on the vascular system may also lead to enhancements in co gnitive performance through increased brain blood flow and an ability to initiate 
neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Additional mechanisms have be en suggested for the ability of flavonoids to delay the 
initiation of and/or slow the progression of AD-like pathology and related neur odegenerative disorders, including a 
potential to inhibit neuronal apoptosis triggered by neurotoxic species (e.g., oxidative stress and neuroinflammation). 
Berry anthocyanins also improve neurona l and cognitive brain functions, ocular health as well as protect genomic DNA 
integrity.  Recent studies reported by Zafra-Stone S, et al 
117 demonstrated that anthocyanins-rich OptiBerry exhibits high 
antioxidant efficacy as shown by its high oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) values, significantly inhibited basal 
MCP-1 and inducible NF-kappa-B transcriptions as well as the inflammatory biomarker IL-8.  Together, these processes  
Figure 1. Protection from oxidative cell induced death by blueberry, green 
tea, carnosine Vitamin D 3or all 4 combined (NT-020).  

Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3 
Figure 2. F344 rats of 3 or 20 months of age were treated with Control NIH21 diet 
or NIH21 diet plus NT-020 10X for 3 weeks prior to testing on a standard Morris 
water maze, 4 trials per day for 5 days of training. Top left: Cumulative distance 
scores for each individual rat on day 5 of training. It can be seen that there is a significantly reduced variance for t he NT020 rats.  When you compare the 
learning impaired groups (cutoff = 3 SD from young) then the treated learning impaired rats perform at a higher leve l than the untreated impaired rats. After 
training brains were prepared for immunos tochemistry and sectioned at 40 µm for 
unbiased stereological measures  using the optical frac tionator. Top Right: There 
is a significant increase in activated mi croglia in the aged dentate gyrus which is 
reduced in NT-020 treated rats. Bottom left: Numbers of proliferating cells at time 
of sacrifice (2 weeks post behavior) were  estimated using Ki67+ immunolableling 
were significantly increased in the aged treated rats compared with control. 
Bottom right: Doublcortin (DCX) positive  cells were also increased in the aged 
NT-020 treated rats suggesting that both proliferation of neural progenitors and 
cells that proceed to a neuronal lineage are increased by this dietary treatment. 
 
act to maintain the number and quality of synaptic connections  in key brain regions and thus  flavonoids have the potential 
to prevent the progression of neurodegenerative pathologies and to promote cognitive performance. 116,118. Preclinical 
evidence has demonstrated that these polyphenols protect vulnerable neurons and enhance the function of existing 
neuronal structures, two processes known to underpin neuro-cognitive function 116. Blueberry anthocyanins can decrease 
this vulnerability to oxidative stress as assessed in vivo by  examining reductions in neur onal signaling and behavioral 
deficits and in vitro via H2O2-induced decrements in striatal  synaptosomal calcium buffering. In preclinical studies, BB 
anthocyanin supplementations are effective in decreasing indi ces of inflammation and oxida tive stress.  To date, the 
anthocyanins show the most efficacy in penetrating the cell membrane and in providing antioxidant protection. 119 More 
recent trials have demonstrated that polyphenolic 
components can be measured in serum and 
plasma, found to cross the blood brain barrier and 
are found in measurable levels within the brain.73   
For example NT-020 contains blueberry, anthocyanins in blueberry are considered to be one of the major active fractions and can be found in 
the brain of several mammalian animal models.
74-
76 Our group has considerable experience 
and demonstrated the safety of polyphenolic67-72 
and n-3 fatty acids52-53, 84 supplementation in 
cancer patient cohorts.  Anthocyanins from BB 
thus hold the most promise to prevent or reverse 
normal or abnormal deteri orations in cognitive 
performance.  With the safety of anthocyanins 
well established, we predict this treatment regimen with anthocyanins can directly improve neurogenesis that is impacted with cytotoxic 
agents. 
85-86   
 
1.5 Anti-inflammatory agents (n-3 fatty 
Acids) and Cognitive Function: In view of the 
high omega-3 poly unsaturated fatty acid content 
of the brain, it is evident that these fats are 
involved in brain biochemistry, physiology and 
functioning; and thus in some neuropsychiatric diseases and in the cognitive decline of aging. 
52-53, 
99-102 DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) is one for the 
major building structures of membrane 
phospholipids of brain and is absolutely necessary 
for neuronal function. Deficiency of DHA alters the course of brain development, perturbs the composition of brain cell 
membranes, neurones, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, as well as sub cellular particles such as myelin, nerve endings 
(synaptosomes) and mitochondria. These alterations induce phy sicochemical modifications in membranes, lead to 
biochemical and physiological perturbations, and result in neurosensory and behavioral upset.99-102 The literature reveals 
growing mechanistic evidence that cognitive function of the aging brain can be preserved, or loss of function can be 
diminished with docosahexaenoic acid, a long-chain (n-3) PUFA. In addition, om ega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 
PUFAs) 52-53, 84 have been shown to modulate le vels of proinflammatory cytokines, hepatic acute phase proteins, 
eicosanoids, and tumor-derived factors in animal models of cancer. Omega-3 fatty acids can be detected in human 
serum/plasma, shown to cross the blood brain barrier and are the primary component of membranes of the nerve cells in the brain,  Deficits in Omega-3 fatty acids are associated with damage to brain biochemistry, structure and cognitive 
function.
99-100 In contrast, a diet high in n-3 fatty acids reduced beta -amyloid (Abeta) and reduced the amount of plaque in 
the brain, especially in the hippocampus and parietal cortex, and reduced the amount of APP, the beta-amyloid precursor 
protein,101-102 improving CI.   
 In summary, our team and others have demonstrated that  the components of COGNUTRIN®, which includes standard 
formulations and extracts of blueberry anthocyanins and om ega-3 fatty acids, can be detected in human serum/plasma, 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 4shown to cross the blood brain barrier and localize in various  brain regions important for learning and memory such as 
cerebellum, striatum and hippocampus in measurable quan tities. Studies have correlated peripheral markers of 
inflammation, immune function and oxidative stress in ser um/plasma with central inflammation and central nervous 
system functioning. Thus based on the etiologies of cognitive ch anges, animal and early clinical trial evidence of safety, 
bioavailability in blood and brain tissue and preliminary eviden ce of efficacy to improve CF, it is logical to test the 
effectiveness of a combination standard nutrition supplement that can provide anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory nutrients 
critical to the physiochemical composition and functioning of th e neurological system to “rescue” tissues from the effects 
of the oxidative damage and inflammation and reverse chemothe rapy-induced cognitive impairment as we propose in this 
study.  
 
1.6 Structural and functional imaging markers of cognitive function: Self-reported poor concentration or ‘chemo-
brain’ has been validated using neuropsychological task s and more recently, neuroimaging studies have identified 
structural 123  and performance differences between patients (i.e. those treated with chemotherapy) and controls 122,124,126.  
For example, a recent functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study has demonstrated that when compared to 
controls, chemotherapy treated patients show hyporesponsiveness in areas of the brain associated with impaired planning 
behavior and attentional abilities (i.e. paraphippocampal gyrus, le ft cuneus, right dorsal striatum, right inferior parietal 
cortex and left middle temporal gyrus). What is more, functional imaging studies have shown these disruptions last from one month following treatment 
126 to 10 years following treatment .122  
 To date, imaging studies have only focused on assessing c ognitive disruption induced by chemotherapy. The proposed 
study aims to replicate these findings and extend them by testing the proposed interventions (e.g. COGNUTRIN®) ability 
to offset the changes in cognitive performance in breast cancer survivors post chemotherapy treatment.   
 1.7 Rationale  Evidence from epidemiologic studi es, as well as our experimental animal literature, suggests that 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agents promote cognitive h ealth among older adults and early stages of Alzheimer’s 
disease.
24-50  To date, interventions with cognitive training alone,51-52 pharmacological agents to treat chemotherapy-
induced anemia,55 psycho stimulants and antioxidant therapies with V itamins A, C and E have not demonstrated efficacy 
or safety in treating CI in cancer survivors.53-54  In addition, new trials have provided further evidence against long-term 
use, cost-effectiveness and side-effects with these pharmacologi cal agents, particularly thrombic events, that established 
the need to identify alternate approaches that can be implem ented for a longer durations, with fewer side effects and an 
established safety profile.54-56  Both length and quality of survival are important end points.2  Our group and others have 
demonstrated the safety of the antioxidant57-63 and anti-inflammatory agents61 in high risk and cancer patient cohorts, 
including breast cancer patients during treatment and the effectiveness of the nutritional supplementation mixture to 
specifically improve cognitive function in preclinical studies.24, 45-48  In the current pilot proposal, we propose to examine 
the safety and influence of an intervention (COGNUTRIN®) usi ng  nutritional supplements (n-3 fatty acids and blue 
berry anthocyanins) on longitudinal changes in cognitive pe rformance in breast cancer survivors post chemotherapy. Our 
ultimate goal is to provide interventions, both therapeutic and lif estyle that carry the potential to treat or ameliorate these 
late effects of cancer treatment.  Based on the multiple etiology, the varying manifestation and extent of cognitive decline documented in this cohort, we hypothesize that interventions  using a combination nutritional supplement with antioxidant 
and anti-inflammatory agents (COGNUTRIN®) can work synergistically to facilitate reductions in oxidative stress loads 
and inflammatory cytokines, with significant improvement in cognitive health resulting in improvements in quality of life of breast cancer survivors. 
 
2 OBJECTIVES 
 
2.1  Pilot trial Primary Objectives 
 
1. Specific Aim 1: Does nutritional supplementation fac ilitate cognitive function in adult breast cancer 
survivors, relative to persons who do not receive this supplementation?  We predict that adult breast cancer 
survivors receiving nutritional supplementation will e xperience improved cognitive performance as assessed by a 
battery of standardized tests of cognitive function.  The current pilot study will evaluate the feasibility of 
administration of the nutritional supplement and placebo in this patient population and performing cognitive 
function testing at baseline and post supplementation. 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 5 
2. Specific Aim 2: Is the facilitation of cognitive function in the nutritional supplementation group mediated 
by changes in markers of oxidative stress and inflammation, relevant to cognitive performance?  We predict 
that persons receiving nutritional supple mentation will exhibit larger changes in antioxidant markers and that 
these changes will serve to mediate or explain differen ces in the cognitive performance of the two groups. The 
current pilot study will evaluate the feasibility of administration of the nutritional s upplement and placebo in this 
patient population and testing antioxidant levels  at baseline and after the supplementation.  
 
3. Specific Aim 3: Does nutritional supplementation fac ilitate cognitive function in adult breast cancer 
survivors, relative to persons who do  not receive this supplementation as indicated by changes in structural 
and resting-state functional markers observed utilizing the MRI/fMRI?  We predict that adult breast cancer 
survivors receiving nutritional supplementation will e xperience improved cognitive performance as assessed by a 
battery of structural and functional changes in imaging ma rkers in the brain. The current pilot study will evaluate 
the feasibility of administration of the nutritional supple ment and placebo in this patient population and performe 
structural and resting-state functional MRI to evaluate changes in these imaging marker s at baseline and after the 
supplementation.  
 
 
3.0 SUMMARY OF STUDY PLAN  
This pilot project is a randomized clinical trial of the feasibility of administering the nutritional supplement and 
placebo, performing a battery of cognitiv e function testing, stru ctural and resting-state functional MRIs, and 
antioxidant levels at baseline and post  supplementation in a target group of breast cancer survivors treated with 
chemotherapy. Prior to study initiation, the Human Subjects Committee will approve all study procedures.  This goal of 
this pilot feasibility study is to provide  a comprehensive assessment of a clini cal trial’s specific challenges as well as 
strategies to mitigate risks before a well- powered c linical trial can be proposed and implemented.   
 
Research teams that use feasibility studi es experience faster clinical trial accrual and significantly fewer delays in 
enrollment than those that forgo this preliminary assessment.  A properly conducte d clinical trial feasibility study can 
provide information regarding:   
 Biomarker methodologies/estimations 
 Effect size estimations 
 Compatibility of the clinical trial treatments and assessments with current patterns of care  
 Available patient population  
 Likelihood of patients agreeing to participate in the clinical trial  
 Potential modifications to clinical trial desi gn and eligibility criteria to enhance enrollment  
 Competing clinical trials  
 Site capabilities  
 Research infrastructure  
 Personnel  
 Equipment  
 Regulatory requirements and timelines  
 Local institutional review board/independent ethics committee (IRB/IEC) review timelines 
 Investigator grant requirements and site contracts  
 Projected patient enrollment rates. 
 The current feasibility pilot trial is to inform the research te am of all these above challenges th at occur with clinical trial s 
and can contribute to the proposal and conduct of a well powered clinical trial.       
 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 6 
   
 
   
 
 
 
             
         
     
         
    
 
     
 
    
 
 4.0  PARTICIPANT SELECTION 
Women who have been diagnosed with stage I-IIIB breast cancer (BCa) and who 
have completed neoadjuvant or 
adjuvant treatment with anthracyclines and/or taxanes + or – Radiation therapy within the past 6 months (+/- 7 
days) will be invited to be screened for eligibility to participate in this trial (subjects on concurrent endocrine therapy 
(TAM, Aromatase inhibitors are also eligible to participate as this is standard of care for this patient population). We will, 
in addition, expand our recruitment at the Moffitt Cancer Ce nter to include the members of the Moffitt Cancer Center 
Affiliate Network (Total Cancer Care  network consisting of 16 community hospital affiliates and 415 community 
oncologists statewide.  With this addition al network to recruit this patient popula tion from, we are confident that we will 
be able to recruit the number of subjects needed for this st udy from each site. Based on the number of subjects that can be 
recruited from Moffitt, we conservatively estimate that we  will recruit and retain 40 subjects during the 6 months 
recruitment period. Throughout the recruitment, data collec tion and retention period of this study we will focus on 
retaining high participation rates of an ethnically diverse population.   Screening/Baseline 
1) Women 30-70 years of age 
2)  Cases with Stage I-IIIB Breast Cancer  3)  Completion of neoadjuvant or adjuvant  treatment with anthracyclines, taxanes + or 
–  Radiation therapy (subjects on concurrent 
 endocrine therapy (TAM, Aromatase  inhibitors are also eligible to participate as  this is standard of care for this patient  population) 
4)  No more than 6 months post treatment (+/- 
7 days) 
5)  No evidence of dementia (MMSE >=23) 
 but some evidence of cognitive impairment  (each subject will be required to answer in  the affirmative: ‘do you have problems 
 with memory and attention since having 
 chemotherapy, and  do you believe  chemotherapy contributed to the problems 6)  Structural and resting-state functional  MRI/fMRI  
7)  Safety Labs (CBC, CMP, PT/PTT, LDL) 
8)  Plasma levels of oxidative markers 9)  Cytokine panel 10)  Completion of the following questionnaires  a.) Demographics    b.) Cognitive Function Battery 
 c.) Fatigue 
 d.) Depression  e.) Nutritional intake R A N 
D 
O MI Z 
E 
Placebo 
Group 
+ 
Multivitamin  
 
N=20 Endpoint Evaluation 
(3-months from baseline. +/- 7 
days) 
1) Functional and resting-state 
 MRI/fMRI   
2) Safety Labs (CBC, CMP, 
PT/PTT,  LDL) 3) Plasma levels of oxidative 
markers 
4) Cytokine panel 
5)  Completion of the 
following    questionnaires      a.) Cognitive Function Battery     b.) Fatigue 
    c.) Depression 
    d.) Nutritional intake     e.) Physical activity 
 
 Nutritional Supplementation (COGNUTRIN®) in Breast cancer Patients with 
Cognitive Impairment: Study Schema 
Nutritional 
Supplment 
(NS) Group 
+ 
Multivitamin  
 
N=20 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 7If women are already patients at Moffitt Cancer Center or one of its affiliates, they will be identified by one of the medical 
oncologists who are co-investigators in this trial based on the diagnosis and treatment recei ved. Women who have been 
diagnosed with stage I-IIIB breast cancer (BCa) and who have completed neoadjuvant or  adjuvant treatment with 
anthracyclines and/or taxanes + or  – Radiation therapy within the pa st 6 months, (+/-  7 days) will be  referred to 
the clinical research coordinator who will then invite these potentially eligible subjects to be screened for eligibility 
criteria to participate in this trial.  All subjects referred to the research team from affiliate sites will be screened for 
eligibility. In this pilot clinical trial, all subjects, if identified as eligible based on initial screening in any other site  other 
than the Moffitt Cancer center, will be required to come to the Moffitt cancer center if willing to continue to participate.  
Although cognitive complaints are reported frequently after breast  cancer treatments, their association with standardized 
neuropsychological (NP) test performance is not well-establishe d. The lack of association between NP test performance 
and subjective cognitive complaints in prio r studies with breast cancer patients 156-157,160 could reflect the lack of 
specificity and sensitivity of the self-report tools, or could be due to reliance on global measures rather than domain-
specific assessments. There is also a skepticism regarding the va lidity of cognitive complaints and their relationship to NP 
test performance in cancer patients.  A few more recent studies have suggested that patient self-report is associated with relevant domains of NP function, which is strongest for memory complaints. There is an emerging literature supporting 
the ability of individuals to subjectively detect changes in cognitive function that precedes statistically significant changes  
in NP performance or structural imaging abnormalities 
158 . There is thus significant support for the value of patient-
reported outcomes as a central measurement in evaluation of cancer treatment-related morbidities 159, including domains 
of cognitive impairment.   
Therefore, based on the current body of research, the inclusion criteria in this trial will be based on subjective cognitive 
complaints in cancer survivors.  Inclusion criteria to identify women who met the inclusion criterion for chemotherapy-
induced cognitive impairment, we will use the most current approach described by Ferguson et al (2012) 160 where each 
subject will be required to answer in the affirmative: ‘do you have problems with memory and attention since having 
chemotherapy, and do you believe chemot herapy contributed to the problems?’  
4.1  Inclusion Criteria.  1) Women 30-70 years of age 2) Cases with Stage I-IIIB Breast Cancer that have completed 
neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment with anthracyclines and/or taxanes + or –Radiation therapy within past 6 
months (+/- 7 days) (subjects on concurrent  endocrine therapy (TAM, Aromatase inhib itors are also eligible to participate 
as this is standard of care for this patient population) 3) Ab le to understand and sign the informed consent. 4) Fluent in  
reading, comprehension and communication in the English language. (Persons who are unable to meet this requirement 
are excluded from the current proposal becau se many of the cognitive tests that are administered are in English and 
translation of these instruments in other languages is curren tly unavailable)  5) No evidence of dementia (MMSE >=23) 
but some evidence of cognitive impairment (each subject will be required to answ er in the affirmative: ‘do you have 
problems with memory and attention since having chemotherapy, and do you believe chemotherapy contributed to the 
problems?’);  6) Each subject must be aware of the nature of his current medical condition and must be willing to give 
consent after being informed of the experimental nature of th erapy, alternatives, potential benefits, side-effects, risks and 
discomforts. 7) ECOG performance status of 0- 2 (8) Accep table hemoglobin and hematocrit level based on CBC. (9) All 
subjects must be willing to be monitored for adequacy of nutritional intake during the intervention, as is the current standard of clinical practice.  
 
4.2  Criteria for exclusion will include: 1) Use of estrogens (oral, dermal  or vaginal), progesterone (oral or topical), 
or androgens during the previous 3 months, 2) Use of over the counter steroid hormonal supplements 3) Patients with 
advanced or Stage IIIC or IV breast cancer or other cancer s.  4) Use of n-3 fatty acids or high dose antioxidant 
supplements other than what is provided in the trial.  5) Hi story of known allergy to components of the study supplements.  
6) Subjects with renal or liver disease (AST/ALT > 5.0 x upper limit of normal as evidenced by impairment of baseline 
laboratory values); Actual creatinine clearance of <60 utilizing the Cockroft-Gault formula (1976), which employs 
creatinine measurements and a patient's weight to predict the cl earance. (The constant for women is 1.04). 7) Concurrent 
participation in another chemoprevention tr ial. 8) Evidence of bleeding diathesis or coagulopathy (PTT and/or either PT 
or INR > 1.5x upper limit of normal (except for subjects receiving anti-coagulation therapy). Concurrent use of Coumadin or Warfarin will be acceptable and monito ring patients on warfarin or Coumadin  will follow the standard of care as 
dictated by the prescribing physician (PT/PTT).  If the prescrib ing physician is not a Moffitt MD, then the prescribing MD 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 8will be notified by the research staff of the subject participa ting in the study, and monitors  for PT, PTT will be obtained 
from patient during the 3 month study visit for review.  9) S ubjects with metabolic abnormalities (e.g. thyroid disorders, 
insulin dependent diabetes, rheumatologi c disease etc.). Subjects with metabolic disorders (a) who are otherwise eligible, 
(b) treated for hypothyroidism by their primary MD with Synthroid (levot hyroxine) and (c) with the approval of the 
Moffitt treating oncologist will not be excluded from the study.  10) Patients with known claustrophobia, presence of 
pacemaker and/or ferromagnetic material in their body that  would prohibit MRI imaging (ex. tissue expanders). 11) 
Medical history of concussions 12) Other acute or chronic medical or psychiatric condition or laboratory abnormality 
that may increase risk associated with study participation or study drug administration, or may interfere with interpretation 
of study results, and in the judgment of the investigator would make the subject inappropriate for entry into this study.    
 Our criteria for inclusion of subjects in this trial is that subjects recruited are able to understand and sign the informed 
consent. The subjects must also be fluent English-speaki ng (Persons who are not fluent  English speakers are excluded 
from the current proposal because many of the cognitive tests that are administered are language-based and are heavily 
influenced by first language).  Subjects must also have  no evidence of dementia (MMSE >=23) but some evidence of 
cognitive impairment (each subject will be required to answer in the affirmative: ‘do you have problems with memory and 
attention since having chemotherapy, and do you believe chemotherapy contributed to the problems?’);.  Each subject 
must be aware of the nature of his current medical condition and must be willing to give consent after being informed of 
the experimental nature of therapy, alternatives, potential benefits, side-effects, risks and discomforts. If a subject is 
determined to be cognitively impaired to the point of not meeting the above criteria  at screening by the investigative team, 
they will not be included in this pilot phase of the clinical trial, making the use of proxy’s unnecessary. 
 4.3  Anticipated problems with subject recruitment and retention:  Our group has extensive experience 
conducting research with breast cancer patients as well as studies collecting neuropsychological data, questionnaires, 
blood samples, and MRI/fMRI.  Thus, we expect difficulties to be  minimal.  As with all clinical trials, we anticipate that 
there will a 10% loss of subjects to follow up, although, in our experience, breast cancer survivors tend to be a highly 
motivated group and the time between ass essments is short and subjects will be  required to come in monthly for 
monitoring safety and compliance.  Moff itt Cancer center, as the only NCI designate d Comprehensive cancer center in the 
State of Florida has a substantial number of subjects treated for breast cancer.   
 
The recruitment, intervention and retention team (PI, Dr . Kumar, Co-I Dr. Jim and CRC) will initiate, develop and 
implement procedures to deal with and solve problems with  attrition. As we have with  our previous and current 
intervention trials, we will take measures to ensure that loss to follow-up is minimal, implementing several strategies for 
recruitment and retention as follows:  
a. Contact with participants will be maintained by th eir preferred method or methods: phone numbers, primary 
and secondary mailing addresses, and e-mail addresses updated at each contact.  
b. At each visit, current contact information will be verified and an alternate means of contacting the person will 
be established with the permission of the participant.  For example, friends, family members, and summer 
addresses will be maintained with the consent of the participant.  
c. Reminder calls and/or e-mails the day prior to the appointment. 
d. Monetary compensation for travel: Because of the importance of retaining participants for the duration of the 
study, participants will be provided $50 for each visit to cover travel e xpenses. Participants traveling more 
than 100 miles from their home to reach the research s ite will receive an additional $30 for transportation 
costs. 
e. Empathetic, warm and experienced cl inical research coordinators and study staff who can establish rapport 
with participants.  
f. Telephone contact will be encouraged with calls from th e research staff to the subject at least once a month 
between visits. 
g. Appointments will be made at the participants’ co nvenience including evenings or early mornings. 
h. Monthly and follow up visits will occur in the comfort of  the Breast Program clinics to ensure familiarity of 
staff and environment. 
i. Valet parking for all subjects, free of charge. 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 9j. Weekly staff meetings will occur and case studies will be reviewed to observe patterns and etiology of 
attrition of participants will be discussed . 
 
5.0  PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION:   
 
5.1  COGNUTRIN : The choice of the supplement to use in this tr ial is based on relevant research supporting the 
various components as well as the use of a commercially available dietary supplement. The supplement to be used will be 
a combination of 2 standardized formulations (a) antioxida nts from blueberry extracts - VitaBlue™ (40% polyphenolics, 
12.5% anthocyanins from blueberries (BB) and (b) omega 3-fatty acids - Lovaza®.  The standardized agent - Lovaza is 
manufactured by Glaxo Smith Kline and will be purchased for use in this study. However, the blue berry anthocyanins 
was purchased from a standard manufacturer and encapsulated at  the dose for this specific study using FDA standards in a 
certified formulary and tested by an independent laborat ory for composition (FDA IND 116424).  The matching placebos 
were also manufactured for this study using FDA standards- a ll of which have been evaluated and approved for use by the 
FDA.  As indicated in the protocol, these are 2 separate products administered separately (pages 8-11).  The combination 
that will be used has met the standards of the FDA and an  IND has been approved by the FDA (FDA IND 116424) for use 
of this agent combination in this study. Our team took into  consideration the high patient burden to the subjects due to 
large size if the agents were combin ed into one capsule and thus decide d to keep them as 2 separate agents. 
 The supplement COGNUTRIN is a term coined by the PI to denote the combinati on of 2 standardized formulations (a) 
VitaBlue™ (40% polyphenolics, 12.5% anthocyanins from bluebe rries (BB) and (b) n-3 fatty acids- Lovaza®.  We have 
obtained IND (FDA IND 116424) from the FDA for this curre nt indication proposed from the FDA. We have not 
submitted a patent for this product but hope  to explore the potential to license this combination if successful in the future. 
We are currently working on obtaining a registered trademark with this name that we co ined –COGNUTRIN. Our goal is 
to develop this combination agent scientifically, maintain excl usivity and to not be confused with myriads of supplements 
in the market place.  
 
5.1.1 VitaBlue™  (BB Anthocyanins): VitaBlue™ is a freeze dried high potency extract from blueberries.  
VitaBlue™ is created using a unique proprietary process fro m VDF FutureCeuticals.  It  comes as a standardized 
powder containing blueberry anthocyanins that is ready for encapsulation.   
 
VitaBlue™ provides concentrated amounts of h ealthy blueberry anthocyanins and polyphenols.
 Made from Wild 
Blueberry Extract (Lowbush Powder, VitaBlueTM, although no major adverse even ts have been observed with 
Vitablue, anecdotal evidence suggests that Blueberry can occasionally induce symptoms of food allergy in 
sensitized individuals; however, no studies have been reporte d to date. The lack of reported evidence may be due 
to the low allergenicity of this berry, the small amounts consumed, or the restricted time frame of consumption. 
Oftentimes a limited or low exposure to certain allergens might be the reason for the limited complaints reported.  
However, as the promotion of blueberry consumption c ontinues, this situation may change (1). Nonetheless, 
based on adverse effects reported to other berries, and par ticularly to members of the same family, it can be said 
that blueberries may induce symptoms of food allergy in sensitized individuals (2).   
 
For example, a 25-year-old woman reported adverse reactions due to lingonberry (V. vitis-idaea). While eating 
lingonberry jam, she developed allergic symptoms including itching wheals around her mouth, however, the 
symptoms dissipated. During a second episode, when she ingested a very small amount of lingonberry jam several 
days later, she immediately noticed more-intense sympto ms, including severe itching on the mouth, tongue and 
throat, and wheals over the mouth. Symptoms dissipated  within an hour, however, it was noted that upon 
secondary exposure the symptoms were more severe and a skin reactivity test demonstrated a positive allergic response to lingonberry (3). Since there are no reported adverse effects of blueberries, we expect no adverse effects to occur with this agent during this study. 
 
5.1.2: Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl esters): We plan to use a standardized product Lovaza® (omega-3-acid 
ethyl esters), an FDA-approved prescription omega-3 pr ovides prescription-only potency and purity with each 1-
gram Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl esters) gel capsule contains 90% omega-3-acid ethyl esters; 84% 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 10eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) ethyl esters. Lovaza® is provided by 
GlaxoSmithKline, who has authorized the FDA center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Division of Metabolic and Endocrine Drug Products to reference Lovaza® Capsul es IND # 45,998.. Bottles are labeled to comply with 
study requirements and applicable regul ations for investigational drug use. Bottles with study agent will be stored 
at controlled room temperature (15-30 0 C). The produc ts are both standardized and examined for content, 
stability and bioavailability and the study will be conduc ted with an investigator-initiated new drug (IND) 
approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as ma ndated by the National Cancer Institute for Phase 
I-III clinical trials. Use of n-3 fatty acids may decrease pl atelet aggregation and subjects with evidence of bleeding 
diathesis or coagulopathy will not be included in this study and those with concurrent use of Coumadin or 
warfarin will be observed closely. The follow-up m onitoring for PT, PTT for patients on warfarin and/or 
Coumadin will follow the standard of care as dictated by  the prescribing physician.  The prescribing MD will be 
notified by the research staff of the subject participati ng in the study, and monitors for PT, PTT will be obtained 
from patients during the monthly clinic visits.  
 
5.2  Rationale for Dose selection and Administration :  
 
5.2.1 Study Agent Lovaza® There is no established Dietary Refe rence Intake for n-3 fatty acids, yet the 
Adequate Intake (AI) is set at 1.6 and 1.1 grams/day for men and women respectively.  While intake in the United 
States occurs at much lower than the proposed AI and no signs of deficiency are observed, the AI is proposed to 
provide optimal health benefits associated with consum ing n-3 fatty acids.  There is no Upper Limit established 
for n-3 fatty acids. In early studies using fish oil capsu les, we and others have demonstrated the safety of 
administering 2-6 gms of EPA per day. Anticachectic effect s were seen with these doses, with no adverse effects, 
however, there was no greater response with 6 gms per day relative to 2-4 grams/day. Therefore, the dose selected for this pilot clinical trial, 4 grams per day is comparable  to the safe but effective dosage used in our preliminary 
studies and that of others. Currently prescription doses of 4 grams a day of Lovaza® is used and approved by the 
FDA to treat hypertriglyceridemia.  Furthermore, one, 3 to 4 oz serving of cold water fish such as salmon or 
sardines contains approximately 1.0-1.5 gms of n-3 fatty acids. The participant will be  provided packages of the 
agent in a capsule form and instruct ed on compliance, intake, duration of intervention, and monitors to be 
completed by the research staff.  Subjects will be instructed  to consume 4 gm Lovaza® in a divided dose (2 gm in 
the morning and 2 gm at night, to provide a total of 4 gm/day) with meals for a period of 3 months.  
 
5.2.2 Blueberry anthocyanins (VitaBlue):  Similarly, there is no established Dietary Reference Intake of the 
constituents of anthocyanins. The average daily consumption of anthocyanins in a western diet is estimated to be 
100 mgs/day. 
120. Anthocyanins are rapidly absorbed and metabolized extensively following a moderate-to-high 
oral dose in humans. Studies have indicated anywhere from 4-6 hours half-life with complete excretion of parent 
compound as well as metabolites within 24 hours both in urin e and plasma,  indicating the need for a dose every 
6- 8 hours to have consistent exposure 121. Similarly administration of anthocyanins at doses ranging from 0.5-2.0 
grams daily for 7 days in colorectal cancer patients with dose dependant concentrations detected in plasma and urine with no toxicities. 
120.  Studies utilizing anthocyanins at doses of  1.4 grams/day (Mitroslect, Indena S.p.A.) 
administered as 0.47 grams/capsule  TID are currently  in progress to provide active cellular antioxidant 
protection, inhibit inflammatory gene expression and consequently pr otect against oxidant-induced and 
inflammatory cell damage and cytotoxicity in ob esity-induced inflammation and insulin resistance 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) in 40-60 year old males for 21 days. In summary, repeated administration of anthocyanins exerts pharmacodynamic effects and generates concentrations of anthocyanins in human plasma as well as urine with no 
toxicity. We will thus use a dose of 0.47 grams/capsule dose of anthocyanins TID to total 1.4 grams per day, similar to the dose used in these chemoprevention trials.
   
 5.3  Availability: VitaBlue will be obtained from VDF FutureCeu ticals'. The product has earned self-affirmed GRAS 
(generally recognized as safe) status for use in food and beve rages after a comprehensive review by an independent panel 
of experts.  Lovaza® is manufactured and distributed by Glaxo Smith-Kline laboratories and will be obtained from them 
for use in this study. The capsules have  been manufactured by our team utilizing standards established by the FDA in a 
certified Compounding Center (Carrollwood Compounding Center a nd Pharmacy) and verified by the Center and by an 
independent testing group to assure consistent quality of the active agent cont ained in each capsule. The FDA has verified 
all these aspects of the agent as well as the placebo manufactured for this study and has provided us an IND approval of 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 11these agents used in this study. Dr. Kumar’s team currently holds 3 INDs for ag ents and placebos deve loped and approved 
by the FDA using the same methods for use in her research approved by this IRB. 
 
Placebo’s were also manufactured by Carrollwood Compounding Center and Pharmacy.  
5.4  Agent Distribution: Agents will only be released by the Invest igational pharmacy at MCC after documentation 
of IRB approval of the protocol and consent is provided and the collection of  all essential documents is complete ( e.g., 
signed 1572, current CV, medical license, and lab certifications, etc.) and new documents have been submitted to the FDA 
for the IND. 
 
5.5  Agent Accountability: The PI, or a responsible party designated by the investigator (Investigational pharmacy at 
MCC), will maintain a careful record of receipt, disposition, and return of all study drugs  on the Investigational Agent 
Accountability Record. All study drug supplies will be kept in  a locked, limited access area. The study drug will not be 
used outside the context of the protocol. Under no circumstan ces will the investigator or other site personnel supply study 
drug to other investigators, patients, or clinics, or allow supp lies to be used other than directed by this protocol. Study 
agent will not be transferred from one participant to another.  
 The investigator will maintain records documenting the recei pt, use, loss or other disposition of the investigational 
product, including batch or c ode numbers, and account for it’ s disposition on a subject-by-subject basis, including specific 
dates and quantities. The source document, documenting the subject’s  participation in this randomized clinical trial, must 
be documented in the medical and resear ch records. Destruction will be docum ented in accordance with institutional 
practices.  5.6  Packaging and Labels: Bottles are labeled to comply with study re quirements and applicable regulations for 
investigational drug use. Bottle labels include agent name, protocol number, dosing and storage instructions, required 
warnings for restricted, investigational use, and spaces for recording the subject registration and randomization number. 
The study agent to be used, Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl esters), an FDA-approved prescription omega-3 provides prescription-only potency and purity with each 1-gram Lovaza ® (omega-3-acid ethyl esters) gel capsule contains 90% 
omega-3-acid ethyl esters; 84% eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) ethyl esters. Lovaza® is 
provided by GlaxoSmithKline, who has authorized the FDA center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Division of 
Metabolic and Endocrine Drug Products to reference Lovaza® Capsules IND # 45,9 98. An investigator-initiated IND will 
be cross filed by the PI for this clinic trial  
 
5.7  Drug Storage of COGNUTRI N (VITABLUE and n-3 fatty acids) : All investigational agents will be received, 
stored and dispensed by the Investigational pharmacy at MCC.  Bottles with study agent will be stored at controlled room 
temperature (15-30 0 C).The PI, or a responsible party designa ted by the investigator, will maintain a careful record of 
receipt, disposition, and return of all study agent on the Investigational Agent Accountability Record.  All study drug 
supplies will be kept in a locked limited access room. The study dr ug must not be used outside the context of the protocol.  
Under no circumstances will the investigator  or .other site personnel supply study drug  to other investigators, patients, or 
clinics, or allow supplies to be used other than directed by  this protocol.  Study agent may not be transferred from one 
patient to another, from one participating center to another participating center or fro m one protocol to another.  All other 
transfers (i.e. patient or PI moves) must be approved in adva nce by the study PI. Every attempt will be made to collect all 
unused study agent supplies to be returned to the Moffitt Research Center PI office.  The investigator will maintain records 
documenting the receipt, use, loss or other disposition of the investigational product, includ ing batch or code numbers, 
and account for it’s disposition on subject-by-subject basi s, including specific dates and quantities. The source document, 
documenting the subject’s participation in this clinical tria l must be documented in the medical and research records.  
Destruction will be adequately documented.   
 
5.8  Registration and Randomization: Potential subjects will be screened by the research coordinator using an 
Eligibility Checklist (Appendix I).   The initial screening visit w ill verify patient eligibility to the study.  A minimum of 
40 subjects will be randomized to the pilot clinical trial.  W ithin 6 months of completion of  treatment with chemotherapy 
and radiation if applicable, we will screen the patients for c ognitive function to determine the eligibility of participants to  
participate in the random ized 
trial portion of the study.  If found eligible based on the criteria established for cognitive 
impairment, subjects will be ready for baseline data collection.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 12  
The research staff will use the Demogra phic Questionnaire Form to obtain baseline demographic data, medical and family 
history, and information regarding other health habits such  as alcohol, tobacco and previo us nutritional supplement use. 
Clinical Research Form (CRF): All medical record data ( CRF) pertaining to the cancer diagnosis, tumor characteristics, 
node involvement, stage confirmation, medical history of can cer, menstrual cycle information, other medical history 
including renal or liver disease, concomitant medications in cluding treatments for cancer and autoimmune diseases will be 
obtained from all subjects at baseline and changes in these variables monitored.  Once clinical eligibility is confirmed, and informed consent is signed, randomization of subjects take s place within the Moffitt SRARS program.  SRARS is a web 
delivered application that records subject registrations and provides randomization assignments.  Subjects will be randomized to one of 2 groups. An email is  sent to a list of pre-determined recipients (clinical research coordinators) 
stating the treatment/randomization assigned to the subject .   
 
5.9  Blinding and Unblinding Methods: All requests to unblind treatment assignment will be directed to the Protocol 
Lead Investigators (Kumar, Moffitt Cancer Center & Rese arch Institute, telephone: 813- 745-6885, fax: 813-745-7185, e-
mail: Nagi.Kumar@moffitt.org  . Dr. Kumar   will determine if disclosure of treatment assignment is required after 
consultation with the Medical Doctor who is the primary MD for the subject.  If disclosure of the treatment would affect 
important medical decisions in a subject experiencing an AE , or could affect decisions regarding safe conduct of the 
clinical trial, unblinding might be allowed. If disclosure is wa rranted, the site will be directed to the product label found i n 
the subject’s CRF binder or other designa ted research record. The label has a scratch-off area that will disclose the 
treatment assignment. Each site will document th e unblinding process in the patient chart.  
 
6.  AGENT ADMINISTRATION: 
 6.1  Dose Regimen and Dose Groups: Intervention groups  
 
6.1.1 Placebo Group:  All participants in the placebo arm will receive the multivitamin supplement and the 
cognitive battery tests and structural and resting-state functional imaging at baseline and 3 months.  The placebo 
group used herein will allow us to ge nerate information regarding the reliable change index, so information 
regarding the naturalistic change in cognitive performance, as well as the potential for pr actice effects to influence 
mean-level change data, across the follow-up period is important.  
 
6.1.2 Nutritional Supplement Group (NS). : The choice of the supplement to use in this trial is based on relevant 
research supporting the various components as well as the u se of a commercially available standardized dietary 
supplement of anthocyanins and n-3 fatty acids.  The suppl ement to be used is a standardized formulation of 
blueberry extract VitaBlue® (40% polyphenolics, 12.5% an thocyanins from blueberries.  The supplement will in 
addition include Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl este rs), an FDA-approved prescription omega-3 provides 
prescription-only potency and pur ity with each 1-gram Lovaza® (omega-3-acid ethyl esters) gel capsule contains 
90% omega-3-acid ethyl esters; 84% eicosapentaenoic aci d (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) ethyl esters. 
Lovaza® is provided by GlaxoSmithKline, who has authorized the FDA center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, Division of Metabolic and Endocrine Drug Products to reference Lovaza® Capsules IND # 45,998. An 
investigator-initiated IND has been obtained by PI for use of these agents in this clin ical trial (IND # 116424).  
Subjects in the supplements treatment arm of the study w ill be given in the same fashion and time table to the 
“placebo” patients as the active treatment patients. 
 
6.2  Agent Administration:  Intervention will be administered to th e patient on an outpatient basis and self-
administered by the participants. The daily dose of will be  taken in divided doses (Lovaza® 2 tablet BID and Vitablue
TM 2 
tablet TID).  On the day of monthly follow-up visit, capsules should be taken within 4 hours of visit and blood draw for 
required lab work.   
 Two bottles containing Lovaza and 1 bottle of anthocyanins  capsules will be dispensed to all participants upon 
randomization with adequate number of capsul es, to ensure that the subject has suffi cient study drug to last until the next 
planned clinic visit.  At baseline and at each monthly visit up to the 3-month final visit, participants will receive these 
supplements in person to take home with them. At that point , participants will receive inst ructions regarding how many 
supplement pills they are to take a day.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 13 
Schedule of dose administration of study agents 
Arm of Study Breakfast Lunch Dinner 
Treatment arm  2 tablets Lovaza 
2 tablets Vitablue 2 tablets Vitablue 2 tablets Lovaza 
2 tablets Vitablue 1 tablet multivitamin/mineral 
Placebo arm 4 tablets matching 
placebo tablets 2 tablets matching placebo 4 tablets matching placebo tablets 1 tablet multivitamin/mineral 
 6.3  Contraindications : COGNUTRIN ingredients - n-3 fatty acids may be  contraindicated in subjects with bleeding 
disorders and anthocyanins may be contraindicated in people who are sensitive or allergic to berries.    
 
During study participation, subjects will be instructed to lim it their consumption of the following berries to 1 cup per day: 
blackberry, blueberry, chokeberry, black currant, elderberry , and black raspberry. They will be asked to limit their 
consumption of the following omega 3’s to  2-3 servings (4 oz per serving) a week: walnuts, flaxseed oil, canola oil, fish 
oils, and fatty fish such as salmon, trout, mackerel, herring,  sardines, pilchards, kipper, eel, whitebait, fresh tuna, 
anchovies, swordfish, bloater, cacha, carp, hilsa,  jack fish, katla, orange roughy, and pangas.  
 6.4  Concomitant Medications: During study participation, subjects will be  instructed to suspend consumption of 
additional supplements containing anthocyanins or omega 3’s.  Subjects are considered enrolled in the trial from the time 
that the informed consent document is signed until the time th at the subject is off study. All medications (prescription and 
over-the-counter), taken by the particip ant while on study will be documented on the concomitant medication CRF and 
will include: start and stop date, dose and r oute of administration, and indication.  
 
6.5  Dose and Toxicity Management: We will ensure that our protocol and informed consent comply with FDA 
recommendations. In addition, we have pl anned monthly visits to monitor daily symptoms monitor and will perform an 
interview for adverse events, unusual sy mptoms, change in medical condition a nd concomitant medications use. Any 
abnormality observed will be communicated by the research  coordinator to the study MD for evaluation and for 
continuation in the study.  Subjects in the study will be dr opped from study until which time the symptom is determined to 
be unrelated to the study agent as determined by the study MD. We will provide each subject with a 24- hour contact 
phone number and specific instruction on contacting the research  team including the MD in this study.  In addition, 
evaluation of safety in this subject population has been added as a specific aim of the trial with a formal comparison of 
safety between active and placebo arms, further illustrating our co mmitment to ensuring subject safety in this and future 
clinical trials.  A patient’s treatment will be discontinued in any of the fo llowing circumstances: (a) Allergic reaction to product; (b) 
Dramatic change in stool frequency; (c) Start of other treat ments that may cause malabsorption; (d) Request of patient of 
MD or patient; (e) Unusual symptoms reported during follow-up or other unusual symptoms or blood work results observed during the study period; and, (f) Persistent nausea not  controlled with antiemetics.  There are no reductions in 
the Cognutrin® dose. If adverse events occur that require holding Cognutrin ® (until etiology is determined), the dose will remain the same once treatment resumes. Any toxicities associated or possibly associated  with Cognutrin ® treatment 
will be managed according to standard medical practice. Subjects will be assessed clinically for toxicity prior to, during 
intervention on a monthly basis and at end of intervention. If >grade III toxicity occurs because of Cognutrin ® at any 
time during the study, treatment with Cognutrin ® will be disco ntinued. We will also inquire about hypersensitivity to 
fish/and or shellfish and symptoms of atrial fibrillation at  each visit. All subjects will be followed by their medical 
oncologists for their cancer treatment, using the routine surve illance guidelines as established by the Cancer Center during 
the study. 
There are no alternative agents that are cu rrently available to treat or ameliorate  cognitive impairment observed in this 
target population. To date, interventions  with cognitive training alone, pharmacological agents to treat chemotherapy-
induced anemia, psycho stimulants and antioxidant therapies with Vitamins A, C and E have not demonstrated efficacy 
nor safety in treating CI.  We and others have demonstrated in  preclinical and clinical trials that plant-based substances 
and n-3 fatty acids with potent antioxidant and anti-inflammato ry properties can be detected in plasma and serum, cross 
the blood-brain barrier, localize in various brain regions important for learning and memory such as cerebellum, striatum 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 14and hippocampus and increase neurogenesis. However, these interv entions have not been evalua ted to ameliorate CI in 
cancer patients treated with chemotherapy.  The results of th is study may inform the design of a well-powered clinical 
trial to test the effectiveness of this intervention to ameliorate these late effects of cancer treatment and ultimately improv e 
quality of survival in this patient population.  However, no guarantee of personal benefit based on participation will be 
made to subjects recruited in this study. Instead, participants will be told that results are expected to contribute to 
increased knowledge about possible interventions to remediate chemotherapy-induced changes in cognitive performance. Among persons in the nutritional supplementation intervention conditions, based on existing evidence from the ageing 
literature, some improvements to c ognitive performance are anticipated. 
On the other hand, the risks to participants of this study can be divided into three groups a) risk due to collection of blood,  
b) potential risk due to study agent intake; c) Magnetic r esonance Imaging (MRI). We have taken careful steps to 
implement p rocedures for minimizing and protecting against potential risks: 
 
(a) Reduce risks of specimen collection:  Participants undergoing venipuncture typically experience brief pain during 
needle insertion; occasionally experience bruising or the need  for additional needle sticks to access “good vein”, and 
rarely experience an infection at the site of needle insertion.   Sterile equipment, accepted clinical practices, and trained; 
experienced staff will be used to reduce the risks of specimen collection. In a ddition the site will be cleaned before 
drawing blood, pressure will be applied until the bleeding stops  and a sterile dressing will be used to cover the puncture 
site.  
 (b) Reduce risk due to study agent:  Based upon our team’s considerable experi ence administering anthocyanins and n-3 
fatty acid supplementation in preclinical and clinical trials , we have proposed periodic monitoring of organ function 
(CBC, CMP) including liver function tests throughout the study.  Moreover, all of the substances in the nutritional 
supplements are found in everyday foods and are not at levels  that greatly exceed a typical dietary intake.  We have 
obtained detailed information and potential side effects of each of the agents used in the st udy and paid attention to the 
criteria for inclusion and exclusion and dose to reduce side effects as follows: Study Agent Lovaza® There is no 
established Dietary Reference Intake for n-3 fatty acids, yet th e Adequate Intake (AI) is set at 1.6 and 1.1 grams/day for 
men and women respectively.  While intake in the United States occurs at much lower than th e proposed AI and no signs 
of deficiency are observed, the AI is proposed to provide optimal health benefits associated with consuming n-3 fatty acids.  There is no Upper Limit established for n-3 fatty acids. In early studies using fish oil capsules, we and others have 
demonstrated the safety of administering 2-6 gms of EPA per day. Anticachectic effects were  seen with these doses, with 
no adverse effects, however, there was no greater response with  6 gms per day relative to 2-4 grams/day. Therefore, the 
dose selected for this pilot clinical trial, 4 grams per day is comparable to the safe but effective dosage used in our 
preliminary studies and that of others. Currently prescripti on doses of 4 grams a day of Lovaza® is used and approved by 
the FDA to treat hypertriglyceridemia.  Furthermore, one, 3 to  4 oz serving of cold water fish such as salmon or sardines 
contains approximately 1.0-1.5 gms of n-3 fatty acids. The participant will be provided packages of the agent in a capsule form and instructed on compliance, intake, duration of interventi on, and monitors to be completed by the research staff.  
Subjects will be instructed to consume 4 gm Lovaza® in a divi ded dose (2 gm in the morning, 2 gm at night, to provide a 
total of 4 gm/day) with meals for a period of 3 months. Blueberry anthocyanins (VitaBlue):  Similarly, there is no 
established Dietary Reference Intake of the constituents of anthocyanins. The average daily consumption of anthocyanins 
in a western diet is estimated to be 100 mgs/day.  Ant hocyanins are rapidly absorbed and metabolized extensively 
following a moderate-to-high oral dose in humans. Studies have indicated anywhere from 4-6 hours half-life with 
complete excretion of parent compound as well as metabolites within 24 hours both in urine and plasma,  indicating the 
need for a dose every 6- 8 hours to have consistent exposure 
121. Similarly administration of anthocyanins at doses ranging 
from 0.5-2.0 grams daily for 7 days in colorectal cancer pa tients with dose dependant concentrations detected in plasma 
and urine with no toxicities.  Studies utilizing anthocyanins at doses of 1.4 gr ams/day .(Mitroslect, Indena S.p.A.) 
administered as 0.47 grams/capsule  TID are currently in progr ess to provide active cellular an tioxidant protec tion, inhibit 
inflammatory gene expression and consequently protect against oxidant-induced and inflammatory cell damage and 
cytotoxicity in obesity-induced inflammation and insulin r esistance in 40-60 year old ma les for 21 days. In summary, 
repeated administration of anthocyanins exerts pharmacodynamic effects and generates concentrations of anthocyanins in 
human plasma as well as urine with no toxicity. We will t hus use a dose of 0.47 grams/capsule dose of anthocyanins TID 
to total 1.4 grams per day, similar to the dose used in these chemoprevention trials.   
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 15Nevertheless, we will record adverse ev ents and will develop a data safety and monitoring plan to ensure that study 
participants are not negatively affected by study com pounds. We will in addition obtain symptoms and concomitant 
medications that may be potentially rela ted to study agent intake using daily monitors. All of the substances in the 
nutritional supplements are found in everyda y foods and are not at levels that greatly exceed a typical dietary intake. 
Nevertheless, we will observe and report a dverse events and will develop a data safety and monitoring plan to ensure that 
study participants are not negatively a ffected by study compounds. Our group is currently involved in several active 
clinical trials where these agents are being used and under IND approval from the FDA. We will keep abreast of the 
literature in the area of potential drug-drug, drug-nutrient interactions and other c ontraindications in the evolving research 
and will amend the study appropriately to ensure subject safety. 
 
(c) Risks due to MRI: For most people, there is no danger associated w ith having an MRI scan.  However, there may be 
some risk of psychological distress for the individuals posed by the confining environmen t of the scanner. We will 
therefore verify that participants are not claustrophobic, thereby reducing the probability of claustrophobia. The scanning 
environment poses potential risk from the magnet; specifically that metallic objects brought into the scanning room are 
dangerous to the individual. However th e well-established Moffitt Cancer Center  and University Diagnostic Institute 
protocol for treatment of patients in this environment minimizes risk. 
 
Other: The research team has considerable experience with admi nistering cognitive tests to young and older adults and in 
all cases, participants will be encouraged to do “their best”,  which seems to minimize test taking anxiety. Experienced 
personnel will administer all self-report and cognitive performance measures. The research study staff will carefully 
monitor participants' reactions and provi de information upon request. All participan ts will be provided with Dr. Kumar’s 
name and telephone number. 
 
Based on the unavailability of effective and safe treatmen ts to ameliorate cognitive impairment resulting from 
chemotherapy and the potential benefit a study such as th is can provide, combined with the careful attention paid 
to minimize and eliminate risks due to participation, the benefits outweigh the risks. 
 Adverse events requiring delays or permanent disconti nuation of Cognutrin® are listed in the table below: 
Event Action 
Grade 1 & 2 constitutional, dermatological, gastrointestinal (GI), metabolic and pain symptoms 
Examples: Rash Allergic rhinitis, cough, bronchitis.  Abdominal Pain 
Belching/Gas 
Nausea/Vomiting Diarrhea No Action Required 
Inform MD 
Document event in research and medical record 
Grade 3 Discontinue Cognutrin ®/Notify Study PI 
Grade 4 Discontinue Cognutrin ®/Notify Study PI 
Grade 2, 3, or 4 abnormal liver function tests1,2 as 
determined by NCI CTC version 4.0    Discontinue Cognutrin ®/Notify Study PI and  
Monitor until it returns to normal  
 
1. Tests used to monitor liver function include: albumin, tota l and direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, total 
 protein, PT/PTT,) 2. In the event that PT/PTT is abnormal due to anticoagulant therapy, treatment and/or drug discontinuation will be at 
 the discretion of the site investigator/MD.  
Regardless of the reason for holding study drug treatment, th e maximum allowable length of treatment interruption is 1 
week. Interruption of intake of >1 week will result in di scontinuance of subject from the study. Patients who have an 
ongoing Cognutrin ®-related Grade 3-4 or serious adverse event at the time of discontinuation from study treatment will 
continue to be followed until resolution of the event or un til the event is considered irreversible by the study MDs. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 16In addition, a standard multivitamin/ mineral preparation will be  provided free of charge during the study duration, to assure a 
consistent baseline intake of essential vitamins and minerals among all study par ticipants during the study period and to 
encourage subjects from not using other supplements that may contain components of the study agents. Subjects in the 
treatment and placebo arms will be provided these multivitamin/mine ral supplements and instructed to consume 1 tablet daily 
with the dinner meal.   In our experience with cancer survivors both clinically and in  research studies, over 75-85% of breast cancer survivors use a 
multivitamin/mineral supplement.   Several of these supplements  have added ingredients including botanicals and biologics 
from unknown as well as known sources.  The quality, content, standardization techniques, safety as well as stability of the content of these supplements have been a ch allenge to our team.  In order to provide  a standard dose to all subjects in the 
study .ensure safety and prevent any over dosing on other supplements, similar to  the content of COGNUTRIN, we have 
provided a standard multivitamin/mineral to the subjects in our clinical trials with botanicals and biologics.    Our group is currently involved in several active clinical tr ials where these agents are being used and under IND approval 
from the FDA. We will keep abreast of the literature in the area of potential drug-dr ug, drug-nutrient interactions and other 
contraindications in the evolving research and will ame nd the study appropriately to ensure subject safety. 
  The research team has considerable experi ence with administering cognitive tests to young and older adults and in all cases, 
participants will be encouraged to do “t heir best”, which seems to minimize test  taking anxiety. Experienced personnel will 
administer all self-report and cognitive performance measures. Th e research study staff will carefully monitor participants' 
reactions and provide information upon re quest. All participants will be provided with Dr. Kumar’s name and telephone 
number to clarify or answer any questions. 
 
6.6  Adherence/Compliance: During study participation, subjects will be asked to: self-administer the study 
medication; complete diet recall forms at specified time pe riods (baseline, 1, 2 and 3 months); avoid consumption of 
additional nutritional supplements and multivitamins containing the recommended da ily allowance (RDA) of Vitamin D. 
Subjects are expected to: maintain ≥85% compliance with study agent intake; comply with dietary, medication and 
supplement restrictions; and complete the diet recall forms to the best of their ability. Subjects will be interviewed at the 
monthly scheduled time points, at which time pill counts will be  performed to verify compliance with study requirements. 
Subjects discovered not to be complying with study requi rements will have the requirements re-explained to them.  
 
6.7  Agent Destruction/Disposal  
At the completion of the study, there will be a final reconciliati on of drug shipped, drug cons umed, and drug remaining. This 
reconciliation will be logged on the drug reconciliation form, signed and dated. Any discrepancies noted will be investigated, 
resolved, and documented prior to destruction of unused study dr ug. Drug destroyed on site will be documented in the study 
files.  
 
 
7 CLINICAL EVALUATIONS AND PROCEDURES  
7.1  Table 1: Schedule and Sequence of Data Collection 
 
 Assessment Schedule 
   Screening Baseline/ 
Randomization  M1 
+/- 7 days  M2 
+/- 7 
days  End of 
Treatment/M3 
+/- 7 days 7 Day Follow Up 
  W1 W3 W4 W7 W8 W11 W12  
Informed Consent X         
Concomitant Medications X X  X  X  X X 
Relevant Medical 
History/Current Medical Condition X         
Mini-Mental Status Exam, 2
nd Edition (MMSE) X         
Self-Reported Cognitive X         
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 17Impairment Since 
Chemotherapy 
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR)  X        
Hopkins Verbal Learning 
Test, Revised (HVLT-R): Form 1  X        
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test, Revised (HVLT-R): Form 2        X  
Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWA): T1  X        
Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWA): 
T2        X  
Color Trails – Part 1 (Form A)  X      X  
Color Trails – Part 2 (Form A)  X      X  
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test – Revised (BVMT-R): 
Form 1  X        
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test – Revised (BVMT-R): Form 2        X  
Digit Span (subset of WMS-IV)  X      X  
Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT)  X      X  
Rey Complex Figure Copy (Copy Trial Only)  X      X  
Demographic Questionnaire  X        
Godin-Leisure Time 
Exercise Questionnaire   X      X  
Primary Care Evaluation of 
Mental Disorders Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)  X      X  
Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI)  X      X  
Patient’s Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory (PAOFI)  X      X  
MRI-Resting state functional MRI and structural MRI.  X      X  
Anthropometric Measurements
1  X      X  
ECOG X       X  
2 Day Food Record2  X  X  X  X  
Hematology (CBC)3 X   X  X  X  
Blood Chemistry (CMP, PT/PTT, LDL)
4 X   X  X  X  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 18Research Labs (Oxidative 
stress, Cytokine) X       X  
Adverse Events    X  X  X X 
Limited Physical Exam X5       X  
Study Agent/Multivitamin 
Distribution  X  X  X    
Study Agent Intake & Symptom Logs  X  X  X  X  
Pill Counts    X  X  X  
Follow Up Phone Call         X 
1 Height, Weight, BMI, Waist, & Hip Circumference  
2 Dietary recall forms and instructions will be distributed in person at the screening visit and collected at the baseline, 
week 4, week 8, and end of treatment visits 
3 Hematology labs do not need to be performed at screening vi sit if lab results are available within the previous 28 days 
 (+/- 3 days)  
4 Blood Chemistry labs do not need to be performed at screeni ng visit if lab results are available within the previous 28 
 days (+/- 3 days)  
5 The initial limited physical exam can be done at either screening or baseline. 
 
7.2 Evaluations during Screening Visit 
7.2.1  All subjects will have the study fully explained to th em and will sign an informed consent document prior 
to having any invasive procedures performed. They  will also be assigned an identification number. 
 
7.2.2  Within 6 months of completing chemotherapy, + or – radiation (+/- 7 days), patients will be screened for 
cognitive impairment. Evidence of cognitive impairment requires each subject answer in the affirmative: 
‘do you have problems with memory and attention since having chemotherapy, and do you believe 
chemotherapy contributed to the problems?’ 
 
 7.2.3  A limited physical exam will be  performed which includes ECOG.  
 NOTE: The limited physical exam can be done at either screening or baseline. 
 
7.2.4 Concomitant medications, medical history, a nd current medical condition will be collected. 
 7.2.5  Mini-Mental State Examination, (MMSE will be admi nistered to screen for and estimate the severity of 
cognitive impairment in order to determine particip ant’s eligibility to participate in the study. 
 
7.2.6 Blood will be drawn for CBC, CMP, PT/PTT, and LDL and measurement of plasma antioxidant 
biomarkers or oxidative stress and inflammation.  
 
7.3 Evaluations during Baseline/Randomization Visit 
  
7.3.1  After eligibility has been confirmed based on screeni ng tests using eligibility checklist, subjects will be 
randomized and supplied with a one-month supply of nutritional supplement (COGNUTRIN) or placebo 
(n=20/arm) and multivitamin . 
 
7.3.2  Review of completed diet survey and concomitant medications. 
 
 7.3.3  Anthropometric measurements will be taken. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 19 7.3.4  The following questionnaires will be completed:  Godi n-Leisure Time Exercise, Patient’s Assessment of 
Own Functioning Inventory (PAOFI); Personal Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), and Symptoms of Fatigue 
and Depression (FSI)  
 
7.3.5  Cognitive testing will be administered (HVLT-R: Form 1, COWA: T1, Color Trails Part 1& 2, Digit 
Span, SDMT, BVMT-R: Form 1, and Rey Complex Figure Copy  
 
7.3.6   Subjects will also undergo a structural and r esting-state functional magnetic resonance Imaging 
(MRI/fMRI)   
 
Subjects should not be randomized until eligibility has been confirmed.  All components of eligibility will be 
confirmed (inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria).  
 
7.4  Evaluations during Study Intervention 
7.4.1  Weeks 3, 7, 11: Participants will be contacted reminding them to complete diet survey and to bring 
completed survey, study agent /symptom logs and a ll left over study agent (including multivitamin) to 
their next in person visit scheduled. 
 
7.4.2  Weeks 4 & 8 ( +/- 7 days): Participants will come in person monthly for the following: 
7.4.2.1  Review of completed diet surveys, study agent/symptom logs, adverse events and concomitant 
medications by CRC and verified with CRU RN. 
7.4.2.2  Collection of any unused nutritional supple ment/ placebo and multivitamin for pill counts 
7.4.2.3  Safety labs (CBC, CMP, PT/PTT, and LDL) will be drawn 
7.4.2.4  Participant will be supplied with a new one-month supply of nutritional supplement or placebo 
 
7.5  Evaluations at Completion of Study Intervention (3 months, +/- 7 days)  
 7.5.1  Blood will be drawn for CBC, CMP, PT/PTT, and LDL and measurement of plasma antioxidant  
biomarkers or oxidative stress and inflammation.  
7.5.2 A limited physical exam will be conducted, incl uding anthropometric measurem ents, ECOG, concomitant 
medications and adverse event collection by CRC and verified with CRU RN. 
 7.5.3 Food records and study agent and symptoms logs will be collected and reviewed with subject for clarification. 
 7.5.4  The following questionnaires will be completed:  G odin-Leisure Time Exercise, Patient’s Assessment of 
Own Functioning Inventory (PAOFI); Personal Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), and Symptoms of Fatigue 
and Depression (FSI) will be completed.  
 
7.5.5  Cognitive testing will be administered (HVLT-R: Form 2, COWA: T2, Color Trails Part 1& 2, Digit 
Span, SDMT, BVMT-R: Form 2, and Rey Complex Figure Copy. 
 
7.5.6 Left over study agent will be collected and pill counts done.  
7.5.7   Subjects will also undergo a structural and r esting-state functional magnetic resonance Imaging 
(MRI/fMRI).   
 
7.6 Post-intervention Follow-up Period (7 days +/- 3 days) 
 Subjects will be contacted by telephone 7 (+/-3) days after discontinuing study agent to capture any signs and 
symptoms occurring since stopping the study drug and changes to concomitant medications. The subject is 
considered off study after te lephone contact is completed. 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 20 
7.7  Methods for Clinical Procedures: 
 
 7.7.1  Demographic Data:  At baseline, in addition to the set of inta ke questionnaires designed to evaluate an  
 expanded set of demographic characteristics, self-reporte d health, lifestyle activity participation completed at 
screening, the following data will be collected at base line (Appendix II). Data regarding menopausal status will 
also be obtained. (Pre-menopausal, post menopausal and CRA (Chemotherapy related amenorrhea will be defined 
as without menstrual periods for a period equal to or over 6 months in a patient who was premenopausal at 
diagnosis).  
 
7.7.2  Anthropometric measurements  such as participant’s height, weight , BMI, waist and hip circumferences 
(Appendix III) will be obtained at base line and at 3 months. These will be measured by a  trained CRC using 
standardized techniques utilized and validated in our previous trials,104-105 and used to calculate body mass index 
(Weight kg/ Height m2) and waist: hip ratio.  Our group h as experience in the use of these methods in this patient 
population in clinical practice as well as in previous studies.   
 
7.7.3   Physical Activity (PA ) will be obtained at baseline and at 3 months using the Godin-Leisure Time 
Exercise Questionnaire106 (Appendix IV).  They will be reviewed by  the study staff to monitor for increase in 
physical activity and to ensure that subject in not participating in strenuous activities.  
 
7.7.4   Dietary intake (Appendix V)  will be assessed at baseline and m onthly by conducting random monthly, 
2-day, 24-hour dietary recalls (gold standard for collecting dietary data) using a 5-step multipass procedure 107-109 
and using the frequently updated NDSR database (for analysis of nutrient composition). At baseline and monthly for up to 3 months, subjects will be requested to complete this instrument and bring it to the scheduled study clinic visit for review and to monitor compliance. Food portion visuals will be provided at baseline in the participant 
folder to enhance the collection of accurate portion size in formation.  Protocols are established for training dietary 
interviewers and meticulous quality c ontrol procedures are established and supervised by Dr. Kumar. The 
University of Minnesota Nutrition Data System-Research ve rsion (NDS-R) is used for data entry and analysis.  
This is a microcomputer-based system for collection and analysis of dietary data that prompts the user to describe food intake at the level of detail such as food source, processing method, fat and salt used in preparation, and 
ingredients that contribute to fat and sodium intake.  The nutrient database contains over 19,000 foods, 7,800 
brand-name products, and many ethnic foods.  Although values are available for 108 nutrients and nutrient ratios, 
we will specifically analyze average intakes of energy and nutrient densit y. The database is derived from USDA, 
food manufacturers, foreign food com position tables, and scientific literatu re. Dr. Kumar’s group is currently 
using these instruments in the active and proposed chemopr evention trials and has experience working with the 
data using these instruments. The primary purpose of this instrument will be to (1) verify compliance to 
restrictions to not over consume other products containi ng similar agents and (2) to verify consumption of 
adequate calories, protein and other nutrients during the st udy.  A detailed list of products containing significant 
amounts of n-3 fatty acids and blueberry anthocyanins will be provided to each subject. Subjects will be instructed 
to avoid excess intake of these foods. 
 
7.7.5  Functional markers (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group: ECOG ) 
110 (Appendix VI):  Functional 
Markers allow subjects to be monitored for basic functi onal status and to monitor any functional impairment. 
Limitations in the activities of daily living have been identified secondary to fatigue a nd lethargy reported by this 
patient population. (Screening & 3 months) 
 
7.7.6   Participants will also be provided with Study Agent Intake and Symptom log  (Appendix VII) which 
they will be required to complete daily. Study agents a nd instructions for administration will be distributed to 
subjects at baseline and monthly during scheduled visits . Each batch will contain a supply for approximately 1 
month. The study intake log will require the subject to ch eck that study agent has been taken and will be secured 
to the symptom monitoring scale to ease completi on and to remind patients to monitor symptoms.  
 
7.7.7  Pill counts  will be completed at monthly visits prior to providing subject with a new batch of 
supplements. Working at a flat surface, the research coordinator applies a pair of latex gloves and then pours the 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 21bottle of study agent/placebo or multivitamin on to the pill c ount tray.  Using a gloved hand or sorter the pills are 
counted individually and returned to the empty bottle.  In  the event of discrepancy between actual and expected 
count, the process is repeated.   
 
7.7.8  Adverse events monitoring (Appendix VIII): 
All adverse events (AEs) that are reported by the subj ect, detected during a visit, physical examination, or 
laboratory work-up will be recorded in the participant’s study record and r ecorded on the CRF. All AEs that occur 
after the start of the study agent will be recorded on th e AE CRF whether or not related to study agent. The 
following information will be captured for each AE: date reported; verbatim term; CTCAE Term (v 4.0); onset 
and resolution date; severity grade; attribution to study agent; whether or not the event was reported as an SAE; 
action taken; whether or not the subject dropped due to the AE; outcome; and comments. 
 For each subject, AE’s will be collected at the screening, Mo nth 1, Month 2, Month 3/EOT, visits as well as at the 
7-day post-treatment follow-up call by the clinical research coordinator. AE’s collected at the screening visit will 
be catalogued as baseline symptoms by the clinical resear ch coordinator and the AE log will be reviewed and 
signed by either the patient’s medical oncologist or PI. AE’s collected during M onth 1 and 2 visits will be 
reviewed with the patient by the nurse who drew thei r blood at CRU and the AE log will be signed by the 
principal investigator. Finally, at the Month 3 visit, th e participant’s medical oncologist will review the AE log 
with the patient and sign-off on the reported symptoms; if the medical oncologist is unavailable to sign the AE log 
at this visit, then the PI will review and sign the form . AE’s reported at the 7-day follow-up call will be reviewed 
and signed by the PI. The participant’s reported symptoms  at this time point will be documented on a powerchart 
telephone note  by the clinical research coordinator. Serious adve rse events (SAE’s) are reported to IRB and FDA. 
If a participant reports an SAE, the PI will immediately be informed and she will then report it to the IRB and 
FDA. AE logs will be scanned to patients’ medical record s by the clinical research c oordinator once they are off-
study.  
 
 
7.7.9 Assessment of Cognitive Performance.    
Cognitive performance will be obtained using a battery of valid and reliable cognitive pe rformance tests has been 
selected for administration based on the results of prel iminary studies and previous research on the impact of 
cognitive training and nutritional supplementation on cognitiv e performance in older adults as well as previous 
research on cognitive deficits in breast cancer survivors. The tests will be used to derive composite indices for the 
domains of memory, executive functioning, processing speed, visual-spatial ability, and attention/concentration. 
The assessment of each domain with multiple measures is designed to more fully represent the domain and to 
minimize the possibility that scores reflect idiosyncratic  performance on a single test. The assignment of measures 
to domains is based on accepted descriptions of their functional demands. We recognize that these measures are 
not pure tests of a domain and that some measures may draw on multiple domains. Nevertheless, the assignment 
of measures to domains as organized below can be considered a useful heuristic for characterizing cognitive 
functioning. To ensure the quality of the data collected, these tests will be administered and scored only by 
research personnel at Moffitt Cancer center qualified and traine d by Drs. Heather Jim and Small before the start of 
the study and supervised by them during the course of the study.    Cognitive Status. Mini-Mental State Examination, (MMSE) (Appendix IX). This domain will be used
 to screen for 
and estimate the severity of cognitive impairment in order to determine participant’s eligibility to participate in the 
study.  The MMSE has demonstrated validity and reliability in psychiatric, neurologic, geriatric, and other medical 
populations.  
 
Estimated Intellectual Ability.  The Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR) 127 (Appendix X) requires 
participants to pronounce 50 irregular words that cannot  be easily decoded phonetically.  Previous studies have 
shown that performance on the NART is highly correlate d with general intelligence (factor ‘g’) as measured by 
the Wechsler intelligence scales127. (Accordingly, the WTAR will be admini stered to all participants at baseline 
only to obtain an estimate of overall intellectual ability).   WTAR scores will be used for descriptive purposes and 
as a covariate in all analyses comparing cogn itive performance in the study samples.  
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 22Verbal Fluency. The Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT) 144 is a measure of verbal fluency and is a 
subtest of the Multilingual Aphasia Examination (MAE; Benton, Hamsher, & Sivan, 1994). At baseline, the 
COWA uses the three letter set of F, A, S  (Appendix XI)to assess phonemic fluency. Individuals are given 1 min 
to name as many words as possible beginning with one of  the letters. The procedure is then repeated for the 
remaining two letters. This is then repeated at the end of study using the letters P, R, W (Appendix XII). 
 Memory.  This domain will be assessed with separate me asures of visuospatial memory and verbal memory.  
Visuospatial memory will be assessed using the Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised (BVMT-R) (Appendix XIII). Respondents are presented with six geometric figures pr inted in a 2 x 3 array.  In three learning trials, 
respondents view the array for 10 seconds and are then asked  to draw as many of the figures as possible in their 
correct location.  After a 20 to 25-minute delay, the task is repeated. Then, the respondent is asked to identify the 
six figures from among 12 figures.  These procedures will be  used to obtain two summary scores.  The immediate 
recall score represents the number of design features corre ctly reproduced across the three learning trials.  The 
delayed recall score represents the number of desi gn features correctly reproduced 20-25 minutes following 
presentation. Form 1 will be used at the baseline visit (A ppendix XIV) and Form 2 at the end of treatment visit 
(Appendix XV). Verbal memory will be assessed using Form 1 of Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised (HVLT-R) 
129,143 at baseline (Appendix XVI) and Form 2 at the end of study visit (Appendix XVII). Respondents 
are given three trials to learn a list of 12 concrete nouns organized into three taxonomic categories.  After a 20-25 minute delay in which other tests will be administered, respondents will be given a delayed free recall task. Immediately following the free recall task, respondents will be asked to recognize the original 12 words from a 
list of 24 words.  In total, four measures of memory performance will be derived from this task: immediate recall, 
delayed free recall, retention (delayed free recall divided by best immediate recall trial), and recognition discrimination index (the total number of true-positive responses subtracted by the total number of false-positive 
errors, including semantically rela ted and unrelated errors).   
 Attention/Concentration.  This domain will be assessed  using the Digit Span (Appendix XVIII) subtest of the 
Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth Edition (WMS-III) at baseline and end of study 130 and Part 1 of the Color 
Trails Test (CTT-1) 131 at baseline and end of study (Appendix XIX) .  The Digit Span assesses immediate verbal 
memory and auditory attention.  The examiner reads increasingly longer series of numbers and the respondent is required to repeat them in the same order.  The examiner then reads additional sequences of numbers and the respondent is required to repeat them in reverse order.  The Digit Span subtest yields one score, number of items completed correctly.  The CTT is an analogue of the orig inal Trail Making Test without significant influence of 
language.  CTT-1 consists of a page with scattered circles numbered from 1 to 25.  Even numbered circles are 
colored yellow and odd-numbered ones are colored pink.  Respondents are instructed to connect the circles in consecutive numeric order with a continuous line as quickly as possible.  The alternating colors are not mentioned 
in the instructions.  A total score is determined by recording the number of seconds required to complete the task.   
Executive Functioning.  This domain will be assessed using Part 2 of the Color Trails Test (CTT-2) 
131  (Appendix 
XX and the Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT) 132  (Appendix XXI) at baseline and end of study. The CTT-2 
will be administered immediately following the CTT-1.  It consists of a page cont aining 25 pink circles and 25 
yellow circles numbered 1 to 50.  Respondents are instruct ed to connect the circles in consecutive order while 
alternating colors (1 pink, 2 yellow, 3 pink, etc.). A tota l scored is determined by r ecording the number of seconds 
required to complete the task.  Alternate forms will be used at the follow-up assessments.  The SDMT requires 
respondents to write the number that corresponds with each symbol for a series of 110 items in which the symbol 
but not the number appears. Respondents identify the correct number using a key provided in which a different 
abstract symbol is matched with a different number.  A total score is determined by calculating the number of 
items correctly completed in 90 seconds. 
 Visual-Spatial Ability. At baseline and end of study, th is domain will be assessed using the Rey Complex Figure 
Copy133 (Appendix XXII), which asks respondents to reproduce a co mplicated line drawing.  The time it takes a 
respondent to do so and the number of errors that she makes are used as the basis for scoring.  This test has been 
shown to be sensitive to impairments in vi sual-spatial ability in breast cancer survivors 7. 
 Calculation of Domain Scores and Impairment Scores.  As in prior research incorporating a non-cancer 
comparison sample, data from the CA- sample will be used to convert raw scores on each test index into 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 23standardized z scores.  A domain score for each of the f our domains listed above will be  calculated by averaging 
the z scores of all the tests indices comprising a domain.  In addition to calculating continuous scores for each test 
index and domain, data from the CA- sample will be used to characterize performance on each individual test 
index as impaired or not impaired.  Consistent with previous research 134 , impairment will be defined as ≥1 
standard deviation be low population norms. 
 
 7.7.10 Self-Report Measures (Baseline and End of Study) 
 
7.7.10.1 Depressive Symptomatology.   The Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders Health 
Questionnaire – 9 (PHQ-9)137  (Appendix XXIII) will be used to assess depressive symptomatology.  The 
PHQ-9 consists of 9 items assessing depression on a 4-poi nt scale (0=not at all, 3=nearly every day).  
Items are summed for a total score ranging from 0 to 27 with higher scores indicating greater depressive 
symptomatology.  The PHQ-9 is a short self-report questionnaire that shows good sensitivity and specificity to assessment of depressive disorders by mental health professionals in primary care patients 
137-138 and cancer patients 139. 
 
7.7.10.2  Fatigue Symptomatology .  The Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI)140-141 (Appendix XXIV) is a 
14-item scale that assesses the frequency, severity, and disruptiveness of fatigue.  Frequency is measured 
in two ways: the number of days fatigue was experien ced in the past week; and the portion of the day on 
average the respondents felt fatigued.  Severity in the past week is measured on an 11-point scale (0 = not 
at all fatigued; 10 = as fatigued as I could be).  Disruptiveness in seven different domains of daily 
functioning is also evaluated.  These domains  are assessed on separate 11-point scales (0 = no 
interference; 10 = extreme interference).  Responses to these seven items are summed to provide a total 
interference score.  Previous research has demonstrated the reliability and validity of the FSI with individuals diagnosed with cancer. 
 
7.7.10.3  Subjective Cognitive Function .  The Patient’s Assessment of Own Functioning Inventory 
(PAOFI) 
142 (Appendix XXV) will be used to assess patients’ perceptions of their cognitive functioning.  
The PAOFI consists of 33 items which assess cognitiv e functioning on a 6 point scale (1=almost always, 
6=almost never).  Items are summed to produce four  subscales: memory, higher level cognition, language 
and communication, and motor sensory processing.   
 
7.7.11  Safety Markers: All safety markers will be performed at  the Moffitt Cancer Center Clinical 
laboratories in real time. Non-fasting blood sample will be drawn at the screening visit (unless labs available 
within 7 days (+/- 3 days), and monthly, using sterile needles for the following studies:  
 
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP including LDL):  Approximately 10 ml of blood will be 
collected in a speckled red-top SST tube and processed at the clinic site by standing for 20–60 minutes to 
clot, then spinning for 20 minutes at 3200 rpm. The sample will be used for the CMP with LDL (Moffitt Cancer Center Labs). 
 
Complete Blood Count (CBC) : Approximately 2.5 ml of blood collected in lavender top EDTA-
containing tubes will be used for CBC. A complete bl ood count (CBC) will be completed using electronic 
cell sizing sorting cytometry/microscopy. Tests performed as part of the CBC panel include the 
following: WBC; RBC; HgB; HCT; MCV; MCH; MCHC; RDW; PLT; MPV; absolute neutrophils; 
absolute bands; absolute lymphs; absolute monocytes; absolute eosinophils; and absolute basophils (Moffitt Cancer Center Labs).  
 
PT/PTT: Blood will be collected in one full 3.2% sodium citrate (light blue-top) tube. The correct blood 
to citrate ratio is critical—do not overfill or under fill  the tube. Mix by inversion four times. Samples are 
stable for 24 hours at room temperature. If the samp le will be stored longer than 24 hours, centrifuge 
specimen within one hour of collection at 2500–3000 rpm. Transfer plasma to a pl astic screw-top vial and 
freeze at –20ºC immediately (Moffitt Cancer Center Labs). 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 247.7.12 Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress.  A number of biomarkers of oxida tive stress and inflammation have 
been shown to change with age and disease. For example the isoprostanes are a family of eicosanoidsformed in 
vivo from the free radical catalyzed peroxidation of arachodonic acid that is independent of cyclooxygenase 
activity. They appear to be reliable ma rkers of lipid peroxidation. Levels of 8-isoprostane increase with age in 
some but not all studies, and are reduced by diets high in  fruits and vegetables. Idea lly measured with GC-mass 
spectroscopy, isoprostanes can also be measured by ELISA. Other markers of lipid peroxidation include 
malondiadehyde that can easily be measured, although it may reflect some enzyme dependent peroxidation and 
inflammation is still a valuable measure for comparison with other studies. Markers of protein oxidation and 
nitration have also been shown to increase with age a nd 2 markers routinely measured are protein carbonyls and 
3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT). Furthermore, oxidative DNA damage is another marker measured in aging as it is widely 
thought that oxidative damage to DNA is a significant c ontributor to age-related di sease as well as cancer. 
Oxidative DNA damage markers are also decreased in hum ans following diets high in fruits and vegetables. 
Markers of inflammation are also useful and also show  up-regulation with age and disease. Plasma samples will 
be analyzed for several biomarkers of inflammation and oxi dative stress. These methods are in routine use in Dr. 
Bickford’s lab for rodent studies and will be adapted for human plasma: Isoprostanes (8-epi prostoglandin F2 α) 
will be measured by ELISA (Cayman Chemical); 3-NT w ill also be measured by ELISA and we will make our 
own plates using routine methods for ELISA with comme rcially available antiserum (3-NT EIA antiserum from 
Cayman Chemical). Protein carbonyls are measured by  oxy-blot techniques (Chemicon). 8-oxodeoxyguanisine is 
measured by ELISA (Cayman Chemicals). MDA is measured  by HPLC, which is more specific for MDA than the 
TBAR assay. 
 
One 10 ml of blood will be collected in  a green top vacutainer and centrifuged 3000 RPM /10 minutes/ RT  to 
isolate the plasma portion of blood. Approximately 5 ml of plasma will be collected and transferred into 1 ml 
plasma aliquots. These will be stored in labeled screw cap tubes at -80 C in the Tissue Core of the Moffitt Cancer 
Center until analysis.  
 
7.7.13 Inflammatory markers-Cytokines  will be measured with a panel including IL-1, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-
10, IL-12, GM-CSF, IFN-gamma, TNF α, and CRP (BioRad-Bioplex). All of these biomarkers have been shown 
to increase with disease, aging and cytotoxic agents and will be used to monitor compliance with the dietary 
supplementation group and as a covariate in the analysis  of cognitive function. The cytokine panel will be 
completed by Dr. Djeu in her research laboratories.  
One 10 ml of blood will be collected in a purple top (EDTA) vacuatiner and centrifuged at 3000 RPM /10 minutes/ RT for isolation of PBMC, plasma and RBC. Appr oximately 5 ml of plasma will be collected and placed 
into one labeled screw cap tube and frozen at -80C. The Bu ffy Coat with adjacent layer of plasma & RBC with be 
harvested and transferred to 50 cc conical tube with  10ml of PBS. The remaining RBC will be harvested and 
washed 3 times with PBS and then re -suspended in equal volume of distilled water. Two,  1 ml RBC aliquots will 
be placed in labeled screw cap tubes and frozen in at -80C. Harvested BC will be harvested on Ficol for PBMC 
(no cell count required). PBMC will be washed once in PBS and the cells will then be re-suspend in 2ml of 
Freezing Media (40 ml FBS + 7 ml DMSO + 3 ml RPMI). Two, 1ml aliquots of PBMC will be placed in labeled cryovials, and frozen MR. Once frosty, they will be placed in storage. All samples will be stored in the Tissue Core at Moffitt Cancer enter until analysis. 
 
2 - 10 ml tube will be forwarded to Tissue Core labs at the Moffitt Cancer Center for processing and storage. 
Once labs specimens for 40 subjects (pre and post interventi on) have been collected, they will be transported from 
Tissue to Dr. Bickford’s lab at USF and Dr. Djeu’s lab at MCC by the clinical research coordinators, using 
appropriate containers to preserve the temperature and thus integrity of the specimens for assay of oxidative stress 
markers.     The plasma collected for assay of oxi dative test markers and cytokines will be stored for a maximum of 12 
months at -80ºC. All specimens collected for assay of safety markers (CBC, CMP, PT, PTT, and LDL) will not be 
stored as they will be completed in real time.  7.7.14 Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Structural and Resting-state functional MRI (fMRI):  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 25 
 Self-reported ‘chemo-brain’ has been validated using ne uropsychological tasks and more recently, neuroimaging 
 studies have identified structural 123  and performance differences between patients (i.e. those treated with 
 chemotherapy) and controls 122,124,126.  For example, a recent functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) 
 study has demonstrated that when compared to  controls, chemotherapy treated patients show 
 hyporesponsiveness in areas of the brai n associated with impaired planning be havior and attentional abilities (i.e. 
 paraphippocampal gyrus, left cuneus, right dorsal striatum, right inferior parietal cortex and left middle temporal 
 gyrus). Specifically, longitudinal assessments of chemot herapy-induced structural changes in cerebral white 
 matter and its correlation with impaired cognitive functioning have been reported in breast cancer patients 145-146. 
 Differences in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) white ma tter (WM) integrity parameters [fractional anisotropy 
 (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD)] between patients a nd healthy controls were assessed using a voxel-based two-
 sample-t-test. In comparison with healthy controls, the patient group demonstrated decreased FA in frontal and 
 temporal WM tracts and increased MD in frontal WM 145-146. 
 
Research has demonstrated that an overall diffuse damage to  white and gray matter of the brain is likely to disrupt 
overall brain organization, reducing efficiency of informa tion transfer.  Previous studies have suggested  that 
breast cancer survivors show decreased efficiency of neural networks, requiring more functional activation across 
a range of brain regions to complete certain tasks compared to healthy women 152,155. The specific pattern  of brain 
changes following breast cancer and chemotherapy, including global versus local deficits, would have important 
implications for developing the most effective interv entions for breast cancer-related cognitive  deficits. 
Elucidation of large-scale brain network configuration in  breast cancer may therefore contribute  important new 
information regarding the neurobiologi c mechanisms of breast cancer-relate d cognitive  impairment. Research 
has demonstrated that an overall diffuse damage to white a nd gray matter of the brain is  likely to disrupt overall 
brain organization, reducing efficiency of information tr ansfer.  Previous studies have  suggested that breast 
cancer survivors show decreased efficiency of neur al networks, requiring more functional  activation 
across a range of brain regions to complete certain tasks compared to healthy women. 152,155 The  specific pattern 
of brain changes following breast cancer and chemotherapy, including global versus  local  deficits, would 
have important implications for developing the most  effective interventions for breast cancer- related 
cognitive deficits. Elucidation of larg e-scale brain network configuration in breast cancer may therefore contribute 
important new information regarding the neurobiologic mechanisms of breast cancer-related cognitive 
impairment153.  
 
Resting-state fMRI measures spontaneous low-frequency fl uctuations in the BOLD signal to investigate the 
functional architecture of the brain. Spatial patterns of  spontaneous fluctuations in blood oxygenation level-
dependent (BOLD) signals reflect the underlying neural architecture. The study of the brain network based on these self-organized patterns is termed resting-state functional MRI (fMRI). Resting state functional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI), combined with structural connectivity ma pping, has proven to be a useful probe for functional 
alterations in the brain as a consequence of changes in brain state, disease processes, neurodevelopment and 
aging, pharmacological interventions such as chemothe rapy, and genetics 151-155. Additionally, several fMRI 
studies have demonstrated that some of these self-organizi ng, resting state networks coincide with brain regions 
that are found to be deactivated across several fMRI studies where an external stimulus or a cognitive paradigm is 
applied. Thus, these brain locations are more active at rest than during task performance. Resting state functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a reliable, non-inv asive method for examining the intrinsic topology of 
large-scale brain networks 154. Resting state fMRI networks are task-independent and thus less vulnerable to 
confounds due to performance variance . These observations have led to the hypothesis that the brain remains 
active in an organized fashion during the resting state,  denoted the default mode network (DMN). The default 
mode hypothesis has been extensively studied, including direct electrophysiological measurement of default network areas, and its changes in different clinical stat es of consciousness. The concepts and exploration of the 
DMN has therefore been regarded as "a paradigm shif t in functional brain imaging'' 147, 150, 148, 149, 153. 
Resting state fMRI connectivity studies are sensitive to abnormal global network organization, revealing changes 
in several clinical populations, including breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapy153.. Bruno et al (21012) 
applied resting state functional magnetic resonance im aging and graph theoretical analysis to examine the 
connectome in breast cancer survivors treated with chemotherapy relative to healthy comparison women. 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 26Compared to healthy females, the breast cancer group displayed altered global brain network organization 
characterized by significantly decreased global clustering as well as disrupted regional network characteristics in 
frontal, striatal and temporal areas. Breast cancer surv ivors also showed significantly increased self-report of 
executive function and memory difficulties compared to healthy females. These results suggest that topological 
organization of both global and regi onal brain network properties may be disrupted following breast cancer and 
chemotherapy. This pattern of altered network organization is  believed to result in reduced efficiency of parallel 
information transfer. This is the first report of altera tions in large-scale functional brain networks in this 
population and contributes novel information regarding the neurobiologic mechanisms underlying breast cancer-
related cognitive impairment 153-154. 
We thus propose to evaluate both chemotherapy-induced changes in structural and functional parameters by 
evaluating (a) differences in cerebral white matter integrity [fractional anis otropy (FA) and mean diffusivity 
(MD)] maps before and after treatment with COGNUTRIN by using magnetic resonance DTI; (b) we will 
perform resting state fMRI to determine changes in pr efrontal executive functioning in breast cancer patients 
treated from baseline and post intervention with COGNUTRIN compared to placebo. To date, imaging studies 
have only focused on assessing structural and functiona l cognitive disruption induced by chemotherapy. The 
proposed study aims to replicate these findings and extend them by testing the proposed interventions ability to 
offset the changes in cognitive performance in breast  cancer patients post chemotherapy treatment.   
  Subjects will be provided prepared, specific and consistent instructions over the intercom prior to start of MRI as 
 follows: “Keep your eyes closed, relax, try not to move, try to stay awake and just let your thoughts wander.” All  subjects will be imaged on a 3T scanner with  an eight channel phased- array head  coil.  Time in scanner for 
 technician getting the imaging optimized for the patient is 5 minutes. 
 
The resting fMRI will be completed first prior to others.  Resting FMRI data will be acquired (Bruno et al, 2012) 
while participants rest in the scanner with their eyes closed using a T2* weighted gradient echo spiral pulse 
sequence: relaxation time = 2000 msec, echo time = 30 msec, flip angle = 80° and 1 interleave, field of view = 220, matrix = 64×64, in-plane resolution = 3.125. Number of data frames that will be collected is 216. An 
automated high-order shimming method based on spiral acquisitions will employed to reduce field heterogeneity. 
To co register and normalize functional images with a standardized template, a high-resolution, 3 dimension 
inversion-recovery prepared fast spoiled gradient ec ho anatomical scan will be acquired: relaxation time: 
minimum, echo time: minimum, flip: 11 degrees, inversion time: 300 msec, bandwidth: +/ −31.25 kHz, field of 
view: 24 cm, phase field of view: 0.75, slice thic kness: 1.5mm, 125 slices, 256×256 at 1 excitation. The total 
scan time is estimated at 10 minutes. 
 A T1- weighted whole brain 3D-TFE (182 contiguous co ronal slices; 250 x 250 mm2 FOV; 4.6 ms TE; 9.7 ms 
TR; 1.2-mm slice thickness; 256 x 256 matrix; 0.98 x 0.98 x 1.2 mm
3 voxel size). T2-weighted TSE (28 
transversal slices; 230 x184 mm2 FOV; 4-mm slice thickness; 3,000 ms TR; 80 ms TE), and a FLAIR (28 
transverse slices; 230 x 183 mm2 FOV; 125 ms TE; 11,000 ms TR; 2,800 ms IR delay; 4-mm slice thickness; 256 
x 256 matrix; 0.65 x 0.87 x 4 mm3 voxel size) will also be acquired to confirm absence of primary  brain 
pathology as an exclusion criterion. Scan time 10 minutes . 
 
A  whole  brain  DTI  SE-EPI (diffusion- weighted si ngle shot spin-echo echoplanar imaging) will be acquired 
with  the following scanning parameters: 68 contiguous  sagittal slices, 112 x 109 matrix  size, 220 x 220 mm2   
FOV, 4,956 ms TR, 55 ms TE, 2.5 parallel  imaging factor, 2.2-mm slice thickness, 1.96 x 1.96 x 2.2 mm3  voxel 
size. Diffusion gradients will be applied along 45 nonco llinear directions with a b-value of 800 s mm-2. 
Additionally one nondiffusion-weighted (b ¼ 0) set of images will be acquired resulting in a total scan time of 
10.34 min.  
 
We anticipated a total scan time of 30-45 minutes for both structural and resting functional MRIs, including time to prepare subject. 
 
 8  CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION AND ENDPOINT DEFINITION 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 27 
8.1  Primary Endpoint 
The primary efficacy endpoint is to generate effect sizes fo r changes in the number of impaired neuropsychological tests. 
The planned intervention period is three months.  Neurops ychological outcomes will be examined using a 2 (group; 
COGNUTRIN, placebo) X 2 (time; baselin e, three-months) repeated measures ANOVA to examine differences in the 
number of impaired neuropsychological tests.    Age, premorbid cognitive f unctioning, depression and fatigue will be 
evaluated for association with neurocogn itive performance and entered as covariates in  statistical analyses if a marginally 
significant association (p<.10) is observed.  
  The primary safety endpoint is incidence and severity of AEs occurring during intervention with either COGNUTRIN or 
placebo. All AEs that are reported by the subject, detected during a visit, physical examination, or laboratory work-up will be recorded in the participant’s medical record and recorded on the CRF. All AEs that occur after the informed consent is 
signed will be recorded on the AE CRF wh ether or not related to study agent. 
 The sample size proposed in the current protocol will not pr ovide sufficient statistical power, but information regarding 
effect sizes will be gathered and used as motivation for futu re clinical trials. We estimate that a minimum evidence of 
improvement in cognitive function with the 3 month intervention as indicated by a score of 1 standard deviation or more 
above population norms on the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – Revised, Controlled Oral Word Association Test, or Color Trails Test Part 1 or 2 will be considered adequate to justify progression to a larger study. 
 
8.2  Secondary Endpoints 
The secondary endpoint will be improvement in subjective cognitive functioning as well as structural and resting state 
functional changes in MRI.                            
In addition we will examine the role of the cytokines and anti-oxidant biomarkers as me diators of reductions in the 
number of impaired cognitive tests. 
We will also examine if other factors such as fatigue, de pression, physical and functional activities are affected by 
COGNUTRIN compared to placebo.  
The sample size proposed in the current protocol will not pr ovide sufficient statistical power, but information regarding 
effect sizes will be gathered and used as motivation for future clinical trials. 
 
8.3  Off Agent Criteria  
Participants may stop taking study agent for the following reasons: 
 after completing the protocol-prescribed intervention  
 at the discretion of the investigator   
 AE or serious adverse events (SAE) requiring dose interruption  
 inadequate agent supply  
 noncompliance with study requirements  
 medical contraindication.  
 
8.4  Off Study Criteria 
If the subject never took study medication ( e.g., does not meet eligibility criteria or withdraws consent prior to 
randomization) the only activity required to remove the subj ect from the study is to complete the Off Study CRF. If the 
subject was randomized to a treatment arm and received stud y medication, post-intervention procedures according to the 
schedule of events should be completed to the extent possible.  
 not meeting randomization (eligibility) criteria  
 the protocol intervention and any protocol-required follow-up period is completed  
 experiencing an AE or SAE  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 28 lost to follow-up  
 taking a concomitant medication  
 medical contraindication prohibiting further study participation  
 discovery of a pre-existing condition not observed at baseline eligibility  
 withdrawal of consent  
 protocol non-compliance (i.e., visit schedule, dose administration, etc.) 
 at the discretion of the investigator  
 death  
 
Post-intervention procedures according to the schedule of  events will be completed to the extent possible.  
9  SPECIMEN MANAGEMENT  
 
9.1  Blood Samples 
All samples once drawn must be processed and stored appropriately  until pick-up by the designat ed courier to transport to 
the Moffitt Cancer Center clincial laboratories.  All safety labs  will be forwarded to the Moffitt clinical labs in real time 
(CBC/CMP/PT/PTT). 2 - 10 ml tube will be forwarded to Ti ssue Core labs at the Moffitt Cancer Center for processing 
and storage. Once labs specimens for 40 subjects (pre and post intervention) have been collected, they will be transported from Tissue to Dr. Bickford’s lab at USF and Dr. Djeu’s lab at MCC by the clinical research coordinators, using 
appropriate containers to preserve the temperature and thus  integrity of the specimens for assay of oxidative stress 
markers.  
10  REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS (AEs)  
 
DEFINITION: An adverse event is any unfavorable and uni ntended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of  a medical treatment or procedure that may or may not be 
considered related to the medical treatment  or procedure. An AE is a term that is a unique representation of a specific 
event used for medical documentation and scientific analyses. 
 A list of AEs that have occurred or might  occur (Reported AEs and Potential Risks)  can be found in § 6.2, Pharmaceutical 
Information as well as the Investigator Brochure.   
10.1  Adverse Events 
 
10.1.1  Reportable AEs  
All AEs that are reported by the subject, detected during a visit, physical examination, or laboratory work-up must 
be recorded in the participant’s medical record and recorded on the CRF. All AEs that occur after the start of 
study agent must be recorded on the AE CRF  whether or not related to study agent. 
 
10.1.2  Data Elements  
 AE reported date 
 AE Verbatim Term 
 CTCAE Term (v 4.0) 
 Event onset date and event ended date 
 Severity grade 
 Attribution to study  agent 
 (relatedness) 
 Whether or not the event was reported as a Serious AE (SAE) 
 Action taken with the study agent 
 Whether or not the subject dropped due to the event 
 Outcome of the event 
 Comments 
 
10.1.3  Severity of AEs 
Identify the AE using the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for AEs (CTCAE) version 4.0. The  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 29CTCAE provides descriptive terminology and a grading scal e for each AE listed. A copy of the CTCAE can be 
found at http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010-06-14_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf  
   
AEs will be assessed according to the CTCAE grade associated with the AE term. AEs that do not have a 
corresponding CTCAE term will be assessed according to th eir impact on the participant’s ability to perform daily 
activities as follows: 
   
Grade 
 Severity  Description   
  
1 
 Mild  Asymptomatic or mild symptoms, clinical or diagnostic observations only; intervention not indicated 
2  Moderate  Minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limited age-appropriate instrumental ADL* 
3  Severe  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life-threatening; hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization 
indicated; disabling; limiting self care ADL**  
4 Life threatening  Life threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated 
5 Fatal Death related to AE     
 * Instrumental ADL refer to preparing meals, shoppi ng for groceries or clothes, using telephone, managing 
money, etc. 
** Self care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and 
not bedridden. 
 
10.1.4  Assessment of relationship of AE to treatment 
Relationship of the AE to study drug will be classified as one of the following:  not related, unlikely, possibly, 
probably, definitely. All AEs will be considered due to drug (AEs classified as unlikely, possibly, probably or definitely) unless clearly not related to therapy. The severity and seriousness of each AE will be assessed by the 
site investigators.  
 
10.1.5  Follow-up of AEs 
All AEs, including lab abnormalities that in the opinion of  the investigator are clinically significant, will be 
 followed until resolution, if possible. If an AE persists  more than 30 days after the subject goes off study, the 
 subject will be referred to  their personal physician.  
 
10.2  SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (SAEs)  
DEFINITION: ICH Guideline E2A and Fed. Reg. 62, Oct. 7,  1997 define SAEs as those events, occurring at any dose, 
which meet any of the following criteria: 
 Results in death 
 Is life threatening (Note: the term life-threatening refers to an eve nt in which the patient was at risk of 
death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused 
death if it were more severe). 
 Requires inpatient hospitalization or pr olongation of existing hospitalization 
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
 Is a congenital abnormality/birth defect 
 Events that may not meet these criteria, but whic h the investigator finds very unusual and/or 
potentially serious, will also be reported in the same manner. 
 
Contact Dr. Kumar by phone or e-mail within 24 hours of knowledge of the event. A SAE regardless of relatedness or 
expectedness will be reported to the Principal Investigator by telephone within 24 hours of the PI/study team becoming 
aware of the event.  
  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 30FDA Notification by Sponsor:  Dr. Kumar will then notify the FDA by telephone or by facsimile transmission of any 
unexpected fatal or life-threatening experi ence associated with the use of the dr ug as soon as possible but no later than 
seven calendar days after the initia l receipt of the information.  
 
IRB Notification by Investigator: Reports of all SAEs (incl uding follow-up information) will be submitted to the all IRBs 
per state and federal guidelines. Copies of each report and docum entation of IRB notification and receipt will be kept in 
the Clinical Investigator’s binder. AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities identified in the protocol as critical to safety 
evaluations will also be reported the IND sponsor.  
 MCC and all participating orga nizations will comply with applicable re gulatory requirements at the participating 
institution related to reporting SAEs to the IRB.   
 
Follow-up of SAE:  Site staff should send follow-up reports as requested when a dditional information is available or to resolve queries. 
Additional information should be entere d on the SAE form in the appropriate format. Follow-up information should be 
sent to the Principal Investigator as soon  as possible. SAEs will be followed until r esolved or stable, especially for those 
related to the study agent.  
 
   
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3111  STUDY MONITORING 
 
11.1  Data Management 
The Data Management team will consist of  the PI, Biostatistician, and Data Entry Manager at MCC, Tampa, FL. As part 
of our efforts to ensure subject confidentiality, all names a nd other data, which might uniquely identify a subject, will be 
expunged from this data set. The database will be password protected and only the data entry person and project manager 
will have access to it. The computer that will house the database is part of a network that is backed up daily. The network 
also makes use of the latest in firewall technology to prev ent unauthorized access or tampering and keeps up-to-date virus 
protection on each computer as well as the network. 
 
Computer files will be backed on regular intervals. Informed consent documents will be kept in files in an area designated 
by the principal investigator.  
 The safety of the study will be monitored by the Principal I nvestigator according to the monitoring plan proposed in this 
Pilot clinical trial. The investigator will allocate adequate time for such monito ring activities. The investigator will also 
ensure that the monitor or other compliance or quality assura nce reviewer is given access to all the above noted study-
related documents and facilities ( e.g., pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the 
monitoring visit.  Internal Monitoring:  Data will be captured in Oncore, Mo ffitt’s Clinical Trial Database. The Case Report Forms will be 
reviewed by Moffitt’s Internal Monitors, periodically throug hout the conduct of this trial. The monitoring will include 
source data verification, utilizing research subject’s medical records.   
11.2  Case Report Forms 
Participant data will be collected using pr otocol-specific case report forms (CRFs).  
  
11.3  Source Documents 
Original documents ( i.e., informed consent forms) will be treated as source documentation for this clinical trial. 
 
11.4  Data and Safety Monitoring  
Toxicities will be monitored continuously through the trial by the IRB, Moffitt a nd FDA. The PI and Biostatistician along 
with the MDs in the study will be responsible for reviewing AEs after 20 subjects have completed the study. If 50% of 
patients randomized to the treatment arm e xperience grade III or greater adverse ev ents, we will discontinue this study. 
 
11.5  Sponsor or FDA Monitoring  
The investigator will permit study-rela ted monitoring, auditing, and inspectio n by the IRB and government regulatory 
bodies (FDA) of all study-related documents ( e.g., source documents, regulatory docu ments, laboratory data, data 
collection instruments, etc.). 
 
11.6  Record Retention 
Records for all participants will be retained, at a minimum, for two years after the approval of a New Drug Application 
(NDA) or as otherwise, directed by the Sponsor. The sponsor  will be notified prior to th e planned destruction of any 
materials. The records should be accessible for inspection and copying by authorized persons of the Food and Drug 
Administration. 
 
12  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 12.1  Study Design/Endpoints  
The central hypothesis for this Pilot clinical trial is that  adults who receive COGNUTRIN will exhibit reduction in the 
number of impaired cognitive tests, as compared to adults on the placebo. 
 
12.2  Sample Size/Accrual Rate 
In this pilot trial, we plan to accrue 40 evaluable subjects. This is a feasibility clin ical trial in preparation to inform the  
design of a well-powered randomized clinical trial.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 32 
12.3  Randomization and Stratification  
During the baseline/randomization visit, subjects will be random ized using block randomization.  The current design will 
ensure equal number of subjects in each arm receiving radia tion therapy post chemotherapy  and concurrent endocrine 
therapy.  
 12.4  Primary Endpoint 
The primary efficacy endpoint is to generate effect sizes fo r changes in the number of impaired neuropsychological tests. 
The planned intervention period is three months.  Neurops ychological outcomes will be examined using a 2 (group; 
COGNUTRIN, placebo) X 2 (time; baselin e, three-months) repeated measures ANOVA to examine differences in the 
number of impaired neuropsychological tests. Age, prem orbid cognitive functioning, depression and fatigue will be 
evaluated for association with neurocogn itive performance and entered as covariates in  statistical analyses if a marginally 
significant association (p<.10) is observed.   
 The primary efficacy endpoint is to generate effect sizes fo r changes in the number of impaired neuropsychological tests. 
The planned intervention period is three months.  Neurops ychological outcomes will be examined using a 2 (group; 
COGNUTRIN, placebo) X 2 (time; baselin e, three-months) repeated measures ANOVA to examine differences in the 
number of impaired neuropsychological tests.    Age, premorbid cognitive f unctioning, depression and fatigue will be 
evaluated for association with neurocogn itive performance and entered as covariates in  statistical analyses if a marginally 
significant association (p<.10) is observed.  The sample size  of 20 patients per arm will a llow us to generate useful 
information for future studies, in terms of anticipated effect size.  Although this pilot study is not designed to be fully 
powered, the current sample size will allow us to detect an effect size difference of .40 fo r a one-tailed paired sample t-
test, on account of the matched groups, at power of .80 and an al pha of .05.  Moreover, the sample sizes will enable us to 
detect a group X time interaction of .23, with an alpha of .05, power of .80, and a stability coefficient of .5.  
12.5  Secondary Endpoint(s) 
 
12.5.1  Is the number of impaired neuropsychological test s in the COGNUTRIN supplementation group mediated 
by changes in cytokines and anti-oxidant markers?   In order to examine the mediation of the intervention group 
effects on number of impaired neuropsychological tests by  changes in biomarkers, we will adopt a bootstrapping 
approach to this analysis.
  Baron and Kenny's approach to regression-based  statistical mediation. In this case, the 
95% confidence intervals around the bootstrapped indirect estimate will be examined to evaluate whether the 
mediation relationship is statistically significant.  Agai n, the analyses here are focused on generating information 
regarding the size of the effects, ra ther than statistical significance.  
  
 12.5.2   We thus propose to evaluate both chemotherapy-ind uced changes in structural and functional parameters 
 by evaluating (a) differences in cerebral white matter integrity [fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity 
 (MD)] maps before and after treatment with COGNUTRIN by using magnetic resonance DTI; (b) we will 
 perform resting state fMRI to determine changes in th e connectome in breast cancer patients treated from baseline 
 and post intervention with COGNUTRIN compared to pl acebo. To date, imaging studies have only focused on 
 assessing structural and functional cognitive disruption in duced by chemotherapy. The proposed study aims to 
 replicate these findings and extend them by testing the proposed interventi ons ability to offset the changes in 
 cognitive performance in breast cancer patients post chemotherapy treatment.   
 12.5.3 Evaluate the effects of COGNUTRIN on changes in subjective cognitive function.  We will evaluate the 
effect of COGNUTRIN on changes in subjective cognitive function; Complian ce will be evaluated by standard 
pill counts, diet records and plasma levels of anthocya nins and erythrocyte n-3 index.  Any unusual patterns in 
compliance will be noted and apparent discrepancies between pill counts or diet records and plasma levels by will 
be summarized as well. The collected data will be entere d through screens created by the Research IT analyst in 
ONCORE, the Research Data Management Systems used at the MCC.  12.5.4  Evaluate the effects of COGNUTRIN on changes in symptoms of fatigue and depression. Additionally, we will evaluate the effect of COGNUTRIN on changes in symptoms of fatigue and depression.  
Medication use such as antidepressants, tranquillizers a nd anxiolytics will also be obtained at baseline and 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 33throughout the study. As with age and fatigue, we will evaluate the effect of these medications for association 
with neurocognitive performance and entered as covariates in statistical analyses if a marginally significant 
association (p<.10) is observed.   
 
12.6  Evaluation of Toxicity 
The primary safety endpoint is incidence and severity of AEs occurring during intervention with either COGNUTRIN or 
placebo. All participants will be evaluated for toxicity from the time that the informed consent is signed up to the end of 
the intervention according to the NCI CTCA E version 4.0. Standard assessment of toxicity will also include interviews, 
clinical evaluation, and monitoring of laboratory values. All toxicity data will be summarized by category and grade in a 
standard fashion. Proportions experiencing most common types of toxicity in this trial will be estimated and exact 95% CIs calculated based on the exact binomial distribution fo r these proportions will be reported. Compliance will be 
evaluated by standard pill counts, diet records and plasma leve ls of anthocyanins and erythr ocyte n-3 index.  Any unusual 
patterns in compliance will be noted and apparent discrepancies between pill counts or diet records and plasma levels by 
will be summarized as well.  
 
12.7  Evaluation of Response   
All participants included in the study w ill be assessed for response to intervention, even if there are major protocol 
deviations.  We estimate that a minimum evidence of improve ment in cognitive function with the 3 month intervention as 
indicated by a score of 1 standard deviation or more a bove population norms on the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – 
Revised, Controlled Oral Word Association T est, or Color Trails Test Part 1 or 2 will be considered adequate to justify 
progression to a larger study. 
  13 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  13.1  Form FDA 1572 
Prior to initiating this study, the Principal Investigator at the participating organizations will provide a signed Form FDA 
1572 stating that the study will be conducte d in compliance with regulations for c linical investigations and listing the 
investigators  at each site that will participate in the protocol. 
 
13.2  Other Required Documents 
 Signed and dated current (within two year s) CV or biosketch for all investigators listed on the Form FDA 1572 for the 
PI and all co-investigators.  
 Current medical licenses for all investigators listed on Form FDA 1572 for the PI and co-investigators 
 Signed receipt of Investigator Brochure 
 Delegation of Responsibility form 
 IRB approval of protocol, informed  consent, recruitment materials 
 
13.3  Informed Consent 
All potential study participants will be gi ven a copy of the IRB-approved Informed Consent to review. The investigator or 
other research staff will explain all aspects of the study in lay language and answer all questions regarding the study. If the  
participant decides to participate in the study, he will be asked to sign the Informed Consent document. The subject is 
considered enrolled in the study from the time the informed consent document is signed. The study agent(s) will not be released to a participant who has not signed the Informed Consent document. Subjects who refuse to participate or who 
withdraw from the study will be treated without prejudice.   Participants must be provided the option to allow the use of  blood samples, other body fluids, and tissues obtained during 
testing, operative procedures, or other standard medical practices for further research purposes. A separate signature area 
is required to allow participants to opt out of allowing tissue to be used for further research.  
  The informed consent document must be reviewed and approve d by the IRB at each organization at which the protocol 
will be implemented prior to study initiati on. Any subsequent changes to the inform ed consent must be approved by each 
organization’s IRB for approval prior to initiation. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3413.4  Confidentiality   
Information about the study subjects will be kept confidentia l and managed according to the requirements of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Add itionally, subject will not be  identified by name, only 
subject identification numbers will a ppear on specimens and questionnaires. 
 
 13.5  Other 
This study is to be conducted according to US and internati onal standards of Good Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 
312 and International Conference on Harm onization guidelines), applicable govern ment regulations and Institutional 
research policies and procedures. 
  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 35 
14.0   REFERENCES  
1. Cancer Facts and Figures. American Cancer Society, Atlanta, Georgia. 2011.  
2. Aziz NM. Cancer survivorship research: state of  knowledge, challenges and opportunities. Acta Oncol. 
2007;46(4):417-32. Review.  PMID:  17497308. 
 3. Nelson CJ, Nandy N, Roth AJ.  Chemotherapy and cognitive deficits: mechanisms, findings, and potential 
interventions. Palliat Support Care. 2007 Sep;5(3):273-80. Review.  PMID:  17969831. 
 4. Boykoff N, Moieni M, Subramanian SK. Confronting chemobrai n: an in-depth look at survivors' reports of impact 
on work, social networks, and health care response. J Cancer Surviv. 2009;3(4):223-32.  PMCID: PMC2775115. 
 5. Vearncombe KJ, Rolfe M, Wright M, Pachana NA, Andrew  B, Beadle G. Predictors of cognitive decline after 
chemotherapy in breast cancer patients. J Int Neur opsychol Soc. 2009;15(6):9 51-62. PMID:  1970945. 
 6. Reid-Arndt SA. Breast cancer and "chemobrain": the c onsequences of cognitive difficulties following chemotherapy 
and the potential for recovery.  Mo Med. 2009;106(2):127-31.  PMID:  19797112. 
 7. Jim H & Small B. Cognitive Func tioning Following Adjuvant Treatment for Breast Cancer: A Controlled 
Comparison.  Proceedings of the International Cognition and Cancer Task Force in March, 2010. 
 8. Jansen C, Miaskowski C, Dodd M, Dowling G, Kramer  J. Potential mechanisms for chemotherapy-induced 
impairments in cognitive function. Onco l Nurs Forum. 2005;32(6):1151-63. Review. 
 
9. Kumar NB, Allen KA, Riccardi D, Bercu B, Cantor A, Mi nton S, Balducci L, Jacobsen  P.  Fatigue, Weight Gain, 
Lethargy and Amenorrhea in Breast Cancer Patients on Chemot herapy:  Is Subclinical Hypothyroidism the Culprit?  
Breast Cancer Research & Treatment.  2004;83:149-59. 
 
10. O'Shaughnessy JA, Vukelja SJ, Holmes FA, Savin M, Jones M, Royall D, George M, Von Hoff D. Feasibility of 
quantifying the effects of epoetin alfa therapy on c ognitive function in women with breast cancer undergoing 
adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clin Breast Cancer. 2005;5(6):439-46. 
 11.  Borysov S & Kumar NB.  In vitro studies of the pot ential mechanism of cognitive impairment with taxane-based 
therapies: Amyloid- β (Aβ) peptide 1-42 accumulation.  Unpublished preliminary studies.  
 
12. Small BJ, Sharp Rawson K, Walsh E, Jim HSL, Hughes TF, Iser L, Andrykowsk i MA & Jacobsen PB.   Catechol-O-
Methyltransferase (COMT) genotype modulates cancer treatment-related cognitive deficits.  Cancer.  (In press.) 
 
13. Abushamaa AM, Sporn TA, Folz RJ.  Oxidative stress a nd inflammation contribute to lung toxicity after a common 
breast cancer chemotherapy regimen.  Am J Ph ysiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002;283(2):L336-45. 
 14. Wolinsky FD, Unverzagt FW, Smith DM, Jones R, Stoddard A, Tennstetdt SL. The ACTIVE cognitive training trial 
and health-related quality of life: Protection that lasts for 5 years  Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences. 2006;61:1324-1329.  
 15. Rebok GW, Rasmusson DX, Brandt J. Prospects for comput erized memory training in normal elderly: Effects of 
practice on explicit and implicit memory tasks.  Applied Cognitive Psychology. 1996;10(3):211-223 
 16. Rasmusson DX, Rebok GW, Bylsma FW, Brandt J. Effects of three types of memory training in normal elderly. 
Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition. 1999;6:56-66. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3617. Labouvie-Veif G, Gonda JN. Cognitive strategy training and intellectual performance in the elderly. J Gerontol. 
1976;31(3):3327-3332. 
 
18. Kramer AF, Larish JL, Stayer DL. Training for attenti onal control in dual task settings: A comparison of young and 
older adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied. 1995;1(1):50-76. 
 19. Schaie KW, Hertzog C, Willis SL, Sc hulenberg J. Effects of cognitive training on primary mental ability structure. 
Psychol Aging. 1987;2(3):233-242. 
 20. Ball KK, Berch DB, Helmers KF, Jobe JB, Leveck MD, Marsiske M, Mo rris JN, Rebok GW, Smith DM, Tennstedt 
SL, Unverzagt FW, Willis SL, Advanced Cognitive Training fo r Independent and Vital Elde rly Study Group.  Effect 
of cognitive training interventions with older adults:  A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association. 2002;288:2271-2281. 
 21. Ball KK, Edwards JD, Ross LA. The impact of speed of  processing training on cognitive and everyday functions. 
Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2007;62B:19-31.  PMID:  
16019280. 
 22. Edwards JD, Wadley VG, Myers R, Roenker DL, Cissell GM, Ball KK. Transfer of a speed of processing 
intervention to near and far cognitive f unctions. Gerontology.  2002;48:329-340. 
 
23. Edwards JD, Wadley VG, Vance DE, Roenker DL, Ba ll KK. The impact of speed of processing training on 
cognitive and everyday performance. Aging & Mental Health. 2005;9:262-271. 
 
24. Roenker DL, Cissell GM, Ball KK, Wadley VG, Edward s JD. Speed-of-processing and driving simulator training 
result in improved driving performance. Human Factors.  2003;45(2):218-233. 
 26. Wolinsky FD, Unverzagt FW, Smith DM, Jones R, Stoddard A, Tennstetdt SL. The ACTIVE cognitive training trial 
and health-related quality of life: Protection that lasts for 5 years  Journals of Gerontology. Series A, Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences. 2006;61:1324-1329. 
 26. Wolinsky FD, Unverzagt FW, Smith DM, Jones R, Wright  E, Tennstetdt SL. The effects of the ACTIVE cognitive 
training trial on clinically relevant declines in health-rela ted quality of life. Journals  of Gerontology. Series A, 
Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences. 2006;61B(5):S281-S287. 
 27. Shytle RD, Ehrhart J, Tan J, Vila J, Cole M, Sanberg  CD, Sanberg PR, Bickford PC.  Oxidative stress of neural, 
hematopoietic, and stem cells: protection by natural compounds. Rejuvenation Res. 2007;10(2):173-8. PMID: 
17518694. 
 28. Luchsinger JA, Mayeux R. Dietary factors and Alzheimer's disease. The Lancet Neurology. 2004;3:579-587.  29. Shukitt-Hale B, Lau FC, Joseph JA. Berry Fruit Suppleme ntation and the Aging Brain. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry. 2008;56(3):636-641.  PMID:  18211020. 
 30. Joseph JA, Denisova N, Fisher D, Bickford P, Prior R, Cao G. Age-related neurodege neration and oxidative stress: 
Putative Nutritional Intervention. Neurologic clinics. 1998;16(3):747-755. 
 31. Olanow CW. A radical hypothesis for neurodege neration. Trends in Ne urosciences. 1993;16:439-444. 
 32. Ramassamy C. Emerging role of pol yphenolic compounds in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases:  A review 
of their intracellular targets. European Journal of Pharmacology. 2006;545:51-64. 
 33. Berger MM. Can oxidative damage be treated nutritionally? Clinical Nutrition. 2004;24:172-183. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3734. Markesbery WR. Oxidative stress hypothesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Free Radical Biology & Medicine. 
1997;23:134-147. 
 
35. Haddard JJ. Antioxidant and prooxidant mechanisms in  the regulation of redox(y)-sensitive transcription factors. 
Cellular Signalling. 2002;14:879-897. 
 36. Morris MC, Evans DA, Schneider JA, Tangney CC, Bienias JL, Aggarwal NT. Dietary folate and vitamins B-12 and 
B-6 not associated with incident Alzheimer's diseas e. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 2006;9(4):435-443. 
 37. Shaik YB, Castellani ML, Perrella A, Conti F, Salini V, Tete S, Madhappan B,  Vecchiet J, De Lutiis MA, Caraffa A, 
Cerulli G. Role of quercetin (a natural herbal compound)  in allergy and inflammation. Journal of Biological 
Regulators and Homeostatic Agents. 2006;20:47-52. 
 38. Ortiz D, Shea TB. Apple juice prevents oxidative stress i nduced by beta-amyloid in culture. Journal of Alzheimers 
Disease. 2004;6:27-30. 
 39. Dai Q, Borenstein AR, Wu Y, Jackson JC, Larson EB . Fruit and vegetable juices and Alzheimer's disease:  The 
KAME project. American Journal of Medicine. 2006;119:751-759. 
 40. Rowland IR, Wiseman H, Sanders TA, Adlercreutz H, Bowey EA. Interindividual variation in metabolism of soy 
isoflavones and lignans:  Influence of habitual diet on e quol production by the gut microflora. Nutrition and Cancer. 
2000;36:27-32. 
 41. Krikorian R, Nash TA, Shidler MD, Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA. Concord grape juice supplementation improves 
memory function in older adults. American Aging Association. Boulder, CO.  2008. 
 
42. Chan YC, Hosoda K, Tsai CJ, Yamamoto S, Wang MF. Fa vorable effects of tea on reduc ing the cognitive deficits 
and brain morphological changes in senescence-accelerate d mice. Journal of Nutrtition Sciences & Vitaminology. 
2006;52(4):266-273. 
 
43. Gallant S, Semyonova M, Yuneva M. Carnosine as a pot ential anti-senescence drug. Biochemistry. 2000;65(7):866-
868. 
 44. Meydani M. Nutrition interventions in aging and age- associated disease. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences. 2001;928:226-235. 
 45. Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Cheng V, Joseph JA. Dose-dependent effects of walnuts on motor and cognitive function 
in aged rats. Br J Nutr. 2008;9:1-5.  PMID:  18778529. 
 46. Siwak CT, Tapp PD, Head E, Zicker SC, Murphey HL, Muggenburg BA, Ikeda-Douglas CJ, Cotman CW, Milgram 
NW. Chronic antioxidant and mitochondrial cofactor admi nistration improves discrimination learning in aged but 
not young dogs. Progress in Neurops ychopharmacology & Biological Ps ychiatry. 2005;29(3):461-469. 
 47. Milgram NW, Head E, Zicker SC, Ikeda-Douglas CJ, Murphey H, Muggenburg B, Siwak C, Tapp D, Cotman CW.  
Learning ability in aged beagle dogs is preserved by behavi oral enrichment and dietary fortification: a two-year 
longitudinal study. Neurobiology of Aging. 2005;26(1):77-90. 
 48. Joseph JA, Shukitt-Hale B, Denisova NA, Prior RL, Cao G, Martin A, Taglialatela G, Bickford PC. Long-term 
dietary strawberry, spinach, or vitamin E supplementa tion retards the onset of age-related neuronal signal-
transduction and cognitive beha vioral deficits. Journal of Neuroscience. 1998;18:8047-8055. 
 49. Gemma C, Bickford PC. Interleukin-1beta and caspase -1: players in the regulation of age-related cognitive 
dysfunction. Review of Neuroscience. 2007;18(2):137-148.  PMID:  17593876. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3850. Cartford MC, Gemma C, Bickford PC. Eighteen-month- old Fischer 344 rats fed a spinach-enriched diet show 
improved delay classical eyeblink conditioning and reduced expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) 
and TNFbeta in the cerebellum. Journal of Neuroscience. 2002;22(14):5813-5816. 
 
51. Shytle RD, Ehrhart J, Tan J, Vila J, Cole M, Sanberg CD, Sanberg PR, Bickford PC. Oxidative stress of neural, 
hematopoietic, and stem cells: prot ection by natural compounds. Rejuve nation Research. 2007;10(2):173-178.  
PMID:  17518694. 
 
52. Mazza M, Pomponi M, Janiri L, Bria P, Mazza S. Omega-3 fatty acids and antioxidants in neurological and 
psychiatric diseases: An overview. Progress in Neuro-Psyc hopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry. 2007;31:12-26.  
PMID:  16938373. 
 53. Gadoth N. On fish oil and omega-3 supplementation in ch ildren: The role of such supplementation on attention and 
cognitive dysfunction. Brain Development. 2008;30:309-312.  PMID:  18006261. 
 
54. Barton D, Loprinzi C. Novel approaches to preventing chemotherapy-induced cognitive dysfunction in breast 
cancer: the art of the possible. Clin Br east Cancer. 2002;Suppl 3:S121-7. Review. 
 
55.  Ferguson RJ, Ahles TA, Saykin AJ, McDonald BC, Furstenberg CT, Cole BF, Mott LA. Cognitive-behavioral 
management of chemotherapy-relate d cognitive change. Psychooncology . 2007;16(8):772-7.  PMID:  17152119. 
 
56. Fan HG, Park A, Xu W, Yi QL, Braganza S, Chang J, Couture F, Tannock IF.The influence of erythropoietin on 
cognitive function in women following chemotherapy for breast cancer. Psychooncolog y. 2009;18(2):156-61.   
PMID:  18561284. 
 
57. Mar Fan HG, Clemons M, Xu W, Chemerynsky I, Breunis H, Braganza S, Tannock IF.A randomised, placebo-
controlled, double-blind trial of the effects of d-methylphenidate on fatigue and cognitive dysfunction in women undergoing adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Supp ort Care Cancer. 2008;16(6):5 77-83.   PMID:  17972110. 
 58.  Wald DS, Kasturiratne A, Simmonds M. Effect of folic acid, with or without other B vitamins, on cognitive decline: 
meta-analysis of randomized tr ials. Am J Med. 2010;123(6):522-527.e2.  PMID:  20569758. 
 
59. Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vicker s A, Blumberg JB. Should supplemental antioxidant 
administration be avoided during chem otherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100(11):773-83. 
PMID:  18505970. 
 
60. Greenlee H, Gammon MD, Abrahamson PE, Gaudet MM,  Terry MB, Hershman DL, Desai M, Teitelbaum SL, 
Neugut AI, Jacobson JS. Prevalence and predictors of anti oxidant supplement use during breast cancer treatment: the 
Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. Ca ncer. 2009;115(14):3271-82 .  PMCID:PMC2763503. 
 61. Smith PJ, Blumenthal JA. Diet a nd neurocognition: review of evidence and methodological considerations. Curr 
Aging Sci. 2010 Feb;3(1):57-66.  Review. PMID: 20298171 
 62.   Flirski M, and Sobow T.  Biochemical markers and ri sk factors of Alzheimer's disease. Curr Alzheimer Res.  
2005;2:47-64. 
 63. Irizarry MC. Biomarkers of Alzheimer di sease in plasma.  NeuroRx.  2004;1:226-234. 
 
64.   Ray S, Britschgi M, Herbert C, Takeda-Uchimura Y,  Boxer A, Blennow K, Friedman LF, Galasko DR, Jutel M, 
Karydas A, Kaye JA, Leszek J, Miller BL, Minthon L,  Quinn JF, Rabinovici GD, Robinson WH, Sabbagh MN, So 
YT, Sparks DL, Tabaton M, Tinklenberg J, Yesavage JA, Tibshirani R, Wyss-Coray T.  Classification and 
prediction of clinical Alzheimer's diagnosis based on plas ma signaling proteins.  Nat Med. 2007;13:1359-62.  PMID:  
17934472. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 3965.  Joseph JA, Shukitt-Hale B, Willis LM. Grape juice, berri es, and walnuts affect brain aging and behavior.  J Nutr. 
2009;139(9):1813S-7S. PMID:  19640963. 
 
66.  Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA .Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids improve cholinergic transmission in the 
aged brain. Genes Nutr. 2009 Aug 29.  PMCID:PM2775891. 
 67. Kumar NB, Krischer JP, Allen K, Riccardi D, Besterman- Dahan K, Salup R, Kang L, Xu P, Pow-Sang J.  A Pilot 
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial of Purified Isoflavones in Modulating Steroid Hormones in men diagnosed with Prostate Cancer.  Nutr Ca ncer. 2007;59(2):163-8.  PMCID:  PMC2435485. 
 
68. Kumar NB, Krischer JP, Allen K, Riccardi D, Besterman- Dahan K, Salup R, Kang L, Xu P, Pow-Sang J.  Safety of 
purified isoflavones in men with early stage prostate cancer.  Nutr Cancer. 2007;59(2):169-75.  PMCID:  
PMC2442460. 
 69. Kumar NB, Cantor A, Allen K, Ric cardi D, Besterman-Dahan K, Seigne J, Helal M, Salup R, Powsang J.  The 
Specific Role of Isoflavones in Reducing Prostate Cancer Risk.  Prostate. 2004;59(2):141-7. 
 70. Kumar NB, Allen KA, Cantor A, Riccardi D, Cox CE.  The Specific Role of Isoflavones on Estrogen Metabolism in 
Pre-menopausal Women.  Cancer.  2002:94(4):1166-74. 
 71. Kumar NB, Besterman-Dahan K, Kang L, Pow-Sang J, Xu P, Allen K, Riccardi D, Krischer JP. Results of a 
Randomized Clinical Trial of the Action of Several Doses of  Lycopene in Localized Prostate Cancer: Administration 
Prior to Radical Prostatectomy. Clin Med Urol.  2008:1:1-14. http://la-press.com/journal.php?journal_id=75 .  
PMCID:PMC2846655, 
 72. Kumar NB, Besterman-Dahan K, Kang L, Pow-Sang J, Xu P, Allen K, Riccardi D, Krischer JP. Results of a 
Randomized Clinical Trial of the Action of Several Doses of Isoflavones in Localized Prostate Cancer: 
Administration Prior to Radical Prostatectomy. J Soc Integrative Oncology.  2010 Winter;8(1):3-13.  PMID:  20205984. 
 73. Janle EM, Lila MA, Grannan M, Wood L, Higgins A, Y ousef GG, Rogers RB, Kim H, Jackson GS, Ho L, Weaver 
CM.  Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of 14C-labe led grape polyphenols in the periphery and the central 
nervous system following oral administration.   J Med Food.  2010;13:926-33.  PMID:  206703061. 
 74. Milbury PE and Kalt W. Xenobiotic metabolism and berr y flavonoid transport across the blood-brain barrier.  J 
Agric Food Chem.  2010;58:3950-56.  PMID:  20128604. 
 
75. Andres-Lacueva C, Shukitt-Hale B, Galli RL, Jauregui O, Lamuela-Raventos RM, Joseph JA.  Anthocyanins in aged 
lueberry-fed rats are found centrally and may e nhance memory. Nutr. Neurosci.  2005; 8:111-20. 
 
76. Kalt W, Blumberg JB, McDonald JE, Vinqvist-Tymchuk MR, Fillmore SA, Graf BA, O'Leary JM, Milbury PE.  
Identification of anthocyanins in the liver, eye, and br ain of blueberry-fed pigs, J. Agric. Food Chem.  2008;56:705-
12.  PMID:  18211026. 
 77. Prasain JK, Peng N, Dai Y, Moore R, Arabshahi A, W ilson L, Barnes S, Michael WJ, Kim H, Watts RL.  Liquid 
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry identificati on of proanthocyanidins in rat plasma after oral 
administration of grape seed extract.  Phytom edicine.  2009;16:233- 43.  PMID:  19095430. 
 
78. Lin LC, Wang MN, Tseng TY, Sung JS, Tsai TH.  Pharm acokinetics of (-)-epigallocatech in-3-gallate in conscious 
and freely moving rats and its brai n regional distribution.  J Agric Food Chem. 2007;55(4):1517-24.  PMID:  
17256961. 
 
79. Mandel S, Amit T, Reznichenko L, Weinreb O, Youdim MB. Green tea catechins as brain-permeable, natural iron 
chelators-antioxidants for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.  Mol. Nutr. Food Res.  2006;50:229-34.   
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 40 
80.  Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA. Recent advances in berry supplementation and ag e-related cognitive decline. 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2009;12(1):91-4. PMID:  19057194. 
 
81.  Shukitt-Hale B, Cheng V, Joseph JA. Effects of blackbe rries on motor and cognitive function in aged rats. Nutr 
Neurosci. 2009;12(3):135-40.  PMID:  19356316. 
 
82. Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA. Modulation of cognition and behavior in aged animals: role for antioxidant- 
and essential fatty acid-rich plant foods.  Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;89(5):1602S-1606S. Review.  PMID:  19339395. 
 
83.  Joseph JA, Fisher DR, Cheng V, Rimando AM, Shukitt- Hale B. Cellular and behavioral effects of stilbene 
resveratrol analogues: implications for reducing the deleterious effects of aging. J Agric Food Chem. 
2008;56(22):10544-51.  PMID:  18954071. 
 
84. Kumar NB, Crocker T, Bepler G . Phase II clinical trial of Omega-3 fatty acids in cancer cachexia. Proceeding of the 
International Society of Preventive Oncology, November 2009.   
 85.  Mustafa S, Walker A, Bennett G and Peter M. Wigmore5-Fluorouracil chemotherapy affects spatial working 
memory and newborn neurons in the adult rat hippocam pus. Eur J Neurosci.  2008;28:323-30.  PMID:  18702703. 
 86.  Monje ML, Vogel H, Masek M, Ligon KL, Fisher PG , Palmer TD.  Impaired Hu man Hippocampal Neurogenesis 
after Treatment for Central Nervous System Malignanc ies. Ann Neurol.  2007;62:515–520.  PMID:  17786983. 
 87. Block KI, Koch AC, Mead MN, Tothy PK, Newman RA, Gyllenhaal C. Impact of antioxidant supplementation on 
chemotherapeutic toxicity: a systematic review of the evidence from randomized contro lled trials. Int J Cancer. 
2008;123(6):1227-39. PMID:  18623084. 
 88.  Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vick ers A, Blumberg JB. Should supplemental antioxidant 
administration be avoided during chem otherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100(11):773-83. 
Review. PMID: 18505970 
 89.  Conklin KA. Chemotherapy-associated oxidative st ress: impact on chemotherapeutic effectiveness.  
Integr Cancer Ther. 2004;3(4):294-300. Review 
 90. Whitney KA, Lysaker PH, Steiner AR, Hook JN, Estes DD, Hanna NH. Is "chemobrain" a transient state? A 
prospective pilot study among persons with non-small cell lung cancer. J Support Oncol. 2008;6(7):313-21.  PMID:  
18847074. 
 91. Il'yasova D, Mixon G, Wang F, Marcom PK, Marks J, Spaso jevich I, Craft N, Arredondo F, DiGiulio R.  Markers of 
oxidative status in a clinical model of oxidative a ssault: a pilot study in human blood following doxorubicin 
administration. Biomarkers. 2009;14(5):321-5.  PMICD:  PMC2716435. 
 
92. Markesbery WR. Oxidative stress hypothesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Free Radical Biology & Medicine. 
1997;23:134-147. 
 
93. Acosta S, Jernberg J, Sanberg CD, Sanberg PR, Small BJ, Gemma C, Bickfo rd PC. NT-020, a Natural Therapeutic 
Approach to Optimize Spatial Memory Performance and In crease Neural Progenitor Cell Proliferation and Decrease 
Inflammation in the Aged Rat. Rejuvenation Res. 20 10 Jun 29.  Epub ahead of print.  PMID:  20586644. 
 94. Chan YC, Hosoda K, Tsai CJ, Yamamoto S, Wang MF. Fa vorable effects of tea on reduc ing the cognitive deficits 
and brain morphological changes in senescence-accelerate d mice. Journal of Nutrtition Sciences & Vitaminology. 
2006;52(4):266-273.  
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 4195. Gallant S, Semyonova M, Yuneva M. Carnosine as a pot ential anti-senescence drug. Biochemistry. 2000;65(7):866-
868.  
 
96. Gemma C, Vila J, Bachstetter A, and Bickford  PC.  Oxidative Stress and the Aging Brain: From 
Theory to Prevention. In Brain Aging: Models, Met hods and Mechanisms.  Ed. Riddle D. CRC Press.  2007:353-
374. 
  
97. Meydani M. Nutrition interventions in aging and age- associated disease. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences. 2001;928:226-235.  
 98. Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Cheng V, Joseph JA. Dose-dependent effects of walnuts on motor and cognitive function 
in aged rats. Br J Nutr. 2008;9:1-5.   PMID:  18778529. 
 100.  Calon F, Lim GP, Yang F, Morihara T, Teter B, Ubeda O, Rostaing P, Triller A, Salem N Jr, Ashe KH, Frautschy 
SA, Cole GM. Docosahexaenoic acid protects from dendritic  pathology in an Alzhei mer's disease mouse model. 
Neuron. 2004;43(5):633-45. 
 101.  Johnson EJ, Schaefer EJ. Potential role of dietary n-3 fatty acids in the prevention of dementia and macular 
degeneration. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;;83 (6 Suppl):1494S-1498S. 
 102.  Lim WS, Gammack JK, Van Niekerk J, Dangour AD. Omega 3 fatty acid for the prevention of dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2006;1:CD005379. Review. 
 103.  Lim GP, Calon F, Morihara T, Yang F, Teter B, Ubed a O, Salem N Jr, Frautschy SA , Cole GM. A diet enriched 
with the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid reduces amyloid burden in an aged Alzheimer mouse model. J 
Neurosci. 2005;25(12):3032-40. 
 
104. Schapira DV, Kumar NB, Lyman GH, Cox CE.  Abdominal Obesity and Breast Cancer Risk.   Annals of Internal 
Medicine.  1990;112:182-186. 
  
105. Schapira DV, Kumar NB, Lyman GH.  Estimate of Br east Cancer Risk Reduction with Weight Loss Cancer.  
1991;67:2622-2625 
 
106.  Godin G, Shephard RJ.  A simple method to assess exerci se behavior in the community. Can J Appl Sport Sci. 1985 
Sep;10(3):141-6.   PMID:  4053261.  
 
107. Jonnalagadda SS, Mitchell DC, Smiciklas-Wright H, Meaker KB, VanH eel N, Karmally W, Ershow A, Kris-
Etherton PM.  Accuracy of energy intake data estimated by a multiple-pass 24-hour recall technique. J Am Diet 
Assoc.  2000;100:303-311.  PMID:  10719403. 
 108.  Mitchell D, Shacklock F. Computers in nutrition: the Minnesota nutrition database. Nu tr Today.  1991;26:52-53. 
 109.  McBride J. Was it a slab, a slice or a sliver?: high t ech innovations take food survey to a new level. Agric Res.  
2001;49:4-7.   
 110. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, Horton J, Davis TE, McFadden ET, Carbone PP. Toxicity And 
 Response Criteria Of The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649-655, 1982 . 111.  Schroevers MJ, Sanderman  R, Sonderen E & Adelita V.  The evaluation of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies 
Depression (CES-D) scale: Depressed and Positive Affect in  cancer patients and healthy reference subjects. Quality 
of Life Research.  2000;9:1015-1029. 
 
112.  Donovan KA, Jacobsen PB, Small BJ, Munster PN & Andr ykowski MA. Identifying Clinically Meaningful Fatigue 
with the Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI). J Pain Symptom Manage. 2008;36(5):480–487. PMCID: PMC2590752 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 42 
113.  Diggle PJ, Heagerty P, Liang K-Y, Zeger SL.  Analys is of longitudinal data. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.  2002. 
 
114.  Yang H, Jiang Y.Research progress of bioactive constitu ents, absorption, metabolism, and neuroprotective effects 
from blueberry. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2010 Jul;39(4):525-8. 
 
115.  Del Rio D, Borges G, Crozier A. Berry flavonoids and phenolics: bioavailability and evidence of protective 
effects.Br J Nutr. 2010;104(Suppl 3):S67-90. 
 
116.  Spencer JP. The impact of fruit flavonoids on memory and cognition. Br J Nutr. 2010;104(Suppl 3):S40-7. Review. 
 
117.  Zafra-Stone S, Yasmin T, Bagchi M, Chatterjee A, Vinson JA, Bagchi D.Berry anthocyanins as novel antioxidants 
in human health and disease prevention. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2007;51(6):675-83. Review. 
 
118.  Spencer JP, Vafeiadou K, Williams RJ, Vauzour D. Ne uroinflammation: modulation by  flavonoids and mechanisms 
of action. Mol Aspects Med. 2012;33(1):83-97. Epub 2011 Nov 15. 
 
119.  Galli RL, Shukitt-Hale B, Youdim KA, Joseph JA.  Fru it polyphenolics and brain aging: nutritional interventions 
targeting age-related neuronal a nd behavioral deficits. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002;959:128-32. 
 
120.  Thomasset S, Berry DP, Cai H, West K, Marczylo TH , Marsden D, Brown K, Dennis on A, Garcea G, Miller A, 
Hemingway D, Steward WP, Gescher AJ. Pilot study of oral  anthocyanins for colorectal cancer chemoprevention. 
Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009;2(7):625-33. 
 
121.  Kay CD, Mazza G, Holub BJ, Wang J. Anthocyanin metabolites in human urine and serum. 
Br J Nutr. 2004;91(6):933-42. 
 122.  de Ruiter MB, Reneman L, Boogerd W, Veltman DJ , van Dam FS, Nederveen AJ , Boven E, & Schagen SB. 
Cerebral hyporesponsiveness and cognitive impairment 1- years after chemotherapy for breast cancer. Human Brain 
Mapping.  2011;32:1206-19.   
 
123.  McDonald BC, Conroy SK, Ahles TA, West JD, & Saykin AJ. Gray matter reduction associated with systemic 
chemotherapy for breast cancer: a prospective MRI stud y. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment.  2010;123:819-
28.  
 
124.  Scherling C, Collins B, MacKenzie J, Bielajew C, & Smith A.  Pre-chemotherapy differences in visuospatial 
working memory in breast cancer patients compared to controls: an fMRI study. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience.  2011;5:122. 
 125.  Talairach J, Tounoux P. Co-planar stereotactic atl as of the human brain: 3-dinsional proportional system: An 
approach to cerebral imaging. Stuttgart: Thieme.  1988 
 126.  Saykin AJ, McDonald BC, Ahles T, Chesnut LA, Wang PJ, Furstenberg CT, Ho rrigan SA, & Mamourian AC. 
Altered brain activation following syst emic chemotherapy for breast cancer: interim analysis from a perspective 
fMRI study’, in Abstract presented at 34th Annual Meeting of  the International Neurophysiological Society, Boston.  
2006. 
 
127.  The Psychological Corporation. Wechsler Test of Adult Reading. San Antonio TX: Harcourt Assessment.  2001. 
 
128.  Bendict R. Brief Visuo-Spatial Memory Test-R evised (BVMT-R). Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources. 1997. 
 
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 43129.  Brandt J. The Hopkins Verbal Learning Test: development of a new memory test with six equivalent forms. Clin 
Neuropsychologist. 1991;5:125-42. 
 
130.  Weschler D. WAIS-III administration and scoring manua l. San Antonio TX: Psychological Corporation; 1997. 
 131.  Maj M, D'Elia L, Satz P, Janssen R, Zaudig M, Uchiya ma C, Starace F, Galderisi S, Chervinsky A, World Health 
Organization, Division of Mental Health/Global Programme on AIDS. Evaluation of two new neuropsychological tests designed to minimize cultural bias in the assessment of HIV-1 seropositive persons: A WHO study. Archives of 
Clinical Neuropsychology. 1993;8:123-35. 
 
132.  Benton A, Hamsher K. Multilingual Aphasia Exam ination. Iowa City, IA: AJA Associates. 1989. 
 
133.  Meyers J, Meyers KE.  Rey Complex Figure Test  and Recognition Trial.  Lutz, FL: PAR, Inc. 1996. 
 
134.
  Weineke MH & Deenst ER. Nueropsychological asse ssment of cognitive function following chemotherapy 
for breast cancer.  Psycho-oncology. 1995;4: 61-6. 
 
135.  Eriksen BA, Eriksen CW.  Effects of noise letters upon identification of a target letter in a non- search task. 
Perception and Psychophysics.  1974; 16:143–9 
 
136.  Roche RAP, Garavan H, Foxe JJ, & O'Mara SM.  Indivi dual differences discriminate event-related potentials but not 
performance during response inhibition. Experi mental Brain Research.  2005; 160:60-70. 
 137.  Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation a nd utility of a self-report version of PRIME-MD: The PHQ 
primary care study. JAMA. 1999;282:1737-44. 
 138.  Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Lowe B. The Patient Health Questionnaire Somatic, Anxiety, and 
Depressive Symptom Scales: A systematic re view. Gen Hosp Psychiary. 2010; 10:345-59. 
 139.  Thekkumpurath P, Walker J, Butcher I, Hodges L, Klei boer A, O'Connor M, Wall L, Murray G, Kroenke K, Sharpe 
M. Screening for major depression in cancer  outcomes. Cancer.  2011; 117:218-27. 
 140.  Hann DM, Jacobsen PB, Azzarello LM, Martin SC, Curra n SL, Fields KK, Greenberg H, Lyman G. Measurement of 
fatigue in cancer patients: Development and validation of the Fatigue Symptom I nventory. Quality of Life Research.  
1998;7:301-10. 
 141.  Hann DM, Denniston MM, Baker F. M easurement of fatigue in cancer patient s: Further validation of the Fatigue 
Symptom Inventory. Quality of Life Research. 2000;9:847-54. 
 
142.  Chelune CJ, Heaton RK, Leahman RAW.  Neuropsychologi cal and personality correlates of patients' complaints of 
disability.  In: Goldstein G, Tarter RE, editors.  Advances in Clinical Neuropsychology, Vol. 3.  New York: Plenum 
Press; Plenum Press: 95-126. 
 
143. Benedict R, Schretlen D, Groninger L,  Brandt J. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test Revised: normative data and analysis 
of inter-form and test-retest reliability. Clin Neuropsychologist. 1998;12:43-55. 
 144. Spreen, O. & Straus, E. (1998). A compendium of Neuropsychological Tests: Administration, Norms, and 
 Commentary. NY: Oxford University Press. 2
nd Ed. 
 145. Deprez S, Amant F, Yigit R, Porke K, Verhoeven J, Va n den Stock J, Smeets A, Christiaens MR, Leemans A, Van 
 Hecke W, Vandenberghe J, Vandenbulcke M, Sunaert. S.  Chemotherapy-induced structural changes in cerebral 
 white matter and its correlation with impaired c ognitive functioning in breast cancer patients. Hum 
 Brain Mapp. 2011 Mar;32(3):480-93. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21033. PubMed PMID: 20725909.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 44 
146. Deprez S, Amant F, Smeets A, Peeters R, Leem ans A, Van Hecke W, Verhoeven JS, Christiaens MR, 
 Vandenberghe J, Vandenbulcke M, Sunaert S. Longitudinal assessment of chemotherapy-induced structural changes  in cerebral white matter and its correlation with im paired cognitive functioning. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan 
 20;30(3):274-81. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.8571. Epub 2011 Dec 19. PubMed PMID: 22184379.  147. Lundervold A. On consciousness, resting state fMRI, and neurodynamics. Nonlinear Biomed Phys. 2010 Jun 3;4 
 Suppl 1:S9. doi: 10.1186/1753-4631-4-S1-S9. PubMed PMID: 20522270; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2880806.  148. van den Heuvel MP, Hulshoff Pol HE. Exploring the br ain network: a review on resting-state fMRI functional 
 connectivity. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010 Aug;20(8 ):519-34. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.03.008. Epub 
 2010 May 14. Review.PubMed PMID: 20471808.  149. Ystad M, Hodneland E, Adolfsdottir S, Haász J, Lunde rvold AJ, Eichele T, Lundervold A. Cortico-striatal 
 connectivity and cognition in normal aging: a combined DTI and resting state fMRI study. Neuroimage. 2011 Mar 
 1;55(1):24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11 .016. Epub 2010 Nov 10. PubMed PMID: 21073962. 
 
150. Hodneland E, Ystad M, Haasz J, Munthe-Kaas A, Lundervold A. Automated approaches for analysis of multimodal  MRI acquisitions in a study of cognitive aging. Com put Methods Programs Biomed. 2012 Jun;106(3):328-41. doi: 
 10.1016/j.cmpb.2011.03.010. Epub 2011 Jun 12. PubMed PMID: 21663993.  
151.  Kesler SR, Kent JS, O'Hara R. Prefrontal cortex a nd executive function impairments in primary breast cancer. Arch 
 Neurol. 2011 Nov;68(11):1447-53. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.245. PubMed PMID: 22084128; PubMed Central 
 PMCID: PMC3239218.  152. Kesler SR, Wefel JS, Hosseini SM, Cheung M, Watson CL, Hoeft F. Default mode network connectivity 
 distinguishes chemotherapy-treated breast cancer survivor s from controls. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 
 9;110(28):11600-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1214551110. Epub 2013 Jun 24. PubMed PMID: 23798392; PubMed Central  
 PMCID: PMC3710809.  153.  Jennifer Bruno, PhD,1 SM Hadi Hosseini, PhD,1 and She lli Kesler, PhD1,2 Altered resting state functional brain 
 network topology in chemotherapy-treated breast cancer survivors. Neurobiol Dis. Dec 2012; 48(3): 329–338.  
 
154.  Zuo XN1, Di Martino A, Kelly C, Shehzad ZE, Gee DG, Klein DF, Castellanos FX, Biswal BB, Milham MP.  The oscillating brain: complex and reliabl e. Neuroimage. 2010 Jan 15;49(2):1432-45. 
 155.  Reuter-Lorenz PA, Cimprich B. Cognitive function and breast cancer: promise and potential insights from functional 
 brain imaging. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jan;137(1):33-43. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2266-3. 
 
156. Patricia A. Ganz, Lorna Kwan, Steven A. Castellon, Am y Oppenheim, Julienne E. Bower, Daniel H. S. Silverman, 
 Steve W. Cole,Michael R. Irwin, Sonia Ancoli-Israel, Thomas R. BelinCognitive Complaints After Breast Cancer  Treatments: Examining the Relationship With Ne uropsychological Test Performance. J Natl Cancer 
 Inst;2013;105:791–801  157. Pullens MJJ, De Vries J, Roukema JA. Subjective cognitive dysfunction in breast cancer patients: a systematic  review. Psycho-Oncology. 2010; 19(11):1127–1138.  158.  Saykin AJ, Wishart HA, Rabin LA, et al. Older adults w ith cognitive complaints show brain atrophy similar to that 
 of amnestic MCI. Neurology.2006; 67(5):834–842.  159. Ganz PA. Doctor, Will the treatment you are recommending cause chemobrain? J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30(3):229–231.  
Amendment 11.0; 07 October 2015  
 45160. Robert J. Ferguson, RH, McDonald BC, Rocque MR, Furstenberg CT, Horrigan S, Ahles TA &  Saykin AJ. 
 Development of CBT for chemotherapy-related cognitiv e change: results of a waitlist control trial. Psycho-
 Oncology, 21: 176–186 (2012). 
 
 
MCC# 17089 
 
Amendment  11.0; 07 October 2015 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN  in Breast Cancer Survivors  
 
Principal Investigator:  Nagi  Kumar, PhD, RD, FADA 
 
Summary  of Changes:  
4.2  Criteria for exclusion  
 Corrected  actual creatinine  clearance  of >60 to <60. 
 
4.3  Anticipated  problems  with subject recruitment  and retention  
 Increased  payment to participants  from $25  to $50  for each visit to cover travel expenses.  
 Added that  participants  traveling more than 100  miles from their  home to reach the research 
site will receive an additio n
al $30  for transportation  costs. 
 
MCC# 17089 
 
Amendment  10.0; 25 February 2015 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN  in Breast Cancer Survivors  
 
Principal Investigator:  Nagi  Kumar, PhD, RD, FADA 
 
Summary  of Changes:  
4.2  Criteria for exclusion  
 Added the following:  
Subjects with metabolic  disorders  (a) who are otherwise  eligible, (b) treated for 
hypothyroidism  by their primary MD with Synthroid  (levothyroxine)  and (c) with the 
approval of the Moffitt treating oncologist  will not be excluded  from the study. 
 Added “(ex. tissue expanders)”  as an example of ferromagnetic  material that wo uld prohibit MRI 
imaging. 
 
7.7.8  Adverse events monitoring  (Appendix  VIII) 
 Added the following:  
For each subject, AE’s will be collected  at the screening,  Month 1, Month 2, Month 3/EOT, 
visits as well  as at the 7‐day post‐treatment  follow‐up call by the clinical  research 
coordinator.
 AE’s  collected at the screening  visit will be catalogued  as baseline symptoms  by 
the clinical  research  coordinator  and the AE log will be reviewed  and signed  by either the 
patient’s medical oncologist  or PI. AE’s collected during  Month 1 and 2 visits will be 
reviewed  with the patient by the nu rse who drew  their blood at CRU and the AE log will be 
signed  by the principal investigator.  Finally, at the Month  3 visit, the participant’s  medical 
oncologist  will review  the AE log with the patient and sign‐off  on the reported symptoms;  if 
the medical oncologist  is unavailable  to sign  the AE log at this visit, then th e PI will review 
and sign the form. AE’s  reported at the 7‐day  follow‐up call will be reviewed  and signed by 
the PI. The participant’s  reported symptoms  at this time  point will be documented  on a 
powerchart  telephone  note by the clinic al research  coordinator.  Serious adverse events 
(SAE’s) are reported to IRB and FDA. If a participant  reports an SAE, the PI will immediately  
be informed  and she will then  report it to the IRB and FDA. AE logs will be scanned to 
patients’ medical records by the clinical research coordinator  once they are off‐study. 
 
 
MCC# 17089 
 
Amendment  9.0; 22 January 2015 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN  in Breast Cancer Survivors  
Principal Investigator:  Nagi  Kumar, PhD, RD, FADA 
 
Summary  of Changes:  
7.7.9 Assessment  of Cognitive  Performance  (pages 21‐22) 
 Clarified  the procedures  in detail for memory testing.  
July 16, 2014 
 Janelle Perkins, Pharm.D., Chairperson USF Institutional Review Board  Re: Summary of Changes  IRB#: Pro00009858 Title: Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors – MCC #17089 
 
Attached, you will find a tracked and clean copy of an amendment to the above application. Due to the 
complicated nature of breast cancer a nd the treatments associated with th is disease, the inclusion criteria 
has been revised to allow sufficient time for patie nts to have any necessary surgeries (i.e. breast 
reconstruction)  after completing ch emotherapy +/- radiation. Therefore the inclusion criterion has been 
revised as follows:  
 Completed neoadjuvant or adjuvant  treatment with anthracyclines and/or taxanes + or –Radiation 
therapy within past 6 months (+/- 7 days) (s ubjects on concurrent endocrine therapy (TAM, 
Aromatase inhibitors are also eligible to participate as this is standard of care for this patient population) 
  Please feel free to contact me if you have  any questions regarding these changes. 
  Thank you,   Nagi B. Kumar, Ph.D., R.D., FADA Senior Member, Populati on Sciences Division 
Director, Cancer Chemopreve ntion, Moffitt Cancer Center 
Professor, Oncologic Sciences | tel: 8137456885 | fax:  8137457183 | email: nagi.kumar@moffitt.org  
MCC # 17089 
 
Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors  
 
Principal Investigator:  Nagi Kumar, PhD, RD, FADA  
 
Amendment 5.1, 04/08/2014 
 
Summary of Changes : 
 
SCHEMA (page 3)  
• Revised  to correct  the questionnaires that will be completed at each visit.  
 7 CLINICAL EVALUATIONS AND PROCEDURES (pages 24 -26) 
• Added window (+/ - 7 days) to week 4, week 8, and week 12 visits.  
1 
 
March 12, 2014 
 Janelle Perkins, Pharm.D., Chairperson USF Institutional Review Board  
 Re: Summary of Changes  IRB#: Pro00009858 Title: Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors – MCC #17089 
 
Enclosed, please find a copy of an amendment to the ab ove application.  This 
modification reflects no substantive changes in procedure.  Specific methods as well as inclusion/exclusion criteria have been modified to include the most current standards and 
evolving methods in the research literature. Modification of faculty in the study is also 
included based on turnover.  The following are included with this submission:  
 A. Tracked copy of the currently approved protocol, reflecting changes below 
B. Clean copy of the amended protocol  
 
Summary of changes and rationale:  
 
• Schema  & Protocol Section 3.0:  Clarification r egarding the inclusion of women 
 on concurrent endocrine therapy; Updated to reflect that all patients will now 
 receive resting -state functional MRI in addition to structural MRI  
• Protocol Section 2.1:  Specific Aim 3 updated to reflect the use of resting- state 
 functional MRI in addition to structural MRI in order to evaluate changes in 
 imaging markers  
• Protocol Section s 4.0 & 4.1: Clarification rega rding the inclusion of women on 
 concurrent endocrine the rapy 
• Protocol Section 4.2: Clarification regarding th e parameters for determining the  
 exclusion of women with renal or liver disease  
• Protocol Section s 5.1.2, 5.6 & 6.1.2:  The removal of specific drug bottle  
 descriptions in order to reflect that  all stud y agents are bottled and labeled per 
 investigational drug use regulations 
• Protocol Section 6.5:  Clarification regarding which labs determine abnormal 
 liver function and the adverse event grade s that  will result in discontinuation of 
 the study agent • Protocol Section 7.1:  Updated to reflect that all patients will now receive resting - 
 state functional MRI in addition to structural MRI; Removal of attention tasks 
 during MRI • Protocol Section 7.3: Updated to reflect that all patients will now receive restin g 
 state functional MRI in addition to structural MRI  
• Protocol Section 7.6.6: Removal of additional 5 days of study agent being 
 supplied to patient , agents were bottled based on a 30 day supply 
• Protocol Section 7.6.10:  Functional MRI has been replaced wi th resting -state 
 functional MRI, therefore working memory tasks to be performed in MRI has 
 been removed from protocol 
• Protocol Section:  7.6.15: Functional MRI methods were replaced with resting - 
 state functional MRI methods 
• Protocol Section 12.5.2:  Seco ndary endpoint changed to reflect the use of a 
 resting -state functional MRI versus a functional MRI 
• Protocol Section 14.0:  References updated to include those used to support the 
 use of resting -state functional MRI  
• Appendices :  Updated with the Teleform version of questionnaires 
 
  
Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions regarding these changes.  
  Thank you,  
    Nagi B. Kumar, Ph.D., R.D., FADA Senior Member, Population Sciences Division 
Director, Cancer Chemoprevention, Moffitt Cancer C enter  
Professor, Oncologic Sciences  
University of South Florida College of Medicine  
12902 Magnolia Drive Tampa, FL 33612  | tel: 8137456885 | fax:  8137457183 | email: nagi.kumar@moffitt.org
 
 
January 30, 2014 
 Janelle Perkins, Pharm.D., Chairperson  
USF Institutional Review Board  
 Re: Summary of Changes  
IRB#: Pro00009858 Title: Pilot Trial of COGNUTRIN in Breast Cancer Survivors – MCC #17089 
 
Enclosed, please find a copy of an amendment to the above application.  This 
modification reflects no substantive changes in procedure.  Specific methods as well as inclusion/exclusion criteria have been modified to include the most current standards and 
evolving methods in the research literature. Modification of faculty in the study is also 
included based on turnover . 
 The following are included with this submission:  
 A. Tracked copy of the currently approved protocol, reflecting changes below  
B. Clean copy of the amended protocol  
 
Summary of changes and rationale:  
 
• Schema:  Updated to reflect changes regarding functional MRI (fMRI)  
• Schema:  Updated to reflect removal of weekly phone calls  
• Protocol Section 2 .0:  Objective 3 updated to reflect changes regarding fMRI   
Rationale for Change:   Although fMRI is one of the variables proposed in this 
clinical  trial, there has been several installation issues with regard to the fMRI 
equipment in association with the MRI equipment current used in structural MRI studies. We anticipate that this will require several months  before the equipment can 
be installed that ensures safety of the MRI.   Since funding was received in July of 
2013, we have been in the process of identifying  MRI equipment where the functional MRI  equipment can be added without compromising the safety to the 
subjects/other patients.  We have learned that there will be further delay in the 
availability of the  fMRI.  The delay in the availability of the functional MRI has 
serious implications on (a) bioavailability of the agent we have developed for this clinical trial; (b) cost of  reproducing another batch of agent to match the current batch 
for consistency of  components and (c)  the funding for this clinical trial. Based on 
these major concerns,  we have amended the proposal to include all other primary an d 
secondary variables that we proposed to monitor in this pilot trial and will perform the functional MRI in the  second 10 pairs of subjects  (10 from the Treatment arm 10 
from the placebo arm).  
• Protocol Section 7.1: Removal of weekly phone calls  
Rational for Change:  Subjects will see a Nurse Practitioner (NP) at monthly visits 
for a limited physical exam assessing any adverse  events. Subjects are instructed to 
contact coordinator, PI or physician should any adverse events occur prior to monthly visit.  
• Protocol Section 7.3:  Addition of limited physical exam with NP to assess 
adverse events  
 
 
  Please feel free to contact  me if you have any questions regarding these changes.  
  Thank you,     Nagi B. Kumar, Ph.D., R.D., FADA Senior Member, Population Sciences Division  
Director, Cancer Chemoprevention, Moffitt Cancer Center  
Professor, Oncologic Sciences  
University of South Florida College of Medicine   
12902 Magnolia Drive Tampa, FL 33612  | tel: 8137456885 | fax:  8137457183 | email: nagi.kumar@moffitt.org
 
 