Supplement 1  
Study Protocol  
Table of Contents  
1. Summary of changes to the protocol  
2. Study Protocol  
  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
Summary of Changes to the Protocol 
There were no changes to the study protocol.  
 
  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
Study Protocol 
A Randomized , Controlled  Trial Using   
Active Choice  to Promote Statin  Prescription  Initiation  
 
Study Protocol 
 
January  2017  
 
  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
Outline  
1. Abstract  
2. Overall objectives  
3. Aims  
 3.1 Primary  outcome  
 3.2 Secondary  outcomes  
4. Background  
5. Study design 
 5.1 Design  
 5.2 Study duration  
 5.3 Target population  
 5.4 Accrual  
 5.5 Key inclusion criteria  
 5.6 Key exclusion criteria 
6. Subject recruitment  
7. Subject compensation 
8. Study procedures  
 8.1 Consent  
 8.2 Procedures  
9. Analysis plan  
10. Investigators  
11. Human research protection  
 11.1 Data confidentiality  
 11.2 Subject confidentiality  
 11.3 Subject privacy  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
 11.4 Data disclosure  
 11.5 Data safety and monitoring  
 11.6 Risk/benefit  
  11.6.1 Potential study risks  
  11.6.2 Potential study benefits  
  11.6.3 Risk/benefit assessment  
  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
1. Abstract  
Cardiovascular (CV) events are the leading cause of mortality in the United States. Statins have 
been demonstrated to be an effective tool for reducing CV events and mortality, but  statins are 
often not  prescribed  for patients that meet evidence -based guidelines .  In this study, we will 
evaluate a health system initiative using active choice to identify eligible patients and prompt 
primary care physicians to initiate statin prescription.  In partnership with the he alth system, this 
will be conducted as a randomized, controlled trial to evaluate its effect   
2. Overall objectives  
The objective  of the study is to evaluate the effect of a health system initiative using active 
choice with and without social comparisons f eedback to encourage physicians  to prescribe statins  
for pati ents that meet evidence- based guidelines . 
3. Aims  
 3.1 Primary outcome  
The primary outcome measure is the change in percentage of eligible patients prescribed a statin 
medication within 2 months of intervention completion . 
 3.2 Secondary outcome  
Not applicable  
4. Background  
Statins, or HMG -CoA reductase inhibitors, are an effective and well tolerated treatment for 
hyperlipidemia and reduce CV event occurrence and mortality .1,2 However, despite their 
demonstrated clinical utility  and wide acceptance, statins are underutilized and not prescribed to 
many patients who would benefit from them under current guidelines .3 In a recent study looking 
at the diabetic population, only about 35% of patients who were eligible and lacked 
contraindications for a statin were prescribed a statin.4 
In 2013, the Americ an Heart Association and the Am erican College of Cardiology created a new 
method of estimating 10 -year cardiovascular disease (CVD)5. They  also concurrently released 
new guidelines for statin prescription that used a combination of age, low -density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL -C) levels, diabetes diagnosis, and 10- year CVD diagnosis to establish clinical 
benefit of statins.6 Although thi s patient information is readily available to primary care 
physicians, clinicians are not often presented with the relevant clinical information in a 
streamlined manner that aids making decisions about a particular guideline.  
Active choices , or compelling  people to make a decision between alternatives , have been 
demonstrated to increase compliance to a beneficial intervention  and may offer an opportunity to 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
increase statin prescription intiation .7,8  Social comparisons feedback has also been demonstrated 
to change physician behavior in many contexts including antibiotic prescribing.9  
References  
[1] Robinson  JG.  Accumulating evidence for statins in primary prevention.  JAMA . 
2013;310(22):2405- 2406.  
[2] Pandya A, Sy S, Cho S, Weinstein MC, Gaziano TA. Cost -effectiveness of 10 -Year Risk 
Thresholds for Initiation of Statin Therapy for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular 
Disease.  JAMA. 2015;314(2):142- 150.   
[3] Hirsh, B. J., Smilowitz, N. R., Rosenson, R. S., Fuster, V., and Sperling, L. S. (2015). 
Utilization of and adherence to guideline -recommended lipid- lowering therapy after acute 
coronary syndrome: opportunities for improvement. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 66, 184–192.  
[4]  Brandy R. Pauff, Michael R. Jiroutek, Melissa A. Holland, Beth S. Sutton, Statin Prescribing 
Patterns: An Analysis of Data From Patients With Diabetes in the National Hospital Ambulatory 
Medical Care Survey Outpatient Department and National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey 
Databases, 2005–2010, Clinical Therapeutics, Volume 37, Issue 6, 1 June 2015, Pages 1329 -
1339, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2015.03.020. 
[5] 2013 Prevention Guidelines ASCVD Risk Estimator. http://www.acc.org/tools -and-practice-
support/mobile -resources/features/2013- prevention -guidelines -ascvd -risk-estimator). Accessed 
June 30, 2016.  
[6] Stone  NJ, Robinson  JG, Lichtenstein  AH,  et al; American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the 
treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation . 2014;129(25)(suppl 2):S1- S45.  
[7] Patel MS, V olpp KG. Leveraging Insights from Behavioral Economics to Increase the Value 
of Health -Care Service Provision. Journal of General Internal Medicine . 2012;27(11):1544-
1547. doi:10.1007/s11606- 012-2050- 4.  
[8] Keller AP, Harlam B, Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. Enhanced active choice: A new method to 
motivate behavior change.  J Consum Psychol. 2011;21:376–383.  
[9] Meeker D, Linder JA, Fox CR, et al . Effect of Behavioral Interventions on Inappropriate 
Antibiotic Prescribing Among Primary Care Practices: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 
2016;315(6):562- 70. 
5. Study d esign  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
 5.1 Design  
This study will use a randomized, controlled trial  to evaluate a health system initiative .  The 
electronic health record  will be used to generate lists of patients who meet criteria for statin 
prescription us ing the 2013 ACC/AHA (American College of Cardiology / American Heart 
Association)  guidelines . Primary care physicians at  the University of Pennsylvania Health 
System will be randomly assigned to a control group with no intervention or one of two 
intervention groups as follow s: 
--Intervention 1: Active choice -- 
Primary care p hysicians will be prompted by email to review an online form with a  list of their  
patients who are eligible for statin  therapy but have not been prescribed one .  Clinical 
information including the following will be presented for each patient ( as available):  age, history 
of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) or diabetes, recent test results including lipid 
profiles  and liver function tests .  If appropriate information is available, the ASCVD risk score 
will calculated and displayed.  
Using the form , the physician will be able to select  atorvastatin 20mg for all of the patients or 
can individually review information for each patient and  select from  the f ollowing options : 1) 
prescribe atorvastatin 20mg  once  daily; 2) prescribe atorvastatin at a different dose ( 10mg, 40mg 
or 80mg) ; 3) prescribe a different statin  (choose from simvastatin, pravastatin, or rosuvastatin) ; 
4) do not  prescribe at statin and select a reaso n (patient declined; patient allergy; other) .  
The online form will be created using a HIPAA compliant website on secure University of 
Pennsylvania  Health System servers .  The website will require the physician to sig n in using 
their PennKey and password.  Once the form is submitted, a member of the study team will enter 
the orders in EPIC for the physician to review and sign.  The physician will receive notification 
that these orders have been entered and are ready to  review.  A letter to the patient will be 
generated describing the physician’s review of their information, prescription of a statin, and the 
risks and benefits of taking a statin medication.   
--Intervention 2: Active choice and social comparisons — 
The pr ocedure listed above in intervention 1 will be used.  In addition, physicians in this arm will 
receive social comparisons feedback on their statin prescribing behavior as follows:  Those 
below the median will be told the statin prescribing rate for the ave rage (50th percentile).  Those 
above the median but below the top performers will only be told the prescribing rate of the top 
performers.  Those above the 90th percentile will be told they are a to p performer.  
 5.2 Study duration 
The study is expected to begin in February  2017 and take one year to complete. 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
 5.3 Target population  
Patients followed by primary care physicians at the University of Pennsylvania Health System  
who using evidence -based guidelines  are eligible to be prescr ibed a statin .  
 5.4 Accrual  
Primary care p hysicians at the U niversity of Penn sylvania  Health System  will be randomly 
assigned to one of the three arms . Based on an initial data review, we have made the following 
assumptions: baseline statin initiation rate is about 65% , median number of patients eligible but 
not on a statin per primary care physician is 38, intracluster correlation for statin prescribing is 
0.026.  Given these baseline, w e estimate that a sample size of 84 pri mary care physicians (28 
per arm) will provide at least 90%  power to detect a 10%  difference between  each  intervention 
arm and the control arm , using a Bonferroni correction to define an alpha of .017 (three 
comparisons)  as our threshold for statistical si gnificance.  
 5.5 Key inclusion criteria 
Patients must meet the following criteria to be eligible for the study:  
1) Have a primary care physician at the University of Pennsylvania Health System ; 2) Meets 
American College of Cardiology / American  Heart Association (ACC/AHA) g uidelines for statin 
prescription as follows: a) A ny form of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) ; b) 
LDL- C levels of 190 mg/dL or greater on their most recent lipid panel ; c) Age 40 to 75 years 
with diabetes and  LDL- C levels of 70- 189 mg/dL on their most recent lipid panel ; d) Age 40 to 
75 years with 10- year ASCVD risk of  7.5%  or greater.  
 5.6 Key exclusion criteria  
Patients will be excluded if any of the following criteria is met: 1) A llergy to statin s; 2) Severe 
renal insufficiency defined as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) less than 30 mL/min; 3) Adverse 
reaction to statins including a) m yopathy, ICD-10 G72.0 G72.9, ICD -9 3594 3599; b) 
Rhabdomyolysis , ICD-10 M62.82, ICD -9 72888; c) h epatitis , ICD-10 K71 6, ICD -9 5733  
Physicians (and their respective patients) will be excluded if they have less than 10 patients 
among their entire panel that are eligible for a statin medication.  
6. Subject recruitment  
Information on primary care physicians  and their patients  at the University of Pennsylvania 
Health system will be obtained from the electronic health record using Penn Data Store and 
Clarity, an EPIC reporting database .    
7. Subject compensation 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
No compensation will be offered in this study . 
8. Study procedures  
 8.1 Consent  
A waiver of informed consent is requested.  This is a health system initiative that will be 
implemented.  The study is to evaluate that initiative.  Therefore, physicians and their patients 
will not be consented as this is the standard of practice per the health system initiative.  Without 
a waiver of the consent, the initiative would still be implemented by the health system, but the 
study would be infeasible.  There are several additional reasons why we feel a waiver of co nsent 
should be granted.  First, it is not feasible to consent every patient and physician and as 
mentioned this initiative would occur with or without the study of it.  Second, if members of the 
control group were consented, they would know they were bein g studied and this could change 
their behavior.  This could potential disrupt the design of the study and making interpretation of 
the findings challenging.  Third, physicians are not being forced to prescribe statins for their 
patients.  Instead, they are  being reminded of evidence- based guidelines and offered an 
opportunity to review pertinent information and prescribe a statin.  This is no different than 
standard of care in which a physician would review the same information and decide to prescribe 
a statin or not.  The initiative is simply a reminder for the physician and makes their standard of 
care process easier to conduct.     
 8.2 Procedures  
Data on primary care physicians and their patients at the University of Pennsylvania Health 
System  will be obtained from  Penn Data Store and Clarity (Epic’s data reporting database) . 
Physician data includes demographic information (age, race, gender, type of medical degree, 
etc.) and may be also obtained from publicly available databases or websites online . Patient 
information includes demographic information, information about comorbid conditions 
(including diabetes, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease, and comorbid conditions needed 
to calculate the Charleston Comorbidity Index , laboratory test results  (total cholesterol,  
triglycerides,  LDL- C, HDL -C, liver function tests, creatinine, and glomerular filtration rate ), and 
any contraindications to statin prescription (allergies  or history of adverse reactions).  
After identifying eligible physicians and patien ts, block randomization will occur at the 
physician level using block sizes of t hree and stratifying by quartile of baseline statin prescribing 
rate.   
9. Analysis plan  
In the main analysis, we will perform unadjusted comparisons of the change in the percent of 
eligible patients that are prescribed a statin before and after the intervention by study group using 
chi-square tests.  To evaluate the robustness of the findings , a multivariate logistic  regression  
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
model  will be fit adjusting for baseline statin prescription status as well as patient and physician 
factors.   Binary variables will be created for time (pre-  and post -intervention), study arm (control 
or intervention), and statin prescription (no or yes).  The outcome of interest will be the 
interaction between the binary variables time, study arm, and statin prescription.   All hypothesis 
tests will be  two-sided using an alpha of 0.017 as our threshold for statistical significance .  
Clustering will be conducted at the level of the physician.    
10. Investigators  
Mitesh Patel, MD, MBA, MS  is the Pr incipal  Investigator (PI) and is  an Assistant Professor of 
Medicine and Health Care Management at the Perelman School of Medicine and The Wharton 
School at the University of Pennsylvania.  He has past experience leading clinical trials to deploy 
interventions impacting patient care and o utcomes .  He currently spends 80% of his effort on 
research and 20% on clinical and teaching activities.  
David Asch, MD, MBA is a co- investigator and is a Professor of Medicine  and a Professor of  
Health Care Management at the Perelman School of Medicine an d The Wharton School at the 
University of Pennsylvania and the Executive Director at the Center for Health Care Innovation 
at the University of Pennsylvania. He has extensive past experience conducting research, 
designing and leading clinical trials, and implementing new policies to improve patient care.  
 
11. Human research protection  
 11.1 Data confidentiality  
Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the  
use of access privileges and passwords. Wherever feasible, identifiers will be removed from 
study -related information. Precautions ar e already  in place to ensure the data are secure by using 
passwords and HIPAA -compliant encryption. 
 11.2 Subject confidentiality  
Data on physicians and patients  will be ob tained from Epic and Penn Data Store . Any 
information  that is obtained will be used for research purposes only .  Information on patients will 
only be disclosed within the study team and to the patient’s primary care physician.  All study 
staff will be reminded of  the confidential nature of the data  collected and contai ned in these 
databases.  
The Leonard Davis Insitute’s Health Services Research Data Center (LDI HSRDC)  will be the 
hub for the hardware and database infrastructure that will support the statistical analysis .  The 
LDI HSRDC is a secure computing environment for a large volume  of highly sensitive data .  All 
members that access data must complete HIPAA training including secure data transfer, 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
passwords, computer security habits and knowledge  of what constitutes misuse or  inappropriate 
use of the server .  Only trained study staff will have access to the code that links the unique 
identifier to the  subject ’s identity. Electronic data will be stored on secure, password- protected 
firewalled serve rs at the University of Pennsylvania . 
 11.3 Subject privacy  
All efforts will be made by study staff to ensure subject privacy.   Data will be evaluated in a de-
identified manner whenever possible.  
 11.4 Data disclosure  
Information on patients will only be disclosed within the study team and to the patient’s primary 
care physician  (to whom this information is already available) .   
 11.5 Data safety and monitoring  
The investigator will provide oversight for the study  evaluation of this health system initiativ e.  
Physician practices will follow their standards of care to manage patients initiated on statins .  
11.6 Risk/benefit  
  11.6.1 Potential study risks  
The potential risks associated with this  study  are minimal.  Breach of data is a potential risk that 
will be mitigated by using HIPAA compliant and secure data platforms for the intervention 
(Penn Medicine servers ) and evaluation (LDI HSRDC server).    S tatins do have known potential 
side effects , mostly commonly myopat hy.  To reduce this risk, patients with document allergies 
or adverse events will be excluded from the initiative and study.  Patients with renal failure will 
also be excluded  as they may require lower doses of statins than patients without renal fai lure.  
Prescribing statins and monitoring for known side effects are otherwise standard of care within 
primary care practices.     
  11.6.2 Potential study benefits  
Statins have been  demonstrated as  an effective tool for reducing cardiovascular events.  Early 
intervention with statins can potentially be life saving  for patients who are at risk or already have 
a diagnosis of cardiovascular disease.  An intervention that prompts physicians to actively think 
about evidence -based guidelines and high -value tr eatment c ould contribute positively to patient 
care and outcomes . However, i t is possible that patients will receive no benefit from this study . 
  11.6.3 Risk/benefit assessment  
The risk/benefit ratio is highly favorable g iven the potential benefit from eligible patients being 
prescribed a statin, that prescription and monitoring of a statin is within the standards of care in a 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018
primary care practice, and that efforts have been put into place to minimize the risk of breach of 
data.  
 
 
Downloaded From:  by University of Pennsylvania, Rebecca Pepe on 10/30/2018