Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetom idine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX ES 
Contents  
eAPPENDIX 1. STUDY PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  ................................ ................   
eAPPENDIX 2. FAST TRACK  PROTOCOL AND INTRAVENOUS DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
GUIDELINES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................   
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................   
 
 
This supplementary material has been provided by the authors to give readers additional information 
about their work.  
 
  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
2 
 
 
 eAPPENDIX 1. STUDY PROTOCOL  AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN    
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Balachundhar Subramaniam, MD, MPH   
Study Sponsor:  Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals   
Study Coordinating Center:  Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center  
Original Protocol Version Date:  01/29/2015  
IRB Protocol Number :    2014P000413      
Clinicaltrials.gov NCT :   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
Purpose    
The goal of this randomized clinical trial is to evaluate the effect of intravenous  (IV) acetaminophen vs 
placebo, combined with IV propofol vs dexmedetomidine, for postoperative sedation and analgesia 
respectively, in adult patients 60 years or older undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or 
combined CABG/valve surgeries to as sess the incidence of postoperative delirium wi th the Confusion 
Assessment Method (CAM or CAM -ICU). It is possible  that there may be a  benefit to those enrolled in the 
dexmedet omidine and acetaminophen group, as their incidence of delirium could  possibly be reduced , 
however we  cannot guarantee this.  
Additionally, this study will assess postoperative cognition following cardiac surgery through 1 -year using a 
cognitive assessment scale and compare postoperative analgesic requirements in patients with and without 
IV acetaminophen.  
 
  

Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
3 
 
 
 Study Summary  
 
Title  Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, 
Combined with Propofol or Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -
Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac Surgery: The 
DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
Objective    To evaluat e the effect of postoperative IV acetaminophen (paracetamol) 
vs placebo, combined with IV propofol vs dexmedetomidine, on 
postoperative delirium among older patients undergoing cardiac surgery  
Inclusion Criteria  Patients 60 years or older undergoing CABG with or without aortic and/or 
mitral valve replacement requiring cardiopulmonary bypass   
Exclusion Criteria  Patients with preoperative left ventricular ejection fraction  (LVEF)  <30%, 
pre-existing cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s 
disea se, medications for cognitive decline, history of recent seizures, 
serum creatinine 2 mg/dL, liver dysfunction, recent history of alcohol 
abuse, English language limitations, hypersensitivity to study medications, 
and undergoing emergent surgery  
Study Des ign Single center, randomized, triple blind, placebo controlled, factorial design 
clinical trial  
 Patients were randomized to one of four factorial groups which included 
randomization to receive postoperative analgesia with intravenous 
acetaminophen or pla cebo every 6 hours for 48 hours. In addition, patients 
were randomized to receive postoperative sedation starting at chest 
closure and continued for up to 6 hours postoperatively or until extubation 
with intravenous dexmedetomidine or propofol.  
 The incid ence of postoperative in -hospital delirium was assessed daily 
using the CAM or CAM -ICU during the patient’s hospitalization. In addition, 
follow up assessments were conducted at one month and one year.   
Study Discontinuation  Patient request or any seriou s adverse event thought to be related to study 
procedures  
Key Roles   Principal Investigator : Balachundhar Subramaniam, MD MPH    
Institution: Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston MA  
  
 
  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
4 
 
 
 Significance and Background    
Approximately 50% of patients have postoperative delirium following cardiac surgery1.  The growing body 
of evidence suggests that in -hospital delirium is associated with poor hospital outcomes, including a tenfold 
increased risk of death, and a fivefold increased risk of nosocomial related complications2.   Delirium has 
also been associated with serious longer term outcomes such as poor functional recovery, and most 
recently, impaired cognitive function for up to one year after cardiac surgery3. Importantly, intervenable 
factors, such as perioperative se dation and analgesia with opioids may contribute to the etiology of delirium.  
In the setting of cardiac surgery done increasingly in older patients, there is an urgent need to test 
alternative sedation and complementary analgesic techniques.  
Dexmedetomid ine, a selective alpha -2 receptor agonist, provides sedation without causing respiratory 
depression. Dexmedetomidine is also suggested to have an opioid sparing effect that makes it a unique 
sedative drug.  Currently used sedation drugs (midazolam) release  deliriogenic mediators through binding 
of Gamma -aminobutyric Acid (GABA ) receptors.  Dexmedetomidine has no effect on the GABA receptors. 
Although these characteristics suggest dexmedetomidine to be a unique and promising drug for sedation 
following cardi ac surgery, its efficacy on reducing the incidence, duration and long term effects of delirium 
has not been studied thoroughly.  
Studies involving use of dexmedetomidine in an attempt to reduce the incidence of delirium in cardiac 
surgical patients provide conflicting results . One  meta -analysis concluded that dexmedetomidine in cardiac 
surgery shortened the ventilator time (but not the Intensive Care Unit ( ICU) or hospital length of stay), 
reduced the incidence of postoperative ventricular arrhythmias and delirium in cardiac surgical patients4. 
However, there are several issues with this meta -analysis, particularly for the systematic assessment of 
postoperative delirium. The problems with the four studies that f ormed the basis of this meta -analysis are 
explained in the next few paragraphs.  
In a retrospective study5 of administrative database from 250 hospitals, the incidence of postoperative 
delirium following cardiac surgery was significantly decreased with associated cost savi ngs in the 
dexmedetomidine group.  This study compared two regimens (dexmedetomidine, propofol plus narcotics 
vs. propofol vs. narcotics). Propofol was used in the dexmedetomidine group as well.  This trial specifically 
does not mention how delirium was as sessed in individual hospitals.   
A randomized controlled trial6 comparing dexmedetomidine/propofol to morphine/propofol in cardiac 
surgery patients showed a decreased duration of delirium (5 days to 2 days) in the dexmedetomidine group.  
This study found a simila r incidence of delirium in both the groups.  Propofol was used as a sedative in both 
the groups and this could have attributed to similar incidences of delirium in both the groups.  There is a 
possibility the study was not powered adequately as the baselin e incidence of delirium in the control group 
was a surprisingly low 15%, much lower than other cardiac surgery studies that have employed state -of-
the art delirium measures. This study used CAM -ICU for assessing delirium both in intubated and extubated 
patients.  While the CAM -ICU, a delirium assessment that does not require any verbal responses by the 
patient, is state -of-the-art for intubated patients, it has reduced sensitivity for delirium in verbal patients.  
This design could have underestimated the i ncidence of delirium.   
The third study7 included in the meta -analysis was a prospective, randomized, open labeled trial comparing 
three groups (dexmedetomidine, midazolam, and propofol). This study reported a dramatically decreased 
incidence of delirium in the dexmedetomidine group, 3%, compare d to 50% in propofol and midazolam 
groups. This was a small study, with only 118 patients were recruited and only 90 patients finally analyzed, 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
5 
 
 
 with 28 patients randomized patients excluded for protocol violations.  This introduces a significant selection 
bias.  Furthermore, a 94% reduction in the incidence of delirium was seen in this study.  This effect size is 
almost implausibly large and has not been seen in other studies.  Nevertheless, this study can provide a 
framework for sample size for future stud ies assuming the best case scenario.   
The final study8 included in the meta -analysis was a prospective randomized c ontrol trial of 89 patients 
undergoing non emergent CABG.  In this study, a patient satisfaction questionnaire was used to assess 
pain, comfort and extubation process between intravenous dexmedetomidine and propofol groups.  One 
patient in each group was r eported to have delirium. This study was not designed to identify patients with 
delirium with any specific tools such as CAM and thus could have grossly underestimated delirium 
incidence.  Thus, the meta -analysis represents a combination of poorly designed  studies with differing 
measurements, and is extremely unlikely to create a significant impact or practice change among clinicians.  
Therefore, these findings will not result in a practice change in cardiac surgical intensive care units.  
Postoperative pain  following cardiac surgery can be due to the sternal incision, chest tube sites and leg 
incisions.  Current pain relief strategy includes postoperative opioid administration ( IV morphine or 
hydromorphone).  While, inadequate pain relief increases the risk of postoperative delirium, opioids with 
their psychoactive properties also increase the risk of postoperative delirium, especially in elderly patients.  
A multimodal balanced postoperative pain management is advantageous and provides several beneficial 
effects.  The options in cardiac surgery would include nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs and 
acetaminophen.  Their postoperative use decreases the exposure of older patients to opioids and can be 
an effective delirium prevention strategy.  N onsteroidal Ant i-Inflammatory Drugs (N SAIDs ) have 
contraindications after many kinds of surgery, including cardiac surgery, which include their deleterious 
effects on the gastrointestinal  tract and renal function.   
Acetaminophen has no psychoactive properties and is an attractive option as it lacks bleeding risks 
associated with nonsteroidal agents.  Acetaminophen is for the most part safe but could cause liver 
dysfunction in rare instances.  Oral administration of acetaminophen achieves limited blood levels in 
criticall y ill patients and therefore has limited efficacy. IV acetaminophen addresses this by allowing 
administration in critically ill patients and providing superior bioavailability to oral preparations9. This 
approach has been shown to reduce pain intensity and also decrease the rescue intravenous morphine 
used during the postoperative period.   
IV acetaminophen has never b een studied in the context of cardiac surgery and delirium prevention.  
Additionally, comparing IV acetaminophen as an adjuvant analgesic in combination with IV propofol or IV 
dexmedetomidine may ascertain additive or synergistic effects on delirium preven tion. Our randomized, 
single -blind, pre -pilot study with 12 patients showed that in patients who received IV acetaminophen as 
adjuvant analgesic (N=6), the incidence of delirium was 17% (1/6) compared to 67% (4/6) in those who did 
not.  The total incidence  was 42% (5/12).  Despite the small sample size, this provocative finding suggests 
that IV acetaminophen with propofol or dexmedetomidine may offer a significant benefit in reducing the 
incidence of delirium following cardiac surgery.  If this benefit is p roved in a larger study as proposed, this 
will have a significant impact in patient care and satisfaction.  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
6 
 
 
 Subject Recruitment  
Screening  
Eligible participants will be identified at preadmission testing clinic appointments , in the cardiac 
catheterization lab or on the medical floors. At this time all inclusion and exclusion criteria will be assessed.  
Inclusion Criteria  
Adult patients ≥ 60 years of age who are undergoing CABG with/without valve (aortic and/or mitral) 
procedure requiring bypass.   
Exclusio n Criteria  
Patients will be excluded if they had a preoperative LVEF <30% emergent procedure, isolated aortic 
surgery, pre -existing cognitive impairment, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, prophylactic 
medications for cognitive decline, active history of drug or alcohol abuse, serum creatinine >2mg/dL , liver 
dysfunc tion, non -English speaking, seizures in the last three months, emergent procedure or  
hypersensitivity to study drugs or procedures.   
 
Adult patients unqualified or incapable of giving legal consent will be excluded.  
Informed Consent  
Written informed con sent will be obtained prior to initiation of any study -specific procedures. Consent will 
be obtained by one of the participating researchers of the study. At the time of consent, all study procedures 
will be explained in detail, including the associated ri sks and benefits.  The subjects will have the opportunity 
to ask any and all questions, and will be reminded that participation is voluntarily. All subjects will be 
consented with curtains drawn or the door closed, assuring patient privacy.  Written inform ed consent will 
then be obtained from interested participants. The original signed form will remain with the investigator in 
the study file.  Copies will be given to the patient and filed in the official medical record as well.   
Randomization and Blinding   
After obtaining written informed consent, participants will be randomized to one of four groups by the 
research pharmacy using a sequence of computer –generated random numbers. Blocked randomization 
will be used to assign recruited participants to one of  four combinations of analgesics and sedatives in a 
1:1:1:1 allocation: (1) acetaminophen and dexmedetomidine, (2) acetaminophen and propofol, (3) placebo 
and dexmedetomidine, or (4) placebo and propofol. In order to blind the patient, the care team, and t he 
research staff assessing outcomes to the analgesia group, 1 gram of IV acetaminophen and placebo (0.9% 
saline) were distributed in equal volume IV bags. Due to the distinct appearance of propofol, there was no 
blinding to the sedation group.  
Study Proce dures  
Overview  
The proposed study is a randomized, placebo controlled, factorial design, triple blind, clinical trial designed 
to evaluate the effect of postoperative IV acetaminophen versus placebo, combined with IV propofol versus 
dexmedetomidine, on p ostoperative delirium among older patients undergoing cardiac surgery.  Patients 
will be r andomized to one of four groups  (1) acetaminophen and dexmedetomidine, (2) acetaminophen and 
propofol, (3) placebo and dexmedetomidine, or (4) placebo and propofol . It is possible that the participants 
who receive acetaminophen and dexmedetomidine may benefit from the study as their  incidence of delirium 
could  possibly be reduced , however we  cannot guarantee this.  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
7 
 
 
 Study Groups  
The four treatment arms will be:  
1. Acetaminophen and dexmedetomidine  
2. Acetaminophen and propofol  
3. Placebo and dexmedetomidine  
4. Placebo and propofol  
 
All study medications will be administered intravenously and doses will be weight -based. 
Acetaminophen/placebo will be  administered on ICU transfer and thereafter every six hours for a total of 
eight doses. Volume of the placebo (saline) will match that of IV acetaminophen at 100ml 0.9% sodium 
chloride.  Acetaminophen administration in any form other than the blinded stud y medication during this 
time was not allowed. Propofol or dexmedetomidine was started during chest closure and continued for up 
to six hours postoperatively or until extubation, whichever occurred first. Participants in the 
dexmedetomidine groups will get  a bolus dose of 0.5  - 1mcg/kg IV during chest closure, followed by a  
maintenance infusion of 0.1 -1.4 mcg/kg/hour. Propofol infusions will be avoided in these participants. 
Patients in the propofol groups will receive propofol at a dose of 20 – 100 mcg/kg /min and dexmedetomidine 
infusions will be avoided in these patients.  
Pharmacy  
Once a participant is enrolled, the study team will contact the research pharmacy to randomize the subject. 
The research pharmacy at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center will b e responsible for preparation and 
distribution of study medications. Study team members will physically deliver the first dose of the 
acetaminophen/placebo (saline) medication. Subsequently the research pharmacy will be responsible for 
delivering the study  medication to the ICU. Any unused drug will be returned to the research pharmacy for 
disposal.   
Study Assessments  
The assessments will be completed at specific time points.  Once consent is obtained, a trained study team 
member blinded to treatment allo cation will proceed with a baseline cognitive and delirium assessment. 
This will include the assessment of cognitive function using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
supplemented with days of the week backwards (DOWB) and months of the year backwar ds (MOYB) for 
additional attention testing, the Delirium Symptom Interview (DSI) to capture symptoms of delirium and the 
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) to assess for baseline depression.  Using data from the cognitive testing 
and DSI, a study team member  will complete the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM), which includes a 
diagnosis of delirium using the CAM diagnostic algorithm.  This detailed assessment will take no more than 
20-30 minutes.  Every day, a study team member will administer a standard cogn itive assessment and the 
CAM. These daily assessments will take approximately 10 -15 minutes.  On the day of discharge, the MoCA 
with DOW and MOY, the DSI, and CAM will be completed.  (If the discharge assessment was performed in 
anticipation of discharge o n a specific day but the discharge was delayed (i.e. logistical reasons, clinical 
reasons), this will not be considered a protocol deviation.)  A follow -up assessment will be administered at 
1 month and 1 year post -discharge over the telephone and will inc lude a telephone version of the MoCA 
known as the T -MoCA, DSI, GDS, and CAM.  Assessments will be administered and scored by trained 
study team members.  
If daily assessments are negative for three  consecutive days (i.e. days 5, 6 & 7), they will then be c ompleted 
every other day until date of discharge. In addition, these assessments will be done at the patient’s convenience 
to ensure ability to finish the evaluations.  The table below outlines the assessments at various time points.  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
8 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Baseline  Daily  Discharge  1 month  1 year  
Assessments       
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 
with Days of the week (DOW) & Months 
of the year (MOY)  X  X   
Delirium Symptom Interview (DSI)  X X X X X 
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS)  X   X X 
Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)  X X X X X 
Standard Cognitive Assessment   X    
Telephone Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (t -MoCA)  with DOW and 
MOY     X X 
 
The delirium research assessments will not be provided to the treating clinicians.  Treating clinicians will assess 
and treat delirium as usual, including assessment and correction of reversible causes, behavioral management 
and use of IV haloperidol for agitation, if needed.  Rescue doses of haloperidol will be recorded in the study.  
Blood A cquisition  
Blood will be collect ed at four times points 1) Baseline: at the time of the pre -operative study assessments 
or on day of surgery; 2) on POD 1 while in the intensive care unit; 3) on POD 2 while in the intensive care 
unit; and 4) within 48 hours prior to discharge or days 8-10, at the lates t. A total of 80 ccs of blood will be 
collected. Blood samples will be collected into sterile vacuum tubes using either a vacutainer or butterfly 
system, at the preference of the phle botomist. All samples will be centrifuged.  The plasma and buffy coat 
will be separated from red blood cells, aliquoted into small samples, labelled and f rozen at -80 Celsius  for 
future use.  Blood samples will be stored in a biomarker bank for further analysis.  
Blood Storage  
Using all blood samples from our p articipants, we will create a bio -repository of genetic material and plasma, 
a resource for future biomarker discovery studies.  The banked specimens wi ll be coded and stored in a -
80 Celsius  freezer at a BIDMC facility.  A list linking study numbers to pa rticipants will be kept in a secure 
computer database.  In the future, the frozen plasma or DNA may be shared with other scientists studying 
a similar relationship between delirium and genetic factors after a formal application procedure and scientific 
review process approved by the IRB.  Information including contact information, rationale for studying data 
and intended use of data may need to be approved by CCI/IRB prior to sharing data.  All such studies will 
be carried out under controlled access and un der the close supervision of the study team.  In these cases, 
the study investigators will maintain confidentiality of the specimens by maintaining the de -identification of 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
9 
 
 
 patient information to the other scientists.  We plan to store these specimens inde finitely.  None of the 
results from these studies will be shared with participants or their family members and none of the genetic 
information obtained will be included in the patient’s medical records.  All patients approached for 
participation in study w ill also need to agree to participation in blood collection/storage as noted in informed 
consent.  
Follow Up  
A follow -up assessment will be administered at 1 month and 1 year post -discharge over the telephone and 
will include a telephone version of the MoCA  known as the T -MoCA, DSI, GDS, and CAM.    
Study Outcomes  
Primary Outcome  
The primary objective of this study was the incidence of in -hospital delirium at any time during a patients’ 
hospital stay.    
Secondary Outcomes  
The secondary outcomes included duration of delirium, postoperative neurocognition at discharge, 48 -
hour breakthrough analgesic requirements, and ICU and hospital lengths of stay.  
Data Collection  
The participant’s demographic data such as age, sex, ethnicity, race and body mass index wil l be recorded. 
Patient comorbid conditions, surgery and anesthetic drugs used will be obtained from Society of Thoracic 
Surgery database and Anesthesia Information Management System, which is a clinical outcomes registry that 
records and assesses the care of adult patients undergoing cardiac procedures at participating hospitals. 
Pertinent characteristics include: preoperative medications, comorbidities, surgical characteristics, and 
postoperative outcomes, including 30 day mortality and major adverse event s like renal failure during hospital 
admission. Information on the sedatives and analgesics given within six hours prior to initiation of the cognitive 
assessment will be recorded, as to determine whether there is an effect on performance. The total opioid  
dosage administered during the first 48 hours post operatively, pain scores and patient delirium assessment 
data will be collected using REDCap. REDCap is a web -based application that allows customized data 
collection and entry. The study team will build and maintain the case report form electronically. Additionally, 
internal audits will be conducted to ensure data completion and data quality. Data will be kept secure in 
computers with password protection.  All data will be analyzed with modified intention  to treat basis, in which 
all subjects who receive at least one dose of a study medication will be included.   
Data Security and Storage   
All data will be kept secure in the password -protected BIDMC network servers.  The paper format will be 
stored in lock ed file cabinets during the study period. Study data will be entered in datasheets and stored 
on a secure password -protected computer on the BIDMC network. Each patient will be assigned a study -
specific ID number.  The data will have all HIPAA identifiers removed and a random study number assigned 
to each patient.    
Safety Reporting  
Our patient population is by definition undergoing high risk surgery and is critically ill.  It is expected that 
they will have a number of unrelated adverse health events dur ing the course of their hospital stay.  The 
potential adverse effects such as the number  of episodes of hypotension (predefined as < 90mm systolic 
for 5 minutes or more), and bradycardia (predefined as <40 beats per minute), will be collected from the 
ICU charts.    
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
10 
 
 
 Therefore, we will limit the scope of our AE monitoring and reporting to the following:  
o All Serious Adverse Events, including an unexpected death, believed to be related to the study   
o Unexpected, non -serious Adverse Events believed to be possibly or probably related to the 
intervention  
Evidence for adverse events will be assessed daily during the hospital stay, for a maximum of 10 days.  
Statistical Analysis  
Please refer to the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) for details  of the power calcu lation and analyses .   
Benefits to the Subject  
There is a possible benefit to those enrolled in the dexmedet omidine and acetaminophen group, as their 
incidence of delirium can possibly be reduced , however we  cannot guarantee this. Society as a whole will 
benefit in the future as a result of knowledge gained from the research.    
Risks to the Subject  
Risk of the Drugs Used  
The drugs dexmedetomidine and acetaminophen are FDA approved for sedation and analgesic purposes.   
Bradycardia and hypotension are less common side effects with dexmedetomidine and in an intensively 
monitored setting of cardiac surgical ICU, the risks of bradycardia and hypotension can be managed 
effectively.  Liver dysfunction is a rare side effect a ssociated with IV acetaminophen.  However, the drug is 
commonly used already in the perioperative setting routinely as the benefits seem to outweigh the risks.  
No routine monitoring is done for liver dysfunction in the current standard of care.  
Risk Assoc iated with Blood Draw  
There is a small risk of phlebotomy to obtain serum for the serum biomarker assays at four time points 
during the study.  Wherever possible, the serum collection will be obtained at the same time as phlebotomy 
and other labs for routi ne clinical laboratory work, thereby eliminating an additional risk imposed by a 
separate phlebotomy for study purposes.  However, in rare cases such as at the time of discharge, patients 
may require a separate lab draw. The risks of the phlebotomy procedu re itself are minimal and are primarily 
related to pain or bruising at the needle puncture site.  Since the amount of blood required at each time 
point is small the risks from anemia or blood loss are negligible.  The blood draws will total only 80 cc’s 
over a maximum of four weeks, which is considered minimal risk.   
Risk of Breach of C onfidentiality  
Patients will be referred to by a study number, and records will be password protected on BIDMC network 
servers. No identifiable data will be shared with the  funding agency, or across institutions.  The information 
that we collect from this research project will be kept confidential.  All information will be stored in a HIPAA 
compliant database.   
Risk/Benefit Ratio  
The drugs used for this study are approved b y the FDA for sedation and analgesic purposes.  When 
monitored in the intensive care setting, the risks of lower blood pressures or heart rates are far too small 
compared to the benefits of decreased delirium following cardiac surgery.   
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
11 
 
 
 Inducements  
No inducements will be offered. Neither patients nor healthcare providers will be paid as part of their 
participation in the study.      
Participant Withdrawals  
Throughout the study participants will be reminded that participation is entirely voluntary an d that they have 
the option to withdraw at any time, for any reason.  
Subject Protection  
Patients will be contacted directly for this study . The informed consent will be explained and obtained in a 
secure and private location such as the preadmission testin g clinic, cardiac catheterization holding areas, 
cardiac surgery clinic, and/or in the pre -operative holding area.  Patients will be informed that their decision 
to participate or not to participate will in no way affect their relationship with their health  care provider. 
Furthermore they will still receive all information about their analgesic management, as is the standard of 
care.  Patients will also have the ability to discontinue their participation at any time.   
  
  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
12 
 
 
 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Introduction  
This Statistical Analysis Plan describes the analysis of the prospective randomized controlled trial that 
has been reviewed and approved by the Committee on Clinical Investigations at Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center (2014P000413) and will be conducted  in accordance with all applicable human subjects’ 
research requirements and applicable federal regulations.    
Study Aims  
Briefly, this randomized, factorial clinical trial evaluates  the effect of intravenous acetaminophen versus  
placebo, combined with in travenous propofol versus  dexmedetomidine, for postoperative sedation and 
analgesia respectively, in adult patients 60 years or older undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG) or combined CABG/valve surgeries to assess the incidence and duration of  postoperative delirium .  
Study Design  
This is a single -center randomized controlled factorial trial of two sedative and two analgesic regimens.  
Study Population and Sites  
The study will prospectively enroll patients undergoing cardiac surgery at Beth Isra el Deaconess Medical 
Center in Boston, Massachusetts.  This includes patients enrolled between September 2015 and April 2018.   
Randomization  
Randomization will be by pre -prepared using a computer generated block randomization in SAS 9.3. Details 
of the bl ock size are kept confidential until the completion of study enrollment.  This schema will be created 
by the unblinded statistician (Ariel Mueller, MA) and sent to the research pharmacy.  Members of the 
research pharmacy will be responsible for preparing a nd dispensing the study medications following an 
active order for study medications.  Specifically this includes preparation and blinding of the placebo in 
accordance with the study randomization schema.   
Patients will be randomized to one of four groups in a 1:1:1:1 fashion. This includes:  
• Acetaminophen and Dexmedetomidine  
• Acetaminophen and Propofol  
• Placebo and Dexmedetomidine  
• Placebo and Propofol  
Primary Endpoints  
The primary endpoint will be the incidence of in -hospital delirium.  This is assessed via the Confusion 
Assessment Method (or CAM -ICU for intubated patients) daily postoperatively, as specified in the study 
protocol.  If a patient is noted to be positive f or delirium on any postoperative day, they will have been 
documented as achieving the primary study endpoint.  
Our pre -specified primary analysis will assess the incidence of delirium between patients receiving IV 
acetaminophen versus placebo.  
Secondary En dpoints  
Secondary outcomes for this study include:  
• Duration of delirium  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
13 
 
 
 o Definition: The number of days of being positive for delirium on the CAM or CAM -ICU 
instruments will be recorded and assessed.  This will be assessed as a continuous variable.        
• Postoperative cognitive decline at discharge, one month and one year postoperatively  
o Definition: This will be assessed by using  the change in Mont real Cognitive Assessment 
score at this time point since baseline.  This will be assessed as a continuous var iable.      
• Breakthrough analgesic requirements within the first 48 hours postoperatively  
o Definition: This will be assessed by calculating the total morphine equivalent administered 
in the first 48 hours postoperatively, with time zero starting at ICU admi ssion.  This will be 
assessed as a continuous variable.      
• Intensive care unit (ICU) length of stay  
o Definition:  This will be defined as the number of hours admitted in the ICU prior to 
transfer to the general floor.  This will be assessed as a continuo us variable and reported 
in hours.   
• Hospital length of stay  
o Definition: This will be calculated as the day of hospital discharge minus the day of 
surgery plus one.  This will be assessed as a continuous variable and reported in days.    
• Predefined potential adverse effects of the study drugs including:  
o Number and durat ion of episodes of hypotension  
▪ Definition: This is predefined as less than 90 mm Hg systolic blood pressure for 
five minutes or more  
o Number and duration of episodes of bradycardia  
▪ Definition: This is predefined as less than 40 beats per minute.  
• The proportion of patients who complete the protocol successfully will be measured.  
• If this sedation and analgesic regimen is abandoned by the  clinicians, the reason will be 
qualitatively described at the end of the study.  
• Levels of inflammatory biomarkers  
Covariates  
Trial data will be collected managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center. RE DCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -based 
application designed to support data capture for research studies, providing 1) an intuitive interface for 
validated data entry; 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export proced ures; 3) automated 
export procedures for seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for 
importing data from external sources. The REDCap system includes validation rules for data entry to help 
ensure data accuracy, and has a full audit trail of data entry and changes.  
Data collection includes the participant’s demographic data such as age, sex, ethnicity, race and body mass 
index will be recorded. Patient comorbid conditions, surgery and anesthetic drugs used will be obtained 
from Society of Thoracic Surgery database and Anesthesia Information Management System, which is a 
clinical outcomes registry that records and assesses the care of adult patients undergoing cardiac 
procedures at participating hospitals. Pertinent character istics include preoperative medications, 
comorbidities, surgical characteristics, and postoperative outcomes, including 30 day mortality and major 
adverse events like renal failure during hospital admission. Information on the sedatives and analgesics 
given within six hours prior to initiation of the cognitive assessment will be recorded, as to determine 
whether there is an effect on performance. The total opioid dosage administered during the first 48 hours 
post operatively, pain scores and patient deliriu m assessment data will be collected using REDCap.  
The overall flow and reporting of study recruitment, enrollment and follow up will follow the CONSORT 
recommendations for the reporting of randomized controlled trials.    
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
14 
 
 
 Sample Size Estimation  
This is a prospective, randomized, placebo controlled, double -blinded, factorial design study consisting of 120 
patients to assess the incidence and duration of postoperative delirium following cardiac surgery.  From the 
previous delirium studies conducted  at our institution, the baseline delirium incidence was 50%.  The pilot 
study showed a 66% reduction in the incidence of delirium.  For the power calculation, a 50% reduction in the 
delirium incidence was used.  Each group needed 56 patients (alpha=0.05 a nd 1-Beta=0.80). This study will 
not be powered for secondary outcomes.   
Because complete data from 112 patients is required in order for analysis, we plan to enroll enough patients 
to obtain data from 120 patients who received the study intervention ( 60 patients per group - acetaminophen 
vs. no acetaminophen) .  We estimate that approximately 150 patients will be enrolled (consented) in order 
to achieve this sample size.   This increase is required because it is possible that patients can be withdrawn 
both before randomization (i.e. cancelled surgery) as well as after randomization but before receiving the 
study intervention (i.e. change in surgery type intraoperatively).   Enrollment will be stopped once a total of 
120 randomized patients have undergone surg ery and received the study medications.  
General Approach to Statistical Analys es 
Baseline and demographic characteristics will be summarized and presented using descriptive statistics.  
Continuous data will be presented as means ± standard deviations or me dians (interquartile range) 
depending on the distribution of the data.  The Shapiro -Wilk test will be utilized in order to determine whether 
or not the data follows a Gaussian distribution.  Differences in continuous data between study groups will 
be asses sed using a parametric t -tests or Wilcoxon Rank -Sum tests as appropriate.  Categorical data will 
be presented as frequencies and proportions and assessed with a chi -square test.  In the event that cell 
counts are small (less than 5), we will employ the use  of a Fisher’s Exact test.  For all analyses two -sided 
p-values less than 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  SAS 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) 
or later will be utilized for all analyses.   
Analyses will be performed on a modified intention to treat basis, in which all patient who receive at least 
one dose of any of the four study medications will be included.  
 
Analysis of the Primary and Secondary Outcomes  
The DEXACET trial has been designed as a factorial, randomized controlled tr ial with four treatment groups.  
We will therefore aim to test 1) the effect of acetaminophen versus placebo and 2) the effect of 
dexmedetomidine in comparison to propofol in the event that there is no interaction between treatment 
effects.  However, the f irst of these (the effect of acetaminophen) is considered the most interesting and 
the study has been powered to answer this question using an unadjusted chi -squared test.    
To test whether or not there is an interaction we will compose a logistic regression model include indicator 
variables for the acetaminophen group as well as the dexmedetomidine group.  We will further include an 
interaction term in this model composed of the indicator variables multiplied together.  If there is a significant 
interaction between groups when assessing the incidence of in -hospital delirium, we will interpret the results 
stratified by all four groups, presenting the main effects only after tak ing into account the other factor, in a 
‘inside the table analysis’.  If the interaction term is not significant we will present the main effects by pooling 
data across the other factor.   
Kaplan Meier curves and a Cox proportional hazards model was used t o compare time to experiencing 
delirium, after confirming the proportional hazards assumption is met.  To test whether the Proportional 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
15 
 
 
 Hazards (PH) assumption holds, we will include a time varying covariate with group in the model.  Given 
the factorial de sign this approach will be replicated in models for all four factorial groups, as well as the 
pairwise comparisons (dexmedetomidine vs propofol; acetaminophen vs placebo) to ensure this 
assumption remains valid.  In the event that this assumption is not va lid, we will include a time -varying 
covariate in the model.  Hazards ratios and their associated 95% confidence intervals will be reported.   
Repeated measures analyses including generalized estimating equations with robust variance will be 
employed to ass ess for differences in continuous variables that are measured at multiple time points over 
time between groups using mixed model regression.  
Interrater reliability assessments of delirium will be assessed for approximately 10% of patients.  This 
includes assessment of both for the presence of delirium, and for key features including acute change, 
inattention, disorganized thinking and an altered level of consciousness. Percent agreement, kappa and 
weighted kappa will be reported.   
Given the nature of a ra ndomized controlled trial, we do not anticipate seeing differences between groups 
in baseline characteristics; however, we will perform a secondary analysis, adjusting for any differences 
observed between groups and presenting adjusted odds ratios and thei r associated 95% confidence 
intervals.  
Interim Analyses  
There will be no interim analysis.  
Missing Data  
The frequency and percentage of missing values for each variable will be collected, analyzed and reported 
as necessary. If there are missing values for  the outcome variable(s), individual patients will be excluded.  
Highly incomplete covariates (>33% of observations missing) will be excluded from analyses.  In the event 
that a variable is missing more than 10% of the time we will consider imputation.  If  missing values are 
missing at random (MAR) or not at random (MNAR), multiple imputation will be performed. Missing values, 
selection or exclusion of observations and variables and handling of missing values in the statistical analysis 
will be describes ca refully and sensitivity analysis will be provided in the manuscript.   
Statistical Analytical Issues   
Adjustments for Covariates  
Given the randomized nature of this study, there will be no covariate adjustment in the primary analysis.  If 
differences betwee n groups persist after randomization we will perform a post hoc analysis including 
variables that are significantly differ between groups.   
Multiple Comparisons  
There will be no adjustment for multiple testing . Results of secondary outcomes and post hoc a nalyses will 
therefore be considered exploratory.   
Examination of Subgroups  
Our pre -specified primary analysis will assess the incidence of delirium between patients receiving 
intravenous  acetaminophen versus placebo.  Predefined subgroup analyses will be performed for our 
primary and secondary outcomes for the following groups:  
• Two sedative groups: dexmedetomidine versus propofol  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
16 
 
 
 • All four factorial groups including both sedatives (dexmedetomidine and propofol) and anal gesics 
(acetaminophen and placebo).    
Post -hoc Analyses  
Post-hoc data driven analyses are allowed aft er the following are undertaken:  
(a) Document which analyses were conducted after the results for the Primary and Secondary Aims 
are analyzed.  
(b) Document the rationale for these analyses.  
(c) Pre-specify their interpretation in the context of the primary and secondary results and their 
impact on the overall trial conclusions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
18 
 
 
 eAPPENDIX 2 . FAST TRACK PROTOCOL  AND  INTRAVENOUS DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
GUIDELINES    
 
FAST TRACK PROTOCOL FOR CARDIAC SURGERY  
Version : 12/2015  
Institutional Authors : BIDMC Perioperative Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit 
Committee  
 
Cardiac Surgery Fast Track Ventilator Weaning Guideline  
Purpose :  Patients who  have undergone an uncomplicated cardiac surgical procedure should be able to 
wean quickly from the ventilator, fostering a more rapid recovery.  The fast track weaning guideline provides 
a decision -making  framework that will expedite the process of weaning  most efficiently  
Patient Selection : Selection of patients for fast track ventilator weaning will be made at time of handoff in 
Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit (CVICU) .  It is a collaborative decision by the healthcare team at which 
time an o rder is placed in the system.  
Ventilator  Settings on Arrival  
All patients are placed on : assist control positive end expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) 5, fraction of inspired 
oxygen  (FiO2) 100%, tidal volume ( vT) 6-10 ml/kg ( ideal body weight ) and respiratory rate  12-14 (or per 
anesthesia)  
Extubation Goal  (4 hours for Fast Track)  
• Nurse will write time of arrival on White Board  
o This allows all members of the team to know when 23 hours is up to prevent Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons ( STS) designation of prolonged ventilation  
 
PRE-EXTUBATION  
I. Hand Off  
• Patient designated as appropriate for fast track wean  
o CVICU Nurse  
o Anesthesia  
o Intensive Care Unit (ICU)  Provider  
o CVICU Respiratory Therapist  (RT) 
 
II. Difficult Airway  
• ICU Provider, Intensivist , Registered Nurse ( RN), and RT discuss p lan in detail  
o Who needs to be notified when patient ready to extubated?  
o Does ICU Provider or Intensivist want to be present for extubation?  
o What additional equipment is needed at the bedside?  
 
III. Rewarming Guidelines  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
19 
 
 
 • All Patients on arrival  
o Change intravenous  fluid ( IVF) to warmed IVF  
o Warmed blankets  
o Hourly temp erature  for the first 4 hours postop eratively  
o Record temp erature  prior to administration of reversal agents  
• If Temperature ≤ 36°C (96.8°F)  
o Bair Hugger set at 42°C  
o May remove when temp > 36°C  (96.8°F) for at least one hour  
o Suggest defer bath until > 36°C for at least one hour  
• Nasal Thermometer Probes  
o May be used if still in place from Operating Room ( OR) 
o Should be removed when reversal agents are administered or at 8 hours, whichever 
comes first  
o If accuracy is being questioned, switch to oral temperatures  
 
IV. Weaning Criteria  
 
Patient Criteria for Ventilator Weaning  
Parameter  Criteria  
Richmond Agitation -Sedation 
Scale (R ASS) +1 thru -1 
Cardiac Index  ≥ 2.0 L/min/m2 
Mean Arterial Pressure ( MAP ) > 60mm  Hg < 80mm Hg  
Cardiac Rhythm  Stable  
Inotropic  Support  No more than one inotropic drip  
Chest Tube D rainage  < 100 ml/hour  
Core T emperature  ≥ 35 o C 
pH ≥ 7.32  
 
V. Page ICU Provider at time patient placed on Continuous Positive Airway Pressure ( CPAP ) 5/5 
• Notify provider if cuff leak present or not  
 
VI. Arterial Blood Gas ( ABG ) should be obtained 30 minutes after placed on CPAP  
• Patient condition may warrant earlier sampling to expedite extubation  
o Should discuss with team  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
20 
 
 
  
EXTUBATION  
VII. Extubation Criteria  
 
Patient Criteria for Extubation  
Parameter  Criteria  
Strength  Able to lift and hold head for ≥ 5 sec  
RASS  +1 to -1 
Heart Rate  60-100  
Cardiac Index  ≥ 2.0 L/min/m2 
MAP  > 60mm Hg < 90mm Hg  
Cardiac  Rhythm  Stable  
Inotropic  Support  No increase  
Chest Tube D rainage  < 100 ml/hour and not increasing  
Core Temperature  ≥ 36o C (96.8°F)  
Respiratory Rate  10-24 bpm  
ABG on following settings:   
CPAP FiO2  ≤ 50% PEEP 5 PS 5  pH 7.34 -7.45; pCO2 35 -45; PaO2 ≥ 80  
 
VIII. If not within fast track criteria then page the ICU provider  immediately to discuss plan of action and 
if not ready for extubation return to step IV.  
 
IX. Meets Extubation Criteria  
• Decision to proceed with extubation  may be made by the CVICU  RN, in coordination 
with the CVICU RT  
• For patients with a difficult airway , the plan to extubate should be discussed with the  
intensivist and ICU provider , prior to extubation  
 
X. Extubate  
• Head of Bed (HOB)  should be elevated at least 60° unless contraindicated  
• Endotracheal Tube ( ETT) should be suctioned prior to extubation , with 
hyperoxygenation  of the patient  before and after suctioning (use the Suction 100% 
function on ventilator).           
• Suction mouth with Yankauer  immediately prior to extubation .  
• Nasogastric  tube, if present, should be aspirated and discontinued.  
• Explain procedure to patient, informing them that a strong cough will be necessary as 
the ETT is withdrawn; explain that patient may be unable to speak for a time.  
• Patient to be placed on face tent /nasal cannula to provide adequate SpO 2 ≥ 92%  
 
 
 
 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
21 
 
 
  
POST -EXTUBATION CARE  
Over the next several hours, oxygen should be weaned to maintain periphe ral capillary oxygen saturation 
(SpO 2) ≥ 92%.           
           Nasal Cannula  O2 Flow /  FiO 2 
Oxygen Flow L/min  Approximate FiO 2 
Room Air  21% 
1 L/min  24% 
2 L/min  28% 
3 L/min  32% 
4 L/min  36% 
5 L/min  40% 
6 L/min  44% 
  
• ABG 30 minutes after extubation  only if clinical suspicion of poor respiratory function  
• Continuous SpO2 Monitoring  
• Observation and assessment of patient for respiratory distress or increased work of breathing  
• Incentive Spirometry  (IS) every 30 min x 4, every 1 hour x 4; then hourly while awake or more often, 
as indicated  
• Dangling  on edge of bed within 2 hours should be performed unles s contraindicated  
• Patient/Family instruction in use of splint pillow during coughing and deep breathing  
• Patient instruction in pain control as an important part of improved ventilation  
• Position with HOB > 45, or up in chair, for enhanced respiratory patte rn/coughing  
• Weaning of FiO2 as tolerated to SpO 2 >92%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
22 
 
 
  
INSTITUTIONAL INTRAVENOUS DRUG ADMINISTRATION GUIDELINES  
 
Version Date : 01/2002  
Revision Date:  11/2014  
Medication:  Dexmedetomidine Hydrochloride (PRECEDEX)  
Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
23 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Effect of Postoperative Intravenous Acetaminophen versus Placebo, Combined with Propofol or 
Dexmedetomidine, on Postoperative In -Hospital Delirium Among Older Patients Following Cardiac 
Surgery: The DEXACET Randomized Clinical Trial  
24 
 
 
 REFERENCES  
 
1. Rudolph JL, Jones RN, Levkoff SE, et al. Derivation and validation of a preoperative prediction rule 
for delirium after cardiac surgery. Circulation. 2009;119(2):229 -236. 
2. Inouye SK. Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med. 2006;354( 11):1157 -1165.  
3. Saczynski JS, Marcantonio ER, Quach L, et al. Cognitive trajectories after postoperative delirium. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;367(1):30 -39. 
4. Lin YY, He B, Chen J, Wang ZN. Can dexmedetomidine be a safe and efficacious sedative agent in 
post-cardiac surgery patients? a meta -analysis. Crit Care. 2012;16(5):R169.  
5. Dasta JF, Jacobi J, Sesti AM, McLaughlin TP. Addition of dexmedetomidine to standard sedation 
regimens after cardiac surgery: an outcomes analysis. Pharmacotherapy. 2006;26(6):798 -805. 
6. Shehabi Y, Grant P, Wolfenden H, et al. Prevalence of delirium with dexmedetomidine compared with 
morphine based therapy after cardiac surgery: a randomized controlled trial (DEXmedetomidine 
COmpared to Morphine -DEXCOM Study). Anesthesiology. 2009;111(5 ):1075 -1084.  
7. Maldonado JR, Wysong A, van der Starre PJ, Block T, Miller C, Reitz BA. Dexmedetomidine and the 
reduction of postoperative delirium after cardiac surgery. Psychosomatics. 2009;50(3):206 -217. 
8. Corbett SM, Rebuck JA, Greene CM, et al. Dexmedetomidine does not improve patient satisfaction 
when compared with propofol during mechanical ventilation. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(5):940 -945. 
9. Holmer Pettersson P, Jakobsson J, Owall A. Plasma concentrations  following repeated rectal or 
intravenous administration of paracetamol after heart surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2006;50(6):673 -677. 
 