 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENTRAL IRB PROTOCOL TEMPLATE  
Hybrid Controlled Trial to Implement Collaborative Care in General Mental 
Health  
(A project of the QUERI Program for Team -Based Behavioral Health ) 
QUERI #15 -289 
Funding Agency: QUERI  
Principal Investigator /Study Chair : Mark S. Bauer, MD  
Version 1 September 21, 2015  
Version 2 Amended November 16, 2015  
Version 3 Amended March 4, 2016  
Version 4 Amended May 6, 2016  
Version 5 Amended June 17, 2016  
Version 6 Amended July 20, 2016  
Version 7 Amended August 3, 2016  
Version 8 Amended October 3, 2016  
Version 9 Amended December 9, 2016  
Version 10 Amended January 23, 2017  
Version 11 Amended October 13, 2017  
Version 12 Amended February 16, 2018  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 2 of 43 
   
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 3 of 43 
 Abstract  
 Provide a summary of the study (recommended length: less than 500 words).  
Based on an internal system -wide review of mental health services and the Mental Health 
Action Plan submitted to Congress in November, 2011, OMHO has undertaken an effort to 
establish  Behavioral Health Interdisciplinary Program teams ( BHIPs ), which are intended to 
provide General Mental Health ( GMH ) care throughout VA. The BHIP goal is to build effective 
interdisciplinary teams, which will provide the majority of care for Veterans in G MH. It is now 
expected that every VAMC establish at least one BHIP in the current initial phase (begun in late 
FY2013), and that the effort scale -up subsequently. Not surprisingly, progress has been 
uneven.  
In 2015 OMHO incorporated the collaborative chron ic care model ( CCM ) as an evidence -based 
model by which to structure BHIPs. Consistent with BHIP goals, CCMs were developed to 
provide anticipatory, continuous, collaborative, evidence -based care. CCMs consist of 6 
elements: delivery system redesign, use o f clinical information systems, provider decision 
support, patient self -management support, linkage to community resources, and healthcare 
organization support. Replicating Effective Programs with External Facilitation ( REP-F) has 
been shown to be effectiv e in implementing complex care models, including CCMs for MH, both 
within and beyond VHA.  
In conjunction with OMHO, we plan a project including both an operational program evaluation 
component (non -research) and a research component  (see letter from Drs. Carroll and Weaver 
from OMHO) .  The overall Specific Aim  of the project is to evaluate the impact of REP -F in 
implementing CCM -based BHIPs.  
OMHO Operational Program (Non -Research) Evaluation Aim:  At the invitation of leadership 
of volunteer VA medical centers, w e will employ REP -F-based implementation to establish 
CCM -based BHIPs.  We will then evaluate the effectiveness of the process by monitoring  
OMHO national BHIP clinical fidelity measures . The results of this program evaluation activity  
will be pr ovided to OMHO and medical center leadership . 
Research Aim s & Hypothes es:  We hypothesize that BHIP implementation using REP -F will 
be accompanied by higher provider ratings of the presence of CCM elements by front -line BHIP 
providers in qualitative analys is of semi -structured interviews.  Secondarily, we will utilize 
standard qualitative analytic techniques of the provider interview data to identify barriers and 
facilitators to BHIP implementation . These provider -focused research activities are referred to  
as “Study 1” in the sections below . In addition, we hypothesize that BHIP implementation using 
REP-F will be accompanied by Veterans rating their care as more consistent with the CCM, and 
by improved Veteran health status. These  Veteran -focused research a ctivities are referred to as 
“Study 2” in the sections below.  
Note that this CIRB application addresses only  these two specific research activities , described 
as Study 1 and Study 2 under the “Research Aim s & Hypothes es” immediately above.  The 
facilitati on evaluation  activities, described under “OMHO Operational Program (Non -Research) 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 4 of 43 
 Evaluation Aim” above are operational activities undertaken at the request of the OMHO and 
are therefore NOT considered research (See letter from Drs. Weaver and Carroll  Appendix 2 ).  
Since our original submission of this protocol, additional guidance from the Office of Research 
Oversight has become available regarding the interface of quality improvement program 
evaluation and research; this has led us to reclassify  our Veteran assessments (Study 2) as 
research due to the extent of data collected .  We have therefore submitted this revised protocol.  
Similar combined operational program evaluation plus research activities were undertaken as 
part of QUERI RRP #13 -237/VA CIRB 13 -48, which is conducted under the regulatory oversight 
of the VA Central IRB.  
 
In terms of specific procedures, as part of the OMHO national BHIP rollout we will provide   
REP-F facilitation support to 9 volunteer VAMCs identified by OMHO.  Due to limited resources, 
we will stagger the timing of REP -F facilitation support, starting three VAMCs at each of six -
month intervals, with the start time randomly assigned in conjunction with OMHO.  Each site will 
receive REP -F facilitation support for 12 months, and non-research program evaluation data will 
be collected at several points before, during and after that time.  
 
Research interview data will be collected from consenting providers prior to and after 12 months 
of REP -F facilitation support  (Study 1) .  Intervi ew data will be analyzed qualitatively; utilizing 
both directed content analysis to identify CCM elements in use as well as grounded thematic 
analysis to identify implementation barriers and facilitators.  Veteran  interview  data will be 
collected from conse nting Veterans on three occasions: prior to REP -F facilitation support, 
midway through the 12 months of REP -F facilitation support, and at the conclusion of the 12 
months of REP -F facilitation support (Study 2). These Veteran  interview  data will be analyze d 
quantitatively.  
 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 5 of 43 
 List of Abbreviations  
BHIP : Behavioral Health Interdisciplinary Program, an OMHO -mandated system redesign for 
general mental health service delivery .  
BAA : Business Associates Agreement . 
CDW : Corporate Data Warehouse.  
CAVHS : Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare Systems -NLR located in North Little Rock, 
Arkansas . 
CCM : Collaborative Chronic Care Model, a n evidence -based model for system redesign 
developed for primary care and now evidence -based for mental health care across primary and 
specialty care systems; serves as the system redesign model for the investigators’ work to 
establish  BHIP s in volunteer VAMCs.  
CDW : Corporate Data Warehouse  
CHOIR : The HSRD Center of Innovation at VA Boston and the Bedford VAMC, The Center for 
Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, formerly the HSRD Centers of 
Excellence at VABHS and Bedford, COLMR and CHQOER.    
DUA : Data Use Agreement.  
EMIC : Ethnogra phic Methods and Implementation Core,  an internal VA transcription service 
located at the VA Iowa City Healthcare System.  
GLM: General Linear Model analysis.  
GMH : General Mental H ealth clinics, established at every VAMC and the typical portal of entry 
to mental health specialty services for most Veteran s with mental health needs.  
IIR: Investigato r-Initiated Research, the HSRD equivalent of a  “Merit” grant award.  
OMHO : Office of Mental Health Operations (1 0-NC5). Note that this office was renamed to the 
Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention (OMHSP) in 2017. OMHO will be used 
throughout for historical accuracy.  
PACIC: Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care.  
PACT : Patient -Aligned Care Teams, the mandated system redesign effort to restructure s ervice 
delivery in primary care . 
PHI: Protected Health Information  
PII: Personally identifiable information.  
PVAMC: CPL. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center (Philadelphia)  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 6 of 43 
 Q-LES-Q: Quality of Life, Enjoyment, and Satisfaction Questionnaire  
QUERI : VA Qual ity Enhancement Research Initiative . 
RCT: Randomized controlled trial.  
REDCap : the Research Electronic Data Capture system  
REP-F: Replicating Effective Programs with Facilitation, an evidence -based implementation 
strategy  utilized to support system redesign efforts within and beyond VA.  
RRP : QUERI Rapid Response Project  funding mechanism . 
SCRSSN : Scrambled social security number.  
TBBH QUERI : QUERI Program for Team -Based Behavioral Health , a set of projects led by Co -
Princi pal Investigators JoAnn Kirchner and Mark Bauer funded by QUERI to facilitate and 
investigate various aspects of team -based behavioral health care.  This study is one of the 
projects.  
VABHS : VA Boston Healthcare System . 
VAWNYHCS : VA Western New York Health care System  
VR-12: Veterans Rand 12 -item Social Functioning measure.   
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 7 of 43 
  
Contents  
Protocol Title: Hybrid Controlled Trial to Implement Collaborative Care in General Mental Health
 8 
1.0 Study Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  8 
2.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 13 
3.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 20 
5.0 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 25 
5.1 St udy Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 26 
5.2 Recruitment Methods ................................ ................................ ................................ .......32 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ......................... 34 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ .............................. 35 
5.5 Study Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 35 
5.6 Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 36 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....38 
6.0 Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 38 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ............................. 38 
8.0 Communication Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......39 
9.0  References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 40 
 
  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 8 of 43 
 Protocol Title: Hybrid Controlle d Trial to Implement Collaborative 
Care in General Mental Health      
 
1.0 Study Personnel  
 
• Provide name , contact information , and affiliations/employee status  for the 
following:  
 
Principal Investigator /Study Chair :  
 
Mark Bauer, MD  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-6380  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Mark.Bauer@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
Co-Investigators:     
  
 Martin P. Charns, DBA  
Role: Co -Investigator  
Affilia tion: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-4945  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Martin.Charns @va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
Anashua Rani Elwy, PhD  
Role: Co -Investigator  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857-364-4944  
Fax: 857-364-4511  
Email: Rani.Elwy@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152-C) 
Boston, MA  02130  
  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 9 of 43 
  
 
Robert Lew, PhD  
Role: Co -Investigator  
Affiliation : VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-6278  
Fax: 857 -364-4424  
Email: Robert.Lew2@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (MAVERIC)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
 
Christopher Miller, PhD  
Role: Co -Investigator , Facilitation Intervention Lead  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-5688  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Christopher.Miller8@va.gov  
Mailing Address:   
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
 
Bo Kim, PhD 
 Role: Co -Investigator  
Affiliation:  VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone:  857-364-4867  
Fax:  857-364-6140  
Email: Bo.Kim@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
  Jennifer L. Sullivan, PhD 
  Role: Co -Investigator  
Affiliation:  VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone:  857-364-5298  
Fax:  857-364-6140  
Email: Jennifer.Sullivan@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
Samantha L. Connolly, PhD  
Role: Co -Investigator  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 10 of 43 
 Employment Status:  
Phone: 857 -364-5987  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Samantha.Connolly@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  8/8ths VA  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA 02130  
 
  JoAnn Ki rchner, MD  
  Role: Co -Investigator, LSI at Little Rock  
  Affiliation: Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare Systems - NLR 
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 501-267-1719  
Fax: 501-257-1703  
Email: JoAnn.Kirchner@va.gov  
  Mailing Address:  
  2200 Fort Roots Drive, Building 58  
  North Little Rock, AR 72114  
 
  Karen Drummond, PhD  
  Role: Co -Investigator  
  Affiliation: Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare Systems - NLR 
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 949-293-9223  
Fax: 501-257-1703  
Email: Karen.Drummond@va.gov  
  Mailing Address:  
  2200 Fort Roots Drive, Building 58  
  North Little Rock, AR 72114  
 
 
  Laura O. Wray, PhD  
  Role: Co -Investigator, LSI at VA Western New York HCS  
  Affiliation: VA Western New York Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 716 -862-8598  
Fax: 716 -862-6734  
Email: Laura.Wray@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
3495 Bailey Avenue  
Buffalo, NY 14215  
 
  David W. Oslin, MD  
  Role: Co -Investigator, LSI at Philadelphia VA  Medical Center  
  Affiliation: CPL. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center (Philadelphia)  
  Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
  Phone: 215 -823-5894  
  Fax: 215 -823-4123  
  Email: Dave.Oslin@va.gov  
  Mailing Address:  
  3900 Woodland Avenue Mailstop 116  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 11 of 43 
   Philadelph ia, PA 19104  
 
 
Other Study Staff  
 
Kelly Stol zmann, MS 
Role: Programmer  Analyst  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-5355  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Kelly.Stolzmann@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue (152M)  
Boston, MA  02130  
 
 
Jeffery Pitcock, MPH  
Role: Data Analyst , Interviewer  
Affiliation: Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System – NLR 
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: (501) 257 -1969  
Fax: (501) 257 -1707  
Email: Jeffery.Pitcock@va.gov   
Mailing Address:  
2200 Fort Roots Drive, Building 58  
North Little Rock, AR 72114  
 
Rachel Riendeau, B A 
Role:  Project Manager, Quantitative Data Lead  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-6104  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email:Rachel.Riendeau@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue  
Boston, MA 02130  
 
Alicia Williamson, BA  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 857 -364-6302  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Email: Alicia.Williamson @va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue  
Boston, MA 02130  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 12 of 43 
  
 
Lee Bernstein, BA  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Western New York Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 716 -862-5306  
Fax: 716 -862-6734  
Email: Lee.Bernstein@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
3495 Bailey Avenue  
Buffalo, NY 14215  
 
April Eaker, BA  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Western New York Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 716 -862-6026  
Fax: 716 -862-6734  
Email: April.Eaker@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
3495 Bailey Avenue  
Buffalo, NY 14215  
 
 
Michael Owings, BS  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Western New York Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: 716 -862-8590  
Fax: 716 -862-6734  
Email: Michael.Owin gs2@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
3495 Bailey Avenue  
Buffalo, NY 14215  
 
Lauren Rodriguez, BA  
Role: Research Assistant /Interviewer  
Affiliation: VA Western New York Healthcare System  
Employment Status: WOC  
Phone:  732-492-9783  
Fax: 716 -862-6734  
Email: Lauren.Rodriguez2@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
3495 Bailey Avenue  
Buffalo, NY 14215  
 
Ashley Hagerty, BS  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: CPL. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center (Philadelphia)  
  Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 13 of 43 
   Phone: 215 -823-5800 x3190  
  Fax: 215 -823-4123  
  Email: Ashley.Hagerty@va.gov  
  Mailing Address:  
  3900 Woodland Avenue Mailstop 116  
  Philadelphia, PA 19104  
 
  Shefali Sanyal, MS, CCRP  
  Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA 
Phone: (857) 364 -6236  
Fax: 857-364-4486   
Email:Shefali.Sanyal@va.gov  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue  
Boston, MA 02130  
 
Allie Silverman, BA  
Role: Research Assistant  
Affiliation: VA Boston Healthcare System  
Employment Status: 8/8ths VA  
Phone: (857) 364 -4614  
Fax: 857 -364-6140  
Mailing Address:  
150 South Huntington Avenue  
Boston, MA 02130  
2.0 Introduction  
 
A. Scientific Background  
A.1. Gaps in Outpatient Mental Health Outcomes and Quality.   Mental health conditions 
affect 46.6% of Americans during their lives, and impact 26.6% in any given year1.  Outcome for 
mental health conditions is suboptimal, and care coordination is problematic both within and 
beyond VHA2,3.  While it is difficult to  link individual care processes to suboptimal outcomes 
across diagnoses, multicomponent care models that emphasize care coordination and 
evidence -based care have been shown to improve health outcomes for individuals across a 
variety of mental health condit ions (Section A.3.). 
Given the need to improve outcome and care coordination for mental health conditions, VHA 
has established norms for recovery -oriented mental health care throughout VHA4, and invested 
heavily in m ental health over the past decade.5  At Senate hearings in 2011 the Committee on 
Veterans’ Affairs has asked for an assessment of the impact of this investment, as well as plans 
for maximization of these resources5.  In parallel, the Office of Mental Health Operations 
(OMHO ) commissioned a VHA -wide assessment of mental health care delivery, supplemented 
by a report by the VA Office of Inspector General in Spring, 2012, on mental health access6.  
These assessments found clear opportunities for improvement, particularly around access to 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 14 of 43 
 and coordin ation of services (Drs. Mary Schohn & Kendra Weaver (OMHO), oral & written 
communications, February -March, 2013).  Recognizing opportunities for improvement, OMHO 
launched an effort to enhance delivery of mental health care, focusing in particular on outpa tient 
General Mental Health ( GMH ) care. GMH is the typical portal of entry for Veterans requiring 
specialty mental health services; for instance, in VISN 1 the number of Veterans seen in each 
VAMC’s GMH clinics ranges from 3,500 -8,000 per year (Dr. Craig C oldwell, VISN 1 MH Lead, 
oral communication, April, 2013).  
 
A.2. Behavioral Health Interdisciplinary Program Teams (BHIPs).   In 2012 OMHO began a 
high priority effort to enhance care coordination in GMH care with the ambitious goal of 
establishing at least  one interdisciplinary GMH team in every VAMC, beginning in late FY2013.  
The intent is that this team -based structure will spread and become the norm for GMH care in 
VHA, as GMH care is not typically team -based.  These teams, called Behavioral Health 
Interdisciplinary Program teams ( BHIPs ), do not utilize a single care model.  Rather, BHIPs are 
operationalized at the facility level to achieve the goal of building effective, interdisciplinary GMH 
teams at all VHA facilities that will provide the majority of  mental health care necessary for a 
panel of assigned Veterans (OMHO, loc. cit.).  National BHIP foci include the provision of 
continuous access to recovery -oriented, evidence -based care, emphasizing population -based 
care, consistent with the VA’s Handbook  on Uniform Mental Health Services in Medical Centers 
and Clinics4.  It is planned that each BHIP will care for a panel of ~1,000 Veterans with 5 -7 
FTEE, including a mixture of licensed independent practitioners, clerical support, and non -
licensed clinical  support personnel (OMHO, loc. cit.).  
In 2012, several pilot BHIPs across 4 VISNs were commissioned with support from OMHO.  In 
2013 -14, a collaborative learning program linked these pilot BHIPs with one VAMC from each 
VISN.  Nationally, however, despite c entralized dissemination support from OMHO (monthly 
technical assistance calls, extensive SharePoint materials, ad hoc consultation), not all VAMCs 
are making progress.  Similar to the PACT roll -out, many sites are struggling with how best to 
form their te ams and establish team -based care (Kendra Weaver, OMHO, written & oral 
communications, 2014).  
Throughout these efforts, no single care model has been adopted, nor has a single 
implementation strategy.  The advantage to this is that individual VAMCs have f lexibility to 
respond to local conditions in pursuing OMHO goals.  However, the challenge is that while the 
overall goals are clear, there is no certainty that VAMCs will employ evidence -based models —
for either the care model intervention or the implementa tion strategy.  Following the PARIHS 
implementation model, which identifies evidence, context, and facilitation as key considerations 
in the implementation process7,8, we along with OMHO leaders (see letter  Appendix 2 ) propose 
that OMHO efforts to establis h BHIPs can be enhanced by an evidence -based care model that 
can be adapted to site -specific contextual factors when implemented with external facilitation to 
support local efforts.  
A.3. Collaborative Chronic Care Models (CCMs) as an Evidence -Based Model f or BHIPs.   
Collaborative chronic care models ( CCMs ) provide an evidence -based and well -
operationalized —yet flexible —model that can address OMHO needs by informing the BHIP 
effort.  CCMs, as initially articulated by Wagner and colleagues9,10 and subsequentl y as part of 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 15 of 43 
 the Robert Wood Johnson Improving Chronic Illness Care initiative11, represent a model of care 
that consists of several or all of six components: work role redesign, use of clinical information 
systems, provider decision support, patient self -management support, linkage to community 
resources, and health care leadership and organization support e.g.,9,10,12 -14.  Examples of how 
CCM elements can be operationalized are provided in the following Table.   
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 16 of 43 
 
 CCM Goal: Anticipatory, Continuous, Evidence -Based, Collaborative Care via…  
Work Role 
Redesign  Self-
Management 
Support for 
Individuals in 
Treatment  Decision 
Support  Information 
Management  Community 
Linkages  
• Care 
Management  
• Access -
Driven 
Schedulin g 
• Activated 
Follow -Up • Incorporation 
of the 
Individual’s 
Values and 
Skills  
• Shared 
Decision -
Making  
• Self-
Management 
Skills  
• Behavioral 
Change 
Interventions  • Provider 
Education  
• Practice 
Guidelines  
• Specialty 
Consultation  • Population : 
Registry  
 
• Provider : 
Reminders  
• Outcome 
Tracking  
• Feedback  
• Integrated 
Care Plans  • Additional 
Resources  
• Peer -
Based 
Support  
Organizational Leadership and Support   
Multiple randomized 
controlled trials indicate 
that CCMs improve 
outcomes for various 
chronic medical 
illnessese.g.,12 -14 and 
depression treated in 
primary care15,16. CCM 
principles have informed 
Primary Care -Mental 
Health Implementation 
efforts such as 
TIDESe.g.,17. Dr. Bauer’s 
work in bipola r disorder 
was the first effort to 
establish CCMs in GMH care (rather than primary care), in both a VA Cooperative Study18 and 
an NIMH -funded multi -site randomized controlled trial ( RCT) in a staff -model HMO19.  Both 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 17 of 43 
 RCTs demonstrated that CCMs improved me ntal health outcomes at little19 to no18 added cost.  
Additional work has extended these findings, focusing on improving physical health outcomes in 
bipolar disorder20-22, and broadening the model to mood disorders in general23.  These efforts 
have resulte d in the endorsement of CCMs in two national practice guidelines for bipolar 
disorder, including VA/DoD guidelines24,25, and listing on the SAMHSA National Registry of 
Evidence -Based Programs and Practices26.  Additionally, in 2011 the VA Office of Telehea lth 
Services, supported by Mental Health Services and OMHO, established a telehealth version of 
the bipolar CCM, the Bipolar Disorders Telehealth Program, now active in 16 sites across 7 
VISNs and 10 states with over 460 consults received. Thus the investi gator team has extensive 
experience in establishing, adapting, and testing CCMs in both research and clinical contexts.  
Of substantial relevance to BHIP efforts, our meta -analytic work indicates that CCMs have 
robust effects in a variety of mental health c onditions and across both primary care and 
specialty care settings in RCTs27.  Meta -analyses indicated significant CCM effects across 
disorders and care settings in depression, mental and physical quality of life, and social role 
function (d=0.20 -0.33); to tal healthcare costs did not differ from controls.   Note that the health 
outcome effect sizes likely indicate the lower bound for CCM effects, since the meta -analyses 
included only unadjusted analyses and included under -powered secondary analyses.  
Subsequ ent work with cumulative meta -analysis and meta -regression28, indicates that the 
modal CCM in RCTs has employed the first four elements listed above, with no single element 
either essential or superfluous to the model.  Moreover, effect sizes for depressio n and mental 
and physical quality of life have stabilized in the range of, respectively, 0.20 (0.04 -0.36), 0.33 
(0.17 -0.49) and 0.31 (95%CI: 0.14 -048)(Figure above)28.  It should be noted that while a number 
of individual RCTs have enrolled mixed diagnosti c groups29-36, the majority have dealt with 
single conditions.  Moreover, RCTs included in the above meta -analyses and published since 
show mixed results for conditions that typically require specialty -level care in VHA, particularly 
PTSD36-39 and substanc e use disorders40.  However, it is notable that these RCTs aimed to 
manage these conditions within primary or general care, while CCMs implemented in GMH 
could be oriented toward facilitating the transition of such patients to specialty programs while 
enha ncing coordination of care.  
A.4. Implementing the CCM: Replicating Effective Programs with External Facilitation 
(REP -F).  In addition, we have done substantive work in the implementation of CCMs using the 
CDC’s Replicating Effective Programs ( REP) impleme ntation strategy.  REP was developed to 
translate effective HIV prevention strategies into practice for community -based organizations41.  
To our knowledge, we have been the first to apply REP strategies in healthcare organizations42-
44 both in establishing  VA Bipolar Telehealth as a multi -VISN CCM, and as part of a two -state, 
five-site CCM implementation RCT (NIMH R -01-MH079994; PI: Amy M. Kilbourne).  
We have chosen REP for our work from among many implementation frameworks because of 
its detailed articulat ion of concrete implementation actions arrayed across four stages: 
assessing Preconditions, Pre -Implementation preparation, Implementation, and post -
implementation Maintenance.  Major activities include development of site -specific Packaging of 
an interven tion supported by provider Training and ongoing Technical Assistance to support 
intervention use.  Classically, REP has focused primarily on maximizing fidelity to the 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 18 of 43 
 intervention41, while our work has augmented REP with an External Facilitation component45,46 
to enhance provider buy -in and capability in order to establish and reinforce desired norms, and 
to achieve broader organizational support by identifying and aligning organizational incentives to 
the implementation efforts42,43,45 -48.  Specifically, external facilitators help providers to address 
organizational barriers and foster ongoing relationships with organizational leadership to 
promote buy -in by ensuring alignment of REP efforts to organizational goals and priorities43,46 -48.   
In terms of pre liminary data regarding REP in combination with External Facilitation , we 
randomized five sites in Michigan or Colorado to implement the bipolar CCM via REP with 
External Facilitation ( REP-F) vs. REP with minimal technical assistance to support CCM use.  
After six months we assessed two types of fidelity monitors, focusing on specific, protocol -
determined18 components: treatment receipt and treatment competency. Sites receiving REP -F 
demonstrated 2.6 -fold more total care management contacts and their patie nts were 7.2 times 
more likely to receive sessions with adequate treatment fidelity44.  Thus REP -F demonstrates 
the ability to enhance fidelity to CCM in community practices, even compared to a “lighter” 
version of REP.  Of additional importance, REP -F has  also been shown to improve outcomes in 
a program geared to improving population -level outcomes in VA49. 
 
B. Significance  
We are working in partnership with OMHO and QUERI to improve Veteran health status and 
quality of care by supporting the implementatio n of team -based collaborative care for Veterans 
with mental health conditions, and to support OMHO’s efforts to develop the most effective 
implementation strategy for doing so.  
In summary,  our team is well positioned to assist OMHO in their efforts to impl ement CCM -
based BHIP teams nationally.  In discussions with OMHO, it was decided that the next logical 
step is to conduct a program evaluation with volunteer VAMCs that desire implementation 
assistance to establish their BHIP teams.  Because of limited imp lementation workforce, and in 
view of OMHO’s desire for empirical evidence that this type  of implementation support i s worth 
their investment, it is planned to randomly assign sit es to the timing of REP -F implementation 
support using a stepped wedge design  50,58-60. Thus we will conduct a randomized program 
evaluation under the sponsorship of OMHO, supplemented by funding from VA Quality 
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), which will  provide implementation support utilizing 
REP-F and assess impact on n ational BHIP fidelity measures . We will also conduct a research 
study to assess BHIP provider perceptions of BHIP care according to the CCM elements  (Study 
1) and assess program impact on Veteran perceptions of collaborativeness of care and health 
status ( Study 2) . 
This project  is clearly aligned with the highest priorities of OMHO, as articulated by Dr. Schohn 
in Senate hearings:  “ VHA’s actions prescribe mental health teams; staffing plans based on 
approved patient panel sizes; and measureable improvement  of patient -centered outcomes for 
depression, PTSD, suicide, substance use, and mental health recovery.”5  Notably, this program 
evaluation effort  represents a unique and time -sensitive opportunity to incorporate a highly 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 19 of 43 
 evidence -based care model into the  early implementation stages of a national initiative before 
the roll -out is completed .   Since this project utilizes no externally funded  staff beyond 
implementation support, results will be readily translatable into operational guidance for OMHO.  
Meanwh ile, our work will provide a more intensive intervention for struggling sites.  These 
synergistic efforts will place OMHO on even stronger footing to respond to diverse site needs as 
their nationwide initiative continues.  
Regarding research contribution to  implementation science, we recall that the fundamental 
insight that led to the development of CCMs was that improving individual care processes did 
not reliably improve health outcomes in target populations9,10.  This is not surprising in light of 
evidenc e that healthcare represents a complex adaptive system rather than a simple 
mechanical system51,52.  That is, healthcare represents a group of human beings working more 
or less together who “have the freedom and ability to respond to stimuli in many differ ent and 
fundamentally unpredictable ways”52,p310.  Thus the fundamental approach to change is not to 
specify behavior in more and more detail “to make the human parts act more mechanical”52,p310 
but rather to create the conditions under which clinician beh avior develops solutions that will 
lead to more effective care.  It will be extremely informative to characterize and analyze front -
line participating providers’ perceptions of the degree to which the CCM was successfully 
implemented, and the barriers and facilitators of its implementation.   
 
C.  Target Population including Vulnerable Populations    
Study 1 (Providers)  
Our research evaluation will sample providers based on BHIP  membership .  Regarding 
providers, we are well aware that they as employees  represent a vulnerable population, having 
worked with this population in the IRB -approved Collaborative Care for Returning Veterans  
study  53, and will take care to prevent both coercion to participate and compromise of 
confidentiality.  
Foundational work for the BHIP proje ct was conducted during a QUERI -funded study, RRP #13 -
237, for which the VA Central IRB ha s regulatory oversight  (VA CIRB 13 -48). For that study, as 
well as the current project , the implementation processes are considered operations, and 
therefore not subject to IRB oversight, while the provider assessments are considered research 
(see letter fr om Drs. Weaver and Carroll of OMHO  Appendix 2 ).  Specifically, the formation of a 
BHIP team is an operational decision by an individual VAMC, and employees cannot 
necessarily opt in or out as part of the research process.  
Study 2 ( Veterans ) 
We will assess  patient -level process and health outcome measures at the popula tion level by 
utilizing the recruitment and telephone interview  procedures  as described below.  For this 
strategy we will use Corporate Data Warehouse ( CDW ) data to identify all Veterans seen in the 
prior year by BHIP providers. We will exclude  individuals with a n encounter for a diagnosis of 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 20 of 43 
 dementia  in the prior year , and determine how well the racial, ethnic, and gender distribution of 
the interviewed  sample resembles that of the population from which it was drawn.  
3.0 Objectives  
A. Specific Aims  
Based on an internal system -wide review of mental health services and the Mental Health 
Action Plan submitted to Congress in November, 2011, OMHO has undertaken an effort to 
establish Behavioral Health I nterdisciplinary Program teams ( BHIPs ), which are intended to 
provide General Mental Health ( GMH ) care throughout VA. The BHIP goal is to build effective 
interdisciplinary teams, which will provide the majority of care for Veterans in GMH. It is now 
expect ed that every VAMC establish at least one BHIP in the current initial phase (begun in late 
FY2013), and that the effort scale -up subsequently. Not surprisingly, progress has been 
uneven.  
In 2015 OMHO incorporated the collaborative chronic care model ( CCM ) as an evidence -based 
model by which to structure BHIPs. Consistent with BHIP goals, CCMs were developed to 
provide anticipatory, continuous, collaborative, evidence -based care. CCMs consist of 6 
elements: delivery system redesign, use of clinical informati on systems, provider decision 
support, patient self -management support, linkage to community resources, and healthcare 
organization support. Replicating Effective Programs with External Facilitation ( REP-F) has 
been shown to be effective in implementing co mplex care models, including CCMs for MH, both 
within and beyond VHA.  
In conjunction with OMHO, we plan a project including both an operational program evaluation 
component (non -research) and a research component  (see letter from Drs. Carroll and Weaver 
of OMHO) .  The overall Specific Aim  of the project is to evaluate the impact of REP -F in 
implementing CCM -based BHIPs.  
OMHO Operational Program (Non -Research) Evaluation Aim:  At the invitation of volunteer 
VA medical centers, w e will employ REP -F-based imp lementation to establish CCM -based 
BHIPs.  We will then evaluate the effectiveness of the process by monitoring  OMHO national 
BHIP clinical fidelity measures. The results of this program evaluation activity  will be provided to 
OMHO and medical center leade rship . 
Research Aim s & Hypothes es:  We hypothesize that BHIP implementation using REP -F will 
be accompanied by higher provider ratings of the presence of CCM elements by front -line BHIP 
providers in qualitative analysis of semi -structured interviews.  Seco ndarily, we will utilize 
standard qualitative analytic techniques of the provider interview data to identify barriers and 
facilitators to BHIP implementation.  These provider -focused research activities are referred to 
as “Study 1” in the sections below . In addition, we hypothesize that BHIP implementation using 
REP-F will be accompanied by Veterans rating their care as more consistent with the CCM, and 
by improved Veteran health status. These Veteran -focused research activities are referred to as 
“Study 2” in the sections below.  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 21 of 43 
 Note that this CIRB application addresses only  these two specific research activities , described 
as Study 1 and Study 2 under the  “Research Aim s & Hypothes es” immediately above.  The 
other activities, described under “OMHO Operationa l Program (Non -Research) Evaluation Aim” 
above are operational activities undertaken at the request of the OMHO and are therefore NOT 
considered research (See letter from Drs. Weaver and Carroll  Appendix 2 ).    Since our original 
submission of this protoco l, additional guidance from the Office of Research Oversight has 
become available regarding the interface of quality improvement program evaluation and 
research; this has led us to recognize that our patient assessments (Study 2) are more 
appropriately cla ssified as research due to the extent of data collected.  We have therefore 
submitted this revised protocol.  Similar combined operational program evaluation plus research 
activities were undertaken as part of QUERI RRP #13 -237, which is conducted under th e 
regulatory oversight of the VA Central IRB  (VA CIRB 13 -48).  
In terms of specific procedures, as part of the OMHO national BHIP rollout we will provide   
REP-F facilitation support to 9 volunteer VAMCs identified by OMHO.  Due to limited resources, 
we wil l stagger the timing of REP -F facilitation support, starting three VAMCs at each of six -
month intervals, with the start time randomly assigned in conjunction with OMHO.  Each site will 
receive REP -F facilitation support for 12 months, and non -research prog ram evaluation data will 
be collected at several points before, during and after that time.  
 
Research interview data will be collected from consenting providers prior to and after 12 months 
of REP -F facilitation support  (Study 1) .  Interview data will be analyzed qualitatively; utilizing 
both directed content analysis to identify CCM elements in use as well as grounded thematic 
analysis to identify implementation barriers and facilitators.  Veteran interview  data will be 
collected from consenting Veteran pa tients on three occasions: prior to REP -F facilitation 
support, midway through the 12 months of REP -F facilitation support, and at the conclusion of 
the 12 months of REP -F facilitation support (Study 2). These Veteran interview  data will be 
analyzed quanti tatively.  
4.0. R esources and Personnel  
A.   Research Sites  
Research will be conducted by investigators at VABHS , CAVHS , VAWNYHCS  and PVAMC .  All 
data will be collected by investigators at these sites and stored only at these sites.   The nine 
VAMC s that ha ve volunteered to utilize REP -F implementation methods to establish a BHIP 
based on CCM principles w ill not be engaged in research .  We consider the se 9 sites to be not 
engaged in the conduct of research, as described in the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, OHRP,  Guidelines on Engagement of Institutions in Human Subjects Research , 
particularly Section III.B , and as was the case for the Central IRB -approved RRP #13 -237/VA 
CIRB 13 -48 (http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/engage08.html ). 
 
Sites whose roles are limited to providing subjects for this research project are considered not 
engaged in research (though of course VABHS , CAVHS , VAWNYHCS , and PVAMC  are 
engaged in research by virtue of their investigators on the study).  Specifically, for Study 1 the 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 22 of 43 
 nine VAMCs will provide information about the study to the population of eligible providers.  For 
Study 2, the nine VAMCs will provide relevant clinic names from which the Veteran sample will 
be drawn by investigators at VABHS.  They will release infor mation to the investigators on 
potential subjects, including identifiable information; however, the provision of such information 
is consistent with VAMC operational (non -research) duties, such as they would do for External 
Peer Review, OMHO reviews, and o ther internal business or clinical operational tasks.  Their 
staff will not conduct interviews, provide interventions, or consent subjects.  Furthermore, their 
role in providing information will not merit professional recognition or publication authorship of 
study results. We will notify facility leadership before we engage in any recruitment activities or 
conduct the telephone interviews.  
 
For the prior RRP, the Central IRB determined that the participating VAMCs that request 
facilitation support to estab lish a BHIP are not engaged in research.  This is because, while the 
site is providing information on the overall population  of interest (employees involved in BHIP, 
BHIP clinics from which subjects are drawn), the actual sample recruitment  will be done by 
investigators at the Boston and North Little Rock VAMCs.  This decision follows the principles 
described in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Human Research 
Protection,  Guidelines on Engagement of Institutions in Human Subjects Research , October 16, 
2008, particularly Section III.B.  Study 1 r esearch activities, i.e. interviews with providers, will be 
conducted by investiga tors at the Boston and  North  Little Rock  VAMCs and will fall under the 
purview of the Central  IRB and the R&D Committees at those facilities.  Study 2 research 
activities, i.e. telephone interviews  with Veterans , will be conducted by research assistants 
located at VABHS and CAVHS,  and will also fall under the purview of the Central IRB and the 
R&D Committees at those facilities.  
 
B.  Individuals and their Specific Roles in the Study  
Study 1: No protected health information will be collected during the provider interviews so study 
team members will not have access to protected health information  (PHI) for Study 1 . The 
interview will ask about how care is organized and delivered in the General Mental Health clinic 
and does not include personal health questions.  However, the team mem bers will have access 
to personally identifiable information (PII) for Study 1 such as GMH employee names, positions 
and contact information.  (Please see Section 7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality for data security 
safeguards.)  
Study 2: Study 2 will involve c ollection of PHI as well as PII for Veterans.  
Specific roles and permissions are summarized in this bulleted list and in the table below.  
• Mark S. Bauer, MD (PI, VABHS ) is an experienced health services researcher, 
implementation scientist, and VA administ rator who has contributed to the CCM 
literature  and the codification of hybrid designs . He serves as an Associate Director of 
the Boston -Bedford HSRD Center of Innovation, The Center for Healthcare Organization 
and Implementation Research ( CHOIR ). He will oversee all aspects of the evaluation, 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 23 of 43 
 will serve as an External Facilitator  and consult on analysis of research and operations 
program evaluation data with the assistance of Rachel Riendeau, BA (Project Manager, 
Quantitative Data Lead, VABHS) and Kelly Stolzmann, MS (Programmer Analyst, 
VABHS).   Dr. Bauer will have access to provider PII (Study 1) and will have access to 
Veteran PHI and PII (Study 2).  He will not consent subjects for Study 1 or Study 2.  Ms. 
Riendeau  and Ms. Stolzmann will have access to provider PII (Study 1) and Veteran PII 
and PHI (Study 2 ).  Ms. Stolzmann will not consent subjects but Ms. Riendeau  will 
consent Veterans (Study 2).   
• Martin Charns, DBA (Co -I, VABHS)  is a senior investigator and the Co -Director  
Emeritus  of CHOIR  and a Professor in the Boston University School of Public Health. He 
will apply his expertise in organ izational science and change to interpreting provider 
interview data.  He will not have access to  provider PII (Study 1) or Veteran PII or  PHI 
(Study 2) and will not consent subjects.  
• A. Rani Elwy, PhD (Co -I, VABHS)  is an accomplished qualitative researcher at CHOIR 
and will oversee data analysis for the qualitative interviews and consult on 
implementation processes.  She will have access to  provider PII (Study 1) but not  
Veteran PII or  PHI (Study 2) and will not consent subjects.  
• Jennifer Sullivan, PhD (Co -I, VABHS) will conduct, code and analyze the provider 
interviews . She will have access to provider PII and will consent provider subjects  (Study 
1) but will not have access to Veteran PII or PHI nor consent Veteran subjects for Study 
2.   
• Alicia Williamson (Research Assistant, VABHS) will assist Drs. Sullivan and 
Drummond  in scheduling the provider interviews and note -taking during the interviews.  
She will conduct telephone interviews of Veterans (Study 2) and will have access to 
provider PII (Study 1) and Veteran PII and PHI (Study 2) and will consent subjects for 
Study 2.  
• Allie Silverman and Shefali Sanyal  (Research Assistants, VA BHS) will conduct 
Veteran interviews (Study 2).  They will not have access to provider PII (Study 1) but will 
access Veteran PII and PHI (Study 2) and will consent subjects in Study 2.  
• Robert Lew, PhD (Co -I, VA Boston Cooperative Studies Coordinating Cente r) is a 
senior biostatistician with extensive experience in clinical trials design and execution, 
including nested analyses and multi -level adjustment in GLM.  He will consult on 
qualitative data analyses from the perspective of having participated in site  balance  
during randomization .  He will not have access to provider PII (Study 1) but  will have 
access to Veteran PII and  PHI (Study 2)  and wil l not consent subjects.  
• Christ opher J. Miller, PhD, (Co -I, VABHS ) is a clinical psychologist who completed his 
HSR&D post -doctoral fellowship under Dr. Bauer.  He is experienced in qualitative 
interviews from several projects and has been a leader in developing CCM self -
management program and provider education materials.  He will serve as an Exte rnal 
Facilitator and as the Facilitation Intervention Lead a nd contribute to qualitative data 
analyses.  He will have access to provider PII (Study 1)  and will not consent subjects.   
He will have access to Veteran PII and PHI but will not consent subjects (Study 2)  
• Bo Kim, PhD (Co-I, Boston ) is a former  OAA Postdoctoral Fellow  and is an investigator 
at CHOIR . She will serve as an External Facilitator and contribute to qualitative data 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 24 of 43 
 analyses.   She will have access to provider  PII (Study 1) but not  Veteran PII or PHI 
(Study 2)  and will not consent subjects . 
• Samantha L. Connolly, PhD (Co -I, Boston)  is a current Postdoctoral Fellow at CHOIR 
and a licensed clinical psychologist. She will assist with qualitative and quantitative 
analyses (Study 1 and St udy 2) and with conducting provider interviews as well as the 
telephone interviews with Veterans . She will conduct telephone interviews of Veterans 
(Study 2) and will have access to provider PII and will consent provider subjects (Study 
1). She will have a ccess to Veteran PII and PHI (Study 2) and will consent subjects for 
Study 2.  
• JoAnn E. Kirchner, MD (Co -I, CAVHS ) is the Director of Mental Health QUERI and an 
expert in External Facilitation.  She will provide ongoing consultation on External 
Facilitation  during the study.   She will have access to provider PII (Study 1) and Veteran 
PII and PHI (Study 2)  but will not consent subjects.  
• Karen Drummond, PhD (Co -I, CAVHS) will assist in conducting the provider interviews  
as well as the telephone interviews of V eterans.  She will have access to provider PII  
and will consent provider subjects  (Study 1) and conduct telephone interviews of 
Veterans (Study 2). She will have access to Veteran PII and PHI (Study 2) and will 
consent subjects for Study 2.  
• Jeffery Pitcock, MPH (Data Analyst, CAVHS)  is responsible for programming the 
REDCap database and data collection instruments for Study 2.  He will have access to 
provider PII (Study 1) and Veteran PII and PHI (Study 2).  He will also conduct telephone 
interviews o f Veterans (Study 2) and  will consent subjects.  
• Laura O. Wray, PhD (Co -I, VAWNYHCS) is the director of the VA Center for Integrated 
Healthcare.  She will serve as the Local Site Investigator  and will supervise the 
VAWNYHCS research assistants in data colle ction .  She will have access to Veteran PII 
and PHI (Study 2)  but will not consent subjects.  
• Lee Bernstein, BA, April Eaker, BA, Lauren Rodriguez, BA, and Michael Owings, 
BS (Research Assistants, VAWNYHCS) will conduct Veteran interviews (Study 2).  
They w ill not have access to provider PII (Study 1) but will access Veteran PII and PHI 
(Study 2) and will consent subjects in Study 2.  
• David W. Oslin, MD (Co -I, PVAMC)  is the Director of the VISN 4 Mental Illness, 
Research, Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC) and the Chief of Behavioral Health 
at the Philadelphia VAMC.  He will serve as the Local Site Investigator and will supervise 
the PVAMC research assistant in data collection.  He will have access to Veteran PII 
and PHI (Study 2) but will not consent subjects.  
• Ashley Hagerty, BS (Research Assistant, PVAMC) will conduct Veteran interviews 
(Study 2).  She will not have access to provider PII (Study 1) but will access V eteran PII 
and PHI (Study 2) and will consent subjects in Study 2.   
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 25 of 43 
  
Study Staff Member  Study 1: Access to 
Provider PII?  Study 2: Access to 
Veteran PII or PHI?  Obtain consent from 
providers (Study 1) or 
Veterans (Study 2)?  
Mark S. Bauer  Yes  Yes No 
Martin Charns  No No No 
A. Rani Elwy  Yes No No 
Rachel Riendeau  Yes Yes Study 2  
Shefali Sanyal  No Yes Study 2  
Robert Lew  No Yes No 
Kelly Stolzmann  Yes Yes No 
Christopher Miller  Yes Yes No 
Bo Kim  Yes No No 
Jennifer Sullivan  Yes No Study 1  
Alicia Williamson  Yes Yes Study 2  
Allie Silverman  Yes Yes Study 2  
Samantha L. Connolly  Yes Yes Study 1, 2  
JoAnn Kirchner  Yes Yes No 
Jeffery Pitcock  Yes Yes Study 2  
Karen  Drummond  Yes Yes Study 1 , 2 
Laura O. Wray  No Yes No 
Lee Bernstein  No Yes Study 2  
April Eaker  No Yes Study 2  
Lauren Rodriguez  No Yes Study 2  
Michael Owings  No Yes Study 2  
David W. Oslin  No Yes No 
Ashley Hagerty  No Yes Study 2  
 
 
C.  Contracting and Business Associates Agreement  
The investigators have contracted with the Ethnographic  Methods and Implementation Core 
(EMIC), located at the VA Iowa Healthcare System (Iowa City, IA) , an internal VA transcription 
service , to transcribe the digitally recorded semi -structured provider interviews  (Study 1) .  The 
investigator team executed a data use agreement ( DUA)  with the service (Appendix 1 ).  They 
will receive the recorded interviews and return verbatim transcriptions to the investigators as 
described in Study Procedures . All study data sent between EMIC and VA Boston will be 
transferred v ia secure file transfer behind the VA firewall.   Handbook 6500.6 establishes VA’s 
procedures, responsibilities, and processes for implementing security in appropriate contracts 
and acquisitions in which VA sensitive information is stored, generated, trans mitted or 
exchanged by VA and a contractor regardless of format and whether it resides on a VA or a 
non-VA system.  In the event that EMIC does not have capacity, we will engage another 
qualified transcription provider and execute the required data use agreement as we have done 
in the past.   
5.0 Study Procedures  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 26 of 43 
  
5.1 Study Design  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
A. Experimental Design  
Research qualitative assessments of provider perceptions of care will be conducted in the 
context of the OMHO -sponsored randomized program evaluation described above.  Utilizing a 
stepped wedge design50,58-60, REP -F implementation support will be provided  to 9 volunteer 
VAMCs in three waves of three sites each.  Providers will be consented to undergo semi -
structured interview prior to and after 12 months of REP -F support, consenting for both 
interviews at enrollment.  Interview data will be analyzed qualit atively ; utilizing both directed 
content analysis to identify CCM elements in use as well as grounded thematic analysis to 
identify implementation barriers and facilitators.  
  
Four BHIP providers will be recruited at each of 9 VAMCs receiving REP -F support, u sing 
recruitment techniques from our prior project, QUERI RRP #13 -237/VA CIRB#13 -48.  We will 
work with VAMC Mental Health  leadership to identify all providers  working within the local BHIP 
team . From that list we will select four providers  per s ite, including at least one physician, 
psychologist, registered nurse, advanced practice nurse, medical support assistant, peer 
support specialist and social worker in each group. Note that VAMC Mental Health  leadership 
will not be informed of which partic ular providers we selected, or whether any participants 
refused or agreed to the interview . The interviewer  and assistant  will take field notes after each 
interview, noting key issues that arose, immediate impressions of the interviewee’s perspectives 
on BHIP implementation and what impact BHIP  care appears to have on patients and providers . 
We will audio  record these interviews and  they will be transcribed by  EMIC, located at VA Iowa 
City Healthcare System , and its contracted replacement .  We will reconcil e transcripts and 
interview notes and code interviews using a rapid assessment procedure, an anthropological 
approach to assessing real -time processes and procedures to r apidly inform policy development 
55. Coding will focus on: discriminating presence or absence of each of the six CCM 
components in BHIP  care.  
B. Minimization of Risk  
See (D) below.  
C. Study Population  
The st udy population will consist of four BHIP providers at each of 9 participating VAMCs.  The 
names of eligible providers (the population) will be supplied by the VAMC and the sampling and 
consenting will be done by inve stigators from VABHS .   
Four BHIP provid ers from each of 9 sites, including at least one physician, psychologist, 
registered nurse, advanced practice nurse, medical support assistant, peer support 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 27 of 43 
 specialist and social worker (for a total of 36 providers) will be needed.  Each will be 
interviewe d prior to and after 12 months of REP -F support.  If an individual consented at 
baseline (the initial interview) declines to participate at 12 months, or has left VA 
employment, another BHIP provider will be consented and interviewed.  
 
D. Added Protections  for Vulnerable Populations  
This research  will be  conducted with employees , a vulnerable population with which we are 
quite experienced.  For the telephone interview with providers, w e will utilize the Central IRB-
approved  study fact sheet with the elements of informed consent which detail s potential risks 
and precautions taken to guard against the risks. Recognizing that employees are vulnerable 
subjects, the consent process will emphasize that the interviews are voluntary  and confidential 
and that their participation or non -participation will not be reported to the employee subjects’ 
supervisors or managers .  For instance, even if we do not meet recruitment goals, we will not 
disclose this information to supervisors and ma nagers since it could imply noncooperation by 
some or all of the employees potentially involved . Importantly, n o individual level data will be 
reported from any source; all data wil l be reported in aggregate form to ensure that any findings 
from the study cannot be traced back to any specific provider.  That is, not only will names not 
be disclosed;  we will not disclose sufficient information  to trace back  data deductively to its 
source.  For instance, if a transcript reveals that a social worker said, “I c annot get sufficient 
medication support from the psychiatrist to do good care management” those data would remain 
confidential with the investigator team; for scientific presentations, publications, or other reports 
such data might be reworded, “I cannot g et sufficient support from the other disciplines to do my 
job effectively.”   We have utilized such redaction methods in our previous work 53. 
E. Data Storage  
There will be no specimens or specimen banking.  
 
All information on individual subjects will be kept confidential on restricted -access  server files 
behind the VA firewall. Access to the analytic files within VA will be limited to the principal 
investigator and those team members involved in the analyses. Individually unique user 
identification codes and passwords are necessary to access the network. Accounts and 
passwords comply with existing VA policy and procedures.  
 
Digital recordings of the telephone provider interviews will be downloaded to secure restricted -
access server files behind the VA firewall following the interviews and then immediately deleted 
from the devices . 
 
Hard copies of the  provider interview  transcripts  will be kept in a locked area of research  space 
at engaged VAMCs (VABHS,  CAVHS) . Hard copies will be maintained  in accordance with t he 
VA Record retention schedule:  
www1.va.gov/VH APUBLICATIONS/RCS10/rcs10 -1.pdf   
 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 28 of 43 
 Only research project staff with credentials and permission to use the data will have access to 
the data.  
 
Study 2  (Veterans ) 
 
A. Experimental Design  
One of the innovative aspects of this multi -site study is that we will take a population -level 
approach to assessing health status and perceptions of care . Thus, at each of the nine sites in 
which we are delivering our REP -F facilitation intervention at the provider level, we will also 
conduct telephone -based quantitative interview s with Veteran s receiving care through the local 
BHIP team. We will administer these interview s to 85 Veterans at each of three time points at 
each site: at the start of our facilitation, midway through facilitation (Month 6), and at the end of 
facilitation (Month 12).  
Similar to our procedures  in QUERI RRP 13 -237/VA CIRB 13 -48, Mental Health Service  
administration at each of the nine sites will provide investigators with the clinic names for 
clinicians  who have treated Veteran s in BHIP clinics over the past year.  We will request a 
HIPAA Waiver of Authorization (attached) to access Veteran  data since the conduct of this 
research would not be practical or valid if individual subject contacts were necessary.  From 
this, we will identify  all Veteran s who received 2 or more  outpatient encounters in that clinic  in 
the prior year; from this point  forward,  Veteran s will be  identified by scrambled SSN ( SCRSSN ) 
rather than SSN or name.  We will gather the following data on these Veteran s via the CDW :  
demographics (age, gender, minority status, marital status, disability), psychiatric diagnoses in 
the past year, cardiometabolic diagnoses (hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, diabetes 
mellitus), service utilization (inpatient days, outpa tient visits), and medication usage .   
We will exclud e those with an  encounter for a diagnosis  of dementia ( ICD-9 code 290.xx, 294.1, 
331.0) .  We will then mail -out a study information packet including an opt -out postcard  (details 
below). We will then subm it a look -up file of the SCRSSNs of those Veterans  to staff at the 
CDW, and they will provide name and mailing address information for them so that packages 
can be mailed.  Each of these potentially e ligible Veteran s will be mailed the study information  
package consisting of (1) a study information fact sheet  from a member of our research team ; 
and (2) an opt-out postcard  and (3) an invitation letter  (see Appendix  4). The recruitment letters 
will include a callback number for research staff and will stat e that, if we d o not receive a phone 
call or  the opt-out postcard  within two weeks from the date of the mailing, a research assistant 
may call the Veteran to explain the study in more detail. The opt -out postcard  strategy has been 
used in other research st udies and has been highly successful  (e.g. it obtained approximately a 
25% participation rate for phone -based Veteran interviews in Dr. Jeffrey Pyne’s CREATE 12 -
300/VA CIRB 13 -29).  
Verbal consent will be obtained during the initial phone call. We will request a Waiver or 
Alteration of Informed Consent (attached) to allow for verbal rather than written consent 
procedures.  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 29 of 43 
 For those who meet eligibility criteria and agr ee to participate in the study , the research 
assistant will then verbally admi nister (over the telephone) a battery that includes self -reported 
race/ethnicity and employment status, the Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care 
(PACIC )61, the Quality of Life, Enjoyment, and Satisfaction Questionnaire ( QLESQ )62, the 
Satisfaction Ind ex63, and the Veterans Rand 12 -item Social Functioning measure ( VR-12)64, 
found in Appendix 5.  This includes a total of 51 items.   The Veteran will be given the 
opportunity to have the health status measures (VR -12, Q -LES-Q) communicated to the VA 
provider of their choice.    Communication with the provider  will be done via encrypted email from 
the research assistant within one business day (see email text, Appendix 6) 
Our recruitment goal is to administer telephone -based interviews  to 85 Veterans at  the start of 
the REP -F facilitation implementation (Month 0) at each site, and to re -contact these same 
Veterans  for follow -up interview s using the same measures  at Month 6  and Month 12 . We 
anticipate approximately 15% dropout at each of these time points , and will replace such 
dropouts from our original pool of Veterans who were sent the study information pack age but 
who did not opt out of the study.  The overall goal is to therefore administer telephone -based 
interview s to 85 Veterans at each of these th ree time points , some of whom will have been 
interviewed three times, some twice, and some once .  Consent script will reflect this 
heterogeneity, asking permission to be interviewed “up to three times in the next 12 months,” 
and will be adjusted accordingl y for those who are interviewed for the first time at 6 months (“up 
to twice in the next six months”) or at 12 months (one -time interview).  Our generalized linear 
modeling statistical approach can manage this heterogeneity in the sample (see below).  
Note that we also provide the Veteran with the option to communicate his/her health status to 
the provider of their choice, to support the use of measurement -based care.  This will be done 
via email using the template in Appendix 6.  Note that this process is i ndependent from the harm 
risk screening and mitigation procedures described in the next section.  
  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 30 of 43 
 B. Minimization of Risk  
Personal identifiers (names and mailing addresses) will be collected and kept until the VA 
Record retention schedule allows their destruction. Data from the telephone -based interview  will 
be given a unique numeric code; the coding crosswalk will be availab le only to the VA Boston 
research study team.  
 
As above, eligible Veterans  will receive the  study information package including a description of 
the study , and an opt -out response postcard. The study description  will emphasize that 
participation is entire ly voluntary, and Veterans may opt out of any further contact from the study 
team by calling the included phone number or returning the opt-out response postcard.  
 
Once the study research assistant reaches the Veteran by telephone, the research assistant will 
review the elements of inform ed cons ent (see Appendix 5 for interview  script) . The r esearch 
assistant will also emphasize that c ompletion of the telephone interview  is entirely voluntary, 
and the Veteran may decline to complete it or may skip items for any reason.  
 
Note that the telephone -based interview  items , mainly drawn from our RRP protocol,  are from 
instruments that have been published and widely used as healt h status or healthcare process 
self-report assessments, or are being used by VA operational assessments. None are probing, 
uncovering, or projective questions that would tend to cause emotional upset.  
 
Nonetheless, we have taken extreme care to put in plac e a process to respond to potential harm 
risk that may be disclosed during the telephone interview.  This harm risk procedure follows the 
protocol  utilized by OMHO in their Veterans Outcome Assessment, which randomly selects 
Veterans newly enrolled in ment al health clinics across the country and assesses their health 
status and satisfaction with care in a longitudinal evaluation process .  Moreover, we have 
substantive support from the OMHO Veterans Crisis Line, who will provide 24/7 access for our 
interview ers in the event that a Veteran discloses harm risk (see Weaver let ter Appendix 7). 
 
Specifically,  as with the OMHO Veterans Outcome Assessment protocol , each Veteran will be 
screened during the interview of current thoughts of harm to self using the suicidality item from 
the PHQ -9, a depression measure widely used in VA clinical care.  Those who screen positive 
for any thoughts of harm to self will then b e assessed with P4 suicidality screener65.  The P4 
stratifies respondents into three risk strata, each with a corresponding risk response:  
• Minimal Risk  
• Lower Risk  
• Higher Risk  
Veterans who screen into any of these risk categories will be offered access to the Veterans 
Crisis Line (800 -273-TALK) , and be encouraged to contact their provider .  The research 
assistant will  also contact the study clinician (Dr. Bauer, Dr. Miller, or Dr. Kirchner) who will send 
an encrypted email notification  to the Suicide Prevent ion Coordinator at their VA medical center 
detailing the risk stratification  and relevant interview notes regarding response to harm risk 
questions.   Email notification will be sent within one business day.  As part of Veterans Crisis 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 31 of 43 
 Line support, they ar e also providing our interviewers with a special internal phone number and 
rapid -response email group for situations in which a Veteran requires warm handoff.  For less 
acute follow -ups, a s with the OMHO survey, we choose to contact the Suicide Prevention 
Coordinator rather than the Veteran’ s provider because the Veteran may be cared for by 
multiple providers, or may not know who to contact, or may refuse to give a provider’s name, 
and the Suicide Prevention Coordinator is in the best position to identify a nd contact the 
appropriate provider locally .  Additionally, if the research assistant is in any way concerned 
about harm risk in the moment, and the Veteran refuses warm hand -off to the Veterans Crisis 
Line, they themselves will contact the Veterans Crisis  Line and provide the name and contact 
information for the Veteran.  This will also be communicated via email from the study clinician to 
the Suicide Prevention Coordinator within one business day.   The risk stratification and 
response scheme and relevant email texts are found in Appendi ces 5 and 6 . 
 
If the Veteran refuses to answer any harm risk questions, the study clinician may  conduct an 
initial assessment of likelihood of harm with the Veteran to determine if contacting the Suicide 
Prevention Coordinator  and/or the Veterans Crisis Line on the Veteran ’s behalf  is necessary to 
prevent harm to the Veteran or others.  
 
Each potential respondent will have a unique personal identifier .  The linking file and personal 
identifying information will be known only to study personnel at VABHS and CAVHS involved 
with the data preparation and analyses on a need -to-know basis .  
 
C. Study  Population  
The study population consists of Veterans who have had 2 or more outpatient encounters with a 
BHIP team  clinician  at the nine participating sites within the prior year.  We exclude those with 
an encounter for a diagnosis of dementia in the prio r year, as outlined above . Our selection of 
participants for the telephone -based interview will result in a sample that mirrors the gender and 
racial distribu tion of the Veteran  population treated within those BHIP teams .  
D. Added Protections for Vulnerable Populations  
We are sampling Veterans  by identifying those who have seen specific providers —i.e., 
providers  practicing in BHIP teams .  However, since we are taking a population -based 
approach, we are interested in population -level analyses.  We t hus will not analyze data in a 
manner that could provide profiles of, e.g., health status or medication usage that could be 
tracked back to an identified Veteran . 
E. Data Storage  
All information on individual subjects will be kept confidential on restricte d-access  server files 
behind the VA firewall  at VABHS and CAVHS . Veteran interview data will be entered directly 
into and stored in the VA’s Research Electronic Data Capture ( REDCap ) system at CAVHS  
within the VA firewall  (no hard copies of interview data will be made) .  Access to the analytic 
files within VA will be limited to the principal investigator and those team members involved in 
the analyses. Individually unique user identification codes and passwords are necessary to 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 32 of 43 
 access the network. Accounts and passwords comply with existing VA policy and procedures. 
Access to the CDW databases requires authorization by VA national data systems which the 
study data analysts have received.  
 
Hard copies of the  provider interviews (Study 1) will be kept in a locked area of CHOIR  space at 
VABHS. No hard copies of Veteran interview data will exist since data will be entered directly 
into REDCap ; opt-out postcard responses will be kept in a locked area of CHOIR space at 
VABHS .  Hard copies will be maintained  in accordance with t he VA Record retention schedule:  
www1.va.gov/VH APUBLICATIONS/RCS10/rcs10 -1.pdf   
 
Only research project staff with credentials and permission to use the data will have access to 
the data.  
 
All data entry will take place be hind the VA firewall, by research team members. The data files 
will be stored in restricted -access, secure server drive restricted for project -specific work .  All 
data analyses for Study 1 and Study 2 will also take place on restricted -access, secure serve r 
drives restricted for project -specific work.  
 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
A.  State ho w many subjects will be needed.  
Four BHIP  providers  from each of 9 sites, including at least one physician, psychologist, 
registered nurse, advanced practice nurse, medical support assistant, peer support 
specialist and social worker  (for a total of 36 providers) will be needed .  Each will be 
interviewed prior to and after 12 months of REP -F support.  If an individual consent ed at 
baseline (the initial interview) declines to participate  at 12 months , or has left VA 
employment, another BHIP provider will be consented  and interviewed.  
  
B.  Describe when, where, how and by whom potential subjects will be identified 
and recruited.  
Each VAM C’s Mental Health S ervice  will provide the names of eligible providers  to the 
investigators and will send an email introducing the study (attached ) to eligible providers .  
Investigators will then randomly order the list of eligible providers  according to discipline 
and invitations will be made via email in order until the desired sample size is reached.  
Each provider will receive an initial invitation and one follow -up email.  If insufficient 
responses are available in a given discipline, we will recruit other eligible discipline 
members to achieve the desired sample size of four providers per VAMC.  No follow -up 
urging or communication regarding recruitment will be requested from Mental H ealth 
Service  after the first email of introduction in order to reduce the potential for coercion or 
assessment of participation by an employee’s superviso r.  
 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 33 of 43 
 C.  Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects, e.g., advertisements.  
Include materials as an appendix or separate attachment.  
Two emails will be sent to providers who may be eligible to participate in the study 
(attached ). The first, f rom the M ental Health S ervice, will describe the study to potential 
participants but is for informational (rather than recruitment) purposes ONLY.  
The second email, from the study investigators, will be used to recruit potential 
participants and will only be sent after the mental health service chief has sent the first 
email. Each provider will receive an initial invitation and a follow -up email (up to three 
times) and follow -up by telephone (up to two times)  to determine willingness to 
participate.  
 
D.  Describe any payments to subjects  
None.  
Study 2  (Veterans )  
A.  State how many subjects will be needed.  
Eighty -five Veterans treated by BHIP teams at each of the nine sites  for each of three 
study time -points  will be needed .  As outlined above, we will recruit a sufficient number 
of Veterans to reach this number at each time point at each VA medical center.  
 
B.  Describe when, where, how and by whom potential subjects will be identified 
and recruited.  
See Section 5.1  (Study2)  A. above.  
 
C.  Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects, e.g., advertisements.  
Include materials as an appendix or separate attachment.  
The study information pa ckage  is attached (Appendix 4), as is the telephone interview 
script to be used by the research assistant for telephone follow -up (Appendix 5). No 
additional recruitment materials will be utilized.    
 
D.  Describe any payments to subjects  
None.  
 
Note on Engagement in the Co nduct of Research  
We consider BHIP sites not to be engaged in the conduct of research, as described in the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, OHRP,  Guidelines on Engagement of Institutions in 
Human Subjects Research , particularly Section III.B  
(http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/engage08.html ) 
Sites whose roles are limited to providing subjects for this research project are  considered not 
engaged in research (though of course VABHS  and CAVHS are engaged in research by virtue 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 34 of 43 
 of their investigators on the study ).  Specifically, the 9 participating  VAMC s will provid e 
information about  the study to the population of eligible providers.  They will  also releas e 
information to the investigators on potential subjects, including identifiable information ; however, 
the provision of such information is consistent with VAMC operational (non -research) duties , 
such as they would do for External Peer Review, OMHO reviews, and other internal business or 
clinic al operational tasks.  Their staff will not conduct interviews, provide interventions, or 
consent subjects.  Furthermore, their role in providing information will not merit professional 
recognition or publication authorship  of study results . We will notify  facility leadership before we 
arrive on -site to engage in any recruitment activities or conduct the interviews.  
 
 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
We will interview 4 providers at each of the 9 BHIP sites  for a total of 36 providers .  Dr. 
Sullivan and Dr. Drummond will conduct the interviews by telephone which will be audio  
recorded.  The providers will be interviewed 2 times  over the course of the study : one 
time before the facilitation process  and a second time 12 months later .  The investigators 
obtaining consent are from VABHS and are health services researchers experienced at 
obtaining informed consent.  We will consent the providers for both interviews in a single 
consent prior to the first interview.   If an individual consented a t baseline (the initial 
interview) declines to participate at 12 months, or has left VA employment, another BHIP 
provider will be consented and interviewed.  
 
For the telephone interview with providers, we  will utilize the Central IRB-approved  study fact 
sheet with the elements of informed consent which detail s potential risks and precautions taken 
to guard against the risks. The study fact sheet will be included with the provider interview 
invitation .  Recognizing that employees are vulnerable subjects, the  consent process will 
emphasize that the interviews are voluntary and confidential and that their participation or non -
participation will not be reported to the employee subjects’ supervisors or managers  nor will the 
content of the interview be reported .  While documentation of informed consent is not required 
for telephone interviews, at the start of the interview, we will review the study fact sheet 
elements of consent and ask the provider if he/she verbally consents to conducting the interview 
and to record ing the interview .  If the provider consents to audio  recording, we will repeat the 
verbal consent so that it is captured on the recording.  A note taker  will assist at the interviews 
should a provider be willing to conduct an interview but would pre fer that no audio  recording be 
made.  
Study 2  (Veterans )  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 35 of 43 
 We are seeking a Waiver or Alteration of the Informed Consent process as well as a Waiver of 
Documentation of Informed Consent for the telephone -based interview .   For the telephone 
interview with Ve terans, we  will utilize the Central IRB-approved  study fact sheet with the 
elements of informed consent which detail s potential risks and precautions taken to guard 
against the risks. The study fact sheet will be included with the Veteran interview invitat ion.  
Veterans will also receive an opt -out postcard to return if they do not wish to participate in the 
telephone interviews. If Veterans choose not to return the opt -out postcard, they will receive a 
telephone call asking them to participate in the telep hone survey. The Veterans will have 2 
opportunities to consent or not consent to participation: the return of the opt -out postcard and at 
the start of the telephone interview.  As part of the informed consent process at the start of the 
interview, we will review the elements of consent and answer any questions the participant may 
have about participation.    By answering the interview questions, the Veterans are consenting to 
participate in the study.  
 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
Inclusion criteria : Employees must be Mental Health staff who are members of BHIP teams at 
participating  sites.  
Exclusion criteria : Within the broader population of BHIP  staff as defined by the inclusion 
criterion above, there will be no exclusion criteria .  
Study 2 ( Veteran s) 
Inclusion criteria  to receive the study information package: to be eligible to participate, 
Veteran s must have had 2 or more  encounter s with a BHIP team clinician  at one of the nine 
sites in the prior year  and be at least 18 years of age .   
Exclusion criteria to receive the study information package: Veterans with an encounter for 
dementia  within the prior year  will be excluded from participation.  
 
5.5 Study Evaluations  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
The provider interview  is attached .  This is a semi -structured interview adapted from  one of our 
prior CCM studies  53, designed to assess the concordance of care for returning Veteran s with 
CCM principles. We have adapted the interview for use in the BHIP initiative  with a particular 
focus on (1) eliciting CCM components that are vs. are not present in GMH care along with an 
assessment of existing system redesign processes and (2) implementation barriers and 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 36 of 43 
 facilitators based on the work of Powell 57 and Kirchner 45.  The interview lasts approximately 45- 
45-60 minutes.  The interviewer and a ssistant will take notes during the interview, and the 
interview will be audio  recorded and transcribed verbatim.   
Study 2 ( Veterans )  
The text of the telephone -based interview  is attached (Appendix 5). It will include verbal 
administration of the PACIC , Q-LES-Q, Satisfaction Index  and VR -12, plus self -reported 
race/ethnicity and current employment status .   
 
5.6 Data Analysis  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
The sample size of four providers per VAMC each interviewed twice (7 2 total  interviews , across  
36 distinct p roviders ) is based on prior developmental qualitative experience and should suffice 
to illustrate the themes and variability that will emerge .  Data will be analyzed by investigators 
working behind the VA firewall on password -protected servers at VABHS  and CAVHS . 
Transcripts, augmented with interviewer notes, will be reconciled and subjected to qualitative 
analyses  (directed content analysis and grounded thematic analysis) , aided by NVivo qualitative 
data management software or equivalent.  We will code int erviews using a rapid assessment 
procedure, an anthropological approach to assessing real -time processes and procedures to 
rapidly inform policy development 55.  Coding will focus on: ( 1) discriminating presence or 
absence of each of the six CCM components in “typical” GMH care, and ( 2) perceived and 
desired implementation support57; in this we will also particularly attend to attitudes and 
capabilities regarding using informatics to communicate with patien ts and other providers.  
Regarding the presence versus absence of the six CCM components , we expect the rank order 
of evaluations to indicate that post -REP-F care is more consistent with CCM elements than pre -
REP-F care . 
Data from qualitative analyses will serve two purposes.  First, directed content analysis56 
focusing on identification of CCM elements will provide data with which t o assess fidelity to the 
intervention dependent variable for  our research hypothesis .  Second , grounded thematic 
analysis54 will contribute to the implementation science literature regarding barriers and 
facilitators of implementation.  
To conduct the direc ted content analysis56 to identify CCM elements, Dr. Sullivan  will identify 
quotes relevant to the presence or absence of each of the six CCM elements.  Quotes will be 
deidentified and information regarding the provider, site, and pre/post implementation s tatus of 
each quote will be kept confidentially by  Dr. Sullivan .  After the final interview is conducted, 
deidentified quotes will be consolidated into a “quote pool” and each quote will be coded by Drs. 
Drummond, Sullivan, Elwy, Kim, and Miller dichotomou sly as to the presence/absence of a 
CCM element in the quote, using the  codebook developed in the RRP .  Coding will be done 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 37 of 43 
 without knowledge of provider, site, or time of interview.  Quote ratings (CCM element = 
present/absent) will then be reassembled in to a coding sheet for each interview, organized 
according to each of the six CCM elements.  If no quotes support the presence of a particular 
CCM element, it will be coded as absent.  Each of the 72  interviews will then be summarized 
with regard to which C CM elements were endorsed as present during the interview, and an 
overall score (0 -6 for the number of CCM elements endorsed as present) will be assigned for 
each interview.  These CCM scores for each of the 72 interviews (4 providers/site, 9 sites, pre - 
and post -implementation) will the n be rolled up to the site level, taking the mean interview CCM 
score as t he overall site score.  These 18  site-level scores (two scores each for each of the 9 
sites, one pre -implementation and one post -implementation) will serve as the basis for 
analyses.  
Formal statistical analyses of directed content analysis data are not appropriate56.  However, 
our a priori  hypothesis is that for each site CCM scores will i ncrease from pre - to post -
implementation, and we will be able to describe the degree to which this occurred within and 
across sites.  Additionally, we will assess individual elements from provider’s ratings in each site 
to identify patterns of implementati on across sites for individual CCM elements, which would 
add internal consistency and validity to our conclusions; that is: common patterns would support 
(though not prove56) generalizability of implementation strategy effects.   
To conduct  the grounded th ematic analysis , Drs. Drummond, Sullivan, Elwy, Miller, and Kim 
will separately code interviews using previously developed  grounded thematic analysis54 codes, 
paying particular attention to newly emergent codes and factors that might be barriers or 
facilit ators to future implementation efforts57.  These analyses will also be used to contextualize 
and explain our direct content analyses above.  
Study 2 ( Veterans ) 
For the three administrations of the telephone -based Veteran interview  at each site, r epeated 
measures general linear model analyses ( GLM )81-83 will control  for site characteristics (between -
site effects) and calendar time, which reflects secular trends (within -site effec ts, as well as the 
number of interview assessments each Veteran contributes . Based on Parchman’s stepped 
wedge CCM trial,73 discussions with Dr. Parchman, our experience  with QUERI RRP 13 -237/VA 
CIRB 13 -48, and OMHO’s operational experience, we anticipate that maximal effects will not be 
seen until the end of the step -down period, i.e., after 12 months of implementation support; 
however, our approach also allows us to detect other patterns, e.g., prompt response at 6 
months and fall -off by 12 months.  
 
GLM quantifies and apportions the variance in outcome (e.g., VR-12 subscale scores ) among 
relevant factors, thus isolating  the change in outcome due to the primary contrast of interest (in 
this study, implementation support vs. waiting).  GLM accommodates repeated measures 
(within -subject correlation), random effects (subject), moderate imbalance among independent 
factors (sites), and vari ous types of missing data , as well as replacement of subjects who are 
not represented at each of the three study time points .84,85 GLM also allows us to explore results 
for patterns of unequal variance, relevant correlation structures, and variance component 
models to ensure that our results are robust.  Additionally, the site sample sizes are large 
enough to explore many site -specific effects by adding site -interaction terms to the model.  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 38 of 43 
  
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
Study 1 (Providers)  
Provider subjects may withdraw from the study at any time  by verbal request, which will be 
documented in the case file by the investigator . Withdrawal will not be communicated to any site 
staff in order to maintain confidentiality and avoid the potential for coercion.  
Study 2 ( Veterans ) 
As above, the study information  package (mailed to eligible Veterans) will include an opt -out 
postcard as well as a phone number for Veterans to call if they do not wish to participat e. 
Furthermore, once contacted by phone by the study research assistant, Veterans will once 
again have the opportunity to withdraw by simply verbally declining to participate at any time.  
6.0 Reporting  
 
Dr. Bauer  will lead regular study investigator meeti ngs and will formally query the investigator 
team specifically for any serious adverse events, unanticipated occurrences related to subject  
safety, breaches of study protocol or confidentiality no less than quarterly, as he has done for  
past studies ( IIR # 10-314 and RRP#13 -237/VA CIRB 13 -48).  Study investigators will also be 
directed to bring any such problems to the attention of the PI as they occur.  The PI will report 
relevant occurrences both to the Central IRB and to the site R&D Committees per VA 
procedures.  
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
 
See also Section 4.D, “Added Protection for Vulnerable Populations.”  
 
Investigators will not disclose subjects’ PII (Study 1) or PHI (Study 2).  All investigators and staff 
engaged in research will have complied with a ll VA research training requirements prior to 
beginning participation in this study.  
 
 
All information on indi vidual subjects will be kept confidential on restricted -access  server files 
behind the VA firewall. Study staff will obtain a list of the names and addresses of BHIP staff 
from mental health leadership at each site in order to recruit providers to complete telephone 
interviews.  The study PI and Qualitative Lead will maintain an electronic file linking i dentification 
numbers to the names of the provider interview participants ( Study 1 “crosswalk”) , with a similar 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 39 of 43 
 file for Veterans  maintained by the study PI and Study 2 staff , Ms. Stolzmann , Ms. Riendeau , 
and Mr. Pitcock . These files will be in a folder th at is separate from other research data.  Access 
to the analytic files within VA w ill be limited to the principal investigator and those team 
members involved in the analyses. Individually unique user identification codes and passwords 
are necessary to acc ess the network. Accounts and passwords comply with existing VA policy 
and procedures.  
 
Hard copies of subject responses (Study 1 provider interviews ; Study 2 opt-out postcards ) will 
be kept in a locked area of CHOIR  space at VA Boston Healthcare System. Hard copies will be 
maintained  in accordance with the VA Record retention schedule 
(www1.va.gov/VHAPUBLICATIONS/RCS10/rcs10 -1.pdf). Only research project staff with 
credentials and permission to use the data will have access to the data.  
 
Involvement of Outside Vendors  
 
There are no outside vendors contracted for this study  at this time . 
8.0 Communication Plan  
 
All site approvals (VABHS , CAVHS , VAWNYHCS  and PVAMC ) will be obtained in compliance 
with Central IRB and local R&D procedures.  For each site participating  but not engaged  in 
research  (in this study, the 9 sites receiving BHIP implementation facilitation) , we will notify the 
Director pr ior to conducting research at his/her  facility.  Also we will process any changes in the 
protocol, informed con sent process, or cessation of engagement in research for any sites in 
concordance with Central IRB and local site procedures.  
The PI will meet regularly with the investigator team, which includes the Local Site Investigator s 
from CAVHS  (Dr. Kirchner) , VAWN YHCS (Dr. Wray)  and PVAMC (Dr. Oslin)  and through this 
mechanism we will facilitate all above communications.  This process has worked well with the 
Central IRB -approved IIR #10 -314 and RRP#13 -237. 
  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 40 of 43 
 9.0  References  
 
1. Kessler RC, Wang PS.  The descriptive epidemiology of commonly occurring mental 
disorders in the United States. Ann Rev Public Health  2008; 29:115 -129. 
2. Hogan MF: New Freedom Commission Report: The President's New Freedom Commission: 
Recommendations to tran sform mental health care in America. Psychiatr Serv  2003; 
54(11):1467 -74.  
3. Watkins, K. E., H. A. Pincus, Paddock S, Smith B, Woodroffe A, Farmer C, Sorbero ME, 
Horvitz -Lennon M, Mannle T, Hepner KA, Solomon J, Call C. Care for veterans with mental 
and subs tance use disorders: good performance, but room to improve on many measures. 
Health Aff 2011; 30(11): 2194 -2203.  
4. VHA. Uniform Mental Health Services Handbook. VHA Handbook 1160.010 . June 11, 2008.  
5. US Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs.  On -line transcrip t of Senate hearing:  “VA Mental 
Health Care: Addressing Wait Times and Access to Care” , 11/30/2011.  Accessed  8/21/14.  
6. VA Office of the Inspector General.  Statement before the Committee on Veterans Affairs of 
the US House of Representatives Hearing on VA Mental Health Care Staffing; 5/8/ 2012.  
Accessed  8/21/14.  
7. Kitson AL, Rycroft -Malone J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A. Evaluating the 
successful implementation of evidence into practice using the PARiHS framework: 
theoretical and practical challe nges. Implement Sci 2008;3:1.  
8. Stetler CB, Damschroder LJ, Helfrich CD, Hagedorn HJ. A Guide for applying a revised 
version of the PARIHS framework for implementation. Implement Sci 2011;  6:99.  
9. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Von Korff M. Organizing care for patients  with chronic illness. 
Milbank Q  1996; 74(4):511 -544.  
10. Von Korff M, Gruman J, Schaefer J, Curry SJ, Wagner EH.  Collaborative management of 
chronic illness.  Ann Intern Med  1997; 127(12):1097 -102.  
11. Improving Chronic Illness Care Program, Group Health Research Institute. Web -based 
overview of CCM.  Accessed  8/21/14.  
12. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K.  Improving primary care for patients with chronic 
illness: The chronic care model, part 1. JAMA  2002; 288 (14):1775 -1779.  
13. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K.  Improving primary care for patients with chronic 
illness: The chronic care model, part 2. JAMA  2002; 288(15):1909 -1914.  
14. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH.  Evidence on the chronic ca re model in the 
new millennium. Health Aff  2009; 28(1):75 -85.  
15. Badamgarav E, Weingarten SR, Henning JM,Knight K, Hasselblad V, Gano Jr. A, Ofman JJ.  
Effectiveness of disease management programs in  depression . Am J Psychiatry  2003; 
160(12):2080 -2090.  
16. Gilbody S, Bower P, Fletcher J, Richards D, Sutton AJ.  Collaborative Care for Depression: 
A Cumulative Meta -Analysis and Review of Longer -term Outcomes. Arch Intern Med 2006; 
166:2314 -2321.  
17. Rubenstein LV , Chaney EF, Ober S, Felker B, Sherman SE, Lanto A, Vive ll S. Using 
evidence -based quality improvement methods for translating depression collaborative care 
research into practice.  Fam Syst Health  2010 Jun;28(2):91 -113. 
18. Bauer MS, McBride L, Williford W O, Glick HA, Kinosian B, Altshuler L, Beresford TP, 
Kilbourne AM, for the CSP #430 Study Team.  Collaborative care for bipolar disorder, Parts 
I&II: intervention and implementation in a randomized effectiveness trial. Psychiatr Serv 
2006; 57:927 -36 & 937 -45. 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 41 of 43 
 19. Simon GE, Ludman EJ, Bauer MS, Unützer J,Operskalski B. Long -term effectiveness and 
cost of a systematic care management program for bipolar disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
2006; 63:500 -08. 
20. Kilbourne AM, Post EP, Drill LJ, Cooley S, Bauer MS. Improving medical and psychiatric 
outcomes for individuals with bipolar disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Psychiatr Serv 
2008; 59:760 -68. 
21. Kilbourne AM, Goodrich DE, Lai Z, Post EP, Schumacher K, Nord KM, Bramlet M, 
Chermack S, Bauer MS: Randomized controlled trial to reduce cardiovascular disease risk 
for patients with bipolar disorders: the Self -Management Addressing Heart Risk Trial 
(SMAHRT).   J Clin Psychiatry 2013; in press.  
22. Kilbourne AM, Goodrich D, Lai Z, Clogston J, Bauer MS, Waxmonsky J. Randomized 
controlled pilot study of Life Goals Collaborative Care for patients with bipolar disorder and 
cardiovascular disease risk. Psychiatr Serv 2012; 63:1234 -38. 
23. Kilbourne AM, Li D, Lai Z, Waxmonsky J, Ketter T. Pilot randomized trial of a cross -
diagnosis collabor ative care program for patients with mood disorders. Depr & Anx 2013; 
30:116 -32. 
24. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, O'Donovan C, Parikh SV, MacQueen G, McIntyre RS, Sharma V, 
Beaulieu S: Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) guidelines for 
the mana gement of patients with bipolar disorder: Update 2007. Bipolar Disord  2006; 
8(6):721 -739. 
25. Department of Veterans Affairs & Department of Defense. Clinical practice guideline for 
management of bipolar disorder in adults, version 2.0.  Department of Veterans Affairs Office 
of Quality and Performance & US Army MEDCOM Quality Management Division . 2009.  
26. USDHHS Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration National Registry of 
Evidence -Based Programs and Practices (NREPP). Web -based search engine for NREPP -
listed programs.  Accessed  8/21/14.  
27. Woltmann E, Grogan -Kaylor A, Perron B, Georges H, Kilbourne AM, Bauer MS.  
Comparative effectiveness of collaborative chronic care models for mental health conditions 
across primary, specialty, and behavioral health setting s. systematic review and meta -
analysis. Am J Psychiatry 2012; 169:790 -804. 
28. Miller CJ, Grogan Kaylor A, Perron BP, Woltmann E, Kilbourne AM, Bauer MS. 
Collaborative chronic care models for mental health conditions: cumulative meta -analysis 
and meta -regressi on to guide future research and implementation; Medical Care 2013; 
51:922 -30. 
29. Coleman EA, Grothaus LC, Sandhu N, Wagner EH. Chronic care clinics: a randomized 
controlled trial of a new model of primary care for frail older adults. J Ame Geriatr Soc 1999; 
47:775 -85. 
30. Druss BG, Rohrbaugh RM, Levinson CM, Rosenheck RA. Integrated medical care for 
pateints with serious psychiatric illness: a randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2001; 
58:861 -68. 
31. Oslin DW, Sayers S, Ross J, Kane V, Ten Have T, Conigliaro J, Corne lisu J. Disease 
management for depression and at -risk drinking via telephone in an older population of 
veterans. Psychosom Med 2003: 69:931 -37. 
32. Smith RC, Lyles JS, Gardiner JC, Sirbu C, Hodges A, Collins C, Dwamena FC, Lein C, 
William Given C, Given B, God deerus H. Primary care clinicians treat patients with medically 
unexplained symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. J Gen Intern Med 2006; 21:671 -77. 
33. Van Stratten A, Tiemens B, Hakkaart L, Nolen WA, Donker MC. Stepped care vs matched 
care for mood and anx iety disorders: a randomized trial in routine practice. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand 2006; 113:468 -76. 
34. van Orden M, Hoffman T, Haffmans J, Spinhoven P, Hoencamp E. Collaborative mental 
health care versus care as usual in a primary care setting. Psychiatry Serv 200 9; 60:74 -79. 
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 42 of 43 
 35. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA, Compton MT, Rask KJ, Zhao L, Parker RM. A randomized 
trial of medical management for community mental health settings. Amer J Psychiatry 210; 
167:151 -59. 
36. Patel V, Weiss HA, Chowdhary N, Naik S, Pednekar S, Chatterjee  S, DeSilva MJ, Bhat B, 
ARaya R, King M, Simon G, Verdeli H, Kirkwood BR: effectiveness of an intervention led by 
lay health counselors for depressive and anxiety disorders in primary care in Goa, India 
(MANAS). Lancet 2010; 376:2086 -95. 
37. Zatzick D, Roy -Byrne P, Russo J, Rivara F, Droesch R, Wagner A, Dunn C , Jurkovich G, 
Uehara E, Katon W: A randomized effectivenesstrial of stepped collaborative care for 
acutely injured trauma survivors. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004; 61:498 –506. 
38. Fortney JC, P yne JM, Kimbrell TA, Hudson TJ, Robinson DE, Schneider R, Moore WM, 
Custer PJ, Grubbs K, Schnurr PP. Telemedicine -based collaborative care for posttraumatic 
stress disorder. a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2014 . 
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.1575.  
39. Schnurr PP, Friedman MJ, Oxman TE, Dietrich AJ, Smith MW, Shiner B, Forshay E, Gui J, 
Thurston V. RESPECT -PTSD: re -engineering systems for the primary care treatment of 
PTSD, a randomized controlled trial. J Gen Intern  Med 2012; 38:32 -40. 
40. Saitz R, Cheng DM, Winter M, Kim TW, Meli SM, Allensworth -DAvies D, Lloyd -Travaglini 
CA, Samet JH. Chronic care management for dependence on alcohol and other drugs. 
JAMA 2013; 310:1156 -67 
41. Neumann MS, Sogolow ED. Replicating effective programs: HIV/AIDS prevention 
technology transfer. AIDS Educ Prev 2000;12(5 Suppl):35 -48. 
42. Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pincus HA, Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence -based 
interventions in health care: application of the Replicating Effective Programs fr amework. 
Implement Sci 2007; 2:42  
43. Kilbourne AM, Neuman MS, Waxmonsky J, Bauer MS, Kim HM, Pincus HA, Thomas M. 
Evidence -based implementation: The role of sustained community -based practice and 
research partnerships. Psychiatr Serv 2012; 63:205 –207, 2012.  
44. Waxmonsky J, Kilbourne AM, Goodrich DE, Nord KM, Lai Z, Laird C, Clogston J, Kim HM, 
Miller CJ, Bauer MS. Enhanced fidelity to treatment for bipolar disorder: results from a 
randomized controlled implementation trial. Psychiatric Services 2014; 65:81 -90. 
45. Stetler CB, Legro MW, Rycroft -Malone J, Bowman C, Curran MG, Hagedorn H, Pineros S, 
Wallace CM.  Role of " external facilitation " in implementation of research findings: a 
qualitative evaluation of facilitation experiences in the Veterans Health Administratio n. 
Implement Sci 1:23, 2006.  
46. Kirchner JE, Parker LE, Bonner LM, Fickel JJ, Yano EM, Ritchie MJ. Roles of managers, 
frontline staff and local champions in implementing quality improve ment . J Eval Clin Pract 
2012; 18:63 -69. 
47. Kirchner JE, Kearney LK, Ritchie M J, Dollar KM, Swenson AB, Schohn M. Lessons learned 
through a national partnership between clinical leaders and researchers. Psychiatric 
Services 2014; doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400054).  
48. Kirchner JE, Ritchie MJ, Dollar KM, Gundlach P, Smith JL. Implementation Facilitation 
Training Manual: Using External and Internal Facilitation to Improve Care in the Veterans 
Health Administration.  North Little Rock, Ark, US Department of Veterans Affairs, Health 
Services Research and Development, Mental Health Quality Enhancement Research 
Initiative, 2013. On -line. Accessed  8/21/14.  
49. Goodrich DE, Bowersox NW, Abraham KM, Burk JP, Visnic S, Lai Z, Kilbourne AM. Leading 
from the middle: replication of a re -engagement program with veterans with mental disorders 
lost to follow -up care. Depression Research and Treatment 2012; doi:10.1155/2012/325249.  
  Version 12 Amended (2 -16-18) VA Central IRB Protocol Template – version 10/26/2012  Page 43 of 43 
 50. Parchman ML, Noel PH, Culler SD, Lanham HJ, Leykum LK, Romero RL, Palmer RF. A 
randomized trial of practice facilitation to improve the delivery of chronic illness care in  
primary car e. Impl Sci 2013; 8:93.  
51. Jordan ME, Lanha HJ, Crabtree BF, Nutting PA, Miller WL, Stange KC, McDaniel RR. The 
role of conversation in health care interventions: enabling sensemaking and learning. 
Implement Sci 2009; 4:15.  
52. Plesk, P. Redesigning h ealth care with insights from the science of complex adaptive 
systems. In: Institute of Medicine, Crossing the Quality Chasm.  Washington, DC, National 
Academy Press, 2001, pp 309 -322. 
53. Bajor LA, Miller CJ, Holmes S, Van Deusen Lukas C, Bauer MS. Collaborati ve care for 
returning veterans.  J Depr Anxiety 2013; 2:2, doi.org/10.4172/2167 -1044.1000134.  
54. Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook . Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.  
55. Utarini A., Winkvist A, Pelto GH. Appraising studies in h ealth using rapid assessment 
procedures (RAP): Eleven Critical Criteria. Human Organization 2001 60(4): 390 -400. 
56. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. 3 approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res 
2005; 15:1277 -88. 
57. Powell BJ, McMillen JC, Proctor EK, Carpe nter CR, Griffey RT, Bunger AC, Glass JE, York 
JL. A compilation of strategies for implementing clinical innovations in health and mental 
health.  Med Care Res Rev 2011; 69:123 -57. 
58. Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Design and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials. 
Contemp Clin Trials, 2007; 28 :182-191. 
59. Brown, C. A., & Lilford, R. J. (2006). The stepped wedge  trial design: a systematic review. 
BMC Med Res Methodol, 6 , 54. doi: 10.1186/1471 -2288 -6-54. 
60. King G, Gakidou E, Ravishankar N, Moore RT, Lakin J, Vargas M, Tellez -Rojo M, 
Hernandez Avila JE, Hernandez Avila M, Hernandez Llamas H. A “politically robust” 
experimental design for public policy evaluation, with application to th e Mexican Universal 
Health Insurance Program. J Policy Analysis and Management 2007; 26:479 -506. 
61. Gugiu PC , Coryn C , Clark R , Kuehn A . Development and evaluation of the short version of 
the Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care instrument. Chronic Illn 2009 Dec;5(4):268 -
76. 
62. Stevanovic D. Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire —short form for 
quality of life assessments in clinical practice: a psychometric study. J Psychiiatr and Ment 
Health Nurs 2011; 18:744 -50. 
63. Nabati L, Shea N, McBride L, Gavin C, Bauer MS. Adaptation of a simple patient satisfac tion 
survey to mental health: psychometric properties.  Psychiatry Res 1998; 77:51 -56. 
64. Selim AJ, Rogers W, Fleishman JA, Qian SX, Fincke BG, Rothendler JA, Kazis LE . Updated 
U.S. population standa rd for the Veterans RAND 12 -item Health Survey ( VR-12). Qual Life 
Res. 2009 ;18:43 -52. 
65. Dube P, et al.  The P4 Screener: evaluation of a brief measure for assessing potential 
suicide risk in 2 randomzied effectiveness trials of primary care and oncology patients. 
Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  2010; 12(6): PCC.10 m00978.  
 