 
Protocol : 
 
TITLE:  The effects of a sub -maximal exercise program on adolescents who sustained a concussion  
 
Clinicaltr ials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol approval date: November  21, 2 017 
 
Investigators:  
William Meehan, MD  
David Howell, PhD  
Can Ozan Tan, PhD  
 
A. Specific Aims/Objectives  
  
1. To observe how concussion affects cerebrovascular function and  symptoms among a dolescents .  
 
2. To investigate the effect of a sub -maximal exercise protocol on cerebrovascular function  and 
concussion symptoms in  adolescents who have recently sustained a concussion.  
 
 
B. Background and Significance  
An estimated 1.6 t o 3.8 million spo rt-related traumatic brain injuries occur annually in the United 
States ,1 the vast majority being concussions. Despite this high prevalence, the clinical management of 
concuss ion remains diffi cult.2 Recovery of symptoms following a concussion usually occurs within a 
few days to a few weeks of injury. These symptoms, which include cognitive difficulties, headache, 
and dizziness, are pervasive, impacting personal relation ships, community re -integration, return to 
sports, and the ability to work or go to school. Unfortunately, the pathophysiology of persistent 
concussive symptoms remains poorly understood, and very few treatment options are available.  
 
After concussion, op timal cerebral blood flow is necessary to meet the metabolic needs of the injured  
brain.  However, cerebral blood flow is diminished globally after injury,3 and in fact, there may be an 
inverse relation between regional flow and symptom burden after concussion.4 Thus, cerebrovascular 
dysfunction may play a role in the manifestation of prolonged concussive symptoms.5 Moreover, 
alterations in cerebral perfusion may act as a trigger in symptom exac erbation. Even if  overt 
symptoms are mostly gone, strenuous effort may induce symptoms, presenting a major obstacle to 
return to daily activities.6 However, prolonged cessation from physical activity may also induce 
concussion -like symptoms, such as difficulty sleeping, concentration abnormalities, and anxiety.7 
 
While high intensity exercise can induce symptoms after a concussion , mild to moderate (so -called 
sub-maximal ) exercise has recently been identified as a safe activity af ter a concussion .6,8–10 Recent 
investigations have supported the use of sub -maximal ex ercise protocols to improve patient outcomes 
following concussion ,9,10 and have identified that more physi cal activity foll owing a concussion is not 
universally detrimental to the duration of time required for symptom resolution.11 Therefore, it is 
conceivable that mild-to-moderate exercise can contribute to symptom resolution by improving 
cerebrovascular function, while avoiding symptom exacerbation associated with high -intensity 
exercise. Although  the 2013 recommendations for concussion in sport states that individ uals should 
remai n at-rest until asymptomatic ,12 these guidelines are expected to change in 2017. This is due to 
recent evidence regarding exercise after concussion that suggests early exercise may not be 
detrimental, and perhaps beneficial in the early stages of recov ery (i.e. within 10 days of 
injury) .8,9,11,13,14 Specifically, s ome researc hers and clinicia ns now  suggest tailoring management plans 
to individual signs and symptoms based on the patient ’s most bothersome findings in order to move 
away from “one therapy for all” treatments .15,16 Therefore, early exercise interventions at a sub -
maximal level soon after c oncussion may be a beneficial strategy in reducing the risk of persistent 
symptoms.    
 
C. Preliminary Studies  
 
Preliminary data obtained among patients seen at the Boston Children’s Hospital Sport Concussion 
clinic indicate that physical activity level i s not associated with symptom duration time  (Cox 
proportional hazard ratio = 1.0008, 95% CI= 0.9994 - 1.0021 , p= .261).11 In fact, when stratified 
among only ad olescents, those who reported more physical activity during recovery reported shorter 
symptom duration times  (Cox proportional  hazard ratio = 1.0018, 95% CI= 1.0004 - 1.0031 , p = 
.009) .11 Furthermore, the extent of impairment of cerebrovascular function is directly  proportional to 
symptom burden (0.018+0.007 in controls vs 0.017+0.010 in patients).  
 
D. Design and Methods  
(1) Study Design  
 Prospective, non -blind ed, Interventiona l study  
 
We plan to recruit up to 60 concussed patients , equally randomized to an  intervention group  who 
participate in the at home exercise program , or those who  undergo the same testing but receive the 
standard of care given by their physician .  Subjects will be recruited from Boston Children’s Hospital 
Sports Medicine Clinic, The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention as well as affiliated schools, 
clinics and sports organizations. The subjects and parents/guardians who voluntarily  agree to 
participate will be scheduled for three visits. Upon the first visit, a research coordinator will explain the 
study and have the subject and parent/guardian sign the “Research Consent Form”, approved by the 
Institutional Review Board of Boston Ch ildren’ s Hospital before participating in the study. Subjects will 
be required to complete three visits to The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention  or Spaulding 
Hospital in Cambridge  for testing.  
  
 
(2) Patient Selection and Inclusion/Exclusion Cri teria  
Inclusion  
• Male or females between 14 -21 years of age  
• Experienced a concussion within 14 days of testing , defined as a person who has had a 
traumatically induced physiological disruption of brain function, manifested by at least one of 
the following:  
o Any pe riod of loss of consciousness;  
o Any loss of memory for events immediately before or after the accident;  
o Any alteration in mental state at the time of the accident (ie., feeling dazed, disoriented, or 
confused)  
o Symptoms of nausea, dizziness, fatigue, headach e, or changes in sleep, cognition or, 
emotions following the accident  
• Low or moderate cardiac risk according to American College of Sports Medicine (11)  
Exclusion  
• History of neurological surgery  
• Seizure disorder  
• Use of medication or medical device t hat wou ld alter heart rate, blood pressure or autonomic 
function  
• Any current, serious, chronic medical or psychiatric disease that, in the Principal Investigator’s 
judgment, may interfere with study participation or data integrity  
• Unable or unwilling to p rovide informed consent  
 
  
(3) Description of Study Treatments or Exposures/Predictors  
 
Concussion Symptoms  will be monitored by the Post -Concussion Symptom Inventory (PCS I), Post -
Concussion Symptom Score (PCSS) ,the abbreviated Concussion  Symptom Invento ry (CSI ), and 
Visual analog scale (VAS)   
 
Surveys: Dizziness Handicap Scale, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ) will be completed before each testing visit.  
 
 
Height and weight  will be measured.  
 
Heart rate,  cerebr al blood flow, and end -tidal CO 2 will be recorded during a one hour session, before 
graded exercise test , during a graded exercise test on a cycle ergometer, and during 5 minutes of 
recovery. The branching exercise protocol (shown in Figure 1 below)  based on the modified YMCA 
protocol will progressively increase exercise intensity up to 85% of age -predicted maximum heart rate. 
Exercise will be stopped at this point or if the volunteer becomes symptomatic.  
 
Single/ Dual -Task Gait:   Patients will be in strumen ted with three accelerometer devices, attached via 
elastic strap at L5, left, and right feet, which take less than one minute to place on the patient. The 
devices will be wirelessly connected to a laptop run by the study coordinator to obtain and sa ve 
motion data. While wearing these devices, they will complete task s in three different conditions :  
• Standing single -task: patients will be seated and be asked to complete a mini -mental 
status examination, adapted from previous investigations and recommen dations .17,36 –38 It 
consists of spelling a five letter word backwards, serial subt raction  of 6s or 7s, or reciting 
the months in reverse order. 8 trials will be completed.  
• Walking single -task: patients will be instructed to walk down the hall at a length of 10m, 
turn around and return to the original starting point, with no obstruction or comp letion of 
other tasks. 8 trials will be completed . 
• Walking dual -task: patients will be instructed to walk down the hall at a length of 10m, turn 
around and return to the original starting point, while completing a mental status 
examination. The exam iner wi ll ask the patient to spell a five letter word backwards, 
subtract by 6s or 7s from a number, or recite the months in reverse order. The examiner 
will say, “Ready, go” and the patient will begin walking while completing the mental task.  8 
trials wi ll be c ompleted.  
• Static postural stability:  As the Balance Error Scoring System (BESS) test is typically 
performed as a part of the clinical exam, participant performance will also be documented. 
During the BESS, three experimental trials are performed with eyes closed in 3 conditions: 
double -leg stance, single -leg stance, and tandem stance. During double -leg stance, 
participants are instructed to stand with their feet positioned side by side. For the single -leg 
stance condition, participants stand on the f oot tha t they identified as their non -dominant 
kicking leg. The tandem stance condition consists of participants standing with their feet 
positioned where the non -dominant foot is placed directly behind the dominant foot. Each 
trial is performed for 20 sec onds. W hen available, participants will perform the test on an 
instrumented motion capture -force platform system.  
 
Estimated time to complete the single and dual -task balance assessment is approximately 8 
minutes. The order of assessments will be rotated f or each  visit, but consistent for all subjects.  
  
 
 
Heart rate  will be monitored via a standard 5-lead ECG.  
 
Cerebral blood f low will be monitored via Near -Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS ) and transcranial Doppler 
ultrasound (TCD). NIRS will be measured  with a probe placed on the forehead contralateral to the 
dominant hand. NIRS -derived blood oxygenation levels will be used as a mea sure of cerebral blood 
flow at the prefrontal cortex.  TCD will be measured with probes placed bilaterally on both sides of the 
head slightly behind the temples. TCD derived blood flow velocities on middle cerebral arteries will be 
used as a measure of glob al cerebral blood flow. The TCD protocol used will be exactly the same as 
the active and IRB -approved protocol (Protocol number : 8926) within this study.  
 
Arterial blood pressure  will be monitored continuously via a photoplet hysmographic finger cuff on th e 
index or middle finger throughout the study session and via a standard oscillometric blood pressure 
cuff attached to the upper a rm. Pressure measurements will be obtained only via oscillometric blood 
pressure cuff during the graded exercise.  
 
End-tidal C O2 will be monitored using infrared analyzer (Model 17515A, VacuMed) connected to a 
nasal cannula.  
Rate of Perceived Exhaustion  (RPE) will be monitored by a visual Borg rating of perceived exertion  
during the graded exercise test  
 
All aerobic activity  will be monitored by a Polar Wrist Units with Heart Rate Monitors.  
 
YMCA modified branching Exercise Protocol:  
The subject will be fa miliarized with the cycle ergometer if they are not already. They will be properly 
positioned with an upright posture, proper bend in the knee for maximal leg extension and hands 
placed on the handle bars. The subject will have a few minutes to become comf ortable and warm up 
before starting the protocol. The first stage of the protocol involves the subject pedaling at a steady 
state (~ 100rpm), at 100 watts or 150 kg / m / min for three minutes. As long as the subject reaches a 
steady state heart rate, defin ed as a heart rate that does not increase more than 5 beat per a minute 
in the last minute of the stage, they will move to the  next stage. The next stage ’s intensity will depend 
on the  difference between their warm up heart rate and the  heart rate reached during the first stage . 
They will increase their Watts or kg/ m/ min as shown in Figure 1. Once the subject experiences 
sympto ms the testing will stop. If the subject does not have an increase in symptoms and can reach 
85% of their age - predicated heart ra te, the testing will stop. Subject will remain  on the cycle 
ergometer for a 2 minute recovery period before getting off.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Modified sub -maximal exercise protocol  
 
(4) Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  
• Primary: b lood oxygenation level in the prefrontal cortex before and after the administration of 
the exercise protocol.  
• Secondary: the p roportion of participants who continue to experience symptoms after the 8-
week exercise intervention  and the potential confounding  variables that contributes  to this risk 
of persistent symptoms.  
  
  
(5) Data Collection Methods, Assessments, Interventions and Schedule (what assessments 
performed, how often)  
 
Consent process : Research staff from the Division of Sports Medicine will c omplete the consenting 
process with the participants and their parents/guardians (if necessary) prior to any testing.  The 
research staff member will explain the project and review the consent/assent form. The subject will 
review the consent form with their parent/legal guardian . The subjects and their parents will be given 
adequate time to review the study materials and ask ques tions.  If they choose to participate, the 
patient and parent will sign the IRB approved consent/assent forms.  It will be made cl ear to the 
patient and their parents that participation in the study is voluntary. They will be informed during the 
explanatio n of the study that their decision to participate or not will not affect their medical treatment at 
Boston Children’s Hospital.  
 
 
Data collection methods:  
Height/Weight  
Cerebral blood flow: NIRS and TCD systems  
CO2 levels obtained during the study session and exercise  
Blood Pressure  obtained during the study session and exercise  
Heart Rate : 5 lead ECG  during the study session and exercise  
Rate of Perceived Exhaustion: Borg Scale  
Post-concussion symptom inventory: PCS I, PCSS, CSI  
Single/ d ual-task gait assessments at rest before exercise  
Aerobic Activity: Polar Wrist Units with Heart Rate Monitors  
Anxiety, Dizziness and patient he alth surveys are measured by the following scales:  Dizziness 
Handicap Scale  (DHS) , Hospital Anxiety and Depressi on Scale (HADS), Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ)  
 
The protocol consists of measurements and procedures that have no known risks and have bee n 
routinely used in laboratory studies as well as other human physiology  and biomechanics  labs without 
any adver se events. Throughout each examination , the electrocardiogram will be monitored using a 
standard 5-lead ECG via wires attached to the chest via hypoallergenic adhesive electrodes. Blood 
pressure will be monitored every 2 – 4 minutes via a standard oscillom etric blood pressure cuff 
attached to the upper arm, and monitored continuously via a photoplet hysmographic finger cuff on the 
index or middle f inger.  
 
The attachment and removal of ECG electrodes and inflation of the blood pressure cuff may cause 
mild di scomfort (though no more than routine physical examinations), but there are no risks 
associated with any of these measurements.  
 
Cerebral blood  flow will be measured via ultrasound with a Doppler probe placed on the left and right 
temple  and a NIRS probe placed on the forehead contralateral to the dominant hand . There are no 
known risks associated with transcranial ultrasound  or near infrared spe ctroscopy . We routinely use 
both (currently, in over 50 young individuals) with no reported discomfort or ill ef fects.  
 
 
Schedule :  
Recruitment : Potential concussed subjects will be recruited from the sports medicine clinic at Boston  
Children’s Hospital by  a research staff member. If the subject is eligible and interested in 
participating they will schedule study vi sit 1 with the research staff member.  
 
 
Study Visit 1 (time of enrollment):   
Subjects will come to The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevent ion or Spaulding Hospital in 
Cambridge  for a two hour visit. Once they give consent we can schedule a time for t esting .  
 
Subjects will be measured for height and weight.  Subjects will complete a short medical  history 
questionnaire , which includes the DHS , HADS, PHQ and a PCS I/ PSCC . Subjects will then be fitted 
for a Polar Wrist Unit and Heart Rate Monitor. During  this time, they will also have a standard 5-lead 
ECG placed by a trained research member. Additionally, a research member will attach a blood 
pressure cuff to their non-dominant arm and to their middle finger (for photoplethysmographic 
measurements) and s et up to the TCD and NIRS system.  Both the usual care group and intervention 
group  will complete this part of the study.  
 
The first part of th e study procedure involves supine rest, performing mental tasks, CO2 rebreathing, 
and resistance breathing  to induce small  periodic  oscillations in arterial  pressure. For resistance 
breathing, volunteers will breathe through a mouthpiece attached to a stan dard impedance threshold 
device made from latex -free PVC (PowerBreathe) set -up to moderate breathing resistance (10-20 
cmH20). There are no risks associated with mental or physical tasks (N -Back and finger tapping 
tasks)  or resistance breathing . The CO2 re -breathing may cause slight lightheadedness in some 
people; however, this can be reversed almost immediately by switching them back to room air.  Both 
usual care and intervention groups will complete this part of the study.  
 
The second part of the procedur e involves the branching graded exercise test. Subjects will still be 
monitored using a standard 5-lead ECG and blood pressure measured by oscillometric blood 
pressure cuff. Throughout the graded exercise test cerebral blood flow will be monitored via TCD or 
NIRS . The subjects will also be connect ed to the metabolic cart to measure VO 2 The exercis e test will 
continu e until the subject reports an increase in symptoms, using the abbreviated concussion 
symptom inventory  or to 85% of their age -predicted maximum  heart rate determined by the 5-lead 
ECG. The subject will be taken off the bike and cool down. Measurements wil l be taken for an 
additional five minutes. Both the usual care  and intervention group will complete this part of the study.  
 
After completion o f testing, the subject will have the ECG, blood pressure cuff,  metabolic cart,  TCD 
and NIRS system removed. They  will be monitored by a trained professional until symptoms ease or 
subject’s heart rate and blood pressure has returned to resting values.  
 
The final part of the procedure includes the single/ dual -task gait evaluation  and VOMS .  
 
Weeks 1 -4 (at-home exer cise) : 
Subjects in the intervention group will be advised to participate in aerobic exercise five days a week. 
This includes walking, biking, jo gging and running. While participating in these activities, they will be 
wearing their Polar Wrist Unit and Hear t Rate Monitor to help subjects track their exercise intensity. 
They will exercise for 20 minutes five times a week at 80% of their heart rate r everse, determined by 
their resting heart rate and maximum heart rate  reached during exercise testing . 
 
Usual ca re subjects will follow their physician ’s instructions for exercise and rest. They will also wear 
the Polar Wrist Unit and Heart Rate Monitor to  track their exercise intensity, but will not receive a 
heart rate specific exercise recommendation.  
 
Study Vis it 2 (approximately 4 weeks post -enrollment):  
 
All participants will participate in this visit. Subjects  will undergo the same procedures as vis it one, 
includ ing the DHS, HADS, PHQ, PCSI/ PCSS, supine rest, graded exercise test , VOMS  and 
single/dual - task gait. At this time, the target heart rate for exercise will be adjusted to a new symptom 
limited heart rate for all participants who are still s ymptomatic based on the same procedure.  
 
Weeks 4-8: 
Subjects will continue to participate in aerobic activity a s specified above, monitored by their Polar 
Wrist Unit and Heart Rate Monitor. Usual care subjects will continue to follow their physician ’s 
recommendations.  
 
Study Visi t 3 (8  weeks post -enrollment):   
All subjects will participate in this visit ( usual car e and intervention). Subjects will undergo the same 
procedures as visit one, including comple ting the  DHS, HADS, PHQ,  PCSI/PCSS, cerebrovascular  
function tests , graded exercise test , VOMS  and single/ dual -task gait .  
 
 
(6) Study Timeline (as applicable)  
 
Once IRB approval is given we will start the recruitment process. We plan to enroll and complete 
testing for a total of 60 subjects over the next  year.  
 
Timeline for all subjects:  
• Recruited from Boston Children’s Hospital Sports Medicine clinic  
• Comes in wi thin 14 days of injury  for study 1 visit  
• Comes in 4 weeks later for study 2 visit  
• Comes in 4 weeks later for study 3 visit  
 
  
E. Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  
 
There are no known risks associated with near -infrared spectroscopy  or trans cranial Doppler 
ultrasound  and the anticipated volunteer discomfort due to instrumentation and measurements is not 
more than that of a routine p hysical exam. The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort 
anticipated during the experimental protocols are not greater than those ordinarily encountered in 
routine daily life. There is the possibility that exercise triggers concussion symptoms how ever exercise 
will be stopped immediately upon reporting of increased symptoms and patients will be monitored un til 
resolution of symptoms.  Risk of exercise in concussion may occur in the setting of acute injury (within 
the first 72 hours), however, there  is no known harmful effect of exercise in sub -acute or chronic mild 
TBI. In fact, recent research suggests that  sub-symptom threshold exercise may aid in recovery.10 If 
any adverse event occurs, they will be reported immediately to the C CI.  
 
 
F. Data Management Methods  
 
Medical health information  will be saved and in put using RedCap survey. There will be an internal 
RedCap to enter recruitment information and identifying information. It will also include the exercise 
logs to help blind the PI from knowing which intervention group the subjects are in. The external 
RedCap will include the surveys, concussion history and test measurements. The information will be 
stored using the study ID numbers consistent with the rest of the measurements . Data from the heart 
rate monitors will be securely transferred from the device to a BCH -encrypted computer via  USB 
drive.  
 
 
G. Quality Control Method  
 
As these studies represent physiologic investigation and not clinical trials, no formal quality assur ance 
programs will be implemented. However, the ongoing results, problems, and limitations of the study 
will be overseen by the P.I. Studies will be conducted in a well -supervised hospital facility and 
subjects will be under constant observation by skilled  professionals. Appropriately certified and 
registered laboratory personnel will be present during the procedure . Procedures will be stopped if the 
volunteer exhibits any discomfort.  
 
Any adverse events will be promptly reported to the Human Research Comm ittee for review according 
to HRC guidelines.  Serious adverse events either expected or unexpected will be repo rted 
immediately (within 24 hours of event) by telephone, fax or email followed by a full written report using 
the PHRC Adverse Event Form withi n 10 working days/14 calendar days.  Mild to moderate 
unexpected or expected adverse events will be reported in writing using the PHRC Adverse Event 
Form within 20 working days/30 calendar days.  
 
Information about particular subjects will be known only by  study team. To maintain confidentiality, 
subject data will be referenced by number and identifying information will not be used during 
discussion, presentation, or publication. Spaulding Hospital certifies key personnel have completed 
education on the use  of human subjects in compliance with NIH regulations.  
 
 
H. Data Analysis Plan  
This protocol seeks to elucidate  the relationship between regional brain blood flow and CO 2 during 
exercise in individuals who have experienced a mild TBI, and to assess the ef fect of a standardized 
exercise protocol on cerebral blood flow.  
Total hemoglobin concentration in the pre -frontal cortex will be calculated as the sum of oxygenated 
and deoxygenated hemoglobin (as measured by NIRS) and will serve as a surrogate for regio nal 
cerebral blood flow. The brain blood flow and end -tidal CO 2 data will be aligned in time. The linear 
relatio nship between the two time series will be determined and compared across injury duration and 
symptom severity. We will use a linear mixed effect  model akin to a multiple linear regression model 
where regional cerebral blood flow is used as the dependent va riable, end -tidal CO 2 is the 
independent variable, and symptom duration and amount of exercise are covariates.  
 
I. Statistical Power and Sample Considerations  
 
To estimate the sample size required to achieve our aims, we used R -language statistical softwa re 
using a p -value cutoff of 0.05 and minimum statistical power of 0.8. To achieve our specific aim, we 
will compare the relation between region al blood flow and CO 2 responses to a branching exercise 
protocol, while accounting for injury duration. Given th is analysis plan, we estimated that obtaining 
data from 60 individuals will allow us to detect any relation with an R2 of 0.31 or higher.  
 
 
J. Study Organization  
Boston Children’s Hospital  
 
K. References  
1.  Langlois JA, Rutland -Brown W, Wald MM. The epidemiology and impact of traumatic brain injury: a 
brief overview. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 200 6;21(5):375 -378. 
2.  Doolan AW, Day DD, Maerlender AC, Goforth M, Gunnar Brolinson P. A review of return to play  
issues and sports -related concussion. Ann Biomed Eng . 2012;40(1):106 -113. doi:10.1007/s10439 -
011-0413 -3. 
3.  Giza CC, Hovda DA. The new neurome tabolic cascade of concussion. Neurosurgery . 2014;75 Suppl 
4:S24 -33. doi:10.1227/NEU.0000000000000505.  
4.  Meier  TB, Bellgowan PSF, Singh R, Kuplicki R, Polanski DW, Mayer AR. Recovery of cerebral blood 
flow following sports -related concussion. JAMA Neurol . 2015;72(5):530 -538. 
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.4778.  
5.  Tan CO, Meehan WP, Iverson GL, Taylor JA. Cerebrovas cular regulation, exercise, and mild 
traumatic brain injury. Neurology . 2014;83(18):1665 -1672. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000000944.  
6.  Leddy JJ, W iller B. Use of graded exercise testing in concussion and return -to-activity management. 
Curr Sports Med Rep . 2013;12(6):370 -376. doi:10.1249/JSR.0000000000000008.  
7.  Broglio SP, Collins MW, Williams RM, Mucha A, Kontos AP. Current and emerging rehabilita tion for 
concussion: a review of the evidence. Clin Sports Med . 2015;34(2):213 -231. 
doi:10.1016/j.csm.2014.12.00 5. 
8.  Thomas DG, Apps JN, Hoffmann RG, McCrea M, Hammeke T. Benefits of strict rest after acute 
concussion: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics . January 2015. doi:10.1542/peds.2014 -0966.  
9.  Leddy JJ, Cox JL, Baker JG, et al. Exercise treatment for postconcussion syndrome: a pilot study of 
changes in functional magnetic resonance imaging activation, physiology, and symptoms. J Head 
Trauma R ehabil . 2013;28(4):241 -249. doi:10.1097/HTR.0b013e31826da964.  
10.  Leddy JJ, Kozlowski K, Donnelly JP, Pendergas t DR, Epstein LH, Willer B. A preliminary study of 
subsymptom threshold exercise training for refractory post -concussion syndrome. Clin J Sport Med. 
2010;20(1):21 -27. doi:10.1097/JSM.0b013e3181c6c22c.  
11.  Howell DR, Mannix RC, Quinn B, Taylor JA, Tan CO, Meehan WP. Physical Activity Level and 
Symptom Duration Are Not Associated After Concussion. Am J Sports Med . 2016;44(4):1040 -1046. 
doi:10.1177/ 0363546515625045.  
12.  McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 4th 
International Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012. Br J Sports Med . 
2013;47(5):250 -258. doi:10.1136/bjsports -2013 -092313.  
13.  Baker JG, Freitas MS, Leddy JJ, Kozlowski KF, Willer BS. Return to full functioning after graded 
exercise assessment and progressive exercise treatment of postconcussion syndrome. Rehabil Res 
Pract. 2012;2012:705309. doi:10.1155/2012/705309.  
14.  Darling SR, Leddy JJ, Baker JG, et al. Evaluation of the Zurich Guidelines and exercise testing for 
return  to play in adolescents following concussion. Clin J Sport Med . 2014;24(2):128 -133. 
doi:10.1097/JS M.0000000000000026.  
15.  DiFazio M, Silverberg ND, Kirkwood MW, Bernier R, Iverson GL. Prolonged Activity Restriction After 
Concussion: Are We Worsening Outcomes? Clin Pediatr (Phila) . June 2015. 
doi:10.1177/0009922815589914.  
16.  Kirkwood MW, Yeates KO, W ilson PE. Pediatric sport -related concussion: a review of the clinical 
management of an oft -neglected population. Pediatrics . 2006;117(4):1359 -1371. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2005 -0994.  
 