Official Title:  Establishing  the effect of electroencephalography  (EEG) -guided theta  
burst  stimulation on reducing mania/hypomania- related affect and reward driven 
behavior in Bipolar Disorder  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date:   06/22/202 1 
Project  title:  Establishing  the effect  of electroencephalography  (EEG) -guided  theta  burst  stimulation 
on reducing mania/hypomania -related affect and reward driven behavior in Bipolar Disorder  
Intended area  of focus : Bipolar Disorder:  proof  of concept  studies  for novel  treatment  approaches,  and 
the advancement of the application of neural devices to bipolar disorder  
PI: Mary  L. Phillips  MD,  MD (Cantab),  Professor  in Psychiatry;  co-PI Fabio  Ferrarelli  MD,  PhD,  Associate 
Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh  
Technical  abstract  
Current Bipolar Disorder (BD) treatments are often ineffective because of lack of efficacy and/or severe 
side effects, especially related to the commonly prescribed medications for the defining BD symptom, mania/hypomania. There is therefore a critical need to develop new, more targeted treatments with fewer  side effects  to treat  and reduce  recurrence  of mania/hypomania  in sufferers  of BD, which  are guided 
by an  in depth understanding of  the neurobiological  mechanisms  predisposing to this defining symptom 
of BD.  
Specific behavioral traits, including elevated reward sensitivity, sensation seeking and impulsivity, predispose to mania/hypomania and mania/hypomania- related reward -driven impulsive behavior, e.g., 
steep  delay  discounting,  the often  disadvantageous  preference  for immediate,  smaller vs. delayed,  larger 
rewards. These behavioral  traits, and thus mania/hypomania and reward -driven impulsive behavior, can 
be triggered in reward expectancy contexts, i.e, waiting for a reward, in people with BD. During these contexts, including when choosing an immediate -smaller vs. a delayed -larger reward, we showed 
abnormally elevated reward neural network (RNet) activity, especially in left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), in adults with BD. Electroencephalography (EEG) provides more affordable, available and translational measures of neural activity than other brain imaging methods such as fMRI. We reported 
that beta  frequency  EEG activity  (beta  power)  during reward  expectancy  is elevated  in adults  prone  to BD. 
These findings  add to the literature  highlighting the left vlPFC  in reward  evaluation,  and indicate  that this 
region is abnormally active during reward expectancy in people with BD. By contrast, higher beta power in the central executive network (CEN), including right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), guides the 
often more advantageous choice of delayed, larger rewards, i.e., less steep delay discounting.  
Theta burst stimulation (TBS) is a non -invasive neuromodulation technique that can target the RNet left 
vlPFC,  and/or  the CEN,  and has great  promise  as a novel  intervention  to delay  or prevent  onset/recurrence 
of mania/hypomania  and reward -driven  impulsive  behavior,  a critical  step  to prevent  mood  cycling  in BD. 
Our goal is to determine if TBS modulation of RNet and CEN reduces mania/hypomania- related affect 
(mania risk) and reward- driven impulsive behavior, as a first step to developing new treatments for BD.  
We aim: 1. To examine acute TBS -induced changes in RNet and CEN EEG beta power during a delay 
discounting task in BD (manic/hypomanic, euthymic) adults (18 -35 yrs, to avoid confounds of long illness 
history) . When choosing between reward  options, we  hypothesize that BD adults will show reduced EEG 
beta power and functional connectivity (FC) in left vlPFC and wider RNet during the choice phase of the 
task after  inhibitory  (continuous)  TBS (cTBS) over  left vlPFC;  and elevated  EEG beta  power and  FC in right 
dlPFC and wider CEN during the choice phase of the task after excitatory (intermittent) TBS (iTBS) over right dlPFC (each vs. control TBS: cTBS over left somatosensory cortex, Som). 2. To determine how TBS - 
induced changes  in RNet/  CEN beta power  impact  mania/hypomania- related  affect  and delay  discounting. 
We hypothesize that greater reductions in left vlPFC -RNet beta power and FC after cTBS over left vlPFC, 
and greater  increases  in right  dlPFC -CEN beta  power  and FC after iTBS  over  right  dlPFC,  will lead  to greater 
reduction in mania/hypomania -related affect and delay discounting than after cTBS over left Som.  
In exploratory analyses, we will: 1. compare effects of left vlPFC cTBS vs. right dlPFC iTBS on affect and 
impulsive behavior; and 2. determine if the above behavioral traits moderate TBS -induced effects.  
Significance.  The importance of understanding  the neural  basis  of predisposition  to mania/hypomania. 
Bipolar Disorder (BD) is debilitating and common, and  defined by a history of mania/hypomania1. Yet, 
current treatments are often ineffective because of their lack of efficacy and/or severe side effects, 
especially related to the commonly prescribed medications for mania/hypomania2. There is therefore a 
critical need to develop new, more targeted treatments with fewer side effects to treat and reduce recurrence  of mania/hypomania,  guided by an in depth understanding of the neurobiological  mechanisms 
predisposing to this key BD symptom. Elucidating causal relationships among neural and behavioral measures  underlying predisposition  to mania/hypomania  can provide  neural  targets for new  interventions 
to prevent mania/hypomania in individuals at risk for BD, prevent mania/hypomania recurrence in euthymic BD individuals, and treat other disorders associated with reward- driven impulsive behavior. 
Which behaviors  predispose to mania/hypomania?  Certain  behavioral  traits,  including reward  sensitivity, 
drive, sensation seeking (RS -Drive -SS) and impulsivity, characterize BD, predispose to mania/hypomania 
and reward -driven impulsive behaviors, and  can be  triggered in  reward expectancy contexts3,4. One  such 
context,  intertemporal  decision  making, involves choosing between an  immediate, smaller vs. a delayed, 
larger reward. Due to high  levels  of the  above traits, individuals with BD tend  to have higher  expectation 
of (more immediate) future rewards5,6, and as a result often show a disadvantageous preference for 
immediate, smaller vs. delayed, larger rewards, known as steep delay discounting7. 
Increasing  evidence  indicates  that neural  activity  in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex  (vlPFC) 
is elevated in BD adults during reward expectancy8, and that the left vlPFC  and other reward network 
(RNet) regions (e.g., orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, striatum and midbrain) support 
reward -driven impulsive behavior during intertemporal decision making9,10. Compared with functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), EEG is more readily available and affordable, even outside major 
academic  centers.  Furthermore,  greater  reward -related  frontocentral cortical beta  (β) band  EEG power  is 
associated with high pleasure and sensation seeking (SS)11. By contrast, the central executive control 
network (CEN), comprising dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), inferior parietal cortex and dorsal 
anterior cingulate cortex12, promotes longer -term, larger reward choice, i.e., less steep delay 
discounting10. Yet, no studies examined the neural basis of intertemporal decision making in BD adults.  
Neuromodulation approaches.  Transcranial magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  and theta  burst  stimulation  (TBS) 
are non -invasive neuromodulation techniques applied to healthy and psychiatric populations13. TBS is a 
TMS  paradigm  that consists  of a 3- pulse,  50 Hz burst  every  200ms  (theta  frequency  range),  and can 
increase  when  applied  intermittently  (iTBS),  and decrease  when  delivered  continuously  (cTBS),  the 
excitability of cortical neurons14. By modulating activity in the RNet and CEN, TBS can establish causal  
brain- behavioral relationships, as a first stage to developing novel, more targeted treatments for BD. 
Summary.  Aim 1 will examine acute,  TBS- induced  changes in left  vlPFC  and wider RNet  β EEG power  and 
FC, and right  dlPFC  and wider  CEN β power  and FC, during a delay  discounting task in BD adults;  and Aim 
2 , the impact of these TBS interventions on mania/hypomania -related affect and delay discounting. We 
will explore whether baseline RS -Drive -SS and impulsivity behavioral traits moderate TBS -induced acute 
changes in EEG parameters, mania/hypomania –related affect, and delay discounting. To achieve these 
aims,  we will compare  the effects  of cTBS  to the left vlPFC  and iTBS  to the right  dlPFC  (each  versus  control 
condition TBS, cTBS to the left somatosensory cortex, Som) in 20 manic/hypomanic or euthymic adults 
with BD (for a range of mania/hypomania- related affect severity; type I/II; 3 -fifths manic/hypomanic).  
Innovation. T his will be the first study  to use an interleaved  EEG/TBS/EEG  design  during delay  discounting 
to elucidate the causal roles of left vlPFC and right dlPFC  in predisposition to mania/hypomania and 
reward -driven impulsive behavior, to provide neural targets to help develop novel BD treatments.  
Feasibility  data.  Acute  TBS-induced changes  in β power.  We collected preliminary  EEG data  during a delay 
discounting task before and after TBS in  3 BD (31.6±8 yrs;  1 female; 2  euthymic,  1 depressed, type I) and 
2 healthy (32.3±9 yrs; 1 female)  adults. Pre -TBS,  left vlPFC β power prior to choosing immediate,  smaller  
rewards  was higher  in BD (0.32±0.40 µv2) vs. healthy 
(-0.20±0.55 µv2) adults. Left vlPFC β  power post 
versus  pre TBS prior  to choosing immediate,  smaller 
rewards was reduced after left vlPFC but not after 
left Som  cTBS  in BD adults  (Fig. 1; EEG cortical  source 
maps (right) are in the 3 BD adults before (top) and after (bottom) left vlPFC cTBS; color bars: current source density distribution normalization). We 
showed a positive relationship between SS and left 
vlPFC  β EEG power  in healthy  adults  during  uncertain 
reward expectancy on a card guessing task 
15, thus 
providing feasibility of examining RS -Drive -SS, 
impulsivity -TBS- induced EEG change relationships.  
Research Design and Methods.  P articipants. We will perform assessments on 25 manic/hypomanic or 
euthymic adults with BD (3 -fifths manic/hypomanic;18 -35 years, to avoid potential confounds of long 
illness  history  on EEG measures;  50%  female;  racial subgroups  reflecting  the distribution  of different  racial 
populations in Pittsburgh), to have useable data in n=20 across all assessments. BD will be defined using 
SCID -5 criteria16; standardized mania17, depression18, and anxiety19 rating scales will measure respective 
symptom severity. Psychotropic medications : any combination (except antidepressant monotherapy) of 
atypical antipsychotics,  lithium,  other  mood  stabilizers,  and antidepressants  taken  for >2 months,  as these 
are commonly prescribed  medications for BD.  Exclusion criteria: Personal and family history of epilepsy, 
binge  alcohol drinking, SNRI  antidepressants,  bupropion  and stimulants,  as they  can elevate  seizure  risk, 
a contraindication  for TBS.  Additional  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria are as previously  reported20. We will 
screen  63 adults  with  BD recruited  from  local  clinics,  to scan  25 (60%  screen  failure),  to obtain  usable  sMRI 
and fMRI and useable  three  EEG/TBS session data  in >20 BD adults,  assuming  20%  fMRI and EEG data  loss 
and attrition. Recruitment  will be over  10.5 months  to allow  project  set-up (3 weeks),  and analyses  at the 
study end (3 weeks). Total RS, Drive, SS21 and total impulsivity22 will be assessed and used in exploratory 
moderation analyses  (below).  All the above  and study  consent  will be administered  at the screening visit. 
Baseline scan.  This will be ~1 week  before  the 3 EEG/TBS/EEG  sessions. Each  participant  will undergo  
structural MRI (sMRI); and fMRI during the delay d
iscounting task ( Fig. 2 ). Task -evoked activation 
with  fMRI  will constrain  the spatial locations  of EEG 
sources in neural regions of interest23. 
TBS neurotargeting, dosing. Baseline sMRI 
(MPRAGE) images will be imported into a TMS 
neuronavigational system (Localite, Ltd) for stereotaxic registration with the TMS coil, and identification in 3D of left primary motor cortex (for individual resting motor threshold, RMT), left vlPFC, and a control cortical region, left somatosensory cortex (Som), using anatomical landmarks.  The software  will mark  the location  and 
trajectory  of the TMS  coil, improving  anatomical  
accuracy across participants. TBS dosing (110% of RMT) is based on studies targeting orbitofrontal and 
ventromedial  prefrontal cortices
24. Meta -analyses  of cTBS  over  motor  cortex  suggest  reliable  decreases  in 
motor evoked potentials for 50 -60min after 40s cTBS25, longer than the post -TBS time interval when we 
will start and run EEG acquisitions during the delay discounting task. Effects of similar TBS protocols 
extend  to dlPFC  and medial  prefrontal cortex26. Safety  and tolerability  of iTBS  and cTBS to prefrontal  

cortex was established in our completed study (R21MH112770). After determining RMT, Simulation of 
Non -Invasive Brain Stimulation (SimNIBS) will identify the cortical target (at baseline scan) for TBS, to 
ensure  that the electric  field  generated  by TBS at 110%  RMT  is focused  on left vlPFC/right  dlPFC/  left Som. 
EEG/TBS/EEG sessions include left vlPFC cTBS, right dlPFC iTBS, and left Som cTBS; max. 3 hours each. 
These will occur over approx. 2 -3 weeks. A random number sequence will be generated by co -I Dr. 
Coffman for the EEG/TBS/EEG session order to which each participant is assigned. All personnel other than the research associate administering TBS will be blind to TBS condition. TBS order will be counterbalanced across participants. Debriefing that payments are fixed will be after the final session.  
Affect will be measured by the PANAS
27 (acute positive, negative affect) before and immediately after 
each  TBS session. We will also administer  the PANAS,  and ask if suicidal ideation  and aggressive  urges  are 
present,  at 1 and 2 hrs after  each  TBS session . If a participant  experiences  large  and/or  sustained increases  
in negative/positive affect, and/or new/potentially harmful symptoms (e.g., suicidal/homicidal ideation), s/he will be immediately referred to psychiatric services. Study staff will assess participants prior to EEG and TBS on each  TBS day,  to ensure  that they  meet  inclusion  criteria.  If these  assessments  suggest  a severe 
manic/hypomanic or depressive  episode,  participants  will be excluded and referred  to psychiatric services. 
EEG during the delay  discounting task (Fig. 2; references  in figure:  (1)
28;(2)29) will be collected  immediately 
before  and after TBS.  TBS will be performed  using the MagPro  X100  (MagVenture,  DK):  cTBS:  1200 pulses 
in a theta burst pattern  (bursts of  3 pulses at  50 Hz repeated at  5 Hz): 2  x 40s blocks of 600 pulses (200 x 
3 pulse  bursts)  each:  1st block  with  an intensity  ramp -up to improve  tolerability,  and the 2nd block  at full 
intensity  110%  RMT,  over  left vlPFC  or left Som.  iTBS:  two blocks  of 20, 2s trains (30  pulses),  8s intertrain 
intervals, for a total of 192s per block. Discomfort. Participants will rate itchiness, tingling, heat, pain on 
a 10-point  scale  (1=none;  10=most  severe)  at the start  and end of TBS.  We will examine  subsequent  effects 
of TBS  on affect. Participants can withdraw from the study if they are unable  to tolerate the procedures.  
EEG data source localization and preprocessing. Using Brainstorm, sensor locations will be registered to 
Human  Connectome  Project -/SimNIBS -generated  tissue surfaces/volumes.  Task -evoked  fMRI  activity  will 
constrain the spatial locations of EEG sources in RNet and CEN cortical regions. Analyses of β (15-30 Hz) 
power in and phase synchronization among these regions will be calculated from source -resolved EEG 
frequency decomposition using complex wavelets. FC will be quantified using phase locking and phase 
coherence30. Parametric regression will predict β  power and FC  to the primary condition on the delay 
discounting task (below). Atlas -defined ROIs : right and left regions in native space using FreeSurfer.  
A priori  EEG measures . We focus  on changes  (pre TBS to post  TBS) in β power  in left vlPFC  (and  right  vlPFC , 
in case of weaker lateralization in some participants), and β FC between these regions, and with other 
RNet regions; and β  power  in right (and left) dlPFC, and β  FC with other CEN regions, to the primary task 
condition (below). Secondary EEG measures: β power and FC in/ among other RNet  and CEN regions.  
EEG data  primary  stimulus  condition: intertemporal decision  making  before  choosing  immediate,  smaller 
reward options, and before choosing delayed, larger reward options. Primary reward -driven impulsive 
behavior measure: k value (discounting of delayed larger rewards), which is obtained via model fitting 
using the Variational Bayesian Analysis toolbox, using  an exponential  or hyperbolic discounting function. 
Secondary behavioral measure: number of  immediate choices.  
Analytic approach. Transformations will render distributions more Gaussian as needed. Data reduction methods  (e.g.,  principal components,  factor analysis)  will reduce  the number  of a priori vlPFC -focused  and 
dlPFC -focused  EEG measures  to a conservative  number  of components/  factors  vs. number  of participants 
(~1 measure: 10 participants) in analytic models. There will be: 2 affect (2 PANAS, above); and one 
behavior  (k) measure  in each  model.  Covariates:  age, BD onset  age,  gender,  SES, yrs. of education, 
menstrual  cycle  phase  (self- report).  Family  psychiatric  illness  history,  history/current 
alcohol/nicotine/cannabis  use per week,  psychotropic  medication  (yes/  no to each  class),  psychotherapy, 
previous COVID -19 (yes/no). Penalized regression (e.g., elasticnet)  will reduce the number of covariates  
to those  with  strongest relationships  with  dependent  variables  (DVs),  to have  ~1 covariate:  10 participants 
in each model. No studies examined effects of TBS on EEG measures in BD. We assume a medium effect 
size, as shown previously for TBS vs. control conditions31. For power calculations for the main analysis  of 
the single overarching model in each hypothesis, we use alpha=0.05 and report the smallest effect size 
with power .80. For subsequent tests, e.g., testing M moderators, we use a Bonferroni corrected alpha.  
Hypothesis testing and power. H1.1, 1.2 (Acute cTBS over left vlPFC vs. iTBS over right dlPFC and cTBS  
over left Som on EEG, affect and behavior measures) . We will use a within -group repeated measures 
ANCOVA, with n=20 and 3 repeated TBS conditions: DVs=max. 3 EEG measures and 2 affect (PANAS) +1 behavior  (k-value)  measures.  Conservatively  assuming a within -subject  correlation  of 0.5, we have  power  
.80 to d
etect a medium  effect size,  f2=0.32,  of TBS condition.  H2 (Relationships  among  RNet  and CEN EEG 
and affect (2 measures) and delay discounting (k parameter) changes ). Multiple regression will examine 
relationships  among  changes  in EEG and affect  and k values  in and among  the different  TBS conditions.  A 
correlation matrix for the 3 EEG and 3 affective/behavioral change measures will first be computed. We hypothesize  that the 9 correlations  between  the two types  of measures  will be positive.  Next,  a 
multivariate  regression  model  will be used,  with  EEG measures  as independent  variables  (IVs),  and affect 
and behavioral measures as DVs. In all n=20 measured thrice, assuming a within- subject correlation of  
r=0.5,  we can detect a medium  effect  size of f
2=0.24.  Exploratory  analyses  (Moderating  effect  of 
behavioral  traits).  With  2 moderators  (2 behavioral traits;  above),  we have  .80 power  to detect a medium 
moderator effect size d=0.45, using alpha=0.05/2=0.02532.. Secondary analyses will use similar models, 
with secondary EEG measures. Rigor, Reproducibility. 1) Diagnostic and behavioral measures have good psychometric properties. 2) MRI data undergo regular quality controls; EEG -TBS will be performed using 
established procedures and safety guidelines. 3) Participants and staff will be blinded to TBS condition. Future work  will examine  effects  of repeated  TBS on mood  and reward -driven  impulsive  behavior  in 
euthymic  and manic/hypomanic  BD adults.  Limitations: As there are two active  TBS conditions,  an active 
control TBS condition was necessary. Left Som cTBS  is a suitable control TBS condition in our pilot data, 
and see
33. No sham condition was possible  due to participant  burden and time  constraints.  It was not  
possible  to recruit  more  BD adults  in 1 year;  we have  sufficient  power  for main  effects.  Recruiting  healthy 
controls  was also beyond the 1-year  time  frame  and budget;  instead,  we include  a TBS control  condition.  
References.  1. K essler et al. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2005;62(6):617- 27; 2. Miura et al. The Lancet 
Psychiatry . 2014;1(5):351 -359;  3. Johnson  et al., Annu Rev Clin Psychol . 2012;8:243 -67; 4. Muhtadie  et al. 
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 2014;129(2):100- 108; 5. Alloy et al. J Abnorm Psychol. 2012;121(2): 339 - 
351; 6. Urosevic, et al. Clin Psychol Rev . 2008;28(7): 1188 -205; 7. Frederick et al. J Economic Literature . 
2002;40(2):351 -401;  8. Caseras  et al. Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(5):  533-41; 9. Smith et al. Neurosci  
Biobehav Rev. 2018; 86:85- 98; 10. McClure et al. Science 2004; 306(5695):503- 7; 11. Leicht et al. PLoS 
One. 2013;8(12):e83414; 12. Bressler and Menon.  Trends Cogn Sci. 2010;14(6):277- 290; 13. Boes et al. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2018;30(3):173- 179; 14. Suppa et al. Brain Stimul. 2016; 9(3):323- 35; 15. 
Coffman et al. J. Affective Disorders. 2021;292: 67- 74; 16. First et al. APA Publishing; 2015; 17. Young et 
al. Br J Psychiatry. 1978;133:429 -435. 18. Hamilton J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1960;25:56 -62. 19. 
Shear et al. Depress Anxiety. 2001;3(4):166 -178; 20. Edmiston et al. Biological Psychiatry: CNNI. 
2020;5(7):660- 668; 21. Carver et al. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1994;67(2):319- 333; 22. Whiteside and Lynam. 
Personality and individual differences. 2001;30(4):669 -689; 23. Liu et al. PNAS . 1998;95(15):8945- 8950; 
24. Hanlon et al. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017;178:310 -317; 25. Wischnewski and Schutter. Brain Stimul. 
2015;8(4):685- 92; 26. Hanlon et al. Brain Res. 2015;1628(Pt A):199- 209; 27. Watson et al. J Pers Soc 
Psychol. 1988;54(6):1063- 70; 28. Kirby  and Maraković. Psychonomic bulletin  & review . 1996;3(1):100- 104;  
29. Lopez -Guzman  et al. PloS  one. 2018;13(1):e0191357; 30. Rodriguez et al. Nature . 1999;397(6718):430- 
3; 31. Lowe et al. Neuropsychologia. 2018;111:344- 359; 32. Baron and Kenny. Pers Soc Psychol. 
1986;51(6):1173 -82; 33. Gratton  et al. Frontiers in systems neuroscience. 2013;7:124.  