Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 1 of 103  
 REVISION HISTORY  
The table below describes revisions in Amendment 01 presented in  the new protocol 
template (Nov ember  2016).    
Revisions Per Amendment 01  
Date: 01 May 2019 
Change  Rationale  Affected Protocol Sections  
Updated formal name of the 
International Council for 
Harmonisation of Technical 
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals 
for Human Use (ICH).  The ICH changed its formal title in 
2018.   Title page (GCP statement)  
 Investigator signature page  
 Section 5.2  
Clarified that the primary objective 
and endpoint is to evaluate ORR 
per investigator assessment.  Clarified that evaluation of ORR 
for the primary objective and 
endpoint will be per investigator 
assessment.   Synopsis  
 8.1 
 9.7.1.1.1  
 9.7.1.6.1  
Clarified that the secondary  
objective and endpoint is to 
evaluate PFS per investigator 
assessment .   Evaluation of PFS for the 
secondary objective and endpoint 
will remain as per investigator 
assessment .    Synopsis  
 8.2 
 9.7.1.1.2  
 9.7.1.6.2  
Added exploratory objectives and 
endpoints:  
To explore ORR based on IIR 
assessment.  
To explore PFS based on  IIR 
assessment.  Added supportive exploratory 
endpoints per IIR to support the 
investigator assessed endpoints.   Synopsis  
 8.3 
 9.5.1.2  
 9.7.1.1.3  
 9.7.1.6.3  
Added that the clinical benefit rate 
(CBR), disease control rate (DCR), 
and duration of response (DOR) 
endpoints will be explored per IIR 
assessment as well as per 
investigator.  Clarified that these exploratory 
endpoints will be determined based 
on both investigator and IIR 
assessments.   Synopsis  
 8.3 
 9.5.1.2  
 9.7.1.1.3  
 9.7.1.6.3  
Added independent imaging review  
(IIR) for tumor assessment scans.  To strengthen data collection for 
potential regulatory submission of 
results from this o pen-label, single 
arm study.   Synopsis  
 Section 9.5.1.2.1  
Updated when to perform formal 
analyses of ORR, PFS, and OS.  Last patient in ( LPI) plus 6 months 
will provide enough time to collect 
information for the primary and 
secondary endpoints and for 
efficacy and safety evaluation.   Synopsis  
 Section 9.7.1.6.4  
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 2 of 103  
 1 TITLE PAGE  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Study Protocol 
Number:  E7080 -M001 -221 
Study Protocol 
Title:  A single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 trial to evaluate efficacy and 
safety of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus in subjects with 
unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (nccRCC) who have not received any chemotherapy for 
advanced disease  
Sponsor :  Eisai Inc.  
155 Tice Boulevard  
Woodcliff Lake,   
New Jersey 07677  
USA  
Investigational 
Product Name:  Lenvatinib ( E7080 ) and everolimus    
 
Indication:  Non clear cell renal cell carcinoma  
Phase:  Phase 2  
Approval  Date:   V1.0  13 May  2016  (Original Protocol)  
 V2.0  01 May 2019 ( Amendment 01 ) 
IND Number : 124564 
GCP Statement:  This study is to be performed in full compliance with International 
Council for  Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and all applicable local 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and regulations.  All required study 
documentation will be archived as required by regulatory 
authorities.  
Confidentiality 
Statement:  This document is confidential.  It contains proprietary information 
of Eisai (the sponsor).  Any viewing or disclosure of such 
information  that is not authorized in writing by the sponsor is 
strictly prohibited.  Such information may be used solely for the 
purpose of reviewing or performing this study.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 3 of 103  
 2 CLINICAL PROTOCOL SYNO PSIS  
Compound No.:  E7080  
Name of Active Ingredient s:  Lenvatinib and Everolimus  
Study Protocol Title  
A single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 study  to evaluate efficacy and safety of lenvatinib in combination 
with everolimus in subjects with unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (nccRCC) who  have not received any chemotherapy for advanced disease  
Investigators  
To be determined  
Site(s)  
Approximately 8 centers in the United States  
Study Period and Phase of Development  
Approximately 24 months, which include 1 8 months of enrollment and estimated 6  months of 
treatment  
Phase 2 
Objectives  
Primary Objective  
 To evaluate  objective response rate ( ORR ), as assessed by the investigator,  of lenvatinib in 
combination with everolimus in subjects with unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma ( nccRCC ) who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced 
disease  
Secondary Objectives  
The secondary objectives of the study are : 
 To assess safety and tolerability of lenvatinib  in combination with everolimus  
 To evaluate progre ssion -free survival (PFS) as assessed by the investigator  
 To evaluate  overall survival (OS)  
 To assess the pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles of lenvatinib and everolimus during combination 
therapy in subjects with nccRCC  
Exploratory Objectives   
 To explore  ORR as assessed by independent imaging review (IIR)  
 To explore PFS as assessed by IIR  
 To explore clinical benefit rate (CBR) as assessed by the investigator and by IIR  
 To explore disease control rate (DCR)  as assessed by the investigator and by IIR  
 To exp lore duration of response (DOR) as assessed by the investigator and by IIR  
 To identify and explore tumor and blood biomarkers that correlate with clinical outcomes, 
including efficacy  
 To explore the relationship of population PK derived exposure parameters  to biomarker, 
safety, and efficacy data using a model -based approach  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 4 of 103  
 Study Design  
This is a single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 study of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus 
(lenvatinib  18 mg/day + everolimus  5 mg/day) in subjects with unresectable adv anced or metastatic 
nccRCC  who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced disease .  A Simon ’s Two-Stage 
Design will be implemented in approximately  31 enrolled  subject s.  Sixteen subjects will be enrolled  
in Stage 1.  If there are at least 2 responders as assessed by ORR, the study will proceed to Stage 2 in 
which 15 more subjects may be enrolled.  Otherwise, the study  will stop early for futility.  In the final  
analysis of 31 subjects, at least 6 responde rs are required to show a statistical ly significant 
improvement of ORR over historical control in the same patient population.  
This study consists of 3 Phases:   a Pretreatment Phase (Screening and Baseline Periods ), a Treatment 
Phase (starting Cycle 1, Da y 1), and a Posttreatment  Phase (End of Treatment Visit and survival 
Follow -up). 
The Pretreatment Phase  will last no longer than 21 days and will include a Screening Period to 
establish protocol eligibility and a Baseline Period to confirm eligibility and establish disease 
characteristics prior to treatment.  
The Treatment Phase will begin at the time of study drug administration on Day 1 of Cycle 1  
and continue in 28 -day (4 -week) cycles until completion of the off -treatment assessments (within 
30 days after the last study drug administration).   Lenvatinib  18 mg/day and everolimus 5 mg/day 
will be administered  orally. Subjects will undergo safety and efficacy assessments.   Toxicity will be 
managed by treatment interruption, dose reduction and/or treatmen t discontinuation.  Subjects who 
discontinue one of the study drugs due to its toxicities may continue to receive the other study drug as 
long as they demonstrate clinical benefit.  Subjects will discontinue both study drugs  at the time of 
confirmed diseas e progression, development of unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study 
termination by the sponsor.  
The Posttreatment  Phase  will start at the End of Treatment Visit and will continue as long as the 
subject is alive or until the study subject withdraws consent.  Subjects who discontinue study 
treatment before disease progression will continue to undergo tumor assessment every 8 weeks  
±1 week until documentation of disease progression or start of another anticancer therapy.  Follow -up 
assessment for survival will be performed every 12 weeks  ±1 week . 
Number of Subjects  
A total of approximately  31 subjects  will be enrolled.  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Males or females age ≥  18 years at the time of informed consent  form (ICF).  
2. Histologically confirmed nccRCC  who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced 
disease . Subjects must have one of the following subtypes of nccRCC: papillary, chromophobe, 
collecting duct carcinoma (CDC), renal medullary carcinoma (RMC), or unclassified.    
3. Radiologically measurable disease meeting the following criteria:  
a. At least 1 lesion of ≥ 10 mm in the longest diameter for a nonlymph node or ≥ 15 mm in the 
short  axis diameter for a lymph node which is serially measurable according to Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST ) 1.1 (Appendix 1) using computerized 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  
b. Lesions that have had external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) or locoregional therapies such as 
radiofrequency (RF) ablation  must show evidence of subsequent progressive disease 
(substantial size increase of ≥20%) to be deemed a target lesion.   
4. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) (Appendix 2) performance status of 0 to 1 . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 5 of 103  
 5. Blood pressure (BP) ≤ 140/90 mmHg at Screening with or without antihypertensive medications 
and no change in antihypertensive medications within 1 week prior to  Cycle 1/Day 1.  
6. Adequate renal function as evidenced by calculated creatinine clearance ≥  30 mL/min ute 
according to the Cockcroft and Gault  formula  (Appendix 3). 
7. Adequate bone marrow function:  
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥  1.5 × 109/L and  
b. Hemoglobin ≥  10.0 g/dL (can be corrected by growth factor or transfusion prior to first 
dose of study drug) and  
c. Platelet count ≥  100 × 109/L  
8. Adequate liver functio n: 
a. Bilirubin ≤  1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN) except for unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia or Gilbert’s syndrome  
b. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) ≤  3 × ULN (≤  5 × ULN if subject has liver met astases).  If ALP 
is > 3 × ULN (in the absence of liver metastases) or >  5 × ULN (in the presence of liver 
metastases) AND subjects are also known to have bone metastases, the liver -specific 
ALP must be separated from the total and used to assess the liver  function instead of the 
total ALP.  
9. Voluntary agreement to provide written informed consent and the willingness and ability to 
comply with all aspects of the protocol.  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Predominant clear  cell renal cell carcinoma ( RCC ) 
2. Prior anticancer  chemotherapy or targeted therapy for advanced nccRCC.  
3. Prior exposure to lenvatinib or mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) inhibitor . 
4. Known intolerance to lenvatinib, everolimus (or other rapamycin derivatives), or any of the 
excipients.  
5. Major surgery performed within 3 weeks prior to the first dose of study drugs or scheduled for 
major surgery during the study.  
6. Gastrointestinal malabsorption, gastrointestinal anastomosis, or any other condition that might 
affect the absorption of lenvatinib or everolimus.  
7. Subjects having >  1 + proteinuria on urine dipstick testing will undergo 24  hour urine collection 
for quantitative assessment of proteinuria.  Subjects with urine protein ≥ 1 g/24  hours will be 
ineligible.  
8. Fasting total cholesterol ˃300 mg/dL (or ˃7.75 mmol/L) or fasting triglycerides level 
˃2.5 × ULN.  NOTE: these subjects can be included after initiation or adjustment of lipid -
lowering medication .  
9. Uncontrolled diabetes as defined by fasting glucose > 1.5 times the ULN.  NOTE: In case this 
threshold is  exceeded, these subjects can only be included after initiation or adjustment of 
glucose -lowering medication.  
10. Known history of, or any evidence of, interstitial lung disease or active noninfectious 
pneumonitis.  
11. Significant cardiovascular impairment: Histor y of (a) congestive heart failure greater than New 
York Heart Association (NYHA) (Appendix 4) Class II, (b) unstable angina, (c) myocardial 
infarction  (d) stroke , or (e) cardiac arrhythmia associated with hemodynamic instability within 6 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 6 of 103  
 months of the first dose of study drug s. 
12. Prolongation of QTcF interval to >480 msec .  
13. Known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive.  
14. Known active hepatit is B (eg, hepatitis B surface antigen [ HBsAg ] reactive) or hepatitis C (eg, 
hepatitis C virus [ HCV ] RNA detected).  
15. Clinically significant hemoptysis or tumor bleeding within 2 weeks prior to the first dose of study 
drug.  
16. Subjects with central nervous syste m (CNS ) (eg, brain or leptomeningeal) metastases . 
17. Other active malignancy (except definitively treated melanoma in -situ, basal or squamous cell 
carcinoma of the skin, or carcinoma in -situ of the cervix or bladder) within past 24 months.  
18. Females who are breastfeeding or pregnant  at Screening or Baseline (as documented by a positive 
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin [ß -hCG] or human chorionic gonadotropin [hCG] test with a 
minimum sensitivity of 25 IU/L or equivalent units of ß -hCG or hCG).  A separate baseline 
assessment is required if a negative screening pregnancy test was obtained more than 72  hours 
before the first dose of study drug.  
19. Females of childbearing potential who:  
 Had unprotected sexual intercourse within 30 days before study entry and who do not 
agree to use a highly effective method of contraception (eg, total abstinence, an 
intrauterine device, a double -barrier method [such as a condom plus diaphragm with 
spermicide], a contraceptive implant, an oral contraceptive, or have a vasectomized 
partner with confirmed azoospermia) throughout the entire study period and for 28  days 
after study drug discontinuation.   
 Are currently abstinent, and do not agree to use a double -barrier method (as described 
above) or refrain from being sexually active du ring the study period or for 28  days after 
study drug discontinuation.  
 Are using hormonal contraceptives but are not on a stable dose of the same hormonal 
contraceptive product for at least 4 weeks before dosing and who do not agree to use the 
same contrac eptive during the study or for 28  days after study drug discontinuation.   
 Are using  oral hormonal contraceptives and who do not agree to add a barrier method . 
 (NOTE:  All females will be considered to be of childbearing potential unless they are 
postmenopa usal [amenorrheic for at least 12  consecutive months, in the appropriate age 
group, and without other known or suspected cause] or have been sterilized surgically [ie, 
bilateral tubal ligation, total hysterectomy, or bilateral oophorectomy, all with surger y at 
least 1  month before dosing]).  
20. Males who have not had a successful vasectomy (confirmed azoospermia) or they and their 
female partners do not meet the criteria above (ie, not of childbearing potential or practicing 
highly effective contraception throu ghout the study period or for 28 days after study drug 
discontinuation).  No sperm donation is allowed during the study period  and for 28 days after 
study drug discontinuation.  
21. Evidence of clinically significant disease (eg, cardi ovascular, respiratory, ga strointestinal, renal , 
or infectious  disease) that in the opinion of the investigator(s) could affect the subject’s safety or 
interfere with the study assessments . 
22. Any medical or other condition that in the opinion of the investigator(s) would preclude the  
subject’s participation in a clinical study.  
23. Active and current u se of illegal recreational drugs . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 7 of 103  
 24. Currently enrolled in another interventional clinical study or used any investigational drug or 
device within the past 28 days preceding informed consent . 
Study Treatments  
Lenvatinib will be provided as 4 mg and 10 mg capsules and everolimus will be provided as 5 mg 
tablets.  
Initial doses of lenvatinib 18 mg/day (one 10 -mg capsule and two 4 -mg capsules) and everolimus  
5 mg/day are to be taken orally in immediate succession  once a day (QD), recommended 
approximately at the same time each morning (consistently either with or without food).  
If a subject cannot tolerate  lenvatinib  due to its toxicities , the l envatinib  dose may be reduced, 
interrupted or disc ontinued according to the guidelines provided in Table 1 and Table 2.   Lenvatinib  
dose reductions occur in succession based on  the previous dose level, ie, one level at a time from 
18 mg/day  to 14, 10 , and 8 mg/day.  Any dose reduction below 8  mg/day must be discussed with the 
sponsor.  
If a subject cannot tolerate  everolimus  due to its toxicities , the everolimus  dose may be reduced, 
interrupted or discontinued.  Everolimus  dose may be reduced from 5 mg/day to 5 mg every other 
day. 
Dose adjustments for both study drugs will be made according to the guidelines provided in Table  2 
for management of intolerable toxicities.  Investigator s will decide the probability of the event being 
related to one or both drugs as to whether dose modification of one or both drugs is required.  Once 
the dose has been reduced, it cannot be increased at a later date.   
Subjects  who are discontinued from one of the study drugs due to intolerance to that drug may 
continue to receive the other study drug as long as they demonstr ate clinical benefit.  
Refer to appropriate protocol section for management of hypertension ( Section  9.4.1.1.1 ), proteinuria 
(Section  9.4.1.1.2 ), hepatic injury ( Section  9.4.1.1.3 ), thromboembolic events ( Section 9.4.1.1.4 ), 
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) (Section  9.4.1.1.5 ), hypocalcemia ( Section  
9.4.1.1.6 ), noninfectious pneumonitis ( Section 9.4.1.1.7 ), infections ( Section 9.4.1.1.8 ), and blood 
glucose/lipids ( Section  9.4.1.1.9 ) before consulting the table below, as appropriate.   
 
Table 1  Dose Reduction Recommendations for Lenvatinib in Combination With 
Everolimus  
Initial  
Lenvatinib  Dose  
(mg, QD) Adjusted Dose To Be Administered  (mg, QD) 
 
Reduction 1  Reduction 2  Reduction 3  Reduction 4  
18 14 10 8 a 
 
QD = once daily.  
a:  Consult Sponsor for further dose reduction recommendations.  
 
 
 
Table 2   Lenvatinib -Everolimus Combination Therapy Dose Reduction and Interruption 
Instructionsa 
Lenvatinib/Everolimus 
Treatment -Related 
Toxicityb,c Including 
Hepatic Injury and 
Thromboembolic Events  During Therapy   Adjusted Dose   
Grade 1 Tolerable Grade 2  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 8 of 103  
  Continue treatment  No change  
Intolerable Grade 2c 
First occurrence  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 1 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus 
at the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Second occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib  and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 1 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus 
at the same dose  as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Third occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction  of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level,  see Table 1 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus 
at the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Fourth occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Discuss with sponsor  
Grade 3d,e 
First occurrence  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1f Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 1 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus 
at the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Second occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 of Investigator to decide the probability of 
the event being related to 1 or both drugs 
as to whether dose modification of 1 or 
both drugs was required.  Dose reduction  
of lenvatinib (one dose reduction level, 
see Table 1 above ) and/or reduce 
everolimus to 5  mg every other day.  
Third occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1f Investigator to decide the probability of 
the event being related to 1 or both drugs 
as to whether dose modification of 1 or 
both drugs was required.  Dose reduction 
of lenvatinib (one dose reduction level, 
see Table 1 above ) and/or adjust 
everolimus  as follows:  
i) if 5 mg daily everolimus at event onset , 
reduce to 5  mg every other day, or  
ii) if 5 mg every other day everolimus at 
event onset , discontinue.  
Fourth occurrence  Interrupt lenvatinib and everolimus  Discuss with sponsor  
Grade 4g:  Discontinue lenvatinib and everolimus  
Note:  For grading see Common Terminology Criteria  (CTC ) for Adverse Events  (AE)  version 4.03  (Appendix 5). 
Collect all CTC grades of AEs, decreasing and increasing grade.  
a: A delay of lenvatinib/everolimus treatment for more than 28 days (due to lenvatinib/ everolimus -related toxicities) 
requires a discussion with the sponsor before treatment may be resumed.  
b: Excluding alopecia.  Drug interruption and dose reduction may be initiated for intolerable Grade 2 and Grade 3 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 9 of 103  
 related symptoms such as anemia, lymphocytopenia , asymptomatic neutropenia if there are no other treatment 
options available and the investigator considers that dose interruption or reduction of study medication is the only 
remaining alternative.  Optimal medical management for nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea have to be initiated 
prior to any lenvatinib/ everolimus interruption or dose reduction.  
c: Applicable only to Grade 2 toxicities judged by the subject and physician to be intolerable. If Grade 2 toxicity is 
determined to be intolerable, the dose of study drug will be reduced with or without dose interruption.  Interruption 
for Grade 3 toxicities is mandatory.  
d: Obese subjects with weight loss requiring dose interruption and reduction do not need to return to Baseline or 
Grade 1 weight loss to restart l envatinib.  Based on the judgment of the investigator, subjects may be restarted at 
the lower dose of lenvatinib once the weight has been stable for at least 1 week. Normal body mass index ( BMI ) 
should be used as the new baseline for future dose reductions . 
e: Not applicable to abnormal clinical laboratory values that are not clinically relevant based on the judgment of the 
investigator (eg, alanine aminotransferase [ALT ], aspartate aminotransferase [AST], gamma glutamyl 
transpeptidase  [ γ-GTP] values < 10 × upper limit of normal [ ULN ], and Na).  
f: For hematology toxicities, restart treatment after toxicity resolves to Grade 2.  
g: Excluding laboratory abnormalities judged to be nonlife -threatening, in which c ase have to be managed as Grade  3. 
Management of Hypertension  
Lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy should be withheld in any  instance  where a subject is at 
imminent risk to develop a hypertensive crisis or has  significant risk factors for severe complications 
of uncontrolled hypertension (eg, BP  significantly ≥ 160/100 mmHg, significant risk factors for 
cardiac disease, intracerebral  hemorrhage, or other significant comorbidities).  Once the BP is 
controlled,  lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy should be resumed as  described below.  
The followin g guidelines should be followed for the management of systolic BP ≥  140 mmHg up to 
< 160 mmHg  or diastolic BP ≥  90 mmHg up to < 100 mmHg confirmed on repeat measurement s 
after an hour, for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy : 
 Conti nue lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy  and institute antihypertensive therapy 
for subjects not already receiving this.  
 For subjects already on antihypertensive medication, the dose of the current agent may be 
increased, if appropriate, or one or more agents of a different class of antihypertensive should 
be added.  
The following guidelines should be followed for the management of systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or 
diasto lic BP ≥ 100 mmHg confirmed on repeat measurements after an hour, for subjects receiving  
lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy:  
 If systolic BP ≥  160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥  100 mmHg persists despite maximal 
antihypertensive therapy, then lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy administration 
should be interrupted and restarted when BP ≤ 150/95 mmHg at a dose of:  one level of dose 
reduction (ie, 14 -mg once daily) per Table 2 of lenvatinib.  Resume everolimus at the same 
dose as prior to dose interruption.   
○ If systolic BP ≥  160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg recurs on the  first reduced d ose 
(ie, 14 -mg once daily ) despite optimal management of hypertension with 
antihypertensive medications (either by dose increase or the addition of a different class 
of antihypertensive), then lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy  administration 
should  be interrupted and restarted when BP ≤ 150 /95 mmHg at a dose of:  one level of 
dose reduction (ie, 10 -mg once daily) per Table 1 and Table 2 of lenvatinib.  Resume 
everolimus at the same dose as prior to dose interruption.  
○ If systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or dia stolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg recurs on the  next reduced dose 
(ie, 10 -mg once daily ) despite optimal management of hypertension with 
antihypertensive medications (either by dose increase or the addition of a different class 
of antihypertensive), then lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy administration 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 10 of 103  
 should be interrupted and restarted when BP ≤ 150 /95 mmHg at a dose of:  one level of 
dose reduction (ie, 8 -mg once daily) per Table 1 and Table 2 of lenvatinib.  Resume 
everolimus at the same dose as prior to dos e interruption.  
○ Additional dose reduction should be discussed with the sponsor.  
The following guidelines should be followed for the management of Grade 4 hypertension 
(life-threatening consequences):  
 Institute appropriate medical management . 
 Discontinue l envatinib -everolimus combination therapy.  
Management of Proteinuria  
Regular assessment of proteinuria should be conducted as detailed in the Schedule of Visits and 
Procedures/Assessments.   Guidelines for assessment and management of proteinuria  are summarized 
as follows for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy : 
 Initial episode of proteinuria: if proteinuria ≥ 2+ is detected on urine dipstick testing, lenvatinib -
everolimus combination therapy  will be continued and a 24 -hour urine collection for total protein 
will be obtained as soon as possible within 72 hours to verify the grade of proteinuria .  Grading 
according to the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events (CTCAE v4.03) will be b ased on the 24 -hour urinary protein result.  Management of 
lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy will be based on the grade of proteinuria according to 
the Dose Reduction and Interruption Instructions (Table 2).  Where lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination  therapy is interrupted and restarted, everolimus should resume at the same dose as 
prior to dose interruption and not  as instructed in Table 2. 
 Urine dipstick testing for subjects with proteinuria ≥  2+ should be performed every 2  weeks (or 
more frequently  as clinically indicated) until the results have been 1+ , trace,  or negative for 
3 consecutive months.  Any subsequent increases in the level of proteinuria ≥2+ on urine dipstick 
testing must be confirmed with a 24 -hour urinary protein test, which  will be assessed and graded , 
and continued management of lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy  administration will be 
based on  the Dose Reduction and Interruption Instructions  (Table 2) .  Where lenvatinib -
everolimus combination therapy is interrupted and resta rted, everolimus should resume at the 
same dose as prior to dose interruption and not  as instructed in Table 2.  If a new event of 
proteinuria ≥  2+ occurs, the subject must resume urine dipstick testing for evaluation of 
proteinuria every 2 weeks until res ults are 1+ , trace,  or negative for 3 consecutive months.  
Management of Hepatotoxicity  
Regular monitoring of liver function tests (ALT, AST, bilirubin  levels) should be conducted as 
clinically indicated.  If signs/symptoms indicating liver injury occur, instructions contained in the 
Dose Reduction and Interruption Instructions  (Table 2)  should be followed.  Appropriate supportive 
care should be provided  along with close monitoring.  If hepatic failure occurs the lenvatinib -
everolimus combination therapy  must be discontinued.  
Management of Thromboembolic Events   
Subjects should be advised to pay attention to symptoms suggestive of venous thromboembolic 
events, which  include acute onset of shortness of breath, dyspnea, chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, 
tachypnea, tachycardia, cyanosis, signs of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) including lower -extremity 
swelling, and warmth to touch or tenderness.  In case any of the se symptoms appear, subjects should 
be instructed to report such symptoms promptly to the treating physician.  If a thromboembolic event 
is confirmed, instructions contained in Dose Reduction and Interruption Instructions  (Table 2)  should 
be followed.  App ropriate supportive care should be provided together with close monitoring.  If a 
subject experiences life -threatening (Grade 4) thromboembolic reactions, lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination therapy must be discontinued.   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 11 of 103  
 Management of Posterior Reversible E ncephalopathy Syndrome  
In clinical studies with lenvatinib, events of PRES were reported in less than 1% of lenvatinib -treated 
subjects.  PRES is a neurological disorder, which can present with headache, seizure, lethargy, 
confusion, altered mental functi on, blindness, and other visual or neurological disturbances.  Mild to 
severe hypertension may be present.  An MRI is necessary to confirm the diagnosis of PRES.  
Appropriate measures should be taken to control BP. If subject develops PRES, contact study 
sponsor.  
Management of Hypocalcemia  
Serum calcium should be monitored  at least  monthly  and replace calcium as necessary during 
lenvatinib treatment.  Interrupt and adjust lenvatinib dosing as necessary depending on severity, 
presence of electrocardiogram ( ECG ) changes , and persistence of hypocalcemia .   
Management o f Non infectious Pneumonitis  
Noninfectious pneumonitis is a recognized class effect of rapamycin derivatives, including  
everolimus. Noninfectious pneumonitis (including interstitial lung disease) was described in  12% of 
subjects taking everolimus.  Some cases were severe and on rare occasions, a fatal  outcome was 
observed. Investigators should therefore consider a diagnosis of noninfectious  pneumonitis in 
subjects presenting with nonspecific respira tory signs and symptoms and in  whom infectious, 
neoplastic and other nonmedicinal causes have been excluded by means of  appropriate investigations.  
Guidelines for assessment and management of noninfectious pneumonitis are summarized as follows 
for subjects  receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy:  
 Subjects who develop radiological changes suggestive of noninfectious pneumonitis and have 
few or no symptoms (CTCAE  grade 1) may continue lenvatinib -everolimus  combination 
therapy  without dose adjustme nts. 
 If symptoms are CTCAE grade 2 :  
o Starting dose of lenvatinib combination therapy with 5 mg daily everolimus:  
combination therapy should be interrupted and the use of corticosteroids may be 
indicated until symptoms abate (resolved to CTCAE Grade 0-1 or baseline) and may 
be restarted with 5 mg everolimus daily in combination with lenvatinib (ie, lenvatinib 
reinitiated at the same dose as prior to dose interruption) administered daily.  
Discontinue everolimus if failure to recover within 4 weeks of reinit iating treatment, 
and continue lenvatinib as a single agent therapy depending on individual clinical 
circumstance.  
o If Grade 2 noninfectious pneumonitis recurs despite optimal management, then 
lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy administration should be interrupted and 
the use of corticosteroids may be indicated until symptoms abate (resolved to 
CTCAE Grade 0-1 or baseline).  Lenvatinib may be reinitiated as a single agent 
therapy depending on individual clinical circumstances.  
 If symptoms are CTCAE Gr ade 3 :  
o Starting dose of lenvatinib combination therapy with 5 mg daily everolimus :  
combination therapy  should be interrupted and the use of corticosteroids may be 
indicated until clinical symptoms resolve. Lenvatinib may be reinitiated as single 
agent th erapy  depending on the individual clinical circumstances.  
 If symptoms are CTCAE grade 4:  
o Study medications should be discontinued.  
Management of I nfections  
Everolimus has immunosuppressive properties and may predispose subjects to infections. Therefore , 
monitor for signs and symptoms of infection and treat promptly. Dose  alterations of everolimus 
(either as single agent or in lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy) may be required in 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 12 of 103  
 accordance with prescribing information.   
Man agement of Blood Glucos e and Lipids  
Hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia and hypertrig lyceridemia are recognized class effects of  
rapamycin derivatives, including everolimus. Glycemic control should be optimized before  
starting a subject on this study.  
Blood glucose will be monitored a s specified in the Schedule of Visits and Procedures /Assessments . 
For subjects with blood glucose > ULN, a fasting (> 6  hours, water only) blood  glucose sample will 
be obtained.  Grading according to CTCAE will be based on the fasting  blood glucose result.  Insulin 
and/or oral hypoglycemic agents may have to be introduced (or the  dose increased) to control blood 
glucose levels. The choice of hypoglycemic agent should be  individualized to the subject s’ clinical 
circumstances and follow standard medical practi ce in  addition to consideration of avoiding 
coadministration of everolimus with inhibitors and  inducers of cytochrome P450 (CYP ) 3A4 and/or 
the multidrug efflux pump P -glycoprotein (Pg P). 
Dose alterations of everolimus (either as single agent or in lenvati nib-everolimus combination  
therapy) may be required in accordance with prescribing information. Where lenvatinib -everolimus  
combination therapy is interrupted, lenvatinib  should resume at the same dose  as prior  to dose 
interruption.  
Duration of Treatment  
Subjects will continue to receive study treatment until disease progression, development of 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or sponsor discontinuation. The duration of treatment 
for each subject is estimated to be approximately 6 months.  
Concomitant Drug/Therapy  
All prior medications (including over -the-counter medications) administered 30 days before the first 
dose of study drug and any concomitant therapy administered to the subject during the course of the 
study (starting at the date of IC F) until 28 days after the final dose of study drug will be recorded.  
Additionally, all diagnostic, therapeutic, or surgical procedures relating to malignancy should be 
recorded.  Any medication that is considered necessary for the subject’s health and th at is not 
expected to interfere with the evaluation of or interact with the study drugs  may be continued during 
the study.  
Treatment of complications or adverse events ( AEs), or therapy to ameliorate symptoms (including 
blood products, blood transfusions, fluid transfusions, antibiotics, and antidiarrheal drugs), may be 
given at the discretion of the investigator, unless it is expected to interfere with the evaluation of (or 
to interact with) the study drugs . 
Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs, a nd low -molecular -weight heparin are permissible but 
should be used with caution.  Granulocyte colony -stimulating factor or equivalent may be used in 
accordance with American Society of Clinical Oncology  (ASCO) , institutional, or national 
guidelines.  Eryth ropoietin may be used according to ASCO, institutional, or national guidelines, but 
the subject should be carefully monitored for increases in red blood cell (RBC) counts.  
If concomitant medication/therapy is administered for an AE, investigators will reco rd that AE on the 
Adverse Events Case Report Form ( CRF ).  
Subjects should not receive other antitumor therapies while on study.  If subjects receive additional 
antitumor therapies during the study, such as radiotherapy, other chemotherapy, or immunotherapy , 
this will be judged to represent evidence of disease progression, and continuation of study medication 
should be discussed with the sponsor.  Following this discussion, if the joint decision is made to 
discontinue study treatment, then such subjects will  complete all End of Treatment assessments and 
continue to be followed for survival in the F ollow -Up Period.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 13 of 103  
 Assessments  
Efficacy Assessments  
The primary endpoint (ORR), secondary endpoint (PFS), and exploratory endpoints (CBR, DCR, and 
DOR) will be evaluated by the investigator.  In addition, ORR, PFS, CBR, DCR , and DOR will be 
assessed by IIR .  The OS status will be assessed throughout the study.  
Tumor assessments will be performed using RECIST v1.1.  Investigator -determined response 
assessments are  to be performed at the site by appropriately qualified personnel at each time point 
and recorded on the appropriate CRFs.  All tumor assessment scans will be sent to an imaging core 
laboratory specified by the sponsor for quality assessment and independen t imaging review.  Tumor 
assessments will be carried out following the guidelines provided by the imaging core laboratory.  
Historical scans performed within the Screening period that do not follow the guidelines completely 
may be used  to demonstrate eligibility, as long as they meet minimum standards as separately defined 
by the imaging core laboratory.    
Tumor assessments including a CT chest and CT or MRI of the abdomen and pelvis, and other areas 
of known or newly suspected disease should be performed prior to Baseline (between Day –28 to 
Day -2) and every 8 weeks (within the 8th week) from the date of first dose during the Treatment 
Phase.  A brain scan will be performed at Screening , and thereafter if clinically indicated.  A bone 
scan will be performed during the pretreatment phase to establish a baseline (a historical bone scan 
performed within 6 weeks before first dose is acceptable), every 24 weeks, and as clinically indicated. 
Lesions identified on bone scans should be followed  with cross -sectional imaging . 
In subjects with complete response (CR) based on body CT/MRI scans, bone scan and brain scan, 
assessment will be required at response confirmation.  All objective responses must be confirmed at 
least 28 days following the ini tial achievement of response.  Subjects going off study treatments 
without disease progression in the Treatment Phase will continue to undergo tumor assessments 
according to the above schedule until disease progression is documented or another anticancer 
therapy is initiated.  
Pharmacokinetic Assessments  
Sparse PK samples will be collected from all subjects and will be analyzed using the population 
approach.  A total of 12 samples (6 plasma samples for lenvatinib and 6 whole blood samples for 
everolimus) per subject will be obtained at the following time points: 2  to 8 hours postdose on 
Cycle  1 Day 1 (C1D1), prior to dose on Cycle 1 Day 15 (C1D15 ), prior to dose and 2  to 8 hours 
postdose on Day 1 of Cycles 2 and 3.   
Pharmacodynamic , Pharmacogenomics, and Other Biomarker Assessments  
Blood and Tissue Biomarkers:  Biomarker discovery and/or validation may be performed to identify 
blood or tumor biomarkers that may be useful to predict subject response to study drug, evaluation of 
respo nse-related and/or safety -related outcomes as well as for potential use in diagnostic 
development.  In addition, biomarkers identified in other clinical studies of study drug may also be 
assessed in samples collected from subjects enrolled in this study. T he decision to perform 
exploratory biomarker analysis may be based on the clinical outcome of this study and/or the signals 
observed in other clinical studies or other information available at that time.  
A blood sample for pharmacodynamic and exploratory b iomarker analysis will be collected predose 
on Day -1 or C1D1, on C1D15, and on Day 1 of subsequent cycles (during Treatment Phase), and at 
the End of Treatment assessment.  Blood samples from all consented subjects may undergo analyses 
including, but not limited to, global proteomic and/or enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) -
based analyses or multiplex bead -based immunoassay in an effort to assess pharmacodynamic 
biomarkers.  
Pharmacogenomic (PG) Assessments:  Archived, fixed tumor tissue will be col lected (if available) 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 14 of 103  
 from all subjects for potential assessment of mutations and other genetic alterations or genes and/or 
proteins that may be important in the development and progression of cancer as well as in response to 
study drug treatment for poten tial use in diagnostic development.  Appropriate 
technology/methodologies will be used based on the amount of tumor tissue available.  
A blood sample for peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMC ) and plasma isolation will be 
collected from consented subject s for potential analysis of cell free nucleic acid (cf -nucleic acid) 
analysis  and exploratory immune cell analysis.  Cell free nucleic acid isolated from plasma samples 
may be used to obtain circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and explore tumor genetic alteratio ns such as 
mutations observed in archival tumor samples as well as those which develop during drug treatment.  
PBMCs may be used for immune cell profiling (eg. tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, T -cell repertoire, 
and immune cell types).  
A blood sample will b e collected for pharmacogenomics (PG) analysis (except where prohibited by 
regional or local laws). Variation in lenvatinib exposure or the occurrence of AEs observed in the 
study population may be evaluated by correlating single –nucleotide polymorphisms w ith PK, safety, 
or pharmacodynamic  data.  Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) extracted from blood samples 
may be used to confirm whether the DNA sequence variants observed in DNA extracted from tumor 
material are limited to the tumor and for potential pro filing of immune cells.  
Data obtained will be used for research, to assist in developing safer and more effective treatments 
and will not be used to change the diagnosis of the subject or alter the therapy of the subject.  The 
DNA will not be used to deter mine or predict risks for diseases that an individual subject does not 
currently have.  Any sample or derivatives (DNA, RNA, and prot ein) may be stored for up to 
15 years to assist in any research scientific questions related to lenvatinib, cancer and/or f or potential 
diagnostic development.  
Instructions for the processing, storage, and shipping of samples will be provided in the Laboratory 
Manual.  
Safety Assessments  
General safety will be assessed by the monitoring and recording of all AEs and serious adve rse events 
(SAEs), regular monitoring of hematology and blood chemistry, regular measurement of vital signs, 
ECG, and the performance of physical examinations (PE) and other safety assessments in line with 
local regulations governing a study of this nature .  
Progression of nccRCC and signs and symptoms clearly related to the disease progression should not 
be captured as an AE.  Disease progression is a study endpoint and should be captured in the CRF as 
per the guidelines for reporting disease progression.  
In case of life -threatening bleeding, the investigator should discuss the case with the Eisai Medical 
Monitor, in addition to discontinuing lenvatinib per Synopsis Table 1 for Grade 4 toxicity and treat 
the subject based on the institution’s standard pract ice.  Clinically significant bleeding will be 
considered as study -specific events and should always be considered as serious important medical 
events, which will be entered on the adverse event CRF and reported using the procedures for 
reporting SAEs, even  if the study -specific event does not meet other serious criteria.  
Bioanalytical Methods  
Lenvatinib  in plasma and e verolimus in blood  will be quantified using validated high pressure liquid 
chromatography ( HPLC )-tandem mass spectroscopy methods.  
Statistical Methods  
Study Endpoints  
Primary Efficacy Endpoint  
 The primary efficacy endpoint is ORR based on  investigator assessment, defined as the 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 15 of 103  
 proportion of subjects who have a best overall response (BOR) of CR or PR.  
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints   
 Progression -free survival (PFS)  based on  investigator assessment  – defined as the time from 
date of first dose of study drug to date of first documentation of disease progression or death, 
whichever occurs first.  
 Overall survival (OS) – defined as the time  from the date of first dose of study drug until date 
of death from any cause . 
Exploratory Endpoints  
 ORR bas ed on IIR assessment  
 PFS based on  IIR assessment  
 Clinical benefit rate (CBR) is the proportion of subjects who have a BOR of CR or PR or 
durable stable disease ( SD).  Stable disease must be achieved at ≥ 23 weeks after first 
lenvatinib administration to be considered durable SD.  The CBR will be determined based 
on both investigator and IIR assessment.  
 Disease control rate (DCR) is the proportion of s ubjects who have a BOR of CR, PR or SD.   
The DCR will be determined based on both investigator and IIR assessment.  
 Duration of response (DOR) is defined as the time from the date that the criteria are met for 
CR or PR (whichever is recorded first) to the d ate that progressive disease ( PD) is objectively 
documented or death, whichever occurs first.  The DOR will be determined based on both 
investigator and IIR assessment.  
Analysis Sets  
The Full Analysis Set (FAS)  include s subjects who received at least 1 dose of the study drugs. This 
will be the analysis set for  all efficacy and safety evaluations.  
The Evaluable Analysis Set  (EAS, a subset of the FAS) includes all subjects who have both an 
evaluable baseline tumor assessme nt and an evaluable postbaseline tumor assessment, unless the 
subjects are discontinued because of disease progression or toxicity. This will be used for the 
sensitivity analyses of efficacy.  
The Pharmacokinetic Analysis Set  will include all subjects who r eceived at least one dose of study 
drug and have evaluable lenvatinib plasma and/or everolimus whole blood concentration data.  
The Pharmacodynamic Analysis Set  will include all subjects who received at least one dose of study 
drug and have evaluable pharmacodynamics data.  
Efficacy Analyses  
Primary efficacy analyses  
Primary endpoint ORR assessed by investigator review will be analyzed using  the FAS.  Subjects 
who did not have a tumor assessment for any reason will be considered as nonresponders and 
included in the denominator when calculating response rate.  
In this population, ORR in the historical control is assumed to be 8% (Hudes , et al., 2007 ).  The ORR 
in this study  is estimated as 25%, which is deemed a clinical meaningful improvement.  Hence, the  
null and alternative hypotheses are set as follows:  
                                                     H0: ORR=8%  
                                                     Ha: ORR  ≥25% 
Simon’s Two-Stage  Design (Simon , 1989 ) is used in hypothesis testing for the primary endpoints.  
The interim futility analysis after Stage 1 allows for an early evaluation of efficacy results in order to 
stop the study  early in the case of low anticancer activity.  A minimum of 2 responders as assessed by 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 16 of 103  
 ORR in the Stage 1 sub jects (n 1=16) is required in the interim analysis  for the study to proceed to 
Stage 2  in which 15 more subjects may be enrolled .  In the final analysis of ORR, a minimum of 6 
responders is required in Stages 1 and 2 subjects combined (n=31)  to claim the superiority  of study  
treatment over historical controls . 
Simon’s Two-Stage  Design for Interim Futility and Final Analyses of ORR  
 Threshold  
Interim Analysis  Continue if ≥2 responders when n 1=16 
Final Analysis  Reject H 0 if ≥6 responders when n=31  
Secondary  efficacy analyses  
PFS assessed by the investigator and OS will be analyzed using Kaplan –Meier product -limit 
estimates.  Median PFS and OS and the cumulative probability of PFS at 3, 6, and 12 months and 
cumulative probability of OS at 6, 12, and 18 months will be presented  with two -sided 95% 
confidence interval (CI) if estimable.  PFS censoring rules will follow Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) Guidance for Industry, Clinical Trial Endpoints for the  Approval of Cancer Drugs and 
Biologics (20 18).   
The cumulative PFS and OS will be plotted over time.  The median, first, and third quartiles from 
Kaplan –Meier estimation for PFS and OS will be provided with 95% CI if estimable.  
Exploratory efficacy analyses  
The ORR based on IIR assessment will be evaluated using the same method described in the primary 
analysis.  
A 2-sided Clopper –Pearson 95% CI will be constructed for CBR and DCR.  The DOR and PFS based 
on IIR assessment will be analyzed using time t o event methods described above.  
Formal analyses of ORR, PFS and OS  
A formal analysis will be carried out after all subject s have been enrolled  and on study treatment for  
at least 6 months or have discontinued due to disease progression, death or toxicity .  Since the 
primary endpoint ORR data are expected to be observed sooner than the secondary endpoints, the 
timing of the formal analysis is chosen such that the secondary endpoints, PFS and OS, will be 
adequately described.  The primary population for effi cacy and safety analys es is the FAS.  
Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker Analyses  
Pharmacokinetic Analyses  
A population PK approach will be used to characteri ze the PK of lenvatinib and everolimus  and 
the final PK model will be used to derive lenvatinib and everolimus exposure parameters to be 
used in the subsequent pharmacokinetic  (PK) /pharmacodynamic  analyses. The analyses will be 
detailed in a separate analysis plan.  Concentrations of each anal yte will be graphed by time 
within each nominal collection interval.  Average dose at each collection interval will also be 
displayed.  
Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Analyses  
Lenvatinib and everolimus  exposure parameters derived from the population PK ana lysis will be 
related to biomarker, safety, and efficacy data using a model -based approach.  For some PK/  
pharmacodynamic  analyses, data from this study may be pooled with data from other clinical 
studies of study drug.  
For efficacy, a tumor growth inhibit ion model based on longitudinal tumor size measurements of 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 17 of 103  
 target lesions will be included.  We plan to explore exposure to both lenvatinib  and everolimus  
exposure and/or selected  biomarkers , identified in other studies of study drug, as predictors 
and/or correlations with tumor burden changes in the tumor growth inhibition model. Other 
analyses will include logistic regression analysis for ORR 24W.   
For the exposure -response relationship of safety, data will be analyzed using a longitudinal 
categorical log istic regression analysis for AEs leading to dosing reduction or interruption.  
For the exposure -response relationship for selected biomarkers , identified in other clinical 
studies of study drug, data  may be analyzed using a model -based approach.  
Population PK and PK/ pharmacodynamic  analyses will be detailed in a separate analysis plan.  
Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker Analyse s 
Soluble, tissue, genetic and/or imaging biomarkers ( Baseline and/or posttreatment) may be 
summarized using descriptive statistics and correlated with clinical outcomes -related endpoints for 
safety and/or efficacy as appropriate.   Details will be included in a separate analysis plan.  
Safety Analyses  
Safety, using the FAS, will be assessed  by monitoring and recording  of all AEs including all 
CTCAE  grades, regular monitoring of hematology and clinical chemistry, urinalysis, regular 
measurement of vital signs, 12 -lead ECGs , and performance of PEs.  
Adverse events and other clinical safety data will be summarized descriptively in the FAS.   The 
incidence of treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs), SAEs, drug -related AEs and AEs leading 
to discontinuation will be summarized in tabulation.  Hematology,  serum chemistry, vital sign 
variables and ECG will be summarized descriptively for observed values, by grade and by change 
from Baseline by cycle.  All AEs and lab parameters will be listed.  
Interim Analyses  
An interim analysis may be performed by the sponsor after 16 subj ects in Stage 1 have completed at 
least 2 tumor assessments ( eg, Week 16 tumor assessments), unless discontinued due to disease 
progression, death or toxicity.  If one or no responder s are observed  in the  interim analysis , the study  
will be stopped early for futility and subjects on study at that time will continue treatment  under the 
discretion of the investigator.  If 2 or more responders are confirmed before the planned interim 
analysis and the safety profiles of both drugs are  acceptable, the study  will continue to Stage 2 and a 
formal interim analysis may be waived .  There will be no enrollment gap for the interim analysis  
Sample Size Rationale  
Approximately  31 subjects , including 16 in the first stage , will be enrolled in the  study .  The actual 
one-sided type I error is 0.0319 and the power is 0.8053 in the proposed Simon ’s Two-Stage  design.  
At interim analysis, the probabilities of early futility stopping are 0.6299 under H 0: ORR= 8% and 
0.0635 under H a: ORR≥ 25%, respectively . 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 18 of 103  
 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1 TITLE PAGE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  2 
2 CLINICAL PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  ................................ ................................ ..........  3 
3 Table Of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  18 
4 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS  ...........................  23 
5 ETHICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  27 
5.1 Institutional Review Boards/Independent Ethics Committees  ...........................  27 
5.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study  ................................ ................................ .................  27 
5.3 Subject Information and Informed Consent  ................................ ........................  28 
6 INVESTIGATORS A ND STUDY PERSONNEL  ................................ .....................  29 
7 INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  29 
7.1 Indication  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  29 
7.1.1  Current Therapeutic Options  ................................ ................................ ................  29 
7.1.2  Lenvatinib  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  30 
7.1.2.1  Mechanism of Action  ................................ ................................ ....................  30 
7.1.3  Everolimus  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  30 
7.1.3.1  Mechanism of Action  ................................ ................................ ....................  30 
7.1.4  Preclinical and Clinical Experience with the Combination of Lenvatinib and 
Everolimus  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  31 
7.1.4.1  Preclinical Experience with the Combination of Lenvatinib and Everolimus
 31 
7.1.4.2  Clinical Experience with Combination Lenvatinib Plus Everolimus 
Treatment in Renal Cell Carcinoma  ................................ ................................ ...........  32 
7.2 Study Rationale  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 33 
8 STUDY OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 33 
8.1 Primary Objective  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 33 
8.2 Secondary Objectives  ................................ ................................ .............................  33 
8.3 Exploratory Objectives  ................................ ................................ ..........................  34 
9 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  ................................ ................................ ......................  34 
9.1 Overall Study Design and Plan  ................................ ................................ ..............  34 
9.1.1  Pretreatment Phase  ................................ ................................ ...............................  35 
9.1.1.1  Screening Period  ................................ ................................ ...........................  35 
9.1.1.2  Baseline Period  ................................ ................................ .............................  35 
9.1.2  Treatment Phase  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 35 
9.1.3  Posttreatment Phase  ................................ ................................ .............................  36 
9.2 Discussion of Study Design, Inc luding Choice of Control Groups  .....................  36 
9.3 Selection of Study Population  ................................ ................................ ................  36 
9.3.1  Inclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 36 
9.3.2  Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................  38 
9.3.3  Removal of Subjects From Therap y or Assessment  ................................ ............  39 
9.4 Treatments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  40 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 19 of 103  
 9.4.1  Treatments Administered  ................................ ................................ .....................  40 
9.4.1.1  Criteria for Interruption of Treatment, Dose Reduction, and Resumption of 
Treatment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  41 
9.4.1.1.1  Management of Hypertension  ................................ ................................ . 43 
9.4.1.1.2  Management of P roteinuria  ................................ ................................ ..... 44 
9.4.1.1.3  Management of Hepatotoxicity ................................ ...............................  45 
9.4.1.1.4  Management of Thromboembolic Events  ................................ ...............  45 
9.4.1.1.5  Management of Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy Syndrome  ..........  45 
9.4.1.1.6  Management of Hypocalcemia  ................................ ...............................  46 
9.4.1.1.7  Management of Noninfectious Pneumonitis  ................................ ...........  46 
9.4.1.1.8  Management of Infections  ................................ ................................ ...... 47 
9.4.1.1.9  Management of Blood Glucose and Lipids  ................................ ............  47 
9.4.2  Identit y of Investigational Products  ................................ ................................ ..... 47 
9.4.2.1  Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Lenvatinib  ................................ ...... 47 
9.4.2.2  Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Everolimus ................................ ..... 48 
9.4.2.3  Comparator Drug  ................................ ................................ ..........................  48 
9.4.2.4  Labeling for Study Drug  ................................ ................................ ...............  48 
9.4.2.5  Storage Conditions  ................................ ................................ ........................  48 
9.4.3  Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  ................................ ...........  49 
9.4.4  Selection of Doses in the Study  ................................ ................................ ...........  49 
9.4.5  Selection and Tim ing of Dose for Each Subject  ................................ ..................  49 
9.4.6  Blinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  49 
9.4.7  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  ................................ ................................ ...........  50 
9.4.7.1  Drug -Drug Interactions  ................................ ................................ .................  50 
9.4.7.2  Prohibited Concomitant Therapies and Drugs  ................................ ..............  51 
9.4.8  Treatment Compliance  ................................ ................................ .........................  51 
9.4.9  Drug Supplies and Accountability  ................................ ................................ ....... 51 
9.5 Study Assessments  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 53 
9.5.1  Assessments  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  53 
9.5.1.1  Demography  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 53 
9.5.1.1.1  Medical History and Physical Examinations  ................................ ..........  53 
9.5.1.2  Efficacy Assessments ................................ ................................ ....................  54 
9.5.1.2.1  Tumor Assessments  ................................ ................................ ................  54 
9.5.1.3  Pharmacokinetic, Pharmaco dynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other 
Biomarker Assessments  ................................ ................................ ..............................  54 
9.5.1.3.1  Pharmacokinetic Assessments  ................................ ................................  54 
9.5.1.3.2  Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker 
Assessments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  55 
9.5.1.4  Safety Assessments  ................................ ................................ .......................  56 
9.5.1.4.1  Adverse Events and Events  Associated with Special Situations  ............  56 
9.5.1.4.2  Serious Adverse Events and Events Associated with Special Situations  58 
9.5.1.4.3  Laboratory Measurements  ................................ ................................ ...... 59 
9.5.1.4.4  Vital Signs and Weight Measurements  ................................ ...................  60 
9.5.1.4.5  Physi cal Examinations  ................................ ................................ ............  61 
9.5.1.4.6  Electrocardiograms  ................................ ................................ .................  61 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 20 of 103  
 9.5.1.4.7  Other Safety Assessments  ................................ ................................ ....... 61 
9.5.2  Schedule of Procedures/Assessments  ................................ ................................ .. 62 
9.5.2.1  Schedule of Procedures/Assessments  ................................ ...........................  62 
9.5.2.2  Description of Procedures/Assessments Schedule  ................................ ........  68 
9.5.3  Appropriateness of Measurements  ................................ ................................ ....... 68 
9.5.4  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events, Pregnancy, and Events Associated with 
Special Situations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  68 
9.5.4.1  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  ................................ ...........................  68 
9.5.4.2  Reporting  of Pregnancy and Exposure to Study Drug Through Breastfeeding
 69 
9.5.4.3  Reporting of Events Associated with Special Situations  ..............................  69 
9.5.4.3.1  Reporting of Adverse Events Associated With Study Drug Overdose, 
Misuse, Abuse, or Medication Error  ................................ ................................ ....... 69 
9.5.4.3.2  Reporting of Study -Specific Events ................................ ........................  70 
9.5.4.4  Expedited Reporting  ................................ ................................ .....................  70 
9.5.4.5  Breaking the Blind  ................................ ................................ ........................  70 
9.5.4.6  Regulatory Reporting of Adverse Events  ................................ .....................  70 
9.5.5  Completion/Discontinuation of Subjects  ................................ .............................  70 
9.5.6  Abuse or Diversion of Study Drug  ................................ ................................ ...... 71 
9.5.7  Confirmation of Medical Care by Another Physician  ................................ .........  71 
9.6 Data Quality Assurance  ................................ ................................ .........................  71 
9.6.1  Data Collection  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 71 
9.6.2  Clinical Data Management ................................ ................................ ...................  72 
9.7 Statistical Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 72 
9.7.1  Statistical and Analytical Plans  ................................ ................................ ............  72 
9.7.1.1  Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ............................  72 
9.7.1.1.1  Primary Endpoint  ................................ ................................ ....................  72 
9.7.1.1.2  Secondary Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ..............  72 
9.7.1.1.3  Exploratory Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ............  72 
9.7.1.2  Definitions of Analysis Sets ................................ ................................ ..........  73 
9.7.1.3  Subject Disposition  ................................ ................................ .......................  73 
9.7.1.4  Demographic and Other Bas eline Characteristics  ................................ ........  73 
9.7.1.5  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  ................................ ................................ .... 73 
9.7.1.6  Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ .........................  74 
9.7.1.6.1  Primary Efficacy Analysis  ................................ ................................ ...... 74 
9.7.1.6.2  Secondary Effic acy Analyses  ................................ ................................ . 75 
9.7.1.6.3  Exploratory Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ...............................  75 
9.7.1.6.4  Formal Analyses of ORR, PFS, and OS  ................................ .................  75 
9.7.1.6.5  Sensitivity Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................  75 
9.7.1.7  Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other 
Biomarker Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 75 
9.7.1.7.1  Pharmacokinetic Analyses  ................................ ................................ ...... 75 
9.7.1.7.2  Pharmacokinet ic/Pharmacodynamic Analyses  ................................ ....... 75 
9.7.1.7.3  Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker Analyses  76 
9.7.1.8  Safety Analyses  ................................ ................................ .............................  76 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 21 of 103  
 9.7.1.8.1  Extent of Exposure  ................................ ................................ ..................  76 
9.7.1.8.2  Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ .......................  76 
9.7.1.8.3  Laboratory Values  ................................ ................................ ...................  77 
9.7.1.8.4  Vital Signs  ................................ ................................ ...............................  77 
9.7.1.8.5  Electrocardiograms  ................................ ................................ .................  78 
9.7.1.8.6  Other Safety Analyses ................................ ................................ .............  78 
9.7.1.9  Other Analyses  ................................ ................................ ..............................  78 
9.7.2  Determination of Sample Size  ................................ ................................ .............  78 
9.7.3  Interim Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 78 
9.7.4  Other Statistical/Analytical Issu es ................................ ................................ ....... 78 
9.7.5  Procedure for Revising the Statistical Analysis Plan  ................................ ...........  79 
10 REFERENCE LIST  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 80 
11 PROCEDURES AND INSTRUCTIONS (ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES)  83 
11.1 Changes to the Protocol  ................................ ................................ ..........................  83 
11.2 Adherence to the Protocol  ................................ ................................ ......................  83 
11.3 Monitoring Procedures  ................................ ................................ ..........................  83 
11.4 Recording of Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 84 
11.5 Identification of Source Data  ................................ ................................ .................  84 
11.6 Retention of Records  ................................ ................................ ..............................  84 
11.7 Auditing Procedures and Inspection  ................................ ................................ ..... 85 
11.8 Handling of Study Drug  ................................ ................................ .........................  85 
11.9 Publication of Results  ................................ ................................ .............................  85 
11.10  Disclosure and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ..............  86 
11.11  Discontinuation of Study  ................................ ................................ ........................  86 
11.12  Subject Insurance and Indemnity  ................................ ................................ .........  86 
12 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  87 
 
LIST OF IN -TEXT TABL ES 
Table 1  Treatment Administered  ................................ ................................ ............ 41 
Table 2  Dose Reduction Recommendations for Lenvatinib in Combination 
With Everolimus  ................................ ................................ ........................ 41 
Table 3  Lenvatinib -Everolimus Combination Therapy Dose Reduction and 
Interruption Instructionsa ................................ ................................ ........... 42 
Table 4  Clini cal Laboratory Tests  ................................ ................................ ........... 60 
Table 5  Schedule of Procedures/Assessments for Study E7080 -M001 -221........... 63 
Table 6  Simon’s Two -Stage Design for Interim Futility and Final Analyses of 
ORR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 74 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 22 of 103  
 LIST OF IN -TEXT FIGURE S 
Figure 1  Progression -Free Survival of Lenvatinib + Everolimus Versus Single 
Agent  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 32 
 
LIST OF APPENDICES  
Appendix 1  Overview of RECIST v1.1 for Evaluation of Tumors Response ............... 88 
Appendix 2  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  Performance  Status  ....................... 94 
Appendix 3  Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (eGFR) Using Cockcroft and 
Gault Formula  ................................ ................................ ............................ 95 
Appendix 4  New York Heart Association Car diac Disease  Classification  ................... 96 
Appendix 5  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse  Events  (v4.03)  ..................... 97 
Appendix 6   Stage Information for Renal Cell Cancer  ................................ .................. 98 
Appendix 7  Sponsor’s Grading for Laboratory Values  ................................ ............... 100 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 23 of 103  
 4 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DE FINITIONS OF TERMS  
Abbreviation  Term  
AE adverse event   
ADL  activities of daily living  
ATC   Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical   
AKT  protein kinase B  
ALP  alkaline phosphatase  
ALT  alanine aminotransferase  
ANC  absolute neutrophil count  
ASCO  American Society of Clinical Oncology  
AST  aspartate aminotransferase  
ATC  anatomical therapeutic chemical  
ß-hCG  beta-human chorionic gonadotropin  
BMI  body mass index  
BCRP  breast cancer resistance protein  
BOR  best overall response  
BP blood pressure  
CA Competent Authority  
CBR  clinical benefit rate  
C1D1  Cycle 1 Day 1  
C1D 15 Cycle 1 Day 15 
ccRCC  clear cell renal cell carcinoma  
CDC  collecting duct carcinoma  
CI confidence interval  
CNS  central nervous system  
CR complete response  
CRA  clinical research associate  
CRF  case report form  
CT computerized tomography  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
ctDNA  circulating tumor DNA  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 24 of 103  
 Abbreviation  Term  
CV curriculum vitae  
CYP  cytochrome  P450  
DCR  disease control rate  
DNA  deoxyribonucleic acid  
DOR  duration of response  
DVT  deep vein thrombosis  
EAS  Evaluable Analysis Set  
EBRT  external beam radiotherapy  
ECG  electrocardiogram  
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
ELISA  enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay  
EMA  European Medicines Agency  
ESMO  European Society for Medical Oncology  
EAS  Evaluable Analysis Set  
FAS Full Analysis Set  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FDG -PET fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography  
FGF fibroblast growth factor  
FGFR  fibroblast growth factor receptor  
FKBP -12 FK506 binding protein -12 
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
ß-hCG  beta-human chorionic gonadotropin  
HBsAg  hepatitis B surface antigen  
HCV  hepatitis C virus  
HDL -C high density lipoprotein -C 
HER2  human epidermal growth factor receptor  
HIV human immunodeficiency virus  
HPLC  high pressure liquid chromatography  
HR heart rate  
HUVEC  human umbilical vein endothelial cell  
ICF informed consent  form  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 25 of 103  
 Abbreviation  Term  
ICH International Council on Harmonisation  
IEC Independent Ethics Committee  
IIR independent imaging review  
IND investigational new drug  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
KIT C-kit receptor CD 117  
LD longest diameter  
LDL -C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol  
LLT lower level terms  
LMWH  Low-molecular -weight heparin  
MDP  methylene diphosphonate  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MRI  magnetic resonance imaging  
mTOR  Mammalian target of rapamycin  
nccRCC  non clear cell renal cell carcinoma  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
NCCN  National Comprehensive Cancer Network  
NSAID  nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory  
NYHA  New York Heart Association  
ORR  objective response rate  
OS overall survival  
PBMC  peripheral blood mononuclear cells  
PD progressive disease  
PDGFR  platelet -derived growth factor receptor  
PE physical examination  
PET proton -emission tomography  
PFS progression -free survival  
PG pharmacogenomics  
PgP P-glycoprotein  
PI principal investigator  
PK pharmacokinetic  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 26 of 103  
 Abbreviation  Term  
P13K  phosphoinositide 3 -kinase  
PRES  posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome  
PT preferred term  
PVC  polyvinyl chloride  
QD once a day  
RBC  red blood cell  
RCC  renal cell carcinoma  
RET  rearranged during transfection  
RF radiofrequency  
RECIST  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
RMC  renal medullary carcinoma  
RNA  ribonucleic acid  
RP2D recommended Phase 2  dose 
RTK  receptor tyrosine kinase  
S6K1  S6 ribosomal protein kinase  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SD stable disease  
SOC  system organ class  
SUSAR  suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions  
TC total cholesterol  
TEAE  Treatment Emergent Adverse Even  
TG triglycerides  
TNM  tumor -node-metastasis  
TSH  thyroid stimulation h ormone  
T4 thyroxine  
ULN  upper limit of normal  
US 21 CF R Title 21 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations  
VEGF  vascular endothelial growth factor  
VEGFR  vascular endothelial growth factor receptor  
WBC  white blood cell  
WHO DD  World Health Organization  Drug Dictionary  
99m-Tc 99m-technetium  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 27 of 103  
 5 ETHICS  
5.1 Institutional Review Boards/Independent Ethics Committees  
The protocol, informed consent form (ICF), and appropriate related documents must be 
reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Independent Ethics 
Committee (IEC) constituted and functioning in accordance with International Council on 
Harmonisation ( ICH) E6 (Good  Clinical  Practice  [GCP] ), Section  3, and any local 
regulations .  Any protocol amendment or revision to the ICF will be resubmitted to the 
IRB/IEC for review and approval, except for changes involving only logistical or 
administrative aspects of the study (eg, chan ge in clinical research associates [CRA s], change 
of telephone number[s]).  Documentation of IRB/IEC compliance with the ICH E6 and any 
local regulations regarding constitution and review conduct will be provided to the sponsor.  
A signed letter of study ap proval from the IRB/IEC chairman must be sent to the principal 
investigator (PI) with a copy to the sponsor before study start and the release of any study 
drug to the site by the sponsor or its designee (ICH E6, Section  4.4).  If the IRB/IEC decides 
to su spend or termin ate the study, the investigator  will immediately send the notice of study 
suspension or termination by the IRB/IEC to the sponsor.  
Study progress is to be reported to IRB/IECs annually (or as required) by the investigator or 
sponsor, dependi ng on local regulatory obligations.  If the investigator is required to report to 
the IRB/IEC, he/she will forward a copy to the sponsor at the time of each periodic report.  
The investigator (s) or the sponsor will submit, depending on local regulations, p eriodic 
reports and inform the IRB/IEC of any repor table  adverse events (AEs) per ICH guidelines 
and local IRB/IEC standards of practice.  Upon completion of the study, the investigator will 
provide the IRB/IEC with a brief report of the outcome of the stu dy, if required.  
At the end of the study, the sponsor should notify the IRB/IEC and Competent Authority 
(CA) within 90  days.  The end of the study will be the date of the last study visit for the last 
subject in the study.  Upon completion of the study, th e investigator or sponsor will provide 
the IRB/IEC with a brief report of the outcome of the study, if required . 
In the case of early termination/temporary halt of the study, the investigator should notify the 
IRB/IEC and CA within 15  calendar days, and a detailed written explanation of the reasons 
for the termination/halt should be given.  
5.2 Ethical Conduct of the Stud y 
This study will be conducted in accordance with standard operating procedures of the 
sponsor (or designee), which are designed to ensure adherence to GCP guidelines as required 
by the following:  
 Principles of the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 28 of 103  
  ICH E6 Guideline for GCP (CPMP/ICH/135/95) of the European Agency for the 
Evaluation of Medicinal Products, Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products, 
International Council for  Harmonisation of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
 Title 21 of the Uni ted States Code of Federal Regulations (US 21 CFR) regarding clinical 
studies, including Part 50 and Part 56 concerning informed subject consent and IRB 
regulations and applicable section s of US 21 CFR Part 312  
5.3 Subject Information and Informed Consent  
As part of administering the informed consent document, the investigator must explain to 
each subject or guardian/le gally authorized representative  the nature of the study, its purpose, 
the procedures involved, the expected duration, the potential risks and be nefits involved, any 
potential discomfort, potential alternative procedure (s) or course (s) of treatment available to 
the subject, and the extent of maintaining confidentiality of the subject’s records.  Each 
subject must be informed that participation in t he study is voluntary, that he/she may 
withdraw from the study at any time, and that withdrawal of consent will not affect his/her 
subsequent medical treatment or relationship with the treating physician.  
This informed consent should be given by means of a  standard written statement, written in 
nontechnical language.  The subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative should 
understand the statement before signing and dating it and will be given a copy of the signed 
document.  If a subject is un able to read or if a legally accep table  representative is unable to 
read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion.  
After the ICF and any other written information to be provided to subjects is read and 
explaine d to the subject or the subject’s legally accep table  representative, and after the 
subject or the subject’s legally accep table  representative has orally consented to the subject’s 
participation in the study and, if capable of doing so, has signed and perso nally dated the 
ICF, the witness should sign and personally date the consent form.  The subjec t will be asked 
to sign an ICF before any study -specific procedures are performed.  No subject can enter the 
study before his/her informed consent has been obtain ed. 
An unsigned copy of an IRB/IEC -approved ICF must be prepared in accordance with ICH 
E6, Section  4, and all applicable local regulations.  Each subject must sign an approved ICF 
before study participation.  The form must be signed and dated by the appro priate parties.  
The original, signed ICF for each subject will be verified by the sponsor and kept on file 
according to local procedures at the site.   Subjects will be asked to either sign a separate ICF 
for pharmacokinetic (PK) assessments or provide con sent for PK assessments within the 
main ICF.  For biomarker assessments, subjects will be asked to either sign a separate ICF or 
provide consent within the main ICF (see Section 9.5.1.3.2 ). Subjects may also be asked to 
either sign a separate ICF or provide consent within the main ICF to allow the sponsor to 
request scans of their tumor assessments for central review.  
The subj ect or the subject’s legally authorized representative should be informed in a timely 
manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the subject’s 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 29 of 103  
 willingness to continue participation in the study.  The communication of this informati on 
should be documented . 
6 INVESTIGATORS AND ST UDY PERSONNEL  
This study will be condu cted by qualified investigators under the sponsorship of Eisai (the 
sponsor) at approximately 8 investigational site s in the United States . 
The name and telephone and fax nu mbers of the medical monitor and other contact personnel 
at the sponsor are listed in the Regulatory Binder  provided to each site.  
7 INTRODUCTION  
7.1 Indication   
This is a single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 study of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus 
in sub jects with unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear cell renal cell carcinoma 
(nccRCC) who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced disease.  
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), which originates within the renal cortex from the proximal 
renal tubular ep ithelium, is the most common kidney cancer, constituting 80 to 85 percent of 
primary renal neoplasms ( Wahal and Mardi, 2014 ).  An estimated 62,700 new cases of 
kidney (renal) cancer are expected to be diagnosed and an estimated 14, 240 deaths from 
kidney cancer are expected to occur in 2016 (American Cancer Society, 2016). 
RCC  is broadly classified as clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC ), which  constitutes  
appro ximately 75 to 80% of RCC and non clear cell renal carcinoma (nccRCC) , which 
constitute approximately 20% to 25% of  the total RCC disease burden.  Non clear cell renal 
carcinoma (nccRCC)  is a group of heterogeneous diseases, which  are grouped together due to 
their low incidence rather than due to their underlying pathology or clinical outcomes . The 
most common type of nccRCC is papillary and constitutes approximately 15% of kidney 
cancers, followed by chromophobe (5%) , collecting d uct (1%), and translocation associated 
RCC (<1%).  The objective  response rate (ORR) for nccRCC with targeted agents is 
approximately 8.3% with a median overall survival ( OS) approximately 11.6 months  
(Hudes,  et al., 2007 ).  
Non clear cell RCC  has shown an increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and its receptors  (Ljungberg, et al., 2006 ).  Also, the pathwa y of 
mammalian  target  of rapamycin (mTOR ), a key regulatory kinase,  has been shown to be 
deregulated in a significant number of  patients with nccRCC  (Davis, et al., 2014 ). 
7.1.1  Current Therapeutic Options  
The current treatment approach for patients with metastatic nccRCC mirror  that of clear cell 
RCC  due to lack of randomized data and consists of sequential administration of single  agent 
therapies that target either the VEGF/VEGF receptor (VEGFR) or mTOR pathways 
(Escudier, et al., 2014 ).   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 30 of 103  
 Hence , the European Society for Medical Oncology ( ESMO ) and National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network  (NCCN ) guidelines list clinical trials as  the preferred option. Temsirolimus 
is the only Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) approved agent  (Hudes, et al., 2007 ).  Other 
agents that are available include  sorafenib , sunitinib, pazopanib, axitinib, everolimus, 
bevacizumab , and erlotinib.  Of these, ever olimus inhibits mTOR, resulting in downstream 
inhibition of protein synthesis and cell proliferation ( AFINITOR® US Package Insert ). 
Therefore, there remains a significant unmet medical need for more effective treatment 
options, including possible combination therapies, with a manageable safety profile in 
patients with advanced RCC.  
7.1.2  Lenvatinib  
Lenvatinib  (LENVIMA®) is a kinase inhibitor that was approved by the US FDA on 
13 Feb 2015 and by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) on 28 May 2015, and indicated 
for the treatment of patients  with locally recurrent or metastatic, progressive, radioactive 
iodine -refractory differentiated thyroid cancer  (LENVIMA® US Package Insert /EU SmPC ). 
7.1.2.1  Mechanism of Action  
Lenvatinib is an oral, multiple receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor  (TKI) .  By inhibiting the 
kinase activities of various receptors (eg, VEGFR 1 -3, fibroblast growth factor receptor 
[FGFR] 1 -4, platelet -derived growth factor receptor [PDGFR] alpha, c -kit receptor CD117 
[KIT] and Rearranged during Transfection [ RET ] protein),  lenvatinib  impedes pathogenic 
angiogenesis (development of new blo od vessels), tumor growth, and cancer progression  
(LENVIMA® US Package Insert /EU SmPC ).  
7.1.3  Everolimus  
Everolimus (AFINITOR®) is an inhibitor of mTOR that is indicated for the treatment o f adult 
patients with advanced RCC after failure of treatment with sunitinib or sorafenib 
(AFINITOR® US Package Insert ).  It is also indicated for other conditions including: 
advanced hormone receptor -positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2 )-
negative breast cancer; advanced neuroendocrine tumors of pancreatic origin; renal 
angiomyolipoma with tuberous sclerosis complex; and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma 
with tuberous sclerosis complex.  
7.1.3.1  Mechanism of Action  
The mTOR, a serine -threonine kinase, acts as a signal transducing protein in the  
phosphoinositide 3 -kinase  (PI3K )/ protein kinase B  (AKT )/ mTOR pathway, which  is known 
to be involved in numerous human cancers. mTOR regulates protein synthesis, cellular 
metabolic state, cell proliferat ion, cell survival and also has some control over the angiogenic 
pathway through the hypoxia -inducible factor 1 (HIF1α) and VEGF and is linked to 
endothelial proliferation.  Inhibition of the mTOR signaling pathway interferes with protein 
translation and s ynthesis by reducing the activity of S6 ribosomal protein kinase (S6K1) and 
eukaryotic elongation factor 4E -binding protein (4EBP -1) that regulate proteins involved in 
the cell cycle, angiogenesis and glycolysis.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 31 of 103  
 Everolimus is an mTOR inhibitor.  Everolimu s binds the intracellular protein FK506 binding 
protein -12 (FKBP -12), forming a complex which then inhibits mTOR complex -1 (mTORC1) 
activity.  Everolimus reduces levels of VEGF and is a potent inhibitor of the growth and 
proliferation of tumor cells, endot helial cells, fibroblasts and blood  vessel -associated smooth 
muscle cells and has been shown to reduce glycolysis in solid tumors in vitro and in vivo.  
7.1.4  Preclinical and Clinical Experience with the Combination of Lenvatinib and 
Everolimus  
7.1.4.1  Preclinical Experi ence with the Combination of Lenvatinib and  Everolimus  
Angiogenesis has been identified as a key factor in the development of RCC.  A major 
component of the angiogenic process in RCC is VEGF ( Posadas, et al., 2013 ).  An alternative 
pathway is mediated by mTOR, which  is downstream of phosphoinositide 3 -kinase and 
protein kinase B and is regulated by the phosphatase and tensin homolog tumor suppressor 
gene.  Inhibition of the mTOR pathway can inhibit both angiogenesis and tumor cell 
proliferation ( Faivre,  et al., 2006 ).  It is hypothesized that combinations of  antiangiogenic  
agents  with mTOR inhibitors  may overcome the resistance that develops with single  agent 
therapy.  With this  combination , blockade could take place at two levels of the pathways 
activated in RCC (at hypoxia -inducible factor and at VEGF) and this may overcome an 
aspect of resistance that may develop through feedback mechanisms.    
Lenvatinib is a potent multiple  receptor tyros ine kinase (RTK) inhibitor that selectively 
inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors (VEGFR1, VEGFR2, 
VEGFR3) in addition to other proangiogenic and oncogenic pathway -related RTKs, 
including fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors FGFR 1-4, PDGF receptor α, KIT, and 
RET.  Lenvatinib inhibited VEGF -driven VEGFR2 phosphorylation and suppressed 
proliferation and tube formation in human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) models.  
Antitumor activity of lenvatinib in vivo has been shown i n numerous xenograft animals.  
These results suggest that lenvatinib may be a novel anticancer therapy through inhibition of 
angiogenesis and may be useful as either monotherapy or in combination with other 
anticancer drugs.  
In pre clinical models (A498 and  Caki -1), the lenvatinib plus everolimus combination 
demonstrated superior antiangiogenesis as well as antitumor activity compared to each single 
agent alone ( data on file). The mechanism of action of the combination of lenvatinib and 
everolimus was furthe r investigated in cell -based nonclinical models, and it is hypothesized 
that the dual inhibition of the VEGF - and FGF -driven mitogen -activated protein kinase 
(MAPK ) and mTOR pathways by the combination of lenvatinib plus everolimus  in 
endothelial cells may contribute to the enhanced antiangiogenic activity of the combination 
treatment.  In addition, the dual targeting of the mTOR -S6K (ribosomal s6 kinase) -S6 
pathway by the lenvatinib plus everolimus combination may contribute toward s the superior 
antitumor activity of the combination ( data on file). 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 32 of 103  
 7.1.4.2  Clinical Experience  with Combination Lenvatinib Plus Everolimus Treatment  
in Renal Cell Carcinoma  
The safety and efficacy of lenvatinib and everolimus combination treatment was investigat ed 
in the r andomized, controll ed, open -label study , E7080 -G000 -205 (hereafter referred to as 
“Study 205”)  in subjects with unresectable,  advanced or metastatic RCC . Study   205 
consis ted of a Phase 1b portion and a Phase 2 portion  (Motzer, et al ., 2015 ).  The 
recommended Phase 2  dose (RP2 D) for the lenvatinib -everolimus  combi nation was 
lenvatinib 18 mg plus everolimus 5  mg administered daily .  
The Phase 2 portion of Study 205 enrolled 153 patients with advanced or metastatic, c lear-
cell, renal cell carcinoma  who had a  history of receiving one prior VEGF agent.   A total of 
153 patients were randomized in  a 1:1:1 ratio to receive treatment with lenvatinib  plus 
everolimus, lenvatinib  (24 mg once daily [ QD]), or everolimus  (10 mg QD) . 
The combination significantl y pro longed progression -free survival  (PFS)  compared wit h 
either single  agent as shown in the Kaplan -Meier (KM) curve below  (Figure 1).  In addition, 
an objective response was achieved by 43% of subjects treated with the combination 
compared with 6% for single  agent everolimus (p<0.0001) and 27% for single  agent 
lenvatinib (p=0. 10). 
 
Source: Study 205 CSR, Figure 4 . 
Figure 1 Progression -Free Survival of Lenvatinib  + Everolimus Versu s 
Single Agent  
The safety profile for lenvatinib plus everolimus was consistent with the known toxic effects 
of each individual agent, with no unexpected treatment -emergent adverse events  (TEAEs ) 
observed.  The most common  TEAEs  of any grade in the lenvatinib plus everolimus arm were 

Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 33 of 103  
 diarrh ea and fatigue or asthenia .  Grade 3 and 4 events occurred in fewer patients allocated 
single  agent everolimus (25 [50%]) compared with those assigned lenvatinib  alone 
(41 [79%]) or lenvatinib plus everolimus (36 [71%]).   The most common Grade 3 or 4 TEAE  
in patients allocated lenvat inib plus everolimus was diarrh ea (10 [20%]), in those assigned 
single  agent lenvatinib it was proteinuria ( 10 [19%]), and in those a ssigned si ngle agent 
everolimus it was an emia ( 6 [12%]).  Two deaths were deemed relate d to study drug, 1 
cerebral h emorrhage in the lenvatinib plus everolimus group and 1 myocardial infarction 
with single  agent lenvatinib ( Motzer, et al., 2015 ). 
7.2 Study Rat ionale  
Clinical evaluation of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus in subjects who have not 
received any chemotherapy for advanced disease  is warranted based on the following:   
 The currently available first -line therapies for RCC are unsatisfactory.  These 
treatments do not induce durable tumor responses and virtually all patients experience 
progression of disease requiring initiation of another therapy.  
 the importance of VEGF, FGF , and mTOR signaling in RCC  
 the clinical experience with lenvatinib in metastatic clear cell RCC  
 The lack of availability of data to demonstrate that combination therapy in treatment 
of metastatic  nccRCC provides significant advantage over single  agent therapy.   
It is hypothesized that combinations of targeted agents may ove rcome the resistance to 
treatments with single  agent therapy.  By using an mTOR inhibitor ( everolimus) in 
combination with a VEGFR inhibitor ( lenvatinib), blockade could take place at two levels of 
the pathways activated in RCC and this may overcome an asp ect of resistance that may 
develop through feedback mechanisms.  
8 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
8.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of the study is to evaluate ORR , as assessed by the investigator,  of 
lenvatinib in combination with everolimus in subjects with unrese ctable advanced or 
metastatic nccRCC  who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced disease . 
8.2 Secondary Objectives  
The secondary objectives of the study are:  
 To assess safety and tolerability of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus  
 To evaluate PFS as assessed by the investigator  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 34 of 103  
  To evaluate OS  
 To assess the PK profiles of lenvatinib and everolimus during combination therapy in 
subjects with nccRCC  
8.3 Exploratory Objectives  
The explorato ry objectives of the study are:  
 To explore  ORR as assessed by independent imaging review (IIR)  
 To explore PFS as assessed by IIR  
 To explore clinical benefit rate (CBR) as assessed by the investigator and by IIR 
 To explore disease control rate (DCR)  as assessed by the investigator and by IIR 
 To exp lore duration of response (DOR) as assessed by the investigator and by IIR 
 To identify and explore tumor and blood biomarkers that correlate with clinical 
outcomes, including efficacy  
 To explore the relationship of population PK derived exposure parameters  to 
biomarker, safety, and efficacy data using a model -based approach  
9 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
9.1 Overall Study Design and Plan  
E7080 -M001-221 is a single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 study of lenvatinib in combination 
with everolimus (lenvatinib 18 mg/day + everoli mus 5 mg/day) in subjects with unresectable 
advanced or metastatic nccRCC  who have not received any chemotherapy for advanced 
disease.  A Simon’s Two -Stage Design will be implemented in approximately  31 enrolled 
subjects.  Sixteen subjects will be enrolled  in Stage 1 .  If there are at least 2 responders  as 
assessed by ORR, t he study  will proceed to Stage 2 , in which 15 more subjects may be 
enrolled .  Otherwise, the study  will stop early for futility.  In the final analysis of 31 subjects, 
at least 6  responders are required to show a statistical ly significant improvement of ORR 
over historical control in the same patient population.  
This study consists of three Phases: a Pretreatment Phase (Screening and Baseline Periods), a 
Treatment Phase (starting  Cycle 1, Day 1), and a Posttreatment Phase (End of Treatment 
Visit and survival Follow -up).   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 35 of 103  
 9.1.1  Pretreatment Phase  
The Pretreatment Phase  will last no longer than 21 days and will include a Screening Period 
to establish protocol eligibility and a Baseline P eriod to confirm eligibility and establish 
disease characteristics prior to treatment.  
9.1.1.1  Screening Period  
Screening will occur between Day –21 and Day –2.  The purpose of the Screening Period is 
to obtain informed consent and to establish protocol eligibilit y.  Informed consent will be 
obtained after the study has been fully explained to each subject and before the conduct of 
any screening procedures or assessments.  Procedures to be followed when obtaining 
informed consent are detailed in Section  5.3. 
Subjects must have a histologically -confirmed diagnosis of nccRCC . 
The Screening Disposition case report form (CRF) page must be completed to indicate 
whether the subject is eligible to part icipate in the study and to provide reasons for screen 
failure, if applicable.  
9.1.1.2  Baseline Period  
The purpose of the Baseline Period is to establish disease characteristics prior to starting 
treatment, and to confirm protocol eligibility as specified in the i nclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Results of baseline assessments must be obtained and reviewed by the investigator prior to 
the first dose of study drug , ie, Cycle 1 Day 1  (C1D1) , to confirm eligibility.  Baseline 
assessments will be performed on Day -1 or on C1D1  prior to treatment.  
Subjects who complete the Baseline Period and meet the criteria for inclusion/exclusion 
(Section s 9.3.1  and 9.3.2 ) will begin the Treatment Phase.  
9.1.2  Treatment Phase  
The Treatment Phase  will begin at the time of study drug administration on C1D1 and 
continue in 28 -day (4 -week) cycles until completion of the off -treatment assessments (within 
30 days after the last study drug administration) .  Lenvat inib 18 mg/day and everolimus 
5 mg/day wi ll be administered orally.  Subjects will undergo safety and efficacy assessments.  
Toxicity will be managed by treatment interruption, dose reduction and/or treatment 
discontinuation.  Subjects who discontinue one of the study drugs due to its toxicities may 
continue to receive the other study drug as long as they demonstrate clinical benefit.  
Subjects will discontinue both study drugs at the time of confirmed disease progression, 
development of unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or study termi nation by the 
sponsor.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 36 of 103  
 9.1.3  Posttreatment Phase  
The Posttreatment Phase will start at the End of Treatment Visit and will continue as long as 
the subject is alive or until the study subject withdraws consent.  Subjects who discontinue 
study treatment before dis ease progression will continue to undergo tumor assessment every 
8 weeks ± 1 week until documentation of disease progression or start of another anticancer  
therapy.  Follow -up assessment for survival will be performed every 12 weeks ±1 week.  
9.2 Discussion of Study Design, Including Choice of Control Groups  
This is a single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 study of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus 
(lenvatinib 18 mg/day + everolimus 5 mg/day) in subjects with unresectable advanced or 
metastatic nccRCC  who have  not received any chemotherapy for advanced disease.   The 
current treatment approach for patients with metastatic nccRCC mirror  that of clear cell RCC  
due to lack of randomized data and consists of sequential administration of single  agent 
therapies that t arget either the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)/VEGF receptor 
(VEGFR) or mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways .  As discussed in 
Section  7.1.4 , combining everolimus (an mTOR inhibitor) with lenvatinib (a VEGFR 
inhibitor) could block the pathways activated in RCC at 2  levels and may overcome an aspect 
of resistance, which  develops wi th single  agent therapy.   The combination of lenvatinib and 
everolimus is chosen based on robust results from Study 205 . 
The current study is designed to provide efficacy and safety data for lenvatinib in 
combination with everolimus in this patient populat ion.  A recently reported Phase 1b/2 study 
in RCC showed a response rate of 43.1% and median PFS of 14. 6 months (95% CI 5.9 -20.1) .  
The primary objective of the study is to evaluate ORR.   The efficacy and safety parameters 
being evaluated are commonly used  in oncology trials.  
9.3 Selection of Study Population  
Approximately 31 subjects will be enrolled at approximately 8 sites in regions that include 
the United States .  Subjects who do not meet all of the inclusion criteria or who meet any of 
the exclusion crite ria will not be eligible to receive study drug.  
9.3.1  Inclusion Criteria  
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria to be included in this study:  
1. Males or females age ≥  18 years at the time of informed consent  form . 
2. Histologically confirmed nccRCC  who have not received any chemotherapy for 
advanced disease.  Subjects must have one of the following subtypes of nccRCC: 
papillary, chromophobe, collecting duct carcinoma (CDC), renal medullary 
carcinoma (RMC), or unclassified.    
3. Radiologically measurabl e disease meeting the following criteria:  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 37 of 103  
 a. At least 1 lesion of ≥ 10 mm in the longest diameter for a nonlymph node o r 
≥ 15 mm in the short  axis diameter for a lymph node which is serially measurable 
according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  (RECIST v1.1) 
(Appendix 1) using computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI).  
b. Lesions that have had external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) or locoreg ional 
therapies such as radiofrequency (RF) ablation must show evidence of subsequent 
progressive disease ( PD) (substantial size increase of ≥20%) to be deemed a target 
lesion.   
4. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) (Appendix 2) performance status of 
0 to 1. 
5. Blood pressure (BP) ≤ 140/90 mmHg at Screening with or without antihypertensive 
medications and no change in antihypertensive medications within 1 week prior to 
C1D1.  
6. Adequate renal function as evidenced by calculated creatinine clearance ≥  30 mL/min 
according to the Cockcroft and Gault  formula  (Appendix 3). 
7. Adequate bone marrow function:  
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥  1.5 × 109/L and  
b. Hemoglobin ≥  10.0 g/dL (can be corrected by growth factor or transfusion 
prior to first dose of study drug) and  
c. Platelet count ≥  100 × 109/L  
8. Adequate liver function:  
a. Bilirubin ≤  1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN) except for unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia or Gilbert’s syndrome  
b. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) ≤  3 × ULN (≤  5 × ULN if subject has liver 
metastases).  If ALP is > 3 × ULN (in the absenc e of liver metastases) or 
> 5 × ULN (in the presence of liver metastases) AND subjects are also known 
to have bone metastases, the liver -specific ALP must be separated from the 
total and used to assess the liver function instead of the total ALP.  
9. Voluntary agreement to provide written informed consent and the willingness and 
ability to comply with all aspects of the protocol.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 38 of 103  
 9.3.2  Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects who meet any of the following criteria will be excluded from this study:  
1. Predomin ant clear  cell RCC . 
2. Prior anticancer  chemotherapy or targeted therapy for advanced nccRCC.  
3. Prior exposure to lenvatinib or mTOR inhibitor.  
4. Known intolerance to lenvatinib , everolimus (or other rapamycin derivatives), or any 
of the excipients.  
5. Major surgery  performed within 3 weeks prior to the first dose of study drugs or 
scheduled for major surgery during the study.  
6. Gastrointestinal malabsorption, gastrointestinal anastomosis, or any other condition 
that might affect the absorption of lenvatinib or everoli mus.  
7. Subjects having >  1 + proteinuria on urine dipstick testing will undergo 24  hour urine 
collection for quantitative assessment of proteinuria.  Subjects with uri ne protein 
≥ 1 g/24 hours will be ineligible.  
8. Fasting total cholesterol >300 mg/dL (or >7.75 mmol/L) or fasting triglycerides level 
>2.5 × ULN.  NOTE: these subjects can be included after initiation or adjustment of 
lipid-lowering medication.  
9. Uncontrolled diabetes as defined by fasting glucose > 1.5 times the ULN.  NOTE: In 
case this threshold is exceeded, these subjects can only be included after initiation or 
adjustment of glucose -lowering medication.  
10. Known history of, or any evidence of, interstitial lung disease or active noninfectious 
pneumonitis.  
11. Significant cardiovascular impairment: Hist ory of (a) congestive heart failure greater 
than New York Heart association (NYHA) (Appendix 4) Class II, (b) unstable angina, 
(c) myocardial infarction (d) stroke , or (e) cardiac arrhythmia associated with 
hemodynamic instability within 6 months of the first dose of study drugs.  
12. Prolongation of QTcF interval to >480 msec.  
13. Known history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive.  
14. Known active hepatitis B (eg, hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg ] reactive) or 
hepatitis C (eg, hepatitis C virus [ HCV ] RNA detected).  
15. Clinically significant hemoptysis or tumor bleeding within 2 weeks prior to the first 
dose of study drug.  
16. Subjects with central nervous system ( CNS ) (eg, brain or leptomeningeal) metastases.  
17. Other active malignancy (except definitively treated melanoma in -situ, basal or 
squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, or carcinoma in -situ of the cervix or bladder) 
within past 24 months.  
18. Females who are breastfeeding  or pregnant at Screening or Baseline (as documented 
by a positive beta -human chorionic gonadotropin [ß -hCG] or human chorionic 
gonadotropin [hCG] test with a minimum sensitivity of 25 IU/L or equivalent units of 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 39 of 103  
 ß-hCG or hCG).  A separate baseline assessm ent is required if a negative screening 
pregnancy test was obtained more than 72  hours before the first dose of study drug.  
19. Females of childbearing potential who:  
o Had unprotected sexual intercourse within 30 days before study entry and who 
do not agree to use a highly effective method of contraception (eg, total 
abstinence, an intrauterine device, a double -barrier method [such as condom 
plus diaphragm with spermicide], a contraceptive implant, an oral 
contraceptive, or have a vasectomized partner with confi rmed azoospermia) 
throughout the entire study period or for 28 days after study drug 
discontinuation.  
o Are currently abstinent, and do not agree to use a double -barrier method (as 
described above) or refrain from sexually active during the study period or f or 
28 days after study drug discontinuation.  
o Are using hormonal contraceptives but are not on a stable dose of the same 
hormonal contraceptive product for at least 4 weeks before dosing and who do 
not agree to use the same contraceptive during the study or for 28 days after 
study drug discontinuation.   
o Are using  oral hormonal contraceptives and who do not agree to add a barrier 
method . 
o (NOTE:  All females will be considered to be of childbearing potential unless 
they are postmenopausal [ amenorrheic for at l east 12  consecutive months, in 
the appropriate age group, and without  other known or suspected cause]  or 
have been sterilized surgically [ ie, bilateral tubal ligation, total hysterectomy, 
or bilateral oophorectomy, all with surgery at least 1  month before dosing ]). 
20. Males who have not had a successful vasectomy (confirmed azoospermia) or they and 
their female partners do not meet the criteria above (ie, not of childbearing potential 
or practicing highly effective contraception throughout the study period or for 28 days 
after study drug discontinuation).  No sperm donation is allowed during the study 
period or for 28 days after study drug discontinuation.  
21. Evidence of clinically significant disease (eg, cardiovascular, respiratory, 
gastrointestinal, renal, or infectious disease) that in the opinion of the investigator(s) 
could affect the subject’s safety or interfere with the study assessments.  
22. Any medical or other condition that in the opinion of the investigator(s) would 
preclude the subject’s participation i n a clinical study.  
23. Active and current u se of illegal recreational drugs . 
24. Currently enrolled in another interventional clinical study  or used any investigational 
drug or device within the past 28 days preceding informed consent . 
9.3.3  Removal of Subjects From Th erapy or Assessment  
The investigator may discontinue treating a subject with study treatment or withdraw the 
subject from the study at any time for safety or administrative reasons.  The subject may 
decide to discontinue study treatment or withdraw from th e study at any time for any reason.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 40 of 103  
 The reason for discontinuation will be documented.  If a subject discontinues study 
treatment, the subject will enter the Follow -Up Period and complete protocol -specified off -
treatment visits, procedures, and survival f ollow -up unless the subject withdraws consent.  
The investigator should confirm whether a subject will withdraw from study treatment but 
agree to continue protocol -specified, off -treatment study visits, procedures, and survival 
follow -up, or whether the su bject will withdraw consent.  If a subject withdraws consent, the 
date will be documented in the source documents.  The Subject Discontinuation From 
Treatment Phase CRF page will be completed indicating the reason for discontinuation.  In 
addition, the dat e of last dose of study drug (s) will be recorded on the Study Drug Dosing 
CRF page.  
During the Follow -Up Period, subjects who have discontinued study treatment before disease 
progression will continue to undergo tumor assessment every 8 weeks ±1 week  until disease 
progression is documented or another anticancer therapy is initiated.  
All subjects will be followed for survival until death, except where a subject withdraws 
consent or the sponsor chooses to halt survival follow -up after completion of the primar y 
study analysis.   Subjects will be followed for survival every 12 weeks ±1 week after the 
End of Treatment Visit.  If a clinic visit is not feasible, follow -up information may be 
obtained via telephone or email.  
A subject who discontinues study treatment should be followed for subsequent protocol -
specified visits and procedures.  If a subject discontinues study drug (s) but remains in the 
study, the set of End of Treatment procedures will be administered, and protocol -specified 
information will be collected .  The reason for discontinuation from study drug (s) should be 
collected on the Subject Disposition From Treatment Phase CRF page.  In addition, the date 
of last dose of study drug (s) will be recorded  on the Study Drug Dosing CRF page.  If a 
subject discontinues study treatment and the study at the same time, the end -of-study 
procedures (Final Visit) will be followed (see Section  9.5.5 ). 
9.4 Treatments  
The study drugs under evaluation are lenvatinib in combination with everolimus . 
9.4.1  Treatments Administered  
Lenvatinib will be provided as 4 -mg and 10 -mg capsules and everolimus will be provided as 
5 mg tab lets.  
Initial doses of lenvatinib 18 mg/day (one 10 -mg capsule and two 4 -mg capsules) and 
everolimus 5 mg/day are to be taken orally in immediate succession once a day (QD), 
recommended approximately at the same time each morning (consistently either with  or 
without food).  
The following treatments will be administered to subjects in this study (Table 1). 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 41 of 103  
 Table 1 Treatment  Administered   
Drug Name  Strength  Oral Dose Form  Number Dispensed and Frequency  Durationa 
Lenvatinib  10 mg  Capsule  1 × 10 mg capsule , once a day, 
recommended at approximately same 
time each morning  Daily  
Lenvatinib  4 mg  Capsule  2 × 4 mg capsule, once a day, 
recommended at approximately same 
time each morning  Daily  
Everolimu s 5 mg  Tablet  1 × 5 mg tablet, once a day, 
recommended at approximately same 
time each morning  Daily  
a. Subjects will continue to receive study treatment until disease progression, development of 
unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or sponsor discontinuation.   
9.4.1.1  Criteria for Interruption of Treatment, Dose Reduction, and Resumption of 
Treatment  
If a subject cannot tolerate lenvatinib due to its toxicities, the lenvatinib dose may be 
reduced, interrupted or discontinued according to the guidelines provided in Table 2 and 
Table 3.  Lenvatinib dose reductions occur in succession based on the previous dose level, ie, 
one level at a time from 18 mg /day to 14, 10 , and 8 mg/d ay.  Any dose reduction below 
8 mg/day must be discussed with the sponsor.  
If a subject cannot tolerate everolimus due to its toxicities, the everolimus dose may be 
reduced, interrupted or discontinued.  Everolimus dose ma y be re duced from 5 mg/day to 
5 mg every other day.  
Dose adjustments for both study drugs will be made according to the guidelines provided in 
Table 3 for management of intolerable toxicities. Investigators will decide the probability of 
the event being related to one or both drugs as to whether dose modification of one or both 
drugs is required. Once the dose has been reduced, it cannot be increased at  a later date.  
Table 2 Dose Reduction Recommendations for Lenvatinib in 
Combination With Everolimus  
Initial  
Lenvatinib  Dose  
(mg, QD) Adjusted Dose To Be Administered  (mg, QD) 
 
Reduction 1  Reduction 2  Reduction 3  Reduction 4  
18 14 10 8 a 
QD = once daily.  
a:  Consult Sponsor for further dose reduction recommendations.  
Refer to appropriate section for management of hypertension ( Section 9.4.1.1.1 ), proteinuria 
(Section 9.4.1.1.2 ), hepatic injury ( Section 9.4.1.1.3 ), thromboembolic events ( Section  
9.4.1.1.4 ), posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome  (PRES)  (Section 9.4.1.1.5 ), 
hypocalcemia ( Section 9.4.1.1.6 ), noninfectious pneumonitis ( Section 9.4.1.1.7 ), infections 
(Section  9.4.1.1.8 ), and blood glucose / lipids ( Section  9.4.1.1.9 ) before consulting the table 
below, as appropriate . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 42 of 103  
 Table 3 Lenvatinib -Everolimus Combination Therapy Dose Reduction 
and Interruption Instructionsa 
Lenvatinib/Everolimus 
Treatment -Related 
Toxicityb,c Including 
Hepatic Injury and 
Thromboembolic Events  During Therapy   Adjusted Dose   
Grade 1 Tolerable Grade 2  
 Continue treatment  No change  
Intolerable Grade 2c 
First occurrence  Interrupt lenvatinib  and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 2 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus at 
the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Second occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib  and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 2 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus at 
the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Third occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Dose reduction  of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 2 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus at 
the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Fourth occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib  and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 Discuss with sponsor  
Grade 3d,e 
First occurrence  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1f Dose reduction of lenvatinib (one dose 
reduction level, see Table 2 above ) and, if 
combination dosing, resume everolimus at 
the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption.  
Second occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1 of Investigator to decide the probability of 
the event being related to 1 or both drugs 
as to whether dose modification of 1 or 
both drugs w as required.  Dose reduction  
of lenvatinib (one dose reduction level, see 
Table 2 above ) and/or reduce everolimus 
to 5 mg every other day.  
Third occurrence  
(same toxicity or new 
toxicity)  Interrupt lenvatinib and, if combination 
dosing, interrupt everolimus until resolved 
to tolerable Grade 2 or Grade  0-1f Investigator to decide the probability of 
the event being related to 1 or both drugs 
as to whether dose modification of 1 or 
both drugs was required.  Dose reduction 
of lenvatinib (one dose reduction level, see 
Table 2 above ) and/or adjust everolimus 
as follows:  
i) if 5 mg daily everolimus at event onset , 
reduce to 5  mg every other day, or  
ii) if 5 mg every other day everolimus at 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 43 of 103  
 Table 3 Lenvatinib -Everolimus Combination Therapy Dose Reduction 
and Interruption Instructionsa 
Lenvatinib/Everolimus 
Treatment -Related 
Toxicityb,c Including 
Hepatic Injury and 
Thromboembolic Events  During Therapy   Adjusted Dose   
event onset , discontinue.  
Fourth occurrence  Interru pt lenvatinib and everolimus  Discuss with sponsor  
Grade 4g:  Discontinue lenvatinib and everolimus  
Note:  For grading see Common Terminology Criteria (CTC) for Adverse Events  (AE)  version 4.03. Collect all CTC 
grades of AEs, decreasing and increasing grade.  
a: A delay of lenvatinib/ everolimus treatment for more than 28 days (due to lenvatinib/ everolimus -related toxicities) 
requires a discussion with the sponsor before treatment may be resumed.  
b: Excluding alopecia.  Drug interruption and dose reduction may be initiated for intolerable Grade 2 and Grade 3 
related symptoms such as anemia, lymphocytopenia, asymptomatic neutropenia if there are no other treatment 
options available and the investigator considers that dose interruption or reduction of study medication is the only 
remaining alternative.  Optimal medical management for nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea have to be initiated prior 
to any lenvatinib/ everolimus interruption or dos e reduction.  
c: Applicable only to Grade 2 toxicities judged by the subject and physician to be intolerable. If Grade 2 toxicity is 
determined to be intolerable, the dose of study drug will be reduced with or without dose interruption.  Interruption 
for Grade  3 toxicities is mandatory.  
d: Obese subjects with weight loss requiring dose interruption and reduction do not need to return to baseline or Grade 1 
weight loss to restart lenvatinib.  Based on the judgment of the investigator, subjects may be restarted at t he lower 
dose of lenvatinib once the weight has been stable for at least 1 week. Normal body mass index ( BMI ) should be used 
as the new baseline for future dose reductions.  
e: Not applicable to abnormal clinical laboratory values that are not clinically relev ant based on the judgment of the 
investigator (eg, alanine aminotransferase ( ALT ), aspartate aminotransferase ( AST), gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 
(γ-GTP ) values < 10 × upper limit of normal ( ULN ), and Na).  
f: For hematology toxicities, restart treatment afte r toxicity resolves to Grade 2.  
g: Excluding laboratory abnormalities judged to be nonlife -threatening, in which case have to be managed as Grade 3.  
9.4.1.1.1  MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION  
Lenvatinib -everolimus  combination therapy should be withheld in any instances where a 
subject is at imminent risk to develop a hypertensive crisis or has significant risk factors for 
severe complications of uncontrolled hypertension (eg, BP significantly ≥ 160/100 mmHg, 
signif icant risk factors for cardiac disease, intracerebral hemorrhage, or other significant 
comorbidities).  Once the BP is controlled, lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy 
should be resumed as described below.  
The following guidelines should be followed f or the management of systolic BP 
≥ 140 mmHg up to < 160 mmHg or diasto lic BP ≥  90 mmHg up to < 100 mmHg confirmed 
on repeat measurements after an hour, for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination therapy:  
 Continue lenvatinib -everolimus combina tion therapy and institute antihypertensive 
therapy for subjects not already receiving this.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 44 of 103  
  For subjects already on antihypertensive medication, the dose of the current agent 
may be increased, if appropriate, or one or more agents of a different class of 
antihypertensive should be added.  
The following guidelines should be followed for the management of systolic BP ≥ 
160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg confirmed on  repeat measurements after an hour, 
for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy:  
 If systolic BP ≥  160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥  100 mmHg persists despite maximal 
antihypertensive therapy, then lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy 
administration should be interrupted and restarted when BP ≤ 150/95 mmHg at a dose 
of:  one leve l of dose reduction (ie, 14 -mg once daily) per Table 3 of lenvatinib.  
Resume everolimus at the same dose as prior to dose interruption.   
○ If systolic BP ≥  160 mmHg o r diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg recurs on the first 
reduced dose (ie, 14 -mg once daily) despite optimal management of hypertension 
with antihypertensive medications (either by dose increase or the addition of a 
different class of antihypertensive), then lenvatin ib-everolimus combination 
therapy administration should be inte rrupted and restarted when BP 
≤ 150/95 mmHg at a dose of :  one level of dose reduction (ie, 10  mg once daily) 
per Table 2 and Table 3 of lenvatinib.  Resume everolimus at the same dose as 
prior to dose interruption.  
○ If syst olic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg recurs on the next 
reduced dose (ie, 10  mg once daily) despite optimal management of hypertension 
with antihypertensive medications (either by dose increase or the addition of a 
different class of antihypertens ive), then lenvatinib -everolimus combination 
therapy administration should be interrupted  and restarted when BP 
≤ 150/95  mmHg at a dose of:  one level of dose reduction (ie, 8  mg once daily) 
per Table 2 and Table 3 of lenvatinib.  Resume everolimus at the same dose as 
prior to dose interruption.  
○ Additional dose reduction should be discussed with the sponsor.  
The following guidelines should be followed for the management of Grade 4 hypertension 
(life-threatening consequences):  
 Institute appropriate medical management.  
 Discontinue lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy.  
9.4.1.1.2  MANAGEME NT OF PROTEINURIA  
Regular assessment of proteinuria should be conducted as detailed in the Schedule of Visits 
and Procedures/Assessments.   Guidelines for assessment and management of proteinuria are 
summarized as follows for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy:  
 Initial episode of proteinuria: if proteinuria ≥ 2+ is detected on urine dipstick testing, 
lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy will be continued and a 24 -hour urine 
collection for total protein will be obtai ned as soon as possible within 72 hours to verify 
the grade of proteinuria.  Grading according to the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.03) (Appendix 5) will be 
based on the 24 -hour urinary protein result.  Management of lenvatinib -everolimus 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 45 of 103  
 combination therapy will be based on the grade of proteinuria according to the Dose 
Reduction and Interruption Instruction s (Table 3).  Where lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination therapy is interrupted and restarted, everolimus  should resume at the same 
dose as prior to dose interruption and not as instructed in Table 3. 
 Urine dipstick testing for subjects with proteinuria ≥  2+ should be pe rformed every 
2 weeks (or more frequently as clinically indicated) until the results have been 1+, trace, 
or negative for 3 consecutive months.  Any subsequent increases in the level of 
proteinuria ≥2+ on urine dipstick testing must be confirmed with a 24 -hour urinary 
protein test, which  will be assessed and graded, and continued management of lenvatinib -
everolimus combination therapy administration will be based on the Dose Reduction and 
Interruption Instructions ( Table 3).  Where lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy is 
interrupted and restarted, everolimus should resume at the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption and not as instructed in Table 3.  If a new event of proteinuria ≥  2+ occurs, 
the subject must resume urine dipstick testing for evaluation of proteinuria every 2 weeks 
until results are 1+, trace, or negative for 3 consecutive months.  
9.4.1.1.3  MANAGEMENT OF HEPATOTOXICITY  
Regular monitoring of liver function tests (ALT, AST, and bilirubin  levels) should be 
conducted as clinically indicated.  If signs/symptoms indicating liver injury occur, 
instructions contained in the Dose  Reduction and Interruption Instructions ( Table 3) should 
be followed.  Appropriate supportive care should be provided  along with close monitoring.  
If hepatic failure occurs the lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy must be 
discontinued.  
9.4.1.1.4  MANAGEMENT OF THROMBOEMBOLIC EVENTS  
Subjects should be advised to pay attention to symptoms suggestive of venous 
thromboembolic events, which  include acute onset of shortness of breath, dyspnea, chest 
pain, cough, hemoptysis, tachypnea, tachycardia, cyanosis, signs of deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) including lower -extremity swelling, and warmth to touch or tenderness.  In case any 
of the se symptoms appear, subjects should be instructed to report such symptoms promptly to 
the treating physician.  If a thromboembolic event is confirmed, instructions contained in 
Dose Reduction and Interruption Instructions ( Table 3) should be followed.  Appropriate 
supportive care should be provided together with close monitoring. If a subject experiences 
life-threatening (Grade 4) thromboembolic reactions, lenvatinib -everolimus combination 
therapy must be discontinued.  
9.4.1.1.5  MANAGEMENT OF POSTERIOR REVERSIBLE ENCEPHALOPATHY SYNDROME  
In clinical studies with lenvatinib, events of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome 
(PRES) were reported in less than 1% of lenvatinib -treated subjects.  PRES is a neurological 
disorder, which can present with headache, seizure, lethargy, confusion, altered mental 
function, blindness, and other visual or neurological disturbances.  Mild to severe 
hypertension may be present.  MRI is neces sary to confirm the diagnosis of PRES.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 46 of 103  
 Appropriate measures should be taken to control BP.  If subject develops PRES, contact 
study sponsor.  
9.4.1.1.6  MANAGEMENT OF HYPOCALCEMIA  
Serum calcium should be monitored at least monthly and replace calcium as necessary dur ing 
lenvatinib treatment.  Interrupt and adjust lenvatinib dosing as necessary depending on 
severity, presence of electrocardiogram ( ECG ) changes, and persistence of hypocalcemia.   
9.4.1.1.7  MANAGEMENT OF NONINFECTIOUS PNEUMONITIS  
Noninfectious pneumonitis is a recognized class effect of rapamycin derivatives, including  
everolimus.  Noninfectious pneumonitis (including interstitial lung disease) was described in  
12% of subjects taking everolimus.   Some cases were severe and on rare occasions, a fatal  
outcome was observed.  Investigators should therefore consider a diagnosis of noninfectious  
pneumonitis in subjects presenting with nonspecific respiratory signs and symptoms and in  
whom infectious, neoplastic and other nonmedicinal causes have been excluded by means of 
appropriate investigations.  
Guidelines for assessment and management of noninfectious pneumonitis are summarized as 
follows for subjects receiving lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy:  
 Subjects who develop radiological changes suggestive of noninfe ctious pneumonitis 
and have few or no symptoms (CTCAE Grade 1) may continue lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination therapy without dose adjustments.  
 If symptoms are CTCAE Grade 2:  
o Starting dose of lenvatinib combination therapy with 5 mg daily everolimus:  
combination therapy should be interrupted and the use of corticosteroids may 
be indicated until symptoms abate (resolved to CTCAE Grade 0-1 or baseline) 
and may be restarted with 5 mg everolimus daily in combination with 
lenvatinib (ie, lenvatinib reinitiated  at the same dose as prior to dose 
interruption) administered daily.  Discontinue everolimus if failure to recover 
within 4 weeks of reinitiating treatment, and continue lenvatinib as a single 
agent therapy depending on individual clinical circumstance.  
o If Grade 2 noninfectious pneumonitis recurs despite optimal management, 
then lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy administration should be 
interrupted and the use of corticosteroids may be indicated until symptoms 
abate (resolved to CTCAE Grade 0-1 or baseline).  Lenvatinib may be 
reinitiated as a single agent therapy depending on individual clinical 
circumstances.  
 If symptoms are CTCAE Grade 3:  
o Starting dose of lenvatinib combination therapy with 5 mg daily everolimus:  
combination therapy should be interrupted and the use of corticosteroids may 
be indicated until clinical symptoms resolve.  Lenvatinib may be reinitiated as 
single agent therapy depending on the individual clinical circumstances.  
 If symptoms are CTCAE Grade 4:  
o Study medications should be discontinued.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 47 of 103  
 9.4.1.1.8  MANAGEMENT OF INFECTIONS  
Everolimus has immunosuppressive properties and may predispose subjects to infections. 
Therefore, monitor for signs and symptoms of infection and treat promptly.  Dose  alterations 
of everolimus (either as single ag ent or in lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy) may 
be required in accordance with prescribing information.  
9.4.1.1.9  MANAGEMENT OF BLOOD GLUCOSE AND LIPIDS  
Hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia , and hypertrig lyceridemia are recognized class effects of  
rapamycin derivatives, including everolimus.  Glycemic control should be optimized before  
starting a subject on this study.  
Blood glucose will be monitored as specified in the Schedule of Visits and 
Procedures/Assessments. For subjects with blood glucose >  ULN, a fasting (> 6h, water 
only) blood glucose sample will be obtained.  Grading according to CTCAE will be based on 
the fasting blood glucose result. Insulin and/or oral hypoglycemic agents may have to be 
introduced (or the dose increased) to control bl ood glucose levels. The choice of 
hypoglycemic agent should be individualized to the subjects’ clinical circumstances and 
follow standard medical practice in addition to consideration of avoiding coadministration of 
everolimus with inhibitors and inducers of cytochrome P450 (CYP )3A4 and /or the multidrug 
efflux pump P -glycoprotein (PgP).  
Dose alterations of everolimus (either as single agent or in lenvatinib -everolimus 
combination therapy) may be required in accordance with prescribing information.  Where 
lenvatinib -everolimus combination therapy is interrupted, lenvatinib should resume at the 
same dose as prior to dose interruption.  
Subjects who are discontinued from one of the study drugs due to intolerance to that drug 
may continue to receive the other stu dy drug as long as they demonstrate clinical benefit.  
9.4.2  Identity of Investigational Products   
The sponsor will provide the study drugs as open -label supplies .   
9.4.2.1  Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Lenvatinib  
 Test drug code:  E7080  
 Generic name:  lenvatinib  
 Chemical name:  4-[3-Chloro -4-(N’-cyclopropylureido)  phenoxy] -7-methoxyquinoline -6-
carboxamide methanesulfonate  
 Molecular formula:  C21H19ClN 4O4•CH 3SO 3H 
 Molecular weight:  522.96  
 Structural formula:   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 48 of 103  
  
9.4.2.2  Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Everolimus  
 Trad e name :  Afinitor®   
 Test drug code:  NA  
 Generic name:  everolimus  
 Chemical name:  40-O-(2-hydroxyethyl) -rapamycin   
 Other names:  RAD001, Certican, SDZ RAD  
 Molecular formula:  C53H83NO 14 
9.4.2.3  Comparator Drug  
Not applicable.  
9.4.2.4  Labeling for Study Drug  
 Lenvatinib  and everolimus  will be labeled in accordance with text that is in full regulatory 
compliance with each participating country and is translated into the required language (s) for 
each of those countries.  
The following information will be included  in the lab el (but not limited to) : 
 Protocol Number  
 Name and address of the sponsor  
 Pharmaceutical dosage form, route of administration, quantity of dosage units, identifier, 
and potency  
 Lot number/batch number  
 Storage conditions, expiration date if necessary  
 CAUTION: New Drug -Limited by the United States law to investigational use.  
9.4.2.5  Storage Conditions  
Study drug will be stored in accordance with the labeled storage conditions.  Temperature 
monitoring is required at the storage location to ensure that the study drug is maintained 
within an established temperature range.  The investigator or designee is responsible for 
ensuring that the temperature is monitored throughout the total duration of the study and that 
records are maintained; the temperature should be mo nitored continuously by using either an 
in-house validated data acquisition system, a mechanical recording device, such as a 

Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 49 of 103  
 calibrated chart recorder, or by manual means, such that minimum and maximum 
thermometric values over a specific time period can be  recorded and retrieved as required.  
9.4.3  Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
This is an open -label, single -arm study.   There is no randomization in this study . 
9.4.4  Selection of Doses in the Study  
Clinical experience with the combination of lenvatinib 18 mg QD plus everolimus 5 mg QD 
in Study 205 shows that combination therapy results in significant prolongation of PFS 
compared with lenvatinib and everolimus as single agents in patients with metastatic RCC.  
The median PFS of 14.6 months for the combina tion of lenvatinib and everolimus is 
clinically relevant and longer than the PFS duration for any other agents approved for 
treatment of RCC.  The combination of lenvatinib plus everolimus is associated with 
acceptable and manageable toxicity, with no over lapping or unexpected treatment -emergent 
adverse events.   
9.4.5  Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject  
Lenvatinib  capsules and everolimus tablets are to be taken orally QD at approximately the 
same time in the morning without regard to food intake from C1D1 onward.  A cycle is 
considered 28 days.  The two drugs should be administered in immediate succession.  If a 
subject misses a dose, it may be taken within the 12 hours following the usual time of the 
morning dose.  If more than 12 hours have elapsed fr om the time of the usual daily dose, 
study drug s should be taken the next day at the usual time in the morning.  In the event a 
subject vomits after study drug administration, the subject should not take another dose until 
the next scheduled dose . Subjects should not take a double dose (two doses at the same time) 
to make up for a forgotten dose.  
Lenvatinib capsules should be swallowed whole with water each morning.  Caregivers 
should avoid exposure to the contents of the capsule.   Lenvatinib is sup plied in high density 
polyethylene  (HDPE ) bottles and the capsules should only be removed at the time of the 
administration because the drug is hygroscopic.   
Everolimus tablets should be swallowed whole with a glass of water.  The tablet should not 
be chewed or cru shed.  Everolimus is supplied in aluminium/polyamide/aluminium/ polyvinyl 
chloride ( PVC ) blisters.  Each tablet should be opened only at the time of administration 
because the drug is hygroscopic and light -sensitive.   
9.4.6  Blinding  
The study will not be blinded . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 50 of 103  
 9.4.7  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
All prior medications (including over -the-counter medications) administered 30 days before 
the first dose of study drug and any concomitant therapy administered to the subject during 
the course of the study (starti ng at the date of informed consent) until 28 days after the final 
dose of study drug will be recorded.  Additionally, all diagnostic, therapeutic, or surgical 
procedures relating to malignancy should be recorded.  Any medication that is considered 
necessar y for the subject’s health and that is not expected to interfere with the study drugs  
may be continued during the study.  
Treatment of complications or AEs, or therapy to ameliorate symptoms (including blood 
products, blood transfusions, fluid transfusions,  antibiotics, and antidiarrheal drugs), may be 
given at the discretion of the investigator, unless it is expected to interfere with the evaluation 
of (or to interact with) the study drugs . 
Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflamma tory drugs (NSAIDs), and low -molecular -weight heparin 
(LMWH) are permissible but should be used with caution.  Granulocyte colony -stimulating 
factor or equivalent may be used in accordance with American Society of Clinical Oncology 
(ASCO), institutional, or national guidelines.  Erythrop oietin may be used according to 
ASCO, institutional, or national guidelines, but the subject should be carefully monitored for 
increases in red blood cell (RBC) counts.   Both systemic and inhalant forms of 
corticosteroids are permissible.  
If the subject is receiving treatment with lenvatinib and requires surgery during the study, the 
stop time and restart time of lenvatinib should be as follows:  
 For minor procedures: stop lenvatinib for 2 days before the procedure and restart it 2 
days afte r, once there is clear evidence of wound healing and no risk of bleeding, but 
at least 2 days after the procedure.  
 For major procedures: hold lenvatinib for 1 week (5 half -lives) prior to surgery and 
then restart when there is clear evidence of wound heali ng and no risk of bleeding, 
but at least 1 week after the procedure.  
If the subject is receiving treatment with everolimus and requires surgery during the study, 
refer to the AFINITOR® US Package Insert . 
If concomitant medication/therapy is administered  for an AE, investigators will record that 
AE on the Adverse Events CRF.  
9.4.7.1  Drug -Drug Interactions  
No dose adjustment of lenvatinib  is recommended when coadministered with CYP3A, P gP, 
and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) inhibitors , and with CYP3A and  PgP inducers 
(LENVIMA® US Package Insert ).  Similarl y, lenvatinib at the proposed dose for clinical use 
is not expected to inhibit the cytochrome P450 -mediated metabolism of other dru gs 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 51 of 103  
 administered concomitantly  (CPMS -E7080 -007R -v1, RDMPKA2013 -156 REVISION NO. 
1). 
A population PK analysis also indicated that agents that raise gastric pH (eg , H2-blockers, 
proton pump inhibitors, antacids) do not have a significant effect on the absorption and 
bioavailability of lenvatinib ( CPMS -E7080 -007R -v1).   
Everolimus is a substrate of CYP3A4 and also a substrate and moderate inhibitor of PgP. In 
vitro r esults indicate that everolimus inhibition of Pg P and CYP3A4 is unlikely.   However, 
everolimus may affect the bioavailability of coadministered drugs that are CYP3A4  and/or 
PgP substrates since inhibition of CYP3A4 and Pg P in the gut cannot be excluded.  
Drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 or drugs that are inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4 
(including herbal supplements or grapefruit) could affect the metabolism of everolimus.  
Please refer to Flockhart DA, 2007  for the most current information regarding inhibitors and 
inducers of CYP3A4 . 
9.4.7.2  Prohibited Concomitant Therapies and Drugs  
Subjects should not receive other antitumor therapies while on study.  If subjects receive 
additional antitumor therapies during the study, such as radiotherapy, other chemotherapy, or 
immu notherapy , this will be judged to represent evidence of disease progression, and 
continuation of study medication should be discussed with the sponsor.  Following this 
discussion, if the joint decision is made to discontinue study treatment, then such subj ects 
will complete all End of Treatment assessments and continue to be followed for survival in 
the Follow -Up Period.  
9.4.8  Treatment Compliance  
Records of treatment compliance for each subject will be kept during the study.  CRAs  will 
review treatment compliance during site visits and at the completion of the study.  
9.4.9  Drug Supplies and Accountability  
In compliance with local regulatory requirements, drug supplies will not be sent to t he 
investigator  until the following documentation  has been received by the sponsor:  
 A signed and dated confidentiality agreement  
 A copy of the final protocol signature page, signed and dated by both the sponsor and 
investigator  
 Written proof of approval of the protocol, the ICFs, and any other informatio n provided 
to the subjects by the IRB/IEC for the institution where the study is to be conducted  
 A copy of the IRB/IEC -approved ICF and any other documentation provided to the 
subjects to be used in this study  
 The IRB/IEC membership list and statutes or He alth and Human Services Assurance 
number  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 52 of 103  
  A copy of the certification and a table  of the normal laboratory ranges for the reference 
laboratory conducting the clinical laboratory tests required by this protocol  
 An investigator -signed and dated FDA Form FDA 1572, where applicable  
 Financial Disclosure form (s) for the principal investigator (PI) and all subinvestigators 
listed on Form FDA 1572, where applicable  
 A signed and dated curriculum vitae (CV) of the PI including a copy of the PI’s current 
medical licen se or medical registration number on the CV  
 A signed and dated clinical studies  agreement  
 A copy of the regulatory authority approval for the country in which the study is being 
conducted, including any other required country -specific documentation and the  
Importation License  
The investigator and the study staff will be responsible for the accountability of all study 
drugs /study supplies  (dispensing, inventory, and record keeping) following the sponsor’s 
instructions  and adherence to GCP  guidelines as well as local or regional requirements.  
Under no circumstances will the investigator allow the study drugs /study supplies  to be used 
other than as directed by this protocol.  Study drugs /study supplies  will not be dispensed to 
any individual  who is not enrolled in the study.   
The site must maintain an accurate and timely record of the following:  receipt of all study 
drugs /study supplies , dispensing of study drugs /study supplies  to the subject, collection and 
reconciliation of unused study d rugs/study supplies  that are either returned by the subjects or 
shipped to site but not dispensed to subjects, and return of reconciled study drugs /study 
supplies  to the sponsor or (where applicable) d estruction of reconciled study drugs /study 
supplies  at the site.  This includes, but may not be limited to: (a) documentation of receipt of 
study drugs /study supplies , (b) study drugs /study supplies  dispensing/return reconciliation 
log, (c) study drugs /study supplies  accountability log, (d) all shipping servic e receipts,  (e) 
documentation of returns to the sponsor , and (f) certificates of destruction for any destruction 
of study drugs/study supplies that occurs at the site .  All forms will be provided by t he 
sponsor.  Any comparable forms that the site wishes t o use must be approved by the sponsor.  
The study drugs /study supplies  and inventory records must be made available, upon request, 
for inspection by a designated representative of the sponsor or a representative of a health 
authority (eg, FDA, Medicines and  Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency  [MHRA ]).  As 
applicable, all unused study drugs/study supplies and empty and partially empty containers 
from used study drugs /study supplies  are to be returned to the investigator by the subject and , 
together with u nused study drugs /study supplies  that were shipped to the site but not 
dispensed to subjects , are to be returned to the sponsor’s designated central or local depot (s) 
during the study or at the conclusion of the study, unless provision is made by the sponsor  for 
destruction of study drugs/study supplies and containers at the site.  Destruction at the site 
will only occur under circumstances where regulation or supply type prohibits the return of 
study drugs /study supplies  to the central or local depot (s).  Approval for destruction to occur 
at the site must be provided by the sponsor in advance.  Upon completion of drug 
accountability and reconciliation procedures by the site’s personnel and documentation 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 53 of 103  
 procedures by the sponsor’s personnel, study drugs/study  supplies that are to be returned to 
the sponsor’s designated central or local depot (s) must be boxed , sealed , and shipped back to 
the central or local depot (s) following all local regulatory requirements.  In some regions, 
study drugs/study supplies may  be removed from the site and hand delivered to the central or 
local depot by sponsor representatives.  Where study drugs /study supplies  are approved for 
destruction at the site, destruction will occur following the site’s standard procedures and 
certificate s of destruction will be provided to the sponsor.  
Drug accountability will be reviewed during site visits and at the completion of the study.  
9.5 Study Assessments  
9.5.1  Assessments  
9.5.1.1  Demography  
Subject demography information will be collected at the Screening Visit.  Demography 
information includes date of birth (or age), sex, race/ethnicity  (record in accordance with 
prevailing regulations).  Baseline characteristics will include ECOG performance status and 
NYHA cardiac disease classification (see Appendix 2 and Appendix 4, respectively) .  
9.5.1.1.1  MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS  
Significant m edical and surgical history and current medical conditions will be obtained 
during the Pretreatment Phase (Screen and B aseline) .   
Physical examinations (comprehensive [including neurological examination] or symptom 
directed) will be performed as designated in the Schedule of Procedures/Assessments (Table 
5).  A comprehensive physical examination  will include evaluations of the head, eyes, ears, 
nose, throat, neck, chest (including heart and lungs), abdomen, limbs, skin, and a complete 
neurologi cal examination.  A urogenital examination will only be required in the presence of 
clinical symptoms related to this region.  Documentation of the physical examination will be 
included in the source documentation at the site.  Significant findings at the Screening Visit 
will be recorded on the Medical History and Current Medical Conditions CRF.  Changes 
from screening physical examination findings that meet the definition of an AE will be 
recorded on the Adverse Events CRF.  
Subjects must have measurable di sease according to RECIST v1.1 (Appendix 1) as defined 
in Inclusion Criterion # 3.  Tumor -node -metastasis ( TNM ) staging at diagnosis should follow 
the guidelines provided in  Appendix 6.  Subjects must also fulfill the medical and physical  
characteristics identified in the inclusion criteria and not otherwise meet any of the exclusion  
criteria.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 54 of 103  
 9.5.1.2  Efficacy Assessments  
The primary endpoint (ORR), secondary endpoint (PFS), and  exploratory endpoints (CBR, 
DCR, and DOR) will be evaluated by the investigator.  In addition, ORR, PFS, CBR, DCR 
and DOR will be assessed by IIR.  The OS status will be assessed throughout the study.  
9.5.1.2.1  TUMOR ASSESSMENTS  
Tumor assessments will be performed  using RECIST v1.1.  Investigator -determined response 
assessments are to be performed at the site by appropriately qualified personnel at each time 
point and recorded on the appropriate CRFs.  Copies of a ll tumor assessment scans will be 
sent to an imaging  core laboratory specified by the sponsor for quality assessment and 
independent imaging review.  Tumor assessments will be carried out following the guidelines 
provided by the imaging core laboratory.  Historical scans performed within the Screening 
perio d that do not follow the guidelines completely may be used to demonstrate eligibility, as 
long as they meet minimum standards as separately defined by the imaging core laboratory.    
Tumor assessments including a CT chest and CT or MRI of the abdomen and pe lvis, and 
other areas of known or newly suspected disease should be performed prior to Baseline 
(between Day –28 to Day  -2) and every 8 weeks (within the 8 th week) from the date of first 
dose during the Treatment Phase.  The same imaging modality and image -acquisition 
protocol (including use or nonuse of contrast , oral and IV ) should be used consistently across 
all time points. A brain scan will be performed at Screening , and thereafter if clinically 
indicated.  Bone scans using whole body bone MRI, 99m-technetium (99m-Tc)  based bone 
scans, or 18F sodium fluoride  positron -emission tomography ( Na-F PET) will be performed 
during the pretreatment phase to establish a baseline (a historical bone scan performed within 
6 weeks before first dose is acceptable ), every 24 weeks, and as  clinically indicated.   Lesions 
identified on bone scans should be followed with cross -sectional imaging.  
In subjects with complete response (CR) based on body CT/MRI scans, bone scan and brain 
scan, assessment will be required at response confirmation.  All objective responses must be 
confirmed at least 28 days following the initial achievement of response. Subjects going off 
study treatments without disease progression in the Treatment Phase will continue to undergo 
tumor assessme nts according to the above schedule until disease progression is documented 
or another anticancer therapy is initiated.  
9.5.1.3  Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic , and Other 
Biomarker  Assessments  
9.5.1.3.1  PHARMACOKINETIC ASSESSMENTS  
Sparse PK samples will b e collected from all subjects and will be analyzed using the 
population approach.  A total of 12 samples (6 plasma samples for lenvatinib and 6 whole 
blood samples for everolimus) per subject will be obtained at the following time points: 2  to 
8 hours post dose on C1D1, prior to dose on Cycle 1 Day 15 ( C1D15 ), prior to dose and 2  to 8 
hours postdose on Day 1 of Cycles 2 and 3.  Actual time and date of PK blood collection as 
well as time of drug administration will be recorded on the appropriate page of the C RF. 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 55 of 103  
 Refer to the Laboratory Manual for the total blood volume  to be collected along with 
instructions for processing, shipping and handling of the samples . 
Lenvatinib in plasma and everolimus in blood will be quantified using validated high 
pressure  liquid chromatography ( HPLC )-tandem mass spectroscopy methods.  
9.5.1.3.2  PHARMACODYNAMIC , PHARMACOGENOMIC , AND OTHER BIOMARKER  ASSESSMENTS  
Blood and Tissue Biomarkers  
Biomarker discovery and/or validation may be performed to identify blood or tumor 
biomarkers that may be useful to predict subject response to study drug, evaluation of 
response -related and/or safety -related outcomes as well as for potential use in diagnostic 
development.  In addition, biomarkers identified in other clinical studies of study drug may 
also be assessed in samples collected from subjects enrolled in this study. The decision to 
perform exploratory biomarker analysis may be based on the clinical outcome of this study 
and/or the signals observed in other clinical studies or other information available at that 
time.  
A blood sample for pharmacodynamic and exploratory biomarker analysis will be collected 
predose on Day -1 or C1D1, on C1D15, and on Day 1 of subsequent cycles (during 
Treatment Phase), and at the End of Treatment assessment.  Blood samples from all 
consented subjects may undergo analyses including, but not limited to, global proteomic 
and/or enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) -based analyses or multiplex bead -
based immunoassay in an effort to assess pharmacodynamic biomarkers.  
Pharmacogenom ic (PG) Assessments  
Archived, fixed tumor tissue will be collected (if available) from all subjects for potential 
assessment of mutations and other genetic alterations or genes and/or proteins that may be 
important in the development and prog ression of cancer as well as in response to study drug 
treatment for potential use in diagnostic development. Appropriate 
technology/methodologies will be used based on the amount of tumor tissue available.  
A blood sample for peripheral blood mononuclear c ells (PBMC ) and plasma isolation will be 
collected from consented subjects for potential analysis of cell free nucleic acid (cf -nucleic 
acid) analysis and exploratory immune cell analysis.  Cell free nucleic acid isolated from 
plasma samples may be used to  obtain circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and explore tumor 
genetic alterations such as mutations observed in archival tumor samples as well as those 
which develop during drug treatment. PBMCs may be used for immune cell profiling (eg. 
tumor infiltrating lymph ocytes, T -cell repertoire, and immune cell types).  
A blood sample will be collected for pharmacogenomics (PG) analysis (except where 
prohibited by regional or local laws).  Variation in lenvatinib exposure or the occurrence of 
AEs observed in the study pop ulation may be evaluated by correlating single –nucleotide 
polymorphisms with PK, safety, or pharmacodynamic  data.  Genomic DNA extracted from 
blood samples may be used  to confirm whether the DNA sequence variants observed in DNA 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 56 of 103  
 extracted from tumor material are limited to the tumor and for potential profiling of immune 
cells.  
Data obtained will be used for research, to assist in developing safer and more effective 
treatments and will not be used to change the diagnosis of the subject or alter the therapy of 
the subject.  The DNA will not be used to determine or predict risks for diseases that an 
individual subject does not currently have.  Any sample or derivatives (DNA , RNA, and 
protein) may be stored for up to 15 years to assist in any research scientific questions related 
to lenvatinib, cancer and/or for potential diagnostic development.  
Instructions for the processing, storage, and shipping of samples will be provide d in the 
Laboratory Manual.  
9.5.1.4  Safety Assessments  
General safety will be assessed by the monitoring and recording of all AEs and serious 
adverse events (SAEs), regular monitoring of hematology and blood chemistry, regular 
measurement of vital signs, ECG, and the performance of physical examinations (PE) and 
other safety assessments in line with local regulations governing a study of this nature.  
Progression of nccRCC and signs and symptoms clearly related to the disease progression 
should not be captured as a n AE.  Disease progression is a study endpoint and should be 
captured in the CRF as per the guidelines for reporting disease progression.  
In case of life -threatening bleeding, the investigator should discuss the case with the Eisai 
Medical Monitor, in addi tion to discontinuing lenvatinib per Table 2 for Grade 4 toxicity and 
treat the subject based on the institution’s standard practice.  Clinically significant bleeding  
will be considered as study -specific events and should always be considered as serious 
important medical events, which will be entered on the adverse event CRF and reported 
using the procedures for reporting SAEs, even if the study -specific event does not  meet other 
serious criteria.  
Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all AEs, including all 
CTCAE  v4.03 grades (for both increasing and decreasing severity)  (Appendix 5), and SAEs; 
regular monitoring of hematology, blood chemistry, and urine values; periodic measurement 
of vital signs and ECGs; and performance of physical examinations as detailed in  Table 5. 
9.5.1.4.1  ADVERSE EVENTS AND EVENTS ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIAL SITUATIONS  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient  or clinical 
investigation subject a dministered an investigational product.  An AE does not necessarily 
have a causal relationship with the medicinal product.  For this study, the study drug s are 
lenvatinib and everolimus .  
The criteria for identifying AEs in this study are: 
 Any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of an investigational product, 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 57 of 103  
 whether or not considered related to the investigational product  (Note:  Every sign or 
symptom should not be listed as a separate AE if the applicable disease [diagnosis] is 
being reported as an AE)  
 Any new disease or exacerbation of an existing disease  
 Any new disease or exacerbation of an existing disease .  However, worsening of the 
primary d isease should be captured under efficacy assessments as disease progression 
rather than as an AE.  
 Any deterioration in nonprotocol -required measurements of a laboratory value or other 
clinical test (eg, ECG or x -ray) that results in symptoms, a change in t reatment, or 
discontinuation of study drug  
 Recurrence of an intermittent medical condition (eg, headache) not present pretreatment 
(Baseline)  
 An abnormal laboratory test result should be considered an AE if the identified laboratory 
abnormality leads to an y type of intervention , withdrawal of study drug, or withholding 
of study drug , whether pr escribed in the protocol or not  
All AEs observed during the study will be reported on the CRF.  All AEs, regardless of 
relationship to study drug or procedure, should  be collected beginning from the time the 
subject signs the study ICF through the last visit  and for 28 days after the last dose of study 
treatment .  Subjects who fail screening primarily due to AE(s) must have the AE(s) leading 
to screen failure reported on the Screening Disposition CRF.  SAEs will be collected for 28 
days after the last dose of study treatment.  
Abnormal laboratory values should not be listed as separate  AEs if they are considered to be 
part of the clinical syndrome that is being reported as an AE.  It is the responsibility of the 
investigator to review all laboratory findings in all subjects and determine if they constitute 
an AE.  Medical and scientific  judgment should be exercised in deciding whether an isolated 
laboratory abnormality should be classified as an AE.  Any laboratory abnormality  
considered to constitute an AE should be reported on the Adverse Event CRF.  
Abnormal ECG (QTcF) results, if not  otherwise considered part of a clinical symptom that is 
being reported as an AE, should be considered an AE if the QTc F interval is more than 
450 ms and there is an increase of more than 60 ms from baseline.  Any ECG abnormality 
that the investigator cons iders as an AE should be reported as such.  
All AEs must be followed for 28 days after the subject’s last dose, or until resolution, 
whichever comes first.  All SAEs must be followed to resolution or, if resolution is unlikely, 
to stabilization.  
Every effo rt must be made by the investigator to categorize each AE according to its 
severity and its relationship to the study treatment.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 58 of 103  
 Assessing Severity of Adverse Events  
Adverse events will be graded on a 5 -point scale according to Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Event (CTCAE v4.03).  Investigators will report CTCAE grades for all AEs (for 
both increasing and decreasing severity) .   
Assessing Relationship to Study Treatment  
Items to be considered  when assessing the relationship of an AE to the study treatment are:  
 Temporal relationship of the onset of the event to the initiation of the study treatment  
 The course of the event, especially the effect of discontinuation of study treatment or 
reintrodu ction of study treatment, as applicable  
 Whether the event is known to be associated with the study treatment or with other 
similar treatments  
 The presence of risk factors in the study subject known to increase the occurrence of the 
event  
 The presence of nonstudy, treatment -related factors that are known to be associated with 
the occurrence of the event  
Classification of Causality  
The relationship of each AE to the study drug will be  recorded on the CRF  in response to the 
following question:  
Is there a rea sonable possibility that the study drug  caused the AE?  
Yes (related)  A causal relationship between the study drug and the AE is a reasonable 
possibility.  
No (not related)  A causal relationship between the study drug and the AE is not a 
reasonable possibili ty. 
9.5.1.4.2  SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS AND EVENTS ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIAL SITUATIONS  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
 Results in death  
 Is life -threatening (ie, the subject was at immediate risk of death from the advers e event 
as it occurred; this does not include an event that, had it occurred in a more severe form 
or was allowed to continue, might have caused death)  
 Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect (in the child of a subject who was exposed to the 
study drug)  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 59 of 103  
 Other important medical events that may not be immediately life -threatening or result in 
death or hospitalization but, when  based on appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize 
the subject or may require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes in the definition of 
SAE listed above should also be considered SAEs.  Medical and scientific judgment should 
be exercised in deci ding whether expedited reporting is appropriate in such situations.  
For this study, the following event s should always be considered  serious and reported as an 
important medical event if it does not meet other serious criteria:  clinically significant 
bleeding.  
In addition to the above,  events associated with special situations include pregnancy or 
exposure to study drug through breastfeeding; AEs associated with study drug overdose, 
misuse, abuse, or medication error .  These  events  associated with spec ial situations are to be 
captured using the SAE procedures but are to be considered as SAEs only if they meet one of 
the above criteria.  All AEs associated with  special situations are to be reported on the CRF 
whether or not they meet the criteria for SAE s.   
All SAEs must be followed to resolution or, if resolution is unlikely, to stabilization.  
The following hospitalizations are not considered to be SAEs because there is no “adverse 
event” (ie, there is no untoward medical occurrence) associated with the  hospitalization:  
 Hospitalizations for respite care  
 Planned hospitalizations required by the protocol  
 Hospitalization planned before informed consent (where the condition requiring the 
hospitalization has not changed after study drug administration)  
 Hospitalization for administration of study drug or insertion of access for administration 
of study drug  
 Hospitalization for routine maintenance of a device (eg, battery replacement) that was in 
place before study entry  
9.5.1.4.3  LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS  
Clinical lab oratory tests to be performed, including hematology, chemistry, and urinalysis, 
are summarized in  Table 4.  Subjects should be in a seated or supine position during blood 
collection.  The Schedule of Procedures/Assessments (Table 5) shows the visits and time 
points at which blood for clinical laboratory tests and urine for urinalysis  will be collected in 
the study.  
Efforts should be made to conduct study visits on the day scheduled.  If necessary, study 
visits may be held up to 3 days  sooner or later than the scheduled day that clinical laboratory 
assessments may be conducted according to (Table 5). 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 60 of 103  
 Table 4 Clinical Laboratory Tests  
Category  Parameters  
Hematology  Hematocrit , hemoglobin, platelets, RBC count, WBC count with 
differential (bands, basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, 
monocytes, neutrophils) , and ANC  
Chemistry   
 Electrolytes  Bicarbonate, chloride, magnesium, potassium, sodium  
 Liver function tests  Alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, aspartate 
aminotransferase, direct bilirubin, total bilirubin  
 Renal function tests Blood urea/blood urea nitrogen, creatinine  
 Thyroid function testsa TSH and free T4  
 Pregnancy  test Serum β -hCG  (if urine not tested)  
Fasting blood tests  Glucose, lipids (total cholesterol, LDL -C, HDL -C, triglycerides ) 
 Other  Albumin, amylase, calcium,  lactate dehydrogenase,  lipase,  
phosphorus,  total protein, uric acid  
Urinalysis  glucose, ketones, pH, protein, RBCs, specific gravity  
Pregnancy test  Urine  β-hCG  (if serum not tested)  
ANC= absolute neutrophil count, β hCG = beta -human chorionic gonadotropin, HDL -C= high density  
lipoprotein -C, LDL -C=low density lipoprotein -C, RBC = red blood cells, T4  = thyroxine, TSH = thyroid 
stimulating hormone, WBC = white blood cells . 
a:  Thyroid function will be assessed at the Screening Visit , at Baseline /C1D 1, Day 1  of every cycle (starti ng at 
C2) throughout the study , and at the End of Treatment Visit .  
 
Clinical laboratory tests during the study  will be performed by trained staff at the study sites . 
Local laboratories will perform tests to qualify subjects for entry into the study.  Laboratory 
certification as available will be included in the final clinical study report for this study.  
All hematology, blood chemistry (including pregnancy test, as applicable), and urinalysis 
samples are to be obtained prior to study drug administration and results reviewed prior to 
administration/dispensing of study drug at the beginning of each treatment cycle.  Refer to 
Table 3 for the management of clinically significant laboratory abnormalities.  
A laboratory abnormality may meet the criteria to qualify as an AE as described in this 
protocol (see Section  9.5.1.4.1 ) and the CRF Completion Guidelines.  In these instances, the 
AE corresponding to the laboratory abnormality will be recorded on the Adverse Event  CRF.  
9.5.1.4.4  VITAL SIGNS AND WEIGHT MEASUREMENTS  
Vital sign measurements (ie, systolic and diastolic blood pressure [BP] [mmHg], heart rate  
[beats per minute], respiratory rate [per minute], body temperature [in centigrade]), and 
weight (kg) will be obtained at the visits designated in the Schedule of 
Procedures/Assessments  (Table 5) by a validated method.  Height will be measured at the 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 61 of 103  
 Screening Vis it only.  Blood pressure and heart rat e will be measured after the subject has 
been sitting  for 5 minutes.  All BP measurements should be performed on the same arm, 
preferably by the same person , if feasible .  For subjects with an elevated BP (systolic BP 
≥140 mmHg  or diastolic BP ≥ 90 mmHg ), confirmation should be obtained by performing  
repeat  measurements after 1  hour to obtain a mean value . 
Subjects with systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg must have their BP 
monitored every 2 weeks (on Day 15 or more frequently as clinically indicated) until systolic 
BP has been ≤ 150 mmHg and diastolic BP has been ≤ 95 mmHg for 3  consecutive mo nths.  
If a new event of systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg occurs, the subject 
must resume the Day 15 evaluation until systolic BP has been ≤ 150 mmHg and diastolic BP 
has been ≤ 95 mmHg for 3 consecutive months.   
9.5.1.4.5  PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS  
Physical examinations will be performed as designated in the Schedule of 
Procedures/Assessments (Table 5).  Documentation of the physical examination will be 
included in the source documentation at the site.  Only changes from screening physical 
examination findings that meet the definition of an AE will be recorded on the Adverse 
Events CRF.  
9.5.1.4.6  ELECTROCARDIOGRAMS  
Electrocardiograms will be obtained as designated in the Sched ule of 
Procedures/Assessments (Table 5).  Complete, standardized, 12 -lead ECG recordings that 
permit all 12 leads to be displayed  on a single page with an accompanying lead II rhythm 
strip below the customary 3 × 4 lead format are to be used.  In addition to a rhythm strip, a 
minimum of  3 full complexes should be recorded from each lead simultaneously.  Subjects 
must be in the recum bent position for a period of 5 minutes prior to the ECG.  
An ECG abnormality may meet the criteria of an AE as described in this protocol (see 
Section  9.5.1.4.1 ) and the CRF Completion Guidelines.  In these instances, the AE 
corresponding to the ECG abnormality will be recorded on the Adverse Events CRF.  
9.5.1.4.7  OTHER SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status  
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status will be assessed at the Screening 
Visit, Baseline/C1D1, Day 1 of each treatment cycle  starting at Cycle 2 , and at End of 
Treatment Visits.  The table in Appendix 2 will be used to assess performance status.  
Pregnancy Test  
A serum  or urine  β-hCG test will be performed for premenopausal women and 
postmenopausal women who have been amenorrheic for less than 12 months.  A 6 -mL 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 62 of 103  
 sample of blood will be taken at designated time points as specified in the Schedule of 
Procedures/Assessments (Table 5). 
9.5.2  Schedule of Procedures/Assessments  
9.5.2.1  Schedule of Procedures/Assessment s 
Table 5 presents  the schedule of  procedures/assessments for the  study.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 63 of 103  
 Table 5 Schedule of Procedures /Assessments for Study E7080 -M001 -221 
Phase  Pretreatmenta, Treatmentb  
All cycles are 28  days in duration   
Posttreatmentc  
Period  Screening  Baseline Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  – 
Last 
Cycle  End of Treatment  Follow -
Up 
Period  
Day -21 to  -2 -1 Day 
1a Day 8  Day 15  Day 1  Day 15  Day 1  Within 30 days  of last 
dose  Every 12 
weeksd 
Visit  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, 9, 10, 
etc.   
Informed consent  X           
Inclusion/Exclusione  X X         
Demographic dataf  X          
Archival tumor block or 
slidesg X          
Pharmacogenomic 
blood sample   X         
Biomarker blood  
serum/PBMC/plasma  
sampleh  X   X X  X X  
ECOGi  X X    X  X X  
TNM staging at 
diagnosis  X          
Medical/surgical history X X         
Vital signsj,k X X  X X X X X X  
Physical exam inationl X X   X X  X X  
12-Lead ECGm X    X X  X X  
Clinical c hemistry and 
hematologyn  X X   X X Xo X X  
Fasting blood glucosep X X    X  X X  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 64 of 103  
 Table 5 Schedule of Procedures /Assessments for Study E7080 -M001 -221 
Phase  Pretreatmenta, Treatmentb  
All cycles are 28  days in duration   
Posttreatmentc  
Period  Screening  Baseline Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  – 
Last 
Cycle  End of Treatment  Follow -
Up 
Period  
Day -21 to  -2 -1 Day 
1a Day 8  Day 15  Day 1  Day 15  Day 1  Within 30 days  of last 
dose  Every 12 
weeksd 
Visit  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, 9, 10, 
etc.   
Amylase and Lipase  X X    X  X X  
Fasting lipidsq X X      X X  
TSH and free T4 levelsr X X    X  X X  
Urine dipstick testings  X X   X X X X X  
Pregnancy testt X          
PKu   X  X X  X   
Telephone contact           Xd 
Lenvatinib treatment    Once Daily    
Everolimus  treatment    Once Daily    
Tumor assessments : 
CT/MRIv X  Performed every 8 weeks after C1D1, or sooner if clinically indicated, until documentation of disease 
progression  or beginning another anticancer therapy . 
Bone  Scanw X  Every 24 weeks ± 1 week  after C1D1 , or as clinically indicated. In subjects with CR based on body CT/MRI 
scans, a bone scan assessment will be required at response confirmation.  
Brain Scanx X  If clinically indicated.  In subjects with CR based on body CT/MRI scans, a brain scan will be required at 
response confirmation.  
Survival   Throughout  
Concomitant 
medicationsy Throughout  
AEs/ SAEsz Throughout  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 65 of 103  
 Table 5 Schedule of Procedures /Assessments for Study E7080 -M001 -221 
Phase  Pretreatmenta, Treatmentb  
All cycles are 28  days in duration   
Posttreatmentc  
Period  Screening  Baseline Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  – 
Last 
Cycle  End of Treatment  Follow -
Up 
Period  
Day -21 to  -2 -1 Day 
1a Day 8  Day 15  Day 1  Day 15  Day 1  Within 30 days  of last 
dose  Every 12 
weeksd 
Visit  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, 9, 10, 
etc.   
 
AEs = adverse events, BP = blood pressure, C1D1 = Cycle 1/Day 1, C1D15 = Cycle 1/Day 15, CR = complete response, CT = computeri zed tomography, ECG = 
electrocardiogram, ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, h = hour, HR = heart rate, med = medical/medica tion(s), MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, , PK = 
pharmacokinetics, PBMC= peripheral blood mononuclear cells , PR = partial response, RR = respiratory rate, SAEs = serious adverse events, T4 = thyroxine, TNM = tumor -mode -
metastasis, TSH = thyroid stimulatin g hormone, Tx = treatment, w/in = within . 
a. The results of all screening assessments and evaluations must be completed and reviewed by the investigator prior to the Base line Visit.  Baseline assessments can be 
performed on Day -1 or on C1D1 prior to  initiati on of lenvatinib and everolimus  treatment.  Informed consent must  be obtained up to 21 days  prior to C1D1.  
b. Efforts should be made to conduct study visits on the day scheduled (  3 day).  Clinical laboratory assessments may be conducted  anytime within 72 hours prior to the 
scheduled visit, unless otherwise specified.  
c. The Posttreatment Phase  will start at the End of Treatment visit and will continue as long as the subject is alive or until the subject withdraws consent  or is lost to follo w-
up.  Subjects who discontinue study treatment before disease progression will continue to undergo tumor assessment every 8 weeks  ± 1 week  until documentation of 
disease progression or start of another anticancer  therapy.  Follow -up assessment for surviva l will be performed every 12 weeks  ± 1 week . 
d. Subjects will be followed for survival every 12 weeks ± 1 week after the End of Treatment Visit.  If a clinic visit is not fe asible, follow -up information may be obtained 
via telephone or email.  
e. New York Heart A ssociation (NYHA) cardiac disease classification should be performed at Screening only, if needed.  
f. Demographic information includes date of birth (or age), sex, and race/ethnicity . 
g. Archived, fixed tumor tissue will be collected (if available) and  may be used in the future for potential assessment of genetic biomarkers.  The decision to perform other 
biomarker assessments may be based on the clinical outcome of this study and/or the signals observed in other studies or  oth er information available at that time. 
h. Collection of blood samples to obtain serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and/or plasma to be used for cell-free nucleic acid, immune cell, and biomarker studies 
from subjects.  Samples will be obtained predose on Day -1 or C1D1, C1D15, Day 1 of all subsequent cycles, and at the End of Treatment Visit.  
i. ECOG will be performed at the Screening and Baseline Visits, on C 2/D1, on Day 1 of every subsequent cycle thereafter , and at the End of Treatment Visit . 
j. Assessments will include vital signs (res ting BP, HR, RR, and body temp erature), weight, and height.  Height will be measured at the Screening Visit only.   Vital signs 
will be performed at Screening, Baseline, C1D8, C1D15, C2D1, C2D15, Day 1 of every cycle thereafter, all unscheduled visits, and at the End of Treatment Visit. 
Elevated BP ( systolic B P ≥140  mmHg or diastolic BP ≥90 mmHg) should be confirmed by repeat  measurements after 1 hour to obtain a mean value . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 66 of 103  
 k. Subjects with systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg must have their BP monitored every 2 weeks (on Day 15 or more  frequently as clinically indicated) 
until systolic BP has been ≤ 150 mmHg and diastolic BP has been ≤ 95 mmHg for 3  consecutive mo nths.  If a new event of systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥ 
100 mmHg occurs, the subject must resume the Day 15 evaluation until systolic BP has been ≤ 150 mmHg and diastolic BP has bee n ≤ 95 mmHg for 3 consecutive 
months.   
l. A comprehensive physical examination (including a neurological examination) will be performed at the Screening Visit, on Cycl e 1/Day 15, on Day  1 of each subsequent 
cycle, and at the End of T reatment assessment.  A symptom -directed physical examination wil l be performed on Baseline (Day -1) or on C1D1  prior to treatment,  and at 
any time during the study, as clinically indicated.  
m. Single 12 -lead ECG.  Subjects must be in the recumbent position for a period of 5 minutes prior to the ECG.   
n. Clinical chemistry an d hematology results must be reviewed prior to administration of lenvatinib and everolimus on C1D1 and all subsequent cycles.   Scheduled 
assessments (Screening Visit, Baseline/C1D1, Cycle 1/Day 15, Day 1 of each subsequent cycle starting with Cycle 2 and a t the End of Treatment Visit) may be 
performed within 72 hours prior to the visit.  If there is a  clinically relevant hematologic or chemistry toxicity of ≥ Grade 3, additional laboratory tests and AE 
assessments are required until the toxicity improved to  < Grade 3.   
o. On C2D15, only liver function (ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin) should be performed.   Note: liver function should be assessed at 
the Screening Visit, then every 2 weeks for the first two months (Baseline/C1D1,  C1D15, C2D1, and C2D15), and then monthly thereafter (Day 1 of each subsequent 
cycle) and at the End of Treatment Visit.  
p. Assessments of fasting blood glucose are to be performed at the Screening Visit, Baseline/C1D1, monthly thereafter on Day 1 o f each su bsequent cycle  starting at Cycle 
2, and at the End of Treatment Visit.   
q. Assessment of fasting lipids (including total cholesterol [TC], low -density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL -C], high -density lipoprotein cholesterol [HDL -C], and 
triglycerides [TG]) are to be performed at the Screening Visit, Baseline/C1D1, on Day 1 of every 3rd cycle thereafter (Cycles 4, 7, etc.), and at the End of Treatment Visit.  
r. Assessment of TSH and free T4 levels are to be performed at the Screening Visit , Baseline/C1D1, Day 1 of each subsequent cycle  starting at Cycle 2 , and at the End of 
Treatment Visit . 
s. Urinalysis will be performed at Screening, Baseline, Cycle 1/Day 15, Cycle 2/Day 1, Cycle 2/Day 15, Day 1 of every cycle ther eafter , all unscheduled visits,  and at the 
End of Tre atment Visit. Urinalysis will include glucose  (fasting at Baseline only), ketones, pH, protein, RBCs, and specific gravity.  If urine protein ≥ 2+ on urinalysis, 
lenvatinib will be continued and a 24 -hour urine collection for total protein will be obtained  as soon as possible within 72 hours to verify the grade of proteinuria.  Urine 
dipstick testing for subjects with proteinuria ≥ 2+ should be performed every 2 weeks (on Day 1 and Day 15 of each cycle or more frequently as clinically indicated) until 
the results have been 1+ or negative for 3 consecutive months. If a new event of proteinuria ≥ 2+ occurs, the subject must resume urine dipstick testing for evaluation of 
proteinuria every 2 weeks until results are 1+ or negative for 3 consecutive months.  
t. A ser um or urine pregnancy test will be performed  in women of childbearing potential (ie, premenopausal and perimenopausal women who  have been amenorrheic for 
less than 12 months) at the Screening Visit . If a negative screening pregnancy test is obtained more t han 72 hours before the planned  first dose of lenvatinib and 
everolimus, a separate serum or urine sample must be obtained and tested at the Baseline Visit.  
u. Sparse PK samples will be collected from all subjects at the following time points: 2 -8 hours postdose on C1D1, prior to dose on C1D15, prior to dose and 2 -8 hours 
postdose on Day 1 of Cycles 2 and 3.   
v. Screening:  Screening tumor assessments using CT of the brain, chest , abdomen and pelvis,  and other areas of known or newly suspected disease should  be performed 
between Day –28 to Day  -2.  Detailed imaging guidelines will be provided by the imaging core laboratory.  Scans that were performed within this window bu t before 
informed consent may be used if they were acquired consistent with the guideline s provided by the imaging core laboratory.  
Treatment Phase:   Tumor assessments of the chest/ abdomen/pelvis and other areas of known disease at Screening plus any areas of  newly suspec ted disease should be 
performed  every 8 weeks (within the 8th week), or sooner if clinically indicated, until documentation of disease progression  and should utilize the same methodology and 
scan acquisition techniques used at Screening to ensure comparability.  All objective responses must be confirmed at least 28 d ays following the initial achievement of the 
response.  The same methodology and acquisition techniques used at Screening should be used throughout the study to ensure comparability.  
Follow -up Period:  Subjects who discontinue treatment without disease progr ession should continue tumor assessments every 8 weeks ± 1 week , until disease 
progression or beginning another anticancer therapy.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 67 of 103  
 w. Bone scans using whole body bone MRI , 99m-technetium based bone scans, or 18F sodium fluoride positron -emission tomography (Na -F PET) will be performed during 
the pre -treatment phase to establish a baseline (a historical bone scan performed within 6 weeks before first dose is acceptable), ev ery 24 weeks, and as clinically 
indicate d. Lesions identified on bone scans should be followed with cross -sectional imaging . 
x. A brain scan will be performed at Screening and thereafter if clinically indicated.  In subjects with CR based on body CT/MRI scans, a brain scan assessment will be 
requir ed at response confirmation.        
y. Concomitant medications will be  recorded throughout and for 28 days after last dose  of lenvatinib and/or everolimus .  All anticancer therapy will be recorded until time 
of death or  termination of survival follow -up. 
z. Thro ughout the study from the signature of Informed Consent.  SAE irrespective of relationship to study treatment must be reporte d as soon as possible but not later than 
24 h.  AEs will be  recorded for 28 days after last dose  of lenvatinib and/or everolimus. D uring treatment interruption due to AEs, repeat AE assessments at least every 
7 days (until restarting lenvatinib and/or everolimus administration).  
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 68 of 103  
 9.5.2.2  Description of Procedures/Assessments Schedule  
Refer to Table 5 for a description and timing of each procedure and assessment in the 
Pretreatment, Treatment, and Posttreatment phases.  
9.5.3  Appropriateness of Measurements  
All clinical assessments are standard m easurements commonly used in studies of nccRCC . 
The safety assessments to be performed in this study, including hematology analyses, blood 
chemistry tests, urinalysis, radiologic studies, and assessment of A Es, are standard 
evaluations to ensure subject sa fety. 
9.5.4  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events, Pregnancy, and Events Associated 
with Special Situations  
9.5.4.1  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
All SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS, regardless of their relationship to study treatment, 
must be reported on a completed SAE form by email or fax as soon as possible but no 
later than 1 business day  from when the investigator becomes aware of the event . 
Serious adverse events, regardless of causality assessment, must be collected through the last 
visit and for up to 28 days after the subject’s last dose of study treatment .  All SAEs  must be 
followed to resolution or, if resolution is unlikely, to stabilization.  Any SAE judged by the 
investigator to be related to the study treatment or any protocol -required procedure should be 
reported to the sponsor regardless of the length of time that has passed since study 
completion.  
The detailed contact information for reporting of SAEs is provided in the Investigator Study 
File. 
For urgent safety issues , please en sure all appropriate medical care is administered to the 
subject and contact the appropriate study team member listed in the Investigator Study File.  
It is very important that the SAE report form be filled out as completely as possible at the 
time of the initial report.  This includes the investigator’s assessment of causality.  
Any follow -up information received on SAEs should be forwarded within 1 business day of 
its receipt.  If the follow -up information changes the investigator’s assessment of causality , 
this should also be noted on the follow -up SAE form.  
Preliminary SAE reports should be followed as soon as possible by detailed descriptions 
including copies of hospital case reports, autopsy reports, and other documents requested by 
the sponsor.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 69 of 103  
 The inv estigator must notify his/her IRB/IEC of the occurrence of the SAE in writing, if 
required by their institution .  A copy of this communication mu st be forwarded to the sponsor 
to be filed in the sponsor’s Trial Master File.  
9.5.4.2  Reporting of Pregnancy and Expos ure to Study Drug Through Breastfeeding  
Any pregnancy in which either the estimated date of conception is  before the last visit or 
within 28 days of last study treatment , or any exposure to study drug through breastfeeding 
during study treatment or within 28 days  of last study treatment , must be reported .  
If an adverse outcome of a pregnancy is suspected to be related to study drug exposure, this 
should be reported regardless of the length of time that has passed since the exposure to study 
treatment.  
A co ngenital anomaly, death during perinatal period, an induced abortion, or a spontaneous 
abortion are considered to be an SAE and should be reported in the same time frame and in 
the same format as all other SAEs (see Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
[Section  9.5.4.1 ]). 
Pregnancies or exposure to study drug through breastfeeding must be reported by fax or 
email as soon as possible but no later th an 1 business day from the date the investigator 
becomes aware of the pregnancy.  The contact information for the reporting of pregnancies 
and exposure to study drug through breastfeeding is provided in the Investigator Study File.  
The Pregnancy Report Fo rm must be used for reporting.  All pregnancies must be followed to 
outcome.  The outcome of the pregnancy must be reported as soon as possible but no later 
than 1 business day from the date the investigator becomes aware of the outcome.  
A subject who beco mes pregnant must be withdrawn from the study .   
9.5.4.3  Reporting of Events Associated with Special Situations  
9.5.4.3.1  REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS ASSOCIATED WITH STUDY DRUG OVERDOSE , 
MISUSE , ABUSE , OR MEDICATION ERROR  
Adverse e vents associated with study  drug overdose, misuse, abuse, and medication error 
refer to AEs associated with uses of the study drug outside of that specified by the protocol.  
Overdose,  misuse, abuse, and medication error are defined as follows:   
Overdose  Accidental or intentional use of the study drug in an amount higher 
than the protocol -defined dose .  
Misuse  Intentional and inappropriate use of study drug not in accordance with 
the protocol .  
Abuse  Sporadic or persistent intentional excessive use of study drug 
accompanied by harmful physical or psychological effects . 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 70 of 103  
 Medication error  Any unintentional  event  that causes or leads to inappropriate study 
drug use or subject harm while the study drug is in the control of site 
personnel  or the  subject.   
All AEs associated with overdose , misuse, abuse,  or medication error  should be  captured  on 
the Adverse Event CRF  and also  reported using the procedures detailed in Reporting of 
Serious Adverse Events (Section  9.5.4.1 ) even if the AEs do not meet serious criteria.  Abuse 
is always to be captured as an AE.  If the AE associated with an overdose, misuse, abuse, or 
medication error does not meet serious criteria, it must still be reported using the SAE  form 
and in an expedited manner but should be noted as nonserious on the SAE form and the 
Adverse Event CRF.  
9.5.4.3.2  REPORTING OF STUDY -SPECIFIC EVENTS  
Study -specific events , consisting of clinically significant bleeding, should always be 
considered as serious important medical events and be entered on the Adverse Event CRF 
and reported using the procedures detailed in Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
(Section  9.5.4.1 ), even if the study -specific event does not meet other serious crit eria.   
9.5.4.4  Expedited Reporting  
The sponsor must inform investigators and regulatory authorities of repor table  events, in 
compliance with applicable regulatory requirements, on  an expedited basis (ie, within 
specific time frames).  For this reason, it is imperative that sites provide complete SAE 
information in the manner described above.  
9.5.4.5  Breaking the Blind  
Not applicable . 
9.5.4.6  Regulatory Reporting of Adverse Events  
Adverse events wi ll be reported by the sponsor or a third party acting on behalf of the 
sponsor to regulatory authorities in compliance with local and regional law and established 
guidance.  The format of these reports will be dictated by the local and regional 
requirement s. 
9.5.5  Completion/Discontinuation of Subjects  
A subject may elect to discontinue the study at any time for any reason.  All subjects who 
discontinue the study are to complete the study’s early discontinuation procedures indicated 
in the Schedule of Procedures/ Assessments  (Table 5). 
The investigator will promptly explain to the subject involved that the study will be 
discontinued for that subject and provide appropriate medical treatment and other necessary 
measures fo r the subject.  A subject who has ceased to return for visits will be followed up by 
mail, phone, or other means to gather information such as the reason for failure to return, the 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 71 of 103  
 status of treatment compliance, the presence or absence of AEs, and clinica l courses of signs 
and symptoms.   
Subjects who discontinue early from the study will be discontinued for  1 of these reasons: 
AE(s), lost to follow -up, subject choice, (ie, subject chooses to discontinue from the 
treatment but is willing to participate in the Follow -Up portion of the study), progression of 
disease, withdrawal of consent (ie, subject no longer wishes to participate in the study and be 
contacted), pregnancy, sponsor discontinuation of the study , or other.  Study disposition 
information will b e collected on the Subject Disposition From Treatment Phase CRF  page . 
9.5.6  Abuse or Diversion of Study Drug  
Not applicable.  
9.5.7  Confirmation of Medical Care by Another Physician  
The investigator will instruct subjects to inform site personnel when they are planning  to 
receive medical care by another physician.  At each visit, the investigator will ask the subject 
whether he/she has received medical care by another physician since the last visit or is 
planning to do so in the future.  When the subject is going to rec eive medical care by another 
physician, the investigator, with the consent of the subject, will inform the other physician 
that the subject is participating in the clinical study.  
9.6 Data Quality Assurance  
This study will be organized, performed, and reported  in compliance with the protocol, 
SOPs, working practice documents, and applicable regulations and guidelines.  Site audits 
will be made periodically by the sponsor’s or the CRO’s qualified compliance auditing team, 
which is an independent function from th e study team responsible for conduct of the study.   
9.6.1  Data Collection  
Data required by the protocol will be collected on the CRFs and entered into a validated data 
management system that is compliant with all regulatory requirements .  As defined by ICH 
guidelines, the CRF is a printed, optical, or electronic document designed to record all of the 
protocol -required information to be reported to the sponsor on each study subject.  
Data collection on the CRF must follow the instructions described in the CRF Completion 
Guidelines.  The investigator has ultimate responsibility for the collection and reporting of all 
clinical data entered on the CRF.  The investigator or designee as identified on Form FDA 
1572  must sign the completed CRF to attest to its accuracy, authenticity, and completeness.  
Completed, original CRFs are the sole property of Eisai and should not be made available in 
any form to third parties without written permission from Eisai, except for authorized 
representatives of Ei sai or appropriate regulatory authorities.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 72 of 103  
 9.6.2  Clinical Data Management  
All software applications used in the collection of data will be properly validated following 
standard computer system validation that is compliant with all regulatory requirements.  All 
data, both CRF and external data (eg, laboratory data), will be entered into a clinical system.  
9.7 Statistical Methods  
All statistical analyses will be performed by the sponsor  or designee after the study is 
completed and the database is locked and released and a snapshot of the database is obtained 
and released.  Statistical analyses will be performed using SAS software or other validated 
statistical software as required.  Deta ils of the statistical analyses will be included in a 
separate statistical analysis plan (SAP).  
9.7.1  Statistical and Analytical Plans  
The statistical analyses of study data are described in this section .  Further details of the 
analytical plan will be provided in the SAP, which will be finalized before database  lock. 
9.7.1.1  Study Endpoints  
9.7.1.1.1  PRIMARY ENDPOINT  
The primary efficacy endpoint is ORR  based on investigator assessment,  defined as the 
proportion of subjects who have a BOR  of CR or PR.  
9.7.1.1.2  SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
The sec ondary efficacy endpoints are:  
 PFS based on investigator assessment – defined as the time from date of first dose of 
study drug to date of first documentation of disease progression or death, whichever 
occurs first.  
 OS – defined as the time from the date o f first dose of study drug until date of death 
from any cause.  
9.7.1.1.3  EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS  
The exploratory endpoints are:  
 ORR based on IIR assessment . 
 PFS based on IIR assessment . 
 CBR  is the proportion of subjects who have a BOR of CR or PR or durable SD. 
Stabl e disease must be achieved at ≥ 23 weeks after first lenvatinib administration to 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 73 of 103  
 be considered durable SD.  The CBR will be determined  based on both investigator 
and IIR assessment s. 
 DCR  is the proportion of subjects who have a BOR of CR, PR , or SD.  The DCR will 
be determined  based on both investigator and IIR assessment s. 
 DOR  is defined  as the time from the date that the criteria are met for CR or PR 
(whichever is recorded first) to the date that PD is objectively documented or death, 
whichever occurs first.  The DOR will be determined  based on both investigator and 
IIR assessment s. 
9.7.1.2  Definitions of Analysis Sets  
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) include s subjects who received at least 1 dose of the study 
drugs. This will be the analysis set for all efficacy and safety evaluations .   
The Evaluable Analysis Set (EAS, a subset of the Full Analysis Set) includes all subjects 
who have both an evaluable baseline tumor assessment and an evaluable postbaseline tumor 
assessment, unless the subjects are discontinued because of disease progression or toxicity. 
This will be used for the sensitivity analyses of efficacy.  
The PK Analysis Set will include all subjects who received at least one dose of study drug 
and have evaluable lenvatinib plasma and/or everolimus whole blood concentration data.  
The Pharmacodynamic  Analysis Set  will include all subjects who r eceived at least one dose 
of study drug and have evaluable pharmacodynamics data.  
9.7.1.3  Subject Disposition  
The number of subjects enrolled, prematurely discontinued from study treatment (defined as 
those who discontinued study treatment due to any reason except  for progressive disease) and 
those with major protocol deviations will be counted.  The reason for study drug 
discontinued will be summarized according to the categories in the CRF.  The end of study 
status (alive, death, withdrew consent or lost to follo w-up) at the data cutoff date will be 
summarized using the data from the survival follow -ups. 
9.7.1.4  Demographic and Other Baseline Characteristics  
Demographic and other baseline characteristics for the FAS will be summarized using 
descriptive statistics.  Continuous demographic and baseline variables include age, weight, 
and vital signs ; categorical variables include sex, age group , ECOG  performance status , race, 
and subtypes of nccRCC .   
9.7.1.5  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
All investigator terms for medications recorded in the CRF will be coded to an 11 -digit code 
using the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary (WHO DD).  The number 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 74 of 103  
 (percentage) of subjects who took prior and concomitant medications will be summarized on 
the FAS by Anatomical Therapeutic Chem ical (ATC) class  and WHO DD preferred term  
(PT).  Prior medications will be defined as medications that stopped before the first dose of 
study drug.  Concomitant medications will be defined as medications that (1) started before 
the first dose of study dru g and were continuing at the time of the first dose of study drug, or 
(2) started on or after the date of the first dose of study drug up to 28 days after the subject’s 
last dose.  All medications will be presented in subject data listing s. 
9.7.1.6  Efficacy Analys es 
9.7.1.6.1  PRIMARY EFFICACY ANALYS IS 
Primary endpoint ORR assessed by investigator review will be analyzed using the Full 
Analysis Set. Subjects who did not have a tumor assessment for any reason will be 
considered as nonresponders and included in the denominator when calculating response rate.  
In this population, ORR in the historical control is assumed to be 8% ( Hudes et al. ,2007 ). 
The ORR in this study  is estimated  as 25%, which is deemed a clinical meaningful 
improvement. Hence, the null and alternative hypotheses are set as follows:  
                                                     H0: ORR=8%  
                                                     Ha: ORR  ≥25%  
Simon’s Two -Stage Design (Simon , 1989 ) is used in hypothesis testing for the primary 
endpoints.  The interim futility analysis after Stage 1 allows for an early evaluation of 
efficacy results in order to stop the study  early in the case of low anticancer acti vity.  A 
minimum of 2 responders as assessed by ORR in the Stage 1 subjects (n 1=16) is required in 
the interim analysis for the study  to proceed to Stage 2 , in which 15 more subjects may be 
enrolled .  In the final analysis of ORR, a minimum of 6 responders  is required in Stages 1 
and 2 subjects combined (n=31) to claim the superiority of study treatment over historical 
controls.  
The ORR  based on investigator assessment  in the final analysis will be calculated an d a 
2-sided Clopper –Pearson 95%  confidence in terval (CI) will be constructed.   
Table 6 Simon’s Two -Stage Design for Interim Futility and Final 
Analyses of ORR  
 Threshold  
Interim Analysis  Continue if  ≥2 responders when n 1=16 
Final Analysis  Reject H 0 if ≥6 responders when n=31  
H0 = null hypothesis ,  n = sample size for Stages 1 and 2 subjects combined , n1 = sample size for 
Stage 1 subjects , ORR = objective response rate   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 75 of 103  
 9.7.1.6.2  SECONDARY EFFICACY ANALYSES  
The PFS assessed by the investigator and OS will be analyzed using Kaplan –Meier product -
limit estimates.  Median PFS and OS and the cumulative probability of PFS at 3, 6, and 12 
months and cumulative probability of OS at 6, 12, and 18 months will be presented with two -
sided 95% CI if estimable.  PF S censoring rules will follow FDA Guidance for Industry, 
Clinical Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics ( 2018 ).   
The cumulative PFS and OS will be plotted over time.  The median, first, and third quartiles 
from Kaplan –Meier estima tion for PFS and OS will be provided with 95% CI if estimable.  
9.7.1.6.3  EXPLORATORY EFFICACY ANALYSES  
The ORR based on IIR assessment will be evaluated using the same method described in the 
primary analysis.  
A 2-sided Clopper –Pearson 95% CI will be constructed fo r CBR and DCR.   The DOR and 
PFS per IIR assessment will be analyzed using time to event methods described above.  
9.7.1.6.4  FORMAL ANALYSES OF ORR,  PFS,  AND OS 
A formal analysis will be carried out after all subject s have been enrolled  and on study 
treatment for  at least 6 months or have discontinued due to disease progressio n, death , or 
toxicity .  Since the primary  endpoint ORR data are expected to be observed sooner than the 
secondary endpoints, the timing of the formal analysis is chosen such that the secondar y 
endpoints, PFS and OS, will be adequately described.  The primary population for efficacy  
and safety analys es is the FAS.  
9.7.1.6.5  SENSITIVITY ANALYSES  
The above efficacy analyses will be conducted in the EAS as sensitivity analyses.  
9.7.1.7  Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodyna mic, Pharmacogenomic , and Other 
Biomarker  Analyses  
9.7.1.7.1  PHARMACOKINETIC ANALYSES  
A population PK approach will be used to characteri ze the PK of lenvatinib and everolimus 
and the final PK model will be used to derive lenvatinib and everolimus exposure parameter s 
to be used in the subsequent pharmacokinetic  (PK) /pharmacodynamic analyses. The analyses 
will be detailed in a separate analysis plan.  Concentrations of each analyte will be graphed 
by time within each nominal collection interval.  Average dose at each collection interval 
will also be displayed.  
9.7.1.7.2  PHARMACOKINETIC /PHARMACODYNAMIC ANALYSES  
Lenvatinib and everolimus exposure parameters derived from the population PK analysis will 
be related to biomarker, safety, and efficacy data using a model -based approach.   For some 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 76 of 103  
 PK/pharmacodynamic  analyses, data from this study may be pooled with data from other 
clinical studies of study drug.  
For efficacy, a tumor growth inhibition model based on longitudinal tumor size 
measurements of target lesions will be included.  We plan to explore exposure to both 
lenvatinib and everolimus exposure and/or selected biomarkers, identified in other studies of 
study drug, as predictors and/or correlations with tumor burden changes in the tumor growth 
inhibition model. Other analyses will include logistic regression analysis for ORR 24W.   
For the exposure -response relationship of safety, data will be analyzed using a longitudinal 
categorical logistic regression analysis for AEs leading to dosing reduction or interruption.  
For the expo sure-response relationship for selected biomarkers, identified in other clinical 
studies of study drug, data may be analyzed using a model -based approach.  
Population PK and PK/ pharmacodynamic  analyses will be detailed in a separate analysis 
plan.  
9.7.1.7.3  PHARMACO DYNAMIC , PHARMACOGENOMIC , AND OTHER BIOMARKER  ANALYSES  
Soluble, tissue, genetic and/or imaging biomarkers (Baseline and/or posttreatment) may be 
summarized  using descriptive statistics and correlated with clinical outcomes -related 
endpoints for safety and/or efficacy as appropriate.  Details will be included in a separate 
analysis plan.  
9.7.1.8  Safety Analyses  
Safety, using the FAS, will be assessed  by monitoring and recording of all AEs including all 
CTCAE grades, regular monitoring of hematology and clinical chemistry, urinalysis, regular 
measurement of vital signs, 12 -lead ECGs , and performance of physical examinations.  
Adverse events and other c linical safety data will be summarized descriptively in the FAS. 
The incidence of TEAEs , SAEs, drug -related AEs , and AEs leading to discontinuation will 
be summarized in tabulation. Hematology, serum chemistry, vital sign variables and ECG 
will be summariz ed descriptively for observed values, by grade and by change from Baseline 
by cycle. All AEs and lab parameters will be listed.  
9.7.1.8.1  EXTENT OF EXPOSURE  
The number of cycles/days on treatment, quantity of study treatment administered, and the  
number of subjects requiring dose reductions, treatment interruption, treatment delay, and  
treatment discontinuation due to adverse events will be summarized for each study drug.  
9.7.1.8.2  ADVERSE EVENTS  
The AE verbatim descriptions (investigator terms from the CRF) will be classified  into 
standardized medical terminology using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 77 of 103  
 (MedDRA).  Adverse events will be coded to the MedDRA (Version 17 or higher ) lower 
level term (LLT) closest to the verbatim term.  The linked MedDRA preferred ter m (PT) and 
primary system organ class (SOC) are also captured in the database.  
A treatment -emergent adverse event (TEAE) is defined as an AE that emerges during 
treatment, having been absent at pretreatment (Baseline) or  
 Reemerges during treatment, having  been present at pretreatment (Baseline) but stopped 
before treatment, or  
 Worsens in severity during treatment relative to the pretreatment state, when the AE is 
continuous.  
Only those AEs that are treatment -emergent will be included in summary table s.  All AEs, 
treatment -emergent or otherwise, will be presented in subject data listing s. 
The TEAEs will be summarized.  The incidence of TEAEs will be reported as the number 
(percentage) of subjects with TEAEs by SOC and PT.  A subject will be counted only on ce 
within a n SOC and PT, even if the subject experienced more than  1 TEAE within a specific 
SOC and PT.  The number (percentage) of subjects with TEAEs will also be summarized by 
maximum severity (mild, moderate, or severe  by highest CTCAE grade).  
The numb er (percentage) of subjects with TEAEs will also be summarized by relationship to 
each study drug  and combined  (Yes [related] and No [not related] ). 
9.7.1.8.3  LABORATORY VALUES  
Clinical laboratory (ie, hematology, serum chemistry , and qualitative urinalysis) values will 
be evaluated for each laboratory parameter.  Abnormal laboratory values will be flagged and 
identified as those outside (above or below) the normal range.   Reference (normal) ranges for 
laboratory parameters will be included in the clinical study repo rt for this protocol.  
Descriptive summary statistics (eg , n, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, 
maximum for continuous variables; n[%] for categorical variables) for laboratory parameters 
and their changes from baseline will be calculated.   Labora tory values will be summarized by  
visit and by worst postbaseline visit.  
Laboratory parameters that are graded in CTCAE (v4.03) will be summarized by CTCAE 
grade.  In the summary of laboratory parameters by CTCAE grade, parameters with CTCAE 
grading in bot h high and low directions (eg, calcium, glucose, magnesium, potassium, 
sodium) will be summarized separately.  
Please see Appendix 7 for sponsor’s grading of laboratory values.  
9.7.1.8.4  VITAL SIGNS 
Descriptive statistics for vital signs parameters (ie, systolic and diastolic BP, pulse, 
respiratory rate, temperature,  and weight)  and changes from baseline will be presented by 
visit for all visits .  Vital signs will be listed by subject and visit.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 78 of 103  
 9.7.1.8.5  ELECTROCARDIOGRAMS  
ECG assessments will be  performed at the Screening Visit and during the Treatment Phase 
according to Table 5.  Descriptive statistics for ECG parameters and changes from baseline 
will be presented by visit. 
9.7.1.8.6  OTHER SAFETY ANALYSES  
Not applicable.  
9.7.1.9  Other Analyses  
Any other statistical/ analytical issues will be discussed in the SAP.  
9.7.2  Determination of Sample Size  
The sample size is calculated using Simon’s Two -Stage Design for the primary endpoint 
ORR assuming an ORR of 25% from this study versus a n historical contro l of 8%.  A total of 
approximately 31 subjects, including 16 in Stage 1, are planned to be enrolled in the study.  
The actual number of subjects accrued will depend on the results from Stage 1.  If ≤1 
responders are observed in the first 16 subjects treate d (Stage 1), the enrollment will be 
stopped. The total sample size will be the actual number of subjects enrolled at the time of 
termination of the study .  If ≥2 responders are observed  in Stage 1 , the study will proceed to 
Stage 2 and a total of 31 subjec ts will be enrolled.  At least 6 responders in 31 subjects is 
required to claim superiority of the study treatment.  This design yields a  one-sided type I 
error  of 0.0319 and the power of 0.8053 in Stage s 1 and 2 combined.  
9.7.3  Interim Analysis  
An interim analy sis may be performed by the sponsor after 16 subjects in Stage 1 have 
completed at least 2 tumor assessments (eg, Week 16 tumor assessments), unless 
discontinued due to disease progression, death or toxicity.  If one or no responders are 
observed in the in terim analysis, the study  will be stopped early for futility and subjects on 
study at that time will continue treatment under the discretion of the investigator. If two or 
more responders are confirmed before the planned interim analysis and the safety pro files of 
both drugs are acceptable, the study  will continue to Stage 2 and a formal interim analysis 
may be waived.  There will be no enrollment gap for the interim analysis.  
At interim analysis, the probabilities of early futility stopping are 0.6299 under  H0: ORR=8 % 
and 0.0635 under H a: ORR≥25 %, respectively.  
9.7.4  Other Statistical/Analytical Issues  
None.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 79 of 103  
 9.7.5  Procedure for Revising the Statistical Analysis Plan  
The SAP will be finalized prior to the database lock in this study .  Any deviation from the 
analysis plan described in the protocol will be documented in the SAP.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 80 of 103  
 10 REFERENCE LIST  
AFINITOR® US Package Insert. 
http://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/afinitor.pdf.  
American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and f igures 2016. Atlanta: American Canc er Society; 
2016 . 
Bassil B, Dosoretz DE, Prout GR Jr . Validation of the tumor, nodes and metastasis 
classification of renal cell carcinoma. J Urol . 1985 ;134 (3):450 -4.  
Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program . Common terminology criteria for adverse e vents 
(CTCA E), version 4.0 [published 28 May 2009 (v4.03: June 14, 2010)].  Available from: 
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010 -06-1 4_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf .  
Cockcroft DW, Gault MH. Prediction of creatinine clearance from serum creatinine. 
Nephron . 1976; 16(1):31 –41. 
Consensus conference. Magnetic resonance imaging. JAMA . 1988; 259(14):2132 -8.  
Criteria Committee , New York Heart Association.  Nomenclature and c riteria for diagnosis 
of diseases of the heart and great v essels. 9th ed. Boston: Little, Br own & Co; 1994 . p. 253-6. 
Davis CF, Ricketts, CJ, Wang M, Yang L, Cherniak AD, Shen H, et al. The somatic genomic 
landscape of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2014;26(3):319 -30.  
Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL, Trotti  A, editors . Kidney. In: AJCC 
Cancer staging m anual. 7th ed. New York: Springer, 2010 . p. 479-89. 
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D, Ford R, et al.  New 
response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1).  Eur J 
Cancer.  2009;45 (2):228 -47. 
Escudier  B, Porta C, Schmidinger M, Algaba F, Patard JJ, Khoo V, et al; ESMO Guidelines 
Working Group . Renal cell carcinoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, 
treatment and follow -up. Ann Oncol . 2014;25(Suppl 3):ii49 -ii56. 
European Society for Medical Oncology [ESMO]. Clinical practice guidelines . Available 
from: https://oncologypro.esmo.org/Guidelines/Clinical -Practice -Guidelines/Supportive -and-
Palliative -Care  
Faivre S, Kroemer G, Raymond E. Cur rent development of mTOR inhibitors as anticancer 
agents. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006;5(8):671 -88. 
Flockhart DA. Drug interactions: cytochrome P450 drug interaction table. Indiana University 
School of Medicine ; 2007.  Available from: http://medicine.iupui.edu/flockhart/table.htm   
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 81 of 103  
 Golimbu M, Joshi P, Sperber A, Tessler A, Al -Askari S, Morales P.  Renal cell carcinoma: 
survival and prognostic factors. Urology . 1986 ;27(4):291 -301.   
Guidance for Industr y: Clinical trial endpoints for the approval of cancer drugs and biologics.  
Washington, DC: United States Food and Drug Administration; December 2018 . 
Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak, Dutcher J, Figlin R, Kapoor A, et al.  Global ARCC Trial. 
Temsirolimus , interferon alfa, or both for advanced renal -cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356(22):2271 -81. 
LENVIMA® US Package Insert. Available from: http://www.lenvima.com/pdfs/prescribing -
information.pdf . 
LENVIMA® EU Summary of Product Characteristics. Available  from: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product -information/lenvima -epar-product -
information_en.pdf  
Ljungberg BJ, Jacobsen J, Rudolfsson SH, Lindh G, Grankvist K, Rasmuson T.  Different 
vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf), vegf -receptor 1 and -2 mrna expression profiles 
between clear cell and papillary renal cell carcinoma. BJU Int. 2006;98(3):661 -7. 
Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Glen H, Michaelson MD, Molina A, Eisen T, et al. Lenvatinib, 
everolimus, and the combination in patients with metastatic rena l cell carcinoma: a 
randomised, phase 2, open -label, multicentre trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Nov;16(15):1473 -82.  
National Comprehensive Cancer Network [NCCN] . Clinical practice guidelines in oncology, 
2015 . Available from: https://www.nccn.org/professionals /physician_gls/default.aspx   
Oken MM, Creech RH, Torney DC, Horton J, Davis TE, McFadden ET, et al. Toxicity and 
response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol. 
1982;5(6):649 -55. 
Posadas EM, Limvorasak S, Sharma S, Figlin RA. Targeting angiogenesis in renal cell 
carcinoma. Exp Opin Pharmacother. 2013;14(16):2221 -36. 
Robson CJ, Churchill BM, Anderson W . The results of radical nephrectomy for renal cell 
carcinoma. J Urol . 1969; 101(3):297 -301.   
Simon  R. Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials, Control Clin  Trials . 
1989; 10(1):1-10. 
Wahal SP, Mardi K. Multilocular Cystic Renal Cell Carcinoma: A Rare Entity with Review 
of Literature. J Lab Physicians. 2014 Jan -Jun; 6(1): 50 –52. 
Eisai Clinical  Study Reports  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 82 of 103  
 Report Number: CPMS -E7080 -007R -v1. Population pharmacokinetic analysis of lenvatinib 
(pooled data) and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analyses of lenvatinib efficacy, 
biomarker (Study E7080 -G000 -303) and safety (Studies E7080 -G000 -201, E708 0-G000 -303, 
E7080 -J081 -208) in subjects with Iodine -131 refractory, unresectable differentiated thyroid 
cancer. 20 May 2014.  
Report Number: RDMPKA2013 -156 REVISION NO. 1.  Study Report: Simulation of drug -
drug interaction between lenvatinib and CYP3A4 subs trate midazolam, and CYP2C8 
substrate repaglinide. 12 Sep 2014 . 
 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 83 of 103  
 11 PROCEDURES AND INSTR UCTIONS (ADMINISTRATIVE 
PROCEDURES)  
11.1 Changes to the Protocol  
Any change to the protocol requires a written protocol amendment or administrative change 
that must be approved by the sponsor before implementation.  Amendments specifically 
affecting the safety of subjects, the scope of the investigation, or the scientific quality of the 
study require submission to health or regulatory authorities as well as additional ap proval by 
the applicable IRBs/IECs.  These requirements should in no way prevent any immediate 
action from being taken by the investigator, or by the sponsor, in the interest of preserving 
the safety of all subjects included in the study.  If the investiga tor determines that an 
immediate change to or deviation from the protocol is necessary for safety reasons to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to the subjects , the sponsor’s medical monitor  and the 
IRB/IEC for the site must be notified immediately.  The sponso r must notify the health or 
regulatory authority as required per local regulations.  
Protocol amendments that affect only administrative aspects of the study may not require 
submission to health or regulatory authority or the IRB/IEC, but the health or regu latory 
authority and IRB  should be kept informed of such changes as required by local regulations.  
In these cases, the sponsor may be required to send a letter to the IRB/IEC and the 
Competent Authorities detailing such changes.  
11.2 Adherence to the Protocol  
The investigator will conduct the study in strict accordance with the protocol (refer to 
ICH E6, Section  4.5). 
11.3 Monitoring Procedures  
The sponsor’s/CRO’s CRA will maintain contact with the investigator and designated staff 
by telephone, letter, or email between study visits.  Monitoring visits to each site will be 
conducted by the assigned CRA as described in the monitoring plan.  The in vestigator will 
allow the CRA to inspect the clinical, laboratory, and pharmacy facilities to assure 
compliance with GCP and local regulatory requirements.  The CRFs and subject’s 
corresponding original medical records (source documents) are to be fully av ailable for 
review by the sponsor’s representatives at regular intervals.  These reviews verify adherence 
to study protocol and data accuracy in accordance with local regulations.  All records at the 
site are subject to inspection by the local auditing age ncy and to IRB/IEC review.  
In accordance with ICH E6, Section  1.52, source documents include, but are not limited to , 
the following:  
 Clinic, office, or hospital charts  
 Copies or transcribed health care provider notes that have been certified for accuracy 
after production  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 84 of 103  
  Recorded data from automated instruments such as IxRS, x -rays, and other imaging 
reports (eg, sonograms, CT scans, magnetic resonance images, radioactive images, ECGs, 
rhythm strips, electroencephalograms [ EEGs ], polysomnographs, pulmonary function 
tests) regardless of how these images are stored, including microfiche and photographic 
negatives  
 Pain, quality of life, or medical history questionnaires completed by subjects  
 Records of telephone contacts  
 Diaries or evaluation checklists  
 Drug di stribution and accountability logs maintained in pharmacies or by research 
personnel  
 Laboratory results and other laboratory test outputs  
 Correspondence regarding a study subject’s treatment between physicians or memoranda 
sent to the IRBs/IECs  
 CRF compon ents (eg, questionnaires) that are completed directly by subjects and serve as 
their own source . 
11.4 Recording of Data  
A CRF is required and must be completed for each subject by qualified and authorized 
personnel.  All data on the CRF must reflect the corresp onding source document, except 
when a section  of the CRF itself is used as the source document.  Any correction to entries 
made on the CRF must be documented in a valid audit trail where the correction  is dated, the 
individual making the correct is identif ied, the reason for the change is stated, and the 
original data are not obscured.  Only data required by the protocol for the purposes of the 
study should be collected.  
The investigator must sign each CRF.  The investigator will report the CRFs to the sponsor 
and retain a copy of the CRFs.  
11.5 Identification of Source Data  
All data to be recorded on the CRF must reflect the c orresponding source documents.   For 
the following item (s), the data recorded directly on the CRF are to be considered source data:  
 Study treatment compliance (eg, the reason for dose  reduction).  
 Discontinuation information.  
 Sampling date and time for drug  concentration.  
 Sampling date and time for the clinical laboratory  test. 
 Comments and other information on AEs (eg, severity, relationship  to study treatment, 
outcome) . 
11.6 Retention of Records  
The circumstances of completion or termination of the study notwithstanding, the 
investigator is  responsible for retaining all study documents, including but not limited to the 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 85 of 103  
 protocol, copies of CRFs, t he Investigator's Brochure, and regulatory agency registration 
documents (eg, Form FDA 1572, ICFs, and IRB/IEC correspondence).  The site should plan 
to retain study documents, as directed by the sponsor, for at least 2 years after the last 
approval of a m arketing application in an ICH region and until there are no pending or 
contemplated marketing applications in an ICH region or at least 3 years have elapsed since 
the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  
It is req uested that at the completion of the required retention period, or should the 
investigator retire or relocate, the investigator contact the sponsor, allowing the sponsor the 
option of permanently retaining the study records.  
11.7 Auditing Procedures and Inspect ion 
In addition to routine monitoring procedures, the sponsor’s Clinical Quality Assurance 
department conducts audits of clinical research activities in accordance with the sponsor’s 
SOPs to evaluate compliance with the principles of ICH GCP and all applic able local 
regulations .  If a government regulatory authority requests an inspection during the study or 
after its completion, the investigator must inform the sponsor immediately.  
11.8 Handling of Study Drug  
All study drug will be supplied to the principal inv estigator (or a designated pharmacist) by 
the sponsor.  Drug supplies must be kept in an appropriate secure area (eg, locked cabinet) 
and stored according to the conditions specified on the drug labels.  The investigator (or a 
designated pharmacist) must m aintain an accurate record of the shipment and dispensing of 
the study drug in a drug accountability ledger, a copy of which must be given to the sponsor 
at the end of the study.  An accurate record of the date and amount of study drug dispensed to 
each su bject must be available for inspection at any time.  The CRA will visit the site and 
review these documents along with all other study conduct documents at appropriate 
intervals once study drug has been received by the site.  
All drug supplies are to be use d only for this study and not for any other purpose.  The 
investigator (or site personnel) must not destroy any drug labels or any partly used or unused 
drug supply before approval to do so by the sponsor.  At the conclusion of the study and as 
appropriate  during the study, the investigator (or a designated pharmacist) will return all used 
and unused drug containers, drug labels, and a copy of the completed drug disposition form 
to the sponsor’s CRA or , when approval is given by the sponsor, will destroy su pplies and 
containers at the site.  
11.9 Publication of Results  
All manuscripts, abstracts, or other modes of presentation arising from the results of the 
study must be reviewed and approved in writing by the sponsor in advance of submission 
pursuant to the term s and conditions set forth in the executed Clinical Trial Agreement 
between the sponsor/CRO and the institution/investigator.  The review is aimed at protecting 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 86 of 103  
 the sponsor's proprietary information existing either at the date of the commencement of the 
study or generated during the study.  
The detailed obligations regarding the publication of any data, material results, or other 
information generated or created in relation to the study shall be set out in the agreement 
between each investigator and the spon sor or CRO, as appropriate.  
11.10  Disclosure and Confidentiality  
The contents of this protocol and any amendments and results obtained during the study 
should be kept confidential by the investigator, the investigator’s staff, and the IRB/IEC and 
will not be dis closed in whole or in part to others, or used for any purpose other than 
reviewing or performing the study, without the written consent of the sponsor.  No data 
collected as part of this study will be used in any written work, including publications, 
witho ut the written consent of the sponsor.  These obligations of confidentiality and non -use 
shall in no way diminish such obligations as set forth in either the Confidentiality Agreement 
or Clinical Trial Agreement executed between the sponsor/CRO and the 
institution/investigator.  
All persons assisting in the performance of this study must be bound by the obligations of 
confidentiality and non -use set forth in either the Confidentiality Agreement or Clinical Trial 
Agreement executed between the institution/inv estigator and the sponsor/CRO.  
11.11  Discontinuation of Study  
The sponsor reserves the right to discontinue the study for medical reasons or any other 
reason at any time.  If a study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the sponsor will 
promptly inform the in vestigators/institutions and regulatory authorities of the termination or 
suspension and the reason (s) for the termination or suspension.  The IRB/IEC will also be 
informed promptly and provided the reason (s) for the termination or suspension by the 
sponso r or by the investigator/institution, as specified by the applicable regulatory 
requirement (s). 
The investigator reserves the right to discontinue the study should his/her judgment so 
dictate.  If the investigator terminates or suspends a study without pri or agreement of the 
sponsor, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the 
investigator/institution should promptly inform the sponsor and the IRB/IEC and provide the 
sponsor and the IRB/IEC with a detailed written explanation of  the termination or 
suspension.  Study records must be retained as noted above.  
11.12  Subject Insurance and Indemnity  
The sponsor will provide insurance for any subjects participating in the study in accordance 
with all applicable laws and regulations.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 87 of 103  
 12 APPENDI CES 
  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 88 of 103  
 Appendix 1 Overview of RECIST v1.1 for Evaluation of Tumors 
Response  
 
Tumor response assessments in this clinical study will use RECIST v1.1 guidelines based on 
the article by Eisenhauer, et al., 2009 , entitled “New response evaluation criteria in solid 
tumours: Revised  RECIST guideline (version 1.1), ” with the exception that chest disease 
may not be followed using chest x -ray and must be assessed with CT.   This appendix 
contains an overview of the REC IST v1.1 guidelines.   
Baseline Tumor Assessment  
Subjects are required to have measurable disease, defined as the presence of at least 
1 measurable lesion, to be eligible for entry into the study.  Measurable and nonmeasurable 
lesions are defined as:  
Measu rable lesions:  
Tumor lesions: Must be accurately measured in at least 1 dimension (longest diameter in the 
plane of measurement is to be recorded) with a minimum size of:  
10 mm by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness no greater than 5 mm ) 
10 mm caliper measur ement by clinical exam ( lesions, which cannot be accurately 
measured with calipers,  should be recorded as nonmeasurable)  
Malignant lymph nodes: To be considered pathologically enlarged and measurable, a lymph 
node must be >15 mm in short axis when assessed  by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness 
recommended to be no greater than 5 mm).  At baseline and in follow -up, only the short axis 
will be measured and followed.  
MRI may be substituted for contrast enhanced CT for some sites, but not lung.  The 
minimum size for measurability is the same as for CT (10 mm) as long as the scans are 
performed with slice thickness of 5 mm and no gap.  In the event the MRI is performed with 
thicker slices, the size of a measurable lesion at baseline should be 2 times the slice 
thickness.  In the event there are interslice gaps, this also needs to be considered in 
determining the size of measurable lesions at baseline.  
Lytic bone lesions or mixed lytic -blastic lesions, with identifiable soft tissue components, 
that can be evaluated by cross -sectional imaging techniques such as CT or MRI can be 
considered as measurable lesions if the soft tissue component meets the definition of 
measurability.  
A lesion located in a previously irradiated area, or in an area previously subjected to any 
locoregional therapy, will be considered measurable only if there has been a documented 
increase in lesion size subsequent to prior treatment but before study entry.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 89 of 103  
 Clinical lesions: Clinical lesions will only be considered measurable when they are 
superf icial and >10 mm diameter as assessed using calipers (eg, skin nodules).  For the case 
of skin lesions, documentation by color photography including a ruler to estimate the size of 
the lesion is suggested.  When lesions can be evaluated by both clinical ex am and imaging, 
imaging evaluation should be undertaken since it is more objective and may also be reviewed 
at the end of the study.  
Nonmeasurable lesions: All other lesions, including small lesions (longest diameter  
< 10 mm or pathological lymph nodes wi th a short axis of ≥  10 mm to <  15 mm short axis), 
lesions that cannot be accurately measured with calipers, and truly nonmeasurable lesions:  
leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural or pericardial effusion, inflammatory breast disease, 
lymphangitic invol vement of skin or lung, abdominal masses/abdominal organomegaly 
identified by PE that is not measurable by reproducible imaging techniques. Lymph nodes 
with a short axis <10 mm are considered nonpathological and should not be recorded or 
followed.  
Simple c ysts (cystic lesions) will not be considered malignant, and will be neither measurable 
nor nonmeasurable.  Cystic lesions believed to be metastases may be considered measurable 
if they meet the general definition of measurability, but noncystic lesions are  preferred as 
target lesions.  
All baseline tumor evaluations should be performed as closely as possible to the start of 
treatment and never more than 4 weeks before the first dose of study treatment.  
Methods of Tumor Measurement  
The same imaging modality a nd the same technique (including use or nonuse of oral and IV 
contrast) should be used to characterize each identified and reported lesion at 
Baseline/Screening and at reassessment time points during the study.  All measurements 
should be taken and recorde d in metric notation, using calipers if clinically assessed.  
Computed tomography and MRI  are the best currently available and reproducible methods to 
measure target lesions selected for response assessment.  Computed tomography should be 
performed with sli ces of 5 mm or less in thickness (as a general rule, lesion diameter should 
be no less than double the slice thickness).  This applies to tumors of the chest, abdomen, and 
pelvis.  Magnetic resonance imaging is also acceptable in certain conditions (eg, fo r body 
scans).  A  CT of the chest without contrast is preferred over MRI.  
Bone scans, positron emission tomography (PET) scan, or plain films  are not sufficient to 
measure bone lesions and document objective response but may be used  to confirm the 
presence or disappearance of such lesions.  Bone scans should be performed using 
99m-technetium -labeled polyphosphonate scintigraphy, whole body bone MRI, or 18F-NaF-
PET.  
Chest x -rays should not be used for baseline assessment of the chest or for follow -up of 
known lesions.  Chest CT should be used.  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 90 of 103  
 Ultrasound  should not be used to measure tumor lesions.  
Endoscopy and laparoscopy  should not be used to measure tumor lesions . 
Documentation of "Target" and "Nontarget" Lesions  
Lesions are evalua ted and classified at Baseline as either target or nontarget and all are then 
followed throughout the study.  
Target Lesions:  
Target lesions are all measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 
5 lesions in total, representative of all involved organs.  Target lesions should be selected on 
the basis of their size (those with the longest diameters) and their suitability for accurate 
repeated measurements.  
The short axis (≥15 mm) of any lymph nodes s elected as target lesions at Baseline will be 
measured and recorded at each evaluation time point, even if the nodes become 
nonpathological (short axis <10 mm).  
The sum of the diameters of all target lesions (longest for nonnodal lesions, short axis for 
nodal lesions) will be calculated at Baseline and reported as the baseline sum diameter.  This 
baseline sum of diameter s will be used as the reference by which to characterize objective 
tumor response.   
Target Lesions Too Small To Measure:  
Lesions that beco me too small to measure during treatment should be assigned a default 
measurement of either 0 mm (if the investigator believes the lesion has disappeared) or 5 mm 
(if the lesion is believed to be present and is faintly visible).  
Target Lesions That Split o r Coalesce:  
If a nonnodal target lesion fragments during treatment, the longest diameters of each 
fragment should be added together to calculate the total sum for that lesion.  When lesions 
coalesce, a plane between them may be maintained that would aid in  obtaining maximal 
diameter measurements for each individual lesion.  If the lesions are no longer separable, the 
vector of the longest diameter in this instance should be the maximal longest diameter for the 
coalesced lesion.  
Nontarget Lesions:  
All other lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as nontarget lesions and should also 
be recorded at Baseline.  Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence or 
absence of each should be noted throughout Follow -up. 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 91 of 103  
 New Lesions:  
The fin ding of a new lesion should be unequivocal (ie, not attributable to a change in 
scanning technique or imaging modality, and not thought to represent something other than a 
tumor).  If a possible new lesion is equivocal, treatment and radiographic evaluatio n should 
continue per this protocol until confirmation of PD or until additional scans confirm the 
presence of a new lesion.  In such a case, the date of progression will be the date of the initial 
scan.  
A lesion identified on a Follow -up study of an anato mical location not studied as Baseline 
will be considered a new lesion.  
Scanning with fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography ( FDG -PET) may be 
employed as a complement to CT scanning in the assessment of PD.  A negative FDG -PET 
scan at Baseline wit h a positive scan during the study will be evidence of PD.  If there is no 
FDG -PET scan at Baseline and a positive FDG -PET scan during the study, it will be 
considered evidence of PD if the positive FDG -PET corresponds to a new site of disease 
confirmed by  CT scan.  A positive postbaseline FDG -PET result corresponding to a 
preexisting site of disease with no radiographic evidence of progression will not be 
considered evidence of PD.  
Evaluation of Response for an Individual Assessment Time Point  
To determine  tumor response, the sum of all target lesions is calculated at Baseline and at 
each subsequent assessment time point (ie, every 6 weeks until progression in this study).  
Each response parameter (target, nontarget, and new lesions) will be reported indepe ndently 
at each radiographic reading as shown below in Table 1 for target lesions and Table 2 for 
nontarget lesions.  The investigator will then make a determination of OR for each 
assessment time point based on a composite evaluation of target, nontarget,  and new lesions, 
as shown in Table 3 .  
Appendix 1 - Table 1  Evaluation of Target Lesions  
 Complete Response (CR)   Disappearance of all target lesions.  All pathological lymph nodes (whether 
target or nontarget) must have a reduction in their short axis to  <10 mm.  
 Partial Response (PR)   At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the longest diameter  (LD)  of target 
lesions, taking as reference the Baseline sum diameters  
 Progressive Disease (PD)   At least a 20% increase in the sum of the LD of target lesions, tak ing as 
reference the smallest  sum LD recorded at Baseline or during treatment.  
The sum must also have an absolute increase of ≥5 mm.   
 Stable Disease (SD)   Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to 
qualify for PD, taking as  reference the smallest  sum LD since the treatment 
started  
 Not Evaluable (NE)   No imaging/measurement done at all or only on a subset of lesions at a 
particular time point; a target lesion at Baseline that is subsequently not 
measured or that is unable to be evaluated.  Includes scans that are not 
performed at a specified time point to evaluate the target lesion(s).  
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 92 of 103  
  
Appendix 1 - Table 2  Evaluation of Nontarget Lesions  
 Complete Response (CR)   Disappearance of all nontarget lesions.  All lymph nodes <10 mm (short 
axis)  
 Non-CR/Non -PD  Persistence of 1 or more nontarget lesion(s)  
 Progressive Disease (PD)   Unequivocal progression (substantial worsening in nontarget disease such 
that overall tumor burden has increased sufficiently to warrant 
discontinuation of therapy); unequivocal progression of existing nontarget 
lesionsa 
 Not Evalu able (NE)   A nontarget lesion at Baseline that is subsequently not measured or that is 
unable to be evaluated  
a:  Although a clear progression of "nontarget" lesions only is exceptional, in such circumstances, the 
opinion of the site radiologist should prevail.  
 
Appendix 1 - Table 3  Overall Response at Each Assessment Time Point for 
Subjects with Target (±  Nontarget) Disease  
Target Lesions  Nontarget Lesions       New Lesions  Overall Response  
CR CR No CR 
CR Non-CR/Non -PD No PR 
CR Not evaluated  No PR 
PR Non-PD or not all evaluated  No PR 
SD Non-PD or not all evaluated  No SD 
Not all evaluated  Non-PD No NE 
PD Any        Yes or No  PD 
Any PD        Yes or No  PD 
Any                          Any Yes PD 
CR = complete response, NE = not evaluable, PD = disease progression, PR = partial response, SD = stable 
disease.  
 
Subjects with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of PD at that time point assessment should be classified as having 
"symptomatic deterioration."  Every effort should be made to document objective 
progression after discontinuation of treatment.  
In some circumstances, it may be difficult to distinguish residual disease from normal tissue.  
When the evaluation of CR depends on this determination, it is recommended that the 
residual lesion be investigated (fine needle aspirate/biopsy) before assigning a status of CR.  
Evaluation of Best Overall Response  (BOR)  and Confirmation of Response  
The best overall response  is the best re sponse recorded from the start of the treatment until 
disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for PD the smallest measurements [nadir] 
recorded since the treatment started).  In general, the subject's best response assignment will 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 93 of 103  
 depend on the  achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria as shown in 
Table  4. 
Confirmation: To be assigned a BOR  of PR or CR, changes in tumor measurements must be 
confirmed by repeat assessments that should be performed no less than 4 weeks after the 
criteria for response are first met.  In this study, a bone scan should be done within 1 week 
after the CR confirmatory scanning time point to exclude new bone metastases.  
 The main goal of confirmation of the PR or CR objective response is to avoid 
overestim ating the response rate.   
 
 In the case of SD, follow -up measurements must have met the SD criteria at least 
once after study entry at a minimum interval of 5 weeks for this protocol.  
 
Appendix 1 - Table 4 Best Overall Response With Confirmation  
Unconfirmed response (First 
Time Point)  Confirmatory Response 
(Subsequent Time Point)  Best Overall Response of:  
CR CR CR 
CR PR SD, PD or PRa 
CR SD SD or PDb 
CR PD SD or PDb 
CR NE SD or NEc 
PR CR PR 
PR PR PR 
PR SD SD 
PR PD SDb 
PR NE SDc 
NE NE NE 
BL = baseline, CR = complete response, NE = not evaluable, PD = disease progression, PR = partial response, 
SD = stable disease.  
a:  If a CR is truly met at the first time point, then any reappearance of disease seen at a subsequent time point 
(including disease meeting PR criteria relative to BL) makes the disease PD at that time point.  
b:  Classify response as SD, provided that confirmatory scan a minimum of 5 weeks later is still "SD."  
Otherwise, response will be classified as PD.  
c:  Classify response  as SD, provided that confirmatory scan a minimum of 5 weeks later is still "SD."  
Otherwise, response will be classified as NE.  
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 94 of 103  
 Appendix 2 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  Performance  
Status  
Scale  ECOG  Status  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all predisease performance  
without restriction.  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able  to 
carry out work of a light or sedentary nature (eg, light housework , 
office work).  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any  
work  activities.  Up and about more than 50% of waking  hours.  
3 Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than  
50% of waking  hours.  
4 Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self -care. Totally confined  
to bed or  chair.  
5 Dead.  
ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.  
Adapted from Oken MM, et al. Am J Clin Oncol.  1982;5:649 -55. 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 95 of 103  
 Appendix 3 Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate  (eGFR) Using 
Cockcroft and Gault  Formula  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 96 of 103  
 Appendix 4 New York Heart Association Cardiac  Disease  
Classification  
The New  York  Heart  Association  Cardiac  Disease  Classification  provides  a 
functional  and therapeutic classification for the prescription of physical activity for 
cardiac subjects.   Based on NYHA definitions, subjects are to be classified as follows:  
 
 
Class  NYHA  Status  
Class  I: Subjects with no limitation of activities; they suffer no symptoms  
from ordinary  activities.  
Class  II: Subjects with slight, mild limitation of activity; they are comfortable  
with rest or with mild exertion.  
Class  III: Subjects with marked limitation of activity; they are comfortable 
only at rest. 
Class  IV: Subjects who should be at complete rest, confined to bed or chair;  
any physical activity brings on discomfort and symptoms occur at  
rest. 
NYHA = New York Heart Association.  
Adapted from The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association.  Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis  of 
Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels.  9th ed.  1994:253 -6. 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 97 of 103  
 Appendix 5 Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse  Events  
(v4.03)  
The National Cancer Institute's CTCAE v4.0 published 28 May 2009 (v4.03: June 14, 2010) 
provides descriptive terminology to be used for AE reporting in clinical trials.  A brief 
definition is provided to clarify the meaning of each AE term.  To increase th e accuracy of 
AE reporting, all AE terms in CTCAE version 4.0 have be correlated with single -concept, 
MedDRA terms.  
 
Grades in CTCAEs v4.03 refer to the severity of the AE.  Grades of 1 through 5, with 
unique clinical descriptions of severity for each AE, are based on this general guideline:  
 
Grade  CTCAE Status  
1 Mild:  asymptomatic  or mild symptoms;  clinical  or diagnostic  observations  
only;  intervention not  indicated.  
2 Moderate:  minimal,  local,  or noninvasive  intervention  indicated;  limiting  
age- appropriate instrumental activities of daily living  (ADL).a 
3 Severe or medically significant but not immediately  life-threatening: 
hospitalization  or prolongation  of hospitalization  indicated;  disabling,  
limiting  self-care ADL.b 
4 Life-threatening consequences: urgent intervention  indicated.  
5 Death related to adverse  event.  
CTCAE = Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse  Events.  
a: Instrumental ADL refers to preparing meals, shopping for groceries or clothes, using the telephone, managing  
money,  etc. 
b: Self -care ADL refers to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and  
not bedridden.  
Adapted from the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, NCI. CTCAE v4.0. Available  from: 
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/ About.html  (Accessed 02 Oct  2014).  
 
 
For further details regarding MedDRA, refer to the MedDRA website  at: 
http://www.meddramsso.com.  CTCAE    v4.0 is available online  at: 
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html (Accessed 02 Oct  2014).  
 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 98 of 103  
 Appendix 6  Stage Information for Renal Cell Cancer  
 
http://www.cancer.gov/types/kidney/hp/kidney -treatment -pdq 
 
Definitions of TNM  
 
The TNM Staging System (tumor -node -metastasis) is the most widely used system for cancer 
staging in the world.  The staging system for renal cell cancer is based on the degree of tumor 
spread beyond the kidney  (Bassil B et al 1985; Golimbu M et al, 1986; R obson CJ et al 
1969 ).  Involvement of blood vessels may not be a poor prognostic sign if the tumor is 
otherwise confined to the substance of the kidney. Abnormal liver function test results may 
be caused by a paraneoplastic syndrome that is reversible with  tumor removal, and these 
types of results do not necessarily represent metastatic disease. Except when computed 
tomography (CT) examination is equivocal or when iodinated contrast material is 
contraindicated, CT scanning is as good as or better than magne tic resonance imaging for 
detecting renal masses  (Magnetic Resonance Imaging JAMA 1988)  
Definitions of TNM  
The American Joint Committee on Cancer has designated staging by TNM classification to 
define renal cell cancer  (Edge SB et al 2010)  
Table 1. Primary  Tumor (T)a 
TX Primary tumor cannot be assessed.  
T0 No evidence of primary tumor.  
T1 Tumor ≤7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.  
T1a Tumor ≤4 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.  
T1b Tumor >4 cm but not >7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.  
T2 Tumor >7 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.  
T2a Tumor >7 cm but ≤10 cm in greatest dimension, limited to the kidney.  
T2b Tumor >10 cm, limited to the kidney.  
T3 Tumor extends into major veins or perinephric tissues but not into the ipsilateral 
adrenal gland and not beyond Gerota fascia.  
T3a Tumor grossly extends into the renal vein or its segmental (muscle containing) 
branches, or tumor invades perirenal and/or r enal sinus fat but not beyond Gerota 
fascia.  
T3b Tumor grossly extends into the vena cava below the diaphragm.  
T3c Tumor grossly extends into the vena cava above the diaphragm or invades the 
wall of the vena cava.  
T4 Tumor invades beyond Gerota fascia ( including contiguous extension into the 
ipsilateral adrenal gland).  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 99 of 103  
 Table 2. Regional Lymph Nodes (N)a 
NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed.  
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis.  
N1 Metastases in regional lymph node(s).  
 
Table 3.  Distant Metastasis (M)a 
M0 No distant metastasis.  
M1 Distant metastasis.  
 
Table 4.  Anatomic Stage/Prognostic Groups  
Stage  T N M 
I T1 N0 M0 
II T2 N0 M0 
III T1 or T2  N1 M0 
T3 N0 or N1  M0 
IV T4 Any N  M0 
Any T  Any N  M1 
aReprinted  with permission from AJCC: Kidney. In: Edge SB, Byrd DR, 
Compton CC, et al., eds.: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th ed. New York, 
NY: Springer, 2010, pp 479 -89. 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 100 of 103  
 Appendix 7 Sponsor’s Grading for Laboratory Values  
 
Sponsor’s Grading for Laboratory Values  
 Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  
BLOOD/BONE MARROW      
Hemoglobin   <LLN – 10.0 g/dL  
<LLN – 100 g/L  
<LLN – 6.2 mmol/L  <10.0 – 8.0 g/dL  
<100 – 80 g/L  
<6.2 – 4.9 mmol/L  <8.0 g/dL  
<80 g/L  
<4.9 mmol/L;  
transfusion indicated  life-threatening 
consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated  
Leukocytes (total WBC)  <LLN – 3.0109/L 
<LLN – 3000/ mm3  <3.0 – 2.0109/L 
<3000 – 2000/ mm3  <2.0 – 1.0109/L 
<2000 – 1000/ mm3  <1.0109/L 
<1000/ mm3  
Lymphocytes  <LLN – 800/mm3  
<LLN – 0.8109/L <800 – 500/mm3 
<0.8 – 0.5109/L <500 – 200/mm3  
<0.5 – 0.2109/L <200/mm3 
<0.2109/L 
Neutrophils  <LLN – 1.5109/L 
<LLN – 1500/mm3 <1.5 – 1.0109/L 
<1500 – 1000/mm3 <1.0 – 0.5109/L 
<1000 – 500/mm3  <0.5109/L 
<500/mm3  
Platelets  <LLN – 75.0109/L 
<LLN – 75,000/mm3  <75.0 – 50.0109/L 
<75,000 – 50,000/mm3 <50.0 – 25.0109/L 
<50,000 – 25,000/mm3 <25.0109/L 
<25,000/mm3  
METABOLIC/LABORATORY      
Albumin, serum - low 
(hypoalbuminemia)  <LLN – 3 g/dL  
<LLN – 30 g/L  <3 – 2 g/dL  
<30 – 20 g/L  <2 g/dL  
<20 g/L life-threatening 
consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated  
Alkaline phosphatase  >ULN – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 5.0ULN  >5.0 – 20.0ULN  >20.0ULN  
ALT  >ULN – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 5.0ULN  >5.0 – 20.0ULN  >20.0ULN  
AST  >ULN – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 5.0ULN  >5.0 – 20.0ULN  >20.0ULN  
Bilirubin (hyperbilirubinemia)  >ULN – 1.5ULN  >1.5 – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 10.0ULN  >10.0ULN  
Calcium, serum -low (hypocalcemia)  <LLN – 8.0 mg/dL  
<LLN – 2.0 mmol/L  <8.0 – 7.0 mg/dL  
<2.0 – 1.75 mmol/L  <7.0 – 6.0 mg/dL  
<1.75 – 1.5 mmol/L  <6.0 mg/dL  
<1.5 mmol/L  
Calcium, serum -high (hypercalcemia)  >ULN – 11.5 mg/dL  
>ULN – 2.9 mmol/L  >11.5 – 12.5 mg/dL  
>2.9 – 3.1 mmol/L  >12.5 – 13.5 mg/dL  
>3.1 – 3.4 mmol/L  >13.5 mg/dL  
>3.4 mmol/L  
Cholesterol, serum -high 
(hypercholesterolemia)  >ULN – 300 mg/dL  
>ULN – 7.75 mmol/L  >300 – 400 mg/dL  
>7.75 – 10.34 mmol/L  >400 – 500 mg/dL  
>10.34 – 12.92 mmol/L  >500 mg/dL  
>12.92 mmol/L  
Creatinine  >ULN – 1.5ULN  >1.5 – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 6.0ULN  >6.0ULN  
GGT (γ-glutamyl transpeptidase)  >ULN – 3.0ULN  >3.0 – 5.0ULN  >5.0 – 20.0ULN  >20.0ULN  
Glucose, serum -high (hyperglycemia)  Fasting glucose value:  
>ULN – 160 mg/dL  
>ULN – 8.9 mmol/L  Fasting glucose value:  
>160 – 250 mg/dL  
>8.9 – 13.9 mmol/L  >250 – 500 mg/dL;  
>13.9 – 27.8 mmol/L;  
hospitalization indicated  >500 mg/dL ; 
>27.8 mmol/L;  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Glucose, serum -low (hypoglycemia)  <LLN – 55 mg/dL  
<LLN – 3.0 mmol/L  <55 – 40 mg/dL  
<3.0 – 2.2 mmol/L  <40 – 30 mg/dL  
<2.2 – 1.7 mmol/L  <30 mg/dL  
<1.7 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 101 of 103  
 Sponsor’s Grading for Laboratory Values  
 Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  
consequences; 
seizures  
Phosphate, serum -low 
(hypophosphatemia)  <LLN – 2.5 mg/dL  
<LLN – 0.8 mmol/L  <2.5 – 2.0 mg/dL  
<0.8 – 0.6 mmol/L  <2.0 – 1.0 mg/dL  
<0.6 – 0.3 mmol/L  <1.0 mg/dL  
<0.3 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Potassium, serum -high (hyperkalemia)  >ULN – 5.5 mmol/L  >5.5 – 6.0 mmol/L  >6.0 – 7.0 mmol/L  
hospitalization indicated  >7.0 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Potassium, serum -low (hypokalemia)  <LLN – 3.0 mmol/L  <LLN – 3.0 mmol/L; 
symptomatic; 
intervention indicated  <3.0 – 2.5 mmol/L  
hospitalization indicated  <2.5 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Sodium, serum -high (hypernatremia)  >ULN – 150 mmol/L  >150 – 155 mmol/L  >155 – 160 mmol/L  
hospitalization indicated  >160 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Sodium, serum -low (hyponatremia)  <LLN – 130 mmol/L  N/A <130 – 120 mmol/L  <120 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Triglyceride, serum -high 
(hypertriglyceridemia)  150 – 300 mg/dL  
1.71 – 3.42 mmol/L  >300 – 500 mg/dL  
>3.42 – 5.7 mmol/L  >500 – 1000 mg/dL  
>5.7 – 11.4 mmol/L  >1000 mg/dL  
>11.4 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
Uric acid, serum -high (hyperuricemia)  >ULN – 10 mg/dL  
≤0.59 mmol/L without 
physiologic 
consequences  N/A >ULN – 10 mg/dL  
≤0.59 mmol/L with 
physiologic 
consequences  >10 mg/dL  
>0.59 mmol/L  
life-threatening 
consequences  
ALT = alanine aminotransferase (serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase), AST = aspartate aminotransferase (serum glutamic oxaloacetic 
transaminase), GGT = γ -glutamyl transpeptidase, N/A = not applicable, LLN = lower limit of normal, ULN = upper limit of norma l, WBC = 
white blood cell.  
Based on Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse events (CTCAE) Version 4.0.  Published: May 28, 2009 (v4.03: June 14, 2010).  
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 102 of 103  
 PROTOCOL SIGNATURE P AGE  
Study Protocol Number:  E7080 -M001 -221 
Study Protocol Title:  A single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 trial to evaluate efficacy and 
safety of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus in subjects 
with unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma (nccRCC) who have not received any 
chemotherapy f or advanced disease  
Investigational Product  
Name : Lenvatinib (E7080 ) and everolimus   
IND Number:  124564 
 
 
PPD
PPD
PPD
Clinical Study Protocol   
Amendment 01  E7080 -M001 -221 
 
 
Eisai  
FINAL : 01 May 2019 Confidential  Page 103 of 103  
 INVESTIGATOR SIGNATU RE PAGE  
Study Protocol Number:  E7080 -M001 -221 
Study Protocol Title:  A single -arm, multicenter, Phase 2 trial to evaluate efficacy and 
safety of lenvatinib in combination with everolimus in subjects 
with unresectable advanced or metastatic non clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma (nccRCC) who have not received any 
chemotherapy f or advanced disease  
Investigational Product  
Name : Lenvatinib ( E7080)  and everolimus   
 
IND Number:  124564 
 
 
 
I have read this protocol and agree to conduct this study  in accordance with all stipulations of 
the protocol and in accordance with International Council for  Harmonisation of Technical 
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and all applicable local Good 
Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines, includin g the Declaration of Helsinki.  
<Name of institution > 
Medical Institution  
 
<Name, degree (s)>     
Investigator   Signature   Date  
 
As regionally required  
<Name, degree (s)>     
President of Japan/Asia 
Clinical Research Product 
Creation Unit   Signature   Date  
 