Version 15Sept2020                                                 Page 1 of 4 
 Study of Humidified Air to Improve Mucociliary Clearance  (MCC)  in COPD:   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Tim Corcoran, Ph.D., Frank Sciurba, M.D.   
Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine  
University of Pittsburgh  
 
Hypothesis:   The delivery of humidified air by nasal cannula will result in real -time improvem ent in 
mucociliary clearance.  
Intervention:    Delivery of humidified air using  Fisher and Paykel  myAirvo 2 and Optiflow nasal cannula 
for  4 hours  at 30 L/min , reduced to 25  L/min if required for tolerance  and 37 degrees C.   
Population:   n=12 , female or male subjects 40 – 85 years of age with chronic bronchitis  
Inclusion criteria:   
(1) Male or Females 40 to 85 years old  
(2) Diagnosis of chronic bronchitis  
(3) Able to regularly produce sputum  
(4) Clinically stable   
(5) Current smoker or ex -smoker with a tobacco history of ≥10 pack -years (1 pack year = 20 cigarettes  
smoked per day for 1 year)  
(6) History of moderate to very sev ere COPD with a post -bronchodilator FEV1/FVC<0.70 and a post -
bronchodilator FEV1>20% and ≤ 70% of predicted normal value at enrollment. (5) CAT score ≥ 10, with 
questions 1 and 2 responses  ≥ 5 
Exclusion criteria:   
(1) Pregnant or nursing or unwilling to per form pregnancy testing   
(2) Unwilling or unable to refrai n for SABA/LABA use ahead of the study  
(3) Unable to lie recumbent for 90 min  
(4) Clinically important pulmonary disease other than COPD (e.g. active lung infection,  clinically 
significant bronchiectasis, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis,  hypoventilation syndrome associated with 
obesity, lung cancer, alpha 1 anti -trypsin  deficiency and primary ciliary dyskinesia) or another diagnosed 
pulmonary or  systemic disease th at is associated with elevated peripheral eosinophil counts (e.g.  allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis/mycosis, Churg -Strauss syndrome,  hyper -eosinophilic syndrome) and/ 
or radiological findings suggestive of a  respiratory disease other than COPD that i s contributing to the 
subject’s respiratory  symptoms.  
(5) Any disorder, including, but not limited to, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepatic, renal, 
neurological, musculoskeletal, infectious, endocrine, metabolic, hematological , psychiatric, or major 
physical impairment that is not stable in the opinion of the Investigator and/or could:  
• Affect the safety of the subject throughout the study  
• Influence the findings of the study or their interpretation  
• Impede the subject’s ability to complete the enti re duration of study  
(6) Treatment with systemic corticosteroids and/or antibiotics, and/or hospitalization for a COPD 
exacerbation within 2 weeks prior to enrol lment , based on last dose of steroids or last date of 
hospitalization whatever occurred l ater 
(7) Acute upper or lower respiratory infection within 2 weeks prior to enrol lment  
Version 15Sept2020                                                 Page 2 of 4 
 (8) Supplementa l oxygen use at greater than 3L/min  
Study procedures:  
MCC assessment  
1) Subjects will perform 2 MCC assessment study days.  One to measur e baseline MCC and the other to 
measure MCC during treatment with the cannula.  Study days will be separated by 4-7 days.   The order 
of the days will be randomized.    Subje cts will refrain from SABA use for 6 hours  and LABA/LAMA use for 
24 hours  prior to Visits 2 and 3 . 
2) Subjects will arrive in nuclear medicine.  They will lie recumbent in the nuclear medicine camera while 
background images are collected.  They will then perform a Cobalt -57 transmission scan which allows for 
visualization of the lung out lines .  Both scans are utilized during image analysis.  
3) Subjects will be seated for the inhalation of the radiolabeled particles.  4 mCi  of Technetium 99m sulfur 
colloid (Tc -SC) in 2ml of saline will be added to a DeVil biss 646 Nebulizer driven by a DeVilbiss 8650D 
compressor and attached to a Spira Dosimeter.  Using standardized procedures developed the Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation  (1), we will deliver the aerosol for 5  approximately minutes using a specified breathing 
pattern (30 breaths/minute) using inhalation flowrates of ~0.5 L/s.    
4) Subjects will then return to the camera a nd lie recumbent while serial two -minute gamma camera 
images are collected for 90 minutes.   On the intervention day, the nasal cannula will be applied after 5 
images are collected.   On the baseline day there will be no intervention.   Coughs will be manually logged 
by study personnel.  
5) After 90 minutes the subjects will exit the camera and remain in the waiting areas around radiology.  
They will continue inhaling from the cannula on the intervention day.   Subjects will perform a 10 minu te 
follow up image at t= 4 hours  and 10 minutes after the start of the imaging sequence.   The 10 minute 
image may be delayed for several minutes if the gamma camera is in use at the specified time Subjects 
would resume their normal medications.   
6) We will plot normalized retention vs. time and compare th e percentage of deposit ed mate rial cleared 
at t= 90 min and  up to 6 hours  on the intervention days.   Areas above the curve 90 min clearance curve 
will also be compared.  We will calculate the central deposition percentage of the Tc -SC aerosol to ensure 
that Tc-SC aerosol delivery was similar on both testing days.   
7) Previous measurements from our group demonstrated a standard deviation of the intrasubject 
differences in MCC measurements (σ) = 7.7%  (2).  Assuming α=0. 05, β=0.2, and n=12 matched pairs , we 
could detect a 6.8% (absolute) change in MC C rates  via paired t -test.   Average MCC rates in control 
subjects over 90 minutes have been reported to be 28.2%  (1).    MCC rate differences reported by Hasani 
et al were approxima tely 8% after 7 days of daily  therapy (3).   
8) We will replace subjects who do not complete both testing days until we have a total of 12 subjects 
with completed studies.    
Spirometry Testing  
Version 15Sept2020                                                 Page 3 of 4 
 Each subject will undergo baseline spirometry assessment to determine eligibili ty. All subjects will 
perform baseline pre and post bronchodilator spirometry at  Visit1 .  Subjects will be asked to hold their 
bronchodilator (albuterol) for 2 hours prior to the PFT test.  
Subjects who meet the PFT criteria at Visit 1  will be required to be tested for COVID -19 prior to undergo 
the MCC measurements at Visits 2 and 3. The COVID testing will be done at the CTRC Montefiore 
Hospital by a trained nurse.  The COVID testing is a safety measure requested by the PI to make sure 
staff present during t he MCC measurements will not be placed at risk of contracting the virus during 
the study procedures. Subjects found ineligible per the PFT results, will be considered a screen fail and 
will not be tested.  
Only patients with COVI D testing negative will be invited to complete study visits 2 and 3.  
Study Questionnaires  
All subjects will complete the following self -administered questionnaires at Visit 1 : 
1) St. George’s Respiratory Questi onnaire (SGRQ)  
2) COPD Assessment Test (CAT)  
3) Modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale (mMRC)  
4) Exacerbation history  
Schedule of Assessments  
Visit schedule  
 Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3 
Baseline MCC*   X  
Treatment MCC*    X 
Questionnaires  X   
Pre and Post Bronchodilator Spirometry  X   
    
* Baseline and Treatment MCC are randomized.  
 
The Fisher and Paykel myAirvo2 heater/humidifier and Optiflow nasal cannula are commercially 
available devices that are used together to deliver heated humidified air or oxygen for breathing.  The 
purpose of this study is to determine whether 4 hours of use of this device will improve mucus clearance 
in patients with chronic bronchitis.  This may occur through hydration of airway secretions and possibly 
through splinting of the airways.  Twelve subjects will be enrolled and pe rform two imaging days and a 
possible screening day.   The primary outcome measure is mucociliary clearance as measured using a 
nuclear medicine imaging technique.   
References  
 
1. Bennett WD, Laube BL, Corcoran T, Zeman K, Sharpless G, Thomas K, Wu J, Mogayzel PJ, Jr., Pilewski J, 
Donaldson S. Multisite comparison of mucociliary and cough clearance measures using 
standardized methods. Journal of aerosol medicine and pulmonary drug delivery 2013; 26: 157 -
164.  
Version 15Sept2020                                                 Page 4 of 4 
 2. Locke LW, Mye rburg MM, Weiner DJ, Markovetz MR, Parker RS, Muthukrishnan A, Weber L, Czachowski 
MR, Lacy RT, Pilewski JM, Corcoran TE. Pseudomonas infection and mucociliary and absorptive 
clearance in the cystic fibrosis lung. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 1392 -1401.  
3. Hasan i A, Chapman TH, McCool D, Smith RE, Dilworth JP, Agnew JE. Domiciliary humidification improves 
lung mucociliary clearance in patients with bronchiectasis. Chron Respir Dis 2008; 5: 81 -86. 
 