1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RANDOMIZED PHASE III, DOUBLE BLIND, PLACEBO CONTROLLED STUDY OF 
PROPHYLACTIC G ABAPENTIN FOR THE REDUCTION OF RADIATION THERAPY 
INDUCED PAIN DURING THE TREATMENT OF OROPHARYNGEAL SQUAMOUS 
CELL CARCINOMA  
NCT Number: 03269344  
2/6/2017  
2 
 RANDOMIZED PHASE III, DOUBLE BLIND, PLACEBO CONTROLLED STUDY OF 
PROPHYLACTIC G ABAPENTIN FOR THE REDUCTION OF RADIATION THERAPY 
INDUCED PAIN DURING THE TREATMENT OF OROPHARYNGEAL SQUAMOUS 
CELL CARCINOMA  
Study Team  
 
Principal Investigator  
 
Andrew Cook  MD 
Department of Radiation Oncology  
 
Scientific Advisors  
 
Farzan Siddiqui MD PhD  
Benjamin Movsas MD  
Department of Radiation Oncology  
 
Haythem Ali MD  
Department of Hematology/ Oncology  
 
Biostatistics  
 
Andrew Taylor MA  
Lonni Schultz PhD  
Department of Public Health Science  
 
Research Pharmacy  
 
Sonia Eliya  Pharm D  
Jehan Jazrawi  BS Pharm  
Research Pharmacy  
 
Participating Sites  
 
Henry Ford Hospital  
2799 West Grand Boulevard  
Detroit, MI 48202  
Protocol Version 1.0 1/6/2017  
  
3 
 Randomized Phase III , Double -Blind, Placebo Controlled  Study of Prophylactic 
Gabapentin for the Reduction of Radiation Therapy Induced Pain During  the Treatment 
of Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma  
 
 
SCHEMA  
Pre-study: Determine eligibility  
▼ 
Signed Informed consent  
▼ 
S  R Arm 1: (control):  Standard supportive care during  
T  A definitive treatment plus placebo  
R 1.  N  
A 2. Smoking History : D Arm 2:  600 mg of gabapentin TID (1800 mg daily  
T Current smoker  O total) during definitive treatment  
I 1. Ex-smoker or non -smoker  M Plus standard supportive care  
F 2.  I  
Y  Z  
  E  
 
 
Patient population:  Patients being treated wi th radiation and concurrent chemotherapy  for Stage 
III and IV ( non-metastatic ) squamous c ell carcinoma of the oropharynx  
Required Sample Size: 60 
  
4 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS              Page  
 
SCHEMA ............................................................................................................................. ...........2  
1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... .............. 4 
2. PATIENT SELECTION .................................................................................................. ........6  
3. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES .................................................................................... .....7 
4. TREATMENT PLAN .............................................................................................................. .7 
5. DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS .................................................................. .13 
6. ADVERSE E VENT REPORTING ........................................................ .............................. .13 
7. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION ............................................................................ .14 
8 STUDY CALENDAR .............................................................................. ................................ 14 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS ................. ................................................................ ..15 
REFERENCES ........................................................................................... ............................... .18 
APPENDIX .......................................... .............................................. ........ .................................. .19 
  
5 
 1.1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1.1 Specific Aims  
Strategies to minimize and mitigate external beam radiation therapy related mucositis and pain 
during the treatment of head and neck cancer remain limited. We hypothesize that gabapentin 
could be used to delay or reduce treatment -related pain, reliance on opioid medication, and 
improve the quality of life for these patients. The specific aims of this proposed study include  the 
following:  
• Evaluate the reduction or delay of mucositis related pain and morbidity with the use 
of gabapentin in patients with stage III or IV oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma 
undergoing definitive radiation with concurrent chemotherapy as part o f their cancer 
management, compared to standard supportive side effect mitigation – using patient 
reported quality of life endpoints such as the Patient -Reported Oral Mucositis 
Symptoms (PROMS) scale.  
• Assess morphine -equivalent opioid use in both treatmen t arms by collecting the 
patient’s narcotic use in the previous 24 -hour period at each weekly evaluation during 
radiation treatment.  
• Report on change in Speech and swallow performance, as measured by the 
Performance Status Scale (PSS) for Head and Neck Can cer Patients . 
• Evaluate changes in weight from baseline throughout treatment between the two 
arms.  
• Calculate the proportion of patients who end up requiring a feeding tube by the end of 
treatment in both arms.  
• Evaluate changes in patient -report quality of life using the Functional Assessment of 
Cancer Therapy Head &Neck (FACT -HN) and PRO -CTCAE metrics.  
• Evaluate the adverse events associated with gabapentin.  
• Evaluate the severity of radiation mucositis (grade 3 -4, CTCAE, v. 4) . 
 
1.2 Background and Significance  
1.2.1 Head and Neck Cancer/ Treatment Related Morbidity  
There are an estimated 55,070 patients with head and neck cancer in the United States, with an 
estimated 12,000 deaths annually  and a rising incidence of Human Papillom a Virus -related 
oropharyngeal cancer. [1, 2] Unfortunately, a large portion of these patients present with locally 
advanced disease.  [3] Definitive radiation with concurrent platinum -based chemotherapy is the 
primary treatment for stage III and IV oropharyngeal carcinoma.   
Chemotherapy has been evaluated in multiple trials in conjunction with radiation therapy to treat 
a variety of head and neck cancers. A comprehensive meta -analysis revealed an overall survival 
6 
 benefit of 7% at 2 years and 8% at 5 years with the concurrent use of cisplatin -based 
chemotherapy . [4] This, however, has not come without major treatment related toxicity and 
morbidity. The addition o f chemotherapy to radiation has been shown to potentially increase 
short -term toxicity burden by 300% (increased relative risk). [5] 
Strategies to minimize and mitigate treatment re lated mucositis and pain remain  limited. Most 
practitioners utilize a combination of oral anesthetic mouth washes, opioid medication, infection 
control, and lifestyle modification. [6] 
1.2.2 Gabapentin  
Gabapentin is an anticonvulsant and has been used to manage neuropathic pain and is FDA -
approved for the treatment of post -herpetic neuralgia and partial onset seizures. While opio ids 
are effective in treating nociceptive pain, head and neck patients experience both neuropathic 
(burning, aching, stabbing) and nociceptive (dull, sore, tend er) pain.  [7] Opioid medications have 
adverse effects including constipation, nausea, vomiting, sedation, impaired psychomotor 
function, urinary retention, hyperalgesia, as well as the potential for dependence.  [8] Gabapentin 
is thought to pro vide neuropathic relief of pain by inhibition of alpha -2-delta -1 receptor 
upregulation in the dorsal horn, reversing p ain mediated regulators of pain. [9] It is generally 
well tolerated, although common adverse effects include somnolence, dizziness, pe ripheral 
edema, and fatigue. [10] 
Gabapentin has evolved as a strategy to reduce morbidity in patients  undergoing radiation 
treatment. Bar -Ad et al. retrospectively evaluated their experience using gabapentin and found 
less opio id use and less treatment breaks when using this strategy for patients undergoing 
chemoradiation treatment to the head and neck. Similar findings were reported for patients 
unde rgoing post -operative radiation therapy without chemothera py. [11] Similarly, Starmer et al 
retrospective ly analy zed 23 patients with oropharyngeal SCC treated with chemoradiation and 
found  that patient s used their PEG tubes later, had their PEG tubes removed earlier, and reported 
less pain and duration of pain in those that used gabapentin . [1] Lastly, Yang et al in their 
retrospective analysis of their head and neck database found gabapentin use to be associated with 
reduced PEG tube dependen ce. [12] 
All of these reports are small, single institution, retrospective experiences and are subject to 
patient selection biases. Given the advantages of gabapentin use during chemoradiation in 
reducing treatment related pain and PEG tube dependence, we seek to prospectively evaluate this 
drug in a randomized, blinded setting. This will validate these findings with a greater level of 
evidence.  
1.2.3 Summary and Rationale for This Study:  
Given the lack of effective strategies to mitigate treatment related pain from mucositis during 
head and neck cancer treatment as well as lack of randomized, prospectively evaluated evidence 
7 
 supporting gabapentin use in this setting, we hereby propose this randomized clinical trial to 
evaluate the effectiveness of gabapentin in delay ing or reducing treatment -related pain, reliance 
on opioid medication, and improving the quality of life for these patients.  
 
2. PATIENT SELECTION  
2.1 Conditions for Patient Eligibility:  
 
2.1.1 Patients being treated with combination radiation  and chemotherapy (definitive)  
therapy  for locally advanced (Stage III and IV) squamous cell carcinoma of the 
oropharynx . 
2.1.2 Age ≥ 18.  
2.1.3 ECOG performance status 0-1. 
2.1.4 Patients must provide study specific informed consent prior to study entry and be able 
to fill out toxicity and quality of life related questionnaires . 
2.1.5 Patients should be concurrently treated with any of the following chemotherapy 
regimens: high -dose every three week cisplatin, low dose weekly cisplatin, or weekly 
carboplatin.  
 
2.2 Conditions for Patient Ineligibility:  
 
2.2.1 Patients may not be receiving  gabapentin , any other investigational agents , or other 
anticonvulsants . 
2.2.2 Patients with metastatic disease are excluded from this clinical trial.  
2.2.3 Patient with allergies or  hypersensitivity to gabapentin.  
2.2.4 Patients receiving surgery as part of their definitiv e management.  
2.2.5 Patients who have received prior chemotherapy or radiation therapy  for head and 
neck cancer . 
2.2.6 Patients unable to complete the required forms; however, verbal completion is 
adequate if recorded on the form daily . 
2.2.7 Uncontrolled serious illness in cluding, but not limited to, ongoing or serious active 
infection requiring IV antibiotics for over 30 days, symptomatic congestive heart 
failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia other than chronic, stable atrial 
fibrillation, immunocompromised  state, significant hepatic insufficiency , significant 
hematological disease , and any serious or unstable psychological condition .  
2.2.8 Patients on any of the following medication that cannot find a suitable substitute 
during the study period: azelastine, orph enadrine, paraldehyde, thalidomide . 
2.2.9 Patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance of  < 60 ml/minute)  
 
2.3 Required laboratory data (to be done at time of enrollement):  
8 
 2.3.1 Creatinine  
 
2.4 Inclusion of Women and Minorities:  Both men and women and members of all races 
and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
3. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
Patient registration can occur only after evaluation for eligi bility is complete, eligibility criteria 
have been met, and the study site has Institutional Review Board approval. Patients must have 
signed and dated all applicable consents and authorization forms. To register a patient to this 
study, the signed and dated eligibility chec klist, along with any necessary supporting 
documentation, and the signed patient consent form will be forwarded to the  responsible data 
manager. To complete the registration process, the data manager will  assign a patient study 
number, in sequential order of conse nt, register the patient to the study, and contact  the treating 
investigator and respon sible research nurse to confirm registration.  
 
4. TREATMENT PLAN  
4.1 Chemotherapeutic Agent Administration  
Chemotherapy, delivered concurrently with radiation therapy, wil l ultimately be determined by 
the treating medical oncologist.  Patients receiving any of the following regimens  will be eligible : 
 
High -dose cisplatin  - Cisplatin: 100 mg/m2/day, every 3 weeks  during radiation treatment, for a 
maximum of 3 doses.  
 
Carboplatin   - Carboplatin: Target area under curve ( AUC ) 2 once weekly for a maximum of 6 
doses.  
 
Weekly cisplatin  - Cisplatin: 40 mg/m2/day, weekly during radiation treatment for a maximum of 
6 dose s. 
 
4.2 Radiation Therapy  
Radiation therapy, delivered concurrently with chemotherapy, will ultimately be determined by 
the treating radiation oncologist. The following guidelines should be followed:  
4.2.1 Dose specifications:  
Volumes and Lymph node levels should be defined as per the RTOG Head and Neck atlas 
http://www.rtog.org/CoreLab/ContouringAtlases/HN.aspx .  
9 
 Definitive treatment ( all primary treatment should be delivered with concurrent chemotherapy as 
per the treating medical oncologist) will be done with simultaneous integrated dosing (SID) in 3 5 
fractions to a total dose of 70 Gy, 63 Gy and 56 Gy to the high -risk, intermediate -risk and low -
risk CTVs, respectively.  
4.2.2 Physical Factors:  
All subjects will undergo radiographic imaging r equired for radiation treatment planning 
purposes using a CT scanner. Digitally  reconstructed radiographs from the CT will simulate the 
patient geo metry during rad iation treatment, including the localization and immobilization 
methods. A virtual treatment planning procedure is used to design treatment fields 
mathematically from the CT images.  
4.2.3 Target Volumes  
The GTV will be treated as the PTV70 (CTV 70+margin) will receive 70 Gy in 35 fractions (2 
Gy per fraction)  
Creation of the PTV70 is as follows: GTV70 defined from CT -sim and diagnostic CT fusion. 
GTV -p (primary tumor) and GTV -n (positive lymph nodes) are to be delineated.  
CTV70 -p=GTV -p with  1 cm expansion, except when the GTV -p is at the base of tongue, then 
the CTV70 -p will be the GTVp with a 1.5 cm expansion.   
CTV70 -n will be created using the GTV -n with a 1 cm expansion.  
CTV70 will then be defined using the CTV70p+ CTV70n. The CTV70 sho uld be modified so as 
not to cross fascial plains or vertebral bodies.  
PTV70 will be defined as the CTV70 with a 0.5 cm expansion. PTV70 should be modified to be 
cropped 3 mm from the skin surface.  
High risk PTV63 (CTV63+margin) areas will receive 63 Gy in 35 fractions (1.8 Gy per fraction)  
The CTV63 delineated to include th e involved lymph node level, and any adjacent lymph node 
levels. For example for a right sided level 2 lymph node, CTV63 will include right sided level -2, 
level -3, level -5, and level -1b. Level -2 should be defined to the base of skull on the involved side 
(sacrificing parotid on involved side).  
PTV63 will be defined as CTV63 with a 0.5 cm expansion.  
Low risk PTV56 (CTV56+ margin) regions will receive 56 Gy in 35 fractions (1.6 Gy per 
fraction)  
The CTV56 will include the uninvolved neck, if clinically indic ated to be treated. Level -2 in the 
uninvolved neck should be treated to the level of C1, allowing for parotid sparing. Also included 
10 
 in the CTV56 is any lymph node level on the involved side that is not included in the CTV63, 
and is still at low risk of tu mor involvement. Such that if right side level -2 LN is involved, then 
right sided level -4 would be defined as CTV 56. Right sided Level -1a would be included only if 
clinically indicated.  
PTV56 will be defined as CTV56 with a 0.5 cm expansion.  
4.2.4 Field  Arrangement:  
IMRT will be used to cover the primary or plannin g target volume (PTV), provided that th e 
normal tissue constraints described below are met.  
4.2.5 Beam Shaping:  
A multileaf collimation system will be used to comp ly with field margin and norma l tissue dose 
requirements.  
4.2.6 Treatment Equipment:  
Treatment will be administered on an isocentrically mounted megavoltage linear  accelerator with 
photon energy ≥ 6 MV. Typical ly, the source -to-axis distance (SAD) will be 100 cm. IMRT will 
be delivered  using volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT)  technique.  
4.2.7 Beam Verification:  
Standard IMRT QA procedures developed at our institution will be performed, includ ing monitor 
units verification, intensity map verification, as well as point dose measureme nts. Cone beam CT 
scans will be obtained daily prior to radiation delivery to ensure proper patient positioning.  
4.2.8 Dosimetry:  
The uniformity requirement will be +/ - 5% of the total  dose at the prescription point within the 
planning target volume.  
4.2.9 Critical Normal Structures:   
QUANTEC Dose Con straint Parameters will be used. Modifications to allow for adequate tumor 
coverage are allowed at the discret ion of the treating physician.  
4.2.10 Radiation Therapy Adverse Events  and Treatment M odifications  
Grade 3 -4 (CTCAE, v. 4) therapy -induced mucositis and/or d ysphagia, which are enhanced by 
cisplatin, are expected to develop in about two thirds of patients. Nutritional evalua tion prior to 
the initiation of therapy is hig hly recommended. Placement of a feeding tube should be recorded, 
as should use of a feeding tube during an d after treatment . Other common radiation a dverse 
11 
 events include: fatigue, weight loss, regional alopecia, xerostomia, hoarseness, transient ear 
discomfort, dysgeusia, and skin erythema and desquamation within the treatment fields.   
Less common long -term treatment adverse events include: hypothyroidism, loss of hearing, 
chronic  swallowing dysfunction requiring permanent feeding tube, a nd cervical fibro sis. Much 
less common ra diation adverse events include: mandibular osteoradionecrosis  (< 5% incidence 
with attention to the dental recommendations ), and cervical myelopathy (< 1% with restriction of 
spinal cord dose to ≤ 45 Gy).  
 
4.3 Protocol Treatment  
 
Figure 1: Treatment schema, as described below.  
4.3.1 Arm 1  
 Patients will receive a placebo along the same dosing schedule as the experimental arm (patients 
randomized to placebo will take the same number of capsules as those assigned to gabapentin).  
This will also include standard supportive care for treatment -related pain and mucositis as 
needed during concurrent chemotherapy and radiation treatment, consisting of the following:  

12 
 • Viscous lidocaine 2% oral solution  
• Oral liquid or solid opioid medications - e.g., morphine, oxycodone. These will be int roduced 
and titrated at the discretion of the treating physician when the patient -reported pain score is ≥ 4 
on a 0 -10 scale.  
4.3.2 Arm 2  
Gabapentin will be initiated at a dose of 300 mg to be taken at bedtime of the night prior to the 
first radiation trea tment. During week 1, the dose will be 300 mg three times a day for a total 
daily dose of 900 mg. Starting week 2, the dose will be 600 mg taken 3 times per day for a total 
daily dose of 1800 mg. This will continue until one week after the end  radiation tr eatment  (week 
8). Therapy will  then be titrated down to 300 mg three times a day for 1 day , and then 
discontinued all together. The standard supporting care for treatment -related pain and mucositis 
described above will also be included.  
4.3.3 Adverse Event s 
Side effects of gabapentin include somnolence, dizziness, peripheral edema, and fatigue . Rarely, 
patients experience changes in behavior or suicidal ideation.  These effects will be evaluated on a 
weekly basis.  
4.3.4 Study medication accountability  
Patient compliance with be evaluated weekly during clinic visits. Patients are expected to receive 
3 doses per day (21 per week), 7 days a week during radiation. Patients who take at least 12 
doses a week will be considered compliant. Patien ts that do not begin gabapentin or require a 
feeding tube  will be followed for the endpoints measured in the protocol for an intent -to-treat 
analysis.  
The investigator is required to maintain adequate records of the disposition of the investigational 
products. Participants will be asked to return unused tablets at the end of radiation treatment and 
at first follow -up. The unused tablets will be counted by pharmacy.  
 
4.4 Duration of Follow Up  
 
Patients will be followed for 6 weeks  after completion of definitive treatment  or until  removal 
(or) termination from study, or until death, w hichever occurs first. Patients removed from study 
for unacceptable adverse events wi ll be followed until resolution or stabilization of the adverse 
event.  
Toxicity notations, quality of life information, and disease status will be recorded. If it is not 
possible to co ordinate a follow -up evaluation at 2 ± 1 months, then a follow -up phone call will 
13 
 be made  to the patient by the treating physician, or clinical trials office designee, in lieu of a 
visit.  
 
4.5 Assignment of interventions  
4.5.1 Allocation sequence generation  
Separate  randomi zation lists will be produced by a statistician  for current smokers  as well as  for 
former/ non -smokers with a goal of 1:1 allocation to both treatment arms.  
4.5.2 Allocation concealment mechanism  
The sequence of the randomi zation numbers is kept in sealed envelopes independent of the 
investigators.  
4.5.3 Implementation  
The Henry Ford Research Pharmacy  will label the tablet packages according to the 
randomi zation list. Single sealed envelopes containing the participants’ randomi zation code will 
be located and the Radiation Oncology Clinic.  
4.5.4 Unblinding  
Blinding of the investigators, outcome assessors, pharmacists, data analysts and trial participants 
will be maintained throughout the  study. Adverse events (AEs) that are considered serious, 
unexpected and at least possibly related to the medica tion would have to be unblinded. The study 
will be unblinded by the trial statistician after the final visit of the primary endpoint assessment . 
4.5.5 Withdrawal of participants/stopping rules and urgent safety  
Participants have a right to withdraw at any time and may be withdrawn at the investigator’s 
discretion. Reasonable effort should be made to contact any participant lost to follow -up. The 
information collected before the withdrawal will be included in analysis. Participants will not be 
replaced. The PI will have the authority to deviate from the protocol if doing so relates to the 
immediate safety of a participant, where continuing to follow protocol would put that participant 
at risk. If any of the following criteria are met, study enrolment and stud y therapy will be 
suspended: death in any participant, where death is attributed in any way to study therapy or 
intervention; grade 4 anaphylaxis as defined by  the World Allergy Organization (WAO).  
Study therapies will be discontinued for any of the following reasons: two or more occurrences 
of grade 3 or above systemic allergic reactions as defined by the WAO; any AE that presents an 
unacceptable consequence to the participant; an illness that requi res treatment not consistent with 
protocol requirements; inability to comply with the study protocol and pregnancy.  
14 
 An internal data safety committee will be formed through the Clinical Trials Office and will 
meet quarterly to review potential adverse effects from the study medication.  
 
5. DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
This study will utilize the CTCAE (NCI Common T erminology Criteria for Adverse Events) 
version 4.0 for toxicity and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) reporting.  
5.1 General Considera tions  
5.1.1 Dose Modifications for Gabapentin  
If patient cannot tolerate gabapentin at the dose specified in this protocol, dose can be reduced in 
300 mg  (or 1 pill)  decrements until side effects subside. If intolerance continues, therapy should 
be discontinued.  Patients who are unable to tolerate the  medication  will be  withdrawn from the 
study.  Patient should be continued to be follow ed as specified on the protocol, however, for 
intent -to-treat analysis purposes.  
 
6. ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING:  
This st udy will utilize the NCI Common Terminology Crit eria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) 
version 4.0 for reporting of adverse events (AEs).  
Serious Adverse Events (SAE) and adverse events will be caref ully recorded, and SAEs will be 
reported to Henry Ford Hospital’s IRB if they meet the IRB’s SAE reporting criteria.  
Definition of an AE: Any unfavorable and unintended sign (i ncluding an abnormal laboratory 
finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical trea tment or 
procedure re gardless of whether it is considered related to the  medical treatment or procedure 
(attribution of unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable, or definite).  
Definition of an SAE: Any adverse experience occurring during any part of prot ocol treatment 
and 30 da ys after that results in any of the following outcomes:  
 Death;  
 A life -threatening adverse drug experience;  
 Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
 A persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
15 
 
 Important medical  events that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered an SAE, when, ba sed upon medical judgment, they may 
jeopardize the patient and may require medical or s urgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcom es listed in the definition. Any pregna ncy, including a male patient’s impregnation of his 
partner, occurring on study m ust be reported to the IRB as a medically significant event. SAEs 
(more than 30 days after last treatment) attributed to th e protocol tr eatment (possible, probable, 
or definite) should be reported to the IRB if the reporting criteria is met.  
 
7. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
7.1 Gabapentin  
Please refer to the FDA -approved package insert for additional information.  
a. Description –   Anticonvulsant, Miscellaneous; GABA Analog  
b. Pharmaceutical Data (as taken from UpToDate) – 
Absorption: Variable, from proximal small bowel by L -amino transport system; sa turable 
process; dose -dependent  
Distribution: Vd: 58 ± 6 L; CSF concentrations are ~ 20% of plasma concentrations  
Protein binding: <3%  
Metabolism: Not metabolized  
Bioavailability: Inversely proportional to dose due to saturable absorption:  
Immediate release:  
900 mg/day: 60%  
1,200 mg/day: 47%  
2,400 mg/day: 34%  
3,600 mg/day: 33%  
4,800 mg/day: 27%  
Half-life elimination:  
Adults, normal: 5 to 7 hours; increased half -life with decreased renal function; anuric adult 
patients: 132 hours; adults during hemodialysis: 3.8 hours  
Time to peak: Adults: 2 to 4 hours . 
Excretion: Proportional to renal  function; urine (as unchanged drug)  
Clearance: Apparent oral clearance is  directly proportional to CrCl.  
c. Administration – Orally  
d. Storage and Stability - : Store vials at ro om temperature and protect from  light.  
e. Supplier – Gabapentin  is commercial ly available.  
 
 
8. STUDY CALENDAR  
16 
 The institutional review board (IRB) approval process is expected to be completed by March of 
2017. The trial will start accrual of patients subsequently. Given the typical volume of patients 
treated at our institution, it  is expected to take 1 -1.5 years to accrue the required 60 patients to 
complete this study. Patients will be followed up until the first follow -up after completion of 
radiation treatment (6 weeks). The trial is expected to conclude January of 2019 with dat a 
analysis and reporting to take place subsequently.  
 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
9.1 Study Endpoints / Analysis Plan  
9.1.1 Primary endpoint  
The primary endpoint is change in quality of life and pain, as measured by the Patient -Reported 
Oral Mucositis Symptoms (PROMS) scale  over the entire study period . This will be measured at 
baseline and weekly during clinic visits. Additional measurements will be obtained at 6 -weeks 
(first follow -up) from the time of radiation treatment completion.  
The PRO MS scale consists of 10 questions on a visual analogue scale of 100 -mm lines 
addressing oral functions  affected by oral mucositis. [13] This questionnaire has been validated in 
patients undergoing radiation treatment fo r head and neck cancers and correlates well with 
clinician determined s cores of mucositis. [14]  
Repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used to determine if there was a 
significant difference between the mean PROMS scores of the two groups over the entire study 
period, and  t-tests will be used to examine if there was a difference in the PROMS scores for the 
two groups at each week of the study period.  
9.1.2 Sample size/ Justification of Number of Subjects  
Based on reported means and standard deviation of PROMS scores of patients undergoing 
radiation treatment , a total of 60 patients will be required to evaluate a 16% reduction in PROMS 
score at week 7 (final week) of radiation treatment, with α = 0.05 and power = 80%. This 
assumes a 10% dropout rate.  
9.2.1 Secondary Endpo ints  
9.2.2  Speech and Swallow Function:  
Report on change in Speech and swallow performance, as measured by the Performance Status 
Scale (PSS) for Head and Neck Cancer Patients  (see appendix) . This will completed  by the 
treating physician / speech -language pathologist  during the same time points as the primary 
endpoint.  
17 
 9.2.3 Weight Loss and Feeding Tube use  
Patient weight loss  will be evaluated by comparing the pe rcent weight change per patient from 
baseline to 6  weeks post-treatment  between treatment arms using th e Wilcoxon -rank sum test at 
the significance level of 0.05.  The feeding tube placement and use will also be documented.   
9.2.4  Opioid Use  
Patients with at least 1 reported administration of opioid analg esic will be considered to have 
received opioid analgesics. The total dose of opioid analgesic s will be the sum of all opioid 
analgesic administrations that have been converted to morp hine equivalents  (see Appendix II) . 
Use of opioid analgesics will b e assessed for a 24 -hour period before c ompleting the assessment 
weekly during radiation . The relationship between analgesic u se and treatment -related pain will 
be evaluated using the general linear model with (at m inimum) stratification , treatment arm, an d 
compliance.  
9.2.5  Adverse Events (CTCAE, v. 4)  
Adverse events related to gabapentin  will be reported. Additionally, th e incidence of grade 3 -4 
radiation induced  mucositis  during tre atment will be compared between treatment arms using 
Fisher’s exact test at the significance level of 0.05.  
9.2.6 Other  Quality of Life  Metrics  
Patients will be asked to complete the FACT -HN and PRO -CTCAE quality of life forms  (see 
Appendix) . The FACT -HN will be assessed at baseline and at the 7 -week (final week) of 
radiat ion. The PRO -CTCAE will be assessed  at baseline and weekly with the PROMS scale.  
The change in scores from baseline to the 6 -week follow -up timepoint will be used for analysis . 
All assessments are summarized in Table 1.   
18 
 Table 1. Subject assessments.  
Parameters  Prior to Study 
Therapy  Weekly During 
Radiation Therapy  At First Follow -
up (6 -weeks post 
completion)  
History and Physical  a X  X 
Performance status a X  X 
Creatinine  X   
PROMS Score  b X X X 
HN-PSS Score a X X X 
FACT H&N  b X  X 
Weight  X X X 
Daily opioid use (in 
morphine equivalents) a X X X 
Assess if f eeding tube 
has been placed  a X X X 
CTCAE and other 
adverse events  a X X X 
PRO -CTCAE 
questionnaire  b X X X 
a Physician  or evaluator  reported.  
b Patient reported.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Starmer, H.M., et al., Effect of gabapentin on swallowing during and after 
chemoradiation for oropharyngeal squamous cell cancer.  Dysphagia, 2014. 29(3): p. 
396-402. 
2. Chaturvedi, A.K., et al., Human papillomavirus and rising orophary ngeal cancer 
incidence in the United States.  Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2011. 29(32): p. 4294 -4301.  
3. Marur, S. and A.A. Forastiere, Head and neck cancer: changing epidemiology, diagnosis, 
and treatment.  Mayo Clin Proc, 2008. 83(4): p. 489 -501. 
4. Pignon, J. -P., et al., Meta -analysis of chemotherapy in head and neck cancer (MACH -
NC): an update on 93 randomised trials and 17,346 patients.  Radiotherapy and 
Oncology, 2009. 92(1): p. 4 -14. 
5. Trotti, A., et al., TAME: development of a new method for summari sing adverse events of 
cancer treatment by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group.  Lancet Oncol, 2007. 8(7): 
p. 613 -24. 
6. Moslemi, D., et al., Management of chemo/radiation -induced oral mucositis in patients 
with head and neck cancer: A review of the curren t literature.  Radiother Oncol, 2016. 
120(1): p. 13 -20. 
19 
 7. Epstein, J.B., et al., Neuropathic and nociceptive pain in head and neck cancer patients 
receiving radiation therapy.  Head & neck oncology, 2009. 1(1): p. 1.  
8. McNicol, E., et al., Management of opioid side effects in cancer -related and chronic 
noncancer pain: a systematic review.  The Journal of Pain, 2003. 4(5): p. 231 -256. 
9. Luo, Z., et al., Injury type -specific calcium channel α2δ -1 subunit up -regulation in r at 
neuropathic pain models correlates with antiallodynic effects of gabapentin.  Journal of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 2002. 303(3): p. 1199 -1205.  
10. Gabapentin for Adults with Neuropathic Pain: A Review of the Clinical Efficacy and 
Safety . 2015, Ottawa ON: 2015 Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health.  
11. Bar Ad, V., et al., Gabapentin for the treatment of pain related to radiation‐induced 
mucositis in patients with head and neck tumors treated with intensity‐modulated 
radiati on therapy.  Head & neck, 2010. 32(2): p. 173 -177. 
12. Yang, W., et al., Predictive Factors for Prophylactic Percutaneous Endoscopic 
Gastrostomy (PEG) Tube Placement and Use in Head and Neck Patients Following 
Intensity -Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) Tr eatment: Concordance, Discrepancies, 
and the Role of Gabapentin.  Dysphagia, 2016. 31(2): p. 206 -213. 
13. Kushner, J.A., et al., Development and validation of a Patient -Reported Oral Mucositis 
Symptom (PROMS) scale.  J Can Dent Assoc, 2008. 74(1): p. 59.  
14. Gussgard, A.M., et al., Assessment of cancer therapy -induced oral mucositis using a 
patient -reported oral mucositis experience questionnaire.  PloS one, 2014. 9(3): p. 
e91733.  
 
 
  
20 
 APPENDIX I  
 
ZUBROD  PERFORMANCE  SCALE  
 
0 Fully  active,  able to carry  on all predisease activities  without  restriction  
 
1 Restricted in  physically  strenuous activity  but ambulatory  and able to carry  work of a light or 
sedentary  nature.  For example, light housework, office  work  
 
2 Ambulatory  and capable of all self -care but unable to carry  out any work  activities.  Up and about 
more than 50%  of waking hours  
 
3 Capable of only limited  self-care, confined to bed or chair  50% or more  of waking hours  
 
4 Completely  disabled.  Cannot carry  on self-care.  Totally  confined  to bed 
 
5 Death  
 
  
21 
 APPENDIX II 
 
Analgesic Conversion  Tables  
 
EQUIANALGESIC POTENCY  CONVERSION  
 
Name  Equianalgesic Dose  (mg) po 
Morphine  60 
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid)  7.5 
Methadone (Dolophine)  20 
Oxycodone  30 
Levorphanol (Levo -Dromoran)  4 
Codeine  200 
Vicodin  60 TRANSDERMAL FENTANYL (DURAGESIC) DOSE PRESCRIPTION  BASED UPON 
DAILY MORPHINE EQUIVALENCE  
Oral 24-hour morphine  (mg/day)  Duragesic Dose (ug/h)  45-134 
 25 
135-224 50 
225-314 75 
315-404 100 
405-494 125 
495-584 150 
585-674 175 
675-764 200 
765-854 225 
855-944 250 
945-1034  275 
1035 -1124  300 
22 
 NARCOTIC  EQUIVALENCY INDEX  
 
NARCOTIC  ROUTE  CONVERSION  FACTOR  
Morphine  IM/IV  1.00 
po 0.17 for single dose trial; 0.33 for chronic administration  
Hydromorphone  IM 6.67 
(Dilaudid)  po 1.33 
Codeine  IM 0.08 
po 0.05 
Oxycodone*  IM 0.67 
po 0.33 
Levorphanol  IM 6.25 
(Levodromoran)  po 3.13 
Meperidine  IM 0.10 
(Demerol)  po 0.03 
Methadone  IM 1.38 
(Dolophine)  po 0.69 
* 1 tablet of Tylox, Percocet, or Percodan contains 5 mg of oxycodone.  
23 
 
 APPENDIX  III 
Weekly Patient and Clinician Report ed Questionnaire s 
 
 

24 
 
  
 
I have taken  pain medication  today.  Yes No 
 
The name of your pain medication:     
 
What is  the dose you are taking?     
 
How do you take your pain medication?  (for example, by  mouth, by patch, by injection)     
 
How often do  you take your pain medication?  (for example, once a day, twice  a day)   
  
25 
 
  
 

26 
 
  
 

27 
 
  

28 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
