 
Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 w COMIRB Protocol  
PROTOCOL #: 17-0633  
  Version Date:  12-14-2017 
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 
CAMPUS BOX F-490    TELEPHONE:  303-724-1055  Fax:  303-724-0990  
 
 
Project Title:  Prevention of enamel demineralization in fixed appliance orthodontic patients using 
UDMA-K18 sealant to prevent microbial atta chment. A randomized split mouth clinical 
trial. 
Principal Investigator:  Dr. Clifton Carey, Professor and Director of Translational Research 
Orthodontics Residents: Dr. Shivani Patel and Dr. Megan Fellows  
Dr. Carey is the research mentor for University of Colorado, School of Dental Medicine, Department of 
Orthodontics residents Drs. Patel and Fellows.  Drs. Patel and Fellows will be performing all the sealant 
and bracket placements.  Dr. Carey will assist in t he histology and evaluation of the extracted teeth. 
    
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :  The hypothesis is that UDMA-K18 containing smooth 
surface sealant will be more effective at redu cing enamel demineralization than the UDMA 
control or no treatment.  This study will as sess the effect of a quaternary ammonium 
methacrylate (QAM) called K18 antimicrobial co mpound tethered to urethane dimethacrylate 
resin (UDMA-K18). This resin will be tested against UDMA sealant and no sealant. This study will evaluate effectiveness of a UDMA-K18 sealant to prevent bi ofilm attachment to tooth 
surfaces thereby eliminating the possibili ty for the tooth to be demineralized.   
II. Background and Significance:  Far too frequently orthodontic patients are unable to perform 
sufficient oral hygiene to remove all of the bacte rial biofilm surrounding orthodontic brackets.  
When the bacterial biofilm is not removed, toot h demineralization is possible.  The incidence 
of new tooth demineralization, often called whit e spot lesions (WSL), has been studied at the 
University of Colorado Department of Orthodont ics.  Forty-four orthodontic patients ages 
between 11 and 21 years of age were assessed ov er the course of their therapy for the 
development of new WSL.  This study report ed that 84.6 % of the patients developed new 
WSL, and the total area of WSLs also increased from 16.6 ± 23.6 mm
2 per patient to 42.6 ± 
50.7 mm2 per patient.  The period of therapy where the greatest increase in WSL occurred 
was between initial banding and 1 year of therapy. The area most susceptible to WSLs during 
treatment is the cervical third, and both anterior and posterior teeth are equally susceptible to 
the development of new lesions.  (Faranesh et al ., 2017).  Given that the bacterial biofilm is 
 
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 hard to remove due to compromised access to all of the tooth surfaces by orthodontic 
appliances (brackets and wires) a new strategy that  limits the ability of bacterial to attach to 
tooth surfaces may have a protective capacit y preventing WSL. The UDMA-K18 dental resin 
is designed to protect enamel from bacterial attachment and biofilm associated acid demineralization which can lead to the formation of white spot lesions (WSL) on the surface 
on the tooth.  The composition of the experim ental sealant is K18, a quaternary ammonium 
methacrylate linked to a siloxane backbone co valently bonded to branched organic urethane 
dimethacrylate (UDMA) monomers.  See Figure 1 for the chemical structure. These UDMA or 
UDMA-K18 monomers are mixed with camphorqui none photoinitiators, which when placed 
on a tooth surface can be polymerized by exposure to a dental blue light. 
Figure 1.  Structure of UDMA-K18. 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report: This tethered K18 anti-attachment compound has 
been tested in clinical studies for antimicrobial accumulation on orthodontic retainers (as well 
as  antimicrobial and cytotoxic activity  in clinical split mouth study (Liu et al. , 2016) and for 
cytotoxic and carcinogenic activity (Gong et al, 2012).  
a. Liu et al., 2016 studied the antimicrobial acti vity of a quaternary ammonium methacryloxy 
silicate-containing acrylic resin in a double bli nd randomized clinical trial. The quaternary 
amine (QAM) was synthesized with a sol-gel reaction between a tetraalkoxysilane and 

 
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 two trialkoxysilanes, creating a methacryloxy functional group and long C-18 carbon 
chain. Liu et al, mentioned that in previous  studies QAMs at a concentration of 4 % to 6 
% have been shown to have immediate contac t killing antimicrobial properties. Cell 
viability assays have also been previously completed and the acrylic resin has been 
deemed noncytotoxic and received 510(K) clearance from the US Food and Drug 
Administration. This in-vivo experiment of 32 patients reviewed the antimicrobial efficacy 
of quaternary ammonium methacrylate (QAM s) containing orthodontic acrylic added to 
orthodontic retainers. There was a statistically significant  difference between the QAMs 
containing side and the control side in the per centage kill in the biovolume. The study 
found that the QAMs-containing acrylic demons trates favorable antimicrobial activity 
against biofilms in vivo experiments. 
b. Gong et al., (2012) studied the possible cytoto xicity by use of the MTT assay on a mouse 
fibroblast cell line (L929).  They determined the effects of increasing molar feed ratios of 
3-(Trimethoxysilyl) propyldimethyloctadecy l ammonium chloride (SiQAC, a starting 
material) on the cytotoxicity of a series of  silsesquioxane-silica hybrids (SqSHs, which 
include K18).  The results of the cell viabilit y assays indicated that the QAMS-containing 
orthodontic acrylic resin is relatively non -cytotoxic Therefore,  the QAMS-containing 
orthodontic acrylic has received 510(K) clea rance for marketing by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) .     
c. K18-UDMA has been tested in the Principal Inve stigator’s laboratory for anti-attachment 
of biofilm (antimicrobial activity) (Stricker et al. , 2016).  2.6 x 10‐6 All of these studies 
show that tethered K18 to UDMA or acrylates prevents attachment of microbial biofilms to 
surfaces.  
d. The methods for determination of lesion dept h and mineral density have been tested in 
the Principal Investigator’s laboratory (Lee et al. , 2015; and Schmuck & Carey, 2010). In 
the Lee study a total of 64 extracted teeth we re cleaned and prepared with an orthodontic 
bracket.  The teeth were randomly divided in to 8 experimental groups of 8 samples to 
evaluate the protection from erosion effica cy of commercial and experimental smooth 
 
Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 surface sealants.  The outcome was the amount  of erosion that the teeth experienced, 
which was measured by determining the lesion (tooth loss) depth as seen in the cross-
section through the orthodontic bracket.  The results of the demineralization were 
between 44.7 ± 21.9 µm for the negative control to 1.1 ± 4.4 µm lost for one of the 
fluoride containing smooth surface sealants.  The erosive loss for the Transbond XT 
smooth surface sealant that this study prop oses to use as a bonding agent was 29.3 ± 
9.6 µm which is significantly less erosion t han the control and significantly more erosion 
than the commercially available fluoride c ontaining smooth surface sealant (p < 0.05).  
e. The methods described in the paper by Schm uck and Carey (2010) will be used for the 
transverse microradiograp hy (TMR) of the samples in this  study.  The extracted teeth will 
be sectioned and digital images will be taken with incident and transmitted polarized light to visualize any lesion in the sample.  TM R will be used to determine surface lost.  TMR 
determination of lesion depth will be used to  compare the measurement via polarized 
light microscopy.  
IV. Research Methods: 
a. Outcome Measures: mineral density profile and lesion depth of extracted teeth in these 
experiments.   Mineral density will be measured by transverse x-ray microradiography 
(Schmuck and Carey, 2010), lesion depth w ill be measured by polarized light microscopy 
(Wefel and Harless, 1984; Darvishiab yaneh and Carey 2016; and for orthodontic 
evaluations Lee et al. , 2015).  
b. Description of Population to be Enrolled: 
Research participants will be between 12  and 89 years of age who are subjects 
undergoing orthodontic treatment at the Depart ment of Orthodontics Clinic, School of 
Dental Medicine, University of  Colorado. The following inclus ion criteria will be applied: 
comprehensive fixed orthodontic treatment with  brackets from at least second premolar 
to second premolar, treatment planned already for the extraction of at least 3 bicuspids 
(any combination), patient at  the University of Colorado School of Dental Medicine 
Orthodontic Clinic, can place bracket base on teeth to be extracted for at least 1 month 
 
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 prior to extractions, no previous white spot le sions, caries or restorations present on the 
facial surface of the teeth being studied, adequate oral hygiene.  
In the recruitment process the attending resi dent will provide information and answer any 
questions about the study to t he potential study participant.  If there is interest on behalf 
of the patient then the consent form will be reviewed and after presentation the form will 
be signed by all who wish to join the study.  The consent form is attached as a separate 
document.  There is no benefit to the patient  to participate other than participating in a 
study that may find a beneficial treatment for ot hers in the future.  There will be no effect 
on the patients treatment or experience should  they decide not to participate or to 
participate. 
The requirement of at least 3 biscupids to be ex tracted is to meet the requirements of the 
matched pair experimental design.  Because each patient is different and their oral 
biology is different treating and analyzing t eeth that do not have matched pairs in the 
same patient are not useful for this study t herefore the inclusion criteria cannot include 
patients with less than 3 planned extractions. 
The inclusion of minors aged 12 and older is  because minors are more likely to develop 
white spot lesions and should this sealan t provide protection then the whole orthodontic 
population will benefit.  Also there is no risk associated with the procedures outlined in this trial so there is no reason to  exclude minors from this study. 
Currently the Department of Orthodontics enr olls 50 to 75 patients per month.  The 
number of patients that meet the above incl usion criteria will be about 30 % of those 
enrolled.  It is anticipated that a minimu m of 1 patients per month can reasonably be 
enrolled into the study.  Thus, the study sh ould receive full enrollment in 4 months. 
c. Study Design and Research Methods (see CONSORT diagram on last page) 
i. The study has a split mouth clinical design where each of two controls and one 
experimental sealant will be in each person.   
1. Each patient will have all three expe rimental sealant sy stems including: no 
sealant (negative control), UDMA seal ant (control) and K18-UDMA sealant 
 
Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 (experimental group).  The number of patients required for this study was 
calculated from studies that had a similar design (de Moura et al. , 2006; Uysal et 
al., 2010).  De Moura et al. studied the effe ct of a fluoridated antiplaque dentifrice 
on the development of caries lesions adjacent to orthodontic brackets.  Fourteen orthodontic patients with planned extractions  were divided into two groups of 7.  
The patients used experimental or cont rol toothpastes 3 times per day for 28 
days.  The teeth were extracted and th e mineral loss was determined in the 
cross-sections by use of microhardness.   The results showed that there was a 
statistically significant (p < 0.05) impr ovement with the experimental antiplaque 
toothpaste for the first 10 µm of depth.  There was no significant difference at 
deeper distances from the surface.  A ca lculation of their experimental power 
shows that an n of 7 per group is insu fficient ot achieve 80 % power at an α of 
0.05.  Additionally, the microhardness method is less sensitive to mineral density 
loss than the TMR methods to be used in this study.  Balancing the increased sensitivity via TMR with the insufficient power in the de Moura study to make 
conclusions about the efficacy of the antip laque toothpaste to prevent tooth loss; 
we opt to be more conservative and use a larger n per group.   Based on the previously observed variations in mine ral density and clinically relevant minimum 
difference of 10 % mineral density in the first 50 microns of tooth surface 
between the negative control and the ex perimental K18-UDMA sealant, the 
number of subjects to achieve 80 % power at an alpha of 0.05 is 20 subjects.  It is anticipated that up to 30 patients ma y be recruited to this study, with 20 
needed for statistical power to answer our research question.  
2. If the patient has a fourth bicuspid is  planned for extraction, a random treatment 
will administered to this last tooth.  Th is will provide additional information on the 
effect of location (upper or lower jaw) on  the protective ability of the experimental 
sealant.  
 
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 ii. Teeth planned for extraction will be bonded with a bracket pad using one of three 
systems: no treatment (negative contro l), UDMA sealant (control) and K18-UDMA 
sealant (experimental group).  The bracke t pad does not have the bracket protruding 
from the base.  
1. Blinding:   
a. The patients will be blinded as to whic h teeth receive the va rious treatments.  
All the teeth to be extracted will receive a bracket pad and which will serve to blind the patient. 
b. The dentists will be partially blinded as they will not be able to identify the 
UDMA from the UDMA-K18 sealants.  T hese are provided to the dentists as 
Sealant A or Sealant B.  The identity of Sealant A and Sealant B will be in a 
sealed envelope stored in the desk of  the Chair of the department of 
Orthodontics.  This drawer is kept locked.   
c. The tooth extraction, preparation of  the extracted teeth for analysis and the 
statistical evaluation will be blinded to the identity of the sealants until the 
evaluations are completed. 
d. When the patient is to receive thei r orthodontic bands, the attending dentist 
(either Dr. Patel or Fellows) will randomly draw an envelope from a container of envelopes that contains a 3 x 5 ca rd which indicates which teeth will 
receive Sealant A, Sealant B or no treatment.  The attending dentist will write 
the patient number and date of sealant placement on the card and place that 
card into a study file for this information.  The placement allocation indicated 
on the cards will be determined via computer randomization.  
2. Bonding may occur then there is referral  for extractions.  The bonding protocol 
will be the standard protocol used in the orthodontic clinic for bonding orthodontic 
brackets to teeth.   
3. The differences will be that instead of  bonding a full orthodontic bracket to the 
bicuspids planned for extraction, a br acket pad will be bonded. The use of a 
 
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 bracket pad in place of a full bracket is to reduce the possibility of the bracket 
from interfering with the orthodontic archwi res attached to the other teeth as part 
of the standard orthodontic therapy. 
4. The treatment to be used on each of t he planned to be extracted bicuspids will 
be determined by selecting an envelope from a container that has within it a card 
indicating which teeth are to receive wh ich treatments.  The patient ID number 
will be recorded on the card which will be kept by the study coordinator in a 
secure location. 
iii. All patients will be given st andard hygiene instructions. 
iv. When the patient reports to the oral su rgeon for extractions, the extracted teeth will be 
placed in Tooth Storage Solution which is antimicrobial and does not alter the surfaces or composition of the teeth.   The container will have th e patient number and date of 
extraction written on the label. 
v. There is no difference related to the procedur es used to extract the teeth that are to be 
extracted for orthodontic therapy.  The standa rd of care is the same for all patients 
whether there is a sealant or not  on the teeth to be extracted.  
vi. These teeth will be returned to the laboratory for histol ogical evaluation of mineral 
density and lesion depth.  
vii. The original location of the extrac ted teeth can be easily made from the tooth 
morphology.  The source of the extracted tooth (original location and patient number) 
will be recorded in the laboratory notebook,  and when data evaluation is conducted will 
be used to identify the experimenta l group for that the tooth.  
d. Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
i. Description: These expe riments utilize bicuspids that are treatment planned for 
extraction to allow for an approximant 30- day period where the experimental treatment 
is exposed to the environment of the mouth in exactly the same manner as all other 
teeth in the patients mouth. 
 
Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 1. About 30 % of the patients who rece ive treatment planning for orthodontic 
therapy will require extraction of bicuspids.   
2. The extractions are usually scheduled to occur at about 30 days after bracket 
bonding to the other teeth.  
3. The experimental design requires that ea ch patient will have all experimental and 
control conditions (on separate teeth).  This split mouth paired samples design 
increases the power of the experiment and allows for fewer patients to be required for sufficient statistical power.  Paired analyses within an individual renders greater sensitivity to exper imental effects than population based 
analyses. 
4. Bonding bracket pads instead of full brac kets removes the protruding portion of 
the bracket so that it does not interfere wi th the orthodontic wires that are placed 
for the therapy.   
5. The use of smooth sealants on the teet h to be extracted is not unique as many 
patients have a smooth surface sealant pl aced after the orthodontic brackets are 
placed.  There are several commercial pr oducts that release fluoride specifically 
for the purpose of prevention of WSL.  It is unfortunate that there are few well 
designed studies about the use of these sealants. 
6. Should the patient decide to withdraw from planned orthodontic therapy prior to 
extractions, the bracket pads can be re moved following the standard procedures 
for removing brackets at the same time  as the brackets are removed.  The 
sealants will come off at the same time  because the standard procedure includes 
polishing the tooth surfaces when brackets are removed. 
7. Patient identification is only to i dentify which tooth received the specific 
treatments so that when the teeth are ex tracted by the oral surgeon the groups 
can be identified.  No patient inform ation is associated with the outcome 
measures.  
 
Protocol Template Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 ii. Justification of Procedures: There are no  procedures delivered to the patient that are 
not within the scope of the standard procedures  for orthodontic patients.  All data is 
gathered from the extracted teeth in the laboratory. 
iii. Data Collection Tools: Mineral densit y and lesion depth will be determined in the 
laboratory through histological examination of the teeth.  Briefly, the teeth are cross-
sectioned through the bracket pad to generate a 1 mm thick slab from the middle of the 
tooth.  This slab is observed under polariz ed light microscopy to measure the lesion 
depth (if any) from the surface, and subject ed to x-ray to determine the mineral density 
across the lesion. 
e. Potential Scientific Problems:  None are anticipated. 
f. Data Analysis Plan  
i. Statistical analysis will include graphical ev aluations, along with descriptive statistics 
(mean, standard deviation), and one-way ANO VA for the three groups for both mineral 
density and lesion depth outcomes. If appropriate, there will be follow-up ranked comparison testing at a significance of P ≤ 0.05.  There will be paired-t tests between 
UDMA and negative controls, UDMA-K18 and negative controls, and paired-t tests 
between UDMA and UDMA-K18 sealants on mineral density and lesion depth outcomes.  Should there be data from a 4
th tooth (2 teeth will receive the same 
treatment) the data from the 2 teeth with t he same treatment will be averaged prior to 
comparison to the controls. 
ii. The possibility of regional variations (lef t vs. right, upper vs. lowe r) has been taken into 
account in the calculation of the size of the patient cohort.  The sample number 
calculation was based on differences and variations that are relatively large, and an 
additional 10 (50 % number) patients were added to the cohort to give the strongest probability of being able to make statistically based conclusions. 
iii. Secondary analyses may be possible to asse ss the ability of microbial biofilm to cause 
demineralization differences between upper and lower arches.  If a patient has a fourth bicuspid that is to be extracted (which is usually the case) the as signment of one of the 
 
Protocol Template Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 three treatments will be to generate a pair (left vs. right or upper vs. lower)  for 
comparison.  The statistical analyses will include paired-t tests for the differences that 
may be observed within each treatment group. 
g. Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:  Whether the use of UDMA-K18 sealant prevents 
tooth demineralization during orthodontic therapy.   
i. This is not a pilot study, and is intended to provide the clinical efficacy of the UDMA-
K18 sealant to prevent white spot lesions around orthodontic brackets.  Unless the variation is much larger than anticipat ed there will be sufficient power in the 
experimental design to make statistically bas ed conclusions about the sealant efficacy.  
One of the experimental design features is that each patient will have all the controls 
and the experimental sealant so paired di fferences within each patient will be 
determined.  This sort of paired difference experimental design is one of the most 
sensitive   
ii. The data generated and the conclusions achi eved will be useful for the dental industry 
to decide whether to commercialize the sealant.    
 
Protocol Template Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 References: 
Darvishiabyaneh S, Carey CM. Stereomicroscope bas ed method to assess enamel and dentin erosion. J 
Dent Res 2016;95 Spec Iss A:1089 
Gong S-Q, Niu L-N, Yiu CKY, Rhou H, Qi Y-P, Bli ssasrd JD, Nikonov S, Brackett MG, Messer RLW, Wu 
DC, Jao J, Brister LB, Rueggeberg FA, Arola DD, Pashley DH, Tay FR. Quaternary ammonium 
silane-functional, methacrylate resin composition with antimicrobial activities and self-repair 
potential. Acta Biomaterialia 2012;8:3270-3282. 
Faranesh S, Shellhart D, Newman S, Tilliss T, Minick G, Carey CM. The incidence of white spot lesions in 
a university orthodontic clinic patient populati on: an observational clin ical cohort study. 2017; 
MSD Thesis, University of Colorado Denver, School of Dental Medicine, Department of 
Orthodontics. 
Lee H, Newman SM, Oesterle LJ, Shellhart WC, Minick GT, Tillis T, Carey CM: In vitro investigation of 
primers and RMGIC on bracket retention and resistan ce to erosion, 2015; MSD Thesis, University 
of Colorado Denver, School of Dental Medicine, Department of Orthodontics. 
de Moura MS, Simplicio AH, Cury JA. In-vivo effect s of fluoridated antiplaque dentifrice and bonding 
material on enamel demineralization adjacent to  orthodontic appliances. Am J Ortho Dentofacial 
Orthoped 2006;130:357-363. 
Liu SY, Tonggu L, Niu L-N, Gong S-Q, Fan B, Want  L, Zhao J-H, Huang C, Pahsley DH, Tay FR. 
Antimicrobial activity of a quaternary ammonium methacryloxy silicate-containing acrylic resin: a 
randomized clinical trial. Nature Sci Rpts 2016a;6:21882. DOI: 10.1038/srep21882 
Stricker B, Johnston AD, Carey CM. Assessment of tethered UDMA ‐K18 antimicrobial efficacy on biofilm 
activity, J Dent Res 2016;95 Spec Iss A:1019. 
Schmuck BD, Carey CM. Improved contact x-ray micr oradiographic method to measure mineral density of 
hard dental materials. J Res Natl Inst Stand Tech 2010;115:75-83. 
Uysal T, Amasyali M, Ozcan S, Koyuturk AE, Akyol M,  Sagdic D. In vivo effects of amorphous calcium 
phosphate-containing orthodontic composite on enamel demineralization around orthodontic brackets. Aust Dent J 2010;55:285-291. 
Wefel JS, Harless JD. Comparison of artificial white spots by microradiography and polarized light 
microscopy. J Dent Res 1984;63:1271-1275. 
  
 
Protocol Template Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Experimental Diagram. 
 
 

 
Protocol Template Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
http://sterile-environments.com/wp-c ontent/uploads/2 015/07/Untitled.png  
 
