 
 CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE  IN A CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
   MEDICAL RECORD                 •  Adult Patient or     •  Parent, for Minor Patient 
 
 
INSTITUTE:  National Cancer Institute   
 
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Marston Linehan, M.D.  
  
STUDY TITLE:  A Phase 2 Study of ZD6474 (Vandetanib) in Patients with Von Hippel Lindau Disease and Renal Tumors  
 
Continuing Review Approved by the IRB on 06/27/11  
Amendment Approved by the IRB on 03/09/12 (F)    Date Posted to the Web: 03/15/12  
Standard  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  
 RESEARCH STUDY  
 •   Adult Patient or    •   Parent, for Minor Patient  
 NIH-2514- 1 (07- 09) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent (1)  
 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
We invite you to take part in a research study at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
 First, we want you to know that:  
 Taking part in NIH research is entirely voluntary.  
  You may choose not to take part, or you may withdraw from the s tudy at any time.  In either case, you will not 
lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  However, to receive care at the NIH, you must be taking part in a study or be under evaluation for study participation.  
  You may receive no benefit from taking part.  The research may give us knowledge that may help people in the 
future.  
 
Second, some people have personal, religious or ethical beliefs that may limit the kinds of medical or research treatments 
they would want to receive (such as blood tra nsfusions).  If you have such beliefs, please discuss them with your NIH 
doctors or research team before you agree to the study.  
 
Now we will describe this research study.  Before you decide to take part, please take as much time as you need to ask any que stions and discuss this study with anyone at NIH, or with family, friends or your personal physician or other 
health professional.  
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
 What is a Research Study?  
 A research study is a carefully supervised study that is done in humans to answer specific questions about a study drug or 
a new way of using an approved drug.  Research studies are used to determine whether study drugs or treatments are 
safe and effective in humans.  
 You are being asked to take part in this study, also known as a clinical trial, because you have kidney cancer related to 
von Hippel -Lindau (VHL) disease.   You are invited to join this phase II study of an investigational (research) drug called 
ZD6474 ( also known as vandetanib or ZACTIMA).  
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  2  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 What is this document?  
 This document is an informed consent form that will provide you with information about this research study.  Before you 
can make a decision about whether or not to participate, you should understand what this study involves and the possible risks and benefits associated with this study.  If you have any questions after reading this document, please ask the study 
doctor or study nurse to explain any words or information that you do not understand.  If you agree to participate in this 
research study, you should be sure that all your questions are answered and that you understand your rights as a study 
subject.  After you sign this form you will be given a copy to keep.  
 
Why is this study being done?  
 The purpose of this research study is to determine if the study drug ZD6474 can be used as a treatment for kidney 
tumors in people who have VHL and whether it can safely be given to patients with  VHL.   ZD6474 is an experimental 
drug that is being tested as a new medication for a variety of cancers, including clear cell renal carcinoma  which is the 
type of kidney cancer seen in VHL patients . ZD6474 is given once daily by mouth as a pill or liquid.  
 Why might ZD6474 work  in cancer patients ?  
 One way tumors are able to grow is by growth and development of new bloo d vessels which bring nutrients and oxygen 
to the tumor.  This process happens because proteins (called receptors) on the surface of cells lining blood vessels and 
cancer cells receive chemical signals that encourage the growth of new blood vessels.  Cance r cells also have other 
receptors on their surface that promote growth of cancer cells directly in response to proteins called ‘growth factors’. In 
laboratory experiments, ZD6474 works by blocking both these kinds of receptors  on the surface of cancer cell s or on the 
lining of blood vessels within cancers.  Blocking these receptors may cause cancer cells or the blood vessels to stop growing.  
 
ZD6474 has been tested in adults who have a variety of different cancers  in clinical trials, but the drug has not b een 
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a cancer treatment.  We do not know whether ZD6474 will 
slow or stop the growth of renal cancer or whether this drug will be effective in your cancer.  
 One of the goals of this study is to try an d understand better how ZD6474 may work in humans with kidney cancer. At 
specific times throughout this study, your blood will be collected and analyzed.   These samples will be studied to look for special markers that may help researchers understand how Z D6474 is affecting you and/or your tumor and to develop 
tests that may be helpful in the study of
 kidney cancer . 
 How many people will participate in this study?  
 The study will initially involve 12 patients enrolled at the NIH.  If one or more people in this group have tumors that 
shrink following treatment with  ZD6474, another 25 patients can enter the study. The plan is to enter up to 37 patients 
with VHL on to this study.    
 
WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF I TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH  STUDY?  
 
What are the chances  that I will get the study drug?  
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  3  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 All eligible subjects enrolled in this study will receive the study drug ZD6474.  This study is an open label study, which 
means that both you and your doctor will know what amount of ZD6474 you are taking.  
How often will I need to visit the hospital, clinic, or doctor’s office?  
 You will visit the NIH clinical center to help your doctors determine whether you are a suitable candidate for this study. 
This visit will involve meetings with doctors, nurses and other staff conducting this study as well as blood and urine tests 
and x -rays. Once you decide to participate in the study, you will need to come to the NIH every 2 weeks during the first 
four weeks of treatment to  meet with your doctors and research nurse and also have s everal tests done. After the first 
four weeks, you will need to return for a visit once every four weeks.  The length of each visit will depend upon the 
number of tests that are being done.  Some visits will be longer than other visits.  
 
What will I be responsible for if I participate in this study?  
 During this study you will not be able to receive any other cancer treatments other than ZD6474.  You will be asked not 
to participate in any other clinical trials involving another experimental treatment while you are being treated in this 
study.  
Several medications (both prescription and non -prescription), ‘alternative/complementary’ or herbal preparations, dietary 
supplements, and foods such as grapefruit juice, can have undesirable interactions with ZD6474. You will not be allowed 
to take certain medications , supplements, and grapefruit juice  during your participation in this study.  Your doctor or the 
study staff will review the list of drugs that you are currently taking, as well as those that you took prior  to participating in 
this study.  Once you are on study, please talk to your NIH doctors prior to starting any new drugs, dietary 
supplements or herbal or complementary medications . 
 
Drugs that affect the normal growth of blood vessels can delay or complicate wound healing following injury or surgical 
procedures. You should not schedule any elective surgeries while you are being treated in this study.  If you have an 
unplanned surgery, inform you doctor immediately, as you may not be able to continue study drug 
treatment.  
 You need to keep your scheduled NIH visits and follow the instructions of your physicians and study nurse.  If you cannot 
keep one of your planned visits, call your research nurse and reschedule the visit.  
 You will also be asked to keep a diary of when you take the medication and any side effects that you experience.  You 
will also need to bring your ZD6474 pill bottles with you to every visit for the team to count your remaining ZD6474 pills.   
You will be given a blood pressure cuff and be  taught how to take your own blood pressure.  You will be asked to take 
your blood pressure at home periodically and keep a diary of the readings. If you experience any worrisome side 
effects or if your systolic blood pressure (upper or higher number) is above 150, or if your diastolic (lower number) is above 100  or above, you should call your doctors at the NIH or seek medical attention from 
your local doctors as soon as possible.  
 Agents such as ZD6474, which interfere with blood vessel formation or growt h may cause developmental problems in 
fetuses and breast -feeding or young children. Therefore, if you  are pregnant or breast -feeding you may not participate in 
this study. If you are female and old enough to get pregnant, you will be given a pregnancy test  before you are given 
ZD6474.  An appropriate and effective method of birth control (which may include abstinence) must be used by any person who is able to become pregnant or father a child and is receiving ZD6474.  Birth control must be continued and 
breast feeding avoided for three months after the last dose of ZD6474 is given to ensure that most of the drug is out of 
your body.  If you become or are found to be pregnant while receiving ZD6474, you must notify one of the doctors listed 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  4  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 on this form right  away. If you become pregnant while you are taking ZD6474 you must stop taking ZD6474, and you will 
not be able to continue treatment with ZD6474.  If you are a male, you should not attempt to father a child while you are 
on this drug and for at least three  months after stopping the drug. You must use an appropriate and effective method of 
birth control during this period. The effect of this drug on your ability to bear or father children after you discontinue 
treatment is unknown.  
 WOMEN OF CHILD -BEARING P OTENTIAL  
There might be unknown risks to the unborn child if you are or if you become pregnant during the study.  Due to these risks, you must not participate in this study if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant during the research study period, or are breast -feeding a child.  
If you are a woman of child -bearing potential:  
• By signing this consent form, you confirm to the best of your knowledge that you are not pregnant now and you do not intend to become pregnant during this study  
• A pregnancy test w ill be done to confirm that you are not pregnant before you take part in this study  
• You must avoid becoming pregnant and use an acceptable method of birth control during this study.  
If at any time during this study you think you might be pregnant, or later  learn that you were pregnant during the study, 
you must contact the study doctor immediately for further instructions about your participation in this study and follow -
up. 
MALE Patients  
The study drug used in this study could affect your sperm and could potentially harm a child that you may father while in 
this study.  You must avoid unprotected sex with a pregnant partner (or woman of child -bearing potential not using birth 
control) or donating sperm during the study and for three months following the las t dose, since the potential for problems 
with the fetus has not yet been thoroughly investigated.  Men should use a condom during the trial and for three months 
following the last dose.  
If your partner becomes pregnant, you must notify the study doctor of any outcomes of the pregnancy from the date of 
the first dose until three months after last dose of  ZD6474.  
 
TYPES OF TESTS OR PR OCEDURES INVOLVED WITH THIS STUDY   
 
Once you meet with your doctors and research team at the NIH and undergo the necessary tests to determine if you are a suitable candidate for this study, you can decide whether you want to participate. If you choose to take part, then you 
will be started on ZD6474.  This drug is given by mouth once every day ( treatment periods are divided arbitr arily into 
cycles -a cycle of ZD6474 is 28 days). You will be instructed about how to take ZD6474.  
 During the 1
st cycle, you will need to return to  the NIH every 2 weeks on the same day of the week as of your first dose 
of ZD6474.  If you stay on the drug  after the 1st cycle, you will return to the NIH every four weeks.  
 At clinic visits during your participation in this study you will have the following tests and procedures.  They are part of 
regular cancer care.  
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  5  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 ● V ital signs (pulse rate, respiration rate, oral temperature, and blood pressure), weight, and performance status 
will be taken at each study visit . 
● Blood will be collected for chemistry, hematology, and other labs to determine if the study drug is causing any ill 
effects on your body.  These s amples will be taken at each study visit.  About 3 -5 teaspoons will be taken each 
time you visit the doctor for this study.   
● If you are a female and able to get pregnant, a pregnancy test will be done within the week before starting  the 
study and once every four weeks  during treatment  before your continue with each new cycle.   
The following tests and procedures will also be done. Even though they are part of regular cancer care, it is possible they 
are being done more often because you are in this study.    
● You will have imaging scans (CT or MRI) done approximately every  12 weeks to assess the size of your tumors 
(or sooner if your doctor feels it is necessary)  
● You will have urine collected during the 1st week of every cycle.  
● You will have an electrocar diogram (E KG) and routine blood work done every week during the 1st two cycles.  If 
you stay on the drug longer, then EKGs will be performed every four weeks .  This means that some of the EKGs 
and blood work will need to be performed locally near your home and the results sent to the NIH.    
The following research studies will be done to see how ZD6474 is affecting your body.  
● Your blood will be taken before and after the ZD6474 dose at weeks 1 and 3 of the 1st cycle, and every four 
weeks  after that, as well as the end of treatment to look for special markers affecting you and/or your tumor that 
may be helpful in the study of  kidney cancer .  About 8 tablespoons will be collected for this portion of the 
research tests.  
STUDY CHART  
 
The chart below shows what will happen to you during the course of your treatment.  
 
DAY WHAT TO DO AND WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO YOU  
Day 1, Week 1 of 
each cycle  • ZD6474 tablets will be given to you along with a pill diary, blood pressure 
monitor, side effect diary, and blood pressure diary.  
Day 1 of Weeks 1 
and 3 of the 1st cycle, 
and  
Day 1 of every cycle 
(4 weeks) after 1st 
cycle (Week 5, 9, 13, 
etc.) 
 • NIH visit  
• Have a history taken of how you feel, have a physical examination, and vital 
signs by a Health Care Provider in the Urology (OP3) Clinic  
• Review your blood pressure, side effects and pill diaries 
• Blood draw for research and routine lab tests befo re ZD6474 dose, and blood 
draw for research tests after ZD6474 dose  
• Urine tests  
• EKG will be done  
Day 1, every week 
for Weeks 2, 4, 6, 7 
& 8,   
 • EKG and routine blood tests will be done by your local doctor with results sent to 
NIH. 
Every 12 weeks 
(start ing with week 
13) • A CT scan or MRI will determine how your tumor is being affected by the 
therapy.  
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  6  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 Can I stop being in the study?  
 Yes.  You can decide to stop at any time.  Tell the study doctor if you are thinking about stopping or decide to stop.  He 
or she will tell you how to stop safely.  
 
It is important to tell the study doctor if you are thinking about stopping so any risks from ZD6474 can be evaluated by 
your doctor.  Another reason to tell your doctor that you are thinking about stopping is to d iscuss what follow  up care and 
testing could be most helpful for you.  
 
The study doctor may stop you from taking part in this study at any time if he/she believes it is in your best interest; if 
you do not follow the study rules; or if the study is stopped . 
 When am I finished with the Study?  
 You may continue to receive ZD6474 treatment in this study until:  
• your tumors get larger , or 
• your doctor feels you are not benefiting from ZD6474, or  
• you experience intolerable side effects  or side effects which make  it unsafe for you to continue , or   
• the doctors taking care of you feel it is not in your best interest to continue, or  
• you choose to withdraw from this study, or  
• you are unable to keep scheduled medical appointments or take the study medication as instr ucted, or  
• a better therapy becomes available, or  
• you are a female and become pregnant, or  
• the drug is no longer available or the study closes  
 
Safety Follow -up Visit/End of study visit:  
 If you co me off of the treatment for any of the reasons listed abov e, we would like to continue to check up on you 
periodically through phone calls to you, your family or your home doctor’s office.  
 If you experience a side effect or abnormal laboratory results, your study doctor may ask that you come back for 
additional visits until the side effect resolves  
 
SIDE EFFECTS OR RISK S FROM BEING IN THE STUDY  
 More than 5000 patients with different types of tumors have been treated with ZD6474. A variety of side effects have 
been seen in patients receiving ZD6474 and are descr ibed below.  In addition to the possible side effects listed below, 
there is always the risk of uncommon or unexpected side effects that you may experience when taking ZD6474.  Your 
doctor will closely monitor you throughout this study and discuss with you any questions regarding risks, discomforts and 
side effects.  
 The administration of any drug involves a general risk of allergic drug reactions.  The symptoms that may occur include headache, rashes /hives , flushing, swollen skin, breathlessness, dizziness,  nausea, and sometimes vomiting.  In rare 
cases, life -threatening reactions may develop, including choking attacks , dangerously low blood pressure and loss of 
consciousness , which will require immediate treatment. 
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  7  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 To our knowledge, patients with VHL have not received this drug outside this trial and hence it is not known whether 
these patients may develop additional or more severe side effects than non -VHL patients.  
 If at any time you have any questions about side effects or if you think you have a side effect or a change in your health condition, it is important that you speak to your study physician.   
 Known side effects in patients receiving ZD6474  
 All drugs have potential side effects.  One of the purposes of th is study is to learn about the possible  side effects of 
ZD6474.  Many drug -related side effects will go away shortly after stopping the drug, but in some cases side effects may 
be serious, long, lasting, or permanent.  During your study treatment and for at least 30 days after your last dose of  
ZD6474, it will be very important for you to report any possible side effects or symptoms that you develop to your study 
doctor.  
 Everyone taking part in the study will be watched carefully for any side effects.  However, doctors don’t know all the side 
effects that may occur .  Side effects may be mild or very serious. Your health care team may give you medicines to help 
lessen some side effects. It may become necessary to temporarily or permanently discontinue ZD6474 or alter the dose of 
the drugs due to side effects you experience.  
 
Patients in clinical studies using ZD6474 have reported the following symptoms and side effects related to ZD6474:  
 
Likely / Common (> 10%):  
• skin rashes  
• nausea  
• loss of appetite  
• weight loss  
• diarrhea  
• constipation 
• high blood pr essure  
• changes on the EKG  without any symptoms   
• feeling tired  
• headache  
• dizziness 
• depression and anxiety  
• sleeplessness 
 
Less Likely (1% to 11%)  
• blood in the urine  
• protein in the urine   
• changes in lab values of electrolytes and liver function tests 
• low plate let count, anemia, and low white blood count  
• bruises 
• gum bleeding, mouth sores or yeast infections  
• fever 
• lack of energy and weakness  
• dehydration   
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  8  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 • vomiting or heartburn  
• shortness of breath  
• cough  
• pain, including pain associated with tumor  
• itching  
• pain, redness, or peeling of the hands and feet  
• increased blood levels of calcium, a mineral normally found in blood  
• changes in levels of parathormone, a substance made in your body that regulates the levels of calcium and phosphorus  
• Inflammation of the pancreas  
• Inflammation/infection of the intestines  
• Abnormal accumulation of fluid in the brain  
• Decrease in thyroid function  
• Stroke  
• Mild nose bleeding  
• Abnormal taste in mouth  
• Dry or irritated eyes 
• Kidney stones  
 
Rare but Serious  
• Life-threatening high blood pressure  
• Sympt omatic and / or life threatening heart rhythm changes  
• Formation of clots, such as in the lung or in the legs  
• Bleeding, from tumors or non tumor sites  
• Bleeding in or around the brain  
• Lack of blood flow to heart (heart attack), brain (stroke), eye (blindness ),legs, or bowel  
• Serious or life threatening complications from rashes  
• Lung inflammation and stiffening, infections or fluid accumulation around the lungs  
• Blockage or penetration of the bowel  or gall bladder duct  
• Kidney failure  
• Problems with wound healing and spreading bacterial infection of the deeper layers of skin and soft tissu  
• Heart Failure, which is the weakening of the heart's ability to pump blood has also been reported and may be related 
to vandetanib. We will be monitoring your heart function with  an ekg. If significant changes occur, we may need to 
stop therapy.  
• Seizures, some patients have had seizures while taking vandetanib, and in one case a patient with seizures also had swelling in the brain that was found on an MRI scan, which got better af ter vandetanib was stopped. If you 
develop seizures, dizziness, headache, changes in your vision, or confusion, you should let your study doctor 
know as soon as possible. These may be symptoms of reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy 
syndrome (RPLS).  
 
In addition, a number of other side effects have been reported in clinical trials using ZD6474 alone, in combination with other chemotherapy agents or radiation. It is unclear whether these side effects are related to ZD6474, or are caused by 
other factors (such as chemotherapy or radiation). These side effects include:  
• Infections, including life -threatening bacterial infections 
• Facial nerve palsies or reversible  confusion, seizures and swelling in the brain  
• Brief loss of consciousness  
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  9  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 • Weakening of the heart  muscle or inability of the heart to pump efficiently  
• Severe breathing problems or lung failure  
• Development of an abnormal pathway between the esophagus (tube connecting the throat to the stomach) and trachea (windpipe) or surrounding structures  
• Developmen t of an abnormal communication between the intestines and surrounding structures, including the urinary 
bladder  
 
AstraZeneca is monitoring patients receiving vandetanib.  You and your study doctor will be told if we have further information about vandetani b that might be relevant to your willingness to continue to take part in the study.  
 Many side effects, including skin rashes, diarrhea, high blood pressure and EKG changes are  often reversible and can 
usually be improved  by reducing the dose of ZD6474.  I f you develop a skin rash, creams and oral medications can be 
given.  If you develop diarrhea related to the ZD6474, medications to stop the diarrhea can be used.  
 
Your skin will be more sensitive to the sun, and you should minimize your exposure to the su n. This may be done 
by reducing the time you are out in the sun, using a hat and clothing to cover most of your body and applying sunscreens with an SPF 45 or higher any time you are outdoors. It is recommended that you take preventative 
action to prevent the rash from occurring while receiving study medication and for 3 to 4 weeks after stopping 
treatment by using the afore mentioned guidelines . 
 
Also, you must notify the study team when the first sign of a rash occurs so that the appropriate steps can be taken in an 
attempt to prevent the rash from becoming severe.    
 
Your eyes may be more dry and changes to your corneas may occur.  In order to prevent corneal ulcers and other eye 
problems, do not wear contact lenses while taking ZD6474.  
 Your blood pressu re will be monitored carefully on the study and, if found to be elevated, medication s to lower your blood 
pressure can be used.  If you have uncontrolled high blood pressure, this elevated pressure can cause damage to other organs including the heart, kidn eys, or brain.  Having uncontrolled blood pressure increases the risk of heart attack and 
stroke in adults.  High blood pressure  may be associated with no symptoms;  however, dizziness, headache or nose bleed 
can occur  in patients with high blood pressure . You will be asked to record your blood pressure at least once a day. If 
your systolic blood pressure (upper or higher number) is above 150, or if your diastolic (lower number) is 
above 10 0 or above, please call your doctors at the NIH or seek medical atten tion from your local doctors 
as soon as possible.  
 
We will monitor your heart function closely by performing ECG/EKGs periodically to look at your heart rate and rhythm. 
This procedure is associated with minimal discomfort.  Abnormalities on the EKG have been reported in patients taking 
ZD6474 on other trials. Some of these abnormalities can have serious or life -threatening consequences if appropriate 
action is not taken (usually stopping or reducing the dose of ZD6474 and/or ensuring that blood electrolyte levels are 
normal). However, as a result of close monitoring and timely intervention, no serious problems or symptoms related to these EKG abnormalities have been reported so far.  
 
AstraZeneca has observed changes in ECGs in some patients being treated wit h vandetanib. These changes in the 
ECG may be drug -related and usually occur without symptoms; accordingly, frequent safety follow -up visits have 
been built into all studies. Similar changes in the ECGs of patients receiving other medications have led to h eart 
rhythm changes, some of which have been life threatening. However, it is estimated that between 0.1 to 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  10  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 1% of patients receiving vandetanib 300 mg have developed heart rhythm changes linked to life -
threatening arrhythmia called Torsades de Pointes. Torsades de Pointes has been associated with sudden death.  If any such changes are noted on your ECGs, you may need to attend additional visits for further 
safety assessments.  
 The risk of developing changes in the ECG and serious heart rhythm changes will b e greater if you have diarrhea, 
vomiting, high fever, faintness or dizzy spells, or are unable to maintain a normal diet.  You should report any of 
these symptoms to your doctor immediately.   You should review your medications and diet with your doctor at 
each visit while you are continuing to receive study medication.  
 These changes in the ECG usually occur without you being able to sense it happening, so frequent follow -up has been 
built into the study.  You may be able to sense some changes in the heart rhythm such as rapid or irregular heart 
beating, dizziness, light -headedness, chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and losing consciousness.  These or other 
new symptoms or possible side effects should be reported immediately to your doctor.  
 
A rare side  effect of anti -blood vessel agents such as ZD6474 is a risk of bleeding, which can sometimes occur at the site 
of or from tumors .  Although patients taking ZD6474 on other trials have experienced bleeding (including one case of 
bleeding into the brain) it  is not clear how frequently bleeding occurs or whether these are related to ZD6474. Other 
drugs (including some drugs that are approved by the FDA for treating kidney cancer) have been associated with 
bleeding, which, in some cases have been life -threaten ing or fatal. Since patients with VHL have tumors at multiple 
locations within the body, bleeding from tumors can have serious or life -threatening consequences, especially if it involves 
hemangioblastomas in areas such as the brain, the spinal cord or angiomas in the eye.  
 
Drugs that affect the normal growth of blood vessels can delay or complicate wound healing following injury or surgical 
procedures. You should not schedule any elective surgeries while you are being treated in this study.  If you have an 
unplanned surgery, inform you doctor immediately, as you may not be able to continue study drug treatment.  
 
The long -term side effects of ZD6474 are not known.  It is possible that there may be temporary or permanent side 
effects of ZD6474 that have not ye t been identified.  
 
The effects of ZD6474 on the human fetus or nursing infant are not known. ZD6474 is harmful to fetal development in 
animals. 
 Known side effects of the procedures that will be done in this research study  
 
Blood Collection  
 The risks associated with blood collection include discomfort, pain, bleeding, bruising, redness, swelling and/or bruising where the blood is drawn from your arm.  Fainting and infection are rare, but can happen with blood collection.  By 
signing this consent form, you are authorizing NIH investigators to use your blood samples for those procedures identified 
in the study protocol.  
 
ECG 
 A recording of the normal electrical activity of your heart is taken by placing electrodes (pieces of metal attached to wires) on the skin of your chest, arms, and legs.  There is minimal discomfort and there are no risks.  
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  11  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
  
Echo 
 
An echocardiogram is an ultrasound of your heart.  An ultrasound is an image made from sound waves.  There is no discomfort and there are no risks.  
 
Imaging stu dies 
 You will have a CT scan or MRI to measure the size of your cancer(s) before starting the treatment and some or all of these scans will be used to periodically monitor the change in the size of your cancer(s) on ZD6474.  These scans are 
common standar d imaging tests used in the diagnosis and monitoring of many diseases.  Although these tests have been 
in use for many years, their potential long term effects on the body are still being learned.  
 
MRI Scan  
 
There are no known harmful effects from the strong magnetic field used for MRI. However, the magnet is so powerful that it may affect pacemakers, artificial limbs, and other medical devices that contain iron.  You should tell the study staf f 
about any metal devices that you may have in your body.  
 
Iron pigments in tattooed eyeliner can cause eye irritation.  
There is slight risk of developing an allergic reaction if contrast material is used during the MRI scan. However, most 
reactions are mild and can be controlled using medication.  
 The MRI scan is pe rformed in a long narrow tube.  You may experience discomfort related to lying still in an enclosed 
space for a prolonged period of time.  The study staff prior to performing the procedure will provide additional instructions to you.  If this occurs, cool air can be blown over you by a fan if desired or your doctor can order a medicine 
to help you relax during this scan.  Keeping the room well lit can also reduce this claustrophobic feeling.  
 
CT Scan  
 If a contrast agent (the special dye) is given with the scan there is a small risk of having a reaction to the contrast.  
These reactions can include nausea, pain in the vein where the contrast was given, headache, a metallic or bitter taste in 
the mouth, and a warm or flushing feeling that lasts from 1 -3 minutes.  Rarely, these symptoms may require treatment.  
In very rare cases, people have had more severe allergic reactions that result in shortness of breath, wheezing, or 
lowering of the blood pressure.  If you have had a reaction in the past, be sure to te ll your doctor or nurse about it.   
 You will be exposed to a limited and medically acceptable dose of radiation during the procedure.  There is always a slight 
risk from being exposed to any radiation, including the low levels of X -rays used for a CT scan. 
 
The radiation dose you receive, if your scans include the use of X -rays or radioactive chemicals, is within the safe limits 
defined by the NIH Radiation Safety Guidelines, and is considered essential for your medical care.  
 
Delay in surgical resection of kidney tumor(s)  
 Von Hippel -Lindau patients with kidney tumors that have reached a certain size (usually around 3cm)  would normally be 
advised to undergo surgery to remove them. Surgical removal of tumors is done to lessen the risk of spread to other 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  12  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 organs.  Removing your kidney tumors does not mean that your cancer has been ‘cured’.  Even if you have surgery to 
remove your kidney tumor(s), it is possible that you will develop new tumors and may need surgery again in the future.  
 
Your tumors may or may n ot be large enough to require surgical resection in the near future. If they are large enough to 
require surgery, a delay in surgery may result  if you choose to participate in this study  and your tumors do not decrease 
in size with ZD6474.  We feel that delaying surgery for approximately 12 weeks is unlikely to greatly increase the risk of tumor spread from your kidneys. After 12 weeks, depending on the effect of ZD6474 on your tumors, a decision will be 
made about whether it is safe to delay surgery any fu rther. If any of your kidney tumors should be very large, we will 
advise surgery at the earliest possible time and will exclude you from the current study.  
 
Potential Benefits of Participation  
 You are being offered this experimental drug (ZD6474) because it may be of benefit to you in treating your VHL disease.  
One potential benefit may be shrinkage of your tumors that would enable you to delay or avoid surgery.  Another possible benefit might be changes to the tumor environment (such as decreased blood supply) that may make surgical removal of 
your tumor(s) easier.  However, there is no guarantee that this drug is of benefit to humans or that you will benefit from taking part in the study.  The drug you receive may even be harmful to you.  
 Individual patients will not have a benefit from taking part in the investigational procedures such as research done on 
your blood samples or tumor tissue.  However, future patients may benefit from what is learned.   
Your participation in this study is voluntary.   
 Potential Benefits to Society  
 The knowledge gained from this study may benefit others.  Your participation may help to determine if ZD6474 treatment 
can be safely and effectively given to other patients with VHL.  
 
Alternative to Participation/ Alternative Approaches or Treatments  
 You may choose not to participate in this study.  Other treatment options may be available to you.  Your doctor is very 
willing to discuss the benefits and side effects of other ways to treat your tumors including the option of surgical resection 
of your tumor(s), treatment of your symptoms only, and other investigational protocols that may be available for your 
condition.  
 
Your other choices may include:
 
 
• Getting care for your cancer without being in a study  
 
• Taking part in another  study  
 
• Surgical removal of your tumor(s)  
 
• Getting no treatment 
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  13  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 If you agree to participate in this study then you and your doctor have determined that there are no other standard 
therapies available that have been shown to improve your chance of survival  or cure, or you have refused other 
treatment options available to you.   
 
CONFIDENTIALITY OF MEDICAL INFORMATION  
 Will my medical information be kept private?  
 We will do our best to make sure that the personal information in your medical record will be k ept private.  However, we 
cannot guarantee total privacy.  Your personal information may be given out if required by law.  If information from this 
study is published or presented at scientific meetings, your name and other personal information will not be  used.  
 All patients will be given a number upon signing this informed consent form.  The number will be used throughout the 
study as your main identifier on study documents that will be sent to AstraZeneca  (the drug company that provides the 
drug used in  this trial).  Every effort will be made to ensure that documents that contain your personal information will be 
crossed out and replaced with your subject identification number if sent to AstraZeneca.  
 
All research samples will be labeled with a unique bar code number.  Only the investigator and designated study site staff 
(i.e. staff at the NIH) will have the key to link the bar -coded samples to the subject to which they correspond.  
 Neither your results nor your samples will be identified with your name in communications with AstraZeneca.  A number 
will be used in all regulatory documentation related to this study.  It is a requirement that your involvement in this study 
be noted in your medical records.  
 Since research studies on samples you provide are not expected to benefit you directly or to change your treatment 
course, these results will not be placed in your medical record and will not be made available to you, members of your 
family, your personal physician, or other third parties.  
 The confidenti ality of your medical records will be maintained to the extent permitted by the applicable laws.  If results of 
the trial are published, your identity will remain confidential.  Using your subject number only, the results and other information from the study may be submitted to regulatory agencies in countries where the study drug
 may be submitted 
for approval.  
 
WHAT WILL BE DONE WITH MY BLOOD AND TUMOR SAMPLES?  
 Consent for Tissue/ Blood (specimen) Banking  
 During the course of the study, several research studies will be performed on your blood and tissue samples. These 
studies will be done to try to better understand:  
• how the drug is handled by your body (i.e, how it is absorbed and broken down ) 
• what effects the drug has on your body  
• whether the drug affects any components of the mechanism that is responsible for formation of new blood 
vessels in or growth of tumors 
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  14  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 Your research blood samples obtained during your participation in the study will be stored in freezers in research 
laboratories at the NIH  and used to test for information required for this study. All samples used for research will be 
coded and no personal information will be included in order to protect your privacy.  
 
 
 
 
Optional Studies  
 
Please read each sentence below and think about your choice. After reading each sentence, circle and initial the answer 
that is right for you.  No matter what you decide to do, it will not affect your care.  
 1. My tissue, blood, and urine specimens may be kept for use in research to learn about, prevent, or tr eat cancer.  
 Yes              No                Initials_________  
 
2. My specimens may be kept for use in research to learn about, prevent or treat other health problems (for example: 
diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, or heart disease).  
 
Yes              No                Initials_________  
 
3. Someone may contact me in the future to ask permission to use my specimen(s) in new research not included in this 
consent.  If the risks of the new research are not covered by this consent, you may be asked to sign conse nt.  
 
Yes              No                Initials_________  
 
4. I want to be contacted in the future if any information is learned that may direct impact my health or the health of my 
relatives.  I understand that for you to contact me in the future, I need to notify you of any changes in my address.  
Yes              No                Initials _________  
 
 
Will I be compensated for participating in this study?  
 
There will be no financial compensation for participating in this study.  
 What are the costs of taking part in this study?  
 The study drug, ZD6474, will be provided to you free of charge by AstraZeneca , Inc. through the NIH .  There is no cost 
to you for the drug itself or for any test or procedure performed solely for research purposes.  NIH will pay for the cost of 
the blood tests, x- rays, scans, drug preparation and pharmacy fees, and other laboratory tests associated with your 
research -related care at NIH while you are enrolled in this study.  You or your insurance company will have to pay for all 
care outside of NIH, which includes non-research related costs that are associated with your routine care for your 
underlying disease.   
 
Drug Sponsor/Manufacturer  
 
 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDI CAL RECORD  NIH 2514 -1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514 -2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  15  of  18 pages  
 
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514- 1 (10- 84) 
 NIH-2514- 2 (10- 84) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 
 
 The study drug is provided by AstraZeneca, Inc.  It is possible that the information obtained  from your participation on 
this study may become valuable for commercial research and development purposes (including patentable inventions), which may be of significant benefit to society, the sponsor of this study, individual researchers, or other third  parties.  
You will not receive direct financial benefit from such research and development.  
  
 
 
Conflict of Interest  
 
The National Institutes of Health and the research team for this study are using ZD6474 developed by Astra Zeneca 
through a joint study with your researchers and the company.  This means it is possible that the results of this study 
could lead to payments to NIH scientists and to the NIH. By law, government scientists are required to receive such payments for their inventions.  You will not receive any money from the development of ZD6474.  
 What are my rights if I take part in this study?  
 
Taking part in this study is your choice.  You may choose either to take part or not to take part in the study.  If you 
decide to take part in this study , you may leave the study at any time.   No matter what decision you make, there will be 
no penalty to you and you will not lose any of your regular benefits.  Leaving the study will not affect your medical care.   
 We will tell you about new information o r changes in the study that may affect your health or your willingness to continue 
in the study.  
 
In the case of injury resulting from this study, you do not lose any of your legal rights to seek payment by signing this 
form.   
 
Participation in this research trial may make you ineligible to participate in other experimental drug trials.   This is 
because researchers may not understand the effect of one research drug on another.  The Principal Investigator or an 
Associate Investigator may end your participation in this study if they feel that termination is medically indicated due to 
side effects, progression of disease or compliance.  Upon completing this study, you may be given the choice of taking 
part in other research protocols that may be appropriate for you or you will be referred to the care of your primary 
physician.  
 
A copy of the informed consent is on file at the Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute and a copy will be 
made available to you.  Your signature on this form indicates that you agree to participate in this medical research study 
under the direction of the principal investigator as listed above.  The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of 
your NIH medical records.  However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical 
record without your permission, for example, if it is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), members of 
Congress, law enforcement officials, or other authorized people including representatives of the NCI or drug manufacturer 
(AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, LP), and the staff of the National Cancer Institute who may inspect and study your medical records.  Your participation in this study does not constitute a promise of long -term care at the NIH Clin ical 
Center.   
 
 
 
  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
   MEDICAL RECORD  •  Adult Patient or    •  Parent, for Minor Patient 
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  16  of  18 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  
 RESEARCH STUDY (Continuation Sheet)  
 •  Adult Patient or   •  Parent, for Minor Patient  
 NIH-2514- 1 (07- 09) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 
 OTHER PERTINENT INFORMATION  
1. Confidentiality.  When results of an NIH research study are reported in medical journals or at scientific meetings, 
the people who take part are not named and identified.  In most cases, the NIH will not release any information about 
your research involvement without your written permission.  However, if you sign a release of information form, for 
example, for an insurance company, the NIH will give the insurance company information from your medical record.   This 
information might affect (either favorably or unfavorably) the willingness of the insurance company to sell you insurance.  
 
The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of your NIH medical records.  However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical record without your permission, for example, if it is required by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), members of Congress, law enforcement officials, or authorized hospital 
accreditation organizations. 
 
2. Policy Regarding Research -Related Injuries.  The Clinical Center will provide short- term medical care for any 
injury resulting from your participation in research here.  In general, no long -term medical care or financial compensation 
for research -relate d injuries will be provided by the National Institutes of Health, the Clinical Center, or the Federal 
Government.  However, you have the right to pursue legal remedy if you believe that your injury justifies such action.  
 
3. Payments.  The amount of payment to research volunteers is guided by the National Institutes of Health policies.  In 
general, patients are not paid for taking part in research studies at the National Institutes of Health.  Reimbursement of 
travel and subsistence will be offered consistent with NIH guidelines. 
 
4. Problems or Questions .  If you have any problems or questions about this study, or about your rights as a 
research participant, or about any research -related injury, contact the Principal Investigator,  W. Marston Linehan, M.D.; 
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, CRC,1W -5942,  9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20892  
Telephone:  301 -496-6353.  Other researchers you may call are:  Sally Fowler, R.N. at (301) 435 -6255, Dr. Ramaprasad 
Srinivasan, the lead Associa te Investigator (301) 496 -6353, or the Urologic Oncology Fellow on call at pager (301) 496-
1211 (24- hour phone number).   If you have any questions about the use of your tissue in future research studies, you 
may also contact the Office of the Clinical Dire ctor at (301) 496- 4251.  
 
You may also call the Clinical Center Patient Representative at (301) 496-2626.  
 
5. Consent Document.  Please keep a copy of this document in case you want to read it again.  
 
  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
   MEDICAL RECORD  •  Adult Patient or    •  Parent, for Minor Patient 
 
STUDY NUMBER:  08-C- 0020 CONTINUATION:  page  17  of  18 pages  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  
 RESEARCH STUDY (Continuation Sheet)  
 •  Adult Patient or   •  Parent, for Minor Patient  
 NIH-2514- 1 (07- 09) 
 P.A.: 09 -25-0099 
 File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 
 COMPLETE APPROPRIATE ITEM(S) BELOW:   
A. Adult Patient’ s Consent  B. Parent’s Permission for Minor Patient.  
I have read the explanation about this study and have been given the 
opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions.  I hereby consent to take 
part in this study.  I have read the explanation about this s tudy and have been given the 
opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions.  I hereby give permission for my child to take part in this study.   
(Attach NIH 2514 -2, Minor’s Assent, if applicable.)  
        
Signature of Adult Patient/Legal Representative  Date 
 
  
Print Name  Signature of Parent(s)/Guardian  Date 
 
  
Print Name  
C. Child’s Verbal Assent (If Applicable)  
The information in the above consent was described to my child and my child agrees to participate in the study .  
 
     
  
Signature of Parent(s )/Guardian  Date 
 Print Name  
THIS CONSENT DOCUMENT HAS BEEN APPROVED FOR USE  
FROM JUNE 27, 2011 THROUGH JUNE 26, 2012.  
  
        
Signature of Investigator  Date 
 
  
Print Name  Signature of Witness  Date 
 
  
Print Name  
 