pg. 1 
 Protocol Title:  COVID -19-associated c oagulopathy: Safety and efficacy of prophylactic 
anticoagulation therapy  in hospitalized adults with COVID -19 
 
Version 1.0  
April 8, 2020  
  
Investigators:  
Usha Perepu, MBBS, Principal Investigator  
Isaac Chambers, MD  
Steven Lentz, MD, PhD  
Sanjana Dayal, PhD  
Grerk Sutamtewagul, MD  
 Table of Contents  
1. Background and scientific rationale  
2. Objectives  
3. Study design  
4. Selection of subjects  
5. Study procedures and evaluations  
6. Randomization  
7. Assessment of Scientific Objectives  
8. Withdrawal or Termination 
9. Study Management  
10. Statistical analysis and considerations  
  
 
  
pg. 2 
 1. Background and s cientific rationale 
Infection with th e novel coronavirus SARS -CoV-2, first identified in Wuhan , China  in late 
2019, has become a global pandemic affecting over  209 countries and territories. The 
illness caused by SARS- CoV-2 is classified as  COVID -19. As of April 8 , 2020, the U.S. has 
by far the largest number of total cases ( 400,549) with a mortality rate of 3.4 %. Higher 
mortality rates of over 5%  have been seen in other countries. Although many patients 
may have only mild upper respiratory symptoms, s ome  COVID -19 patients become 
severely ill with respiratory failure  with risk of prog ression to multiple organ failure and 
development of a systemic coagulopathy with features similar to disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC) .1 The pathophysiology of COVID -19-associated 
coagulopathy appears to be  complex and multifactorial, involving both cellular and 
plasmatic elements of the hemostatic system. Development of coagulopathy has been 
sugges ted to be a predictor of mortality in patients with COVID -19.2 The primary 
treatment of DIC is focused on treating the underlying pathology; which for COVID -19 is 
currently limited  to supportive therapy and experimental therapeutics . Treatment with 
low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) in prophylactic doses was  associated with better 
outcomes in severe cases of COVID -19 meeting ISTH criteria for DIC in a retrospective 
analys is.1,2 The International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH) has published 
an interim  guidance document recommending thromboprophylaxis with LMWH for all 
hospitalized patients with COVID -19.3 However, it is not known if patients with 
coagulopathy  from COVID -19 benefit from higher levels of prophylactic anticoagulation 
therapy.  Presently no data exist regarding the relative safety  or efficacy of intermediate -
dose versus low -dose prophylactic LMWH.  
 
This prospective, randomized,  open -label, single -center interventional study is designed 
to compare the safety and efficacy of two LMWH dosing protocols in patients admitted 
to the Unive rsity of Iowa Hospitals  with COVID -19 who meet the modified ISTH Overt 
DIC criteria score ≥ 3. Patients will be randomized to low -dose LMWH  (standard of care  
arm) or intermediate -dose LMWH  (intervention arm) .  
 
2. Objectives  
 
2.1 The primary objective  of the study is to compare all- cause mortality of hospitalized 
patients with COVID -19 coagulopathy treated with low -dose versus intermediate -dose 
LMWH  at 30 days.  
2.2 The secondary objectives  are to determine whether the use of low -dose versus 
intermediate -dose LMWH  has an impact on major bleeding, arterial thrombosis, venous 
thrombosis, ICU admission, or transfusion of blood product s. 
2.3 The exploratory objectives  are to determine the effects of SARS -CoV-2 infection on 
laboratory coagulation parameters to better understand the mechanism of COVID -19 
coagulopathy.  
 
pg. 3 
 3. Study design  
3.1. Design  
This is a single center, randomized, open -label study comparing low -dose enoxaparin 
(40 mg SC daily or 30 mg  SC twice daily  if BMI ≥40 ; standard of care arm) versus 
intermediate -dose enoxaparin (1 mg/kg SC daily  or 0.5 mg/kg SC twice daily if BMI ≥40; 
intervention  arm) in hospitalized patients with laboratory -confirmed SARS -CoV-2 
infection.  
3.2. Rationale for enoxaparin dosing  
Severe infection with SARS -CoV-2 is commonly complicated with coagulopathy. 
Prophylactic anticoagulation therapy was associated with decreased mortality in a 
retrospective analysis of Chinese patients with COVID -19 associated coagulopathy .2 
Pharmacologic thrombo prophylaxis is st andard of care for patients admitted to the 
hospital with severe respiratory illness and is recommended by the ISTH guidance 
document for hospitalized patients with COVID -19.3 Patients with a BMI ≥  40 
randomized to the standard of care arm will receive low -dose prophylaxis with  LMWH 
but will be adjusted for weight per University of Iowa institutional recommen dations.4 
The relative safety and efficacy of low -dose prophylactic LMWH versus higher doses of 
LMWH is unknown. Due to potential bleeding risks with full therapeutic  dose 
anticoagulation, the intervention arm in this study will be intermediate-dose of  LMWH .  
 
4. Selec tion of s ubjects  
4.1 Inclusion criteria  
Subjects must meet all the inclusion criteria to participate in this study . 
• Laboratory confirmed SARS -CoV-2 infection  
• Age ≥18 years  
• Requires hospital admission for further clinical management  
• Modified ISTH Overt DIC score ≥ 3 
 
4.2 Exclusion criteri a 
Subjects meeting any of the exclusion criteria at baseline screening will be excluded.  
• Indication for full therapeutic -dose anticoagulatio n 
• Acute venous thromboembolism (deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary 
embolism) within prior 3 months  
• Acute cardiovascular event  within prior 3 months  
• Acute stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic) within prior  3 months  
• Active major bleeding  
• Severe thrombocytopenia (<2 5,000/mm3) 
• Increased risk of bleeding, as assessed by the investigator  
• Acute or chronic renal insufficiency with glomerular filtration rate (GFR) < 30 
ml/min calculated  by the modified Cock croft and Gault formula  
• Weight < 40 kg or > 150 kg  
• Known allergies t o ingredients contained in  enoxaparin  
pg. 4 
  
5. Study procedures and e valuations  
5.1 Screening and enrollment  
Potentially eligible patients will be identified by a healthcare professional per 
institutional policy on privac y. The healthcare  professional will assess the eligibility of 
the patient by performing a chart review which will include  laboratory  results  and 
weight as measured  on admission to the hospital . After obtaining verbal consent from 
the patient to be contacted for the study, a  member of the research staff will approach 
the patient  to be part of the study. The research staff will obtain  informed consent from 
the patient /LAR  before  collecting any data and performing any procedures.  
5.2 Trial intervention s 
As standard of care, hospitalized patients with confirmed COVID -19 will be monitored 
for coagulopathy. Daily blood tests for platelet count, prothrombin time, D- Dimer , and 
fibrinogen and weekly thromboelastography will be obtained, and a daily Modified ISTH 
Overt DIC score will be calculated (Exhibit 1). Only patients meeting all inclusion and 
exclusion criteria will be asked to participate in the trial. Patients will be randomized to 
one of two arms : 
1) Patients randomized to the standard of care arm will receive low -dose enoxaparin 
(40 mg subcutaneously  daily if BMI <40 and 30 mg subcutaneously  twice daily  if BMI 
≥ 40).  
2) Patients randomized to the intervention arm will receive intermediate -dose 
enoxaparin (1 mg/kg Subcutaneously  daily  or 0.5 mg/kg Subcutaneously  twice daily 
if BMI ≥ 40).  
5.3 Dose Modifications  
1) Enoxaparin  will be held if platelets decrease to <25,000/mm3. Enoxaparin will 
resume once platelets increase  to ≥25,000/  mm3. 
2) Enoxaparin will be held if fibrinogen is <50 mg/dL. Enoxaparin will resume once 
fibrinogen increases to ≥50 mg/dL.  
3) Enoxaparin will be help if glomerular filtration rate (GFR) < 30 ml/min calculated by 
the modified Cockcroft and Gault formula and resumed once the GFR is ≥30 ml/min. 
 
All participating patients will continue the assigned doses of enoxaparin until hospital 
discharge or until a clinical event occurs requiring either discontinuation of 
anticoagulation  therapy  or full therapeutic dose anticoagulation therapy . 
6. Randomization  
Randomization to treatment arm will be allocated through a centralized randomization sys tem 
in a 1:1  ratio for the standard of care versus intervention arms (low- dose versus intermediate-
dose enoxaparin, respectively) . The randomization process will be initiated by the study 
personnel  who will access the web- base d system and enter the patient’s unique identifier, 
confirmation of eligibility and  informed consent . 
pg. 5 
  
7. Assessment of Scientific Objectives  
7.1 Study Outcome Measures  
This study will track clinical events of interest  
7.1.1 All-cause mortality at 30 days from enrollment date  
1) In-hospital mortality will be determined by chart review  
2)  Out-of-hospital mortality will be determined by chart review or via 
telephone encounter by a trial investigator  
7.1.2 Venous thrombotic events  
1) Symptomatic DVT  
2) Pelvic DVT or inferior vena cava DVT  
3) Superior vena cava thrombosis (SVC syndrome)  
4) Pulmonary embolis m 
5) Cerebral venous thrombosis  
6) Retinal vein thrombosis  
7) Mesenteric venous thrombosis  
8) Adrenal hemorrhage/adrenal vein thrombosis  
9) Renal vein thrombosis  
10) Line-related venous thrombosis  
7.1.3 Arterial thrombo tic events  
1) Acute limb arterial thrombosis, including arterial limb gangrene  
2) Ischemic stroke (defined as any residual neurologic deficits at 24 
hours)  
3) Transient ischemic attack  (defined as no residual deficits at 24 
hours)  
4) Acute (unstable) coronary syndrome  
5) Myocardial infarction  
6) Aortic thrombosis  
7) Spinal cord infarction  
8) Mesenteric artery thrombosis  
9) Renal artery thrombosis  
10) Hemodialysis graft (or fistula) occlusion  
7.1.4 Bleeding events  
1) Major Bleeding  
a. Bleeding resulting in a decrease in hemoglobin of 2 g/dL or 
more over a 24 -hour  period  
b. Bleeding leading to a transfusion of 2 or more units of 
packed red blood cells  
c. Bleeding that occurs in a critical site (intracranial, 
intraspinal, intraocular, pericardial, intra- articular other 
than the operative site, intramuscular with compartment syndrome or retroperitoneal)  
pg. 6 
 d. Bleeding that leads to death  
2) Minor Bleeding  
a. Bleeding event that does not meet any of the criteria 
required for  the event to be classified as a major event  
7.1.5 Admission to the intensive -care unit  
7.1.6 Acute renal failure  
7.1.7 Transfusion of blood products  
1) Transfusion of blood products including packed red blood cell s, 
platelets, cryoprecipitate and fresh frozen plasma will be  
documented and recorded  
7.1.8 Laboratory Assessments  
1) Daily  labs will be obtained including complete blood count with 
differential, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, D-dimer, fibrin ogen, lactate dehydrogenase, C -reactive protein, 
ferritin , asp artate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, 
alkaline phosphatase , and serum creatinine  
2) Thromboelastography (TEG)  will be obtained within 24 hours of 
enrollment and weekly thereafter  
3) Blood samples for exploratory laboratory test s will be obtained 
within 24 hours of enrollment and weekly thereafter. Exploratory 
tests will include thrombin generation, cell free DNA , and PAI -1.  
  
8. Withdrawal or Termination 
Any participant who wishes to withdraw from the study may do so at any time. If a participant 
chooses to withdraw from the study, no new data about that participant will be collected for 
study purposes. A participant may also withdraw authorization for the researchers to use his or 
her data that has already been collected (other than data needed to keep track of the withdrawal, including demographic data), but the participant must do this in writing to the site 
principal investigator.  
The study may be terminated at any time by the Principal Investigator if it is deemed continuation of th e protocol will not yield statistically or scientifically useful data.  
 
9. Study Management  
It is expected that the IRB will have the proper representation and function in accordance with 
federally mandated regulations. The IRB should approve the consent form  and protocol.  In 
obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with the applicable regulatory requirement(s)  and should adhere to Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and to 
ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Before recruitment and 
enrollment onto this study, the patient will be given a full explanation of the study and will be 
pg. 7 
 given the opportunity to review the consent form. Each consent form must include all the 
relevant elements cur rently required by the FDA Regulations and local or state regulations. Once 
this essential information has been provided to the patient and the investigator is assured that the patient understands the implications of participating in the study, the patient  will be asked 
to give consent to participate in the study by signing an IRB -approved consent form.  Prior to a 
patient’s participation in the trial, the written informed consent form should be signed and personally dated by the patient or the patient’s leg ally acceptable representative, and by the 
person who conducted the informed consent discussion.  
  
10. Statistical analysis and considerations  
The null hypothesis is that intermediate- dose LMWH (intervention arm) will have a mortality rate 
that is not less tha n low -dose LMWH (standard of care arm). A sample size of 82 patients to each 
arm of the study are needed to  have 80% power when testing a difference of 20% (40% vs 20% for 
the two arms). Mean with SD and frequencies for all variables will be reported for e ach arm. A chi -
square test will be conducted to test the mortality difference between the two arms.  
 
  
 
Exhibit 1  
Modified ISTH Overt DIC Score  
Laboratory Results  Points  
Platelet Count   
> 100,000/µL  0 
< 100,00/µL and ≥50,000 /µL  1 
< 50,000 /µL  2 
D-Dimer    
No increase , ≤0.50  mcg/mL  0 
Moderate increase , >0.50 and <3.00  mcg/mL  2 
Strong increase , ≥3.00  mcg/mL  3 
Prothrombin time   
Prolonged < 3 sec  0 
Prolonged 3 to 5 sec  1 
Prolonged ≥ 6 sec  2 
Fibrinogen level   
> 100 mg/dL  0 
< 100 mg/dL  1 
  
Interpretation of Score   
pg. 8 
 If≥ 3: compatible with COVID -19-associated coagulopathy  
If< 3: not suggestive of COVID -19-associated coagulopathy  
  
 
 
References  
 
1. Guan W -j, Ni Z -y, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. New 
England Journal of Medicine. 2020.  
2. Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor 
prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. 2020;18(4):844- 847.  
3. Thachil J, Tang N, Gando S, et al. ISTH interim guidance on recognition and management of 
coagulopathy in COVID -19. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis.n/a(n/a).  
4. Lentz  SR. Thrombosis in the setting of obesity or inflammatory bowel disease. Hematology. 
2016;2016(1):180- 187.  
 