Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, 
Department of Family and Community Medicine Research 
Division  
Document  Protocol  
Official 
Study Title  Multilevel Intervention Based on Colorectal Cancer 
(CRC) and Cervical Cancer Self -Screening in Rural, 
Segregated Areas  
Document 
date  March 1, 2021  
NCT  04471194  
 
Page 1 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9) HR
P-591 - Protocol for   
Human Subject  Research  
Pr
otocol Title:  
Increasing cancer screening among women in rural and segregated areas: A multilevel intervention based on self-
screening and adapted educational materials  
Pr
incipal Investigator:  
Name:  Jennifer Moss, PhD  
Department:  Family and Community Medicine  
Telephone:  717-531-0003 x323429  
E-mail Address:  jmoss1@pennstatehealth.psu.edu
Ver
sion Date: 
March 1, 2021  
Clinic
altrials.gov Registration # : 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Important Instructions for Us ing This Protocol Template: 
This template is provided to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes the necessary information needed by the IRB to determine whether a study meets all applicable criteria for approval.  
1. GEN
ERAL INSTRUCTIONS:
•Prior to completing this protocol, e nsure that you are using the  most recent version by verifying the
protocol template version date in the footer of this document with the current version provided in the
CATS IRB Library.
•Do not change the protocol template version date located in the footer of this document.
•Some of the items may not be applicable to all types of research.  If an item is not applicable, pleaseindicate as such  or skip question(s) if indicated in any of the instructional text .
•GRAY INSTRUCTION AL BOXES:
oType your protocol responses below  t
 he gray instructional boxes of guidance language.  If the
section or item is not applicable, indicate not applicable.
oPenn State College of Medicine/Penn State Health r esearchers: D elete the instructional  boxes
from the final version of the protocol prior to upload to CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu) .
oPenn State researchers at all other campuses : Do NOT delete the instructional boxes from the
final version of the protocol.
•Add the completed protocol template to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ) on t he “Basic
Information” page.
2. CATS IRB LIBRARY:
•D
ocuments referenced in this protocol template (e.g. SOP’s, Worksheets, Checklists, and Templates) can be
accessed by clicking the Library link in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ).
3. PR
OTOCOL REVISIONS :
•When making revisions to this protocol as requested by the IRB, please follow the instructions outlined inthe Study Submission Guide available in the Help Center in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ) for using track
changes.
•Update the Version Date on page 1  e ach time revisions are made .

Page 2 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)   
 
If you need help…  
University Park and other campuses:  
Office for Research Protections Human Research 
Protection Program  
The 330 Building, Suite 205  
University Park, PA 16802 -7014  
Phone: 814 -865-1775  
Fax: 814- 863-8699  
Email:  irb-o rp@psu.edu  College of Medicine and Penn State Health : 
Human Subjects Protection Office  
90 Hope Drive, Mail Code A115, P.O. Box 855  
Hershey, PA 17033  
(
Physical Office Location: A cademic Support Building 
Room 1140)  
Phone: 717 -531-5687  
Email:  irb-hspo@psu.edu    
 
 
  
Page 3 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  
2.0 Background 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation 
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization 
7.0 Study Design and Procedures  
8.0 Subject Numbers and Statistical Plan  
9.0 Data and Saf ety Monitoring Plan  
10.0 Risks  
11.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects and Others  
12.0 Sharing Results with Subjects  
13.0 Subjec t Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
14.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
15.0 Resources Available  
16.0 Other Approvals  
17.0 Multi -Site Study  
18.0 Adverse Event Reporting  
19.0 Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
20.0 Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
21.0 References  
22.0 Confidentiality, Privacy and Data Management  
 
  
Page 4 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  1.0 Objectives  
 
1.1 Study Objectives  
In this study, we will deliver self- sampling HPV tests and FIT  kits, as well as adapted cancer screening 
educ ational materials, by mail to 11 0 women who are out -of-date for both cervical and colorectal 
cancer screenings,  recruited through federally qualified health centers (FQHCs) in rural, segregated 
counties of Pennsylvania . A control group of 110 women, also recruited through FQHCs in rural, 
segregated counties  of Pennsylvania, will be used for comparison; these women will receive standard-
of-care reminders for can cer screening and complete the baseline and follow -up surveys .  
 
The hypothesis is that delivering self -sampling HPV tests and FIT, as well as adapted educational 
materials, to women in rural, segregated areas could help overcome  environment - and person -level 
barriers and thereby increase cancer screening, reduce geo graphic cancer disparities, and improve 
public health.  
 
1.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
Differences in overall cervical cancer screening rate and the overall colorectal cancer screening rate at the end of the study between the two arms.   
2.0 Background  
 
2.1 Scientific Background and Gaps  
In 2018, an estimated 4,100 women in the United States died from cervical cancer, and 23,240 women 
died from colorectal cancer.1 It is possible to prevent many of these deaths through screening (e.g., with 
the human papillomavirus [HPV] test for cervical cancer or fecal immunochemical test [FIT] for 
colorectal cancer).2,3 Women ages 50-65 are eligible for routine screening for both cancers , yet 
screening for both cancers falls below national goals. Mortality and screening patterns for these cancers vary by geographic factors.  For example, colorectal cancer mortality is 16% higher,
4 and screening is 9% 
lower,5 in rural than in urban areas. Furthermore, urban/rural differences in screening may be greatest 
in areas that are also racially segregated,6 i.e., areas with high spatial concentrations of a given racial 
group.  
 Women in areas that are both rural and segregated face unique barriers to screening for cervical and colorectal cancers. Social Cognitive Theory
7 posits that environment- , person -, and behavior -level 
factors influence health. Interventions that target determinants at only one level fail to adequately address screening barriers and to account for geographic differences in behaviors.   
 
2.2 Previous Data  
The principal investigator (PI) has conducted several studies on ge ographic disparities in cancer 
prevention and control relevant to this proposal. Most broadly, the PI published a research study 
demonstrating that, while cancer incidence is only 3% higher in rural compared to metropolitan areas,  
cancer mortality is 10% higher
4; this mortality disparity increases to 13% for cervical cancer and 16% for 
colorectal cancer. Another study focused on cervical cancer described a clustering of risks for women in 
rural areas, including lower density of primary care providers, lower participation in Pap screening, and higher cervical cancer incidence.
8 Further, the authors demonstrated that eliminating urban/rural 
differences in access to and utilization of screening would completely eliminate the disparity in incidence.  
 The PI has also led research studies that incorporate other dimensions of the social environment into 
the analysis of rural cancer control (e.g., socioeconomic status, racial residential segregation). T he PI has 
Page 5 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  a forthcoming study describing urban/rural differences in cervical and colorectal cancer screening, which 
were greatest in counties that were highly racially segregated (Moss & Landrine, in prep).  In addition, an 
upcoming study describes geographic patterns in “complete” participation i n cancer screening, i.e., 
receiving all of the recommended screenings for a given gender and age group (Moss & Cronin, in prep).  
The finding most relevant to this proposal is that more than 50% of women ages 45 -65 living in rural and 
highly -segregated counties were out- of-date with both cervical and colorectal cancer screenings. 
Extending these findings, the PI and collaborators have demonstrated that cancer risk perceptions, healthcare access, and participation in cervical cancer screening were lowest in areas that were both rural and segregated (although colorectal cancer screening was lower in rural areas, the interaction between rurality and segregation did not reach statistical significance)
9. 
 Most recently, the PI has conducted several formative research studies of the target population, including surveys, in -depth interviews, and focus groups. These studies aimed to identify factors that 
affect cancer screening within rural, segregated counties of Pennsylvania. These studies are in the final 
phases of data collection and analysis. Preliminary results show that the t arget study population is 
receptive to using home cancer screening kits  for both cervical and colorectal cancer (>90% willing to 
use a self-sampling test) . Person - and environment -level barriers to care have been identified. Finally, 
data collected during the focus groups were  used to tailor the educational materials that will be utilized 
in the proposed study.  
 
Taken together, these preliminary studies emphasize the urgent need  for interventions to improve 
cervical and colorectal cancer screening behaviors in these communities. Individual -level barriers (e.g., 
attitudes) and environment- level barriers (e.g., access to care) both play an important role in explaining 
the associations of screening with rurality and racial residential segregation.  
 
2.3 Study Ratio nale  
The impact of the proposed project is to improve cancer screening in vulnerable communities, specifically women living in rural, segregated areas of Pennsylvania through the use of home cancer screening kits for cervical and colorectal cancer. This will be achieved through the use of adapted educational materials while addressing environment - and person -level barriers to screening. 
 For the purposes of this study, target areas are those designated as “rural” by the United States Department of Agriculture and with a dissimilarity index of racial residential segregation greater than the national mean.  These counties in Pennsylvania include  Clarion, Clearfield, Crawford, Forest, Greene, 
Huntingdon, Indiana,  Lawrence, McKean, Northumberland, Schuylkill,  Somerset, Union,  and Wayne.  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Female  
2. 50-65 years of age  at time of study enrollment  
3. Lives in rural, segregated county of Pennsylvania  
4. Able to speak, read, and communicate well in English  
5. Out of date for both cervical and colorectal cancer screening 
6. Active patient at selected Primary Health Network clinics  
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Has had a partial or complete hysterectomy  
2. Has a family history of colorectal cancer (family member diagnosed 40 years of age or younger)  
3. Has a personal history of cervical or colorectal cancer  
4. Males  
Page 6 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  5. Persons who are cognitively impaired  
6. Persons who are incarcerated  
 
3.3 Early Withdrawal of Subjects  
3.3.1 Criteria for removal from study  
There are no  foreseeable reasons why a study participant  might be removed by the investigators 
from the study. Participants can voluntarily withdraw from the study at any time and for any 
reason.   
3.3.2 Follow -up for withdrawn subjects  
The withdrawal will be documented and the subject will be replaced if the timeline allows.  
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
4.1 Identification of s ubjects  
Potentially -eligible women will be identified from the electronic health record (EHR) of partner FQHC 
clinics by an e mployee of the FQHC.   
 
4.2 Recruitment process  
4.2.1 How potential subjects will be recruited.  
Once identified via the means listed under section 4.1,  an employee of the FQHC will send all 
potentially -eligible women an initial invitation letter and email to participate in the study. This initial 
invitation letter will include information from both the FQHC and the study team, and will be signed by 
both the PI and a representative of the FQHC. Included in this mailing will be directions about how to 
contact  the study team if interested in  study  participation , and a copy of the summary explanation of 
research . The email will contain the same information as the letter, but without the summary 
explanation of research as this cannot be sent as an attached file. The email message will indicate that 
the summary explanation of research document has been included in the mailed invitation they have 
received . If the response rate is low, as assessed 6 weeks after mailing the initial invitation letter, an 
employee of th e FQHC will do follow -up calls to women who were initially contacted but did not 
respond to the initial invitation letter  or email.  
4.2.2 Where potential subjects will be recruited.  
Potential participants will be recruited from participating FQHC patient popula tions using EHR data.  
4.2.3 When potential subjects will be recruited.  
An employee of the FQHC  will contact potentially -eligible women by mail and email using the initial 
invitation letter within one month  of identification from the EHR data. Interested women will contact a 
member of the study team to express their desire to participate in the study  via phone, email, the study 
website , or by completing and returning an included post card . A member of the study team will follow -
up with the  poten tially -eligible wome n by phone to  screen for eligibility and complete the baseline 
survey.  
 4.2.4 Describe the eligibility screening process and indicate whether the screening process will occur before or after obtaining informed consent . Screening begins when the investigator 
obtains information about or from a prospective participant in order to determine their 
eligibility.  In some studies, these procedures may not take place unless HIPAA Authorization 
is obtained OR a waiver of HIPAA Authorization when applicable for the screening procedures 
Page 7 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  is approved by the IRB.   [For FDA regulated studies, consent for any screening activities would 
need to be obtained prior to screening unless  specifically waived by the IRB. ] 
 
A member of the study team will contact potentially -eligible women by phone to discuss the 
study, screen for eligibility, and obtain verbal consent  from  interested individuals.  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation  
5.1 Consent Process:  
Check all applicable boxes  below: 
 
 Informed consent will be sought and documented with a written consent form [Complete Sections 
5.2 and 5.6]   
 
 Implied or verbal consent will be obtained – subjects will not sign a consent form  (waiver of 
written documentation of consent)  [Complete Sections 5.2, 5.3 and 5.6]   
 
  Informed consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be omitted or 
altered (e.g. , deception). [Complete section 5.2, 5.4 and 5.6]   
 
 Informed consent will not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement. [Complete Section 5 .5] 
  T 
he following checkbox is for all locations EXCEPT Penn State Health and College of Medicine:  
 
  Exempt Research at all Locations Except Penn State Health and the College of Medicine : If you 
believe that the research activities outlined meet one or more of the criteria outlined in “HRP- 312- 
Worksheet - Exemption Determination. ” Please verify by checking this box that if conducting an 
exempt research study, the consent process will disclose the following  (all of which are included in 
“HRP- 590- Consent Guidance for Exempt R esearch ”): 
 P e nn State affiliation; name and contact information for the researcher and advisor (if the 
researcher is a student); the activities involve research; the procedures to be performed; participation is voluntary; that there are adequate provisions to maintain  the privacy interests of 
subjects and the confidentiality of the data; and subjects may choose not to answer specific 
questions.   
 
 If the research includes the use of student educational records include the following language in this section  (otherwise delete) : The parent or eligible student will provide a signed and dated 
written consent that discloses : the records that may be disclosed;  the purpose of the disclosure ; the 
party or class of parties to whom the disclosure may be made ; if a parent or adult  student requests, 
the school will provide him or her with a copy of the records disclosed ; if the parent of a student 
who is not an adult so requests, the school will provide the student with a copy of the records disclosed.  
 
 Note: If this box has been checked, skip the remainder of section 5 and proceed to section 6 of this  
protocol. If the investigator’s assessment is inaccurate, an IRB Analyst will request revision to the 
protocol and that an informed consent form be submitted for review and approval. Except for 
exemptions where Limited IRB Review (see “HRP -312- Worksheet - Exemption Determination” ) is 
required or where otherwise requested by the IRB, informed consent forms for research activities determined to be exempt witho ut Limited IRB Review are generally not required to be submitted 
for review and approval by the University Park IRB .  
 
Page 8 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)   
5.2 Obtaining Informed Consent   
5.2.1 Timing and Location of Consent   
Participants will be consented by a member of the research team over the phone, after 
eligibility is confirmed, using the Summary Explanation of Research.  Participants will have 
previously received a copy of the Summary Explanation of Research in the mail with recruitment 
materials.  
5.2.2 Coercion or Undue Influence during Consent   
After a review of the research study via the Summary Explanation of Research, participants will be asked if they would like to continue to participate in the baseline  survey . They will be 
reminded that participation in the study will not alter or impact their care in any way.  
Participants will be reminded that they may refuse to answer any question, and may end their participation at any time.  
 
5.3 Waiver  of Written Documentation of Consent  
5.3.1 Indicate which of the following conditions applies to this research: 
  The research presents no more that minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
OR 
  The only record linking the subject  and the research would be the consent document and the 
principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subj ect 
will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, and the subject’s wishes will govern. ( Note: This condition is not applicable for FDA- regulated 
research. If this category is chosen, include copies of a consent form and /or parental permission form for participants who want written documentation linking them to the research.)
 
OR 
  If the subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group 
or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and provided there is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that info rmed consent was obtained.  (Note: This condition is not 
applicable for FDA- regulated research. )
  
 
Describe the alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained:  
5.3.2 Indicate  what materials, if any, will be used to inform potential subjects about the research 
(e.g., a letter accompanying a questionnaire, verbal script, implied consent form , or summary 
explanation of the research)  
 
Potential participants identified via the means outlined in section 4.1 will receive the initial invitation letter, initial invitation email, and the initial invitation post card inviting them to participate in the research. These documents will direct them to the study team website (research.med.psu. edu/casper). The FQHC recruitment script will be used to as a secondary 
means of recruitment, if necessary. The s ummary explanation of research will be sent to 
participants  with the mailed recruitment materials . 
Page 9 of 21 (V.01/21/201 9)  5.4 Informed consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be omitted or 
altered (e.g. , deception).  
5.4.1 Indicate the e lements of informed consent t o be omitted or altered  
Not applicable.  
5.4.2 Indicate why  the research could not practicably be carried out without the omission or 
alteration of consent elements  
Not applicable.  
5.4.3 Describe why the research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
Not applicable.  
5.4.4 Describe why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects.  
Not applicable.  
5.4.5 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, 
describe why the research could not be practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
Not applicable.
 
5.4.6 Debriefin g  
Not applicable.  
5.5 Informed consent will not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement  
5.5.1 Indicate why  the research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver of consent  
Not applicable.  
5.5.2 Describe why the research i nvolves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
Not applicable.  
5.5.3 Describe why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of subjects.  
Not applicable.
 
5.5.4 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, describe why the research could not be practicably be carried out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
Not applicable.
 
5.5.5 Additional  pertinent information after participation  
Not applicable.  
  
5.6 Consent – Other Considerations  
 5.6.1 Non- English -Speaking  Subjects  
Not applicable.  
 
Page 10 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  5.6.2 Cognitively Impaired Adults  
 
5.6.2.1  Capability of Providing Consent  
Not applicable.  
 
5.6.2.2  Adults Unable to Consent  
Not applicable.  
 
5.6.2.3  Assent  of Adults Unable to Consent  
Not applicable.  
 
5.6.3 Subjects who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)   
 
5.6.3.1  Parental Permission  
Not applicable.  
 
5.6.3.2  Assent  of subjects who are not yet adults  
Not applicable.  
 
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization 
 
6.1 Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 Check all that apply: 
  Not applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or disclosed in this study . [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable] 
 
 Authorization will be obtained and documented as part of the consent process.  [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable ] 
 
 Partial waiver is requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained) . [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
 Full waiver  is requested  for entire research study  (e.g., medical record review studies ). 
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
 Alteration is request ed to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization 
(verbal authorization will be obtained).  [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
6
.2 Waiver o r Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 6.2.1 Access, use or disclosure of PHI represent ing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual  
6.2.1.1  Plan to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure  
Information is included in the “Confidentiality, Privacy and Data 
Management” section of this protocol.  
 
Page 11 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  6.2.1.2  Plan to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers  
Identifying information  will be destroyed after the completion of data 
analysis.  
 
6.2.2 Explanation for why  the research could not practicably be conducted without access to and 
use of PHI  
 
PHI is necessary for processing the self- sampling tests. Participant date of birth is required when 
completing the Pathology Services Special Account Requisition form. Thus, the research question regarding completion of self- sampling tests cannot be answered without use of PHI. 
Additionally, participant address and email address is necessary for mailing study materials and compensation.  
 
6.2.3 Explanation for w hy the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver  or 
alteration of authorization  
 Alteration of authorization is necessary since participants will be giving hipaa authorization via 
verbal consent, over the phone prior to data collection. All data collection for the proposed study will be conducted over the phone ; written consent is not feasible since none of the study 
activities will not be in person.  
 
6.3 Waiver or alteration of authorization statements of agreement  
 
Protected health information obtained as part of this research will not be reused or disclosed to any other 
person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of the research study, or f or other 
permitted uses and disclosures according to federal regulations.  
 
The research team will collect only information essential to the study and in accord with the ‘Minimum Necessary’ standard (information reasonably necessary to accomplish the objec tives of the research) per 
federal regulations.   Access to the information will be limited, to the greatest extent possible, within the research team. All disclosures or releases of identifiable information granted under this waiver will be accounted for and documented. 
 
7.0 Study Design and Procedures  
  
7.1 Study Design  
The study is a prospective, two -arm, randomized intervention. Participants will be randomized to 
receive either (1) a standardized letter informing them that they are out-of -date for both cervical and 
colorectal cancer screenings and should schedule an appointment with their provider to receive these screenings , i.e., standard of care  (control arm), or (2) cervical and colorectal cancer self- sampling kits, 
instructions for completing the self- sampl ing kits, and educational materials about cervical and 
colorectal cancer (intervention arm). Participants in the intervention arm will mail their completed self-sampling kits to the Penn State Health Clinical Labs for processing; FIT kits will then be sent to and 
processed by Quest diagnostics.  All participants will complete a baseline and follow -up survey.  
 
7.2 Study P rocedures  
 
Page 12 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  7.2.1 Baseline survey - Week 0  
 
Once a participant has been identified, recruited, and consented as described above, she will complete the baseline survey with a member of the study team via phone. After completion of 
the baseline survey, the participant will receive a thank you letter f rom the study team . 
 
7.2.2 Randomization- Week 0  
 
Once a participant has completed the baseline survey, she will be randomly assigned to either 
the control arm or the intervention arm by a member of the study team. A simple 
randomization scheme, with 1:1 randomization, will be used to ensure equal sample sizes in the intervention and control arms.  
 
 
7.2.3 Control arm - Week 1  
 
Participants  randomized into the control arm will be mailed  a standardized letter informing 
them that they are out- of-date for both cervi cal and colorectal cancer screenings and should 
schedule an appointment with their provider to receive these screenings.   
 
7.2.4 Intervention arm - Week 1  
 
Participants randomized into the intervention arm will be mailed  cervical and colorectal cancer 
self- sampling kits, instructions for completing the self -sampling kits, a lab requisition form, and 
educational materials about cervical and colorectal cancer. Participants will also receive an 
intervention cover letter that describes the contents of the package and what they are being asked to do. Participants will be asked to complete both cervical and colorectal cancer self-
sampling kits within 3 days of each other via the intervention cover letter. Once complete, 
participants will mail the kits within 3 days of completing both tests to the Penn State Hershey 
Clinical Labs  in a prepaid mailer provided by the study team.  Notably, deviations from the timing 
of sampling and returning the test kits is quite flexible, since studies show that these samples are stable for up to 28 days.   
 
 
7.2.4.1  Reminder postcard- Week 6  
 
Participants who have not completed and returned both their cervical and colorectal 
cancer self- sampling kits within 6 weeks of receipt of kits will be mailed a reminder 
letter  from the study team.  
 
7.2.5 Follow -up survey - Week 10 
 
Participants will complete the follow -up survey with a member of the study team via phone. 
This will occur regardless of whether the participant was in the intervention or the control arm, and regardless of whether the participant completed and returned the self -sampling kits if in the 
intervention arm.  
 
 
7.3 Duration of Participation  
 Participants will be considered enrolled in the study from the time of consent until the completion of the follow -up survey. We anticipate a total participation of approximately 1 hour and 35 minutes  for 
thos e in the intervention arm  over the course of 10 weeks; this includes  ~45 minutes to complete the 
baseline survey , ~20 minutes for the  follow -up survey  and up to ~15 minutes to complete each cervical 
Page 13 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  and colorectal cancer screening test kits. We anticipate a total participation of approximately 1 hour and 
5 minutes  for those in the control arm, over the course of 10 weeks; this includes ~45 minutes  to 
complete the baseline survey and ~20 minutes for the follow -up survey.  
 
7.4 Test Article(s) (Study Drug(s) and/or Study Device(s))  
7.4.1 Description 
The Evalyn® Brush  is a self- sampling kit that screens for HPV, a leading cause of cancer death 
among women. This tool has recently been FDA approved, but has not been incorporated into 
national clinical guidelines. This product is a small pink capped brush that can be used  to take a 
sample of cervical cells.   The InSure®  test (Fecal Globin by Immunochemistry) is a fecal occult blood test that detects 
human hemoglobin from blood in fecal samples. The test is recommended for use by healthcare 
professionals to screen for colo rectal cancer.  
7.4.2 Treatment Regimen  
Participants will take a sample of their cervix cells that amounts to a few millimeters of bio specimen.  
 Participants will collect a fecal sample from toile t water using the provided tools and brush the 
sample on the InSu re® FOBT test card.  
7.4.3 Method for Assigning Subject to Treatment Groups  
Once a participant has completed the baseline survey, she will be randomly assigned to either the control arm or the intervention arm by a member of the study team. A simple randomization  scheme, with 1:1 randomization, will be used to ensure equal sample sizes in the 
intervention and control arms.  
7.4.4 Subject Compliance Monitoring  
Subject compliance will be confirmed once their lab results are received from the Penn State 
Heath Clinical lab.  
7.4.5 Blinding of the Test Article s 
Not applicable .
 
7.4.6 Receiving, Storage, Dispensing and Return  
 
7.4.6.1  Receipt of Test Article  
HPV self -sampling kits (Evalyn Brush, Rovers Medical Devices) are purchased 
from the manufacturer and shipped to the PI’s office at Penn State Health. The study test article will be mailed to each participant in the intervention arm in original, unopened packaging, including 1 brush, 1 protective cap, 1 
container/package for the brush, and 1 plastic bag for return mailing. The mailing will also include a lab requisition form (including a unique participant ID) to link each participant with their returned test kit.  
 FIT kits (InSure test, Fecal Globin by Immunochemistry) are purchased through Quest Diagnostics and shipped to the PI’s office a t Penn State 
Health. The study test article will be mailed to each participant in the 
intervention arm in original, unopened packaging, including 1 sample card, 1 
Page 14 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  collection brush, 1 self-adhesive label, and 1 reply form. The mailing will 
also include a lab requisition form (including a unique participant ID) to link each participant with their returned test kit.  
 
The mailing will also include a pre -stamped and pre -addressed return 
shipping container for the participant to use to mail both kits to the PSH 
Clinical Lab. The unique participant ID will also be printed on this envelope and other participant materials.   
 
7.4.6.2  Storage  
Before HPV self -sampling kits are sent to study participants, they will be 
stored in a locked cabinet in the Department of Family and Co mmunity 
Medicine offices at 134 Sipe Ave. Kits mailed to the lab will be disposed of after analysis.  
 Before colorectal self -sampling kits are sent to study participants, they will 
be stored in a locked cabinet in the Department of Family and Community Medicine offices at 134 Sipe Ave. Kits mailed to the lab will be disposed of 
after analysis.  
 
7.4.6.3  Preparation and Dispensing  
Before it is sent to the participant, the Penn State Heath Clinical lab Pathology Services Special Account Requisition document s will be labeled 
with the participant’s study ID #, date of birth, and sex  (as required by the 
Requisition form) . The m ailing will include the HPV self -sampling kit with 
the instructions, the colorectal cancer self- sampling kit with the 
instructions , a Penn State Heath Clinical lab Pathology Services Special 
Account Requisition form , educational materials regarding the use of home 
cancer screening kits , and an intervention cover letter .  
 The package will also include a prepaid and labeled mailing to send t he kits 
and Pathology Services Special Account Requisition document s to the Penn 
State Heath Clinical lab. Participants will need to include the date and time of sample collection on the requisition form.  
 
7.4.6.4  Return or Destruction of the Test Article  
HPV self -sampling kits will not be returned to participants. The samples will 
be analyzed and the kits will be destroyed by the Penn State Heath Clinical lab once analysis is complete.  
 Colorectal cancer self- sampling kits will not be returned to participants. 
The samples will be analyzed and the kits will be destroyed by the Quest Diagnostics once analysis is complete.  
 
7.4.6.5  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
Not applicable . 
 
8.0 Subject Numbers  and Statistical Plan  
 
Page 15 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  8.1 Number of Subjects  
We plan to contact 500 potentially -eligible women via mail and email using the initial invitation letter. 
Of these, 220 are planned to consent and complete the baseline survey . From this 220, 110 will be 
randomized to the control group and 110 will be randomized to  the intervention group.  We expect 
about 10% loss to follow -up over the study period.  
 
8.2 Sample size determination  
This is a pilot study to approximate the rates of colorectal and cervical screening in the two study arms. 
Should the intervention yield a screening rate of 40% and the control arm a screening rate of 20%, then 
the proposed sample sizes yield 80% power based on a two -sided Fisher’s exact test and a 2.5% type -1 
error rate (allowing for two co -primary endpoints). The re sults of this pilot study will inform us with 
more accurate assessments of these screening rates so that future, more accurately powered studies can be conducted.  
 
8.3 Statistical methods  
The statistical analysis of study outcomes will primarily be descriptive . Outcomes will be assessed via the 
baseline and follow -up surveys, and whether or not self -sampling kits were returned by participants in 
the intervention arm. The main outcome is the differences in overall cervical cancer screening rate and the overall c olorectal cancer screening rate at the end of the study between the two arms. Analysis of 
the main outcomes will be evaluated with a Fisher’s exact test.  Demographics of the patients in the two groups will be compared.  
9.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
9.1 Periodic evaluation of data  
Not applicable.  
 
9.2 Data that are reviewed 
Not applicable.  
9.3 Method of collection of safety information  
Not applicable.  
9.4 Frequency of data collection 
Not applicable.  
9.5 Individuals reviewing the data  
Not applicable.  
9.6 Frequency of review of cumulative data  
Not applicable.  
9.7 Statistical tests  
Not applicable.  
9.8 Suspension of research  
Not applicable.  
 
Page 16 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  10.0 Risks  
The greatest potential risk to participants is psychological harm of cancer screening. Some participants may  
experience anxiety while collecting the screening samples or awaiting screening results. Studies have  
demonstrated  that this anxiety is transient10. Financial, legal, or other risks are not anticipated.  
 
For participants who complete the self- sampling test for cervical cancer, there is a risk of minor internal damage 
that may oc cur when collecting the sample. The minor interna l damage is transient and resolves itself. There are 
no foreseeable physical risks for completing the self- sampling test for colorectal cancer. For participants who 
screen positive on HPV test or FIT, additional risks are possible. Among 100 participants  ages 50 -65, we anticipate 
that up to 6 will screen positive on the HPV test 11 and up  to 4 will screen positive on the FIT12. 
 For participants with abnormal resu lts on their screening tests, test results will be communicated to the 
participant via their medical provider at the FQHC following the standard of care, including encouraging her to seek follow -up care (e.g., additional screenings) a t the FQHC or elsewhere. In addition, educational materials  
mailed to those in the intervention group  will include recommended follow -up steps for women  who receive 
abnormal results, specifically, seeking additional screening or diagnostic tests. These mat erials  will encourage 
participants to reach out to their medical provider at the  FQHCs for these tests (or for referral to  specialists). Test 
results will be mailed to both the study team and the participating FQHC to ensure proper follow -up. These  
procedu res should minimize the time it takes for participants to seek follow -up for abnormal screening results,  
therefore lowering the potential risks from an abnormal screening result. Should any participants be diagnosed  
with cervical or colorectal cancer, potential treatments for individuals with screen -detected versus symptomatic  
cancers are theoretically less risky.  
 Loss of confidentiality is a risk of participation. Disclosure of responses to survey items will not place participants at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to their finances, employability, or reputation.  
 Protection against risks . 
To protect against psychological risks associated with cancer screening, we will include information in the 
educational materials about (1) what scre ening tests examine, (2) what potential  abnormal results could indicate, 
and (3) recommendations for follow -up after abnormal results . 
 In order to protect participant privacy (including survey responses and results of cancer screening tests), data will 
be maintained on a password- protected database on a secure network. A password -protected dataset containing 
participant identifying information will also be maintained  on the secure network, but only the study team  will 
have access to this dataset; this data set will be destroyed after the study is complete.  
 
11.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects and Other s  
11.1 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
No direct benefits to subjects.  
11.2 Potential Benefits to Others  
The findings of this study can provide benefits to others in that they will inform  future interventions, 
public health programs, and clinical practice to promote screening, earlier diagnosis, and  increased 
survival of cervical and colorectal cancer, especially in vulnerable communities. In addition, the  
proposed research  will benefit participants and others by contributing to scientific knowledge about the 
fields of  health behaviors and cancer prevention.  This knowledge  has implications for improving clinical 
and public health generally, as well as specifically increasing  cancer  screening and, in the long-term, 
reducing disparities in, and the overall burden of, cervical and colorectal cancers.  
Page 17 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  12.0 Sharing Results with Subjects  
Study findings will not be directly shared with participants  by the study team . However, participants will be notified of 
their self- sampling results by their medical provider  at the FQHC . Research study team members will receive the results 
of the self-sampling kit from the lab and communicate these results to a central administrat ive employee at the FQHC  
via Penn State Kiteworks. This individual  will share the results with the participants’ medical provider at the FQHC . The 
medical provider will then share these results with the participants via the standard of care as determined b y the 
provider.  PHN’s policy regarding sharing test results with patients is as follows:  
 Once the results are received, the ordering providers must personally acknowledge receipt of  the results with a 
signature and date and indicated if further action is needed.  
 
a. Depending on the type of the test result, the ordering providers may communicate  results to the patients or may  
request that a clinical staff member contact the patient  with results and any follow -up instructions. All patient  
communication is to be  documented in the EMR.  
b. When the patient must take action in response to the results, direct verbal  communication should be used.  
Documentation should reflect that the information was  received and understood by the patient. If the patient cannot be  
reached, reasonable  attempts should be made, this includes using phone outreach and mailed letter  attempts. All 
attempts should be documented in the medical record.  
 
For abnormal results:  
1. An attempt to communicate results to the patient must be initiated  within 14 days of receiving results. Follow up 
instructions should be  provided via verbal communication.  
2. If the patient is not able to reached in person or by phone, a standard ‘test  result’ letter found in our EMR, indicating 
the need for the patient to contact  the office will be mailed to the patient.  
 
13.0 Subject Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
The study team has received an exception from using Greenphire ClinCards from the Controller. Physical or 
electronic retailer gift cards to reimburse participants will be purchased through Shop OnLion.  
 
Subjects will receive a total of $50 in Walmart gift card s for their participation. A $20 Walmart gift card will be 
provided upon completion of the  baseline survey and a $30 Walmart gift card will be provided upon completion 
of the follow -up survey , regardless of whether the self -sampling kits are returned . All gift cards will be electronic 
unless a physical gift card is requested by the participant.  
14.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
14.1 Costs  
There are no costs that subjects may be responsible for because of participation in this research.  All 
necessary costs will be covered by the research study.  
 
14.2 Compensation for research -related injury  
Not applicable.  
15.0 Resources Availabl e  
 15.1 Facilities and locations  
Participants will be recruited through collaborating FQHCs  in eligible counties.  These counties include: 
Crawford, Lawrence, Greene, Forest, Clarion, McKean, Clearfield, Indiana, Somerset, Huntingdon, Union, Northumberland, Schuylkill, and Wayne.  FQHCs have been  identified by the Pennsylvania Association of 
Community Health Centers. A letter of support that states participating clinic locations, provided by the partner FQHC, is available for review in the attac hed letters of agreement.  
Page 18 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  15.2 Feasibility of recruiting the required number of subjects  
Community Health Centers see thousands of  patients  annually . Our partner FQHC sees close to 85,000 
patients annually across all clinics , and sees roughly 1,800 women in our target population ( women ages 
50-65) at participating clinics . We seek to recruit 22 0 members of this  target  population. 
15.3 PI Time devoted to conducting the research  
The PI will utilize dedicated research time to conduct this research.  
15.4 Availability of me dical or psychological resources  
Any participant requiring medical or psychological resources as a result of participating in this study will 
be referred to the Primary Health Network clinic where they receive care. These resources might include 
follow -up procedures or any other preventive/screening services they need.”  
15.5 Process for informing Study Team  
The research team will meet regularly to discuss this study, study procedures, and any issues that may arise. All team members will receive in -depth protocol  training before performing any study -related 
tasks. 
16.0 Other Approvals  
16.1 Other Approvals from External Entities  
This research  proposal  has been reviewed by the National Institutes of Health, which is the funding 
agency for the study , during the grant review pr ocess . Each FQHC  has provided approvals to confirm 
their participation in this study as noted in the attached letters of agreement.  
16.2 Internal PSU Committee Approvals  
 Check all that apply: 
  Anatomic Pathology – Penn State Health  only  – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of 
pathologic specimens. Upload a copy of “ HRP-902 - Human Tissue For Research Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  Animal Care and Use – All campuses  – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissues in animals  
 
  Biosafety – All campuses  – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens 
in a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DN A 
or gene therapy ). 
 
  Clinical Laboratories – Penn State Health only  – Collection, processing and/or storage of extra tubes 
of body fluid specimens for research purposes by the Clinical Laboratories; and/or use of body fluids 
that had been collected for clinical purposes but  are no longer needed for clinical use. Upload a copy 
of “HRP-901 - Human Body Fluids for Research Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  Clinical Research Center (CRC) Advisory Committee – All campuses  – Research involves the use of 
CRC services in any way.  
 
  Conflict of Interest Review – All campuses  – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.  
 
Page 19 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)    Radiation Safety – Penn State Health only  – Research involves research -related radiation 
procedures. All research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research -related) 
must upload a copy of “ HRP-903 - Radiation Review Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  IND/IDE Audit – All campuses  – Research in which the PSU  researcher holds the IND or IDE or 
intends to hold the IND or IDE.  
 
  Scientific Review – Penn State Health only  – All investigator- written research studies requiring 
review by the convened IRB must provide documentation of scientific review with the IRB 
submission. The scientific review requirement may be fulfilled by one of the following: (1) external peer -review process; (2) department/institute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by 
the Clinical Research Center Advisory committee.  N OTE: Review by the Penn State Health  Cancer 
Institute (PSCI) Protocol Review Committee or the PSCI Disease Team is  required if the study 
involves cancer prevention studies or cancer patients, records and/or tissues. For more information 
about this requirement see the IRB website. 
 
17.0 Multi -Site Study  
 
17.1 Other sites  
  Not applicable.  
 
17.2 Communication Plans  
Not applicable.  
 
17.3 Data Submission and Security Plan Not applicable.  
 
17.4 Subject Enrollment  
Not applicable.  
 
17.5 Reporting of Adverse Events and New Information  
Not applicable.  
 
17.6 Audit and Monitoring Plans  
Not applicable.  
18.0 Adverse Event Reporting  
18.1 Reporting Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the Responsible IRB  
In accordance with applicable policies of The Pennsylvania State University Institutional Review Board (IRB), the investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or reported harm (adverse event) experienced 
by a subject or other individual, which in the opinion of the investigator is determined to be (1) 
unexpected; and (2) probably related to the research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be submitted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and procedures.  
19.0 Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
 19.1 Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the Penn State quality 
assurance program office(s), IRB, the sponsor, and government regulatory bodies, of all study related 
Page 20 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  documents (e.g., source documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  
The investigator will ensure the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g., 
pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.). 
20.0 Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking 
20.1 Data and/or specimens being stored  
Not applicable.  
 
20.2 Location of storage  
Not applicable.  
 
20.3 Duration of storage  
Not applicable.  
 
20.4 Access to data and/or specimens  
Not applicable.  
 
20.5 Procedures to release data or specimens  
Not applicable.  
 
20.6 Process for returning results  
Not applicable.  
21.0 References  
 
1 Siegel, R. L., Miller, K. D. & Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2018. CA Cancer J Clin  68, 7 -30, doi:10.3322/caac.21442 (2018).  
2 U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: Cerv ical cancer: Screening , 
<https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/cervical - cancer -
screening2 > (2018).  
3 U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: Colorectal cancer: Screening, 
<https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/colorectal -can cer-
screening2 > (2016).  
4 Blake, K. D., Moss, J. L., Gaysynsky, A., Srinivasan, S. & Croyle, R. T. Making the case for investment in rural cancer control: An analysis of rural cancer incidence, mortality, and funding trends. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  (2017).  
5 Cole, A. M., Jackson, J. E. & Doescher, M. Urban –rural disparities in colorectal cancer screening: cross‐sectional analysis of 
1998 –2005 data from the Centers for Disease Control's Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Study. Cancer medicine 1, 350 -
356 (2012).  
6 Coughlin, S. S., King, J., Richards, T. B. & Ekwueme, D. U. Cervical cancer screening among women in metropolitan areas of the Un ited States by individual -level and area- based measures of socioeconomic status, 2000 to 2002. Cancer 
epidemiology, biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by 
the American Society of Preventive Oncology  15, 2154- 2159, doi:15/11/2154 [pii] (2006).  
7 Bandura, A. Social cognitive theory. Handbook of social psychological theories , 349- 373 (2011).  
8 Moss, J. L., Liu, B. & Feuer, E. J. Urban/Rural Differences in Breast and Cervical Cancer Incidence: The Mediating Roles of 
Socioeconomic Status and Provider Density. Womens Health Issues  27, 683 -691, doi:10.1016/j.whi.2017.09.008 (2017).  
9 Moss, J. L., Ehrenkranz, R., Perez, L. G., Hair, B. Y. & Julian, A. K. Geographic disparities in cancer screening and fatalism among a nationally representative sample of US adults. J Epidemiol Community Health  73, 1128- 1135, doi:10.1136/jech -
2019- 212425 (2019).  
10 Wardle, J. et al.  Psychological impact of colorectal cancer screening. Health Psychol  22, 54 -59, doi:10.1037//0278 -
6133.22.1.54 (2003).  
11 Datta, S. D.  et al.  Human papillomavirus infection and cervical cytology in women screened for cervical cancer in the United 
States, 2003- 2005. Ann Intern Med 148, 493- 500, doi:10.7326/0003- 4819- 148-7- 200804010- 00004 (2008).  
12 Shin, H. Y.  et al.  Performance of the Fecal Immunochemical Test for Colorectal Cancer Screening Using Different Stool -
Collection Devices: Preliminary Results from a Randomized Controlled Trial. Gut Liver  10, 925 -931, doi:10.5009/gnl15479 
(2016).  
Page 21 of 21 (V.01/21/2019)  22.0  Confidentiality, Privacy and Data Management  
IMPORTANT: The following section is required for all locations EXCEPT Penn State Health and the College of 
Medicine.  Penn State Health and College of Medicine should skip this section and complete “HRP -598 
Resear ch Data Plan Review Form.” In order to avoid redundancy, for this section state “See the Research Data 
Plan Review Form” if you are conducting Penn State Health research. Delete all other sub- sections of section 
22. 
 
See the Research Data Plan Review Form . 
 