Document T ype: Protocol 
Protocol Title: An Open-Label Study to Assess the Long-term Safety and Efficacy of AXS-05 in 
Subjects with Major Depressive Disorder
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]
Document Date: July 9, 
2020
Certain information within this protocol has been redacted to protect either personally identifiable 
information (PI I) or company confidential i nformation (CCI). 
This may include, but is not limited to, redaction of the following: 
•Named perso
ns or organizations as sociated with the study.
•Proprietary information, such as scales or coding systems, which are considered confidential
information.
•Other information as needed to protect the  confidentiality of Axsome Therapeutics , personal
information, or to otherwise protect the integrity of the clinical study.
Axsome Therapeutics , Inc.  Confidential   
AXS -05-303 
Version Date  (Amendment 3): July 9, 20 20 Page 1   
PROTOCOL  
 
COMPOUND NAME/NUMBER:  
 AXS -05 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  
 AXS -05-303 
 
  
DEVELOPMENT PHASE:  
 Phase 3 
PROTOCOL  TITLE:  An Open -Label Study to Assess the Long- term Safety and 
Efficacy of AXS -05 in Subjects with Major Depressive 
Disorder  
 
PROTOCOL VERSION: 
 Amendment 3 
PROTOCOL DATE : 
 July 9, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This study will be performed in compliance with Good Clinical Practices and applicable 
regulatory requirements, including the archiving of essential documents. Information contained 
in this protocol is confidential in nature, and may not be used, divulged, published, or otherwise 
disclosed to others except to the extent necessary to obtain approval of the i nstitutional r eview 
board or independent e thics committee, or as required by law. Persons to whom this information 
is disclosed should be informed that this information is confidential and may not be further 
disclosed without the express permission of Axsome Therapeutics , Inc. 
  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc.  Confidential   
AXS -05-303 
Version Date  (Amendment 3): July 9, 20 20 Page 5  5. If female and of childbearing potential, has a negative urine pregnancy test result at Visit 1, is 
practicing at least two adequate methods of birth control (i.e., oral or parenteral contraceptives, intrauterine device, condoms, spermicides), and is not currently pregnant or breastfeeding nor plans to become pregnant during the course of the study.  
a. Long- term abstinence is acceptable when it is in line with the subjects preferred and usual 
lifestyle.  
b. Female subjects using a hormonal contraceptive or intrauterine device must have been 
doing so for at least 1 month before Screening and must follow that product’s package insert instructions including additional protection at times when hormonal contraceptiv e 
doses might be missed.  
c. Female subjects may be enrolled without a negative urine  pregnancy test if they are 
surgically sterile or at least 2 years post -menopausal.  
d. Male subjects and their female sexual partners should use an acceptable method of birth 
control (as noted above) during the study.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
A subject will be excluded from the study if the subject meets any of the following criteria:  
1. History of seizure disorder; undergoing abrupt discontinuation of alcohol, benzodiazepines, 
barbit urates or antiepileptic drugs; or any other condition that increases the risk of seizure such 
as stroke, significant head injury, tumor or infection of the central nervous system, 
arteriovenous malformation, neuroleptic malignant syndrome/serotonin syndrom e, or 
clinically significant, as deemed by the investigator, metabolic disorders (e.g., clinically significant hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, severe hepatic impairment, and hypoxia).  
2. Is considered by the investigator, for any reason (including, but not limited to, the risks 
described as precautions, warnings, and contraindications in the current version of the 
investigator’s brochure  for AXS -05 tablets), to be an unsuitable candi date to receive AXS -05. 
3. If the subject is currently receiving or plans to use drugs with known bupropion interactions (as listed in the Wellbutrin SR package insert ), PI is aware of any potential drug interaction 
and has deemed the subject acceptable to participate.  
4. Any current or recent medical, psychiatric, or social condition t hat, in the investigator’s 
opinion, is likely to interfere with the conduct of the study, confounds the interpretation of study results, or endangers the subject’s well -being. This includes (but is not limited to) any 
clinically significant oncologic, hema tologic, endocrine/metabolic, cardiovascular, 
respiratory, renal, hepatic, gastrointestinal, infectious or neurologic disease or has a chronic disease which is unstable or progressive.  
5. History of allergy or hypersensitivity to bupropion, dextromethorphan,  opiate drugs (e.g. 
codeine, etc.), or any other ingredient in the study medication.  
6. History of intolerance to bupropion or dextromethorphan.  
7. Unable  or unlikely  to comply with the study protocol  or unsuitable  for any other reason, 
including  other  conditions  that might indica te that the subject  is unsuit able for the study  as 
judged  by the investigator such as known  history  of poor medication  compliance or significant  
instability in status  of psychosocial  issues. 
8. Previously received treatment with any investigational drug (other than AXS -05) or device 
within 30 days of Visit 1.  
Test Product, Dosage, 
and Mode of 
Administration  AXS -05 (105 mg bupropion, 45 mg dextromethorphan) tablet, oral  

Axsome Therapeutics , Inc.  Confidential   
AXS -05-303 
Version Date  (Amendment 3): July 9, 20 20 Page 6  Treatment Regimen  Doses will be titrated as follows:  
• Days 1 – 3: AXS -05 (105 mg bupropion, 45 mg DM) tablet, once daily , in the morning  
• Days 4 – end of study (maximum of 12 months): AXS -05 tablet, twice daily  
All doses should be taken orally on an empty stomach (at least 2 hours  pre- or 2 hours post-
prandial)  with water. Twice daily doses should be taken at least 8 hours apart, orally on an empty 
stomach (at least 2 hours  pre- or 2 hours post -prandial) with water.  
Study Duration  The duration of participation will be up to 12 months.  
Criteria for 
Evaluation  Primary Safety Measures : 
• Incidence of treatment- emergent AEs (TEAEs) following dosing with AXS -05. 
Additional Safety Measure s: 
• Change in vital signs (blood pressure and heart rate) over time  
• Change in ECG findings over time  
• Change in clinical laboratory measures  over time  
• Incidence of suicidal behavior, as identified via the C -SSRS  
Efficacy Measures : 
• Change in MADRS over time  
• Change in SDS over time  
• Change in Q- LES-Q-SF over time  
• CGI-S 
• CGI-I 
Statistical Methods  Analysis Populations:  
The foll owing  analysis populat ions are planned for this s tudy: 
 Safety Population—the Safety Population will include all subjects who receive at least 1 dose 
of the study medication . 
 Intent -to-Treat (ITT)  Population—the ITT Population will include all subjects who receive at 
least 1 dose of the study medication and report at least one efficacy measurement.  
Descriptive statistics will be used for all variables and all data over time.  
Sample Size 
Determination  This study will enroll approximately 1 100 subjects, with 300 subjects treated for at least 6 months 
and 100 for 12 months.  The study will be considered completed once 300 subjects are treated for 
at least 6 months and 100 for 12 months. This sample size will provide an adequate number of 
subjects exposed to assess the long- term safety of AXS -05. 
