Title: Interleu kin-1 Bloc kade in HF w ith Preserved EF (D -HART2) 
PI: Antoni o Abbate , MD 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Uniqu e Protocol ID: HM20000118  
 
Document approval date: April 20, 2016 
 
Document Type: Protocol and SAP  
 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol    Version 04052016     
        
 
 
 
 
 
Inter leukin-1 Blockad e in Hear t Failure with 
Preserved Ejectio n Fractio n (HFpEF)  
 
 
 
 
 
A Randomize d Placeb o-controlled Doub le-blinded Study 
 
 
 
 
 
D-HART2  study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    STUDY PROTOCOL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator(s): Antonio 
Abba te, MD, PhD; Benjamin W. 
Van Tassell, PharmD 
 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Commonwealt h Unive rsity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
2  
  
 
Prior vers ions and edits: 
 
Edits to Version 1: 0813201 4 
• Blood press ure measurement through ccNexfin finger cuff, section 7.8 and 7.13: The 
ccNexfin “finger cuff” has been adde d for continuou s blood pressu re monitoring throughou t 
the exercise protocol. Patients will also unde rgo brief blood pressu re cuff inflation/deflation 
to measu re flow-mediated dilatation prior to exercise. 
• Bioelectrical Impedanc e (Bio-Impedance ) to measur e body composition, section 7.9 
and 7.13: Four electrodes will applied to the skin, a small amount of electricity will be ran 
through the body to measu re bioelectrical impendanc e (bio-impendance ) to determine body 
composition. 
 
Edits to Version 2: 09072014  
• Personne l: The list has been upda ted. 
• Sections 5.2 and 7.12 – The desc ription of the biomarkers has been clarified in more detail. 
• Section 7.1 – It is now explained that the patient will receive the investigational drug in 2 
batches , one for 5 weeks and a secon d one for 7 weeks . 
• Section 7.6 – The timing of follow up visits has been clarified in more detail. 
• Section 8.3.1 – The definition of “related” and “unrelated” to resea rch has been clarified in 
more detail. 
 
Edits to Version 3 04062015 : 
• Personne l have been upda ted. 
• The University of Virginia has been removed from the list of potential alternate sites as site 
initiation will no longe r be an option. 
• Health Diagnos tic Labo ratories is now known as True Health Diagnos tic Labo ratories and 
this chang e has been upda ted. 
• The procedu res for the whole blood assa y have been removed as this analysis is not being 
conduc ted during the study. 
• “Any abno rmal laboratory test” will no longe r be cons idered an adve rse event. 
• The definition of Adverse Events (AEs) has been revised, and reporting plan clarified. 
 
Edits to Version 4 11282015:  
• Screening will be performed in the whole VCU Health System, not just in the VCU Pauley 
Heart Center, as previously described (Section 6.1). 
• Requirement for “prior hosp italization for heart failure” has been removed from inclusion 
criteria (Section 6.2, and Append ix B forms). 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
3  
  
 
TABL E OF CONTENTS  
 
 
1)  Personne l 
 
2)  Protocol summary 
 
3)  Schematic of study design 
 
4)  Background information and significance  
 
5)  Objectives 
 
5.1  Primary Endpo int(s) 
 
5.2  Seconda ry Endpo ints 
 
6)  Enrollment in the study 
 
6.1  Screening 
 
6.2  Inclusion & Exclusion criteria 
 
7)  Study design 
 
7.1  Treatment with Anakinra 
 
7.2  Allocation concea lment 
 
7.3  Patient Compliance 
 
7.4  Conco mitant Medications 
 
7.5  Standa rd Medical Manage ment 
 
7.6  Cardiopulmonary exercise test 
 
7.7  Echoca rdiogram 
 
7.8  Blood pressu re measu rement through ccNexfin finger cuff 
 
7.9  Bio-Impedanc e measu rement 
 
7.10  Exercise-stress echoca rdiogram 
 
7.11  Questionna ires 
 
7.12  Biomarkers 
 
7.13  Study Schedu le 
 
7.14  Cost cove rage analysis 
 
8)  Assess ment of safety 
 
8.1  Specification of safety parameters 
 
8.2  Data Collection and transfer 
 
8.3  Methods of Timing for Assess ing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety 
 
Parameters 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
4  
  
 
8.4  Reporting procedu res 
 
8.5  AE/SAE data collection 
 
8.6  The data and safety monitoring (DSMB ) plan 
 
8.7  Regulatory reporting 
 
8.8  Type and duration of follow up of subjects after adve rse even ts 
 
8.9  Halting rules 
 
9)  Adjudication of clinical even ts 
 
9.1  Event-adjudicating committee 
 
9.2  Definition of the even ts 
 
9.3  Implications of the findings of the even t-adjudicating committee 
 
10)  Discontinuation of treatment and withdrawal 
 
10.1  Reason s for discon tinuation of treatment or withdrawal from the study 
 
10.2  Handling of withdrawals 
 
10.3  Termination of the study 
 
11)  Recruitment strategies 
 
12)  Statistical cons idera tions 
 
12.1  Study hypo thesis 
 
12.2  Sample size cons ideration 
 
12.3  Statistical analysis 
 
13)  Literature cited 
 
Append ix: DSM B Chapter for D-HAR T2 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
5  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1)  PERSONNEL  
 
 
Name Role Institution/ Division 
Antonio Abbate, MD/PhD 
Benjamin Van Tasse l, PharmD  
Co-Principal Inves tigator 
 
Co-Principal Inves tigator  
VCU , Cardiology 
 
VCU , Schoo l of Pharmacy 
 
 
Ross Arena, PhD  Inves tigator  University of Illinois, Chicago , IL 
 
Justin Canada , EPC Exercise Physiologist VCU , Physical Therapy 
Salvatore Carbone , MS 
 
Robin Sculthorpe, PharmD Resea rch Assistant 
 
Inves tigational Pharmacy VCU , Cardiology 
 
VCU , Schoo l of Pharmacy 
 
 
Michae l C. Kontos, MD Event Adjudicating Committee VCU , Cardiology 
Keyur Shah, MD Event Adjudicating Committee VCU , Cardiology 
Elizabe th Miller, MD Event Adjudicating Committee VCU , General Medicine 
 
 
Dominick Angiolillo, MD DSM B Chair University of Florida, Cardiology 
Richard Cooke , MD DSM B member VCU , Heart Failure 
Gonza lo Bearman, MD DMS B member VCU , Infectious diseas e 
Ion Jovin, MD DSM B member VCU , Cardiology / McGuire VA 
Jeffrey Kushinka, MD DSM B member VCU , General Internal Medicine 
Christine DeWilde, RN DSM B coordinator VCU , Pulmonary 
 
 
Juan Lu, PhD 
Kenne th Ellenbogen , MD 
John (Ian) Nixon, MD 
Charles A. Dinarello, MD Consu ltant 
Consu ltant 
Consu ltant 
Consu ltant VCU , Biostatistics 
VCU , Cardiology 
VCU , Cardiology 
University of Colorado 
Pierluigi Tricoci, MD 
Filippo Crea, MD 
Giusepp e Biondi-Zocca i, MD Consu ltant 
 
Consu ltant 
 
Consu ltant Duke University 
 
Catholic University, Rome, Italy 
 
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy 
Abbrev iations: DSMB=Da ta Safety Monitoring Boar d 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2)  PRO TOCO L SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
Title:  Interleukin-1  Blockad e  in  Heart  Failure  with  Preserved  Ejection 
Fraction (HFpEF) 
 
Population:                             60  patients  with  a  clinical  diagnos is  of  heart  failure,  a  recent 
imaging   study   docu menting   LV   ejection   fraction   >50%   and 
evidenc e of diastolic dysfunction, and CRP >2 mg/L 
 
Site(s):  Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 
 
 
 
Study Duration:  24 months 
 
 
 
Descr iption:                           Phase II clinical trial of Anakinra for the treatment of heart failure 
with  preserved  ejection  fraction,  impaired  left  ventricular 
relaxation, and increase d systemic inflammation (CRP >2 mg/L) 
 
Objectives:                             To determine the effects of IL-1 blockad e with Anakinra on peak of 
aerobic exercise capac ity (peak VO 2) and ventilatory efficiency 
(VE/VCO2) measu red  with a cardiopulmonary  test in patients with 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction 
 
Study Design:                        Single-center,   rando mized,   doub le-blinded ,   placebo -controlled 
clinical trial with allocation to Anakinra 100 mg daily or placeb o in 
2:1 ratio for 12 weeks 
 
Estimated Time to 
Complete Enrollment:  15 months 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
7  
 
 
 
3)  SCHE MATIC OF STUDY DES IGN 
 
 
 
 
 
HFpEF ( 
(n=60)( Anakinra( 
(n=40)( 
 
 
 
Placebo( 
(n=20)(  
Follo w%up( 
 
 
 
 
Follo w%up( 
 
 
CPX CPX CPX CPX 
 
Echo  
 
Echo - 
stress Echo  Echo  
 
Echo - 
stress  Echo  
 
Biomarkers  Biomarkers  Biomarkers  Biomarkers  
 
Even t(s) 
Adjudica tion Even t(s) 
Adjudica tion 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations:  CPX=Cardiopulmonary Exercise  Test; Echo=echocardiography; Echo -stress=dobutamine stress 
echocardiography;  HFpEF=Heart  Failure  with Preserved  Ejection  Fraction  
 
 
 
 
4) BACKGROUN D INFORMAT ION AND SIGNIFICANC E 
 
Heart failure (HF) is a cond ition in which the heart can no longe r pump enoug h blood to the rest 
of the body or it is unab le to do so without significantly increasing the filling pressu re. HF is 
characterized by dyspnea , fatigue, and declining cardiac function. Poor exercise capac ity is a 
common finding among HF patients and impose s a significant detriment to quality of life. 
Quantifiable measu res of exercise capac ity such as peak oxyge n consu mption (peak VO2) and 
the  minute  ventilation  and  carbon  dioxide  produc tion  slope  (VE/VCO 2)  represen t  strong 
independen t predictors of HF mortality and hosp italization. 
 
Despite the clear improvements in the treatment of cardiovascu lar diseas e over the past seve ral 
decades , the incidenc e and prevalence of HF have not decreased , survival has marginally 
improved ,  and morbidity  remains  unaccep tably  high.[1-3]  There is an urgent need to deve lop 
nove l therapeu tic approache s to alleviate symptoms, improve functional capac ity and quality of 
life, slow diseas e progression, and reduc e hosp italization. 
 
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a key pro-inflammatory mediator in innate immunity that induce s synthesis 
and   expression   of   multiple   seconda ry   inflammatory   mediators   (i.e.   Interleukin-6   [IL-6], 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016   
 
Peak VO2 
(mL/min/kg) 
VE/VCO2 
Exercise time (min) 
CRP  (mg/L)   
 
Interleukin-18 [IL-18], C reactive protein [CRP ]).[4]  Early desc riptions also noted that very small 
concen trations of IL-1 could induc e a seps is-like synd rome assoc iated with cardiac dysfunction 
and desc ribed the fine regulation of the synthesis and release of this cytokine.[5]  Two related 
gene s code for two different proteins IL-1α and IL-1β, both binding the same IL-1 recep tor (type 
I). IL-1β is the main form of circulating IL-1, binding to the membrane IL-1 recep tor in the same 
cell (autocrine), neighbo ring cells (paracrine), or entering the circulation targeting distant cells 
(endoc rine). IL-1α, on the other hand , is mostly expresse d as a membrane-boun d protein or 
release d  from  the  cytoplasm  during  cell  death.  An  additional  gene  code s  for  IL-1  recep tor 
antagon ist (IL-1Ra), a protein that binds to the IL-1 recep tor but does not exert agon ist activity, 
and functions as a naturally occu rring anti-inflammatory protein.[4] 
 
Exogenou s also IL-1β induce s a reversible and dose-dependen t contractile dysfunction in vitro 
or in vivo in the mouse .[4,6]  Thes e obse rvations formed the basis for an open -label, single-arm, 
proof-of-concep t study to test the safety and feasibility of IL-1 blockade  in patients with stable 
HFrEF and e levated CRP (>2 mg/L), and de termine the effects on aerobic exercise capac ity 
(ClinicalTrials.gov [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ).[7]  We enrolled patients (n=8) with stable chronic HFrEF as 
evidence d  by  no  recen t  hosp italizations  (within  previous  12  months),  no  recen t  medication 
change s (within 3 months), and screening CRP >2 mg/L. Patients received 14 days treatment 
with daily anak inra 100 mg subcu taneou s injection starting after the base line cardiopulmonary 
exercise testing (CPX ) to evaluate the co-primary endpo ints of peak  VO 2 and VE/VCO 2 slope at 
the beginning and end of the study. Of the 8 patients enrolled, 1 expe rience d flu-like symptoms 
during the study and withdrew after 8 days of injections (symptoms resolved spon taneous ly with 
3 days of discon tinuation). All 7 patients who completed the protocol expe rience d improvement 
in peak VO 2  after 14 days anak inra treatment; 6 out of 7 patients expe rience d improvement in 
the VE/VCO 2 slope after 14 days anak inra treatment (Figure 2). Patients also expe rience d 
significant improvements in seconda ry endpo ints of total exercise time and oxyge n utilization 
efficiency score. To verify the achievement of IL-1 blockade , we found a 80-90% reduc tion in 
median plasma of CRP , IL-6, and IL-1β, without measu rable change s in TNFα. While there was 
no significant  assoc iation  between  peak  VO2 and CRP,  there  appea red  to be trend  toward 
improved peak VO2 with lower CRP (Figure 2). No significant change s occu rred in resting heart 
rate  (HR),  maximum  HR,  resting  blood  pressu re,  maximum  blood  pressu re,  or  heart  rate 
recove ry between base line and 2 weeks CPX . 
 
 
P=0.016  100 P=0.031  10 
20 80 
60 8 
15 40 6 
 
10 4 
20 
5 2 P=0.016   
10 
 
8 
 
6  Base line 
 
4 
 
2 P=0.016   
 
 
 
 
 
P=0.016  
 
0 10 14 days  
0 0 
5  10  15  20 
Peak  VO 2 (mL/kg/min)  
 
Figure  2. Treatment  with anakinra  for 14 days  led to an improvement  in aerobic  exercise  capacity  and a reduction  in CRP  
levels  in an open -label  proof  of concept  study  in patients  with HFrE F. Modified  from Van Tassell  et al. PLOSONE  2012.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
9  
  
 
1 ng 100 ng 
IL-1β  CHF 
effects  of  recombinant  murine  Interleukin -1β     (IL-1β)  on  measures  of  systolic  and  diastolic  left  
% 
Control   
 
1 ng 100 ng 
IL-1β  CHF 
R2  Linea r =  0.65 1  
VO2  (mL/kg/min )   
 
The role of IL-1 in HFpEF 
or  diastolic  dysfunction  is 
less  established .  IL-1β  
Fractional  shortening    Isovolumetric  relaxation  time  
* * 
40  * 24  60
  
Contractile  reserve  
induce s  cellular 
20 
hype rtrophy  and  changes  
in calcium hand ling in vitro, * 
* 12 
 
 
ms 40 
 
20  * * 
% 
1 ng 100 ng 
mechan isms  involved  in 
the  pathogenes is  of  
 
Figure  3. The Control  Control   
IL-1β  
CHF 
HFpEF.[8]  Similar  effects ventricular  function  are shown,  panels  A and B respectivel y, and on contractile  reserve  (after  isoproterenol  10 ng), 
panel C, in comparison to mice with heart failure (CHF). Modified from Van Tassell et al. PLOSONE 2012.  
are induce d by other inflammatory  mediators downstream of IL-1β.[9]  We have recen tly found 
that in the mouse in vivo IL-1β induce s reversible and dose -dependen t alterations in diastolic 
function (Figure 3). Moreove r, IL-1β also blunts the contractile respons e to β-adrenergic stimuli 
(isoproterenol), an additional mechan ism potentially involved in exercise intolerance in HFpEF. 
 
From a clinical standpo int, patients with chronic IL-1-mediated disease s such as patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis are more likely to have left ventricular hype rtrophy and diastolic 
dysfunction.[10,11]  In a study of 23 patients with rheumatoid arthritis, a single dose of anak inra 
100 mg improved left ventricular diastolic function as well as coronary flow reserve and flow- 
mediated brachial artery vasod ilatation,[12]  sugges ting that IL-1 blockad e may represen t a viable 
treatment   strategy.   More   recen tly,   studies   in   patients   with   critical   illness ,   a   cond ition 
characterized by intense inflammation, more than 50% of patients had impaired diastolic 
dysfunction,[13]   and  the  presenc e  of  diastolic  dysfunction  was  transient  and  correlated  with 
inflammatory biomarkers.[9] 
 
In our own pilot feasibility study of patients with 
HFpEF, elevated CRP levels (a marker of IL-1 
activity)  correlated  with  reduce d  exercise 
capac ity (peak VO2)(Figure 4). 
 
In the current proposa l, we propos e that IL-1 
contributes to the exercise intolerance that 
characterizes patients with HFpEF by modulating 
cardiac   relaxation,   contractile   reserve   and/or 
other  endo thelial  function,  and  we  propos e  to 
inves tigate  IL-1  blockad e  with  anak inra  as  a  
20  
 
 
15  
 
 
10  
 
 
5 
 
 
0 
0 10   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 30  
CRP (mg/L )   
 
R2  =  0.65 1  
P = 0.002  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 50  
therapeu tic strategy to improve quality of life and 
reduc e morbidity in HFpEF. Figure  4.  Preliminary  data  show  a  significant  inverse 
correlation between CRP  levels and peak VO2. 
 
5)  OBJECTIVES 
 
The current resea rch  is designed  to inves tigate  the safety and efficacy  of Anakinra  in heart 
failure patients with preserved ejection fraction, evidenc e of impaired left ventricular relaxation, 
and elevated CRP levels (as a marker of inflammation) in a rando mized doub le-blinded trial. We 
hypo thesize that blockad e of IL-1 will improve exercise capac ity in these patients. 
 
5.1  Primary Endpo int(s) 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
10  
  
 
Absolute change s in aerobic exercise capac ity (peak VO2) and ventilatory efficiency (VE/VCO 2 
slope)  after 12 weeks  treatment  will be cons idered  co-primary  endpo ints.  This will compare 
patients treated with anak inra (N=40) vs placeb o (N=20), and provide a rando mized, doub le- 
blinded assess ment of the effects of IL-1 blockad e on aerobic exercise performance . The data 
will be collected and electronically transferred to the core laboratory at the University of Illinois, 
Chicago , IL. 
 
5.2  Seconda ry Exploratory Endpo ints 
 
Additional endpo ints will include parameters measu red at CPE T, echoca rdiography , as well as 
biomarkers, and clinical outcomes. 
 
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test (CPX ) parameters: in addition to the change s from base line in 
VO 2   and  VE/VCO 2    at  12  weeks  (which  cons titute  the  co-primary  endpo ints),  seconda ry 
endpo ints will compare change s in VO 2 and VE/VCO 2 at 4 and 24 weeks in patients treated with 
anak inra  versus  placebo .  This will help determine  when  the peak effect of IL-1 blockade  is 
achieved , the duration of effects after cessa tion of therapy, and the presenc e of any rebound 
effects. We will also analyze  change s  in heart rate and blood pressu re  during exercise  and 
during recove ry to asses s chronotropic competency and heart rate recove ry. The data will be 
collected  and  electronically  transferred  to  the  core  laboratory  at  the  University  of  Illinois, 
Chicago , IL. 
 
Echoca rdiography : structural and functional echoca rdiographic parameters include left and right 
ventricular  dimensions,  mass,  systolic  and  diastolic  function.  These  will provide  mechan istic 
insight as to whether the hypo thesized change s in aerobic exercise performance are dependen t 
upon change s in cardiac dimension/function. The data will be collected and electronically stored 
for further analysis at the conc lusion of the study. 
 
Exercise  stress  echoca rdiography :  Exercise  stress  echoca rdiography  will  be  performed  at 
base line  and  12  weeks  to  measu re  diastolic  and  contractile  reserve.  We  will  perform  an 
assess ment before initiation of exercise and immediately after cessa tion of peak exercise. 
 
Questionna ires: Two independen t ques tionna ires will be used to asses s quality of life and HF 
symptoms.  The Minneso ta  Living with Heart Failure ques tionna ire  (MLHFQ) is a 21-ques tion 
graded ques tionna ire that has been extensively used to measu re impairment in quality of life in 
patients  with  HF.[14]   The  Duke  Activity  Status  Index  (DAS I)  ques tionna ire  is  a  12-ques tion, 
yes/no, instrument that allows for the calculation of perceived functional capac ity,[15]  in which 
each ques tion desc ribes a different phys ical activity and the ques tions are weighted acco rding 
to their degree of phys ical exertion. Both ques tionna ires will be administered at 0, 4, 12 and 24 
weeks  in  acco rdanc e  with  CPE T  and  echoca rdiography .   The  data  will  be  collected  and 
electronically stored for further analysis at the conc lusion of the study. 
 
Biomarkers:  Blood will be collected at each timepoint throughou t the study (0, 4, 12, and 24 
weeks ) and analyzed for complete blood cell coun t, metabolic markers (including lipids and 
lipoproteins, glycemic control and insulin resistance , liver and renal pane l, sterols), inflammatory 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
11  
  
 
markers (i.e. high sens itivity CRP ) and cardiac biomarkers (i.e. NT-proBNP and tropon in I). The 
data will be collected and electronically stored for further analysis at the conc lusion of the study. 
 
Clinical outcomes:  Incidenc e  of death (cardiac and non-cardiac),  hosp italizations  (for HF, for 
other cardiac cause s not related to HF, or for non-cardiac reasons ) will be recorded at 4,12, and 
24 weeks in every patient, and then every 12 weeks until study conc lusion (max 108 weeks ). 
The inves tigators and clinicians caring for the patients will remain blinded to treatment allocation 
and to the CRP data. Adjudication of even ts will be performed by an ad hoc committee blinded 
to treatment allocation and to CRP data. 
 
 
 
6)         ENRO LLMENT IN THE STUD Y 
 
6.1  Screen ing 
 
Patients will be screene d by the inves tigators in the VCU Pauley Heart Center Inpatient and 
Outpatient  services  during  the  course  of  their  regular  clinical  care.  A  waiver  to  obtain 
authorization  by the subjects to acces s persona l health information during screening proces s 
has been obtained from the IRB. Thos e who meet entry criteria will be approache d by the 
inves tigators for enrollment. Potential subjects will be provided with an Informed Consen t Form 
in acco rdanc e with the local Institutional Review Board. Enrolled subjects will then unde rgo 
complete screening for entry criteria (listed below). Where poss ible, inves tigators will rely on 
clinically  available  laboratory  results;  the remaining  laboratory  analyses  will be ordered  and 
billed to the study accoun t. The central laboratory at VCU Hospitals will be used for all clinically 
available  tests. Point-of-care  testing  may be used for the determination  of the plasma  CRP 
levels. Should enrollment fall behind this goal, we will pursue recruitment at other community- 
base d centers in Central or Northern Virginia. 
 
 
 
6.2  Subject Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
 
In order to be eligible for this study, patients must meet  ALL the 4 Inclusion criteria and  NONE  
of the Exclusion criteria. 
 
INCLUSION CRITERIA: 
 
1)  Symptoms and signs of heart failure (NYH A II-III) 
 
2)  Recen t Imaging Study (<12 months) showing LVEF>50% and LVEDV I<97ml/m2 
 
3)  Evidenc e of abno rmal LV relaxation, filling, diastolic distensibility, and diastolic stiffness 
as shown by one of the following 
a.   Invas ive Hemodyna mic measu rements 
i.   mPC W >12 
ii.   LVEDP >16mmH g 
b.   Tissue Doppler Echoca rdiogram 
i.   E/E’ >15 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
12  
  
 
ii.   E/E’ 8-15 and one of the following 
o LVH 
o Afib 
o LAE 
o  E/A<0.5+DT>28 0 
c.   Biomarkers 
i.   BNP >200pg /ml  (not  due  to a conco mitant  diseas e  such  as  pulmonary 
arterial hype rtension, pulmonary embolism, acute renal failure, or other) 
4)  hsCRP > 2.0 mg/L 
EXC LUSION CRITERIA: 
 
-  Age <21 
-  Conco mitant  cond itions  or treatments  which  would  affect  completion  of the  study  or 
interpretation of the study tests including but not limited to the following cond itions: 
o  phys ical inability to walk or run on a treadmill 
o  angina or evidenc e of spon taneou s or induc ible ische mia 
o  uncon trolled arterial hype rtension 
o  atrial fibrillation (or other arrhythmias) 
o  moderate to seve re valvular heart disease  
o  chronic pulmonary disease  
o  anemia (Hgb<1 0 g/dl) 
-  Angina, uncon trolled hype rtension or electrocardiograph  (ECG ) change s (i.e. ischemia, 
arrhythmias) that limit maximum exertion during cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
-  Anticipated need for surgery 
-  Active infection including chronic infection 
-  Active cance r (or prior diagnos is of cance r within the past 10 years) 
-  Recen t (<14 days ) or active use of immunosupp ressive  drugs (including but not limited 
to high-dose corticosteroids [>1 mg/kg of prednisone equivalent], TNF-α blocke rs, 
cyclospo rine) not including NSA IDs or corticosteroids used for IV dye allergy only) 
-  Chronic   auto-immune   or  auto-inflammatory   diseas e   (including   but  not  limited   to 
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus ) 
-  Neutropen ia (abso lute neutrophil coun t<1,800/mm3  [or <1,000/mm3  in African-American 
patients]) 
-  Severe impairment in renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 ml/kg*min) 
-  Recen t or planne d use of vacc ination with live attenua ted viruses 
-  Allergy to rubbe r or latex 
-  Allergy to produc ts derived from Esche richia coli 
-  Pregnanc y or breastfeeding 
-  Inability to give informed consen t 
 
 
7)  STUDY DES IGN 
 
We designed a single center, placeb o-controlled, doub le-blinded rando mized study of Anakinra 
in patients  with heart failure  with preserved  ejection  fraction  (HFpEF).  Patients  will unde rgo 
base line clinical assess ment,  CPET , echoca rdiogram,  exercise stress echoca rdiography ,  and 
blood tests for biomarkers. The CPET , the echoca rdiogram and blood tests will be repea ted at 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
13  
  
 
each visit (4, 12 and 24 weeks ). The exercise stress echoca rdiogram will be repea ted after 12 
weeks of treatment.  See Schematic of Study Design (3). 
 
7.1  Treatment with Anakinra 
 
Anakinra and matching placeb o syringes will be provided by the manufacturer, Swedish Orphan 
Biovitrum  (SOB I,  Stockho lm,  Sweden )  to  the  Inves tigational  Pharmacy  at  the  coordinating 
center at VCU , where the syringes are stored until ready to be administered to the patient. SOB I 
has also guaranteed  a continuou s supp ly of anak inra and placeb o shou ld the current supp ly 
expire prior to completion of the trial. 
 
After completion of all base line testing patients will be given a 5-week supp ly of Anakinra or 
placebo , and will be instructed on how to store and self-administer the drug once daily 
(approximately at the same time every day). We adde d an extra 7-day supp ly in case of a need 
to delay Visit 2 of few days . An additional 7-week supp ly of Anakinra or placeb o will be given on 
Visit 2 (4 weeks ). The patient will also be educa ted on expec ted side effects and need to inform 
the inves tigators  abou t any foresee n  and unforesee n  even ts. A sharp container  sufficient  to 
contain all 60 syringes will be given to the patient to dispos e the syringes in, and to bring back 
at the each visit. 
 
7.2  Allocation concea lment 
 
Anakinra  or  placeb o  (vehicle)  will  be  supp lied  by  the  manufacturer  of  Anakinra  (Kineret™, 
Swedish Orphan Biovitrum, Stockho lm, Sweden ), dispense d in small syringes (1 ml), provided 
to the patient for daily subcu taneou s injection. The syringes for Anakinra or placeb o will be 
undistinguishab le.   The  rando mization   log  will  be  prepared   by  a  consu ltant   outside  the 
institutions  involved  in the enrollment  (Giusepp e  Biondi-Zocca i,  MD, University  La Sapienza , 
Rome,  Italy)  and  sent  electronically  to the  director  of the  Inves tigational  Pharmacy  at VCU 
(Robin Sculthorpe, PharmD). Acces s to rando mization log will be restricted and allowed only on 
an emergenc y basis, or as reques ted by the Data Safety and Monitoring Board, or at the end of 
the study including all data collection. In case of an emergency , a phys ician treating any patient 
enrolled  in  the  study  may  reques t  un-blinding  of  that  individual  patient  if  the  phys ician 
determines that un-blinding is necessa ry to make a treatment decision. The PI will contact the 
VCU Inves tigational Pharmacy to provide the treatment allocation to the PI, who will then relay 
the information to the treating phys ician. If reques ted by the DSMB , the PI will contact the VCU 
Inves tigational   Pharmacy  to  provide  the  rando mization   log  directly  to  the  DSMB .  Upon 
completion of the study (including completion of all data collection and even t adjudication), the 
PI will reques t the complete rando mization log from the VCU Inves tigational Pharmacy. 
 
7.3  Patient Compliance with Study Interven tion 
 
One goal of the trial is to maximize adhe rence and retention throughou t the study. Adherence 
will be addresse d  by coun t of unuse d  syringes  and completion  of all study visits. Retention 
refers to the involvement of study patients throughou t the intervention phas e of the protocol. 
 
7.4  Concomitant Medications 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
14  
  
 
All conco mitant medications will be recorded at each clinic visit. Administration of Anak inra with 
medications  that affect the immune  system  (i.e. immunosupp ressan t)  or increase  the risk of 
infection (i.e. cance r chemotherapy) is NOT permitted. If a patient requires treatment with such 
medications, he/she will not be eligible for inclusion in the study. If a patient already enrolled in 
the study requires such treatments, the investigational treatment (Anakinra or placebo ) will need 
to be discon tinued (see reaso n for discon tinuation). 
 
7.5  Standar d Medical Manage ment 
 
Patients  in  the  study  will  receive  guideline-base d  medical  treatments  as  indicated.  Such 
treatments   may   include   β-adrenergic   recep tor   blocke rs,   angiotensin   conve rting   enzy me 
inhibitors or recep tor blocke rs, aldosterone blocke rs, isoso rbide dinitrate, hydralazine, digoxin, 
aspirin, and statins. 
 
7.6  Cardiopulmonary Test 
 
Upon completion of screening/enrollment, subjects will be schedu led for Visit 1 at the 
cardiopulmonary exercise suite. A phys ician-supe rvised maximal aerobic exercise test will be 
administered using a metabolic cart that is interfaced with a treadmill. A conse rvative ramping 
treadmill protocol will be used . Prior to each test, the oxyge n and carbon dioxide senso rs will be 
calibrated using gase s of known oxygen , nitrogen , and carbon dioxide concen trations and the 
flow senso r will also be calibrated using a 3-liter syringe. Subjects will be briefed regarding the 
protocol and will be reques ted to exercise to fatigue. 12-lead ECG monitoring will be conduc ted 
at base line, throughou t the test and into recove ry. Blood pressu re will be measu red every two 
minutes using an automated exercise-compatible device (Tango , SunTec h Medical). In this 
techn ique, expired gase s are sampled using a mouthpiece-mounted senso r, and analyzed to 
continuous ly measu re oxyge n (O2) uptake; the highes t 10-secon d average value for O2 uptake 
defines  peak  oxyge n  consu mption  (VO2  peak  in  mL•kg-1•min-1).  The  ventilatory  equivalents 
method will be used to determine VO2 at ventilatory thresho ld. Ten secon d averaged VE and 
VCO 2  data,  from  the  initiation  of  exercise  to  peak ,  were  input  into  spreadshee t  software 
(Microsoft  Excel,  Microsoft  Corp.,  Bellevue ,  WA)  to  calculate  the  VE/VCO 2  slope  via  least 
squa res linear regression (y = mx + b, m=slope).   American Heart Assoc iation guidelines for 
exercise testing contraindications and termination criteria will be followed. 
 
Upon completion of exercise testing, the results of the cardiopulmonary exercise test will be 
reviewed  and discusse d  with the patients. Patients with angina, abno rmal  blood pressure  or 
heart rate response , or ECG change s sugges tive of coronary ische mia will be excluded from the 
study. 
 
Subjects  will  return  to  the  cardiopulmonary   exercise  suite  for  the  additional  visits  upon 
completion of 4 weeks (Visit 2, 28±7 days ) or 12 weeks (Visit 3, 84±7 days ) of treatment with 
Anakinra or placebo , or following 12 weeks of wash-out (Visit 4, 168±1 4 days ). At each visit, 
subjects will unde rgo a brief phys ical exam and repea t exercise testing. 
 
7.7  Echocard iogra m 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
15  
  
 
 
 
Prior  to  initiation  of  treatment,  the  patient  will  unde rgo  a  transthoracic  echoca rdiogram  to 
measu re  left  and  right  ventricular  and  atrial  dimensions,  left  and  right  ventricular  systolic 
function, transmitral flow Doppler spec tra, mitral and tricusp idal valve annu lus tissue Doppler 
spec tra,  ejection  time  and  stroke  volume,  inferior  vena  cava ,  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery 
diameters and Doppler spec tra, acco rding to the recommenda tions of the American Society of 
Echoca rdiography .[16-18]  The echoca rdiogram will be repea ted at each additional visit. 
 
 
7.8  Blood pressur e measure ment throug h ccNexfin finger cuff 
 
 
A small cuff will be placed on the subject’s  finger to measu re  blood flow. A standa rd  blood 
pressu re  cuff  will  then  be  placed  on  the  arm  and  inflated  for  2-3  minutes.  The  finger  cuff 
[ccNexfin, Edwards Scientific] will measu re change s in blood flow before and after cuff deflation 
to provide an estimate of flow mediated dilatation—a surrogate marker of endo thelial function. 
The estimated duration of the study is less than 10 min. 
 
7.9  Bioelectrical Impedanc e analysis (Bio-Impedance ) 
 
 
Bioelectrical   Impedanc e   Analysis   or  Bio-Impendanc e   is  a  non-invas ive,   quick  and  safe 
techn ique that allows estimating body composition. Impedanc e is briefly defined as the property 
of  the  electrical  ionic  conduc tion  of  soft  tissue  where  fat  and  bone  are  cons idered  poor 
conduc tors, however the microampere range deve loped during the test does not represen t any 
haza rd for the patient. The patient will be aske d to stay still on the bed, with supe rior limbs 
abduc ted at 30° and the inferior ones at 45°. Four cutaneou s electrodes (two on the foot and 
two on the homolateral hand ) are applied. Between two electrodes , at least 5 cm distance is 
required.  A  small  electricity  current  is  applied  to  the  electrodes .  We  will  measu re  how  the 
electricity is conduc ted through the body using a Quantum IV Body Composition Analyzer RJL 
Systems) and then, using a dedicated software, we will determine the body composition (water, 
lean mass and fat). The estimated duration of the study is less than 10 min. 
 
7.10  Stress -Echocard iogra m 
 
 
At visit 1 and visit 3, in correspondenc e of the CPE T, the patient will unde rgo a limited 
echoca rdiogram acqu isition prior to initiation of the exercise and after peak exercise. Two 
dimensional and Doppler images will be acqu ired to measu re LV dimensions in diastolic and 
systole from the apical 4 chamber view, the pulsed wave and tissue Doppler spec tra of the 
transmitral flow, the mitral annu lus, the tricusp idal annu lus. 
 
7.11  Questionna ires 
 
Prior to each cardiopulmonary  exercise test, subjects will complete the Minneso ta Living with 
Heart Failure and the Duke Activity Status Index (DAS I) ques tionna ires. The Minneso ta Living 
with Heart Failure ques tionna ire (MLHFQ) is a 21-ques tion graded ques tionna ire that has been 
extensively used to measu re impairment in quality of life in patients with HF.[14]  The ques tions 
are designed  to measu re a wide rage of phys ical, emotional,  social, and mental factors that 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
16  
  
 
contribute to overall quality of life. The DAS I is a twelve-item “yes/no” ques tionna ire that allows 
for the calculation of perceived functional capac ity. Each ques tion desc ribes a different phys ical 
activity and asks the subjects if they feel they can perform the task. The ques tions are weighted 
acco rding to their degree of phys ical exertion. The weighted values from the “yes” responses 
are summed to produc e a score in metabolic equivalents. 
 
7.12  Biomarker s assess ment 
 
Blood samples will be taken from a peripheral vein at 0, 4, 12 and 24 weeks . Samples will be 
centrifuged and then refrigerated, and shipped with cold pack s within 24 hours to True Health 
Diagnos tic Labo ratories LLC., Richmond, VA. The results of the complete blood cell coun t and 
basic metabolic profile will be sent to the PI at VCU by email or fax. 
 
 
Blood samples will be used for analysis of for complete blood cell coun t, metabolic markers 
(including lipids and lipoproteins, glycemic control and insulin resistance , liver and renal pane l, 
sterols),  inflammatory  markers  (i.e.  high  sens itivity  CRP )  and  cardiac  biomarkers  (i.e.  NT- 
proBNP and tropon in I). 
 
One EDTA-containing tube, one SST containing tube, one Serum Separator Clot Activator tube 
and one PPT tube will be used for analysis of plasma levels of biomarkers by the True Health 
Diagnos tics LLC, Richmond, VA. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
17  
  
 
 
7.13  Study Schedu le 
 
  
Enrollment  
Visit 1  
Visit 2  
Visit 3  
Visit 4  
Additional 
F/U 
 (Base line) (Week 4) (Week 12) (Week 24)  
 
Screening *  
X      
Consen t X      
Clinical assess ment ** X X X X X X 
Inves tigational therapy  X X X   
CPE T  X X X X  
Echoca rdiogram  X X X X  
ccNexF in monitoring  X X X X  
Bio-Impedanc e  X X X X  
Stress echoca rdiogram  X  X   
Biomarkers X X X X X  
*_Pregnanc y test will be performed, if indicated 
**_Clinical assess ment includes history and phys ical, medication reconc iliation, and assess ment 
of adve rse even ts 
 
 
 
7.13  Cost covera ge analysis 
 
A cost cove rage analysis was conduc ted prior to the initiation of the trial to determine what 
cons titutes  standa rd  of care,  which  will  be  billed  to  the  patient  or the  insurer,  and  what  is 
cons idered ‘resea rch’ which will be paid for with the study budge t. 
 
 
8)         ASSESSMEN T OF SAFETY 
 
8.1  Specification of Safety Parameters 
 
Safety parameters will include data deriving from history and phys ical examination performed at 
each visit, laboratory data and results of functional and imaging tests. To enhanc e detection of 
adve rse even ts between visits, all patients will be encou raged to contact the resea rch team at 
any time with conce rns or any perceived change s in their healthcare status. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
18  
  
 
Disease -related data (HF-related) will be assesse d including chang es in symptoms (or new 
symptoms), functional capac ity, vital signs (including weight), renal function, or any significant 
change s in medications. 
 
Data spec ific to the treatment will also be assessed . The patient will be aske d abou t symptoms 
and examined for signs of infection. Considering that Anakinra may mask signs of infection such 
as fever, a low thresho ld for further inves tigation will be advoca ted. A complete cell coun t will be 
measu red   at  each  visit  to  exclude   the  unusua l   case s   of  Anak inra-related   neutropen ia 
(ANC <1000 ), for which suspens ion of active treatment will be encou raged until return to a value 
of ANC >1,800/mm3  (or >1,000/mm3  if patient is African-American). 
 
Change s  to  treatment  for  side-effects  or  unan ticipated  problems  will  be  performed  without 
breaking the rando mization code , unless deemed necessa ry for the treatment of the individual 
patient by the phys ician, in which case the phys ician will be made aware while the remainder of 
the team, espec ially the inves tigators performing and interpreting the tests, will be maintained 
blinded.  
 
The  risks  of the  tests  performed  have  been  desc ribed  above .  In  order  to  reduc e  risk,  the 
procedu res will be performed by skilled practitioners in the standa rd clinical fashion. 
 
Abnormal or incidental findings will be hand led on a case by case basis as clinically indicated. 
 
8.2  Data collection 
 
The principal inves tigator at the site will be provided with a data collection shee ts or case report 
forms on which data abou t the individual subject will be collected. The subjects will be identified 
as a consecu tive number (i.e. 01, 02, …08). The data collected on these forms will not contain 
any persona l identifiable information. A database of de-identified data will be created. 
 
8.3  Methods of Timing for Assess ing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety 
Parameters 
 
8.3.1  Adverse Events 
 
All Adverse Effects (AEs) will be recorded on an AE form regardless of causa lity. 
 
An  AE  is defined  as  any  untoward  medical  occu rrence  in a patient  or clinical  inves tigation 
subject administered a pharmaceu tical produc t cons idered to be causa lly related to the study 
treatment or resea rch conduc t. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintende d sign 
(including an abno rmal laboratory finding), symptom, or diseas e temporally assoc iated with the 
use of medicinal (inves tigational) produc t. The occu rrence of an AE may come to the attention 
of study personne l during study visits and interviews of a study recipient for medical care, or 
upon review by an inves tigator or study coordinator. An even t that is cons idered by the 
inves tigator(s)  to  be  expec ted  and  related  to  the  natural  history  of  the  diseas e  is  NOT 
cons idered an AE. 
 
All even ts cons idered  AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for 
“serious  adve rse  even ts”  shou ld  be captured  on the appropriate  AE form. Information  to be 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
19  
  
 
collected   includes   even t   desc ription,   time   of   onse t,   clinician’s   assess ment   of   seve rity, 
relationsh ip to study intervention (assesse d only by those with the training and authority to make 
a diagnos is, which would include a phys ician) and time of resolution/stabilization  of the even t. 
All AEs occu rring while on study must be docu mented appropriately regardless of relationsh ip. 
All AEs will be followed to adequa te resolution. 
 
Any  medical  cond ition  that  is  presen t  at  the  time  that  the  patient  is  screene d  shou ld  be 
cons idered as base line and not reported as an AE. However, if it deteriorates at any time during 
the study, it shou ld be recorded as an AE. 
 
All AEs must be graded for seve rity and relationsh ip to study produc t. 
 
Severity  of  Event:  All  AEs  will  be  asse ssed  by  the  study  inves tigator  using  the  following 
guidelines: 
 
• Mild: even ts require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the patient’s daily 
activities. 
• Moderate: even ts result in a low level of inconven ience or conce rn with the therapeutic 
measu res.  Moderate  even ts  may  caus e  some  interference  with  functioning  and  may 
require systemic drug therapy or other treatment. 
• Severe: even ts interrupt a patient’s usua l daily activity and may require systemic drug 
therapy or other treatment. Severe even ts are usua lly incapac itating. 
• Life threatening: any adve rse drug expe rience that places the patient or subject, in the 
view of the inves tigator, at immediate risk of death from the reaction as it occu rred (i.e. 
does not include a reaction that might have cause d death had it occu rred  in a more 
seve re form). 
 
Change s in the seve rity of an AE will be docu mented to allow an assess ment of the duration of 
the  even t  at  each  level  of  intensity  to  be  performed.  Adverse  even ts  characterized  as 
intermittent require docu mentation of onse t and duration of each episode.  
 
Relationsh ip  to  the  intervention:  All  suspec ted  AEs  must  have  their  relationsh ip  to  study 
intervention assesse d using the terms: assoc iated or not assoc iated. In a clinical trial, the study 
intervention  must always be a suspec t. To help assess , the following guidelines are used to 
asses s causa lity: 
 
• Definitely  related:  The  even t  is  temporally  related  to  the  administration  of  the  study 
intervention and, in the opinion of the inves tigator, no other etiology explains the even t. 
• Probab ly  related:  The  even t  is  temporally  related  to  the  administration  of  the  study 
intervention  and  represen ts,  in  the  opinion  of  the  inves tigator,  the  most  plausible 
explanation of the even t. 
• Possibly  related:  The  even t  is  temporally  related  to  the  administration  of  the  study 
intervention but, in the opinion of the inves tigator, it does not represen t the most likely 
explanation of the even t. 
• Definitely Unrelated: The even t is temporally independen t  of study intervention  and/or 
the even t appea rs, in the opinion of the inves tigator, to be explained by another etiology. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
20  
  
 
 
 
 
8.3.2  Serious Adverse Events 
 
An SAE  is any adverse  even t/expe rience  occu rring  between  base line  assess ments  and the 
patients final study visit that results in any of the following outcomes and is cons idered by the 
inves tigator(s) to be unexpec ted or not cons istent with the natural history of the diseas e: 
 
• Death 
• Life threatening (subject at immediate risk of death) 
• Requires inpatient hosp italization or prolonga tion of existing hosp italization 
• Results in a persistent or significant disability or incapac ity 
• Important  medical  even ts that may not result in death, be life threatening,  or require 
hosp italization   may  be  cons idered   SAEs  when,  base d  upon  appropriate   medical 
judgment, may jeopa rdize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to 
preven t one of the outcomes listed in this definition. 
 
All the unexpec ted SAE will be promptly (within 24 hours) reported to the local IRB and DSM B 
(see  reporting  procedu res).  The  DSM B  report  to  the  inves tigators  will  be  forwarded  to  the 
NHLBI Program Officer, including the discuss ion of the conce rns, and the basis for any 
recommenda tions that the DSM B has made in respons e to the conce rns (within 7 calenda r days 
if fatal or life-threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions; or within 14 days for 
unan ticipated problem that is not an SAE or within 15 calenda r days for all non-fatal, non-life 
threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions, or within 30 days of receipt of the 
DSM B or IRB report for all other unan ticipated problems or sche duled meetings). 
 
 
 
8.4  Reporting Procedures 
 
8.4.1  Serious Adverse Events 
 
All unexpec ted AEs that result in death or are otherwise reportable SAEs or AEs will be reported 
promptly to the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB ) and the IRB within 1 business day of 
knowledge of the even t. 
 
AEs (serious or nonse rious) that transp ire seconda ry to an overdose must also be reported to 
the DSM B within 1 business day of knowledge of the even t, using an AE form. 
 
The SAE form will always be completed as thorough ly as poss ible with all available details of 
the even t, signed by the inves tigator (or designee ), and, if a reportable adve rse even t as defined 
herein, forwarded to the DSM B within the designated time frames. If the inves tigator does not 
have all information  regarding  an SAE, he/she will not wait to receive additional  information 
before notifying the DSM B of the even t and completing the SAE form. The form will be upda ted 
when additional information is received. 
 
The inves tigator will always provide an assess ment of causa lity at the time of the initial report. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
21  
  
 
8.5  AE/SAE Data Collection 
 
When an AE/SAE is suspec ted, it is the respons ibility of the inves tigator(s) to review all 
docu mentation  (e.g. hosp ital progress notes, laboratory and diagnos tic reports) relative to the 
even t. The inves tigator will then record all relevan t information regarding a suspec ted AE/SAE 
on the AE form. The inves tigator will attempt to establish a diagnos is of the even t base d on 
signs, symptoms, and/or other clinical information. In such cases , the diagnos is shou ld be 
docu mented as the AE/SAE and not the individual signs/symptoms. 
 
8.6  The Data and Safety Mon itoring Board (DSMB ) 
 
For this study, the DSM B is compose d of a coordinator and 5 voting members, including a 
cardiologist  from  University  of  Florida  in  Jacksonv ille,  Florida,  a  heart  failure  spec ialist,  a 
gene ral cardiologist, an infectious diseas e spec ialist, and a gene ral internal medicine spec ialist. 
The composition of the DSM B has been approved by the VCU IRB. The DSM B will meet every 
6 months or soone r in case of unan ticipated serious adve rse even ts. The DSM B coordinator will 
provide the board members with data regarding screening, enrollment, adve rse even ts and 
withdrawals, and he/she will not participate in the voting. The board members may reques t 
unblinding  at  any  time.  Upon  reques t  of  the  DSM B  (following  positive  vote  by  3  or  more 
members),  the  coordinator  will  retrieve  the  rando mization  code  for  one  or  more  individual 
patients (as needed ). If necessa ry the DSM B will inform the inves tigators of the unblinding of 
the  rando mization  code ,  if  not  necessa ry  the  inves tigators  (and  the  patients)  will  be  kept 
blinded . The DSM B may reques t an expe rt opinion by one or more non-members, however only 
the DSM B members will vote on any individual issue . The DSM B (following positive vote by 3 or 
more members) may reques t temporary or permanen t halting of the study (see halting rules), or 
interruption  of  treatment  of  one  or  more  patients.  The  minutes  from  each  meeting  will  be 
distributed to the board members, NHLBI Program Officer, and to the IRB, and not to the 
inves tigators   unless   spec ifically   reques ted   by  the  DSMB.   A  brief  conc lusive   statement 
addressing  whether  the  study  shou ld  continue  as  planne d  or  not  will  be  provided  to  the 
inves tigators and the IRB every 6 months. The inves tigators will provide the NHLBI staff with 
reports from the DSM B and the IRB in a timely fashion (within 7 calenda r days if fatal or life- 
threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions; or within 15 calenda r days for all 
non-fatal, non-life threatening  unexpec ted,  suspec ted  serious adve rse reactions, or within 30 
days of receipt of the DSM B or IRB report for all other unan ticipated problems or schedu led 
meetings). See Append ix – DSM B Chapter. 
 
8.7  Regulatory Reporting 
 
This study is conduc ted in acco rdanc e to the NIH Good Clinical Practice guidelines. An 
Inves tigational  New Drug use waiver from the Division  of Cardiovascu lar  & Renal Produc ts, 
Center for Drug Evaluation & Resea rch, Food & Drug Administration was given to Dr. Abbate. 
The study protocol, consen t, and Data and Safety Monitoring Plan has been approved by the 
VCU IRB. The inves tigators will provide the NHLBI staff with reports from the DSMB and the 
IRB in a timely fashion (within 7 calenda r days if fatal or life-threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted 
serious  adve rse  reactions;  or  within  15  calenda r  days  for  all  non-fatal,  non-life  threatening 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
22  
  
 
unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions, or within 30 days of receipt of the DSM B or 
IRB report for all other unan ticipated problems). 
 
8.8  Type and Duration of Follow-up of Subjects after Advers e Events 
 
All AEs and SAEs will be followed until resolution, until the cond ition stabilizes, until the even t is 
otherwise explained, whicheve r occu rs first. All AEs and SAEs docu mented at a previous 
visit/contact and designated as ongo ing, will be reviewed at subsequen t visits/contacts, where 
the designation may remain ongo ing. The inves tigator will ensu re that the follow-up includes any 
supp lemental inves tigations as may be indicated to elucidate the nature and/or causa lity of the 
SAE. This may include  additional  laboratory  tests or inves tigations,  histopathological 
examinations, or consu ltation with other health care professionals. SAEs that are ongo ing at the 
time of the subjects final study visit/contact will be docu mented as ongo ing. 
 
8.9  Halting Rules 
 
The  DSM B  will  monitor  the  progress  of  the  presen t  trial.  No  interim  efficacy  analyses  are 
planned ; however an interim analysis could be performed at any time to asses s efficacy and 
futility, if reques ted by the 3 or more members of the DSMB . The DSM B will meet regularly to 
review safety data every 6 months (or soone r in case of unan ticipated serious adve rse even ts). 
All meetings and actions taken by the committee will be recorded along with the reason s for the 
actions. Thes e docu ments will include any data summaries or analyses provided to the DSM B 
and  will  remain  confidential  until  the  study  is  conc luded .  The  DSM B  may  choos e  to  stop 
enrollment on the basis of safety data obse rved. If safety conce rns are found, further enrollment 
will not be allowed until issue s are resolved. If no safety conce rns are found , enrollment will 
continue until the target sample size is reached . 
 
 
 
9)         ADJUDICAT ION OF CLINICAL  EVENT S 
 
9.1  Event-adjudicating committee 
 
The even t-adjudicating  committee  is compose d  of a gene ral  cardiologist,  a cardiologist  with 
training in heart failure, and a gene ral internal medicine spec ialist. The committee will meet at 
the end of the study and adjudicate all the even ts. The committee will be blinded to treatment 
allocation. In order to favor allocation  concea lment,  the committee  will also be blinded to C- 
reactive protein levels, which may be affected by treatment. 
 
9.2  Definition of the events 
 
The even ts adjudicated will include: 
-    Death; 
-    Cardiac death (in which a direct caus e attributable to cardiac diseas e is presen t); 
-  Sudde n cardiac death (in which cardiac death occu rred out of the hosp ital and sudden ly; or 
in  the  hosp ital  due  to  ventricular  arrhythmias  unrelated  to  other  conco mitant  cardiac 
cond itions); 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
23  
  
 
-  Non-cardiac death (in which the even t of death is cons idered not to be a direct consequence 
of cardiac disease ); 
-    Hospitalization for any cause ; 
-  Hospitalization   for  heart  failure  (in  which  the  primary  diagnos is  for  hosp italization   is 
deco mpensa ted  heart  failure  established  as  the  finding  at admission  of all  2 cond itions 
listed: a. dyspne a or respiratory distress or tachypne a at rest or with minimal exertion; b. 
evidenc e of elevated cardiac filling pressu re or pulmonary conges tion (at least one of the 
cond itions  must be met: pulmonary  conges tion/edema  at phys ical exam OR ches t X-ray; 
plasma BNP levels ≥200 pg/ml; or invas ive measu rement of left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressu re >18 mmH g or of pulmonary artery occluding pressu re (wedge ) >16 mmH g) 
-    Acute myoca rdial infarction, as defined by the WHO consensu s statement; 
-    Unstable angina, or need for coronary revascu larization; 
-  Cardiac tachy -or brady-arrhythmias  leading to a new hosp italization  or to prolonga tion  of 
hosp ital stay; 
-    Acute renal failure (defined as in increase in plasma creatinine levels of 50% or 0.5 mg/L); 
-    Acute respiratory failure (not due to heart failure); 
-    Sepsis or other serious infection requiring antibiotic therapy; 
-    Acute stroke. 
The analysis will cons ider time to first event and time to each even t. It will also cons ider event 
rates at 1, 3 and 6 months, in order to favor comparisons with other studies. The number of 
days  free  of  hosp italization  during  the  first  1,  3  and  6  months  will  also  be  measu red  and 
compared between groups . 
 
9.3  Implications of the findings of the even t-adjudicating committee 
 
The even ts will be adjudicated only after the completion of the study, and therefore the findings 
by the committee will have no implications on the conduc t of the study. 
 
 
 
10)       DISCON TINUA TION OF TREA TMEN T AND WITHDRA WAL 
 
10.1  Reasons for Discontinuation of Treatment or Withdra wal from the Study 
 
Patients may withdraw from the study at any time. The inves tigators can withdraw any patient at 
any time from the study if medically necessa ry. It will be extremely important to obtain complete 
follow-up  data  on  each  patient,  excep t  on  those  who  withdraw  consen t  to  release  such 
information. It will be docu mented whether or not each patient completed the study. If for any 
reaso n the study treatment or obse rvations were discon tinued , the reason s will be recorded and 
the IRB will be informed. 
 
Reason s for discon tinuation of Anakinra (or placebo ): 
1)  Neutropen ia (ANC <1000 )*; 
2)  Systemic infection (seps is)*; 
3)  Surgery *; 
4)  Cance r; 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
24  
  
 
5)  Hypersens itivity reaction (rash, anaphy laxis); 
6)  Severe injection site reactions *; 
7)  Need for immunosupp ressant therapy; 
8)  Acute myoca rdial infarction or stroke. 
* treatment may be restarted after cond ition resolved 
 
 
 
 
10.2  Handling of Withdrawals 
 
Loss to follow-up can occu r due to patients’ withdrawal or unreported death. Patients that have 
withdrawn  from  treatment  will  still  be  offered  to complete  all the  functional  assess ments  to 
analyze data in an intention-to-treat strategy. If patients are lost to follow up and their clinical 
cond ition canno t be established (alive vs dead , hosp italized vs not), they will be excluded from 
the  initial  analysis,  and  then  reintroduce d  for  sens itivity  analysis  cons idering  all  potential 
outcomes. 
 
10.3  Termination of Study 
 
The decision regarding continuation or termination of the study will be solely base d on safety 
data, and will be made by the DSM B. Interim analyses will be performed by the DSM B upon 
reques t by the co-PIs. The co-PIs will meet every month (or soone r in case of unan ticipated 
serious adve rse even ts) to discus s enrollment, withdrawals, and adve rse even ts. If protocol 
modifications  are warranted, close consu ltation with the DSM B and IRB will be required, and 
their approval will be needed . 
 
 
 
11)       RECRU ITMENT  STRATEGIES 
 
The inves tigators or coordinators in the study will screen and evaluate patients evaluated at the 
Virginia Commonwealth University Health System for heart failure. Such patients are likely to be 
found in the Department of Internal Medicine and the Department of Emergenc y Medicine. No 
adve rtisement strategies are planne d at this time. 
 
 
 
12)       STATISTICAL CONS IDERA TIONS 
 
12.1  Study Hypothesis 
 
We hypo thesize that IL-1 blockad e with Anakinra will improve aerobic exercise performance and 
reduc e hosp ital admission rates in patients with HF and preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). As 
the first step in testing this hypo thesis, we propos e a rando mized, doub le-blinded , pilot study to 
determine the effect of anak inra on aerobic exercise performance over the course of 6 months. 
Althoug h this pilot study will not be powered to detect difference s in the 3-month and 6-month 
hosp ital admission rates, we believe this study will provide an estimate of the potential effect. An 
improvement in aerobic exercise performance alone would represen t a valuable achievement in 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
25  
  
 
this HF popu lation, and would provide the rationale—espec ially  if paired with a signal showing 
reduce d readmission rates—for a subsequen t Phase III clinical study to evaluate IL-1 blockade 
on the key outcomes of HF morbidity and mortality. 
 
12.2  Sample Size Considerations 
 
The sample size for this pilot study is calculated acco rding to the primary endpo int of difference 
in interval chang e in peak VO 2 at 12 weeks between anak inra and placebo . Given an expec ted 
average peak VO 2  of 15 ± 3.5 mL/kg/min for HF patients, 40 subjects rando mized to anak inra 
and 20 subjects rando mized to placeb o (2:1 rando mization) would provide approximately 95% 
power  to  detect  a  difference  of  3.5  mL•kg-1•min-1   (23%  improvement)  in  peak  VO2.  An 
improvement of 3.5 mL•kg-1•min-1  equa ls 1 metabolic equivalent and is typically assoc iated with 
a 13–15% reduc tion in mortality. A conse rvative estimate of 20% loss to follow-up or withdrawal 
would retain >90% power. 
 
12.3  Statistical Analysis 
 
12.3.1  Demographics and Baseline Characteristics 
 
Baseline measu rement and demographic characteristics will be summarized for the patients into 
each of the treatment arms. Descriptive summaries of continuou s measu rements will cons ist of 
means , standa rd deviations and 95% confidenc e intervals; if the measu rements have markedly 
non-normal  distributions,  then  medians  and  interquartile  range s  will  be  provided  instead. 
Descriptive summaries of categorical measu rements will cons ist of frequenc ies, proportions and 
95% confidenc e intervals on those proportions. The summaries for each measu rement will be 
provided sepa rately for each treatment group. 
 
12.3.2  Analysis of the Primary Endpo int 
 
The data will be collected and electronically transferred to the core laboratory at the University 
of Illinois, Chicago , IL, where Dr. Ross Arena, PhD, will analyze data at the end of the study. 
After locking the database , he will be provided a group allocation acco rding to treatment A or B 
(blinded to real treatment). Dr. Arena and Dr. Lu (biostatistician) will analyze the data acco rding 
to blinded group allocation and the desc ription of the group allocation will be disclosed only after 
completion of the analysis. The difference s in interval change s between the treatments will be 
compared  using  rando m-effect  analysis  of  variance  for  repea ted  measu res  to  analyze  the 
effects  of time  and  group  allocation.  Unadjusted  p values  will  be  reported  throughou t,  with 
statistical significanc e set at the 2-tailed 0.05 level. All analyses will be based on a ‘complete 
case ’ approach . 
 
12.3.3  Analysis of Seconda ry Endpo ints 
 
The  data  will  be  collected  and  electronically  stored.  The  analysis  will  be  performed  at  the 
conc lusion of the study as desc ribed above . For statistical analysis, all values will be reported 
as the median and interquartile range for potential deviation from Gauss ian distribution. The 
difference s between treatment groups will be computed using the Wilcoxo n signed-rank test for 
continuou s variables or Fisher’s exac t test for discrete variables. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
26  
  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
27  
  
 
13) LITERA TURE CITED 
 
1.  Meta-analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure (MAGG IC). The survival of patients 
with heart failure with preserved or reduce d left ventricular ejection fraction: an individual 
patient data meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 2011 [Epub ahea d of print]. 
2.  Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, Jacobse n  SJ, Roger VL, Redfield  MM. Trends in 
prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 
2006 ;355:251-9. 
3.  Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jone s DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, Bravata DM, 
Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, 
Kissela BM, Kittner SJ, Lack land  DT, Lichtman  JH, Lisabe th LD, Makuc DM, Marcus 
GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, Moy CS, Mozaffarian D, Musso lino ME, Nichol G, Paynter 
NP, Soliman EZ, Sorlie PD, Sotoodehn ia  N, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, 
Turner  MB.  Heart  Diseas e  and  Stroke  Statistics--2012  Update:  A  Report  From  the 
American Heart Assoc iation. Circulation 2012 ;125:e2-e220.  
4.  Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1 in the pathogenes is and treatment of inflammatory diseases . 
Blood 2011 ;117:3720 -32. 
5.  Luster  AD.  Chemokines--chemotactic  cytokines  that  mediate  inflammation.  N  Engl  J 
Med 1998 ;338:436-45. 
6.  Van Tasse ll BW, Seropian IM, Toldo S, Goyal N, Robati R, Abbate A. Interleukin-1beta 
induce s   a   reversible   non-ische mic   cardiomyopa thy   in   the   mouse .   Eur   Heart   J 
2010 ;31:720-20. 
7.  Van Tasse ll BW, Arena RA, Toldo S, Mezza roma  E, Azam T, Seropian  IM, Shah K, 
Canad a   J,  Voelkel   NF,  Dinarello   CA,  Abbate   A.  Enhance d   Interleukin-1   activity 
contributes  to  exercise  intolerance  in  patients  with  systolic  heart  failure.  PLoS  One 
2012 ;7:e33438.  
8.  Thaik CM, Calderone  A, Takahash i  N, Colucci  WS. Interleukin-1  beta modulates  the 
growth and pheno type of neona tal rat cardiac myocy tes. J Clin Inves t 1995 ;96:1093 -9. 
9.  Wu CK, Lee JK, Chiang FT, Yang CH, Huang SW, Hwang JJ, Lin JL, Tsen g CD, Chen 
JJ,  Tsai  CT.  Plasma  levels  of  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha   and  interleukin-6   are 
assoc iated with diastolic heart failure through downregulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum 
Ca2+ ATPase. Crit Care Med 2011 ;39:984-92. 
10.  Liang KP, Myasoedov a E, Crowson CS, Davis JM, Roger VL, Karon BL, Borgeso n DD, 
Therneau TM, Rodehe ffer RJ, Gabriel SE. Increase d prevalence of diastolic dysfunction 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 2010 ;69:1665 -70. 
11.  Rudominer RL, Roman MJ, Devereux RB, Paget SA, Schwartz JE, Locksh in MD, Crow 
MK, Sammaritano  L, Levine  DM, Salmon  JE. Independen t  assoc iation  of rheumatoid 
arthritis  with  increase d  left  ventricular  mass  but  not  with  reduce d  ejection  fraction. 
Arthritis Rheum 2009 ;60:22-9. 
12.  Ikono midis  I, Lekak is  JP, Nikolaou  M, Paraskeva idis  I, Andreado u  I, Kaplanog lou  T, 
Katsimbri P, Skarantavos G, Soucaco s PN, Kremastinos DT. Inhibition of interleukin-1 
by anak inra improves vascu lar and left ventricular function in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Circulation 2008 ;117:2662 -69. 
13.  Ikono midis I, Nikolaou M, Dimopou lou I, Paraskeva idis I, Lekak is J, Mavrou I, Tzane la 
M,  Kopterides  P,  Tsanga ris  I,  Armagan idis  A,  Kremastinos  DT.  Assoc iation  of  left 
ventricular diastolic dysfunction with elevated NT-pro-BNP in gene ral intensive care unit 
patients  with  preserved  ejection  fraction:  a  complementary  role  of  tissue  Doppler 
imaging parameters and NT-pro-BNP levels for adve rse outcome. Shock 2010 ;33:141-8. 
14.  Garin  O, Ferrer  M, Pont  A, Rue  M, Kotzeva  A, Wiklund  I, Van  Ganse  E, Alonso  J. 
Disease -spec ific   health-related   quality   of   life   ques tionna ires   for   heart   failure:   a 
systematic review with meta-analyses . Qual Life Res 2009 ;18:71-85. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
28  
  
 
15.  Hlatky  MA, Boineau  RE, Higginbotham  MB, Lee KL, Mark  DB, Califf RM, Cobb  FR, 
Pryor DB. A brief self-administered  ques tionna ire to determine functional capac ity (the 
Duke Activity Status Index ). Am J Cardiol 1989 ;64:651-4. 
16.  Gardin JM, Adams DB, Douglas PS, Feigenbau m H, Forst DH, Fraser AG, Graybu rn PA, 
Katz  AS,  Keller  AM,  Kerber  RE,  Khandhe ria  BK,  Klein  AL,  Lang  RM,  Pierard  LA, 
Quinone s MA, Schnittger I. Recommenda tions for a standa rdized report for adult 
transthoracic  echoc ardiography :   a  report  from  the  American  Society  of 
Echoca rdiography 's Nomenclature and Standa rds Committee and Task Force for a 
Standa rdized Echoca rdiography Report. J Am Soc Echoca rdiogr 2002 ;15:275-90. 
17.  Gottdiener JS, Bedna rz J, Devereux R, Gardin J, Klein A, Manning WJ, Morehea d A, 
Kitzman D, Oh J, Quinone s M, Schiller NB, Stein JH, Weissman NJ. American Society of 
Echoca rdiography recommenda tions for use of echoca rdiography in clinical trials. J Am 
Soc Echoca rdiogr 2004 ;17:1086 -119. 
18.  Lang RM, Bierig M, Devereux RB, Flachska mpf FA, Foster E, Pellikka PA, Picard MH, 
Roman MJ, Seward J, Shane wise JS, Solomon SD, Spence r KT, Sutton MS, Stewart 
WJ. Recommenda tions for chamber quan tification: a report from the American Society of 
Echoca rdiography's  Guidelines  and  Standa rds  Committee  and  the  Chamber 
Quantification Writing Group, deve loped in conjunction with the Europea n Assoc iation of 
Echoca rdiography ,   a  branch  of  the  Europea n   Society  of  Cardiology.   J  Am  Soc 
Echoca rdiogr 2005 ;18:1440 -63. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
29  
  
 
DSM B CHAR TER 
 
Charter, Data and Safety Mon itoring Board for 
 
NHLBI 1R34HL118348 -01A1 
 
Interleukin-1 blockad e in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
 
Diastolic Heart Failure Anakinra Respons e Trial -2 
(D-HAR T2) 
Updated on Augus t 13, 2014 
 
Execu tive Secretary: Christine DeWilde, RN – dewildect@vcu.edu 
 
 
 
 
1  Introduc tion 
 
This Charter is for the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB ) for the study: Interleukin-1 
blockad e in hear t failure with preserve d ejection fraction: Diastolic Heart Failure 
Anakinra Respons e Trial -2 (D-HAR T2) 
 
hereafter referred to as “D-HAR T2”. 
 
The Charter is intende d to be a living docu ment.  The DSM B may wish to review it at regular 
intervals to determine whether any change s in procedu re are needed . 
 
2  Responsibilities of the DSM B 
 
The DSM B is respons ible for safegua rding the interests of study participants, assess ing the 
safety and efficacy of study procedu res, and for monitoring the overall conduc t of D- 
HAR T2. 
 
The DSM B is an independen t group advisory to the inves tigators, and is required to provide 
recommenda tions abou t starting, continuing, and stopping the study D-HAR T2. In 
addition, the DSM B is aske d to make recommenda tions, as appropriate, to the 
inves tigators abou t: 
 
• Participant safety 
• Benefit/risk ratio of procedu res and participant burden 
• Selection, recruitment, and retention of participants 
• Adherence to protocol requirements 
• Completeness , quality, and analysis of measu rements 
• Amendments to the study protocol and consen t forms 
• Notification of and referral for abno rmal findings 
• Efficacy of the intervention at study termination (no interim analyses planned ) 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
30  
  
 
3  Organ ization and Interac tions 
 
Communication with DSM B members will be primarily through the DSM B execu tive secretary, 
Christine DeWilde, RN, Officer and the inves tigators at Virginia Commonwealth 
University (VCU ).  It is expec ted that study D-HAR T2 inves tigators will not communicate 
with DSM B members abou t the study directly, excep t when making presen tations or 
respond ing to ques tions at DSM B meetings or during conference calls. 
 
a.   DSM B Members and NHLBI Program Staff 
 
DSM B members and their expe rtise are listed in Append ix A. Consistent with NHLBI policy, the 
DSM B is assigned an Execu tive Secretary (ES) to provide an unbiased staff interface for 
the DSMB , espec ially during execu tive sess ions. The ES is respons ible for assu ring the 
accu racy and timely transmission of the final recommenda tions and DSMB minutes . 
 
b.  Schedu ling, Timing, and Organ ization of Meetings 
 
DSM B meetings will be held at the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, unless 
otherwise spec ified. For DSM B members residing outside of Virginia, telephone 
participation will be allowed for all meetings. The purpose of the first meeting is to review 
and discus s this Charter, to provide an overview of study D-HAR T2 activities, to review 
and make recommenda tions abou t the protocol(s), and to determine the frequenc y of 
interim analyses and whether data will or will not be maske d to identity of rando mized 
groups . Enrollment in a study canno t begin until the DSMB ’s recommenda tion for 
approval of the protocol has been made and IRB approval for the protocol including the 
DSM P has been obtained. 
 
Meetings are usua lly held approximately twice a year, every 6 months, with additional meetings 
or conference calls schedu led as needed .  Once the DSM B has established its working 
routine, cons ideration can be given to replacing one or both meeting per year with a 
conference call, if the agend a permits.  Meetings and conference calls will be schedu led 
and the agend a will be deve loped by the ES in close consu ltation with the Chair and the 
NHLBI Program Officer. 
 
• For this DSMB , meetings will be held twice per year. 
• The DSM B will monitor the progress of the presen t trial. 
• No interim efficacy analyses are planned ; however an interim analysis could be 
performed at any time to asses s efficacy and futility, if reques ted by the 3 or more 
members of the DSMB . 
• The DSM B may choos e to stop enrollment on the basis of safety data obse rved. If safety 
conce rns are found , further enrollment will not be allowed until issue s are resolved. If no 
safety conce rns are found , enrollment will continue until the target sample size is 
reached.  
 
The agend a for DSM B meetings and calls will be drafted by the ES in consu ltation with the 
Chair, inves tigators and the NHLBI Program Officer. The ES will finalize the agend a after 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
31  
  
 
consu ltation with the DSMB Chair.  The agend a and meeting materials shou ld be 
distributed by the ES 4 weeks before each meeting or call to the DSM B members, 
inves tigators, and the NHLBI Program Officer. 
 
The ES will collect and docu ment all potential conflicts of interest from each member of the 
DSM B related to the design, conduc t, interpretation, and publication of the study. Before 
each meeting, when the agend a is sent out, the ES will ask all DSM B members to state 
whether they have deve loped any new conflicts of interest since last meeting.  This 
review will be conduc ted in addition to the review for conflicts of interest conduc ted by 
the VCU IRB at the time of initial IRB approval. If a new conflict is reported, the Chair 
and staff will determine if the conflict limits the ability of the DSM B member to participate 
in the discuss ion. The DSMB also will review adve rse even t data, other safety data, 
quality and completenes s of study data, and enrollment data at each meeting to ensu re 
proper trial conduc t. 
 
It is expec ted that all DSM B members will attend every meeting and call. However, it is 
recogn ized that this may not always be poss ible. Quorum for voting is cons idered to be 
half the number of standing members plus one. The Board may wish to decide if 
particular expe rtise is neede d within the quorum for the meeting to be valid. All standing 
Monitoring Board members are voting members.  The Board may also wish to decide in 
advanc e whether ad hoc members can vote. 
 
A quorum of this DSMB is cons idered to be 3 members out of total 5. 
 
 
 
 
c.  Discussion of Confidential Material 
 
DSM B meetings and calls will be organized into open , closed , and execu tive sess ions. 
 
• During the open sess ions, information will be presen ted to the DSM B by the Study 
Inves tigators and the NHLBI Program Staff as appropriate, with time for discuss ion. 
 
• During the closed sess ions, the DSM B will discus s confidential data from the study D- 
HAR T2, including information on efficacy and safety by treatment arm, if available.  The 
DSM B will decide whether to remain maske d to the treatment assignments at each 
meeting. If the closed sess ion occu rs on a conference call, steps will be taken to ensu re 
that only the appropriate participants are on the call, and to invite others to re-join the call 
only at the conc lusion of the closed sess ion. NHLBI Program Officer would join the 
sess ion only at the discretion of the Chair. 
 
The DSM B may elect to hold an execu tive sess ion in which only the DSMB members, NHLBI 
Program Officer (at the discretion of the Chair) and the ES are presen t in order to 
discus s study issue s independen tly. Voting on recommenda tions will follow Roberts’ 
Rules of Order (Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (10th Edition) RON R by 
Henry M. Robert III, William J. Evans (Editor), Daniel H. Honemann (Editor), Thomas J. 
Balch (Editor), Sarah Corbin Robert, Henry M. Robert III, General Henry M. Robert) 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
32  
  
 
If the execu tive sess ion occu rs on a conference call, steps will be taken to ensu re that only the 
appropriate participants are on the call, and to invite others to re-join the call only at the 
conc lusion of the execu tive sess ion. 
 
At the conc lusion of the closed and execu tive sess ions, the participants will be re-convene d so 
that the DSM B Chair can provide a summary of the DSMB ’s recommenda tions.  This 
provides an oppo rtunity for study inves tigators and NHLBI Program Officer to ask 
ques tions to clarify the recommenda tions, if necessa ry.  The meeting is then adjourned. 
 
d.   Reports of DSM B Deliberations 
 
• Formal minutes:  The ES is respons ible for the accu racy and transmission of the formal 
DSM B minutes, within 14 days of each meeting or call.  These minutes prepared to 
summarize the key points of the discuss ion and deba te, reques ts for additional 
information, respons e of the inves tigators to previous recommenda tions, and the 
recommenda tions from the current meeting. Prior to submission to the inves tigators and 
the NHLBI Program Officer, minutes will be reviewed by the DSM B Chair for final review 
and approval. The DSMB Chair may sign the minutes or indicate approval electronically 
via email.  Then , the minutes are sent to the inves tigators and the NHLBI Program 
Officer. 
 
• Reports to IRBs: The inves tigators will prepare a memo docu menting DSMB ’s 
deliberations and recommenda tions and send the memo to VCU IRB and NHLBI 
Program Officer. 
 
• The DSM B report to the inves tigators will be forwarded to the NHLBI Program Officer, 
including the discuss ion of the conce rns, and the basis for any recommenda tions that 
the DSM B has made in respons e to the conce rns (within 7 calenda r days if fatal or life- 
threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions; or within 14 days for 
unan ticipated problem that is not an SAE or within 15 calenda r days for all non-fatal, 
non-life threatening unexpec ted, suspec ted serious adve rse reactions, or within 30 days 
of receipt of the DSM B or IRB report for all other unan ticipated problems or schedu led 
meetings). 
 
e.   Reports to the DSM B 
 
For each meeting, the inves tigators will prepare summary reports and tables to facilitate the 
oversight role of the DSMB . The DSM B shou ld discus s at the first or subsequent 
meetings what data they wish to review and how it shou ld be presen ted. The regular 
reports to the DSM B will contain blinded data for all enrolled subjects. If necessa ry, the 
DSM B may request un-blinding of the data, in which case , the DSM B will reques t that 
the rando mization log be sent to the study biostatistician (Juan Lu, PhD), who will then 
prepare an un-blinded report for the DSMB . 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
33  
  
 
f.  Statistical Monitoring Guidelines 
 
At the first meeting, review of the protocol will include review of the statistical analysis plan.  The 
DSM B shou ld discus s the adequac y of that plan. The final plan, whether part of a 
resea rch protocol or sepa rate docu ment, will be maintained as an appe ndix to this 
charter. The DSMB shou ld discus s the statistical monitoring procedu res they propos e to 
follow to guide their recommenda tions abou t termination or continuation of the trial (if 
applicable). These procedu res could include guidelines for early termination for bene fit, 
termination for futility, and termination for safety reason s (if applicable). 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
34  
  
 
Appendix A: DSM B members 
 
Dominick Angiolillo, MD, PhD  DSM B Chair 
Dr. Angiolillo is an Assoc iate Professo r of Medicine in Cardiology at the University of Florida in 
Jacksonsv ille. He is board certified in Cardiology and Interventional Cardiology, and serves as 
Medical Director for the Cardiovascu lar Resea rch Program in the division of Cardiology. 
http://www .hscj.ufl.edu/directory/bio.aspx? id=1318  
 
Richard Cooke, MD  DSM B Member 
Dr. Cooke is an Assoc iate Professo r of Medicine in Cardiology at the Virginia Commonwealth 
University, and is the Chief of the Advance d Heart Failure Service in the VCU Pauley Heart 
Center. Dr. Cooke is board-certified in Internal Medicine, Cardiology, Heart Failure, and 
Interventional Cardiology.   http://www .pauleyhea rt.vcu.edu/staff/cooke .html 
 
Gonza lo Bearman, MD  DSM B Member 
Dr. Bearman is a Professo r of Medicine and serves as Chief of the Division of Infectious 
Diseas e as well as Hospital Epidemiologist. Dr. Bearman is Board Certified in Internal Medicine, 
Infectious Diseases , and General Preven tive Medicine and Public Health. 
 
Ion Jovin, MD, PhD  DSM B member 
Dr. Jovin is an Assoc iate Professo r of Medicine in Cardiology, and serves as Director of the 
Cardiac Catheterization Labo ratories at the Hunter McGuire Veterans Administration Medical 
Center in Richmond, VA. Dr. Jovin is board certified in Cardiology and Interventional Cardiology. 
http://www .pauleyhea rt.vcu.edu/staff/jovin.html 
 
Jeffrey Kushinka, MD                       DSM B member 
Dr. Kushinka is an Assoc iate Professo r in the Division of General Internal Medicine, has served 
as Interim Chair for 2 years. He is also the clerkship director for 3rd Medical Studen ts and an 
Assoc iate Program Director for the Internal Medicine Residenc y Program. Dr. Kushinka is board 
certified in Internal Medicine. 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
35  
  
 
Appendix B: Case Report Forms 
 
• Screening and Enrollment form (1 page ) 
• Individual Patient Cover Sheets  (2 pages ) 
• Individual Visit Assess ment Form (5 pages ) 
• Adverse Event reporting form (1 page ) 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
36  
  
 
 
 
D-HART2   Screening  and enrollment  form  
Subject  number : D-HART 2   _ Initials   Date     
 
INCLU SION CRITERIA:  {A// 6 criteria  need  to be met) 
D Symptoms  and signs  of heart  failure  (NYHA  11-111) 
D Recent  Imaging  Study  (<12 months)  showing  LVEF>50%  and LVEDVI<97ml/ m2 
D Evidence  of abnormal  LV relaxation,  filling,  diastolic  distensibility,  or diastolic  stiffness  as 
shown  by one of the following:  
o   Invasive  Hemodynamic  measurements  (mPCW  >12 or LVEDP>16mmHg ) 
o  Tissue  Doppler  Echocardiogra m, EIE' >15 
o  Tissue  Doppler  Echocardiogra m, EIE' 8-15 and one additional  criterion  (E/A<O.S and 
DT>280 ms, LVH, left atrial  enlargemen t, prior atrial  fibrillation ) 
o   BNP>200pg/ml  (not due to a concomitant  disease  such  as pulmonary  arterial hypertensio n, 
pulmonary  embolism,  acute  renal failur e, or other ) 
D The patient  is 2::21 years  old, and willing  and able to provide  informed  consent.  
D The  patient  is  willing  and  able  to  comply  with  the  protocol  (i.e. self  administration  of the 
treatment,  and exercise  protoc ol) 
 
EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  (check  only if applica ble -7 patient  excluded) : 
o   Concomitant  conditions  or treatments  which  would affect  completion  of the study  or interpretation  of the 
study  tests  including but not limite d to the following conditions:  physical  inability  to walk or run on a 
treadmil l, angina  or evidence  of spontaneous  or inducible  ischemia , uncontrolled  arterial  hypertension, 
atrial fibrilla tion (or other  arrhythmia s),moderat e to severe  valvular heart  disease,  chronic  pulmonary 
diseas e, anemia (Hgb<10  g/dl) 
o  Persistent  or chronic  atrial fibrillation  (prior history  is not an exclusion  if patient  is in sinus  rhyth m) 
o    Active  infec tion including  chronic  infection  
o    Active  cancer  (or prior diagnosis  of cancer  within the past 10 years)  
o    Anticipated  need  for surgery  
o   Recent  (<14 days)  or active  use of immunosuppressive  drugs  (including  but not limited to high-dose 
corticosteroids  [>1_mg/kg of prednisone  equivalent ],TNF-a blockers , cyclosporine)  not inclu ding NSAIDs 
or corticosteroids  used  for IV dye allergy  only) 
o  Chronic  auto-immune  or auto-inflammatory  disease  (including  but not limited to rheumatoid  arthriti s, 
systemic  lupus  erythematosus ) 
o    Active  cancer  (or prior diagnosis  of cancer  within the past 10 years)  
o  Neutropenia  (absolute  neutrop hil count< 1,800/mm 3 [or <1,000/mm  in African -American  patients] ) 
o  Severe  impairment  in renal  function  (estimated  glomerular  filtration  rate <30 mllkg*min)  
o  Recent  or planned  use of vaccination  with  live attenuated  viruses 
o    Allergy  to rubber  or latex  
o    Allergy  to products  derived  from Escheri chia coli 
o  Pregnancy  or breastfeeding  
 
Eligibility  criteria  verified  and consenting  completed  by   on   (date) 
D Patient  given a copy  of the inform ed consent  and sufficient time to read and have  questions,  answered.  D The original  signed  copy  is stored  for researc h, a signed  copy  is given  to the patien t,and an additional  
copy  is placed  in the chart.  D Laboratory  test for screening  CRP  sent 
Screening  plasma  C-reactive  protein  levels  >2 mg/L  -7 verified  on _/_/_by   _ 
 
 
 
 
Version  April  5, 2016  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
37  
 Participant  Study  ID: 
 
 
 
- Was the patient  re-admitted  between  baseline  and 4- 
week FU? NO  I  YES 
 
- Was the patient re-admitted  between  4-week FU and 12- 
week FU? NO  I  YES 
 
- Was the patient  re-admitted  between  12-week  FU and 
24-week FU? NO  I  YES 151 Batch_o,f_Dr,ug Dispensed  to Participant 
Date: 
#of syringes  dispensed :    
Date for 4-week follow-up: _/_/   
Date: _,_,   Drug  Returned  by Participant  at 4-week  FU 
 
#of syringes  returne d:    
251 Batch_o,f_Dr,ug Dispensed  to Participant 
Date: 
#of syringes  dispensed :    
Date for 12-week follow-up: _/_/   
 
Drug  Ret_urn,_ed,by Participant  at 12-week FU 
Date: 
#of syringes  returne d:    
 
 
Eligibility Confirmed  on _/_/__ 
Signe d/Performed  by: If Re-Consented:  
 Date  ICF signed:  _/_/   Withdre w_C,o_ns,e nt: 
Date: 
Reason?  
Informed  Consent:  
Version  _!_!__ 
IRB approval  _/_/  ; signed  on _1_1   Notes:  
 
Randomization:  _/_/  Notes:  
 
Study Time Point  
Study Procedure  
Completed  
Notes  
Screening 
I   I Blood Draw (scree ning - VCU )   
Echocardiogram  (prior enrollment)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_/_/  Note  in CIS re: Clinical Triai/ICF 
Process    
Blood Draw (baseline- HDL)  
Echocardiogram   
FMD   
BIA  
Dietary  Assessment   
Concomitant  Rx  
Baseline History   
CPET  
Echo-stress   
Invest.  Drug Dispensed  (151 Batch)  
Drug  Dose  #1 administ ered  
 Blood Draw (4-week  HDL)   
Echocardiogram   
FMD   
  
 
 
 
HM2000018  - lnterteuki n-1Blockade  in heart  failure with preserved  eiectio n fraction (0-HART2l  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
38  
 _4-w,_ee,k FU
 BIA   
CPET  
Concomitant Rx  
AE review/History  
Invest. Drug  Dispensed  (2nd Batch)  
Other:  
 
 
 
 
 
1_2,-w_e,ek FU Blood Draw (12-week HDL)   
Echocardiogram  
FMD  
BIA  
Dietary Assessm ent  
CPET  
Echo-stress   
Concomitant Rx  
AE review/History  
Other:  
 
 
 
 
2_4-,w_e,ek FU Blood Draw (12-week HDL)   
Echocardiogram  
FMD  
BIA  
Dietary Assessm ent  
CPET  
Concomitant Rx  
AE review/History  
Other:  
Additional Note s: 
• SAEs  Reported?  
• Deviations? 
  
 
HM2000018  - lnterteukin-1Blockade in heart failure with reserved e·ection fraction ID-HART21  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
39  
  
 
 
D-HART2 Subject  #  Initial s    Date  on Enrollment    _ 
 
 
Baseline  
 
 
[ ]lnclusion/exclus.ion  criteria  reviewed;  [  ] conse nt obtained  
 
[ ] Heart Failure  symptoms - NYHA II [ ] or Ill [  ] 
 
 
Current  sympto ms  and signs: (check  all that apply)  
[ ] shortness  of breath;  [ ] orthopnea ;[  ] paroxysmal  nocturna l dyspnea  
[ ] chest  pain;[] tiredness/fatigue;  [ ] edema  (sym ptom);  [  ] abdominal  fullness  
On exam:  [ ] pittin g edema ,[  ] 53 gallop,  [ ] 54 gallop,  [ ] JVD, [  ] rales  
 
Notes                                                                                                                               _ 
 
Medical  History: (check  all that  apply)  
[ ]Ischemic  heart disease ;[  ] Prior  PCI; [ ] Prior CABG ;[  ] Prior  CVA;  [ ] Hypertension 
[ ] Diabetes ;[  ] Hy[perlipidemia;  [ ] Current  Tobacco  user;[  ] Peripheral  Vase  Disease 
[ ] Chronic  Kidney  Disease ;[  ] Chronic  Obstructive  Lung  Disease ; [ ] DVT/ PE; 
[ ] Obstructive  sleep  apnea ;[  ] Morbid  obesity,  check  [ ] if BMI >35 and [  ] if >40 
 
Body  weight:   kg/  lb Height:   m/  ft BMI:   kg/m2 
Blood  Pressure:   }  mmHg HR:   min  
Notes    _ 
 
Plannin g: (check  all completed ) 
[ ] Baseline  echoca  rdiogram  Doppler  
[ ] Nexfin  and Bioel ectrical  impedance  analysis  
[ ] Dietary  assessment  
[ ] Baseline  cardiopulmonary  exercise  test 
[ ] Heart failure  questionnaires  
[ ] Baseline  stress echocardiogram  Doppler  
[ ] Labs sent to HDL 
[ ] Recor ding of current  medications  
[ ] Dispensing  of investigational  drug (for 35 days)  by  _ 
[ ] Patient  education  on drug handling ,storage ,and self-admini stration  
[ ] Outpatie nt Hospital  Follow  up on day 28 (24-32) on  at   _ 
Notes      _ 
 
 
Version 04052016  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
40  
  
 
D-HART2 Subject #  Initial s    Date  on Enrollmen t   _ 
 
 
Follow  up visit: 4 weeks  
 
Date  of  enrollment ._---' Date  of F/U visit   _ 
 
 
Clinical  condit ions: (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 heart  failure  symptoms,   NYHA class  (1-?IV},check  [  1 if re-hospitalization  
[ 1 re-hospitalization  for other  cause  (complete  dedic ated sheet ) 
[ 1 death,  check  [ 1 if presumed  cardiac  death,  check  [  1 if sudden  death 
[ 1 interruption  of investigationa l treatment  (complete  dedicated  sheet ) 
 
Note s    
 
Current  symptoms and signs: (check all that apply)  
[ 1 shortness  of breath;  [  1 orthopnea ;[   1 paroxysmal  nocturnal  dyspnea  
[ 1 chest  pain;[  1 tiredness/fatigue;  [  1edema  (sym ptom); [  1 abdominal  fullness  
On exam:  [ 1 pitting  edema ,[  1 53 gallop , [  154 gallop,  [  1JVD,[  1 rales  
 
Note s    
 
Past Medica lHistory: (changes  vs prior -new diagnoses)  
[1  ;[1  ;[ 1 ·[1---------  
Note s    
 
Body  weight:   kg/  lb 
Blood  Pressure:   }  mmHg 
 
Plannin g: (check  all completed ) 
[ 1 F/u echocardiogram  Doppler  Height:   m/  ft 
HR:   min BMI: _kg/m2 
[ 1 Nexfin  and Bioelectrical  impedance  analysis  
[ 1 F/u cardiopulmonary  exercise  test 
[ 1 F/u stress  echocardiogram  Doppler  (only  at the 3 months  visit) 
[ 1 Labs sent to HDL 
[ 1 Updating  current medications  
[ 1 Assessment  of compliance  with investigational  drug performed  by   _ 
(used  syringes · returned  syringes  ) 
[ 1 Assurance  of compliance  
[ 1 Dispensing  of investigationa l drug (for 49 days)  by    
[ 1 Schedulin g next appointme nt on  at   _ 
 
 
Version  04052016  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
[ 1 F/u stress  echocardiogram  Doppler  (only  at the 3 months  visit) 
[ 1 Labs sent to HDL 
[ 1 Updating  current  medications  
[ 1 Assessment  of compliance  with investigational  drug performed  by   _ 
(used  syringes  · returned  syringes  ) 
[ 1 Assurance  of compliance  
[ 1 Schedulin g next appointme nt on at   _ 
Version 04052016  
41  
  
 
D-HART2 Subject  #  Initial s    Date  on Enrollmen t   _ 
 
 
Follow  up visit: 12 weeks  
 
Date  of  enrollmen t._---' Date  of F/U visit   _ 
 
 
Clinical  condition s: (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 heart  failure  symptoms,   NYHA class  (I IV},check  [  1 if re-hospitalization  
[ 1 re-hospitalization  for other  cause  (complete  dedic ated sheet ) 
[ 1 death,  check  [ 1 if presumed  cardiac  death,  check  [  1 if sudden  death 
[ 1 interruption  of i11vestigationa l treatment  (complete  dedicated  sheet ) 
 
Notes    _ 
 
 
Current  symptoms  and signs:  (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 shortness  of breath;  [  1 orthopnea ;[   1 paroxysmal  nocturnal  dyspnea  
[ 1 chest  pain;[  1 tir edness/fatigue;  [  1edema  (sym ptom); [  1 abdominal  fullness  
On exam:  [ 1 pitting  edema ,[  1 53 gallop , [  154 gallop,  [  1JVD, [  1 rales  
 
Notes    _ 
 
 
Past Medica lHistory:  (changes  vs prior - new diagnoses)  
[1  ;[1  ;[ 1 ·[1--------  
Notes    _ 
 
Body  weight:   kg/  lb 
Blood  Pressure:   }  mmHg 
 
Plannin g: (check  all completed ) 
[ 1 F/u echocardio gram Doppler  Height:   m/  ft 
HR:  min BMI:   kgjm2  
[ 1 Nexfin  and Bioelectrical  impedance  analysis  
[ 1 Dietary  assessment  
[ 1 F/u cardiopulmonary   exercise  test 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
[ 1 F/u stress  echocardiogram  Doppler  (only  at the 3 months  visit) 
[ 1 Labs sent to HDL 
[ 1 Updating  current  medications  
[ 1 Assessment  of compliance  with investigational  drug performed  by   _ 
(used  syringes  · returned  syringes  ) 
[ 1 Assurance  of compliance  
[ 1 Schedulin g next appointme nt on at   _ 
Version 04052016  
42  
  
 
D-HART2 Subject #  Initial s    Date  on Enrollment    _ 
 
 
Follow  up visit: 24 weeks  
 
Date  of  enrollmen t_---' Date  of F/U visit   _ 
 
 
Clinical  conditions: (check  all that apply} 
[ 1 heart  failure  symptoms,   NYHA class  (1-?IV},check  [  1 if re-hospitalization  
[ 1 re-hospitalization  for other  cause  (complete  dedic ated sheet ) 
[ 1 death,  check  [ 1 if presumed  cardiac  death,  check  [  1 if sudden  death 
[ 1 interruption  of investigational  treatment  (complete  dedicated  sheet ) 
 
Note s    
 
 
Current  sympto ms and signs:  (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 shortness  of breath;  [  1 orthopnea ;[   1 paroxysmal  nocturnal  dyspnea  
[ 1 chest  pain;[  1 tiredness/fatigue;  [  1edema  (symptom);  [  1 abdominal  fullness  
On exam:  [ 1 pitting  edema ,[  1 53 gallop , [  154 gallop ,[   1JVD, [  1 rales  
 
Note s    
 
 
Past Medica lHistory: (changes  vs prior - new diagnoses)  
[1  ·[1  ;[ 1 ·[1--------  
Note s    
 
Body  weight:   kg/  lb 
Blood  Pressure:   }  mmHg Height:   m/  ft 
HR:   min BMI:   kgjm2  
 
Plannin g: (check  all completed ) 
[ 1 F/u echocardiogram  Doppler  
[ 1 Nexfin  and Bioelectrical  impedance  analysis  
[ ] F/u cardiopulmonary  exercise  test 
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016  
43  
  
 
 
D-HART2 Subject #  Initial s    Date  on Enrollment   _ 
 
 
Unscheduled  visit 
 
Date  of enrollment  ,Date of F/U visit 
 
 
Clinica lconditions: (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 heart  failure  symptoms,   NYHA class (171V} ,check [  1 if re-hospitalization  
[ 1 re-hospitalization  for other  cause  (complete  dedic ated sheet ) 
[ 1 death,  check  [ 1 if presumed  cardiac  death,  check  [  1 if sudden  death 
[ 1 interruption  of investigational  treatment  (complete  dedicated  sheet ) 
 
Notes    _ 
 
 
Current  sympto ms and signs:  (check  all that apply)  
[ 1 shortness  of breath;  [  1 orthopnea ;[   1 paroxysmal  nocturnal  dyspnea  
[ 1 chest pain;[] tiredness/fatigue;  [ ] edema  (sym ptom); [  ] abdominal  fullness  
On exam:  [ 1 pitting  edema ,[  1 53 gallop , [  154 gallop,  [  1JVD, [ I rales  
 
Notes    _ 
 
 
Past Medica lHistory: (changes  vs prior - new diagnoses)  
[1  ;[1 ;[ 1 ·[1--------  
Notes    _ 
 
Body  weight:   kg/  lb 
Blood  Pressure:   }  mmHg Height:   m/  ft 
HR:   min BMI:   kg/m2 
 
Plannin g: (check  all completed ) 
[ 1 Schedulin g next appointme nt 
 
Note s  _ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 04052016  
VCU Clinical Study Protocol Version 04052016   
  
 
D-HART2  study  Version April 7, 2015  
 
 
D·HART2  Study  EVENT  FORM  
 
D-HART 2 Subjec t     
Initials    _ 
 
Hospitalization, date  _ 
 
D  Acute Decompens ated  Heart Failure as 
primary  diagnosis   (see Protocol)  
D  Acute Coronary  Syndrome as primary 
diagno sis 
D  Arrhythmia  as primary diagno sis 
D  Acute Renal Failure 
D  Acute Respiratory Failure  (not due to 
heart  failure) 
D  Sepsis, or Severe  Infection 
D  TIA/Stroke 
D  Other  (Specify   _ 
 
Other events date  _ 
(not leading  to hospitalization) 
D  Injection site reaction 
D  Rash D Fever 
D Infection (requiring antibiotic tx D) 
D  NauseaNom iting/Diarrhea  
D  Other s: (Specify  ) 
 
Interruption  of Treatment, 
date  _ 
D  Mand ated by protocol 
D  Decision made  by patient Death, date  _ 
 
D  Out of hosp ital and sudden  
D  In-hospital, asso ciated with ventricular 
arrhythmia  not secondary  to other 
cardiac disease  
D  In-hospital, asso ciated with acute 
cardiac issue  
D  In-hospital, asso ciated with acute non 
cardiac issue  (Specify   ) 
D  Other ( Specify    _ 
D  Unkn own 
 
 
 
ADVERSE  EVENT : YES D  NO  D 
 
 
ANTICIPATED  D , NOT  ANTICIPATED  D 
 
 
SEVERITY:  
MILD  0; MODERATE  0; SERIOUS  0 
 
 
RELATED  TO RESEARCH:  
UNRELATED  0; POSSIBLY  0; 
PROBABLY  0; DEFINITELY  0 
 
IF SERIOU S, UNANTICIPATE D, and RELATED  TO RESEARCH  -7 
REPORT  IMMEDIATELY  TO THE PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR (s) 
 
 
 
Com pleted By, Name  Signature  Date 
 
Attach de-identified Notes  from chart  or notes (check  D if not available) 
 
 
Principal  lnvestigator(s) Signature  Date 
 
Prompt  report  to the IRB/DSMB  needed  D compl eted D by  on   _ 