VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 1 of 25 
   
 
 
Continued Access Study  of the InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector for  
Minimally Invasive Connection of an Arteriovenous Graft for Hemodialysis  
 
 
INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
 
 
 
Clinical Trial Registration:   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
IDE # G140221  
 
Investigational Plan Revision History:  
 
Rev 1,  March  15, 2022 : Initial release . 
 
 
 
Sponsored by:  
 
Phraxis, Inc.  
2910 13th Terrace NW    
St. Paul, MN 55112 USA  
Telephone (study contact): (612) 801 -6730  
 
 
 
Reviewed and Approved by:  
 
 
___________________________________________     _____________________________  
Site Principal Investigator      Date  
 
 
___________________________________________     _____________________________  
Sponsor representative:       Date  
Cindy Setum, PhD., Director of Clinical Affairs  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 2 of 25 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
                                 Page  
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS        4    
1.0 GENERAL INFORMATION         5   
2.0 INTRODUCTION  AND  BACKGROUND       6  
3.0 STUDY DEVICE DESCRIPTION        6 
        Indication for Use         7    
4.0 PRIOR  STUDIES          7 
        Bench Testing          7 
        Pre-Clinical Studies                       7   
        Clinical Studies          8   
5.0 STUDY OBJECTIVE          8  
6.0 STUDY DESIGN          8 
7.0 SUBJECT  SELECTION         8 
        Initial Inclusion Criteria         9 
        Final Inclusion Criteria         9 
        Exclusion Criteria         9  
8.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS          10   
9.0 SUBJECT SCREENING AND INFORMED CONSENT      11 
Screening and Enrollment         11 
        Baseline Imaging          11 
        Informed Consent         11  
10.0 STUDY PROCEDURE         12 
  General Procedure               12 
 Use of Clamps          12 
        Additional  Treatment         12 
        Vascular Grafts for Hemodialysis        13 
        Treatment of Ipsilateral Central Venous Stenosis Prior to Enrollment    13 
        Study Device Failure, Defect, or Suspected Device Problem     13 
        Bailout Procedure         14  
        Assessment of Graft Flow  at End of Procedure      14 
        Initial Use of the Graft for Hemodialysis       14 
11.0 FOLLOW -UP PROCEDURES AND GRAFT INTERVENTIONS     14 
        Subject Management         14 
        Pharmacologic Regimen         14 
        Follow -up Evaluations         15 
         Telephone Follow -up for Subjects Who  Miss Final Visit    15 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 3 of 25 
   Follow -up Considerations Related to COVID -19 Pandemic     15 
        Graft Interventions         15 
       Summary of Tests and Procedures        16 
       Final Events          16 
12.0 POTENTIAL RISKS          16 
       Steps to Minimize Risks         17  
13.0 POTENTIAL BENEFITS         17 
14.0 SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY      18 
15.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY TERMINATION       18 
16.0 STUDY DURATION         18 
17.0 TRAINING           18 
18.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS         18 
19.0 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT       19 
        Data Collection          19 
       Data Management         19  
20.0 DATA MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MEASURES    20 
        Sponsor Monitoring         20 
        Clinical Events Committee        20 
21.0 ADVERSE EVENTS         20 
        Definitions          20 
Review and Notification of UADEs        21 
Investigator Evaluation of Adverse Events       22 
Reporting and Review of Serious Adverse Events      22 
Reporting Deaths          22 
22.0 PROTOCOL VIOLATIONS         23 
23.0 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITIES AND CONSIDERATIONS    23 
        Investigator Responsibilities        24 
        Sponsor Responsibilities         24 
        Record Retention Policy         25 
24.0 MEASURES TO AVOID BIAS        25  
25.0 PUBLICATION POLICY         25 
26.0 REFERENCES          25 
 
 
Appendix A: InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector  Instructions for Use  
Appendix B: Sample Informed Consent Form   
Appendix C:  Case Report Form  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 4 of 25 
 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AE  Adverse Event  
AIG  Arterial InterGraft Connector  
AV  Arterio venous  
AVG   Arteriovenous graft  
CEC   Clinical Events Committee  
CRF   Case Report Form  
DCC   Data Coordination Center  
EDC   Electronic Data Capture  
GCP   Good Clinical Practice  
IFU  Instructions for Use  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
KDOQI   Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (National Kidney Foundation)  
ePTFE   expanded Polytetrafluoroethylene  
UADE   Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
VIG  Venous InterGraft Connector  
VIG-CAS  Venous InterGraft Continued Access Study  
 
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 5 of 25 
 1.0 GENERAL INFORMATION  
 
Study Name:  Continued Access Study of the InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector for 
Minimally Invasive Connection of an Arteriovenous Graft for Hemodialysis   
 
 
Study Device:  InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector  
   
Study Device  
Regulatory Status :  Investigational Device. Limited by Federal (United States) law to investigational use.  
 
Indication for Use:  
(proposed)  The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector provides a minimally invasive, 
sutureless method for attachment of an arteriovenous graft to a vein in the upper 
extremity.   The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector facilitates creation of the 
arteriovenous graft connection to a vein in support of hemodialysis in subjects with End 
Stage Renal Disease. The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector is used together 
with conventional suturing of the arterial anastomosis to facilitate creation of an 
arteriovenous graft in support of hemodialysis in subjects with end stage renal disease.  
Study Design:   Prospective,  multicenter, non -randomized  study  
 
Subject s:  Up to 15 subject s with end stage renal disease  who have a planned arteriovenous graft 
implant procedure for hemodialysis access  and who meet the study se lection criteria will 
be included.    
 
Sponsor:   Phraxis, Inc.  
Saint Paul, MN  
   Sponsor representative: Cindy Setum, Ph.D., Director of Clinical Affairs  
   csetum@phraxis.com  
 
Data Coordination  & 
Statistical Analysis  Technical Resources International, Inc.  
Bethesda, MD  
Project Manager: Daniel Molina  
dmolina@tech -res.com  
 
Clinical Events  
Committee (Chair) :  Arif Asif , MD  
   Neptune, NJ  
   Arif.Asif@HackensackMeridian.org  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 6 of 25 
 2.0 INTRODUCTION  AND BACKGROUND  
The traditional sutured graft -to-vein anastomosis suffers from stenosis that subsequently develops due to 
neointimal hyperplasia. This pathology is thought to form  due to surgical implant trauma to the vein and 
surrounding tissues, the sutures themselves, as well as turbulent flow across the anastomosis.  The novel 
InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector ( VIG) is designed to provide a minimally invasive anastomosis for 
arteriovenous ( AVG ) implantation that may avoid  the pathology and clinical problems currently associated with a 
sutured anastomosis.   
The recently completed  ‘VIG-only’ pivotal study evalu ated the safety and effectiveness of using the VIG for the 
venous anastomosis , together with traditional suturing of the arterial anastomosis for implantation of  an AVG for 
hemodialysis .  The VIG -only study was approved by FDA  (IDE G140221)  and included  158 subjects  contributed 
from 10 USA study sites.   Collected data included  baseline characteristics, AVG patency and use for 
hemodialysis, AVG interventions, and adverse events throughout a six -month follow -up period.  The p rimary 
study endpoint was cumulative graft patency at 6 months. Secondary endpoints includ ed evaluation of primary 
unassisted patency at six months, the number and type of AVG interventions, and serious adverse events  
including rates of death, AVG infection, emergent surgery, significant bleeding and pseudoaneurysm .  
Results of the VIG-only study show ed that the primary endpoint of cumulative graft patency at 6 months , 
assessed by  comparison to a target Performance Goal of 75% , was met (P -value < .001). By Kaplan Meier 
survival analysis, the lower 95% Confidence Bound for cumulative patency at 180 days was 86.98%.  Primary 
unassisted patency was 60.21%, with a  lower 95% Confidence Bound at 180 days of 50.84%. There were four 
deaths (2.5%), none of which were related to the VIG study device.   Six subjects had AVG infections (3.8%) 
resulting in  surgical excision of the graft. None of the AVG infections were related to the VIG study device. 
There were no reports of emergent surgery, significant bleeding or pseudoaneurysm.  These results provide 
evidence of VIG efficacy for creating a venous anastomosis during AVG implantation,  with no significant safety 
concern s. 
Phraxis, Inc.  (Sponsor)  is currently preparing an application to  FDA for marketing clearance of the VIG. The 
continued access study of the VIG ( hereafter referred to as the ‘ Venous InterGraft Continued Access Study, or 
‘VIG-CAS ’) described in th is investigational plan allows for continued enrollment of subjects while the 
marketing application is being prepared and subsequently review by FDA.   The VIG -CAS will include  the same 
patient population , follow -up schedule , and study endpoints  as the VIG-only study.  
The VIG -CAS  will be conducted  in compliance with the Investigational Plan , Investigational Device Exemption 
(IDE) regulations, Good Clinica l Practice  guidelines (GCP) , and other applicable  regulatory requirements.    
 
3.0 STUDY DEVICE DESCRIPTION  
 
The VIG  is designed for transcatheter delivery within a 4 -7 mm diameter peripheral  vein,  and connection to a n 6 
mm AVG  that has been tunneled under the skin in a standard manner. The connection  is made via a small skin 
incision.  The VIG is constructed  as a nitinol framework encapsulated with ePTFE in the midsection and uncoated 
at the ends ( Figure 1 ). The VIG distal flared end is configured as a nitinol scaffold with anchoring barbs that 
extend into the vein wall , and the proximal  ‘graft end’ is a stent -like framework for anchorin g within the  AVG .  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 7 of 25 
 The VIG is intended as a permanent implant . The VIG is delivered and deployed within the target vein using a 
customized transcatheter delivery system. A detailed description of the VIG and  delivery system is provided in 
the Instructions for Use ( Appendix A ).   
 
Figure 1 - InterGraft Venous  Anastomotic Connector  (VIG ). Note barbs that anchor VIG within the vein  (arrow ).  
 
 
 
          
                                             
Indication  for Use (proposed)  
The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector provides a minimally invasive, sutureless method for 
attachment of an arteriovenous graft to a vein in the upper extremity.   The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic 
Connector facilitates creation of the arteriovenous graft connection to a vein in support of hemodialysis in patients 
with End Stage Renal Disease. The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic  Connector is intended to be used together 
with conventional suturing of the arterial anastomosis to facilitate creation of an arteriovenous graft in support of 
hemodialysis in patients with End Stage Renal Disease.  
 
4.0 PRIOR STUDIES  
 
The VIG, together with  an arterial InterGraft Connector (AIG) , were evaluated i n prior studies as summarized 
below.  The findings from the prior studies  are also applicable to use of the VIG  only.   
 
NOTE: The AIG has been discontinued and it is not studied in this investigational plan . 
 
Bench Testing    
Bench testing of the VIG confirmed the structural integrity of the device, adequacy of resistance to compressive 
forces and radial forces, adequacy of bond strengths, kink and migration resistance, and verification of critical 
dimensions.  Where applicable, testing was  conducted using commercial 6mm ePTFE grafts  that were selected 
due to their current widespread clinical use.  
 
Pre-Clinical Studies  
Simulated use testing  was performed  for verification  of the VIG deployment procedure . The VIG performed 
adequately for intended use with respect to the ability to access, deploy and withdraw.  
 
Acute animal studies evaluated the deliverability of the VIG, the ability to complete an AV circuit using ePTFE 
grafts, and near-term graft patency  following initial implantation  of grafts using a VIG and AIG .1 Testing was 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 8 of 25 
 performed using a  canine  femoral ar tery/vein model .  These studies provided ev idence of safety and acceptable 
performance of  the VIG and AIG.  
 
Clinical Studies  
 
First-in-Human Study  
A first -in-human clinical evaluati on of the  VIG and AIG  was perform ed.2 The study was conducted at the Italian 
Hospital in Asuncion, Paraguay, under a protocol that was approved by the Paraguayan National Regulatory 
Authority and the institutional Ethics Committee. All subject s provided prior written consent, and the study was  
conducted in accordance with ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice.  The InterGraft connectors were 
successfully used in 9/9 subjects for connection of an AV G in the upp er arm: five subjects received both the VIG 
and the AIG, and four subjects received the VIG for the venous anastomosis and a standard sutured arterial 
anastomosis.  Delivery and deployment success was obtained in all cases. All AVGs were patent at the end of the 
procedure , with no procedural adverse events related to the VIG.  Three subject s exited the study early for reasons 
unrelated to the InterGraft connectors. The remaining subjects  had patent grafts at 6 months.  
VIG-only Pivotal Study  (IDE G140221)  
As described in Section 2.0  above, a pivotal ‘ VIG-only’ clinical study was conducted under an IDE approved by 
FDA . The study is now completed and the primary endpoint of cumulative graft patency at 6 months with 
comparison to a target Performance Goal of 75% was met (P -value < .001).  The results of the pivotal study 
provide evidence of safety and effectiveness  for use of the VIG  and provide  justification f or the continued access 
study described in this investigational plan.   
 
5.0 STUDY OBJECTIVE  
 
The objective of the  VIG continued access study  (VIG -CAS)  is to allow study investigators and their patients 
continued access to the VIG while a marketing application is prepared by Phraxis, Inc. and reviewed by the FDA.  
The study will allow for the collection of additional safety and effectiveness data  using the VIG.  
 
6.0 STUDY DESIGN  
 
The VIG -CAS  is a multicenter, prospective,  single -arm ( non-randomized ) study  that will include up to 15 
subjects contributed from up to five  (5) study sites/investigators who previously participated in the VIG -only 
study.  No new investigators will be included. All subjects will  be assigned to treatment with  the VIG  and a 
standard sutured arterial anastomosi s for implantation of an AVG for hemodialysis. The selection criteria (patient 
population) , follow -up schedule , and study endpoints are  the same as th ose used in the VIG -only study.  
 
Study data  will be  collected up to the point at which each subject has completed the  final 6-month follow up  or 
experienced a terminal study e vent.  
 
7.0 SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
The following inclusion and exclusion criteria must be met for enrollment in the study:  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 9 of 25 
 Initial Inclusion Criteria (All must be answered YES for study eligibility.)  
1. Subject is ≥ 18 years of age.  
 
2. Subject requires the creation of a vascular access graft for hemodialysis, secondary to a diagnosis of End   
Stage Renal Disease.  
 
3. Subject has the vascular access graft placed in an upper extremity.  
 
4. Baseline imaging shows suitable va scular anatomy/ vesse l size for the InterGraft ™ Venous Connector 
and an artery at least 3.5 mm in diameter  that is suitable for creating the arterial anastomosis.  
 
5. Subject has a reasonable expectation of remaining on hemodialysis for at least 6 months.   
 
6. Subject or his/her legal guardian understands the study and is willing and able to comply with the dialysis 
schedule and follow -up requirements.  
 
7. Subject or his/her legal guardian provides written informed consent.   NOTE: In accordance with the 
requirements of some Institutional Review Boards  (IRBs), where applicable, only those subjects with 
capacity to consent for themselves will be included. Thus, where required by the IRB, adult individuals 
who lack capacity to consent for themselves will be excluded from the study.  
 
Final Inclusion Criterion to be applied at the time of surgery (Must be answered YES for enrollment into the 
study .) 
 
8. Physician’s examination at time of surgery shows no significant vessel lesions, calcification(s), anatomic 
structures , or abnormalities that may limit ability to safely deploy the InterGraft ™ Venous Connector  or 
create a sutured arterial anastomosis.  
Exclusion Criteria (All must be answered NO for study eligibility.)  
1. Subject  has a documented and unsuccessfully treated ipsilat eral central venous stenosis as determined by 
imaging . 
 
2. Subject currently has a known or suspected bacterial, fungal, or HIV  infection.   NOTE: Subjects  with 
hepatitis B or C may be included in the study.  
 
3. Subject has a known hypercoagulable or bleeding disorder or requires treatment with warfarin or heparin. 
NOTE: The intent of this criterion is to exclude patients with high risk for bleeding or clotting 
complications.  Patients who are taking the oral anticoagulant Eliquis® (apixaban) may be included in 
the study if  Eliquis is temporarily discontinued prior to the study procedure, in accordance with the 
approved prescribing  instructions. Patients may receive anticoagulation therapy any time after  the study 
AV graft implant procedure, at their physician’s discretion. This should be driven by an indication 
unrelated to the vascular access.   
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 10 of 25 
 4. Subject  has had a previous instance of Heparin Induced Thrombocytopenia type 2 (HIT -2) or has known 
sensitivity to heparin.  
 
5. Subject has co -morbid conditions that may limit their ability to comply with study and follow -up 
requirements.  
 
6. Subject  has had >2 previous arteriovenous accesses in treatment arm.  
 
7. Subject is currently taking Aggrenox®.  
 
8. Subje ct needs  or is scheduled for any major surgery  within 30 days of the study procedure.  
 
9. Subject  is currently taking maintenance immunosuppressant medication such as rapamycin, 
mycophenolate or mycophenolic acid, prednisone  (>10 mg), cyclosporine, tacrolimus , or 
cyclophosphamide.  
 
10. Life expectancy is less than 12 months.  
 
11. Subject  is pregnant.   NOTE: A negative urine pregnancy test within 24 hours of the study procedure is  
required in all female subjects  with reproductive capacity .  
 
12. Subject is a poor compliance risk (i.e .. history of IV or oral drug abuse).  
 
13. Subject is enrolled in another dialysis or vascular investigational study.  
 
8.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
Study endpoints include the following:  
 
Endpoint #1. Cumulative patency at 6 months, defined as the p ercentage of subjects free from loss of access 
of the AVG  for hemodialysis, assessed at 6 months . 
 
Endpoint #2. Acute device success, defined as AV G flow at the end of the procedure  as determined by 
palpable graft thrill and /or audible bruit, without significant bleeding or emergent surgery . 
 
Endpoint #3. Primary Unassisted Patency at 6 months, defined as the percentage of subjects free from the first 
occurrence  of either access thrombosis or an access procedure performed to maintain access patency.  
 
Endpoint #4. Time to First Cannulation, defined as the time from initial access placement to the first graft 
cannulation  for hemodialysis . 
 
Endpoint #5. Number and type of interventions required to maintain secondary patency . 
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 11 of 25 
 Endpoint #6. Number and type of serious adverse events (SAEs) through 6 months .  SAEs include the 
following : death, emergent surgery,  AVG  infection requiring treatment (e.g., prolonged or intravenous 
antibiotic therapy), significant bleeding (defined as bleeding requiring treatment) , and pseudoaneurysm.    
 
Expected interventions for restoration of patency will be documented and reported separately, are reflecte d in the 
evaluation of cumulative  patency, and  are not required to  be reported/ tabulated again as SAEs.  
 
Endpoints will be evaluated acutely (at the time of implant), at time of any AVG intervention , at two weeks, and 
monthly through 6 months for all subjects.  The study AV G patency evaluation will start  immediately after the 
index procedure is completed (e.g., subject  leaves the surgery suite).  This means that once the AV G is created, 
patency evaluation begins.  The occurrence of acute thrombus  and treatment thereof during the index  procedure 
while the vascular access is being created does not trigger the loss of primary patency.  
 
9.0 SUBJECT SCREENING AND INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Screening  and Enrollment  
Patients referred for AVG implant should be screened for study eligibility.  A me mber of the Research Team will  
evaluate the patient  for eligibility. If all initial inclusion criteria are met and no exclusion criteria are present, a 
member of the Research Team should inform the  patient about the study’s purpose and should obtain written 
informed consent.  
 
Final e nrollment  eligibility  is determined at the time of surgery, after the physician has confirmed the final 
inclusion criterion is m et.  Enrolled subjects will be assigned a unique study subject identification number. Each 
study site will maintain subject screening and enrollment logs .  Reason for screen failures will be recorded.  
Screening log data will not be included in the primary database but will be reviewed during study monitoring . 
 
Baseline I maging  
Angiographic or ultrasonic imaging  of the target limb  vasculature  is routinely performed as part of determining 
the optimal AV access plan  for a patient . As part of screening, baseline imaging should be reviewed to determine 
whether the patient  meets the following criteria  (as determined by the physician)  for use of the  VIG:   
• General : Flow rate must be adequate for the creation of dialysis access, as previously mapped with 
ultrasound or angiography  
 
• Vein inner diameter at planned anastomosis site is 4 -7 mm  in luminal diameter  
 
• Artery inner diameter at planned anastomosis site is at least 3.5 mm in luminal diameter   
Informed C onsent  
A me mber of the Research Team will  approach the subject  to obtain written informed consent. The background of 
the study and the benefits and risks of procedures and the study should be explained to the subject .  The subject  
(or their legal representative , if applicable ) must sign the consent form prior to initiation of study procedures. The 
consent form  used must be approved by the study site’s IRB.  Failure to provide consent renders the subject  
ineligible for the study.  Subjects will be given a copy of th e signed informed consent document. The signed 
informed consent will be retained with the study records at the site.  It is the responsibility of the investigator to 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 12 of 25 
 assure that informed consent is obtained from each subject in accordance with the guidelines of the IRB and all 
applicable regulatory guidelines.  A sample informed consent form is provided in Appendix B . 
 
 
10.0 STUDY  PROCEDURE  
 
General Procedure  
The procedure will be performed in accordance with the  VIG Instructions for Use  (IFU , Appendix A ).   A 
commercially available 6mm diameter  ePTFE  graft will be used. Conventional grafts or grafts designed for early 
cannulation (within 24 -48 hours)  may be used . The study procedure will be performed in an operating room that 
has fluoroscopic imaging capability for guiding placement of the VIG.  The anesthesia regimen will be 
determine d at the physician’s discretion;  there are no study -specific anesthesia requirements. A regional nerve 
block is typically performed for placement of an AV G.  Standard, r outine hemodynamic monitoring will be 
performed to assess cardiovascular status throughout the procedure . Heparin anticoagulation may be provided at 
the physician’s discretion.  
 
Small skin incisions will be made for tunneling the graft under the skin in a standard manner.  The VIG device  is 
provided pre -loaded within a customized catheter -based delivery system for over -the-wire delivery.  The VIG is 
inserted through  an introducer sheath placed in the target vein  so that th e ‘vessel end’ of the  VIG is  deployed 
within the ve in, and the ‘graft end’ extend s out of the ve in for connection to the graft.  Delivery and deployment 
will be performed under fluoroscopic guidance. The VIG will be deployed first, connected t o the AV G, then  the 
graft  and VIG  will be flushed and clamped. The arterial anastomosis will then be created using a standard suturing 
method.  
 
NOTE: Although not expected, i f connection of the venous graft segment  using the VIG is attempted but not able 
to be completed, the venous anastomosis should be completed using standard suturing. Such situations will be 
considered as a n acute device  failure.  
 
Following e stablishment of the AV circuit, the skin incisions will be sutured clo sed using standard techniques. 
The subject  will be moved to a recovery area for monitoring  prior to  discharge. It is anticipated that most subjects 
will be discharged the same day or within 24 hours following the AVG  implant procedure.  
Use of C lamps  
To avoid mechanical damage or disruption to the  AVG or VIG, surgical clamps  or other tools with teeth or other 
sharp features  should not be used during the AVG  implant procedure .  An  atraumatic or guarded (e.g ., rubber) 
clamp should be used for clamping the AVG , as needed .  Do not clamp or manipulate the VIG with surgical tools. 
Use only gentle pinching with the fingers to hold the VIG and to control hemostasis.  
 
Additional  Treatment  
It is anticipated that no other interventional treatments will be required during the implant procedure.  At the 
venous anastomotic site, no further treatment should be provided if the luminal diameter is > 90% of the adjacent 
normal vessel , based on operator’s assessment .  If the luminal diameter is <90%, balloon angioplasty may be 
performed  as follows:  
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 13 of 25 
 After deployment, the nitinol -reinforced VIG may be smoothed and more fully seated against the vessel wall by 
inflating an angioplasty balloon. Balloon treatment should be performed according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions , by a physician skilled in peripheral vascular interventional techniques . The balloon diameter used 
should be equal to that of the VIG diameter and should be no larger than 6mm when used to treat the VIG 
segment that is within the  AVG . The balloon should be inflated within the VIG along the entire length.   Multiple 
inflations may be needed. To avoid possible displacement of the VIG, the physician should assure that the balloon 
is fully deflated prior to carefully removing the balloon.  
 
Vascular G raft for Hemodialysis   
Vascular grafts that meet the following requirements, as determined by the physician, may be used:  commercially 
available, straight (not -tapered), 6 mm inner diameter  ePTFE grafts.   Adequate graft length  and trimming  must be 
carefully determined  to facilitate optimal positioning after the venous and arterial graft anastomoses have been 
completed . The graft should never be too short.  
 
Treatment of Ipsilateral Central Venous Stenosis Prior to Enrollment  
Ipsilateral c entral venous stenosis is a study exclusion.   However, a patient with central venous stenosis may be 
considered for the study following successful treatment of the stenosis.  Central stenosis angioplasty may be 
performed first, then immediately followed with the study  procedure.   The patient may be enrolled if, as assessed 
by the investigator, the central stenosis has <30% residual stenosis, which is the KDOQI threshold for successful 
intervention.  The patient should not be enrolled if the residual stenosis is ≥ 30% or if the investigator determines 
that the treatment could impact the ability to assess the study endpoints  (e.g., acute device  success, graft patency, 
safety).  
Study Device Failure, Defect, or Suspected Device Problem  
Device malfunction is defined as any occurrence in which the study device does not perform as intended, when 
used or attempted to be used in a study procedure .  As described in the  IFU, a visual examination of the VIG 
should be performed at the time of opening the packaging  and prior to use in a subject .   Defective devices 
(obvious or suspected) should not be used.  A replacement  VIG should be obtained and the study procedure 
continued.  A device accountability log will be used to account for all used and opened/unused devices in this 
study.    
 
If a VIG defect or malfunction is discovered/su spected any time prior to vascular deployment, the VIG should not 
be used .  A replacement device/component should be used and the study procedure continued.  A Device 
Malfunction  CRF  must be completed for all device malfunctions, failures or suspected failures, and the defective 
product identification should be recorded on the device accountability log .  Whenever possible, a 
defective/suspected defected VIG should be return ed to the Sponsor for evaluation.  
The Device Malfunction CRF should be used to report and provide details of situations in which the VIG does not 
perform as intended. Failure of the VIG to perform as intended may potentially be due to a variety of reasons, 
including defect or suspected defect in the device itself or the delivery system; operator error; anatomic issues; or 
other reasons. If use of the VIG  is attempted but ultimately the device is not able to be used, a Device Malfunction 
CRF should be submitted to report the surrounding details.   
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 14 of 25 
 NOTE: Device Malfunctions should  be reported within 24 hours of discovery .  24-hour reporting of device 
malfunctions will assist with Sponsor ’s efforts to assess whether any SAEs associated with a device malfunction 
may also have occurred.   
 
Bailout P rocedure  
Bailout procedures are not anticipated but could potentially be required if, for example, the  VIG does not deploy 
correctly,  does not seal correctly,  is not deployed at an acceptable location , or if there are any major vascular 
events.   In such cases, the subject  should be referred for surgical intervention.  No attempt should be made to 
remove an improperly deployed VIG  using percutaneous methods.  
 
Assessment of Graft Flow at the End of the Procedure  
An AV G placed using the VIG and a sutured arterial anastomosis  typically has a pulse and/or thrill which is easily 
palpable over the skin or directly on the AVG prior to closure of the surgical incisions.  Thus, the AVG  flow 
assessment is similar that used for standard sutured AVGs. An optimal method to confirm AVG patency at the 
end of the implant procedure is to feel a thrill near the arterial anastomosis  or confirm a Doppler signal.   
Ascultation u sing a sterile or covered stethoscope is also acceptable.   At the physician’s discretion and as 
warranted, a final angiogram may  also be performed to verify patency of the graft . 
 
Initial Use of the Graft  for Hemodialysis  
Initial hemodialysis cannulation of AVGs  placed with the VIG should be performed in accordance with the graft 
manufacturer’s Instructions for Use.   After needle withdrawal, use gentle, non -occlusive digital pressure to 
compress the cannulation site until hemostasis is achieved. The VIG should NOT be directly cannulated.   In 
accordance with standard practice, once placed, AVGs should be used for hemodialysis access as soon as deemed 
appropriate by the nephrologist and/or operator. For standard ePTFE AVGs, the time from placement to first 
cannulation is typically after two weeks.  Early cannulation AVGs can be used  sooner, in accordance with 
approved labeling . Every effort should be made to minimize infection risk by removing central catheters as soon 
as possible.   
 
 
11.0 FOLLOW -UP PROCEDURES AND GRAFT INTERVENTIONS  
 
Subject  Management  
Prior to discharge, the study investigator  or their designee  should confirm  that the subject  understands the 
postoperative  care requirements , as determined by the physician , and the required fol low-up schedule.  T he two-
week  visit should be scheduled.  
 
It is recommended that investigators follow the Fistula First Guidelines  for vascular access monitoring   
(http://esrdnetwork18.org/pdfs/QI%20 -%20FF%20Tools/FFTool_VAMPFlowChrt.pdf   or current).  
 
Pharmacologic Regimen  
There are n o study -specific pharmacologic requirements.  The need for intraoperative and postoperative 
anticoagulation therapy should be  based on subject  history  and m aintained a s deemed appropriate  by the 
physician .  Anticoagulation /anti-platelet  therapy will be recorded on the  eCRF. 
 
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 15 of 25 
 Follow -up E valuation s 
Subject s will be followed  at two weeks and monthly thereafter  through six months  to assess AVG patency and  
any complications , if applicable .  Measurement of access flow rate is part of standard care. Data from routine AV 
access flow monitoring performed as part of usual care , as available,  will also be collected.    
 
Graft ultrasound evaluation should be performed at the 3 - and 6 - month follow -up visits and the results recorded 
on the CRF.  
 
NOTE: For reference and in accordance with standard care, baseline flow measurements are typically assessed 
during two dialysis sessions two weeks apart; and monthly measurements will be performed thereafter.    An 
access flow rate < 500 mL/min or a drop in access flow rate of 25% from baseline should trigger an angiographic 
evaluation of the AVG  and possible intervention.  
 
Telephone Follow -up for Subjects Who  Miss Final Visit 
If a subject  misses or is unavailable/unwilling to return for the final 6 -month f ollow -up visit, telephone follow -up 
with the subject  or thei r dialysis center should be attempted  to determine the patency status of the AVG  and to 
gather as much additional  information as possible to complete the 6 month follow up and study completion  CRFs.  
Telephone follow -up should be done only if the subject  is unwilling or unable to  return for an in -person visit .  If 
the subject  cannot be reached, then the ir dialysis center should be contacted  (if allowed)  to collect information 
about the most recent hemodialysis using the AVG. If it is not possible to reach the subject  by phone or to contact 
the dialysis center, then the subject  will be considered as lost -to-follow up.    
 
Follow -up Considerations Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic  
To reduce the likelihood of community exposure to COVID -19, investigators will be allowed  to implement non -
contact monthly study follow -up visits,  in accordance with institutional and IRB requirements and approval to do 
so, and as deemed appropriate based on the COVID -19 pandemic situation at each site.  Non -contact follow -up 
visits may include communications via telephone, FaceTime, email, Virtual Care or similar. In lieu of an in -
person AVG patency assessment, investigators should obtain a copy of the most recent hemodialysis record as 
verification of AVG patency.  
If non-contact follow -up is implemented due to the local pandemic situation , AVG ultrasound examination s will 
not be expected (at the 3 - and 6 -month follow -ups) and f ailure to perform the ultrasound examination will not be 
considered as a protocol deviation.  
Investigators will be required to report the reason for performing non -contact follow up (due to pandemic, or 
other reason).   
Graft Interventions  
As per standard care following the AVG implant  procedure , AVG interventions should be avoided  within the first 
7 post-operative days.  As warranted and determined by the physician, standard balloon angioplasty and 
thrombectomy procedures may be  performed within the AVG , VIG,  and adjacent native artery and vein. 
Mechanical thrombectomy devices that use spinning, rotating or other movable parts should NOT be used within 
the VIG, as this may result in entanglement or other damage to the VIG. The balloon diameter used should be 
equal to that of the VIG diameter and should be no larger than 6mm when used to treat the VIG segment that is 
within the  AVG . 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 16 of 25 
 Summary of Tests and Procedures  
The required schedule for subject  treatment and follow -up evaluation is shown in Table 1 .   
 
Table 1 : Schedule of Subject  Treatment and Evaluation  
Timeframe (window)  Test/Procedure  
Pre-procedure (within 30 days)  Baseline imaging of target AV G site (performed as part of 
standard care)  
Baseline labs: Hgb, Hct, WBC, platelets  
Pre-procedure (within 24 hours)  Urine pregnancy test for female subjects with reproductive 
potential  
Immediately following end of AVG  implant procedure 
(before leaving surgery suite)  Confirmation of AV G flow (p alpable thrill /pulse , audible bruit ) 
At the physician’s discretion and if warranted, an a ngiogram 
may also be performed to confirm patency.  
Post- procedure (within 48 hours)  Post procedure labs: Hgb, Hct  
At discharge  Confirmation of AV G flow (palpable thrill /pulse , audible bruit)  
2 weeks following the procedure (14 +4/-7 days)  Clinical follow - up with AVG evaluation (includes collection of 
information regarding any subsequent hospitalization, AEs, 
AVG interventions)  
30, 60, 90, 120, 150,180 days following the procedure (± 
14 days)  Clinical follow - up with AVG evaluation (includes collection of 
information regarding any subsequent hospitalization, AEs, 
AVG interventions)  
 
AVG flow rate evaluation (ultrasound or similar) is performed 
at the 90 -day and 180 -day follow -up visits.  
 
 
Final Events  
The following final events will justify cessation of study follow -up: death, AVG  abandonment, lost to follow up  
(at least 3 attempts to contact the subject should be made and documented) , or completion of study follow -up.   
 
 
12.0 POTENTIAL RISKS   
 
Potential adverse events that may occur and/or require treatment with use of the VIG include but are not limited 
to: 
• allergic reaction to device materials or procedure medications  
• anastomotic disruption or tearing  
• aneurysm  
• artery tear or rupture  
• bleeding  
• bruising  
• contrast dye reaction  
• death  
• device breakage  
• dissection or ‘tissue flap’ in blood ve ssels in which the VIG has been inserted  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 17 of 25 
 • embolism  
• hematoma  
• infection  
• inflammation  
• kinking/compression of t he AV G and/or VIG device  
• migration or misplacement of VIG device  
• occlusion  
• pseudoaneurysm  in the AVG , VIG device , or adjacent native blood vessels  
• seroma  
• stenosis  of the AV G 
• swelling of implanted arm  
• thrombosis  of the AV G 
• vessel spasm  
 
Many of the potential AEs listed above are similar  AEs that may occur  during and after AVG  placement using 
standard surgical techni ques. Potential risks of a standard surgical procedure to implant a n AVG  for hemodialysis 
include but are not limited to the following:  
• failure of sutures  
• bleeding immediately after the procedure  
• infection  
• possible need for re -operation  
 
The VIG will be used with a st andard 6  mm AVG  for hemodialysis that is sold and packaged separately. Potential 
AEs that may occur with use of the AVG  are described in the  Instructions for Use packaged with the AVG . 
Pregnant subjects are excluded from the study. In females of reproductive capacity , a pregnancy test must be 
performed prior to the procedure.  This is to ensure that a fetus is not irradiated.  Other potential risks to a fetus 
related to the study procedure are unknown.  
There are no unique blood tests required for the study; however, results of standard blood tests performed to 
evaluate general health status at baseline, during the study procedure and during study follow -up will be included 
with the study data.  Risks of having blood drawn include infection (rare) and bleeding (rare).  
Steps to Minimize Risk  
The following steps will be taken to minimize potential risks:  
• The study will include only investigators who have prior training and clinical experience using the VIG.  
• The study procedure will be performed in a surgical suite with radiologic imaging capabilities. If the 
study  procedure is unable to be performed (not expected), the patient will be able to receive traditional 
surgical graft implantation.           
13.0 POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Potentia l clinical benefit for the VIG  is unknown.  Anastomoses with the VIG may potentially reduce venous 
vessel trauma, improve the local vessel wall shear stresses , and promote laminar flow, thereby improving patency.  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 18 of 25 
 14.0 SUBJECT  WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY  
 
Subjects  may withdraw consent from the study at any time.   Study data collected prior to withdrawal will be 
analyzed and included with the final study results.   The investigator may withdraw the subject  from the study at 
any time if assessed to be in the best interest of the subject .  
 
15.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY TERMINATION  
 
The study  may be terminated at any time  for reasons of safety, based on a recommendation by the IRB , the study 
Clinical Events Committee (CEC) , or other considerations of the Sponsor.  S erious, device -related or possibly 
related AEs that are unexpected in either frequency or type may prompt a review by  the principal investigator , 
CEC,  and/or Sponsor, and may lead to consider ation of  stopping the study. Such a review and discussion will be 
documented and included with the study records.  
 
 
16.0 STUDY DURATION  
 
Enrollment is expected to occur over a  6-month per iod. Thus, completion of enrollment and 6 -month follow up is 
anticipated within a  12-month  duration.  
 
 
17.0 TRAINING  
 
Training of appropriate clinical site personnel will be the responsibility of the Sponsor  or their designees .  To 
assure uniform data collection and protocol compliance,  trainers  will pr ovide an educational session to  review the 
VIG-CAS Investigational Plan, techniques for the identification of eligible subject s, instructions on data 
collection, follow -up schedules and regulatory requirements.  Ongoing email and telephone feedback regarding 
completion of eCRFs will be provided by the DCC and study monitors.  
 
Prior to enrollment sta rt, refresher  technical training for set -up and use of the VIG  will be provided . Only prior 
investigators with experience using the VIG will participate  in the study ; thus, roll -in cases will not be required.  
 
 
18.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS   
 
All subjects who meet the enrollment criteria and in whom use of the VIG is attempted will be included in the 
intention -to-treat analysis population.    
 
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize subject baseline and outcome data.  Continuous variables will be 
summarized using means, standard deviations, medians, interquartile ranges, minimum and maximum  values .  
Categorical variables will be summarized in frequency distributions.  A copy of the database  used to prepare 
clinical report summaries will be archived to enable any statistical analyses performed to be replicated.  A full data 
listing will be prepared at the completion of the study.  Listings of data represented on the CRF will include  key 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 19 of 25 
 baseline, demographic , and outcome variables to facilitate further investigation of tabulated values and to allow 
for clinical review of safety variables.  
 
No formal hypotheses will be  tested or associated significance levels assigned to study results.    Nominal 
confidence intervals may be calculated in summarizing clinical results for study  endpoints but not for purposes of 
product labeling.   
In addition to summarizing and reporting SAEs that are part of Study  Endpoint #6, listings of other AEs (serious 
and non -serious) will be  prepared and evaluated . 
 
19.0 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Data Collection  
Primary data collection  based on source documented medical records will be performed by study coordinators or 
other designated research staff at each site. A copy of the CRF (data to be collected) is provided in Appendix C . 
Electronic data capture  (EDC)  will be used .  The EDC system  used will be compliant with FDA requirements.   
Site training  on EDC data recording will be provided by the Data Coordinating Center (DCC).   All EDC training 
will be documented in the Investigator site file. Throughout the study, a help desk at the DCC will be available for 
any questions that arise from the sites concerning EDC.  
 
Notification of subject enrollment must be provided to the Sponsor within 24 hours . The enrollment notification 
may be made by email to the Sponsor  or by entry of an enrollment form into the EDC within 24 hours of 
enrollment.  
 
The timeline for entry of CRF data into the EDC  is as follows : 
 
• Pre-procedure (b aseline ) Imaging , Inclusion/Exclusion, Index Procedure, and Discharge information 
should be entered  within 7 days of enrollment.  
 
• Follow -up For ms should be entered  within 7 days of the follow -up visit.   
 
For any deaths that may occur throughout the study duration, efforts should be made to obtain a copy of the death 
certificate and autopsy report, as applicable.  
 
Data Management  
The DCC will use a validated clinical data management system consisting of a relational database and a web 
application to capture the study data through single -pass data entry.  Automated edit checks for missing, 
discrepant, and out of range data will be programmed into the data entry forms, and manual edits will be 
conducted by the DCC Managers on an ongoing basis. The Sponsor will provide a list of edit checks to the DCC.   
 
Any data discrepancies identified during data monitoring will be communicated to study sites for resolution or 
justification. Once all discrepancies and queries have been resolved, the site principal investigator  will confirm 
the data accuracy with his/her signature on a Verification CRF , or similar method .  Once the study is completed, 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 20 of 25 
 all data have been entered into the clinical database, and all discrepancies have been resolved, an audit will be 
conducted to verify that all requirements for database  lock have been met.  The database will then be  locked and 
final analyses performed.  
 
CRF submission status will be track ed by the Sponsor and DCC.   
 
 
20.0 DATA MONITORIN G AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MEASURES  
 
Sponsor Monitoring  
Study site monitoring will be performed by Sponsor personnel or Sponsor designees (contract monitors ) to ensure 
that the study is conducted in compliance with applicable regulations and with the study protocol. A pre -
investigation visit will be made to orient the staff to the study protocol  and procedures , applicable regulations and 
requirements, and study administration expectations.  Study  sites will be evaluated to ensure an adequate pa tient 
base and sufficient staf f support for proper study conduct.   
 
No sites may receive shipment of study devices until the following documents are received by the sponsor:  
 
• Written IRB approval for conduct of the study  
• IRB approval of a consent form  
• Signed Investigator Letter of Agreement  
• Executed Study Agreement  
• Copies of Investigator’s CV and medical license  
• Financial Disclosure  
 
Clinical  sites will be regularly monitored for timeliness and accuracy of  data submitted to the DCC.  Any evident 
patterns of noncompliance with respect to the protocol, data accuracy, maintenance of source documentation, or 
timeliness will be cause for the site to be put on probation. If correction actions are not made, the site will be 
asked to withdraw from the study.  
Clinical Events Committee  
An independent Clinical Events Committee (CEC) will provide medical review of SAEs, UA DEs, and any deaths 
that may occur throughout the study.  The CEC will be comprised of independent physicians with expertise in the 
care and management patients that comprise the potential study population .  Details of CEC operations will be 
defined in a CEC Charter.  
 
21.0 ADVERSE  EVENTS   
Definitions  
Adverse Event (AE)  is defined as any undesirable sign, symptom or medical or psychological condition  
even if the event is not considered to be related or possibly related to the study device or study  
procedure/intervention.  Medical condition/diseases present before starting the study will be considered  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 21 of 25 
 adverse events only if they worsen after starting study treatment. An adverse event is also any undesirable and 
unintended effect of research occurring in human subjects as a result of the collection of identifiable private 
information under the research. Adverse events also include any problems associated with the use of a study 
device that adversely affects the rights, safety or welfare of subjects.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  is defined as any undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition which  
is fatal, is life -threatening, requires or prolongs in -patient hospitalization, results in persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect, is medically significant and which the 
investigator regards as serious based on appropriate medical judgment. An important medical event is any AE that 
may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization but may be considered an SAE when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, it may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definitions of SAEs.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Event (UAE)  is defined as any event or experience that meets all three criteria  below:  
 
• Is unexpected in terms of nature, severity or frequency, given the research procedures that are described 
in the protocol -related documents AND in the characteristics of the subject population being studied  
• Related or possibly related to participation in research. This means that there is a reasonable possibility 
that the incident may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research study.  
• The incident suggests that the research placed the patient or others at greater risk of harm than was 
previously known or recognized OR results in actual harm to the patient or others  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADE)  is defined as any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any 
life-threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application 
(including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects” (21 CFR 812.3(s).  
 
Review and Notification of UADEs  
Federal law requires that the FDA be notified immediately of all UADE s.  The UADE review and notification 
process will be as follows:  
 
(i) The study site will submit an Adverse Event (AE) report, indicating that the AE is serious  and 
related or possibly related  to the study device.  Study sites must  report all SAEs (including 
UADEs) to the Sponsor within 24 hours of discovery.  If additional supporting information 
regarding the SAE is requested after the initial 24 -hour report, the information will be promptly 
sent to the Sponsor, when available, via email.  
 
(ii) The Sponsor will immediately conduct an evaluation and prepare a UADE report.  The Sponsor 
will consult with the CEC as part of the UADE evaluation process.  
 
(iii) The Sponsor will report the results of the UADE evaluation to FDA, all reviewing IRBs, and 
participating investigators within 10 working days after the Sponsor first receives notice of the 
UADE (§§ 812.46(b), 812.150(b)(1).  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 22 of 25 
 Investigator Evaluation of Adverse Events  
The occurrence of AEs, including S AEs and UAEs, will be monitored throughout the study duration.  Adverse 
event information will be collected and reported on designated AE forms  and classified by the principal 
investigator as serious/not serious. The investigator will determine the relatedness of the AE to the study device 
and study procedure according to the following definitions:  
 
• Related (AE is clearly related to the device/procedure)  
• Possibly related (AE may be related to the device/procedure)  
• Unrelated (AE is clearly not related to the device/procedure)  
 
Procedure -related AEs  are AEs that occur during the time interval from when the subject  enters and leaves the 
surgical treatment suite for the index procedure (e.g., AV G implant procedure).  Thus, the procedure includes use 
of the study device, as well as any treatments or procedures that are applied before or after the study device (eg, 
anesthesia, suturing of incision sites after AVG is completed), while the subject  is in the surgical suite.  
Device -related AEs  are AEs related or possibly related to the study device  or to the study device procedure which 
includes delivery, deployment, and attachment of the study device  to the AV G.  
Procedure -related events may not necessarily be related to the study device; for example, a procedure event such 
as an anesthesia reaction would not be related to the study device.    
 
Device -related events may also occur after the study procedure, for example, fracture of metal strut in the VIG. 
 
For situations in which a study subject  experiences a SAE that results in abandonment of the study AV access 
site, the subject  should be followed to the next follow -up visit after the study AVG  is abandoned. This allows for 
collection of  information about the subject ’s health status after the AVG  is abandoned.  After that visit, the  
subject can then be formally exited  from the study. This means that the date that AVG  patency is lost and the date 
of study withdrawal are not necessarily the same date.  
 
Reporting and Review of  Serious  Adverse Events  
SAEs must  be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of discovery , and to national and local regulatory 
authorities, in accordance with national and local policies and procedures.  In addition, all UADE s will be 
evaluated at the time of discovery  and reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours.   SAEs are reported by email or 
telephone call, using a designated SAE reporting form provided by the Sponsor.  
 
A final determination as to whether an SAE meets the requirements for expedited reporting to the FDA and 
participating IRBs will be made by the Sponsor.  
 
Reporting Deaths  
Data regarding a subject  death should be recorded on the AE/SAE CRF as follows:  
 
If the outcome of an AE is reported as FATAL, then the STOP DATE of the AE should be date of the death.  
The AE with the fatal outcome will generally be the ‘cause of death’ as stated in source documents. The AE 
causing the death should be recorded on the CRF either by selecting from the checklist of specified AEs OR 
by selecting "Other" and then specifying the AE causing the death.  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 23 of 25 
  
If a death is discovered during follow -up and there is no information available regarding the AE(s) leading to 
the death outcome, and mark as “other” for AE type.  Record ‘fatal’ for the outcome. The START DATE and 
STOP DATE recorded should be the same date, eg the date of death.  In the “Event Summary” section, 
provide the date of death.  Complete as much information as possible on th e CRF.   
 
For all deaths, a copy of source document information (e.g., death record, hospital admiss ion and discharge 
summary, etc) should be provided, if available.  Deaths should be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of 
discovery, along with any available source documents describing the death, as available. Additional Source 
document information regarding the death, as may be requested by the CEC , should be provided as soon as it 
becomes available.  
 
22.0 PROTOCOL VIOLATIONS  
 
Protocol Violation  is defined as any change, deviation, or departure from the study design or procedures of the 
research project that is not approved by the IRB and study sponsor prior to its initiation or implementation, OR 
deviation from standard operating procedures, Good Clinical Practices (GCPs), national or local regulations. 
Protocol violations may or may not be under the control of the research team or hospital staff.  
 
Major Protocol Violations  
All major protocol violations must be reported to the IRB, as applicable and in accordance with local IRB policy, 
AND to the study sponsor, immediately upon discovering them, and no later than seven (7) calendar days from 
the time the study team receives knowledge of the event . 
 
A major violation is a protocol violation that meets the following criteria:  
• Represent a serious or continuing failure on the part of the study team to comply with the protocol, 
standard operating procedures, GCPs, federal, state or local regulations  
• Impacts subject  safety or substantially alter risks to subject s. May or may not result in actual harm 
(clinical, emotional, social, financial, etc)  
• Significantly damages the completeness, accuracy and reliability of the data collected for the study  
• Is under control of the investigator/research team/hospital staff . 
 
Any evident patterns of noncompliance with the protocol requirements  will be cause for the site to be put on 
probation for a period of one month. If corrective  actions are not made, the site will be asked to withdraw from 
the study.  
 
A log of all protocol deviations should be maintained in the study regulatory binder.  
 
 
23.0 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITIES AND CONSIDERATIONS  
 
The responsibili ties described in this section are required by Federal law and regulation (21 CFR 812, 
Investigation Device Exemptions; 21CFR 50, Protection of Human Subjects; 21 CFR 56, Institutional Review 
Boards).  
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 24 of 25 
 Investigator R esponsibilities  
The study site investigator  is responsible for ensuring that the study is conducted according to all signed 
agreements, the study protocol, and applicable FDA regulations.  These responsibilities are listed below.  In 
addition, each investigator must complete and sign the Investigator’s Letter of Agreement provided by the 
Sponsor.  
• IRB approval. The investigator must submit the study protocol to his/her IRB and obtain their written 
approval before being allowed to participate in the study. The investigator is also responsible for fulfilling 
any conditions of approval imposed by the IRB.  
• Informed consent. Part of the IRB approval will include approval of Informed Consent text specific to the 
study.  The investigator must administer the approved informed consent text to each prospective study 
subject , and obtain the subject ’s signature on the text, prior to study enrollment.   
• Study coordinator.  To assure proper execution of the protocol, site investigators must identify a study 
coordinator for the site. Working under the authority of the investigator, the coordinator will assure that 
study requirements are fulfilled, and will be the key contact person  at the site for all aspects of study 
administration.  
• Records.  Site investigators must maintain accurate, complete, and current records relating to the conduct 
of the study.  Such records include  key study related correspondence (e.g., correspondence with IRB, 
DCC, sponsor, study monitors); study device accountability records; subject  case history information 
(CRFs, consent form, AE records).  
• The study site principal investigator has overall responsibility for supervision of the use of the  study  
device. The study investigator shall permit the device to be used only with subjects under his/her 
supervision.   
• Reporting requirements. The investigator is responsible for reporting any unanticipated adverse device 
effects, SAEs, protocol violations, withdrawal of IRB approval, and other required reports (progress 
report and final report) a ccording to the FDA guidelines and ICH GCP guidelines.  
 
Sponsor Responsibilities  
Phraxis, Inc. is the manufacturer of the VIG study device , the Sponsor of the study, and the IDE holder.  The 
Sponsor’s responsibilities include:  
• Ensure that the study is conducted according to the signed study s ite clinical agreement, investigational 
plan and protocol, ICH GCP guidelines, and all applicable regulatory regulations.  
• Provide study devices to participating study sites  
• Provide study device training to investigators and study site staff  
• Select the Principal investigator, site investigators, study sites and other study consultants (e.g. DCC) who 
participate in the study  
• Provide financial support to study sites and consultants per individual Agreements  
• Establish regulatory standards per federal regulations for clinical study sites and other study participants  
and perform regular site monitoring to assure compliance with them.  
• Perform site monitoring of clinical data at study sites  
 
The Sponsor ( Phraxis ) retains ownership of all clinical data generated in the study and controls the use of the data 
for purposes of regulatory submission to the US and other governments.  
 
VIG-CAS /Investigational Plan  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 25 of 25 
 Supply of Study Devices  
VIG devices will be provided to each study site per the terms of a Study Agreement betwee n Phraxis, Inc. and the 
site. At  the cessation of the study, all unused study devices will be dispositioned per the agreements between the 
site and Phraxis, Inc.  
 
Record Retention P olicy  
Study documents should be retained for at least two years after the last approval of a marketing application, and 
until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications; OR at least two years have elapsed since the 
formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  The Sponsor will inform in writing 
when study documents are no longer needed.  Study sites should not destroy any study records without first 
confirming with the sponsor.  
  
 
24.0 MEASURES TO AVOID BIAS  
 
Measures that will be used to avoid bias include:  
• Use of independent CEC  
• Objective criteria for endpoint determination  
•  Intention -to-treat primary analysis  
 
 
25.0 PUBLICATION POLICY  
 
The publication of results from any single center experience within the study is strongly discouraged until one 
year following the study’s termination to allow for preparation and publication of the multicenter results.  
 
 
26.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Yevzlin AS, Setum CM, Kallok MJ, Valliant A. Percutaneous AVG creation in a canine model. 
Presented at the 2013 American Society of Diagnostic and Interventional Nephrology 9th Annual 
Scientific Meeting.  
 
2. Ebner, A, Ross JR, Setum CM, Kallok, MJ, Yevzlin AS. Transcatheter Anastomosis Connector  System 
for Vascular Access Graft Placement: Results from a First -in-Human Pilot Study. J Vasc Access  2016; 
17:111 -117. 
 
 