 
Version date 07/26/2022   
 
 
Assessing Benefits of Near Infrared Autofluorescence 
(NIRAF) Detection for Identifying Parathyroid Glands 
during Total Thyroidectomy.  
 Research Protocol  
 
 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
Carmen C . Solórzano, M D, FACS  
Professor of Surgery  
Chair, Department of Surgery  
Director, Vanderbilt Endocrine Surgery  
Vanderbilt University  Medical Center  
 
 
Colleen M. Kiernan, MD , MPH, FACS  
Assistant Professor of Surgery  
Department of Surgery  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version date 07/26/2022   
 
 
 
Table of Contents : 
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
 
Version date 07/26/2022  1.0 Background  
 
Inadvertent damage to or excision of a healthy parathyroid gland (PG) following a total 
thyroidectomy could result in transient hypocalcemia (< 6 months) in 5 – 35% of cases or 
permanent hypocalcemia (> 6 months) in up to 7% of the patients (1, 2). Patient that 
develop hypocalcemia will thus need to take high doses of oral calcium and vitamin D 
levels every 4 –8 hours  temporarily if it is a case of transient hypocalcemia or for the rest 
of their life if is a case of permanent hypocalcemia . Preoperative modalities such as 
ultrasound imaging, 99mTechnetium -sestamibi scintigraphy, and computed tomography 
(CT) are not as effective in localizing healthy parathyroid glands  and may not always 
correlate well with the surgical field of view as observed intraoperatively. Consequently, 
most surgeons rely on visual identification of PGs  during surgery , whereby  the accuracy 
of PG identification is eventually determined by her/his surgical skill and experience ( 3). 
When in doubt, a surgeon routinely confirms the identity of PG tissue intraoperatively by 
sending the specimen for frozen section analysis that typically requires a wait time of 20 –
30 minutes per sample ( 4), is costly  and has risk of possible injury to a healthy PG .  
By easily being able to distinguish parathyroid from other tissues intraoperatively, 
postsurgical  complication s and associated costs  may be reduced.  The unique discovery 
of near infrared autofluorescence (NIRAF) in parathyroid  tissues demonstrated that optical 
modalities that detect NIRAF can be utilize d for non -invasive and label -free identification 
of parathyroid tissues  with an accuracy as high as 97%  (5, 6). Since then, several research 
groups have explored the feasibility of localizing parathyroid glands  using NIRAF detection 
with reasonable success , resulting in FDA permitting marketing for this optical technique  
(7). In this stud y, we plan to evaluate  whether the device called ‘PTeye’  (AiBiomed, Santa 
Barbara, CA) is beneficial or not, for the surgeon and patient during  total thyroid ectomies . 
The results of s uch a study will  help us to understand and assess the true impact of optical 
modalities such as PTeye on (i) improving the quality and efficiency of  total 
thyroid ectomies  and (ii) minimiz ing risk of postsurgical complications and related 
expenses.   
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
The goal of this study is to  assess whether using PTeye  – a NIRAF detection modality  – 
can improve patient outcomes and reduce healthcare associated costs after  total 
thyroid ectomy procedur es. The specific aims of this study is to determine if PTeye is 
beneficial or not for (i) intraoperative identification of parathyroid tissues, (ii) improving 
efficiency of  total thyroid ectomi es, and (iii) minimizing risk of postsurgical complications . 
 
By being able to quickly and definitively locate parathyroid glands while in the operating 
room, the duration of surgical procedure could be further reduced . In addition , the number 
of frozen section biopsy and associated costs can be minimized . Furthermore, accidental 
excision or damage to healthy parathyroid glands during total thyroid ectomy procedure s 
can be decreased, thus minimizing the risk for  postoperative hypocalcemia and 
hypoparathyroidism.  
   
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
Modalities that rely on NIRAF detection for label -free parathyroid  identification have been 
successfully validated in several studies  (8-11). FDA recently allowed marketing  to 
Fluobeam  (a commercially available  imaging system) and PTeye  (a commercial fiber 
 
Version date 07/26/2022  probe -based system) in 2018  (7). Certain outcome studies have reported that imaging -
based systems for NIRAF detection such as Fluobeam was able to reduce the incidence 
of postsurgical t ransient  hypocal cemia after total thyroidectomy (10, 11). However , other 
studies have reported that they observed no benefit from imaging -based systems in 
minimizing postsurgical hypocalcemia  (13). In a recent study, Thomas et al.  demonstrated 
that a fiber probe -based system – the PTeye – was more sensitive in parathyroid 
identification compared to an imaging -based system  for NIRAF detection  (14). To date, 
there has been no studies that determine the impact of a fiber probe -based system (i.e. 
PTeye)  during total thyroid ectomy  operation s in minimizing  a number of frozen sections  
obtained intraoperatively  or postsurgical complications.  
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusions:  
• All adult s (i.e., ≥ 18 years old) patients with thyroid disease who will be 
undergoing  total thyroidectomy ( includes patients who have undergone a prior 
neck exploration for parathyroid disease or other but have an intact thyroid  
gland ). 
• All adults (i.e., ≥ 18 years old) patients with persist ing thyroid disease and will be 
undergoing re -operative or completion thyroidectomy.  
 
Exclusion:  
• Children and minors  
• Pregnant women  
• Patients with concurrent parathyroid and thyroid disease  
• Patients with incidental enlarged p arathyroid discovered during thyroidectomy 
procedure . 
• Patients undergoing thyroid lobectomy or p artial thyroidectomy  
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
The research will be designed as a single center  study, where p atient recruitment will be 
conducted by the participating surgeon s at Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) . 
At VUMC, t he initial  evaluation will be conducted while the surgeon  is evaluat ing the 
patients at the Endocrine Surgery Clinics at the Vanderbilt Eskind Diabetes Center, 
Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center  or the Odess  clinic  (for ENT patients) . The final eligibility 
of each patient for participating in this study will be determined by the participating surgeon  
in accordance of his/her medical conditions . Following the exclusion criteria, the study will 
aim to accrue all eligible patients who are going to the OR as part of their standard surgical 
procedure:  
 
1.  On the date of procedure consent  at clinic  or the date of surgery , patients will be 
given a paper consent form detailing about the outcome study with PTeye  in 
addition to the consent for the surgical procedure  that will be performed.  
2.  The key study personnel will briefly describe the PTeye and its application to the 
patient.  
3.  If the patient is interested in participating, the key study personnel will provide the 
patient with a paper -based consent form.  
4. The key study personnel or the surgeon assigned to the patient will be available to 
discuss the protocol with the patient (including, risks, benefits, alternatives, etc.).  
 
Version date 07/26/2022  The patient will also be provided with the contact information of the principle 
investigator should they have any questions.  
5. If the patient consents to be part of the study, a scan of their signed consent  form 
will be stored digitally in the patient’s medical record .  
Prior to surgery, the patient will be assigned a unique ID (e.g. TThy _001). The unique ID 
will be utilized for randomly allocat ing the patient  to the experimental  arm (where the 
surgeon will use PTeye) or a control arm (where the surgeon will not use PTeye ). The 
allocation will be conducted by the study coordinator  using ‘Random Allocation Software’ 
(http://mahmoodsaghaei.tripod.com/Softwares/randalloc.html ). 
 
6.0 Study Procedures  
 
For patients assigned to the study arm, the surgeon will use the PTeye as an intraoperative 
tool to identify if a suspect tissue is a parathyroid or not, during the total thyroid ectomy 
procedure . The surgeon will first take 5 baseline NIRAF measurements on the thyroid 
gland (or neck muscle, if thyroid is absent) using the disposable sterile fiber probe that is 
connected to the PTeye console (see Figure 1), as per device functionality requirements. 
The subsequent step would involve touching the target tissue in the neck with the fiber 
optic p robe, following which the  PTeye will indicate to the surgeon if the tissue is 
parathyroid or not . Parameters which are displayed on the PTeye console – Baseline 
values, Detection Intensity, Parathyroid Detection Ratio – will be recorded for each patient 
enrolled in the study arm. PTeye indicates that a tissue is parathyroid if it displays the 
‘Parathyr oid Detection Ratio’ is greater than 1.2. The rest of the surgical procedure will 
follow according to standard protocol.  
 
For patients assigned to the control arm, the surgeon will not use the PTeye and will 
proceed with the total thyroid ectomy as usual, while relying solely on her/his surgical 
experience in identifying the parathyroid glands during the operations.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A commercial fiber probe -based system (PTeye, AiBiomed) for detecting near infrared 
autofluorescence (NIRAF) utilized for intraoperative parathyroid gland  identification. PTeye 
consists of 1) the console that has a display and indicates to the surgeon if a tissue is parathyroid 
or not, 2) a detachable fiber optic probe, and 3) a foot -pedal which is activated by the surgeon for 
tissue NIRAF measurements . 
 
De-identified information regarding (i) patient demographics, (ii) duration of surgery, (iii) 
number of frozen section analysis performed, (iv) frozen section and permanent histology 
reports of all excised tissues, (v) blood calcium levels (before surgery , within 24 hours 

 
Version date 07/26/2022  after surgery, 1st postoperative visit  after surgery and 6 months after surgery  (if followed 
up)), (vi) blood parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels ( within 24 hours after surgery, 1st 
postoperative visit after surgery  and 6 months after surgery  (if followed up ), (vii) history 
and duration of calcium and/or Vitamin D supplementation before and after surgery  and 
(viii) postsurgical complications, if any and history of  ER visits or  hospitalization due to low 
blood  calcium  will be compiled  for all enrolled patients. These  preoperative, intraoperative 
and postoperative investigations are to be performed at the surgeon’s discretion as 
necessary for the patient. These  parameters would then be compared between the study 
arm and the control arm to truly gauge the impact or value of a device like PTeye for total 
thyroid ectomie s. 
 
7.0 Risks  
 
• The proposed study is designed to co llect NIRAF  measurements  from neck tissues  
with a commercial device called PTeye during a total thyroidectomy . The device 
that will be used for NIRAF measurements has been permitted  for marketing  by 
the FDA.  
• Each PTeye  measurement takes less than 2 seconds, with the whole set of 
measurements not adding more than 5 minutes to the surgical procedure.  Thus, 
there is  a minimal increase of risk of surgery due to the potential five extra minutes 
of anesthesia time associated with the study . In addition, the participating surgeon  
will evaluate the eligibility of the patient based on his or her medical condition.  
Patients with high anesthetic risks will not be asked to participate in the study.  
 
• Since the power of near infrared  light from PTeye will be extremely low, no side 
effects should be introduced to the patient.  
 
• There should not be any discomforts, inconveniences, and/or risk resulting from 
this study.  
 
• The study should not increase the risk of infection as a disposable sterile probe is 
used for each patient .   
 
• The PTeye device used in this study has been  permitted by the  FDA for marketing . 
The FDA permit for marketing  is granted based on the caveat that necessary 
precautionary measures will be taken by the surgeon to minimize the probable 
risks (as listed in the device brochure).  The PTeye may be associated with 
unknown/unforeseen risks as with any other FDA  cleared  for marketing medical 
devices used during surgical procedures.  
 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or Others  
 
Upon identification, adverse events resulting from this in vivo  data acquisition procedure 
will be reported to the PI as well as the Vanderbilt IRB immediately. The study will be 
immediately terminated and not resumed until the sources leading to the adverse events 
are identified.   
 
 
 
Version date 07/26/2022  Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
The data acquisition procedure will be terminated if the medical conditions of the 
participant show some unexpected and adverse changes.  The decision of terminating the 
study will be  determined by the participating surgeon .  
 
9.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
Benmiloud  et al. studied  the impact of NIRAF -based identification of parathyroid  gland s 
during total thyroidectomies,  which comprised of a group of 93 patients w here NIRAF was 
used by a surgeon for parathyroid identification and a control group of 153 patients where 
NIRAF was not used  (10). Their study reported that mean parathyroid glands identified by 
surgeon with NIRAF imaging was significantly higher at 3.1±0.9, while that of same 
surgeon without NIRAF imaging was 2.6 ±0.1 (p=0.0001) . Based on this data  (mean 
difference: 0.5 and standard deviation: 1.0) , it was determined that in order to observe a 
statistically significant difference  (i.e. for an expected mean  difference: 0.7 and expected 
standard deviation:  1.0), 33 patients would be required per group (for a 9 5% powered 
study). Since this study may involve patient  follow -up for data up to  6 months after surgery, 
we will thus assume an approximate data attrition rate of 20%, thus requiring a recruitment 
of 40 patients per group. Therefore, a total of 80 patients (study and control arm) should 
be recruited per surgeon for this  study at this site. To assess the influence of impact for 
surgeons based on her/his su rgical experience, one senior surgeon (>10 years of 
experience) and one junior surgeon (<5 years of experience) will participate in study. 
Overall, 160 patients need to be enrolled to assess the impact of this technology.  
 
10.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
All study staff are required to complete the CITI Protection of Human Subjects Training 
Program.  All data pertaining to this study will be stored in a HIPPA -compliant  data spread -
sheet with access limited solely  to the investigators listed on the study. Only indirect 
identifiers such as medical record number (MRN) will be used. Participants’ information, 
including his or her name and medical record number, will be available only to the PI and 
key study personnel. It will be stored in a password -protected computer and a locked file 
cabinet in the study coordinator’s office where we also will store the consent forms. All 
records will only be available to the PI and key study personnel. All information potentially 
identifying the participant will not be included in the data analysis or reporting of results 
therein.   
  
11.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
The duration of the study is expected to be approximately two year and will depend on 
patient availability.  The data acquired from this study will be preserved indefinitely, as it 
may influence the future development of the entire research project.  Howev er, the data 
will not be accessible to anyone other than the participants of this study.  All original paper 
records, record sheets, preoperative and postoperative lab investigations, 
drug/medication history, post -surgical medical history, histo pathologica l diagnoses of the 
investigated tissue samples, will be collectively retained by the PI  or Key Study Personnel .  
The data of this study will be stored in a password protected computer, and only users 
with permission from the PI can access the data base.   
 
12.0  References  
 
Version date 07/26/2022   
1. Antakia R, Edafe O, Uttley L, Balasubramanian SP. Effectiveness of Preventative 
and Other Surgical Measures on Hypocalcemia Following Bilateral Thyroid 
Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Thyroid. 2014 ; 25:95 -106. 
2. Edafe O, Antakia R, Laskar  N, et al. Systematic review and meta -analysis of 
predictors of post -thyroidectomy hypocalcaemia. The British journal of surgery. 
2014 Mar ; 101 (4):307 -20. 
3. Sosa JA, Bowman HM, Tielsch  JM, et al. The Importance of Surgeon Experience 
for Clinical and Economic Outcomes from Thyroidectomy. Annals of Surgery. 
1998 ; 228 (3):320 -30. 
4. Novis DA, Zarbo RJ. Interinstitutional comparison of frozen section turnaround 
time. Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine. 1997 ; 121 (6):559.  
5. McWade MA, Sanders ME, Broome JT, et al. Establishing the clinical utility of 
autofluorescence spectroscopy for parathyroid detection. Surgery. 2016 ; 
159(1):193 -203. 
6. McWade MA, Paras C, White LM, et al. A novel optical approach to intraoperative 
detection of parathyroid glands. Surgery. 2013 12// ; 154 (6):1371 -7. 
7. The United States Food and Drug Administration. FDA permits marketing of two 
devices that detect parathyroid tissue in real -time during surgery. Available at: 
https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm624982.
htm. Accessed November 3, 2018.  
8. Ladurner R, Sommerey S, Arabi NA, et al. Intraoperative near -infrared 
autofluorescence imaging of parathyroid glands. Surgical Endoscopy. 2016:1 -6 
9. Falco J, Dip F, Quadri P, et al. Increased identification of parathyroid glands using 
near infrared light during thyroid and parathyroid surgery. Surgical Endoscopy. 
2017 September 01 ; 31(9):3737 -42. 
10. Benmiloud F, Rebaudet S, Varoquaux A, et al. Impact of autofluorescence -based 
identification of parathyroids during total thyroidectomy on postoperative 
hypocalcemia: a before and after controlled study. Surgery . 2018; 163(1):23 -30 
11. Benmiloud F, Godiris -Petit G, Gras R, et al . Association of Autofluorescence -
Based Detection of the Parathyroid Glands During Total Thyroidectomy With 
Postoperative Hypocalcemia Risk: Results of the PARAFLUO Multicenter 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA S urgery.  2019; (in press)  
12. Thomas G, McWade MA, Paras C, et al. Developing a clinical prototype to guide 
surgeons for intraoperative label -free identification of parathyroid glands in real 
time. Thyroid. 2018 ; 28(11):1517 -31 
13. DiMarco A, Chotalia R, Bloxham R, et al. Does fluoroscopy prevent inadvertent 
parathyroidectomy in thyroid surgery? The Annals of the Royal College of 
Surgeons of England. 2019 Jul 15 ; 101 (7):508 -13. 
14. Thomas  G, Squires  MH, Metcalf, T., et al . Imaging or a Fiber Probe -based 
Approach? Assessing Different Methods to Detect Near Infrared Autofluorescence 
for Intraoperative Parathyroid Identification. Journal of the American College of 
Surgeons.  2019; (in press)  
 