Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	3	of	44  
	
 
13	STUDY	MANAGEMENT 	............................................................................................................................... .	37	
13.1	IRB/IEC 	OR	COMPETENT 	AUTHORITY 	APPROVAL	...........................................................................	37 	
13.2	MONITORING	.................................................... ............................................................... ..................................	37 	
13.3	STUDY	AUDITS	....................................................................................................................... ............................	37 	
13.4	PROTOCOL 	DEVIATIONS	................................................................................................................... ............	37	
13.5	DATA	MONITORING 	COMMITTEE	..................................................... ........................................................	38 	
14	DEVICE	 ACCOUNTABILITY 	......................................................................................................................... 	39	
15	PROTECTION 	OF	HUMAN	SUBJECTS 	...................................................................................................... 	39	
15.1	STATEMENT 	OF	COMPLIANCE	................................................................................................................... 	39	
15.2	INFORMED 	CONSENT	...................................................................................................................... ...............	39 	
16	STATISTICAL	CONSIDERATIONS 	............................................................................................................. 	40	
16.1	GENERAL 	ANALYSIS 	PRINCIPLES	.................................................... .........................................................	40 	
16.2	STUDY	ENDPOINTS 	............................................................................................................................. ...................	40 	
16.3	POWER 	AND	SAMPLE 	SIZE	ESTIMATION	...............................................................................................	42 	
17	PUBLICATION 	POLICY	.................................................................................................................................	 44	
	
 

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	4	of	44  
	
 
1 PROTOCOL 	SIGNATURE 	PAGE	
Protocol:	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
Confidentiality 	
I	understand	that	the	following	is	considered	confidential:	stu dy	protocol,	study	case	
report	forms,	study‐related	docu mentation	including	corresponde nce	with	the	study	
sponsor,	all	pre‐publication	data 	derived	from	the	study,	and	technical	information	
that	has	not	been	previ ously	made	public.		
	
I	understand	that	the	contents	of 	this	Protocol	may	not	be	used 	in	any	other	clinical	
study	and	may	not	be	disclosed	t o	any	other	person	or	entity	wi thout	the	prior	
written	permission	of	the	Sponsor .	The	foregoing	shall	not	appl y	to	disclosure	
required	by	law	or	regulation,	f or	example	submission	to	an	Ethics	Committee;	
however,	I	will	give	prompt	noti ce	to	the	Sponsor	of	any	such	disclosure.	
Compliance	with	EC 	and	Protocol 	Requirements 	
I	have	read	and	agree	to	conduct 	this	clinical	study	in	accorda nce	with	the	design	and	
specific	provisions	of	this	prot ocol;	modifications	to	the	study	or	protocol	are	
acceptable	only	with	a	mutually	a greed	upon	protocol	amendment. 	I	agree	to	await	
approval	for	the	protocol	and	in formed	consent	from	the	governing	EC	or	equivalent	
review	board,	and	from	the	local 	Ministry	of	Health	(if	require d)	if	my	site	is	located	
outside	the	United	States,	before	initiating	the	study.	I	agree 	to	obtain	informed	
consent	from	subjects	prior	to	p erformance	of	study‐specific	screening	assessments	
or	enrollment	in	the	study.	I	ag ree	to	collect	and	record	data	 as	required	by	this	
protocol	and	case	report	forms,	to	prepare	annual,	final	and	ad verse	effect	reports	as	
required	by	this	protocol,	and	t o	maintain	study	documentation	 for	the	period	of	time	
required.			
	
Site	Number:		
Printed	Name	of	Investigator:	
Signature	of	Investigato r:	 Date	of	Signature:		
	
		

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	5	of	44  
	
 
2 ABBREVIATIONS 	and	DEFINITIONS	
	
ACT	 Activated	Clotting	Time 	
AE	 Adverse	Event	
AF	 Atrial	fibrillation	 	
AFEQT	 Atrial	Fibrillation	Effect	on	Quality	of	Life	questionnai re	
ASD	 Atrial	septal	defect	
AT	 Atrial	tachycardia	
CABG	 Coronary	artery	bypass	graft	(surgery)	
CAD	 Coronary	artery	disease	
CBC	 Complete	blood	count	
CEC	 Clinical	Event	Committee	CFAE	 Complex	fractionated	atrial	electrograms	
CHADS
2	 Scoring	system	in	determining	s troke	risk	for	those	with	AF		 	
CIED	 Cardiac implanted electronic device 	
CRA	 Clinical	Research	Associate	
e‐CRF	 Electronic	Case	Report	Form	
CT	 Computed	tomography	
CTI	 Cavotriscuspid	isthmus	DSMB	 Data	and	Safety	Monitoring	Board	
EC	 Ethics	Committee	
ECG	 Electrocardiogram	
EDC	 Electronic	Data	Capture	
GCP	 Good	Clinical	Practice	HCG	 Human	chorionic	gonadotrophin	
HIPAA	 Health	Insurance	Portabi lity	and	Accountability	Act	
HRQL	 Health	Related	Quality	of	Life,	a	subscale	of	the	UFS‐QOL	ICE	 Intracardiac	echocardiography	
ICF	 Informed	consent	form	ICH	 International	Conference	on	Harmonization	
INR	 International	normalized	ratio	
LAA	 Left	atrial	appendage	
LMWH	 Low‐molecular‐weight	heparin	
LV	 Left	ventricle	MI	 Myocardial	infarction	
MRI	 Magnetic	resonance	imaging	
NYHA	 New	York	Heart	Association	
PVI	 Pulmonary	vein	isolation	
RF	 Radiofrequency	SADE	 Serious	Adverse	Device	Effect	
SAE	 Serious	Adverse	Event	
TEE	 Transesophageal	echocardiogram	
TTE	 Transthoracic	echocardiogram	
TIA	 Transient	ischemic	attack	UADE	 Unanticipated	Adverse	Device	Effect	
	

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	6	of	44  
	
 
3 PROTOCOL 	SYNOPSIS 	
Sponsor: 	Abbott	Electrophysiology 	(Topera,	Inc.)
Protocol 	Title:	Randomized	Evaluation	of	Redo	Ablation	Procedures	of	Atrial	Fi brillation	
with	Focal	Impulse	and	Rotor	Mod ulation	Guided	Procedures	(REDO ‐FIRM)	
Planned 	Study	Centers: 	Up	to	30	centers	in	Europeand	North	America
Primary 	Objective: 	
Evaluate	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	FIRM‐guided	procedures 	in	conventional	repeat	
(“redo”)	RF	ablation	for	the	treatment	of	paroxysmal	and	persistent	atrial	fibrillation.	
Secondary/Additional 	Objectives: 	
 Evaluate	the	acute	effectiveness	 of	FIRM‐guided	procedures	in	eliminating	the	source	of	
arrhythmia.	
 Quality	of	life	outcomes.	
 Paroxysmal	and	persistent	AF	outcomes.	
 Post‐ablation	inducibility.	
 Health	economic	outcomes.	
Study	Design:		
This	is	a	prospective,	multicenter,	randomized	study	to	assess	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	
FIRM‐guided	procedures	in	conventional	“redo”	RF	ablation	for	t he	treatment	of	persistent	
and	paroxysmal	atrial	fibrillation.	
Sample	Size:		
A	total	of	268	subjects	will	be	e nrolled	and	equally	(1:1)	rand omized.	
Randomization: 		
FIRM	+	PVI	vs.	PVI+	(after	confirming	PVI	reconnection	by	Lasso ).	
Ablation 	Procedure: 	
 FIRM	+	(Re‐)	PVI	vs	(Re‐)PVI+	
 Optional	ablation:	
 FIRM	group:	prophylactic	ablation*	of	the	RA‐Isthmus	line	and	a ny	inherent	
arrhythmia	that	is	found	to	have 	focal	firing	during	procedure. 		
 Control	group:	ablation	of	any	arrhythmia	that	is	found	to	have 	focal	firing	
during	procedure/that	is	provoked.	The	following	prophylactic	a blation*	may	
be	performed:		
 RA‐isthmus	line	
 Non	PV‐trigger	(if	provoked)	
 Caval	vein	isolation	
 No	LA	appendage	isolation.		
 *Prophylactic	 ablation	should	be	performed 	for	all	study	subjects	if	it	is	the	standard	 of	
practice	of	the	Investigator. 	
Study	Assessments	& 	Follow‐Up:	
 Patient	informed	consent 	
 Screening/Baseline 	

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	7	of	44  
	
 
Follow‐Up	Assessments:	
 10	days	post	procedure	 for	safety	assessment. 	
 6	weeks	post	procedure	prior	to	blanking	period	exit.		
 3,	6,	and	12	months	with	7	days	o f	continuous	monitoring	within 	1‐2	weeks	of	each	
follow‐up	visit. 	
Blanking	period	is	8	weeks	post‐p rocedure.	Cardioversion	may	be 	done	around	week	6	to	
have	patients	exit	blanking	period.	
Amiodarone	discontinuation:	4‐6	weeks	prior	to	procedure;	4‐6	w eeks	post‐procedure	or	
follow	standard	practice.	Antiarrhythmic	drug,	Class	IC:	Discontinue	after	5	half‐lives. 	
Inclusion 	Criteria: 	
Subjects	are	required	to	meet	the	following	inclusion	criteria: 	
1. Male	or	female	18	–	80	years	of	age.	
2. Has	at	least	one	(1)	e pisode	of	spontaneous 	persistent	or	parox ysmal	atrial	fibrillation	
documented	by	rhythm	s trip/ECG	following	the	most	recent	ablation.	
3. Had	one	(1)	previous	AF	ablation	 after	January	01,	2013,	but	NO T	within	the	last	3	
months.	
4. Oral	anticoagulation	required	with	either	Novel	Oral	Anticoagul ant	( NOAC)	or	Warfarin	
(in	the	case	of	Warfarin,	therapeutic	INR	≥	2.0	for	at	least	three	weeks	prior	to	randomization)	for	those	subjects	who	meet	two	or	more	of	the	f ollowing	criteria: 	
a. Age	65	years	or	older	
b. Diabetes	
c. Coronary	artery	disease	(CAD)	
d. Congestive	heart	failure	
e. Hypertension	with	systolic>165	mm	Hg	
5. Willingness	and	able	to	remain	on	anti‐coagulation	therapy	for	 a	minimum	of	3	months	
post	procedure	for	all	subjects	and	at	least	12	months	post	pro cedure	if	the	patient	is	on	
anti‐coagulation	pre‐procedure	or	has	CHADS
2	score	≥	2	(or	CHADs‐Vasc	score	>1).	
6. Left	atrial	diameter	<	6.0	cm	vi a	transthoracic	echo	or	transesophageal	echo;	or	<6.5	cm	
via	CT	or	MRI	up	to	6	months	pre‐procedure	with	documented	imag e	of	largest	
dimension,	or	intra‐procedural	IC E	or	atrial	angiogram	if	CT/MR I	not	available.	
7. Willingness,	ability	and	commitment	to	participate	in	baseline	 and	follow‐up	evaluations	
without	participation	in	another	 clinical	trial	which	may	confo und	the	results	of	this	
study,	unless	approved	by	the	Sponsor.	
8. Informed	consent	in	writing	from	patient.	

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	8	of	44  
	
 
Exclusion 	Criteria: 	
Subjects	must	NOT	meet	any	of	th e	following	exclusion	criteria: 		
1. Presence	of	structural	heart	dis ease	of	clinical	significance	including:	
a. Coronary	artery	disease	with	either:	
o Coronary	artery	bypass	surgery	(CABG)	within	the	last	six	months,	
or	
o Stable/unstable	angina	or	ongoing	myocardial	ischemia	
b. Congenital	heart	disease	where	either	the	underlying	abnormalit y	or	its	
correction	prohibits	or	increases	the	risk	of	ablation.	
2. NYHA	Class	IV.	
3. Ejection	fraction	<	35%	(within	previous	6	months).	
4. Previous	AF	ablation	within	the	last	3	months.	
5. ASD	closure	device,	LAA	closure	 device,	prosthetic	mitral	or	tr icuspid	valve,	or	
permanent	pacemaker.	
6. History	of	myocardial	infarction	 (MI)	within	the	past	three	(3) 	months.	
7. Contraindication	to	Heparin	and	W arfarin/other	novel	oral	anticoagulants	(e.g.	
dabigatran,	rivaroxaban,	apixaban).	
8. Diagnosed	atrial	myxoma.	
9. Any	concomitant	arrhythmia	or	th erapy	that	could	interfere	with	the	interpretation	
of	the	results	from	this	study.	
10. Untreatable	allergy	 to	contrast	media.	
11. Severe	electrolyte	abnormalities 	at	time	of	the	ablation	proced ure	or	atrial	
fibrillation	secondary	to	electro lyte	imbalance,	thyroid	diseas e,	or	reversible	non‐
cardiac	cause.	
12. Atrial	fibrillation	from	a	rever sible	cause	(e.g.,	surgery,	hyp erthyroidism,	
pericarditis).	
13. History	of	pulmonary	embolus	within	one	year	of	enrollment.	
14. Acute	pulmonary	edema.	
15. Atrial	clot/thrombus	on	imaging	s uch	as	on	a	trans‐esophageal	e chocardiogram	
(TEE)	performed	within	72	hours	 of	the	procedure	if	deemed	appr opriate	by	
investigator.	
16. Any	history	of	a	cerebrovascular 	disease	(including	stroke	or	T IA)	within	the	past	6	
months.	
17. Any	anticipation	of	cardi ac	transpla
ntation	or	other	cardiac	su rgery	within	the	next	
12	months.	
18. Significant	pulmonary	disease,	(e.g.	restrictive	pulmonary	dise ase,	constrictive	or	
chronic	obstructive	pulmonary	dis ease)	or	any	other	disease	or	 malfunction	of	the	
lungs	or	respiratory	system	that 	produces	severe	chronic	sympto ms	and	
significantly	increases	risk	to	sedation	or	anesthesia.	
19. Acute	illness	or	active	systemic	infection	or	sepsis.	
20. Any	history	of	blood	clotting	ab normalities	or	bleeding	abnorma lities.	
21. Life	expectancy	of	less	than	12	months.	
22. Any	Intramural	thrombus,	tumor,	or	other	abnormality	that	precl udes	catheter	
introduction	or	safe	manipulation.	

Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
	
 
 
CLN–108, Rev C  Page	9	of	44  
	
 
23. Women	known	to	be	pregnant.
Safety	Assessments: 	
Safety	shall	be	evaluated	both	acute	(in	hospital)	and	long	ter m:	
 Freedom	from	serious	adverse	even ts	related	to	the	procedure	wi thin	10	days	of	the	
procedure.	
 Freedom	from	procedure‐related	se rious	adverse	events	(includin g	from	any	repeat	
procedures	required)	within	 one	year	of	the	procedure.	
	
Effectiveness 	Assessments: 	
 Acute	Effectiveness	
The	acute	success	of	FIRM‐guided	p rocedure	is	defined	as	elimin ation	of	the	source	of	
arrhythmia	identified	by	FIRMap	as	indicated	by:	
1. No	evidence	of	the	source	on	FIRMap	immediately	post‐procedure,	OR	
2. Reduction	of	electrogram	amplitude	to	<0.2mV	in	region	designat ed	by	FIRMap.	
	
 Long‐term	Effectiveness	
The	long‐term	effectiveness	of	F IRM‐guided	procedures	versus	co nventional	ablation	
shall	be	defined	as:		
	
1. Freedom	from	atrial	fibrillation	(AF),	atrial	tachycardia	(AT),	or	atrial	flutter	(AFL)	recurrence	at	3‐12	months	post	procedure.	
	
Freedom	from	AF/AT/AFL	recurrenc e	is	defined	as	no	documented	e pisodes	>	30	
seconds	with	conventional	non‐invasive	7‐day	monitoring.	In	the 	case	of	a	cardiac	
implanted	electronic	device	(CIED ),	freedom	from	AF/AT	/AFL	rec urrence	is	defined	
as	no	documented	episodes	>	30	seconds	in	a	1‐week	window	of	th e	follow‐up	visits,	
in	addition	to	any	symptomatic	episodes	with	documented	episode 	>	30	seconds.		AT	
recurrence	does	not	include	episodes	of	CTI	(cavotricuspid	isth mus)	dependent	
flutter.	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 
	 	 Page	10	of	44	
	
 
 
4 BACKGROUND 	AND	RATIONALE 	
	
Atrial	fibrillation	(AF)	is	the	most	common	sustained	arrhythmia	in	man,	and	
has	an	increasing	population	pre valence	over	time.	Treatment	is	aimed	at	
stroke	prevention	on	the	one	hand ,	and	amelioration	of	symptoms	
(palpitations,	lightheadedness,	d yspnea,	fatigue)	due	to	the	arrhythmia.	
Medical	therapy	often	fails	to	r ender	a	satisfactory	response	f or	the	latter,	
prompting	the	search	for	alternative	therapies.	Surgical	and,	i n	the	last	15	
years,	catheter	ablation	techniq ues	have	been	devised	to	try	to 	prevent	
episodes	from	starting.	Ground breaking	work	by	Haïssaguerre1	showed	that	
premature	discharges	or	rapid	repeated	firing	from	the	pulmonar y	veins	(PVs)	
could	trigger	AF	episodes	and	th at	electrical	isolation	of	the	PVs	could	
potentially	cure	the	patient	of	A F.	PV	isolation	currently	is	a 	painstaking	
process	consisting	of	delivering	 radiofrequency	energy	in	the	l eft	atrium	to	
isolate	these	veins.	Such	proced ures	take	3‐5	hrs.	to	complete	depending	on	
the	complexity	of	the	individual 	case,	and	a	majority	of	patien ts	require	a	2nd	
or	even	3rd	procedure	to	achieve 	acceptable	antiarrhythmic	resu lts.	Despite	
considerable	investigative	effort ,	the	exact	pathophysiology	of 	how	PV	triggers	
initiate	and	or	maintain	episo des	of	AF	has	been	elusive.		
	Recently,	Narayan	et	al
2	have	developed	an	algorithm	that	has	been	licensed	
for	use	with	a	novel	mapping	t echnology	(RhythmView,	Abbott	
Electrophysiology	(Topera,	Inc.),	Menlo	Park,	CA)	for	analyzing	atrial	
recordings	during	human	AF,	find ing	that	>95%	of	cases	demonstr ate	either	a	
rapidly	spinning	rotor	(small	ci rcuit)	or	very	rapid	focal	impulse	formation.	
Furthermore,	they	have	shown	tha t	catheter	ablation	at	these	re latively	
circumscribed	areas	can	signific antly	affect	AF,	either	by	subs tantial	slowing	of	
the	rate	or	termination	(to	an	at rial	tachycardia	or	sinus	rhythm).	In	the	
CONFIRM	(CONventional	vs	Focal	Impulse	and	Rotor	Modulation)	tr ial,	
patients	were	treated	with	eithe r	conventional	mapping	and	abla tion	(largely	
PV	isolation	or	PVI)	vs	ablation	of	rotors	or	sites	of	focal	im pulse	formation	as	
designated	by	the	mapping	algorit hm,	followed	by	conventional	a blation	(PVI).	
The	authors	found	much	higher	acute	and	long‐term	efficacy	when 	focal	
impulse	and	rotor	modulation	(FI RM	procedure)	was	used	(82.4	vs 	44%	
freedom	from	AF	at	24	months	pos t	procedure).	Although	CONFIRM	 was	a	
controlled	study,	a	randomized	 evaluation	would	be	warranted.	
	
                                            
1 Haïssaguerre M, Jaïs P, Shah DC et al . Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrilla tion by ectopic beats originating in the  pulmonary 
veins. N Engl J Med 1998; 339: 659–66.  
2 Narayan,S.M.,	D.E.	Krummen,	P.	Clopton,	K.	Shivkumar	and		J.M.	 Miller.	Direct	Or	Coincidental	Elimination	of	Stable	Rotors	or	
Focal	Sources	May	Explain	Successful	Atrial	Fibrillation	Ablati on:	On‐Treatment	Analysis	of	the	CONFIRM	(CONventional	
ablation	for	AF	with	or	without	Focal	Impulse	and	Rotor	Modulat ion)	Trial.	Journal	of	the	American	College	of	Cardiology	
(2013)	62:138‐147.  

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 
	 	 Page	11	of	44	
	
 
 
Redo‐FIRM	is	a	prospective,	multicenter,	randomized,	controlled 	study	to	
assess	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	FIRM	procedures	followed	by	ablation	
including	PVI	versus	a	standard	 conventional	pro cedure	includin g	PVI	for	the	
redo‐treatment	of	persistent	or	paroxysmal	atrial	fibrillation	 after	1	failed	
preview	PVI.			
	
4.1 RATIONALE	
According	to	the	American	Heart	 Association,	atrial	fibrillatio n	affects	
approximately	2	million	Americans .		Atrial	fibrillation	may	red uce	cardiac	
performance	and	may	result	in	th rombus	formation	in	the	left	at rium	and	
thromboembolic	events,	such	as	stroke.	Approximately	15%	of	all	strokes	
occur	in	people	with	atrial	fibr illation.		Ablation	of	atrial	f ibrillation	that	
specifically	targets	approximate ly	2‐3	mm	outside	of	the	pulmon ary	vein	is	
currently	a	standard	of	care	trea tment	in	subjects	with	symptomatic	atrial	
fibrillation	who	have	failed	dru g	therapy.		Unfortunately,	this 	procedure	is	time	
consuming,	creates	substantial	damage	in	the	left	atrium	due	to	the	number	of	
lesions	required,	and	has	mixed	 success	with	the	best	outcomes	being	50‐70%	
freedom	from	symptoms	at	1	year	 post	ablation.		Also,	as	with	a ny	invasive	
procedure,	patient	complications 	may	heighten	with	increased	time	and	
additional	radiation	exposure.	
	
One	of	the	major	issues	with	the	 current	procedure	is	the	lack	 of	knowledge	
about	the	critical	regions	of	the 	heart	that	have	the	source	rh ythms	causing	
and	sustaining	AF.		Some	very	new 	technology	developed	based	up on	work	
done	under	NIH	support	at	the	University	of	California	San	Dieg o	has	shown	
promise	in	diagnosing	these	key	source	rhythms.		Ablation	to	target	these	sources,	called	Focal	Impulse	an d	Rotor	Modulation	(FIRM)	guide d	procedure,	
shows	promise	but	need	t o	be	evaluated	further.	
		
4.2 HYPOTHESIS	
Focal	Impulse	and	Rotor	Modulation	(FIRM)	guided	procedures	wil l	eliminate	
the	source	of	clinical	arrhythmias	in	subjects	with	clinical	indications	for	
repeat	AF	ablation	procedures.	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 
	 	 Page	12	of	44	
	
 
 
5 STUDY	OBJECTIVES 	
The	primary	objective	is	to	evalu ate	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	FIRM‐
guided	procedures	in	conventiona l	repeat	ablation	for	the	treat ment	of	
persistent	or	paroxysmal	atrial	fibrillation	(AF).	
	
The	secondary	objectives	are:	1) 	to	evaluate	the	acute	success	 of	FIRM‐guided	
procedure	in	eliminating	the	sou rce	of	arrhythmias,	and	2)	to	e valuate	quality	
of	life	outcomes.	
6 STUDY	DESIGN		
The	study	is	designed	as	a	prosp ective,	multicenter,	randomized,	study	to	
assess	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	FIRM‐guided	repeat	RF	ab lation	
procedure	including	PVI	versus	a 	standard	PVI	procedure	for	the	treatment	of	
persistent	and	paroxysma l	atrial	fibrillation.			
	
6.1 SAMPLE	SIZE	
Up	to	268	subjects	at	up	to	30	investigative	sites	will	be	enro lled	and	equally	
(1:1)	randomized	between	a	cohort	undergoing	conventional	RF	ablation,	vs.	a	
cohort	undergoing	FIRM‐guided	co nventional	RF	ablation.	Additio nally,	
ablation	of	any	atrial	tachycardias	(AT)	and/or	the	cavotricusp id	isthmus	may	
be	performed	in	those	subjects	with	documented	AT/atrial	flutter.	
	
6.2 STUDY	DURATION	
Overall	study	duration	(first	subject	enrolled	through	last	sub ject	exit)	will	be	
comprised	of	approximately	18	mo nths	of	enrollment	period,	1	mo nth	per	
subject	for	screening	and	baseline	measurements,	and	12	months	 per	subject	
for	follow‐up,	for	a	total	study	duration	of	up	to	31	months.		 	Study	duration	for	
an	individual	subject,	once	cons ented,	will	be	up	to	1	month	fo r	screening	
(including	baseline	measurements )	and	12	months	for	follow	up	a fter	
treatment	for	a	total	duration	of	approximately	13	months.		

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 
	 	 Page	13	of	44	
	
 
 
7 ENDPOINTS 	
 
7.1 PRIMARY	EFFECTIVENESS	ENDPOINTS	
Effectiveness	endpoints	are	 defined	in	the	table	below.	
	
	 Table	1	–	Primary	 Effectiveness 	Endpoints 	
Endpoint 	 Definition
Long	term	success  The	long‐term	effectiveness	of	F IRM‐guided	procedures	versus	
conventional	ablation	shall	be	defined	as:		
 Freedom	from	atrial	fibrillati on	AF/AT/AFL	recurrence	at	3	
‐12	months	post	procedure.		
	
Freedom	from	AF/AT/AFL	re currence	is	defined	as	no	
documented	episodes	>	30	seconds	with	conventional	non‐
invasive	7‐day	monitoring.	In	the	case	of	a	cardiac	implanted	electronic	device	(CIED),	freedom	from	AF/AT/AFL	recurrence	is	defined	as	no	documented	episodes	>	30	seconds	in	a	1‐week	
window	at	the	follow‐up	visits,	in	addition	to	any	symptomatic	
episodes	with	documented	episode	>	30	seconds.		AT	recurrence	does	not	include	episodes	of	CTI	(cavotricuspid	isthmus)	dependent	flutter.	
 
	
	
7.2 PRIMARY	SAFETY	ENDPOINTS	
Safety	shall	be	evaluated	both	ac ute	(in	hospital)	and	long	ter m,	as	defined	in	the	
table	below.  	
	
Table	2	–	Primary	 Safety	Endpoints 	
Endpoint 	 Description
Acute	success Freedom	from	seriousa dverse	events	related	to	the	 procedure	
within	10	days	of	the	procedure.	
Long‐term	success	 Freedom	from	pr ocedure‐related	serious	advers e	events	
(including	those	related	to	repeat	procedures)	within	one	year	
of	the	initial	procedure.	
	
7.3 SECONDARY	ENDPOINTS		
Secondary	endpoints	are	defined	 in	Table	3	below.	This	study	will	also	collect	data	
relating	to	the	health	economics 	of	the	FIRM‐guided	procedure	t o	conduct	
additional	evaluations	if	primary	endpoints	are	met.	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 
	 	 Page	14	of	44	
	
 
 
Table	3	–	Secondary 	Endpoints 	
Endpoint 	 Definition
Acute	Effectiveness	 The	acute	success	of	FIRM‐guided	procedure	is	defined	as	
elimination	of	the	source	of	arrhythmia	identified	by	FIRMap	
as	indicated	by:	
1. No	evidence	of	the	source	on	FIRMap	immediately	post‐
procedure,	OR	
2. Reduction	of	electrogram	amplitude	to	<0.2mV	in	region	designated	by	FIRMap.	
 
Table	4	–	Additional	 Evaluations 	
Parameter 	 Definition
Total	RF	ablation	time	 TotalRFab lation	time	as	measured	by	total	time	of	ablation	
lesion	applications,	from	first	a blation	lesion	to	end	of	last	
lesion,	will	be	documented.		These	values	will	be	compared	between	the	FIRM‐guided	and	conventional	ablation	groups.	If	ablation	for	AT/atrial	flutte r	is	pursued,	this	ablation	tim e	
will	be	documented	separately	
Repeat	procedure	and	hospitalization	Any	descriptive	information	re garding	repeat	procedures	and	
re‐hospitalizations	will	be	compared	between	groups		
Cumulative	long‐term	
freedom	from	AF	Cumulative	long‐term	freedom	fr om	AF	will	be	assessed	at12	
months	after	the	initial	AF	proc edure	but	will	permit	results	
of	repeat	ablation	
Early	Recurrence	of	
AF/AT	Recurrences	of	sustained	AF/AT	in	the	first	8	weeks(blanking	period).	
Change	in	Atrial	Function	 Change	in	left	atrial	size	and	pulmon ary	vein	inflow	Doppler	
on	echocardiogram	( when	available)	
Change	in	Ventricular	
Function	Change	in	left	ventricular	ejection	fraction	and	parameters	of	diastolic	dysfunction	(when	available)	
Quality	o f	Life	 Impact	on	quality	of	life,	using	patient‐reported	outcome 	
instruments	(EQ‐5D	and	AFEQT),	within	treatment	groups	
(change	from	pre‐procedure	t o	post‐procedure	follow‐up	
time	points)	and	between	treatment	groups.		Analysis	will	be	performed	if	primary	endpoints	are	met.	
Economic	Analysis	 Cost‐effectiven ess	analysis	based	on	clinical 	and	patient‐
reported	outcomes	and	resource	u tilization.		Analysis	will	be	
performed	if	primary	endpoints	are	met.		
 
 

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 	 	 Page	15	of	44	
	
 
8 SELECTION,	 DISCONTINUATION, 	AND	 WITHDRAWAL 	OF	
SUBJECTS 	
8.1 SELECTION	CRITERIA	
The	criteria	listed	below	shall	be	used	to	determine	if	a	parti cipant	is	eligible	for	entry	
into	the	study.	A	subject	must	meet	ALL	of	the	study	inclusion	 criteria	and	NONE	of	
the	study	exclusion	criteria	in	o rder	to	be	considered	eligible 	for	participation.	
	
A. Inclusion 	Criteria	
Subjects	are	required	to	meet	the	following	inclusion	criteria: 	
1. Male	or	female	18	–	80	years	of	age.	
2. Has	at	least	one	(1)	e pisode	of	spontaneous 	persistent	or	parox ysmal	atrial	
fibrillation	documented	by	rhyth m	strip/ECG	following	the	most	 recent	ablation.	
3. Had	one	(1)	previous	AF	ablation	 after	January	01,	2013,	but	NO T	within	the	last	
3	months.	Detailed	documentation	of	the	previous	ablation	strat egy	is	required.	
4. Oral	anticoagulation	required	with	either	Novel	Oral	Anticoagul ant	( NOAC)	or	
Warfarin	(in	the	case	of	Warfarin,	therapeutic	INR	≥	2.0	for	at 	least	three	weeks	
prior	to	randomization)	for	those	subjects	who	meet	two	or	more 	of	the	
following	criteria:  	
a. Age	65	years	or	older	
b. Diabetes	
c. Coronary	artery	disease	(CAD)	
d. Congestive	heart	failure	
e. Hypertension	with	systolic>165	mm	Hg	
5. Willingness	and	able	to	remain	on	anti‐coagulation	therapy	for	 a	minimum	of	3	
months	post	procedure	for	all	su bjects	and	at	le ast	12	months	p ost	procedure	if	
the	subject	is	on	anti‐coagulati on	pre‐procedure	or	has	CHADS 2	score	≥	2	(or	
CHADs‐Vasc	score	>1).	
6. Left	atrial	diameter	<	6.0	cm	via	transthoracic	echo;	or	<6.5	c m	via	CT	or	MRI	up	
to	6	months	pre‐procedure	with	d ocumented	image	of	largest	dime nsion,	or	
intra‐procedural	ICE	or	atrial	an giogram	if	CT/MRI	not	availabl e.	
7. Willingness,	ability	and	commitment	to	participate	in	baseline	 and	follow‐up	
evaluations	without	participation	in	another	clinical	trial	whi ch	may	confound	
the	results	of	this	study,	unl ess	approved	by	the	Sponsor.	
8. Signed	informed	consent.	
B. Exclusion 	Criteria	
Subjects	must	NOT	meet	any	of	th e	following	exclusion	criteria: 		
1. Presence	of	structural	heart	dis ease	of	clinical	significance	including:	
a. Coronary	artery	disease	with	either:	
o Coronary	artery	bypass	surgery	(CABG)	within	the	last	six	
months,	or	
o Stable/unstable	angina	or	ongoing	myocardial	ischemia	
b. Congenital	heart	disease	where	either	the	underlying	abnormalit y	or	its	
correction	prohibits	or	increases	the	risk	of	ablation.	
2. NYHA	Class	IV.	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 	 	 Page	16	of	44	
	
 
3. Ejection	fraction	<	35%	(within	previous	6	months).	
4. Previous	AF	ablation	within	the	last	3	months.	
5. ASD	closure	device,	LAA	closure	 device,	prosthetic	mitral	or	tr icuspid	valve,	or	
permanent	pacemaker.	
6. History	of	myocardial	infarction	 (MI)	within	the	past	three	(3) 	months.	
7. Contraindication	to	Heparin	and	W arfarin/other	novel	oral	anticoagulants	(e.g.	
dabigatran,	rivaroxaban,	apixaban).	
8. Diagnosed	atrial	myxoma.	
9. Any	concomitant	arrhythmia	or	th erapy	that	could	interfere	with 	the	
interpretation	of	the	re sults	from	this	study.	
10. Untreatable	allergy	 to	contrast	media.	
11. Severe	electrolyte	abnormalities 	at	time	of	the	ablation	proced ure	or	atrial	
fibrillation	secondary	to	electro lyte	imbalance,	thyroid	diseas e,	or	reversible	
non‐cardiac	cause.	
12. Atrial	fibrillation	from	a	rever sible	cause	(e.g.,	surgery,	hyp erthyroidism,	
pericarditis).	
13. History	of	pulmonary	embolus	within	one	year	of	enrollment.	
14. Acute	pulmonary	edema.	
15. Atrial	clot/thrombus	on	imaging	s uch	as	on	a	trans‐esophageal	e chocardiogram	
(TEE)	performed	within	72	hours	 of	the	procedure	if	deemed	appr opriate	by	
investigator.	
16. Any	history	of	a	cerebrovascular 	disease	(including	stroke	or	TIA)	within	the	
past	6	months.	
17. Any	anticipation	of	cardiac	transplantation	or	other	cardiac	su rgery	within	the	
next	12	months.	
18. Significant	pulmonary	disease,	(e.g.	restrictive	pulmonary	dise ase,	constrictive	
or	chronic	obstructive	pulmonary	 disease)	or	any	other	disease	 or	malfunction	
of	the	lungs	or	respiratory	system	that	produces	severe	chronic 	symptoms	and	
significantly	increases	risk	to	sedation	or	anesthesia.	
19. Acute	illness	or	active	systemic	infection	or	sepsis.	
20. Any	history	of	blood	clotting	ab normalities	or	bleeding	abnorma lities.	
21. Life	expectancy	of	less	than	12	months.	
22. Any	Intramural	thrombus,	tumor,	or	other	abnormality	that	precl udes	catheter	
introduction	or	safe	manipulation. 	
23. Women
	known	to	be	pregnant.	
8.2 INFORMED	CONSENT		
The	investigator	will	obtain	written	informed	consent	from	the	 subject	using	the	
IRB/EC‐approved	consent	form	prio r	to	initiation	of	any	study‐s pecific	assessments	
or	procedures.	Consent	is	documented	by	the	dated	signatures	of 	the	subject	the	
person	conducting	the	consent	d iscussion,	and	the	investigator. 		Written	informed	
consent	must	be	obtained	from	a	potential	subject	no	more	than	 90	days	prior	to	
performing	the	study	procedure.		
 

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 	 	 Page	17	of	44	
	
 
8.3 MOMENT	OF	ENROLLMENT	
	
The	subject	will	be	considered	“en rolled”	in	the	study	after	th e	subject	has	signed	
the	study	informed	consent	for m,	completed	all	 baseline	assessm ents,	and	
randomized	to	a	study	treatment	 group.	Randomization	will	occur 	on	the	day	of	the	
procedure.		
	
Optional 	sub‐study	cohort	enrollment :	If	the	patient	is	disqualified	on	the	day	of	
the	procedure	because	PV	reconnec tion	cannot	be	confirmed,	the	patient	cannot	be	
randomized	/	enrolled	in	the	study.	However,	if	AF	can	be	susta ined	the	patient	may	
undergo	FIRM‐guided	ablation	and	enroll	in	the	sub‐study	cohort .	The	patient	will	
be	required	to	comply	to	all	prot ocol	follow‐up	requirements.	S ee	Section	10.2b.	
	
8.4 SUBJECT	DISCONTINUATION	OR	WITHDRAWAL	
The	investigator	should	instruct	the	subject	regarding	the	importance	of	complying	with	the	data	collection	and	follow‐up	visit	requirements.	Poor 	subject	adherence	
may	result	in	the	sponsor	discontinuing	the	subject	from	the	st udy.			
Subjects	may	be	involuntarily	removed	from	the	study	for	failur e	to	adhere	to	the	
protocol,	failure	to	attend	follow‐up	visits,	or	due	to	safety	reasons.	In	such	cases,	the	investigator	shall	arrange	for	an	exit	visit	and	complete	a 	study	exit	case	report	
form	for	the	subject.		
Subjects	may	voluntarily	withdraw	from	the	study	at	any	time	without	reason.	The	
investigator	shall	make	an	effort 	to	obtain	an	exit	visit	but	c annot	insist	on	the	visit	
if	the	subject	does	not	wish	to	come	in.			The	investigator	sha ll	complete	a	study	exit	
case	report	form	with	as	much	information	as	is	available	at	th e	time	of	withdrawal.			
A	subject	may	be	withdrawn	after 	screening	and	before	receiving 	the	study	
treatment	if,	at	the	investigator’s	discretion,	he	or	she	has	d eveloped	a	general	
health	condition	that	would	increase	risks	from	study	treatment.	
	
8.5 CONTACT	FOR	FOLLOW‐UP	A ND	LOSS	TO	FOLLOW‐UP	
	
Subjects	who	miss	a	study	visit	should	be	contacted	immediately 	by	the	
Investigational	Site	to	determine	the	reason	for	the	missed	vis it	and	to	reschedule	
the	visit	as	soon	as	possible	to 	meet	the	study	visit	window.	I f	the	subject	cannot	be	
located	after	3	attempts	through 	a	variety	of	communication	mod es	(phone,	email,	
letter),	then	the	subject	will	be 	considered	lost	to	follow‐up. 	The	investigational	sites	
should	collect	contact	information	(home	phone,	cell	phone,	fax ,	email,	home	
address,	etc.)	from	the	subject	in	order	to	minimize	loss	to	fo llow‐up.	All	attempts	to	
contact	the	subjects	will	be	doc umented	and	retained	in	the	sub ject	study	record.	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 	 	 Page	18	of	44	
	
 
9 INVESTIGATOR 	SELECTION 	
9.1 INVESTIGATIVE	SITES	
A. Up	to	30	investigational	sites	in 	Europe	and	North	America	will 	participate	in	
this	study	
B. To	qualify	for	participation,	the	study	investigator	will	have	 completed	the	
following:	
o Undergone	the	standard 	training	provided	by	Abbott	EP/Topera,	Inc.	in	
the	use	of	the	RhythmView®	system	and	analysis	of	FIRM	maps	
produced	by	the	system.		
o Participated	in	5	FIRM‐guided	procedures	prior	to	enrolling	any 	
subjects	in	the	study.		
	
9.2 EQUIPMENT	REQUIREMENT	
A. In	order	to	participate	in	this	study,	the	site	must	also	have	 the	following	
equipment	available:	
o 64‐pole	mapping	catheter	(Topera	FIRMap	Catheter)	and	appropriate	analyzer	to	acquire	full	chamber	data	(RA	or	LA )	per	Topera	
RhythmView	system	requirements.	
o Topera	RhythmView	3D	electrophysiologic	mapping	system.	
o Optionally,	3‐D	electroanatomic	 mapping	system	(CARTO,	Biosense 	
Webster,	Velocity	or	Nav‐X,	St	Jude	Medical)	compatible	with	FI RMap	
for	documentation	of	lesions	relative	to	recordings	from	mappin g	
catheter.	
9.3 INVESTIGATOR	DISCONTINUATION	
	
Prior	to	participation	in	the	stu dy,	all	investigators	must	sig n	the	Protocol	Signature	
Page	which	outlines	the	investigator’s	obligations	in	the	study .	The	sponsor	may	
elect	to	discontinue,	or	suspend ,	the	investigator’s	participat ion	in	the	study	due	to	
poor	study	compliance,	lack	of	co mpliance	with	applicable	regul ations	or	IRB/EC	
requirements,	or	insufficient	recruitment	of	study	subjects.		
10 	STUDY	FLOW	AND	VISIT	SCHEDULE 	
The	study	will	be	conducted	in	three	phases	listed	below	and	de picted	in		
Figure	1.	
		
1. Screening	&	Baseline	
2. Study	procedure	through	discharge	
3. Follow‐up	periods	
 
Each	of	these	phases	is	discusse d	separately	below,	following	T able	5	–	Schedule	of	
Assessments. 		
		 	

	Redo‐FIRM	
 
 
CLN-108, Rev C 	 	 Page	19	of	44	
	
 
Figure	1:	Study	Flow	 Chart	
	
 
 

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	21	of	44  
	
 
 
10.1 SCREENING	AND	BASELINE	
A. Screening 	
Patients	at	the	investigational	sites	with	persistent	or	paroxy smal	AF	will	be	asked	
about	their	interest	in	study	participation.	For	those	patients 	who	express	an	
interest	to	participate,	the	inclusion/exclusion	criteria	will	 be	reviewed	against	
existing	medical	history	and	the 	results	of	any	standard	clinic al	work‐up	to	assess	
preliminary	eligibility.		Potential	patients	who	do	not	meet	en trance	criteria	may,	as	
appropriate,	repeat	screening	evaluations	at	a	later	time	for	possible	enrollment	
into	the	study.	
	
B. Baseline	 Assessment 	
If	the	patient	is	not	excluded	based	on	existing	medical	histor y	and	standard	clinical	
work‐up,	the	patient	will	be	asked	to	provide	informed	consent	 to	participate	in	the	
study.		Baseline	assessments	include	the	following	as	shown	in	 Table	5	–	Schedule	of	
Assessments.		
	
 Determine	study	eligibility	based	on	the	requirements	specified 	in	the	
inclusion	/	exclusion	criteria.	
 Medical	 history,	 including	 any	 hospitalizations	 or	 emergency	 ro om	
visits	 for	 episodes	 of	 all	 cardiac	 arrhythmias	 within	 six	 month s	 of	
screening,	 all	 anti‐arrhythmic	 drugs	 (AADs)	 and	 other	 cardiac	
medications.	
 Reported	incidence	of	at	least	1	episode	of	persistent	or	parox ysmal	
atrial	fibrillation	(AF)	documented	by	rhythm	strip/ECG	following	the	most	recent	ablation..	
 Treatments	administered	for	atri al	fibrillation	in	the	six	months	prior	to	
enrollment,	 e.g.,	 pharmacologic	 treatments	 and	 non‐pharmacologi c	
interventions.		Medications	should	include	dose	and	duration.	
 Documentation	of	therapeutic	International	Normalization	Ratio	 (INR)	
for	three	weeks	prior	to	the	procedure	(if	applicable	per	Inclu sion	
Criteria)	in	cases	of	su bjects	taking	Warfarin.	
 NYHA	and	ERHA	class	assessment.	
 Current	cardiac	rhythm.	
 Largest	dimension	left	atrial	diameter	measured	from	transthora cic	
echo,	cardiac	CT	or	cardiac	MR	within	the	last	6	months	with	im age	
documentation.		Intracardiac	echocardiographic	measurement	at	t he	
time	of	the	procedure	can	alternatively	be	used	to	document	thi s.	
 Ejection	fraction	(EF)	measured	within	the	last	6	months	or	fro m	the	
pre‐procedure	TEE	or	TTE.	
 When	clinically	indicated,	TEE	will	be	performed	prior	to	the	a blation	
procedure.	If	any	evidence	of	left	atrial	thrombus	is	discovere d,	then	the	
ablation	procedure	will	not	be	pe rformed	at	that	time.		The	pat ient	may	
be	either	excl uded	 
from	the	study	or	maintained	on	oral	anticoa gulation	
for	an	additional	period	of	at	least	6	weeks	and	re‐tested	(TEE 	repeated)	
for	thrombi.	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	22	of	44  
	
 
 
 12‐Lead	ECG	within	72	hours	of	study	procedure.	
 Cardiac	medications	currently	pre scribed	for	the	subject’s	dail y	medical	
therapy.	
 Pre‐	procedure	Laboratory	values	per	standard	practice.		
 Neurological	Exam	(if	clinically	indicated)	if	symptoms	suggestive	of	
neurologic	disease,	and	is	to	be	performed	by	the	neurology	med ical	
staff.		
 Prior	 to	 the	 procedure,	 subjects 	f i t t i n g 	t h e 	i n v e s t i g a t o r ’ s 	s t a ndard	
criteria	for	anticoagulation	will	have	been	orally	anti‐coagulated	(in	case	
of	Warfarin,	with	therapeutic	INR	(≥2.0)	for	at	least	three	weeks	prior	to	randomization,	 or	 they	 may	 be	 placed	 on	 therapeutic	 doses	 of	subcutaneous	low‐molecular‐weight	heparin	(LMWH)).		As	dictated 	by	
center	clinical	practice,	oral	anti‐coagulation	will	be	discont inued	and	
e i t h e r 	s u b c u t a n e o u s 	L M W H 	o r 	I V 	h e p a r i n 	w i l l 	b e 	s u b s t i t u t e d 	a t 	therapeutic	doses	until	the	time	of	the	procedure.		At	the	inve stigator’s	
discretion,	dabigatran,	rivaroxaban	or	apixaban	will	be	withhel d	for	24	
hours	prior	to	the	procedure.	
 Amiodarone	to	be	discontinued	 4	weeks	prior	to	procedure.	
 Antiarrhythmic	drug,	Class	IC:	Discontinue	after	5	half‐lives.	
 EQ‐5D	and	AFEQT	Quality	of	Life	surveys.		
 Pregnancy	test	to	be	performed	for	women	of	child	bearing	potential	
	
Each	site	will	maintain	a	screen ing	log	noting	the	reasons	for	 screening	failures.	
10.2 STUDY	PROCEDURE	
The	individual	center	and	investigator	should	define	the	ablati on	strategy		for	the	
conventional	redo‐procedures	of	 the	Control	group	prior	to	part icipation	in	the	trial.	
	
 Ablation	guidelines	(optional):	
 FIRM	group:	prophylactic	ablation*	may	be	 performed	for	the	RA‐Isthmus	
line	and	for	any	inherent	arrhythmia	that	is	found	to	have	foca l	firing	during	
the	procedure.		
	
 Control	group:	additional	ablation	may	be	performed	for	any	arrhythmia	
that	is	found	to	have	focal	firing	during	procedure.	The	follow ing	prophylactic	
ablation*	may	be	performed:		
 RA‐isthmus	line	
 Non	PV‐trigger	(if	provoked)	
 Caval	vein	isolation	
*Prophylactic	 ablation	should	be	performed 	for	all	study	 subjects	if	it	is	
determined 	to	be	the	standard 	of	practice	of	the	Investigator. 	
	
 LA	appendage	isolation	are	not	permitted.		
	
A. Pre‐procedure 	Preparation 	
Just	prior	to	and/or	during	the	procedure,	a	glycoprotein	IIb/I IIa	inhibitor	or	other	
platelet	inhibitor	may	 be	administered	if	it	is	standard	practi ce.		The	insertion	of	the	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	23	of	44  
	
 
 
FIRMap	catheter	or	performing	transseptal	puncture,	whichever	comes	first,	will	be	
f o l l o w e d 	i m m e d i a t e l y 	b y 	a n 	I V 	h e p a r i n 	b o l u s , 	f o l l o w e d 	b y 	r e p e a t ed	 heparin	
administration,	adjusted	as	necessary	to	achieve	and	maintain	an	ACT	above	300	seconds.	
B. Intra‐procedure 		
Subject	randomization	will	be	performed	during	the	procedure	af ter	the	following	
criteria	are	met.	See	Figure	2.	
1) AF	is	sustained	for	at	least	5	minutes	uninterrupted.		
2) Confirmation	of	PV	reconnection.			
IMPORTANT: 		
 If	AF	cannot	be	sustained	and	PV	reconnection	cannot	be	confirm ed,	the	
patient	is	disqualified	and	cannot	be	randomized	/	enrolled	in	 the	study.	The	
patient	 will	 undergo	 conventional	 AF	 ablation	 at	 the	 discretion 	o f 	t h e 	
investigator.		
 If	the	patient	is	in	sinus	rhythm	and	one	or	more	of	his/her	ve ins	are	not	
isolated,	it	is	acceptable	to	isolate	the	vein(s)	before	induct ion	of	AF.		AF	must	
still	be	sustained	for	5	minutes	before	the	patient	can	be	rand omized.	If	AF	
cannot	be	sustained	after	re‐isolation	of	veins,	the	patient	wi ll	be	excluded	
from	study	before	randomization.	
 Optional 	sub‐cohort	enrollment : 	I f 	A F 	c a n 	b e 	s u s t a i n e d 	b u t 	P V 	
reconnection	cannot	be	confirmed,	the	patient	is	disqualified	a nd	cannot	not	
be	randomized	/	enrolled	in	the	study.	However,	the	patient	may 	undergo	
FIRM‐guided	ablation	and	enroll	in	the	sub‐study	cohort.	The	pa tient	will	be	
required	to	comply	to	all	protocol	follow‐up	requirements.	
	Figure	2.	
	
		
 	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	24	of	44  
	
 
 
Table	6	–	Intra‐ Procedure 	Guidelines	
During	the	procedure,	the	following	steps	should	be	taken.	
Parameter 	 Description
Vascular	access	 Under	sterile	technique,	the	right	and/or	left	 femoral	veins	ma ybe	
cannulated	via	Seldinger,	or	perc utaneous	approach.		Other	vasc ular	access	
also	may	be	obtained	based	upon	physician	judgment.			
1. Induction	of	
sustained	AF	
	
2. Induction	of	non	PV‐Triggers	(if	standard	care	includes	
ablation	of	
extra‐pulmonary	foci)	Burst	pacing	at	200	ms	for	5	s	from	the	RA	and	twice	from	the	C S.
		A	non‐PV	trigger	is	defined	as	a	PAC	that	triggers	either	susta ined	or	non‐
sustained	AF	or	atrial	tachyarrhythmia	(AT).		Repetitive	PACs	t hat	do	not	
result	in	sustained	or	non‐sustained	AF/AT	are	not	considered	n on‐PV	
triggers.		Reproducible	AF/AT	initiation	is	required	for	non‐PV	triggers	to	allow	for	accurate	mapping	of	the	region	of	origin	outside	the	 PVs	with	
multi	polar	catheters	with	or	 without	3D	mapping	systems.	
	Non‐PV	triggers	will	be	induced	as	follows:		
1. Isoproterenol	infusion	(starting	at	2	mcg	and	incrementing	up	t o	20	
mcg	per	standard	laboratory	protocol).		Per	standard	laboratory 	
protocol,	another	sympathomimetic	agent	(e.g.,	IV	norepinephrin e	or	
epinephrine)	may	be	substituted	for	isoproterenol.	
2. Cardioversion	of	spont aneous	AF	or	AF	induced	by	left	or	right	 atrial	
rapid	pacing.		AF	and	the	subsequent	cardioversion	may	be	induced/	performed	during	infusion	of	isoproterenol	so	as	to	maximize	th e	
possibility	of	inducing	AF	triggers.	
	As	part	of	the	trigger	protocol,	multiple	cardioversions	may	be 	necessary	
whenever	AF	is	induced	(spontaneously	or	with	isoproterenol	inf usion	/	
burst	pacing)	with	the	endpoint	of	mapping	the	trigger	beat(s)	 leading	to	
post‐cardioversion	early	AF	recu rrence.	In	case	of	early	AF	rec urrence,	the	
beat	initiating	AF	will	be	consid ered	a	trigger	and	will	be	ana lyzed	for	site	of	
origin	using	the	mapping	techniq ues	described	in	the	definition .	
PV	reconnection	 Look	for	PV	rec onnection	(at	least	one	vein)	wi th	Lasso	catheter.
Randomization	 The	patient	will	 be	randomized	once	PV	reconnection	is	confirmedand	AF	
is	sustained	>	5	minutes.		
Reference	catheter	
placement	Reference	catheters	(including	 64‐pole	FIRMap	catheter(s))	ma ybe	
inserted	and	placed	within	the	h eart	to	record	signals	as	clini cally	required	
at	the	discretion	of	the	physician.	
Access	to	left	atrium	 Access	to	t he	left	atrium	shouldbeaccordi ng	to	the	institution’s	standard	
practice.	
Anticoagulation	 Upon	insertion	of	64‐pole	FIRMap	catheter	or	tr ansseptal	puncture	
(whichever	comes	first),	an	IV	h eparin	bolus	should	be	administ ered,	
followed	by	repeated	heparin	admi nistration,	adjusted	as	necess ary	to	
achieve	and	maintain	an	ACT	above	300	sec.		ACT	will	be	monitored	every	10	minutes	following	initial	hepar in	delivery	until	the	target	 value	is	
achieved	and	subsequently	checked	at	least	every	thirty	minutes 	during	the	
procedure.	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	25	of	44  
	
 
 
	
	
Catheter	placement	 Catheters	ma ybe	inserted	and	used	according	to	the	institution’s	standard	
practice.	
Source	arrhythmia	
diagnosis	After	obtaining	at	least	1	minut e	of	continuous	electrograms	fr om	the	64‐
pole	FIRMap	catheter	either	simultaneously	or	se quentially	in	t he	right	and	
left	atria,	these	electrogram	da ta	will	be	transferred	to	the	T opera	
RhythmView®	system.		This	will	then	produce	FIRMap	displays	which	will	
be	interpreted	by	the	operator	to	determine	which	locations	hav e	focal	or	
rotor	rhythms	that	could 	be	sources	of	the	AF.		
3‐D	Electroanatomic	
Mapping	3‐D	electroanatomic	maps	may	be	created	using	CARTO	or	Nav‐Xsys tems	
for	documentation	of	anatomy	and	ablation	lesion	locations.	
FIRM‐guided	
procedure	Under	fluoroscopic	guidance,	a	cardiac	ablation	catheter	is	pas sed	to	the	
location(s)	identified	as	AF	source	rhythms	(rotors	or	focal	im pulses).			
Conventional	
Ablation	In	the	conventional	arm	of	the	study,	data	will	be	recorded	reg arding	any	
additional	ablation	such	as	that	 performed	per	local	routine	fo r	AF	(e.g.	
additional	trigger	elimination).			
Additional	ablation	
for	other	
arrhythmias	(non‐
AF)	Additional	ablation	for	other	a rrhythmias	will	be	noted	for	atrial	
tachycardia	(AT)	and/or	right	cavo‐tricuspid	isthmus	ablation	i n	the	event	
that	the	patient	has	documented	AT/atrial	flutter	prior	to	or	d uring	the	
procedure.	
Vascular	access	
sheath	removal	The	vascular	access	sheaths	will	 be	removed	when	the	ACT	reache s	a	
clinically	acceptable	level.			
Voltage	mapping	 Perform	voltage	mapping	is	strongly	recommended .	
	
The	following 	precautions 	should	be	taken	per	standard 	of	practice:	
 Typically,	in	order	to	reduce	the	risk	of	introducing	air	embol i	through	a	trans‐
septal	sheath	into	the	left	atrium,	the	following	precautions	a re	taken:	
o Aspiration	or	spontaneous	bleed	b ack	from	the	trans‐septal	shea th	
side‐port	may	be	performed	after	each	catheter	withdrawal;		
o Trans‐septal	catheter	insertion	and	withdrawal	will	always	be	performed	slowly;	
o Unnecessary	catheter	exchanges	may	be	avoided;	
o The	time	any	trans‐septal	sheath	is	through	the	septum	may	be	minimized;	and	
o The	time	multiple	sheaths	cross	the	septum	may	be	minimized.	
 Just	prior	to	ablation,	at	each	ablation	site	in	the	posterior	 LA	or	RA,	pacing	at	
high	output	(>15	mA)	from	the	ablation	catheter	tip	or	fluorosc opic	
visualization	of	diaphragmatic	m ovement	may	be	u sed	to	assess	whether	the	
phrenic	nerve	is	in	proximity	to	the	ablation	zone.		These	data 	will	be	
documented	and	used	to	gui de	ablation	at	each	site.	
 Esophageal	temperature	monitoring 	during	ablation	in	the	posterior	LA,	per	
local	standard	of	care,	 may	also	be	considered.	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	26	of	44  
	
 
 
C. Intra‐procedure 	Measurements 			
Table	7.	
Data	 Description
Fluoroscopy	times	 To	be	recorded:
Total	fluoroscopy 	time	
 The	total	fluoroscopy	time	for 	the	procedure	(a.k.a.,	“pedal	
down”	time)	
Ablation	 fluoroscopy 	time	
 The	time	between	the	first	ablation	catheter	insertion	to	last	
ablation	catheter	removal	from	the	left	atrium.	
Total	RF	ablation	
time	TotalRFablation	time	as	measur ed	by	total	time	of	ablation	
lesion	applications,	from	first	a blation	lesion	to	end	of	last	lesion,	
will	be	documented.		These	values	will	be	noted	in	both	the	
FIRM‐guided	and	conventional	ablation	groups.	If	ablation	for	AT/atrial	flutte r	is	pursued,	this	ablation	tim e	will	
be	documented	separately	
Total	procedure	
time	Total	procedure	time	defined	as: time	from	insertion	of	first	sheaths	for	vascular	access	 to	removal	of	catheters.	
Medication	
administration	Cardiac	medications	administe red	during	the	procedure	
including	drug	name,	dosage, 	and	indication	and	will	be	
recorded.	
Devices	and	
equipment	Devices	and	equipment	used	during	the	procedure	including	access	devices,	diagnostic	and	ablation	catheters,	and	mapping	equipment	type	will	be	recorded.	
	
D. Post‐procedure 	&	Discharge 	Requirements 	
The	measurements	and	evaluations 	that	will	occur	at	post‐proced ure	are	provided	
below.	
 Post‐ablation	and	following	recovery	from	anesthesia,	subjects	will	be	
monitored	until	stable.			
 Once	the	sheaths	have	been	removed	and	hemostasis	has	been	achieved,	heparin	or	LMWH	will	be	restarted	along	with	oral	
anticoagulation	(warfarin	or	novel	oral	anticoagulants	(e.g.	da bigatran,	
rivaroxaban,	apixaban)).	
	
The	platelet	inhibitor	(if	administered	during	the	procedure)	a nd	
heparin	or	LMWH	will	be	continued	until	the	INR	exceeds	2.0	(in 	the	
case	of	warfarin	use	for	longer ‐term	oral	anticoagulation).	
	
Oral	anti‐coagulation	will	contin ue	for	at	least	three	months	a fter	the	
procedure.		Subjects	who	were	on	oral	anticoagulation	pre‐proce dure	
will	be	maintained	on	anticoagulation	for	the	duration	of	the	s tudy.	
	
Note:		Oral	Glycoprotein	 IIb/IIIa	Inhibitors 	use	is	discouraged	 during	the	
follow‐up	period.	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	28	of	44  
	
 
 
	
 Resolution 	Period	
Following	ablation	treatment,	subjects	will	undergo	8‐week	“resolution”	period	
(aka	“blanking	period”)	where	me dical	therapy	may	be	optimized	and	where	
any	of	the	procedurally‐derived	a rrhythmias	that	commonly	follow	ablation	
procedures	may	resolve.		Cardiov ersion	may	be	done	around	week	 6	to	have	
patients	exit	blanking	period.	
Note:		During	the	8‐week	resolution 	period,	medications 	may	be	adjusted	as	
medically 	indicated, 	and	as	indicated	 in	above	section.		Any	clinically	indicated 	
changes	must	be	documented 	along	with	the	reason	for	change.	
 Anti‐arrhythmic 	Medications 	
Amiodarone	must	be	discontinued	 4‐6	weeks	prior	to	ablation	and 	may	be	re‐
administered	after	ablation	by	t he	discretion	of	the	investigat or.	
Antiarrhythmic	drug,	Class	IC:		m ust	be	discontinued	(5	half‐li ves.)		prior	to	
ablation	and	can 	
be	re‐administe red	after	ablation	by	the	discr etion	of	the	
investigator.	
 Recurrence 	of	AF	
If	re‐ablation	for	AF	is	necessary	after	documentation	of	the	r ecurrent	
arrhythmia	has	occurred,	the	patient	will	be	considered	a	prima ry	efficacy	
study	failure	but	still	fo llowed	up	for	AF	burden.			
A. Day	10	Follow‐ up	(	2	days)	
(Phone	Call	or	visit	at	in vestigator’s	discretion)		
 Subjects will be asked if they have  experienced any untoward medical 
occurrences since the study procedure. If so, these events will be recorded on 
the Adverse Event form.   
 Symptom and rhythm assessment.  
B. Six‐Week	Follow‐up	(	1	week)	
The	following	assessments/proc edures	will	be	performed:	
 Diagnostic 12-lead ECG 
 EQ-5D and AFEQT Quality of Life surveys 
 Symptom and rhythm assessment  
 Concomitant anti-arrhythmic medications 
 Adverse  event documentation  
 In case of atrial fibrillation electric cardioversion within 4 weeks  
C. Three‐Month	Follow‐up	(	1	week)	
The	following	assessments/proc edures	will	be	performed:	
 Diagnostic 12-lead ECG 
 7-day continuous ECG monitor or CIED interrogation 
 EQ-5D and AFEQT Quality of Life surveys 
 Symptom and rhythm assessment  

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	29	of	44  
	
 
 
 Concomitant anti-arrhythmic medications 
 Adverse event documentation  
D. Six‐Month	Follow‐ up	(	2	weeks)	
The	following	assessments/proc edures	will	be	performed:	
 Diagnostic 12-lead ECG 
 7-day continuous ECG monitor or CIED interrogation 
 Echocardiography, if clinically indicated 
 EQ-5D and AFEQT Quality of Life surveys 
 Symptom and rhythm assessment  
 Concomitant anti-arrhythmic medications 
 Adverse event documentation 
E. Twelve‐Month	Follow‐ up	(	4	weeks)	
The	following	assessments/proc edures	will	be	performed:	
 Diagnostic 12-lead ECG 
 7-day continuous ECG monitor or CIED interrogation 
 EQ-5D and AFEQT Quality of Life surveys 
 Symptom and rhythm assessment  
 Concomitant anti-arrhythmic medications 
 Adverse event documentation 
F. Unscheduled 	Follow‐up	Visit	
The	following	assessments/procedur es	will	be	performed,	if	poss ible:	
 Diagnostic 12-lead ECG 
 7-day continuous ECG monitor or CIED interrogation by the discretion of the 
operator  
 EQ-5D and AFEQT Quality of Life surveys 
 Symptom and rhythm assessment  
 Concomitant anti-arrhythmic medications 
 Adverse Event documentation  
  

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	30	of	44  
	
 
 
 
11 ADVERSE 	EVENTS	
At	enrollment,	time	of	procedure,	 and	at	each	post‐procedure	vi sit	the	subject	
will	be	evaluated	for	any	complications	or	adverse	event.	The	I nvestigator	will	
b e 	r e q u i r e d 	t o 	p r o v i d e 	t h e 	S p o n s o r 	w i t h 	a n y 	i n f o r m a t i o n 	c o n c e r n ing	 any	
findings	 that	 suggest	 any	 adverse	 events/complications	 pertinen t	 to	 the	
investigation.	 All	 AEs	 occurring	 during	 the	 study	 will	 be	 recor ded	 on	 the	
appropriate	e‐CRFs.	
	Subjects	will	be	carefully	monitored	during	the	study	for	possible	AEs.		Any	AE	observed	will	be	fully	investiga ted	by	the	Investigator	and	cla ssified	in	line	with	
the	definitions	below.	All	adverse	events	will	be	followed	unti l	resolution	or	until	
the	Investigator	judges	the	outcome	to	be	chronic	or	stable.		
11.1 DEFINITIONS	
Adverse	events	will	be	reported	and	classified	by	the	Investiga tor	using	the	
specific	signs,	symptoms	or	abnormal	laboratory	values,	or	medi cal	diagnosis	if	
no	 signs,	 symptoms	 or	 abnormal	 laboratory	 values	 can	 be	 identif ied.	 The	
Investigator	will	classify	the	a dverse	events	based	on	the	defi nitions	as	follows	
(EN	ISO/FDIS	14155:2010):	
 Adverse 	Event	(AE)	‐	Any	untoward	medical	occurrence,	unintended	disease	
or	injury	or	any	untoward	clinical	signs	(including	an	abnormal 	laboratory	
finding)	in	subjects,	users	or	other	persons	whether	or	not	rel ated	to	the	
investigational	 medical	 device.	
	
 NOTE	 1:	 This	 includes	 events	 rela ted	 to	 the	 procedures	 involved .	
NOTE	2:	For	users	or	other	person s	this	is	restricted	to	events	related	to	the	
investigational	medical	device.	
 Adverse 	Device	Effect	(ADE)	–	Adverse	Event	related	to	the	use	of	a	medical	
device.	This	includes:	
o Any	adverse	event	resulting	from 	insufficiencies	or	inadequacie s	in	
the	 instructions	 for	 use,	 the	 deployment,	 the	 implantation,	 the 	
installation,	the	operation,	or	any	malfunction	of	the	medical	 device.	
o Any	event	that	is	a	result	of	a	 use	error	or	intentional	misuse .	
 Serious	Adverse	Event 	(SAE)	‐	Adverse	Event	that	
o Led	to	death	
o Led	to	a	serious	deterioration	in	the	health	of	the	subject	tha t	either:	
 resulted	in	a	life‐threate ning	illness	or	injury*,	or	
 resulted	in	a	permanent	impairment	of	a	body	structure	or	a	body	function,	or	
 required	in‐patient	hospitalization	or	prolongation	of	existing 	
hospitalization,	or	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	31	of	44  
	
 
 
 resulted	in	medical	or	surgical	intervention	to	prevent	life	
threatening	illness	or	injury	or	permanent	impairment	to	a	body	structure	or	a	body	function**.	
o Led	to	fetal	distress,	fetal	death	or	congenital	abnormality	or 	birth	
defect	
	NOTE	1:		*	In	this	context,	the	term	refers	to	an	event	in	which	the	subject	was	at	
immediate	risk	of	death	at	the	time	of	the	event;	it	does	NOT	r efer	to	an	
event	that	might	have	caused	death	if	it	were	more	severe.	
**	For	example,	if	the	occurrence	of	a	“catheter	insertion	site 	hematoma”	or	
an	“AV	fistula”	requires	a	blood	transfusion	and/or	surgical	re pair,	it	should	
be	considered	a	seri ous	adverse	event.	
NOTE	2:		
 Pre‐planned	hospitalizations	for	pre‐existing	condition,	or	a	p rocedure	
required	by	the	protocol,	without	a	serious	deterioration	in	he alth,	is	
not	considered	to	be	a	serious	adverse	event.	For	example,	repe at	
ablation	for	recurrence	of	AF	wo uld	not	be	considered	an	SAE.	
 Emergency	room	visits	that	do	no t	result	in	hospitalization	(i.e.,	an	
overnight	 stay)	 should	 be	 evaluated	 for	 one	 of	 the	 other	 seriou s	
outcomes	to	determine	if 	they	qualify	as	SAEs.	
 	Serious	Adverse 	Device	Effect	(SADE)	–	Adverse	device	effect	that	has	
resulted	in	any	of	the	consequences	characteristic	of	a	serious 	adverse	event.		
 Unanticipated 	Adverse	 Device	Effect	 (UADE)	‐	Serious	adverse	device	
e f f e c t 	wh i c h 	b y 	i t s	n a tur e , 	i n c i d e n ce , 	s e v e r i t y 	o r 	o u t co m e 	h a s	 not	 been	
identified	in	the	current	version	of	the	risk	analysis	report.			
	
11.2 ADVERSE	EVENT	EVALUA TION	AND	REPORTING	
 AE	Reporting 	
Conditions	 or	 diseases	 which	 are	 pre‐existing	 and	 chronic	 shoul d	 not	 be	
recorded	as	adverse	events.		Cha nges	in	a	chronic	condition	or	 disease	that	are	
consistent	with	natural	disease	progression	are	NOT	considered	 adverse	events.		
Pre‐existing	 conditions	 or	 diseases	 should	 be	 documented	 as	 par t	 of	 the	
subject’s	medical	history.		Elective	or	pre‐planned	treatments	for	atrial	fibrillation	(e.g .	scheduled	re‐
ablation	or	cardioversion)	which	are	part	of	the	subject’s	sche duled	treatment	
plan	should	not	be	considered	adv erse	events.		However,	any	eve nts	related	to	a	
procedure	 (including	 re‐do	 proce dures)	 or	 the	 patient’s	 underly ing	 atrial	
fibrillation	which	were	not	expected	or	indicate	a	worsening	of 	condition	should	
be	reported	as	adverse	events.		(example:	procedure‐related	per foration	or	
cardiac	tamponade).	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	32	of	44  
	
 
 
Every	effort	should	be	made	to	report	the	underlying	condition	or	unifying	
diagnosis	for	the	event.		The	adverse	event	should	be	recorded	 in	standard	
medical	terminology	rather	than	the	subject’s	own	words	when	po ssible.		Signs	
and	symptoms	that	are	considered 	unrelated	to	an	encountered	co ndition	or	
disease	should	be	recorded	as	in dividual	adverse	events	(e.g.	i f	congestive	heart	
failure	and	severe	headache	are	observed	at	the	same	time,	each 	event	should	be	
recorded	as	an	individual	adverse	event).		In	contrast,	adverse 	events	that	occur	
secondary	 to	 other	 events	 (e.g.	 sequelae),	 if	 clearly	 identifia ble,	 should	 be	
identified	by	the	primary	cause	 (example:	bradycardia	→	dizzine ss	→	fainting;	
the	primary	adverse	ev ent	is	bradycardia).	
 Relatedness 	
The	investigator	will	assess	each	adverse	event	for	its	relatio nship	to	the	study	
device,	and	whether	it	was	anticipated	in	the	protocol.		The	de termination	of	the	
level	of	relatedness	of	the	adverse	event	to	the	study	device	o r	procedure	will	be	
made	according	to	the	definitions	below		
o Device	Related:	The	adverse	event	was	directly	and	clearly	rela ted	to	
the	device	or	procedure		
o Not	Device	Related	
o Unknown	
	
Adverse	 events	 that	 are	 serious	 and/or	 unanticipated	 will	 be	 re viewed	
i m m e d i a t e l y 	b y 	t h e 	A b b o t t 	E P 	( T o pera)	 Medical	 Monitor	 and	 will	 also	 be	
reviewed	during	quarterly	DSMB	meeting.	
 SAE	Reporting 	
All	serious	adverse	events	(SA(D )Es)	should	be	phoned	/	faxed	/ 	e‐mailed	to	
Abbott	EP	(Topera,	Inc.)	within	 24	hours	of	learning	of	an	event.		The	following	
information	will	be	collected	a nd	recorded	as 	appropriate.	
 Nature	of	adverse	event	
 Date	of	onset	of	adverse	event	
 Date	of	resolution	of	adverse	event,	if	applicable		
 Statement	as	to	why	it	is	consid ered	unanticipated,	if	applicable	
 Statement	as	to	why	it	is	cons idered	serious,	if	applicable	
 Statement	as	to	the	degree	to	which	it	is	considered	device	rel ated,	
and	why	
 Results	of	any	diagnostic	 tests	that	were	performed	
 Description	of	any	treatment	administered	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	33	of	44  
	
 
 
	
	
It	is	the	responsibility	of	each	Investigator	to	report	all	Ser ious	Adverse	Events	
and/or	Serious	Adverse	Device	Effects	to	the	IRB/EC,	according	 to	national	
regulations	and	IRB/EC	requirements.		
	Abbott	EP	(Topera	Inc.)	will	assure	that	the	Authorized	Represe ntative	will	
report	all	Serious	Adverse	Events	to	the	Competent	Authorities	 in	accordance	
with	 European	 Medical	 Devices	 directives	 and	 all	 applicable	 nat ional	
regulations.		Any	protocol	modifications	deemed	necessary	by	this	review	will	be	reported	to	the	IRB/EC	and,	for	sites	located	outside	of	Europe,	to	the	app licable	Ministry	of	
Health.			
11.3 ANTICIPATED	ADVERSE	EVENTS	
Table	9	–	Anticipated 	Adverse 	Events	
Description 	 Description 	
Discomfort	due	to	insertion/removal	of	vascular	sheaths	
beyond	what	is	normally	observed	Ventricular	arrhythmia	requiring	defibrillation	
Hemorrhage	and/or	hematoma	at	sheath	insertion	
requiring	evacuation	or	transfusion		Cardiac	tamponade	due	to	perforation	
Extremity	weakness,	swelling,	and/or	pain	
Discomfort	and/or	damage	to	the	skin,	muscles,	or	
nerves	due	to	remaining	in 	a	supine	position	for	an	
extended	period	of	time.	Nerve	injury	(diaphragmatic	paralysis,	pyloric	spasm,	
gastric	hypomotility)	
Complete	AV	block		 Air	embolism	
Nausea	/vomiting	 Allergic	reaction	
Headache	different	from	baseline Endocarditis	
Hypertension	>180	mm	Hg	systolic	(repeated	measures) Esophageal‐atria	fistula
Hypotension	<80	mm	Hg	systo lic	(repeated	measures) Hemothorax	
Brief	“black	out”	periods	 Pericarditis	
Shortness	of	breath/Dy spnea Pseudo	aneurysm	
Feeling	of	chest	pain,	skippe d	beats,	and/or	rapid	heart	
rate	different	f rom	baseline	Pulmonary	vein	stenosis
Damage	to	skin	from	prolonged	exposure	to	x‐rays Radiation	injur y	
New	arrhythmias	(not	previously	documented) Renal	failure	form	I V	contrast
Arterial	injury	requiring	intervention Respiratory	failure	
Thromboembolism	 Stroke/TIA	
Local/systemic	infection	 Valvular	damage	
Pneumothorax	 Pleural	effusion	
AV	fistula	 Pulmonary	edema	
Thrombophlebitis	 Anemia	requiring	transfusion
Pulmonary	embolism	 Vasovagal	reaction	
Myocardial	infarction	 New	pericardial	effusion	>1	cm

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	34	of	44  
	
 
 
Discomfort	and/or	damage	to	the	skin,	muscles,	or	
nerves	due	to	percutaneous	access	in	excess	of	usual		Death	 (must	be	reported 	
within	the	regulation 	of	
serious	adverse	events)	
Left	heart	access	via	trans‐ septal	puncture	has	known	
potential	adverse	events	of:	cardiac	perforation,	cardiac	
tamponade,	and	embolic	events*.			
*	Literature	reviews	have	demonstrated	that	the	risk	of	such	ev ents	are	<1%.	Mullins,	
Charles	E.	“Trans‐septal	left	heart	catheterization:	Experience 	with	a	new	technique	in	
520	pediatric	and	adult	subjects .”		Pediatric	Cardiology,	v.	4, 	pgs.	239‐246	(1983).	
	
11.4 DEVICE	DEFICIENCIES	AND	MALFUNCTIONS	
Investigators	must	report	all	possible	device	deficiencies,	mal functions	or	near	
incidents	associated	with	the	device,	per	institutional	standard	practice	and	
regulations.		This	includes	unexpected	outcomes	or	device	defic iencies	that	
might	have	led	to	a	serious	adve rse	event	if	a)	suitable	action 	had	not	been	taken	
or	b)	intervention	had	not	been	made	or	c)	if	circumstances	had 	been	less	
fortunate.	
 Definitions 	
o Device	deficiency	‐	inadequacy	of	a	medical	device	related	to	i ts	
identity,	quality,	durability,	reliability,	safety	or	performan ce,	such	as	
m a l f u n c t i o n , 	m i s u s e 	o r 	u s e 	e r r o r 	a n d 	i n a d e q u a t e 	l a b e l i n g 	( E N 	ISO/FDIS	14155:2010).	
o Malfunction	‐	failure	of	an	inve stigational	medical	device	to	p erform	
in	accordance	with	its	intended	purpose	when	used	in	accordance 	
with	the	instructions	for	use	or	protocol	(EN	ISO/FDIS	14155:20 10).		
		

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	35	of	44  
	
 
 
12 INVESTIGATOR 	REQUIREMENTS 	
12.1 PROTOCOL	ADHERENCE	
Each	Investigator	must	adhere	to	the	protocol	as	detailed	in	th is	document	and	agree	
that	the	Sponsor	must	approve	any	change	to	the	protocol	before	seeking	approval	
from	the	IRB/EC	or	CA.	Each	Inve stigator	will	be	responsible	for	enrolling	only	those	
subjects	who	have	met	all	of	the	protocol	inclusion	criteria	an d	none	of	the	exclusion	
criteria.	
12.2 ELECTRONIC	CASE	REPORT	FORMS	AND	DATA	CAPTURE	SYSTEM	
Data	collection	will	involve	the	use	of	the	Electronic	Data	Cap ture	(EDC)	system,	to	
which	only	authorized	personnel	will	have	access.	Electronic	ca se	report	forms	
(eCRFs)	will	be	used	to	capture	study	data	in	an	EDC	system.	Entering	of	eCRFs	should	be	 handled	 in	 accordance	 with	 instructions	 from	 the	 Sponsor	 or	 Sponsor	
representative.	All	eCRFs	must	be	completed	by	qualified	study	 center	personnel.	
Each	Investigator	is	responsible	for	ensuring	that	accurate	dat a	are	entered	into	the	
EDC	system	in	a	timely	manner.		
The	Investigator	or	designee	will	be	responsible	for	reviewing	 eCRFs,	resolving	data	
queries	generated	by	the	Sponsor	via	the	system,	providing	missing	or	corrected	data,	
approving	all	changes	performed	on	the	subject	data,	and	endors ing	these	data	within	
the	EDC	system.	This	approval	me thod	will	include	applying	an	e lectronic	signature,	
a	 uniquely	 assigned	 user	 name,	 and	 a	 password	 that	 together	 wil l	 represent	 a	
traditional	handwritten	signature.		Queries	may	be	issued	electronically	to	the	study	site	and	answ ered	electronically	by	
that	site’s	personnel.	The	identifying	information	(assigned	user	name,	date,	and	time)	for	both	the	originator	of 	the	query	and	the	originator	o f	the	data	change	(if	
applicable)	will	be	collected.	
12.3 SOURCE	DOCUMENT	MAINTENANCE	
Source	documents	may	include,	but	are	not	limited	to,	study	pro gress	notes,	study‐	or	
subject‐specific	e‐mail	correspondence,	computer	printouts,	lab oratory	data,	and	
recorded	 data	 from	 automated	 instruments.	 The	 original	 signed	 I C F 	f o r 	e a c h 	
participating	 subject	 shall	 be	 filed	 with	 records	 kept	 by	 the	 I nvestigator.	 All	
documents	produced	in	this	study	will	be	maintained	by	the	Investigator	and	made	available	for	inspection	by	the	Sponsor	or	Sponsor	representati ve	and	applicable	
regulatory	authorities.	
12.4 STUDY	MONITORING	REQUIREMENTS	
The	Sponsor	or	Sponsor	representative	will	conduct	site	visits	 to	inspect	study	data,	
subjects’	medical	records,	and	eCRFs	in	accordance	with	current	ICH	E6	Good	Clinical	Practice	(GCP)	guidelines,	and	the	respective	United	States	or	 foreign	regulations	and	
guidelines,	as	applicable.	The	Sponsor	or	Sponsor	representative	will	also	be	able	to	
review	query	status	remotely,	 which	may	warrant	additional	communication	with	the	
Investigator	and	the	study	site’s	personnel.	The	Investigator	w ill	make	available	to	
the	Sponsor,	or	Sponsor	representative,	source	documents,	signe d	ICFs,	and	all	other	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	36	of	44  
	
 
 
study‐related	 documents.	 The	 Inv estigator	 will	 allow	 the	 Sponso r	 or	 Sponsor	
representative	and	applicable	regulatory	authorities	to	inspect 	facilities	and	records	
relevant	to	this	study.	
	
12.5 STUDY	COMPLETION	
The	 Sponsor	 requires	 the	 following	 data	 and	 materials	 before	 a	 study	 can	 be	
considered	complete	or	terminated,	including,	but	not	limited	t o:	
	
o Laboratory	findings,	clinical	data,	and	all	special	test	result s	from	screening	
through	FU	
o eCRFs	properly	completed	by	appropriate	study	personnel	and	sig ned	and	
dated	by	the	Investigator	within	the	EDC	system.	This	approval	method	will	include	applying	an	electronic	si gnature,	a	uniquely	assigned	u ser	name,	and	
a	password	that	together	will	represent	a	traditional	handwritten	signature.	
o Copies	of	complete	device	accountability	records,	if	applicable 		
o Copies	of	all	IRB/IEC	or	CA	approvals	and	acknowledgements	
o A	summary	of	the	study	prepared	by	the	Investigator	(an	IRB/IEC 	or	CA	
summary	letter	is	acceptable)  
		

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	37	of	44  
	
 
 
13 STUDY	MANAGEMENT 	
Study	management	will	occur	in	accordance	with	ISO	14155,	(Clin ical	investigation	
of	medical	devices	for	human	subjects	–	Good	clinical	practices ),	the	Declaration	of	
Helsinki,	the	applicable	national	regulations	and	Institutional 	research	policies	and	
procedures.	Several	key	components	of	study	management	are	disc ussed	separately	
below.	
	
13.1 IRB/IEC	OR	COMPETENT	AUTHORITY	APPROVAL	
The	IRB/IEC	or	CA	must	approve	the	protocol	or	amended	protocol 	(if	applicable)	
and	the	corresponding	ICF	before	the	study	may	be	initiated;	an y	recruiting	materials	
before	 use;	 and	 subsequent	 amended	 protocols	 and	 corresponding	 ICFs	 before	
instituting	amendment‐specified	 changes	to	the	study,	unless	re quired	for	subject	
safety.			The	Investigator	is	responsible	for	informing	the	IRB/IEC	or	CA 	of	any	changes	made	
to	the	protocol,	and	to	advise	the	IRB/IEC	or	CA,	at	least	once	a	year,	about	the	progress	of	the	study.	The	Investigator	(or	Sponsor,	if	applicable)	is	also	responsible	for	notifying	the	IRB/IEC	or	CA	of	any	significant	AEs	that	occ ur	during	the	study	
according	to	local	IRB/IEC	or	CA	requirements.	
 
 Study	Registration 	
The	study	will	be	registered	with 	www.clinicaltrials.gov	in	accordance	with	the	
Declaration	of	Helsinki.		
13.2 MONITORING		
The	study	will	be	monitored	period ically	at	each	enrolling	site	per	the	study	
monitoring	plan	for	the	purposes	of		
o Verifying	compliance	to	the	protocol	and	applicable	regulations ,	
o Verifying	case	report	form	data	 to	original	entries	in	source	f iles,		
o Abbott	EP	(Topera)	employees	or	 representatives	will	monitor	th e	study	
according	to	company	standard	operating	procedures.		
13.3 STUDY	AUDITS	
The	Sponsor	and	representatives	of	regulatory	health	authoritie s	are	permitted	to	
inspect	the	study	documents	(pro tocol,	case	report	forms,	study ‐related	medical	
records,	study	correspondence	wi th	EC	and	sponsor,	etc.).	In	addition	to	ongoing	
monitoring	of	the	study,	GCP	aud its	by	the	Sponsor	or	its	repre sentatives	are	also	
permitted.	All	attempts	will	be	m ade	to	preserve	subject	 		
	
13.4 PROTOCOL	DEVIATIONS	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	38	of	44  
	
 
 
A	protocol	deviation	is	defined	a s	any	event	where	the	clinical 	investigator	or	site	
personnel	did	not	conduct	the	study	according	to	the	protocol.		
	
Investigators	can	only	initiate	deviations	from	the	protocol	wh ere	necessary	to	
protect	the	life	or	physical	wellbeing	of	a	subject,	i.e.,	in	a n	emergency.		Protocol	
deviations	shall	be	reported	to	t he	Sponsor	regardless	of	whether	medically	
justifiable,	pre‐approved	by	the	 Sponsor,	or	taken	to	protect	t he	subject	in	an	
emergency.		Subject‐specific	dev iations	will	be	reported	on	the 	eCRF.		Non‐subject	
specific	deviations,	(e.g.,	unauth orized	use	of	a	study	device	 by	a	physician	who	has	
not	signed	an	investigator	agreem ent,	etc.),	will	also	need	to	be	reported	to	the	
Sponsor.		All	deviations,	regard less	of	major	/	minor	or	pre‐ap proved,	will	be	
reported	on	the	eCRF.		Investiga tors	will	also	adhere	to	procedures	for	reporting	
study	deviations	to	their	IRB/EC	in	accordance	with	their	speci fic	IRB/EC	reporting	
policies	and	procedures.		
	Regulations	require	that	investig ators	maintain	accurate,	complete	and	current	
records,	including	documents	sho wing	the	dates	of	and	reasons	for	each	deviation	
from	the	protocol.		
	
o Definitions 	
For	reporting	purposes,	the	Sponsor	classifies	study	deviations 	as	major	or	
minor:	
	
 Major	deviation:		Any	deviation	from	subject	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria;	subject	infor med	consent	procedures	(e.g.	
failure	to	obtain	informed	consent	or	failure	to	obtain	informe d	
consent	prior	to	study	entry);	r andomization	errors;	failure	to 	
report	SAE’s,	unanticipated	adve rse	device	effects,	and	deaths	
within	applicable	regulatory	timef rames;	device	accountability	
issues	(e.g.	missing	or	lost	investigational	product);	or	devic e	
misuse	/	unauthorized	device	use.	
	
 Minor	deviation:		Deviation	from	a	protocol	requirement	such	as 	
incomplete/	inadequate	subject	testing	procedures,	non‐compliance	with	medication	regimens,	follow‐ups	performed	outside	specified	time	windows,	etc.	
	
The	Sponsor	will	continuously	monitor	site	compliance.		The	site	will	receive	a	list	of	site‐specific	study	de viations	on	an	annual	basis	as	 part	of	the	
Annual	Progress	Report	and	as	pa rt	of	the	Final	 Report	upon	com pletion	of	
the	study.		
13.5 DATA	MONITORING	COMMITTEE	
A	Data	Monitoring	Committee	[DMC ]	will	provide	ongoing	independ ent	review	of	
the	data,	further	ensuring	the	continued	safety	of	subjects,	as	well	as	the	validity	and	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	39	of	44  
	
 
 
scientific	merit	of	the	trials. 		The	DMC	consists	of	at	least	t hree	voting	members,	
with	relevant	expertise.		The	DM C	members	are	not	directly	rela ted	to	the	study.	
	
14 DEVICE	ACCOUNTABILITY 	
The	investigator	shall	maintain	a dequate	records	of	the	receipt 	and	disposition	
of	all	devices	per	local	institut ional	procedure	and	regulation s.		
	
15 PROTECTION 	OF	HUMAN	SUBJECTS 	
15.1 STATEMENT	OF	COMPLIANCE	
This	study	will	be	conducted	in	compliance	with	the	current	ICH	E6	GCP,	the	ethical	
principles	of	the	Declaration	of	Helsinki,	current	FDA	GCP	guidelines,	and	any	additional	national	or	IRB/IEC	or	CA‐required	procedures,	which ever	represents	
the	greater	protection	for	the	individual.		
15.2 INFORMED	CONSENT	
This	study	will	be	conducted	in	compliance	with	current	ICH	E6	 GCP	pertaining	to	
informed	consent,	the	current	CFR	(Title	21,	Parts	50).	To	part icipate	in	the	study,	
the	subject	must	sign	and	date	the	ICF	after	having	been	inform ed	about	the	nature	
and	purpose	of	the	study,	participation	and	termination	conditi ons,	risks,	and	
benefits,	before	initiation	of	any	study‐related	procedures.	A	 copy	of	the	signed	ICF	
must	be	provided	to	the	subject. 	If	applicable,	the	ICF	will	be 	provided	in	certified	
translation	for	non‐English‐speaki ng	subjects.	Signed	ICFs	must 	remain	in	the	
subjects’	study	files	and	be	ava ilable	for	verification	by	the	 Sponsor	or	Sponsor	
representative	at	any	time.			

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	40	of	44  
	
 
 
16 STATISTICAL 	CONSIDERATIONS 	
16.1 GENERAL	ANALYSIS	PRINCIPLES	
All	primary	endpoint	analyses	wi ll	be	conducted	under	the	principle	of	“Intention‐To‐
Treat”	(ITT),	where	each	subject 	randomized	to	a	treatment	grou p	who	has	met	all	
inclusion/exclusion	criteria	and	 had	a	mapping	and /or	ablation	 catheter	inserted	
shall	be	considered	part	of	the	I TT	group.		As	a	secondary	expl oratory	analysis,	a	“Per	
Protocol”	(PP)	analysis	may	be	performed	with	a	subgroup	of	the 	ITT	group	who	have	
no	major	protocol	deviations	repor ted,	and	have	achieved	their	 12‐month	visit	
(endpoint).	
 
16.2 Study	Endpoints	
A. Long‐Term	Effectiveness	(Pri mary	effectiven ess	endpoint)	
	
Single	Repeat	Procedure	Freedom	from	AF/AT/AFL	recurrence*	in	t he	period	from	3	
to	12	months	after	the	initial	AF	ablation	procedure.		Freedom	from	AF/AT/AFL	recurrenc e	is	defined	as	no	documented	e pisodes	>	30	
seconds	with	conventional	non‐invasive	7‐day	continuous	monitor ing.		In	the	case	of	a	
cardiac	implanted	electronic	device	(CIED),	freedom	from	AF/AT/ AFL	recurrence	is	
defined	as	no	documented	episode s	>	30	in	a	1‐week	window	at	the	follow‐up	visits,	
in	addition	to	any	symptomatic	episodes	with	documented	episode 	>	30	seconds.		AT	
recurrence	does	not	include	episodes	of	CTI	(cavotricuspid	isth mus)	dependent	
flutter.		The	statistical	hypothesis	for	this	endpoint	is	operationalized 	as	follows:	
	H
O:	pE	=	pC	
HA:	pE		pC	
	=	.05	(two‐tailed)	
	Where:		
p
E	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	FIRM	arm	
pC	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	conventional	ablation	c ontrol	arm	
	
The	proportion	of	successes	in	ea ch	treatment	arm	shall	be	eval uated	relative	to	their	
respective	primary	endpoint	usin g	both	Chi‐Square	(Binomial,	1d f)	and	by	Kaplan‐
Meier	survival	estimation.	Each	 evaluation	will	include	95%	con fidence	intervals.	
B. Acute	Effectiveness	(Secondary	effectiveness	endpoint)	
	The	acute	success	of	FIRM‐guided	p rocedure	is	defined	as	elimin ation	of	the	source	of	
arrhythmias	identified	by	FIRMap	as	indicated	by;			
1. No	evidence	of	the	source	on	FIRM ap	immediately	post‐procedure, 	OR		

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	41	of	44  
	
 
 
2. Reduction	of	electrogram	amplitude	to	<0.2mV	in	region	designat ed	by	
FIRMap		
	
The	proportion	of	successes	in	each	arm	will	be	calculated	as	f ollows:	
	
n
N	
	
Where:	
	n	=	the	total	count	of	“successf ul”	subjects	in	the	arm	in	ques tion	
N	=	the	total	count	of	subjects	 for	that	arm	in	the	ITT	group	
	The	statistical	hypothesis	for	this	endpoint	is	operationalized 	as	follows:	
	H
O:	pE	=	pC	
HA:	pE		pC	
	=	.05	(two‐tailed)	
	Where:		p
E	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	FIRM	arm	
pC	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	conventional	ablation	c ontrol	arm	
	This	endpoint	will	be	evaluated	using	a	Chi‐Square	test	of	independence,	the	proportions	assumed	to	be	binomial	for	each	group.	
C. Acute	Safety	(Primary	safety	endpoint)	
	The	acute	safety	success	of	eithe r	treatment	arm	is	defined	as	freedom	from	serious	
adverse	events	related	to	the	pr ocedure	within	ten	(10)	days	of	the	index	procedure.	
The	proportion	of	successes	in	each	arm	will	be	calculated	as	f ollows:	
	
n
N	
	Where:		n	=	the	total	count	of	subjects	 presenting	freedom	from	serious 	adverse	events	related	
to	the	procedure	within	ten	(10)	days	of	the	index	procedure.	N	=	the	total	count	of	subjects	in	that	arm	in	the	ITT	group		
The	statistical	hypothesis	for	this	endpoint	is	operationalized 	as	follows:	
	
H
O:	pE	=	pC	
HA:	pE		pC	
	=	.05	(two‐tailed)	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	42	of	44  
	
 
 
Where:	
	p
E	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	FIRM	arm	
pC	=	the	proportion	of	“successes”	in	the	conventional	ablation	c ontrol	arm	
	This	endpoint	will	be	evaluated	using	a	Chi‐Square	test	of	independence,	the	proportions	assumed	to	be	binomial	for	each	group.	
D. Long‐Term	Safety	(Primary	safety	endpoint)	
	Long‐term	safety	is	defined	as	freedom	from	procedure‐related	s erious	adverse	
events	(SAEs)	(including	those	re lated	to	repeat	procedures)	wi thin	one	year	of	the	
initial	procedure.		The	statistical	hypothesis	for	this	endpoint	is	operationalized 	as	follows:	
	H
O:	pE	=	pC	
HA:	pE		pC	
	=	.05	(two‐tailed)	
	Where:		p
E	=	the	proportion	of	subjects	fr ee	from	serious	adverse	events	related	to	the	
procedure	(including	from	any	re peat	procedures	required)	withi n	one	year	of	the	
index	procedure	in	the	FIRM	arm		p
C	=	the	proportion	of	subjects	fr ee	from	serious	adverse	events	related	to	the	
procedure	(including	from	any	re peat	procedures	required)	withi n	one	year	of	the	
index	procedure	in	the	conventional	ablation	control	arm		The	proportion	of	events	in	each	 treatment	arm	sh all	be	evaluated	relative	to	their	
respective	primary	endpoint	usin g	both	Chi‐Square	(Binomial,	1d f)	and	by	Kaplan‐
Meier	survival	estimation.	Each	 evaluation	will	include	95%	con fidence	intervals.	
	
16.3 POWER	AND	SAMPLE	SIZE	ESTIMATION	
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	43	of	44  
	
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	 	
	
	
	
	
	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
  

	Redo‐FIRM	
	
	
CLN-108, Rev C   Page	44	of	44  
	
 
 
17 PUBLICATION	 POLICY	
The	data	generated	in	this	clinical	study	are	the	exclusive	pro perty	of	the	Sponsor	and	
are	 	As	the	study	Sponsor,	Abbott	retains	the	firs t	right	to	disclose	the	
r e s u l t s 	o f 	t h e 	S t u d y 	t h r o u g h 	a 	p u b l i c a t i o n 	o r 	a n y 	o t h e r 	p u b l i c 	 disclosure.	 	 A	
Publication	Steering	Committee	(PSC)	may	be	formulated	to	oversee	the	publication	
process.	The	PSC	may	include	Principal	Investigator(s),	members 	of	the	Steering	
Committee,	investigators	and	other	individuals	who	have	expertise	in	the	area	and	employees	of	Abbott.	All	manuscripts	and	abstracts	will	be	revi ewed	and	approved	
by	the	PSC	and/or	Abbott.		Authorship	on	the	primary	publication	of	the	results	from	this	study	will	be	based	on	contributions	to	study	design,	enro llment,	data	analysis,	
and	interpretation	of	results.	
	
	
