[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 EFFICACY OF EXPAREL ® ON POST -OPERATIVE PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA 
CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE  
 
Summary  
This will be a head to head study that includes two cohorts of patients undergoing roux-en-y 
gastric bypass  with the use of circular end to end anastomotic (EEA)  stapler to create the 
gastro -jejunal anastomosis . One cohort ( 50 patient s) will receive Ex parel® (liposomal 
bupivacaine injection solution)  injections intra -operatively  at time of incision closure. The control 
cohort ( 50 patients) will receive standard  bupivacaine  injections  at the time of incision closure, 
the current standard of care . Post-operative analgesia will be standardized and identical for both 
cohorts.  The primary outcome will be pain scores  and 24 and 48  hours  post operatively, 
measure using the visual analog scale (VAS) . Secondary outcomes will include the parameters 
included in the American Pain Society Post -Operative Questionnaire (APS -POQ -R), a validate d 
measurement tool to assess how patients experience pain and how it may impact their ability to 
complete daily activity.  Readmission, ED visits, and phone calls to clinic related to pain control 
will be evaluated by retrospective chart review at day 30 p ostop.  This information may better 
direct surgeons in selecting type of injected medication at the incision site, in an effort to 
achieve better short -term results.  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Background  
Compared to open operation, laparoscopic surgery offers numerous benefits, inc luding  
decreasing surgical trauma,  improved cosmesis and decrease d wound infection and wound 
related complications. Another significant advantage is the reduction of post -operative pain ; 
however, effective post-operative  analgesia following laparoscopy still often requires 
intravenous or oral narcotics . Several factors may contribute to the development of pain post -
laparoscopic surgery, including the stretching of the intra -abdominal cavity, peritoneal 
inflammation and ne uro-vascular irritation [1–3]. Lower intensity and duration of pain associated 
with laparoscopic surgery has been well documented when compared to lapa rotomy. 
Nevertheless safe peri -operative analgesic regimen that effectively achieves pain relief with 
minimal side effects is required , and it likely best achieved by a multimodality approach  
Reduction of pain may be achieved by early administration of ana lgesics, typically prior to 
patient awakening from anesthesia [1, 4–7]. Preventive analgesia includes any intraoperative 
analgesic agents/techniques that provides the ability to control pain -induced sensitization of the 
central nervous system and decrease the development of ongoing pain [1, 8, 9] .  
 
Commonly used non -opioid based medications such as acetaminophen (paracetamol) have 
been shown to reduce pain after various surgical procedures [1, 10, 11] . Local analgesia has 
also been shown to be effective  adjunct  in relieving pain related to laparoscopic surgery . [1, 9, 
12, 13] . Bupivacaine is an amide -based local anesthetic . The use of multiple analgesics  
medications  when compared to a single analgesic  medication  for reduction  in pain  post-
operatively, allow s more rapid  post-operative recovery therefore allowing patients to resume 
normal activities of daily living sooner. [1, 11]  Most enhanced recovery protocols as a result now 
include provisions for multimodal analgesia, in many cases beginning intraoperatively.  
 
Exparel ® is a formulation of bupivacaine  (Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc., San Diego), offering 
extended -release bupivacaine  tissue release, and thus prolonged analgesia . In the Exparel® 
formulation, multi -vesicular liposomes (MVL) encapsulate the bupivacaine medication . The 
tightly packed multi -lamellar vesicles that comprise an Exparel® unit have proven to provide 
longer term drug release compared to other technologies using uni-lamellar vesicles . This 
arrangement of vesicles within the Exparel® , spans tens of micrometer s in diameter and slows 
degradation in vivo, allowing  for greater sustainability of medication release lasting days as 
opposed to hours. Several randomized clinical trials have been completed with this novel 
medication  leading to is approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The outcome 
measures included verbal pain scores , amount s and duratio n of use of post -operative opioid 
analgesics  and patient satisfaction . In post market studies, r esearchers have conducte d a wide 
range of surgical studies assessing the use of Exparel® for a variety of surgical procedures. 
Currently th ere are no prospective studies evaluating post -operative pain after  roux-en-y gastric 
bypass . Of particular interest is the use of  the circular  EEA, which requires a larger incision site  
in the left upper quadrant, and is typically the site of the greatest operative pain.  
 
A study conducted by Skolnik et al. assessing the use of Expare l® in ileostomy reversals 
indicates there was a s tatistically significant in reduction of post -operative opioid analgesic use, 
length of hospital stay, and maximal pain scores. A majority of the current studies support these 
findings, bu t the evaluation of Ex parel® for post -bariatric pain is limited.  
 
Roux-en-Y gastric  bypass  (RYGB)  is a well-studied  bariatric  surgical  procedure  that is  not 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 only a very effective  procedure for weight  loss, but is also associated with a reduction of 
significant co -morbid conditions. Roux -en-y gastric bypass operation s involves the creation 
of  two new anastomoses, the gastrojejunal anastomosis linking the gastric pouch to the 
roux limb , and the jejuno -jejunal anastomosis connecting the bypassed biliopancreatic limb 
with the distal Roux limb. [14] Nationally the circular EEA stapler is the most common technique 
to form the gastrojejunal anastomosis . This stapler is ~40mm in diameter, and is introduced 
through an incision in the left upper quadrant incision . This is the largest incision created  
and is typically the site of the most intense postoperative pain. [14] Given the location next 
to the costal margin, pain at this location can also lead to patien ts self -splinting, limiting 
lung expansion and putting them at risk for post -operative atelectasis, respiratory 
insufficiency or pneumonia.  
 
Currently,  there  are no prospective trials for that examine  post-operative  pain management  
in patients undergoing laparoscopic roux -en-y gastric bypass utilizing  a circular EEA staplers 
used to create gastrojejunal  anastomosis.  Objective  data from such  an investigation  would  
serve  to better  direct patient  care by providing  needed  information  about  the most 
appropriate  medications to be used in reducing post -operative pain  for this specific  bariatric  
population, and resultant symptoms of pain and increased hospital resource use.  
 
 
 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Aims and  Hypothesis  
 
Aim: To evaluate the  efficacy in reducing post -operative pain with the use of Exparel ® in 
comparison to bupivacaine  injections in bariatric patients undergoing LRYGB with EEA stapler 
anastomosis at the incision sites.  
 
Hypothesis  1a.  Exparel ® liposomal bupivacaine injected  at the incisional sites prior to incision 
closure will reduce post-operative  pain when compared to standard local analgesia using 
bupivacaine . 
 
Hypothesis  1b. Exparel® liposomal bupivacaine  injected  at the incisional sites prior incision 
closure  will reduc e post-operative opioid analgesic use when compared to standard local 
analgesia using  bupivacaine.  
 
Hypothesis  1c. Exparel® liposomal bupivacaine  injected  at the incisional sites prior to incision 
closing will reduce unplanned readmission, and inquir ies to medical providers regarding pain in 
the first 30 days post operatively  compared to standard local analgesia using bupivacaine.  
 
 
  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Materials and  Methodology  
 
Study  Design  
 
The study  will be composed of 100 , and  will consist of  two cohort s of 50 patients . The study 
cohort  will include 50 patients who receive intraoperative  Exparel ® injections  at the incision locations in 
addition to our standard multimodality post -operative analgesia . The control arm will include  50 
patients who meet inclusion  criteria  but receive standard 0.25% bupivacaine and our standard 
multimodality post -operative analgesia . Patients will be randomized  by RED Cap™ database 
system in collaboration with Cleveland Clinic Pharmacy  to receive either Exparel ® or the control 
medication (0.25% Bupivacaine ). Consent  from patients  will be obtained  and documented  
by a dedicated  research  personnel  prior to any enrollment.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
After  Institutional Research  Board (IRB)  study  approval,  patients  will be prospectively  
enrolled  in to the study. The  participants  for this study  will include  bariatric  patients  who 
present  at the Cleveland  Clinic  Bariatric  Surgery  Center  of Excellence,  over 18 years of age, 
fulfilling  NIH criteria  for bariatric  surgery  and will proceed  with laparoscopic Roux-en-y 
gastric bypass  with the use of EEA stapler anastomosis  for the  treatment  of their obesity. 
Patients who fulfill the inclusion criteria and do not meet any of the exclusion criteria will be 
approached for participation. Patients will provide written personal signature on the 
consent/authorization form for enrollment in the study.  
 
Exclusion Crit eria: 
Exclusion  criteria  includes  age <18 years  which  is a contra -indication  to laparoscopic  roux-
en-y gastric bypass , patients with previous history of roux-en-y gastric bypass , or patients 
undergoing other bariatric procedures . Patients on  pre-operative  opioid analgesics will also 
be excluded from participating in the study. If the physician feels that the safety of the 
patient is at risk the participant will be excluded from the study , patients will be additionally 
excluded . Participants unwilling and u nable to return for required follow -up visits will also be 
excluded.  
 
  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Methods  
Phase I: Preoperative Procedures  
All patients undergoing laparoscopic roux en Y gastric bypass will undergo pre -operative 
assessments. This includes appointments with internal medicine physicians specialized in care 
of the bariatric surgical population, nutrition counseling, psychological  screening, demonstrated 
weight loss during a preoperative trial period, and additional evaluation and clearance by 
subspecialists based on co -morbid conditions. In addition patients have a complete history and 
physical examinations performed by or supervi sed by Dr. Matthew Kroh MD, and Dr. John 
Rodriguez, Staff Bariatric Surgeons that utilize the circular EEA technique. Consent for this 
study will occur during a preoperative visit.  
 
Phase II: Operative procedure  
The bariatric surgical procedure, (laparosc opic RYGB), will be performed at the Cleveland Clinic 
Main Campus Bariatric Surgery Center of Excellence. The gastro -jejunal anastomosis will be 
created through the use of a circular end to end anastomotic (circular EEA) stapler with a 
3.5mm staple height (Covidien , Dublin, Ireland ). Patients will be randomized to receive either 
Exparel (R) (liposome bupivacaine injection solution), or standard  bupivacaine , ~0.25% . 
Standardized injection volumes and technique will be performed. The study coordinator an d/or 
the co -investigators on this study will notify the operative team prior to incision time to remind 
them of participation in this study. Those administering the study medication will not be blinded 
to the administration, since the appearance between the med ication s is significantly different.  
 
Phase Ill: Postoperative Procedures  
Patients have an initial stay in the Post Anesthesia Recovery Area, and then are typically 
admitted to a nursing unit specializing in post -operative bariatric care. Patients will be  followed 
by the surgical team while in the hospital, and all will receive the same multimodal anesthetic 
regimen Patients are advanced on a diet along a pre -determined schedule, starting usually on 
post-operative day 1.  
 
At 24 hours a member of the resear ch team will administer a 2 -part questionnaire containing the 
VAS and the Revised American Pain Society Post -Operative Questionnaire (APS -POQ -R).[16]  
The latter is validated for assessment of the patient's experience of pai n and it hindrance to 
daily activity in the post -operative period.   The VAS and APS -POQ -R assessment will be 
administered at 48 hours only if the patient is not discharged on post-operative  day 1.  
Assessors will be blinded to the medication that was admini stered in the operating room.  
 
Following discharge from the hospital, standard follow up appointments are scheduled at 7 -10 
days, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months. Patients are monitored for adverse events 
from bariatric surgery, enumerated and standardized by the American Society of Metabolic and 
Bariatric Surgeons. [15] 
 
.  ED visits and readmissions, as well as phone calls to clinic for issues related to pain will be 
evaluated at 30 days postop via a retrospective chart review to assess patie nt healthcare usage 
after discharge.  Assessors will be blinded to the medication that was administered in the 
operating room.  
 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Chart review will be completed to determine the amount of intravenous and oral narcotic pain 
medication used during the hospital stay, converted to morphine equivalents. Chart review will 
also be completed to detect narcotic related adverse events, similar to those used in prior 
studies of Exparel®. [17] 
 All data will be collected in a password -protected REDCap™ customized for this pro ject.  Data 
points and schedule of assessment is provided in Table 2. 
 
Study Protocol  
CCF policy on the use of Exparel ® will be followed throughout the study.  Specific but not 
comprehensive points include;  
 
 Use of Exparel ® is limited to one per patient  
 All safety guidelines as outlined in IOH policy on use of Exparel ® will be followed  
 All patients will be provided safety information concerning Exparel ® on discharge  
 
Local Analgesia Administration Technique for the Investigational Group (see Table 1)  
 Dilute to final  volume of 120mL 
(20mL Exparel®  + 60mL Bupivacaine (0.25%) and 40mL 0.9% injectable saline)  
 At the end of surgical procedure - inject 60mL around the left subcostal surgical site. 
Administer 40mL  in the prefascial space, and 20mL at the dermal – subdermal junction  
 inject 15mL  at each remaining trocar site (4 trocar sites)= 60mL  
 
Local Analgesia Administration Technique for the Control Group      
 60cc Bupivacaine (0.5 %) and 60mL  0.9% injectable Saline (final concentration 0.25% 
bupivacaine)  
 At the end of surgical procedure - inject 60mL around the left subcostal surgical site. 
Administer 40mL in the prefascial space, and 20mL at the dermal –subdermal junction  
 Inject 15mL  at each remaining trocar site (4 trocar sites)= 60mL  
 
All injections will  use a spinal needle, part of the stand operative equipment for this procedure, 
and be administered with a moving needle technique.  
 
 
  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Table 1: Study Medication and Post -operative Multimodality Pain Regimen  
 
 Investigational Group  Control Group  
Intraope rative Analgesia  
Local anesthetic 
Administered as:  
½ administered in the LUQ 
port site  
- 40 mL in prefascial space 
around the LUQ port  
- 20mL at dermal / 
subdermal junction  of the 
LUQ port site  
½ volume split among 
remaining ports  20cc Exparel®  
60cc Bupivicaine (0.25%)  
40cc Normal Saline  
Final volume: 120cc  
60cc Bupivicaine (0.5 %) 
20cc Normal Saline  
Final volume: 120cc  
IV analgesia  1000mg IV acetaminophen once  
+ Additional medication administered by Anesthesia 
Providers  
Post-operative Analgesia  
If NPO  Ketorolac IV 30mg q6 hours x 48 hours  
Hydromorphone IV 0.2mg q4 hours prn  
After taking liquids  Acetaminophen po 1000 mg q8 hours  
Ketorolac IV 30mg q6 hours x 48 hours  
Roxicodone po 5 -10 mg  q4 hours prn  
Hydromorphone IV 0.2mg q4 hours prn  
 
All injections will be documented in the intra -operative report including areas injected, and 
amount of Exparel®  or Bupivacaine used.  Any adverse events are to be documented as well 
in the electronic medical record.  
 
  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Pain assessment:  
 First assessment at 24 hours post operatively using In Hospital Pain Assessment 
Questionnaire, including  
o Visual Analog Scale ( VAS) 
o American Pain Society Post -Operative Questionnaire -Revised ( APS-POQ -R) 
 Second assessment at 48 hours post operatively with the same assessment  
questionnaires if the patient was not discharged on post -operative day 1.   
 Retrospective chart review for Narcotic Associated Adverse Events (NAE)  
NAEs include:  
o Somnolence  
o Respiratory depression  
o Hypoventilation  
o Hypoxia  
o Dry mouth  
o n/v 
o constipation  
o Sedation  
o Confusion  
o Pruritus  
o Urinary retention  
o Post op ileus  
 
Data  Collection  
As confidentiality  of patient  health  records  is of significant importance , the data obtained  or 
recorded  from this study  will be stored  in a REDCap  (Research  Electronic  Data  Capture) 
database  developed  by the principal  investigator  and co-principal  investigator,  research  
fellows,  and the bariatric  research  support  staff at the Cleveland  Clinic.  REDCap  is a secure,  
web-based  application  designed  to support  data capture  for research  studies  and among  
many  functions, includes  an intuitive  interface  for data entry,  audit  trails  for tracking  data 
manipulation, and automated  export  procedures  with integration  into statistical  packages.  
Only  researchers  listed and approved  on the study  protocol  will have  access  to the data.  If 
data should  need  to be  provided  to investigators  outside  of the protocol,  it will be provided  
without  identifying  information  in order  to protect the  patient's  privacy  and remain  in 
compliance  with HIPAA.  The database  will be maintained throughout  the approved  
duration  of the project.  
 
 
Table 2: Schedule of Assessments  
 
Study  Day/Time  Point   
Pre-op Operative 
encounter  
(24, 48 hours 
post op)  7-10 
days post 
op 1 month post 
op 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Questionnaire      
VAS  I*   
APS-POQ -R  I*   
Satisfaction and healthcare 
utilization survey      
General  Procedures      
Informed  consent  I*    
Complete  medical  history  S    
Updated  medical  history   S S S 
Medication  history  S    
Medication  changes   S S S 
Vital Signs  S S S S 
Physical  exam  S S S S 
Height  S    
Body  weight  S S S S 
Body  Mass  Index  S S S S 
Laboratory  Tests      
CBC S    
Basic  chemistry  S    
- S=Standard of Care; I=Investigational Procedures; *= no additional costs for 
Investigational Procedures. 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 APS -POQ -R 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
  

[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Gordon, et al. J Pain. 2011; 11(11): 1172 -86.  
 
Visual Analog Pain Scale  
 
How would you rate your current pain?  
 
Place a mark along the line below  
 
 
 
  

[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Interview at 1 Week and 1 Month Post -Operative Follow Up  
1. How satisfied were you with your post -operative analgesia  
Extremely 
dissatisfied  Very 
dissatisfied  Somewhat 
dissatisfied  Somewhat 
satisfied  Very 
satisfied  Extremely 
Satisfied  
      
      
  
 
2. Were you readmitted to the hospital?  
Yes   No  
 
If yes, for what reason?         
 
3. Did you have any unplanned medical visits?  
 
Yes   No  
 
If yes, for what reason?         
 
 
4. Did you experience any health related problems during your recovery?  
 
Yes   No  
 
If yes, what were they?         
 
5. Did you contact a medical provider about your recovery, apart from your scheduled post -
operative visits?  
 
Yes   No  
 
If yes, for what reason?         
 
 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 Statistical analysis  
Descriptive  statistics  will be computed  for all variables. These  include  means,  ranges,  
standard  deviations,  and percentiles  for continuous  variables  and also frequencies  and 
percentages  for categorical  variables. Data will be separated into two groups; investigational 
group and control group. Data will be presented as mean ± standard deviation, median 
[interquartile range] or N (%).  All analyses will be performed using SAS (version 9.2  or higher , 
The SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and R (version 2.13.1  or Higher , The R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, Vienna Austria). A P < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant  Results  will 
be compared  within  each  cohort  and between  cohorts.  
 
Power analysis  
This power analysis  was calculated  for the primary  aim of the study to  compare post -
operative pain reduction between both cohorts.  Calculations were made based on results in 
the Butz  et al. paper involving the use of the VAS scale in postoperative pain in breast 
reconstruction. Power was calculated assuming the use of a two -sample t test to compare mean 
VAS levels between Exparel ® patients and patients given the standard of care treat ment. The 
actual difference in means was assumed to be 1.5 mm and pooled standard deviation was 
varied across a range from 1 mm to 3 mm. For standard deviations similar to those seen in the 
Butz article, 50 patients are calculated to give > 85% power to de tect a 1.5 mm difference in 
mean VAS at a  standard deviation of 2. 6 mm.  
 
Based on these calculations, a sample size of 50 patients per group is adequate under the 
conditions seen in the reference paper - a pooled standard deviation of about 2 mm and a 
difference in means of about 1.5mm. However, we see from the other conditions explored that 
the adequacy of this sample size (defined as having ≥ 80% power to detect a difference) is 
somewhat sensitive to either the true difference in means being less or the s tandard deviation 
larger.  
 
Timeline and Feasibility  
We fully expect to achieve our objectives upon completion of the funding period based on 
statistical and clinical resources available through the Digestive Disease  and Surgery  Institute, 
and Department of  Quantitative Health Sciences.  
Risk/Benefit Analysis  
Benefits  
Participation in this study may help to improve post -operative pain.  There is no guarantee that 
all patients will benefit by participating in this research study.  Participation in this study may 
provide information that may help other people in the future.  
 
Risks  
There may be risks or side effects related to the study drug that are unknown at this time. 
Patients and IRB will be notified of any significant new find ings that become known that may 
affect the patient’s willingness to continue in the study. There are no additional risks related to 
this beyond those which would be routinely discussed related to surgery. The treating physician 
will counsel subjects regard ing the surgical risks related to each procedure as part of obtaining 
informed consent.  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
  
Complications  
Any complications, anticipated or unanticipated, will be monitored until they are resolved or 
explained.  
 
Protocol Changes  
Any changes to the study protocol will be reviewed and approved by the Cleveland Clinic IRB 
prior to implementation.  
 
Study Termination  
The investigator may terminate this study at any time. All data collected prior to termination of 
study can be used for analysis.    
 
Data Monito ring and Coordination Procedures   
The study investigator or his designee will monitor the study by frequent communications with 
all personnel engaged in the study to assure that the study is carried out according to protocol. 
Data will be entered into a da tabase to facilitate data analysis.  Proper precautions will be taken 
to ensure the safety of patient information. The Principal Investigator or his designee will 
monitor the study  at least  once a year for data quality, subject recruitment, accrual, and 
retention, outcome and adverse event data, assessment of scientific repo rts or therapeutic 
development, results of related studies that impact subject safety, and procedures designed to 
protect the privacy of subjects.  
 
IRB Reporting  
Events requiring prompt reporting to the IRB will be done so in a timely manner.  At the time of 
continuing review, the following information will be provided: 1) summary of cumulative adverse 
events (if any); 2) assessment of external factors (i.e. scientific reports, therapeuti c 
developments, results of related studies) that impacted the safety of subjects; and 3) any 
changes to the risk -benefit ratio.  
 
Consent Forms  
Each patient, prior to evaluation, will sign a consent form.  Copies will be distributed as follows: 
the original  copy will be retained by the study coordinator, and one cop y will be given to the 
patient.  
 
Study Records and Reports  
Investigator Records  
The investigator is responsible for the preparation, review, and retention of the records listed 
below:  
 all correspo ndence that pertains to the study,  
 source documents containing clinical results,  
 documentation of date and reason for any deviation from protocol  
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
  All applicable essential documents, as defined by Sections 8.2 -8.4 of ICH E6 
Guidance on Good Clinical Practic e 
 
Information Use  
Clinical information gathered from this study may be formalized in a manuscript and submitted 
for presentation or publication in a medical journal.  
 
 
Local/Institution  Review  Board  
The protocol  for this investigation  will be reviewed and  by the Institutional  Review  Board 
(IRB).  
 
  
Available  Resources  
There  will be no dedicated  space  or equipment  for the procedures  specific  to this 
investigation,  however  all shared  facilities  and equipment  will be available.  Procedures 
included  in this study will  occur  at the standard  facilities. At  the Cleveland  Clinic,  these  
procedures  take place in the operating theaters /suite . A research  coordinator  will be 
responsible  for consenting  patients  prior to their involvement  in this study.  The surgical 
procedures  for this study  will be performed  by Dr. Kroh,  Director  of Surgical  Endoscopy, and 
Dr. Rodriguez.  
 
Office:  Dr. Rodriguez  and support  staff have  adequate  office  and clinic space in  the Digestive  
Disease  Institute.  
 
Operative theaters:  Dr. Rodriguez  and his co -investigators will have access to the Cleveland 
Clinic’s operative rooms in order to perform the operative procedure. These operative rooms 
are fully equipped for the desired bariatric procedure.  
 
Statistical  Support:  The Cleveland  Clinic Digestive  Disease  and Surgery  Institute has  a 
dedicated  biostatistician  that will statistically  support for the analysis associated with this 
study.  
 
Communication:  Additional  areas  that are  available  to support  this study  include  a conference  
room  and library  space with both teleconferencing  and videoconferencing  capabilities.  
 
 
 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
   
References  
1.  Rasooli S, Moslemi F, Golzari SEJ (2015) Intraperitoneal Bupivacaine -Meperidine 
Infiltration Versus Intravenous Paracetamol: A Comparison of Analgesic Efficacy in Post -
Gynecologic Diagnostic Laparoscopic Pain. Anesthesiol Pain Med 5:e26414. doi: 
10.5812/aapm.26414v2  
2.  Alexander JI (1997) Pain after laparoscopy. Br J Anaesth 79:369 –78. 
3.  Gibbison B, K insella SM (2009) Postoperative analgesia for gynecological laparoscopy. 
Saudi J Anaesth 3:70 –6. doi: 10.4103/1658 -354X.57883  
4.  Møiniche S, Kehlet H, Dahl JB (2002) A qualitative and quantitative systematic review of 
preemptive analgesia for postoperativ e pain relief: the role of timing of analgesia. 
Anesthesiology 96:725 –41. 
5.  Ong CK -S, Lirk P, Seymour RA, Jenkins BJ (2005) The efficacy of preemptive analgesia 
for acute postoperative pain management: a meta -analysis. Anesth Analg 100:757 –73, 
table of c ontents. doi: 10.1213/01.ANE.0000144428.98767.0E  
6.  Adachi YU, Nishino J, Suzuki K, et al (2007) Preemptive analgesia by preoperative 
administration of nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs. J Anesth 21:294. doi: 
10.1007/s00540 -006-0493 -7 
7.  Soleimanpour H, Hassanzadeh K, Vaezi H, et al (2012) Effectiveness of intravenous 
lidocaine versus intravenous morphine for patients with renal colic in the emergency 
department. BMC Urol 12:13. doi: 10.1186/1471 -2490 -12-13 
8.  Holmér Pettersson P, Owall A, Jakobsson J  (2004) Early bioavailability of paracetamol 
after oral or intravenous administration. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 48:867 –70. doi: 
10.1111/j.0001 -5172.2004.00452.x  
9.  Ziyaeifard M, Azarfarin R, Golzari SE (2014) A Review of Current Analgesic Techniques in 
Cardiac Surgery. Is Epidural Worth it? J Cardiovasc Thorac Res 6:133 –40. doi: 
10.15171/jcvtr.2014.001  
10.  Moon Y -E, Lee Y -K, Lee J, Moon D -E (2011) The effects of preoperative intravenous 
acetaminophen in patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy. Arch Gyne col Obstet 
284:1455 –60. doi: 10.1007/s00404 -011-1860 -7 
11.  Eydi M, Golzari SE, Aghamohammadi D, et al (2014) Postoperative Management of 
Shivering: A Comparison of Pethidine vs. Ketamine. Anesthesiol Pain Med 4:e15499. doi: 
10.5812/aapm.15499  
12.  Elhakim  M, Elkott M, Ali NM, Tahoun HM (2000) Intraperitoneal lidocaine for postoperative 
pain after laparoscopy. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 44:280 –4. 
[KROH, ET AL. EFFICACY OF EXPARE L® ON POST -OPERATIVE 
PAIN AFTER RYGB USING EEA CIRCULAR STAPLER TECHNIQUE ] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Revised  
3/23/2020  
 
 
 13.  El-Sherbiny W, Saber W, Askalany AN, et al (2009) Effect of intra -abdominal instillation of 
lidocaine during m inor laparoscopic procedures. Int J Gynaecol Obstet Off Organ Int Fed 
Gynaecol Obstet 106:213 –5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijgo.2009.04.016  
14.  Berbiglia L, Zografakis JG, Dan AG (2016) Laparoscopic Roux -en-Y Gastric Bypass: 
Surgical Technique and Perioperative Care . Surg Clin North Am 96:773 –794. doi: 
10.1016/j.suc.2016.03.003  
15.  Brethauer SA, Kim J, el Chaar M, et al (2015) Standardized outcomes reporting in 
metabolic and bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis Off J Am Soc Bariatr Surg 11:489 –
506. doi: 10.1016/j. soard.2015.02.003  
16.  Gordon DB, Polomano RC, Pellino TA, et al (2010) Revised American Pain Society Patient 
Outcome Questionnaire (APS -POQ -R) for quality improvement of pain management in 
hospitalized adults: preliminary psychometric evaluation. J Pain O ff J Am Pain Soc 
11:1172 –1186. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2010.02.012  
17.  Vogel JD (2013) Liposome bupivacaine (EXPAREL®) for extended pain relief in patients 
undergoing ileostomy reversal at a single institution with a fast -track discharge protocol: an 
IMPROVE  Phase IV health economics trial. J Pain Res 6:605 –610. doi: 
10.2147/JPR.S46950  
 