 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity  
 
Study Proposal  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document last updated May 30, 2025  (only addition of  cover letter and enrollment  end date ) 
 
Last IRB approval October 30, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
A. SIGNIFICANCE  
A.1 BACKGROUND  
Obesity is a significant public health problem affecting nearly 1 in 5 children in this country . Children of 
racial and ethnic minority groups, of low socioeconomic status, and living in rural communities  continue 
to have  the highest  rates of obesity .1-3 Obesity increases a child’s risk for health conditions, including diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, and orthopedic problems .4-5  Children with obesity are at  increased  
risk for  mental health problems  and experien ce reduced quality of life6-7 and obesity in adulthood, all contributing 
to significant  healthcare utilization and costs .4-5  
Lifestyle behavior interventions are the cornerstone of treat ment for childhood obesity , but this 
approach only address es one aspect of this complex condition . Family , community , and sociodemographic 
factors  are equally important to address .17 Families  from rural and underserved  communities experience barriers 
to engaging in  healthy  lifestyle behavior s, including challenges  affording and accessing nutritious food, lack of 
safe opportunities  and spaces  for physical activity, and stressed  home  environment s and also may have 
difficult ies accessing  obesity interventions  due to  transportation obstacles , time and competing priorities , or 
reduced  access to healthcare  generally.8-22  Failing to adequately target these barriers may help to explain why 
obesity interventions have not been as successful in these populations , exacerbating existing disparities.8-10 
Dietz and colleagues have a framework tha t emphasiz es the need to integrate  community systems with 
health care delivery  to improve obesity care and reduce disparities  (Figure 2) .27 Within this framework , 
community systems provide resources to facilitate healthy behaviors and healthcare system s provide  
multidisciplinary care, leveraging information technology  to support clinical decision -making  and facilitate self -
management . These systems inform and interact with one another , leading to  productive  interactions between 
families and  healthcare providers, a supportive  community  environment , and tools  for self -management to 
engage and empower  famil ies. 
A.2 RIGOR OF PRIOR RESEARCH  
Previous s tudies evaluating integrated interventions to address obesity  have  gaps in approach , 
including inattention to psychosocial determinants , lack of  robust  community engagement , and failure 
to target rural populations . Taveras  et al. conducted a study enhancing primary care management of children 
with obesity at six primary care sites in Massachusetts using  a neighborhood resource guide  to community -
based lifestyle  programs and text messaging  to support lifestyle behavior change .33 Armstrong  et al. combined  
physical activity opportunities through recreational facilities in North Carolina with multidisciplinary obesity 
treatment .34 Families in both studies reported  improv ed health behaviors , but effects on weight were small or 
non-significant . These studies did not  address psychosocial determinants of obesity or engag e communities 
beyond referral to community -based lifestyle programs.  Scientific  mento rship team member  Eneli has 
established the Primary Care Obesity Network in Ohio,  a model for integrating obesity care into the medical 
home and creating patient -centered neighborhoods .35 Children  who received integrated obesity care through the 
network demonstrated  successful weight outcomes , but  there were  challenges  in sustaining aspects of the 
network , underscoring the importance of engaging  families, practices, and communities  in developing and 
sustaining  integrated care systems . 
A.3 PRELIMINARY WORK  
Our research team has demonstrated the importance of addressing  psycho social determinants of health  
among families of children with obesity . The research project leader’s (RPL) A cademic Pediatric Association  
Research in Academic Pediatrics Initiative on Diversity  Award  study of children ages 4-12 years seeking 
treatment in the Nemours Weight Management Clinic found tha t families with moderate -high psychosocial risk, 
especially related to financial difficulties and caregiver and child mental health problems, were three times more 
likely to be lost to follow -up or not have a meaningful decrease in weight. Families who rec eived psychological 
counseling were twice as likely to remain in obesity treatment.11 Analyzing  data on >7000 children  in the N ational 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey  database , we found that children with severe obesity were two times 
more likely to be of a  racial or ethnic minorit y backgrounds , from single -parent households , or from households 
experiencing  povert y.3 Finally, i n a survey of over  200 families of overweight  children under age 5 from a  
Nemours primary care clinic , 85% endors ed one or more  psycho social needs .21 Our q ualitative research ,22 
coupled with  work by the Nemours Value Based Services Organization  with 450 families across Delaware , led 
to the development of a 13-item literacy -sensitive, family -friendly psycho social needs  screener , incorporating 
items  from validated measures and feedback from  families .   
Preliminary data from the RPL’s K23 show  that self -management tools keep families engaged in obesity 
treatment .  Driven by our previous work demonstrating that parents with higher psychosocial risk report lower 
self-efficacy managing their child’s behaviors,36-37 we developed and tested  a video -based parenting intervention 
for families of children  ages 4-12 with obesity .32 Qualitative interviews with  caregivers produced three  themes  
that informed design of the intervention and th is proposed project : the value of hearing from  other families of 
children with obesity of diverse backgrounds, the importance of choice and convenience in how the intervention 
is delivered , and the need to be activated . The intervention  has been  tested in a pilot RCT with 120 families  
attending the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness Clinic , with preliminary data showing  improved  short -term 
visit adherence among families who view ed the videos . 
Our team has spearheaded studies demonstrating the value of telehealth in improving  the reach of  
childhood obesity  care. A survey of  159 Nemours pediatric primary care providers  (PCP)  demonstrated their 
desire  to connect families with community resources and have obesity specialists  accessible by telehealth .26 We 
presented findings from 85 telehealth visits  with the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic among families 
in rural Delaware . Not only did 100% of families surveyed report that telehealth visit s were more convenient , but 
no-show rates  were significantly lower  than in -person visits .31 We also  conducted a pilot RCT with 45 
adolescents , which found that integrating telehealth visits with obesity specialists  between primary care visits  
was linked to  better weight outcomes .28 Finally, Dr. Phan  and Dr. Davis  have demonstrated the effectiveness of 
iAmHealthy, a family -based behavioral  group treatment  delivered via telehealth, in the IDeA States Pediatric 
Clinical Trials Network (ISPCTN) .38-40  
A.4 PROPOSED PROJECT  
Based on our preliminary  work  and the 
Clinical -Community Integration Frame -
work , we have developed  Mobile 
Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity 
(MICCO , Figure 2). MICCO is an evidence -
based , multi -component intervention that 
combines integrated community care to ad -
dress  psycho social needs, multidisciplinary 
obesity care, and self -management tools to 
promote healthy lifestyle  behaviors . All 
components are delivered through  a single 
mobile platform to increase accessibility for 
underserved populations and are integrated into the patient -centered medical home through the mobile 
platform’s integration with the EHR. Aim 1: Community -engaged and qualitative research methods will be used 
to refine MICCO and ensure it is community -centered and family -friendly .  Aims 2 and 3 : MICCO will then be 
tested in a RCT with families of children with obesity from rural primary care practices to examine its impact on 
family engagement in treatment , child weight status and  disparities in these outcomes . 
B. INNOVATION  
Because attrition  is one of the most challenging problems in obesity treatment, developing and testing 
interventions  that increase  family engagement  is critical.   MICCO will change practice paradigms by combin ing 
and delivering evidence -based interventions in an innovative way, leveraging technology, the patient -centered 
medical home, and the community to increase engagement and sustainability beyond the clinical trial .   
B.1 MICCO will address psychosocial determinants of health to reduce disparities in childhood obesity 
outcomes.  Most  childhood obesity interventions focus on changing  diet and  physical activity .8 However, we 
have demonstrated the importance of addressing psycho social determinants of health  in the treatment of 
childhood obesity , especially to decrease attrition from treatment .3,11 Each component of MICCO is aligned with 
this goal . MICCO provides targeted psycho social services to families in partnership with  community 
organizations ; visits  with obesity specialists including a psychologist  to assist  families  with behavior change, 
parenting, mood , and self -esteem ; and psychoeducational tools to educate, engage, and empower families .   
B.2 Our study differentiates itself in the design and test ing of  a mobile application that is state -of-the-
art, user -friendly , and integrated with the healthcare system.41 Nearly all families of children with obesity  
(95%)  in our prior studies report ed access to  the internet through a mobile device , making it a n accessible and  
convenient platform to augment healthcare delivery . Other studies have utilized mobile apps  for childhood 
obesity ,41 but few have  been  integrated  with the healthcare system. Our project  leverages the family -friendly Figure 3. MICCO Intervention Components  

Nemours App and its integration with the Nemours EHR  to deliver MICCO , combining components that families 
can use on their own with components that allow families to interact with their healthcare team, enhancing family 
engagement with the intervention .41 Our study will refine MICCO with best -practice methods used in private 
(marketing) and healthcare (e -health) settings  to improve the usability of new technologies42-43 and will leverage 
our collaboration with the Nemours App developers to ensure changes are made quickly and that the newest 
technological innovations are employed in the intervention.  
B.3 We will employ best -practice community -engaged research strategies to ensure that MICCO is 
feasible, relevant, and poised to create sustainable change .44-45 While e ngag ement of  community 
stakeholders  is increasing in childhood obesity studie s, fully engaging stakeholders in a meaningful and rigorous 
manner is still uncommon .46 We will engage a diverse group of stakeholders in rural communit ies in Delaware , 
including families, community organizations, and primary care practices , as partners in all phases of research 
design and execution  to enhance alignment  of MICCO with community  resources  and stakeholder values , ensure 
MICCO is family -friendl y, and facilitate  effective recruitment, retention, and dissemination.  
C. APPRO ACH 
C1. OVERVIEW : The proposed study will refine and test a n evidence -based , multi -component  intervention, 
Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity (MICCO ), delivered  through a mobile application platform linked 
to the Nemours EHR. We will engage a  Council of Community Partners  and a Council of Parent Partners  and 
use Think Aloud testing  to refine  MICCO (Aim 1) , which  will then be tested in a RCT with families of young 
children with obesity from three primary care practices in  rural Delaware to examine impact on attrition  and child 
weight (Aim 2) and disparities in these outcomes (Aim 3) . Overall project goal:  Improve the relevance  and 
accessibility  of obesity interventions  for families in underserved rural communities  to reduce health disparities.  
C.2 RESEARCH TEAM : Our team is exceptionally well-qualified to conduct this study, with expertise spanning 
all methodological and conceptual aspects of the proposed work ( see Biosketches ). Thao -Ly Phan, MD, MPH 
(RPL) is the Medical Director of  the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic who has been awarded  two 
career development grants to addres s psychosocial factors that impact weight outcomes , leveraging EHR -based 
technology.  Her senior mentorship team  has diverse and complimentary  areas of expertise and connections with  
professional networks that will strengthen  Dr. Phan ’s research : (1) Anne Kazak, PhD, ABPP , Director of the 
Nemours CHDS  and Nemours PI of PEDSnet , has  expertise in psychosocial intervention s and implementation 
science  and has served as Dr. Phan’s primary mentor  on multiple projects ; (2) Ann Davis, PhD, MPH , Director 
of the Center for Children's Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition at the University of Kansas Medical Center , has  
expertise in telehealth obesity interventions for rural populations  and has collaborated with Dr. Phan through the 
ISPCTN ; (3) Ihouma  Eneli, MD, MS , Director of the Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital  and Director of the Primary Care Obesity Network in Central Ohio , has expertise in integrat ing 
obesity treatment into primary care  and has collaborated with Dr. Phan on PEDSnet and AAP Institute for Healthy 
Childhood Weight  activities ; and (4) Allison Karpyn, PhD  is the Director of the Center for Research Education 
and Social Policy  at the University of Delaware and member of the ACCEL Community Engagement Core , with 
expertise in community -engaged research and improving access to healthy food for underserved communities . 
This project leverages robust resources offered by  the IMPACT Core , including mobile app development  
expertise , and extends our collaboration  with Nemours primary care practices  and caregivers of children with 
obesity  in rural Delaware  with the assistance of the PROMISE  Core  (see C. 4, Aim 1 ). 
C.3 MICCO INTERVENTION: Based on our preliminary work and the Clinical -Community Integration 
Framework,  we developed a multi -component intervention, Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity 
(MICCO, Figure 3), that will be accessible by mobile phone or tablet through a custom dashboard on the 
Nemours App. The Nemours App is a n existing state of the art mobile application platform  that provi des 
comprehensive patient  services ( tools for education, telehealth, appointment s, communication  with providers , 
and health management) ; is accessible by mobile device, tablet, or desktop/laptop computer;  and is linked to the 
Nemours EHR (EPIC , see detailed description  of Nemours App  in IMPACT  Core) .  All MICCO components will 
be available in English and Spanish , and families will receive hands -on instruction  on using MICCO . 
Component 1: Integrated Community Care. Upon beginning the MICCO intervention, t he social needs 
screener  , refined and tested by members of the research team (see A.3) , will be sent to caregivers through the 
Nemours App  (in English) or a REDCap  survey  (in Spanish) .  REDCap survey results will be entered into the 
EHR by the community health worker.  A positive screen will appear on an EHR dashboard for review by trained  
community health workers who are an integral part of each primary care practice’s patient -centered medical 
home .  The decision to incorporate a community health worker as part of the team was based on Community 
Partner and Healthcare Partner feedback, given the broader scope of the community health worker’s role and 
their demonstrated effectiveness  on the RPL’s recent study to increase COVID -19 vaccine uptake among 
underserved populations.  EPIC’s care management  tool will be used by the community health worker  to establish 
a care plan, refer the family to services (e.g. food banks, transportation services, mental health providers) in their 
zipcode recommended by the Council of Community Partners, and track communi ty programs  that have been 
accessed .  The commun ity health workers  will participate in the  Council of Community Partners to incorporate 
resources shared by community and state organizations into the intervention.   Based on feedback from the 
Council of Community Partners, community resources will also include a monthly healthy lifestyle event for 
participants  to encourage peer support  and family engagement.  Monthly healthy lifestyle events will include a 
physical activity , healthy dinner , and presentation on a healthy lifestyle topic (e.g., cooking class, mindfulness)  
provided at no cost to participants.   
Component 2: Integrated Obesity Care. Families will receive evidence -based weight management treatment 
consistent with Stage 3 AAP Expert Committee Recommendations and U nited States Preventive  Services  Task 
Force (USP STF) guidelines ,8,47 tailored to the needs of each family.  Treatment will include biweekly telehealth  
or in-person  (included based on parent and healthcare stakeholder feedback)  visits with members of an  existing 
and established transdisciplinary group of obesity specialists (medical provider, psychologist, exercise 
physiologist, dietitian , and community health worker ) from the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic, 
with an interpreter available for families whose preferred language is Spanish. Telehealth v isits will be delivered 
via the Nemours App  and in -person visits will be provided at Nemours Children’s Health, Milford . Care provided 
will include motivational interviewing  to establish lifestyle behaviors goals  specific to each child’s needs  but 
following evidence -based lifestyle recommendations like MyPlate and the Traffic Light 
Diet, cognitive -behavioral strategies such as self -monitoring and stimulus control, positive 
parenting strategies, and management of child mood and self -esteem . Based on feedback 
from parent partners  and in recognition of the challenges with attending biweekly visits,  
providers will  reach out to parents by their preferred method of communication ( App, 
phone, or text) if a family misses a visit.  This outreach will focus on  evaluating progress 
with lifestyle behavior goals,  problem -solving strategies to assist with lifestyle behavior 
goals, setting new lifestyle behavior goals as appropriate , and ensuring families are 
connected to community programs as needed.  
Component 3: Self -Management Tools. Families will be provided with 
psychoeducational tools  in English or Spanish  through the Nemours App to promote 
lifestyle behavior change . These will include a self -monitoring tool (Figure 3) to track daily progress toward  
lifestyle behavior goals established during visits, a series of culturally -relevant videos developed by the research 
team to promote positive parenting among families of children with obesity (see A.3, Figure 4), and media -based 
educational resources (e.g. , exercise / cooking videos) to promote healthy lifestyle behaviors curated by 
multidisciplinary obesity specialists . Obesity specialists  and community health workers  will review  data on an  
EHR dashboard about lifestyle behavior goal metrics  and anthropometric measurements to inform  clinical 
decision s during  visits  with families .  Participants will also have  the option of access ing the YMCA of Delaware’s 
virtual platform  through the App  at no cost to participants . 
Figure 4. Positive Parenting Videos  
 
 
families will receive compensation for study visit s, as detailed on the form.  
 
 
 
 
“The parent is what gets your child 
to come outside . Your child listens 
to you and your child looks up to 
you.” 
 “Constant motivation and 
complimenting the child will 
encourage them to keep playing and 
having more fun when they play .” 
 “If you come outside with your kid, 
they’re going to feel loved, they’re 
going to feel important, like you have 
an interest in their life .” 
 Figure 3. Goal 
Tracking
 
C.4 STUDY DESIGN : See 
PHS Human Subjects & 
Clinical Trials form for de-
tailed  eligibility criteria, 
sample size justification, 
recruitment /retention plan, 
time-line, human subjects 
protection, and data/safety 
monitoring.  All participating  
AIM 1. REFINE MICCO WITH COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT  AND THINK ALOUD  TESTING  
 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT  
Three communities  in Southern Delaware  (Milford, Millsboro , and Seaford ), each 2+ 
hours from the NCH -D. will be engaged in the study  in collaboration with our PROMISE  
Core . The Nemours primary care clinics  in these three towns  have a diverse patient 
population  (Figure 5). Based on  EHR data , of the 532 children with obesity ages 4-12 
years living in a rural area who had visited  one of the  primary care clinic s in the past 
year, less than 20%  were referred to and less than 10%  attended the hospital -based 
obesity clinic , with c hildren of Hispanic ethnicity being even less likely to be referred , 
underscoring disparities in accessing care.   A Council of Community Partners  and 
Parent Partners  will serve as  active members of the research team . Partners will 
participate in monthly calls and frequent e -mail correspondence, receiving a stipend for 
their time . The Council s will provide insight into implementing the study  in and 
disseminating findings to  the c ommunity , with each partner inform ing aspects unique to 
their perspective . There will be three  members from each  of 3 groups : 
1) PCPs  will inform integration of  MICCO and standard of care into the patient -centered 
medical home ; 
2) Primary care coordinators  will determine  best approach  for care coordination of psycho social services ; 
3) Community organizations providing s ocial services  or community centers  will identify and facilitate  
access to  relevant community -based  psychosocial  services and lifestyle resources  to address family 
psychosocial needs , will help recrui t families  from their organizations through advertisement and inform best 
ways to recruit and engage families during the course of the study .  
Six families of children with obesity of diverse backgrounds  will serve on a Council of Parent Partners and 
inform  ways to increase the relevance of MICCO content and decrease the burden of participating for families . 
 
THINK ALOUD TESTING : Families  of children ages 4-12 years with obesity who receive care from the primary 
care clinics  will be recruited  using purposeful sampling . Families who meet eligibility criteria will be identified 
from a report generated from the electronic health record .  Legal guardians will receive an initial recruitment text  
to the  preferred  mobile number identified in the electronic health record .  Research staff will contact legal 
guardians  who express interest to screen for eligibility and review the consent form, if eligible.  Legal guardians 
will provide feedback on the usability of the MICCO mobile application via Think Aloud  testing , an evidence -
based metho d for obtaining in -vivo feedback that has been used by members of the IMPACT  Core  in the 
development of  e-health  interventions .42-43 Legal guardians will meet with a trained research team member via a 
secure online meeting platform , which will allow  them to experience the app with their own internet connection 
and mobile or computer device.  Participants will be asked to remain off camera and to sign onto the meeting 
with their study ID number to maintain confidentiality.  If potential participants prefer  to conduct the session  in-
perso n, an in -person session can be arranged  with a preference for participants to still use their own device to 
experience the app .   After a brief introduction to MICCO, f amilies  will be instructed on how to access the  MICCO 
App prototype  on their mobile device , tablet, or computer . They will then be instructed to use MICCO and 
encouraged to say everything that they are thinking and doing as they navigate independently through  the 
components , sharing their screen so that the research team member can view their screen flow . There will also 
be a brief series of qualitative interview questions to assess for acceptability of the App (please see attached 
interview guide). The research team member will record the session (audio and screen share  if conducted online, 
audio if conducted in -person ) and take notes on observations , including feedback about content and technology . 
The recording will be transcribed by a professional transcription company.  Personal information will be deleted 
from the transcript and the recording will be deleted after the study is complete.  After each session  (30-60minutes 
in length) , family feedback will be summarized  utilizing a  modified cognitive interview analysis protocol .48 The 
process will be  iterative, with real -time changes made quickly after each session , expedited by our collaboration 
with the Nemours App developers, and testing ending  when saturation is achieved (i.e., no novel suggestions 
for improvement identified) . It is anticipated that 5 -10 families will be needed to achieve saturation of responses.42 
 
 
Figure 5.  Primary care clinics in 
Southern DE  
AIMS 2 and 3 : EXAMINE  IMPACT OF MICCO ON FAMILY ENGAGEMENT AND CHILD ADIPOSITY  AND 
DISPARITIES IN THESE OUTCOMES  
PARTICIPANTS : 184 families  of children with 
obesity (BMI percentile ≥ 95th percentile for age) 
ages 4 -12 years who are patients of the primary 
care practices in Milford , Seaford,  or Millsboro  
serving primarily  rural populations  will be 
identified from the  EHR  and with advertisement 
at community centers . Participants identified 
from the EHR will be contacted by text and/or e -
mail message.   Interested participants will be 
advised to contact a research team member , 
who will then contact interested families to 
assess eligibility criteria and interest in 
participation .  If a family is eligible and 
interested after this contact, the research team 
member will arrange a time to conduct an 
informed consent process with the participant, 
who will sign an electronic consent .  
STUDY DESIGN : Enrolled families will be randomly allocated to receive MICCO ( see C.3) or an active control 
condition ( standard care ) using a 1:1 randomization scheme stratified by race/ethnic ity (three  groups impacted 
most by obesity  in the community : Latin o, non -Hispanic Black, non -Hispanic White ; Figure 6 ). The intervention 
will be delivered over 6 months.  
STANDARD CARE:  An active control condition was selected to demonstrate the impact of the intervention 
beyond the typical care that a child would receive in primary care. Standard care will include  bimonthly  in-person 
visits for  lifestyle counseling with the child’s  PCP per 2023 AAP Clinical Practice Guidelines .47  PCPs  will receive 
training  on these recommendations  at the start of the clinical trial, with refresher  training provided every six 
months  and a lifestyle handout provided to facilitate education at each nursing visit . PCPs  will not be trained on 
MICCO . Only participants in the MICCO group will have access to the MICCO dashboard on the Nemours App 
to prevent contamination . 
OUTCOME MEASURES  
Family Engagement in Treatment : Study visits will be documented in the EHR as part of routine clinical care 
for all patients, including the number of visits with primary care providers  (where obesity and lifestyle counseling 
was provided, per ICD-10 codes ) or obesity specialists  (including type of specialist)  and number of 
cancelled /missed visits . Attrition  (non-attendance  to 6 month  follow -up visit) will be assessed  via EHR review .  
In addition, number of days in study will be assessed as a secondary outcome.  
Child Adiposity : Weight will be measured with a wireless  smart scale  that has been used in prior research and 
demonstrated excellent  agreement with research -grade scales .49-50 Height will be measured using a reliable 
method us ed by RPL Phan and mentor Davis using  a measuring tape and ruler , which has demonstrated validity 
when compared to measurement of height with a medical -grade  stadiometer  measured by a research team  
(Forset , et al., 20 22).51 Procedures for ensuring reliability of measurements using these  devices  will be followed, 
per guidelines  established by Krukowski and Ross  during the pandemic .50 Children will be measured by their 
caregiver each month in advance of visits , with weight measurements transmitted wirelessly to and height 
measurements entered into the Nemours Ap p for the MICCO Group and measurements entered into the EHR 
by research staff  for the Standard Care group .  
Disparities : Child race /ethnicity  and insurance  (proxy measure of socioeconomic status)  will be collected from 
the EHR . Age, sex, caregiver preferred language, and social needs (from screener ) will also be collected . 
C5. DATA ANALY TIC PLAN .  Think Aloud Testing (Aim 1):  Themes from qualitative interviews will be 
identified using an inductive thematic approach  (see PHS Human Subjects Form for more detail) .53 RCT (Aim 
2): Based on prior research describing the impact of behavioral interventions on BMI z -scores, we expect a mean 
difference in adjusted BMI z -score of 0.25 with the interventio n, an  effect size that has also been associated with 
a change in cardiometabolic risk.8 A sample size of 92 participants (46 in each group) can detect an effect size 
of this magnitude with a power of 80% and a level of significance of 0.05 , assuming a 50% attrition rate  based 
Measures (N = 46)  
Weight and height for every visit  
Visit adherence a nd attrition  
Figure 6.   
RCT 
Design  
Measures (N = 46)  
Weight and height at every clinic visit  
Clinic visit  adherence and attrition  
MICCO (6 months)  
Care coordination through App  
Biweekly visits  
Self-management tools in App  
MICCO Group (N = 92)  
Equal distribution of Black, Latin o, White  
Families of children 4 -12 yo  with obesity  
Recruited from EHR report and from community 
centers  
Standard Care Group (N = 92)  
Equal distribution of Black, Latin o, White  
 
Conservative  
Lost to Follow -Up 
(N = 46)  
Standard Care (6 months)  
Bimonthly in -person lifestyle counseling 
with PCP per Stage 2 AAP Expert 
Committee Recommendations  
Conservative  Lost 
to Follow -Up  
(N = 46)  
on prior studies ,11-12 we would need to enroll 1 84 participants ( 92 in each group). A mixed effects model with 
random coefficients will be used to assess the longitudinal effects of MICCO  on change s in adjusted BMI z -score  
to minimize the effect of missing data . Logistic regression analysis will be used to assess the effect of the 
intervention on attrition . Disparities (Aim  3): The same models will be used to preliminarily assess the  interaction 
between the intervention and race/ethnicity and insurance on a djusted BMI z -score and attrition  to inform a larger 
multi -site trial that will be fully powered to evaluate disparities.  Due to pilot nature of study and variability in 
engagement, the decision was made by the COBRE External Advisory Committee to end enrollment after 1 year.  
C.6 POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, ALTERNATIVES . Analysis of EHR data suggests that it will be feasible to recruit 
the sample size intended and advertisement  of the study through our community partners will also facilitate  
recruitment . However , if recruitment is slow we may expand eligibility to include children w ith BMI ≥ 85% or from 
other  Nemours  clinics  in rural areas . Every effort will be taken to refine MICCO based on input from stakeholders ; 
if MICCO  is found to be  ineffective  in the RCT , we will obtain  qualitative feedback from our Council s, analyze 
app analytics , and assess whether behavior change  improved . We understand that technology evolves quickly 
and modifications may be needed to ensure that the intervention remains current . We will leverage Nemours’ 
investment in innovati ve technologies  and the expertise of our IMPACT  Core to continuously improve  our 
intervention to be state  of the art.54 If families are experiencing connectivity issues, we may use primary care 
space  and equipment  for telehealth visits. Finally, success depends on effective collaboration with the  communit y 
and therefore we will  incorporate metrics to objectively measure collaborative efforts.27 
C.7 SCIENTIFIC RIGOR. This study  was designed  to ensure that it will yield robust, unbiased results . MICCO 
incorporates evidence -based strategies for the treatment of childhood obesity that align with USPSTF and AAP 
guidelines and are informed by the team’s preliminary work.  Best practice c ommunity -engage d research 
methods and usability testing  will be used to  tailor and  refine the intervention  for families of children with obesity 
in rural communities of Delaware . A RCT will be used to evaluate efficacy of the intervention, with planned 
sample size calculated to  detect a reduction  in adjusted BMI z -score that would yield positive cardiometabolic 
outcomes  based on prior research  and accounting for attrition rates based on prior studies . Stratified  
randomization  will be used to ensure a diverse and representative sample from which disparities can be 
preliminarily evaluated . Our study will focus on o bjective o utcome measures  to assess intervention efficacy , 
using innovative and automated technology . We will collect additional information about use of MICCO  and 
components of standard care  visits to account for potential variability in participant experience of either 
intervention . Finally,  rigorous data analytic approaches and transparent reporting guidelines will be followed . 
C.8 FUTURE DIRECTIONS. This study will position Dr. Phan  to secure external funding to conduct a large -
scale , multi -site implementation trial of MICCO , for example through existing collaborations with the ISPCTN or 
PEDSnet , leveraging common EPIC interfaces among sites . With a refined intervention and robust  data from a 
single site RCT , Dr. Phan  will be highly competitive to apply for  funding  from the NIH  (NICHD /NIDDK  R01) or 
funding from PCORI  in year 2 of the COBRE , with a  larger goal of transforming health care delivery and policy  
for children with obesity  to include integrated preventive care  and innovative technologies to expand the reach 
of this  care. Importantly, this study will increase capacity for community -engaged research in rural Delaware to 
ensure that research with these populations continue s to be  conducted in a meaningful and impactful manner.  