1	IRB	Submission	AAAR4891	
Version	 06/10/19	
Title:	The	effect	of	vaginal	preparation	with	chlorhexidine 	gluconate	vs.	povidine-
iodine	vs.	saline	on	vaginal	bacterial	colony	counts	in	pregnant	women	
Study	Purpose	and	Rationale	
Cesarean	delivery	is	the	m ost	common	major	surgical	procedure	performed	in	the	
United	States,	with	one	in	three	babies	delivered	by	cesarean.	 	Women	who	deliver	
by	cesarean	 are	5	to	20	times	more	likely	to	develop	postpartum	endometritis	than	
women	who	deliver	vaginally.		Those	women	who	labor	prior	to	cesarean	delivery	are	at	greatest	risk	of	infectious	
complications.	Although	the	use	of	prophylactic	systemic	antibiotics	prior	to	
cesarean	has	significantly	reduced	 the	risk	of	endometritis,	over	10%	of	women	
who	undergo	cesarean	after	the	onset	of	labor	will	develop	postpartum	
endometritis	[1,	2] .		These	infections	may	lead	to	extended	intravenous	antibiotic	
therapy	for	new	mothers,	prolonged	hospital	length	of	stay,	and	increased	health	care	expenditures	[3].	
At	present,	preoperative	abdominal	skin	antisepsis	and	systemic	antibiotic	
prophylaxis	are	routinely	adopted 	strategies	to	reduce	postoperative	infectious	
complications.	Multiple	studies	have	also	 examined	the	effect	of	vaginal	preparation	
(or	washing)	with	povidine-iodine	prior	to	cesarean	delivery	on	postpartum	
endometritis	and	infectious	complications.	A	2014	Cochrane	review	 of	seven 	trials	
randomizing	over	2500	women	found	that	vaginal	preparation	immediately	prior	to	
cesarean	significantly	reduces	the	rate	of	post -cesarean	endometritis	from	8.3%	in	
the	control	group	to	4.3%	in	the	vaginal	preparation	group	(RR	0.45,	95%	CI	0.25 -
0.81)	 with	even	greater	effects	observed	in	a	smaller	subset	of	women	with	
ruptured	membranes	[4].	A	review	of	evidence -based	 practices	for	cesarean	
delivery	recommended	vaginal	preparation	with	iodine-base	solution	at	the	time	of	cesarean	with	a	USPSTF	grade	of	B	(moderate	certainty	that	the	net	benefit	was	
moderate	to	substantial)	[5].	Likewise ,	a	2015	review	of	evidence -based	practices	to	
reduce	surgical	site	infections 	after	cesarean	delivery	published	in	Infection	Control	
&	Hospital	Epidemiology	included	preoperative	vaginal	cleansing	among	six	interventions	reviewed	in	good -quality	articles	with	“strong”	strength	of	evidence	
for	effectiveness	 [6].	And	finally,	a	recently	published	meta-analy sis	of	pre -cesarean	
vaginal	cleansing,	which	included	sixteen	trials	of	nearly	5,000	women,	also	found	a	
significant	reduction	in	endometritis	with	vaginal	cleansing	compared	to	placebo	(RR	0.52,	95%	CI	0.37 -0.72).	The	authors	concluded	that	preoperative	v aginal	
cleansing	with	povidone-iodine	10%	should	be	performed	prior	to	all	cesarean	deliveries	in	women	in	labor	and	with	ruptured	membranes	[7].	
Despite	this	evidence,	vaginal	preparation	immediate	prior	to	cesarean	delivery	is	
not	widely	practiced.		Among	167	maternal-fetal	medicine	fellows	who	responded	[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
	 2	to	a	survey	of	preferred	techniques	at	cesarean	delivery	in	2012,	only	5%	included	
pre-operative	vaginal	preparation	among	their	preferences	[8].			
	
In	addition	to	increasing	acceptance	of	this	practice,	questions	remain	about	the	
best	antiseptic	agent	for	reducing	microbes	in	the	vaginal	mucosa.	Although	th e	
majority	of	studies	published	on	vaginal	preparation	at	the	time	of	cesarean	have	
used	povidone -iodine	solutions,	there	is	evidence	that	chlorhexidine	preparations	
may	be	superior	antiseptics .	A	recent	randomized	controlled	trial	published	in	the	
New	England	Journal	of	Medicine	found	that	chlorhexidine-alcohol	was	superior	to	iodine-alcohol	abdominal	preparations	at	the	time	of	cesarean	for	reducing	the	risk	
of	surgical -site	infections	 [9].		Furthermore,	povidine	 iodine	is	contraindicated 	in	
patients	with	severe	iodine	allergy	and	its	antiseptic	properties	may	be	affected	by	both	vagin al	pH	and	the	presence	of	blood 	[10] .		
	
There	is	one	published	randomized	control	trial	that	compared	pov idone	iodine	to	
chlorhexidi ne	for	vaginal	antisepti s	prior	to	vaginal	hysterectomy.	Unlike	vaginal	
preparation	at	the	time	of	cesarean	delivery,	vaginal	antiseptic	preparation	prior	to	hysterectomy	in	gynecological	surgical	is	standard	of	care.		This	study	showed	that	
chlorhexidine	 solution	was	more	effective	than	povidone	iodine	at 	reducing	bacteria	
colony	counts	in	the	operative	field	 [11].	
	
Current	practices	Vaginal	preparation	or	washing	in 	women	undergoing	cesarean	who	are	not	
laboring	or	have	rupture	of	membranes	is	not	standard	of	care	or	indicate d	by	
current	evidence.		A	vulvar	and	 perineal 	wash	with	povidine -iodine	solution	is	
routinely	perfomed	immediately	prior	to	all	vaginal	deliveries	at	our	institution;	however,	this	is	not 	evidence-based	or	protocolized .		In	addition,	v aginal	
preparation	with	povidine -iodine	(or	chlohexidine,	according	to	surgeon	
preference)	 is	standard	of	care	prior	to	vaginal	procedures	in	pregnant	and	
postpartum	women	such	as	cervical	cerclage,	chorionic	villus	sampling,	or	dilation	and	curr etage	for	postpartum	hemorrhage .		
	Pre-cesarean	vaginal	preparation	is	strongly	supported	 by	the	 current	evidence	
discussed	above	to	reduce	rates	of	post -operative	endometritis	in	women	in	labor	
or	with	 ruptured	membranes	prior	to	cesarean.	This	is	standard	of	care	at	certain	
institutio ns,	and	recently	has	been	made	standard	of	care	at	CHONY 	by	instituting	a	
new	Perinatal	Practice	Guideline ;	however,	because 	this	is	a 	relatively	new	initiative	
implementation	may	not	yet	be	100%.	
	
Purpose 	
The	purpose	of	this	study	is	to	see	whether	chlorh exidine	is	superior	to	povidine -
iodine	vaginal	antisepsis	at	reducing	bacteria	 colony	counts	in	women	undergoing	
cesarean	by	comparing	three	groups:	vaginal	washing	with	chlorhexidine,	vaginal	washing	with	povidine -iodine,	and	vaginal	washing	with	saline	a lone.	 	
		
	 3	Study	design 	
	
This	is	a	p rospective	 trial	of	vaginal	preparation	(or	vaginal	 cleansing/washing )	on	
pregnancies	admitted	to	CHONY	Labor	&	Delivery	unit	for	cesarean	delivery 	with	
three	arms.	Randomization	allocation	would	be	performed	in	1:1:1	fashion	for	
vaginal	preparation	with	chlorhexidine 	gluconate,	povidine -iodine,	and	saline	
washes. 		A	saline	wash	group	is	included	to	determine	if	the	act	of	cleansing	the	
vagina	with	a	sponge	alone	reduces	bacterial 	colony	counts.	 		
	Primary	outcome	
• Aerobic	and	anaerobic	post-preparaton	vaginal	bacterial	 colony	counts	in	
each	group 	
	Secondary	outcomes	
• Baseline	aerobic	and	anaerobic	vaginal	bacterial	colony	counts 	
• Change	in	aerobic	and	anaerobic	bacterial	colongy	counts	within	each	group	
• Clinical	infectious	outcomes	(although	this	study	is	not	powered	to	detect	these	differences) 	
	
Inclusion	criteria	(intervention	groups)	
• Pregnant 	women	admitted	for	cesarean	delivery	
• Gestational	age	 ≥	34	weeks 	
• Maternal	age	greater	than	or	equal	to	18	years 	
	
Exclusion	criteria	(intervention	groups)	
• Rupture	of	membranes	or	a ctive	labor 		
• Chorioamnionitis	(prior	to	enrollment)	
• Recent	(within	4	weeks)	antibiotic	exposure 	
• Maternal	HIV	infection	or	other	known	immunocompromised	state	
• Placenta	previa	or	accreta 	
• Known	allergy	to	shellfish	or	iodine 	
• Known	allergy	to	chlorhexidine	glu conate	
	
Sampling	(for	the	intervention	groups	these	procedures	will	be	performed	in	the	
operating	room	after	anesthesia	is	placed)	
• Three	vaginal	swabs	of	posterior	fornix	(aerobic	culture,	anaerobic	culture,	and	quantitative	PCR )	taken	immediately	prior	to	vaginal	preparation	using	
sterile	technique	(this	will	be	the	only	step	for	the	laboring	 group).	
• Vaginal	preparation	or	wash	 performed	over	30	seconds	with	three	sponge	
sticks	soaked	in	 1)	low	concentation	c hlorhexidine 	gluconate	0.5%	solution;	
2)	povidine-iodine	10%;	or	3)	saline,	according	to	randomization	allocation.	
• Additional	three	vaginal	swabs	of	posterior	fornix	taken	at	 5-15	minutes	
after	vaginal	preparation	is	completed 	using	sterile	technique 	
	
	
	 4	Solution	preparation	
• A	chlorhexidine	gluconate	0.5%	solution	will	be	prepared	by	combining	
chlorhexidine 	gluconate	4%	solution	(1	 part)	with	normal	saline,	i.e.	sodium	
chloride	0.9%	( 7	parts). 	
• Povidine-iodine	10%	and	normal	saline	will	be	used	directly	as	the	products	
listed	in	the	drugs/biologics	section	of	the	RASCAL	IRB	submission.		
	
Data	collection	
• Baseline	maternal	demographic	and	pregnancy	information	will	be	collected	
at	the	time	of	sample	collection	(after	consent	is	obtained) 	by	abstraction	
from	the	electronic	medical	record	
• Retrospective	chart	review	of	maternal	and	neonatal	infectious	out comes	at	
the	time	of	discharge	and	at	the	time	of	the	postpartum	visit.	
		
Statistical	procedures	and	sample	size 	
	
To	our	knowledge,	this	is	the	first	study	to	assess	vaginal	 bacterial	counts	in	
pregnant	women	after	an	antiseptic	preparation.	Therefore,	we	have	selected	a	sample	size	of	10	women	in	each	group	for	this	pilot	study.	
	
Due	to	recent	research	that	has	shown	race 	and	ethnic -related	differences	in	the	
vaginal	microbiome	of	reproductive-aged	and	pregnant	women	[12,	13] ,	our	study	
will	include	equal	numbers	of	Hispanic	and	African	American	women	in	each	group .		
	
The	difference	in	change	in	CFUs	pre	and	post	intervention	will	be	compared	
between	groups.				
	
		 	
	 5	Potential	risks/benefits/alternatives	
	
Risks:	
The	greatest	risk	of	participating	in	the	study	is	experiencing	an	allergic	reaction	or	
localized	reaction /irritation 	to	the	 solution	used.		
	
1)	Chlorhexidine	arm: 	
Chlorhexidine	gluconate	solution	has	an 	overall	 low	rate	of	adverse	or	allergic	
reactions.	All	women	undergoing	non-emergent	cesarean	delivery	at	our	institution	receive	abdominal	preparation	with	chlorhexidine -alcohol	(unless	there	is	a	known	
allergy)	consi stent	with	current	evidence	of	its	effectiveness	and	safety	 [9].	
Chlorhexidine 	gluconate	is	not	FDA-approved	for	use	on	mucosal	surfaces.		
However,	 chlohexidine	with	low	concentrations	of	alcohol	(4%	or	less)	are	s afe	and	
effective	for	vaginal	use .		The	 off-label	use 	of	chlorhexidine	solutions	for	vaginal	
preparation	is	supported	by	the	American	College	of	Obstetricians	and	
Gynecologists	in	the	setting	of	iodine	allergy	or	surgeon	preference	 [14].	At	our	
institution,	chlorhexidine	vaginal	preparation	is	routinely	used	at	the	time	of	
gynecologic	surgery	according	to	surgeon	preference. 	In	addition,	chlorhexidine -
based	mouthwashes	are	approved	for	use	on	oral	mucosal	surfaces	in	the	treatment	of	gingivitis	and	periodontitis.	 	
	Of	note,	there	is	an	FDA	warning	from	February	2017	of	rare	but	serious	allergic	reactions	to	skin	antisepsis	with	chlorhexidine	gluconate.		However,	th is	has	not	to	
our	knowledge	been	reported	with	vaginal	preparation ,	which	generally 	uses	a	
much	lower	concentation	of	chlorhexidine.		There	have	been	numerous	large	
prospective	published	studies	on	chlohexi dine	vaginal	washing	 or	irrigation	in	
thousands	of	laboring	pregnant	patients 	(these	studies	had 	different	research	aims	
and	therefore	 are	not	included	under	the	study	purpose	and	rationale )	with	no	
reported	adverse	effects	[15 -19].	
	
2)	Povidine -iodine	arm	
Povidine-iodine	has	an	overall	low	rate	of	adverse	or	allergic	reactions.		 In	seven	
trials	randomizing	over	2800	women	to	povidine-iodine	vaginal	preparation	prior	
to	cesarean	delivery,	there	were	no	reported	side	effects	 [4].		However,	vaginal	
irritation	or	reaction	is	a	possible	side	effect.	All	pregnant	women	undergoing	
vaginal	procedures	(such	as	chorionic	villus	sampling	or	cervical	cerclage)	receive	
vaginal	preparation	with	povidine-iodine.		In	addition,	it	is	routinely	used	in	
gynecologic	procedures	and	surgery	according	to	surgeon	preference.	 	
	3)	Saline	arm	There	is	minimal	risk	with	a	vaginal	saline	wash.	Localized	irritation	or 	minor	
discomfort	may	be	possible	due	to	sponge	stick	washing.			Finally,	for	all	three	arms,	there	is	the 	potential	 risk	of	loss	of	confidentiality	of	
sensitive	health	information,	however	this	is	unlikely.	A	code	number	will	be	used	to	separate	data,	bio logical	samples,	and	health	information	from	the	participant’s	
	 6	name	and	other	potential	identifiers.	The	research	file	that	links	the	code	number	to	
the	patient’s	name	will	be	kept	in	a	locked	cabinet,	encrypted	data	file,	or	password -
protected	computer,	and	only	the	investigator	and	authorized	study	staff	will	have	access	to	the	file. 	
	Benefits:	There	are	no	personal	or	direct	benefits	from	taking	part	in	this	study.	However,	the	
information	collected	from	this	research	may	help	others	in	the	future.	
	Alternatives:	
Women	may	decline	to	participate	in	the	study	and	undergo	routine	care	on	labor	
and	delivery.	Declini ng	to	participate	will	not	impact	their	pregnancy,	intrapartum	
or	postpartum	care.		Compensation:	
The	thirty	participants	undergoing	vaginal	prep aration 	in	the	study	will	receive	$50	
in	cash	for	their	time	and	effort.		
	
	
	
	 	
	 7	References	
	
1.	 Smaill,	F.M.	and	R.M.	Grivell,	Antibiotic	prophylaxis	versus	no	prophylaxis	for	
preventing	infection	after	cesarean	section.	Cochrane	Database	Syst	Rev,	
2014(10):	p.	CD007482. 	
2.	 Hammad,	I.A.,	et	al.,	Peripartum	complications	with	cesarean	delivery:	a	review	
of	Maternal-Fetal	Medicine	Units	Network	publications.	J	Matern	Fetal	
Neonatal	Med,	2014.	 27(5):	p.	463 -74.	
3.	 Blumenfeld,	Y.J.,	et	al.,	Risk	Factors	for	Prolonged	Postpartum	Length	of	Stay	
Following	Cesarean	Delivery.	Am	J	Perinatol,	2015.	32(9):	p.	825 -32.	
4.	 Haas,	D.M.,	S.	Morgan,	and	K.	Contreras,	 Vaginal	preparation	with	antiseptic	
solution	before	cesarean	section	for	preventing	postoper ative	infections.	
Cochrane	Database	Syst	Rev,	2014(12):	p.	CD007892. 	
5.	 Dahlke,	J.D.,	et	al.,	 Evidence-based	surgery	for	cesarean	delivery:	an	updated	
systematic	review.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol,	2013.	209(4):	p.	294 -306.	
6.	 McKibben,	R.A.,	et	al.,	Practices	to	Reduce	Surgical	Site	Infections	Among	Women	Undergoing	Cesarean	Section:	A	Review.	Infect	Control	Hosp	Epidemiol,	2015.	36(8):	p.	915 -21.	
7.	 Caissutti,	C.,	et	al.,	 Vaginal	Cleansing	Before	Cesarean	Delivery:	A	Systematic	
Review	and	Meta-analysis.	Obstet	G ynecol,	2017.	
8.	 Dahlke,	J.D.,	et	al.,	 Preferences	in	cesarean	delivery	surgical	technique:	a	survey	
of	maternal-fetal	medicine	fellows.	J	Matern	Fetal	Neonatal	Med,	2015.	 28(1):	
p.	77-81.	
9.	 Tuuli,	M.G.,	et	al.,	 A	Randomized	Trial	Comparing	Skin	Antiseptic	Agents	at	
Cesarean	Delivery.	N	Engl	J	Med,	2016.	 374(7):	p.	647 -55.	
10.	 Mangram,	A.J.,	et	al.,	Guideline	for	prevention	of	surgical	site	infection,	1999.	Hospital	Infection	Control	Practices	Advisory	Committee. 	Infect	Control	Hosp	
Epidemiol,	1999.	20(4):	p.	250-78;	quiz	279 -80.	
11.	 Culligan,	P.J.,	et	al.,	 A	randomized	trial	that	compared	povidone	iodine	and	
chlorhexidine	as	antiseptics	for	vaginal	hysterectomy.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol,	2005.	 192(2):	p.	422 -5.	
12.	 Ravel,	J.,	et	al.,	 Vaginal	microbiome	of	reproductive-age	women.	Proc	Natl	Acad	
Sci	U	S	A,	2011.	108	Suppl	1 :	p.	4680 -7.	
13.	 Stout,	M.J.,	et	al.,	 Early	pregnancy	vaginal	microbiome	trends	and	preterm	
birth.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol,	2017.	
14.	 American	College	of,	O.,	P.	Gynecologists	Women's	Health	Care,	and	P.	
Committee	on	Gynecologic,	Committee	Opinion	No.	571:	Solutions	for	surgical	
preparation	of	the	vagina.	Obstet	Gynecol,	2013.	 122(3):	p.	718 -20.	
15.	 Rouse,	D.J.,	et	al.,	 Clinical	trial	of	chlorhexidine	vaginal	irrigation	to	prevent	
peripartal	infection	in	nulliparous	women.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol,	2003.	189(1):	p.	166-70.	
16.	 Rouse,	D.J.,	et	al.,	 Chlorhexidine	vaginal	irrigation	for	the	prevention	of	
peripartal	infection:	a	placebo-controlled	randomized	clinical	trial.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol,	1997.	 176(3):	p.	617 -22.	
	 8	17.	 Eriksen,	N.L.,	K.M.	Sweeten,	and	J.D.	Blanco,	Chlorhexidine	vs.	Sterile	vaginal	
wash	during	labor	to	prevent	neonatal	infection.	Infect	Dis	Obstet	Gynecol,	
1997.	 5(4):	p.	286 -90.	
18.	 Goldenberg,	R.L.,	et	al.,	 Use	of	vaginally	administered	chlorhexidine	during	
labor	to	improve	pregnancy	outcomes.	Obstet	Gynecol,	2006.	 107(5):	p.	1139 -
46.	
19.	 Saleem,	S.,	et	al.,	Chlorhexidine	vaginal	and	infant	wipes	to	reduce	perinatal	mortality	and	morbidity:	a	randomized	controlled	trial. 	Obstet	Gynecol ,	2010.	
115(6):	p.	1225 -32.	
		