Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
1 
  
 
 
Registry -Based , Randomized Controlled Trial Comparing  Intra -
operative Urinary  Catheter vs. no Catheter for Laparoscopic 
Inguinal Hernia Repair  
 
 
 
P.I.: Michael J. Rosen, MD FACS  
Director, Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive Hernia Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
2 
 INTRODUCTION  
  An inguinal  hernia repair is a common outpatient procedure with a low rate of morbidity. 
One well -recognized complication of this operation is post -operative urinary retention (PUR), 
which is a failure  of spontaneous voiding requiring catherization [1]. The reported incidence of PUR 
ranges between 0.4 and 3% of open tension -free repairs . For laparoscopic  inguinal hernia repairs 
that range is between 1 and 22 % [2]. At our institution there is no consensus when it comes to 
using intraoperative catheters. Among the surgeons who routinely use the catheters  the incidence 
of urinary retention is reported to be 1 -5%. Since no randomized controlled trials have evaluated 
PUR as the primary outcome  exist in literature, there is no consensus on whether catheter use aids 
in minimizing post -operative urinary retention. Routine use of i ntraoperative catheterization  
increases the risk of urethral  trauma, catheter -associated  infections and bladder damage leading 
to increased cost of care  and potential patient morbidity [3]. On the other hand , PUR is associated 
with additional procedures, such as cath eterization , whi ch may delay hospital discharge  or 
increase the length  of stay  and cause patient discomfort [1]. This work aims to study the effect of 
intraoperative catheters on PUR and whether the aforementioned risks associated with this 
procedure are justified.  
We hypothesize  that the use of i ntra-operative urinary catheter reduce s the incidence of 
postoperative  urinary retention after laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair , thus justifying the 
potential complications  associated with  intra -operative catheter insertion.   
Specific Aim #1:  To determine if the use of intra -operative urinary catheter reduces 
the inciden ce of postoperative  urinary retention after laparoscopic inguinal hernia 
repair .  
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
3 
 Specific Aim #2:  To determine if there is a difference in the rates of intraoperative 
bladder injuries between the study groups.  
Specific Aim #3 :  To determine the rate of urinary tract complications after insertion 
of the intra -operative urinary catheter for the control group.  
Specific Aim #4 : To determine the rate of urinary tract complications after insertion 
of a urinary catheter for patients wh o develop PUR.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
This trial will follow the same methodology of data collection employed in previous 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) performed by th e Cleveland Clinic Hernia Center . The  Americas 
Hernia Society Quality Collaborative (AHSQC)  registry will serve as the main  platform for data 
collection. Registry -based trials use data available in a preexisting  database to increase the 
efficiency of performing RCTs , decreasing  the high cost and logistical challenges associated with 
operatio nalizing this type of research .  
This will be a multi -institution study, performed at the Cleveland Clinic  Foundation  (CCF) 
hospitals in Ohio and Florida. Enrollment and surgeries are anticipated to occur at Cleveland Clinic 
Hernia Center located at Main C ampus, Fairview Hospital , Hillcrest Hospital and CCF Weston in 
Florida. Additiona lly, enrollments and surgeries may also  occur in Strongsville , Twinsburg  and 
Beachwood Family Health and Surgery Centers.  
Specific patient inclusion criteria include all patients aged 18 years or older presenting for 
an elective unilateral  or bilater al inguinal hernia repair, who are able to tol erate general 
anesthesia and who are considered eligible to have a hernia  repair through a laparoscopic  
approach. Patients presenting with primary  or recurrent inguinal hernias , previously repaired in an 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
4 
 open fashion, will be considered  eligible  to be enrolled in this study. Exclusion criteria include 
patients who cannot tolerate general anesthesia  and patients who ar e not able to understand and 
sign a written consent form .  The intervention will be no intraoperative urinary catheter for the 
entirety of the case . If surgeons  determine the need for an intraoperative  catheter for the no 
catheter  group, the patient will remain in the intervention group and will be treat as intention to 
treat which will be recorded in RedCap . Patients will be randomized to  urinary catheter  versus no 
catheter after  anesthesia induction  and stratified based on unilateral ver sus bilateral repair . No 
other intraoperative or postoperative differences will occur  between the two groups.   
Post -operative  urinary retention will be defined as post -operative failure to void requiring  
straight catheterization, placement  of an indwelling  catheter or return to the emergency 
department due to  failure  to void after discharge from the hospital [4,5] . Bladder scanning , its 
timing  and specific criteria for placement of urinary catheter will be determined by the standard 
policies of each institution and  surgeon.  
Baseline information, operative details , and 30-day outcomes are already captured within 
the AHSQC database, allowing for follow -up, and data capture with decreased effort outside of 
routine care. Randomization data  will be captured  and stored in RedCAP®. 
Baseline patient demographics will be obtained  at initial patient recruitment, and baseline 
AHSQC questionnaires will be completed f ollowing patient recruitment. All o perative details  are 
already routinely collected  and stored in the  AHSQC database . Patient -reported  quality of life  will 
also be  assessed at baseline and  at 30 days using the EuraHS Quality Of Life survey tool [6], which is 
collected for all patients entered into the AHSQC as p art of the AHSQC Inguinal Hernia 
Postoperative  Assessment.  Patients will be required to complete th ese forms at each clinic visit , 
or via telephone contact, as this is standard procedure for all patients entered into the AHSQC . At 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
5 
 the time of the one-month  follow -up clinic visits, a routine physical examination will be performed 
on all patients.  The p atient s will be blinded to which  arm they were randomized until the first 30 -
day follow up visit.  
 
OUTCOMES TO BE INVESTIGATED  
 Each outcome to be investigated is based on the specific aims of the study and they are listed 
below:  
 Specific Aim #1: To determine if the use of intra -operative urinary catheter 
reduces the incidence of postoperative  urinary retention af ter laparoscopic 
inguinal herni a repair.  
This will be assessed by comparing the P UR rates between the two study 
groups.  
 Specific Aim #2:  To determine if there is a difference in the rates of 
intraoperative bladder injuries between the study groups.  
This will be determin ed by comparing the rates of intraoperative bladder 
injuries between the two study groups.  The events will be captured on 
RedCap.   
 Specific Aim #3: To determine the rate of urinary tract complications after 
insertion of the intra -operative urinary cathete r for the control group.  
This will be accomplished by analyzing th e rates of urinary tract injury, 
infections and bladder injuries due to intraoperative catheter placement.  The 
events will be captured on RedCap.   
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
6 
  Specific Aim #4: To determine the rate of urinary tract complications after 
insertion of a urinary  catheter for patients who develop PUR.  
This will be accomplished by analyzing the rates of urinary tract injury , or 
infections and bladder injuries due to catheter placement  after patients 
develop PUR.  The events will be captured on RedCap.   
 
 
SURGICAL PROCEDURE  
Patient preparation common for both groups   
All patients will be asked to void in the pre -operative area prior to going into the operating 
room. Patients will be operated in the supine , and slight Trendelenburg position (15º degrees), 
with arms  tucked along the body. The procedure  will be performed under general anesthesia. 
Antibiotic prophylaxis will be  performed according to institutional protoco l. Pharmacological 
prophylaxis  of venous thromboembolic events is usually not necessary for gener al laparoscopic 
inguinal hernia repair. Although , if deemed necessary,  this will be performed per Surgical Care 
Improvement Project (SCIP ) protocol and  will not be considered a protocol deviation. Skin 
preparation and hair removal will be performed per SCIP protocol. All necessary material s, 
including the urine catheterization kit , will be available in the operative room before the start of 
the procedure . 
After induction of anesthesia , randomization will occur. It will be performed according to a 
computer -generated block randomization scheme , which will take place in RedCAP . The 
randomization  will be stratified for unilateral or bilateral hernia s based on  the surgeon’s report. 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
7 
 The operati ng room nurse will call a designated phone number where he or she will be able to 
speak to the research coordinator who will perf orm the randomization in RedCAP. After 
confirming with the surgeon whether the hernia  is unilateral or bilateral , he or she will inform the 
surgeon regarding the  group that the patient has been assigned.  In case there is an incidental 
hernia discovered on the contralateral side upon dissection , and after randomization  has occurred , 
the pat ient will remain in the original  arm with an intention to treat.  
 For the intraoperative urinary catheter group  
A standard catheterization kit available at the  institution  where the surgery is being performed  will 
be used  to place the catheter using standa rd sterile technique.  
 For the no intraoperative urinary catheter group  
No catheter will be inserted.  
 
Common operative steps for both groups  
Inguinal hernia repairs will be performed using the transabdo minal preperitoneal  (TAPP) or total 
extraperitoneal  (TEP)  techniques based on surgeon preference and expertise. These techniques  
have been described in detail in the literature.  
ANTICIPATED TIME FRAME  
 Estimated patient accrual time is two year s with data collection to occur 
throughout the  year up to 30 days from the last surgery . Data analysis and manuscript production 
will occur within six months of completion of data collection.  
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
8 
  
PATIENT RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 As with any surgical procedure, there are some associated risks , and the se will be discussed  
in a separate surgical consent form. The subjects may experience some pain, bleeding , and 
discomfort; however , this may occur with any surgical operation.  Common events  following 
hernia repair include seroma or hematoma around t he hernia repair, inflammation , or infection.  
Patients will be made aware of the risk for conversion  to an open approach if considered 
necessary by the attending surgeon.  Additionally, the risk of injuries to the bladder, iliac vessels, 
epigastric vessels, cord  structures , and vas deferens during preperitoneal space or hernia 
dissection are  always discussed prior to any inguinal hernia repair.  The risk of postoperative 
chronic pain and hernia recurrence will be discussed in detail  during the preoperative visit, as it is 
usua l for every inguinal hernia repair.  This will occur independently of patient participation in this 
study.  
 
PATIENT BENEFITS  
There are no direct benefits to subjects for participating in this study.  Subject 
participation will help to improve the general knowledge of the use of urinary catheter s during  
minimally invasive inguinal hernia repair.  
COSTS TO THE SUBJECTS  
There are no extra costs to the subjects associated with the research.  Procedures 
related to the preoperative evaluat ion and the hernia surgery are considered standard of care and 
will be the responsibility of the subject  and the subject’s insurance company.   
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
9 
 ALTERNATIVES TO PARTICIPATION  
Patients are under no obligation to participate in this study.  A member of the re search will 
discuss all available surgical options to the patients.  Declining to partic ipate  in this study will not 
impact any patient’s ability to receive care or to undergo inguinal  hernia repair at the Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation.  
PAYMENTS TO THE SUBJE CTS 
Subjects will not receive payment for their participation or any activity related to this 
proposed study.  
PLAN  FOR OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT  
For each subject, written informed consent will be obtained prior to any protocol -related 
activities. As part of this procedure, the principal investigator, surgeon co -investigator, or one of 
the approved study coordinators must explain orally and in writi ng the nature, duration, and 
purpose of the study in such a manner that the subject is aware of the potential risks, 
inconveniences, or adverse effects that may occur. The subjects  will be informed that they may 
withdraw from the study at any time.  Subjec ts will receive all information that is required by 
federal regulations.  
Once  a potential study patient is identified, the investigator or one of the approved study 
coordinators will be responsible for instituting the informed consent process in a face -to-face 
manner. Before starting any study procedures, the investigator will discuss the proposed research 
study in detail with the potential subject during the office visit to discuss treatment options.  The 
subject  will be allowed ample time to read and revi ew the informed consent document and  ask 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
10 
 questions.  The informed consent document will be reviewed  with the subject  in depth by the 
participating investigator or designated member of the research team to ensure that the potential 
participant has a good un derstanding of the study protocol, what is required of the study 
participants, the potential risks and benefits of study participation, and his or her rights as a study 
participant.  The investigators will be available by phone or office visit to answer an y questions 
that the participant may have.  After consideration, the subject may return if necessary for 
another appointmen t with the investigator to discuss the study, ask questions, and sign the 
informed consent document to participate in this study.  
After the subject has read and reviewed the informed consent document an d has 
agreed to participate, he or she will be asked to sign and date the document . The study member 
obtaining consent will also sign and date the form, and documentation of the informed consent 
process will be included in the research file (i.e., the person who obtained consent, where and 
when consent  was obtained, and who was present during the process). A copy of the consent form 
will be given to the subject for their records.  
 
PROVISIONS FOR SUBJECTS FROM VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
                 The population to be studied includes adults 18 years of age or over, so children are  
therefore excluded.  Decisiona lly-impaired and cognitively -impaired persons will not be 
approached to participate in this study as we are seeking subjects who have the capacity to 
understand and actively consent to the procedure independently.  Pregnant women  will be 
excluded from participating in this study.  
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
11 
                    Staff and employees at the participating institutions are considered a part of the 
vulnerable population.  Staff and employees may be eligible to participate in this study. Since 
subje cts may or may not benefit from this study, we do not want to exclude this population.  If an 
employee is a potential candidate for this study, the subject will be informed during the consent 
process that his  or her participation or refusal to participate will in no way influence grades, 
employment, or subsequent recommendations.  Every effort will be made to prevent coercion 
during this initial process and throughout study participation.  According to IRB policy, students 
and house staff cannot be asked to  participate in research conducted while under the direct 
supervision of the investigator, so those subjects will not be enrolled.  
In those instances where potential participants cannot read the consent form 
because they do not speak English, we will work  with the IRB to develop a language -appropriate 
consent form.  In addition, a qualified translator will be present to assist with obtaining the 
informed consent of the participant and throughout the duration of the patient’s participation in 
the study.  In  addition, in the unusual situation where a subject cannot read a consent form due  to 
illiteracy or blindness, a member of the research study staff will read  and explain the consent form 
to the participant or to the participant’s legally  authorized  represe ntative.  A witness, who will sign 
and date the consent form, must also be present during this oral presentation.  
 
 
 
 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
12 
 SUBJECT PRIVACY AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
Anonymity and confidentiality of subjects participating in this study will be 
maintained. The only potential identifiers on any study documents submitted to the sponsor or 
designee will be subject study numbers, dates of birth, and dates of procedures.  Ev ery effort will 
be made to maintain the confidentiality of documents that identify the subject by name (e.g., 
signed informed consent documents, clinic charts), except to the extent necessary to allow 
monitoring by the Office of Research Compliance at the Cleveland Clinic or other regulatory 
authorities.   
All information collected, such as name or medical record number, will be stored in 
the AHSQC database. Randomization will occur with the use of a customized Research Electronic 
Data Capture (REDCap®) dat abase program. This is in a secure network/firewall protected 
electronic database to which only the investigator and the designated members of the study team 
will have access using an individual assigned login and password. Only approved study members 
listed on the IRB protocol will have access to the separately -stored master list. This list will be 
stored on a CCF computer and a secured drive. Only the Principal Investigator, Lead Research 
Coordinators, and Biostatisticians will be granted access to retrie ve patient data for routine data 
quality assessments and data analyses. All electronic records pertaining to the clinical study will be 
password -protected  and only approved study members listed on the IRB protocol will have 
password access.  
 
 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
13 
  
POWER CALCUL ATION  
Sample size and power calculation were performed according to post -operative urinary retention, 
the primary outcome measure.  Previous publications have reported a urinary retention rate of 
7.5% when no urinary catheters were used. We surveyed the CC F surgeons who routinely use 
intra -operative catheter and the average reported retention rate was 2%. Furthermore, we looked 
at the available AHSQC data only for the surgeons who reported routine use of cath eters. After 
excluding patients with history of B PH, the rate of retention was 2%. In order to detect a 5.5 
percentage -point decrease from the non -foley arm’s 7.5% retention rate at 80% power while 
holding type I error at 5%, an estimated total sample size of 444 subjects (222 per arm) is required. 
Assum ing a 10% loss to follow -up at 30 days, a total of 488 patients will be recruited for this study 
(244 patients per arm).  Below is a plot of the study power for a range of possible event rates, to 
understand how the study power may change if the actual eve nt rate in the non -foley arm is 
higher or lower.  (Other parameters are held constant.)  
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
14 
  
Figure 1: The plot of the estimated power for a two sample proportions test  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 The primary endpoint will be analyzed with a logistic regression model that includes 
treatment arm and covariates related to baseline disease severity.  The primary aim will be tested 
with a likelihood ratio test of the treatment term in the regression mod el.  As a sensitivity analysis, 
the unadjusted likelihood ratio test will be performed.  Tests resulting in a p -value less than 0.05 
will be considered significant.  
Secondary endpoints will be analyzed in a similar fashion.  Furthermore, tables of summary  
statistics of patient and hernia characteristics will be generated, summarizing continuous 
covariates with the median and IQR while summarizing categorical covariates with sample 
proportions.  No hypothesis tests of baseline characteristics will be perfor med.   
DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD  

Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
15 
 A data safety monitoring board will not be required for this trial because both the 
intervention and the control are considered standard of care at CCF.   
 
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE/INNOVATION  
Post -operative urinary retention is a well-recognized  complication after minimally invasive 
inguinal repair. In the literature , there is a wide range (1 -22%) of reported rates of retention . 
However , no studies looked at retention  as a primary outcome. This  will be the first randomized 
controlled trial that will  determine if the use of intra -operative urinary catheter reduces the 
incidence of postoperative  urinary retention after laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.  
As previously mentioned, this trial will b e another registry -based randomized prospective 
study performed in the hernia disease space  by our institution. We have an opportunity here to 
collect most of the data that will be analyzed at the end of the study on the AHSQC database, 
which will act as t he central data storage platform for this trial. Registry -based clinical trials have 
been proposed as a way to achieve the scientific power of an RCT while minimizing the 
cumbersome nature associated with running such trials . In effect, the registry -based trial allows 
for faster accrual of patients and secure data storage with a reduced financial burden.  
 
 
 
 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
16 
 REFERENCES  
[1] Koch CA, Grinberg GG, Farley DR. Incidence and risk factors for urinary retention after 
endoscopic hernia repair. Am J Surg 2006;191:381 –5. doi:10.1016/J.AMJSURG.2005.10.042.  
[2] Jensen P, Mikkelsen T, Kehlet H. Postherniorrhaphy urinary retention - Effect of local, 
regional, and general anesthesia: A review. vol. 27. 2002. doi:10.1053/rapm.200 2.37122.  
[3] Blair AB, Dwarakanath A, Mehta A, Liang H, Hui X, Wyman C, et al. Postoperative urinary 
retention after inguinal hernia repair: a single institution experience. Hernia 2017;21:895 –
900. doi:10.1007/s10029 -017-1661 -4. 
[4] Patel JA, Kaufman AS, H oward RS, Rodriguez CJ, Jessie EM. Risk factors for urinary retention 
after laparoscopic inguinal hernia repairs. Surg Endosc 2015;29:3140 –5. 
doi:10.1007/s00464 -014-4039 -z. 
[5] Sivasankaran M V., Pham T, Divino CM. Incidence and risk factors for urinary re tention 
following laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. Am J Surg 2014;207:288 –92. 
doi:10.1016/j.amjsurg.2013.06.005.  
[6] Muysoms FE, Vanlander A, Ceulemans R, Kyle -Leinhase I, Michiels M, Jacobs I, et al. A 
prospective, multicenter, observational study on quality of life after laparoscopic inguinal 
hernia repair with ProGrip laparoscopic, self -fixating mesh according to the European 
Registry for Abdominal Wall Hernias Quality of Life Instrument. Surg (United States) 
2016;160:1344 –57. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2016 .04.026.  
[7] Arnold MR, Coakley KM, Fromke EJ, Groene SA, Prasad T, Colavita PD, et al. Long -term 
assessment of surgical and quality -of-life outcomes between lightweight and standard 
Version 3 – March 21, 2019  
NCT  #03835351  
 
17 
 (heavyweight) three -dimensional contoured mesh in laparoscopic inguinal h ernia repair. 
Surg (United States) 2018. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2018.10.016.  
 