A Patient -Centered Strategy For Improving 
Diabetes Prevention In Urban American 
Indians  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
September 15, 2016  
Randall Stafford , MD, MPH , Principal Investigator  
Stanford University  
Stanford, California 94305  
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary  
American Indians and Alaska Natives (AIAN)  have disproportionate rates of obesity and 
diabetes and are more  likely to  suffer from psychosocial stressors than their white 
counterparts. These  stressors  increase obesity risks and are barriers to fully participating in 
lifestyle  interventions.  While lifestyle interventions such as the Diabetes Prevention Program 
have  been  effective among racial/ethnic groups, including American Indians, these  
interventions  have not been studied in primary care or community -based settings and  have 
not addressed barriers pertaining to psychosocial stressors or historical  traumas.  
  
b. Objectives  
Our specific aims are:  
1. To deepen engagement of patient and provider stakeholders to better  understand the patient -
centered perspective on psychosocial issues that  influence progression to diabetes among 
urban AIANs.  
2. To refine, strengthen, and test an enhanced DPP that incorporates  psychosocial support for 
urban AIANs in a RCT (n=204).  
3. To rapidly disseminate research findings to key stakeholders at the local  state, and national 
level.  These aims address the priority of  eliminating  health disparities by addressing the context 
of prevalent diabetes in a  
marginalized population.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
Human subjects must be used to inform the development of a culturally  appropriate and 
enhanced diabetes prevention program addressing  psychosocial stressors and to evaluate the 
effectiveness of this program  
compared to the standard program.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  

9/27/19   Page 2 of 10 Phase 1, we will use the first six months of the study to refine a nd strengthen the intervention 
and study protocol by analyzing existin g deidentified data from the Indian Health Center and 
using Talking Circles(TCs), Modified Photo  Voice, and Digital Storytelling:  
 
1) We will analyze existing, deidentified pre - and post -intervention data  from the existing IHC 
diabetes prevention program to identify information on  the association between mental health, 
BMI, and other indicators.  
 
2) Talking Circles: A total of five Talking Circles (TCs)  will be conducted with  participants 50 
total participants) who are interested in urban AIAN health  and wellness to gain relevant  
insights. Each talking circle will have up to 10  participants in the session and, in keeping with 
tradition, each session will  have unlimited time. Skilled facilitators will lead participants in a 
process to  set ground rules, share a meal, and participate in guided discussions.  Participants 
will decide if the session will be audio recorded or if an  alternative method to summarize  the key 
points from the session will be  used.  
 
3) Modified Photo  Voice: Ten AIAN community members who participated in  a TC will be invited 
to participate in a 6 -week Modified Photo  Voice project.  Participants will participate in 6 sessions 
(one session per week) use a  digital camera to take photographs and write photo narratives 
pertaining to  health needs and assets in AIAN communities. During photo sharing  sessions, 
participant discussions will be audio recorded and transcribed for  data analysis to unco ver 
relevant themes. Participants will share photos  and findings with stakeholders during a 
Community Action Board  (CAB) meeting so that the CAB can use these findings to develop  
appropriate interventions for the enhanced diabetes prevention program.  
 
4) Digital Storytelling: Ten AIAN community members who participated in a  TC but  did not 
participate in the Modified Photovoice project, will be invited to  participate  in a 3-day digital 
storytelling project. A skilled facilitator will guide participants  throu gh a process of storytelling 
combined with technology and digital media to  create a 1 -3 minute video. Open -ended 
interviews will be conducted with participants  one week  after video completion. These interviews 
will be audio recorded and  transcribed to  identify relevant themes. Participants will be invited to 
present their videos  to the  Community Action Board and discuss their experience with the 
process.  
 
In phase 2, we will conduct a randomized controlled trial with up to 210  participants  for the 16 
week intervention.  
 
Recruited participants will be screened using a set of entry criteria,  including a BMI  between 30 
and 55, and one criterion for metabolic syndrome (e.g.  triglycerides,  HDL, blood pressure, 
fasting blood glucose). Patients cannot already h ave received  a diagnosis of Type II diabetes 
(among other exclusionary criteria). Potentially  eligible  patients complete a written consent 
process which includes a thorough  presentation of  the study's purpose, procedures, and 
potential risks & benefits.  
 
1) Participants will be referred or self -referred to the study.  
2) Initial Screen (self -report): Conducted either in -person or by phone.  
3) Clinical Screen*: In -person verification of eligibility measurements (ie.  Weight  and lab 
measurements). *The clinical  screen can be skipped if clinical  values <3  months are available 
(ie. weight and lab measurements)  
4) Consent: Written, informed  consent will be obtained  
 
9/27/19   Page 3 of 10 Participants will be recruited by Timpany Center staff and community members.  If they are 
otherwise eligible except that some of their  information  is more than 3 months old, we will 
conduct a clinical screening to collect  recent  blood  pressure, and blood test for cholesterol and 
blood sugar. They will consent  in- person  for the cli nical screening. Eligible participants will 
receive an explanation  about the  study and sign the full study consent form. After signing the 
consent form,  the participant completes baseline data collection. This includes an interviewer  
administered questionn aire, a blood test, clinical measurements, and  wearing a  pedometer for 7 
days. After all baseline data is collected, the participant is  randomly  assigned to ONE of two 
groups: 1) diabetes prevention program (DPP) or 2)  enhanced  diabetes prevention program 
(DPP+).  
 
There are 102 people in the standard DPP and 102 people in the enhanced  diabetes  prevention 
program to address historical trauma (DPP+). Participants will  complete  3 evaluations during 
the research study: baseline, 5 months  (1 week  following  the conclusion of intervention), 
Participants  enrolled in the last cohorts will not have as many follow -up evaluations as  those  
enrolled in initial cohorts. The evaluations include blood draws, other  measurements  (blood 
pressure, height, weight, and waist circ umference), and a series of  questionnaires. Blood 
samples and other measurements will be collected at  all of  the evaluation visits (baseline, 5 
months, 8 months, 14 months, and 20 months)  after a  more than 8 hour fast. The volume of 
most blood samples will  be 20 cc's  (approximately 1.5 tablespoons). Any  samples left over after 
analysis will be  destroyed  when the study is completed. Questionnaires include a series of 
questions  about  their eating patterns, physical activity habits, smoking status, past medical  
history, current medications, use of additional health care resources,  resilience, and  emotional 
status. Questionnaires will be filled out at the clinic visits at  baseline, 5  months, 8 months, 14 
months, and 20 months.  
b. Procedure Risks  
We have designed this study to be least risky through the following means:  
1) The intervention targets improvement of behaviors (diet, exercise, stress  reduction) that can  
help decrease weight; thereby, decreasing the chance  of cardiovascular disease.  
2) The intervention recommendations are based on accepted clinical  guidelines.  
3) The intervention builds on previous trials conducted by key investigators  on this  project.  
c. Use of Deception in the Study : 
Deception will not be used in the research study.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
We may use audio recording or video recording for Talking Circles, Modified  Photovoice, Digital 
Storytelling, CAB meetings, and intervention classes for  research purposes to analyze 
transcribed data and for educational purposes  in order to review how the health educators are 
presenting the protocol to  the participants. We may also use audio recording for interviewing  
participants about how they  feel about the health education they receive.  
 
We will also use camera pictures (and accompanying written or audio  narrative) and  video 
footage created by participants to share cultural stories, and  perceptions of  health needs and 
assets in the AIAN commu nity. Audio recordings from  interview  debriefings will be destroyed 
once they have been transcribed. Photos,  videos, and  
accompanying audio from Modified Photo  Voice and Digital Storytelling maybe  used  for 
educational purposes, such as during community pre sentations or  scientific  meetings and 
9/27/19   Page 4 of 10 conferences. Photos, videos, and audio will not be linked to  individuals  unless we have received 
express written approval to use the media for a  given  purpose.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Standard treatments for weight management and diabetes prevention will  be described to all 
participants. This program utilizes existing standards of  care. No standard treatment is being 
withheld. The alternative is not to  participate a nd to individually pursue an exercise program(s), 
work with a  personal trainer, or consult with a dietitian on diet modifications.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after  the conclusion of the study?  
If funding allows, we will continue with the enhanced diabetes prevention  program. However, 
the enhanced components of the program may not  typically be covered by the Indian Health 
Center of Santa Clara Valley, so  we do not gu arantee it.  
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
Because our primary end point is increased resilience and weight loss for  diabetes prevention, 
we do not expect any adverse events to cause us to  terminate the study early. We plan to 
continue the study for the full 20  months and provide participants with the opportunity to 
participate i n several follow -up focus groups to contextualize  study results.  
3. BACKGROUND   
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
AIANs are more than twice as likely to be diagnosed with diabetes  compared to white 
Americans (8% vs. 18%). Additionally, compared to non - Hispanic whites, AIANs have high 
rates of depression symptoms (e.g.,  sadness some of the time 14% vs. 8%), any illicit drug use 
(18%  vs. 9%),  more than once binge drinking in the last month (32% vs. 17%), reported  "not 
satisfied with life" (10% vs. 5%), 14+ days/month with poor mental  health (18% vs. 11%), and 
serious psychological distress (5.2% vs.  3.1%). AIAN scholars have described  the cumulative 
effects of the hardship s AIANs have experienced over the centuries as historical and  
intergenerational trauma. Although diabetes and historical trauma have  been researched 
separately, very little research exists on the  conceptualization or measurement of trauma as it 
relates to  metabolic outcomes.  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
NA 
4. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
For Talking Circles:  
i. 10-15 
ii. 10 -15 
iii. We will enroll talking circle participants based on the following criteria:  
a. self -identified AIAN  
 
For Modified Photovoice Project  
i. 10-15 
9/27/19   Page 5 of 10 ii. 10 -15 
iii. We will enroll 10 AIAN community members who participa ted in the talking circles  
 
For the Digital Storytelling Project  
i. 10-15 
ii. 10 -15 
iii. We will enroll 10 AIAN community members who participated in the talking circles but not the 
photovoice project  
 
For the Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT)  
i. Up to 210  
ii. Up to 210  
iii. We will enroll AIAN adults who have a BMI between 30 and 55 and at least 1 risk factor for 
metabolic syndrome as the ultimate  goal of the study is to prevent diabetes in AIAN populations.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
i. Older than 21  
ii. Men and Women  
iii. Self -identified as AIAN  
c. Vulnerable Population s 
We are working with an AIAN population that may include participants who are economically 
disadvantaged. The reason for working with these participants is because diabetes is 
disproportionately prevalent among low -socioeconomic status (SES) and racial/ethnic minority 
populations in the United States (US), which is why we are trying to improve health care for this 
population  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
The study is not including children because the focus of our research is diabetes prevention 
which has a low prevalence among children. Those children with the disease likely nece ssitate 
unique intervention strategies not present in our research.  
e. Stanford Populations  
NA 
f. Healthy Volunteers  
Up to 210 healthy volunteers may be included in the randomized controlled trial. The st udy aims 
to promote healthy lifestyles in people who are at increased risk for diabetes. Other than obesity 
and risk factors for diabetes, the participants should be generally healthy. The volunteers will 
not be exposed to any additional risks or harm.  
g. Recruitment Details  
Timpany Center staff will recruit participants from the center and surrounding community. They 
will advertise and recruit for the study at cultural events. Staff will: 1) utilize clinical records to 
identify  patients who meet the eligibility criteria; 2) meet with clinical providers and ask them to 
refer potentially eligible patients; 3) attend numerous AIAN cultural events such as Pow Wows; 
4) reach out to public schools in San Jose with the highest concentr ation of AIAN children.  
 
9/27/19   Page 6 of 10 Talking Circles  
We will recruit 10 -15 participants for 5 talking circles. We will recruit participants who have 
expressed an interest in the health of urban AIAN such as IHC staff, founding members and 
board members, as well as ser vice users and illness survivors .  
 
Modified Photovoice  
We will recruit 10 AIAN community members who also participated in the talking circles.  
 
Digital Storytelling  
We will recruit 10 AIAN community members who participated in the talking circles but not the 
modified photovoice.  
 
Randomized Controlled Trial  
We will recruit up to 210 AIAN adults who have a BMI between 30 and 55 and at least 1 risk 
factor for metabolic syndrome. The study will be open to the general public.  
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
Inclusion for Talking Circles  
i. Self -Identified AIAN  
ii. Experience with the historical psychosocial stressors faced by AIANs  
 
Inclusion for Modified Photovoice  
i. 10 participants from the talking circles  
 
Inclusion for Digital Storytelling  
i. 10 participants from the talking circle who did not participate in the modified photovoice  
 
Inclusion for Randomized Controlled Trial  
i. Self -identified urban AIAN men and women  
ii. BMI Between 30 -55 
iii. Not diagnosed with Type II Diabetes  
iv. At least one of the following criteri a 
 a. Triglycerides: 150mg/dL or higher  
 b. Reduced HDL: <40mg/dL (men); <50mg/dL (women)  
 c. Blood pressure: >130/80 or current treatment with antihypertensives  
 d. Fasting glucose: >100mg/dL  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
Exclusion criteria for Randomized Controlled Trial  
i. Significant medical comorbidities, including uncontrolled metabolic disorders (e.g., thyroid, 
diabetes, renal, liver), unstable heart disease, heart failure, and ongoing substance abu se; 
ii. On greater than 10 prescription medications.  
iii. Psychiatric disorders requiring atypical antipsychotics or multiple medications;  
iv. Inappropriate for moderate exercise according to the Revised Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire;  
v. Pregna nt, planning to become pregnant, or lactating;  
vi. Family household member already enrolled in the study;  
vii. Already enrolled or planning to enroll in a clinical trial that would limit full participation in the 
9/27/19   Page 7 of 10 study;  
viii. Resident of a long - term care facility;  
ix. Lack of spoken English by patient or a household member > 18 y who can serve as 
interpreter;  
x. Plans to move during the study period (9 months post -randomization);  
xi. Investigator discretion for clinical safety or adherence reasons (e.g., u nstable housing, 
chronic pain).  
i. Screening Procedures  
Exclusion criteria for Randomized Controlled Trial  
i. Significant medical comorbidities, including uncontrolled metabolic disorders (e.g., thyroid, 
diabetes, renal, l iver), unstable heart disease, heart failure, and ongoing substance abuse;  
ii. On greater than 10 prescription medications.  
iii. Psychiatric disorders requiring atypical antipsychotics or multiple medications;  
iv. Inappropriate for moderate exercise accord ing to the Revised Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire;  
v. Pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or lactating;  
vi. Family household member already enrolled in the study;  
vii. Already enrolled or planning to enroll in a clinical trial that would limi t full participation in the 
study;  
viii. Resident of a long -term care facility;  
ix. Lack of spoken English by patient or a household member > 18 y who can serve as 
interpreter;  
x. Plans to move during the study period (9 months post -randomization);  
xi. Inv estigator discretion for clinical safety or adherence reasons (e.g., unstable housing, 
chronic pain).  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will be asked about participation in other studies during the screening proc ess. If 
they are in another study, they will need to gain approval from both study protocol directors to 
remain in both studies. Additionally, they will be asked to inform study researchers if they join 
another study during the duration of their participat ion in this study.  
k. Payments to Participants  
Participants in the RCT will receive payment in form of incentives, such as running shoes and 
farmer’s market vouchers. Individuals will receive a gift card for $20 or equivalent incentive 
valued at $20 and a T -shirt valued at $10 upon completion of the assessment. To promote 
retention, participants who express that transportation is a barrier will be offered assistance with 
transportation in the form of bus passes or taxi rides, d epending on their circumstances.  
l. Costs to Participants  
There will be no costs to the subjects for the diabetes prevention intervention.  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
The intervention with be conduct ed over 20 weeks. We anticipate the screening of participants 
will take 1 hour. Active participation in the study will take a minimum of 2 hours a week for 
participation in group sessions and 1.5 hours for each evaluation. Participants may decide to 
9/27/19   Page 8 of 10 make h ealthy lifestyle changes, such as increasing their physical activity levels as a result of 
participating in the study. Finally, we anticipate analysis of participant data will take 3 months.  
5. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
NA 
ii. Investigational drugs 
NA 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
NA 
iv. Procedures  
NA 
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
NA 
vi. Physical  well-being : 
Randomization to the usual diabetes prevention program (DPP) could improve physical well -
being while randomization to the enhanced DDP (DPP+) has greater potential to improve 
physical well -being.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being  
Randomization to the usual diabetes prevention program (DPP) could improve physical well -
being while randomization to th e enhanced DDP (DPP+) has greater potential to improve 
psychological well -being.  
viii. Economic well -being  
Randomization to the usual diabetes prevention program (DPP) could improve economic well -
being while randomization to enhanced DDP could improve long -term economic well -being by 
reducing the chance of costly obesity -related illness.  
ix. Social  well-being   
Randomization to the usual diabetes prevention program (DPP) could improve social wel l-being 
while randomization to enhanced DDP could also improve social well -being. However, 
randomization to both groups could also negatively affect social well -being if someone in the 
participant’s social circle reacts negatively to the participant trying  to make healthy changes.  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low - innocuous procedures such as phlebotomy, urine or stool collection, no therapeutic 
agent, or safe therapeutic agent such as the use of an FDA approved drug or device.  
9/27/19   Page 9 of 10 b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
NA 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
For Aims 1 and 2, participants will be made aware that they will be audio -taped and that these 
tapes wi ll be analyzed without identifiable information. Participants will be allowed to discontinue 
participation at any time if they are uncomfortable . They can also elect to not participate in any 
portion of the study protocol. For the RCT, participants will be  made aware of the study protocol 
through the informed consent process. The IHC DPP staff members and the Steering 
Committee will take time to discuss the meaning of participation, including the potential risks, 
and potential benefits. In addition, the res earch team will monitor all SAEs and follow 
appropriate reporting mechanisms. The study will also include a Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) to monitor and minimize risks to participants. This careful consent process, 
monitoring of SAEs, and oversig ht provided by the DSMB are the planned procedures for 
protecting against and minimizing all potential risks.  
d. Study Conclusion  
We will terminate the study if regular comparison analysis shows that the study poses harm to 
an intervention group. However, because the study is using behavioral change for weight -loss, 
the chance of termination is remote. In the event of adverse effects, we will have referrals to 
nurse practitioner as well as primary care physicians.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review :  
Data Monitoring Board  members:  
Board members include:  
-Veronica Yank, MD  
-Mike Baiocchi, PhD  
-Virgil Moorehead, PhD  
-Steve Adelsheim, MD  
ii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
- DSMB meetings are schedule annually or on an ad hoc basis when needed.  
iii. Specific triggers or stopping rules  
                              -There were not triggers or stopping rules.  
iv. DSMB Reporting  
- Reporting: Hayley Hedlin, PhD  
v. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
                    N 
vi. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study 
monitoring? (Y/N)  
  Y 
9/27/19   Page 10 of 10  
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
               NA 
6. BENEFITS  
Subjects may experience the benefit of better health behavior and the  Timpany Center may 
have improved ability to address the diabetes  epidemic  
7. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALI TY 
All participant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford 
University, Stanford Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  
 
 
 