Title: A feasibility  pilot study for a  social support intervention in kidney transplant 
candidates  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Date : October 1, 2024
Attachment  UUU  
 
  
 
Title:  
 
Drug or Device 
Name(s):  
FDA IND/IDE  
Sponsor: University of 
Minnesota  Clinical and 
Translational Science 
Institute  
Protocol  Date: June 15, 
2019  
Revision  Date(s) : Not 
applicable  A feasibility pilot  study for a social  support intervention in 
kidney transplant candidates  
Not appli cable 
 
 
Not applicable 
 
 
Study Principal Investigato1·  (if multicenter  study) : Allyson H art, MD, MS 
701 Park Ave , Nephro logy Suite S5 
Minneapolis , MN, 55415 
Phone 612-873-6987 
email: hartl044@ umn.edu  
Site Principal Investigator:  Allyson Hart, MD, MS 
Hennepin Healthcare 
701 Park  Ave, Nephro logy Suite S5 
Minneapoli s, MN, 55415 
Phone 612-873-6987 
email: allyson.hart @hcmed .org 
Other  Investigators:  
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
Template  version: March  27, 2019 
Templat e adapted  from:  Children 's Hospita l of Philadel phia Research  Institu te 
PRO TOCOL SYNOP SIS 
 
Study Title   Development of a social support  intervention fo r kidney transp lant 
candidates  
 
Funder  University of Minnesota  WERC  award  
 
Clinical Phase Not applicab le 
 
Study Rational e  Intensive home-based group  counseling with a psyc hologist are the 
only intervent ions that have been  shown to increase rates o f living 
kidney donatio n however , they are not feasib le for transpl ant 
centers . A recen t review on strategies to increase l iving kidney 
donat ion concl uded that  strategies directed at cand idates a nd the ir 
social supp01t  networ ks are the most pro mising based  on the data 
available. Therefore , we propose an intervent ion that incorporates 
individualized risk commu nication into gro up counseling with 
patients and  their suppor t networks at the transp lant cen ter. 
 
Study Objecti ve(s)  Primar y 
• To dete rmine whether  counse ling with the shared  decision aid, 
provide d in the clinical setting to cand idates along wit h 
members of t heir socia l suppo1t  netwo rk, increases  pursuit of 
transpl ant. 
Secondar y 
• To dete rmine whether the intervention influences patie nt 
knowledge  about  kidney transp lant, decisional conflict, and 
hope. 
• To deter mine  if the intervention  influences  social  suppo1t  group 
knowledge about  kidney transp lant and  intention/ motivat ion to 
support the pat ient through the transp lant process.  
Test Articl e(s) 
(If Applicable ) Not applicab le 
 
 
Study Design Pilot randomized  contro l trial 
 
 
Subject Population 
Key Criteria for 
Inclusio n and Exclusion: Inclusion criteria include adult  kidney transp lant candidates  at the 
University of Minnesota or H ennepi n Co unty Medical  Center. 
Exclusion criteria include inability to  consent , non-English 
speaking , or cand idates fo r combined or gan transp lant. 
 
 
Number Of Subje cts Tota l Number  of Subjects:  60 
Tota l Number of Sites: 2 
 
Study Duration  Each subject's  participat ion will last 3 months.  
The entire study is expected  to last through November  1st 2020.  
 
Study Phase s (1) Scree ning: screeni ng for eligibility  and obtai ning consent  
 
Screening 
Intervention 
Follow -Up (2) Intervention:  group counseli ng sessi on 
 
Efficacy  Evaluations  Primar y evaluation  measurements that will be used to assess  the 
efficacy  of the intervention 
Pharmacokinetic 
Evaluations  Not applicable  
 
 
Safety  Evaluations  Not appli cable 
Statistical  And Analytic 
Plan  
 
 
Data  And Safety 
Monitoring Plan  A Student's  T-test will compare means for the primaiy  outcome  of 
the numb er of inquiri es per cand idate (p rimar y outcome). Chi- 
squai·ed an
d Studen t's T-tests will be used to compar e seco ndary 
outcomes. 
The principle  investigator is responsible for  data quality 
management and ongoing assessment of safety.  
 
 
page1v  
 
TABLE  1: SCHED ULE OF STUD Y PRO CEDURES 
 
Study Phase Screening  Treatment/Inter vention  Follow- up 
Visit Numb er 1 2 NIA 
Informed  Conse nt/Assent  X   
Review Inclusion/Excl usion 
Criteria  X   
Bassline Survey to measure 
secondru.y  outcomes  X   
Dem ographics/Medica l 
Histo1y  X   
Rand omization  X   
Inte1vention  (group 
counse lling session)  X  
Survey  to measure secondru.y 
outcomes   X  
Assess  primru.y  outcome 
through  medical  records   X 
1  
 
1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Name and Description  of Investigational Product  or Intervention  
We will conduct a pil ot randomized trial to compare group  counseling with transplant 
cand idates  and their  suppo1t  network s that incorporate s the shared  decision  aid with a risk 
calculator, versus u sual pre-transplant care.  
 
1.2 Findings  from  Non-Clinical and Clinical Studies  
Not appli cable 
1.2.1 Non-Clinical Studies  
Not applicable  
1.2.2 Clinical Studies  
1.2.2.1  Human  Pharmacokinetic s 
Not appli cable 
1.2.2.2  Clinical  Studies  in Adults  
 
 
1.2.2.3  Clinical  Studies  in Children  
  
1.3 Selection  of Drug s and Dosages  
Not applicable  
1.4 Relevant  References  
1.5 Compliance  Statement  
This study will be conducted in full acco rdance of all appli cable Hennepin Health care 
Resear ch Policies and Procedure s and all applicable Federal  and State  laws and  regulation s. 
All episodes  of noncompliance will be documented and  repo1ted according to the Prompt 
Repo1ting Guidelines , Attachment EEE , of the Hennepin Healthcare IRB Policie s and 
Procedure s. 
The inve stigator s will perfonn the study in accordance with this protocol , will obtain 
consent , unless waiver of consent  or othe r alteration is approved , and will repo1t 
unanticipated problems involving risks  to subject s or others  and SAEs  in accordance with 
The Hennepin H ealthca re IRB Policie s and Procedure s and all Federal requi rements.  
Collection,  recording, and rep01ting of data will be accurate  and will ensure  the priva cy, 
health , and welfare of research subject s during  and after the study. 
2  
 
2 STUDY OBJE CTIVE S 
The pmpose  of the study is  to dete nnine whether  counseling with the  shared decis ion aid, 
provi ded in the c linical setting to candidates al ong with members of t heir social suppo11 
networ k, increases p ursuit of transpl ant. 
2.1 Primary Objective (or Aim) 
The primary o bjective of this study is to detenni ne whether co unseling with the shared 
decision  aid, prov ided in the clinica l setting  to candidates  along with  members of their social 
suppo1t netwo rk, increases p ursuit of t ranspl ant. 
 
2.2 Secondar y Objectives (or Aim)  
The secondaiy objec tives are to: 
• Determine whether the intervention influ ences patient knowledge  abou t kidney 
transp lant, dec reases dec isiona l conflict, and hope. 
• Detemline if the intervention influ ences social suppo1 t group knowl edge  about 
kidney tra nsplant and intention/ motivatio n to suppo1 t the patie nt throug h the 
transp lant process.  
 
3 INVESTIGATIO NAL PLAN  
3.1 General  Schema of Study D esign 
3.1.1 Screening  Phase and  Baseline A ssessment  
Potential subjects wi ll be screened u sing the  protocol inclu sion and exclus ion cr iteria. 
Potential subjects w ill be reach ed out to over th e phone  before t heir initial appo intm ent at 
the clinic to see if they express interest in hearing more abo ut the interve ntion. Those  whom 
want  to learn m ore abo ut the intervention w ill then be met with during their first kidney 
transplant co unseling appointm ent at the transp lant clinic. Permission (info1med consent) 
will be obtained d uring this  appoi ntment, if the pat ient wo uld like the partici pate in the 
intervention. After the patient has completed t he health  assessm ent phase a nd is officially a 
candidate fo r transp lant, they wi ll be emolled in the study. 
3.1.2 Study Interv ention  
Participants in the intervention grou p first undergo usual pre-transplant counseling, and w ill 
then undergo a group counseling session with m embers  of their suppmt netwo rk at the 
transplant center. The session will includ e 1) a descr iption of general options fo r treatment 
of end stage  kidney disease, 2) the  likely outcome of each of those o ptions speci fic to the 
transplant candid ate utilizing the deci sion ai d, 3) a presentat ion of common reasons to 
pursue or not pursue eac h of those options (including commo n barri ers to living donat ion), 
and 4) a discussion of how the suppo1t  netwo rk can  be involved in the transp lant process.  
Tllis discussion will be info1med by focus groups conducted in a previous  study. 
3  
 
The gro up counseling sessi on w ill foll ow a ge neral script and will be facilitated by the 
principal investigator or a trained transp lant educator , with recording and rando m rev iew of 
the sessions to ensure quality and consistency of the content. Prin ted results of the decision 
aid output  will be shared w ith th e clinical transplant team t o replicate clinical practice. 
 
The control group will unde rgo the usual pre-transplant c ounseling and clinical evaluation 
conducted by the transplant center team. The control  group will be info1m ed about the 
availability o f the online sha red decision aid by a m ember of the research team. 
 
3.1.3 Part  2 (Use an appropriate descriptor  such as "Open -Label  Treatment")  
Not applicable 
3.1.4 Follow -up 
Not applicable 
3.2 Allocation to Groups  and Blinding  
The enr olled study pa rticipants will be ran domized via computer into either the interve ntion 
or control group. Pa1ticipant and researc her blinding is not feasible for the interven tion, but 
asce1tainment and statistical analysis of outcomes will be perform ed by an analyst blind ed to 
group ass ignme nt. 
3.3 Study Duration , Enrollment  and Number  of Sites 
3.3.1 Duration of Study Participation  
The study duration per subject will be up to 3 months. There will be one day of screening 
and one day that th e inte1venti on takes  place. The re mainder of the time is allotted for 
patients to undergo standard pre-transplant ca re and cou nseling. 
3.3.2 Total Number  of Study Sites /Total Number  of Subjects  Projected  
The study will be conducted at two investigative sites in the United  States . 
Recruitm ent will stop when approximately 60 subjects are consented (7 patients in the 
control group + 8 pa tients + 6-7 friends and famil y eac h in the inte1ven tion group). 
3.4 Study Population  
3.4.1 Use of Vulnerable  Populations and Patients  Who Opt  Out of Research  
Vulnerable populations and patients who opt out will not be included in the study.  
3.5 Inclu sion and Exclu sion Criteria  
3.5.1 Inclusion  Criteria  
l) Adult males or females. 
2) Kidney  transplant candidates.  
4  
 
3) Additional  criteria as required. 
3.5.2 Exclusion Criteri a 
1) Non- English speaking  individuals. 
2) Individuals with impaired ability to consent.  
3) Candidates fo r combined  organ  tTanspl ant. 
4) Patients  who choose to  opt out of resear ch. 
Subjects that  do not meet all of the enro llment criteria may  not be enrolled. Any violations 
of these  criteria  must be repo1ted in acco rdance with IRB  Policies and  Procedm es. 
4 STUDY PRO CEDURES 
4.1 Screening  Visit and Baseline Assessment  
• lnfo1med  Consent 
 
• Med ical Reco rd Review 
4.2 Study Interv ention 
4.2.1 Visit 1 
• Demograp hic survey 
 
• Evaluative  survey  
4.2.2 Visit 2 and Visit 3 
Not appli cable 
 
 
4.3 Part 2 of the Study (e.g. Open -Label  Trea tment) 
Not appli cable 
4.3.1 Visit 4 
Not appli cable 
4.3.2 Visit 5 
Not appli cable 
4.4 Follow-up 
• Medical records  
5  
 
4.4.1 Visit 6 
Not applicable  
4.4.2 Visit  6: End of Study  
Not applicable  
4.5 Unscheduled Visits  
Not applicable  
4.6 Concomitant Medication  
Not applicable  
4.7 Rescue Medication Administration  
Not applicable  
4.8 Subject  Completion/Withdrawal  
Participant s may withdraw from the study any time without prejudice of their care.  The 
infmmed consent document s tipulate s that we will retain data collected prior to study 
withdrawal. Pa1tial withdrawal (no further active  paitic ipation but with ongoing  data 
collection  after  withdrawal from  health  record) will be reque sted if a participant wishes  to 
cease pa1ticipation,  as per the informed consent document.  
4.8.1 Early  Termination  Study Visit  
Subject's  data from  after  withdrawal  from  the study will be not be used. 
5 STUDY EVALUATIONS  AND MEASUREMENTS  
• Informed  Consent: infmmed  consent  will be  used to infmm patients  about  the 
inte1 vention and their right s if the y choose to participate.  
•  Medical  Record  Review: medical  records will be reviewed to ensure  that patients 
meet inclu sion/exclusion criteria for inter vention . They will also be used during 
follow -up to assess our primary outcome  variable, to determine if the patient 
engaged in pur suit of transplant.  
 
•  Demographi c survey (see appendix): This  surve y will be  used to under stand the 
population participating in the intervention.  
•  Evaluative survey (see  appendix):  This survey w ill assess our  secondary outcome 
measures, to determine whether  the inter vention influen ces patient  knowledge  about 
kidney tran splant , decisional conflict, and  hope. Also, to determine if the 
inter vention  influen ces social support group kno wledge  about  kidne y transplant and 
intentio n/motivation to suppmt  the patient through the tran splant pro cess. 
6  
 
5.1 Screening  and Monitorin g Evaluation s and Measurement s 
5.1.1 Medical  Record  Review and demo graphic s questionnair e 
• Race 
 
• Ethnicity  
 
• Household incom e 
 
• Education level 
 
• Blood type 
 
• Calculated pane l reactive antibody a ge 
 
• Time  on dialysis 
 
• Diabete s 
 
• Gender  
 
• BMI  
• Cause of kidney failure 
 
• Comorbidities (hypertens ion, cerebrova scular disease, peripheral  vascular disease, 
and ma lignancy) 
5.1.2 Physical Examination  
Not appli cable 
5.1.3 Vital Signs 
Not applicable 
5.1.4 Laboratory  Evaluation s 
Not appli cable 
5.1.4.l Hematology  
Not applicable 
5.1.5 Other Evaluation s, Measures 
Not applicable 
5.2 Efficacy Evaluation s 
Baseline and o utcome e valuations will be used to te st for inter vention efficacy. These 
meas ures will include: pursuit of transplant, patient knowl edge  about  kidne y transplant, 
7  
 
patient decisional conflict, patient hope , social support group  knowledge about kidne y 
transplant  and social support group  intentio n/moti vation to support the patient  through the 
transplant process. A process evaluation will be conducted to ensme the inter vention i s 
implemented with fidelity an d to assess w hat wor ked and  did not work dmin g the 
implement ation process.  
5.2.1 Diagnostic Tests,  Scales , Measures,  etc. 
Base line evaluations will be admini stered before  pruticipation in the intervention. After the 
inter vention i s complete , the outcome  evaluation smvey w ill be administered. These smveys 
will have  the same  questions and measurement s (listed above) in order to te st for 
intervention effi cacy /effectiveness.  
5.3 Pharmacokinetic Evaluation  
Not applicable  
5.4 Safety  Evaluation  
Subject  safety  will be monit ored by the principle  investigator.  
6 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
The sample  size ( n=60) w ill be sufficient for conducting statistica l analysis  of the 
inter vention.  A Student's  T-test will compare  means for the  prima1 y outcome of the number 
of inquirie s per cand idate.  Both  a Chi-squared and Student's  T-tests will be used to compar e 
seconda1 y outcomes . 
 
6.1 Primary  Endpoint  
Prima1 y endpoint: pursuit of transplant  
6.2 Secondary  Endpoints  
Seco ndaty  endpoints: patient  knowledge about  kidney transplant , decisional  conflict , and 
hope.  Also , social suppo11  group knowledge about kidne y transplant and 
intentio n/moti vatio n to suppo1t  the pati ent through the tran splant pro cess 
 
6.3 Statistical  Methods  
A Student's T-test will compare mean s for the prima1 y outcome of  the number  of inquirie s 
per candidate betwee n and within the intervention and co ntrol groups. Both a Chi -squared 
and Student's  T-tests w ill be used to compare  secondruy o utcomes between  and within the 
intervention and control groups. This is a feasibility  pilot  study; therefore, it is not powered 
to test anything.  We will be co llecting data that we could adjust  for (i.e. demographic s), but 
we will not be adjusting, because the main  goal of this particulru·  study is to gauge if the 
inter vention i s feasible.  
8  
 
6.3.1 Baseline  Data  
Baseline and demo graphic characteristics will be summ arized by standa rd descriptive 
summ aries (e.g. means and standard deviations for continuou s variables such as  age and 
percentages for categ orical variables such as ge nder). 
6.3.2 Effica cy Analysis  
The prima1 y efficacy endpoint will be the  change  in pursuit of transplant between the 
baseline and the outcome evaluation. Seco ndary endpoints will includ e the  change in 
patient knowledge about kidney transplant, patient decisional conflict, patient hope, social 
supp01t g roup kn owledge about kidn ey transp lant and soc ial support group 
intention/motivation to support the patient through the tran splant process between th e 
baseline and outcome evaluation. All measurements will be compared with th e control/no 
treatment group m easurements. 
6.3.3 Pharmacokinetic Anal ysis 
Not applicable 
6.3.4 Safety Anal ysis 
Not applicable 
6.4 Sample  Size and Power  
The sample size will be n=60, with 30 patients consented from each site. This is a feas ibility 
pilot study ; therefore, it is not powered to test anything. 
6.5 Interim  Anal ysis 
Not applicable. 
7 STUDY MEDICATIO N (DRUG, DEVICE, OR OTHER  STUDY 
INTERVE NTION) 
 
7.1 Description  
 
7.1.1 Packaging  
 
Not appli cable 
 
7.1.2 Labeling  
 
Not applicable 
 
7.1.3 Dosin g 
 
Not applicable 
 
7.1.4 Treatment  Compliance  and Adherence  
9  
 
Not appli cable  
 
7.1.5 Drug  Accountability  
 
Not applicable  
 
8 SAFETY  MANAGEMENT  
8.1 Clinical Adverse Events  
Clinical adverse  events  (AEs)  will be monitored throughout the  study  by the principal 
investigator.  
8.2 Adverse Event  Reporting  
Since the  study  procedures are not greater than minimal  risk, SAEs  are not expected. If any 
unanticipated problems related to the  research involving risks  to subjects or  others  happen 
during the course of  this study  (including SAEs)  they will be repo1ted to the  IRB in 
accordance with IRB Attachment GGG: Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to 
Subjects or Others. AEs that are not serious but  that are notable and could involve  1isks to 
subjects wi ll be summarized and  submitted to the IRB at the time of continuin g review.  
8.3 Definition  of an Adverse Event  
An adverse  event  is any untoward medical  occmTence  in a subject  receiving  a test a1ticle and 
which the occmTence  does  not necessarily  have  a causal  relationship with the treatment.  An 
adverse  event  can therefore be  any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an  abn01mal 
laborato1y  finding) , symptom , or disease  tempora lly associated with  the use of the test 
a1ticle , whether or not related to the product.  
All AEs (including SAEs) wi ll be noted in the  study  records and on the case report f01m 
with a full description including the natme, date and time  of onset , dete1mination of non- 
seriou
s versus  serious, intensity  (mild , moderate , severe) , duration , causality , and outcome 
of the event.  
8.4 Definition  of a Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE)  
An SAE  is any untoward medical  occunence that 
• results  in death , 
• is life-threatening,  
• requires  inpatient hospitalization  or prolongation of existing  hospitalization,  
• results  in a persistent  or significant  disability /incapacity , or 
• is a congenita l anomaly/bi1th  defect.  
 
8.4.1 Relation ship of SAE  to study drug or other intervention 
It is unlikely  that there  will be any SAEs  in relation  to the intervention, as the  inte1vention  is 
a social suppo 1t inte1vention. 
8.5 IRB/IEC  Notificati on of SAEs  and Other Unanticipated  Problem s 
The Investigator  will promptly notify the  IRB of  all internal (occmri ng in subjects enrolled 
at this  site) unanticipated prob lems involving r isks to subjects  or others , and Serious 
Adverse  Events  that are related to the  research activity. Rep01ts  will be submitted to the  IRB 
in accordance wit h the timeline below. External (at other sites)  SAEs that are  both 
unexpected and related to the study  intervention will be reported promptly.  
 
Category of Prompt Report Initial Notification 
Internal  (occmr ing in subjects  enrolled at this 
site), related (o r more likely related t han 
unrelated) SAE  5 days 
Internal , unrelated SAE  30 days  
External SAE  and AEs need not be  repo1te d 
unless it represents  an unanticipated  problem  A brief summaiy of impo 1tant AEs may be 
repo1ted at time of continuing review  
Unant icipated  Problems  Invol ving Risks to 
Subjects or Othe rs 5 days 
8.5.1 Follow-up report  
If an SAE has  not resolved at the  time of the init ial repolt  and new info1mation  ai·ises that 
changes  the investigator 's assessment  of the event , a follow-up repo 1t including all relevant 
new or reassessed info1mation (e.g.,  concomitant medication , medica l histo1y)  shou ld be 
submitted  to the IRB. The investigator  is respon sible for  ensuring t hat all  SAE  ai·e followed 
until either reso lved or stable.  
8.6 Investigator R eporting of a Serious Adverse Eve nt to Sponsor 
Not appli cable  
8.7 Medical  Emergencies  
Not appli cable  
9 STUDY ADMIN ISTRA TION 
9.1 TREATMEN T ASS IGNMEN T METHOD S 
9.1.1 Randomi zation or Other Assignment 
Randomizatio n will be computer  generated  and stratified  by site. 
11  
 
9.1.2 Blinding  
Blinding  is not feasible due to the nature  of the interv ention.  
9.1.3 Unblinding  
fu the  case of a SAE  the PI will be unblinded.  
9.2 Data  Collection  and Management  
We will keep  a master li st containing  all PHI  and subject  ID numbers  separate from  data 
fo1ms  that have  only a study ID number.  The m aster  list will be  in a locked file cabin et. 
We will keep a copy of all data on REDCap , a password protected electronic database 
which meets Health  fusurance Po1tabili ty and Accountability  Act (HIPAA) and 
Univer sity security requirement s, with the  original  paper  copy locked  in a cabinet.  
9.3 Confidentiality  
All data and records generated  during  this study will be kept confidential  in accordance  with 
fustitutional  policie s and HIPAA on subject privacy and that  the fuvestigator and other s ite 
personnel will not u se such data and records for any purpo se other than conducting the 
study. 
Data will be stored in REDCap , a password protected electronic database which  meet s 
Health  Insurance Po1tability and Accountability  Act (HIPAA)  and University sec mity 
requirement s. The original consent fo1m , HIPAA  authorizations  and any wlitten study 
c01Te sponden ce will be  kept in a locked cabinet in the  secured office suite. Only the signed 
consent fo1m  will include  patient name , phone  number , address  and EHR  number ; all other 
data stored separatel y will be linked b y a de-identifiable  number.  A scanned copy of the 
consent  f01m will be placed  in the  pa1ticipant's  EHR.  All member s of the research team 
who ha ve access to the data will have co mpleted required Good C linical Pra ctice and 
Hum an Resea rch Protections for Biomedical Study Team s and any other IRB mandated 
training.  
No identifi able data will be u sed for future  study without  first obtaining IRB approval. The 
investigator will obtain  a data use agreement between  the provider  (the Pl) of the data and 
any recipien t researchers (including others at Hennepin  Healthca re) before  sharin g a limited 
dataset (PHI limited to d ates and zip  codes). 
Risk of breach  of confidentiality  will be minimal as all  data will be linked to a unique 
numerical ID which  does not con tain any personally identifiable health info1mation . No 
personally identifiable he alth info1mation will be collected for thi s study. fu the event  of a 
breach  of confidentiality , pa1ticipant s will be notified  and correcti ve actions  will be taken  as 
appro p1iate . The IRB will be promptly n otified of any  confidenti ality breaches.  
 
 
9.4 Regulatory and Ethical  Considerations  
12  
 
9.4.1 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan 
The principle investigator will provide oversight of the data  and safety monitoring  plan. All 
data and record s generated during thi s stud y will be kept confidential in accordance with 
Institutional policie s and HIPAA on subject pri vacy  and that the investigator and  other  site 
personnel will not use s uch data  and records for any purpo se other than conducting the 
study. All data  will be stored in REDCap , a password prote cted electronic databa se which 
meet s Health  Insurance Portability and  Accountability  Act (HIPAA)  and University security 
requirement s. We will keep  a master list containing  all PHI and subject ID number s separa te 
from  data form s that ha ve only a  study ID number. The  master list will be in a locked file 
cabinet. No identifi able data w ill be u sed for future  study without fir st obtaining IRB 
approval.  
9.4.2 Risk  Assessment  
The discussions about mmiality and remov al from the transplant li st have the potential to 
cause  emotional distress to partic ipant s. This possibility would be  explained during the 
informed  consent pro cess, and candidate s who wo uld not  want information about potential 
waiting li st outcomes would not be included. The  risk of loss of confidentiality i s also 
present with procedure s outlined as above to keep  all study material de -identified and 
confidential.  Overall, these risks are minimal  with ve1y  low likelihood  of causing  significant 
harm . 
Risk of breac h of confidentiality will be minimal as all data will be linked to a unique 
numerical ID which does not contain any personally identifiable health information . No 
personally identifiable he alth infonnati on will be collected for thi s study. In the event  of a 
breach  of confidentiality , pa1ticipant s will be  notified  and correct ive actions will be taken  as 
appropriate. The IRB will be promptly notified of any confidentiality breaches. 
 
9.4.3 Potential  Benefits  of Trial  Participation  
The inter vention  has the potential to change  the par·adigm  of pre -transplant  counseling.  This 
would help to better info1m patient s and their  suppmt  networks to make  critical decisions 
smrnunding kidne y transplantation.  
9.4.4 Risk -Benefit  Assessment  
The benefits  of the study outweigh the risks. As precaution s will still be  taken  to minimize 
risks, the potential benefit s offer an opportunity to help educate patient s and their  familie s 
about kidne y transplant. Furthermore , the intervention i s designed to assist  patient s in 
making  critical deci sions regarding their care, while engaging their  social support group.  
9.5 Recruitment  Strategy  
Patients will be  selected  from  transplant  centers at HCM C and the University  of Minnesota 
based  on the inclu sion and exclusion criteri a. We will identify prospective  subjects throug h 
their  kidney  transplantation counseling appointment. The subject s will likely be composed 
of both the principle investigato r's patient s and other pro vider's patien ts. 
13  
 
Eligible patients will be called prior to their transp lant eligibility sc reenin g appo intm ent and 
asked if the y wo uld be inter ested in h earing more about the intervention at their 
appointment. If t he pa tient is interested, informed consent will be obtained by a s tudy 
member durin g their initial screenin g appointm ent at the clinic. The intervention will only 
begin after  patients have gon e through the screenin g process and been identifie d as 
candidates for kid ney t ransplant. 
9.6 Informed  Consent /Assent  and IDPAA Authorization  
Informed consent will be ob tained by members o f the study. The consent process w ill be 
documented in writing with the long form of consent documentation. Patients will be called 
prior  to their transplant e lgibility screening appo intm ent and asked if th ey wo uld be 
interested in h earing more abo ut the intervention. If the patient is interested, informe d 
consent will be obtained durin g their appointment at the clinic. Membe rs of the study tea m 
will obtain concen t. Patients will give co ncent for intervention participation. 
We will read the consent document with th e par ticipant, beginnin g with a co ncise and 
focused presentation of key info1m ation to assist the subject to  understand the reasons w hy 
one might or might not wa nt to pa1t icipate in the research. We will explain the deta ils in 
such a way  that the participant understands what it would be like to take part in the resear ch 
study. The interven tion w ill only begin after pat ients have gon e through the screenin g 
process and b een identified as ca ndidates fo r kidney transplant, week s after informed 
concent i s obtained. 
9.6.1 Waiver of Consent 
Not applicable 
9.6.2 Waiver of A ssent  
Not applicable 
9.6.3 Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
Not applicable 
9.7 Payment  to Subjects/Familie s 
Not applicable 
9.7.1 Reimbur sement  for travel , pat'king,  and meal s 
Not applicable 
9.7.2 Payments to parent  for time  and inconvenience (i.e. compensation ) 
Not applicable 
9.7.3 Payments to subject  for time , effort , and inconvenience (i.e. compen sation) 
Subject s will be given a  $40 Target gift card at time of participation or $40 chec k mailed 
within 30 days a fter pa rticipation in the inte1ven tion. 
14  
 
9.7.4 Gifts  
Not applicable 
10 REFERE NCES  
11 APPENDIX  
Baseline and Outcome  Evaluation s 
Patient Surve y 
 
1. A patient on dialysis has the same level of kidney functioning as a patient with a 
transp lanted kidn ey. 
D True 
D False  
D Don't know  
 
  
 
2. fu general, patients can live at  least 5 years longer with a kidney transplan t than if 
they stayed on dialysis. 
D Tme 
D False  
D Don't know  
 
3. fu general, most people on dialysis are happier with the quality of  their lives than 
peopl e with transplant s. 
D Tme 
D False 
D Don't know  
 
  
 
4.  Patient have better health outcomes if they receive a transplan t before starting 
dialysis. 
D Tme 
D False 
D Don't know  
15  
 
 
 
5. If a patient waits  long enough on the waitlist, a matching kidney from  someone who 
has died wi ll definitely become availab le. 
D Trne  
D False  
D Don' t know  
 
  
 
6. About what  percentage of  all transplanted  kidne ys function for at least one year? 
0 50% 
0 75% 
0 90% 
D Don' t know  
 
  
 
7.  Nationally, how long do patients generally wai t on the wait list for a kidne y from 
someone who ha s died ? 
D <1 year 
D 1-2 years  
D 3-5 years  
D >5 years  
D Don' t know  
 
  
 
8. Compared to transp lants from donor s who  have died, how long do transplant s from 
living donor s last? 
D Shorter 
D Longer 
D Same  
D Don' t know  
16  
 
 
 
9. What  is the chance  that a living donor  or recipient  would dies undergoing  surge1y? 
□<1% 
□ 3% 
0 10%  
0 25% 
D Don' t know  
 
 
10. Do you feel SURE  about  the best choice  for you? 
D Yes 
ONo 
 
11. Do you know the benefits  and risks for getting  a kidney transplant ? 
D Yes 
□No 
 
12. Are you clear about  which benefits  and risks matter most  to you?  
D Yes 
□No 
 
  
 
13. Do you have enough suppo1t  and advice  to make a choice ? 
D Yes 
□No 
 
 
14. I have a positive  outlook  toward  life. 
D Strongly  agree 
D Agree  
0 Disagree 
D Strongly disagree 
17  
 
 
 
15. I have  sh01t  and/or long- range  goals.  
D Strongly agree  
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
16.  I feel all alone. 
D Strongly agree 
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
  
 
17. I can see possibilities  in the midst  of difficulties. 
D Strongly agree  
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
18. I have  faith  that gives me comfor t. 
D Strongly agree  
D Agree  
D Disagr ee 
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
19. I feel scared about  my future.  
D Strongly agree  
0 Agree  
D Disagree  
18  
 
D Strongly disagree 
 
  
 
20. I can recall  happy/ joyfu l times . 
D Strongly  agree 
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
21. I have a deep  inner  strength. 
D Strongly  agree 
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
 
 
22. I an1able  to give and receive  caring/love.  
D Strongly  agree 
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
23. I have a sense  of direction. 
D Strongl y agree  
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
 
24. I believe  that each  day has potential.  
D Strongly  agree 
19  
 
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree  
 
 
25. I feel my life has value  and wo1ih.  
D Strongly agree  
D Agree  
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree  
  
26. How confident  are you filling  out medical  f01ms  by yourself?  
D Extremely 
D Quite  a bit 
D Somewhat 
0 A little bit 
D Not a t all 
20  
 
Family Survey  
1. A patient on dialysi s has the same  level  of kidney functioning as a patient  with a 
transplanted kidney . 
D Trne  
D False  
D Don't  know  
 
  
 
2. In general, patients  can live at least 5 years longer  with a kidney tran splant than  if 
they stayed on dialysis.  
D Trne  
D False  
D Don' t know  
 
3. In general, most  people  on dialysis  are happier  with the quality  of their  lives than 
people with transplants.  
D Trne  
D False  
D Don' t know  
 
  
 
4.  Patient have  better  health  outcomes  if they receive  a transplant  before  sta1iing 
dialysis. 
D True  
D False  
D Don' t know  
 
 
5. If a patient waits  long enough  on the  waitlist, a matching kidne y from  someone  who 
has died will definitel y become available.  
D Trne  
D False  
D Don' t know  
21  
 
 
 
6. About what percentage of all transplanted  kidne ys function for at least one year? 
0 50% 
0 75% 
0 90% 
D Don't know  
 
 
 
 
7.  Nationa lly, how long do patient s generally wa it on the wait list for a kidne y from 
someone w ho ha s died ? 
D <1 year 
D 1-2 years  
D 3-5 years  
D >5 years  
D Don't know  
 
  
 
8. Compared to  transplants from  donor s who have died, how long do transplant s from 
living donor s last? 
D Sh01ter 
D Longer 
D Same  
D Don't know  
 
  
 
9. What  is the chance that  a living donor or recipient  would dies under going surgery? 
□<1% 
□ 3% 
□ 10% 
0 25% 
D Don't know  
22  
 
 
 
10. I am confident that  I could deal  efficiently with unexpected events. 
D Never  
D Ahnos t never 
D Sometime s 
D Fairly often 
D Ve1yoften  
 
11. I intend to help my friend  or famil y member  get through the transplant  proce ss. 
D Strongly  agree 
D Agree  
D Neither  agree  nor di sagree 
D Disagree  
D Strongly disagree 
 
  
 
12. A.re you seriou sly thinkin g about  helping  my friend  or famil y member  get through 
the transplant pro cess? 
D Yes 
□No 
 
 
13. How confident  are you filling  out medica l forms  by yourself?  
D Extremely 
D Quite  a bit 
D Somewhat 
0 A little  bit 
D Not at all  