Boiled Peanut Oral Immunotherapy for the Treatment of Peanut Allergic 
Pediatric Patients  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Prot ocol v3 2/12/2020  
1 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Boiled Peanut Oral I mmunotherapy for the Treatment of 
Peanut Allergic Pediatric Patients (BPOIT)  
 
 
CCF IRB Number: 18 -1294 
 
NCT number: 04090203  
 
 IND: 18661  
 
Funded by: Cleveland Clinic RPC  
Mark Lauer Pediatric Research Grant  
   
Principal Investigator  
Jaclyn Bjelac, MD  
9500 Euclid Avenue A120  
Cleveland, OH 44195  
Bjelacj2@ccf.org  
216.445.1449 office  
216.316.2754 mobile  
 
Co-Investigator/ IND Sponsor  
Alton Melton, MD  
meltona@ccf.org  
216.44 4.6817  
 
Co-Investigator  
Kara McNamara, MD  
216.444.4828 mcnamak@ccf.org  
 
Co-Investigator  
Leigh Ann Kerns, MD  
216.444.6340 Kernsl2@ccf.org  
  
 
   
 
 
2 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 INVESTIGATOR’S SIGNATURE PAGE  
 
 Protocol Amendment :                3 
 
Protocol Date:    12 February 2020  
 
 
Boiled Peanut Oral Immunotherapy for the Treatment of Peanut Allergic Pediatric Patients 
(BPOIT)  
 
The signature below constitutes the approval of this protocol and the attachments, and provides the 
necessary assurances that this trial will be conduc ted according to all stipulations of the protocol, including 
all statements regarding confidentiality, and according to local legal and regulatory requirements and 
applicable US federal regulations and ICH guidelines.  
 
The trial will be carried out in accordance with International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical 
Practice (ICH GCP) and the following:  
 
• United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 CFR Part 
46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and 21 CFR Part 312)  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be 
submitted to the Pediatric Research  Review  Committee ( PRRC) and Institutional Review Board (IRB) for 
review an d approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any 
participant is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, a ll changes to the consent form will be IRB -
approved; a determination will be made regarding whether a new consent needs to be obtained from 
participants who provided consent, using a previously approved consent form. 
 
Sponsor : Alton Melton , M.D.  
 
Signed:   Date:   
  
   
Investigator: Jaclyn Bjelac , M.D.  
 
Signed:   Date:   
 
 
Name and Address of Institution:  Cleveland Clinic  
                9500 Euclid Avenue  
               Cleveland, Ohio  44195  
 
 
 
3 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Table of Contents  
       
 Investigator Signature Page & Statement of Compliance ……… …………………………………..   2 
1 Protocol Summary …………………………………………………………………………………………………….  5 
    1.1      Synopsis  ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  5 
    1.2      Schema ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..  8 
    1.3      Schedule of Activities ……………………………………………………………………………………………  9 
2 Introduction  …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  10 
    2.1      Study Rationale ……………………………………………………………………………………………………  10 
    2.2      Background  ………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  10 
    2.3      Risk Benefit Assessment ……………………………………………………………………………………….  13 
3 Objectives and Endpoints  ………………………………………………………………………………………..  15 
4 Study Design  …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  17 
    4.1      Overall Design ………………………………………………………………………………………………………  17 
    4.2      Scientific Rationale for Study Design …………………………………………………………………….  17 
    4.3      Justification for Dose ……………………………………………………………………………………………  17 
    4.4      End of Study Definition …………………………………………………………………………………………  17 
5 Study Population ……………………………………………………………………………………………………  18 
    5.1      Inclusion Criteria ………………………………………………………………………………………………….  18 
    5.2      Exclusion Criteria ………………………………………………… ……………………………………………….  18 
    5.3      Lifestyle Considerations ……………………………………………………………………………………….  19 
    5.4      Screen Failures …………………………………………………………………………………………………….  19 
    5.5      Strategies for Recruitment and Retention ……………………………………………………………  19 
6 Study Intervention  ………………………………………………………………………………………………… .. 20 
    6.1      Study Intervention Administration ……………………………………………………………………….  20 
  6.1.1       Study Intervention Description …………………………………………………………………………….  20 
  6.1.2       Dosing and Administration …………………………………………………………………………………..  22 
    6.2      Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability ……………………………………………………..  27 
    6.3      Measures to Minimize Bias …………………………………………………………………………………..  28 
    6.4      Study Intervention Compliance ……………………………………………………………………………  29 
    6.5      Concomitant Therapy …………………………………………………………………………………………..  29 
  6.5.1       Rescue Medication ……………………………………………………………………………………………….  29 
7 Study Intervention Discontinuation and  Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal  ..  32 
    7.1      Discontinuation of Study Intervention ………………………………………………………………….  32 
    7.2      Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study ……………………………………..  32 
    7.3      Lost to Follow Up …………………………………………………………………………………………………  32 
8 Study Assessments and Procedures  …………………………………………………………………………  34 
    8.1      Efficacy Assessments ……………………………………………………………………………………………  34 
    8.2      Safety and Other Assessments …………………………………………………………………………… .. 34 
    8.3      Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events …………………………………………………………  34 
  8.3.1       Definition of Adverse Events (AE s) ………………………………………………………………………  34 
  8.3.2       Definition of Serious Adverse Event s (SAEs) …………………………………………………………  34 
  8.3.3       Classification of an Adverse  Event ……………………………………………………………… ………..  35 
  8.3.4       Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow Up ……………………….  35 
  8.3.5       Adverse Event Reporting  ………………………………………………………………………………………      37 
  8.3.6       Serious Adverse Event Reporting ………………………………………………………………………….  37 
  8.3.7       Reporting Events to Participants ………………………………………………………………………….  37 
4 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
         
 
           8.3.8       Events of Special Interest …………………………………………………………………………………….  37 
  8.3.9       Reporting of Pregnancy ………………………………………………………………………………………..  38 
    8.4      Unanticipated Problems ………………………………………………………………………………………  38 
  8.4.1       Definition of Unanticipated Problems ………………………………………………………………….  38 
  8.4.2       Unanticipated Problem Reporting ………………………………………………………………………..  38 
  8.4.3       Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants ………………………………………………  38 
9 Statistical Considerations  …………………………………………………………………………………………  39 
    9.1      Statistical Hypotheses ………………………………………………………………………………………… . 39 
    9.2      Sample Size Determination ………………………………………………………………………………….  39 
    9.3      Population for Analyses ……………………………………………………………………………………….  39 
    9.4      Statistical Analysis ………………………………………………………………………………………………..  39 
10 Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations  …………………………………  40 
   10.1       Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations ……………………………………..  40 
 10.1.1       Informed Consent Process  ……………………………………………………………………………………  40 
10.1.1.1       Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants ……  40 
10.1.1.2       Consent Procedures and Documentation …………… .…………………………………… ……  40 
 10.1.2       Study Discontinuation and Closure ………………………………………………………………………  40 
 10.1.3       Confidentiality and Privacy …………………………………………………………………………………..  41 
 10.1.4       Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data ……………………………………………………………  41 
 10.1.5       Key Roles and Governance …………………………………………………………………………………..  41 
11 References ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  43 
12 Supplements  ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………  42 
 12.1       Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire for Parents  (1-12 years old)………………..  42 
 12.2       Food Allergy Quality of Life Ques tionnaire for Parents ( 13-16 years old )………………  43 
 12.3  
13      Dosing/Adverse Event Recording Sheet …………………………………………………………........  
Summary o f Changes Table ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
          
     44 
45  
5 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
1. Protocol Summary  
 
1.1 Study Synopsis  
 
Title:  Boiled Peanut Oral Immunotherapy  
Study Description:  Prospective Phase 1 clinical trial providing proof of 
concept data on boiled peanut oral immunotherapy  
(OIT ) for the treatment of peanut allergy in children. 
We hypothesize that the proportion of subjects 
successfully desensitized with  boiled peanut  OIT is 
greater than the theoretical placebo rate of 20%.  
Objectives:  • Determine the  effect of boiled peanut 
immunotherapy on the immune response to 
peanut . 
• Compare the safety and tolerability of boiled peanut oral immunotherapy to published data on roasted peanut oral immunotherapy in 
pediatric subjects with confirmed IgE mediated 
peanut  allergy.  
Endpoints:  • Primary endpoint:  Response to treatment 
defined as ability to successfully consume a single dose of 300  mg or greater of peanut 
protein with no dose limiting symptoms at exit double blind placebo controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) .  
• Secondary endpoints:  
• Maximum dose achieved with no or minimal 
symptoms at exit DBPCFC.  
• Change in the maximum tolerated dose from 
screening to exit DBPCFC.  
• The rate of side effects of treatment defined as oral itching, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, urticaria,  
angioedema, abdominal upset, vomiting, diarrhea, cough, wheeze, or anaphylaxis.  
• Change in quality of life scores before and after 
treatment utilizing validated , age specific, 
food -related quality -of-life surveys before and 
after peanut oral immunotherapy  (Supplement 
1) 
• Peanut protein component panel, to determine the presence of high levels of sensitivity to peanut proteins known to be associated with 
sever e systemic reactions (Arah 1,2, 3) versus 
mild reactions (Arah8) . 
6 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 • Levels of peanut specific serum IgG 4, with 
higher levels associated with increased 
tolerance to peanut protein . 
Study Population:  Children ages  1-16 with peanut allergy suggested via 
history of reaction and objective evidence of IgE 
mediated hypersensitivity either via skin testing or in 
vitro testing (peanut specific IgE concentration) within the last 12 months . 
Inclusion criteria:  
• Age 1 -16 years  
• History of immediate hypersensitivity reaction to peanut  or a high level of suspicion based on 
testing at the discretion of the investigator  
• Evidence of IgE mediated peanut hypersensitivity  within a 12 month period of 
study enrollment   including:  
• Skin prick test with wheal diameter of 
at least 3mm  and/or  
• Peanut specific IgE >0.35 ku/L  
Exclusion criteria:  
• History of life threatening peanut anaphylaxis  
• Asthma requiring more than medium dose inhaled corticosteroids for age per the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Asthma Guidelines  
• Cardiovascular disease  
• Use of beta- blockers (oral), angiotensin 
converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin  
receptor blockers, or calcium channel blockers  
• Use of steroid medications in the following manners:  
• Daily oral steroid dosing for greater than 1 month during the past year OR  
• Burst or steroid course in the past 3 month s 
before inclusion OR  
• Greater than 2 burst  oral steroid courses in the 
past year of at least 1 week duration  
• Pregnancy or lactation  
• Prior participation in food oral immunotherapy studies, including OIT, sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT), or epicutaenous immunotherapy (EPIT)  
• Eosinophilic gastrointestinal disease  
• Oat allergy, as oat flour is the vehicle with 
which study drug may be mixed for purposes of 
blinding and will be used as placebo for the exit 
DBPCFC  
7 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 • History of food pro tein-induced enterocolitis 
syndrome (FPIES)  
• History of developme ntal delay or speech delay 
that precludes age -appropriate 
communication, in the opinion of the 
investigator  
Description of Sites and Facilities Enrolling 
Patients:  Screening will be performed at the Cleveland  Clinic 
main campus  and satellite outpatient clinic locations. 
Any patients identified as eligible will be referred to 
main campus for further evaluation and possible 
enrollment.  
Description of Study Intervention:  Oral Immunotherapy will be administered  utilizing a 
powder derived from  boiled  peanut s. Treatment will 
begin with an initial escalation day in which dosing is begun at 0.1 mg peanut protein and escalated to a final dose of 6 mg peanut protein. Doses are ingested orally. The subjects will continue daily oral ingestion of doses at home and return for updosing every 2 weeks to  a 
final maintenance dose of 300  mg peanut protein. The 
subjects will continue daily oral ingestion of the peanut product for a minimum  duration of 28 days before 
undergoing exit DBPCFC . At the conclusion of the study, 
patients will be offered continued maintenance 
therapy off study in line with current specialty 
standards.   
Study Duration:  18 weeks  
Participant Study Duration:  18 weeks  
     
 
         
 
    
 
8 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 
1.2 Study Schema  
 
 
         
 
         
 
         
 
         
 
    
Open food 
challenge  
No signs of allergic 
reaction  
Signs of  
allergic reaction  
Does not 
qualify  
Enrolled in study  
Initial dose escalation day  
Withdrawn  
 Continue dose at 
home  
Unacceptable side effect at dose 
≤ 1.5 mg peanut protein  
Ingests dose of ≥  1.5 mg peanut 
protein without adverse reaction  
Return for dose escalation every 
2 weeks  
Reach maintenance dose of 300 
mg peanut protein  
Continue daily maintenance 
dose 
Return for 1 month exit DBPCFC  
9 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
  
1.3 Schedule of Activities  
 
  
 
   
Visit  
 
Study Visit 1 
Study Visit 2 
Visit 1 +1 -4 weeks  
SV 3  
Visit 2 +2 weeks  
SV 4  
Visit 2 +4 weeks  
SV 5  
Visit 2 +6 weeks  
SV 6  
Visit 2 +8 weeks  
SV 7  
Visit 2 +10 weeks  
SV 8  
Visit 2 +12 weeks  
SV 9  
Visit 2 +14 weeks  
SV 10  
Visit 1 +18 weeks  
Procedures  
Enrollment/Baseline visit  
Oral Food Challenge 
Initial dose escalation  
Dose escalation visit 1  
Dose Escalation Visit 2  
Dose escalation visit 3  
Dose escalation visit 4  
Dose escalation visit 5  
Dose escalation visit 6  
Dose escalation visit 7  
Oral Food Challenge  
Informed 
Consent X           
Demographics  X           
Vitals  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Spirometry* X  X X X X X X X X X 
Blood Draw   X        X 
Skin prick test    X        X 
Oral food 
challenge   X         X 
Urine 
Pregnancy  X          X 
Study Drug 
Administration    X X X X X X X X  
Study Drug 
Compliance     X X X X X X X X 
AE Review    X X X X X X X X X 
Conmed 
Assessment  X X X X X X X X X X X 
10 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 All dose escalation visits have a window of +/ - 2 day  
All follow up visits have a window of +/ - 7 days  
The enrollment/baseline visit, initial oral food challenge (SV 1), will take place at the Pediatric Allergy Clinic at the Cleveland Clinic main campus.   
The initial escalation day, dose escalation visits, and final oral food challenge (SV 2 -10) will take place in 
the Clinical Research Unit.  
 
* Spirometry will be performed on all patients ages 5+ and/ or at the physician’s  discretion at the initial 
study visit as well as the exit oral food challenge . Rather than full spirometry, peak  flow will be 
performed at every updosing visit on all patients ages 4+ and/or if the physician feels that it is developmentally appropriate  
 
2. Introduction  
 
2.1 Study Rationale  
Peanut al lergy (PA) is a common and  potentially life threatening condition for wh ich the only current  
approved  management involves strict dietary avoidance. Oral immunotherapy (OIT) is a promising 
investigational treatment option for this condition, and multiple published stu dies have demonstrated 
efficacy in achieving successful desensitization to peanut in children with peanut allergy .8-16 However, 
the widespread clinical use of OIT has bee n limited by numerous factors. These include the high rate of 
adverse events  (AEs), in cluding anaphylaxis, which often leads to high subject drop -out ra tes in 
published studies (Table 1). These studies all used peanut products produced by roasting methods, including flour, peanut powder, or peanut butte r. Published data have demonstrated that boiling peanut 
results in reduced allergenicity while preserving the immunogenicity necessary to produce tolerance.
19 
In this pilot study, we plan to compare the use of boiled peanut OIT to published data on roasted peanut 
OIT in children with peanut al lergy. Based on currently available data, we hypothesize that the subjects 
treated with this novel regimen of boiled peanut will demonstrat e lower rates of adverse  events while 
demonstrating similar immunologic markers of peanut desensitization and possible tolerance compared 
to published data on subjects treated with OIT utilizing a traditional roasted peanut product.  
 
2.2 Background and Significance  
Peanut allergy (PA) has a reported prevalence of 2% in children and 0.7% in adults.1 The prevalence of 
PA also appears to be increasing, and in a registry of fatal food induced anaphylaxis, 63% of the 32 
fatalities were caused by peanut.2 The implications of PA extend beyond the patient and their family. 
This food allergy in particular has impacted the educational system  as well as the food industry.3 The 
effect on quality of life can be significant,4,5 often leading to social isolation and even fear of death. 
Currently  standard of care for PA consists of allergen avoidance, which is often  ineffective, and 
administration of emergency medications on accidental exposure.6 Given the prevalence of PA  and its 
associated morbidities, safe and effective therapies are desperately needed.  
 Immunotherapy relies on the delivery of increasing doses of specific allergens over time with the goal of developing desensitization, which increases the dose of protein needed to elicit an allergic response . FAQL 
Questionnaire  X          X 
11 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Over the past century, immunotherapy has been successfully used to treat asthma, allergic rhinitis, and 
insect venom anaphylaxis through subcutaneous or sublingual administration. Although the exact 
mechanisms underlying allergen immunotherapy are still not fully understood, it is known to induce allergen -specific regulatory T cells, which suppress TH2 response s that promote IgE production. This 
response is coupled with increases in serum concentrations of allergen -specific IgG4 antibodies which 
compete with IgE on cell surfaces and result in reductions in mast cell and basophil activation and mediator release.
7 An increased IgG4 to IgE ratio is associated with clinical tolerance to a given food.  
 Though immunotherapy can be administered in a variety of methods, oral immunotherapy (OIT) has shown the most promise in the treatment of food allergy. Several recent trials have utilized the  
technique of oral immunotherapy for treatment of peanut and other food allergies. This therapy involves mixing the food allergen into a vehicle of choice and having the subject begin daily consumption while gradually increasing the dose. Several endpoints have been defined when evaluating the response to immunotherapy. Desensitization results in a higher threshold for an allergic reaction, typically above the amount that will be encountered in an accidental exposure. However, this do es require ongoing 
dosing. The most desirable outcome of OIT is  sustained unresponsiveness, or continued long term 
tolerance of the food without the need for daily maintenance therapy.  
 Although individual responses vary considerably, OIT will induce significant desensitization in most 
subjects who are able to tolerate the therapy. However, these studies are limited by frequent treatment related AEs and high rates o f withdrawal due to these AEs.  The reported AEs and dropout  rates from 
representative studies  are outlined in Table 1 .
8-16  
 There is a large amount of heterog eneity in the reporting of AEs. More specifically, AEs are at times 
reported in terms of the percent of subjects experiencing an adverse reaction. At other times, adverse 
reactions are reported in terms of the percent of doses that cause an AE. This method is often utilized to report AEs during maintenance dosing. This is in part due to the fact that  over the course of all phases of 
an individual study and when including mild AEs in addi tion to more significant reactions, nearly 100% of 
patients have some form of AE during treatment.  Thus it may be more meaningful to report the percent 
of doses causing symptoms at times.  
 Table 1: Prior OIT Trials  
Author  N Age Design  Adverse Events  
Drop  
outs  Additional Detail on Drop Outs  
Jones et al  
2009 [8] 39 1-16 Open label  92% of subjects on initial escalation 
day, 46% doses during build up, 3.7% 
doses during maintenance  10 
(25%)  4 withdrew  for allergic effects and 
6 for personal reasons  
Hofmann  
et al  
2009  [10] 28 1-16 Open label  93% of subjects on initial escalation 
day, 46% doses during build up, 3.5% 
of doses during maintenance  5 
(18%)  3 withdrew following initial 
escalation, 1 during build up, 1 
during maintenance  
Blumchen 
et al  
2010  [9] 23 3-14 Randomized, 
open label  7.8% of doses during rush protocol, 
2.9% of doses during maintenance  8 
(35%)  1 during rush protocol, 7 during 
long term buildup of which 4 for 
allergic side effects  
Varshney  
et al  
2011 [11] 19 1-16 Double blind, 
placebo 
controlled  47% subjects with “clinically 
relevant” AEs during initial 
escalation day, 1.2% doses during 
build up  3 
(16%)  2 withdrew during initial escalation 
day and 1 after first build up dose  
Anagnostou 
et al  22 4-18 Open label  86% subjects during build up and 
maintenance  1 
(5%)  Withdrew after the first up dose at 
home  
12 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 2011  [12] 
Anagnostou 
et al  
2014 [13] 99 7-16 Randomized, 
placebo 
controlled  
cross over  6.3 % of all doses  7 
(7%)  5 withdrew for allergic reactions or 
persistent symptoms, 1 disliked 
taste, and 1 no specific reason  
Vickery et al  
2014  [14] 39 1-16 Open label  Previously reported in pilot study 
(Jones et al 2009)  15 
(38%)  6 withdrew due to allergic side 
effect and 9 for personal reasons  
Narisety et 
al 
2014 [15] 21 7-13 Randomized,  
double blind, 
placebo 
controlled  43% doses during blinded phase 
(escalation and maintenance), 36.7% 
doses in OIT group during unblended 
phase  7 
(33%)  1 withdrew after initial escalation, 
1 during build up and 3 during 
maintenance. 1 drop out on SLIT 
with pl acebo OIT  
Vickery et al  
2016 [16] 37 9-36 
months  Randomized, 
double blind, 
low and high 
dose  95% patients during entire study, 
0.8% doses during study  5 
(14%)  2 withdrew for nonadherence, 1 for 
recurrent emesis and 1 for EoE  
Abbreviations: N, number of subjects, AEs, adverse events, SLIT, subl ingual immunotherapy, OIT, oral 
immunotherapy, EoE, eosinophilic esophagitis  
 
 Given the high rate of these treatment related AEs such as oral itching, stomach upset and other GI 
complaints, and occasional serious s ystemic allergic reactions requiring the use of injectable 
epinephrine, OIT is still considered an experimental treatment. While some major medical centers and a 
number of private practice allergist s offer peanut OIT to their patients, it is not yet FDA ap proved.  
 
A commercially developed product, AR101 (Aimmune Therapeutics), an investigational oral biologic drug, was recently trialed in a phase 3 study evaluating efficacy. In the intervention group, 67.2% of 
patients ages 4 –17 tolerated at least a 600 -mg dose of peanut protein in the exit food challenge, 
compared to 4.0% of placebo patients (p<0.00001) . In the trial’s primary analysis group of ages 4 -17, 496 
patients from both arms (372 AR101 and 124 placebo) were evaluable for safety. In both arms, the incidence of serious adverse events (SAEs) was low. A total of 10 patients experienced SAEs, none of 
which were considered life -threatening: nine of these patients were in the AR101 arm (2.4%) and one 
was in the placebo arm (0.8%). Of the nine AR101 patient s who experienced a SAE, five patients 
experienced mild or moderate SAEs. The other four AR101 patients experienced severe SAEs, which, for two of these patients, were not related to treatment (a concussion and a viral asthmatic exacerbation). Of the two patients who experienced severe SAEs related to treatment, both of whom had elevated baseline peanut -specific IgE levels greater than 100 kU/L, one experienced anaphylaxis, and the other 
experienced wheezing on the first day of treatment. Both of these pati ents discontinued from the study. 
In ages 4 –17, 20.4% of AR101 patients and 6.5% of placebo patients discontinued the trial. In the AR101 
arm, 12.4% of patients discontinued due to investigator -reported adverse events, including 6.7% due to 
gastrointestinal adverse events and 2.7% due to systemic allergic hypersensitivity reactions. In the 
placebo arm, 2.4% of patients discontinued due to investigator -reported adverse events (Table 2).
28 
 
       
13 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
    
Table 2: Discontinuations in the AR101 Group
28           
 
 AR101  
(n= 372)  
% n 
Total discontinuations regardless of causality  20.4%  76 
Discontinuations not related to adverse 
events  8.0%  30 
Discontinuations related to adverse events  12.4%  46 
• Gastrointestinal2  6.7%  25 
• Systemic hypersensitivity reactions3 2.7%  10 
• Respiratory system  1.1%  4 
• Cutaneous  0.8%  3 
• Other  1.1%  4 
 
 We seek to identify a means of accomplishing peanut desensitization while decreasing the rate of treatment related AEs. It has been shown that standard roasting methods of peanut preparation can play a significant role in increasing the undesirable allergenic properties of peanuts.
17 It has also been 
demonstrated that peanut antigen stimulation of peripheral blood T lymphocytes is unaffected by various heating methods, which is nec essary for induction of tolerance.
18  An additional study confirms 
the findings of extended boiling resulting in reduction of peanut allergenicity while preserving th e effect 
on T cell reactivity.19 A group recently reported a series of 4 subjects with peanut allergy who were 
treated with daily doses of boiled peanut, one of which subsequently transitioned to raw peanut. All subjects demonstrated lower IgE reactivity to boiled peanut compared to control suggesting that in vivo findings correlate with the prior in vitro data.
20 
 While OIT is a promising therapy, w e hypothesize that by treating peanut allergic subjects with a peanut 
product of reduced allergenicity but preserved T cell reactivity, we will be able to desensitize these subjects to a target maintenance dose of peanut protein with reduced rates of allergen associated AEs, while preserving immunologic effects that will promote tolerance. This will confirm that the immunologic changes produced  by roasted peanut OIT can be replicated more safely using boiled 
peanut. If successful, such a therapy will decrease the number of subjects that must discontinue this 
treatment due to related AEs, and offer a potentially important therapy for this life th reatening 
condition. Improved safety of this intervention may also allow for higher t reatment doses to be used,  
may allow inclusion of more severely allergic subjects excluded from previous trials, and possibly 
increase the likelihood for attainment of per manent tolerance with sustained unresponsiveness, rather 
than perpetuating the need for continual d aily dosing. This will likely result in the eventual inclusion of 
BPOIT in general Allergy/Immunology practice as a treatment for peanut allergy.  We suspect this 
therapy will improve quality of life as measured by validated questionnaires as well as, or better than, roasted peanut oral immunotherapy.
28 
 
14 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
   
2.3 Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 2.3.1 Known potential risks  
There is a significant rate of adverse reactions with peanut oral immunotherapy in clinical trials to date. Mild adverse reactions such as oral itching or nausea are  reported in up to 10 -15% of all doses. Over the 
course of an individual study, this reaches nearly 100% of all subjects. The rate  of these adverse events 
are outlined in representative studies in Table 1 .  
 More severe reactions requiring treatment with epinephrine or inhaled beta -agonists are less frequent 
but can occur.  In a large review of multiple centers performing peanut OIT, Wasserman et al noted a 
total of 95 adverse reactions requiring epinephrine in 352 patients that collectively received more than 
240,000 doses of peanut .
25 The results of the largest peanut OIT trial to date, a phase 2 clinical trial 
utilizing product AR101 were published in March of 2018.21 In this study, 9 (14%) of 63 subjects received 
a single injection of epinephrine  during initial double blind placebo controlled food challenge ( DBPCFC ) 
at sc reening: 4 were randomized to AR101, 4 to placebo, and 1 was not enrolled. For the duration of 
maintenance therapy, o ne treatment subject received a single epinephrine injection for moderate 
anaphylaxis at home. Finally, during the exit DBPCFC, 11 of 26 placebo subjects (42%) were administered 
epinephrine  and 2 of 23 AR101 subjects (9%) received a single injection of epinephrine . 
 Across the various peanut OIT trials, there has been no specific statistical analysis examining adverse reaction rate or withdrawal rate at various ages. Presumably this is due to the fact that no specific age 
related pattern has emerged and that anaphylaxis and subject withdrawal has occurred in subjects of all 
ages.  
 There is also a risk for development of Eosinophilic Esophagitis (EoE). A recent review estimated the prevalence across the OIT clinical trials as 3 -4% and in the study conducted by Bird et al , EoE occurred in  
only 1 subject (  <5% ) from the treatment group.
21 Once OIT is discontinued in these patients, the EoE 
typically resolves.  
 There is also a risk of causing anxiety or stress in the subject or the family.  The impact of oral 
immunotherapy on quality of life has been examined with a variety of foods. Quality of life in  patients 
with food allergy improves in some but d eclines in others while undergoing OIT, and in particular tends 
to decline in those rating a higher quality of life prior to initiation of the treatment.
26  
 2.3.1 Known Benefits  
The primary benefit of peanut oral immunotherapy is increasing the threshold of peanut which will result in an allergic reaction. This increased threshold is typically above the amount encountered upon 
accidental ingestion. This can reduce the risk of a s ubject experiencing a severe or life-threatening 
allergic reaction due to an accidental ingestion. Importantly, this can also ease anxiety in both the subject and family that is often associated with the diagnosis of a food allergy.  
 
The question of whether oral immunotherapy will induce sustained unresponsiveness, or ongoing 
tolerance of peanut following cessation of the daily maintenance doses, is yet to be fully elucidated. 
15 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Results have varied among initial clinical trials. If this can be obtained, this would allow full incorporat ion 
of peanut into the diet o f previously allergic subjects.  
 
 2.3.3 Assessment of the potential risks and benefits  
We believe that given the low rate of serious adverse reactions along with the hypothesis that subjects receiving the boiled peanut will experience a lower rate of these adverse reactions, that the potential benefit to induce desensitization to peanut outweighs these risks. In addition to personal benefit, this study has the potential to further the future treatment options for peanut allergic  children.  
 
3. Objectives and Endpoints  
 
Objective  Endpoint s Justification  
Primary  
Determine the effect of 
boiled peanut immunotherapy on the 
immune response to peanut  
and demonstrate that the 
proportion of subjects 
successfully desensitized with boiled peanut OIT is not 
appreciably lower than the proportion of subjects successfully desensitized with roasted peanut OIT  in 
published data.  
    Primary Endpoint: Response to 
treatment defined as ability to successfully consume a single dose 
of 300 mg or grea ter of peanut 
protein with no dose limiting 
symptoms at exit double blind placebo controlled food challenge (DBPCFC).  
 The highest dose of roasted peanut protein tolerated by the subject at exit DBPCFC will also be 
compared to the highest dose 
tolerated a t baseline.  
 
The effect of boiled peanut immunotherapy on the immune response to peanut will be evaluated via specific serum markers of sensitization and 
tolerance to peanut .  
• Levels of serum specific 
peanut IgE, with higher 
levels associated with greater  likelihood of 
clinical reactio n on 
exposure to peanut protein.  
• Peanut protein component panel, to determine the 
presence of high levels of 
sensitivity to peanut 
proteins known to be Previous in vitro data has 
demonstrated that boiling peanuts can result in reduction 
of peanut allergenicity while preserving the effect on T cell 
reactivity.  
16 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 associated with severe 
systemic reactions (Arah 
1,2, 3) versus mild react ions (Arah8)  
• Levels of peanut specific serum IgG4, with higher 
levels associated with 
increased tolerance to peanut protein  
• These markers will be evaluated at baseline  and 
the conclusion of the 
study .  
Secondary  
Compare the rate of adverse 
effects of boiled peanut oral 
immunotherapy to published data on roa sted peanut oral 
immunotherapy . The rate of adverse events in the 
subjects receiving boiled peanut oral immunotherapy. Possible 
adverse events include: side 
effects of treatment defined as 
oral itching, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, urticaria, angioedema,  abdominal upset, vomiting, diarrh ea, cough, wheeze, 
or anaphylaxis  
• Adverse events will be recorded in terms of the 
percentage of subjects 
with adverse events on initial escalation day and at dose escalation visits by 
CRU staff.   
• Adverse events will also be recorded in terms of overall percentage of home doses that result in 
adverse reaction, with data compiled from home  
logs (Supplement 2).   
The adverse reactions will be 
graded in severity and the treatment required will be recorded.   
 
Validated, age -specific, food -
related quality -of-life surveys 
before and after peanut oral 
immunotherapy  will be completed As described above, the rate of 
adverse events with roasted peanut oral immunotherapy is high. Thus treatment options 
with less adverse effects  are 
highly desirable. In vitro data has 
demonstrated that boiled peanut has reduced allergenicity compared to roasted peanut and similar immunogenicity. As such, we anticipate a lower rate of advers e reactions in our subjects 
compared to published data on  
roasted peanut OIT . 
17 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 by all patients/families27 
(Supplement 1 ). 
 
4. Study Design  
 
4.1 Overall Design  
We will perform a phase 1  clinical trial utilizing  oral immunotherapy with powder derived from  boiled 
peanut. Our hypothesis is that the subjects treated with this novel regimen of boiled peanut will 
demonstrate lower rates of adverse effects while demonstrating similar immunologic markers of peanut 
desensitization and possible tolerance in comparison to published data on subjects treated with OIT 
utilizing roasted peanut  product . 
 
4.2 Scientific Rationale  
Oral immunotherapy has not yet been approved by the FDA for the treatment of food allergy. However, 
multiple clinical trials in recent years have shown significant promise in utilizing oral immunotherapy for 
peanut allergy. I t is expected that oral immunotherapy will be more widely available in the near future, 
and options with a more favorable side effect profile are highly desirable.  
 The phases of our clinical trial were modeled after the previous high quality studies utilizing roasted peanut OIT and are comparable in methodology and duration.  
 
4.3 Justification for Dose  
The maintenance dose for oral immunotherapy with peanut has varied across previous clinical trials. 
Doses have ranged from 300  mg up to a maximum of 4000 mg.8-16 Only one study has compared  the 
efficacy of different maintenance doses. In this study, Vickery et al found that a maintenance dose of 
300 mg was as efficacio us as a 3000 mg dose  at inducing sustained unresponsiveness . This is also likely 
to be above the dose encountered in an accidental ingestion, as 1 whole peanut contains roughly 250 
mg of peanut protein.22  
 
4.4 End of Study Definition  
A participant is considered to have completed the study if he or she has completed all phases of the 
study including the last visit or the last scheduled procedure shown in the Schedule of Activities (SoA), Section 1.3.  
 
The end of the study is defined as completion of the last visit or procedure shown in the SoA . 
 
 
5. Study Population  
 
We will recruit 10  children ages 1 to 16 years with peanut allergy suggested via history and objective 
evidence of IgE mediated hypersensitivity to peanut either via skin testing or in vitro testing (peanut 
specific IgE concentration) within the last 12 months. Skin prick testing will be performed with standard 
peanut extract (1:20 w/v, Greer) and peanut specific IgE concentration will be performed using ImmunoCap. We will use standard criteria to indicate sensitization.  
   
18 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
Abbreviations: SPT, skin prick test  
 In addition, the individual’s parent or guardian must provide signed and dated informed consent and the 
individual must provide signed and dated assent when appropriate. The individual and parent or 
guardian must agree to comply with all study procedures and the individual must have the ability to take 
oral medication.  
 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
Abbreviations:  ICS, inhaled corticosteroid,  OIT, oral immunotherapy, SLIT, sublingual immunotherapy, EPIT, 
epicutaneous immunotherapy 
 
A history of life -threatening anaphylaxis is defined as a reaction involving respiratory failure, 
hypotension or neurologic compromise. Medium dose ICS is defined by the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute asthma guidelines. Patients with oat allergy, while rare, are to be excluded as this  will 
serve as the placebo  for our exit food challenge (SV10 ). Inclusion Criteria  
Age 1 -16 years  
History of immediate hypersensitivity reaction to peanut  or a high level of suspicion based on 
testing at the discretion of the investigator  
Evidence of IgE mediated peanut hypersensitivity  within a 12 month period of study 
enrollment  
           SPT with wheal/flare of at least 3 x 6 mm  
                                and/or  
           Peanut specific IgE >0.35 kU/L  
Exclusion Criteria  
History of life threatening peanut anaphylaxis  
Asthma requiring more than medium dose ICS  
Prior participation in OIT, SLIT or EPIT  
Oat allergy  
Cardiovascular Disease  
Use of beta -blockers (oral), angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor 
blockers, or calcium channel blockers  
Use of steroid medications in the following manners:  
             Daily oral steroid dosing for grea ter than 1 month during the past year OR  
             Burst or steroid course in the past 3 month before inclusion OR  
             Greater than 2 bursts oral steroid courses in the past year of at least 1 week duration  
Pregnancy or lactation  
Eosinophilic  Gastrointestinal Disease  
History of food protein -induced enterocolitis (FPIES)  
History of developmental delay or speech delay  that precludes age -appropriate communication, 
in the opinion of the investigator  
19 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 
5.3 Lifestyle Considerations  
With the exception of the oral  immunotherapy treatment, subjects will be instructed to continue strictly 
avoiding peanut in their diet. Prior oral immunotherapy studies have sought to determine predictors of 
adverse reactions to treatment and co -factors are often noted in subjects that  do experience adverse 
reactions. This can include illness, exercise, or allergen exposure in subjects with allergic rhinitis.23 
Subjects will be instructed to refrain from exercising for 60 minutes following ingestion of the study 
drug. Subjects and their  families will also be instructed to contact the physician investigators if an illness 
or significant rhinitis symptoms occur, as a temporary adjustment to the daily dose may be necessary.  
 
5.4 Screen Failures  
Screen failures are defined as participants who consent to participate in the clinical trial but are not 
subsequently randomly assigned to the study intervention or entered in the study. A minimal set of screen failure information is required to ensure transparent reporting of screen failure participants, to 
meet the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) publishing requirements and to 
respond to queries from regulatory authorities. Minimal information includes demography, screen failure details, eligibility criteria, and any serious ad verse event (SAE).  
 Individuals who do not meet the criteria for participation in this trial (screen failure) because there are no objective signs of an IgE mediated reaction during initial food challenge may not be rescreened.  
These individuals are not peanut allergic and thus not candidates for the treatment of peanut allergy.  
 
5.5 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention  
Individuals will be screened for possible study eligibility at the Cleveland Clinic Allergy Clinic locations . 
The recruiting physicians will include the Pediatric Allergy clinic staff as well the Respiratory Institute Allergy staff. All Allergy physicians will be made aware of the study and details of recruitment at a Quarterly Allergy and Immunology staff meeting  which is attended  by both Pediatric Institute and 
Respiratory Institute allergy physicians.  
 Once potential participants are identified, a study investigator will reach out to the parent/guardian of the patient via an introductory letters and telephone t o inquire about study interest. Should the family 
express a desire to participate, they will be invited to the main campus for Enrollment/Baseline visit. This visit will take place with one of the physician investigators and will involve extensive discussi on of 
the study including protocol, risks and benefits. If the individual and their parent or guardian opt to 
participate in the study, informed consent, and assent when appropriate,  will be obtained at this time 
and the individual will be enrolled.  
 
There has been a significant amount of media and online attention to these evolving treatment options 
for food allergy including OIT. As such, frequent and unsolicited inquiries regarding OIT are made by patients/families encountered in the Allergy clinics. This fact accompanied by the prevalence of peanut allergy in the pediatric population leads us to believe the accrual rate of participants will be fairly rapid.   
6. Study Intervention  
 
6.1 Study Interventions Administration  
 
20 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 6.1.1 Study Intervention Description  
Commercially available whole canned boiled peanuts (Peanut Patch, McCall Farms) will be purchased 
from online retailers. This commercially available product , regulated by the F ood and Drug 
Administration, is  regularly consumed by humans.  
 
Altho ugh additives are typically contained in commercially available products, this is not expected to be 
clinically relevant. The prevalence of allergy to food additives has been reported as high as  0.23 % based 
on self -report. However, the reported cases in medical literature are typically  either anecdotal or 
diagnosed based on poorly -controlled challenge procedures. Thus expert consensus is that relatively few 
food additives have been convincingly demonstrated to true hypersensitivity reactions.6  
 
Peanut Patc h  
Information from the Manufacturer’s Website:  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
21 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
Nutrition Facts  
Serving Size 1/4 cup (about 34g)  
Amount Per Serving  
Calories  100Calories from Fat 70  
% Daily Value*  
Total Fat  8g 12% 
 
Saturated Fat 1.5g  8% 
 
Trans Fat 0g   
Cholesterol  0mg 0% 
Sodium  320mg  13% 
Total Carbohydrate  3g 1% 
 
Dietary Fiber 2g  8% 
 
Sugars 0g   
Protein  4g  
Vitamin A 0%  Vitamin C 0%  
Calcium 0%  Iron 2%  
* Percent Daily Values are based on a 2,000 calorie diet. Your daily values 
may be higher or lower depending on your calorie needs:  
Calories per gram:  
Fat 9 • Carbohydrate 4 • Protein 4  
 
 
 
22 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 The boiled peanuts will be processed into powder . All processing will take place in the University 
Hospitals Dahms Clinical Research Unit  kitchen . The Dahms Clinical Research Unit  kitchen is a Class III 
Non -Commercial Food Service establishment and is inspected on a routine basis through the Cleveland 
Health Department.   The peanut processing will be  supervised by the CRU Bionutrition director who is 
certified  in food protection through the Ohio Department of Health.  
Boiled peanuts will be shelled and placed evenly on individual trays of a food dehydrator purchased for 
use of this process only (Nesco FD -75a Food Dehydrator).  The dehydrator was purchased specifi cally for 
this study and no other food items will come into contact with or be used on this device.  Peanuts will be 
dehydrated at a temperature of 105 degrees F (41 degrees C) for 17 hours (1,020 minutes). Immediately upon removal, peanuts will be ground t o a fine powder in a food processor.  
 Peanut powder will be placed in Pactiv/Newspring plastic deli containers with lids. These will be sealed, labeled, and shipped  via courier from the Case Western Clinical Research Unit directly  to the 
investigational drug pharmacy for storage in a refrigerator.   
 
We will characterize the processed boiled peanut and determine the concentration of peanut protein . 
This will be necessary to calculate the doses for subjects in the boiled peanut immu notherapy arm. To 
further characterize this product, the specific component proteins including Ara h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9 will 
also be quantified. These specific proteins are known to be associated with either higher risk for anaphylaxis (Ara h 1, 2, and 3) versus more mild reactions (Ara h 8).24 This assay will be performed as an ELISA within the Cleveland Clinic Proteomics lab.  
 A representative sample from each batch of prepared boiled peanut powder will be sent to JLA laboratories, a USDA certified lab, in  order to test for aflatoxin levels and to quantify a total bacterial 
count and total mold count. This lab is approved by the USDA -AMS for Aflatoxin in Peanuts and ISO 
17025 accredited by ANAB for aflatoxin and microbiological testing. Aflatoxin testing is  performed by 
HLPC method  in accordance with AOAC 991.31  and AOAC 2005.08 . The total bacterial count will be 
obtained using AOAC -RI 051702/MB073.6 and the mold  count using AOAC - RI 051702/MB074.03.  
 The doses will be measured and allotted into individual medicine cups by the Investigational Drug Service Department  as outlined in Section 6.2 . The subjects will mix the powder with a vehicle of the 
subject/family’s choice (applesauce, pudding, or hot cereal)  just prior to oral ingestion . 
 6.1.2 Dosing and Administration  
Oral Food Challenge  
After informed consent is obtained (and assent when relevant), eligible subjects will undergo an open roasted peanut graded food challenge to 4000 mg of peanut protein to confirm peanut allergy and to determine the amount  of peanut protein required to induce an allergic reaction at baseline. An oral food 
challenge is the gold standard for diagnosis of food allergy. PB2 peanut powder ( PB2 Foods, Tifton, GA ) 
will be used exclusively for this challenge, mixed in a vehicle of the family’s choice (such as applesauce, pudding, etc).  
 Subjects will be instructed to hold medications with strong antihistamine properties for five days prior to the challenge (diphenhydramine, loratadine, desloratadine, cetirizine, levocetirizine, fexofenadine, 
azelastine). The challenge will not be performed in the setting of acute illness, including febrile illness, 
asthma exacerbations, and significant flares of atopic dermatitis.   
23 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 The oral food challenge protocol is outlined in Table 3. The initial oral food challenge will take place 
under the supervisio n of a trained Allergy/Immunology investigator and trained Allergy/Immunology 
nurse at Cleveland Clinic Children’s main campus Allergy Clinic, where similar food challenges are routinely conducted. The physician investigator available will be trained in re cognition and treatment of 
IgE mediated food reactions, will be available for immediate evaluation of any signs or symptoms of 
reaction.  
 
Table 3: Oral food challenge to peanut for enrollment (Study Visit 1)  
Time  Dose  Clinician Intervention *  
0 5mg  Obta in weight, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, 
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation level. Peak flow  will 
be done on patients 4+ or deemed developmentally 
appropriate. Full physical examination of ears, oropharynx 
and nose, lungs, and skin prior to  administration of dose  
+15 minutes  10mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+30 minutes  25mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+45 minutes  50mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+60 minutes  100mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+75 minutes  500mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+90 minutes  1000mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+105 minutes  4000mg  Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
Full physical examination of ears, oropharynx and nose, 
lungs, and skin after completion of final dose.  
*Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation level to be obtained with any change in physical exam or clinical status  
 If objective signs of an allergic reaction occur, then the challenge will be stopped, and t he subject 
treated based on the presenting symptoms and clinical judgment of the supervising investigator (Table 4). If no objective signs occur within 2 hours after the last dose is consumed, then the child will be considered not peanut allergic and will not qualify for the study.  
 
 
         
 
     
24 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
Table 4: Oral food challenge stopping criteria  
A positive food challenge will be defined by the presence of either of the following:  
• One or more major criteria  
• Two or more minor criteria  
An indeterminate food challenge will be defined by the presence of one minor criterion.  
A negative food challenge will be defined by the absence of major or minor criteria.  
All symptoms should be of new onset and not due to ongoing disease. Symptoms must occur no later 
than 2 hours after the last dose . 
Major Criteria  
• Confluent erythematous pruritic rash  
• Respiratory signs (at least one of the following):  
Wheezing Inability to speak  
Stridor  
Dysphonia  
Aphonia  
• >/= 3 noncontact urticarial lesions lasting for more than 3 minutes  
• >/= 1 site of angioedema  
• Hypotension for age not associated with vasovagal episode  
• Evidence of severe abdominal pain (such as abnormal stillness or doubling over) that persists 
for more than 3 minutes  
Minor Criteria  
• Vomiting  (persistent symptoms would elevate to major criterion)  
• Diarrhea  
• Persistent rubbing of nose or eyes that lasts for >/= 3 minutes  
• Persistent rhinorrhea that lasts for >/= 3 minutes  
• Persistent scratching that lasts for >/= 3 minutes  
 
The subjects with objective signs of an IgE mediated reaction to peanut using standard criteria (Table 4) 
will be eligible for enrollment . 
 If patient is found to be study eligible,  then a urine pregnancy test will be done on females who have 
reached the a ge of child birthing potential.  
 Initial Dose Escalation   
Upon enrollment, d emographic data will be collected including age, sex, race, history of asthma/atopic 
dermatitis/allergic rhinitis. The enrolled subjects will present to the Clinical Research Unit  for a one day 
dose escalation. The intent of the initial escalation is to begin and remain at subthreshold levels and 
identify a safe starting dose for home administration. Any subjects unable to tolerate at least 1.5 mg 
peanut protein will be discharged.  
 Active illness or asthma exacerbation will prompt rescheduling of the initial dose escalation. Patients are encouraged to eat foods brought from home before and during dose escalation.  
   
25 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Prior to the first dose, patients will receive the following interventions:  
• Blood obtained by venipuncture for baseline laboratory evaluation  
o Peanut specific IgE concentration  
o Peanut component testing (peanut specific IgE concentration for Ara h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9)  
o Peanut specific IgG4 concentration.  
o Serum samples will be sent to the Cleveland Clinic Main Campus laboratory with the 
exception of the peanut IgG4 level which will be sent out to the Mayo Clinic.  
• Skin prick test  to peanut with extracts routinely  used for this purpose in clinical practice  
o Negative control (50% glycerin/50%Cocas)  
o Positive control (Histamine base 6mg/mL)  
o Peanut extract 1:20 (Hollister Stier)  
o Apply one drop of each solution to upper back (infants and young children) or forearm (children over the age of 6 able to avoid scratching the extract), and 
prick through with sterile bifurcated needle to disrupt the top layer of the 
epidermis . The location used for the skin prick test will remain consistent for 
each patient throughout the study.  
o The test will be read by the clinician 15 minutes following application. The wheal (raised center) and flare (flat erythematous patch) will be measured horizontally and vertically with an average of these 2 measurements recorded as the diameter.  
  Table 5: Initial dose escalation (Study Visit 2)  
Time  Dose  Clinician Intervention *  
0 0.5 mg peanut 
protein  Obtain weight, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, 
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation level ( i.e. vital signs). Peak 
flow will be measure on patient 4+ or deemed developmentally appropriate. Full physical examination of ears, oropharynx and 
nose, lungs, and skin prior to administration of dose  
+30 minutes  1 mg  Repeat vital signs. Examination of skin and auscultatio n of lungs 
prior to dose  
+60 minutes  2 mg  Repeat vital signs. Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs 
prior to dose  
+90 minutes  4 mg  Repeat vital signs. Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs 
prior to dose  
+120 minutes  6 mg  Repeat vital sig ns. Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs 
prior to dose  
*Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation level to be obtained with any change in physical exam or clinical status  
 Dose escalation will begin with 0. 5 mg of peanut protein and increase to a maximum of 6 mg (Table 5). 
The doses will be administered at 30 minute intervals following a set of vital signs and limited physical examination. At any objective sign of reaction (Table 4) the escalation wil l stopped, and the patient will 
be treated based on the presenting symptoms and clinical judgment of the supervising investigator. 
Subjects will be monitored for 2 hours after resolution of any signs of reaction and/or after completion 
of the final dose.  
 
26 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Subjects will then be instructed to consume the highest tolerated dose of peanut protein daily until their 
return f or dose escalation . 
  Build -Up  
For the next phase, participants will undergo incremental dose escalations every two weeks. These dose escalations with take place under the supervision of a trained Allergy/Immunology physician investigator within the Clinical Research Unit. The subject will be given an increased dose of the peanut and observed for at least 2 hours. Subjects will then continue to take daily doses of an identical amount of peanut protein at home. We will increase to a target maintenance dose of 300  mg of peanut protein, 
which should be  accomplished in approximately 6 dose increases, or 12  weeks’ time.  
 If a patient is unable to tolerate the maximum dose during the initial dose escalation visit, they will be given double the maximum dose tolerated during the dose escalation visits until they are back on the dose escalation schedule defined in Table 6.  
 If a subject does not tolerat e a dose increase, then the patient will be administered a dose reduced by 
25%, with increase to the originally intended dose at the subsequent visit. If the patient still does not tolerate the dose, then the decision on how to proceed will be determined at the investigator’s discretion. This may involve temporarily decreasing the subject’s dose, making a smaller increase, or prolonging the duration of a given dose. If any subject is unable to reach the goal maintenance dose, then the investigator may decid e to continue the subject on a lower maintenance dose for the duration 
of the study.  
 Table  6: Dose Escalation Schedule 
 
Dose of Peanut Protein  Week of Protocol  
6 mg 0 
12 mg 2 
25 mg 4 
50 mg 6 
75 mg 8 
150 mg 10 
300 mg 12 
 
 
Home Dosing  
All subjects will be offered  the opportunity to continue once daily consumption of the maintenance dose 
after the end of their study participation . This ongoing maintenance therapy  is optional and will not be 
paid for by the study. The subjects will be instructed to otherwise continue a peanut free diet.  
  
27 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 Follow Up  
The subject will also undergo a final oral food challenge at the final visit (SV10 ). This food challenge will 
be double blind and placebo controlled. A double blind pl acebo controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) is 
the gold standard for diagnosis of food allergy and is the standard utilized for most oral immunotherapy trials at exit.  
 Roasted peanut powder will be utilized for the challenge, with oat flour as placebo. An individual will undergo a standard challenge described below (Table 7) with either the roasted peanut or the placebo, 
blinded to both subject and investigators. The same individual will then undergo a second challenge with the opposite (either peanut or plac ebo) either later that day or by returning to clinic the following day. 
Each challenge will be performed by increasing  doses up to a final dose of 1 000 mg of peanut protein. 
The individual doses will be 25, 100, 200, 300, 600, and 1000  mg of peanut protein. The highest 
tolerated dose will be recorded.  If a patient reacted to a dose lower than 25 mg of peanut powder 
during the initial Oral Food Challenge then they will be started at the dose lower than where the reaction occurred for  the DBOFC . 
 A urine pregnancy test will be repeated on all females of child bearing potential before the DBOFC.  
 Table 7: Double blind oral food challenge  to peanut or control oat (SV 10 ) 
Time  Dose  Clinician Intervention *  
0 25 mg peanut 
protein  Obtain weight, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, 
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation level. Peak flow in children ages 4+ or as developmentally appropriate. Full physical examination of ears, oropharynx and nose, lungs, 
and skin prior to adminis tration of dose  
+15 minutes  100 mg Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+30 minutes  200 mg Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+45 minutes  300 mg Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+60 minutes  600  mg Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
+75 minutes  1000 mg Examination of skin and auscultation of lungs prior to dose  
Full physical examination of ears, oropharynx and nose, 
lungs, and skin after completion of final dose.  
*Vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation level to be obtained with any change in physical exam or clinical status  
 If objective signs of an allergic reaction occur, then the challenge will be s topped, and the subject 
treated based on the presenting symptoms and clinical judgment of the supervising investigator (Table 4). If no objective signs occur within 2 hours after the last dose is consumed, then the challenge will be considered negative.  
 Quality of Life Questionnaire  
At enrollment and after completion of the study, patients or caregivers will be asked to complete previously validated, age specific food allergy quality of life questionnaires
27( Supplement 1 ) 
  
28 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
 
6.2 Preparation/Handling/ Storage /Accountability  
The Investigational Drug Service (IDS) will provide secure storage, temperature monitoring, drug 
accountability, and dispensing of Investigational Product (IP) to comply with the protocol and applicable 
state and federal regulations related to clinical research.  
IP Management  
Upon the receipt of the IP, IDS will electronically document lot numbers, expiration dates, and quantity. The supply of roasted peanut powder and boiled peanut powder will be tracked and stored separately.  
 
IP dispensing 
IDS will dispense the IP to eligible subjects upon receipt of a valid prescription. The prescription will be scanned to ids@ccf.org
 or faxed to 216 445- 5554, Monday through Friday, 0700 -1600. After reviewing 
the prescription, the pharmacist will:  
1. Weigh the prescribed dose  
2. Transfer the prescribed dose into a plastic jar  
3. Dispense the quantity of doses prescribed  
4. Update drug accountability log**  
5. File the prescription in the subjects’ tab in the study binder  
** Asso ciate  the dose, quantity , lot of IP dispensed with subject number  and date  
IP disposition  
Returned or expired IP will be accounted for and then  destroyed per department policy.  
 
6.3 Measures to Minimize Bias  
This study utilizes  a prospective trial design i n order to minimize recall bias. In addition, the double blind 
placebo controlled exit challenge will help minimize bias.  
 
6.4 Study Intervention Compliance  
The subjects will have periodically scheduled trips to return the empty medicine cups for monitoring of 
adherence. In addition, the subjects or their families will complete a log at home recording administration of doses as well as any adverse effects.  
 
6.5 Concomitant Therapy  
Data regarding the subjects’ concomitant medications will be recorde d at each study  visit to the 
Pediatric Allergy Clinic or the Clinical Research Unit. For this protocol, a prescription medication is defined as a medication that can be prescribed only by a properly authorized/licensed clinician. 
Medications to be reported  include  concomitant prescription medications, over- the-counter 
medications  such as oral antihistamines,  and supplements.  
 
The concomitant use of antihistamines could directly affect the primary endpoint. The use of antihistamines could mask or prevent some symptoms of an allergic reaction such as urticaria or pruritus. Upon enrollment, the treating physician investigator will evaluate the specific indication for antihistamine use and will make a determination regarding continued use or discontinuation. This will 
be documented within t he electronic medical record.  
29 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
6.5.1 Rescue Medication  
All subjects will be prescribed an epinephrine auto -injector to have available for rescue at home. All 
subjects will also be prescribed an oral antihistamine , cetirizine , to have available for rescue at home. It 
will be confirmed that all subjects with an underlying diagnosis of asthma have a prescription for a short 
acting beta -agonist (albuterol or levalbuterol) available for rescue at home. Any subjects with a 
diagnosi s of asthma that do not have a short acting beta -agonist will have one prescribed.  
 
The study sites (Pediatric Allergy office and Clinical Research Unit) will have rescue medications available at the time of each study visit. The following rescue medications may be used:  
     
 
         
 
         
 
         
 
  

30 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
    
 
         
 
       
7. Study Intervention Discontinuation and Participant 
Discontinuation/Withdrawal  
 
7.1 Discontin uation of Study Intervention  
Criteria for discontinuing oral immunotherapy in a subject will include: 
• Subject nonadherence to O IT, specifically defined by 12 (approximately 10 %) nonconsecutive 
missed doses. 
• A life -threatening adverse reaction to OIT, specifically a grade 4 reaction as defined by the 
Consortium of Food Allergy Research (CoFAR) criteria. See table in Section 8.3.3.1.  
• Symptoms suggestive of Eosinophilic Esophagitis of (EoE) – i.e. difficulty sw allowing, chest pain, 
persistent heart burn, upper abdominal pain, and/or no response to gastroesophageal reflux 
disease (GERD) medication  
 Symptoms suggestive of Eosinophilic Esophagitis (EoE) will prompt discontinuation of oral 
immunotherapy and begin on ce weekly symptom monitoring phone calls with study staff. If symptoms 
fail to resolve after 1 month off therapy, consultation with Gastroenterology will be considered for 
further evaluation and management.  
 Discontinuation  from oral immunotherapy does no t mean discontinuation from the study, and 
remaining study procedures should be completed as indicated by the study protocol.  If a clinically significant finding is identified (including, but not limited to changes from baseline) after enrollment, the investigator or qualified designee will determine if any change in participant management is needed. 
Any new clinically relevant finding will be reported as an adverse event (AE).  
 

31 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 The data to be collected at the time of study intervention discontinuation wil l include the following:  
• Skin prick test to peanut  
• Peanut sIgE, peanut component panel, and peanut IgG4  
 
 
7.2 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study  
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  Subjects may 
withdraw from the study for the following anticipated reasons  
• Adverse events related to OIT  
o Chronic or recurrent GI symptoms  
o Acute hypersensitivity reactions  
o Chronic or recurrent cutaneous symptoms  
• Social reasons : time  constraints , transport  
• Principal Investigator temporarily suspends or prematurely discontinues study participation. The 
date and reason for discontinuation must be documented (e.g. non -compliance). Every effort 
should be made to complete the appropriate assessments.  
• Pregnancy during the course of the study for a child -bearing participant  
• The investigator considers it, for safety reasons, to be in the best interest of the subject.   
• Disease progression  
o Worsening asthma that requires increasing therapy such that exclusion criteria are met  
 The reason for  subject  discontinuation or withdrawal from the study will be recorded on the Case 
Report Form (CRF). Subjects who sign the informed consent form and are enrolled  but do not receive 
the study intervention may be replaced.  Subjects  who sign the informed consent form, and are enrolled 
and receive the study intervention, and subsequently withdraw, or are withdrawn or discontinued from the study, will not be replaced.  
 
7.3 Lost to Follow -up 
A participant will be considered lost to follow -up if he or she fails to return for 2 scheduled visits and is 
unable to be contacted by the study site staff.  
 The following actions must be taken if a participant fails to return to the clinic for a require d study visit:  
• The site will attempt to contact the participant and reschedule the missed visit within 1 week for 
an updosing visit or within 1 month for a follow up visit  and counsel the participant on the 
importance of maintaining the assigned visit sche dule and ascertain if the participant wishes to 
and/or should continue in the study.  
• Before a participant is deemed lost to follow -up, the investigator or designee will make every 
effort to regain contact with the participant (where possible, 3 telephone calls and, if necessary, a certified letter to the participant’s last known mailing address or local equivalent methods). These contact attempts should be documented in the participant’s medical record or study file.  
• Should the participant continue to be unreachable, he or she will be considered to have withdrawn from the study with a prima ry reason of lost to follow -up. 
 
  
32 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 8. Study Assessments and Procedures  
 
8.1 Efficacy Assessments  
Procedures  
Skin tests: Skin testing to peanut will be performed at the visits specified in the SoA  (section 1.3). Skin 
testing will include skin prick with peanut exact (1:20 w/v, Greer), negative control (saline) and positive 
control (histamine).  
 
Laboratory tests:  Blood samples will be collected at the visits specified in the SoA . Blood work will 
include peanut specific IgE concentration, peanut component testing (peanut specific IgE concentration for Ara h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9), and peanut specific IgG4 concentration. The peanut sIgE and peanut component panel will be sent to the Cleveland Clinic main laboratory. The peanut specific IgG4 will be sent to Mayo Clinic laboratories. The laboratories used will supply a list of reference ranges and units of the laboratory parameters.   
Volume of blood to be collected:   
Peanut specific IgE concentration  0.5 mL  
Peanut component panel   0.6 mL  
Peanut IgG4 concentration   0.5 mL  
Total      1.6 mL  
8.2 Safety and Other Assessments  
Screening to ensure all subjects meet the inclusion criteria and do not meet any exclusion criteria will be  
performed within 1 month of the initial oral food challenge visit. At Visit 1, the physician and participant will review and update the patient’s Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Emergency Care Plan. This plan will outline the recommended treatment in case of a n allergic reaction occurs during their enrollment in the 
study. This plan is signed by a physician, and includes emergency contact information. In addition, each 
study visit  will include obtaining a brief interim history to ensure that no potential augmenting factors, 
such as viral illness, are present at the time of study drug or control drug administration. Vital signs , a 
targeted physical exam  and conmed review will be performed prior to any study drug administration for 
the same purposes.   
 
Study visi t evaluation:  
Brief interim history  
Discussion of any interim AEs  
Vital signs: Temperature, Heart Rate, Respiratory Rate  
Physical Exam: Targeted assessment of General Appearance, HEENT, Cardiac, Respiratory, Abdominal, 
and Skin   
 
8.3 Adverse Events and Se rious Adverse Events  
 
8.3.1  Definition of Adverse Event  
Adverse event means any untoward medical occurren ce associated with the use of an intervention in 
humans, whether or not considered intervention -related (21 CFR 312.32 (a)).  
The CoFAR (the consortium  of Food Allergy research)  scale will be referenced to assess SAEs/AEs related 
or possibly related to an allergic reaction. CTCAE (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events ) 
version 5.0 will be referenced for SAEs/AEs that are not related to allergic reactions and are therefore 
not listed in the CoFAR scale.  
 
33 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 8.3.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
An adverse event (AE) or suspected adverse reaction is considered "serious" if, in the view of either the 
investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: d eath, a life -threatening adverse 
event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant 
incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or 
require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the participant  and ma y require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of 
the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home or hypotension not responsive t o 
treatment with epinephrine . 
  8.3.3 Classification of an Adverse Event  
 
8.3.3.1 Severity of an Event  
All adverse events will be graded in severity utilizing criteria specifically developed by the Consortium of 
Food Allergy Research.
27 These criteria are  widely accepted and applied to OIT clinical trials.  
 
Grade 1  
Mild  Grade 2  
Moderate  Grade 3  
Severe  Grade 4  
Life threatening  Grade 5  
Death  
Transient or mild  
discomforts (< 48  
hours), no or minimal medical  
intervention/therapy  
required. These  
symptoms may 
include  
pruritus, swelling or 
rash, abdominal discomfort or other transient symptoms.  Symptoms that produce 
mild -to-moderate 
limitation in activity, some assistance may be needed; no or minimal intervention/therapy is required.  
Hospitalization is possible . These 
symptoms may include persistent hives, wheezing without dyspnea, abdominal discomfort/increased vomiting or other symptoms . Marked limitation in 
activity, some assistance usually required; medical intervention/therapy required, hospitalization is 
possible. Symptoms 
may include 
bronchospasm with dyspnea, severe abdominal pain, throat tightness with hoarseness, and transient hypotension among others. Parenteral 
medication(s) are 
usually indicated.  Extreme limitation in 
activity, significant assistance  required; 
significant medical/therapy.  
Intervention is required; 
hospitalization is 
probable. Symptoms may include persistent hypotension and/or hypoxia with resultant decreased level of consciousness associated with collapse and/or incontinence or other  
life-threatening 
symptoms  Death  
  
8.3.3.2 Relationship to Study Intervention  
All adverse events ( AEs) must have their relationship to study intervention assessed by the clinician who 
examines and evaluates the participant  based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. 
34 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 The degree of certainty about causality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical trial, the 
study product must always be suspect.  
 
• Definitely Related  – There is clear evidence t o suggest a causal relationship, and other possible 
contributing factors can be ruled out. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test 
result, occurs in a plausible time relationship to study intervention  administration and cannot be 
explaine d by concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the 
study intervention  (dechallenge) should be clinically plausible. The event must be 
pharmacologically or phenomenologically definitive, with use of a satisfactory rechallenge 
procedure if necessary. 
• Probably Related – There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and the influence of other 
factors is unlikely. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs within a reasonable time after admi nistration of the study intervention, is unlikely to be attributed to 
concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals, and follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal (dechallenge). Rechallenge information is not required to fulfill this definition.  
• Potentially  Related  – There is some evidence to suggest a causal relationship (e.g., the event 
occurred within a reasonable time after administration of the trial medication). However, other factors may have contributed to the event (e.g., the particip ant’s clinical condition, other 
concomitant events). Although an AE  may rate only as “possibly related” soon after discovery, it 
can be flagged as requiring more information and later be upgraded to “probably related” or “definitely related”, as appropriat e. 
• Unlikely to be related  – A clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, whose 
temporal relationship to study intervention  administration makes a causal relationship 
improbable (e.g., the event did not occur within a reasonable time after administration of the study intervention ) and in which other drugs or chemicals or underlying disease provides 
plausible explanations (e.g., the participant ’s clinical condition, other concomitant treatments).  
• Not Related – The AE is completely independent of study  intervention  administration, and/or 
evidence exists that the event is definitely related to another etiology. There must be an alternative, definitive etiology documented by the clinician  
 
8.3.3.3 Expectedness  
An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study intervention.  
 8.3.4 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow-up  
The occurrence of an adverse event (AE) or serious adverse event (SAE) may come to the attention of study personnel during study visits and interviews of a study participant presenting for medical care, or upon review by a study monitor.  
 All AEs including local and systemic reactions not  meeting the criteria for SAEs will be captured on the 
appropriate case report form (CRF). Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, clinician’s assessment of severity, relationship to study product (assessed only by those with  the 
training and authority to make a diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution.  
 
35 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Any medical  condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered as 
baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at any 
time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
 Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event 
at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of 
onset and duration of each episode.  
 All reportable events will be recorded with start dates occurring any time after informed consent is obtained until 7 (for non -serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study participation.  At 
each study visit, the investigator will inquire about the occurre nce of AE/SAEs since the last visit.  Events 
will be followed for outcome information until resolution or stabilization.  
  8.3.5 Adverse Event Reporting  
An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be utilized during the study. The DSMB will consist of 2 Board Certified Allergy/Immunology physicians who are not participating in the study and do 
not have any conflicts of interest as well as 1 pediatric physician of another specialty. The DSMB will meet prior to initiation of the study, following t he enrollment of the 6
th subject,  and then quarterl y 
during the course of the study.  
 8.3.6 Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
The study clinician will immediately report to the sponsor any serious adverse event, whether or not considered study intervention r elated, including those listed in the protocol or investigator brochure and 
must include an assessment of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the study intervention 
caused the event. Study endpoints that are serious adverse events (e.g., all -cause mortality) must be 
reported in accordance with the protocol unless there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship 
between the study intervention and the event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis). In that case, the investigator must immediately report the  event to the sponsor.  
 All serious adverse events (SAEs) will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site investigator deems the event to be chronic or the participant is stable. Other supporting documentation of the event may be requested  by the study sponsor and should be provided as soon as possible.  
 The study sponsor is responsible for notifying the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of any 
unexpected fatal or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible, but in no c ase later 
than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.  In addition, the sponsor must notify FDA and all participating investigators in an Investigational New Drug (IND) safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines that the information qualifies for reporting  
 8.3.7 Reporting Events to Participants  
All anticipated AEs will involve overt symptoms  and thus be readily apparent to the subjects and their 
families. When an AE occurs during a study visit, the nature and severity of the AE as well as the 
implications for ongoing treatment will be discussed by a physician investigator with the subject and  
parents/guardians. This discussion will take place after any potential treatment is administered and the 
subject is deemed medically stable but prior to end of the study visit.  
 
36 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 When an AE occurs at home, the nature and severity of the AE as well as the implications for ongoing 
treatment will be discussed by a physician investigator with the subject and parents/guardians  via 
phone. If a study visit is deemed appropriate to further manage the AE or for further discussion of the AE, then additional discussi on will take place at this time.  
 
8.3.8 Events of Special Interest  
This is not applicable to our study.  
 
 8.3.9 Reporting of Pregnancy  
If a pregnancy were to occur during the course of the study, the subject would be withdrawn from the study. The pregnancy would be reported the PRRC and IRB at the Cleveland Clinic. The subject would be 
referred to an appropriate physician (OB/Gyn) for further management.  
  
8.4 Unanticipated Problems  
 8.4.1 Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
The Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) considers unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others to include, in general, any incident , experience, or outcome that meets all of the 
following criteria:  
• Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given (a) the research procedures that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the Institutional Review Board (IRB) -
approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics of the 
participant population being studied;  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possibly related” means there is a reasonable possibility that t he incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the 
procedures involved in the research); and  
• Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
8.4.2 Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
The investigator will report unanticipated problems (UPs) to the reviewing Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) and to the lead principal investigator (PI). The UP report will inc lude t he following information:  
• Protocol identifying information: protocol title and number, PI’s name, and the IRB project number;  
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• An explanation of the basis for determining that the event, incident, experience, or outcome 
represents an UP;  
• A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been taken or 
are proposed in response to the UP.  
 To satisfy the requirement for prompt reporting, UPs will be reporte d using the following timeline:   
 
• UPs that have  serious impact or require a change to the protocol will be reported to the IRB and 
to the study sponsor within 10 days  of the investigator becoming aware of the event.   
37 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 • All UPs should be reported to appropriate institutional officials (as required by an institution’s 
written reporting procedures), the supporting agency head (or designee), and the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP). The reporting timeline for UPs that do not have serious impa ct or require a change to the protocol will be the time of continuing renewal with the IRB.  
 8.4.3 Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants  Should unanticipated problems arise  that have serious impact to the protocol or to the safety of 
participants, participants will be notified based on the opinion of the IRB once the UP has been reviewed.  
  
9. Statistical Considerations  
 
9.1 Statistical Hypothesis  
We will obtain observation data on patients receiving boiled peanut oral immunotherapy which has not 
yet been well described in human trials. We will compare with proportion of patients successfully desensitized as defined by meeting the primary endpoint with the expected placebo rate. The null hypothesis is that the proportion of patients successfully desensitized by boiled peanut oral immunotherapy will not be greater than the expected 20% that has been previously published as the 
proportion of patients successfully meeting the prima ry endpoint in OIT studies (which aligns with the 
expected 20% that would naturally “outgrow” a peanut allergy). If we reject this null hypothesis, we will 
be able to conclude that the proportion of successfully desensitized by boiled peanut t herapy is gre ater 
than placebo.  For the safety aspect of the study we will be comparing the historical SAEs/AEs of patients 
who received OIT with roasted peanuts and compare them with the patients enrolled in this study for the rate of occurrence and severity of the SA Es/AEs observed.  
9.2 Sample Size Determination  
The sample of 10 patients will provide >90% power to determine the expected success rate (80%) is greater than a theoretical placebo rate (20%).  
9.3 Populations for Analysis  
Both an  Intentional -to-Treat (ITT ) and per -protocol analysis will be performed .  
 
9.4 Statistical Analysis  
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize the data.   Categorical variables will be presented as 
number and percentage of total patients.   Continuous variables will be summarized using mean, 
standard deviation, median and [Q1, Q3].   The proportion of patients with successful consumption of 
peanut protein without symptoms (primary endpoint), will be tested to determine whether the proportion differs from 0.2 (20%) (the ex pected success rate in a theoretical placebo group).  
 
10. Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations  
 
10.1 Regulatory, Ethical and Study Oversight Considerations  
 
10.1.1 Informed Consent Process 
38 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
  
10.1.1.1 Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants  
Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention, study procedures, and risks are given to the participant and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to starting intervention/administering st udy intervention.  The following consent materials are submitted with this 
protocol :  
• Informed Consent  
• Informed Assent  
 10.1.1.2 Consent Procedures and Documentation  
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the individual and parent/guardia n’s agreeing to 
participate in the study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation. Consent forms will be  Pediatric Research Review Committee (P RRC) and  Institutional Review Board (IR B)-approved and 
the participant  and/or parent/guardian  will be asked to read and review the document. The investigator 
will explain the research study to the participant and parent/guardian and answer any questions that 
may arise. A verbal explanation will be provided in terms suited to the participant  and parent/guardian ’s 
comprehension of the purposes, procedures, and potential risks of the study and of their rights as research participants.  Participants  and parents/guardians will have the opportunity to carefully review 
the written consent form and ask questions prior to signing. The participants and parents/guardians should have the opportunity to discuss the study with their family or surrogates or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The participant’s parent/guardian  will sign the info rmed consent document prior 
to any procedures being done specifically for the study. Participants  and parents/guardians  must be 
informed that participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw from the study at any time, without 
prejudice. A copy of the  informed consent document will be given to the participant ’s parent/guardian  
for their records. The informed consent process will be conducted and documented in the source 
document (including the date), and the form signed, before the participant undergoe s any study -specific 
procedures. The rights and welfare of the participants will be protected by emphasizing to them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline to participate in this study  
 10.1.2 Study Discontinu ation and Closure  
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause.  Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be 
provided by the suspending or terminating party to <study participants, investigator, funding agency, 
the Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) sponsor and regulatory authorities>.  If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the Principal Investigato r (PI) will 
promptly inform study participants, the Institutional Review Board (IRB), and sponsor and will provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension.  Study participants will be contacted, as applicable, and be informed of changes to study visit schedule.  
  Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
• Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participants  
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stopping    
• Insuffic ient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
• Determination that the primary endpoint has been met  
• Determination of futility  
 
39 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are addressed, 
and satisfy the sponsor, IRB and/or Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 10.1.3 Confidentiality and Privacy  
Participant confidentiality and privacy is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, their 
staff, and the sponsor(s) and their interventions. This confidentiality is extended to cover testing of 
biological samples and genetic tests in addition to the clinical information relating to participants. Therefore, the study protocol, documentation, data, and all other information generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data will be released to any unauthorized third party without prior written approval of the sponsor.  
 All research activities will be conducted in as  private a setting as possible.  
 The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the sponsor, representatives of the Institutional Review Board (IRB), regulatory agencies or pharmaceutical company supplying study product may 
inspect all documents and records required to be maintained by the investigator, including but not 
limited to, medical records (office, clinic, or hospital) and pharmacy records for the participants in this study. The clinical study site will permit access to such records.  
 The s tudy participant’s contact information will be securely stored at each clinical site for internal use 
during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a secure location for as long a period as dictated by the reviewing IRB, Institutional policies, or sponsor requirements.  
 Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific reporting, will be transmitted to and stored at within RedCap Cloud. This will not include the participant’s c ontact or 
identifying information. Rather, individual participants and their research data will be identified by a unique study identification number. The study data entry and study management systems used by clinical sites and by CRU  research staff will b e secured and password protected. At the end of the study, 
all study databases will be de -identified and archived within RedCap Cloud.  
 10.1.4 Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data  
Data will be maintained on RedCap Cloud per institute policy. Stored specimens will be discarded after analysis per Cleveland Clinic Laboratory policy.  
 10.1.5 Key Roles and Study Governance  
Principal Investigator 
Jaclyn Bjelac, MD  
Staff, Pediatric Allergy and Immunology  
Cleveland Clinic  
9500 Euclid Ave/A120  Cleveland, OH 44 195  
  Medical Monitor  
Clinical Research Unit  
   
40 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 11.  References  
 
1. Bunyavanich et al. Letter to the Editor: Peanut allergy prevalence among school age children in a 
US cohort  not selected for any disease . J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Sep;134(3):753 -5. 
2. Bock SA, Muñoz -Furlong A, Sampson HA. Fatalities due to anaphylactic reactions to foods. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol.  2001 Jan;107(1):191 -3.  
3. Sicherer, SH and Sampson, HA. Food allergy: A review and update on epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, prevention, and manage ment.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018 
Jan;141(1):41- 58.  
4. Primeau MN, Kagan R, Joseph L, et al. The psychological burden of peanut allergy as perceived by adults . Clin Exp Allergy. 2000 Aug;30(8):1135- 43. 
5. Sicherer SH, Noone SA, Muñoz -Furlong A. The impact of childhood food allergy on quality of life. 
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 Dec;87(6):461- 4. 
6. Sampson HA et al. Food allergy: A practice parameter update -2014. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 
Nov;134(5):101 6-25. 
7. Wood, RA.  Food allergen immunotherapy: current status and prospects for the future  J Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2016 Apr;137(4):973- 982. 
8. Jones, SM, et al. Clinical efficacy and immune regulation with peanut oral immunotherapy.  J 
Allergy Clin Immunol. 200 9 Aug;124(2):292- 300. 
9. Blumenchen, K et al. Oral peanut immunotherapy in children with peanut anaphylaxis.  J Allergy 
Clin Immunol. 2010 Jul;126(1):83- 91. 
10. Hofmann, AM, et al. Safety of a peanut oral immunotherapy protocol in children with peanut 
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immu nol. 2009 Aug;124(2):286 -91. 
11. Varshney, P, et al. A randomized controlled study of peanut oral immunotherapy: clinical 
desensitization and modulation of the allergic response.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 
Mar;127(3):654- 60. 
12. Anagnostou K , et al. Efficacy and safety of high -dose peanut oral immunotherapy with factors 
predicting outcome.  Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Sep;41(9):1273- 81. 
13. Anagnostou K , et al. Assessing the efficacy of oral immunotherapy for the desensitisation of 
peanut allergy in children (STOP II): a phase 2 randomised controlled trial.  Lancet. 2014 Apr 
12;383(9925):1297- 304. 
14. Vickery, VP, et al. Sustained unresponsiveness to peanut in subjects who have completed peanut oral immunotherapy.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Feb;133(2):46 8-75. 
15. Narisety , SD, et al. A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled pilot study of sublingual 
versus oral immunotherapy for the treatment of peanut allergy.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 
May;135(5):1275- 82. 
16. Vickery, VP, et al.  Early oral immunotherapy  in peanut -allergic preschool children is safe and 
highly effective.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jan;139(1):173 -181. 
17. Maleki SJ, Chung SY, Champagne ET, Raufman JP. The effects of roasting on the allergenic properties of peanut proteins. J Allergy Clin Imm unol. 2000 Oct;106(4):763- 8. 
18. Beyer K, Morrow E, Li XM, et al. Effects of cooking methods on peanut allergenicity.  J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2001 Jun;107(6):1077- 81. 
19. Tao B et al. Extended boiling of peanut progressively reduces IgE allergenicity while retaining T cell reactivity. Clin Exp Allergy. 2016 Jul;46(7):1004 -14. 
20. Turner PJ, Mehr S, et al. Letter to the Editor: Loss of allergenic proteins during boiling explains 
tolerance to boiled peanut in peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014; 134:751 -3. 
41 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 21. Bird, JA, et al. Efficacy and Safety of AR101 in Oral Immunotherapy for Peanut Allergy: Results of 
ARC001, a Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Phase 2 Clinical Trial.  J Allergy Clin 
Immunol Pract. 2018 Mar - Apr;6(2):476- 485. 
22. United S tates Department of Agriculture. USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard 
Reference, release 21. 2002. Available at: http://ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=17477 . 
23. Virkud YV , et al. Novel baseline predictors of adverse events during oral immunotherapy in 
children with peanut allergy.  J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Mar;139(3):882 -888 
24. Klemans RJ , et al. Ara h 2 is the best predictor for peanut allergy in adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 
Pract. 2013 Nov -Dec;1(6):632-8.  
25. Wasserman, RL, et al. Oral Immunotherapy for Peanut Allergy: Multipractice Experience With Epinephrine -treated Reactions . J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2014 Jan- Feb;2(1):91- 6. 
26. Rigbi, NE, et al. Changes in patient quality of life during oral immunotherapy for food allergy.  
Allergy. 2017 Dec;72(12):1883- 1890.  
27. Factor JM et al. Effect of oral immunotherapy to peanut on food -specific quality of life . Ann 
Allergy Asthma Immunol 109 (2012) 348 -352. 
28. Burks, AW et al. Oral immunotherapy for treatment of egg allergy in children  N Engl J Med. 2012 
Jul 19;367(3):233- 43. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
42 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 12. Supplements  
 
12.1 Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire for Parents (1 -12 years old)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

43 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 12.2 Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire for Parents (1 3-16 years old)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

44 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 12.3 Dosing/Adverse Events Recording Sheet  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
Please provide a list of changes from the previous approved version of the protocol  starting at IRB 
approval . This table will remain blank until initial IRB approval. The list shall be a brief overview. When 
appropriate, a brief justification for the change should be included. This is a running list  for the life of the 
study . 
 
Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
04.02.2019  Footer and PSP  Changed Version number and version date to 4.0 
and 4 -2-19 respectively  
 6. Study Intervention  All references to “UH Lerner Tower Kitchen” were 
replaced with “UH Dahms Clinical Research Unit”  
 6. Study Intervention  The onging  post study OIT maintenance period 
was changed to being optional for study 
participants and is not paid for by the study.  
 8.2 Study Assessments and 
Procedures  At Visit 1, the physician and participant will 
review and update the patient’s Food Allergy & 
Anaphylaxis Emergency Care Plan.  Conmed 
review also added before each dose escalation  
 PSP and section 8.3.9  Changed PIRC (Pediatric Institute Review 
Committee) to PRRC (Pediatric Research Review Committee)  
 Inclusion criteria  Added the additional language “ within a 12 
month period of study enrollment ” in the 
inclusion criteria requiring Evidence of IgE 
mediated peanut hypersensitivity  
 1.3 Schedule of activities  and section 
6.1 Added Urine Pregnancy  
 6.2 IP dispensing  Remove randomize to treat and place a blinded 
label on jar from.  
 Section 7.2  Added additional reasons for discontinuation  
 1.3 Schedule of activities  Changed Adverse event review to AE review, 
added Study drug compliance and conmed 
assessment lines  
46 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
 8.3.1  The CoFAR and CTCAE are mentioned as the 
scales that will be used to assess SAEs/AEs  
 8.4.2  and 8.4.3  Rewording of reporting requirements and 
timelines  
05.28.2019  PSP and footer  Updated amendment # and version date  
 Schedule of events , table #4 and table 
#5 Added spirometry and peak flow measure to 
study visits  
 9.1 Statistical Hypothesis  Added language in regards to safety hypothesis  
10.01.2019  PSP and footer  Updated amendment # and version date  
 Schedule of Events section 1.3 and 
section 6.1  Added additional urine pregnancy at visit 10  
 Schedule of Events  section 1.3  Added language on spirometry being done at 
investigators discretion at enrollment as well visit 
10 
 Section 6.1  Clarified that the location of the skin prick test 
must be the same throughout the study  
 Section 6.1 and table 7  Added a 25 mg dose in DBOFC as well as 
clarification that additional smaller doses may be necessary on a patient by patient basis depending 
on the results of the initial OFC  
 Section 6. 1 In build-up phase a dose double the size of the 
highest tolerated dose in the initial escalation 
may be used before the patient can be entered into the build -up phase schedule  
02.12.2020  Footer  Updated protocol version date and  amendment 
number  
 PSP Added signature line for sponsor  
 Inclusion criteria  Added verbiage to inclusion criteria # 2   “or a high 
level of suspicion based on testing at the 
discretion of the investigator .” 
47 
 
Melton/Bjelac  02-12-2020  Amendment #3  
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
 Initial dose escalation (Table 5)  Removed the first 2 doses  in the initial do se 
escalation (0.1 and 0.2 milligrams of peanut 
protein) . Added a 4mg dose to be given at +90 
minutes. Adjusted time for 6mg dose to +120 
minutes  
   
 