APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  1 of 21
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2017-1)
Protocol Title:  Preliminary  Effectiveness of  Remotely Monitored Blood Alcohol Concentration Device  as 
Treatment Modality
Principal Investigator: Frank  D. Buono, Ph.D.
Version Date: June 1, 2020
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  2 of 21SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the usage and acceptability of the Soberlink’s blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) unit in collaboration  with  Aware  treatment to assess increased  sobriety within patients 
suffering from  alcohol use disorder (AUD).   
The specific AIMS will be: 
1)To determine the effectiveness of Soberlink’s  ability  to increase  abstinence 
2)To evaluate the impact  of Soberlink’s device on the participant based on their  quality  of health and 
sobriety.
3)To evaluate the extent  to which need  for higher levels of follow-up care and treatment  is reduced  for 
individuals who  have had access to the Soberlink  device.
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
The duration of the time of the study  will be two years to complete.  This  will include  (as seen on Figure 1) 
time for IRB approval and recruitment, randomization and completion the study,  follow-up and lastly analysis 
with dissemination.  
Figure  1: Overview  and Timeline  
0 3
66 9 12 15 18 21 24
4 Phase 1 IRB and Recruitment 
…
9Phase 2 Randomization and Trial 15
Phase 3 Follow-up
3
6Phase 4 - Analysis and Dissemination
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
Alcohol dependence (AD) has been characterized as a chronic disorder that presents an enduring vulnerability 
to relapse.  Unfortunately, AD treatment is commonly delivered as a series of acute care sessions (Etheridge, 
Craddock, Dunteman, & Hubbard, 1995; McLellan, Lewis, O'Brien, & Kleber, 2000), which means  that 
individuals seeking treatment often face the challenge of maintaining sobriety  upon returning to the same 
environment where  they had struggled  with alcohol  dependence previous to seeking treatment. Studies  have 
shown that 40%– 60% of patients  treated  for alcohol problems relapse within 3 months, and this rate 
increases to 70%–80% within  12 months (Bradizza, Stasiewicz, & Paas,  2006; McLellan et al., 2000;  Witkiewitz  
& Marlatt,  2004). medical  costs associated  with  alcohol use disorders (AD) are over $120 billion per year,  until 
very recently, there has been  relatively  little involvement of physicians  or other general healthcare providers 
in the treatment of AUDs  (Sacks et al., 2015).  By convention, most contemporary AUD treatment  has been 
delivered outside mainstream  healthcare  by specialty  “treatment programs” that are time-limited  by 
insurance restrictions and highly structured to deliver  a standardized “program”  of care (McLellan et al., 
2005; Foll et al., 2009).  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  3 of 21Outcome research has typically concentrated upon program “graduation” rates and “posttreatment” 
abstinence as standard measures of treatment  “success” or “failure” (McLellan et al., 2005).There are 
conceptual (McKay and Hiller-Sturmhöfel, 2011; McLellan  et al., 2014)  and some  methodological indications 
(Kim et al., 2011; Oslin et al., 2014) that ADs may be better managed using a chronic illness  approach. 
However, for the reasons described above, there is not yet the evidence-base needed to guide a 
personalized, chronic care approach to the treatment of ADs, or even  to guide the use of monitoring 
technology within that treatment approach.  Previous  research on the use of mobile phones for AD treatment  
include telephone-based monitoring of medication adherence  (Stoner & Hendershot, 2012), behavioral self-
control training to withstand cravings  (Yu et al., 2012),  and video-recording breathalyser tests to measure  
breath alcohol content (BrAC) combined with contingency  management procedures (Alessi & Petry,  2013). 
Two recent studies  used, the Addiction-Comprehensive Health Enhancement Support  System  (ACHESS)  
(Gustafson et al., 2014) and Location-Based Monitoring  and Intervention  for Alcohol Use Disorders (LBMI-A) 
(Dulin, Gonzalez, & Campbell, 2014)  to monitor  patients  with AD. These two smartphone applications with 
composite functions have proven effective  in reducing  the incidence of hazardous drinking and promoting 
abstinence. 
Soberlink is a comprehensive  alcohol  monitoring system  designed to remotely  monitor  a person’s Blood 
Alcohol Concentration (BAC). Combining a professional grade handheld breathalyzer with  wireless  
connectivity, the technology  includes real-time facial recognition, robust tamper detection  and real-time 
alerting. The Soberlink System  also provides professionals  with a password protected, HIPAA compliant 
healthcare portal  where they can set up a variety of advanced reporting tools. Soberlink is designed and 
assembled in the United States and is one of the few FDA 510(k) cleared  medical devices in remote alcohol 
monitoring. The breathalyzer device  uses fuel cell technology  to detect  BAC, is handheld, and includes  an 
embedded camera. It uses  wireless technology to send the data  in real-time.  The cloud-based monitoring 
system includes  a scheduler that automatically tracks scheduled  tests and sends reminders to the client for 
testing. Retesting is automatically scheduled if a positive test is received or if a client’s identity  cannot be 
verified. The device locks out for 15 minutes  to ensure alcohol evaporates before the next test. Facial  
Recognition software ensures  identity  is approved or declined in real-time. Artificial  intelligence is used  to 
report on testing and Green, Yellow and Red visual icons are used in all reporting  to identify events.
Aware Recovery Care (ARC) is an in-home  addiction treatment program that provides highly intensive,  
rigorously monitored, 52 weeks  of intensive outpatient care, based on a chronic disease model  of care.  This 
model was first used  in 2012 and delivers a four-phased, year-long program treating substance use disorder. 
The approach  implements principles  of evidence-based  practices including  Motivational  Interviewing, 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and Dialectical Behavioral Therapy, in the home setting. Additionally, all 
families are offered education and the opportunity to participate  in the treatment  process. ARC works  to 
transform the home  environment into a healthy,  healing  environment for clients and families to recover.  ARC 
supports clients in creating  and maintaining both  structure and recovery that is tailored to each  individual's 
needs. 
4.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  4 of 21Study Sites/Feasibility. The study will be conducted in at clinical office for Aware Recovery  Center (North Haven, 
CT). The census of the facility on average recruits 38 new individuals a month and they currently  have 300. This 
will be the first study, completed at this site, which is a randomized control treatment design.  
Procedure: 
 (www.randomized.com ). Individuals will be placed into one of two conditions (Soberlink+Aware; Named  Group 1) 
or (Aware; Named Group 2).  Both  groups  will be consented by either  the principal investigator or the research 
assistants who will be present  at all screenings and ensured that they  understand their  rights.  Participants will be 
told they are allowed  to leave or withdraw for the study  without penalty or hindering the relationship  between 
themselves and Aware Recovery.  
Figure 2: Time Intervals for Assessments
Soberlink+Aware/ Group 1: 
Group 1
This group  will include access to the Aware  treatment  (see ‘Aware  treatment’  below), and access to the Soberlink 
device. A research  assistant will train the participant  and provide  an orientation (see orientation  to Soberlink 
below) for what  will be taught.  All participants will be complete screening and outcome assessments,  along with 
using the Soberlink device for the first time.  The participant’s Soberlink device will be set up to test participants 
twice a day.  Reminder emails  (see attached  reminder  emails)  will be sent  out the day before, and the day of the 1 
month, 2 month and 3-month surveys that will be completed online in the participant’s home  through a secure 
link sent directly  to them.  Subsequent phone  calls will be made by the research assistant  to the participant if they  
have missed their evaluation.  Upon completion of the surveys, the participants  in group  1 will be paid, and 
reminded of the subsequent follow-ups. The estimated  time of the process will take 45 to 60 minutes  to 
complete.  
Orientation to Soberlink
Patients assigned to the Soberlink-Aware condition will receive a 30-minute  orientation to the Soberlink, including 
an initial their first administration of the BAU. Participants will learn the following: 
1.The Soberlink  System consists of a wireless Breathalyzer that uses a professional grade fuel cell sensor to 
detect alcohol levels at an accuracy  of +/-.005 BAC.  
2.The device also has an embedded camera  and uses  Facial Recognition software to automatically  identify 
the client at the end of the test. 
3.The participant will have a set testing schedule that consists of a minimum of 2 tests per day. The 
participant will have a test window of 2 hours with  a Late  window of 1 hour. 
4.When the participant blows into the Soberlink device, it will capture the BAC level while the embedded 
camera takes  a photo of the participant during the test
The breathalyzer device uses fuel cell technology to detect BAC, is handheld, and includes an embedded  camera.  
It uses wireless technology to send the data in real-time. The cloud-based monitoring system  includes a scheduler 
that automatically tracks scheduled tests and sends reminders to the client  for testing. Retesting is automatically  
scheduled if a positive test is received or if a client’s identity cannot  be verified. The device locks out for 15 
minutes to ensure alcohol  evaporates before the next test.  Facial Recognition  software ensures identity is Admission 1 Month Eval 2 Month Eval 3 Month Eval6 week
Follow-Up
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  5 of 21approved or declined  in real-time. Artificial intelligence is used to report on testing and Green, Yellow and Red 
visual icons are used  in all reporting to identify events.
All individuals in group 1 will be required  to complete two BAC’s per day.  A testing  window will be scheduled with 
each individual between  7am to 9am  (morning BAC) and 8pm to 10pm  (evening  BAC).  During  the testing  window,  
all individual  in this group can provide  the BAC at any time  within the window, all tests performed outside the 
window will be recorded but counted  as unscheduled  test on the BAC spreadsheet. All participants can opt in to 
receive a text-reminder sent by Soberlink’s automated server to remind  the patient  about their  morning  and 
evening BACs. 
Individuals who miss two consecutive BAC’s  will be followed up by either Research Assistant  or the PI. Individuals 
who miss four consecutive BAC’s without contact of the PI or the research assistant  will be temporarily  hold 
unless the individual has expressed thoughts of leaving the study prematurely.  Missing  more than  six consecutive 
BACs without communication will result in termination  from the study by the PI.  A pilot  study  contacted  at Aware 
prior to the PI being involved demonstrated little reactivity or premature departure for those who had access to 
the Soberlink device.  
Aware/Group 2 :
This group  will not receive  access or training to Soberlink device,  however  they will be recruited  to complete the 
same set of surveys at the same time intervals (See Figure 2). Upon completion of the surveys, the participants  in 
group 2 will be paid,  and told reminded the subsequent follow-ups. Reminder  emails  (see attached reminder 
emails) will be sent out the day before, and the day of the 1 month, 2 month  and 3 month  evaluations.  
Subsequent phone calls  will be made  by the research assistant  to the participant if they  have missed their  
evaluation.  The estimated time of the process will take under 30 minutes to complete.   
Aware Treatment: Aware Recovery Care  (ARC)  is an in-home addiction treatment program that provides highly 
intensive, rigorously monitored, 52 weeks of intensive  outpatient care,  based on a chronic disease  model  of care.  
The approach  implements principles  of evidence-based  practices including  Motivational  Interviewing, Cognitive  
Behavioral Therapy,  and Dialectical Behavioral Therapy.  Additionally, all families are offered education and the 
opportunity to participate in the treatment process. The client's individualized treatment  team consists of a 
licensed professional  (nurse  or master’s level clinician), two Certified Recovery Advisors (CRAs),  and an LMFT. The 
clients care team is overseen by a master's  level  alcohol and drug counselor, an advanced practicing nurse, and an 
addiction psychiatrist. The licensed professional is responsible for leading the team, collaborating with external 
providers, communicating with family  members and providing  referrals  to external providers as needed.  The  
CRAs are lived-experience advisors, at least  one of whom is both age and gendered match  in order to provide  a 
more intimate therapeutic relationship. CRAs are responsible for delivering  a staged biopsychosocial  curriculum.  
Familial involvement  is another key component of this model, with education and frequent  communication  
provided. All care teams include a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist for 6 family therapy  sessions, as well as 
4 family education sessions delivered by a special trained family education facilitator. 
Randomization. At the randomization visit, the research assistant will conduct assessments to evaluate alcohol 
use. Eligible patients will be assigned to one of the two groups using randomization sequence. The 
randomization sequence  will allow for equal representation between  two groups without bias on gender, age 
or ethnicity given all individuals will be categorized as single  variable
 Assessments: 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  6 of 21We are planning to assess a broad range of subject characteristics, process measures and treatment 
outcomes over the 3-month  trial and at the 6 week post treatment follow-up (See Table 1). Baseline 
assessments are designed to ensure that patients meet eligibility criteria and that important predictor 
variables such  as cognitive impairment are assessed. Baseline measures include evaluation and understanding 
of the extent of the AUD issue from a several different vantages points. Primary outcome measures include 
reductions in days per week of use and negative BAU screens for alcohol. Monthly assessments will take 
approximately 30 minutes and monthly and follow-up’s 45 minutes. Patients will be paid $10 for the baseline 
and monthly assessments, $25 for follow-up assessments (up to $65 total).
Table 1. List of Assessments
Screening & Baseline Assessments 
a)Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7) will be used to assess for generalized anxiety 
b) The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-V (SCID) will be used to assess lifetime and current 
DSM- V substance use and Axis I and II psychiatric disorders181 and screen patients for 
psychiatric eligibility.
c)Patient  Health  Questionnaire  (PHQ-9)  will be used  for depression symptoms  for the past 2 weeks.
d)   Substance Use History will assess frequency, intensity and duration of use and route of 
administration of drugs.
e)Alcohol Abstinence Self-Efficacy Scale will evaluate the participant’s beliefs of alcohol usage.
Outcome Measures.
a)Soberlink  (BAC):  sensor  to detect  alcohol levels  at an accuracy of +/-.005 BAC.  BAC is 
established by the manufacturer based on predetermined cut off points
The Time Line Follow Back (TLFB),  administered by research  administer onto a secure web-
basedserver. Will be used to collect self-reported frequency, quantity and route of administration of 
heroin, prescription opioids, cocaine, alcohol and other drugs use during the preceding 30 days, and 
medicationb)
use 185-
187.
c)Quality of Life Scale is a self-directed survey that assess the quality of life of the individual.  
d)    Soberlink  Use Survey  is a self-directed  survey  that evaluates  the effectiveness  of the device.  
e)   The Drug Risk Response Test (DRRT)  189,190 is a role-playing assessment of coping  responses to 
drug use risk situations, and takes 8-10 minutes to complete. The instrument is composed of six 
audio-taped  scenarios. Patients are instructed to imagine that they  are in the situation and 
provide a detailed account to how they  would respond to that situation. Patient accounts are 
recorded and scored by trained evaluators. The instrument provides 4 measures: the number of 
coping responses, the number of activities per response, the quality of the best response and the 
quality of the overall response. The measure has been show to mediate days of drug abstinence 
in automated CBT treatment 189.f) AUDIT C- is brief alcohol screen that reliably identifies  patients who are hazardous drinkers  or have  
active alcohol use disorders. 
Data monitoring procedures involve an organizational structure of clearly defined tasks assigned to all 
research personnel involved in the conduct of this study. The organizational structure used  to ensure quality of 
data in this project include: 1) extensive training and close supervision of research assistants in data collection; 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  7 of 212) direct entry of most data at time of collection; and 3) utilization of on-line error- checking procedures. The 
PI supervises data procedures. All error corrections are fully documented in the research records of the study. 
All research personnel are required to participate in and document training in protection of human subjects 
and the responsible conduct of scientific research. Data entry and review in this study will be conducted using a 
web-based data collection and monitoring system. Another set of automatic email reports, sent on a weekly or 
less frequent basis, provides a set of designated recipients (e.g., the PI or Project Director) with information 
about study logistics, such as number of subjects enrolled, number of subjects active in the protocol, gender 
composition of the sample, percentage of missing data by each assessment instrument, or any other 
information necessary to monitor the progress of the project and the compliance with the protocol. A fully 
computerized system allows this type of monitoring without furnishing investigators with data that could 
influence the outcome of the study. The system meets the highest security and reliability standards. All 
connections to the systems are secured and encrypted using 128-bit strong encryption protocols and only 
authorized users are able to access the system. 
5.Genetic Testing   N/A ☒
A.Describe
i.the types of future  research to be conducted using  the materials, specifying if immortalization  of 
cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing,  genome  wide  association studies, or animal 
studies are planned Write here
ii.the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under  which  material will be received 
Write here
iii.the types of information about the donor/individual contributors  that will be entered into a 
database Write here
iv.the methods  to uphold confidentiality Write here
B.What are the conditions  or procedures  for sharing of materials  and/or distributing for future research 
projects? Write here
C.Is widespread sharing of materials planned? Write here
D.When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  Write here
E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials  at any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers that connect 
them to their materials?  Write  here
i.How will requests to withdraw materials be handled  (e.g., material no longer identified: that is, 
anonymized) or material destroyed)? Write here
F.Describe the provisions for protection of participant  privacy Write here
G.Describe the methods  for the security of storage  and sharing of materials  Write  here
6.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
We will recruit 110 individuals with  alcohol use disorder as diagnosed by the DSM-5.  They will be recruited at 
Aware Recovery Center in North  Haven, CT.  
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in 
the research project. Will subjects  who may require additional  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a justification  
for their  involvement.
☐Children ☐ Healthy  ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  8 of 21☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐Pregnant women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
Inclusion Criteria: 1) are at least 21 years old, 2) currently enrolled at Aware In home treatment, and 3) Primary 
or secondary DSM-5 diagnosis of alcoholism use disorder (AUD). 
Exclusion Criteria: 1) Current suicide or homicide risk, 2) meet criteria for DSM-IV current psychotic disorder, or 
bipolar disorder, 3) does not have phone access with text message capabilities , 4) Unable to read or understand 
English, 5) Unable to complete the study because of anticipated incarceration or move, 6) Life-threatening or 
unstable medical problems, 7) No course of current or pending legal action, 8) Soberlink results being used for 
child custody or legal circumstance.
9.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  
Subjects will be interviewed by a trained and supervised research assistant to determine interest in 
participating in the study and eligibility.  Participants will be interviewed at the Aware facility prior during the 
admission process, or via Zoom or telephone if the subject is unable to present to the clinic, using standardized 
psychological assessments or will complete similar standardized self-report forms. Eligibility will be evaluated 
by the research assistant and reviewed with the project director or PI prior to initiation
10.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
The main  risk associated  with the study is the possibility that confidential  information obtained during the 
study will be disclosed, given the social and legal sanctions associated  with  the use of psychoactive 
substances and psychiatric symptoms.  Patient names  and other identifying  information do not appear on 
research records. Finally, we will clearly explain our mandated obligation to report incidents, as well as 
suspicion of child  abuse or neglect,  and risk of harm to self or others, and advise subjects  that continued  
alcohol use alone does  not require reporting to child protection  services.
Soberlink: All Soberlink results are sent directly from devices to Soberlink web portal where they are stored 
under specific password protected  account,  that only the PI and the research assistant  will have access  to.  
Soberlink uses Rackspace servers  to host our sites which all use a Secure Sockets Layer  (SSL)  certificate and 
our public  facing sites go beyond that and use an Extended  Validation SSL (EVSSL or EV SSL) certificate.  These  
Certs prevent online transaction fraud, EVSSL certificates help organizations gain consumer  trust  by providing 
secure transaction processes.   All of the SSL Certificates  use AES 256 encryption  which  is considered the 
industry standard.
Rating Scales and Assessments: These are all noninvasive and should add no risk. The major  disadvantage is 
the time  it takes to complete them. Confidentiality of these results is specifically protected by Federal laws, 
and all records  will be identified by code number only, with the master file kept under lock by the Principal 
Investigator.
11.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  9 of 21Confidentiality with regard to collected materials will be maintained via a numbered reference system 
maintained by the principal investigator. Subjects’ names will appear only on a consent  form and “key” form 
kept in a secured cabinet by the PI, separate from the subject records.  All collected materials will be kept in 
locked file cabinets in a secured office. Inclusion and exclusion criteria, and the use of trained clinical 
interviewers in the assessment phase of the study will help to avoid the acceptance of subjects into this study 
who have either insignificant substance abuse or significant psychiatric contraindications to both treatments in 
this study.  In cases of psychological deterioration or worsening substance abuse, we will recommend to 
patients to contact their physician immediately and consider withdrawing from the study to receive more 
intensive treatments.  When necessary subjects will be withdrawn from this study and research staff will assist 
patients with appropriate sites for treatment such as the care coordinator, their sponsor or the emergency 
room.  In instances of suicidal or homicidal risk, appropriate authorities including their primary provider will be 
informed and necessary actions (seeking crisis/suicidality evaluations and possible hospitalization) taken. 
Soberlink have  facial  recognition to confirm its the correct  participant testing, while also have internal sensors 
and algorithms that can detect if the participant  is using an alternative air source (i.e. air pump) or sample is 
not consistent with human breath.  
 
12.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
a. What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study? The risks  associated with  participating in this study  can be categorized  as minimal (i.e., 
risks are commensurate with  everyday risks associated with drug  abuse treatment  and data have 
adequate protection  for maintaining confidentiality).
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? N/A
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:
i.How will adverse events and unanticipated  problems involving  risks to subjects  or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed? NA
ii.What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  NA
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? NA
The principal investigator is responsible for monitoring  the data, assuring protocol compliance, and 
conducting the safety reviews at the specified frequency monthly, quarterly.  During the review 
process the principal investigator will evaluate whether  the study should continue unchanged, require  
modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.
The principal investigator, the Institutional Review  Board (IRB) have the authority to stop or suspend 
the study or require  modifications.
This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated  Problems Involving Risks  to Subjects  or 
Others (UPIRSOs), including  adverse events, are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events  occur, 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  10 of 21Reportable Events (which are events that are serious or life-threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated  but 
occurring with a greater frequency than expected)  and possibly, probably, or definitely related)  or 
Unanticipated Problems  Involving Risks  to Subjects or Others that may require a temporary or permanent 
interruption of study  activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written  report within  5 
calendar days  of the Principal Investigator becoming  aware of the event to the IRB (using the appropriate forms  
from the website) and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The investigator will apprise fellow 
investigators and study personnel of all UPIRSOs  and adverse events  that occur during the conduct  of this 
research project  through regular  study meetings and/or via email  as they are reviewed by the principal 
investigator. The protocol’s research  monitor, study sponsors, funding and regulatory agencies will be informed  
of serious adverse  events within 5 days  of the event becoming known to the principal investigator.
13.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
A sample size of 110 would provide >80% power (α= .05) to detect a medium to large effect size (d= .65) and 
allow to fully evaluate gender differences. Greater power  is provided by the repeated  measures  GEE and 
LMM analysis for the primary  outcomes  of BAC screen negative for alcohol  drugs and days/month  of self-
reported illicit drug use. Sample size calculations for LMM  are dependent on the number of repeated events,  
the retention rate, and the interclass correlation, in addition to the alpha  level,  the expected  effect size, and 
the statistical  power 198. The current  randomized  trial would provide  estimates to guide  a power  analysis for 
a large Stage  II study. Statistical procedures and models for analyzing data have been selected according  to 
the research  hypotheses being  investigated  and the types of data  available.  We will use α< .05, but will use 
appropriate corrections  for multiple tests. Statistical  analyses will be conducted  on an intention-to-treat 
sample using  SPSS. Using chi square and t-tests,  we will first conduct  preliminary analyses of the adequacy  of 
the randomization procedure, the comparability of baseline measures for the two groups,  and the possible 
need for covariates in the analyses of treatment outcome data.
SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
1.Name of the radiotracer: Write here
2.Is the radiotracer FDA approved?     ☐YES ☐NO
If NO, an FDA issued IND is required for the investigational  use unless RDRC assumes  oversight.  
3. Check  one:    ☐IND#  Write here  or  ☐ RDRC oversight (RDRC  approval will be required prior to use)
4.    Background Information: Provide a description of previous human use, known risks,  and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this radiotracer  is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Write here
4.    Source:   Identify the source  of the radiotracer  to be used. Write here
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  11 of 215.    Storage,  Preparation  and Use:  Describe the method  of storage, preparation, stability information, method of 
sterilization and method of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 Write  here
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☒N/A
1.If an exemption from IND filing requirements is sought for a clinical investigation of a drug product that is 
lawfully marketed in the United States, review  the following categories  and complete the category  that 
applies (and delete  the inapplicable categories) :
Exempt Category 1: The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed  in the United States  
can be exempt from  IND regulations if all of the following  are yes: 
1.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report  to the FDA as a well-controlled study in support  
of a new indication  for use or to be used to support any other  significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug.☐
2.The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed  as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the investigation is NOT  to support  a significant change  in the advertising for the 
product.☐
3.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration  or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor  that significantly increases the risks (or decreases  the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product☐
4.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC) 
review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50 and 
21 CFR Part 56).☐
5.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for investigational drugs.☐
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  12 of 21 Exempt Category 2 (all items i, ii, and iii must  be checked  to grant  a category 2 exemption)
☐i. The clinical investigation is for an in vitro diagnostic  biological product that involves  one or
more of the following (check all that apply):
☐ Blood  grouping serum
☐ Reagent red blood cells 
☐ Anti-human globulin
☐ii. The diagnostic  test is intended to be used  in a diagnostic  procedure that confirms  the
diagnosis made by another,  medically established,  diagnostic product or procedure; and
☐iii.  The diagnostic  test is shipped in compliance with 21 CFR §312.160.
 Exempt Category 3
☐ The drug is intended solely for tests in vitro  or in laboratory research animals if shipped  in accordance with 
21 CFR 312.60
 Exempt Category 4 
☐ A clinical  investigation  involving use of a placebo if the investigation does not otherwise  require submission  
of an IND. 
2. Background Information: Provide  a description of previous  human use, known risks, and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this drug is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Write here
3. Source:  Identify  the source of the drug  or biologic to be used. Write here
a) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects? ☐YES ☐NO  
If yes, by whom? Write here
4.Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, and for 
parenteral products, method  of sterilization and method  of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 Write  here
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service  utilized:
    ☐  YNHH  IDS                                                        ☐  CMHC Pharmacy                                           ☐ West  Haven VA
    ☐  PET Center                                                      ☐    None      
    ☐  Other: 
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service  at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail  how the PI 
will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.   
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  13 of 215.Use of Placebo:  ☐Not applicable to this research project
If use of a placebo  is planned, provide a justification  which addresses  the following:
a)Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies. If there  are no other available therapies, state 
this. Write here
b)State the maximum total  length  of time a participant  may receive placebo while on the study.  
Write here
c)Address the greatest potential harm that may come  to a participant as a result  of receiving placebo. 
Write here
d)Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo. 
Write here
6.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure   ☐Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has ended?
☐ Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under  which continued access to study  drug(s)  may  apply as well as 
conditions for termination of such access.  Write here
☐ NO   If no, explain  why this is acceptable. Write here
 B.  DEVICES  ☐N/A
1. Are there any investigational devices used  or investigational procedures performed at Yale-New Haven 
Hospital (YNHH) (e.g.,  in the YNHH  Operating  Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular  Center)?   ☐Yes   ☒No    
 If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements :
A YNHH New  Product/Trial Request Form must be completed via EPIC:  Pull down  the Tools tab in the EPIC Banner,  
Click on Lawson,  Click  on “Add new”  under  the New Technology Request Summary and fill out the forms 
requested including  the “Initial Request  Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary”, and attach any other pertinent  
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;    AND
Your request  must be reviewed  and approved in writing by the appropriate YNHH  committee before 
patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive  the investigational device or investigational procedure.
2.Background Information: Provide  a description of previous human use, known risks, and any other factors  
that might influence risks.  If this is the first time this device is being used  in humans,  include relevant  data on 
animal models. 
The Soberlink  device has been FCC and FDA approved,  and has been utilized in several all clinical trials 
evaluating the efficacy and durability  of the device. It has demonstrated by Skipper et al (2014) as a pilot  
study, and by Koffarnus, et al 2017 as a randomized control study to evaluate  the preliminary efficacy within  
adults with alcohol use disorder.  The device  utilizes face-id to recognize and document the individual who  is 
providing a BAC, however  all information  is stored directly onto the Soberlink’s  secure server (see below for 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  14 of 21security measures). Given that it has been approved by the FCC, all other risks have  been minimalized based 
on research. 
3.Source: 
a) Identify the source of the device to be used. Soberlink Cellular 
b) Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? ☒Yes   ☐No     
4.Investigational device accountability:  State how the PI, or named designee, ensures that an investigational 
device is used only in accordance with the research protocol approved by the HIC, and maintains control of 
the investigational device  as follows:
a)Maintains appropriate records,  including  receipt of shipment, inventory at the site, dispensation  or use 
by each participant, and final disposition  and/or  the return of the investigational device (or other 
disposal if applicable): Write here
b)Documents pertinent information  assigned to the investigational device (e.g., date, quantity, batch or 
serial number, expiration  date if applicable, and unique code number): Write here
c)Stores the investigational device according to the manufacturer's recommendations with  respect to 
temperature, humidity,  lighting, and other environmental considerations: Write here
d)Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements: Write here
e)Distributes  the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol: Write here
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  110
a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 110 
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: N/A
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☒Flyers ☐ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical record review* ☐ Departmental/Center research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☐ Web-based  clinical trial registries ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☐ YCCI Recruitment database ☐ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook): 
☒ Other: Word of mouth 
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.Describe how potential subjects  will be identified.  
Clinicians at Aware Recovery Care (ARC) will inform  potential participants through word  of mouth  about  the 
research opportunity  at ARC. Clinicians can direct  them  to the flyers or provide  the contact information of the 
PI to set up a meeting.   Flyers will be hung  around the main facility and breakout  rooms where potential  
participate congregate. The flyer  provides name  and telephone number of where the PI can be reached.
b.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. Patients will be enrolled at Aware Recovery Center a 
Connecticut community practice will be invited to participate as patient respondents. Patients will be recruited 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  15 of 21through a flyer posted and word of mouth (through their clinician) at the Aware facility.  Patients who call 
about information about the study will be screened based on inclusion criteria and ability to understand and 
read English.  Individuals who meet the criteria will meet with the research assistant either in person, via Zoom, 
or via telephone to be evaluated for eligibility.
c.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? Research Assistants and/or the PI of the study 
4.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☐Yes, all subjects
☐Yes, some of the subjects
☒No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. Write  here
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☐ For entire  study  - –
☒ For recruitment/screening purposes only– 
☐ For inclusion  of non-English speaking subject if short form is being  used  and there is no translated HIPAA  
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: It would be impracticable to obtain signed  authorization prior to screening since the subjects  
will either  call into the lab for screening  or will be referred  by the patient’s clinician. 
ii. If requesting a waiver of signed  authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed  authorization  for use/disclosure of this data:  After seeing a flyer or being referred to 
the PI by the clinician,  potential subject who call the PI/research  team  will be screened  for eligibility  
over the phone or via Zoom.  The waiver of written  authorization  allows for the collection  of PHI. If 
the subject is found to be ineligible,  the PHI will not be kept.  It would be impractical  for all 
participants to have a signed authorization prior to enrollment  in the research study as some will be 
calling from an off-site location  and asking them to physically sign something  may not be possible. 
Not enrolling these subjects into this minimal risk study because they are unable to sign a form could 
negatively influence the analysis. 
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  16 of 216.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
The process of consent will take place in person during the first study visit when possible. However, if the 
participant cannot meet with the research team due to one of the following: 1) not able to transport 
him/herself to the location,  2) autoimmune disease or 3) due to social distancing requirements, the consent 
process will take place remotely (see below),.  All potential subjects interested in the study will be fully 
informed about all aspects of the study using the appropriate consent attachment (adult consent or parental 
consent with child assent) and invited to participate. The PI or a research assistant will meet with them to read 
through the informed consent document to ensure that they each understand the content and to answer any 
potential questions that may arise.  Potential participants will be given a copy of the consent forms if they 
would like more time to decide if they wish to participate. Participants can request and keep a copy of the 
informed consent document. Participants will be informed that they are free to decline participation and 
withdraw from the study at any time and that neither action will adversely affect their relationship with study 
personnel or their clinic staff.
If the consent is not completed in-person, a secure email will be sent to the individual with an attached specific 
Zoom (www.zoom.com) ID, and time to meet online. The participant will meet with the either the PI or RA to 
complete the consent. Signature of the consent will be conducted electronically through Zoom. Zoom has the 
capabilities to allow participants to electronically sign (e-sign) their names, through manually signing their 
name with their finger on the screen through an IPAD or through a mouse on a computer. Patients can retain 
copies of the signed consent through a secondary secure email sent directly to them by the PI or RA.  Given 
that all clients at Aware have access to an online capability and have a secure registered email, there is no 
additional risks to the client. 
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
For all participants, the PI or a research assistant will meet with them to read through the informed consent 
document.  Each participant will be asked repeatedly throughout the consent whether they understand what is 
presented.  In addition, subjects will be asked to provide a summary of their understanding of the consent. 
Participants will also be asked what questions they have about the study procedures, their rights and 
obligations and the expectations and obligations of the study staff. When it is clear that they understand the 
material, both the research staff and the participant will sign two consents and the participant will retain a 
copy for their records
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
Non-english speaking subjects will not be included in this protocol.
As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☒
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  17 of 21Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☐Not Requesting any consent waivers 
☒Requesting a waiver of signed consent:
☒ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire Study (Note that an information  sheet may be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent,  address the following:
Would  the signed consent form be the only  record  linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal  risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk? YES ☐    NO☐ 
Does the research include any activities  that would require  signed consent in a non-research  context? YES ☐   
NO ☐
 ☐ Requesting  a waiver of consent :
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire Study 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  18 of 21 
For a full waiver of consent,  please  address all of the following:
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.  
☐ No
Will the waiver  adversely affect  subjects’  rights  and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why  would the research be impracticable to conduct  without the waiver?  
Where  appropriate,  how will pertinent information  be returned to, or shared  with subjects at a later  date?   
n/a
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
1.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected  and used for the research?   We will collect names, addresses, email  addresses, phone numbers, 
birth date and admission, discharge  dates, and psychiatric diagnosis. 
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded  and stored? 
Data will be stored two in two servers: 1) Soberlink uses Rackspace servers to host our sites which all use a 
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) certificate and all of the SSL Certificates use AES 256 encryption which is considered  
the industry standard.  This server will collect,  record and store all data regarding any data that is inputted from 
the Soberlink device.   2) All surveys will be stored through Qualtrics. Qualtrics is an approved vendor of Yale 
University, and will securely  store, record and store all participants surveys.   
3.How will the digital data be stored?  ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive   ☐Portable Hard  Drive   ☒Secured Server   
☒Laptop Computer  ☐Desktop Computer  ☐Other
4.What methods and procedures will be used  to safeguard the confidentiality and security of the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated  above during and after the subject’s participation in the study? 
All survey  information will be stored on a privately maintained, Yale approved vendor (Qualtrics) for all data 
collection.  Specific native IPADs will be utilized for intake/admission  only.   All other survey’s will be completed 
online in the participant’s  home through a secure  link sent directly to them.  Soberlink uses Rackspace servers to 
host our sites which  all use a Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)  certificate and our public facing sites go beyond  that and 
use an Extended Validation  SSL (EVSSL or EV SSL) certificate. These Certs prevent online transaction  fraud,  EVSSL 
certificates help organizations gain consumer trust by providing secure transaction  processes.   All of the SSL 
Certificates use AES 256 encryption which is considered the industry  standard.
The PI and his research team will have access to coded information  and will be responsible  for all data 
collection and analysis.  All information  will be stored  on Yale’s secure  server  and will be encrypted. 
Information will not be uploaded to the sponsored server  as identifiable data. Only aggregate 
information that does not consist of identifiers will be distributed to Soberlink,  and Aware Recovery 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  19 of 21Care. A copy of the de-identified information  will be stored on a secure server at Yale.  All data will be 
coded through in a password protected Microsoft  Access file.  
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
5.What will be done with the data  when the research  is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when  identifiers  will be destroyed. If no, describe how  the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured. Files with identifiable data will be destroyed upon completion  of the study in 
regulation with University Policy,  non-PHI will be kept  indefinitely for data analysis.   
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obtained? N/A
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
There is no direct benefit to  individuals. We hope individuals who  are randomized into the Aware+Soberlink 
group will receive access  to the Soberlink  device to monitor their  alcohol usage and give them a permanent 
product measurement. Those  who  are not randomized into the control group  will still have access  to the Aware  
Model.  All individuals will have access to the Aware In-home treatment model. A five-phase step down model  
that provides  access to continual care through an integrated  team  of medical,  nursing, counselors and home 
health advisors coming to the patient’s home.   
The study will assist in evaluating the efficacy of the combined effect of Soberlink and Aware Model and given 
the limited risks of the current study the study would be categorized as minimal (risks are commensurate  with 
everyday risks associated  with alcohol abuse treatment as an adequate protection of confidentiality).  T his 
information is important in order to develop cost-effective treatments for alcohol dependence,  which ultimately 
would be of great benefit  to society. Given the anticipated benefits to subjects and to society, the low risks to 
subjects are reasonable.
Patients who  are randomized to the Soberlink group will have receive the Soberlink device  and four months of 
service for no charge (390 USD).  Soberlink will purchase  gift cards for the PI and PI/RA will distribute them to the 
participant. 
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
Patients are not restricted  from seeking any ancillary treatment (i.e. Alcoholic Anonymous). 
2.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  20 of 21All patients in both groups (Soberlink+Aware and Aware) will be receive  gift cards incentives of the following 
increments for completing  assessments: Evaluations, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3will  be 10USD. The six week  
follow-up appointment  will be 25USD. The total  compensation per person is 65USD.   
3.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
For this study there will be no direct costs  associated with participation in the research.  The study  will not 
cover any costs  that participants incur  for their  access to the internet or web browser.  Patients will be 
responsible for their own coverage through this.  
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
N/A. The research  is expected to involve only minimal risk.
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? NA
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? NA
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  NA
d.Who will pay for this treatment? NA
e.How will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? NA
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020IRB# 2000027787
Page  21 of 21IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No  
☐
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 6/9/2020