Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 1 of 10 
  
 
Acceptability of Virtual Reality Experience by 
Health Care Providers for Improving Focus and Reducing 
Anxiety:  A Pilot Trial.  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
 
 
10/23/202 0
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 2 of 10 
 
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 3 of 10 
 Aims, purpose, or objectives:  
We propose to conduct a pilot study on the safety and impact of two nature -based virtual reality (VR) interventions 
on level s of anxiety and inattention . 
 
Paradigms like this have been used previously to study the impact of VR on anxiety1,2 but this specific intervention 
has not. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that it is feasible, but unique to t he study of workplace anxiety and 
inattention,  and in its design too.   
 The proposed investigation will apply two  novel paradigm s using proprietary VR (R -VR) interventions  designed to 
reduce anxiety and inattention . We will explore whether this interventi on is safe, and whether it can impact the 
stress, anxiety, and difficulty in focus  of employees in the workplace.  Results from this pilot study will be used to 
decide if a larger efficacy study with longer duration of daily VR experience will be developed.  
  The primary aims:  
1) Evaluate the safety and acceptability of the R -VR 
 
2) Evaluate the adherence to  the R -VR 
 
3) Evaluate the impact of using R -VR on anxiety and inattention levels  
 
4) Compare the impact of  two R -VR paradigms on anxiety and to correlate this impa ct with baseline self -
efficacy  
 The major constructs that will be examined in this proposal are (1) S afety ; (2) A nxiety; (3) Inattention ; (4) Self -
Efficacy .  It is expected that this exploratory work will lay the foundation for future studies on anxiety and 
inattention interventions at work.   
 Background:   
 
Is anxiety in the workplace  relevant ? According to large population- based surveys, up to 33.7 percent of the 
population is  affected by an anxiety disorder during their lifetime3. In the workplace, millennials and people who 
fall into the “Gen Z” category are especially vulnerable4, and 54 percent of workers under 23 said they felt anxious 
or nervous  due to stress in the preceding month5.  
 While some anxiety may improve job performance
6 by motivating people, many studies now document the 
detrimental impact of anxiety on job performance. Impostor syndrome7, burnout8, and decreased satisfaction with 
work9 are just some of the negative impacts of anxiety. Also, much research also demonstrates that the greater the 
anxiety, the lower degree of hope and sense of possibility10,11, with a subsequent sense of demoralization. In fact, 
anxious CEOs may be risk- averse verging on paranoid12.  
 
Furthermore, anxiety disorders are also very costly. The total costs of anxiety disorders were approximately $40 
Billion in the US in the 1990s13 and € 74.4 billion for 30 European EU countries in 201014. The current costs are 
likely to be much higher.   Do we really need an intervention for anxiety at work?  Although there are many conventional treatments for 
anxiety disorders, 40 percent of people who are treated r elapse or are refractory
15. Also, the percentage of people 
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 4 of 10 
 with anxiety disorders who seek help is lower than 50 percent. Having an ancill ary and readily available 
intervention for state anxiety in the workplace is likely to be helpful.  
 
Why will we not focus on diagnoses per se? The category of “anxiety disorders” has raised much controversy recently, and there is a trend to examine traits in research that correlate with biology rather than consider diagnostic categories
16.  This is a feas ibility study in a general population not focused on anxiety disorders  but 
focused on the acceptability of such an intervention.  Why will we use nature -based interventions?  
Studies indicate that forest w alks are especially helpful in improving anxiety
17-19. Even short -term exposures to 
nature decrease anxiety and improve happiness and wellbeing20-24. 
 
In a recent systematic review25, many studies indicate that VR was a n effective form of therapy for mental 
disorders compared to “treatment as usual”. In addition, t here are an increasing number of studies that have 
demonstrated that VR may be helpful for anxiety26,27. Specifically, it has been shown to be useful where worry is 
excessive28, for social anxiety, post -traumatic stress disorder, and panic attacks26. 
 
For these reasons, combining nature -based interventions with VR is a potentially feasible approach to decrease 
anxiety in the workplace.  
 While the exact mechanism is unknown, some preliminary data indicates that this might occur by shifting 
proportional pow er from higher Beta frequencies into lower Beta frequencies, and significantly reduced broadband 
Beta activity in the anterior cingulate cortex2. And even after one session of VR, there is decr eased activity in the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and medial prefrontal cortex that increases over subsequent sessions29. 
 
Study Design and Methods  
 Design:  This is a single blinded randomized cross -over study.  The participant s will be randomly assigned the 
order of the paradigms viewed in the R -VR or as videos on the computer.  The randomization will be  through 
REDCap , as program med by the study statisticians.  The R -VR with the pre -programmed paradigms  and 
corresponding non- VR videos  will be labelled A through D .    The coordinators  will be informed via REDCap 
about which the experience to provide the participant s for each of the study visits: A -D for Visits 1 -4.   
 Data Collection  
 
• Participant s will complete study surveys/questionnaires through REDCap.  The coordinator will provide the 
iPad digital or paper copy version of the survey/questionnaire to the participant  for the in -person visits and 
by email link or phone interview for the remote visits.   
 
• Survey data collection in this study will utilize REDCap30.  The only anticipated paper source documents 
will be if participant  chooses to complete surveys via paper copy or phone collection, which will then have 
select variables entered directly into the REDCap  data entry system.  All other data collection will be 
entered directly into this password protected system.    
  
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 5 of 10 
 Visit Flow a nd Timeline  
 
 Day 0  Day 1  Day 4  Day 7  Day 10  
Visit Number  V02 V1a2  V1b V2a  V2b V3a  V3b V4a  V4b 
  + 0 day to +7 
days from Consent  VR/Video  Immediately 
following 
VR/Video  Prior to 
VR/Video  VR/Video  Immediately 
following 
VR/Video  Prior to VR/Video  VR/Video  Immediately following 
VR/Video  Prior to 
VR/Video  VR/Video  Immediately 
following 
VR/Vid eo 
Informed Consent  X1             
Inclusion/Exclusion  X             
Demographics Form  X             
Medical History  X             
Adverse Events  X X   X   X   X   
Concomitant Medications  X X   X   X   X   
R-VR Intervention   X   X   X   X  
Brief Resilience   X   X   X   X   
Evaluate Response to the VR 
experience (HUMAN)   X  X X  X X  X X  X 
Emotional distress   X  X X  X X  X X  X 
Cognitive Function   X  X X  X X  X X  X 
Self-efficacy   X   X   X   X   
Anxiety   X  X X  X X  X X  X 
Satisfaction Survey              X 
1Consent can be completed digitally in person or through remote consenting 
2Visit 0  and Visit 1 can occur on same day or on separate occasions at the participant’s  convenience. 
 
Assessments  
 Study Entry Screen/Safety:  
• Demographics Form:   This form will collect demographic s (age, sex, education, marital status, job title) , 
and other lifestyle history of the research participant .  
• Medical History Form: This form will collect history of comorbid conditions such as head injury, seizures, 
major mental illness or anything that could interfere with the VR experience (e.g. eye sight).  This information will be collected via self -report and health record abstr action.  
• Adverse Events:   Pre-post measures will be obtained for dizziness ; stomach awareness ; headaches ; 
eyestrain and lightheadedness ; nausea; seizures in individuals with photosensitivity; disorientation; 
temporary (short term) loss of spatial awareness . 
• Concomitant Medications:   Current medications  (name, dosing, and indications ) will be collected at every 
patient encounter.  
 
Outcomes :  
• Anxiety:   State -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI -Y1)31-35 This 20 item self -report measure indicates the 
intensity of feelings of anxiety; it distinguishes between state anxiety (a temporary condition experienced in specific situations) and trait anxiety (a general tendency to perceive situations as threatening).  This uses a 4 
point visual analog scale and the participant indicates how they feel in the moment (1=not at all to 4=ve ry 
much so). 
• Brief Resilience Scale (6 item)
36: This brief 6 item survey is a validated way to assess resilience (ability to 
bounce back or recover from stress).  It uses a 5 point visual analog scale to measure ability to bounce back where 1 is ‘strongly disagree’ and 5 is ‘strongly agree’ wi th a resilience focused statement.  
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 6 of 10 
 • Human (7 items) : This form has been developed by the Reulay sponsor and is used by the sponsor to 
individualize the Virtual Reality Experience to each person depending on the issues the person needs 
addressed.  It provides 7 options and the participant will indicate the level of which each item is a current issue from 1= not at all to 5=a great deal.  For this study, we will administer this questionnaire and evaluate the participant response to the two VR experiences based on how they responded to this survey. 
• Emotional Distress : Adapted from the Emotional Distress -short form 7a (7 items)
37.  The PROMIS Anxiety  
item banks assess self -reported fear (fearfulness, panic), anxious misery (worry, dread), hyperarousal 
(tension, nervousness, restlessness), and somatic symptoms related to arousal (racing heart, dizziness). Anxiety is best differentiated by symptoms that reflect autonomic arousal and experience of threat. Only one behavioral avoidance item is included in the adult item bank; therefore, behavioral fear avoidance is not fully evaluated. The anxiety measures are universal rather than disease -specific. The ori ginal adult short 
form (7a), which is being used in this study was constructed by the domain team with a focus on representing the range of the trait and also representing the content of the item bank. Domain experts reviewed short forms to give input on t he relevance of each item. Psychometric properties and clinical input 
were both used and likely varied in importance across domains. Each item on the measure is rated on a 5 -
point scale (1=never; 2=rarely; 3=sometimes; 4=often; and 5=always) with a range i n score from 7 to 35 
with higher scores indicating greater severity of anxiety. The original form instructed participants to think about the past seven days, but for purposes of this study, we will reword the question to focus on the current time (‘now’).  Therefore due to the change in directions of the reference point, our version of this 
measu re is unvalidated and cannot be compared to the general population.   
• Cognitive Function short form 6a (6 items)
37 : The PROMIS Cognitive Function and Cognitive Function 
Abilities Subset item banks assess patient -perceived cognitive deficits. Facets include mental acuity, 
concentration, verbal and nonverbal memory, verbal fluency, and perceived changes in these cognitive functions. The extent to which cognitive impairments interfere with daily functioning, whether other people observe cognitive impairments, and the impact of cognitive dysfunction on quality of life are also assessed.  
• Self-efficacy ( Short Form 4a  – 4 items )
37:  This PROMIS Self -efficacy Scale  defines sel f-efficacy as 
confidence in one’s ability to successfully perform specific tasks or behaviors. It assesses confidence in 
one’s ability to successfully perform specific tasks or behaviors related to one's health in a variety of situations. Each item on the measure is rated on a 5 -point scale (1=I am not at all confident; 2=I am a little 
confident; 3=I am somewhat confident; 4=I am quite confident; 5=I am very confident)  
• Satisfaction with the program:  This questionnaire is adapted from Was it Worth it Questionnaire (WIWI)
38 
and the Reulay Qualitative Survey (RQS)  to  measure study and RV satisfaction .  It will be administered to 
the participants prior to discharge after completing the intervention at the end of the study, probing their satisfaction with the research study. These data could be used to assess the feasibility of the intervention by asking the patient if the entire research experience was worth it for them.  
 
Acceptability and Adherence to Intervention:  
• Acceptability will be measured through the p atient satisfaction survey at the end of the study.  
• Adherence to the R -VR will be assessed by collecting attendance for study visits 1- 4. 
  Resources  
REDCap will be utilized for data collection using created online forms. Clinician investigators will provide medical oversight. Tools needed for this intervention include one R -VR for each paradigm for a total of 2 R -VRs 
and a computer for the non VR exper iences . 
 
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 7 of 10 
 Study Design  
We will use standardized procedures to ensure uniform instructions and support for all participant s for the 
recruitment, screening, and study entry.   
 Recruitment  
Participant s will be recruited from Mayo Clinic healthcare professiona ls.  We propose to recruit, consent and 
screen a convenient sample of 36 participants through IRB approved contact materials in order to enroll 24 to 
study. All participants who respond to the recruitment message will be pre -screened for inclusion and excl usion 
criteria via a telephone pre- screen.  Those who meet criteria will be invited to a consent visit followed by a study 
screening visit.  After consent and screening has taken place, participant s who meet all study entry criteria will be 
invited to part icipate in the study.  
 Consent and Screen  
Study coordinator will discuss possible participation with the potential participant  who has expressed an interest in 
the study.  The study coordinator will begin by introducing the study details, and after determ ining that the 
participant  has continued interest in study participation, will move on to the study consent.  If the participant  
chooses to consent, the study coordinator will screen the participant for study entry inclusion/exclusion criteria.  If study e ntry criteria are met, the participant  will begin their study participation. They will be asked to complete the 
study surveys/questionnaires, and after this is completed the participant  will be instructed on the R -VR device and 
the video viewing experience s. 
Video Experience P rocedure 
Participant s will be scheduled for a 30 -min office visit. After a verbal description of the study process and 
complet ion of  IRB consent form, participant s will complete the  demographic and other baseline questionnaires.  
The coordinator will instruct the participant on certain procedures dependent on t he study participant ’s 
randomi zation  and visit:  
R-VR Experience : Study participant will be asked to complete a set of questionnaires, following completion they 
will be seated  in a swivel chair in the center of the research room, given basic instruction on the VR headgear 
[Oculus Quest], and then offered  the opportunity to experience the intervention  event.  The  approximately 10 
minute VR event involves one of two scenes (randomly selected by REDCap):  Scene 1  is designed for relaxation 
in nature with natural scenery such as trees, streams and deer, or  Scene 2  designed to help the participant  focus 
with natural scenery such as glowing embers and fireflies. After a  VR experience, the headgear will be removed 
and the  participant s will be asked to complete a second round of questionnaires . 
Computer Video Experience :  Study participant will be asked to complete a set of questionnaires, following by 
being seated at a computer and asked to watch a video with one of two sc enes: (Scene 1) natural scenery such as 
trees, streams and deer; (Scene 2) natural scenery such as glowing embers and fireflies.  After this viewing they will be asked to complete a set of surveys.  
All w ill be remunerated up to $40 at the end of their study participation.  This amount will be prorated based on the 
number of visits completed 
This process will provide a within- participant  control, allowing us to investigate whether the VR experience is safe 
and results in significantly more change than the Vi deo experience.  
 
Participant  Information  
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 8 of 10 
  
Target accrual:  24 to be randomized ( 36 to be consented and screened ). 
 Participant  population :  24 adults  
 Inclusion Criteria:  
1. 18 years of age or older at the time of consent  
2. Healthcare Professional at Mayo Clinic  
3. Not pregnant by participant  self-report at time of consent  
4. Have the ability to provide informed consent  
5. Have no contraindicat ed comorbid health conditions  as determined by the clinical investigators  
 Exclusion Criteria:   
1. Currently (within the past 3 weeks) been practicing mindfulness training on a weekly/regular basis  
2. Currently (within the past 3 weeks) been undergoing an additional program (e.g. CAM) to improve quality of life  
3. Currently (within 3 weeks) been enrolled in another clinical or research program (e.g. CAM) which impacts  
the patients’ QOL, stress or anxiety  
4. Currently has photosensitivity  
5. Cannot tolerate virtual reality experiences  
6. An unstable medical or mental health condition as determined by the physician investigator  (e.g. pre -
existing eye strain, seizures, dizziness, nausea)  
 
Data Analysis  
 Power Statement :  The sample size for this pilot investigation (N= 24) was established after considering both the 
statistical implications and the amount of project effort and resources required to recruit and study this unique participant population. 
Data Analysis Plan:  Data related to participant  recruitment will be summarized, including the frequency of calls 
and the reasons for failing screening criteria.  In all cases, data will be summarized using mean ± SD for 
continuous variables and frequency percentages for nominal variables. Details will be documented and 
summarized for any  participant s who experience adverse events or are unable to compl ete the 10 -minute VR 
experience for any reason. The percentage of participant s who undergo the initial VR experience (V2) but 
discontinue study participation without returning for the 2
nd VR experience (V3) will be summarized and 
compared between scenes using Fisher’s exact test . Anxiety, stress, cognition will be assessed immediately 
before /after and  24 hours following each VR experience.  Within and between group comparisons will be 
performed  using appropriate repeated measures analyses (e.g. paired t -test, repeated measures ANOVA) taking 
into account the two group repeated measures cross -over study design. In all cases, findings will be summarized 
using point estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals.   
References  
 1. van Bennekom MJ, Kasanmoentalib MS, de Koning PP, Denys D. A Virtual Reality Game to Assess Obsessive -Compulsive Disorder. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2017;20(11):718- 722. 
2. Tarrant J, Viczko J, Cope H. Virtual Reality for Anxiety Reduction Demonstrated by Quantitative EEG: A Pilot Study. Front Psychol. 2018;9:1280.  
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 9 of 10 
 3. Bandelow B, Michaelis S. Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st century. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 
2015;17(3):327- 335. 
4. Brown RL, Richman JA, Rospenda KM. Economic Stressors and Psychological Distress: Exploring Age Cohort Variation in the Wake of the Great Recession. Stress Health. 2017;33(3):267- 277. 
5. Shellenbarger S. The Most Anxious Generation Goes to Work. Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/the -most -anxious -generation- goes-to-work -11557418951. Updated 09 May 
2019. Accessed 31/07/2020. 
6. Cheng BH, McCarthy JM. Understanding the dark and bright sides of anxiety: A theory of workplace anxiety. J Appl Psychol. 2018;103(5):537- 560. 
7. Bravata DM, Watts SA, Keefer AL, et al. Prevalence, Predictors, and Treatment of Impostor Syndrome: a Systemat ic Review. J Gen Intern Med. 2020;35(4):1252- 1275. 
8. Virga D, Schaufeli WB, Taris TW, van Beek I, Sulea C. Attachment Styles and Employee Performance: The Mediating Role of Burnout. J Psychol. 2019;153(4):383- 401. 
9. Yilmaz A. Burnout, job satisfaction, a nd anxiety- depression among family physicians: A cross -sectional 
study. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care. 2018;7(5):952- 956. 
10. Baryshnikov I, Rosenstrom T, Jylha P, et al. State and trait hopelessness in a prospective five -year study of 
patients with depressive disorders. J Affect Disord. 2018;239:107- 114. 
11. Gozuyesil E, Karacay Yikar S, Nazik E. An analysis of the anxiety and hopelessness levels of women during IVF -ET treatment. Perspect Psychiatr Care. 2020;56(2):338- 346. 
12. Manor M, Wowak A, V.O. B, Gomez -Mejia LR. How Anxiety Affects CEO Decision Making. Harvard 
Business Review. Decision Making Web site. https://hbr.org/2016/07/how -anxiety -affects -ceo-decision -
making. Updated 19 July 2016. Accessed 31 July 2020. 
13. Greenberg PE, Sisitsky T, Kessler RC, et al. The economic burden of anxiety disorders in the 1990s. J Clin Psychiatry. 1999;60(7):427- 435. 
14. Gustavsson A, Svensson M, Jacobi F, et al. Cost of disorders of the brain in Europe 2010. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;21(10):718- 779. 
15. Roy- Byrne P. Treatment -refractory anxiety; definition, risk factors, and treatment challenges. Dialogues 
Clin Neurosci. 2015;17(2):191- 206. 
16. Lilienfeld SO, Treadway MT. Clashing Diagnostic Approaches: DSM -ICD Versus RDoC. Annu Rev Clin 
Psychol. 2016;12:435- 463. 
17. Koselka EPD, Weidner LC, Minasov A, et al . Walking Green: Developing an Evidence Base for Nature 
Prescriptions. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019;16(22). 
18. Hansen MM, Jones R, Tocchini K. Shinrin- Yoku (Forest Bathing) and Nature Therapy: A State -of-the-Art 
Review. Int J Environ Res Public H ealth. 2017;14(8).  
19. Song C, Ikei H, Miyazaki Y. Physiological Effects of Visual Stimulation with Forest Imagery. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15(2):213. 
20. Bratman GN, Hamilton JP, Hahn KS, Daily GC, Gross JJ. Nature experience reduces ruminat ion and 
subgenual prefrontal cortex activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(28):8567- 8572.  
21. Keniger LE, Gaston KJ, Irvine KN, Fuller RA. What are the benefits of interacting with nature? Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013;10(3):913- 935. 
22. Capaldi CA, Dopko RL, Zelenski JM. The relationship between nature connectedness and happiness: a 
meta -analysis. Front Psychol. 2014;5:976. 
23. Hartig T, Mitchell R, de Vries S, Frumkin H. Nature and health. Annu Rev Public Health. 2014;35:207-228. 
24. Gasco n M, Triguero- Mas M, Martinez D, et al. Mental health benefits of long- term exposure to residential 
green and blue spaces: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015;12(4):4354- 4379. 
Virtual Reality  Pilot 
PI: IT Croghan, PhD  
Mayo Clinic –  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
       Page 10 of 10 
 25. Valmaggia LR, Latif L, Kempton MJ, Rus -Calafell M. Vi rtual reality in the psychological treatment for 
mental health problems: An systematic review of recent evidence. Psychiatry Res. 2016;236:189- 195. 
26. Maples -Keller JL, Bunnell BE, Kim SJ, Rothbaum BO. The Use of Virtual Reality Technology in the 
Treatmen t of Anxiety and Other Psychiatric Disorders. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2017;25(3):103- 113. 
27. Oing T, Prescott J. Implementations of Virtual Reality for Anxiety -Related Disorders: Systematic Review. 
JMIR Serious Games. 2018;6(4):e10965.  
28. Gorini A, Pallavic ini F, Algeri D, Repetto C, Gaggioli A, Riva G. Virtual reality in the treatment of 
generalized anxiety disorders. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010;154:39- 43. 
29. Landowska A, Roberts D, Eachus P, Barrett A. Within-  and Between -Session Prefrontal Cortex Re sponse 
to Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy for Acrophobia. Front Hum Neurosci. 2018;12:362. 
30. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) --a metadata- driven methodology and workflow process for  providing translational research 
informatics support. Journal of biomedical informatics. 2009;42(2):377- 381. 
31. Gaudry E, Vagg P, Spielberger CD. Validation of the State -Trait Distinction in Anxiety Research. 
Multivariate Behav Res. 1975;10(3):331- 341. 
32. Greene J, Cohen D, Siskowski C, Toyinbo P. The Relationship Between Family Caregiving and the Mental Health of Emerging Young Adult Caregivers. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2017;44(4):551- 563. 
33. Ugalde A, Krishnasamy M, Schofield P. The relationship betwe en self -efficacy and anxiety and general 
distress in caregivers of people with advanced cancer. J Palliat Med. 2014;17(8):939- 941. 
34. State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. In: The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology.1- 1. 
35. Arnau RC, Broman- Fulks JJ, Green BA, B erman ME. The Anxiety Sensitivity Index --Revised: 
confirmatory factor analyses, structural invariance in Caucasian and African American samples, and score reliability and validity. Assessment. 2009;16(2):165- 180. 
36. Smith BW, Dalen J, Wiggins K, Tooley E, Christopher P, Bernard J. The brief resilience scale: assessing the ability to bounce back. Int J Behav Med. 2008;15(3):194- 200. 
37. Northwestern University. Health Measures:  Transforming How Health is Measured. https://www.healthmeasures.net/. Published 2020. Accessed June 15, 2020.  
38. Chauhan C, Atherton PJ. Patient satisfaction with participation in phase II/III NCCTG clinical trials: Was it worth it? (N0392). . J Clin Oncology. 2012a;30(15_Supplement):6133. 
 