Version date Nov 28 2017  
  
 
 
 
 
 
RUSH UNIVERSITY MEDI CAL CENTER  
Targeting Diet -Microbiome 
Interactions in the 
Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s 
Disease  
ORA: 16111903  
 
Department of Defense (DoD) Funded Study  
 
Principal Inv estigator: Ali Keshavarzian, MD  
 
Co-Principal Investigator: Gian Pal, MD  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BACKGROUND/RATIONALE  
Summary.  The microbiome  influences  neurodevelopment,  modulates  behavior,  and contributes  to various  
neurological  and neuropsychiatric  disorders.  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD)  affects  1% of the US population  over the 
age of 60, resulting  in cognitive  and motor  dysfunction,  and is characterized  by aggregation  of α-synuclein  
(αSyn).  While  the etiology  of PD is largely  unknown,  environmental  factors  appear  to play a role in most  cases.  
Our team  has recently  discovered  that the microbiome  promotes  motor  deficits,  induces  microglia  activation,  
and increases  αSyn pathology  in a mouse  model  of PD (Sampson  et al., Cell, 2016,  in press).  Antibiotic  
treatment  ameliorates,  while  microbial  colonization  enhances,  pathophysiology  in adult  animals,  suggesting  
symptoms  arise  from  postnatal  signaling  between  the microbiota  and the brain.  We tested  whether  metabolites  
produced  by gut bacteria  from  food impact  disease,  a notion  supported  by epidemiological  data that fiber  
content  in diet affects  motor  symptoms  in PD patients.  Indeed,  we show  that feeding  short -chain  fatty acids  
(SCFAs),  microbial  fermentation  products  of dietary  fiber,  modulates  neuroinflammation,  αSyn aggregation  in 
the brain,  and motor  symptoms.  These  findings  reveal  that gut bacteria  impact  disease  outcomes  in a mouse  
model  via modulation  of microbial  metabolites  produced  from  food.  The current  project  will analyze  the gut 
microbiome  and metabolites  from  PD patients  and controls,  and employ  clinically  relevant  mouse  models  to 
determine  how metabolites  produced  by the microbiome  from  dietary  substrates  affect  motor  symptoms.  
Finally,  we propose  to test whether  directly  regulating  microbial  metabolite  profiles  using  “designer”  dietary  
fibers  and probiotics  offers  new avenues  for ameliorating  PD-like symptoms.  
 
HYPOTHESIS  
Interactions  between  diet and the microbiome  contribute  to the pathophysiology  of PD, and targeted  modulation  
of dietary  metabolites  produced  by the microbiome  can ameliorate  disease  course  and/or  symptoms  
 
OBJECTIVES  
Studies  have  correlated  diets,  which  in turn affect  microbiota  composition,  with both positive  and negative  PD 
outcomes  [1]. However,  mechanisms  of action  have  not been  identified.  Recent  advances  describing  how the 
microbiome  critically  impacts  the immune,  metabolic  and nervous  systems  may help provide  an explanation  to 
the link between  diet and PD [2-6]. Gut bacteria  process  dietary  components  to produce  microbial  metabolites,  
which  enter  the host and access  almost  every  tissue  of the body,  including  the brain  [5-7]. We propose  the novel  
hypothesis  that variations  in gut microbiome  composition  alter the metabolic  output  of ingested  dietary  fibers,  
modulating  SCFA  profiles  that impact  pathophysiology  and motor  deficits  in PD. Our project  objectives  are: 1) 
define  a disease -modifying  role for the human  gut microbiome  in PD, 2) determine  how the microbiome  and its 
metabolites  impact  disease,  and 3) test “designer”  diets  and probiotics  that ameliorate  symptoms  in mice.  If 
successful,  this research  will support  the transformative  concept  that the gut microbiome  contributes  to the 
pathogenesis  of PD, and may advance  research  toward  development  of dietary  and probiotic  therapies.  
 
Parkinson’s  disease.  Behavioral,  psychiatric  and neurodegenerative  disorders  often  display  hallmark  
neuropathologies  within  the central  nervous  system  (CNS).  One neuropathology,  amyloidosis,  results  from  
aberrant  aggregation  of specific  neuronal  proteins  that disrupt  many  cellular  functions.  Affected  tissues  often  
contain  insoluble  aggregates  of proteins  with altered  conformations,  a feature  believed  to contribute  to an 
estimated  50 distinct  human  diseases  [8]. Neurodegenerative  amyloid  disorders,  including  Alzheimer’s,  
Huntington’s,  and Parkinson’s  diseases,  are each associated  with a distinct  amyloid  protein  [9]. PD patients  
display  motor  deficits  including  tremors,  muscle  rigidity,  bradykinesia,  and impaired  gait. It is a multifactorial  
disorder  that has a strong  environmental  component,  as less than 10% of cases  are hereditary  [10].  Aggregation  
of α-synuclein  (αSyn)  is thought  to be pathogenic  in a family  of diseases  termed  synucleinopathies,  which  
includes  PD, Multiple  System  Atrophy  (MSA),  and Lewy  body  Dementia  [9, 11, 12]. αSyn aggregation  is a 
stepwise  process,  leading  to oligomeric  species  and intransient  fibrils  that accumulate  within  neurons.  
Dopaminergic  neurons  of the substantia  nigra  pars compacta  (SNpc)  appear  particularly  vulnerable  to the 
effects  of αSyn aggregates.  Dopamine  modulators  are a first line therapeutic  in PD; however  treatments  can 
carry  serious  side effects  and often  lose effectiveness  [13].  Discovery  of safe and effective  therapeutics  are 
needed  to address  the increasing  burden  of PD in an ever-aging  population,  a paradoxical  consequence  of 
mankind’s  achievements  in increased  lifespan.  
 
The gut-brain  axis.  Although  neurological  diseases  have  been  historically  studied  within  the CNS,  peripheral  
influences  are implicated  in the onset  and/or  progression  of diseases  that impact  the brain  [14].  While  gut-brain  
interactions  have  been  appreciated  for many  decades,  providing  a wealth  of information  about  the close  
 
 interac tions  between  the gut associated  immune  system,  enteric  nervous  system  (ENS)  and gut-based  endocrine  
system  [15],  these  findings  have  largely  been  ignored  by the neuroscience  community.  Recently,  emerging  data 
suggest  bidirectional  communication  between  the gut and the brain  in anxiety,  depression,  nociception  and 
autism  spectrum  disorder  (ASD),  among  others  [6, 16, 17] Gastrointestinal  (GI) physiology  is influenced  by 
signals  arising  both locally  within  the gut and from  the CNS.  Neurotransmitters,  immune  signaling,  hormones  
and neuropeptides  produced  within  the gut may,  in turn, impact  the brain  [18, 19]. Research  into how the gut- 
brain  axis influences  neurological  conditions  may reveal  insights  into the etiology  of some  CNS  disorders.  
 
The microbiome  and the nervous  system.  The human  body  is permanently  colonized  by microbes  on 
environmentally  exposed  surfaces,  the majority  of which  reside  within  the GI tract [20].  Mounting  evidence  over 
the past decade  has suggested  the gut microbiome  critically  controls  the development  and function  of the 
immune  and metabolic  systems  [2, 3]. Increasingly,  new research  is beginning  to uncover  the profound  impacts  
that the microbiota  can have  on neurodevelopment  and the CNS  [6]. Germ -free (GF)  mice  and antibiotic  treated  
specific  pathogen  free (SPF)  mice  are altered  in hippocampal  neurogenesis  and display  impaired  spatial  and 
object  recognition  [21].  Gut bacteria  affect  expression  of the serotonin  (5-hydroxytryptamine;  5-HT) receptor,  
brain -derived  neurotropic  factor  (BDNF),  and NMDA  receptor  subunit  2 (NR2A)  [22-24]. GF mice  have  altered  
cortical  myelination  and impaired  blood -brain  barrier  function  [25, 26]. Additionally,  the microbiota  promotes  
enteric  and circulating  serotonin  production  in mice  [27],  and affects  anxiety,  hyperactivity  and cognition  [19, 
22, 28, 29]. Adding  relevance  to these  findings,  dysbiosis  (i.e., alteration)  of the human  microbiome  has been  
reported  in subjects  diagnosed  with several  neurological  diseases  [17].  For example,  fecal  and mucosa - 
associated  gut microbes  are different  between  individuals  with PD and healthy  controls  [30-33]. Yet, how 
dysbiosis  arises  and whether  this feature  contributes  to PD pathogenesis  remains  unknown.  
Gut bacteria  influence  the differentiation  and function  of immune  cells in the intestine,  periphery  and 
brain  [34-36]. Intriguingly,  subjects  with PD exhibit  intestinal  inflammation  [37],  and GI abnormalities  such as 
constipation  often  precede  motor  symptoms  by many  years  [38, 39]. Braak’s  hypothesis  posits that aberrant  
αSyn accumulation  initiates  in the gut and propagates  via the vagus  nerve  to the brain  [40].  This notion  is 
supported  by pathophysiologic  evidence:  αSyn inclusions  appear  early  in the ENS,  and the glossopharyngeal  and 
vagal  nerves  [38, 41], while  vagotomized  people  are at reduced  risk for PD [42].  Further,  injection  of αSyn 
fibrils  into gut tissue  of healthy  rodents  induces  pathology  within  the vagus  nerve  and brainstem  [43].  However,  
the notion  that αSyn aggregation  initiates  in the ENS  and spreads  to the CNS  via retrograde  transmission  
remains  controversial  [44],  and experimental  support  for a gut microbial  connection  to PD is lacking.  
 
Gut bacteria  and diet. Microbiota  composition  and function  are shaped  over the course  of an individual’s  life 
and depend  on many  factors  including  a significant  role for diet [4]. In humans  and mice,  both long-term dietary  
patterns  [45] and rapid,  extreme  dietary  changes  [46] can shape  and re-shape  the representation  of microbial  taxa 
and their functional  attributes.  Since  many  of the precursor  molecules  available  for microbial  metabolism  are 
provided  by diet, altering  diet can alter the metabolic  output  of the microbiome.  Broad  effects  of diet on the 
microbiome  and its associated  metabolome  were  observed  when  humanized  mice  were  switched  from  standard  
mouse  diets  to a high sugar,  polysaccharide -deficient  diet [47].  Although  mice  harboring  microbiotas  from  three  
different  humans  showed  distinct  composition,  metabolomic  fingerprints  of the three  groups  were  remarkably  
similar  when  fed the same  diet [47],  illustrating  conservation  of microbial  metabolism.  The principle  of dietary  
impacts  to the metabolic  output  of the microbiome  has also been  established  in humans  [48].  
 
Diet and Parkinson  disease.  Epidemiological  studies  have  shown  a robust  relationship  between  indices  of 
nutritional  health  and PD. Constipation  is associated  with an increased  risk of PD [49],  with loss of dopamine  
transporter  upon  imaging  [50] and with αSyn  pathology  and loss of midbrain  dopamine  neurons  [51, 52] that 
are typical  of central  nervous  pathology  in PD. Mid-life adiposity  is also predictive  of the development  of PD 
[53],  and risk of the disease  is increased  in subjects  with low dietary  intake  of polyunsaturated  fatty acids,  
flavonoids  [54] vegetables,  fruits  and nuts [55-57]. Thus,  most  relevant  to our hypothesis,  it appears  that 
patients  with PD consume  diets  low in fiber  compared  to the controls.  
Many  recent  studies  have  focused  on intestinal  bacterial  metabolites  that may affect  brain  function  and 
neuroinflammation  [58-61]. Among  these  microbiota -produced  metabolites,  perhaps  short  chain  fatty acids  
(SCFAs)  have  received  the most  attention.  SCFAs  are the short  (C1-C4) saturated  fatty acids  formate,  valerate,  
acetate,  propionate  and butyrate  that are formed  by intestinal  bacteria  as products  from  the fermentation  of non- 
 
 digestible  carbohydrates,  mostly  in the colon  [62, 63]. Broadly  speaking,  SCFAs  can affect  neuroinflammation  
 
 through  two distinct  mechanisms:  1) regulation  of inflammation  via SCFA  receptors  [64-66]; and 2) epigenetic  
regulation  of neural  function  and neuroinflammation  through  histone  deacetylase  inhibition  (HDACi)  [67, 68]. 
With  regard  to SCFA  receptors,  acetate,  propionate  and butyrate  have  been  shown  to bind to specific  
receptors  on mammalian  cells including  Gpr41,  Gpr43,  and Gpr109a  [69].  Also,  the transport  proteins  MCT1  
and Slc5A8  are required  for SCFAs  to enter  cells and exert  HDACi  activity  [69].  Gpr41  preferentially  binds  to 
propionate  and butyrate.  Gpr43  is primarily  activated  by acetate  and propionate,  and Gpr109a  is specific  for 
butyrate  [69].  Signaling  via Gpr109a  is associated  with modulation  of inflammation  [70].  Significantly,  
Gpr109a  was recently  shown  to be upregulated  on microglia  in the substantia  nigra  of PD patients  [71].  As a 
result,  Gpr109a  has been  suggested  as a treatment  target  for PD [72].  However,  our knowledge  of how SCFAs  
and their receptors  influence  brain  function  and potentially  participate  in CNS  pathologies  like PD is still 
limited  and requires  further  studies  [67].  
Some  of the most  compelling  evidence  for the ability  of SCFAs  to impact  neuroinflammation  in PD 
comes  from  epigenetic  studies  that show  the HDAC  inhibitory  activity  (HDACi)  of butyrate.  PD appears  to be 
characterized  by global  histone  deacetylation  in the brain  [73].  Significantly,  αSyn  exerts  HDAC  activity  by 
binding  directly  to histone  H3 and promoting  deacetylation  and neurotoxicity  that can be reversed  with HDACi  
such as butyrate  [74].  In support  of this notion,  butyrate  and other  HDACi  have  been  shown  to suppress  
pathology  and neuroinflammation  in multiple  models  of PD [75].  The novel  HDACi  K560  protected  against  
neuroinflammation  and pathology  in both the MPP+  and MPTP  models  of PD in mice  [76].  HDACi  also protect  
from  neuroinflammation  and pathology  in the rat rotenone  model  of PD [77].  Consistent  with these  above  data 
for the protective  activity  of butyrate  in PD is our microbiome  profiling  data showing  decreased  numbers  of 
butyrate  producing  bacteria  in PD patients  [30].  Our finding  was recently  replicated  by others  who also showed  
significantly  decreased  fecal  SCFA  levels  in PD patients  [78].  Therefore  our strategy  of studying  the role of 
SCFAs  in the pathogenesis  of PD and our approach  to modulate  butyrate  production  by the intestinal  microbiota  
through  prebiotic  fiber  feeding  as a therapy  for PD is based  on strong  scientific  premise.  
 
SPECIFIC  AIMS  
Specific  aim 1. Profile  the human  stool  microbiome,  and serum  and stool  SCFA  levels,  in early  PD 
patients.  We will profile  the human  fecal  microbiome  and metagenome  from  new onset  PD patients  and 
controls  by next generation  shotgun  sequencing  and bioinformatics  analysis,  and determine  SCFA  levels  and 
ratios  in stool  and serum.  By correlating  disease  severity  scores  with specific  microbial  metabolites,  we will 
determine  whether  SCFA  levels  and/or  ratios  are a biomarker  for PD, and identify  candidate  microbiota  from  
new PD patients  and healthy  controls  for transplant  into germ -free (GF)  mice  for functional  studies.  
 
Specific  aim 2. Determine  how the microbiome  regulates  gut-brain  interactions  in a PD model.  We will 
transplant  human  microbiota  into germ -free mice  from  high (top 3rd) and low (bottom  3rd) SCFA  producers,  
from  PD and HC donors  identified  in Aim 1. We will assess  motor  symptoms,  gut motility,  neuroinflammation  
and αSyn aggregation.  Advanced  tissue  clearing  approaches  (CLARITY)  will be used to image  changes  in gut 
and brain  neuronal  circuits,  and measure  neuronal  activation  and electrophysiology  in intestines  and brains  of 
“humanized”  mice.  These  studies  will reveal  functional  links  between  the microbiome  and the pathophysiology  
of PD by determining  gut-brain  connections  in a novel  and relevant  mouse  model.  
 
Specific  aim 3. Develop  and test “designer”  fiber  diets  to modulate  SCFA  levels  in PD mice.  SCFAs  are a 
collection  of dietary  fermentative  breakdown  products  that impact  the immune  and nervous  systems.  We have  
developed  a novel  library  of fiber  diets,  and validated  in bioreactors  that adding  specific  dietary  mixtures  to 
microbial  communities  can shape  the SCFA  repertoire.  We will test dietary  fiber  mixtures  that produce  
“healthy”  SCFA  ratios  from  PD stools  in vitro, and treat mice  “humanized”  with a PD microbiota  to regulate  
SCFA  levels.  Neuroinflammation,  αSyn pathology,  and motor  symptoms  will be assessed.  These  studies  aim to 
modulate  disease  outcomes  through  rational  dietary  control  of microbiomes  and their metabolites.  
 
Specific  aim 4. Test dietary  and probiotic  treatments  in mice  with  PD-like symptoms.  We predict  that the 
efficiency  of a microbiome  to utilize  dietary  substrates  varies  based  on its composition,  and an optimal  
intervention  may require  modulating  both diet and the microbiome.  Further,  different  SCFA  profiles  likely  alter 
gut bacterial  composition.  Herein,  we will mine  microbiome  sequence  data to identify  bacteria  that are 
selectively  reduced  or missing  in PD patients,  and treat humanized  PD mice  with these  potential  probiotics.  
 
 Finally,  we will feed specific  diets  that shape  SCFAs  ratios  and administer  candidate  bacteria  simultaneously  to 
humanized  mice  with PD symptoms,  to test potential  combinatorial  (i.e., prebiotic  and probiotic)  interventions.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 re o c S 
 
 mb i l d n 
Hi 
Time  to descend  (s) 
Time  to remove  (s) RESEARCH  STRATEGY  
Preliminary  data.  The Thy1 -α-synuclein  (ASO;  alpha-synuclein  overexpressing)  mouse  model  displays  
progressive  deficits  in motor  function  similar  to human  PD. ASO  animals  harboring  a complex  microbiota  
(SPF -ASO)  require  significantly  more  time to walk  across  a challenging  beam  compared  to wild-type (WT)  
littermates  (SPF -WT),  and also exhibit  increased  time to descend  from  the top of a pole to its base,  two 
measures  of gross  motor  function  (Figures  1A, B). In addition,  removal  of an adhesive  from  the nasal  bridge,  a 
test of fine motor  control,  is impaired  in SPF-ASO  mice  (Figure  1C). Finally,  the hind limb clasping  reflex,  a 
measure  of striatal  dysfunction  [79, 80], is also defective  in ASO  mice  (Figure  1D). To assess  a contribution  of 
gut bacteria,  we re-derived  ASO  mice  under  germ -free conditions  (GF-ASO)  and compared  performance  in 
these  tests to tests.  Remarkably,  GF- 
A B C D E ASO  animals  exhibit  reduced  deficits  
10 
8 * * 20 
 
15 * ** 25 
20 * * 3 
 
** * 
2 10 ** 
8 *** in the time to cross  the beam,  descend  
a pole,  remove  a sticker,  and display  
6  15 
10 
4  **** 10 
    1 
5 
2  5    6 improved  hind limb clasping  (Figures  
4  1A-D). 
2 
 
0 
  WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
SPF GF  
0 
WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
SPF GF  
0 
  WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
SPF GF  
0 
  WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
SPF GF  
0 
WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
 
SPF GF Figure  1. Gut microbes  promote  motor  and 
gastrointestinal  (GI)  dysfunction.  (A) Time  
to traverse  beam  apparatus.  (B) Time  to descend  pole.  (C) Time  to remove  adhesive  from  nasal  bridge.  (D) Hind -limb  clasping  reflex  
score.  (E) Total  fecal  pellets  produced  in 15 minutes.  Animals  tested  at 12-13 weeks  of age. N=4 -6, error  bars represent  mean  from  3 
trials  per animal.  Data  representative  of 2 repeats  per experiment.  *p ≤ 0.05;  **p≤ 0.01;  ***p≤ 0.001.  SPF=specific  pathogen  free,  
GF=germ -free,  WT=wild -type,  ASO=Thy1 -α-synuclein.  
 
Subjects  with PD exhibit  intestinal  inflammation  [37],  and GI abnormalities  such as constipation  often  precede  
motor  defects  by years  [38, 39, 41, 81], leading  to the intriguing  hypothesis  that PD may originate  in the gut 
[38].  GF animals  display  significantly  improved  fecal  output  compared  to mice  harboring  gut bacteria,  revealing  
that the microbiota  enhances  GI motility  in ASO  mice  (Figures  1E). Further,  stool  from  SPF-ASO  mice  contain  
reduced  water  content  compared  to GF-ASO  mice  (data  not shown).  Together,  these  findings  demonstrate  that 
gut microbes  modulate  the hallmark  motor  and intestinal  dysfunction  in a preclinical  model  of PD. 
Motor  deficits  in PD coincide  with the accumulation  of αSyn  into insoluble  aggregates  [82].  Under  SPF 
conditions,  we observe  by microscopy  of ASO  brain  tissue  notable  aggregations  of αSyn  in the caudoputamen  
(CP)  and substantia  nigra  (SN)  (Figures  2A and B), brain  regions  of the nigrostriatal  pathway  affected  in both 
mouse  models  and human  PD [9]. Surprisingly,  GF-ASO  mice  display  appreciably  less αSyn  aggregates  in these  
regions  (Figures  2C and D). αSyn  aggregates  are immunostimulatory  and activate  immune  cells,  including  
brain -resident  microglia  [83-85]. Microglia  undergo  significant  morphological  changes  upon                
activation,  transitioning  from  thin cell bodies  with numerous  branched  extensions  to round,  amoeboid  cells with 
fewer  processes  [34, 86]. Within  the CP and SN, microglia  of SPF-ASO  mice  display  significant  increases  in 
cell body  diameter,  along  with fewer  processes  of shorter  total length,  compared  to GF-ASO  mice  (Figures  2E, 
F). Overall,  we reveal  that the microbiota  promotes  αSyn  
A C E 
8 
 
 
6 
 
 
4 
 
 
2 
 
 
0  
 
 
****  
 
 
**** 
*** aggregation  and activation  of microglia  within  specific  
brain  regions  linked  to PD. 
 
Figure  2. αSyn  pathology  and microglia  activation  is increased  in 
mice  harbouring  a gut microbiota.  (A, C) Representative  images  of 
the caudoputamen  from  (A) SPF-ASO  or (C) GF-ASO  animals  stained  
with aggregation -specific  αSyn  antibody  (red),  Phospho -Ser129 -αSyn  
B D F 
 
 
 
Neurotrace  αSyn  inclusions  Phospho -αSyn  WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
 
SPF GF 
 
 
60 **** 
** 
**** 
40 
**** 
 
20 
 
 
 
0 
WT  ASO  WT  ASO  
 
SPF GF antibody  (green),  and Neurotrace/Nissl  (blue).  (B, D) Images  of the 
substantia  nigra  from  (B) SPF-ASO  or (D) GF-ASO  animals.  Substantia  
nigra -resident  microglia  parameters  (E) diameter  and (F) number  of 
branch  points.  
 
The microbiota  influences  brain  development  during  
gestation,  as well as modulates  gut-brain  signaling  in 
adulthood  [5]. To differentiate  between  these  mechanisms,  
we treated  adult  SPF animals  with an antibiotic  cocktail  to Time  to cross  (s) 
No. of branch  points  Diameter  (m) 
Fecal  pellets  at 15min  
 
 deplete  the microbiota  postnatally.  Conversely,  we colonized  adult  GF mice  with a complete  mouse  microbiota.  
We found  that depleting  the microbiome  with antibiotics  ameliorated  motor  and GI deficits,  αSyn  pathology  
and microglia  activation  in ASO  mice  (not shown  due to space  constraints).  Colonizing  GF mice  with gut 
 
 
E Time  to cross  (s) 
Time  to descend  (s) 
Time  to descend  (s) 
Time  to remove  (s) 
Hindlimb Score 
Fecal  pellets  at 15min  bacteria  restored  PD-like symptoms.  Thus,  altering  gut bacteria  during  adulthood  contributes  to αSyn -mediated  
pathophysiology.  This reversibility  of symptoms  suggests  active  gut-brain  signaling  by the microbiota.  
Recently,  it was revealed  that gut bacteria  modulate  microglia  activation  or maturation  through  
production  of short -chain  fatty acids  (SCFAs)  [34].  Thus,  we treated  GF animals  with a mixture  of SCFAs:  
acetate,  propionate,  and butyrate  (mice  remained  microbiologically  sterile).  Within  affected  brain  regions  (CP 
and SN), microglia  in SCFA -administered  animals  display  increased  activation  compared  to untreated  mice  
(data  not shown).  Further,  SCFA  treatment  increased  αSyn  aggregations  in the CP and SN (data  not shown).  
Oral SCFA  treatment  of GF mice  is sufficient  to induce  αSyn -mediated  impairment  in beam  traversal,  pole 
descent,  and hind limb reflex  (Figures  3A-D; compare  GF-ASO  to SCFA -ASO).  SCFAs  promote  constipation - 
like symptoms  (Figure  3E). We propose  that the microbiota  actively  produces  metabolites  from  dietary  fibers  
that regulate  microglia  
activation  and αSyn  A15 
 
10  
 
 
*** **  
 
*** 
**** B 20 
15 
 
 
10  
 
***  
*** ** 
** C 15 
10 ** 3 15 
 
* 
** * 
2 10 
** *  
 
* 
*** aggregation,  contributing  
to symptoms  in a mouse  
model  of PD. 
 
5 
 
 
 
0 
WT ASO  WT ASO  WT ASO  
SPF GF SCFA   
 
5 
 
 
0 
WT ASO  WT ASO  WT ASO  
SPF GF SCFA  5 
 
 
 
0 
WT ASO  WT ASO  WT ASO  
SPF GF SCFA  1 
 
 
 
0 
WT ASO  WT ASO WT ASO  
SPF GF SCFA  5 
 
 
 
0 
WT ASO  WT ASO  WT ASO  
SPF GF SCFA   
Figure  3. SCFAs  promote  
αSyn -stimulated  microglia  
activation  and motor  
dysfunction.  (A) Time  to traverse  beam  apparatus.  (B) Time  to descend  pole.  (C) Time  to remove  nasal  adhesive.  (D) Hind  limb  
clasping  reflex  score.  (E) Total  fecal  pellets  produced  in 15 minutes.  Microglia  activation  by SCFA  feeding  not shown  due to space  
constraints,  but see Sampson  et al., Cell (in press)  for data.  
 
Given  our observation  that postnatal  signaling  by the microbiota  influences  motor  function  in mice,  and evidence  
that PD patients  have  altered  microbiomes  [30-32], we sought  to determine  whether  gut microbes  from  patients  
with PD impact  disease  outcomes  when  transferred  into mice.  We collected  fecal  samples  from  6                
human  subjects  diagnosed  with new onset  PD as well as 6 matched  healthy  controls  (HC)  at RUMC,  and 
transplanted  human  microbiota  into GF animals  to generate  “humanized”  mice  at Caltech.  Remarkably,  beam  
traversal,  pole descent  and hind limb reflex  scores  are significantly  impaired  in ASO  animals  that are colonized  
A10 
8 
 
 
6 
 
 
4 
 
 
2 
 
 0  
 
 
 
 
*** ** B20 
** 
 
15 
 
 
10 
 
 
5 
 
 0  
 
 
 
 
 
****  
 
**** 
**** C 8 
 
6 
 
 
4 
 
 
2              
 
 0 D 3 
**** 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
0  
 
 
** 
** ****  
controls  (Figure  4). We will use this powerful  
experimental  approach  to define  how human  
gut bacteria  regulate  neuroinflammation,  
pathophysiology  and motor  symptoms.  
 
Figure  4. Microbiota  from  PD patients  induce  
WT    ASO    WT    ASO  
HC PD WT    ASO    WT    ASO  
 
 
 
HC PD WT    ASO    WT    ASO  
 
 
 
HC PD WT    ASO    WT    ASO  
 
 
 
HC PD increased  αSyn -mediated  motor  deficits  in mice.  
Compiled,  averaged  data from  all 6 independent  cohorts  
in each  motor  task described  in Figure  3. **p≤ 0.01;  ***p≤ 0.001;  **** p≤ 0.0001.  HC=germ -free mice  colonized  with fecal  microbes  
from  healthy  controls,  PD=germ -free mice  colonized  with fecal  microbes  from  Parkinson’s  disease  patients,  WT=wild -type,  
ASO=Thy1 -α-synuclein  genotype.  Note:  for all 6 individual  pairs,  mice  with PD microbiota  performed  worse  in most  or all tests  
compared  to HCs.  Also,  we have  not excluded  any fecal  samples  tested  in this data set, thus these  results  appear  to be robust.  
 
Specific  aim 1. Profile  the human  stool  microbiome,  and serum  and stool  SCFA  levels,  in early  PD 
patients  and matched  healthy  controls  
Introduction.  We [30] and others  [31] have  shown  that patients  with PD have  abnormal  microbiota  
compositions.  These  data support  the hypothesis  that the human  microbiome  could  either  trigger  PD or impacts  
PD disease  course.  However,  several  questions  remain  to be answered:  (1) what  is the exact  nature  of the 
dysbiosis  in PD and how specific  is the dysbiosis  for PD compared  to other  synucleinopathies?  (2) what  are the 
contributing  factors  for the observed  dysbiosis?  and (3) how does the dysbiosis  promote  PD pathogenesis?  The 
objective  of this aim is to fill the translational  knowledge  gap between  dysbiosis  of the microbiome  and PD. 
 
Aim 1.1. Comprehensively  interrogate  microbiome  composition  to elucidate  the exact  nature  of the dysbiosis  in  
PD and to determine  whether  the observed  dysbiosis  is specific  for PD 
Rationale.  The currently  published  data on microbiome  composition  present  in PD utilized  targeted  approaches  D 
* Time  to cross  (s) 
Time  to remove  (s) 
Score  
 
 such as 16S rRNA  pyrosequencing  [30, 31]. These  techniques  provided  accurate  assessment  of microbiota  
composition  to the genus  level,  but are not adequate  to provide  species  or strain  level  determination  and thus 
 
 further  studies  using  next generation  sequencing  and advanced  bioinformatics  are needed  to comprehensively  
interrogate  microbiome  composition.  This approach  provides  very detailed  information  about  the microbiome  
that may enable  better  understanding  of host-microbial  interaction  processes,  and may identify  bacteria  that are 
either  missing  or over-representing  in the PD subjects,  possibly  providing  leads  toward  identification  of 
bioactive  species  for study  in Aim 4 and future  research.  
Experimental  Approach.  We have  already  collected  and biobanked  fecal  and blood  samples  from  40 well- 
characterized  (including  20 newly  diagnosed,  treatment  naïve)  PD patients  and 20 matched  [for age, gender,  
race,  BMI]  healthy  controls  (HC).  We also have  comprehensive  dietary  information  (using  24 hour diet recall  
questionnaire  prior  to stool  collection)  in these  subjects.  To profile  the human  fecal  microbiome,  DNA  will be 
extracted  using  the NexteraXT  sample  preparation  kit adapted  for acoustic  liquid  handling,  and subjected  to 
whole -genome  shotgun  metagenomic  sequencing.  This procedure  is routine  to our team  [87-90], but briefly,  
shotgun  metagenomics  will be performed  using  the NexteraXT  barcoded  kit on the Labcyte  Echo  and TPP 
Mosquito  platforms,  allowing  low-biomass  inputs.  Sequencing  will be performed  at 2X150  bp using  the Illumina  
HiSeq  4000  platform,  allowing  excellent  depth  of coverage,  and mapped  to ~47,000  reference  bacterial  genome  
sequences  using  HUMAnN2.  In our experience,  assembly  using  metaSPADES  [91] does not work  well            
for data generated  using  this method,  but when  the reference  genome  collection  is fairly  complete,  as it is for 
human  stool  microbiomes,  read mapping  provides  excellent  taxonomic  and functional  results.  Bioinformatics  
analyses  using  HUMAnN2  and QIIME  [92] will map metagenomic  DNA  data sets to determine  gene  content  
and the corresponding  microbial  pathways  involved.  Though  we will mine  this data exhaustively  for global  
multi -parameter  analysis,  we will specifically  determine  whether  genes  associated  with known  SCFA  pathways  
are enriched  or depleted  differentially  in PD patients  and controls.  
Our hypothesis  is that microbiota -derived  metabolites  contribute  to PD symptoms,  and may be 
protective  or pathogenic  depending  on metabolite  levels  and/or  ratios.  The question  is whether  hallmark  
changes  in microbiome  composition  and function  are specific  to PD or are the consequence  of aggregated  αSyn  
in the ENS  and intestinal  dysfunction.  To answer  this question,  we will collect  stool  samples  from  patients  with 
Multiple  System  Atrophy  (MSA),  a synucleinopathy,  and α-synuclein -dementia  [n=20  each group],  and 
interrogate  their microbiome  composition  and function  using  shotgun  metagenomics  as described.  Comparison  
to the PD microbiome  will address  specificity  to related  neurodegenerative  disease,  and this knowledge  could  
also further  expand  the role of microbiome  to additional  disorders  where  αSyn  plays  a pathogenic  role. 
 
Aim 1.2. Identify  the potential  contributing  factors  for dysbiosis  in PD 
Rationale.  It is well established  that environmental  factors  such as diet, as well as genetics,  impact  microbiome  
composition  [93].  Currently,  there  are no data for how environment  impacts  the microbiome  in PD. Filling  this 
knowledge  gap can advance  our understanding  of the underlying  mechanism  of dysbiosis  in PD and provide  an 
opportunity  for disease  modification  in those  at high risk of developing  PD, such as first-degree  relatives.  
Experimental  Approach.  In order  to determine  the contribution  of environmental  and genetic  factors  to 
dysbiosis  in PD, we propose  two approaches.  First,  a cross  sectional  study  where  we will compare  microbiome  
composition  in subsets  of PD patients  (newly  recruited  as part of the proposed  application)  whose  household,  
non-related  spouse  (for environmental  factor)  and their first-degree  relatives  who do not live with the patient  
agree  to provide  stool  samples  as well.  The consent process will be initiated after the subject has been initially 
screened for eligibility. If the patient meets inclusion and exclusion criteria, the subject will be approached by a 
member of the study staff during his/her regular clinic visit o r sent a copy of the consent form so that they may read it 
in the comfort of their own home. If the potential subjects' spouse/ relative accompany during the clinic visit, they will 
be informed about the study. If not, the subject will be asked to share th e study information with their spouse/ relative 
and inform the study team if interested. If the subject is interested in moving forward, the consent will be reviewed by 
the study coordinator in the Gastroenterology clinic.   The study coordinator, PI or stu dy staff delegated the 
responsibility by the PI will obtain informed consent from the subject.  
We also plan to have the study registered on clinicaltrials.gov and the Michael J Fox trial finder so that 
interested participants can contact the study team.  
Each household  and first-degree  relative  study  subject  will be evaluated  to ensure  there  is no clinical  evidence  of 
neurological  disorders  including  PD. Also,  these  subjects  will complete  a 24 hour diet recall  questionnaire  before  
stool  collection  and validated  3 month  food frequency  questionnaires  to collect  dietary  information  similar  to PD 
patients.  Each  subject  (including  PD subjects)  will complete  a smell  questionnaire  and a sleep  questionnaire  to 
determine  whether  these  “control”  subjects  have  loss of smell  or have  REM  sleep  disorders  because  these  
 
 conditions  increase  the risk of PD. For assessing  smell,  we will use the UPSIT  questionnaire  [94, 95]. For 
assessing  REM  sleep  disorder,  we will use RBD1Q  which  consists  of a   single  question,  answered  “yes”  or 
“no,”  as follows:  “Have  you ever been  told, or suspected  yourself,  that you seem  to ‘act out your dreams’  while  
asleep  (for example,  punching,  flailing  your arms  in the air, making  running  movements,  etc.)?”  [96] We predict  
that at least 20 PD patients /MSA  will have  both household  spouse  and first degree  relative  willing  to provide  
stool  samples  for this study.  
Second,  in the longitudinal  study, we will collect  stool  every  3 months  (with  3 day diet questionnaire  
prior  to each collection)  over 12 months  and determine  microbiome  composition  over time.  All PD subjects will 
undergo clinical assessments at baseline and end of the study to determine the severity  of PD. These assessments 
will include : Movement Disorder Society -Sponsored Revision of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale 
(MDS -UPDRS); Hoehn and Yahr Stage (HY); Non -Motor symptoms Scale (NMSS); Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) . We will correlate  the microbiome  data with PD symptoms,  diet and response  to treatment  
and progression  of disease.  These  studies  will determine  whether  disease  progression  and factors  such as PD 
medications  and diet significantly  impact  microbiome  composition.  Further,  we will determine  whether  
changes  in SCFA -producing  bacteria  (as part of Aim 1.1) and/or  abnormal  SCFA  profiles  (as part of Aim 1.3) 
correlate  with severity  of PD symptoms.  
 
 
Inclusion/ Exclusion Criteria:  
 
For Parkinson’s disease subjects : 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. 40 -80 years of age  
2.Documented diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease  
 For cross sectional study - the Parkinson’s disease stages 1 -4 are eligible  
 For longitudinal study - the Parkinson’s disease stages 1 -2.5 are eligible  
Exclusion criteria:  
1.History of GI diseases (except for hemorrhoids or occasional (<3 times a week) heartburn)  like Inflammatory 
bowel disease or Celiac disease  
2.Antibiotic use within last 12 weeks  
3.Use of probiotic supplement except yogurt  
4.Intentional change in diet  
5. Chronic use of NSAIDS. A washout period of 3 weeks is needed before the subject could be enrolled  into the 
study. Low dose aspirin is allowed  
 
For household controls/ 1st degree relatives : 
Inclusion criteria:  
1.40-80 years of age  
2.No clinical evidence of neurological disorders including Parkinson’s disease  
3.Live in the same household as the Parkinso n Disease patient or is a first degree relative of the PD patient  
Exclusion criteria:  
1.History of GI diseases (except for hemorrhoids or occasional (<3 times a week) heartburn))like Inflammatory 
bowel disease or Celiac disease  
2.Antibiotic use within last  12 weeks  
3.Use of probiotic supplement except yogurt  
4.Intentional change in diet  
5. Chronic use of NSAIDS. A washout period of 3 weeks is needed before the subject could be enrolled into the 
study. Low dose aspirin is allowed  
 
 
 
 Aim 1.3. Determine  how dysbiosis  promotes  PD pathogenesis  by correlating  microbiomes  to metabolites  
Rationale.  Gut bacteria  produce  metabolites  that impact  neuronal  function  [6, 97]. Some  of the most  common  
microbial  metabolites  with profound  physiologic  effects  are SCFAs,  produced  through  fermentation  of fibers  in 
the lumen  of the colon.  Several  studies  have  shown  that the biological  effect  of SCFAs  is dose dependent,  as 
high butyrate  is pro-inflammatory  and toxic  while  low dose butyrate  is anti-inflammatory  [63].  Butyrate  can also 
impact  biological  processes  through  epigenetic  changes  because  it is a potent  HDAC  inhibitor  [75].  SCFAs  
regulate  intestinal  barrier  function  and low levels,  specifically  butyrate  and propionate,  can promote  gut 
permeability  to bacterial  products,  leading  to neuroinflammation  [34],  as has been  seen in PD patients.  Our data 
reveal  feeding  SCFAs  to GF mice  increases  neuroinflammation  (Sampson  et al., Cell, 2016),  consistent  with a 
recent  paper  using  the same  approach  [34],  and also induces  motor  symptoms  in germ -free ASO  mice  (see 
Figure  3). While  robust,  these  findings  are confounding  in light of a report  for low absolute  SCFA  levels  in PD 
patients  [33],  though  specific  SCFAs  are increased  relative  to total levels  in PD samples.  Additional  research,  as 
proposed  in this project,  is needed  to reconcile  these  data by expanding  PD cohorts  for SCFA  analysis,  and 
experimentally  overcoming  potential  developmental  issues  known  for GF mice  [98] by using  humanized  animals  
where  bacteria  dynamically  produce  SCFAs.  We will determine  ratios  of SCFAs  in PD patients,  along            
with absolute  levels.  Finally,  we will modulate  SCFA  ratios  to test functional  outcomes  in mice  (Aims  3 & 4). 
Experimental  Approach.  We will determine  SCFA  concentrations  in serum  and stool  from  early  onset  PD 
patients  and HCs.  Briefly,  as described  in our studies  [99, 100],  samples  will be thawed  and centrifuged  at 
13,000  rpm for 10 minutes.  An aliquot  (0.2 µL) will be injected  into a GC-FID 7890A  instrument  equipped  with 
a fused  silica  capillary.  Values  will be quantitated  by comparison  to external  standards  for formate,  acetate,  
butyrate,  valerate,  propionate,  iso-butyrate  and iso-valerate.  This study  will be the largest  PD cohort  to date that 
is analyzed  for SCFAs,  and the only one that will have  metagenomic  data.  Thus,  we will correlate  serum  and 
stool  metabolomics  data with stool  metagenomic  data,  and PD symptoms  and disease  severity  obtained  through  
validated  PD questionnaires.  Principal  component  analysis  (PCoA)  of metagenomic  and metabolomics  data will 
be performed  using  MATLAB  software  (MathWorks)  and compared  to PD symptom  data collected  from  
subjects.  Data  will be centered  and standardized  (σ = 1) prior  to running  the PCoA  function.  We will use this 
bioinformatics  analysis  to define  positive  and negative  correlations  between  all parameters,  to determine  a 
microbial  or metabolite  “fingerprint”  for PD. In addition  to informing  the studies  in Aims  2-4 and validating  an 
involvement  for SCFAs,  this study  may yield  molecular  biomarkers  for early  PD. 
 
Expected  Outcomes  for Specific  Aim 1. We anticipate  confirming  our prior  findings  that patients  with PD 
have  dysbiosis,  and further  identifying  the nature  of the dysbiosis  including  changes  at the species  and strain  
level.  We will extend  these  studies  via metagenomic  analysis  to quantify  butyrate -producing  bacteria  and gene  
pathways  involved  in SCFA  production,  which  we predict  will be different  between  PD patients  and HCs.  We 
anticipate  defining  correlations  between  PD status,  dysbiosis  and SCFAs.  We anticipate  that microbiome  
composition  in first-degree  relatives  is more  similar  to PD subjects  than to HCs.  We predict  that patients  with 
other  forms  of α-synucleinopathy  have  dysbiosis,  but that their microbiomes  are different  from  PD patients.  
Indeed,  our pilot data using  16S rRNA  analysis  in 6 patients  with MSA  show  distinct  dysbiosis  from  PD (data  
not shown).  We predict  that patients  with PD have  abnormal  SCFA  ratios  in stool  and serum,  and will carefully  
determine  levels  of all detectable  SCFAs  in order  to determine  disease -related  profiles.  We cannot  predict  
microbiome  stability  in PD patients,  but anticipate  that there  will be variation  in the microbiome  over time,  but 
that dysbiosis  will remain  throughout  the year with persistence  in abnormal  SCFA  profiles.  
Pitfalls  and Alternative  Strategies  for Specific  Aim 1. SCFA  analysis  and metagenomics  are routine  to our 
team.  We do not predict  any problems  in collecting  the proposed  samples  from  subjects.  We already  have  the 
required  stool  and serum  samples  from  40 PD patients  and HCs.  We have  access  to over 2,000  PD patients  at 
RUMC  where  we have  been  obtaining  samples  for years,  and several  hundred  more  from  the UW Movement  
Disorders  clinics.  We have  extensive  experience  in collecting  multiple  stool  samples  over one year in PD 
patients  with no dropout.  Nonetheless,  we plan to recruit  an additional  4 subjects  in the event  of 10% dropout.  
We have  access  to patients  with other  synucleinopathies  (over  70 patients  with MSA  and over 200 patients  with 
Lewy  body  Dementia)  through  our Movement  Disorders  clinics  at RUMC  and UW.  We have  shown  that the 
proposed  number  of subjects  [n=40]  is adequate  for statistical  differences  in microbiome  composition  between  
PD and HCs [30].  However,  if we find the number  of samples  in our biobank  is not sufficient,  we are able to 
collect  additional  samples  at both sites (see letters  from  Drs. Shannon  and Pal). If we find that our  
metabolomics  data suggest  non-SCFA  pathways,  then we will expand  our studies  to include  comprehensive  
 
 untargeted  metabolomics  by sending  samples  to Metabolon  (see letter  of support),  a commercial  entity  with 
whom  we have  collaborated  and published  [27, 90]. 
 
 
Specific  aim 2. Determine  how the microbiome  regulates  gut-brain  interactions  in a PD model  
Introduction.  Our preliminary  data in Figure  4 reveal  that microbiota  transplant  from  early  onset  PD patients  
exacerbates  disease  in ASO  mice  compared  to gut bacteria  from  healthy  controls.  However,  we did not measure  
SCFA  levels  in donors  at time of collection,  as sampling  was prior  to our current  knowledge.  Here,  we will 
transplant  microbiota  into WT and ASO  mice  from  high (top 3rd) and low (bottom  3rd) SCFA  producers,  
aiming  for 6 PD and 6 HC donors  for each (24 total groups).  We will assess  motor  symptoms  and gut motility.  
Neuroinflammatory  status  will be determined,  and αSyn  aggregation  measured  in the gut and brain.  We will 
extend  our current  data to measure  neurodegeneration  in the enteric  nervous  system  and various  brain  regions  
using  tissue  clearing  by CLARITY.  CLARITY  will be used to measure  neuronal  activation  through  cFos  
staining  in fixed  postmortem  tissue;  to corroborate  and expand  these  results,  we will perform  real-time calcium  
imaging  and electrophysiology  in living  tissue  from  humanized  mice.  These  studies  will reveal  functional  links  
between  the microbiome  and PD pathophysiology,  and test SCFAs  as a mediator  of gut-brain  connections.  
 
Rationale.  Novel  AAV tools  to study  cellular  populations . Genetically -encoded  tools  that can be used to 
visualize,  monitor,  and modulate  mammalian  neurons  are revolutionizing  neuroscience.  The Gradinaru  lab has 
recently  published  an in vivo selection  platform  (CREATE)  for identifying  adeno -associated  viruses  (AAVs)  
that more  efficiently  transduce  genetically  defined  cell populations.  The CREATE  platform  has already  
demonstrated  one novel  vector  with intravascular  delivery,  AAV -PHP.B,  that is 40- to 90-fold more  efficient  at 
transducing  the brain  than the current  standard,  AAV9  [101].  AAV -PHP.B  transduces  most  neuronal  types  and 
glia across  the brain.  We also possess  a novel,  
unpublished  capsid  (PHP.S)  identified  in the screen  
that has increased  affinity  for peripheral  neurons 
over PHP.B  or the widely  used AAV9  (Figure  5). 
 
Figure  5. (A) Synapsin -driven  multi -spectral  labeling  via 
systemically -delivered  AAV -PHP.S  appears  brighter  and 
labels  fine processes  (arrow)  compared  to (B) AAV9  in 
PACT -cleared  duodenal  cross  sections  of the mouse  gut. (C) 
Individual  neurons  in enteric  ganglia  are distinctly  colored,  
enabling  tracing  of individual  neuronal  processes.  (D) Locally  
delivered  synapsin -driven  channelrhodopsin  via AAV -PHP.S  
spatially  restricts  expression  in enteric  ganglia  and limits  
photostimulation  area.  (E1)  Systemic  delivery  of AAV -PHP.S  
coding  CAG -driven  Cre-dependent  XFPs  in TH-Cre mice  restricts  expression  to dopaminergic  neurons.  (E2-4) Individual  duodenal  
layers  (18µm  projections)  are visualized  in fine detail  after  PACT.  
 
We will package  constructs  driven  by cell specific  promoters  in AAV -PHP.S  to achieve  cell-type specific  
expression  via non-invasive,  systemic  injection  (by contrast,  available  vectors  for local  delivery  can damage  the 
gut). This will enable  in depth  observation  (e.g. fluorescent  proteins  or calcium  indicators)  or manipulation  (e.g. 
activity  effectors)  of peripheral  nerves  or enteric  populations  in the gut. Within  these  viruses,  specific  promoters  
will be used to drive  the expected  patterns  of reporter  expression  in the CNS  – we have  had success  with 
CaMKII α for cortical  glutamatergic  neurons;  Synapsin  for neurons,  broadly;  GfABC1D  for astrocytes;  Myelin  
Basic  Protein  for oligodendrocytes;  Tyrosine  Hydroxylase  (TH)  for dopaminergic  neurons;  FEV  for  
serotonergic  neurons;  and PCP2  for Purkinje  neurons  (Figure  6). We have  also developed  the VAST  (Viral  
Assisted  Spectral  Tracing)  system,  which  achieves  sparse,  multi -color  labeling  and will be used to perform  
tracing  of dense  neuronal  pathways  in both the gut and brain  (Figure  7) and measure  differences  in neurites  and 
synapses  in experimental  and control  animal  cohorts.  
 
Figure  6. Intravenously  
delivered  AAVs  provide  
broad  and cell type - 
restricted  gene  
expression  across  the 
brain.  A-C. Cell type- 
restricted  promoters:  
PCP2,  Purkinje  neurons  

 
 (A); TH, midbrain  dopaminergic  neurons  (B); and Myelin  Basic  Protein,  oligodendrocytes  (C) provide  expected  patterns  of reporter  
expression  within  AAVs.  
 
 Figure  7. A modular  AAV -based  method  
for sparse,  multi -color  labeling  with  
controllable  labeling  efficiency.  The 
schematic  shows  the overview  of the VAST  
approach,  which  takes  advantage  of the ability  
to deliver  multiple  transgenes  to the CNS  
using  bloodstream  delivery  of novel  AAV  
serotypes  such  as AAV -PHP.B.  VAST  
labeling  of mitral  cells  and tufted  cells  in the 
mouse  olfactory  bulb in TBX -Cre mice  at high (left)  and low (right)  doses  of the inducer  AAV.  
 
Experimental  Approach.  Behavioral  analysis  of colonized  mice.  Prior  to colonization,  mice  will be 
systemically  injected  with AAVs  that contain  promoter  constructs  to label  Tyrosine  Hydroxylase  (TH)  for 
dopaminergic  neurons  or Synapsin  for all neurons.  Wild -type (WT)  or Thy1 -ASO  (ASO)  mice  raised  in germ - 
free conditions  will receive  fecal  transplants  of high and low SCFA  producing  microbiota  derived  from  PD and 
HC donors.  After  allowing  6 weeks  of colonization,  mice  will be assessed  for motor  deficits  and gut motility.  
After  motor  testing,  mice  will be sacrificed  and tissues  analyzed  using  CLARITY,  as described  below.  
Motor  function  for all animals  will be tested  between  hours  7 and 9 of the light-phase.  Beam  traversal  is 
performed  first, before  allowing  animals  to rest for ~1hr  and testing  on pole descent.  The following  day, 
adhesive  removal  and hind limb scoring  will performed.  Fecal  output  will performed  within  3 days and 
immediately  prior  to tissue  collection.  Beam  traversal - A 1 meter  plexiglass  beam  (Stark’s  Plastics,  Forest  Park,  
OH) was constructed  of four segments  of 0.25m  in length.  Each  segment  is of thinner  widths  3.5cm,  2.5cm,  
1.5cm,  and 0.5cm,  with 1cm overhangs  placed  1cm below  the surface  of the beam.  The widest  segment  is a 
loading  platform  for the animals  and the narrowest  end placed  into home  cage.  Animals  will have  two days of 
training  to traverse  the length  of the beam  before  testing.  On the third  day, animals  will be timed  over three  trials  
to traverse  from  the loading  platform  to the home  cage.  Timing  will begin  when  the animals  place  their fore 
limbs  onto the 2.5cm  segment  and end when  one fore limb reaches  the home  cage.  Pole descent - A 0.5m  long 
pole,  1cm in diameter,  is placed  into the home  cage.  Animals  receive  two days of training  to descend  from  the 
top of the pole and into the home  cage.  On the test day, animals  are placed  head -down  on the top of the pole and 
timed  to descend  back  into the home  cage.  Timing  begins  when  the experimenter  releases  the animal  and      
ends when  one hind limb reached  the home  cage base.  Adhesive  removal - ¼” round  adhesive  labels  (Avery,  
Glendale,  CA) will be placed  on the nasal  bridge  between  the nostrils  and forehead.  Animals  are placed  into their 
home  cage (with  cage mates  removed)  and timed  to completely  remove  the sticker.  Animals  are recorded  over 
three  trials.  Hind  limb clasping  reflex  scoring - Animals  are gently  lifted  upwards  by the mid-section  of the tail 
and observed  over ~5-10 seconds  [80].  Animals  are assigned  a score  of 0, 1, 2, 3 based  on the extent  to       
which  the hind limbs  clasped  inward.  0, no clasping.  A score  of 1 is assigned  to animals  which  clasp  one hind 
limb inward  or if both legs exhibit  partial  inward  clasping.  A score  of 2 is given  if both legs clasp  inward  for the 
majority  of the observation,  but still exhibit  some  flexibility.  A score  of 3 is assigned  if animals  display  complete  
paralysis  of hind limbs  that immediately  clasped  inward  and exhibited  no signs  of flexibility.  Inverted            
grid- Animals  are placed  in the center  of a 30cm  by 30cm  screen  with 1cm wide  mesh.  The screen  is inverted  
head -over-tail and placed  on supports  ~40cm  above  an open  cage with deep  bedding.  Animals  are timed  until 
they release  their grip or remain  for 60s. All motor  tests are video  recorded,  and a blinded  investigator  scores  
performance  to validate  scoring  by unblinded  investigators.  Fecal  Output - Animals  are removed  from  their home  
cages  and placed  into a 12cm  x 25cm  translucent  cylinder.  Fecal  pellets  are counted  every  5 minutes,  cumulative  
over 15 minutes.  Principal  component  analysis  (PCoA)  of all motor  function  and gut motility  is performed   
using  MATLAB  software  (MathWorks)  using  behavioral  data collected  from  mice  that performed  at 
least 3 tasks.  Data  is centered  and standardized  (σ = 1) prior  to running  the PCoA  function.  
After  testing,  mice  will be sacrificed  and prepared  for either  histology  or physiological  recordings.  For 
these  particular  studies,  we will colonize  12 mice  per condition  and all will undergo  behavioral  evaluation.  
Within  each condition  and as described  below,  tissue  from  4 mice  will be evaluated  for histology,  4 for 
population  activity  imaging,  and 4 for whole  cell patch  clamp  electrophysiology.  
 
Histological  evaluation  of neuronal  populations  in cleared  brain  and GI tissue.  Mice  will be sacrificed  via 
intracardial  perfusion  with 4% paraformaldehyde.  To enable  fine-scale  neural  circuit  mapping  in a whole  
unsectioned  specimen  by light microscopy,  the opaque  sample  needs  to be “cleared”  to allow  light penetration  

 
 throughout  the whole  sample.  One effective  tissue  clearing  technology,  CLARITY,  creates  tissue -hydrogel  
hybrids  that lock in place  bio-macromolecules  and are amenable  to selective  lipid extractions  to increase  optical  
 
 
transparency  [102].  To perform  this, GI and brain  tissue  will be collected  then cleared  using  the passive  
CLARITY  technique  (PACT  [103,  104])  developed  by the Gradinaru  lab by first embedding  a 4% acrylamide  
hydrogel  scaffold,  hybridizing,  and incubating  in 8% SDS to remove  light-scattering  lipids.  PACT  clearing  
retains  the three -dimensional  structure  of the tissue,  preserves  protein -protein  interactions,  and is compatible  
with fluorescent  protein  detection  without  the need  for antibody  labeling  [105]  (Figure  8). Antibodies  will be 
used to stain  tissue  for various  markers.  In particular,  we will use cell-specific  markers  to label  neurons  
(PGP9.5),  astrocytes  (GFAP),  microglia  (Iba1),  epithelial  cells (E-cadherin),  and neuron -specific  markers  to 
identify  dopaminergic  (TH)  and cholinergic  (ChAT)  subpopulations.  Antibodies  against  cFos  will be used to 
detect  neuronal  activity.  Antibodies  to phosphorylated  Syn as well as a conformation -specific  Syn antibody  
will identify  pathologic  aggregates.  See Figure  2 as example  of Syn aggregation  data.  For microglia  activation,  
IBA1  stained  z-stacks  will be imaged  at 1µm steps  and subsequently  analyzed  using  Imaris  software,                  
as previously  described  [34].  Semi -automated  reconstruction  of microglia  cell bodies  and processes  will be 
performed,  whereby  the experimenter  designates  individual  cell bodies  and the software  quantifies  diameter,  
dendrite  length,  and branch  points  from  each 
given  cell body.  20-60 cells per region  per animal  
will be analyzed.  PACT  is also compatible  with 
the TUNEL  assay,  and neurite  labeling  and 
quantification,  which  will be used to assess  cell 
death/degeneration  of TH-positive  neurons.  We 
will image  this combinatorial  labeling  using  
confocal  or light sheet  microscopy  to determine  
differences  in cellular  population  activity,  
integrity,  and death  between  conditions.  
 
Figure  8. (A) Whole  stomach  from  transgenic  ChAT -GFP  
mouse  cleared  by PACT  and imaged  using  light  sheet  
microscopy.  Inset  shows  retention  of fine structure  details  of 
ganglia.  (B) Antibody  labeling  of neurons  (PGP9.5),  astrocytes  (GFAP),  and nuclei  (DAPI).  Whole  tissue  was imaged  using  confocal  
microscopy  and volumetrically  reconstructed  from  1µm  thick  images.  Interactions  between  cell types  can be clearly  observed  within  
and between  (C) myenteric  plexus,  (D) submucosal  plexus,  and (E) intestinal  crypts.  Scale  bars = 30µm.  
 
Physiological  recordings  from  brain  and gut tissue.  For recordings  from  the brain,  thick  slices  (300µm) will be 
collected  and incubated  in oxygenated  aCSF.  Slices  will then be mounted  in a perfused  chamber  for recording.  
For recordings  from  GI tissue,  2 cm long segments  of the GI tract will be cut and opened  along  the mesentery  
and incubated  in oxygenated  Kreb’s  solution  with muscle  relaxants  (e.g. nicardipine,  atropine).  The tissue  will 
then be microdissected  to expose  the myenteric  or submucosal  plexus  and pinned  to a perfused,  Sylgard  lined  
chamber,  mucosa  side up. We will perform  whole  cell patch  clamp  on both brain  and GI tissue  to assess  passive  
(e.g. membrane  resistance,  resting  potential),  active  (e.g. action  potential  threshold  and amplitude),  and synaptic  
(e.g. post synaptic  currents)  properties  of neurons.  In the brain,  we will record  from  substantia  nigra  pars 
compacta.  In the gut, we will record  from  both the myenteric  and submucosal  plexuses  of the duodenum,  
jejunum,  proximal  colon,  and distal  colon.  We will record  a minimum  of 12 neurons  from  each region  in each 
mouse  for comparison.  By performing  AAV -based  labeling  before  microbiota  transplantation  as described  
above,  specific  cell types  can easily  be identified  for recording.  Separately,  we will use AAVs  to deliver  a 
genetically  encoded  calcium  indicator  (e.g. GCaMP)  for activity  imaging.  For the gut, tissue  can be prepared  
without  the need  for microdissection  and population  dynamics  can be recorded  via fluorescent  imaging  in 
response  to physiological  stimuli  (i.e. stretch,  touch)  [106].  
 
Expected  Outcomes  for Specific  Aim 2. We expect  that ASO  mice  receiving  transplants  from  PD donors  will 
display  increased  pathology  compared  to mice  with microbiota  from  HCs.  Further,  we predict  animals  receiving  
microbiota  from  low SCFA  producers  will display  more  severe  motor  deficits,  while  it may be difficult  to 
resolve  here which  SCFAs  mediate  phenotypes  (addressed  in Aims  3 and 4). We expect  to observe  increased  
Syn aggregation  in both brain  and gut tissue  for animals  with the worst  motor  defects.  In the brain,  we expect  to 
see an increase  in dopaminergic  cell death  or degeneration  in mice  transplanted  with PD donor -derived  
microbiota,  though  phenotypes  may be subtle  such as deterioration  of dopaminergic  projections,  primarily  in the 
 
 striatum,  while  cell bodies  are spared.  Physiologically,  we expect  PD-microbiota  colonized  mice  to display  
decreased  enteric  neuronal  activity,  particularly  in the dopaminergic  population  [107].  We expect  to observe  
reduced  cellular  excitability  as well as decreases  in postsynaptic  currents  generated  by dopamine  release.  
 
 Pitfalls  and Alternative  Strategies  for Specific  Aim 2. We expect  no technical  issues  as all proposed  studies  
are routine  to the Gradinaru  and Mazmanian  laboratories,  and all proposed  technologies  and reagents  already  
generated  and validated.  Further,  all IACUC,  IRB and IBC protocols  are already  in place  for the humanized  
mouse  studies,  as evidenced  by our preliminary  data.  No studies  have  explored  the physiology  of enteric  
neurons  in the context  of PD models  or during  Syn aggregation,  thus data generated  here will be novel.  
Preparation  of gut tissue  for whole  cell patch  clamp  electrophysiology  does risk damaging  the enteric  neuronal  
network  during  the dissection  to expose  the plexuses  for recording.  Using  genetically  encoded  activity  
indicators  circumvents  this problem,  however  delivery  of a high viral dose will be necessary  to achieve  strong  
expression  in enough  neuronal  cells to observe  population  dynamics;  we think  this is possible  based  on pilot 
data for delivery  of opsins  at levels  sufficient  for photoactivation,  using  the AAV -PHP.S  vector  proposed  here.  
 
Specific  aim 3. Develop  and test “designer”  fiber  diets  to modulate  SCFA  levels  in PD mice  
Introduction.  SCFAs  are normally  produced  in the colon  as a consequence  of fermentation  of dietary  fibers  by 
subsets  of intestinal  bacteria,  and impact  the immune  and nervous  systems.  Our data suggest  that SCFAs  
contribute  to the pathogenesis  of PD. Indeed,  feeding  a mixture  of SCFAs  promotes  motor  symptoms  in GF 
mice  on an ASO  background  (see Figure  3). While  butyrate  activates  microglia  [108,  109],  butyrate  is anti- 
inflammatory  in other  contexts  [109,  110].  One of the reasons  for these  contradictory  results  is our limited  
understanding  of how SCFAs  impact  neuroinflammation  and contribute  to PD pathogenesis.  Microglia  may 
respond  differently  than other  immune  or epithelial  cell types  to SCFAs.  Further,  it is not known  whether  the 
absolute  levels  of each of the three  main  SCFAs,  or rather  the ratio of these  SCFAs,  are important  and whether  
the rate of SCFA  production  influences  their biological  effects.  We acknowledge  that feeding  defined  mixtures  
of SCFAs  to GF mice  is an artificial  approach,  though  it does provide  a robust  proof  of concept.  Further,  
dynamic  bacterial  production  of SCFAs  may provide  different  results  than feeding  static  concentrations.  Thus,  
in order  to interrogate  the impact  of SCFAs  in PD, it is most  prudent  to manipulate  SCFA  profiles  (increases  or 
decreases)  using  “authentic”  approaches  where  gut microbes  transform  dietary  fibers  into SCFAs  metabolites.  
 
Aim 3.1. In vitro  studies  to identify  designer  fibers  to normalize  SCFA  profile  in PD stool  
Rationale.  Different  fiber  oligosaccharides  and polysaccharides  have  distinct  fermentation  profiles  favoring  the 
growth  of subsets  of bacteria  [111].  Thus,  one can use this prebiotic  property  of fibers  to modify  gut 
microbiome  composition  and function  to achieve  “desired”  biological  outcomes.  Of course,  not all bacteria  are 
capable  of fermenting  polysaccharides  to produce  SCFAs,  and different  bacteria  produce  different  types  of 
SCFAs.  We have  shown  the importance  of structure/function  of fibers  in producing  specific  SCFAs  by gut 
bacteria,  and demonstrated  our ability  to carefully  change  the structure  of fiber  products,  leading  to differential  
production  of SCFAs  when  incubated  with stool  from  PD patients  and HCs (see Figure  10). Thus,  changing  
SCFA  profiles  in stool  with prebiotics  is a strong  tool to 1) elucidate  the underlying  mechanism  of microbiota  
involvement  in the pathogenesis  of PD and 2) identify  a therapeutic  approach  for PD. 
We propose  that studying  the levels  and/or  ratios  of SCFAs  may shed light on their mechanism  of 
action.  We have  developed  a novel  library  of “designer”  prebiotics  that produce  high or low butyrate  and 
propionate  proportions,  and are slow  fermenting  compared  to commercial  fibers  (Figure  9), thus avoiding  
production  of rapid  and high levels  of SCFAs  that may be toxic  to 
cells.  We further  validated  the specific  SCFA -producing  properties  of 
our prebiotics  in fermentation  bioreactors  by adding  them  to stools  
from  PD patients  and HCs,  and showed  that these  prebiotics  can shape  
the SCFA  repertoire  (Figure  10). 
 
Figure  9. Conceptualized  placement  of dietary  fibers  that provide  different  
relative  proportions  of butyrate  and propionate,  and further  classified  as slow  
or fast fermenting.  Slow  fermenting  fibers  [(in pink)  4=starch -entrapped  
microsphere,  5= soluble  wheat  bran arabinoxylan,  6 and 7=soluble  corn bran  
arabinoxylans,  8=enzyme -debranched  corn arabinoxylan , 9=resistant  potato  starch  
(all but #9 produced  at Purdue)]  are preferable  to fast fermenting  fibers  [(in blue)  
commercial  fibers,  1=fructooligosaccharides  (FOS),  2=resistant  high-amylose  corn  
starch,  3=psyllium;  and soluble  sorghum  bran arabinoxylans  (prepared  at Purdue)  
that was fast fermenting  with high butyrate  level].  Slow  fermenting  fibers  will be 
chosen  for animal  testing  due to their  high tolerability  and production  of SCFAs  into 
1 
 1 
3 
2 
8 
 
4 
5 
 
7 
 
 more  distal  regions  of the colon.  In the current  project,  we will extend  this analysis  to 
acetate  as well.  
 
 ●  
 
Blank  Mixture  1    Mixture  2    Mixture  3    Mixture  4    Mixture  5    Mixture  6 
30 ● 
 
 
● 
 
20 
 
● 
 
 
 
● 
 
 
 
 
● 
 
 
10 ●
  
 
 
 
 
 
Time  
0 h 
12 h 
24 h Figure  10. Prebiotic  mixture  diets  tested  in a fermentation  
bioreactor  on healthy  control  (HC)  and Parkinson’s  patient’s  
(PD)  stools.  Certain  diets  were  as propiogenic  as the Mixture  6 
fast-fermenting  control  (Mixtures  1 and 4), and as butyrogenic  
(Mixture  3). By 24 h fermentation  time,  most  but not all of the 
fiber  mixtures  brought  propionate  and butyrate  levels  in PD 
stools  to that of the HC group  (PD initially  had significantly  
 
 
 
 
 
● ● 
● ● ●● 
● ● 
 
 
● 
 
●● 
● ●● 
● 
0 
HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD 
Condition  
 
Blank  Mixture  1    Mixture  2    Mixture  3    Mixture  4    Mixture  5    Mixture  6 
 
● 
20 
●● lower  propionate  & butyrate).  Mixtures  were  1=20%  FOS  + 20%  
potato  starch  + 20%  Promitor™  (soluble  corn fiber)  + 20%  
chitin -glucan  + 20%  wheat  bran,  2=50%  potato  starch  + 50%  
wheat  bran,  3=50%  potato  starch  + 50%  chitin -glucan,  4=50%  
Promitor  + 50%  wheat  bran,  5=33.3%  potato  starch  + 33.3%  
Promitor  + 33.3%  wheat  bran,  6 (soluble  faster -fermenting  
control)=50%  FOS  + 50%  Promitor.  
 
15 
●● 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
 
● ● 
 
● 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
● 
 
 
● 
● 
●● 
●● 
● ●● ●● 
●● 
 
 
 0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
● 
 
 
 
 
 
 
●● 
 
 
 
 
● ● 
●● ● ● 
 
 
 
 
●●  
Time 
0 h 
12 h 
24 h In year 1, we will feed dietary  fiber  mixtures  already  
shown  in our in vitro  bioreactor  studies  to produce  
“healthy”  butyrate/propionate/acetate  ratios  in PD 
stools  to mice,  profile  effects  of these  diets  on the 
microbiome,  and assess  neuroinflammation,  αSyn 
HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD HC  PD 
Condition  pathology,  and motor  symptoms  (Aim  3.2; see  
below).  These  results  will form  the basis  for studies  in 
years  2 and 3 to further  enhance  the fiber-PD relationship  with emphasis  on identifying  fiber  chemical  and 
physical  structures  that specifically  enhance  expansion  of bacterial  species  that are propio - or butyro -genic  for 
further  testing  in animals  for PD-like symptoms.  These  studies  will develop  and test novel  approaches  for 
dietary  control  of microbial  metabolites  linked  to PD. 
Experimental  approach.  In year 1, we will test the three  fiber  products  that are most  effective  to “normalize”  
SCFA  profiles  via increased  butyrate/SCFA  ratios,  propionate/SCFA  ratios  and acetate/SCFA  ratios  (data  for 
candidate  fibers  already  collected;  see Figure  10 for partial  list) in mouse  models  (see Aim 3.2). This “gain  of 
function”  approach  should  provide  evidence  for the importance  of SCFAs  and also to determine  the potential  
importance  of increased  butyrate  vs. propionate  vs. acetate  ratios  in modifying  disease  progression  in mice.  
For the bioreactor  studies  in years  2 and 3, we will first test various  fibers  and fiber  mixtures  to 
understand  better  how to generate  desired  profiles  of SCFAs  for positive  changes  in PD endpoints,  as  
determined  in the year 1 study.  Stools  from  3 PD patients  and 3 healthy  controls,  with divergent  microbiota  as 
determined  by metagenomic  sequencing,  will be used in fermentation  studies  as described  below.  Then,  3 or 
more  candidate  fibers  will be chosen  and tested  on stools  collected  from  all 40 PD patients  and 20 healthy  
controls  in Aim 1.1. to study  the effects  of different  fiber products  on microbiota  composition  and SCFA  
production.  Fibers  will be studied  that meet  the pre-determined  criteria  of producing  high SCFA  amounts  with 
relatively  slow fermenting  property  for tolerability  and distal  fermentation  in the colon.  RT-qPCR  with primers  
specific  for the 16S rRNA  gene will be used to track  both butyrate  (e.g.,  Eubacterium , Rosburia ) and propionate  
producing  bacteria  (Prevotella , Bacteroides ) groups,  and followed  by metagenomics  for community  profiling.  
Fiber  will be measured  by the phenol  sulfuric  acid method  and fibers  adjusted  to same  fiber  weights.  
Fecal  samples  provided  by subjects  will be, as quickly  as possible,  flash  frozen  in liquid  nitrogen  and thawed  in 
the anaerobic  chamber  30 minutes  prior  to analysis  as per Rose  et al. (2010)  [112].  The bioreactor  fermentation  
procedure  will be similar  to that described  by Kaur  et al. (2011)  [99],  except  that all procedures  will be done  in 
an anaerobic  chamber.  Dietary  fiber  (1%)  and 5% feces  will be added  to PBS buffer  in an anaerobic  tube,  and 
sealed  tubes  incubated  at 37 °C for 12 h, and in certain  cases  for a time course  profile  at various  times  from  0 to 
24 h. Fermentation  metabolites  will be analyzed  according  to our protocol  in Kaur  et el. (2011)  [99] by gas 
chromatography.  Metagenomic  analysis  will be done  as described  in Aim 1.1. These  studies  will identify  
designer  fibers  that “normalize”  SCFA  ratios,  or even  improve  upon  SCFA  ratios  (i.e. elevate  targeted  SCFAs),  
in PD stool  to that of healthy  controls.  
 
Aim 3.2. Normalizing  SCFA  ratios  in a humanized  mouse  model  of PD 
Rationale.  While  bioreactors  are useful  due to high throughput  capabilities,  mouse  models  are needed  to 
determine  complex  phenotypes.  This sub-aim will test whether  dietary  management  of the microbiome  may be 5 butyrate  (mM)  propionate  (mM)  
10 
● 
 
 a viable  approach  to modulate  PD symptoms  in humanized  mice.  
Experimental  approach.  We will generate  independent  mouse  colonies  harboring  microbiota  from  5 human  
PD patients,  selected  as those  whose  microbiomes  and SCFA  levels  deviated  the most  from  healthy  controls,  as 
 
 determined  in Aim 1. 1. Both  germ -free WT and ASO  mice  will be colonized.  Beginning  at 5-6 weeks  of age, 
we will feed dietary  fibers  already  known  to increase  ratios  of the 3 major  SCFAs  continually  in drinking  water,  
and leave  control  groups  unfed.  Fiber  doses  will be determined  empirically  as the concentration  in water   
required  to achieve  the desired  output  fiber  concentrations  in feces  of GF mice  (thus,  accounting  for background  
absorption  and non-microbial  breakdown).  Starting  at 12 weeks  of age, mice  will be motor  tested,  
neuroinflammation  determined  and Syn pathology  assessed,  as described  in Aim 2. Microbiomes  and 
metagenomes  will be profiled,  as described  in Aim 1.1. SCFA  levels  will be tested  in feces  over time and colon  
contents  upon  sacrifice,  to determine  if metabolite  profiles  responded  as predicted  by the fiber  administered.  
When  available  by years  2-3, “optimized”  fibers  from  the bioreactor  studies  using  PD and healthy  stool  
from  this project  will be tested  in humanized  mice,  as described  above  for both technical  approach  and outcome  
measures.  Criteria  will be identifying  fibers  that shift the microbiome  and metabolome  of the 5 most  divergent  
PD donors  toward  a “healthy”  state.  The ability  to develop  fibers  predicted  to have  effects  for specific  
microbiomes,  then test efficacy  in mice  with matched  or different  microbiomes,  may also have implications  in 
development  of personalized  mouse  models  of disease.  
 
Expected  outcomes  for Specific  Aim 3. We predict  that we will find abnormal  SCFA  profiles  in PD stool  
before  fermentation  and improvement  of SCFA  profile  after fermentation  with some  of the fibers  we plan to 
study.  We predict  that we will be able to identify  at least 2 fiber  products  that show  efficacy  in mice  following  
testing  and identification  from  bioreactor  studies.  Finally,  it would  be exciting  if a fiber  had efficacy  in the 
humanized  mouse  group  that matched  its bioreactor  results,  and reduced  efficacy  in other  mouse  groups.  
Pitfalls  and Alternative  Strategies  for Specific  Aim 3. We do not predict  any technical  issues  as the proposed  
methods  are well established  in our laboratories.  If we find that the first 5 fiber mixtures  we selected  to study  do 
not provide  a desire  outcome  when  co-cultured  with PD stools,  then we will use other  sets of products  that we 
have  already  characterized  their fermentation  profile  and predict  that they will be able to increase  butyrate  and 
propionate  (see Figure  9) [100].  If we do not identify  new products  with better  SCFA  profiles,  then we will 
continue  to use the products  that we have already  identified  to increase  butyrate  and propionate  in PD stools   
(see Figure  10). Finally,  as an alternative  and possible  future  study,  we will transplant  into GF mice  microbiota  
from  PD patients  before  and after bioreactor  “treatment”  with fibers,  and test motor  performance  and GI/brain  
pathophysiology  to determine  if reshaping  the microbiome  in vitro  is sufficient  to alter its function.  
 
Specific  aim 4. Test dietary  and probiotic  treatments  in mice  with  PD-like symptoms  
Introduction.  We speculate  that the efficiency  of a microbiome  to utilize  dietary  fibers  varies  based  on its 
composition,  and an optimal  intervention  requires  modulating  both diet and the microbiome.  Further,  different  
SCFA  profiles  likely  impact  gut bacterial  composition.  Herein,  we will mine  existing  microbiome  sequence  data 
to identify  bacteria  that are selectively  reduced  or missing  in PD patients,  and treat humanized  PD mice  with 
novel  probiotics  to test for amelioration  of motor  symptoms  and pathophysiology.  Next,  we will analyze  
microbiomes  from  the current  project  (Aim  1.1), which  will expand  our PD cohort  from  6 to 40 subjects,  to 
identify  and test additional  microbial  treatments.  Finally,  we will feed specific  diets  that favorably  shape  SCFA  
ratios  (as determined  in Aim 3) while  administering  candidate  therapeutic  bacteria,  to test the innovative  
hypothesis  that both dietary  and microbial  interventions  are needed  for optimal  benefits  in a PD mouse  model.  
 
Aim 4.1. Administer  to mice  bacteria  that are depleted  in the PD microbiota  and test symptoms  
Rationale.  Publications  from  our group  and others  have recently  revealed  that the intestinal  microbiome  is 
altered  in PD patients  relative  to controls  [30-32]. Further,  we show  that transplant  of human  gut bacteria  into 
mice  transfers  symptoms  from  PD patients  (see Figure  4), suggesting  microbiome  changes  are functional  and 
not simply  a consequence  of disease.  In both the human  studies  and humanized  mouse  studies,  it appears  that 
specific  microbes  are selectively  depleted  in subjects  with PD. Briefly,  fecal  pellets  were  collected  from  the 
“humanized”  mouse  groups  whose  data is shown  in Figure  4, bacterial  DNA  extracted,  and 16S rRNA  
sequencing  performed  in the laboratory  of Dr. Knight.  Sequences  were  annotated  into Operational  Taxonomic  
Units  (OTUs).  Recipient  animal  groups  were  most  similar  to their respective  human  donor’s  profile  in 
unweighted  UniFrac  [113],  based  on PCoA  (Figures  11A,  B). We identified  a number  of genera  that are altered  
in animals  colonized  with microbiota  derived  from  PD donors,  compared  to healthy  controls  (Figure  11C). 
OTUs  reduced  or missing  in ASO  mice  with PD microbiota  include  members  of families  Lachnospiraceae,  
Rikenellaceae,  and Peptostreptococcaceae  (Figure  11C). Intriguingly,  we observe  that animals  receiving  PD 
 
 donor -derived  microbiota  display  an altered  SCFA  profile  compared  to mice  colonized  with microbes  from  
controls  (data  not shown),  supporting  a link between  dysbiosis  and SCFA  levels.  Together,  these  results  indicate  
 
 
 
A B  0.7 
0.6 
 
 
0.5  
 
 
 
 
***  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** that differences  in fecal  microbial  communities  in PD patients  
can be maintained  following  transfer  into mice,  and suggest  
bacteria  that are reduced  in PD may be new probiotics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
C g. Proteus  (p. Proteobacteria)  
g. Bilophila  (p. Proteobacteria)  
 
 
g. Roseburia  (p. Firmicutes)   
0.4 
 
 
0.3 
 
 
0.2 
 
 
0.1 
 
 
0.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unweighted  
UniFrac  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASO  
WT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weighted  
UniFrac   
Figure  11. Microbiome  dysbiosis  of PD patient  samples  after  transplant  
into germ -free mice.  (A) Unweighted  UniFrac  Principal  Coordinate  Analysis  
(PCoA)  of microbial  communities  of human  donors  (large  circles)  and recipient  
mice  (small  circles).  Each  donor  and recipient  sample  are matched  by        
color.  (B) Unweighted  and weighted  UniFrac  analysis  of microbial  
communities  in recipient  animals  based  on donor  identity.  (C) Taxa -level  
analysis  of individual  genera  altered  between  PD and healthy  donors  as a 
function  of recipient  mouse  genotype.  Left column  indicates  percentage  with  
significant  differences  observed;  right  column  indicates  fold change  between  
 
 
g. Pseudoramibacter  Eubacterium  (p. Firmicutes)  
unsp.  f. Veillonellaceae  (p. Firmicutes)  PD and healthy  donors.  ***p≤ 0.001,  999 permutations.  WT=wild -type,  
ASO=Thy1 -α-synuclein  genotype.  
g. Butyricimonas  (p. Bacteroidetes)  
 
 
g. Bacteroides  (p. Bacteroidetes)  
unsp.  f. Lachnospiraceae  (p. Firmicutes)  
g. Clostridium  (p. Firmicutes)  
unsp.  f. Rikenellaceae  (p. Bacteroidetes)  
g. Butyricicoccus  (p. Firmicutes)  
 
 
g. Enterococcus  (p. Firmicutes)  
unsp.  f. Peptostreptococcaceae  (p. Firmicutes)  
g. rc4-4 (p. Firmicutes)  
unsp.  f. Clostridiaceae  (p. Firmicutes)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0    -6.0 -4.0 -2.0 0.0  2.0 4.0 6.0 Experimental  approach.  We will treat humanized  mice  
harboring  a PD microbiota  with bacteria  that appear  to correlate  
with health.  Initially,  we will leverage  data gathered  from  our 
completed  studies.  Experimentally,  we will colonize  germ -free 
WT and ASO  mice  with microbiota  from  the 3 PD patients  that 
displayed  the most  severe  symptoms  (Note:  individual  subjects  
will be chosen  from  the 6 PD patients  for which  the aggregate  
data is shown  in Figure  4). GF mice  will be colonized  at 5 weeks  
Fraction  Different  Fold Change  of age to generate  3 independent  mouse  colonies.  At 12 weeks  of 
age, each animal  group  will be treated  by oral gavage  with 1) Lachnospiraceae;  2) Rikenellaceae;  3) 
Peptostreptococcaceae;  or 4) mock  gavage.  Individual  bacterial  species  will be chosen  as those  most  
phylogenticially  similar  to the OTUs  from  our data set and available  from  the American  Type  Culture  
Collection  (ATCC;  URL  not provided  as to adhere  to DoD  application  guidelines).  Bacteria  will be grown  in 
pure culture,  and 1 x 109 colony  forming  units  (CFU)  will be administered  to mice  daily  for 30 days;  this 
regimen  was chosen  as it is a high dose and exposure,  increasing  likelihood  for a positive  result  with future  
experiments  aimed  at optimizing  treatment  parameters.  Fecal  samples  will be collected  before  and weekly   
during  treatment  for microbiome  profiling.  Following  30 days of treatment,  mice  will be tested  for motor  
symptoms  in beam  traversal,  pole decent,  adhesive  removal  and hind limb clasping,  as described  in Specific  aim 
2, and shown  in Figure  3 and Sampson  et al., 2016.  For those  microbial  treatments  that ameliorate  motor  
deficits,  mouse  groups  will be analyzed  for neuroinflammation  and αSyn  aggregation  as described  in Aim 2. 
Finally,  for those  probiotic  treatments  that ameliorate  motor  symptoms,  neuroinflammation  and reduce  αSyn  
aggregation,  neuronal  phenotyping  and CLARITY  will be performed  comparing  treated  and untreated  groups  as 
described  in Aim 2. This comprehensive  analysis  will not only identify  novel  microbial  treatments  for PD 
symptoms  in mice,  but is designed  to reveal  mechanisms  of action  for how beneficial  bacteria  may ameliorate  
the pathophysiologies  that contribute  to motor  deficits.  
In addition  to the microbes  to be tested  from  our existing  data set, this project  will generate  new 
information  that adds to the list of potentially  therapeutic  microbes  based  on a larger  cohort  size, as described  in 
Aim 1. Depending  on the number  of new bacterial  candidates,  mice  can be treated  first with pools  of species   
and then narrowed  down,  or treated  with single  species  from  the onset.  Description  of experimental  approaches  
similar  to the studies  above.  This research  will identify  additional  microbes  with therapeutic  potential.  
 
Aim 4.2. Combine  prebiotic  and probiotic  treatments  to optimize  disease  protection  in mice  
Rationale.  A direct  prediction  from  our central  hypothesis  is that a possible  intervention  for PD may require  
cooperation  between  diet and microbiome,  since  specific  microbes  metabolize  certain  dietary  fibers  into 
molecules  that may impact  PD. The studies  proposed  in Aim 3.2. will test potential  therapeutic  diets  in mice  
with a PD microbiome  (that may be missing  key bacterial  species),  and Aim 4.1. will test candidate  probiotics  
for efficacy  without  altering  diet, which  may be required  for some  microbes  to improve  PD symptoms.  Herein,  
we will test if diets  predicted  to “normalize”  the PD microbiome  require  specific  species  of bacteria  for their 
efficacy  in mouse  models,  suggesting  that synbiotics  (prebiotic  + probiotic)  may be the most  optimal  treatment.  Mean  Distance  
 
 Experimental  Approach.  We will generate  independent  mouse  colonies  harboring  microbiota  from  5 human  
PD patients,  selected  as those  whose  microbiomes  and SCFA  levels  deviate  the most  from  healthy  controls,  as 
 
 determined  in Aim 1. Both  germ -free WT and ASO  mice  will be colonized.  The fibers  to be tested  will include  
all which  showed  effects  on targeted  SCFA  modulation  in bioreactor  studies,  regardless  of efficacy  in the 
mouse  studies  of Aim 3.2. The bacterial  species  to be tested  will include  those  that are significantly  depleted  in 
the PD patients  from  this current  cohort,  as determined  by Aim 1.1. Fibers  will be tested  individually  by 
administration  in water  at doses  empirically  determined.  Due to the numerous  combinations  of treatments  and 
animal  groups,  mice  will be treated  with pools  of candidate  species  (as consortia  of bacteria  may in fact be 
needed  for efficacy),  and then narrowed  to single  species  in subsequent  studies  as needed.  Also,  we will not 
maintain  all 5 donor -derived  mouse  colonies  simultaneously,  rather  use economy  of scale  to test prebiotic  and 
probiotics  combinations  in mice  (WT  and ASO)  colonized  from  a single  donor  at a given  point  in time,  as this 
will allow  us to breed  larger  age- and sex-matched  groups.  All techniques  used to profile  the microbiome,  
determine  SCFA  levels,  test motor  and GI function,  assess  neuroinflammation,  measure  Syn aggregation,  and 
determine  neuronal  activity  have  already  been  described.  These  studies  will test if diets  predicted  to 
“normalize”  the PD microbiome  require  specific  species  of bacteria  for their efficacy  in mouse  models.  
 
Expected  Outcomes  for Specific  Aim 4. We anticipate  identifying  bacteria  (or collections  of bacteria)  that 
protect  mice  from  PD symptoms,  based  on selective  microbial  depletion  from  the human  PD population.  Some  
species  may protect  without  modulation  of SCFA  levels,  while  others  may require  specific  dietary  fibers  for full 
efficacy.  For those  conditions  where  there  is cooperation  between  diet and the microbiome,  we predict  that fibers  
producing  “optimal”  SCFA  ratios  will be most  effective  in ameliorating  symptoms  in mice.  
Pitfalls  and Alternative  Strategies  for Specific  Aim 4. All techniques  and reagents  required  for this project  are 
already  in use by our team,  thus we anticipate  no technical  issues.  While  historically  many  gut bacteria  were    
not culturable,  recent  advances  now allow  isolation  of 60%-70% of the human  microbiota  [114,  115].  If the 
bacterial  species  of interest  from  the microbiome  profiling  are not closely  represented  phylogenetically  by 
strains  from  the ATCC,  we will culture  and isolate  desired  species  from  human  donor  stool  using  selective  
microbiological  plating  and 16S rRNA  matching  to metagenomic  data.  For the bacterial  treatment  studies,  dose 
and exposure  schedules  may need  to be optimized  for full efficacy.  Finally,  our analysis  will identify  microbes  
that are over-represented  in the PD population,  suggesting  they may have  pathogenic  potential.  If we fail to 
identify  disease -protective  microbes,  we will administer  possible  PD-promoting  bacteria  to mice  humanized  
with healthy  microbiota,  and measure  motor  symptoms  and pathophysiology,  as strategies  to inhibit  the activity  
of pathogenic  microbes  may be a therapeutic  option.  These  studies  can instead  be performed  in future  projects.  
 
Statistical  analysis.  Group  descriptive  statistics  will be performed  on all variables.  Normality  of distribution  
will be assessed  by the Lilliefors  test, and homogeneity  of variance  will be examined  with the Levene  test. 
Inter -group  differences  will be analyzed  by one or two-way ANOVA  using  the Holm -Sidak  test for comparison.  
For animal  research,  based  on our previous  studies  over many  years,  6-8 mice  per group  will be needed  (and all 
studies  performed  in duplicate)  on average  in each group  to achieve  a probability  of 88% that the study  will 
detect  a relationship  between  independent  and dependent  variables  at a two-sided  5% significance  level.  This 
power  calculation  assumes  that the true change  in the dependent  variables  is 0.53 standard  deviations  per one 
standard  deviation  change  in the independent  variable.  For human  subjects  work,  based  on the humanized  mouse  
data in Figure  4 and our publication  [30],  a sample  size of 20 human  donors  per group  achieves  96% power      
to detect  a small  effect  size (f2= 0.08)  attributed  by patient  category  by an F-test with an alpha=0.05,             
when  adjusting  for 7 additional  explanatory  variables.  
 
Overall  Strategic  Plan.  De-identified  stool  samples  collected  at RUMC  will be sent to Caltech  for colonization  
of mice,  as we have been  doing  for over 2 years.  Additional  samples  for ongoing  enrollment  will be collected  at 
RUMC  and UW.  Fecal  swabs  from  all samples  will be sent to UCSD  for microbiome  profiling  (metagenomics).  
All samples will be coded so that investigators at Rush and UW can link it back to the subjects. I nvestigators 
from UCSD, Caltech and Purdue will not have access to the link to the codes with subject identifiers . Fibers  will 
be developed  and optimized  in bioreactors  at Purdue.  Fecal  samples  and dietary  fibers  will be sent to Caltech,  
where  all mouse  treatments  will take place.  Fecal samples from Rush will  also be sent to t he Hamaker  lab at Purdue   
to perform  in vitro  fermentation  tests.  The Mazmanian   laborator y will administer  the motor  tests,  assess  
neuroinflammation,  and measure  Syn aggregation;  while  the Gradinaru  laboratory  will perform  the CLARITY  
analysis  and neuronal  activity  tests.  Finally,  fecal  samples  from  mice  will be sent to UCSD  for metagenomics,  
and to Purdue  for in vitro  fermentation and SCFA  analysis.  We predict  that specific,  molecular  interactions  Formatted:  Font: Italic
 
 between  diet and the microbiome  impact  PD outcomes,  and that this project  will identify  mechanisms  of action  
for how bacteria  in the gut affect  pathophysiology  in the brains  of mice.  Merging  the complementary  expertise  of 
the PIs and Co-Investigators,  and using  powerful  preclinical  models  that bridge  animal  and human  research,  this 
project  may define  a functional  contribution  for the gut microbiome  in a neurodegenerative  disease  that can be 
leveraged  to develop  novel,  safe, effective  and easy to administer  treatments  for Parkinson’s  disease.  
 
 References  Cited  
1. Seidl,  S.E.,  et al., The emerging  role of nutrition  in Parkinson's  disease.  Front  Aging  Neurosci,  2014.  6: 
p. 36.  
2. Hooper,  L.V.,  D.R. Littman,  and A.J. Macpherson,  Interactions  between  the microbiota  and the immune  
system.  Science,  2012.  336(6086):  p. 1268 -73. 
3. Sharon,  G., et al., Specialized  metabolites  from  the microbiome  in health  and disease.  Cell Metab,  2014.  
20(5): p. 719-30. 
4. Sonnenburg,  J.L. and F. Backhed,  Diet-microbiota  interactions  as moderators  of human  metabolism.  
Nature,  2016.  535(7610):  p. 56-64. 
5. Sampson,  T.R. and S.K. Mazmanian,  Control  of brain  development,  function,  and behavior  by the 
microbiome.  Cell Host  Microbe,  2015.  17(5): p. 565-76. 
6. Sharon,  G., et al., The Central  Nervous  System  and the Gut Microbiome.  Cell,  2016.  167(4): p. 915-932. 
7. Cryan,  J.F. and T.G. Dinan,  Mind -altering  microorganisms:  the impact  of the gut microbiota  on brain  
and behaviour.  Nature  reviews.  Neuroscience,  2012.  13(10):  p. 701-12. 
8. Sacchettini,  J.C. and J.W. Kelly,  Therapeutic  strategies  for human  amyloid  diseases.  Nat Rev Drug  
Discov, 2002.  1(4): p. 267-75. 
9. Brettschneider,  J., et al., Spreading  of pathology  in neurodegenerative  diseases:  a focus  on human  
studies.  Nat Rev Neurosci,  2015.  16(2): p. 109-20. 
10. Nalls,  M.A.,  et al., Large -scale  meta -analysis  of genome -wide  association  data identifies  six new risk 
loci for Parkinson's  disease.  Nat Genet,  2014.  46(9): p. 989-93. 
11. Prusiner,  S.B.,  et al., Evidence  for alpha -synuclein  prions  causing  multiple  system  atrophy  in humans  
with parkinsonism.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A, 2015.  112(38):  p. E5308 -17. 
12. Luk, K.C.,  et al., Pathological  alpha -synuclein  transmission  initiates  Parkinson -like neurodegeneration  
in nontransgenic  mice.  Science,  2012.  338(6109):  p. 949-53. 
13. Jenner,  P., Molecular  mechanisms  of L-DOPA -induced  dyskinesia.  Nature  reviews.  Neuroscience,  2008.  
9(9): p. 665-77. 
14. Dinan,  T.G. and J.F. Cryan,  The impact  of gut microbiota  on brain  and behaviour:  implications  for 
psychiatry.  Curr Opin  Clin Nutr Metab  Care,  2015.  18(6): p. 552-8. 
15. Mayer,  E.A.,  Gut feelings:  the emerging  biology  of gut-brain  communication.  Nat Rev Neurosci,  2011.  
12(8): p. 453-66. 
16. Mayer,  E.A.,  D. Padua,  and K. Tillisch,  Altered  brain -gut axis in autism:  comorbidity  or causative  
mechanisms? Bioessays,  2014.  36(10):  p. 933-9. 
17. Schroeder,  B.O.  and F. Backhed,  Signals  from  the gut microbiota  to distant  organs  in physiology  and 
disease.  Nat Med,  2016.  22(10):  p. 1079 -1089.  
18. Wall,  R., et al., Bacterial  neuroactive  compounds  produced  by psychobiotics.  Adv Exp Med Biol,  2014.  
817: p. 221 -39. 
19. Selkrig,  J., et al., Metabolic  tinkering  by the gut microbiome:  Implications  for brain  development  and 
function.  Gut Microbes,  2014.  5(3): p. 369-80. 
20. Ley, R.E.,  D.A.  Peterson,  and J.I. Gordon,  Ecological  and evolutionary  forces  shaping  microbial  
diversity  in the human  intestine.  Cell,  2006.  124(4): p. 837-48. 
21. Mohle,  L., et al., Ly6Chi  Monocytes  Provide  a Link between  Antibiotic -Induced  Change  in Gut 
Microbiota  and Adult  Hippocampal  Neurogenesis.  Cell Reports,  2016.  
22. Diaz  Heijtz,  R., et al., Normal  gut microbiota  modulates  brain  development  and behavior.  Proc Natl 
Acad  Sci U S A, 2011.  108(7): p. 3047 -52. 
23. Sudo,  N., et al., Postnatal  microbial  colonization  programs  the hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal  system  
for stress  response  in mice.  J Physiol,  2004.  558(Pt 1): p. 263-75. 
24. Bercik,  P., et al., The intestinal  microbiota  affect  central  levels  of brain -derived  neurotropic  factor  and 
behavior  in mice.  Gastroenterology,  2011.  141(2): p. 599-609, 609 e1-3. 
25. Braniste,  V., et al., The gut microbiota  influences  blood -brain  barrier  permeability  in mice.  Sci Transl  
 
 Med,  2014.  6(263):  p. 263ra158.  
26. Hoban,  A.E.,  et al., Regulation  of prefrontal  cortex  myelination  by the microbiota.  Transl  Psychiatry,  
2016.  6: p. e774.  
 
 27. Yano,  J.M.,  et al., Indigenous  bacteria  from  the gut microbiota  regulate  host serotonin  biosynthesis.  
Cell,  2015.  161(2): p. 264-76. 
28. Clarke,  G., et al., The microbiome -gut-brain  axis during  early  life regulates  the hippocampal  
serotonergic  system  in a sex-dependent  manner.  Mol Psychiatry,  2013.  18(6): p. 666-73. 
29. Neufeld,  K.M.,  et al., Reduced  anxiety -like behavior  and central  neurochemical  change  in germ -free 
mice.  Neurogastroenterol  Motil,  2011.  23(3): p. 255-64, e119.  
30. Keshavarzian,  A., et al., Colonic  bacterial  composition  in Parkinson's  disease.  Mov Disord,  2015.  
30(10):  p. 1351 -60. 
31. Scheperjans,  F., et al., Gut microbiota  are related  to Parkinson's  disease  and clinical  phenotype.  Mov 
Disord, 2015.  30(3): p. 350-8. 
32. Hasegawa,  S., et al., Intestinal  Dysbiosis  and Lowered  Serum  Lipopolysaccharide -Binding  Protein  in 
Parkinson's  Disease.  PLoS  One,  2015.  10(11):  p. e0142164.  
33. Unger,  M.M.,  et al., Short  chain  fatty acids  and gut microbiota  differ  between  patients  with Parkinson's  
disease  and age-matched  controls.  Parkinsonism  Relat  Disord,  2016.  
34. Erny,  D., et al., Host  microbiota  constantly  control  maturation  and function  of microglia  in the CNS.  
Nat Neurosci,  2015.  18(7): p. 965-77. 
35. Rooks,  M.G.  and W.S.  Garrett,  Gut microbiota,  metabolites  and host immunity.  Nat Rev Immunol,  
2016.  16(6): p. 341-52. 
36. Matcovitch -Natan,  O., et al., Microglia  development  follows  a stepwise  program  to regulate  brain  
homeostasis.  Science,  2016.  353(6301):  p. aad8670.  
37. Devos,  D., et al., Colonic  inflammation  in Parkinson's  disease.  Neurobiol  Dis, 2013.  50: p. 42-8. 
38. Braak,  H., et al., Idiopathic  Parkinson's  disease:  possible  routes  by which  vulnerable  neuronal  types  
may be subject  to neuroinvasion  by an unknown  pathogen.  J Neural  Transm,  2003.  110(5): p. 517-36. 
39. Verbaan,  D., et al., Patient -reported  autonomic  symptoms  in Parkinson  disease.  Neurology,  2007.  69(4): 
p. 333 -41. 
40. Del Tredici,  K. and H. Braak,  A not entirely  benign  procedure:  progression  of Parkinson's  disease.  Acta  
Neuropathol,  2008.  115(4): p. 379-84. 
41. Shannon,  K.M.,  et al., Is alpha -synuclein  in the colon  a biomarker  for premotor  Parkinson's  disease?  
Evidence  from  3 cases.  Mov Disord,  2012.  27(6): p. 716-9. 
42. Svensson,  E., et al., Vagotomy  and subsequent  risk of Parkinson's  disease.  Ann Neurol,  2015.  78(4): p. 
522-9. 
43. Holmqvist,  S., et al., Direct  evidence  of Parkinson  pathology  spread  from  the gastrointestinal  tract  to 
the brain  in rats. Acta Neuropathol,  2014.  128(6): p. 805-20. 
44. Burke,  R.E.,  W.T.  Dauer,  and J.P. Vonsattel,  A critical  evaluation  of the Braak  staging  scheme  for 
Parkinson's  disease.  Ann Neurol,  2008.  64(5): p. 485-91. 
45. Ridaura,  V.K.,  et al., Gut microbiota  from  twins  discordant  for obesity  modulate  metabolism  in mice.  
Science,  2013.  341(6150):  p. 1241214.  
46. Levy,  R. and E. Borenstein,  Metagenomic  systems  biology  and metabolic  modeling  of the human  
microbiome:  from  species  composition  to community  assembly  rules.  Gut Microbes,  2014.  5(2): p. 265- 
70. 
47. Marcobal,  A., et al., A metabolomic  view of how the human  gut microbiota  impacts  the host metabolome  
using  humanized  and gnotobiotic  mice.  ISME  J, 2013.  7(10):  p. 1933 -43. 
48. Wu, G.D.,  et al., Comparative  metabolomics  in vegans  and omnivores  reveal  constraints  on diet- 
dependent  gut microbiota  metabolite  production.  Gut, 2016.  65(1): p. 63-72. 
49. Adams -Carr,  K.L.,  et al., Constipation  preceding  Parkinson's  disease:  a systematic  review  and meta - 
analysis.  J Neurol  Neurosurg  Psychiatry,  2016.  87(7): p. 710-6. 
50. Jennings,  D., et al., Imaging  prodromal  Parkinson  disease:  the Parkinson  Associated  Risk Syndrome  
Study.  Neurology,  2014.  83(19):  p. 1739 -46. 
51. Abbott,  R.D.,  et al., Bowel  movement  frequency  in late-life and incidental  Lewy  bodies.  Mov Disord,  
 
 2007.  22(11):  p. 1581 -6. 
52. Petrovitch,  H., et al., Bowel  movement  frequency  in late-life and substantia  nigra  neuron  density  at 
death.  Mov Disord, 2009.  24(3): p. 371-6. 
 
 53. Abbott,  R.D.,  et al., Midlife  adiposity  and the future  risk of Parkinson's  disease.  Neurology,  2002.  59(7): 
p. 1051 -7. 
54. Gao,  X., et al., Habitual  intake  of dietary  flavonoids  and risk of Parkinson  disease.  Neurology,  2012.  
78(15):  p. 1138 -45. 
55. Okubo,  H., et al., Dietary  patterns  and risk of Parkinson's  disease:  a case-control  study  in Japan.  Eur J 
Neurol,  2012.  19(5): p. 681-8. 
56. Kamel,  F., et al., Dietary  fat intake,  pesticide  use, and Parkinson's  disease.  Parkinsonism  Relat  Disord,  
2014.  20(1): p. 82-7. 
57. Kyrozis,  A., et al., Dietary  and lifestyle  variables  in relation  to incidence  of Parkinson's  disease  in 
Greece.  Eur J Epidemiol,  2013.  28(1): p. 67-77. 
58. Bercik,  P., S.M.  Collins,  and E.F. Verdu,  Microbes  and the gut-brain  axis. Neurogastroenterol  Motil,  
2012.  24(5): p. 405-13. 
59. Mayer,  E.A.,  et al., Gut microbes  and the brain:  paradigm  shift in neuroscience.  J Neurosci,  2014.  
34(46):  p. 15490 -6. 
60. Patterson,  E., et al., Gut microbiota,  the pharmabiotics  they produce  and host health.  Proc Nutr Soc, 
2014.  73(4): p. 477-89. 
61. Cryan,  J.F. and T.G. Dinan,  Mind -altering  microorganisms:  the impact  of the gut microbiota  on brain  
and behaviour.  Nat Rev Neurosci,  2012.  13(10):  p. 701-12. 
62. Morrison,  D.J. and T. Preston,  Formation  of short  chain  fatty acids  by the gut microbiota  and their  
impact  on human  metabolism.  Gut Microbes,  2016.  7(3): p. 189-200. 
63. Tan, J., et al., The role of short -chain  fatty acids  in health  and disease.  Adv Immunol,  2014.  121: p. 91- 
119. 
64. Thorburn,  A.N.,  L. Macia,  and C.R. Mackay,  Diet,  metabolites,  and "western -lifestyle"  inflammatory  
diseases.  Immunity,  2014.  40(6): p. 833-42. 
65. Maslowski,  K.M.  and C.R. Mackay,  Diet,  gut microbiota  and immune  responses.  Nat Immunol,  2011.  
12(1): p. 5-9. 
66. Maslowski,  K.M.,  et al., Regulation  of inflammatory  responses  by gut microbiota  and chemoattractant  
receptor  GPR43.  Nature,  2009.  461(7268):  p. 1282 -6. 
67. Bourassa,  M.W.,  et al., Butyrate,  neuroepigenetics  and the gut microbiome:  Can a high fiber  diet 
improve  brain  health?  Neurosci  Lett, 2016.  625: p. 56-63. 
68. Stilling,  R.M.,  T.G. Dinan,  and J.F. Cryan,  Microbial  genes,  brain  & behaviour  - epigenetic  regulation  
of the gut-brain  axis. Genes  Brain  Behav,  2014.  13(1): p. 69-86. 
69. Ganapathy,  V., et al., Transporters  and receptors  for short -chain  fatty acids  as the molecular  link 
between  colonic  bacteria  and the host.  Curr Opin  Pharmacol,  2013.  13(6): p. 869-74. 
70. Segain,  J.P., et al., Butyrate  inhibits  inflammatory  responses  through  NFkappaB  inhibition:  implications  
for Crohn's  disease.  Gut, 2000.  47(3): p. 397-403. 
71. Wakade,  C., et al., Upregulation  of GPR109A  in Parkinson's  disease.  PLoS  One,  2014.  9(10):  p. 
e109818.  
72. Wakade,  C. and R. Chong,  A novel  treatment  target  for Parkinson's  disease.  J Neurol  Sci, 2014.  347(1- 
2): p. 34-8. 
73. Harrison,  I.F. and D.T. Dexter,  Epigenetic  targeting  of histone  deacetylase:  therapeutic  potential  in 
Parkinson's  disease?  Pharmacol  Ther,  2013.  140(1): p. 34-52. 
74. Kontopoulos,  E., J.D. Parvin,  and M.B.  Feany,  Alpha -synuclein  acts in the nucleus  to inhibit  histone  
acetylation  and promote  neurotoxicity.  Hum  Mol Genet,  2006.  15(20):  p. 3012 -23. 
75. Sharma,  S., R. Taliyan,  and S. Singh,  Beneficial  effects  of sodium  butyrate  in 6-OHDA  induced  
neurotoxicity  and behavioral  abnormalities:  Modulation  of histone  deacetylase  activity.  Behav  Brain  
Res, 2015. 291: p. 306 -14. 
76. Choong,  C.J., et al., A novel  histone  deacetylase  1 and 2 isoform -specific  inhibitor  alleviates  
experimental  Parkinson's  disease.  Neurobiol  Aging,  2016.  37: p. 103-16. 
77. Monti,  B., et al., Valproic  acid is neuroprotective  in the rotenone  rat model  of Parkinson's  disease:  
 
 involvement  of alpha -synuclein.  Neurotox  Res, 2010.  17(2): p. 130-41. 
 
 78. Unger,  M.M.,  et al., Short  chain  fatty acids  and gut microbiota  differ  between  patients  with Parkinson's  
disease  and age-matched  controls.  Parkinsonism  Relat  Disord,  2016.  32: p. 66-72. 
79. Cyr, M., et al., Sustained  elevation  of extracellular  dopamine  causes  motor  dysfunction  and selective  
degeneration  of striatal  GABAergic  neurons.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A, 2003.  100(19):  p. 11035 -40. 
80. Zhang,  J., et al., Motor  impairments,  striatal  degeneration,  and altered  dopamine -glutamate  interplay  in 
mice  lacking  PSD-95. J Neurogenet,  2014.  28(1-2): p. 98-111. 
81. Forsyth,  C.B.,  et al., Increased  intestinal  permeability  correlates  with sigmoid  mucosa  alpha -synuclein  
staining  and endotoxin  exposure  markers  in early  Parkinson's  disease.  PLoS  One,  2011.  6(12):  p. 
e28032.  
82. Stefanis,  L., alpha -Synuclein  in Parkinson's  disease.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Med,  2012.  2(2): p. 
a009399.  
83. Croisier,  E., et al., Microglial  inflammation  in the parkinsonian  substantia  nigra:  relationship  to alpha - 
synuclein  deposition.  J Neuroinflammation,  2005.  2: p. 14. 
84. Kim,  C., et al., Neuron -released  oligomeric  alpha -synuclein  is an endogenous  agonist  of TLR2  for 
paracrine  activation  of microglia.  Nat Commun,  2013.  4: p. 1562.  
85. Sanchez -Guajardo,  V., et al., Neuroimmunological  processes  in Parkinson's  disease  and their  relation  to 
alpha -synuclein:  microglia  as the referee  between  neuronal  processes  and peripheral  immunity.  ASN  
Neuro, 2013.  5(2): p. 113-39. 
86. Joers,  V., et al., Microglial  phenotypes  in Parkinson's  disease  and animal  models  of the disease.  Prog 
Neurobiol,  2016.  
87. Donia,  M.S.,  et al., A systematic  analysis  of biosynthetic  gene  clusters  in the human  microbiome  reveals  
a common  family  of antibiotics.  Cell,  2014.  158(6): p. 1402 -14. 
88. David,  L.A.,  et al., Diet rapidly  and reproducibly  alters  the human  gut microbiome.  Nature,  2014.  
505(7484):  p. 559-63. 
89. Tong,  M., et al., Reprograming  of gut microbiome  energy  metabolism  by the FUT2  Crohn's  disease  risk 
polymorphism.  ISME  J, 2014.  8(11): p.  2193 -206. 
90. Hsiao,  E.Y.,  et al., Microbiota  modulate  behavioral  and physiological  abnormalities  associated  with 
neurodevelopmental  disorders.  Cell,  2013.  155(7): p. 1451 -63. 
91. Bankevich,  A., et al., SPAdes:  a new genome  assembly  algorithm  and its applications  to single -cell 
sequencing.  J Comput  Biol,  2012.  19(5): p. 455-77. 
92. Caporaso,  J.G., et al., QIIME  allows  analysis  of high-throughput  community  sequencing  data.  Nature  
methods,  2010.  7(5): p. 335-6. 
93. Lee, Y.K.  and S.K. Mazmanian,  Has the microbiota  played  a critical  role in the evolution  of the 
adaptive  immune  system?  Science,  2010.  330(6012):  p. 1768 -73. 
94. Doty,  R.L.,  D.A.  Deems,  and S. Stellar,  Olfactory  dysfunction  in parkinsonism:  a general  deficit  
unrelated  to neurologic  signs,  disease  stage,  or disease  duration.  Neurology,  1988.  38(8): p. 1237 -44. 
95. Doty,  R.L.,  et al., Olfactory  testing  differentiates  between  progressive  supranuclear  palsy  and idiopathic  
Parkinson's  disease.  Neurology,  1993.  43(5): p. 962-5. 
96. Postuma,  R.B.,  et al., A single -question  screen  for rapid  eye movement  sleep  behavior  disorder:  a 
multicenter  validation  study.  Mov Disord,  2012.  27(7): p. 913-6. 
97. Clarke,  G., et al., The microbiome -gut-brain  axis during  early  life regulates  the hippocampal  
serotonergic  system  in a sex-dependent  manner.  Molecular  psychiatry,  2012.  
98. Macpherson,  A.J. and K.D.  McCoy,  Standardised  animal  models  of host microbial  mutualism.  Mucosal  
Immunol,  2015.  8(3): p. 476-86. 
99. Kaur,  A., et al., In vitro  batch  fecal  fermentation  comparison  of gas and short -chain  fatty acid 
production  using  "slowly  fermentable"  dietary  fibers.  J Food  Sci, 2011.  76(5): p. H137 -42. 
100. Rumpagaporn,  P., et al., Elevated  propionate  and butyrate  in fecal  ferments  of hydrolysates  generated  
by oxalic  acid treatment  of corn bran  arabinoxylan.  Food  Funct,  2016.  
101. Deverman,  B.E.,  et al., Cre-dependent  selection  yields  AAV variants  for widespread  gene  transfer  to the 
 
 adult  brain.  Nature  Biotechnology,  2016.  34: p. 204-209. 
102. Chung,  K., et al., Structural  and molecular  interrogation  of intact  biological  systems.  Nature,  2013.  497: 
p. 332 -7. 
 
 103. Treweek,  J.B., et al., Whole -body  tissue  stabilization  and selective  extractions  via tissue -hydrogel  
hybrids  for high-resolution  intact  circuit  mapping  and phenotyping.  Nature  Protocols,  2015.  10: p. 
1860 -1896.  
104. Yang,  B., et al., Single -Cell Phenotyping  within  Transparent  Intact  Tissue  through  Whole -Body  
Clearing.  Cell,  2014.  158: p. 945-58. 
105. Xiao,  C., et al., Cholinergic  Mesopontine  Signals  Govern  Locomotion  and Reward  through  Dissociable  
Midbrain  Pathways.  Neuron,  2016.  90: p. 333-347. 
106. Hennig,  G.W.,  et al., Use of Genetically  Encoded  Calcium  Indicators  (GECIs)  Combined  with Advanced  
Motion  Tracking  Techniques  to Examine  the Behavior  of Neurons  and Glia in the Enteric  Nervous  
System  of the Intact  Murine  Colon.  Frontiers  in cellular  neuroscience,  2015.  9: p. 436. 
107. Furness,  J.B., Types  of neurons  in the enteric  nervous  system.  Journal  of the Autonomic  Nervous  
System,  2000.  81: p. 87-96. 
108. Singh,  V., et al., Histone  deacetylase  inhibitors  valproic  acid and sodium  butyrate  enhance  
prostaglandins  release  in lipopolysaccharide -activated  primary  microglia.  Neuroscience,  2014.  265: p. 
147-57. 
109. Huuskonen,  J., et al., Regulation  of microglial  inflammatory  response  by sodium  butyrate  and short - 
chain  fatty acids.  Br J Pharmacol,  2004.  141(5): p. 874-80. 
110. Vinolo,  M.A.,  et al., Regulation  of inflammation  by short  chain  fatty acids.  Nutrients,  2011.  3(10):  p. 
858-76. 
111. Desai,  M.S.,  et al., A Dietary  Fiber -Deprived  Gut Microbiota  Degrades  the Colonic  Mucus  Barrier  and 
Enhances  Pathogen  Susceptibility.  Cell,  2016.  167(5): p. 1339 -1353  e21. 
112. Rose,  D.J., et al., Starch -entrapped  microspheres  show  a beneficial  fermentation  profile  and decrease  in 
potentially  harmful  bacteria  during  in vitro  fermentation  in faecal  microbiota  obtained  from  patients  
with inflammatory  bowel  disease.  Br J Nutr,  2010.  103(10):  p. 1514 -24. 
113. Lozupone,  C. and R. Knight,  UniFrac:  a new phylogenetic  method  for comparing  microbial  
communities.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol,  2005.  71(12):  p. 8228 -35. 
114. Goodman,  A.L.,  et al., Extensive  personal  human  gut microbiota  culture  collections  characterized  and 
manipulated  in gnotobiotic  mice.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A, 2011.  108(15):  p. 6252 -7. 
115. Faith,  J.J., et al., Identifying  gut microbe -host phenotype  relationships  using  combinatorial  communities  
in gnotobiotic  mice.  Sci Transl  Med,  2014.  6(220):  p. 220ra11.  