Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 1 of 32  
  
 Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, 
double -blind, placebo -controlled trial  
 
Princip al Investigator:  Evie Carchman , MD  
Phone: (608) 263- 2521 
Fax: (608) 265- 5963 
 
Sub Investigator : Christina Papageorge, MD  
 General Surgery Research Fellow  
 Graduate Student, Masters in Clinical Investigation   
 
Study Site:    University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics  
 Department of Surgery  
 600 Highland Avenue  
 Madison, WI 53792  
  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 2 of 32  
  
Table of Contents  
 
1.0 Protocol Summary  
2.0 Introduction  
3.0 Study Aims  
4.0 Selection of Study Patients  
5.0 Research Design and Methods  
6.0 Registration Procedures  
7.0 Treatment Plan  
8.0 Study Parameters  
9.0 Drug Formulation and Procurement  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  
11.0 Records to be Kept  
12.0 Patient Consent and Peer Judgment  
13.0 Data and Safety Monitoring  
14.0 References  
15.0 Appendix  
  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 3 of 32  
 1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  
 
Postoperative urinary retention (POUR) complicates up to 30% of general abdominal  operations.  It 
results in patient discomfort, embarrassment, interference with therapies, and significant nursing 
burden.  More importantly, urinary retention necessitates use of intermittent catheterization or placement of an indwelling urinary  catheter , which exposes the patient to an increased risk of urinary 
tract infection (UTI), urethral injury, and potentially increased hospital length of stay  and cost.  For these 
reasons, a safe and effective intervention for preventing POUR would be highly valuab le.  Despite such a 
need, no contemporary studies exist evaluating medications that can be used to prevent POUR in broad general surgery populations.  To address this gap, we are designing a prospective, randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial t o test the hypothesis that preoperative loading with tamsulosin will 
prevent POUR in patients undergoing elective, inpatient complex intra- abdominal surgery and thereby 
lead to improved short -term outcomes.   
 Tamsulosin is a safe and widely -used selective  alpha
1A adrenergic blocker commonly used for the 
treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms in men with benign prostatic hypertrophy.  It has also been shown to have some benefit in reducing POUR and need for catheterization in men undergoing inguinal 
hern ia repair and other outpatient urologic procedures.  To test our hypothesis, we will conduct a 
randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial in which we administer tamsulosin or placebo for 7 
days pre -operatively to pat ients scheduled for inpatient co mplex intra- abdominal  surgery, and then 
compare the rates of POUR in each group (Aim 1).  We also propose a retrospective analysis  of our data 
to identify risk factors for POUR and subgroups of patients that would derive the greatest benefit from 
preoperat ive tamsulosin (Aim 2).  Furthermore, we propose to determine if preoperative tamsulosin 
therapy leads to improved short -term outcomes, including reduced rate of UTI and shorter hospital 
length of stay (Aim 3).  
  2.0 INTRODUCTION  
 
Postoperative urinary retention refers to the inability to void spontaneously or completely following 
surgery.  It complicates up to 69% of operations, depending on the type of surgery, and can have 
significant consequences for the patient.
1  The etiology of postoperative urinary retention is likely 
multifactorial, with contributing factors including sympathetic stimulation secondary to pain and 
surgery, lo cal edema, intraoperative bladder distention, patie nt anxiety, immobilization, damage to 
parasympathetic nerves of the S2 to S4 dermatome, and medication effects.2  It is typically self- limited, 
and is managed with intermitten t or indwelling urinary catheterization until resolution.  Multiple risk 
factors for postoperative urinary retention have been identified.  These include opioid use, neuraxial 
anesthesia, type of operation such as anorectal procedures and lower limb joint arthroplasties, older 
age, male gender, and pre -existing lower urinary tract symptoms.2 
 Although an often underemphasized problem following surgery, postoperative urinary retention occurs 
frequently and can have significant c onsequences for the patient.  Direct effects of urinary retention 
include patient discomfort, embarrassment, and the consequences of bladder distention such as 
hemodynamic effects (rarely), prolonged detrusor dysfunction, and possible kidney disease.
2  Indirect 
effects of urinary retention are a result of the need for catheterization to empty the bladder.  Perhaps the most significant of these is catheter -associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI).  UTI is one of the 
most commo n hospital -acquired infections, and 70 -80% of these are associated with an indwelling 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 4 of 32  
 urinary catheter.3  The most important predictor of CAUTI is duration of catheteri zation, with an 
estimated 4 to 7% risk of developing bacteriuria for each day of indwelling catheter use.3   Furthermore, 
indwelling catheters cause gross hematuria and  urethral stricture in up to 5% and 7%, respectively, of 
patients with short -term indwelling urinary catheters.4  Concentrated efforts to reduce catheter -
associated UTI invariably involve early removal of indwelling urinary catheters (IUC) .  However, in order 
to facilitate early catheter removal without a large associated risk of catheter reinsertion, targeted 
efforts must be made to redu ce the risk of urinary retention . 
 
Tamsulosin is a selective alpha -1A adrenoreceptor antagonist that has been demonstrated to be 
effective in treating lower urinary tract symptoms in men with benign prostatic hypertrophy.5  
Furthermore, it is a safe and well- tolerated medication with more minimal cardiovascular effects than 
other less-selective alpha blockers.5  It is thought to relieve lower urinary tract symptoms by relaxation 
of the smo oth muscle present in the bladder neck, urethral sphincter, and prostate.   Tamsulosin has 
been studied previously in surgical patients, and was found to reduce the rate of POUR from 21.1% 
(placebo) to 5.9% in men undergoing varicocelectomy, inguinal hernia repair, and scrotal surgery.6  
It has not previously been studied in broad general surgery populations, and has not been dosed more than approximately 24 hours  pre-operatively.  Steady -state concentration of tamsulosin is not achieved 
until the fifth day of once -daily dosing, which the rationale for the longer preoperative treatment 
duration this this study.  
 In summary, POUR is a common, and not inconsequential , complication following general surgery 
procedures.   In particular, it results in the need for catheterization, exposing the patient to all of the 
concomitant risks.  Therefore, the ability to prevent urinary retention , thereby mitigating the need for 
catheterization,  would provide significant benefit to surgical patients.  
 
 
3.0 STUDY AIMS  
 In this study , we will test the hypothesis  that preoperative loading of the alpha- adrenergic receptor 
inhibitor tamsulosin will decrease the incidence of postoperative urin ary retention in patients 
undergoing elective complex intra- abdominal surgery, thereby also decreasing the rate of UTI and 
hospital length of stay.  To test this hypothesis, we will accomplish the following aims:  
 
3.1 Specific Aim 1:  Determine if tamsulosin administered preoperatively and perioperatively is 
more effective than placebo in preventing postoperative urinary retention in patients undergoing elective , inpatient , complex intra -abdominal  surgery.  
 
We hypothesize that patients treated with tamsulosin for 7 days preoperatively  and 
immediately postoperatively  will have a lower incidence of postoperative urinary retention and 
need for catheterization compared to those patients treated with placebo.  To test this hypothesis, we will investigate the followi ng sub -aims:  
 
3.1.1 Aim 1a.   Determine the frequency of postoperative urinary retention in each group, 
as defined by need for at least a single intermittent catheterization after surgery or 
following the removal of IUC.  
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 5 of 32  
 3.1.2 Aim 1b.   Measure the ability to spontaneously and completely void in patients after 
the removal of IUC by measuring time until first void, post void residual urine 
volume, and number of intermittent catheterizations.  
 
3.1.3 Aim 1c.   Determine the rate of IUC replacement.  
 
3.1.4 Aim 1d.   Measure frequency of adverse effects  of tamsulosin therapy.  
 
3.2 Specific Aim 2:  Identify risk factors  for postoperative urinary retention based on preoperative 
characteristics and type of operation, and ident ify which patient population benefits the most 
from preoperati ve tamsulosin therapy.  
 
We hypothesize that there are identifiable patient-  and operation -related characteristics that 
can predict postoperative urinary retention.  In testing this hypothesis, the following tw o sub -
aims will be investigated:  
 
3.2.1 Aim 2a.   Determine what preoperative patient characteristics and operative 
characteristics predict postoperative urinary retention.  
 
3.2.2 Aim 2b.   Determine which subgroup of patients derives the greatest benefit from 
preoperative tamsulosin therapy.  
 
3.3 Specific Aim 3: Determine if preoperative tamsulosin therapy results in improved short -term 
outcomes.   
 
In this aim, we will test the hypothesis that reducing the rate of postoperative urinary retention leads to decreased  rate of UTI and decreased hospital length of stay .  We therefore propose the 
following sub -aims:  
 
3.3.1 Aim 3a.   Compare and contrast rates of postoperative UTI in patients randomly 
assigned to tamsulosin therapy compared to those in the placebo arm.  
 
3.3.2 Aim 3b.   Determine postoperative length of stay in the two groups of patients.  
 
3.4 Endpoints  
 
3.4.1 Primary endpoint  
 
3.4.1.1  Need for any intermittent catheterization after initial IUC removal  
 
3.4.2 Secondary endpoints  
 
3.4.2.1  Need for replacement of IUC  
3.4.2.2  Adverse events  of tamsulosin and placebo  
3.4.2.3  Time from catheter removal, last intermittent catheterization (if performed in the operating room or post -anesthesia care unit), or departure from operating 
room (if no IUC) until first spontaneous void  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 6 of 32  
 3.4.2.4  Total number of intermittent catheterizations required per subject  
3.4.2.5  Post void resi dual urine volume after first spontaneous void, as measured by 
bladder scanning 
3.4.2.6  Need for discharge from the hospital with an IUC  
3.4.2.7  Urinary tract infection diagnosed within 30 days  of operation  
3.4.2.7.1  Defined as a symptomatic, culture -confirmed UTI with >105 CFU wit h a 
single pathogen  if diagnosed while inpatient  
3.4.2.7.2  Defined as a subject self -reported, clinician -diagnosed UTI (if diagnosed 
as an outpatient or at another facility) —to be collected over the phone 
at 30 day follow up contact with subject  
3.4.2.8  Hospital length of s tay in days  
 
 4.0 SELECTION OF PATIENTS  
 
4.1 Study population 
 
Patients will be identified from the general surgery clinics at the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics  (UWHC) , UW Digestive Health Center  (UW DHC) , The American Center (TAC), and the 
UW East Clinic .  This includes patients who are being evaluated and worked up for surgery.   
 
4.2 Eligibility Criteria  
 
4.2.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
Patients must be 18 years of age or older,  English -speaking,  able to provide 
informed consent, and s cheduled to undergo an elective , complex intra- abdominal 
operation  with a planned postoperative inp atient stay of at least 1 night.  Eligible 
operations will include any of the following operations approached via any 
operative approach (i.e. open, laparoscopic, hand -assisted lap aroscopic, single -
incision laparoscopic, or robotic):  
 
4.2.1.1  Partial colectomy  
4.2.1.2  Total abdominal colectomy  
4.2.1.3  Proctocolectomy  
4.2.1.4  Low anterior resection  
4.2.1.5  Abdominoperineal resection  
4.2.1.6  Restorative proctocolectomy/IPAA  
4.2.1.7  Proctopexy (transabdominal) for prolapse  
4.2.1.8  Intestinal stricturoplasty  
4.2.1.9  Lysis of adhesions  
4.2.1.10  End or diverting colostomy reversal  
4.2.1.11  Ileostomy reversal  
4.2.1.12  Closure of enterocutaneous, enteroenteric, or enterocolic fistula  
4.2.1.13  Partial or complete gastrectomy  
4.2.1.14  Small bowel resection  
4.2.1.15  Small bowel diversion/ostomy  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 7 of 32  
 4.2.1.16  Large bowel diver sion/ostomy  
4.2.1.17  Pancreaticoduodenectomy  
4.2.1.18  Pancreatectomy  
4.2.1.19  Hepatectomy  
4.2.1.20  Gastric bypass  
4.2.1.21  Sleeve gastrectomy  
4.2.1.22  Nissen/Dor/Toupet fundoplication  
4.2.1.23  Transabdominal adrenalectomy  
4.2.1.24  Splenectomy  
4.2.1.25  Complex abdominal wall hernia repair (i.e. Rives -Stoppa type repair, large 
laparoscopic ventral hernia repair)  
4.2.1.26  Exploratory laparotomy  
4.2.1.27  Other comparable complex intra- abdominal operation s  
 
4.2.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
4.2.2.1  Less than age 18  
4.2.2.2  Allergy or contraindication to tamsulosin  
4.2.2.3  Serious sulfa allergy  
4.2.2.4  Current use of alpha blocker (alfuzosin, doxazosin, prazosin, silodosin, terazosin , 
verapamil, tamsulosin, phenoxybenzamine ) or oral alpha agonist  (midodrine)  
4.2.2.4.1  Initiation of one of these medications during the intervention phase of 
the study will result in subject withdrawal from the study.  
4.2.2.5  Curren t warfarin use  
4.2.2.6  Pre-existing indwelling urinary catheter, suprapubic catheter, or urostomy  
4.2.2.7  End stage renal disease or dialysis -dependence  
4.2.2.8  Sitting s ystolic blood pressure  in the upper extremity of  less than 100mmHg  at 
time of eligibility screening  
4.2.2.9  Presence of orthostatic hypotension at the time of eligibility screening  
4.2.2.9.1  Orthostatic hypotension is defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure 
of 20mmHg from sitting to standing, or drop in diastolic BP of 10 mmHg 
from sitting to standing after 2 -3 minutes of sta nding after being in a  
sitting position  
4.2.2.10  Anticipated i nability to take oral medications on post -operative day #0  
4.2.2.11  Anticipated requirement for IUC beyond post -operative day #2   
4.2.2.12  Non -English speaking  
4.2.2.13  Pregnant  or breast -feeding 
4.2.2.14  Unwillingness to answer all 7 questions on the IPSS survey  
4.2.2.15  Lacking capacity to provide informed consent  
 
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 8 of 32  
 5.0 RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
5.1 Collaborating sites    
 
There are no collaborating sites.  Patients will be identified from the general surgery clinics at 
UWHC , the UW DHC , The American Center (TAC), and UW East Clinic .  All patients enrolled in 
the study will undergo surgery at , and be admitted to , UWHC.    
 
5.2 Data e xtraction from medical record  
 
The following information will be extracted from the subject ’s medical record  at the time of 
preoperative visit, following enrollment in the study :  date of birth, age,  gender,  race, height, 
weight, information about planned surgery, co -morbidities, past medical history,  past surgical 
history,  current medications,  allergies, and smoking history .  Additional data extracted from the 
subject ’s medical record following their operation includes: operation performed, length of 
operation (minutes), type of anesthesia (general, regional, MAC, local), volume of intravenous fluids administere d intra -operatively, estimated blood loss, placement of epidural, type of 
anesthetic medications used,  placement /removal of IUC in the operating room , volume of urine 
output in the operating room, and whether or not straight catheterization was performed a t the 
conclusion of the case in the operating room.  
 
Data to be extracted from the medical record following discharge from the hospital includes: 
hospital length of stay (days) , whether or not the subject was discharged with an indwelling 
catheter, diagnos is of urinary tract infection  within 30 days of operation , and urine culture data 
if applicable .   
 
All of th e data extracted from a subject’s medical record will be entered into the ICTR OnCore 
Clinical Research Management System . 
 
5.3 Data collection  
 
At the time of the pre -operative visit, following enrollment in the study , subjects  will fill out the 
International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) Survey .  This survey is a validated, self-
administered 7 -item questionnaire that assesses  obstructive lower urinary tract symptoms.   
Additionally, subject s will be administered a questionnaire that asks  about history of prior 
problems with urinary retention and prior urinary tract surgeries or procedures, consisting of a total of 3 questions.   Subjects may decline to  answer the survey questions on the IPSS survey, 
but this will result in ineligibility for the trial, as IPSS score is a stratification variable for 
randomization.  Subjects may skip the urinary tract surgery/history questions if they feel uncomfortable or e mbarrassed, and this will not result in exclusion from the study. Case report 
forms (CRFs) will be utilized to collect data prospectively during the subject ’s postoperative 
course  while inpatient.  This data will be collected by a study team member , and will include 
time of arrival and departure from the  operating room, time of first void, date/time of IUC 
removal, date/time of first void after catheter removal, first post -void residual volume, 
date/time of first straight catheterization (if applicable ), date/time of all subsequent straight 
catheterizations (if applicable), date/time of IUC replacement (if applicable) , and date/time of 
the first two adequate voids (if applicable) .  Finally, subjects  will be contacted by telephone 30 -
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 9 of 32  
 40 days after the da te of surgery to ask if they have been treated for a urinary tract infection 
since discharge from the hospital (in order to capture UTIs that are diagnosed outside of our 
hospital system) .   Additionally, data regarding adverse events will be collected using an Adverse 
Event Log.  A study team member will make contact with the subject at two separate time 
points to inquire about adverse events: 1) on the day of surgery  (in person, in the hospital) , and 
2) postoperatively via telephone call 30 -40 days after surgery.  Additionally, adverse events will 
be abstracted from the electronic medical record during the immediate postoperative period.  
AEs occurring following surgery up until 48 hours after discontinuing study drug will be 
abstracted from the subject’s EMR.  
 
5.4 Confidentiality protections, shar ing of data, disposition of data  
 
Subjects  enrolled in the study will be sequentially assigned a unique 3 -digit study identification 
number, which will  be used to identify the subject throughout the course of  the study.  The link 
between  the subject’s identifiers (i.e. name, MRN, birthdate) and  the subject ID will be available 
in the OnCore system. All data exported from the system will only contain the Subject ID number, and will not contain other subject ide ntifiers.  
 
All paper forms containing subject  information or data will be kept locked in the offices of the PI 
or study coordinator.  
 
5.4.1 ICTR OnCore Clinical Research Management System  
 
This study will utilize the clinical research management software, Online  
Collaborative Research Environment (OnCore), adopted by the School of Medicine and Public Health (SMPH) and available to all researchers conducting clinical research studies. The instance of OnCore that will be utilized for this study is supported and man aged by the UW Institute for Clinical and Translational Research 
(ICTR). OnCore -CRM has been, and continues to be deployed nationally at multiple 
academic medical centers, some of which are NIH Clinical and Translational Science 
Award (CTSA) sites includin g UW ICTR, and is an extension of technology currently 
used in more than two dozen Cancer Centers around the country.  
 
ICTR OnCore is a sophisticated, web -based data management system that: a) 
ensures secure, easy data entry at multiple sites; b) integrat es multiple data sources 
such as individual studies and patient registries; c) provides controlled, secure 
access to sensitive data using role -based access control; d) provides workflow 
automation; and e) allows export and reporting of data for Data and Safety Monitoring Boards and biostatisticians.  
 
This software provides protocol management functions (e.g. subject scheduling; 
screening, data organization), maintains updated forms, addresses budget 
development, billing, and fiscal management, generates su mmary reports, and 
provides essential links with other research administration and electronic medical records systems. ICTR OnCore eases the burden of the individual researcher and unifies protocol management within research programs and including research ers at 
multiple sites, enhancing protocol integrity and regulatory compliance efforts.  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 10 of 32  
  
Current Status: Both UW ICTR and SMPH are committed to the use of ICTR OnCore 
on an enterprise -wide scale. ICTR OnCore completed the initial pilot phase in 2009 
and ha s been fully implemented for all clinical research groups across the 
infrastructure. Many workflows and processes have been identified and standardized within ICTR OnCore for use across the spectrum.  
 
ICTR OnCore -CRM is hosted by the UW School of Medicine and Public Health 
(SMPH) Information Technology (IT) Office  on its server farm with redundant 
systems at two, environments are maintained for production, training, and testing. 
The application -programming model employed in ICTR OnCore -CRM conforms to 
the J ava 2 Platform, Enterprise Edition (J2EE) standard for web -based applications. 
J2EE is a widely accepted standard for developing multi -tier enterprise applications 
and is based on standardized, modular components. The J2EE standard includes compliance test s to ensure portability of applications. In addition to portability, J2EE 
provides a JDBC API for database access and a proven security model that is applicable to Internet applications. J2EE also supports Enterprise JavaBeans components, Java Servlets API , JavaServer Pages, and XML technology. The ICTR 
OnCore -CRM application uses these, Apache Web services, and an application 
server (JBoss/TomCat). The backend is an Oracle® relational database management system maintained by SMPH IT . Both the database and application servers are 
behind a firewall maintained by SMPH IT  staff. Several complete environments are 
maintained for production, training, testing, and validation.  This provides for a high 
level of system security and reliability.  
 
The data collected during the course of the study will be stored in OnCore .  
However, as is necessary for the completion of remote data analysis and travel 
to/from conferences where da ta may be presented, data exported from OnCore 
may be transferred  to a l imited number of password -protected and encrypted 
laptops belonging to study staff as necessary.  In this case, data would be stored on 
a password protected and encrypted USB drive in order to transfer data to the 
laptop.  Laptops and USB drives will only contain data that has been exported from 
OnCore and containing only Subject ID number without associated subject 
identifiers.  Only study staff will have access to such USB drives and laptops.  
Laptops and USB drives will not contain the key to the code.  
 
The clinical research pharmacy will maintain the randomization code sheet, and this 
will not be made accessible to other study team members until completion of the 
study (or at interim data and safety monitoring analysis).  Unblinding at interim data analy sis will only occur for subject s whose data collection is complete.  
 
5.5 Sub-studies/correlative studies  
 
The data collected during this study will be used to retrospectively identify risk factors that are associated with urinary retention  as described in Specific Aim 2 .  This analysis will be performed 
both on the placebo treated group alone and the overall  study population .  Logistic regression  
will be used for this analysis.  The response variable will be the primary endpoint (need for a ny 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 11 of 32  
 intermittent catheterization ).  The various preoperative and operative variables collected during 
the study will be used as predictor variables in this analysis.      
 
5.6 Timeline  
 
5.6.1 Screening for eligibility  
 
Pre-screening of general surgery clinic patients will occur prior to initial contact.  If a 
patient is found to be eligible on pre -screening and upon contact  has expressed 
interest  in learning more about the study, then formal screening for eligibility  will 
occur  after informed consent is obtained .  If the subject is determined to be 
potentially eligible based on the gross eligibility criteria reviewed during the pre -
screening process, the subject will be invited to learn more about the study. If the 
patien t is interested in participating in the study at that time, the enrollment 
protocol , including obtaining informed consent,  will be initiated.  If the patient has 
another scheduled preoperative visit that will occur more than one week prior to 
their scheduled surgery date, then the informed consent and enrollment procedures 
may be deferred until the next visit.   Likewise, if t he patient does not have another 
preoperative clinic visit appointment scheduled, but would like more time to make a decision about participation in the study, arrangements will be made for future follow up with a study team member as described below.  
 
5.6.2 Consent/Enrollment/B aseline  
 
After the pre -screening procedures determine the subject may be potentially 
eligible, and the subject has expressed an interest in participating in the study , we 
will proceed with the informed consent process ( either at the initia l or subsequent 
preoperative clinic visit) .  As part of formal screening for eligibility, all women of 
childbearing age and potential will be given a pregnancy test.  Upon completion of 
the screening procedures, and determination that the subject is eligib le to 
participate, the individual will be considered enrolled in the study. Due to 
constraints of the study related to the medication starting 7 days preoperatively, 
consent and enrollment must be completed at least 7 days prior to the scheduled surgery.  If after the initial clinic visit, the patient has another scheduled preoperative clinic visit prior to 7 days preoperatively, then the patient will be given the opportunity to take the consent form home if they so desire, and then signed informed consent will be obtained at the next clinic visit  if applicable .  If, however, 
the patient does not have an additional preoperative clinic visit scheduled and needs additional time to consider participation in the study, he or she may bring written materials home and study personnel will follow up via telephone call.  If the 
patient is interested in participating in the study, then a visit will be arranged with 
the study coordinator (prior to 7 days preoperatively) for the patient to sign the 
consent form , undergo formal eligibility screening, and  complete enrollment.  
 After enrollment, the subject  will fill out the first data collection form, which 
includes the IPSS survey and questionnaire regarding history of previous urinary retention and urinary tract surgery o r procedures .  The subject may choose to 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 12 of 32  
 decline to answer any of the IPSS survey questions, however, this will result in 
exclusion from the study, as IPSS score is being used for stratification in the 
randomization process.  Following completion of the IP SS survey, the subject will  be 
randomized by the clinical research pharmacy .  The subject  will be given a 14 -day 
supply of tamsulosin or plac ebo, according to randomization, along with instruc tions 
for taking the medication . 
 
5.6.3 Treatment period  
 
Treatment wi ll start 7 days prior to scheduled surgery and will continue post -
operatively for up to 7 days  while the subject  is still in the hospital (for a total of 14 
doses) .  A member of the study team will contact the subject via telephone as a 
reminder on the day that treatment is to be initiated.   If a subject discontinues study 
treatment  (chooses to withdraw from the study)  prior to their scheduled surgery , 
the subject wil l be discontinued and replaced , and reason for withdraw  from study 
will be noted.   Data will continued to be collected for these subjects and their data 
will be included on an intent -to-treat basis, but they will be replaced for sample size.  
If the subject  discontinues study drug any time after their surgery , the subject will 
be followed with intent to treat and will not be replaced.  If a subject’s planned 
surgery is postponed PRIOR to initiation of treatment but is rescheduled to within 30 days of when th e subject was randomized, then the subject may stay enrolled in 
the trial, will keep their same treatment assignment, and will be given a new start 
date  for treatment (7 days before their rescheduled surgery date).  If, however, the 
surgery is postponed or  cancelled AFTER initiation of treatment, then the subject 
will be taken off treatment and discontinued from the study.  If the subject has not 
yet initiated treatment and their surgery is rescheduled to a date that is more than 30 days from the date of randomization, the subject will be discontinued.   
 
Once a subject  complete s the bladder management protocol ( is voiding 
spontaneously and completely —specifically, 2 consecutive voids with PVR less than 
200mL) OR require s replacement of an IUC, the treatment  will be discontinued  
within 24 hours,  and the protocol is complete.   The protocol may be completed as 
early as POD#0.  The maximum number of days of treatment will be 14 (up until 
POD#6, i.e. last dose given in the evening of POD#6).  No subjects  will be discharged 
from th e hospital on study medication.  
 
5.6.4 Follow -up 
 
A member of the study team will contact the subject via telephone approximately 
30-40 days after surgery to ask about adverse events and to inquire about urinary 
tract infection  and voiding prob lems .  Subjects will be asked about diagnosis of 
urinary tract infection since leaving the hospital, and chart review will be performed by study personnel to ascertain the diagnosis of urinary tract infection.    
 As part of standard of care, most subjects will also have a scheduled post -operative 
follow up visit in the General Surgery clinic  with their surgeon , usually 2 -3 weeks 
following the date of surgery.  In general, if a patient is  discharged from the hospital 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 13 of 32  
 with an IUC, it is standard to have the patient follow u p in the Urology Voiding 
Clinic;  however, this would be outside of the scope of this study protocol.   
 
5.6.5 Final study encounter  
 
The final study encounter  will be the  follow up phone call on or around post -
operative day #30 for all subjects  (30-40 days after surgery) .  A study team member 
will contact the subject via telephone to ask if he/she has  been treated for a urinary 
tract infection since disch arge from the hosp ital (in order to capture UTIs treated 
outside of the UW system) , and to inquire about adverse events  since discharge 
from the hospital.  
 
5.6.6 Early termination visit  
 
If a subject  wishes to terminate their enrollment in the study early, no visit will be 
requir ed, and this decision will have no bearing on the individual’s clinical care.   If 
enrollment is terminated after surgery , then the subject will not be replaced. If 
enrollment is terminated prior to surgery , the subject will be replaced.        
 
 
6.0 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
 All subject s will be registered prior to b eginning the protocol treatment.  The following information 
will be included in registration:  
 
Subject  name, address, telephone number, birth date, sex, race  
Primary disease site, planned operation  
Date on study  
Date randomized  
Staff physician  
Protocol number  
  7.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
7.1 Administration Schedule  
 
7.1.1 Treatment ARM A —tamsulosin:  
 
Tamsulosin 0.4mg capsule orally one time per day, to be taken 30 minutes after dinner or before bed starting 7 days before surgery and continuing for 0 -6 days 
post -operatively.  Outline of schedule : 
 
Day 1: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Day 2: tamsulosin  0.4mg in the evening  
Day 3: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Day 4: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 14 of 32  
 Day 5: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Day 6: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Day 7: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening  
Day 8: surgery  
Day 8: tamsulosin 0.4mg in t he evening (same day as surgery) if the subject has 
not yet completed the bladder management protocol  
Day 9- 14: tamsulosin 0.4mg in the evening until up to 24 hours after the subject 
has an indwelling urinary catheter replaced (at which time the protoc ol stops) or 
the subject  completes the bladder management protocol ( has voided twice  
consecutively  with a post -void residual <200mL ).  The mi nimum number of total 
doses is 7 ; the maximum number of total doses is 14.  The 14th dose will be the 
final dose re gardless of bladder function.   No subject s will be discharged from the 
hospital on study medication.  
 
7.1.2 Treatment ARM B —placebo:  
 
Placebo capsule orally dosed exactly as outlined above for Treatment ARM A  
 
7.2 Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
 
An adverse event log will be maintained for each enrolled subject.  Adverse event screening  will 
occur at three time points: 1) on the day of surgery either pre - or post - operatively (in person, in 
the hospital , via interview of the subject by a study team  member ), 2) during the  postoperative  
period for  the period from surgery until  48 hours after completion of the intervention ( via 
abstraction of AEs from the subject’s EMR ), and 3) 30- 40 days after surgery (via telephone 
interview of the subject by a study  team member).   Safety data will be monitored and analyzed 
by an external Data Monitoring Committee  (through ICTR) , and unanticipated problems or 
complications will be reported to the IRB per its reporting guidelines.   Unexpected or severe 
adverse events will also be reported to the PI within 72 hours of identification.  
 
7.3 Dose Modifications  
 
Dose modifications will not be made in this study.  If a subject  has an intolerable adverse event 
or side effects related to the study treatment, the drug will be discon tinued  and the subject will 
be removed from the protocol .  Follow up outcome data will still be collected to allow for intent -
to-treat analysis.    
 
7.4 Supportive Care  
 
All supportive measures consistent with optimal patient care will be given throughout the s tudy.   
 
7.5 Duration of Therapy  
 
Treatment will be discontinued within 24 hours of  the subjec t’s complet ion of the bladder 
management protocol with return of normal bladder function ( 2 consecutive voids with PVR less 
than 200mL ) or requir ement of  IUC re -insertion for urinary retention.   The maximum number of 
doses (days) of treatment is 14.  If ongoing urinary retention is present, further management 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 15 of 32  
 will be deferred to the treating physician team.  This sometimes  involves initiation of a short 
course of alpha -blockers in conjunction with IUC, followed by a spontaneous voiding trial.  
 
 
8.0 STUDY PARAMETERS  
 
Component  Description  Timing  Contact points  
Pre-screening for 
eligibility  The electronic medical 
records of prospective subjects will be pre-
screening for eligibility by a study team 
member.  After the patient is 
scheduled in the general surgery clinic, prior to actual appointment.  Study team 
member  
Invitation to participate 
in study  If the patient is eligible 
based on pre -
screening, the patient will be informed about 
the study and asked  
about interest in 
participating.  At initial  or subsequent  
pre-operative general 
surgery clinic 
appointment  Surgeon, 
resident, nurse 
practitioner, or 
study team 
member  
Informed consent  If the patient is eligible 
for the study, he/she will be given a copy of the informed consent and the informed 
consent process will 
occur.  Either initial pre -
operative clinic visit, or 
subsequent pre -
operative clinic visit if scheduled more than 1 
week prior to the date 
of surgery  Surgeon, 
resident, or study 
team member  
Formal screening for eligibility  The Eligibility Checklist 
will be completed by a 
study team member 
with the patient.  
Includes pregnancy test 
in women of 
childbearing age  and 
potential . At initial or subseq uent 
pre-operative general 
surgery clinic 
appointment  Study team 
member  
Enrollment  Enrollment in the study 
and registration.  After informed consent 
process at preoperative 
clinic visit.  Study team 
member  
IPSS Survey  (R) Validated survey of 
lower urinary tract 
symptoms to be completed by the 
subject  Pre-operative clinic 
visit, after enrollment  Study team 
member  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 16 of 32  
 Component  Description  Timing  Contact points  
Urinary history 
questionnaire  (R) Short questionnaire (3 
questions) regarding history of urinary retention and prior 
urinary tract surgery or 
procedures  Pre-operative clinic 
visit, after enrollment  Study team 
member  
Randomization  Random allocation by 
the PRC to either the 
tamsulosin group or 
the placebo group  Preoperative clinic visit, 
after enrollment.  PRC 
Reminder phone call (R) Phone call  or text 
message  from study 
personnel to subject on Study day 1 to remind subject to start taking 
the drug/placebo  Study day 1  Study team 
member  
Pre-operative 
treatment with study 
drug  (R) Dosing of tamsulosin or 
placebo as described in 
section 7.1  Study days 1 -7 Subject to self -
administer at 
home  
Screening for adverse events, time 1 of 3  Study personnel will 
ask subject about treatment- emergent 
adverse events occurring during the 
preoperative phase of 
intervention  Study day 8, pre or post 
operatively  Study team 
member  
Operation  (SOC)  Elective inpatient 
complex intra-
abdominal surgery as 
scheduled  Study day 8  Surgeon  
Post -operative 
treatment with study 
drug (R)  Dosing of tamsulosin or 
placebo as described in 
section 7.1  Study days 8 -14, or 
discontinued prior to 
day 14 based on 
completion of bladder 
management protocol 
or re -insertion of IUC  Administered by 
subjec t’s RN  
Bladder management protocol  (see appendix) 
(SOC)  Monitoring of bladder 
volume via supra- pubic 
ultrasound,  
measurement of post-void residual volume, intermittent 
catheterization as 
needed  Postoperatively, while 
inpatient ( Days 8- 14) Subject ’s RN  
Screening for adverse 
events, time 2 of 3  Study personnel will 
perform review of the From day of surgery 
until 48 hours after  Study team 
member  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 17 of 32  
 Component  Description  Timing  Contact points  
EMR to abstract AEs  
occurring during the 
postoperative phase of 
intervention  completing the 
intervention  
Final study visit  (R) Telephone call to 
subject by study team 
personnel  30-40 days after 
surgery  Study team 
member  
Screening for adverse 
events, time 3 of 3  (R) Study personnel will 
ask subject about treatment- emergent 
adverse events occurring during the post -intervention 
phase of trial (up to 30 
days after surgery)   30-40 days after 
surgery via telephone call, will be  combined 
with inquiry about UTI (see below)  Study team 
member  
Inquiry about diagnosis of UTI (R)  Telephone call to 
patient 30 days after surgery to inquire 
about whether the 
patient has been 
treated for a UTI since surgery ; chart review 
for UTI diagnosis  within 
our institutional EMR  30-40 days after 
surgery via telephone call (will be combined 
with above phone 
call)/chart review  Study team 
member  
 
 
9.0 DRUG FORMULATION AND PROCUREMENT  
9.1 Tamsulosin  hydrochloride  (NDC 0597- 0058- 01) 
 
9.1.1 Other names:   FLOMAX  
 
9.1.2 Classification: alpha
1A adrenoceptor antagonist  
 
9.1.3 Mode of Action:  Tamsulosin works by blocking alpha 1A adrenergic receptors in the 
prostate, prostatic urethra, and bladder neck, which results in relaxation of the 
smooth muscles in the bladder neck and pros tate, thereby reducing bladder outlet 
obstruction.  
 
9.1.4 Storage and stability  
 
Stored at 25 degrees Celsius (77 degrees F); excursions permitted to 15 degrees C to 
30 degrees C (59 degrees F to 86 degrees F)  
 
9.1.5 Dose specifics: 0.4mg orally dosed one time per day , 30 minutes after a meal,  in the 
evening  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 18 of 32  
  
9.1.6 Preparation : capsule  
 
9.1.7 Route of administration: orally; capsules should not be crushed, chewed, or opened  
 
9.1.8 Incompatibilities  
 
9.1.8.1  Other alpha -adrenergic blockers  
 
Per package insert: “ The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions 
between FLOMAX capsules and other alpha -adre nergic blocking agents have not 
been determined. However, interactions may be expected and FLOMAX capsules should NOT be used in combination with other alpha -adrenergic 
blocking ag ents .”  Patients taking concomitant alpha blockers (including 
verapamil, which has alpha blockade action at therapeutic doses) will be excluded from the study.  
 
9.1.8.2  Cimetidine  
 
Per package insert: “ The pharmacokinetic interaction between cime tidine and 
FLOMAX capsules was investigated. The results indicate significant changes in 
tamsulosin HCl clearance (26% decrease) and AUC (44% increase). Therefore, 
FLOMAX capsules should be used with caution in combination with cimetidine, 
particularly at doses higher than 0.4 mg .”  Patients taking cimetidine will still be 
eligible for the study, but will be notified about potential increased risk of side effects.   
 
9.1.8.3  Warfarin  
 
Per package insert: “A definitive drug -drug interaction study between 
tamsulosin hydrochloride and warfarin was not conducted. Results from limited 
in vitro and in vivo studies are inconclusive.  Therefore, caution should be 
exercised with concomitant admi nistration of warfarin and FLOMAX capsules.”   
We will exclude patients taking warfarin.   
 
9.1.8.4  Strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (boceprevir, clarithromycin, conivaptan, grapefruit 
juice, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, lopinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, 
posac onazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, telithromycin, vorico nazole)  and 
CYP2D6 (bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine ) 
 It is recommended that doses higher than 0.4mg daily should not be used in 
combination w ith strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 or C YP2D6 and that caution 
should be exercised when using tamsulosin in combination with such drugs.   
Studies have demonstrated an increased AUC and C
max when tamsulosin is taken 
in combination with strong inhibitors of CYP2D6 or CYP3A4, but these increases 
have been shown to still fall equivalently or below the higher U.S. dosage of 
0.8mg daily.  One study specifically examining clinical effects (i.e. orthostasis) of 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 19 of 32  
 concomitant tamsulosin/paroxetine and tamsulosin/ketoconazole found no 
significant clinical effect of these medications being co -administered.  Patients 
taking strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 will not be excluded from the 
study, however they will be advised about potential increased risk of side 
effects.  
 
9.1.9 Availability: commercially available  
 
9.1.10  Side effects  (reported in package insert; data derived from two U.S. clinical trials 
(US92 -03A and US93 -01)7,8: 
 
 Tamsulosin 0.4mg 
(n=502)  Placebo 
(n=493)  
Body as whole  
Headache  
Infection  
Asthenia  
Back pain  
Chest pain   
97 (19.3%)  
45 (9.0%)  
39 (7.8%)  
35 (7.0%)  
20 (4.0%)   
99 (20.1%)  
37 (7.5%)  
27 (5.5%)  
27 (5.5%)  
18 (3.7%)  
Nervous System  
Dizziness  
Somnolence  
Insomnia  
Libido decreased   
75 (14.9%)  
15 (3.0%)  
12 (2.4%)  
5 (1.0%)   
50 (10.1%)  
8 (1.6%)  
3 (0.6%)  
6 (1.2%)  
Respiratory System  
Rhinitis  
Pharyngitis  
Cough increased  
Sinusitis   
66 (13.1%)  
29 (5.8%)  
17 (3.4%)  
11 (2.2%)   
41 (8.3%)  
23 (4.7%)  
12 (2.4%)  
8 (1.6%)  
Digestive System  
Diarrhea  
Nausea  
Tooth disorder   
31 (6.2%)  
13 (2.6%)  
6 (1.2%)   
22 (4.5%)  
16 (3.2%)  
7 (1.4%)  
Urogenital System  
Abnormal ejaculation   
42 (8.4%)   
1 (0.2%)  
Special Senses  
Blurred vision   
1 (0.2%)   
2 (0.4%)  
Table reproduced  (with modification)  from Flomax package insert.  
 
In the two U.S. clinical trials referenced above, symptomatic postural hyp otension 
occurred in 0.2% of me n treated with tamsulosin 0.4mg vs. no patients in the 
placebo groups.  Syncope occurred in  0.2% of men treated with tamsulosin 0.4mg 
vs. 0.6% in the placebo groups.  Multiple testing for orthostatic hypotension was also performed in these studies, and demonstrated a 16% rate of at least one 
positive orthostatic test result in the tamsulosin 0.4 mg subjects, vs.  11% rate in the 
placebo group.
7,8 
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 20 of 32  
 No men in the tamsulosin 0.4mg group or placebo group discontinued treatment 
due to abnormal ejaculation.  
 
In a double -blind RCT comparing tamsulosin 0.2mg to placebo in 140 women over a 
4-week  period, there were 2 patients out of 70 in the tamsulosin group who had 
dizziness and asthenia (2 .9%) compared to no adverse effects reported in the 
placebo group.9 
 
9.1.10.1  Incidence not known (Post -marketing experience)  
 
9.1.10.1.1  Allergic reactions including skin rash, pruritus, angioedema of tongue, 
lips and face, urticarial.  This has been reported in patients with severe 
sulfa allergy , and therefore severe sulfa allergy is one of the exclusion 
criteria for this study . 
9.1.10.1.2  skin desquamation  
9.1.10.1.3  Priapism (probably less than 1 in 50,000 patients)  
9.1.10.1.4  palpitations  
9.1.10.1.5  hypotension  
9.1.10.1.6  constipation  
9.1.10.1.7  vomiting  
9.1.10.1.8  Intraoperative Floppy Iris Syndrome  (IFIS) : This is a clinical syndrome of 
a flaccid billowing iris, iris prolapse, and pupil constriction that has been described during cataract surgery and has been associated with tamsulosin.  This syndrome increases the difficulty of performing cataract surgery  and increases the rate of complications associated with 
cataract surgery .
10  It has been found to occur even up to a ye ar afte r 
discontinuation of tamsulosin, and possibly longer.11  However, one 
prospective study evaluating outcomes after surgery in which IFIS was present found that when surgeons were aware of prior or current tamsulosin use, they were able to employ compen satory techniques 
resulting in a low complication rate.
11 
 
9.1.11  Nursing implications  
 
Nursing staff would administer the study medication when the patient is in the hospital.   
  
10.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
10.1 Randomization and stratification  
  Subjects will be stratified by gender,  pelvic/non -pelvic surgery , and high vs low IPSS score 
(which “high” defined as >=8, and “low” <=7)  prior to randomization.  Subjects  will be 
randomized with a 50/50 chance of being allocated to active drug or placebo.  Randomization will be performed by the Pharmaceutical Research Center, and the code sheet for 
randomization will be kept by the PRC.  Unblinding of study team members will only occur for 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 21 of 32  
 interim data analysis , which will be performed between  May  15 and May 30, 2016.  Onl y 
subjects for who complete data collection (including 30 -day postoperative outcomes) has 
been obtained will be unblinded at that time.    
 
For purposes of stratification, “pelvic” operations include the following: surgery involving the rectum (colorectal anastomosis, ileo -rectal anastomosis, IPAA, proctopexy, proctocolectomy, 
proctectomy, LAR, and APR).  
 
10.2 Sample size  
 
In this study, we propose to compare a group of subjects given a placebo and a group given 
tamsulosin in order to prevent postoperative urinary retention.  The primary endpoint is need 
for at least a single intermittent catheterization, treated as a binary outcome.  Secondary 
endpoints include need for indwelling catheter replacement (binary), time until first void 
(continuous), number of intermittent catheterizations ( numeric ), post -void residual urine 
volumes (continuous), UTI rates (binary), and length of stay (continuous).  The sample size calculation is based on the primary endpoint.  We will employ a two -tailed, two sample test 
for eq uality of proportions (chi -squared or Fisher's exact) at a significance level of 0.05 
(equivalent to one -tailed alpha of 0.025) in order to compare urinary retention rates  as 
measured by our primary outcome .  Based on pilot data and information from the literature, 
we anticipate that 30% of the placebo group will experience urinary retention, and that the 
tamsulosin group will see a 50% reduction to a 15% urinary retention rate.  In order to achieve 
at least 80% power for detecting a significant group diffe rence, we will need 134 subjects 
included in each study arm , or a total of 268 subjects .  However, to provide for a 10% drop out 
rate, we would need to  plan to enroll 14 7 subjects in each arm, yielding a n enrollment goal  of 
294 subjects.    
 
10.3 Error levels  
 
 Two -sided t ype I error level is set at 0.05, and type II error level is 0.20.   
 
10.4 Differences to be detected for comparative studies  
 
Based on institutional urinary retention rates  and information from the literature, we 
anticipate  that 30% of the placebo group will experience urinary retention, and that the 
tamsulosin group will see a 50% reduction to a 15% urinary retention rate.   This is the pre -
specified difference in the primary outcome that the study is designed to detect at a two -
tailed significance level of 0.05 and power of 80%.  The secondary outcomes that will be compared include  need for indwelli ng catheter replacement, time until first void,  number of 
intermittent catheterizations , post -void residual urine volumes , UTI rates , and length of stay.  
These secondary outcomes can be thought of as more hypothesis -generating.  We 
acknowledge that we may not be powered to achieve statistical significance for our secondary outcome measures.  
 
10.5 Estimated accrual rate / study duration 
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 22 of 32  
 The estimated sample size needed to achieve the pre -specified statistical significance and 
power is a total of 2 68 subjects  (134 subjects in each arm) .  Subjects that withdraw from the 
study prior to surgery will be replaced.   We estimate that there will be a 10% drop -out rate , 
and therefore the enrollment goal to account for drop -outs is estimated to be 29 4 subjects 
(147 in each arm) in order to achieve an actual sample size of 268 subjects .  We initially 
predicted that we would need to replace subjects that received epidural anesthesia, but the 
interim analysis showed no significant difference in response between epidural and non -
epidural patients.  
 
The estimated accrual rate is approximately 1-2 subject s per week.  In order to enroll a total of 
294 subjects , this would take approximately 147-294 weeks, or 2. 8-5.7 years .  After 
enrollment of the final subject , data collection will continue for 30 days beyond that  subject’s  
date of surgery.  Expected study duration is approximately 3-6 years from the time that 
enrollment begins.  
   
10.6 Stopping rules  
 
The trial will be stopped if at interim data analysis there is a highly significant difference 
(p<0.0 01) between the tamsulosin group and the pl acebo group in the primary outcome .  Data 
monitoring will be performed by the ICTR DMC every 6 -12 months as needed.  The single 
planned interim data analysis will be performed between May 15 and May 30, 2016, by the PI 
(Evie Carchman ), Greg Kennedy,  Christina Papageorge , and Glen Leverson  for the purposes of 
a Master’s thesis project.  I f the rate of either priapism or syncope in the tamsulosin group 
exceeds that of the placebo  group by an absolute value of 10 %, then the study will be 
stopped.  
 
10.7 Primary endpoint for interim and final analysis  
 
The primary endpoint  for interim and final analysis is  need for any intermittent catheterization 
after initial IUC removal.   This outcome will be compared primarily with an intent -to-treat 
analysis.  However, we will also perform an as -treated analysis.  Compliance will be measured 
based on pill -counts.  A subject will be considered “compliant” if greater than or equal to 70% 
of the pills that were supposed to be taken were actually taken.   
 
10.8 Hypothese s 
 
10.8.1  Primary  
 
10.8.1.1  We hypothesize that subjects  treated with tamsulosin will have a decreased 
need for intermittent catheterization after initial IUC re moval compared to 
those  treated with placebo.  
 
10.8.2  Secondary  
 
10.8.2.1  Subjects treated with tamsulosin will have a lower rate of IUC replacement compared to those treated with placebo.  
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 23 of 32  
 10.8.2.2  Subject s treated with tamsulosin will have a higher incidence of abnormal 
ejaculation, dizziness, and orthostasis compared to those treated with 
placebo.  
 
10.8.2.3  Subjects  treated with tamsulosin will have a shorter time until first 
spontaneous void compared to those treated with placebo.   
 
10.8.2.4  Subject s treated with tamsulosin will have a fewer number of t otal 
intermittent catheterizations required per subject compared to thos e treated 
with placebo.   
 
10.8.2.5  The tamsulosin group will have a smaller average p ost void residual urine 
volu me after first spontaneous void compared to the placebo group.  
 
10.8.2.6  The tamsulosin group will have a smaller proportion of patients being discharged from t he hospital with an IUC compared to the placebo group.  
 
10.8.2.7  The tamsulosin group will have a lower incidence of u rinary tract infection 
diagnosed within 30 days of operation  compared to the placebo group.  
 
10.8.2.8  Subject s treated with tamsulosin will have a shorter average h ospital length of 
stay (in days ) compared to those  treated with placebo.  
 
10.8.2.9  Male gender, high preoperative IPSS score, older age, pelvic operations, larger volume of intraoperative fluids, and epidural anesthesia will be risk factors for POUR.  
 
10.8.2.10  Higher risk patient groups will be most likely to benefit from tamsulosin therapy for the prevention of POUR.  
 
10.9 Maximum number of subjects  
 
We have allowed for a 10% drop out in our enrollment goal calculation .  If, however, drop -out 
rate exceeds the allowed 10%, we will enroll additional subject s to maintain 80% power at a 
0.05 significance level.  As  a contingency plan, t he maximum number of subjects we will enroll 
will be based on a 30% drop out rate.  This would yield a maximum number of subjects in each  
arm of 174 , or a total maximum enrollment of 348  subjects.  
 
10.10 Plan for analysis  
 
To analyze differences between the tamsulosin group and the placebo group with regards to the primary outcomes, w e will employ a one -tailed, two sample test of proportions (Chi -
squared or Fisher’s exact) at a two -tailed significance level of 0.05 in order to compare urinary 
retention rates, as defined by need for at least a single  intermittent catheterization.   This 
analysis will be performed primarily with an intent -to-treat analysis.  However, we will also 
perform an as -treated analysis.  Compliance for the as -treated analysis will be measured 
based on pill -counts and subject report.  A subject will be consid ered “compliant” if greater 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 24 of 32  
 than or equal to 70% of the pills that were supposed to be taken were actually taken, and 
crossover from placebo to active drug did not occur.  Additionally, this analysis will be 
performed both including and excluding the subje cts who receive epidural anesthesia.     
 The secondary  outcomes will be analyzed using either Chi- squared or Fisher’s exact tests for 
binary outcome measures, and Student t -tests for continuous outcome variables.   
 
The retrospective study to identify risk factors for POUR will be a logistic regression  
using our primary outcome as the response variable and the various preoperative and  
operative variables as the predictor variables.  We plan to look at risk factors b oth in  
the placebo cohort alone and the overall sample of all patients.  We will quantify the  
risks of each variable with odds ratios.   
 
In order to identify groups of patients most likely to benefit from tamsulosin, we will perform chi-squared or Fishe r’s exact tests on subgroups of patients to identify variables that are 
associated with  POUR, and then create interaction variable s between tamsulosin and the key 
factors identified in the initial analysis.  We will also employ binary logistic regression in this analysis to identify odds ratios for the interaction variables.   
 The interim analysis will be a two -sided two sample test of proportions (Chi -squared or 
Fisher’s exact) at a two -tailed alpha of 0.001 comparing differences in the primary outcome 
between the tamsulosin and placebo groups.  Given the very small p value chosen for interim 
analysis there will be little to no inflation of the overall type I error for the study.   
 11.0 RECORDS TO BE KEPT  
 
11.1 Personnel in charge of managing study data  
 
Study data  will be primarily managed by the study coordinator  and sub investigator.     
 
11.2 Confidentiality  
 
Subjects enrolled in the study will be sequentially assigned a unique 3 -digit study identification 
number, which will be used to identify the subject throughout the course of the study.  The link between the subject’s identifiers (i.e. name, MRN, birthdate) and the subject ID will be 
available in the OnCore system. All data exported from the system will only contain the 
Subject ID number, and will not contain othe r subject identifiers.  
 All paper forms containing patient information or data will be kept locked in the offices of the PI or study coordinator.  
 
The data collected during the course of the study will be stored in the OnCore system.  OnCore 
is an electronic data management system that will be used to capture, edit, manage, and 
export study data for analysis.  
 
Subject identifiable information is restricted at multiple levels.  The research team will manage study data through OnCore.  Access to the O nCore system is restricted to those that have 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 25 of 32  
 been granted access by the software administrators.  User access requires supervisor 
approval, completion of HIPAA and Human Subjects Protection training, and completion of 
role-based training in the OnCore sys tem. In addition, users’ access is limited to protocols for 
which they have some responsibility of protocol, subject, or data management. Within those protocols, the ability to view and modify data is restricted based on their role in the conduct of the re search project (e.g. regulatory staff do not have the privilege to view subject 
identifiable information).  
 In addition, the technical components of this software are managed by the UW -Madison’s 
School of Medicine and Public Health Information Technology O ffice  (for server maintenance, 
software upgrades, etc.), and security and software support is provided by ICTR administrative 
staff. SMPH IT  and ICTR administrative staff are able to access subject information in order to 
help end users of the software pro gram when questions arise.  
 
All communication between the clients and the OnCore application takes place via Hypertext Transfer Protocol over Secure Socket Layer or HTTPS. HTTPS provide the ability for normal web based communication over an encrypted Secu re Socket Layer (SSL) connection. This 
ensures that data passing between the client and OnCore is protected from unauthorized attempts to access the data.  
 Data that is exported from the OnCore system will be coded.  As is necessary for the 
completion of r emote data analysis and travel to/from conferences where data may be 
presented, this coded data may be transferred to a limited number of password -protected 
and encrypted laptops belonging to study staff as necessary.  In this case, data would be 
stored on  a password protected and encrypted USB drive in order to transfer data to the 
laptop.  Laptops and USB drives will only contain coded data, and will be used only as 
necessary as described above.  Only study staff will have access to such USB drives and laptops.  Laptops and USB drives will not contain the key to the code.  
  
11.3 Data collection methods  
 
Data not readily available in the EMR will be collected using Case Report  Forms.  Data will be 
collected from subject s’ electronic medical records  and subject self-report by a study team 
member.  Prospective data regarding bladder fu nction will be collected by a study team 
member while the subject  is inpatient.  Data regarding AEs and UPs will be collected using a 
form (Adverse Event Log) by a study team member  via interview of the subject or abstraction 
from the EMR .  Data regarding treatment for UTI will be collected over the phone by a study 
team member 30 -40 days after the date of surgery  and via chart review .  Subjects will be 
identified on the data collection forms by  their unique study ID number.  Data will be 
compiled into a single database in OnCore .   
 
11.4 Data management  
 
Online Collaborative Research Environment (OnCore) will serve as the Clinical Trial 
Management System for this study. ICTR OnCore is supported by the UW School of Medicine and Public Health Information Technology (SMPH -IT) staff and managed by the UW ICTR 
Clinical Research Infrastructure System (CRIS).  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 26 of 32  
  
OnCore is a sophisticated, web -based data management system that: a) ensures secure, easy 
data entry at multiple sites; b) integrates multiple data sources; c) provides controlled, secure 
access to sensitiv e data using role -based access control; d) provides workflow automation; 
and e) allows export and reporting of data for Data and Safety Monitoring Boards and 
biostatisticians.  
 
This software provides protocol management functions (e.g. subject scheduling;  screening, 
data organization), maintains updated forms, addresses budget development, billing, and 
fiscal management, generates summary reports, and provides essential links with other research administration and electronic medical records systems. ICTR O nCore eases the 
burden of the individual researcher and unifies protocol management within research programs and across research sites, enhancing protocol integrity and regulatory compliance 
efforts.  
 
The ICTR OnCore support  team will work with the invest igator and study team to ensure that 
relevant, applicable study data are collected and entered into electronic Case Report Forms (eCRFs) through a secure web -based system with restricted access.  
 
11.5 Duration of study records  
 
Paper study records  and the study  master list  will be destroyed once all data is transcribed 
into the database , analyzed , and published , no sooner than 7 years after completion of the 
study .  The data in OnCore will remain indefinitely, until the study team requests the data be 
manually d eleted.  A de-identified version of the database will be kept indefinitely for possible 
future studies.  
 
12.0 PATIENT CONSENT AND PEER JUDGMENT 
 
Current FDA, NCI, state, federal, and institutional regulations concerning informed consent will be followed.    
 
Waiver of informed consent will be used for screening review of eligibility for potential subjects .  If 
deemed eligible, the study will be discussed with a prospective subject, and if the subject is interested, the informed consent process will proceed, cu lminating with signed consent 
documentation.   
 Potential subjects will be given written and verbal information about the study, and will be given time to ask any questions, prior to providing signed informed consent.  Due to constraints of the study relat ed to the medication starting 7 days preoperatively, consent and enrollment must be 
completed at least 7 days prior to the scheduled surgery.  If after the initial clinic visit, the patient 
has another scheduled preoperative clinic visit prior to 7 days pr eoperatively, then the patient will 
be given the opportunity to take the consent form home if they so desire, and then signed 
informed consent will be obtained at the next clinic visit.  If that clinic visit is the patient's last 
clinic visit prior to the date of surgery, informed consent will be obtained at that time unless the patient needs additional time to consider participation .  If the patient needs additional time to 
consider participation in the study, he or she may bring written materials home and  study 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 27 of 32  
 personnel will follow up via telephone call.  If the patient is interested in participating in the study, 
then a visit will be arranged with a study team member (prior to 7 days preoperatively) for the 
patient to sign the consent form and complete e nrollment.  
 
The consent process will occur in a private clinic room or office.  
 
 
13.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
 
An adverse event log will be maintained for all subjects enrolled in the study.   A member of the 
study team will directly inquire about adverse events  (via interview of the subject)  when the 
subject  reports to the hospital on the day of surgery (after 7 days of taking the study medication).  
The adverse event log will be updated again  based on AEs reported in the EMR from the time of 
surgery until 48 hours after completion of the intervention portion of the study, and finally a third time via telephone call 30 -40 days after surgery .  Four  stud y team members ( Evie Carchman, Greg 
Kennedy,  Christina Papageorge , and Glen Leverson ) will meet between May 15 and May 30, 2016, 
to perform interim data analysis on primary endpoint data for the purposes of a Master’s research project.   
 
13.1 Data Monitoring Committee  
 
We plan to utilize the UW ICTR Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) to oversee the study.  The 
UW ICTR DMC is co -chaired by Dave DeMets and Norm Fost and is comprised of experienced 
members (core plus ad hoc) with expertise required to oversee this study.  The DMC members 
will review protocol -specific reports created by statisticians using data pulled from the ICTR 
OnCore clinical research management system.  These standard reports will include an overview of study objectives, a review of actual and projected accrual rates, an evaluation  of 
patient demographics for balance of randomization, and a summary of the number and seriousness of adverse events.  An interim analysis of study results may be performed and 
source documents may be reviewed to allow the DMC to independently judge whether the 
overall integrity and conduct of the protocol remain acceptable based on data provided and 
reported by the Principal Investigator. The DMC will make recommendations to the Principal 
Investigator that could include actions of continuation, modificatio n or termination.  
 In providing oversight for the conduct of this study, the ICTR DMC will meet every 6 months 
during the 3 -year study to review all adverse events.  The predefined stopping points for this 
study will include excess rates of syncope , or priapism requiring medical treatment .  The 
boundary for excess harm will be an incidence of syncope or priapism in the tamsulosin group that exceeds that of the placebo group by an absolute value of 5%, or an observed excess harm which in the judgment of the DMC, is excessive.   We will report all serious adverse 
events to the DMC and the IRB oversight committee, the Health Sciences IRB in accordance 
with their reporting guidelines.  
 
The individuals responsible for dat a and safety monitoring are independent of  the 
researchers.  
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 28 of 32  
 If a subject prematurely withdraws from the study, then a study team member will call the 
patient (or visit the patient in the hospital) to inquire about adverse events.  
 
Between May 15 -30, 2016, unblinding will occur for subjects for which complete data 
collection (30 days from operation) has been  achieved,  and interim data analysis will then be 
performed by Evie Carchman (the PI) , Greg Kennedy,  Christina Papageorge, and Glen Leverson 
for purpos es of  a Master ’s research project.     
 
13.2 Study Monitoring Service (SMS)  
 
While many institutions involved in clinical research conduct various types of quality 
assurance reviews and audits, UW ICTR is one of a few institutions to offer Study Monitor of 
Recor d services, a robust academic equivalent to the industry Contract Research Organization 
(CRO) standards for ongoing study monitoring.  
 The SMS will offer three types of compliance review activities on this study: 1) Study Monitor of Record Reviews; 2) Rou tine (Random/QA) Reviews; and 3) Directed (For -Cause) Reviews. 
The Study Monitor of Record activities will be contracted for the proposed study, and will include the conduct and follow -up of monitoring visits throughout the life cycle of the study 
(e.g., S ite Initiation Visit, Interim Monitoring Visits, and Close -Out Visit). Study monitoring 
visits will occur off- site (remotely) and/or on -site at a frequency necessitated by the protocol 
risk and complexity.  
 For this study, UW ICTR SMS personnel will conduct a S ite Initiation Visit (SIV) with the UW-
Madison research personnel in person after IRB approval is confirmed and before enrollment 
of any subjects into the study. The SIV will include a detailed review of the protocol, good clinical practice guid elines, and data management expectations of the research team at the 
study site and the SMS personnel. Following the Site Initiation Visit (SIV), SMS Monitoring 
personnel will routinely conduct ongoing Interim Monitoring Visits (IMVs) for all data 
collection sites, either on -site, remotely or a combination of both, following enrollment of the 
first subject(s) and throughout the duration of the study. During IMVs, the monitors will 
review study materials, including but not limited to: regulatory files, conse nt forms, case 
report forms, and device accountability logs. UW ICTR SMS personnel will conduct a Close -Out 
Visit (COV) upon completion of the study at the study site.  
 
Monitoring could consist of full or partial review of study records, depending on risk  level and 
observed compliance. As such, during their monitoring activities, UW ICTR SMS personnel plan 
to review all (100%) of the study -related subject records for 10-20% of the enrolled subjects. 
The subject records of the first two subjects enrolled will be monitored in their entirety, with 
the additional numb er of enrolled subjects to be randomly . SMS personnel could increase the 
percentage of study or subject records to be reviewed if warranted by the ongoing monitoring 
findings.  
 
The study monitor(s ) will work closely with the ICTR DMC statistician and the study statistician 
to conduct periodic central data reviews, with follow -up conducted by the study monitors for 
any data discrepancies identified.  
 
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 29 of 32  
 14.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Buckley BS, Lapitan MC. Drugs for treatment of urinary retention after surgery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010(10):Cd008023.  
2. Choi S, Awad I. Maintaining micturition in the perioperative period: strategies to avoid urinary retention. Curr Opi n Anaesthesiol. 2013;26(3):361- 367.  
3. Lo E, Nicolle LE, Coffin SE, et al. Strategies to prevent catheter- associated urinary tract infections 
in acute care hospitals: 2014 update. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014;35(5):464- 479.  
4. Hollingsworth JM, Roge rs MA, Krein SL, et al. Determining the noninfectious complications of 
indwelling urethral catheters: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2013;159(6):401- 410.  
5. O'Leary MP. Tamsulosin: current clinical experience. Urology. 2001;58(6 Sup pl 1):42 -48; 
discussion 48.  
6. Madani AH, Aval HB, Mokhtari G, et al. Effectiveness of tamsulosin in prevention of post -
operative urinary retention: a randomized double -blind placebo -controlled study. Int Braz J Urol. 
2014;40(1):30 -36. 
7. Narayan P, Tewari A. A second phase III multicenter placebo controlled study of 2 dosages of 
modified release tamsulosin in patients with symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. United States 93 -01 Study Group. J Urol. 1998;160(5):1701- 1706.  
8. Lepor H. Phase III multice nter placebo -controlled study of tamsulosin in benign prostatic 
hyperplasia. Tamsulosin Investigator Group. Urology. 1998;51(6):892 -900.  
9. Pummangura N, Kochakarn W. Efficacy of tamsulosin in the treatment of lower urinary tract 
symptoms (LUTS) in women. Asian J Surg. 2007;30(2):131- 137.  
10. Yaycioglu O, Altan -Yaycioglu R. Intraoperative floppy iris syndrome: facts for the urologist. 
Urology. 2010;76(2):272- 276.  
11. Chang DF, Osher RH, Wang L, Koch DD. Prospective multicenter evaluation of cataract surgery  in 
patients taking tamsulosin (Flomax). Ophthalmology. 2007;114(5):957- 964.  
 
 15.0 APPENDIX  
 ELIGIBILITY CHECKLIST  
Any patient being seen in a general surgery clinic at UWHC or the UW Digestive Health Center for 
possible complex intra- abdominal surgery is  a potential subject.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 
   >= 18 years of age  
  English -speaking 
  able to provide informed consent  
  scheduled to undergo elective complex intra -abdominal surgery with a planned stay of at least 1 
night in the hospital after surgery  
  “complex intra- abdominal surgery” includes one  of the following operations via ANY 
transabdominal approach (i.e. open, laparoscopic, hand -assist laparoscopic, single -incision 
laparoscopic, robotic):  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 30 of 32  
 o Partial colectomy  
o Total abdominal colectomy  
o Proctocolectomy  
o Low an terior resection  
o Abdominoperineal resection  
o Restorative proctocolectomy/IPAA  
o Proctopexy (transabdominal) for prolapse  
o Intestinal stricturoplasty  
o Lysis of adhesions  
o End or diverting colostomy reversal  
o Ileostomy reversal  
o Closure of enterocutaneous, enteroenteric, or enterocolic fistula  
o Partial or complete gastrectomy  
o Small bowel resection  
o Small bowel diversion/ostomy  
o Large bowel diversion/ostomy  
o Pancreaticoduodenectomy  
o Pancreatectomy  
o Hepatectomy  
o Gastric bypass  
o Sleeve gastrectomy  
o Nissen/Dor/Toupet fun doplication  
o Transabdominal adrenalectomy  
o Splenectomy  
o Complex abdominal wall hernia repair (i.e. Rives -Stoppa type repair, large laparoscopic 
ventral hernia repair)  
o Exploratory laparotomy  
o Other comparable complex intra- abdominal operation  
 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
  allergy or contraindication  to tamsulosin  
  serious sulfa allergy  
  current use of an alpha blocker (alfuzosin, doxazosin, prazosin, silodosin, terazosin , verapamil, 
tamsulosin, phenoxybenzamine ) or oral alpha agonist  (midodrine)  
  current warfarin us e 
  current indwelling urinary catheter, suprapubic catheter, or urostomy  
  end stage renal disease or dialysis -dependent  
  sitting systolic blood pressure in the upper extremity of less than 100mmHg at time of eligibility screening  
  presence of orthostatic hypotension at the time of eligibility screening  
o orthostatic hypotension is defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure of 20mmHg from sitting to standing, or drop in diastolic BP of 10 mmHg from sitting to standing after 2 -3 
minutes of standing after being in  a sitting position  
  anticipated inability to take oral medications on post -operative day #0  
  anticipated requirement for indwelling urinary catheter beyond post -operative day #2   
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 31 of 32  
   non-English speaking  
  pregnant or breast -feeding women  
  lacking  capacity to prov ide informed consent  
  unwillingness to answer all 7 questions on the IPSS survey  
 
  
Preoperative tamsulosin for the prevention of postoperative urinary retention: a randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial 
 
 
Post -Op Urinary Retention Protocol  
Version: 5.0, December 8, 2017  
Page 32 of 32  
  
INSTITUTIONAL BLADDER MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL  FOR ADULT SURGICAL INPATIENTS  
(Standard of care for post -operative general surgery patients)  
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  No 
Straight 
catheterize  No No 
No 
Yes 
END ALGORITHM:  
After 24 hours of 
straight catheterization, 
insert indwelling urinary 
catheter.  
Yes If no 2nd void 
in 6 hours  
Yes 
Bladder scan 
>500mL or patient 
reports bladder 
discomfort  Bladder scan 
after 6 hours if 
no void  
Yes 2nd post -
void residual 
<200mL?  Yes 
END ALGORITHM  START:  
• On arrival to unit from PACU without indwelling urinary catheter  
• Concern for urinary retention  
• Indwelling urinary catheter discontinued  
Bladder scan  
for PVR  
PVR <200mL?  
PVR <500mL?  Has patient been 
consistently 
straight 
catheterized for 24 
hours?  Patient 
voids  
Yes 
Bladder scan every 
2 hrs until >500mL 
or patient reports 
bladder discomfort  No 
No 