 
A Randomized Trial of Vaginal Surgery for Uterovaginal Prolapse: 
Vaginal Hysterectomy With Native Tissue Vault Suspension vs. 
Mesh Hysteropexy Suspension (SUPeR)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Version 5.0  
 
October 9, 2020  
 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020    A Randomized Trial of Vaginal Surgery for Uterovaginal Prolapse: Vaginal Hysterectomy 
with Native Tissue Vault Suspension vs. Mesh Hysteropexy Suspension  
Short name: Study of Uterine Prolapse Procedur es- Randomized Trial “SUPeR” 
 
Concept approval: July 21, 2011  
Mini-protocol approval: April 27, 2012  
Final approval : July 20, 2012  
Proposed amendment : October 9 , 2020  
SUPeR  Protocol Committee  
UCSD : Charles W. Nager , Chair   
Duke:  Anthony  G. Visco  
University of Pennsylvania : Heidi Harvie  
Cleveland Clinic : Marie Paraiso  
Brown: Charles Rardin  
UAB: Holly E. Richter   
University of New Mexico : Yuko Komesu  
University of Pittsburgh : Halina M. Zyczynski  
DCC RTI:  Sonia Thomas , Amaanti Sridhar   
NICHD : Donna Mazloomdoost  
 
 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 6 , 2020  ii  
TABLE OF CON TENTS  
A. STUDY AIMS  1 
A.1 Primary Aim  1 
A.2 Secondary Aims  1 
B. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  2 
B.1 Rationale for the Vaginal Operations Being Proposed for this Study  2 
B.2 Rationale for Primary Outcome for this Study  7 
B.3 Study Design – Superiority Vs. Non -Inferio rity 9 
B.4 Rationale for Including a Body Image Assessment  9 
C. STUDY SCHEMA  10 
C.1 Study Design D iagram  10 
D. STUDY POPULATION  10 
E. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  11 
F. PARTICIPANT SCREENING  12 
G. BASELINE VISIT  12 
H. RANDOMIZATION  13 
I. APPOINTMENT SCHEDULING  14 
J. INTER VENTIONS – SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS  15 
J.1 Surgeon Experience and Certification  15 
J.2 Description of Surgical Procedures  17 
J.3 Masking of Randomized Intervention  19 
K. OUTCOME VISITS  21 
L. TIMELINE OF VISITS/CALLS AND STUDY SCHEDULE  21 
M. OUTCOME MEASURES  22 
M.1 Primary Outcome Measure  22 
M.2 Comparative Secondary Outcome Measures  23 
N. SAMPLE SIZE/POWER CALCULATIONS  30 
O. STATISTICAL DESIGN  31 
P. ETHICAL CONCERNS, LIMITATIONS, AND INFORMED CONSENT  32 
P.1 Ethical Concerns  32 
P.2 Informed Consent  33 
P.3 Data and Safety Monitoring Board  33 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 6 , 2020  iii P.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  34 
Q. PROTOCOL COSTS  34 
R. REFERENCES  34 
S.  APPENDICES  39 
Appendix A. Figures  39 
Appendix B. Planned Study Timeline  40 
T. AMENDMENT – REVISED: CLARIFICATION OF LENGTH OF SUBJECT 
PARTICIPATION  41 
U. AMENDMENT: EXTENSION OF THE STUDY OF UTERINE PROLAPSE PROCEDURES -
RANDOMIZED TRIAL (SUPER) STUDY FOR LONG -TERM FOLLOW -UP TO 10 YEARS 
(E-SUPER)  43 
 
  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 6 , 2020  iv  
LIST OF TABLES  
 
Table 1. Vaginal Surgery Treatment Options for Uterovaginal Prolapse (non -obliterative 
procedures only)  2 
Table 2. Uterosacral Vault Suspension Procedures  3 
Table 3. Masking Summary  20 
Table 4. Timeline of Measures  22 
Table 5. Resource Utilization Data Collection and Price Data Source, by Utilization 
Category  26 
Table 6. Body Image Scales  29 
Table 7. Sam ple Size Calculations  30 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
1 A. Study Aims  
The primary purpose of this randomized clinical trial is to compare the effectiveness and safety 
of two trans vaginal  apical suspension strategies  for uterovaginal prolapse: a  mesh augmented 
hysteropexy vs. vaginal hysterectomy and uterosacral ligament suspension.  
A.1 Primary Aim  
1. To determine  whether treatment succes s in women with symptomatic uterovaginal 
prolapse  undergoing transvaginal mesh augmented hysteropexy differs  in women 
undergoing vaginal hysterectomy and native tissue cuff suspension  at time points 
through 3 years .  
Hypothesis –  
1. This study will test the null hypothesis that t reatment success will not differ in women 
with symptomatic uterovaginal prolapse undergoi ng vaginal surgery with a synthetic 
mesh hysteropexy compared to  women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy with native 
tissue vaginal suspension  against the alternative hypothesis that success does differ for 
the treatment regimens . Operationally, the hypothesis will be tested using a two -sided 
log-rank test to test for a difference in the risk of failure across the two treatment arms to 
achieve an overall Type I error rate of  0.05 across the interim and final analyses .  
A.2 Secondar y Aims  
1. Secondary Efficacy Outcomes : To compare  detailed anatomic and  comprehensive 
functional outcomes (includ ing prolapse, urinary, sexual,  bowel and health -related 
quality of life (HRQOL) ) in both groups . 
2. Safety : To measure and compare safety, adverse  events  (including  mesh erosion and 
exposure) , pain , and need for subsequent procedures in both group s.  
3. Predictors of Poor Outcomes : To determine if advanced prolapse, age, obesity, 
smoking, menopausal status, estrogens, previous prolapse  surgery , and physical activity 
levels , alone or in combination , predict higher treatment failure .  
4. Cost -Effectiveness : To compare the cost -effectiveness of the two surgical approaches 
and relate the difference in cost of care between the two groups to differences in health 
utilities and health -related quality of life . 
5. Body Image : To describe changes in body image as measured by a validated scale , the 
Body Image Scale  (BIS) ,.in a group of women undergoing mesh augmented hysteropexy 
or vaginal hysterectomy and to evaluate whether or not changes in sexual function are 
associated with changes in body image.    
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
2 B. Background  and Significance  
The apex of the vagina (either cervix or the vaginal cuff) is thought to be the keystone of pelvic 
organ support . Loss of apical support is usually present in women with prolapse that extends 
beyond the hymen .1,2 At least half of the observed variation in anterior compartment support 
may be explained by apical support.3 Adequate support for the vaginal apex is thought to be an 
essential  component of a durable surgical repair for women with advanced prolapse.4,5 Because 
of the significant contribution of the apex to anterior vaginal sup port, surgical correction of the 
anterior and posterior walls may fail unless the apex is adequately supported.6 A better term for 
the most common prolapse conditions would be “uterovaginal ” or “cuff-vaginal ” prolapse . Apical 
suspension procedures can broadly be separated into those performed transvaginally  and those 
performed abdominally. Abdominal procedures are performed via laparotomy or using 
conventional laparoscopic or robotically assisted -laparoscopic techniques.  While various 
abdominal and vaginal approaches exist, national data suggest that 80 -90% of prolapse surgery 
is performed vaginally .7,8, 9 Transvaginal mesh systems were introduced to improve native tissue 
vaginal repairs without ent ry into  the peritoneal cavity. FDA data released July 2011 noted that 
in 2010 approximately 300,000 women underwent surgical procedures to repair pelvic organ 
prolapse ( POP ), one-third used mesh, and 75% of mesh procedures  were done tran svaginally.  
This study is specifically addressing transvaginal surgical repair of uterovaginal prolapse.  
B.1 Rationale for the Vaginal Operations Being Proposed for this Study  
Typical vaginal treatment options for prolapse are outlined in Table 1  below.  
Table 1.  Vaginal Surgery Treatment Options for Uterovaginal Prolapse (non -obliterative 
procedures only)  
 Uterovaginal Prolapse  
Native tissue options  TVH-USLS  
(occ. TVH-SSLS)  
Native tissue hysteropexy  
Vaginal mesh options  Hysteropexy (mesh strap technique) (e.g. Uphold ®) 
Hysterectomy and vaginal mesh  
Native Tissue Options   
Uterovaginal Prolapse : Most  uterovaginal  prolapse is managed with a vaginal hysterectomy , +/- 
anterior and posterior colporrhaphy and other repairs as indicated . With minor degrees of 
uterine prolapse, culdeplasties (McCall, Mayo procedures) are performed to support the apex. 
With more advanced prolapse, a colpopexy is often performed. The most common procedure in 
academic centers is an intrap eritoneal colpopexy (the uterosacral ligament suspension)  (see 
Appendix A, Figure 1). The success rates for uterosacral operations were well summarized by 
Barber et al in  ICI Chapter for POP  as outlined in Table 2.  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
3 Table 2.  Uterosacral Vault Suspension Procedures  
Year  First  Author  No. of 
Pts. Mean Follow -
up Months  
(range)  Definition  of 
anatomic  success*  Anatomic 
success  – all 
segments  Anatomic 
recurrence  by 
segment  Reoperation  for 
prolapse  
1997  Jenkins10 50 (6-48) Not defined  96% Anterior  4% None  reported  
1999  Comiter11 100 17 (6.5-35) Grade  0-1 96% Apex  4% 4 (4%)  
2000 Barber12 46 15.5 (3.5-40) Stage  0/1 or stage  2 
without symptoms  90% Apex  5%  
Anterior  5%  
Posterior  5% 3 (6.5%)  
2000 Shull13  289 Not stated  Grade  0-1 95% Apex  1%  
Anterior  3.5%  
Posterior  1.4%  None  reported  
2001  Karram14  168 21.6 (6 -36) Grade  0-1 88% Apex  1%  
Anterior  or Posterior  
11% 11 (5.5%)  
2003  Amundsen15  33 28 (6-43) Stage  0 or 1 82% Apex  6%  
Posterior  12% None  reported  
2006  Silva16  72 61.2 (42-90) Symptomatic stage  2 
or greater  85% Apex  3%  
Anterior  7%  
Posterior  14% 2 (3%)  
2006  Antovska17  32 25 (9-42) Stage 0 or 1  NR Apex 0%  
Anterior   
2007  Wheeler18 35 24 (0 -46) Stage 0 apical 
prolapse  80% Apex 20%  0 (0%)  
2009  De Boer19  48 12 Stage 0 -1 48% Apex 4.2%  
Anterior 47.9%  
Posterior 14.6%  None Reported  
2011  Doumouchtsis20 42 60 Grade 0 of vaginal 
vault  84.6%  Apex 15.4%  5 (11.9%)  
In summary, uterosacral vault suspension procedures have a low overall recurrence rate of 4 -
18%, anterior vaginal recurrence  rates of 1 -6% and a reoperation rate of less than 7%. Ureteral 
injury rates of 1 -11% are reported.   
Native Tissue Hysteropexy : Limited  data are available on the success of native tissue vaginal 
uterine suspension (hysteropexy) procedures. Sacrospinous hy steropexy was first reported in 
1989.21 One randomized controlled trial ( RCT) comparing sacrospinous suspen sion with or 
without vaginal hysterectomy showed higher recurrent apical  prolapse without  hysterectomy (21 
vs. 3%, p  = 0.03) with no significant difference in recurrent anterior  prolapse with hysterectomy 
(65 vs. 50%, p  = 0.2).22 This study was limited by 7% post randomiza tion change in surgical 
plan and low numbers (only 66 total participant s). Cohort studies of sacrospinous hysteropexy 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
4 suggest high apical failure rates in those with advanced prolapse, but small sample size 
prohibited definitive conclusions. Most of these studies used suture techniques for the 
sacrospinous hysteropexy , which  tend to be unilateral, produce deviation of the cervix and 
vaginal axis and this procedure has not achieved any significant popularity in the 20 years since 
the initial report. There is one recently published report of  a retrospective single author 
experience with a  uterosacral hysteropexy techniques , but the pelvic organ prolapse 
quantification ( POPQ ) system was not used to measure the outcomes and the outcome 
assessor was often the surgeon.23 A survey of Pelvic Floor Disorders Networ k (PFDN ) sites 
reveals rare performance of this procedure (approximately 25 total in last 5 years at 3 sites). In 
summary, although suture vaginal hysteropexy techniques have been available for more than 
20 year s they are uncommonly performed and there are minimal published data on these 
procedures.  
Vaginal Mesh Options  
The FDA conducted a systematic review of the scientific literature on transvaginal mesh and in 
July 2011 published a report titled “ Urogynecologic  Surgical Mesh: Update on the Safety and 
Effectiveness of Transvaginal Placement for Pelvic Organ Prolapse .”24 The report noted that in 
2010 appr oximately 300,000 women underwent surgical procedures to repair POP , one-third 
used mesh, and 75% of mesh procedures  were done transvaginally. Systematic reviews by the 
Society of Gynecologic  Surgeons (SGS) found weak  evidence for improved anterior anatomy  
when vaginal  prolapse repairs were performed with synthetic mesh  compared with native 
tissue.25 A systematic review of vaginal mesh kits for apical repair found they appear effective in 
restoring apical prolapse in the short -term, but long -term outcomes are  unknown .26   
Many  urogynecologists  use transvaginal mesh for apical compartment prolapse , even after the 
July 2011 FDA notification on transvaginal mesh for prolapse.  Despite widespread use of  
vaginal mesh for apical support  in patients with and without uteri , there is a dearth  of data on the 
results of these procedures and systematic reviews on vaginal mesh for the apical compartment 
are inconclusive . Well done studies are needed on vaginal me sh for the apical compartment  for 
patient counseling and to establish retention of the uterus as a safe and effective treatment 
choice.   
Uterovaginal Prolapse : Vaginal mesh options for uterovaginal prolapse include hysteropexy  with 
a mesh strap technique or hysterectomy and vaginal mesh apical suspension.   
Hysteropexy  (Mesh  Strap Technique ): In the past, j ustifications for removal of the uterus include  
concerns regarding cervical hypertrophy, future cervical or uterine pathology, or even a non-
evidenced belief that the uterus organ itself is involved in the prolapse process. Uterine 
pathology is rare (<  1%) in women undergoing prolapse surgery .27 Thus, the common practice 
of hysterectomy at the time of vaginal prolapse repair is to facilitate apical suspension. While 
hysterectomy is the norm , it is not clear whether removing the uterus is necessary or leads to 
better results. Hysterectomy  can have adverse effects; it is associated with menopause 4 years 
earlier than in women who d id not have surgery28 and is associated with a 2 -fold risk of ovarian 
failure.29 When presented with a scenario in which the participant receives preoperative 
counseling that the success of surgery is similar with and wit hout hysterectomy, 66% indicated 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
5 they would decline a hysterectomy (Frick AC et al, SGS 2011). A recent review on uterine -
sparing apical prolapse repair concluded that vaginal hysterectomy was not necessary .30 One 
purpose of this study is to compare a uterine -sparing technique (mesh hysteropexy and other 
native tissue vaginal prolapse repairs) with a vaginal hysterectomy utilizing native 
tissue/ligament suspension and other native tissue vaginal prolapse repairs.  
The concept of creating a mesh suspension bridg e to support the cervix and vaginal apex to 
bilateral sacrospinous ligaments was initially developed by Petros31 with the infracoccygeal 
sacropexy ; however , the trocar delivery system and multifilament mesh resulted in unacceptably 
high complication rates and is no longer on the market. The concept of this pro cedure evolved 
from a trocar placed device to a trocarless placement, with the most recent product developed 
by Boston Scientific (Uphold ® and Uphold ® LITE ). This procedure is performed through an 
anterior approach using a synthetic monofilament mesh bridg e which attaches the cervix to this 
mesh and then bilaterally to the sacrospinous ligament ( see Appendix  A, Figure 1) . It is 
essentially a mesh hysteropexy technique, although the FDA predicate  approval process did not 
allow it to be promoted and marketed as such. The most recent FDA approval was September 
14, 2011 for the Uphold ® LITE  Vaginal Support System indicated “for tissue reinforcement and 
stabilization of fascial structures of the pelvic floor for vaginal wall prolapse, where surgical 
treatment is intended, either as mechanical support or bridging material for the fascial defec t.” 
The Uphold ® LITE  mesh  has the same overall dimensions  as the previous Uphold ® mesh, but 
has a 75% increase in pore size, 38% reduction in weight, a 32% reduction in surface area ratio 
and is blue for enhanced visibility. As most literature would sugges t that lighter, larger pore size 
mesh is preferable and may have less stress shielding (Moalli, AUGS, 2011) , these changes are 
all considered positive , and for SUPeR  we anticipate using the Uphold ® LITE  product. This 
Uphold ® procedure results in a uterus i n a more midline  position with bilateral mesh sacral 
ligaments and theoretically is less likely to have suture pullout, asymmetry or extreme posterior 
deviation of the uterus. These mesh strap hysteropexy techniques allow  the potential for 
decreased operative time and morbidity associated with hysterectomy. Theoretically , mesh 
exposure rates may be lower with these mesh strap hysteropexy techniques because of  the 
smaller amount of mesh material used compared to other commonly p erformed anterior and 
posterior mesh kit procedures , the mesh straps are directed away from the vagina  so that  the 
mesh can be placed distant from incision lines . 
In a recently published single center study of 115 participant s, 53 were Uphold ® hysteropexy 
procedures32 at a median f ollow -up of 11.8 months ( range 0.4 -30.9 months) . Using POP -Q > -1 
to define recurrence, the combined anterior apical  recurrence rate was 1.89%, including no 
anterior (Ba  > -1) and one apical (C  > -1). Using POPQ  > 0 there were no recurrences in Ba  > 0 
or C > 0 compartment. The mesh exposure rate was 1.9%. In the overall group of 115 
participant s, 13.4% (13/97) reported preoperative dyspareunia and 8.3% reported postoperative 
dyspareunia (8/97). Dyspareunia resolved in 12/13 with preoperative dyspareunia and was de 
novo in 6 participant s – all 6 had perineorrhaphy.  As noted earlier, o ver 15,000 Uphold ® kits 
have been sold in the U.S. (personal communication 5/2011) but their usage for uterine 
prolapse vs. vault prolapse indications is not known. However , this number would make it 
significantly more common than any suture/native tissue/ligament hysterope xy technique . A 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
6 recent study of 31 women randomized to hysterectomy or hysteropexy, both using 
polypropylene mesh, found no significant differences in outcomes .33, 34   
A review of  clinicaltrials. gov reveals that there are  2 ongoing registered trials studying the 
Uphold ® procedure as a hysteropexy:  
1. VAULT study (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]?term=Vault&rank=1 ): 
“Vaginal Uphold Hysteropexy and Laparoscopic Sacral Hysteropexy for the Treatment of 
Uterovaginal Pelvic Organ  Prolapse (VAULT)”. This multicenter trial is sponsored by the 
Foundation for Female Health Awareness and coordinated at the Cleveland Clinic with 
anticipated enrollment that will end in summer 2012. This study is not randomized and 
has a one -year outcome.  Both groups retain their entire uteruses and the primary 
outcome is a composite outcome including cervix above the mid -vagina, absence of any 
prolapse beyond the hymen, absence of retreatment and absence of vaginal bulge 
symptoms. Secondary outcome measur es include anatomic, symptomatic, short -term 
morbidity, pain and functional activity.   
2. HUUT study  (http://www.anzctr.org.au/trial_view.aspx?ID=343047 ): “Hysterectomy or 
Uphold Uterine Cons ervation in Women with Apical Prolapse – A Randomized 
Controlled Trial (HUUT). Found in the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials 
Registry and being performed in Victoria, Australia. This study is similar to the current 
protocol. Major inclusion crite ria are stage > 2 symptomatic uterine descent. The primary 
outcome is the incidence of stage >  2 apical POP (Point C below -1 cm) at 12 and 36 
months after surgery. Secondary outcomes are overall POP stage  > 2, PFDI -20 
measures, PFIQ 7 measures, PISQ 12 me asures, and PGI -I measures.   
In the VAULT study, the primary outcome of anatomic and symptomatic prolapse cure is being 
assessed at one year. In the HUUT study, primary outcome time points are 12 and 36 months.  
In December of 2011, the American Urogyneco logic Society ( AUGS ) and American Congress of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists  (ACOG ) published a joint committee opinion on “Vaginal 
Placement of Synthetic Mesh for Pelvic Organ Prolapse” in which one of their recommendations 
was: “ Rigorous comparative effectiveness randomized trials  of synthetic mesh and native tissue 
repair and long -term follow -up are ideal. ”35 Vaginal mesh is probably the most controversial 
topic in pelvic floor disorders and a strong argument can be made that the PFDN  is the best 
group to study it.  Our network  can successfully perform  non-biased rigorous, long -term 
comparative safety and efficacy studies that are needed to comprehensively assess the role of 
mesh in prolapse surgery. It is acknowledged that with this study design, we will not be able to 
separate whether it is the hysteropexy  procedure  itself or the mesh component of the 
hysteropexy that produces the results.  
Other Non-Trocar Mesh Hysteropexy Techniques : Currently, t here are one trocar and 2 non-
trocar techniques to perform these procedures. Besides the Uphold ® device, th ere is one other 
product that allows a non -trocar attachment to the sacrospinous ligament (AMS Elevate). The 
PFDN UCSD site has  trialed both , and the disadvantage of the AMS d evice is that it is not as 
easily replaced for suboptimal anatomic applications, although this is a minor concern. The 
PFDN has selected the Boston Scientific Uphold ® device for this study because it has been 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
7 especially designed for uterine preservation and it is the lowest mesh load to allow this 
technique.   
Trocar Mesh Kit Techniques : Trocar -based mesh kits attempt to accomplish a similar colpopexy 
to the traditional suture suspension to the sacrospinous lig ament  (SSL) . In this study we are 
proposing a non -trocar approach for several theoretical reasons:   
1) Trocar -based methods involve the placement of a trocar through the ischiore ctal fossa, 
and the course of the trocar places the rectum at risk for perforati on.   
2) Additional  mesh  placed  in the ischiorectal fossa  with trocar -based suspensions  do not 
contribute to the repair and increases mesh burden without clear benefit . 
3) Direct and accurate attachment to the SSL . 
4) Surgeons in this network are comfortable with d irect SSL techniques (OPTIMAL trial 
experience). It is the opinion of many investigators that trocar -based procedures for 
apical suspension will decline.  
5) There is some evidence from maker evolution that  trocar kits are being replaced by non -
trocar kits.  
Hysterectomy and Vaginal Mesh Apical Suspension : This procedure is not a commonly 
performed operation. The uterus is typically left in place with these vaginal mesh apical 
techniques in an attempt to  reduce the risk of mesh erosion .36 Mesh erosion rates are fivefold  
higher when hysterectomy is performed.37 Most investigators who have completed a vaginal 
hyste rectomy and have easy access to the uterosacral native tissues do not see added benefit 
to adding a mesh and would rather perform a native tissue suspension.  
In conclusion , the purpose of this study is to compare vaginal  hysterectomy and native tissue 
cuff suspension with  a non -trocar mesh apical repair for uterine prolapse. At this point in time , 
there is no strong evidence that either uterosacral or sacrospinous ligament suspension is the 
better vaginal native tissue repair , but uterosacral ligament suspension is the most commonly 
performed operation with a vaginal hysterectomy and investigators will use that procedure for 
cuff suspension after hysterectomy. The protocol development team will monitor OPTIMAL 
study results as  they become available and this recommendation is subject to change  if 
sacrospinous ligament suspension is a clear winner over uterosacral ligament suspension in 
that trial. For the vaginal hysterectomy , a specific non -trocar mesh procedure will be studied , 
namely the Uphold ® LITE  procedure which will be performed according to manufacturer 
recommendations  through an anterior transverse incision.  Concomitant  anterior and posterior 
colporrhaphy procedures will be allowed , as needed , per the judgment  of the su rgeon in both 
arms.  
B.2 Rationale for Primary Outcome for this Study   
Over the last several years there has been increasing clarity defining success in prolapse 
surgery. The PFDN has led this effort with some important publications including “Defining 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
8 Success After Surgery For Pelvic Organ Prolapse” by Barber et al.38 In this study using CARE 
data, the participant’s assessment of overall improvement and rating of treatment success were 
compared between surgical success and failure for each of 18 surgical success definitions 
used. The results of this study along with th e emerging data on the distribution of pelvic support 
loss in the general population led the authors to conclude that success should be defined as:  
1. Absence of bulge symptoms  
2. Absence of retreatment  
3. Use of the hymen as a threshold for anatomic success.  
Further support for emphasizing the most distal measure of prolapse as the most important 
prolapse outcome measure comes from another PFDN study “Quantification of vaginal support: 
are continuous summary scores better than POPQ stage”.39 In this study , pooled baseline data 
from 322 CARE patients, 380 OPUS patients and 439 ATLAS patients were  used to evaluate 
and compare 3 continuous summary support loss  (SL) variables (which contained C point 
measures), POPQ ordinal stages, and SLmax (location of the single most distal point). SLmax 
demonstrated the greatest respons iveness and the best correlation with POPDI, POPIQ, PFDI 
Question 4, and PFDI Question 5. The authors recommended “Given its ability to provide an 
easily understood measure of maximum vaginal descent and its high responsiveness, SLmax 
may serve as a good p rimary outcome in studies evaluating prolapse treatment”. They further 
state “If the aim of a surgical procedure is to restore support to a specific compartment, it is 
logical to provide descriptive statistics for the preoperative and postoperative status of that 
compartment.”   
For this study, we considered  including a measure of  apical descent “point C” in the primary 
outcome, but problems with this approach  includ e: 
1. Most importantly, f or one group in this study point C is the vaginal cuff and in the other  
group s it is a cervix. The cervix typically resides on the anterior vaginal wall, is often 3 
cm in diameter, and in normal asymptomatic parous women or in hysteropexy patients, 
point C could typically be near a third or a half of -TVL while in a well-supported  post 
hysterectomy cuff, point C  = -TVL.  An outcome measure using this point C measure of 
different anatomical structures produces an inherent bias  against a group that has a 
cervix instead of a vaginal cuff.  
2. Most evidence supports that it is the most distal  point that produces symptoms. If there 
is significant loss of support C , there is usually prolapse of the anterior (or posterior) wall 
more distal to that and therefore measurable in our outcome .3 
3. There are no evidence -based data at which  point does  “point C” become symptomatic 
when it is above the hymen.  
For all these reasons , it is important not to ba se the primary outcome on a C measure that will 
almost certainly be lower in the group that retains a cervix. Therefore , for th is study,  treatment 
success is the primary outcome and treatment success is defined as:  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
9 1. Absence of bulge symptoms  
2. Absence of retreatment  
3. No prolapse past the hymen  
Change in p oint C measures , however , will be an important secondary outcome with a specific 
analysis  plan and included in the primary publication.   
B.3 Study Design  – Superiority Vs. Non-Inferiority  
Discussions with the protocol committee on alternative study designs reached a consensus that 
either group could end up superior and therefore a superiority study  design is most appropriate.  
RCT vs . Patient Preference Trial ( PPT)  
  
A PPT trial should be considered when the study is at risk for enrolling a set of RCT participants 
that is not gener alizable to the population at large. An example of this was the OPUS trial where 
there was concern that participants  with some minor incontinence concerns who otherwise met 
OPUS inclusion criteria would be different than the randomized group. In this study , there are 
not any obvious patient criteria that would select out a group that would have a bias about not 
participating. Since we are confining our study to women  with essentially an inactive uterus, 
strong patient concerns about uterine symptomatology  that would make non -randomize d 
participants  different  should be minimized . Therefore , we think a RCT is far preferable to a PPT 
and makes the study design cleaner.  The protocol members strongly considered other de signs 
including cohort studies, parallel patient preference  trials, and patient preference trials if futility is 
reached in the RCT . The group considered only a RCT would provide a meaningful addition to 
the current literature on mesh and hysteropexy and Level A evidence to advance the science of 
the field. Contingency measure s to improve recruiting could be considered during the trial but an 
alternative trial design contingency was not favored by the protocol group.  
B.4 Rationale for Including a Body Image Assessment  
This study  offers a unique opportunity to compare body image and sexual function changes in 
women with and without mesh , and women with and without a uterus who are treated with a 
prolapse procedure. While trials have been conducted randomizing women to removal or no t of 
the cervix and have not found a difference in sexual function, there are no data regarding the 
sexual function of women who do and do not have their uterus removed. The physiologic role of 
the uterus in sexual function includes rhythmic contractions at orga sm as well as the 
psychological  role the uterus may play in some women. In addition, body image changes have 
not been well -characterized in women with prolapse who then undergo treatment and body 
image has been shown by others to play a central role in sex ual function.  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
10 C. Study Schema   
The study is a multi -center, randomized, surgical trial of women with symptomatic uter ovaginal 
prolapse  desiring vaginal surgical treatment. The purpose of this study is to compare  a vaginal 
hysterectomy with native tissue ap ical repairs  with a non -trocar mesh hysteropexy r epair . The 
primary outcome is measured over time (up to 60 months ) using a survival analysis approach.   
 A figure illustrating the study design is depicted below.  
C.1 Study Design D iagram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*All groups may receive concomitant anterior and/or posterior repairs as needed per  the 
discretion of the surgeon.  
D. Study Population  
The study population will be adult women  (>21 years of age)  with symptomatic uterovaginal 
prolapse at or beyond the hymen who desire vaginal surgical management. This study is 
intended to be done only on women who have completed childbearing and have an inactive 
uterus , defined as amenorrhea for 1 year . Therefore , women will be postmenopausal or will 
have amenorrhea from an endometrial ablation. Amenorrhea caused from exogenous steroids, 
or hypothalamic disorders will not allow inclusion. This protocol will adhere to the CONSORT 
guidelines for performing and reporting randomized controlled  trials (Begg  et al 1996). Women 
who are eligible but decline enrollment will be characterized in a manner consistent with the 
CONSORT requirements.  Uterovaginal Prolapse in patients 
desiring vaginal surgical repair  
Native tissue:  
TVH/USLS *  UPHOLD hysteropexy*  Randomized  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
11 E. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria were developed to be similar to the VAULT study 
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) so that  indirect comparisons could be made 
between the arms in this study and a Laparoscopic Sacral Hysteropexy  group .   
Inclusion Criteria   
1) Women aged 21 or older who have completed childbearing   
2) Prolapse beyond the hymen (defined as Ba , Bp, or C  > 0 cm)  
3) Uterine descent into at least the lower half of the vagina  (defined as point C  > -TVL/2)  
4) Bothersome b ulge symptoms as indicated on Question 3 of the PFDI -20 form relating to 
‘sensation of bulging’  or ‘something falling out’  
5) Desires vaginal surgical treatment for uterovaginal prolapse  
6) Available for up to 60 month follow -up  
7) Amenorrhea  for the past 12 months  from either menopause or endometrial ablation  
8) Not pregnant , not at risk for pregnancy or a gree to contraception if at risk for pregnancy 
(only applicable to the rare endometrial ablation patient)  
9) Eligible for  no cervical cancer screening for at least 3 years40,41   
Exclusion Criteria   
1) Previous sy nthetic material (placed vaginally or abdominally) to augment POP repair   
2) Known p revious uterosacral or sa crospinous uterine  suspension  
3) Known adverse reaction to synthetic mesh or biological grafts; these complications 
include but are not limited to erosi on, fistula, or abscess  
4) Chronic pelvic pain  
5) Pelvic radiation  
6) Cervical elongation  defined as an expectation that the C point would be stage 2 or 
greater postoperatively if a hysteropexy was performed (note: cervical shortening or 
trachelectomy is not an allowed intraoperative procedure within the hysteropexy 
treatment group )  
7) Women at increased risk of cervical dysplasia  requiring cervical cancer screening more 
often  than every 3 years (e.g. HIV+  status , immunosuppression because of transplant  
related medications , Diethylstilbestrol  (DES) exposure in utero, or previous treatment for 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2, CIN3, or cancer) )  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
12 8) Uterine abnormalities (symptomatic uterine fibroids, polyps, endometrial hyperplasia, 
endometrial cancer, or any uterine disease that precluded prolapse repair with uterine 
preservation in the opinion of the surgeon  
9) Indication for ovarian removal (adnexal m ass, BRCA 1/2 positivity, family history of 
ovarian cancer ) 
10) Current condition of amenorrhea caused by exogenous sex steroids or hypothalamic 
conditions  
F. Participant  Screening  
It is anticipated that participants  will come from the practices of PFDN investigators and 
advertisement will not be needed. Participants  with bothersome prolapse complaints and 
prolapse at or beyond the hymen will be offered the range of therapeutic options cons istent  with 
the physician ’s practice including but n ot limited to expectant management, conservative 
treatment and abdominal or vaginal surgery for their condition. Those participants  desiring 
vaginal surgery will be offered participation in SUPeR . The pelvic organ prolapse quantitat ive 
exam and a bothersome bulge question (Question 3 of the PFDI -20) are routine clinical care 
and will be used to determine eligibility.   
Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP -Q)  
The pelvic organ prolapse evaluation will be performed according to the guidelines established 
by the International Continence Society.10 The procedure will be standardized as demonstrated 
in a videotape produced by Duke University Medical Center (“Pelvic Organ Prolapse 
Quant ification Examination”). Examinations will be performed in the dorsal lithotomy position 
with the participant  straining maximally. Participants  will be asked to confirm that the extent of 
prolapse demonstrated during the examination is consistent with the maximum degree of 
prolapse seen in their daily life. Standing POPQ examinations will be performed if maximal 
prolapse cannot be demonstrated in the dorsal lithotomy position . 
Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory -20 (PFDI -20) 
Participants  will be considered as h aving bothersome vaginal bulge symptoms  if they report a 
positive response to PFDI -20 Question 3 and any degree of bother (i.e., any response other 
than “not at all” to the question “How much does this bother you?”):  
a) Question 3: Do you usually have a bulge  or something falling out that you can see or feel 
in your vaginal area ? 
G. Baseline Visit  
Candidates will be approached for enrollment in a manner consistent with local IRB 
requirements and will be consented and enrolled in the study with verbal and written consent. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
13 Once eligibility is confirmed , baseline information will be obtained which will  include 
Demographics, Medical History, Physical Examination , and baseline forms . 
Demographics and Medical History  
• Age, race/ethnicity, marital status, education  
• Obstetric history ( including vaginal parity)  
• Prior pelvic surgeries  
• Menopause/estrogen status  
• Prior treatment of pelvic organ prolapse or urinary incontinence  
• Smoking  
• Diabetes  
• Urinary tract infection history  
• Current medication use  
Physical Examination  
• Height and weight  
Surgery should be scheduled and performed within 4 months. If more than 4 months transpires 
before surgery , baseline instruments will need to be re -administered.  
H. Randomization  
After eligibility is determined  and consent  is obtained from the participant , the participant will be 
randomized to one of the two treatment arms using a web -based randomization system. To 
minimize any risk of selection bias resulting from clinician knowledge of current or future  
treatment assignments, each participant will be ran domized by the surgeon when  the participant 
is in the operating room . The participant will be randomized t o one of two apical procedures: 
either a vaginal hysterectomy with  USLS  or mesh strap vaginal hysteropexy  (Uphold ® 
procedure) , with the randomize d procedure provided to the surgeon for each participant 
individually in the operating room immediately prior to the surgery . Other native tissue vaginal 
wall prolapse repairs  (e.g., anterior colporrhaphy , posterior colporrhap hy, perineorrhaphy) w ill 
be allowed as needed.  
Randomization (1:1 to the two treatment arms ) will be performed using permuted blocks, with a 
block size that is known only to the DCC  and will be stratified by site.  For each participant, the 
web-based system will determine the treatment allocation from a static randomization table 
developed by the study randomization statistician prior to the start of the study. Only the study 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
14 statistician and randomization system pro grammer will have access to the randomization table 
to minimize the risk of selection bias.  
I. Appointment Scheduling  
Routine clinical practice postoperative visits will take place during the 12 week postoperative 
period with the inclusion of one study vis it at 6 weeks to assess for  early outcomes. The 6 week 
in person visit and the i n person visits every 6 months for the duration of the study will capture 
the following outcomes : 
1) Urinary function including duration of post -op catheterization  and de novo voiding 
dysfunction rates . A PVR will be  assessed by catheterization or bladder scan at the 6 
week visit and this is defined as an elevated postoperative post void  residual >  150 ml  
that was not present preoperatively.    
2) De novo  incontinence rates  and sev erity assessed  by the UDI-6, ISI, and AE survey   
3) Functional activity by a dministration of the Functional Activity Assessment Scale42 
4) Mesh -related complications: mesh exposure in the vagina  or mesh erosion into another 
organ  and the class ification of the intervention:  
a) None or non -surgical medical intervention only  
b) Minor or int ra-office surgical intervention  
c) Outpatient surgery  
d) Inpatient surgery  
5) Rates, location, and severity of pelvic pain using the modified Surgical Pain Scale that 
has demo nstrated validity and responsiveness in OPTIMAL43, pain medication use , AE 
survey,  and Pain Mapping Instrument  
6) Pelvic infection : 
a) Perioperative  infections , defined  as requiring antibiotics  
b) Urinary tract infections , defined as culture proven or antibiotics given  
c) Vaginal infections with flora uncommon to the vaginal canal  
7) Neuromuscular  problems (including groin and leg pain)  with the use of the Pain Mapping 
Instrument  
8) Vaginal scarring, vaginal shortening, de novo dyspareunia, and worsening dyspareunia 
with AE survey   
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
15 Subsequent study visits will then occur at 6 month intervals for up to 60 months  for collection of 
all study measures.   
J. Interventions – Surgical Interventions  
J.1 Surgeon Experience and Certification   
Experience   
To reduce bias related to surgical experience, s urgeons should be experienced with all 
procedures being performed in this study. For the native tissue arm  in this study , surgeons need 
to be experienced with vagina l hysterectomy and uterosacral ligament suspension  and for the  
uterovaginal Uphold ® procedures , surgeons  need to be experienced with the Uphold ® 
procedure.  
In this study, all participating surgeons  should be qua lified to do either procedure  and will 
require certification to be a study surgeon. Because vaginal hysterectomies and uterosacral 
ligament suspension procedures have been performed for decades , while Uphold ® procedures 
are less than 4 years old, it is ack nowledged that most surgeons in this study will have more 
experience with the TVH/USLS arm.  However , the primary skills required to do the Uphold ® 
procedure (e .g., anterior vaginal dissection to the sacrospinous ligament and the use of a Capio 
device ) are familiar to urogynecol ogic surgeons and experience with these techniques is 
transferrable to the Uphold ® procedure. Certification criteria ensure that all study surg eries are 
performed by surgeons who are well trained on procedures for both arms to assure study 
validity, while at the same time establishing standards for the trial that allow results to be 
generalized to the population of urogynecologic surgeons likely to perform these surgeries in the 
future.    
Certification     
All surgeries will be performed by certified surgeons. Surgeon certification will require an 
attestation by the surgeon and signed off by the site PI and it will require the following 
requirement s. 
FOR TVH/USLS CERTIFICATION:  
1. All surgeons will view a surgical videotape or DVD illustrating essential components of 
the uterosacral vault suspension technique .    
2. All certified surgeons should have performed a minimum of 20 vaginal  hysterectomies, 
20 uterosacral  procedures , with performance of at least 5  of these apical procedures  in 
the 12 months prior to beginning participant  enrollment.  
FOR UPHOLD®  CERTIFICATION  
1. All surgeons will view a surgical videotape  or DVD illustrating essential components of 
the Uphold ® technique .  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
16 2. All certified surgeons should have performed  20 sacrospinous ligament dissections in 
their careers , with performance of at least 10 anterior va ginal dissections to the 
sacrospinous ligament .  
3. Performance  of at least 10 Capio suture applications .  
4. Performance of or has received hands -on proctoring on at least 5  Uphold ® procedures  
for uterovaginal prolapse or cuff -vaginal prolapse . Surgeons who meet all the criteria 
except the Uphold ® procedure experience criteria may enroll participants  in the SUPeR  
study ; however , if the participant  randomizes to the Uphold arm, the surgery will be 
proctored by a certified study surgeon. This certified surg eon will be scrubbed in and 
provide hands on supervision for the anterior dissection , Capio placement of the mesh 
arms, tensioning parts of the procedure, and incision closure.  The certified proctoring 
surgeon will be the study surgeon of record  and takes full responsibility for the 
performance and the quality of the procedure.  The procedure may be counted as a 
proctored procedure for the other surgeon .  
5. Prior to signing off on certification for each site’s surgeon, the site PI will review these 5 
cases for any Uphold ® procedure related complications and may request additional 
proctoring or experience before approving certification of that surgeon.  
Surgica l Education and Monitoring  
At baseline, all study surgeons will provide data on their training, surgical volume, and length of 
time in practice. On a quarterly basis, all study surgeons will provide the number of utero vaginal 
apical suspensions that they performed outside of the SUPeR  study.  The surgical videotape s or 
DVD’s illustrating essential components of the uterosacral vault suspension technique and 
Uphold ® technique will be made available and distributed to each participating surgeon , along 
with a detailed written description of the technique and guidelines for concurrent procedures.  
The videotape /DVD  and written material will be reviewed and discussed at an in -person PFDN 
Steering Committee meeting at a time shortly before enrollment begins . Each Principal 
Investigator at the clinical sites will be responsible for reviewing and discussing the videotape 
and written materials with participating surgeons at his/her site (before enrollment begins) . 
Certified Surgeons as Teachers  
All sites in the Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  are teaching institutions and have accredited 
fellowship programs in Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery. R esidents and 
fellows  may assist at surgery for SUPeR  participants.  The certified surgeon is always the 
surgeon of record for the study  and takes full responsibility for the performance and the quality 
of the procedure. The certified surgeon will be scrubbed in and will perfo rm (or provide hands -
on supervision ) of the procedure. The certified surgeon  assumes full responsibility for assuring 
proper uterosacral ligament suture placement, attachment of these sutures to the vagina, 
anterior dissection for the Uphold ® procedure , Capio  placement of the mesh arms, tensioning 
parts of either procedure , and incision closure.    
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
17 J.2 Description of Surgical Procedures  
Uterosacral Ligament Suspension (ULS)  
The ULS procedure used in this protocol is a modification of the technique described by  Shull.13 
1. ULS is performed through a vaginal incision.   
2. The placement of uterosacral ligament stitches will be performed in such a way as to 
avoid neurovascular and ureteral compromise.  
3. One permanent and one delayed absorbable 0 or 2 -0 monofilament suture (2 sutures 
per side; 4 sutures total) must be placed in each ligament, extending to the ipsilateral 
anterior and posterior fibromuscular wall of th e vaginal apex. The permanent sutures will 
be placed near full thickness, excluding vaginal epithelium. The delayed absorbable 
sutures will be placed full thickness through the vaginal wall with the knot tied inside the 
vaginal canal. The type of suture ma terial will be recorded.   
4. The use of a pulley stitch is allowed.   
5. No plication of the uterosacral ligaments across the midline or culdoplasty is allowed.  
6. Other aspects of the suspension procedure will be left to surgeon preference but will be 
recorded.  
7. In the event that clinical circumstances prohibit safe/effective completion of the planned 
procedure, the preferred back -up procedure is a S SLF. In the unlikely event that both 
ULS and SSLF cannot be performed safely or effectively, the choice of vaginal 
suspension procedure will be left to the surgeon's discretion and recorded.  
Uphold®  Procedure  
The Uphold ® procedure used in this protocol is a modification of the technique described by Vu 
and Goldberg .32  
1. Hydrodissection of the vaginal walls will be performed with at least 30 cc of 0.25% 
bupiv acaine with epinephrine  or dilute Pitressin (20 Units/50 -100 cc) .  
2. An approximate 4 cm transverse vaginal incision is made in the anterior vagina wall 
between the bladder neck and the cervix but at least 3 cm from the cervix so that the 
suture line will not overlap with the mesh.  
3. Blunt or sharp dissection to approach the  sacrospinous ligament extraperitoneally . 
4. After confirmation of the location of the ischial spine, the tapered lead and mesh 
assembly will be delivered into the SSL 1 -2 fingerbreadths medial to the ischial spine.  
5. The most cephalic  edge of the mesh will be attached to the cervix with sutures . 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
18 6. Mesh modifications ( e.g. cutting)  are strongly discouraged;  any exceptions will be 
documented on operative case report forms.   
7. Tensioning to re -suspend the apex without tense mesh arms . 
8. Vagina l closure with 2-0 polyglactin . 
9. Placement of a vaginal pack and Foley catheter removed on POD1.   
For all procedures : 
1. The study surgeon is responsible for meeting the experience requirements, is the 
surgeon of record, and will be present  and scrubbed in for key portions of the procedure. 
Residents or fellows may participate in procedures as is standard for each Clinical Site.  
2. Cystoscopy with intravenous indigo carmine dye (or an appropriate substitute)  
performed at the end of the procedure after all vault suspension sutures are tied or after 
the Uphold ® straps are adjusted and is required as a standard part of the surgical 
procedure.  
3. Prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis  is required for all participan ts. The method 
may be chosen by each surgeon.  
4. Preoperative intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis is required as part of the surgical 
procedure. The details (choice of antibiotic, dose, etc.) will be determined by each 
surgeon.  
5. All concomitant native tissue pr ocedures must be declared and recorded prior to 
randomization. The surgeon has the discretion to alter from this preoperative plan as 
necessary to achieve the desired anatomic result. Any such alterations must be 
recorded.  
6. Anterior and posterior colporrhap hies will be performed at the discretion of the operating 
surgeon such that points Aa, Ba, Ap and Bp are less than or equal to -1 cm at the end of 
the procedure (i.e., anterior and posterior vaginal points located at least 1 cm above the 
hymen) at the end of the procedure. Colporrhaphies, when performed, will be performed 
with 2 -0 or 0 delayed  absorbable sutures. A non -straining POPQ examination will be 
performed and recorded at the end of the operative procedure and prior to cessation of 
anesthesia.  
Surger y for Stress Urinary Incontinence      
Stress continence outcomes are not a primary outcome in this study , and it is recognized that 
there is evidence to support universal or selective use of midurethral slings in the settin g of 
vaginal operations for prolapse. Therefore , concomitant full length transobturator or retropubic 
midurethral slings will be allowed p er the discretion of the surgeon. The placement of a 
midurethral sling should not have an effect on the primary outcome because tension -free 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
19 vaginal tape has been shown to not provide additional distal anterior  vaginal wall support for 
patients undergoing total mesh colpopexy or  laparoscopic colpopexy.44,45   
J.3 Masking of Randomized Intervention  
Although  the primary  outcome does not depend on masked patients and blinded evaluators, 
several imp ortant patient -reported secondary aims are subject to patient reporting bias if the 
participant is aware of her group assignment. For example , in this current era of television 
advertisements recruiting patients for class action law suits against mesh m anufacturers , many 
urinary, bowel, and sexual compl aints  are being attributed to transvag inal mesh and it is quite 
possible that if the participa nt knows  that she  has mesh she migh t be more likely to over -report 
these conditions. There are also significant internet testimonials that hysterectomy worsens 
sexual function and a patient’s knowledge of having or not having a uterus could bias her 
report s on sexual function. For all these reasons, the ideal study desi gn encourages ma sking 
and blinding to treatment assignment. There is precedent for achievable patient and evaluator 
blinding in RCT’s of supracervical and total hysterectomies46 and in this study , where the uterus 
is inactive , we think those successful blinding examples are relevant to this study design.  
The study surgeon is providing clinical care to enrolled participants , thus masking the surgeon 
to treatment allocation or participant  symptoms is not practical or feasible, other than the 
allocation concealment prior to surgical randomization . The study surgeon will not be performing 
the anatomic outcome assessments. It  is our intent that when feasible and ethical, all outcomes 
assessors and the participant  will be masked to the treatment allocation. All participants  will be 
asked to remain masked to their treatment group for the duration of the study , although we 
recognize  that unintentional unmasking by the participant  may occur.  Current ACOG 
recommendations allow women age 30 years or older with known recent negative cervical 
cytology and negative HPV testing to be screened no sooner than 3 years.40  Current US 
Preventative Services Task Force , American Cancer Society, American Society for Colposcopy 
and Cervical Pathology, and American Society for Clinical Pathology recommendations allow no 
screening for age <21, every 3 year screening for ages 21 -29, every 5 year screening ages 30 -
65, and no screening for women older than 65.41 Therefore all participants  in this study should 
be able to go 3 years without screening and the overwhelming majority of participants  in this 
study will be >30 and are allo wed to have every 5 year screening.   Unmasking is permitted for 
the rare amenorrh oeic woman with a uterus aged 18 -30 eligible for this study  who in the opinion 
of the study surgeon needs screening during the study . We recognize that this masking is for 
cervical cancer screening and women may still have regular exams. In the event the patient is 
about to have a pelvic exam or imaging study of her pelvis we will request the patient to remind 
her provider to not tell her about the status of the absence or pre sence of her uterus.  
Participants  will be encouraged to see the study team for any gynecologic problems or 
evaluations during the course of the study. At every 6 month visit , the participants  will be 
queried if they are still blinded, and if not, what caused the unblinding and what group they think 
they are in? This will be done in a manner that reaffirms that blinding is preferred for the 
duration of the study. After the study is completed (m aximum 60 months) participants  will be 
queried as to what randomization arm they think they received and will then be notified of their 
uterine and mesh status. To minimize biases, subjective  and most objective outcomes will be 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
20 obtained by study nurses or coordinators masked to the procedure. POPQ measures will be 
obtained by co -investigators or different study nurses who will not be blinded to the surgical 
procedure because they will either see or not see a cervix but  would be less biased than the 
operatin g surgeon towards over -reporting the anatomic surgical outcome.  
Table 3. Masking Summary  
Masking  Uterovaginal Prolapse  Intervention  
Participant   Yes 
Study coordinator  or study nurse  Yes 
Telephone interviewer  (if applicable)  Yes 
Study surgeon  No 
Anatomic evaluator# No# 
# to maximize masking , it is proposed that the anatomic evaluator not be the study coordinator or study 
nurse who should remain masked. The anatomic evaluator should be a Co -investigator, fellow , or other 
qualified nurse who did not perform the surgery.  
It is preferable to mai ntain masking of group assignment for participants  until the study 
completion . There are two issues to consider: (1) masking the participant  to the surgical 
intervention throughout study follow -up unless there are medical reasons or participant  
insistence to reveal assignment; and (2) masking the research staff (evaluators) who will be 
performing data collection for outcome measures. In addition to those described above, the 
following steps will be taken to maintain masking while maintaining participant  safety: 
• For the dictated operative note, the procedure listed under the “Procedure” heading will 
be indicated as “vaginal apical suspension as per SUPeR  protocol .” The specific type of 
vault suspension will not be listed under the “Procedure” heading; however , details of the 
vaginal hysterectomy / vault suspension or hysteropexy will be described in the text of 
the detailed operative description.   
• For sites with electronic medical records, all references to the vaginal apical  suspension 
procedure will be indicated as “vaginal apical suspension as per SUPeR  protocol” with 
the exception of the detailed operative description in the text of the dictated operative 
note described above.  
• For the handwritten operative note in the participant ’s hospital chart  (if applicable) , the 
procedure will be indicated as “vaginal apical suspension as per SUPeR  protocol  (see 
dictated operative note)”.  
• The procedu re on the surgical consent form (not the research consent form) will be listed 
as “vaginal apical suspension per SUPeR  protocol.”  
• The study surgeon (not the study coordinator or other research staff that will be 
completing postoperative data collection) wi ll complete the intra -operative portion of the 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
21 Hospitalization Form  which will be transmitted electronically  to the Data Coordinating 
Center.  
• A sticker will be placed on the participant ’s ho spital chart, indicating that she is enrolled 
in the SUPeR  study a nd that the exact type of procedures performed should not be 
revealed to her.  
• In the case the care team needs to know the exact surgical procedure, details of the 
surgery can be found in the procedure details of the operative note.  
• Key clinical and labora tory costs that have the potential to unmask the participant 
through the billing process will be covered by the research study .  
If unmasking does occur, the study coordinator will complete a protocol deviation form.  
Deviations  will be tracked and reported to the DSMB to determine if unmasking is occurring at 
high frequency and to determine if a pattern of unmasking can be found and addressed by 
protocol or policy revisions .  
K. Outcome Visits 
Outcome visits will occur e very 6 m onths up to a maximum of 60 months. All women will 
continue  to be followed through the end of the study, including those who seek alternative 
treatment or re-treatment to ensure that all safety events are captured. At each of these visits , a 
physical exam will be performed to assess anatomic (POP -Q) results and a lso to evaluate for 
mesh exposures and erosions and to ask about bulge symptoms (PFDI -Q3) and retreatment so 
that the primary  outcome and safety outcomes will be assessed. The PFDI -Q3 has been 
demonstrated to function well as a standalone  question and does not require the entire PFDI -20 
to be administered with it.47 Additionally at 6, 12, 24,  36, 48 , and 60  months  secondary outcome  
measures will be administered .  
L. Timeline of Visits/Calls  and Study Schedule  
In-person visits e very 6 months up to 60 months . It is not anticipated that with this frequency of 
in person visits there will be a need for telephone calls. Total study enrollment time is estimated 
to be 24 months . Based on these assumptions, an expected study schedule is included in 
Appendix B.   
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
22 Table 4. Timeline of Measures  
Measure  Base -
line Peri-
op 6 
wks 6 
mo 12 
mo 18 
mo 24 
mo 30 
mo 36 
mo 42 
mo 48 
mo 54 
mo 60 
mo 
Demographic 
info X             
Medical 
history  X             
Operative and 
perioperative 
review *   X 
            
Postoperative 
recovery#    X 
           
POPQ  X   X X X X X X X X X X 
AE review   X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Exam for 
mesh 
exposure    X X X X X X X X X X X 
PFDI –
Question 3  X  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Functional 
Activity Scale  X  X X X X X  X  X  X 
Surgical Pain 
Scale  X  X X X X X  X  X  X 
PFDI -20 
(includes 
POPDI -6, 
CRADI -8, 
UDI-6) X 
  X X X X X  X  X  X 
PFIQ  X   X X X X  X  X  X 
PGI-I     X X X X  X  X  X 
ISI X  X X X X X  X  X  X 
PISQ -IR X   X X X X  X  X  X 
BIS X  X X X X X  X  X  X 
SF-12  X   X X X X  X  X  X 
* Includes OR complications with Dindo score, EBL, Transfusion, HGB change from pre -op to POD1, 
length of hospital stay.  
# Assess  duration of postoperative catheterization, PVR, de novo incontinence , pelvic pain scale and pain 
mapping review for vagina, groin, and leg pain.    
M. Outcome Measures  
The following outcome measures w ill be collected at baseline, 6 months, 12 months, and then 
every 6 months with the survival analysis approach.   
M.1 Primary Outcome Measure   
A participant  will be considered a treatment failure if any ONE of the following criteria is met:  
1) Report of bothersome vaginal bulge symptoms (see definition below), or  
2) Re-treatment for prolapse (surgery or pessary), or  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
23 3) Any prolapse measure (Ba, C, Bp) is beyond the hymen (i.e. >  0 cm)  
Bothersome vaginal bulge symptoms  = positive  response to  Question  3 of the PFDI -20: “Do you 
usually have a bulge or something falling out that you can see or feel in your vaginal area? ” 
AND any degree of bother . This single question has been identified to most accurately and 
reliably identify  those women with POP. An affirmative answer to this question was 96% 
sensitive (95%CI 92 -100) and 79% specific (95%CI 77 -92) for prolapse beyond the hymen. The 
1-week test -retest reliability was good (kappa .84 ).47  
Participants  not considered a treatment failure for the primary outcome will be considered a 
treatment success.  
M.2 Comparative Secondary Outcome Measures  
Secondary Aim 1 – Secondary  Efficacy Outcomes : These measures will require a statis tical 
analysis plan and will be reported in the primary outcome manuscript .  
1) Anatomic : POPQ point (Ba, Bp, C) , mean or median (but should be normally distributed) 
measures postop in each group. Proportion of participants  in each group with C > -1/2 
TVL.  
2) Functional : 
a) Prolapse  – mean  Patients Global Impression of Improvement (PGI -I)48,  mean 
overall prolapse symptoms using POPDI -649 scores    
b) Urinary  – urinary function  including duration of post -op catheterization, mean UDI -6 
scores49, Hunskaar Incontinence Severity Index, de  novo voiding dysfunction rates, 
de novo incontinence rates  
(i) Sexual  – mean PISQ -IR50 and specific rates of de  novo dyspareunia  
(ii) Bowel  – bowel function using CRADI -8 scores49  
(iii) QOL  – general SF -12 scores and sub -scales51, and Pelvic QOL  mean PFIQ 
score49; Functional Activity Assessment Scale42 
Secondary Aim 2 – Safety : These measures will require a statistical analysis plan and will be 
reported in the primary outcome manuscript .  
1) Intraoperative safety  – group comparisons of mean Operative time, estimated blood 
loss, blood transfusion, intra- and post -operative complications categorized using a 
modification of the Dindo Classification .52 
2) Adverse events  – mesh related complications:  mesh exposure in the vagina or mesh 
erosion into another organ and the classification of the intervention:  
a) none or non -surgical medical intervention only  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
24 b) minor or intra -office surgical intervention  
c) outpatient surgery  
d) inpatient surgery  
Other complications possible in both arms:  
1) Rates of pain captured from the modified Surgical Pain Scale43,  pain medication use,  
and location of pain with Pain Mapping Instrument  
2) Pelvic infection : 
a) perioperative infections  
b) urinary tract infections  
c) vaginal infections with flora uncommon to the vaginal canal  
3) Vaginal shortening, de  novo vaginal bleeding, atypical vaginal discharge, fistula 
formation,  neuromuscular problems (including groin and leg pain)  
4) Need for subsequent procedures  – any surgical or non-surgical  treatment for pelvic floor 
disorders (including urinary incontinence, voiding dysfunction, defecatory dysfunction or 
fecal incontinence, recurrent prolapse, and dyspareunia/pelvic pain ). Any subsequent 
uterine or cervical office or Operating Room procedur e in hysteropexy group (e.g., 
cervical biopsy, LEEP, hysteroscopy, D and C, hysterectomy).  
5) Subsequent uterine or cervical pathology  
6) Rates of vaginal scar ring defined as de novo vaginal scar requiring medical or surgical 
intervention or adversely affecting  quality of life  
7) Rates of vaginal shortening, de novo dyspareunia, and worsening dyspareunia with AE 
survey instrument  
Complication Monitoring  
Groups will be compared for rates of “ important complications” . The definition of “important 
complicati on” is:  
• Any Grade IIIb or greater Dindo complication , which will also include any intervention 
under a regional anesthetic. The se concurrent or subsequent Operating Room 
interventions include but are not limited to:  mesh removal, ureteral repair, abscess 
drainage, revision of vaginal stricture, operative hysteroscopy, or hysterectomy.   
• New onset (de novo) dyspareunia preventing vaginal intercourse . 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
25 • Intractable pelvic pain – defined as daily pelvic pain after the 6 w eek postoperative visit 
which significantly affects the participant ’s quality of life requiring ongoing management 
or is refractory to medical and physical therapy.  
The important complication rate will be calculated at 6 month intervals for both groups; as a 
guideline, the protocol committee considers that a true difference of more than 15 percentage 
points in the complication rates for the two surgical procedures to represent an important 
difference between groups. Stopping the study will be considered by  the DSMB during their 
regularly scheduled  reviews  if they find compelling evidence  of an important difference  based on 
point and interval estimates of the important complication rates in the two s tudy arms . While  the 
true difference of 15 percentage point s or greater  can guide the DSMB considerations, final 
decisions about a magnitude of difference in safety risk that warrants a recommendation to stop 
the study lie fully w ithin the discretion of the DSMB .  
Secondary Aim 3 – Predictors  of Poor Outcomes : The co -variates of advanced prolapse, 
age, obesity , smoking, menopausal status, estrogens, primary vs. recurrent prolapse , and 
physical and functional activity as measured by the Functional Activity Scale  will be evaluated to 
determine if they predict higher treatment failure.  
Secondary Aim 4 – Cost -Effectiveness Analysis : The cost -effectiveness analysis will be 
conducted from a payer perspective and will be expressed as incremental cost required to 
produce on e additional unit of quality -adjusted life year (QALY). Data on each participant ’s use 
of medical and non -medical resources related to urologic or gynecologic conditions will be 
collected during the follow up period. Direct and indirect costs of the treatm ent of apical pelvic 
organ prolapse with native tissue  surgical repair or transvaginal mesh repair and women’s 
preference for health states for improvement in pelvic organ prolapse will be estimated.  
We plan to capture incremental health care resource use related to study interventions and 
complications and other prolapse management (such as pessary us e or additional surgery). 
Costs will be estimated using the resource costing method where medical service use from 
each study case report form is monetized by multiplying the number of units of each medical 
service by the average unit cost of this service in dollars. This method allows a consistent 
capture of resource use when costs are incurred across multiple health systems or payers. 
Detailed case report forms that include the procedures performed ( e.g. surgical interventions) 
and clinical events (e.g. c omplications, readmissions) will be completed by the study coordinator 
at study visits. Data from three resource types (physician visits, hospital procedures and 
admissions, and emergency room visits) will be collected. Cost for each medical service use wi ll 
be assigned based on national Medicare reimbursement rates, as indicated in the following 
table. Additionally, we will obtain detailed billing records for a limited number of procedures and 
hospitalizations in selected study sites (e.g. prolonged admiss ion to the ICU or readmission to 
the hospital for a surgical complication).  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
26 Table 5. Resource Utilization Data Collection and Price Data Source , by Utilization 
Category  
Service  Price Weight  
Physician visit  Medicare reimbursement  
Surgical intervention and admission  
Complication hospitalization – routine    Medicare reimbursement  
Medicare reimbursement  
Complication hospitalization – significant  
ER – routine complication  Billing record – actual amount paid  
Medicare reimbursement  
ER – significant complication  Billing record – actual amount paid  
Subsequent surgery  Medicare reimbursement  
The SF-6D preference -based utility index algorithm  derived from the SF -12 instrument53 will be 
used to calculate each participant ’s utility index at baseline and various follow up time points 
based on her responses to the SF-12 quest ionnaire.  The SF -6D focuses on seven of the eight 
health domains covered by the SF -12: physical functioning, role participation (combined role -
physical and role -emotional), social functioning, bodily pain, mental health, and vitality ). This 
instrument has been previously used in women with urinary incontinence .54 These data will be 
used to compare change in QALYs between the two treatment groups. We are choosing to use 
a general  scale to calculate change in utilities (rather than condition -specific) to allow for 
comparison of cost -effectiveness results with other interventions and diseases. Because the 
follow up period for participants  spans at least three  years, costs and QALYs in the second year 
and third year of follow up will be discounted using a 3% discount rate /year .  
Differential mean costs and differential mean QALYs between the two treatment groups will be 
estimated using multiple regression analy sis. Specifically, a generalized linear model with 
appropriate link function (e.g., log -link) and re sponse probability distribution (e.g., gamma 
distribution) will be used to analyze costs due to the potential skewness and heteroscedasticity 
of medical expendit ure data, while an ordinary least squares regression will be used for 
analyzing QALY data. The models will account for treatment group, study site and stratification 
factors, as well as other characteristics of the participants  that are found to differ sig nificantly 
between the traditional vaginal hysterectomy with native tissue vault suspension and mesh 
hysteropexy suspension groups. When estimating QALYs, we will also adjust for participants ’ 
baseline utility scores to account for potential imbalance in b aseline utility between the two 
treatment groups .55 
We will calculate the incr ement al cost -effectiveness ratio (ICER), which is the differential mean 
costs divided by the differe ntial mean QALYs between the two groups, to assess the additional 
costs associated with each additional QALY gained. Our base case analysis will be conducte d 
based on participants  with complete data. Sensitivity analysis will be conducted to include 
participants  with incomplete data using the multiple imputation method.  Non-parametric 
bootstrapping resampling technique will be used to derive the 95% confidence int erval for the 
ICER.56, 57 In addition, cost -effectiveness acceptability curve (CEAC) will be generated to 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
27 illustrate the likelihood that one treatmen t is more cost -effective than the other with various 
ceiling cost -effectiveness ratios.  
In the case that a statistically significant difference in changes in utilities (as measured by  SF-
6D) between the treatment groups is not detected, we plan to conduct s upplemental analyses 
using alternative outcome measures, such as incremental cost per treatment success, 
incremental cost per POP HRQOL, or incremental cost per satisfaction.  
The cost -effectiveness evaluations will be conducted as within -trial comparisons . A decision 
analytic model will also be developed from trial data to evaluate the trajectory of the cost -
effectiveness ratio over a lifetime; assuming an average life expectancy, given the average age 
of participants at the time of the intervention.  
Secon dary Aim 5 – Body  Image : We will compare BIS scores between women who undergo 
uterovaginal prolapse repair with a mesh hysteropexy and with hysterectomy and native tissue 
repair.  
Hypothesis : Women with uterovaginal prolapse  will demonstrate improvement in body image 
as measured by a body image scale follow ing surgery for uterovaginal prolapse , and will parallel 
changes in sexual function; both measures will improve with improvements in prolapse, as 
measured by the leading edge of prolapse and the POPDI.  
Hypothesis : BIS scores will demonstrate greater improv ement in the cohort of SUPeR  women 
who undergo hysteropexy  with mesh.  
Background : Body Image is how a woman feels —her perceptions and attitudes —about her 
body .58 Body image likely plays an important role in demand for treatment for pelvic organ 
prolapse a nd a woman’s satisfaction with treatment. The Body Image Scale  (BIS) was originally 
developed and validated to measure changes in body image in women treated for breast 
cancer.59 Jelovsek et al modified the BIS and compared women with advanced prolapse ( stages 
3 and 4) to a cohort of w omen with normal support ( stages 0 and 1). In that cross sectional 
cohort study, women with prolapse were more likely to be self -conscious about their body, les s 
likely to feel physically attractive, less likely to feel feminine, and less likely to feel sexually 
attractive.60 In addition, women with decr eased body image also scored more poorly on the 
physical scale of the SF -12, a general measure of overall quality of life.61 Further investigations 
have explored the interplay between body image, sexual function and prolapse in a large multi -
center cohort study of 384 women undergoing surgical and non -surgical treatment for 
prolapse.60, 62 At baseline, women with poorer body image reported poorer sexual function.  Of 
the 235 women who gave data at 6 months follow -up, sexual function improved (PISQ 12 pre 33  
+/- 0.6 vs. post 43 +/ - 0.8, p < .0001) as well as changes in body image (pre 23.2 + / 6 vs. post 
12.8 +/ - 3, p < .001) and bother from prolapse (POPDI -6 40.6 +/ - 1.7 versus 14 +/ - 1, p < .01). In 
a multivariate linear regression analysis, only changes in body image and body mass index 
remained associated with changes in sexual function .60    
Using the Body Exposure During Sexual Activity Questionnaire  (BESAQ) and the Body Image 
Quality of Life Inventory  (BIQLI), Lowder et al compared cohort of 76 women planning surgery 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
28 for prolapse to 67 women controls with normal vaginal support.63 BESAQ scores improved after 
surgery, as did measures of prolapse and sexual function on the PISQ 12; in a regression 
analysis, postoperative chang es in POPDI scores were predictive of 6 mont h BESAQ scores, 
further demonstrating the association between prolapse and body image changes. In a follow -
up qualitative study of 25 women who participated in focus groups and 27 women who 
participated in one -on-one interviews, women with prolapse reported they felt self -conscious, 
less feminine and less attractive. In addition, women reported that they often changed sexual 
intimacy practices because of their prolapse, or avoided intimacy altogether.64   
While the PFDN has described cha nges in sexual function in women undergoing treatment for 
prolapse and following childbirth, these evaluations of sexual health has focused on changes in  
validated sexual function measures (either the PISQ 12 or the Perso nal Experiences 
Questionnaire) and  change in sexual activity status and did not include measures of body image 
changes. SUPeR  will randomize women to either a vaginal apical repair with mesh or a vaginal 
native tissue repair to answer the question of whether mesh augmented repair without 
hysterectomy leads to better prolapse outcomes  than native tissue repair with hysterectomy for 
treatment of uterovaginal prolapse. This trial offers a unique opportunity to explore the body 
image changes of women following vaginal surgery for uterovaginal prolapse with and without a 
graft-augmented repair and to evaluate whether body image changes play a role in reports of 
sexual function following repair. Additionally, we will be able to add to the literature regarding 
the possible impact of hysterectomy on  body image.   
Methods : The original BIS was developed in 276 patients diagnosed with cancer and then was 
revised and further validated in a cohort of 682 women with breast cancer. Factor analysis of 
this measure reveale d a scale that was resolved with a single factor that accounted for >  50% of 
variance in responses. The scale showed high reliability (total Cronbach’s alpha 0.93), criterion 
and discriminant validity .58 The original BIS included two questions which were eliminated by 
Jelovsek  (“Have you bee n feeling the treatment has left your body less whole?” and “Have you 
been dissatisfied with the appearance of your scar?”) and was reworded to be specific to 
prolapse ( Table 6 ); this  modified version was used in both th e papers by Lowenstein. Others 
have used the BIS scale in a cohort of women undergoing treatment for prolapse with a 
pessary, and included one of the previously eliminated questions, “Have you been feeling the 
treatment has left your body less whole?”65 but eliminated the item regardi ng the appearance of 
a scar. We propose to use the original BIS scale of 10 items, with the change in wording to 
make the scale specific to prolapse proposed by Jelovsek. The BIS scale will be administered at 
baseline, 6 months, 12 months,  and then every 6  months until the study is concluded.  
Total BIS scores will be calculated as described by Hopwood et al , and changes in BIS scores 
will be correlated with changes in PISQ R scores, the leading edge of prol apse, and POPDI 
scores using Pears on’s and Spearman  correlation  coefficient s. If measures are correlated, we 
will further describe changes in individual items of the BIS scale before and after treatment for 
prolapse, to determine which portions of the BIS scale explain the overall change in BIS scores, 
and evaluate the associations between BIS item scores and PISQ -IR item scores. General 
linear model  analyses will be used to evaluate how well the combination of  BIS scores, 
demographic and experimental variables explain changes in PISQ -IR scores.  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
29 Between randomization group comparisons will also be made using linear models  for total and 
item scores  controlling for randomization strata . We will also utilize extensions of this model to 
evaluate if any differences in BIS scores are either modified by or confounded with differences 
in either efficacy or side effects.  
SUPeR  will recruit 180 women. Body image will be measured in all women enrolled even 
though not all women will be sexually active. For the analyses described above, we anticipate 
that approximately 75% (135 women) will report sexual activity, and approximately half of the 
cohort will be randomized to the group undergoing  mesh strap/uterine preservation or native 
tissue repair with  hysterectomy . Lowenstein et al  demonstrated a change in BIS scores before 
and after treatment for prolapse in sexually active women from 23.2 +/ - 1.6 to 12.8 +/ - 1.3 in a 
cohort of 239 women undergoing both surgical and non -surgical treatment for prolapse.  
Because all women in this study will undergo surgical proce dures, we anticipate that differences 
in this study will be at least this large; consequently, assuming that approximately 130 women 
are sexually active, the study will have at least 90% power  to detect those changes.  
Table 6. Body Image Scales  
# Original Body Image Scale (BIS)  Modified Body Image Scale (MBIS)  
1 Have you been feeling self -conscious about your 
appearance?  Same  
2 Have you felt less physically attractive as a 
result of your disease or treatment?  Have you felt less physically 
attractive as a result of your vaginal 
prolapse ? 
3 Have you been dissatisfied  with your 
appearance when dressed?  Same  
4 Have you been feeling less feminine as a result 
of your disease or treatment?  Have you been feeling less feminine 
as a result of your vaginal 
prolapse ? 
5 Did you find it difficult to look at yourself naked?  Same  
6 Have you been feeling less sexually attr active as 
a result of your disease or treatment?  Have you been feeling less sexually 
attractive as a result of  your vaginal 
prolapse ? 
7 Did you avoid people because of the way you 
felt about your appearance?  Same  
8 Have you been feeling the treatment has left 
your body less whole?  Deleted  
9 Have you felt dissatisfied  with your body?  Same  
10 Have you been dissatisfied  with the appearance 
of your scar?  Deleted  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
30 N. Sample Size/Power Calculations  
This study is designed to compare the relative effectiveness of two transvaginal  apical 
suspension strategies for uterovaginal prolapse: a mesh augmented hysterope xy vs. vaginal 
hysterectomy and uterosacral ligament suspension. Power and sample size calcul ations were 
generated to determine the sample size needed to test for treatment difference favoring the 
mesh augmented strategy (i.e., a superiority trial) across the study arms for a variety of 
assumptions about effect size and study follow -up time. For a ll power analyses, we assumed 
that failure in both arms follows an exponential survival model and that the native tissue repair 
has a success rate of 80% at 24 months. This 80% calculation is based on an assumed 85% 
anatomic success rate for uterosacral li gament suspension (Table 2) and an additional 5% 
failure rate based on symptom failure. In the only published Uphold®  series there is a 98% 12 
month anatomic success rate.32 Although no 2 -year outcome data are available for the Uphold®  
procedure, under an assumption of a constant hazard, the 1 -year success rate of 98% yields a n 
estimated 2 -year anatomic success rate of 96%; combining this estimate with a similar 5% rate 
for symptom failure yields a 91% composite (anatomic and symptom) success rate. All analyses 
also assumed that statistical tests would be conducted with a Type I error rate of 0.05 with 
adjustment for multiple comparisons  based on a single interim analysis . Sample size estimates 
assumed that the 2 -year success rate in the mesh -augmented arm is in the range of 90% to 
93% at 24 months  (note that this represents a hazard ratio in the range of 0.33 to 0.47 under the 
assumed exponential survival model) , that the enrollment time for the study is 2 years, the loss -
to-follow -up on both arms is no more than 5% per year, and the total study duration from last 
participant  enrolled to primary outcome analysis is 36 months with one interim analyses for 
efficacy  when the last participant reaches the 24 -month follow -up. Table 7 provides estimates of 
the power for the different assumptions for total sample sizes in the range of 160 to 300 
participants  under the assumption that a single interim analysis will be conducted using  O’Brien -
Fleming stopping rules .  
Table 7. Sample Size Calculations  
Total Sample 
Size Power as a Function of 2-Year Effect Size —with Base 2-Year Success 
of 80% and 36 -Month Follow -Up After Last Enrollment and a 2 -Year 
Enrollment Period  
Δ=0.10  
HR=0.472  Δ=0.11  
HR=0.423  Δ=0.12  
HR=0.374  Δ=0.13  
HR=0.325  
160 0.87 0.93 0.96 0.99 
180 0.89 0.95 0.98 0.99 
200 0.92 0.96 0.99 >0.99  
220 0.94 0.98 0.99 >0.99  
240 0.96 0.98 0.99 >0.99  
260 0.95 0.99 0.99 >0.99  
280 0.98 0.99 >0.99  >0.99  
300 0.98 0.99 >0.99  >0.99  
Based on these calculations, a total of 180 participants  will be randomized at a 1:1 ratio to the 
two treatment arms. This sample size will provide a power of 0. 89 to detect an additive 
difference of 10% in the 2 -year success rate (i.e. a haza rd ration 0f 0.472) and a power of 0.95 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
31 to detect additive difference s of 11% or greater in the 2-year success rate  (hazard ratios of 
0.423 or less) .  
One of the advantages of the survival analysis approach is that the study continues to 
accumulate informa tion on individuals enrolled early in the study as they have events beyond a 
fixed two-year or three-year time frame, particularly for a study like this one in which successes 
are more likely to occur than are failures over the first three  years. As such, the survival 
approach with multiple looks will allow the analysis of the primary outcome of overall risk of 
treatment failure for the study to be completed and results published, while still collecting 
information on longer -term outcomes.  
O. Statisti cal Design  
Data analysis : Surgical failure rates will be compared using survival analysis approaches 
appropriate for interval censored data (classic log -rank tests and survival models using a 
generalized linear model approach with a complementary log -log link) and secondary outcom es 
will be reported as rates in each group or as group means and evaluated with the appropriate 
parametric or nonparametric statistical tests. For the primary analysis we first generate a 
standard log -rank test to provide an overall test of difference of t he two treatment regimens. We 
will then conduct model -based analys es using a generalized linear model with a complementary 
log-log link that examines failure risk as a function of treatment controlling for appropriate design 
variables site and age cohort).  The model -based analyses will be used to generate an overall 
test of treatment difference using a two -sided hypothesis test with an overall Type I error rate of 
0.05, and point and interval estimates of 12 -, 24- and 36 -month surgical success rates on each  
treatment arm as well as well as differences in these rates on the two arms.  The study has been 
designed for a single interim analysis when the last participant enrolled reaches the 24 -month 
follow -up time using a Lan -DeMets alpha spending function with O ’Brien -Fleming type 
boundaries. This approach will result in spending approximately 0.001 alpha at the interim 
analysis and 0.049 at the final analysis.  
Although the primary analysis will include all follow -up data from participants with follow -up time 
beyond 36 months when the study performs the primary analyses, 48 - and 60 -month data will 
still be limited at that time. Once all study participants have completed the 60 -month follow -up 
period, a generalized linear model with a complementary log -log link tha t examines failure risk 
as a function of treatment controlling for appropriate design variables site and age cohort)  will 
be used to conduct a secondary efficacy analysis to evaluate differences in long -term success 
between the two treatment arms . These analyses will provide an overall test of treatment 
difference using a two -sided hypothesis test with an overall Type I error rate of 0.05, and point 
and interval estimates of 48- and 3 0-month surgical success rates on each treatment arm as 
well as well as differences in these rates on the two arms.  
A number of secondary outcome measures that include both continuous and binary measures 
will be collected periodically across the study. To account for the correlation among the multiple 
measures on each study an d to account for missing data associated with differential follow -up 
time associated with the primary design, appropriate model -based approaches (linear mixed 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
32 models for continuous outcome s and generalized linear models for binary measures) will be 
used to  compare the effects of treatment.  The approach for these secondary analyses will be 
included in the statistical analysis plan.  
P. Ethical Concerns , Limitations, and Informed Consent  
P.1 Ethical Concerns  
Physician bias  against uterine preservation or mesh : Physicians may be reluctant to perform a 
uterine sparing, mesh supporting procedure instead of the traditional vaginal hysterectomy and 
apical suspension. Some physicians  (and patients) have  strong beliefs against the use of mesh, 
especially in light of t he July 2011 FDA warning. We note that  survey results still demonstrate 
that many AUGS members are still doing these procedures implying that this is still a relevant 
surgical problem. The mesh use in this study with the Uphold®  device minimizes mesh load. All 
other repairs will be native tiss ue further minimizing possible mesh -related complications. The 
mesh exposure rates and complications related to mesh should be low as the mesh load is 
small, the newer Uphold®  mesh is even lighter, and it is not placed adjacent to the incision. 
Furthermore , mesh erosion rates requiring OR removal  would likely produce a significant  
difference in “important complications”  and could lead to early study termination.   This should 
be acceptable to surgeon and patient. We believe that this study has equipoise giv en the 
expected similar recovery and morbidity for both procedures. If mesh apical procedures are 
comparable to mesh anterior compartment procedures then evidence for equipoise comes from 
systematic reviews66 and an RCT67 which already support improved anatomic outcomes with 
mesh in the ante rior compartment. The study also has relevance given the growing tr end of 
uterine sparing surgery and the widespread use of transvaginal mesh kit procedures.  
Participant  bias: Women may have preferences regarding removing or conserving their uterus.  
We think evidence -based counseling on the pros and cons of both these options with emphasis 
on the importance of studying the issue will resolve this. We note that a problem somewhat 
similar to this was encountered and easily overcome in the successful randomi zed trials of 
supracervical vs. total hysterectomy.46, 68 Similarly, a successful RCT examined hysterectomy 
compared with endometrial ablation of dysfunctional uterine bleed ing (ClinicalTrials.gov 
Identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) . At one site (UCSD) , we have been presenting these 2 options to 
patients and have not typically encountered strong patient preferences in either direction . There 
is some concern that verbal reports from the Australia study have implied that patients equally 
choose between hysterectomy and hysteropexy, but prefer to choose rather than be 
randomized. We have heard of other countries and groups saying randomizat ion in surgical 
trials is not possible for more than 12 years in both networks and every time this has not been 
our experience in our networks. We think that we will have fewer problems in this country and in 
this network because of our track record of eff ective randomization.  
Masking : All efforts will be made to mask participants  and outcome evaluators, but the study 
has inherent limitations in this regard. Participants  may find details of their operation on their 
surgical bill,  but to minimize unmasking from a bill review we will be requesting donated 
Uphold®  kits from the manufacturer. Participants  may examine themselves and feel a cervix, or 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
33 they may be told they have a cervix by another examiner. There may be health situations where 
it is necessary for them to know if they have a cervix and if so, they will be readily told by their 
study surgeon. We think it will be relatively easy to keep the stu dy coordinator masked for 
ascertaining all outcomes other than the anatomic one. The anatomic outcome evaluator will 
need to know if the participant  has a cervix or not to properly record POPQ values, but the study 
is designed so that this evaluator is a t hird person and has no bias towards the results.  
Perception of commercial bias : It is not unprecedented for a NIH -funded network to study a 
specific product ( e.g., Botox, Inter Stim in the PFDN; Gynecare TVT, TVT -O and AMS Monarc  in 
the UITN TOMUS study). If a non -commer cial, home -made mesh bridge device was studied 
and proven inferior, proponents could argue it was the fault of a non -standardized device. For 
this reason , we favor a hysteropexy kit that lends itself to standardiza tion. It is likely that industry 
funding  will be available for this study, but industry will not participate in data collection, data 
analysis, or manuscript preparation.  
P.2 Informed Consent    
Patients who are candidates for study participation will be a pproached for enrollment. Written 
informed consent will be obtained in accordance with Institutional Review Board guidelines.  
A common template for informed consent will be used by all centers, with modifications allowed 
to meet the necessary requirements of their respective institutional human subjects committees.  
Uterovaginal Prolapse : Eligible women will be informed that traditional treatment for uterine 
prolapse includes hysterectomy with native tissue suture support; but more recently an option is 
uterine sparing with a mesh graft suspension and we do  not know which procedure is more 
successful or more durable. Advantages of hysterectomy include eliminating the possibility of 
future uterine or cervical pathology while the disadvantages are the removal of a normal organ, 
possible earlier menopause, and the risks of intra -peritoneal injury, intra -abdominal bleeding 
and vaginal shortening . The advantage of the hysteropexy procedure includes preservation of a 
normal organ, normal tim ing of menopause , and decreased risk of intra -peritoneal 
complications. The disadvantages include possible future uterine or cervical pathology requiring 
additional surgery . All patients will be made aware of the risks of transvaginal mesh included in 
the FDA warning (e.g . mesh erosion, pelvic pain, and dyspareunia)  via the study informed 
consent statement .   
P.3 Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
The NICHD has established a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to oversee this study. 
Members of the DSMB are independent of the  study investigators and include representatives 
with urology, urogynecology, and biostatistics  expertise and a lay member . The DSMB will have 
regularly scheduled meetings,  either in person or by teleconference.  The Chair may request to 
meet more frequent ly. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
34 This protocol will be approved by the DSMB prior to initiation of recruitment.  The DSMB will also 
monitor study progress and will have the ability to recommend that the trial be stopped for 
safety, futility, or efficacy as outlined in the paragraphs below  
At each regularly scheduled  meeting  of the DSMB that occurs after initiation of enrollment in the 
trial, the DSMB will review study enrollment and participant safety information and will have 
authority to recommend to the NICHD Director th at the study be stopped for either safety or 
futility. While the safety guidelines described in Section M will be considered by the DSMB in 
their deliberations about study safety and futility, final stopping criteria will be established by the 
DSMB.   
The DSMB will also review efficacy data to evaluate whether to stop the study for efficacy at the 
planned formal interim analysis described in Section O.  
P.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
Each clinical investigator is responsible for reporting serious or  unexpected adverse events to 
the IRB at their institution and to the Data Coordinating Center, who will transmit the information 
to the Safety Monitor. The DCC and the Safety Monitor summarize the case and reports it to the 
NIH Program Director  and to the  DSMB Chair in an expedited manner. The Safety Monitor and 
Chair of the DSMB will determine whether the case should be reported to the IRBs at all the 
institutions participating in the trial. The Chair of the DSMB has the  discretion to convene an 
emergency  meeting of the DSMB.  
Q. Protocol Costs  
See separate spreadsheet.  
R. References  
1. Swift SE. The distribution of pelvic organ support in a population of female subjects seen 
for routine gynecologic health care. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000; 183:277 -85. 
2. Delancey JO. Fascial and muscular abnormalities in women with urethral hypermobility 
and anterior vaginal wall prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002; 187:93 -8. 
3. Summers A, Winkel LA, Hussain HK, DeLancey JO. The relationship between ant erior 
and apical compartment support. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 194:1438 -43. 
4. Shull BL. Pelvic organ prolapse: anterior, superior, and posterior vaginal segment 
defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999; 181:6 -11. 
5. Toozs -Hobson P, Boos K, Cardozo L. Management  of vaginal vault prolapse. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1998; 105:13 -7. 
6. Hsu Y, Chen L, Summers A, Ashton -Miller JA, DeLancey JO. Anterior vaginal wall length 
and degree of anterior compartment prolapse seen on dynamic MRI. Int Urogynecol J 
Pelvic Floor Dysfunc t 2008; 19:137 -42. 
7. Brown JS, Waetjen LE, Subak LL, Thom DH, Van den Eeden S, Vittinghoff E. Pelvic 
organ prolapse surgery in the United States, 1997. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002; 186:712 -
6. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
35 8. Olsen AL, Smith VJ, Bergstrom JO, Colling JC, Clark AL. Epidemi ology of surgically 
managed pelvic organ prolapse and urinary incontinence. Obstet Gynecol 1997; 89:501 -
6. 
9. Boyles SH, Weber AM, Meyn L. Procedures for pelvic organ prolapse in the United 
States, 1979 -1997. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 188:108 -15. 
10. Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bo K, et al. The standardization of terminology of female pelvic 
organ prolapse and pelvic floor dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996; 175:10 -7. 
11. Comiter CV, Vasavada SP, Raz S. Transvaginal culdosuspension: technique and 
results. Uro logy 1999; 54:819 -22. 
12. Barber MD, Visco AG, Weidner AC, Amundsen CL, Bump RC. Bilateral uterosacral 
ligament vaginal vault suspension with site -specific endopelvic fascia defect repair for 
treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000; 18 3:1402 -10; discussion 
1410 -1. 
13. Shull BL, Bachofen C, Coates KW, Kuehl TJ. A transvaginal approach to repair of apical 
and other associated sites of pelvic organ prolapse with uterosacral ligaments. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 183:1365 -73; discussion 1373 -4. 
14. Karram M, Goldwasser S, Kleeman S, Steele A, Vassallo B, Walsh P. High uterosacral 
vaginal vault suspension with fascial reconstruction for vaginal repair of enterocele and 
vaginal vault prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001; 185:1339 -42; discussion 13 42-3. 
15. Amundsen CL, Flynn BJ, Webster GD. Anatomical correction of vaginal vault prolapse 
by uterosacral ligament fixation in women who also require a pubovaginal sling. J Urol 
2003; 169:1770 -4. 
16. Silva WA, Pauls RN, Segal JL, Rooney CM, Kleeman SD, K arram MM. Uterosacral 
ligament vault suspension: five -year outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 2006; 108:255 -63. 
17. Antovska SV, Dimitrov DG. Vaginosacral colpopexy (VSC) --a new modification of the Mc 
Call operation using vaginosacral ligaments as autologous sliding  grafts in 
posthysterectomy vault prolapse. Bratisl Lek Listy 2006; 107:62 -72. 
18. Wheeler TL, 2nd, Gerten KA, Richter HE, Duke AG, Varner RE. Outcomes of vaginal 
vault prolapse repair with a high uterosacral suspension procedure utilizing bilateral 
single  sutures. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2007; 18:1207 -13. 
19. de Boer TA, Milani AL, Kluivers KB, Withagen MI, Vierhout ME. The effectiveness of 
surgical correction of uterine prolapse: cervical amputation with uterosacral ligament 
plication (modi fied Manchester) versus vaginal hysterectomy with high uterosacral 
ligament plication. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2009; 20:1313 -9. 
20. Doumouchtsis SK, Khunda A, Jeffery ST, Franco AV, Fynes MM. Long -term outcomes 
of modified high uterosacral l igament vault suspension (HUSLS) at vaginal 
hysterectomy. Int Urogynecol J 2011; 22:577 -84. 
21. Richardson DA, Scotti RJ, Ostergard DR. Surgical management of uterine prolapse in 
young women. J Reprod Med 1989; 34:388 -92. 
22. Dietz V, van der Vaart CH, van  der Graaf Y, Heintz P, Schraffordt Koops SE. One -year 
follow -up after sacrospinous hysteropexy and vaginal hysterectomy for uterine descent: 
a randomized study. Int Urogynecol J; 21:209 -16. 
23. Romanzi LJ, Tyagi R. Hysteropexy compared to hysterectomy for  uterine prolapse 
surgery: does durability differ? Int Urogynecol J 2012; 23:625 -31. 
24. FDA. Urogynecologic Surgical Mesh: Update on the Safety and Effectiveness of 
Transvaginal Placement for Pelvic Organ Prolapse. United States Food and Drug 
Administrati on White Paper July 2011:page 6.  
25. Murphy M. Clinical practice guidelines on vaginal graft use from the society of 
gynecologic surgeons. Obstet Gynecol 2008; 112:1123 -30. 
26. Feiner B, Jelovsek JE, Maher C. Efficacy and safety of transvaginal mesh kits i n the 
treatment of prolapse of the vaginal apex: a systematic review. Bjog 2009; 116:15 -24. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
36 27. Renganathan A, Edwards R, Duckett JR. Uterus conserving prolapse surgery --what is 
the chance of missing a malignancy? Int Urogynecol J; 21:819 -21. 
28. Farquhar CM, Sadler L, Harvey SA, Stewart AW. The association of hysterectomy and 
menopause: a prospective cohort study. Bjog 2005; 112:956 -62. 
29. Moorman PG, Myers ER, Schildkraut JM, Iversen ES, Wang F, Warren N. Effect of 
hysterectomy with ovarian pres ervation on ovarian function. Obstet Gynecol; 118:1271 -
9. 
30. Dietz V, Schraffordt Koops SE, van der Vaart CH. Vaginal surgery for uterine descent; 
which options do we have? A review of the literature. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor 
Dysfunct 2009; 20:349 -56. 
31. Petros PE. Vault prolapse II: Restoration of dynamic vaginal supports by infracoccygeal 
sacropexy, an axial day -case vaginal procedure. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 
2001; 12:296 -303. 
32. Vu MK, Letko J, Jirschele K, et al. Minimal mesh repa ir for apical and anterior prolapse: 
initial anatomical and subjective outcomes. Int Urogynecol J 2012.  
33. Carramao S, Auge AP, Pacetta AM, et al. [A randomized comparison of two vaginal 
procedures for the treatment of uterine prolapse using polypropylene  mesh: hysteropexy 
versus hysterectomy]. Rev Col Bras Cir 2009; 36:65 -72. 
34. Lunardelli JL, Auge AP, Lemos NL, et al. Polypropylene mesh vs. site -specific repair in 
the treatment of anterior vaginal wall prolapse: preliminary results of a randomized 
clinical trial. Rev Col Bras Cir 2009; 36:210 -6. 
35. Committee Opinion no. 513: vaginal placement of synthetic mesh for pelvic organ 
prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 2011; 118:1459 -64. 
36. Debodinance P, Fatton B, Lucot JP. [Should a hysterectomy be carried at the same  time 
as surgery for a prolapse by vaginal route?]. Prog Urol 2009; 19:1060 -73. 
37. Ehsani N ea. Risk Factors for Synthetic Mesh Extrusion Following Abdominal Sacral 
Colpopexy and Vaginal Mesh Procedures: A Fellows Pelvic Research Network Study. 
Female Pel vic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery 2012; 18:s4.  
38. Barber MD, Brubaker L, Nygaard I, et al. Defining success after surgery for pelvic organ 
prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 2009; 114:600 -9. 
39. Brubaker L, Barber MD, Nygaard I, et al. Quantification of vagin al support: are 
continuous summary scores better than POPQ stage? Am J Obstet Gynecol; 203:512 
e1-6. 
40. ACOG Practice Bulletin no. 109: Cervical cytology screening. Obstet Gynecol 2009; 
114:1409 -20. 
41.
 http://www.acog.org/About_ACOG/Announcements/New_Cervical_Cancer_Scre
ening_Recommendations . New Cervical Cancer Screening Recommendations from the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the American Cancer Society/American 
Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology/American Society for Clinical Pathology.  
42. McCarthy M, Jr., Jonasson O, Chang CH, et al. Assessment of patient functional status 
after surgery. J Am Coll Surg 2005; 201:171 -8. 
43. Barber MD JN, Kenton K, Hsu Y, Greer J, Dyer K, White A, Meikle S, Ye W. Validation 
of the Surgical Pain Scales in Women undergoing Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery. In 
press 2012.  
44. McDermott CD, Terry CL, Woodman PJ, Hale DS. Does tension -free vagina l tape 
placement at the time of total prolift colpopexy affect distal anterior vaginal support? 
Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 2010; 16:353 -7. 
45. McDermott CD, Terry CL, Woodman PJ, Hale DS. The effect of tension -free vaginal tape 
placement on distal ant erior vaginal wall support at the time of laparoscopic sacral 
colpoperineopexy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2011; 283:1303 -7. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
37 46. Thakar R, Ayers S, Clarkson P, Stanton S, Manyonda I. Outcomes after total versus 
subtotal abdominal hysterectomy. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:1318 -25. 
47. Barber MD, Neubauer NL, Klein -Olarte V. Can we screen for pelvic organ prolapse 
without a physical examination in epidemiologic studies? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 
195:942 -8. 
48. Yalcin I, Bump RC. Validation of two global impression questi onnaires for incontinence. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 189:98 -101. 
49. Barber MD, Kuchibhatla MN, Pieper CF, Bump RC. Psychometric evaluation of 2 
comprehensive condition -specific quality of life instruments for women with pelvic floor 
disorders. Am J Obstet  Gynecol 2001; 185:1388 -95. 
50. Rogers RG, Coates KW, Kammerer -Doak D, Khalsa S, Qualls C. A short form of the 
Pelvic Organ Prolapse/Urinary Incontinence Sexual Questionnaire (PISQ -12). Int 
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2003; 14:164 -8; discussion 168.  
51. Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1992; 30:473 -83. 
52. Dindo D, Demartines N, Clavien PA. Classification of surgical complications: a new 
proposal with e valuation in a cohort of 6336 patients and results of a survey. Ann Surg 
2004; 240:205 -13. 
53. Brazier JE, Roberts J. The estimation of a preference -based measure of health from the 
SF-12. Med Care 2004; 42:851 -9. 
54. Hollingworth W, Campbell JD, Kowalski J, et al. Exploring the impact of changes in 
neurogenic urinary incontinence frequency and condition -specific quality of life on 
preference -based outcomes. Qual Life Res 2010; 19:323 -31. 
55. McCulloch CE SS. Generalized, linear, and mixed models. New York: John Wiley, 2001.  
56. Efron B TR. An introduction to the bootstrap. New York: Chapman and Hall, 1993.  
57. Subak LL, Brubaker L, Chai TC, et al. High costs of urinary incontinence among women 
electing surgery to treat stress incontinence. Obstet Gynec ol 2008; 111:899 -907. 
58. Cash T. The psychology of physical appearance: Aesthetics, attributes, and images. In: 
TF Cash and t PRuzinsky (Eds), ed. New York: Guilford Press.  
59. Hopwood P, Fletcher I, Lee A, Al Ghazal S. A body image scale for use with can cer 
patients. Eur J Cancer 2001; 37:189 -97. 
60. Jelovsek JE, Barber MD. Women seeking treatment for advanced pelvic organ prolapse 
have decreased body image and quality of life. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006; 194:1455 -
61. 
61. Lowenstein L, Gamble T, Sanses TV, et al. Changes in sexual function after treatment 
for prolapse are related to the improvement in body image perception. J Sex Med 2010; 
7:1023 -8. 
62. Lowenstein L, Gamble T, Sanses TV, et al. Sexual function is related to body image 
perception in women wit h pelvic organ prolapse. J Sex Med 2009; 6:2286 -91. 
63. Lowder JL, Ghetti C, Nikolajski C, Oliphant SS, Zyczynski HM. Body image perceptions 
in women with pelvic organ prolapse: a qualitative study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011; 
204:441 e1 -5. 
64. Lowder JL, Gh etti C, Moalli P, Zyczynski H, Cash TF. Body image in women before and 
after reconstructive surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. Int Urogynecol J 2010; 21:919 -25. 
65. Patel M, Mellen C, O'Sullivan DM, LaSala CA. Impact of pessary use on prolapse 
symptoms, qu ality of life, and body image. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010; 202:499 e1 -4. 
66. Sung VW, Rogers RG, Schaffer JI, et al. Graft use in transvaginal pelvic organ prolapse 
repair: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2008; 112:1131 -42. 
67. Nguyen JN, Burchette RJ. O utcome after anterior vaginal prolapse repair: a randomized 
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2008; 111:891 -8. 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
38 68. Learman LA, Summitt RL, Jr., Varner RE, et al. A randomized comparison of total or 
supracervical hysterectomy: surgical complications and clin ical outcomes. Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 102:453 -62. 
  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
39 S.  Appendices  
Appendix A . Figures   
Figures demonstrating the 2 operations proposed in the SUPeR protocol ( illustrations by 
Jasmine Tan -Kim, MD) . 
  
Figure A.  Hysterectomy with uterosacral  ligament 
suspension  Figure B.  Uterine sparing apical mesh suspension 
(hysteropexy)  
 
  

Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
40 Appendix B . Planned Study Timeline  
Milestone Date  Description of Milestone  
December 2012  Final Protocol Version 1.0 available for submission to FDA 
and site IRBs  
March 2013  Randomize first participant  
March 2015  Enrollment Complete  
March 2017  Conduct Interim Analysis when last participant reaches 2 -
year follow -up 
March 2018  Last participant reaches 3 -year follow -up 
August 2018  Final study report subm itted to BSC  
October 2018  Final study report submitted to FDA  
 
  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
41 T. AMENDMENT – REVISED: CLARIFICATION OF LENGTH OF SUBJECT 
PARTICIPATION   
• We removed the last sentence of the original version of this amendment. The 
inclusion of this sentence was an accidental oversight of a decision from when 
the protocol committee was considering an extension to the SUPeR study  (i.e. e -
SUPeR) . The intent of thi s decision was to help facil itate a clear separation of the 
studies and assist with enrollment.  
• The last sentence of the original version of this amendment has been replaced 
with an explicit statement regarding when participants should be unmasked.  
Backgro und 
The primary aim of SUPeR was to  determine whether treatment success in women with 
symptomatic uterovaginal prolapse undergoing transvaginal mesh augmented hysteropexy 
differs in women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy and native tissue cuff suspension at  time 
points through 3 years. The study was designed with a survival analysis approach with 36 
month follow -up after last enrollment with an expected  2 year enrollment period . SUPeR 
randomization began in April 2013, enrollment ended in October 2014, and t he last surgery 
(randomization) was performed in January 2015. Because there is a 6 week window for the final 
visit, we will have 3 year data on all continuing participants by March  2018. By April 2018, 
subjects in SUPeR will have been followed every 6 mon ths for 3 to 5 years. The primary 
outcome should be available by April 2018.   
As the protocol states, o ne of the advantages of the survival analysis approach is that the study 
continues to accumulate information on individuals enrolled early in the study as they have 
events beyond the three-year time frame . The protocol states, “ As such, the survival approa ch 
with multiple looks will allow the analysis of the primary outcome of overall risk of treatment 
failure for the study to be completed and results published, while still collecting information on 
longer -term outcomes. ” This clearly implies the intention of continuing to collect data for all 
subjects every 6 months for 5 years. Indeed , the schedule of measures , the study budget and 
the informed consent to patients emphasized every 6 month visits up to 5 years (60 months). All 
subjects  were consented to par ticipate in SUPeR and undergo visits every 6 months for up to 5 
years (60 months). The 30, 42, and 54 month visits are abbreviated visits that collect data for 
the primary and major secondary outcomes (POPQ, mesh exam, PFDI -Q3, and AE survey) .  
Some investigators ha d interpreted that the study ends when the last patient reaches the 3 year 
follow -up. There is ambiguity in the protocol and in the compensation section of the consent  
form that suggests  that not everyone might complete 60 months of visits.   
Purpose  
The purpose of this amendment is to clarify the length of subject participation .  
• We clarify that all subjects should be followed every 6 months for 60 months (5 
years) .  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
42 In support of this clarification we note:  
1. The schedule of measures, the study budget and the informed consent to patients 
emphasized every 6 month visits up to 5 years (60 months) . Patients were consented  
and agreed to every 6 month visits for up to 60 months (5 years)  
2. We believe that this amendment does not require reconsenting subjects at most sites 
because subjects were consented to every 6 month visits for up to 60 months. However , 
this decision is made by each local IRB.   
All participants should be  unmasked by a study coordinator at the completion of their 60 -month 
study visit.  
  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
43 U. AMENDMENT : EXTENSION  OF THE STUDY OF UTERINE PROLAPSE 
PROCEDURES -RANDOMIZED TRIAL (SUP eR) STUDY FOR LONG -TERM 
FOLLOW -UP TO 10 YEARS (E -SUPeR)  
Background  
The primary aim  of SUPeR was to determine whether treatment success in women with 
symptomatic uterovaginal prolapse undergoing transvaginal mesh augmented hysteropexy 
differs in women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy and native tissue cuff suspension at time 
points throug h 3 years. The study was designed with a survival analysis approach with 36 
month follow -up after last enrollment with an expected 2 year enrollment period. SUPeR 
randomization began in April 2013, enrollment ended in October 2014, and the last surgery 
(randomization) was performed in January 2015. All subjects reached 3 year follow -up in March 
2018. Retention in this time period was excellent; three year primary outcome data was 
available for 96% of the participants. Some participants have reached the 5 ye ar follow -up time 
point and have been unmasked.  
What has become apparent with this excellent follow -up is that the SUPeR cohort represents a 
unique opportunity to understand the longer term efficacy and safety outcomes of a native 
tissue repair and a mesh hysteropexy. There are no studies in the literature with such 
outstanding long -term follow -up over an extended period of time. The current 96% retention rate 
underscores how readily participants accept the evaluations  that have b een performed in this 
study.  
Proposed Extension of Study  
This amendment proposes to continue to follow the subjects in this study who have not 
undergone  reoperation for prolapse until reoperation for prolapse is reported, 10 year s of follow -
up  is completed , or until participant retention in this study falls below 60%. To decrease subject 
burden, the frequency of study visits will be reduced from every 6 months to annually from the 
date of surgery. A reduction of select secondary patient reported outcome measures that are 
unlikely to provide interesting data during t his 5 -10 year time period is proposed.   
The annual follow -up visits for year 6 could begin as early as April 2019 when our first subject 
reaches the 6 year mark. The table below represents the abbreviated outcome measures that 
will be collected at each an nual visit.   
Measure  6 years  7 years  8 years  9 years  10 years  
POPQ  X X X X X 
AE review  X X X X X 
Exam for mesh exposure  X X X X X 
PFDI -20 (includes POPDI -6, CRADI -8, 
UDI-6) X X X X X 
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
44 Measure  6 years  7 years  8 years  9 years  10 years  
PFIQ  X X X X X 
PGI-I  X X X X X 
ISI X X X X X 
PISQ -IR X X X X X 
The measures that are unlikely to add significant value to the outcome measures and have 
been removed from these annual assessments are:  
• Functional Activity Scale  
• Surgical Pain Scale  
• BIS 
• SF-12 
Limited (Virtual) Participation Option  
The following su bjects can be offered the opportunity to consent to limited study participation: 
participants who discontinued, withdrew consent, were withdrawn  by investigator , or were  lost to 
follow -up during the initial  5-year SUPeR study , and  subjects who initially declined  to enroll in  E-
SUPeR.  All of the subjects described will be approached so as not to introduce bias , provided 
that the local  site IRB  deter mines it  is appropriate to approach these participant s for consent  to 
this alternative less burdensome option . The limi ted study participation option excludes the in -
person visit and physical exam  and includes  study assessments  that can be completed remotely  
(i.e., via phone , mail, or internet.)       
The table bel ow represents the outcome measures that will be collected at each annual visit 
under the limited participation option.  
Measure  6 years  7 years  8 years  9 years  10 years  
AE review  X X X X X 
PFDI -20 (includes POPDI -6, CRADI -8, 
UDI-6)  X X X X X 
PFIQ   X X X X X 
PGI-I  X X X X X 
ISI  X X X X X 
PISQ -IR  X X X X X 
 
Adverse Event Collection and Reporting  
Pelvic Floor Disorders Network  
SUPeR, Protocol 24P01  
 
Confidential Please Do Not Copy  
Version 5.0 October 9, 2020  
45 The E -SUPeR study is an observational extension of the original SUPeR protocol and does not 
involve a treatment intervention. A primary goal of E -SUPeR is to ascertain the long -term failure 
rates associated with vaginal hysterectomy plus uterosacral ligame nt suspension  and mesh 
hysteropexy. Therefore, negative outcomes that may be related to these procedures, as 
evidenced by treatments or re -operation for prolapse or incontinence, suture or mesh erosions, 
and periurethral implants for stress incontinence (s uch as collagen) will be collected by the 
study coordinator at the time of the annual visit and reported to the DSMB in summary format. 
Similarly, any additional pelvic (urologic, colorectal, and gynecological) surgery will be collected 
annually and report ed to the DSMB in summary format.    
Outcomes that are not likely related to native tissue repair or mesh hysteropexy (i.e., non-
urologic/non -colorectal/non -gynecologic diagnoses, procedures and hospitalizations) will not be 
collected. Outcomes classified as serious adverse events (SAEs) , defined as all deaths and 
SAEs that are considered related to the index surgery of SUPeR or  the pelvis,  will be reported 
to the Medical Safety Monitor , DSMB, site IRB (per local IRB requirements), and NICHD IRB in 
an expedited manner.  By definition, as E -SUPeR  starts five years after the randomization for the  
index surgery of SUPeR, fatalities wi ll most likely not be  related to native tissue repair or mesh 
hysteropexy , but all fatalities regardless of relationship to the study surgeries  will be collected 
for E-SUPeR.  
Sample Size Estimate  
The available cohort includes a total of N  = 156 subjects after excluding those initially ineligible  
for the SUPeR study , deaths, and  those who have had a second surgery secondary to index 
surgery failure  during the 5 year SUPeR study . Any participants who undergo  reoperation for 
prola pse between  completin g the 5-year SUPeR study and being assessed for E-SUPeR  will be 
considered eligible for the extension. Limited data regarding the second surgery will be collected 
and then the subject’ s participation will end immediately thereafter.   It is anticipated that the 
number of participants in follow up will be reduced by approximately  5% per year due to  either 
withdrawal or re operation for prolapse . 
Feasibility and Statistical Analysis  
If overall  participant  retention drops below 60%, the study will be terminated so that 
unnecessary burden without appreciable benefits is not placed on the participants or the study 
investigators.  
Once the study is completed, differences  between the treatment groups  in long -term surgical 
success and other outcomes will be evaluated using statistical methods consistent with the 
analyses performed at 3 and 5 years.   
 