Study Title:  Nitrofurantoin Administration for the Prevention of Short -Term Catheter 
Associated Urinary Tract Infection After Pelvic Surgery  (NAUTICA):  A Randomized Controlled 
Trial  
 
 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
Date:  July 6, 2018  
  
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
Primary Objective  
 
To evaluate the efficacy of  administration of nitrofurantoin prophylaxis  after catheter 
discontinuation  for the prevention of catheter -associated urinary tract infections in 
patients with postoperative short -term catheterization following pelvic reconstructive 
surgery.  The primary o utcome will be the treatment of clinically suspected and/ or 
culture -proven UTI within 30 days of surgery.  
 
Secondary Objectives  
 
1. To evaluate adverse outcomes related to study medications in each group  
2. To evaluate medication compliance  
 
BACKGROUND  
 
Urinary tract infections (UTI) are the most common hospital -acquired infections, 
accounting for nearly 30% of cases  of nosocomial infections  and affecting nearly 1 
million people per year.1-3 They account for nearly 8.1 million visits to health care 
providers and cost an estimated $1.6 billion a year in the United States alone.3,4  
 
Following pelvic reconstructive and urinary incontinence surg ery, UTI s are one of the 
most common complications.4,5 The baseline risk of UTI associated with pelvic floor 
surgery ranges between 5 -35%, increasing greatly with catheterization.3 In women who 
are undergoing surgery for urinary incontinence, the risk of U TI ranges between 8.9% to 
34%.4,6,7 Risk factors for urinary tract infections in women undergoing pelvic floor and 
urinary incontinence surgery include: history of recurrent UTI, longer operative times, 
and increased duration of postoperative catheterizati on.6 
Postoperative voiding dysfunction and i ncomplete bladder emptying is common 
following pelvic reconstructive and incontinence surgeries, with incidence ranging from  
2.5 % to 31%.6 As a result, these women may have additional catheterization for a shor t 
period of time, which increases the risk of UTI.1,2,4,5 There is a 15 -20% risk of developing 
a postoperative UTI with short -term catheterization, even if the catheter remains in 
place for merely  24 hours.8 The risk of UTI increases  5-10% each day the catheter is left 
in place.1 In the SISTEr trial, which was a multicenter, prospective, randomized trial 
comparing Burch colposuspension versus autologous fascial slings for the treatment of 
stress urinary incontinence, catheter usage po stoperatively for incomplete bladder 
emptying  resulted in an increased rate of UTIs. Participants who underwent the fascial 
sling  (48%)  had more UTI events ( 305) compared with the 32% of women in the Burch 
colposuspension group (203)  (p<0.001) .9   
This w as concluded to be secondary to the prolonged need for catheterization due to 
postoperative voiding dysfunction.5,9,10  
 
Complications of catheter -associated UTI can include pyelonephritis, renal disease, and 
bacteremia.2,5 These complications increase the morbidity of the patients undergoing 
these surgeries, especially in those who are elderly. The number of pelvic floor and 
urinary incontinence surgeries is expected to increase by 40% in the coming years ; thus, 
it is imper ative to target efforts to reduce the risk of postoperative UTI and its 
complications in the elderly population.3,5 
 
Numerous studies have been conducted to evaluate different prophylactic antibiotic 
regimens to help decrease the rate of postoperative cath eter-associated UTI s.11 Many of 
these studies have shown precedent for the use of antibiotic prophylaxis.1,4,12 In a 
randomized, double -blind, placebo controlled trial by Van der Wall et al ., they reported 
on the efficacy of ciprofloxacin in preventing UTI  in short -term catheterization following 
surgery .1 In their study,  20% of placebo patients had symptomatic UTIs, compared with 
5% UTI rate in  the ciprofloxacin treated group.1 Ghezzi et al. also demonstrated 
favorable results using single dose prulifloxac in to reduce the rate of UTI in women with 
short -term postoperative catheterization after undergoing a transvaginal tape 
procedure.2 In this prospective trial, no women in the prulifloxacin treatment group  had 
a positive urine culture (p<0.0001), symptomatic UTI at catheter removal (p = 0.0015) or 
a positive urine culture at 1 week follow -up (p =0.2).2 
 
In addition to fluoroquinolones , nitrofurantoin has also been evaluated as a prophylactic 
regimen for use with short -term catheterization. In her prospective, multicenter 
randomized controlled trial, Rogers et al. demonstrated that the  daily  use of 
nitrofurantoin crystals decreased risk  of UTI in patients undergoing pelvic organ 
prolapse (POP) or urinary incontinence surgery when compared with placebo  in those 
patients who had an indwelling suprapubic catheter postoperatively  (46% versus 61%, 
p=0.002) .12 Jackson et al. echoed these findi ngs and found that a short 3 -day course of 
nitrofurantoin  twice daily  after outpatient mid urethral sling surgery also significantly 
reduced the incidence of UTI in the first 6 weeks postoperatively  in patients who were 
discharged with short -term catheteri zation  (placebo 32% versus 17.6% in the 
nitrofurantoin group, p =0.04 ).4 Conversely, Dieter et al. found that prophylactic once 
daily nitrofurantoin during catheterization did not decrease the risk of urinary tract 
infection in patients receiving short -term  catheterization following POP or urinary 
incontinence surgery.3  This finding was thought to be secondary to differences in study 
design lending to a lower baseline prevalence of UTI.3 Additionally, a Cochrane review of 
antibiotic prophylaxis for short -term catheter bladder drainage does find that there is 
some evidence, although limited, that the rate of bacteriuria is decreased with the 
administration of antimicrobials within the first postoperative days, or from 
postoperative day two until the catheter is removed.15  
 
Although there are a few  studies showing favorable results for the use of prophylactic 
nitrofurantoin  during catheterization  after pelvic surgery, the  optimal  timing of 
antibiotic administration  and length of dosing regimen  is not well defi ned. The American 
Urological Association (AUA) recommend s empiric antibiotic treatment at the time of 
external urinary catheter removal in patients with risk factors, such as tobacco use, 
advanced age, and anatomic abnormalities of the urinary tract.13 The AUA Panel does 
cite that bact eriuria in the setting of noninfectious urinary tract di sease is a risk factor 
for bacteremia, and , thus, prophylactic antibiotic treatment at time the of catheter  
removal may  be indicated.13  This recommendation is based on a few studies providing 
evidence for antibiotic treatment at the time of catheter removal. One of these studies, 
a randomized controlled trial by Harding et al., studied women with asymptomatic 
catheter -acquired bacteriuria after short -term catheterizat ion and randomly assigned 
them to receive antibiotic therapy or no therapy  at the time of Foley catheter removal . 
All women had urine cultures collected for up to 14 to 28 days following catheter 
removal. Those with antibiotic therapy demonstrated a signif icant increase in 
elimination of bacteriuria (81%) with oral antibiotics compared to the untreated 
population  (36%) .14 Based on these studies , the AUA does recommend empiric antibiotic 
treatment at the removal of an external urinary catheter in patients with risk factors.13 
However, there is no standardization concerning the  type of antibiotic to be used or 
treatment duration. 
 
Although there are  a few studies showing favorable results for use of nitrofurantoin 
doing catheterization after pelvic surgery, there are no clearly defined 
recommendations  regarding its use for urinary tract infection prevention after catheter 
removal. Therefore, the objective  of our study is to examine the effects of 
administration of  nitrofurantoin therapy  at the time of Foley c atheter removal  for the 
prevention of catheter -associated UTI in patients undergoing POP and/or urinary 
incontinence surgery.   
 
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
This is a randomized , double -blind, placebo -controlled trial offered to  patients  who 
receive postoperative short -term transurethral catheterization after undergoing surgery 
for pelvic organ prolapse (POP), urinary incontinence, or both. The study will be 
conducted at two clinical sites:  
 
1. Women’s Center for Pelvic Health (Mercy), Atrium Health , Charlotte, NC  
2. Women’s Center for Pelvic Health (NorthEast) Atrium Health , Concord, NC  
 
 
Human Subject Research and Informed Consent  
 
Each participant will be required to sign an Internal Review Board ( IRB) approved 
consent at the time of enrollment prior to any study -related interventions or 
assessments. The informed consent form will describe the study in detail. Additionally, 
the study consent form will disclose the planned uses of study data, as well as potential 
risks to the participants . Each prospective subject will have the objectives of the study 
explained to them prior to enrollment . The subject will be given an opportunity to ask 
questions  and decide whether or not to participate. Copies of the inf ormed consent will 
be provided to the participants on request, and the originals will be stored at the 
primary study center (#1).  
 
Subjects  have the right to:  
 Voluntarily participate in the study  
 Withdraw  or refuse participation  in the study at any poin t without questioning  
 Understand the objectives of the study  
 Understand the risks and benefits of the study  
 Have their confidentiality maintained  
Participant Screening and Point of Enrollment  
Participants scheduled to undergo surgery for pelvic organ prolapse (POP) or urinary 
incontinence will be identified and will be screened against inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. If confirmed to meet the requirements for the study, they will be eligible t o be 
invited to participate in the study. Participants will be enrolled in the study once 
informed consent is obtained.  
Participants will be enrolled by physicians, fellows, nurse practitioners , physician’s 
assistants , and/or a research nurse  prior to surg ery. Each practi tioner will receive 
education and training regarding the study enrollment.  
STUDY POPULATION  
Inclusion Criteria  
The study will include women who are seeking surgical management for POP or urinary 
incontinence.  
1. Age greater than 18  
2. Creatinine clearance greater than 30 ml/min  
3. Failed postoperative  hospital  voiding trial  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Pregnant  
2. History of glucose -6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency  
3. History of renal insufficiency, renal transplant, or nephropathy  
4. Allergy to nitrofur antoin  
5. History of recurrent UTI (defined as greater than two culture -proven infections in 
six months or three infections in one year)  
6. Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)  within one month  of surgery  
7. Non -English speaking  
8. Urinary tract infection while Foley cathet er is in place  
9. On antibiotic therapy for other non -urological reasons  
10. Sustained intraoperative bladder injury requiring prolonged catheterization  
greater than 5 days  
11. Undergoing mesh excision  from within the bladder , fistula repair,  cystotomy 
repair , urethr al diverticulectomy, sacral neuromodulation, urethral surgery, or 
any other procedure requiring prolonged catheterization  and bladder 
decompression  
12. Placement of a suprapubic catheter  
13. Participants that request intermittent self -catheterization  
14. Neurologic co nditions affecting urinary tract system and normal voiding 
mechanisms  
15. History of hepatic impairment due to prior nitrofurantoin use  
16. Inability to provide consent/decisionally impaired  
17. More than two in -office voiding trials  
Rationale for Nitrofurantoin and R egimen Chosen for This Protocol  
Nitrofurantoin was chosen as the interventional medication for this study due to its 
efficacy in reducing urinary tract infections in women that required short -term 
postoperative catheterization.4,12 Both prophylactic dosing (once daily) and therapeutic 
dosing (twice a day) have been studied. There are conflicting outcomes with once daily 
dosing, as one studied showed a decrease in UTI rates, while another did not  when 
given during the catheterization  time period .3,12 There is one study that showed a 
significant reduction in rate of UTI with twice daily dosing.4 Therefore, we have decided 
to proceed with twice daily dosing to ensure maximum coverage for UTI. 
Additionally, Escherichia coli , the most com mon uropathogen, displays low resistance 
patterns to nitrofurantoin in our geographical region .16 Trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP -SMX) , another first line therapy for treatment of UTI, which was the agent studied  
in a prior randomized controlled trial15, displays only a 75% sensitivity for treating 
Escherichia coli  in our hospital system.16 Conversely , nitrofurantoin has  a 98% sensitivity 
for treating Escherichia coli  in our hospital system.16 
In this study, not all of the participants will be receiving antibiotic treatment during the 
study course. Per the  2009  International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America  (IDSA) , prophylactic antimicrobials  should not be routinely 
used in patients with indwelling catheterization due to the concern about selection of 
antimicrobial resistance. However, they cite that additional studies must be undertaken, 
given the findings of previous research that does illus trate fewer UTIs in patients who 
receive antimicrobial prophylaxis at the time of catheter removal.17 The data is still 
evolving regarding prophylactic antimicrobials . We are also limiting the exposure to the 
antibiotic treatment to only 5 days; recommende d treatment courses for nitrofurantoin 
range from 5 -7 days .21,22  
Study Withdrawal  
Participants may withdraw  from the study  at any point in time . Documentation of the 
reason for withdrawal will be captured in the data collection forms. There will be no ris k 
to participants that choose to withdraw from the study.  
Preoperative Period  
All consecutive participants undergoing a scheduled surgery for POP and/ or urinary 
incontinence will be identified , screened,  and approached for enroll ment . All will be 
screened for UTI. To be eligible to participate, the participant is not to have a UTI from 1 
day to 1 month prior to surgery.  Participants will be asked if they have any dysuria, 
frequency, or bladder irritation in the absence of vaginal discharge.  A “YES ” to all three 
of these symptoms indicates a positive scree n, and therefore, the participant will be 
excluded. Additionally, the participant with be asked if they have been treated for a UTI 
within the past month with antibiotics. A “YES” indicates a positive screen, and 
therefore, the participant will be excluded.  
Participants who do not meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be considered 
screen failures. Screen failures will be captured and the cause for screen failure will be 
documented.  
Perioperative and Surgery Period  
All partic ipants will receive routine pre operative intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis  
based on standard hospital protocols . This will either be 2 or 3 grams of cefazolin based 
on patient weight . In the event of an allergy, an appropriate alternative , such as  
clindamycin 900 milligrams plus aztreonam 2 grams , will be given . All participants will 
have a 16 French latex Foley catheter placed intraoperatively using sterile techniqu e. 
Any patient with a latex allergy will receive  a non -latex 16 French Foley catheter . 
Postoperative Period  
All participants will undergo a postoperative retrograde fill voiding trial  per our 
division ’s standard protocol  on postoperative day zero prior to discharge (for outpatient 
procedures) or on the morning of postoperative day 1 for hospitalized participants .  
 
Participants will pass the voiding trial if they void more than 200 mL  with less than one -
third post -void re sidual . If they fail, a 16 French Foley catheter will be reinserted.  
 
All participant s that fail the voiding trial will be discharged home with an indwelling 
Foley catheter. These participants will receive Foley maintenan ce education prior to 
discharge. They will be scheduled for a follow up voiding trial in the office in  1-7 days.  
The names of all participants that fail the voiding trial will be communicated to the 
principal investigator and/or the research nurse for continued follow up.  
In Office  Voiding Trial  
Participants who are discharged with an indwelling Foley catheter will be scheduled to 
return to the office in 1-7 days for  an in -office retrograde voiding trial . All office 
personnel (nurses, medical assistants, physicians, physician’s assistants, and nurse 
practitioners) will receive education regarding voiding trial technique as outlined below 
prior to study commencement.  
 
The bladder will be retrograde filled with normal saline  up to a maximum of 300mL , and 
the catheter will then be removed. The participant will attempt to void immediately , but 
the participan t will have up to 6 0 minutes to attempt voiding.  After voiding, the 
participant will be asked to complet e a Force of Stream questionnaire .17 The urine will 
be measured  and a post -void residual will be obtained with a bladder scan . If urine  
voided  is 200 mL or greater , and the post -void residual is less than one -third of the total 
amount (voided volume plus residual volume) , the catheter will be left out and the 
participant will be considered a voiding trial pass. If the volume is less than 200 mL , and 
the post -void res idual is greater than one third of the total amount, the participant will 
be deemed a voiding trial failure ; these patients  will be sent  home with a Foley catheter.  
After completing a bladder scan immediately after void ing attempt, the provider will be 
notified of the voided volume and post -void residual (to be obtained by bladder scan) . 
 
Once a participant has successfully passed the voiding trial, they  will be  eligible for 
randomization.   
Randomization  
Randomization will be controlled by the Carolinas HealthCare System Investigational 
Drug Services pharmacy through random permuted blocks and stratified per site . The 
biostatistician will generate the randomization sequence and provide this information to 
the pharmacist.  
The study will be double -blinded such that both study participants and investigators will 
be masked to treatment allocation and block size randomization, except for the 
pharmacist  and statistician , who will have no contact with the patients.  
The Investigational Drug Services (IDS) pharmacy will provided blinded medication 
bottles containing either nitrofurantoin or placebo 100mg capsules. Each bottle will 
contain 10 capsule s. These bottles will be labeled by the IDS pharmacy with a 
randomization number. The study medications will be released by the pharmacy to the 
research nurse, who is also blinded. The medication  bottles  will be stored in a locked 
cabinet in a climate -cont rolled room until dispensed .  
Eligible participants  that have successfully passed the in -office voiding trial  will be 
randomized into one of two groups upon completion of the voiding trial data collection 
sheet . There will be no indication which  group the participant was randomized to. These 
sheets will be fluorescent colored and a part of each participant’s chart. This sheet will 
need to be completed by the nurse administering the voiding trial.  
 
The participants randomized to Group A will rece ive 100  mg nitrofurantoin every 12 
hours by mouth starting on the day the Foley catheter is removed and complete a five -
day course. Conversely, participants randomized into Group B will receive a matched 
placebo every 12 hours each day starting on the date  of Foley catheter removal, for five 
days.  Again, t here will be no indication which group the participant was randomized to.  
 
At the time of randomization, the participant will be assigned a randomization number. 
The bottle of medication with the same corr esponding randomization ID will be 
dispense d. This will be a bottle  of 10 capsules of nitrofurantoin  or matching placebo 
with instructions to take every 12 hours for five days. The first dose will be given in the 
office. Participants will be asked to compl ete a one -week medication diary .  Participants 
will be asked to return this bottle of medication, any unused medication, and a 
medication compliance diary at the first postoperative visit following surgery.   
Any participant that fails the in -office voiding trial will be treated per standard clinical 
practice. That participant will be scheduled to return for an additional in -office voiding 
trial in 1-7 days.  They will still be eligible to participate in the study after a pass ed 
voiding trial in the office. Data will still be collected on the se participants . If the 
participant elects to intermittent self -catheterize, they will then be excluded from the 
study. Any participant that required any more than two in -office voiding trials 
postoperatively will be excluded.  
Week 2 Postoperative Visit (+/- 1 week)  
Participants will be scheduled for a 2-week  postoperative follow up visit. They will be 
instructed to return their bottle  of study medication and a medication compliance diary 
at this visit.  
 
 
 
Treatment of UTIs  
 
Urinary tract infection will be defined as:  
 Any treatment received (outside of study drug) for clinically suspected UTI 
and/or a culture -proven UTI with a uropathogen within the first 30 days 
following surgery.  
o A urine culture is deemed positive if there are greater than 100,000 
colony -forming units of a single organism. Urine cultures with mixed 
bacterial flora will NOT  be classified as a positive culture.  
o Clinically suspected UTIs will be defined as dysuria, fr equency, and 
irritation in the absence of vaginal discharge.  
Study participants will not be eligible to take phenazopyridine while on study 
medications.  
If a participant has clinical symptoms of a UTI during the study period, a urine specimen 
will be sent for culture and treat ment will be  based on appropriate antibiotics regarding 
specific  susceptibilities. Per the IDSA  guidelines , the following duration of treatment 
guidelines will be followed18: 
 7-14 days  duration of antimicrobial treatment for pati ents with a catheter -
associated UTI, regardless of whether the catheter is in place or not  
 A 3-day antimicrobial regimen may be considered for women aged 65 years  old 
or less  who develo p a catheter -associated UTI  after the catheter has been 
removed  
 
The investigator will maintain discretion to deviate from these guidelines pending 
clinical reasons.  
 
The participant will be treated empirically  for seven days  with one of the following 
antibiotics  while awaiting urine culture results , based on personal treat ment history, 
contraindications, and allergies17: 
 Cephalexin  (500mg every 12 hours for 7 -14 days)  by mouth  OR 
 Fosfomycin  (3 grams once)  by mouth OR 
 Ciprofloxacin  (250 mg every 12 hours for 3 days OR 250 -500mg every 12 hours 
for 7 -14 days)  by mouth  
 
Fosfomycin is a single dose regimen. Although the IDSA recommends a 3-day or 7-14 
day treatment course, recent in -vitro studies indicate that a single dose of fosfomycin is 
also effective and cost effective.19,20 Fosfomycin was demonstrated to have high 
bactericidal activity against biofilms on siliconized latex catheters.19 Therefore , it will 
also be offered as a treatment option for UTI to our participants.  
 
Urine cultures will be obtained with susceptibilities,  and antibiotic treatment may be 
changed depending on resistance. Once the uropathogen is known, the appropriate 
antibiotic regimen to treat the known uropathogen will employed.  
 
If a participant is being empirically treated for a UTI, and the urine cultu re returns 
negative, the participant will be  notified and  instructed to stop taking the antibiotics.  
 
The triage nursing staff, both in office and through the nursing phone triage  service will 
receive study training prior to study commencement.  Any participant that contacts our 
office outside of normal business hours with concerns of a UTI will be triaged and  
empirically treated with one of the appropriate antibiotics  listed above. If  they receive 
treatment from another provider  outside our hospital system , authorization for release 
of records will be need to be signed by the participant.  
 
Any participant that has a positive urine culture from an outside provider, or is treated 
based on clinical symptoms  without evidence of a positive urine culture will be deemed 
a treatment failure. These participants will be included in the study analysis as 
treatment failures.  
DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT  
All study data will be recorded by research staff and securely maintained at primary site.  
Data will be entered by study staff into REDCap database that will be stored on a secure 
server.  
Each patient will have  a unique identification number to which only the principal and co -
investigators will have access. The data collection spreadsheet will not contain any 
patient identifiers  and will be password protected. T he master list that links the patients 
and their study identification number will be stored separately from the database. All 
collected information will be s tored separately on a password protected hard drive . A 
back up copy of the file will be stored on a password protected hospital network 
drive.   All hard copies of study data will be stored in a locked cabinet in the office of the 
research nurse, which will also be locked.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUTCOME MEASURES  
Primary Hypothesis  
The primary hypothesis is that the administration of nitrofurantoin will reduce the UTI 
rate compared to the UTI rate in the placebo arm upon discontinuation of 
catheterization.  The null hypothesis is that the administration of nitrofurantoin will not 
redu ce the rate of UTI.  
Primary Outcome Measure  
The primary outcome of the study will be the treatment of symptomatic urinary tract 
infection and rate of urinary tract infection in the first 30 days following pelvic 
reconstructive surgery.  
Secondary Outcome M easures  
1. Adverse Events  
a. Any adverse event related to drug administration will be reported. Adverse 
events not related to medication administration will not be collected. Please 
refer to section on Adverse Events for details of reportable criteria.  
2. Medicati on compliance  
a. All participants will need to complete a medication diary during the study 
drug treatment period. They will be asked to return this diary at their follow 
up. Medication compliance will be assessed and analyzed by way of these 
medication diari es. 
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
Calculations of sample size were based on comparisons of UTI rates in the nitrofurantoin 
and placebo arms.  According to published results , the UTI rate in the placebo arm was 
32% and approximately a 14 -15% reduction was observed in the treatment arm.4,12 
Using this information, we designed our study to mimic these findings, and assumed a 
UTI reduction rate of 18% in the nit rofurantoin arm could be observed in our clinical 
setting.  Based on this assumption , total sample size of 164 patients was projected to 
achieve 80% power with a two -sided α error of 0.05. We increased the total sample size 
to 180 to allow for a 10% dropout  rate. However, due to primary investigator timeline  
and lack of attrition , recruitment ceased once the sample size of 164 was reached. The 
power was calculated by using the PASS 15 (2017, NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, Utah, USA). All 
analyses were conducted using  an intent -to-treat principle, which included all women 
randomized and not withdrawn from the study. A per -protocol analysis was also 
performed, and only included patients that completed the study.  
 
Categorical data were compared using X2 or Fisher’s Exact  test where appropriate. 
Continuous variables were compared using  Student’s t -test or Wilcoxon rank sum where 
appropriate, and are presented as mean±standard deviation or median (interquartile 
range). We estimated risks for UTI with odds ratio  (OR)  and cor responding 95% 
confidence intervals (95% CI) calculated using logistic regression. A P value <0.05 
defined statistical significance. All analyses were conducted using SAS Enterprise Guide 
version 7.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).  No interim analysis was perfo rmed.  
 
STUDY MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION  
The Principal Investigator will monitor the study and assess the need for amendments as 
the study progresses. A protocol revision may be necessary for reasons including but not 
limited to rights,  safety of participants , welfare of participants , and thus, and 
amendment will be required. Appropriate approvals (i.e., IRB) of the revised protocol 
must be obtained prior to implementation at each site.  
 
Site Documentation  
All study documents included in this protocol that will be presented to subjects will be 
submitted to the IRB for approval. The primary site will maintain a study binder for all 
sites that will include the following:  
 Enrollment log of patients that have c onsented to be in the study 
(electronic version)  
 Protocol deviation log (electronic version)  
 Adverse event log (electronic version)  
 Investigator protocol and amendments  
 IRB submissions, modifications, and renewals  
 Data safety monitoring committee reports  
 IRB approved consent form  
 Data collection forms  
 
 
Monitoring  
Monitoring will be conducted by the data safety monitoring board  (DSM B) throughout 
the study to ensure that the study is conducted in accordance with the study protocol. 
By verifying compliance, monitoring helps to safeguard the subject safety, ensure data 
quality, and provide ongoing training and support to ensure compliance.  
Data verification will occur at 6-month  intervals to verify data, assess continued 
compliance with protocol.  
An interim an alysis will be completed at 6 months from the study commencement date . 
The purpose of the interim analysis  is to discern whether the trial can be stop ped for 
early benefit , as well as evaluate for safety and efficacy . Interim data analyses will be 
presented to the Data Safety and Monitoring Board for their review and 
recommendation.  
Study Drug Information  
 Drug: Nitrofurantoin 100 mg capsules, with matched placebo, will be provided by 
Central Compounding Center South  
 Storage:  all study medications will be in a secure, locked, climate controlled location 
accessible only to authorized study personnel. All study medications will be 
maintained at controlled room temperature between 20 -25°C with excursions 
permitted from 15 -30°C. 
 The principal investigator and/or her designee(s) will be responsible for ensuring 
accountability of study medications is maintained throughout the study for all study 
medications that is received, dispensed, and disposed of per institutio nal standards 
of procedures . This log will be maintained on the electronic application, Vestigo.  
 Only participants enrolled and randomized in this study may receive study 
medications  
 All unused study medications will be destroyed per the institution’s dest ruction 
policy  
Protocol Deviations  
Protocol deviations will be documented and logged on the Protocol Deviations log 
(electronic version). This will be done for every protocol related deviation related to any 
portion of the study timeline. Deviations will b e reviewed and evaluated on an ongoing 
basis, and, as necessary, appropriate corrective and preventive actions (including 
notification, re -training, or discontinuation) will be put in place.  
 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB ) 
A data safety monitoring board  (DSM B) will be comprised of an external physician and 
research nurse. They will be tasked to review all adverse events that occur across both 
study sites. A semi -annual report of all adverse events will be generated and sent to the 
Data Safety Monito ring Committee every 6 months.  
All Serious Adverse Events (SA Es) will be reported to the DSMB  via email within 2 days 
of site staff being informed of its occurrence. The PI and research nurse will be cc’d on 
all communications with the DSMB . Copies of de -identified source documentation 
regarding the SAE will be included, as well as other clinically meaningful documentation.  
The PI will be responsible for ensuring that all sites com ply with the DSMB requests.  
Reporting Adverse Events  
  
 Adverse e vents (AE) will be recorded and reported per the criteria and timeline below.  
 
All AEs must be recorded and entered into the AE log and REDCap. An event number will 
be assigned by each site and recorded.  
 
SAEs must be reported to the DSMB within two business days as outlined above in the 
Data Safety Monitoring Committee section.  
 
Reportable AEs include those determined to be related to the study medication. AEs not 
related to the study medications will no t be collected. Please note that underlying 
diseases are not reportable AEs unless there is an increase in severity or frequency 
during the course of the investigation. Death should not be recorded as an AE, but as an 
outcome of a specific SAE.  
 
Any parti cipant that suffers an allergic reaction to the study medications will be 
unblinded. This will be a reported adverse event that will also be reported to the DSMB, 
as outlined above.  
 
Adverse Event Definitions  
 
Adverse Event: any untoward medical occurrenc e, unintended disease or injury, or any 
untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory finding) in subjects, whether or 
not related to study medications  
 
Serious Adverse Event:  an adverse event that led to:  
 Death  
 Serious deterioration in the health  of the subject that either resulted in  
o A life -threatening illness or injury  
o A permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function  
o Medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -threatening illness 
or injury or permanent impairment to a body stru cture or body 
function  
 
Unrelated:  No evidence that the timing of the AE has a relationship to the time study 
medications were taken  
 
Possibly Related:  The AE has a timely relationship to the study medications, however a 
potential alternative etiology may be responsible for the AE  
 
Probably Related:  The AE has a timely relationship to the study medications and the 
causative relationship can clearly be established. No potential alternative etiology is 
apparent.  
 
Severity Definitions  
 
Mild : Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated and are of minor irritant 
type causing no loss of time from normal activities. Symptoms do not require therapy or 
a medical evaluation; signs and symptoms are transient.  
 
Moderate : Events introduce a low level of inconvenience or concern to the participant 
and may interfere with daily activities, but are usually improved by simple therapeutic 
measures; moderate experiences may cause some interference with functioning.  
 
Severe : Events interrupt the par ticipant’s normal daily activities and generally require 
systemic drug therapy or other treatment; they are usually incapacitating.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Van der Wall E, Verkooyen RP, Mintjes -de Groot J et al. Prophylactic ciprofloxacin for 
catheter -associated urinary -tract infection. Lancet 1992;339:946 –51. 
2. Ghezzi F, Serati M, Cromi A et al. Prophylactic single -dose prulifloxacin for catheter -
associated urinary tract infection after tension -free vaginal tape procedure. Int  
Urogynecol J 2007;  18: 753 -757.  
3. Dieter AA, Amundsen CL, Edenfield AL et al. Oral Antibiotics to Prevent Postoperative 
Urinary Tract Infection. Obstet  Gynecol 2014; 123(1): 96 -103.  
4. Jackson D, Higgins E, Bracken J et al. Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Urinary Tract Infection 
Afte r Midurethral Sling: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr  
Surg  2013; 19(3): 137 -41. 
5. Sutkin G, Alperin M, Meyn L et al. Symptomatic urinary tract infections after surgery for 
prolapse and/or incontinence. Int Urogynecol J 2010; 21: 955.   
6. Dieter AA, Amundsen CL, Visco AG, Siddiqui NY. Treatment for urinary tract infection 
after midurethral sling: a retrospective study comparing patients who receive short - 
term postoperative catheterization and patients who pass a void trial on the day of 
surgery. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 2012;18(3):175 –8.  
7. Vigil H, Mallick R, Nitti V et al. Risk Factors for Urinary Tract Infection following Mid 
Urethral Sling Surgery. J Urol 2017;197(5): 1268 -73.  
8. Schiotz HA, Guttu K. Value of urinary prophylaxis wi th methenamine in gynecologic 
surgery. Acta Obstet  Gynecol  Scand 2002; 81: 743 -46. 
9. Albo ME, Richter HE, Brubaker L et al. Burch colposuspension versus fascial sling to 
reduce urinary incontinence. N Engl J Med 2007; 356:2143 -2155.  
10. Sutkin G, Lowder JL, Smith KJ. Prophylactic antibiotics to prevent urinary tract infection 
during clean intermittent self -catheterization (CISC) for management of voiding 
dysfunction after prolapse and incontinence surgery: a decision analysis. Int  Urogynecol 
J 2009; 20:933 -38. 
11. Falagas, ME, Athanasiou S, Iavazzo C et al. Urinary tract infections after pelvic floor 
gynecological surgery: prevalence and effect of antimicrobial prophylaxis. A systematic 
review. Int  Urogynecol J 2008; 19: 1165 -1172.  
12. Roger s RG, Kammerer -Doak D, Olse n A et al.  A randomized, double -blind, placebo -
control led comparison of the effect of nitrofurantoin monohydrate macrocrystals on the 
development of urinary tract infections after surgery for pelvic organ prolapse and/or 
stress urinary incontinence with su prapubic catheterization. Am J Obstet  Gynecol 
2004;191:182 –7. 
13. Wolf SJ, Bennett CJ, Dmochowski RR et al. (2012). Urologic Surgery Antimicrobial 
Prophylaxis . American Urological Association. Retrieved from 
http://www.auanet.org/guidelines/antimicrobial -prophylaxis -(2008 -reviewed -and-
validity -confirmed -2011 -amended -2012)  
14. Harding GK, Nicolle LE, Ronald AR, Preiksaitis JK, Forward K R, Low DE et al . How long 
should catheter -acquired urinary tract infection in women be treated? A randomized 
controlled study. Ann Intern Med 1991; 114:713.  
15. Niël-Weise BS and van den Broek PJ . Antimicrobial policies for short -term catheter 
bladder drainage  in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; (3):CD005428.  
16. Antibiotic Susceptibility Surveillance Report. Carolinas Health Care System. 2014.  
17. Tunitsky -Bitton E, Murphy A, Barber MD, et al. Assessment of voiding after sling: a 
randomized trial of 2 methods of postoperative catheter management after midurethral 
sling surgery for stress urinary incontinence in women. Am J Obstet  Gynecol 
2015;212:597.e1 -9. 
18. Hooten TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD et al. Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment of 
Catheter -Associated Urin ary Tract Infection in Adults: 2009 International Clinical 
Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 
50(5): 625 -63. 
19. Rodríguez -Martínez JM , Ballesta S , Pascual A . Activity and penetration of fosfom ycin, 
ciprofloxacin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and co -trimoxazole in Escherichia coli and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. Int J Antimicrob Agents  2007 Oct;30(4):366 -8.  
20. Sastry S, Doi Y. Fosfomycin: Resurgence of an old companion. J Infect Chemother 2016 
May;22(5):273 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2016.01.010.  
21. Jancel T, Dudas V. Management of uncomplicated urinary tract infections. West J Med 
2002; 176(1): 51 -55. 
22. Goettsch WG, J anknegt R, Herings RMC. Increased treatment failure after 3 -days' 
courses of nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim for urinary tract infections in women: a 
population -based retrospective cohort study using the PHARMO database. Br. J. Clin. 
Pharmacol. 58:184 –189.  
 
 
  
 
Figur e 1. Study Trial Flow  
 
 
 
 
 
Group 1  
(Nitrofurantoin during  
catheterization)  Group 2 
(Nitrofurantoin after  
catheterization)  
Released from office with bottle of medication  
Maintain medication diary  
First dose taken in office  
 
 Patients Identified and Consented Postoperatively after failure of 
voiding trial  
Randomization after Passing Voiding Trial in Office  (1-7 days 
following surgery)  
Group A  
(Nitrofurantoin AFTER 
catheterization)  Group B  
(Placebo AFTER  
catheterization)  Participants  Screened  and Consented at Preoperative Appointment  
 
Monitor for UTI x 30 days  
 
 
 1st postoperative follow -up 1 -2 weeks later  
Return unused study medication  
Return medication diary  
 