 
 
  1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Auricular Acupressure  as an Adjunct Treatment for Opioid Tapering  
in a Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care  Unit: A Pilot Feasibility  Study  
 
 
PI: Heather Ja ckson, PhD, APRN , FNP-BC, NEA -BC, ADS  
Michelle Terrell, DNP, APRN, CPNP -AC/PC  
Mary Dietric h, PhD, MS 
Gloria Rubadeau , MSN, APRN, NNP -BC 
Micaela Arseneau, DNP, APRN, CPNP -AC 
Kim Steason,  DNP, CPNP -PC/AC   
Ann Sween ey, MD 
 
 
 
 
Proto col version 3/22/22  
NCT0502538 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 
  
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Overview  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal S tudies and Previous H uman Studi es 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclus ion Cr iteria  
5.0 Enrollme nt/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigation al Agents/Devices (side effec ts) 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Oth ers 
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Disco ntinuation  
10.0 Statistical Consid eratio ns 
11.0 Privac y/Conf identiality Issues  
12.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
  
 
 
 
 
Study Over view  
This intervention pilot  feasibility  study will assess the impact of auricular ac upres sure 
as an additional  non-pharm acologi c therapy  for infants  at risk for  developing Iatrogenic 
Withdrawal Syndrome  (IWS)  in the Pedi atric Cardiac Intensive Care Unit (PCICU) of Monroe 
Carrell Jr Childr en’s Hospital at Vanderbilt  (MCJCHV) . We will recru it 40 healthy, 34 weeks 
gestational  age or older infants  exposed to prolo nged medications  (greater than 5 days)  for 
cardiac procedure s that may cause withdrawal upo n cessation  such as opioids , 
benzodiazepines , or other sedative medications . Participants wi ll receive the auricular 
acupressur e in add ition to the standard of care  such as clustered  nursing care, touch,  positi on 
change, env ironmental controls,  holding, and swaddling . Within 24 hours of impleme nting a 
weaning protocol , acupressure will be applied  to three designated point s of one ear following 
the NADA protocol acupu ncture technique  while also incorporatin g the Near -Term Infant (NTI) 
conceptual framework identified elements  (see figure 3). Acupressure wil l be administered via 
stickers that are adh esive  to the skin l ike a B and-Aid (see figure 1). These stickers include  a 
vaccaria plant seed in the center tha t applies continuous light pressure on the designated 
point s. This form of acupressure was selected a s it is organic and does not contain metal which  
may interfere with emergency medical care s uch as imaging. After the initial 24 hour s of 
application , stickers will be removed, the infant’s skin will be assessed for any disruption such 
as bruising or disco loration, and the stickers will be rotated to the infant’s othe r ear at the sa me 
NADA protoc ol auricular sites. Acu pressure stickers will be removed and ap plied to the opposite 
ear every 48 -72 hours until withdrawal symptoms improve  (1). Withdrawal symptoms are 
measured every 6 hours with the enhanced Withdrawal Assessment tool ( WAT) as part of the 
standard of care .  Upon completion of the weanin g regimen, infants with a score of les s than o r 
equa l to 3 or less than 2 above base line with no more than 2 rescue medic ation doses in  24 
hours  will have the ac upressure re moved .  
 
Figure  1: Auricular Acupressure to NADA Protocol Sites  
Acupressure Sticker  Auricular Application  NADA Protocol Points:  
Shen Men , Liver, Lung  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 1.0 Backgrou nd 
 
Opioid and benzod iazepi ne medicati ons are nece ssitated in the tr eatment of critically ill 
infants  in the cardiac intensive care unit  to provide pain relie f and anxiolysis. However, use of 
these modalities are associated with a multi tude of uncomfortable symptoms surroundin g 
phys ical dep endence  and may lead to withdrawa l syndrome , bowel dys function, a s well as 
exacerbation  of delirium  (2). Additionally, long term use of opioids and benzodi azepine s in the 
infant  popula tion may impair neurode velopment (3-5). This is esp ecially concerning for infants 
undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass as this inter vention further places this population at risk for 
impair ed neur ological d evelopment (6). These medications  further contribute to prolonged 
hospital st ays as they must be gradually weaned (7, 8) .  
Given the sequ elae of the prolonge d opioi d and benzodiazepine  exposure in this 
vulnera ble population, first line treatments  involve the maxim ization of non -pharmacologi c 
therapies. These  treatments  include swaddling,  reduction in environmental stimulation , use of 
sound machines or mus ic, vibratio n, and soothing touch  (9, 10 ). Yet, these tre atments are not 
always succe ssful in significantly  reducing  symptoms of withdrawal  (with significance referring 
to reductio ns that do not re quire additiona l medica tion administrations ).  
The N ADA proto col uses  an au ricular acupuncture tec hnique created by a physician  for 
the treatment of ad diction and has demonstrat ed efficacy in the adult popul ation (11-13). 
Acupuncture  and acupres sure studies in pediat ric popul ations h ave al so dem onstrated 
improve ment  in multiple s ymptoms commonly ex perienced by infants  in withdrawal. These  
symptoms include pain, agitat ion, crying, feeding difficulties with subsequent growth impairment, 
and sleep d isturbance (14-25). Current  evidence suggests  acupuncture and a cupressure are 
safe on neonates, but high quality randomized controlled trials are ne eded to confirm effic acy 
for the treatment of withdrawal  (1, 23-28). This study, wi th the u se of the NTI, will establish 
efficacy and provide a framew ork to guide future  acupuncture  and acupressure  studies. 
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 Sedative medications such as opioids a nd benz odiazepines are common ly admini stered 
to impr ove comfort of infants unde rgoing cardiac surgical procedures. Unfortunately cessation of 
these medications are commonly associated with onset of uncomfortable withd rawal as infants 
become physically depe ndent o n these medications (29, 30) . This condition is known as 
Iatrogenic Withdrawal Syndrome (IWS) and is further associated with impaired neurological 
development as well as prolonged mechanical ventilation and hospita l stays (3-5, 31 -33). 
Infants with IWS experience a multitude of symptoms shared by other infant  conditions 
that have been improved with acupuncture including tremors, hypertonicity, agitation, disrupted 
sleep, fee ding difficulty, vomit ing, diar rhea, te mperat ure instability, tachypnea,  and impaired 
weight gain (34-37). Treatment s focus on non -pharmacologic adjuncts  that support physiologic 
stability and prevent furthe r devel opmental difficulties,  prolonge d hospit al sta ys, and interrupted 
materna l bonding (9, 38, 39) . These therapies i nclude swaddling, position change, soothing 
touch , and environmental controls ; however, they have not traditionally included  acupres sure as 
a non-pharmacologic adjunct . Altho ugh standard interventions are helpful, there remains a need 
to optimize these interventions and further reduce or prevent the use of medication.  
Current evidence  suggests that  acupun cture is safe and bene ficial for multip le co nditions 
that impact neonata l and pediatric populations including withdrawal , yet this therapy remains 
underutilized as there is a lack of high -quality studies evaluating feasibility and therapeutic 
effica cy in t he treatment of depend ence (1,10-24). A  less invasive acupuncture  therap y is 
acupressure, a technique that applies mild pressure via stickers, similar to Band -Aids, to 
designated body points rather than needle insertion to provide a therapeutic bene fit. 
Acupressure may serve as  an additional non-pharmacological adjunct to ease  the severe 
discomfort of withdrawal in infants physically dependent on medications.  
 
 
  5 
 In addition to therapeutic utility of acupressure, it may be cost effective by decreasing 
hospital stays and the need for  more ex pensive a nd in vasive pharmacologic interve ntions (9). In 
this pilot  feasibility study, acupressure will be used as an additional intervention to 
current, standard therapies . The  Near -Term Infant conceptual framewor k (NTI) g uided  the 
creation of our acupres sure protocol to ensure incorporation of standard of care as well as 
optimization of acupressure elements to produce healthy outcomes in infants at risk for 
developing iatrogeni c withd rawal syndrome . This acupressure protoc ol has been  implemented 
at MCJCHV  in the neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) population  and was deemed f easible, 
accepted by healthcare providers  and moth ers, as well as safe . If proven feas ible and benef icial 
within a  PCICU population, fur ther studie s may be conducted to evaluate the effi cacy of 
acup ressure in easing with withdrawal symptoms as measured by the enhanced withdrawal 
assessment tool (WAT -1), when applied in conjunction with stan dard treatment s.  
Aim 1: Ass ess feasibility of del ivering an acupre ssure protocol for the treatment of withdrawa l in 
a pediatric cardiac intensive care unit.  Feasibility will be assessed with successful completion of 
the following objectives:  
a. Achieve recru itment and con sent of  4 parents per month  whose infant has be en 
exposed to opioids and/or benzodiaze pines for greater than 5 days,  with a retention 
of 80% or higher during a 24 month  time period (n= 40). 
b. Deliver the acupressure protocol to 20 infants  at risk for dev eloping withdrawal  within 
the standard of  care as an  addit ional non -pharmacologic intervent ion (20 infants will 
receive  standard of c are). 
Aim 2 : Assess impact of auricular acupressure on withdrawal symptoms for an infant physically 
dependent on opioid and/or benzodia zepine medication s. Efficacy of  auricular acup ressure will 
be assessed, in line with the standard of care, with comparison of the following assessments 
among intervention and control groups:  
a. Duration of opioid and /or benzodiazepine exposure  
b. Duration  of wea n phase  
c. Duration of me chanical ventilation  
d. Total me dication dosage as me asured in morphine equivalents  and benzodiazepine  
dosages  (mg/kg/patient)  
e. Hospital length of stay  
f. Severity of withdrawal symptoms as measur ed by the Enhanced Withdrawal 
Assessment Tool  (WAT -1)  
g. Presen ce and /or seve rity of delirium  as m easured by the Pediat ric Confusion 
Assessment Method for the Intensiv e Care Unit ( psCAM -ICU)  
h. Severity of agitation as measured by the Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale ( RASS )  
i. Infant Pain scores  as measur ed by  Faces, Leg, Acti vity, Cry, C onsolabi lity Scale 
(FLACC )   
Aim 3 : Assess acceptability and implementation of the acupressure protocol as an adjunct 
treatment for withdrawal syndrome  within the standard of care.  
a. Examine parental satisfaction of acupress ure as an additional t reatmen t as 
measured by the Client Satisfaction Qu estionnaire (CSQ8).  
b. Assess provider and staff satisfaction of acupressure as an additional therapy as 
measured by Acceptability of Intervention Measure (AIM), Intervention 
Appropriaten ess Mea sure (IAM), and  Feasib ility of Interven tion Measur e (FIM).  
c. Assess  qualitative feedback as reported by parents and healthcare providers .   
Impact:  Results from this proposed study may expand first line, non -pharmacological therapy 
for infants experie ncing  withdrawa l sympt oms. Of fering enhanced c are for IWS infants  while 
reducing costs related to hospital treatments is a public health concern during an opioid 
epidemic. Acupressure is safe, noninvasive, inexpensive, and efficiently implemented for 
 
 
  6 
 disor ders wi th similar cond itions to withdrawal syn drom e, thus  warranting add itional 
investigation for consideration as an included standard of practice for post procedural infants . 
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
There is a multitude of research, w hich ha s demons trated efficacy and safety of 
acupuncture and acupressu re in the neonatal and ped iatric population ; including research within 
MCJCHV by the PI yielding  no adverse outcomes (28). This treatme nt has al so ex hibited 
therapeutic  results in v eterinary medicine (40).  In pediatrics, acupu ncture has de monstr ated 
improved my ofascia l pain and postop erative nausea/vomiting (41, 42) . For infants , acupuncture  
and acupressure  has reduce d crying in infants with colic and reduced pain during procedures  
(14, 1 9, 22 , 43). Incid entally, these positive ef fects can lead to be tter attachment wit h mothers . 
Several stu dies have out lined the p resence of activ e ear points in the neonat e which propose 
the use of auricular acupunct ure or acupr essure  should be consi dered as an  adjunct trea tment 
(44-47). More specific research studies in NAS reveal acupunctur e and acupressur e are 
practical non-pharma cologic  interventions (1, 9). Laser acupuncture has been perfo rmed on 
infants with NA S and resulted in reduction in mor phine use, dia rrhea, length o f stay  and 
improved feedi ng as well as sl eep (23-25). Acupressure in combi nation with massage has also 
demonstrate d efficacy in p remat ure infants weight  gain (21). Acupressure is the least in vasive 
technique and very well tolerated  (48). A similar study perf ormed ac upressure on NAS infants in 
1992 -1996 wi th several limi tations but there were no adverse reactions or skin disru ption noted 
(1). In this s tudy, ea r seed s were left in place for up to 72 hours, followi ng th e NADA protocol 
without any negative effects. Limita tions included  lack of contro l for additional a cupress ure 
applied by m others, lack of blinding ( sham), and timely application of the see ds (with in 24 hours 
of birth).  
 
4.0 Inclusion/Ex clusion Criteria  
 
This prospective pilot study will be conducted over a 24-month  period  and will enroll  a 
total of 40 infants. Infants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to the two groups ; randomization will 
occur within REDC ap. Inclusion criteria  are as follows: infants , 34 weeks or greater gestation , 
exposur e to opioids and/or benzodiaz epine medications  for 5 days or more , beginning a stable 
wean, and maternal age of  18 or older as thes e individuals are able to consent f or themselves 
(see Table 2).  Exclusion criteria will be captur ed in the medi cal record as fo llows: hemodynami c 
instability, transfer to anot her facility prior to completion  of the weaning regime n or death . 
Parent s identif ied b y health care providers in the  PCICU will be approached  by study providers 
(Jackson, Terrell,  Sweeney, Weber,  or W illiams ) in the PCICU . Project procedures will be 
described and  if participants wou ld like to en roll in the  study, the consent process wi ll be 
completed by study p roviders . Following informed consent, acup ressure will be adm inistered 
within 24 hours MCJCHV . Healthcare providers caring for these infants will be identified through 
the medical record and subsequent surveys sent through their V UMC email.  No ethnic group 
will be targeted or  excluded from this st udy. 
  
Table 2: Inclusion an d Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion  Exclusion  
34 weeks gestational a ge to 1 year of a ge Transfer t o another facility prior to wean 
completion   
Maternal age 1 8 or older Re-escalation of care/Wor senin g Illness  
English speaking Death  
Hemodynamical ly stable  
 
 
  7 
 Exposure to opioid and/or benzodia zepine for 
5 days or mor e 
 
5.0 Enrollment  
A purposeful samp ling techniq ue will be utilized to recruit participants fr om MCJCHV  as 
referred by healthcare provid ers c aring for i nfant s expo sed to opioids  and/or benzodiazepines  
for surgical proce dures . Informati onal flyers  (Appendix A)  will b e produced and p rovided by 
healthcare providers to parents interested  in partici pating in the st udy and asked if  they would 
like to be contact ed by  the PI or research  team . At that time, parents  may contact th e PI, ask the 
PI to c all them , or the PI will be av ailable durin g the week (Monday -Friday)  to discuss the stud y 
immedi ately fol lowing t heir discussion with their healthcare provi der. Additi onall y, infants at risk 
for developing withdr awal may be  identified  by followi ng the census in the PCICU. Daily 
monitoring of the P CICU census  via the electronic medic al record  will be performed  by the PI .  
Previous infant studies, including a p ilot feasib ility study conducted by the PI at 
MCJC HV, have reported  high reten tion rates of mother’s t hat consent to a cupuncture for the 
treatm ent of withdrawal  but w e are mi ndful of chall enges in enrollment  and retention  (1, 23, 24 , 
28). Enrolled par ticipants will remain in the st udy until cessation of opioid and /or benzodiazepine  
unless they are transferred to another facility  (see Ta ble 2 Exclusio n Cri teria) or  parents 
voluntari ly withdrawal. If an infant  is trans ferred, acu press ure will not be cont inued but surveys 
will be provi ded to asse ss satisfaction and acce ptability ( Aim 3) . Healthcare providers will be 
identified through the medical record and surveys sent through their VU MC email.  
6.0 Study Procedu res (Design ) 
6.1. Interventi ons.  
Acupressure Admini stration  (Aim1). All p articipant s will receive th e standard non -
pharma cological treatment, which may inc lude any variety of the follow ing treatmen ts: rooming 
in, sooth ing tough , swa ddling, s kin to skin, positi oning,  reduced sti mulat ion, and sound 
mach ines, as needed and tolerat ed. These treatmen ts are documented  by nurses  in the medical 
record. The essential  characteristics for neonatal a cupuncture (Figure 3) as g uided by the Nea r-
Term Infant con ceptual framework (Fi gure 2) are included in the  delivery  of this acupres sure 
protoc ol.  
Withi n 24 hours of weaning medications , one of five specia lty trained  advance d pra ctice 
providers will apply  acupressur e stickers to o ne ear (l eft or ri ght depending on ac cess t o site) in 
accordance w ith the NADA protocol ac upuncture techniqu e. Applic ation will  occur at designated 
points  including  Shen Men, Liver , and Lung: in the room with the mo ther; and poten tially duri ng 
breast feedi ng, holdi ng, skin to skin contact or bottle  feeds. Adm inistrators and n urses will 
document  the activities of  the infant during acupressu re placement in t he medical  record. 
Stickers  will remain  in pla ce for 24 hours.  
At 24 hours , skin will b e assessed, and  stickers  will th en be rotated to th e oppo site ear 
every 48-72 hours if there are no adverse effec ts such as s kin irrita tion. Shou ld skin irritation be 
present after the 24 -hour perio d, the stick er appl ied to the oppos ing ear will be  removed in  12 
hours and s kin asses sed. If skin irritation con tinues , acupressur e will be discontinued, and the 
participant will be w ithdrawn f rom the intervention portion of the study. Parents and health c are 
providers of th e infan t will still be provid ed surveys to  assess satisfa ction and  acceptabil ity of 
acupres sure. If no s kin ir ritation o ccurs , stickers may  be rotated for these participants every 12 
hours. Assessment  of the ear skin will  be docume nted a t the time of acupr essu re removal in the 
medical  record. In a ccordance with previous neonatal st udies th at app lied auricula r acup ressure 
under these guideline s (48-72 hour acupressure placement ), we do n ot anticipate sk in irritation 
but wil l continue  to monitor throughout hospitalization (1, 20, 28) . Acupres sure will be 
discon tinued  when withd rawal symptoms  measure less than or equa l to 3 or less than 2 above 
basel ine with no  more than 2 rescue medic ation doses in  24 hours. Study part icipants  will 
 
 
  8 
 receive the  same a ssessments  as non -participants and must meet t he same weaning  
qualifications  in line with  the standard of care .  
Acupress ure Efficacy (Aim 2).  As part of  the standard of care,  multiple metrics will be 
captu red and compared am ong the  intervention and contro l group. These include dur ation of 
opioid and/ or benz odiazepine medications, dur ation of weani ng ph ase, duration of mecha nical 
venti lation , and  hospital  length of stay . To ensure appropriate opioid dos age c omparisons, all 
opioid med ications will be convert ed to morphine equivalents  (mg/kg/pa tient) ; benzodiazepine  
medications and dosag es will a lso b e captured. Consistent  with the current standard of care fo r 
infants treated in the P CICU  the following assessme nts will be conduct ed: Withdrawal 
Assessment Tool (WAT-1) for  Pediatric With drawal  every 6 hours , Preschool Confusion 
Assessment M ethod for  the ICU (psCAM-ICU) every 12 ho urs, Richmond Agitatio n-Sedation  
Scale (RASS)  every 2 -4 hours and  Faces Legs Activity Cry Consolability Scale (FLACC) every 
4 hours .  
Acupressure Acceptabili ty (Aim 3). Prior to  discharge  and aft er completion of  the 
weaning proto col, parent(s) wil l receive the Client S atisfacti on Questio nnaire (CSQ8)  to ass ess 
parental satisfaction of  acupressure  as an addi tional t herapy. Staff and provid ers who car ed fo r 
particip ants will also receive three brief  electronic surveys via REDCa p directly to their ema il 
prior to discharge . This su rvey will i nclude 12 quest ions: Acceptability of Inter venti on Measure 
(AIM) , Interv ention Appropriateness Measure (IAM), and Feasibility of Interven tion Measure  
(FIM) to e valuate ac ceptability o f acupres sure as a compleme ntary t herapy.  Qualitative 
feedback  back from healthcare providers an d parents will be documented by administrators at  
time o f acupressure applicatio n and skin assessment. Such feedback would inc lude 
observations reported to the research team by he althcare provider s or parents.  
6.2. Conceptual Fr amework  & Innova tion. An important i nnovation of this st udy is the 
devel opmen t of a st andard ized pro tocol speci fic for infants  that i s guided by the Near -Term 
Infant (NTI) conceptual  frame work to ensure  that essential components of infant  care are 
incorporated in this adju nctive  treatm ent with in the standard of c are (49). To our knowledge, th e 
use of a conceptual f ramework has only been  impleme nted in one neonatal  acupressure study 
(performed by the P I) and no  consiste nt framework has been outlined for fu ture studies . Use of  
the NTI gui ded the develo pment of ou r acupressure p rotocol to ensure o ptimal delivery of this  
therapy as a complemen tary t reatment for IWS. Based o n previous eviden ce relate d to 
acceptability of acupres sure with neonates, we will elimi nate a treatment roo m during 
application , allowing t he infan t to be with  his/her parents . An auricular technique i s supported by 
the NTI to imp rove physiologic sym ptoms  within the stand ard of ca re by r educing stimulation to  
the infant , as f ull body admini stration would requi re unwrapping , exposi ng bod y poin ts, and 
laying the i nfant down. All of  the elements defined b y the NTI ensure matern al-infant bonding, 
as well as incorporation of family and  other human interactions . These are nove l elem ents the 
NADA p rotocol did not cons ider as it wa s develo ped fo r the adult population. Us e of the NTI is 
innova tive and significan t in our study as it en sures a daptations to the NA DA pr otocol including 
evidence -based  strategies of acupressur e that are i mperat ive for the IWS population. 
Cumulat ively, these consid erations  allow  for the inclusion  of acupressure with in the standard of 
care for infants  thereby p romoting  future feasibility and  acceptance of this novel treatme nt by 
parents, health care provider s, an d institutions.   
 
 
 
  9 
 
 
FIGURE  2: Near-Term Infant Concep tual 
Framework   FIGURE  3: Es sential Characteristics  for Neonatal 
Acupunctu re as Informed by the N ear-Term  Infant 
Conceptual  Fram ework 
 
7.0 Risks to Participa nts 
 
This study includes an i ntervention t rial that requires r egistry in ClinicalT rials.gov. The re 
is minimal risk t o human participan ts in the proposed study ; nonetheless, rig orous efforts will be 
made to p rotect them. We wi ll recruit a total of 40 infants  at risk for experiencing w ithdrawal  at 
Monr oe Carrell Jr. Children ’s Hospital at Vanderbilt  in Nashv ille, TN. Rec ruitmen t and con sent 
will be conduc ted by the P I and research team . Written , electronic, or te lephone  informed 
consent wil l be obtained pri or to initiating an y study acti vities. All key personnel a nd study team 
members are licensed healthcare profe ssionals with extensi ve substance dependence and 
neonatal experience  that have been specially tr ained and creden tialed to apply auricular 
acupressure .  
The only known  physica l risk associated wit h auricular acupress ure is the po ssibil ity of 
irritation to the  infant’ s skin such  as brui sing or discoloration. Skin irritation will be  defined as 
bruising,  and seve re redn ess a s doc umented by the acupressure provider. Should skin ir ritation 
be present a fter the 24 -hour per iod of acupre ssure applicat ion, the s ticker applied to the 
oppo sing ear  will be removed in 12 hours (as this is half the initial evaluatio n period designa ted 
in the  protoco l) and skin assesse d. If skin irritation oc curs i n the opposing ear, acupressure wil l 
be disconti nued, and the participan t will be withdrawn from t he study . If no skin irritation occurs, 
stickers will be ro tated for these participa nts eve ry 12  hours. In ac cordance with previ ous 
neonatal studies, including one performed by the PI at MCJCHV, we do not anticipate skin 
irritation  when applying  auricular  acupressure under the se guidelines (48-72 hour a cupressure  
placeme nt) (1, 20, 28) .  
Protections for Infants. Infants  in this study will be  viable near term gestat ional  age; 
individua ls engaged in this r esear ch will have no  part in  determin ing viabi lity of the neonate. 
Clinical studies have  been con ducted on th e use  of acup ressure and (more i nvasive) 
acupunct ure and p rovide data fo r assessing  potential r isks to infants. Every parent p roviding 
consen t in this study will be fu lly info rmed reg arding the  reasonably foreseeable impact  of 
acupress ure in infants experi encin g withdrawal from substance s.  
Adequacy of P rotect ion Again st Risks. All membe rs of the team will hav e the required 
huma n participants r esea rch (CITI resea rch et hics and  complia nce) and H IPPA training. All 
paper  copie s of data wil l be kept  in a l ocked  file cabin et in the PI’s office  at VUM C. Electro nic 
 
 
  10 
 information  will remain in the  password p rotected, pr oject number iden tification , REDCap  
database . The PI and res earch te am will always be available to the healthcare providers and 
staff via cell ph one. Participants’ parents  will be given a telep hone number , pager numb er, and 
email address which wil l allow them to contact the PI at any time. Should t here be any  adverse  
events, PCICU  providers are available  to provid e care for th e infants.   
Potential Benef its of the Proposed Research to Participants. Acupressure  may serv e as 
an ad ditional non -pharmacolog ic intervention that improves sym ptoms of withdr awal in infa nts at 
risk of developing withdr awal syndrome . In additi on to therape utic utility of  acupre ssure, it may 
be cost effective by  decreasing ho spital stays as  well as  the need for more exp ensiv e and 
invasive  pharmacologic interventions . 
Importance  of the Knowl edge to be Gained . Acu pressure may augment current first  line 
therapi es assisting in  the av oidance of  medications, promoting maternal bondi ng, and reducin g 
hospit al length of stay. If prove n feasi ble wit hin a pediatric card iac intens ive care popul ation , 
further stud ies may  be conduct ed to evaluate the efficacy o f acupressur e in easing withdrawal  
symp toms as measured by th e enhanced Withdraw al Assessment Tool (WA T), when a pplied in 
conjunction wi th standard treatments.  
Data and S afety Monitori ng Pl an. The PI is responsibl e for th e monit oring of t he 
progres s of the study and safety of all p articipants.  Participants must meet a ll inclusion cri teria 
and none  of the exclusio n criteria. All dis cussions with pa rticipants’ parents will take plac e in 
confid ential areas (priva te room or hospital room inpa tient).  
 
8.0 Reporting of  Adverse  Event s or Unan ticipat ed Pr oblem s involvin g Risk to 
Participants or Others  
 
The s tudy team is comp rised of seven specialty trained  and credentialed providers that 
will c ommunicat e any issues s uch as skin irritation to the PI imme diately. Ad verse events (AE ) 
in this study  will be minimal as there are no invas ive procedures an d the in tervention may be 
administered within the  standard of ca re as the  PI has done previously at MCJCHV; with no 
reported  AE (28). Howev er, AE will be monitored t hroughout the study and  any event w ill be 
followed  to resolution or stabilization. An AE is d efined as an y unfavorable medical occurrence 
in a huma n study part icipant, whether or not it is conside red to be related to participation  in the 
research. Any AE w ill be reported to the VUMC IRB imm ediately. An  unanticipate d problem  
(UP) is any incid ent, e xperience, or outcome that meets all of the foll owing criteria:  a) 
unexpecte d given the research proced ures and characteristics of the st udy population, b ) 
related or possibly related to  participati on in the re search and c)  suggests  that the research  
place s participants or others at a greater risk of ha rm tha n was pre viously known  or recognized. 
We will rep ort any such events to the IRB. Th e PI will provide  continuous, close monitoring of  
participant s at VUMC wi th prompt rep orting of  AEs to the IRB an d will  follow VUMC  reporting 
guidelines.  
 
9.0 Study Withdr awal/D iscontinu ation 
 
Partic ipants may withdraw from th e study at any time a nd continue s tandard care. 
Participants may be withdraw n if deemed medical ly necessary  by an attend ing physi cian or 
study staf f or if exclusion criteria are met . Partici pants may be with drawn fro m the study b y the 
principal investigato r for repeated non-compliance. This would entail al tering the seed 
placement for ex ample. Parti cipants will  be reminded that participation will not  affec t their 
clinical services  and the CSQ8 parental satisf action s urvey will be provided to parents of 
participants.  
 
10.0 Statistical Considerat ions: Analysis Plan  
 
 
  11 
 The study sample w ill be chara cterized usi ng descriptiv e statistics includi ng 
mean /median , standard deviations /interquartile range , proportion s and percentages as outli ned 
below. B enchm arks for suc cess are summarized in Ta ble 2.  
Data A nalysis Ai m 1. The primary goal of  this aim is t o assess feasi bility and 
implementation of t his study in cluding re cruitment,  retention, and execution of and adhe rence to 
the acupressure pr otocol.  Feas ibility measures  will be reported as frequencies and  proportions 
(% of el igible patients enrolled, % of  patients prem aturel y termina ting treatment,  % of patien ts 
complet ing all st udy a ssessments, % of data collection procedures c ompl eted, % of missing  
medi cal record data) . Feasibility will be determined thr ough  the following be nchmarks: a) 
recruitment succe ss: recruitmen t rate  of 2 infants per month  over the prop osed  24-month  time 
frame  (80% of  40 (ex 32) enrolled); b) study reten tion: retentio n of >80% of participants through 
all assessment perio ds, c) adheren ce to the  acupre ssure administra tion protocol: a dvanced 
practi ce providers w ill record at least 90 % of all acupressure  sessions in the RE DCap datab ase 
and medical recor d.   
Data Ana lysis A im 2. Descrip tive data will be gene rated for the outcome s detailed in  
Table 2: Aim 2 by treatment  group . Given the feasibility goal of this study , we will not conduct  
formal statistical tests of association between the two  treatment groups,  but we will provide 
descriptives by groups and meas ures of variability. These statist ics will inform us of data tre nds. 
Descriptive s will be generated based on t he intent to treat pr inciple .  
 
Data Analysis A im 3. Parental satisf action with  acupressure  as an addition al non-
pharm acolo gic intervention will be reported as means with standard deviations  and p ercentiles  
of the CSQ8 scores  within  each ca tegory of the following: exce llent, good, fair and po or. 
Provid er and staff acceptab ility of ac upressure as  an additional non-pharmaco logic treatment 
will be measured with the Acc eptability of Int ervention Measure  (AIM), Interv ention 
Appropriatene ss M easu re (IAM), and Feasibility of I ntervent ion Measure (FIM ). These 
measu res will be repor ted as frequency distri butions and proportions (% of AIM scores, % of 
IAM scores, and % of FIM scores). 
 
Table 2: Assessment Meas ures  
Outcomes  Measures  Time Point  
Aim 1 Feasibility  of Ac upressure 
Protocol  
 Demog raphics : age median  & 
interquartile range , weight medi an & 
interquar tile range, %  male /female , % 
race (black, white, Hispanic) 
 
 
Recruitme nt Metrics: % of eligibl e 
patients enrolled, % of  patients 
prem aturel y terminating treatm ent, % 
of patients co mple ting all stu dy 
assessments, % of data collecti on 
procedure s completed, %  of missin g 
medica l recor d dat a 
 
Enrollment Metrics : % of eligible 
patients enr olled, % of patients 
prem aturely termina ting treatment, % 
of patients completing  all study 
assessment s, % of data col lection 
procedures completed, % of  missin g 
medical record da ta 
 Duration  of stud y 
 
 
 
 
 
Duration of study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duration  of study   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  12 
 Acupre ssure Administration : % sticker 
displacem ent & reapplication , adverse  
events  
 
Infant  Activity, Non-Pharmacolo gic 
Treatments   Every  24-72 hours  
 
 
 
Every 6 hours 
Aim 2  Acupressu re Efficacy  
 
 
 Duration  of Medication Expos ure 
(days): median, interquartile range  
 
Durati on of Wean Phase  (days) : 
median , interquartile range  
 
Duration of Mechanical Ventilation 
(days) : medi an, interquartile range  
 
Total Medicati on Equivalents  
(mg/kg/pt ): median , interquartile range 
 
Hospital Length of Stay (days): 
median , interquarti le range  
 
Exposur e to adjunct medications : 
median, interquartile range  
 
WAT-1 Scores: median, in terquartile 
range 
 
psCAM -ICU Scores : median, 
interquarti le range  
 
RASS  Scores : median, in terquartile 
range 
 
FLACC Scores : media n, interquartile 
range Duration o f study  
 
 
Duration of study  
 
 
Duration of study  
 
 
Every 2 4 hours  
 
 
Duratio n of study  
 
 
Every 24  hours 
 
 
Every 6 hours  
 
 
Every 12 hours  
 
 
Every 2-4 hours 
 
 
Every 4 hours  
Aim 3 Accepta bility Parenta l Satisfaction: CSQ8  means, 
SD, % scores  
 
Staff/Provider  Acceptabilit y: % AIM 
scores, % IAM scores , % FIM scores  
 
Qualitative Feedba ck Duration of study  
 
 
Completion of Study  
 
 
Every 24-72 hours 
 
 
11.0 Privacy/C onfidentiality Issues  
 
There is  a risk  of breach  in confidentially; howe ver, steps will be t aken to decre ase this 
risk as  all da ta will be  collected by the PI from th e me dical recor d then input  into RED Cap. 
Databases will only be a ccessible by mem bers o f the study tea m, passwor d protect ed, and  a 
confide ntial project identifica tion number will be  assigned . This information  will include 
recruitment metrics (Aim 1), and parental satisfa ction and acceptabili ty data (Aim 3) incl uding 
the fol lowing surve ys: CS Q8, AIM, IAM, FIM and qualitative .  
 
 
  13 
 Recruitment of paren ts will take pla ce dur ing routine care. Confidential ly and privacy will 
be ensured b y the  PI and healthcare providers when  discussing the st udy and potential 
participation.  
 
12.0 Follow -up and Record Rete ntion 
 
All data will be s tored in the Van derbilt Un ivers ity Medica l Cent er RED Cap. Only 
authorized study per sonnel will have access  to the passwo rd protected data tracking system  
and the project w ill have an identific ation nu mber assigned . Paper copies o f resear ch rec ords 
such as completed  paper consent fo rms a nd survey s will be kep t in a  designated binder and 
locked cabinet in a restricted  access o ffice at Vanderbilt University Medical  Center or uploade d 
into REDCap. The PI  will ma nage data inc luding quality a ssessmen t (com pleteness and  
accuracy)  to ensure  all variables  are ca ptured  and entered into REDCa p appropriate ly. At 
completion of th e study, the P I will archive paper copies of re search records in accordance with 
Vande rbilt University Medi cal Center’s pol icy and as rec ommend ed by t he institu tional rev iew 
board (IRB ).  
 
13.0 Referenc es 
 
1. Schwartz L, Xiao R, Brown E, Sommers E. Auricular acupressure augmentation of 
standar d medical management of the neona tal narcotic abstinence syndrome. Medical 
Acupuncture. 2011;23(3 ):175-86. 
2. Amirnov in R, Sanchez -Pinto L N, Oku hara C , Lieu P, Koh JY, Rodgers JW, et al. 
Implementa tion of a Risk -Stratified Opioid and Benzodiazepine Weaning  Protocol in a Pediat ric 
Cardiac ICU. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2018;19(11):1024 -32. 
3. McPherson C,  Inder T. Perinatal and n eonatal u se of s edatio n and analgesia. Semin Fetal 
Neonata l Med. 2017;22(5):314 -20. 
4. Weber F, Van Beek S, Scoones G. Potential neuro toxicity of anestheti c drugs in y oung 
children: who cares? A survey among European  anesthetists. Minerva An estesiol. 
2016; 82(3):294 -300. 
5. Chen X, Wa n Y, Wen K, Liang  T, Lin T, Li  P. [Perioperative anesthetic exposure and the 
neurodevelopmental status of 1 year old baby under went neonata l cardiac surgery]. Zhong Nan 
Da Xue Xue Bao Yi X ue Ban. 2015;40 (11):1234 -8. 
6. Mebius MJ , Kooi EM W, Bilardo CM , Bos AF. Brain Injury and Neurodeve lopmental 
Outcome in Congenital Heart Disease: A Systematic Review. Pediatri cs. 2017;140(1).  
7. Barnett AM, M achovec KA, Ames WA, Homi HM, Turi JL, Koo J, et al. The effect of 
intraop erative me thado ne during  pediat ric cardiac surgery on postop erative opioi d 
requirements. Paediatr Anaesth. 2020.  
8. Gupta P, Whiteside W, Sabati A, T esoro TM, Gossett JM,  Tobias JD, et al. Safety and 
efficacy of prolonged dexmedeto midine use in c ritically ill childr en wi th heart disease *. Ped iatr 
Crit Care Med. 2012;13(6):660 -6. 
9. Edwards L, Brown LF. Nonpharmacologic management of neonatal abstinence  
syndrome: an integra tive review.  Neonatal network : NN. 2016;35(5):305 -13. 
10. Maguire D. Care o f the infa nt with ne onata l abstine nce syn drome:  strength of the 
eviden ce. The Journ al of perinatal & neonatal nursing. 2014;28(3):204 -11; quiz E3 -4. 
11. Stuyt EB, Voyles CA, Bursac  S. NADA Pro tocol for Behavioral Health. Putting Tools in the  
Hands of Behav ioral Heal th Provide rs: The Case f or Auri cular Detoxi fication Specialists. 
Medicine s (Basel, Switzerland). 2018;5(1).  
 
 
  14 
 12. Association NAD. Acupuncture Detoxifi cation Specialist Tra ining and Re source Manual. 
Fourth ed: NADA Literature Clearin ghouse; 2015. 2 03 p. 
13. Bergdahl L , Berman AH, H aglund K. Pat ients' experience of auricular acupu ncture during 
protracted withdrawal. Journal of psychiatric and mental healt h nursing. 2014;21(2) :163-9. 
14. Landgren K, Kvorning N, Hallstrom I. Acupuncture reduces crying in infants  with infa ntile 
colic: a  random ised, contro lled, blind clinical study. Ac upuncture in medicine : journal of the 
British Medical Acupuncture Society. 2010;28(4):174 -9. 
15. Gentry KR, McGinn KL, Kundu A, Lynn AM. Acupuncture therapy for infants: a 
preliminar y report o n reasons for consult ation,  feasibility, and tolerability. Paed iatric 
anaesthesia. 2012;22(7):690 -5. 
16. Nager AL, Kobylecka M, Pham PK, Jo hnson L, Gold JI. Eff ects of acup uncture on pain 
and inflammation in pediatric eme rgency departme nt patient s with acu te appendiciti s: a pilot 
study. J ournal of alternative and comp lementary medicine (New York, NY). 2015;21(5):269 -72. 
17. Tsai SL, Reynoso E , Shin DW, Tsung JW. Acupuncture as a Nonpharmacologic 
Treatment for Pain in a Ped iatric Emergenc y Departme nt. Pediat ric emergency care. 2 018. 
18. Yang C, Hao Z, Zhang  LL, Guo Q. E fficacy and safety of acupuncture in children: an 
overview of systematic rev iews. Pediatric resea rch. 2015;78 (2):112 -9. 
19. Abbasoglu A, Cabioglu MT, Tugcu AU , Ince DA, Teki ndal MA, E cevit A, e t al. Acupress ure 
at BL60 a nd K3 Points Before Hee l Lancing in Preterm Infants. Explore (New York, NY). 
2015;11(5):363 -6. 
20. Chen KL, Lind rea KB, Quah -Smith I,  Schmolzer G M, Daly M, Schindler T, et al. Magnetic 
noninvasi ve acupuncture for infant  comfort ( MAGNI FIC) - a single-blinde d rand omised 
controlled pilot trial.  Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 1992). 2017;106(11):1780 -6. 
21. Chen LL, S u YC, Su CH, Lin HC, Kuo HW. Acup ressure and meridian massage: combined 
effects on  increasing bod y weight i n prematur e infants. Jou rnal of  clinical nu rsing. 
2008;17(9) :1174-81. 
22. Ecevit A, Ince DA, Tarcan A, Cabioglu MT, Kurt A. Acupuncture in preterm ba bies during 
minor pai nful procedu res. Journal of traditional Chinese medicine = Ch ung i tsa chih ying wen 
pan. 2011;3 1(4):308-10. 
23. Filippelli AC, W hite LF, Spellman  LW, Broderic k M, Highfield ES, Sommers E, et al. Non -
Insertive Acupuncture and Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome: A Case Serie s from an Inner City 
Safety Net Hospital. Global advances in hea lth and me dicine : i mprov ing healt hcare o utcome s 
worldwide. 2012;1(4):48-52. 
24. Raith W, Schmolzer GM, Resch B, Reiterer F, Avian A, Koestenberger M, et al. L aser 
Acupuncture for Neonatal Abs tinence Syndrome: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Pediatrics. 
2015;136(5):8 76-84. 
25. Raith W, Urle sberger  B. Laser ac upuncture as an adjuvant thera py for a neonate with 
neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) due to maternal sub stitution therapy: ad ditional val ue of 
acupuncture. Acupuncture in medicine : jour nal of the Brit ish Medica l Acupunct ure Society. 
2014;32( 6):523 -4. 
26. Jackson HJ, Lopez C, Miller S, Engelhardt B. A Scoping Review of Acupuncture as a 
Potential Intervention  for Neonatal Abstine nce Syndrome . Med Acupunct. 2019;31(2):69 -84. 
27. Jackson HJ,  Lopez C, Mille r S, Engle hardt B. N eonat al Abstin ence Sy ndrome : An 
Integrative Review  of Neonatal Acupuncture to Inform a Protocol for Adjunctive Treatment. Adv 
Neonatal Care . 2019;19(3):165 -78. 
28. Jackson HJ, Lopez C, Miller S, Englehardt B. Feasibility of auricular ac upressure as an 
adjunct treatment for neo natal opioid  withdrawal syndr ome (NOWS). S ubst Abus. 2020:1 -10. 
 
 
  15 
 29. Whelan KT, Heckmann MK, Lincoln PA, Hamilton SM. P ediatric Withdrawal I dentificatio n 
and Management. J Pediatr Intensive Care. 2015; 4(2):73 -8. 
30. Fernández -Carrión F,  Gaboli M, Gon zález-Celador  R, Gó mez de Quero-Masía P, 
Fernánde z-de Miguel S, Murga -Herrera V, et al. Withdrawal syndrome in the pediatric intensive 
care unit. Incidence an d risk factors. Med Intensiva. 2013;37(2):67 -74. 
31. Duceppe MA,  Perreault  MM, Frene tte AJ, Burry LD, Ric o P, L avoie A, et al. Frequen cy, 
risk fact ors and symptomatology of iatrogenic withdrawal from opioids and benzodiazep ines in 
critically Il l neonates, children and adults: A systematic review of clini cal studies. J Clin Pharm  
Ther. 201 9;44( 2):148 -56. 
32. da Silva PS, Reis ME, Fonseca TS, Fonseca M C. Opioid and Benzodiazepine Withdrawal 
Syndrome in PICU Patients: Which Ris k Factors Matter? J A ddict Med. 2 016;10(2):110 -6. 
33. Tanaka C, Shimizu N, Staito O, Motomura M, Watanabe I . Risk fac tor of withdra wal 
syndrome  in the  paediatric ICU. Critical Care . 2014;18(1):P421.  
34. Kraft WK, van den Anker JN. Pharmacologic management of the opioid neonata l 
abstinence  syndrome. Pediatric clinics of North America. 2012;59(5):1147 -65. 
35. Sublett J. Ne onata l abstine nce syn drome : therapeutic interventions. MCN The American 
journal of maternal child nursing. 2013;38(2):102 -7; quiz 7 -9. 
36. Grim K, Harrison TE, Wilder RT. M anagement of neonatal abstinence syndrome from 
opioids. Clinics in perinat ology. 201 3;40( 3):509 -24. 
37. Sutter MB, Le eman L, Hsi A. Ne onatal opioid  withdrawal syndrome. Obstetrics and 
gynecology clinics of North America. 20 14;41(2):317 -34. 
38. Davis JM, Sh enberger J, Terrin N, Breeze JL, Hudak M, Wachman EM, et al. Com parison 
of Safety an d Efficacy of Methado ne vs Morphi ne for Treatment of Neonatal A bstinence 
Syndrome: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA pediatrics. 2018;172(8 ):741 -8. 
39. Boucher AM. Nonopioi d management of neonatal abstinence syndrome. Advances in 
neonat al care : official j ourna l of the Nationa l Association of Neonatal Nurses. 2017;17( 2):84 -
90. 
40. Habacher G, Pittler MH, Ernst E. Effectiveness of acupuncture in veterinary medicin e: 
systemati c review. Journal of veterinary internal medicine. 2006;20(3):48 0-8. 
41. Jindal V, G e A, Mansky PJ . Safety and  effica cy of acupuncture in children:  a review of 
the evidence. Journal of pediatric hematology/oncology. 2008;30 (6):431 -42. 
42. Lee A , Fan LT. St imulation of the wrist acupuncture point P6 for preventing 
posto perative n ausea and vomit ing. The Cochran e database o f systematic reviews. 
2009(2): Cd003281.  
43. Reinthal M, Andersson S, Gustafsson M, Plos K, Lund I, Lundebe rg T, et al. Effects of 
minimal a cupuncture in children with infantile colic - a prospective, qua si-randomi sed single  
blind control led trial. Acupunct ure in medicine : journal of t he British Medical Acupuncture 
Society. 2008;26(3):171 -82. 
44. Raith W, Pich ler G, Zotter H, Muel ler W, Urles berger B. Detection of psychic ear 
acupuncture points in a newbo rn infant with neona tal abstinence  syndro me. J ournal of 
alternative an d complementa ry medicine (New York, NY). 2010;16(4):345 -6. 
45. Kurath -Koller S, Pansy J, Mileder LP, Schmolzer  GM, Urlesbe rger B, Raith W. Active 
Somatic and Psychic Ear Acupuncture Poin ts in Newb orn Infant s with Neonata l Abstinence  
Syndro me. Journal of alternative and  complementary medicine (New York, NY). 
2016;22(10):788 -93. 
46. Van Ameronge n KS, Blattmann FC, K uhn A, Surbe k D, Nelle M. Ear acupuncture points 
in neonates. Journal of alt ernative a nd complem entary medicin e (New York, NY). 
2008;14(1):47-52. 
 
 
  16 
 47. Raith W, Kutschera J, Muller W, Urlesberger B. [Ear acupuncture points in neonates wi th 
neonatal abstinenc e syndrome d ue to maternal substitution therapy]. Zeitschrift fur Geburtshil fe 
und Neo natologie.  2010;214(3):1 03-7. 
48. Yeh ML, W ang PL, Lin JG, Chung ML. The effects and measures of auricular acupressure 
and interactive multimedia for  smoking cessation in  college stu dents. Evidence -based 
complementary and alternative medicine : e CAM. 2014; 2014:89843 1. 
49. Medoff -Cooper B, Bakewell-Sachs S, Buus-Frank ME, Santa -Donato A. The AWHONN 
Near-Term Infant Initiative: a conceptual framework for  optimizing health fo r near -term infants. 
Journal of obstetric, gynecologic, and neonatal nursing  : JOGNN /  NAACOG. 2 005;3 4(6):666 -71. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 