Michigan Mental Health Integration Partnership - Implementing PTSD Treatment in Federally 
Qualified Health Centers for Michigan Medicaid Enrollees 
PE-PC Pilot 
National Clinical Trial Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Date:  September 23, 2021
Principal Investigator: 
Rebecca Sripada, PhD, Assistant Professor, University  of Michigan D epartment of Psychiatry 
Supported by: 
Michigan Mental Health Integration Partnership (MIP) Scholars program 
Michigan Department of Health and Human Services 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title:     PE-PC Pilot  
 Study Description:  A study to evaluate the delivery and sustainability of a brief trauma- focused treatment, 
Prolonged Exposure for Primary Care (PE -PC), an evidence -based intervention for PTSD, 
delivered via telehealth to patients  in Community Health Centers (CHCs) in Michigan . 
 Outcomes:  Primary Outcome: PE-PC participants will experience  reductions in  PTSD symptoms as 
measured by the PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5) at 2 months and 4 months . 
 
 Secondary Outcome s: PE-PC participants will experience reductions in depr ession as 
measured by the PHQ -9 at 2 months and 4 months . We will also e xamine the mechanisms 
of PE -PC’s effect by measuring the two potential mediators  of intervention effectiveness , 
recovery goals (Recovery Assessment Scale; RAS)  and p osttraumatic cognitions ( Post -
Traumatic Cognitions Inventory ; PTCI) .  
 
Intervention  Information:   Deliver PE -PC to patients via telehealth . This treatment consists of four 30 -minute sessions 
of in -vivo and narrative exposure, with content drawn from the PE model .
1 
 
Study Population:  The sample will consist of 50 participants, age 18 and older, of any gender, race or 
ethnicity, who are currently enro lled at a CHC and screen positive for PTSD on the PCL -5 
(PCL -5 ≥ 33).   
Locations:   University of Michigan  
   Family Medical Center of Michigan 
Hamilton Community Health Network  
Family Health Care  
 Estimated Study   
Start Date:   October 1 , 2018   
 
Study Duration:  2 year s 
 
 
  
1  BACKGROUND & RATIONALE  
 
1.1  Background  
 
Posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) is a disorder that  develop s following exposure to traumatic events  such as 
rape, assault, natural disaster, or combat. It is associated with distress, impairment, and greater risk for adverse health outcomes, including am ong Michigan Medicaid enrollees.
2 The percentage of patients screening positive for 
PTSD in primary care settings  has been estimated to range from  14% -23%.3-6  
 Despite this high prevalence, treatment for PTSD is severely limited  at CHCs.
7 In addition, patients  with PTSD may 
be reluctant to seek care in specialty mental health clinics .8 Furthermore, community mental health providers 
rarely have training in efficacious PTSD treatments, and community dissemination and implementation efforts have 
had mixed success.9 Thus, there is significant need for a brief PTSD treatment delivered in the primary care setting.  
Providing brief PTSD treatment in the primary care setting aligns with the MDHHS Section 298 Initiative to 
coordinate physical health services and behavioral health services.  
 
1.2  Study Rational e 
 
The purpose of this project is to expand access to trauma -focused treatment among Medicaid Enrollees with PTSD , 
thereby improving the quality of ment al health services delivered to this population. This project directly addresses 
the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS) Mental Health and Wellness commission priority 
to provide “better access to high quality, coordinated and consiste nt service and care between agencies, service 
providers and across geographical boundaries.”  
 
The project goals are to evaluate the delivery and sustainability of a brief trauma -focused treatment, Prolonged 
Exposure for Primary Care (PE -PC), an evidence -based intervention for PTSD, when delivered via telehealth to  
patients enrolled at CHCs  in Michigan. CHC s serve 680,000 Michigan residents across 260 delivery sites. Ninety -two 
percent of CHC patients have incomes below 200 percent of the federal poverty level. Approximately 16 percent of 
CHC patients are uninsured, and more than half rely on Medicaid for th eir insurance. Thus, providing PTSD 
treatment to CHC  patients will improve care to Medicaid enrollees and promote Mental Health and We llness 
commission priorities of developing a trauma informed system that includes implementation of evidence -based 
trauma- informed care. 
 To address the high burden of PTSD in Medicaid enrollees in Michigan CHC s, we plan to deliver PE -PC to patients in 
CHCs. This treatment consists of four 30 -minute sessions of in -vivo and narrative exposure, with content drawn 
from the PE mo del.
1 Recently published efficacy data from a randomized controlled trial showed that PE -PC 
significantly reduced PTSD and depression sympto ms as compared to usual primary  care treatment.10 Thes e 
changes were maintained at 6-month follow -up. 
 
2  OUTCOMES   
 
2.1  Primary Outcome  
 
The Primary Outcome measure is  change in PTSD symptoms as measured by the PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5). 
PCL-5 will be administered at baseline,  2-month s post -enrollment  (around the time of treatment completion) and 
4-months post - enrollment . Two 2 -month and 4 -month surveys will be administered regardless of whether the 
patient has completed the intervention.  
 
1. PCL-5 [Time  Frame:  Baseline, 2-month s, 4-months ] 
The PCL-511 is a 20 -item self -report measure designed to assess P TSD symptoms as defined by the DSM -
5. Each item of the PCL -5 is scored on a five point scale ranging from 0 ( “not at all”) to 4 (“extremely ”). 
The PCL -5 has strong internal consistency , test-retest reliability, and convergent and discriminant 
validity .12,13 Scores ≥ 33 indicate a probable diagnosis of PTSD.  
 
2.2  Secondary Outcomes  
 
1. Depressive symptoms  (measured by the Patient Health Questionnaire; PHQ -9)14,15 [Time  Frame:  Baseline, 2 -
months, 4 -months ] 
2. Recovery goals (measured by the Recovery Assessment Scale; RAS )16,17 [Time  Frame:  Baseline, 2 -months, 4 -
months ]  
3. Posttraumatic cognitions (measured by the Post- Traumatic Cognitions Inventory; PTCI)18 
[Time  Frame:  Baseline, 2-months, 4 -months ]  
 
3  STUDY DESIGN  
 
The goal of this pilot project is to deliver PE -PC to 50 patients via telehealth and evaluate patients’ engagement 
with the treatment, satisfaction, and PTSD -related outcomes.  This is an open trial. All participants will receive the 
same intervention.  
 
4  SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
The population of interest is individuals with PTSD who receive services from CHCs in Michigan.  
 
4.1  Inclusion Criteria  
The goal of the study inclusion and exclusion criteria is to identify a broadly representativ e sample of CHC patients 
with PTSD .  
 
Patients will be eligible for the study if they : 
1) are age 18 years or older  
2) receiv e care at a Michigan CHC  
3) have a PCL -5 score ≥33  
4) have had psychotropic medication stability for at least 4 weeks  
 
4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
Patients will be excluded if they are: 1) substantially cognitively impaired, 2) unable to agree to study procedures  
for any reason (including incompetency), 3 ) at high  risk of suicide , or 4) current ly engage d in a trauma-focused 
behavio ral treatment  (such as Prolonged Exposure or Cognitive Processing Therapy) . Patients who do not speak 
English will be excluded for logistical reasons . 
 
4.3  Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited from the following CHCs: Family Medical Center of Michigan, Hamilton 
Community Health Network , and Family Health Care . All three clinics are all currently engaged in University of 
Michigan research studies and strongly endorse the current study.   
 
5  STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
 
5.1  Delive ry and Duration   
 
PE-PC will be delivered by the telepsychologist via interactive video technology, or telehealth.   
 
5.2  Interventionist Training  
 
Therapist training and PE -PC implementation PE -PC will be guided by Dr. Sheila Rauch and Dr. Jeffrey Cigrang, 
treatment developers of PE -PC. Dr. Rauch and Dr. Cigrang have established a PE -PC training protocol that  includes 
didactic training followed by phone consultation on training cases. Trainers will augment this training with case review to establish competence.  
 
5.3 Delivery of Treatment  
 
Eligible participants are individuals presenting in CHC s who screen positive for PTSD, using validated screening 
measures currently used in multiple Michigan CHC s. Those who screen positive will be connected by a warm 
handoff to the research assistant  (or will call us after being provided with our contact information) , who will 
review inclusion/exclusion criteria, present the study information sheet , and schedule the first meeting with the 
telepsychologist. 
 
PE-PC treatment will follow the PE -PC manual and patient workbook.  Treatment content for PE- PC is drawn 
from the PE model a nd condensed so as to deliver the most efficacious components of PE. PE -PC consists of four, 
30-minute appointments scheduled approximately once a week over 4 -6 weeks (to accommodate scheduling and 
missed appointments). Before beginning the 4 -session treat ment, the telepsychologist will schedule an initial 
appointment with the patient to determine the index trauma  and answer any questions about the treatment. 
During the first PE -PC session, the PC -MHI provider will review the “Confronting Uncomfortable Memo ries” 
activity workbook to be completed at home and brought back for use in subsequent sessions. The workbook asks 
the patient to write a detailed first-person narrative of the event associated with the greatest level of current distress, including recollection of personal thoughts, feelings, and physical reactions. Emotional processing questions are also included. In addition, the telepsychologist will plan for in -vivo exposure activities between 
sessions. The patient will be instructed to complete the mem ory exposure for 30 minutes each day between 
sessions. At the second PE -PC session, the telepsychologist will review the patient’s exposures, problem -solve any 
implementation difficulties, and process the exercises. The patient will then read the narrative and his or her 
answers to the emotional processing questions out loud and they will process the exercise. Practice continues between sessions. This session format and content are repeated at the third and fourth sessions. At the end of the fourth session,  the telepsychologist and patient will review treatment progress assisted by results of the PTSD 
Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5) administered during the fourth session. Participants who still need or desire treatment 
at the conclusion of PE -PC will receive referrals to other mental health resources.   
 
6  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
We used paired t- tests and multiple regression to determine symptom change over time. Multiple 
imputation was used to impute missing data. Ten imputed datasets were generated, and coefficients and standard errors were adjusted for the variability between imputations according to Rubin’s combination rule .
19 
We i ncluded auxiliary variables that were correlated with the missing variables at r > 0.4 .20 Imputation procedures 
were conducted in SAS, using the Ma rkov Chain Monte Carlo approach.  
 
 
 
7  REFERENCES  
 
1. Foa EB, Hembree EA, Rothbaum BO. Prolonged Exposure Therapy for PTSD: Therapist Guide. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press; 2007.  
2. Seng JS, Clark MK, McCarthy AM, Ronis DL. PTSD and physical comorbidity among women receiving 
Medicaid: results from service -use data. J Trauma Stress 2006;19:45 -56. 
3. Meredith LS, Eisenman DP, Green BL, et al. Design of the Violence and Stress Assessment (ViStA) study: a 
randomized controlled trial of care management for PTSD among predominantly Latino patients in safety net 
health centers. Contemporary clinical trials 2014;38:163 -72. 
4. Gillock KL, Zayfert C, Hegel MT, Ferguson RJ. Posttraumatic stress disorder in primary care: prevalence and 
relationships with physical symptoms and medical utilization. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2005;27:392 -9. 
5. Davis RG, Ressler KJ, Schwartz AC, Stephens KJ, Bradley RG. Treatment barriers for low -income, urban 
African Americans with undiagnosed posttraumatic stress d isorder. J Trauma Stress 2008;21:218 -22. 
6. Liebschutz J, Saitz R, Brower V, et al. PTSD in urban primary care: high prevalence and low physician 
recognition. J Gen Intern Med 2007;22:719 -26. 
7. Meredith LS, Eisenman DP, Green BL, Basurto -Davila R, Cassells A, Tobin J. System factors affect the 
recognition and management of posttraumatic stress disorder by primary care clinicians. Med Care 2009;47:686 -
94. 
8. Possemato K, Ouimette P, Lantinga LJ, et al. Treatment of Department of Veterans Affairs primary care 
patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychological Services 2011;8:82 -93. 
9. Ruzek JI, Rosen RC. Disseminating evidence -based treatments for PTSD in organizational settings: A high 
priority focus area. Behav Res Ther 2009;47:980 -9. 
10. Cigrang JA, Rauch SAM, Mintz J, et al. Moving Effective Treatment for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder to 
Primary Care: A Randomized Controlled Trial with Active Duty Military. Families, Systems, and Health in press.  
11. Weathers FW, Litz BT, Keane TM, Palmieri PA, Mar x BP, Schnurr PP. The PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5). 
Scale available from the National Center for PTSD. 2013.  
12. B
levins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, Witte TK, Domino JL. The Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist for 
DSM
-5 (
PCL
-5)
: Development and Init ial Psychometric Evaluation. Journal of Traumatic Stress 2015;28:489 -98. 
13. Bo
vin MJ, Marx BP, Weathers FW, et al. Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist for Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders –Fifth Edition (PCL -5) in veterans. P sychological Assessment 2016;28:1379.  
14. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern 
Med 2001;16:606- 13. 
15. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self- report versi on of PRIME -MD: the PHQ 
primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. Journal of the American Medical Association 1999;282:1737 -44. 
16. Corrigan PW, Giffort D, Rashid F, Leary M, Okeke I. Recovery as a psych ological construct. Community 
mental health journal 1999;35:231 -9. 
17. Roe D, Mashiach -Eizenberg M, Corrigan P. Confirmatory factor analysis of the brief version of the recovery 
assessment scale. The Journal of nervous and mental disease 2012;200:847 -51. 
18. Foa EB, Ehlers A, Clark DM, Tolin DF, Orsillo SM. The posttraumatic cognitions inventory (PTCI): 
Development and validation. Psychological assessment 1999;11:303.  
19. Rubin DB, Little RJ. Statistical analysis with missing data. Hoboken, NJ: J Wiley & So ns 2002.  
20. Enders CK. Applied missing data analysis: Guilford press; 2010.  
 