                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 1 PROTOCOL (16 -02093)  
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Use of Low Cost  Prostheses to Improve Upper Extremity Function  
in Children with Cerebral Palsy  
 
PURPOSE OF STUDY AND BACKGROUND  
Purpose of the Study : To assess the effectiveness of upper extremity prosthesis in improving the upper 
extremity function of children with cerebral palsy who have limited use of their hands  
 
Background  
Cerebral  palsy  is the most  common  childhood  disability,  affecting  approximately  two to three  out of every  
one thousand  live births  in the United  States,  and the most  common  form  is spastic  (77%)  (CDC) . Up to 
83% of children  with cerebral  palsy  have  upper  extremity  involvement,  which  limits  their ability  to live and 
work  independently.1  
 
In the past,  there  have  been  very few well-designed  studies  proving  efficacy  of various  treatment  modalities  
of the upper  extremity  in patients  with cerebral  palsy.  Traditional  methods  such as surgery  have  only 
weakly  positive  data.2 In two recent  comprehensive  reviews,  the most  supportive  data was found  for 
therapeutic  techniques,  in particular,  constraint -induced  movement  therapy  (CIMT)  and bimanual  
training.2,3 A review  of over 100 patients  studied  since  1997  showed  that forced  use of the weaker  hand  and 
intensive  bimanual  training  in patient s with unilateral  spastic  cerebral  palsy  can improve  measures  of 
dexterity  and use.4 Additional  focuses  include  other  intensive  and structured  therapies,  Botox  injections,  
and family -centered  or home  programs.  However,  most  treatments  are effective  only in patients  with 
relatively  advanced  ability.   
 
The Manual  Ability  Classification  System  (MACS)  is a simple  way to describe  how children  with cerebral  
palsy  use their hands  during  routine  activities  at school  and home.5 Level  I indicates  a child  who has full 
use, while  level  V would  be one without  any use. The intervening  levels  describe  increasingly  severe  
limitations;  level  II pertains  to a child  who can handle  most  objects,  level  III to someone  who handles  items  
with difficulty,  and level  IV to a patient  who can only use their hands  in adapted  situations.  Many  of the 
intensive  and structured  therapeutic  regimens  were  developed  for children  at higher  functioning  MACS  
levels.6 For children  with lower  levels  of activity,  MACS  IV and V, there  are much  fewer  available  
treatments.   
 
Upper  extremity  function  in cerebral  palsy  patients  can have a profound  effect  on their quality  of life and 
ability  for self-care.7,8 Children  with MACS  IV or V comprise  15-30% of the pediatric  cerebral  palsy  
population  and are more  globally  involved.1 Although  they are a minority  of total patients,  they consume  a 
large  portion  of resources  for care,  and should  have  options  for improvement  of the upper  extremity.  
 
In recent years, three -dimensional printing has expanded to medical uses,  and prostheses of the hand are 
being produced and proven to be functional.9 The advantages of three -dimensional prostheses are lower 
cost, customizability and rapid turnover. The major disadvantages are durability and initial set -up fees. 
Given that child ren can quickly outgrow an expensive prosthesis, the advantages of three -dimensional 
printed prostheses may outweigh the disadvantages. The feasibility of three -dimensional printing means  
that children  are eligible  to receive  sophisticated  devices  earlier  and more  frequently  than they would  
otherwise,  given  economic  constraints.   
 
Orthotics  and prostheses  both refer  to external  devices,  though  prostheses  are more  specifically  meant  to 
repla ce a missing  part. One manner  of considering  low-functioning  patients  with cerebral  palsy  is that they 
are lacking  useable  parts,  such as mobile  fingers  or oppos able thumbs.  The most  common  upper  extremity  
contracture  pattern  in cerebral  palsy  patients  is thumb  in palm  with clasped  hand,  followed  by shoulder  
adduction  and internal  rotation,  and wrist  flexion  with pronation.1 In spite  of having  contr actures,  even  
children  with severe  limitations  maintain  a small  amount  of active motion  of either  the wrist  or elbow . This 
active  motion  in proximal  joints  can be used to motor  distal  motion  by means  of a prosthesi s which  is 
                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 2 driven  by tenodesis . Templates  for functional,  three -dimensionally  printed  prostheses  which  give patients  
the ability  to grasp  and release  by means  of wrist  or elbow  motion  are already  available  and have  been  
utilized  for pediatric  patients  with congenital  finger  amputations  or malformations . Cerebral  palsy  patients  
with contracted,  poorly  mobile  fingers  and some  small  degree  of control  over wrist or elbow  motion  might  
also be eligible  for utilizing  such a device.   
 
A systematic  review  and meta -analysis  was recently  performed  on the use of orthotics,  or splints,  in 
children  with cerebral  palsy.  Unlike  constraint  or bimanual  therapies,  orthotics  can be applicable  to lower -
functioning  patients.  When  looking  only at functional,  as opposed  to non-functional,  hand  splints,  
preliminary  data showed  a small,  immediate  benefit.10 Some  investigators  likened  functional  hand  splints  to 
being  utilized  like spectacles  for vision,  with the improved  use present  only during  wear,  while  others  
speculated  that the gains  made  during  usage  would  carry  over into times  without  wear.  Currently,  
insufficient  data exists  to determine  which  theory  is most  accurate.   
 
Study  Design : Prospective  one group  pretest -posttest  design   
Primary  outcome  measures:  passive  and active  range  of motion,  MACS,  Assisting  Hand  Assessment , 
Melbourne  Assessment  of Unilateral  Upper  Limb  Function , Pediatric  Motor  Activity  Log 
Secondary  outcome  measure:  Pediatric  Quality  of Life Inventory  
 
CHARACTERISTICS  OF THE  RESEARCH  POPULATION  
Number  of Subjects:  Participants  will be 12 children . 
Gender  of Subjects : Males  and females  will be enrolled  
Age of Subjects : 4-17 years  
Racial  and Ethnic  Origins : Participants  of all racial  and ethnic  origins  will be included.  
Inclusion  Criteria : 
• Diagnosis:  cerebral  palsy  
• 4-17 years  old 
• MACS  levels  III - V 
• Active  movement  of wrist  or elbow  
Exclusion  Criteria : 
• MACS  levels  I, II 
• Botox  or orthopedic  surgery  in past 6 months  
• Severe  contractures  
• Lack  of voluntary  arm motion  
Vulnerable  Subjects : Children  are the target  population.  Appendix:  Children  will be uploaded.  Some  
children  may have  cognitive  limitations,  so Appendix:  Cognitively  Impair ed Subjects  will be uploaded.  A 
review  of the patient’s  medical  record  as well as a discussion  with parent/legal  guardian  will be used to 
assess  the patient’s  ability  to provide  assent  and sign the form.  If unable  to sign and patient  is able to 
indicate  and understanding  of the study,  verbal  assent  will be obtained.  Additionally,  children  without  the 
capacity  to provide  assent  will be included  because  they may benefit  from  this study  in that their upper  
extremity  function  might  improve.   
 
METHODS  AND  PROCED URES  
Methods  and Procedures  
Participant s will be 12 children,  aged  4-17 years,  with cerebral  palsy  and MACS  level  III - V 
 
All patients, with CP and upper extremity involvement, who are being seen during a regular ly 
scheduled  clinic/office/occupational therapy visit by the PI, co -investigator or occupational 
therapist, and are potentially eligible for enrollment in the study will be provided information about 
the study.   The PI, co -investigator, occupational therapist or resea rch coordinator will explain the 
project to the child and the child’s parents. The parents will be asked if they are interested in having 
their child voluntarily participate in the study. The Consent form (please see Process of Consent section 
below for fu rther details) will be presented to the parent/legal guardian and the age appropriate Assent form 
will be presented to the child. If parent/legal guardian and child agree to participate, then they will be asked 
to sign the Consent and Assent forms.  
                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 3  
Additi onally, the PI , co-investigator  and occupational therapists  will review their own individual databases 
for potential subjects and contact the ir own patients  by phone to describe the research project. The 
Telephone Recruitment Script and Waiver of Authoriza tion have been uploaded. If patient and parent are 
interested, then patient will be referred to the occupational therapist.  For these subjects, the occupational 
therapist  or research coordinator  will be obtaining consent/assent (please see Process of Conse nt sec tion 
below for further details) when the patient comes for Visit 1.  
 
All visits  for this study  are for research  purposes.  The patient  will be scheduled  for Visit  1, Screening  Visit.  
At Visit  1, a pediatric  occupational  therapist  will perform  a comprehensive  initial  evaluation  to determine  
functional  level, range  of passive  and active  upper  extremity  motion,  presence  of contractures,  and level  of 
spasticity/abnormal  tone. The evaluation  will include  the following  widely  used measures  of upper  
extremity  function  in patients  with cerebral  palsy:  MACS,  the Assisting  Hand  Assessment  (AHA),  
Melbourne  Assessment  of Unila teral Upper  Limb  Function,  and Pediatric  Motor  Activity  Log (PMAL).  
From this information  the occupational  therapist  will determine  patient’s  eligibility  for enrollment,  i.e., if 
the patient  meets  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.  Additionally,  for the patients  that are enrolled  in the 
study,  this will serve  as their initial  evaluation.  
 
Those patients determined to be eligible and signed  consent/assent/authorization forms   will be fitted with 
a three -dimensionally printed arm prosthesis , which uses wrist or elbow  tenodesis for  grasp and 
release. Three -dimensional printers can manufacture prosthes es, which use  proximal motion to 
activate opening  and closing of the fingers.  
 
Patients  with MACS  III have  limited  active  finger  and wrist  motion.  Many  patients  with MACS  level  IV 
have  a small  amount  of active  wrist  motion  and minimal  finger  motion.  These  two groups  of patients  can 
have  prostheses  with extension  caps on the fingers  and thumb  driven  by wrist  motion.  The palmar  
fingertips  would  then be utilized  for sensory  input  and additional  fine control.  In contrast,  those  patients  
(some  MACS  IV and some  MACS  V) with unusable,  contracted  fingers  and no wrist  motion  may need  
more  involved  prostheses.  Similar  to prostheses  for children  with congenital  finger  amputations,  a 
prosthetic  hand  component  would  be fitted  over the existing  hand,  and extension  and flexion  of the 
prosthetic  fingers  (not just caps)  would  be driven  by elbow  motion.    
 
The fabrication  of the prosthesis  will involve  several  steps.  First the measurements  by the occupational  
therapist  will include:  (1) circumferential  measurements  of all fingers,  thumb,  web space,  wrist  and 
forearm,  and (2) length  measurements  from  (a) elbow  to wrist,  (b) wrist  to each metacarpal  joint,  (c) each 
metacarpal  joint to proximal  interphalangeal  joint,  (d) each proximal  interphalangeal  joint to distal  
interphalangeal  joint,  (e) each distal  interphalangeal  joint to finger  tip, (f) metacarpal  to interphalangeal  
joint of thumb,  and (g) interphalangeal  joint to tip of thumb.  These  measurements  will be inputted  to the 
software  in the computer  connected  to the 3D printer.  This software  drives  the printer  to produce  the 
following  prosthetic  components  for the subjects  who will be using  their own fingers:  (1) 3 dorsal  caps per 
finger,  which  fit between  the joints  and the distal  joint and tip, (2) 2 dorsal  caps for the thumb,  which  fit 
between  the joints  and the joint and tip, (3) dorsal  hand  hood,  which  fits between  wrist  and metacarpals,  
and (4) dorsal  forearm  hood.  For the subjects  for whom a prosthetic  hand  is being  fabricated,  the same  
measurements  will be used to make  the prosthetic  components  with the same  components  being  made  for 
the dorsum  of the forearm  and hand,  but complete  replicas  of the fingers  and thumb  will be made.  For both 
designs,  all of these  components  are interconnected  with nylon  cord and tensioning  fasteners.  The fasteners  
are used to adjust  the tension  to provide  the movement  at the joints  of the prosthesis  that is generated  by 
either  the subject’s  own active  elbow  flexion,  or wrist  flexion  or extension.  All of the components  will be 
made  from  a cornstarch -based  material called  polylactic  acid.   According  to FDA  regulations,  external  
prosthetic  components  are exempt.  As SOC,  children  have previously  received  similar  splints  of both 
designs,  but fabricated  manually  by an occupational  therapist.  
 
After  the prosthesis  has been fabricated,  the occupational  therapist  will place  it on the patient’s  arm and 
hand.  The therapist  will assess  the fit of all of the components  and ask patient  if there  are any areas  of 
discomfort.  Therapist  will adjust  prosthesis  to eliminate  any areas of discomfort.  Additionally,  the therapist  
                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 4 will evaluate  the ease of movement  between  all of the components  and adjust  the tension  of the cords  as 
needed.  
 
Visit  Schedule  
Visit  1, Screening  Visit : Previously  described  initial  evaluation.  
Visit s 2: The occupational  therapist  will take circumferential  and length  measurements  and/or  3D scan of 
the subject’s  arm and hand.  These  measurements /scan  will be sent via encrypted  email  to the Maker  Space , 
NYU  Tandon  School  of Engineering,  where  the prosthesis  will be fabricated  using  a 3D printer.  As a 
secondary  outcome  measure,  all subjects  and their parents  will be asked  to complete  the Pediatric  Quality  
of Life Inventory  (PedsQL) . 
Visits  3-4: The prosthesis  will have  been shipp ed or delivered  to the occupatio nal therapist  who will use 
these  two visits  to adjust  the prosthesis  to optimize  fit and functioning.  
Visits  5-12: Occupational  therapy  treatment  1x week  for 8 weeks.  Each  occupational  therapy  treatment  will 
be a one-hour standardized  session  that will include the following:  stretching/strengthening  (approximately  
20 minutes),  bimanual  training  (approximately  20 minutes),  and activities  of daily  living  (approximately  20 
minutes).  
Visit  13 (one week  after 8th occupational  therapy  treatment) : Re-evaluation  including  measurement  of 
upper  extremity  range  of passive  and active  motion,  level  of spasticity/abnormal  tone,  MACS,  AHA , 
Melbourne  Assessment  of Unila teral Upper  Limb  Function , PMAL,  and PedsQL.  These  will be performed  
both with the prosthe sis on and with it off. 
Visit  14 (6 months  after initiation  of occupational  therapy  treatment):  Re-evaluation  including  same  
assessments  as Visit  13. These  will be performed  both with the prosthesis  on and off. 
 
Additionally, subjects will be asked to keep  a log of daily activities including how long prosthesis is worn . 
 
Data Analysis and Data Monitoring  
Demographics will be reported.  Passive and active rang e of motion measurements and the MACS, AHA, 
Melbourne Assessment,  PMAL  and the PedsQL  scores  at initial evaluation , end of occupational therapy 
treatment and 6 months follow -up will be compared.  DSMP has been uploaded.  
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
The data will be stored on a computer to which only research personnel have access and will be password 
protected to prevent unauthorized access.  Data will be stored in either the locked office of the PI or the 
research coordinator.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT  ASSESSMENT  
Risk   
This study  is low risk because  it involves  the fabrication  and use of upper  extremity  splinting,  which  are 
commonly  an integral  part of typical  occupational  therapy  treatment  of this population  of children.  The 
primary  difference  will be in the fabrication  technique,  3D printing,  being  utilized.  For the evaluations,  
measurements,  scans  and treatment  by the occupational  therapists,  the only potential  for any discomfort  
would  be mild discomfort  during  the stretching  portion  of the treatment  session.  For the prosthesis,   
one risk is minor skin irritation  or discomfort  from  it.  
 
Prote ction  Against  Risks  
The parents  and children  will be instructed  to monitor  the upper  extremity  for redness  or discomfort  and 
report  any problems  to the occupational  therapist.  
All necessary precautions will be taken to maintain confidentiality of data and prevent unauthorized access 
to data.  The data will be entered into a REDCap database. Only personnel associated with this study will 
have access to the data. The data will be stored and accessible only on password -protected computers.  
 
Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
The use of the prosthesi s may improve  the subject’s  upper  extremity  function.  
 
INVESTIGATOR’S QUALIFICATIONS & EXPERIENCE  
                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 5 All research personnel have completed the CITI tutorial training in the protection of human subjects. 
Copies of the CVs of all personnel are included.  
 
SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT/ASSENT  
Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment  
Subjects will be patient s, aged 4 -17 years , with diagnosis of  cerebral palsy and MACS level III - V who 
have been seen a t regular clinic/office/occupational therapy visit by PI, co-investigators or occupational 
therapist and indicated as a potential subject for study . Each  subject will be scheduled for Visit 1,  Screening 
Visit , with a pediatric occupational therapist who will perform a comprehensive evaluation.  
 
Additionally, the PI , co-investigator  and occupational therapists  will review their own individual databases 
for potential subjects and contact them by phone to describ e the research project.  Telephone Recruitment 
Transcript has been uploaded.  If patient and parent are interested, then the patient will be referred to the 
occupational therapist. For these subjects, the occupational therapist or research coor dinator will b e 
obtaining consent/assent (please see Process of Consent section below for further details) when the patient 
comes for Visit 1 , Screening Visit . 
 
For all subjects, from the information acqu ired through this Visit 1  evaluation, the occupational therapist 
will determine who is an appropriate candidate for inclusion in the study.  
 
Process of Consent  
At a regular clinic/office/ occupational therapy visit, p otential participants and their parents/legal guardians 
will be approached by the  PI, co -investigator , or occupational therapist who will describe the project  to 
them . For non -English speaking participants, the institution’s translation services, a health -care specific 
telephonic interpreting system, will be used  to present the study information verbally and the Short Consent 
Form in the parent’s native language will be used to obtain signed consent.  
 
If the parent/legal guardian and child are interested, the Consent Form and age appropriate Assent Form 
will be presente d by the PI, co -investigator, occupational therapist, or research coordinator . For those 
patients recruited from the databases of the PI , co-investigator  or occupational therapis t, the 
Consent/Assent forms will be presented by the occupational therapist or  research coordinator. The 
parent/legal guardian and patient  will be given the opportunity to read the forms  and ask and have 
thoroughly answered any questions that they may have. Only after the parent/legal guardian and child 
assure the presenter that the y fully understand the project and voluntarily agree for the child to participate, 
will their signatures be obtained. Parents will be given copies of the signed Consent and Assent Forms. 
Signed Consent and Assent Forms will be stored in subjects’ files/bin ders in a locked office.  
 
Subject Capacity:  A review of the patient’s medical record as well as a discussion with parent/legal 
guardian will be used to assess the patient’s ability to provide assent and sign the form. If unable to sign 
and patient is able to indicate an understanding of the study, verbal assent will be obtained. Additionally, 
children without the capacity to provide assent will be included because they may benefit from this study in 
that their upper extremity function might improve.  
 
Costs  to the Subject  
No costs will be incurred by the subject or his/her family.  
 
Payments for Participation  
Transportation costs up to $50 will be reimbursed for each completed visit . Participant will be required to 
provide a receipt of costs incurred in orde r to receive reimbursement.  
 
REFERENCES  
1. Makki  D, Duodu  J, Nixon  M. Prevalence  and pattern  of upper  limb involvement  in cerebral  palsy.  
J Child  Orthop  2014;8:215 -219. 
2. Novak  I, McIntyre  S, Morgan  C, et al. A systematic  review  of interventions  for children  with 
cerebral  palsy:  state of the evidence.  Dev Med Child  Neurol  2013;55:885 -910. 
                                                                                                  Version:  2/27/17 
 6 3. Sakzewski  L, Gordon  A, Elisson  AC. The state of the evidence  for intensive  upper  limb therapy  
approaches  for children  with unilateral  cerebral  palsy.  J Child  Neurol  2014;29:107 7-1090.  
4. Gordon  AM. To constrain  or not to constrain,  and other  stories  of intensive  upper  extremity  
training  for children  with unilateral  cerebral  palsy.  Dev Med Child  Neurol  2011;53(Suppl4):56 -61. 
5. Jeevanantham  D, Dyszuk  E, Bartlett  D. The Manual  Ability  Classification  System:  a scoping  
review.  Pediatr  Phys  Ther  2015;27:236 -241. 
6. Cohen -Hozler  M, Sorek  G, Kerem  J, et al. The influence  of intense  combined  training  on upper  
extremity  function  in children  with unilateral  cerebral  palsy:  does initial  ability  matter? Phys  
Occup  Ther  Pediatr  2016;Jan  6:1-12. 
7. James  S, Ziviani  J, Ware  RS, Boyd  RN. Relationships  between  activities  of daily  living,  upper  
limb function,  and visual  perception  in children  and adolescents  with unilateral  cerebral  palsy.  
Dev Med Child  Neurol  2015;57:852 -857. 
8. Öhrvall  AM, Eliasson  AC, Löwing  K, et al. Self-care and mobility  skills  in children  with cerebral  
palsy,  related  to their manual  ability  and gross  motor  function  classifications.  Dev Med Child  
Neurol  2010;52:1048 -1055.  
9. Zuniga  JM, Carson  AM, Peck  JM, et al. The development  of a low-cost three  dimensional  printed  
shoulder,  arm, and hand  prostheses  for children.  Prosthet  Orthot  Int 2016;Apr  26 [Epub  ahead  of 
print].  
10. Jackman  M, Novak  I, Lanin  N. Effectiveness  of hand  splints  in children  with cerebral  palsy:  a 
systematic  review  with meta -analysis.  Dev Med Child  Neurol  2014;56:138 -147. 
 