With Lov e: Using 
Promotoras for a 
Hispanic Community 
Palliative Care 
Promotora Palliative 
Care  
 
NCT0373603 1 
 
March 28, 2019  
Title: Con cariño: Using Promotoras for a Hispanic Community Palliative Care 
Intervention – A pilot study  
 
Objective/Hypothesis:  We hypothesize that the intervention group (promotora -based) 
will, in comparison to a self -education group (no promotora), show  improved quality of 
life and pain scores and decreased ED visits and ICU admissions. We anticipate that 
the promotora -based program will be cost -effective.  
 
Specific Aims:  (1) To assess the impact of the promotora -based program compared to 
self-education  (usual care) on quality of life scores, pain scores, ED visits, and ICU 
admissions as assessed via survey completion and the medical record. (2) To perform a 
cost-effectiveness analysis of this intervention. (3) To utilize our findings to establish a 
nove l, culturally sensitive, outpatient, cancer palliative care program in an underserved, 
majority Latino, county hospital setting.  
 
Goals of the Research: We anticipate our intervention will increase the rate of 
palliative care service utilization among unde rserved Latino cancer patients residing on 
the US -Mexico border. We believe that by increasing the awareness of palliative care 
services that there will be a decrease in overall health care costs as well as an overall 
improvement in quality of life for the  Hispanic cancer patients in our community.  
 
 
Background and Significance:  Palliative care is defined as “care given to improve the 
quality of life of patients who have a serious or life -threatening disease”. The integration 
of palliative care early in the  treatment course of advanced cancer patients has been 
shown to improve quality of life, increase survival among cancer patients, and decrease 
overall healthcare costs. (Hay et al., 2017, Temel et al., 2010). Access to end of life 
care; however, is not equ al with significant disparities occurring among minorities and 
marginalized groups.  
 
A study involving patients with gynecological cancers found that non -white patients 
were less likely to enroll in hospice or palliative care despite a majority reporting wishing 
to die pain free and comfortable in their homes (Harris et al., 2009). Latinos are also 
less likely to have had end of life conversations with health care providers and may 
therefore be less informed regarding end of life issues such as advance dir ectives. This 
is despite studies showing that end of life conversations improve advance care planning 
among Latinos (Shen et al., 2016).  
 
End of life costs are a great burden for many Latinos. Up to 25% or more of healthcare 
costs are amounted in a patient ’s last year of life, making end of life care especially 
difficult for this group and others of low socioeconomic status (Riley & Lubitz, 2010). In 
a study by Hanchate et al., it was found that Latinos’ Medicare expenditures are 57% 
higher than Whites in t heir last six months of life ($21,166 vs $31,702 even with 
controlling for sex, age, morbidity -burden level, cause and site of death) (Hanchate, 
Kronman, Young -Xu, Ash, & Emmanuel, 2009). A lack of insurance and immigration 
status increases this burden. Cu rrently there are 11.1 million undocumented immigrants 
in the US which account for 14.6% of the uninsured population. These individuals rarely 
have access to appropriate end of life care due to costs (Jaramillo & Hui, 2016). Along 
the US -Mexico border thes e figures are exponentially increased. In 2008, prior to the 
Affordable Care Act, nearly half of the US residents living along the Mexico -US border 
had no health insurance and about 63% of the uninsured were undocumented foreign -
born individuals (Su, Pratt , Stimpson, Wong, & Pagán, 2014). The uninsured rate 
decreased to 31% by 2012 among residents living in the US -Mexico border region; yet 
the majority remained unable to access health care (Shen, M., Gai, Y., & Feng, 2016).  
 
The lack of insurance, increased  cancer -care burden, and cultural barriers are leaving 
many dying Latinos and their families vulnerable at one of the most difficult times. It is 
imperative that innovative approaches are considered to provide the best care at the 
end of life. Moreover, th is could potentially decrease costs to Medicare and hospitals.  
      
Our aim is to test the cost effectiveness with respect to the healthcare system with an 
innovative approach for palliative care education intended to increase the quality of care 
at the end of life for Latinos in a US -Mexico border town. Our goal is to use promotoras 
(community health workers) to provide palliative services to patients diagnosed with 
advanced cancer. This model has demonstrated success in other behavioral 
modification pro grams such as those designed to increase cervical cancer screening 
rates, increase vaccination uptake, and medication adherence. In a program using lay 
navigators among elderly oncology patients with Medicare it was estimated that a total 
of 19 million dol lars in costs per year was eliminated among the navigated patients. ED 
visits decreased by 6% per quarter in navigated compared to non -navigated patients, 
ICU admissions were reduced by 10.6%; and lastly, the cost of using a navigator gave a 
return on inve stment of 1:10 (Rocque et al., 2017).  
      
We believe that we can use promotoras in the context of a culturally -sensitive palliative 
education program. We hypothesize that this intervention will decrease healthcare costs 
through a reduction in ED visits and ICU admissions. Additionally, we hypothesize that 
promotora -based education regarding self -care will reduce depression, improve pain 
control, and improve overall quality of care as perceived by patients and families in a 
Latino underserved community.  
 
 
Innovation:  
 
El Paso, a town in the US -Mexico border, is home to over 800,000 residents of which 
82% are Hispanic/Latino, almost a quarter of its population does not have health 
insurance and 20% lives below the federal poverty line. El Paso along with m any other 
border towns suffers from an increasing burden due to health disparities and lack of 
health access. It is estimated that along the Texas -Mexico border there is 1 general 
practitioner for over 6,000 people and this number broadens for many special ties. 
Cancer is currently the second leading cause of death in El Paso and the majority of 
these patients do not receive comprehensive palliative care services. We believed that 
due to the high burden of cancer and cancer related deaths, it was imperative that 
palliative services will be offered to these patients. Due to the many barriers that 
currently exist to providing health care among Latinos in the US -Mexico border such as 
physician shortage and lack of insurance, a new innovative way to provide these  
services had to be implemented.  
 
Promotoras, or lay community health care workers, have been imperative in bridging the 
gap of health care access and disease prevention along the US -Mexico border. The 
promotora model has been used successfully for dissem inating health information, 
improving cancer screening, vaccinations, and implementation of many public health 
projects. We believe that this model can also be applied to providing palliative care 
services and education. This has not been done before. We b elieve that this new 
approach will help to improve access in remote areas where access to health care is 
limited and simultaneously be cost effective.  
 
 
Research Design and Methods:  
 
Study Population: Our study population will include men and women with a dvanced 
cancer or with a new change in prognosis i.e. metastasis or recurrence of primary 
cancer  and/or their caregivers . Participants must be over the age of 18 years and self -
identify as Hispanic or Latino. Each patient must be capable of providing conse nt to 
participate on the project. The subjects will be recruited from Texas Tech clinics as well 
as from University Medical Center where they will be invited to participate.  
 
Sample Size:  
Promotora study:  A total of 150 patients will be recruited and wil l be randomly assigned 
to either the control or intervention groups.  
 
Caregiver study:  A total of 150 caregivers will be recruited.  
 
Recruitment plan:  
Promotora study:  
• Each patient will be recruited via the Texas Tech clinics  and the  University 
Medical Center (UMC) : palliative care service , the UMC cancer navigation 
program , and the infusion center . Each patient and their caregivers will be invited 
and those who desire to participate will be contacted by the research staff 
personnel. A screening survey w ill be done to see if they first qualify. Patients 
already enrolled in inpatient or outpatient hospice will be excluded. Interested 
and qualifying individuals will be consented by the research staff. At this time, the 
participant will also complete baselin e survey s: Demographics, Patient Health 
Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9), and Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness 
Therapy -Palliative  Care  (FACIT -Pal). Participants can choose whether to fill out 
the surveys on their own ( self-administer ) or have a research  staff member read 
the questions and mark the answer choices on their behalf (structured 
interview).   
 
 
• Participants will be randomized into either the intervention ( also known as the 
study group or the promotora ) group  or the control ( also known as self -educa tion 
or control ) group. Each participant will continue to receive the standard of care 
for his or her oncologic diagnosis as determined by his or her treating oncologist 
over the course of the study. During the study period, all participants will 
complete baseline  (demographics, PHQ -9, FACIT -Pal), interim (adverse events) 
and exit (adverse events, PHQ -9, FACIT -Pal) surveys . Information pertaining to 
hospitalizations and emergency room visits will be obtained from their medical  
records and public health reco rds. The intervention group will have three face -to-
face meetings with the promotora.  The control group will receive two phone calls.  
 
• If the patient is in the intervention group, the promotora will call the patient in 
order to invite them to a meeting. Me etings will be arranged by the promotora 
and the patients.  Participants  will be encouraged to bring support persons to the 
promotora meetings.   
o Meeting 1  topic : What is cancer, Medical Management, What is palliative  
care, Local resources, Goals and Expect ations , Discussion . Total time: 45 
min 
o Meeting 2  topic : Taking care of self: physical activity, nutrition, pain 
management , Family Values, Total: 50 min  
o Meeting 3  topic : Caregiver burnout, patient’s wishes, revisit Goals and 
Expectations. Making  hard decis ions, planning for the future (Power of 
Attorney, Advance Directives) . Local resources, support groups, the 
grieving process. Exit interview  (Re-administration of FACIT -Pal and PHQ -
9 and advanced directives ) Total: 45 min  
 
At the beginning of each meeting the patient s will be asked about adverse events 
(hospitalizations and ED visits ). This data will be validated against the 
information stored within the patient’s medical record  
 
 If the patient is in the control group, they will receive two phone calls. The  first 
phone call will be to ask about adverse events that have occurred since 
enrollment into the study. The second call will be to ask about adverse events 
since the first phone call and to administer the exit interview (Re -administration of 
FACIT -Pal an d PHQ -9).  
 
Caregiver study:  
All patients recruited to the study will be asked to identify their caregiver to take the 
caregiver financial survey. The caregiver may be of any race or gender. If the caregiver 
is with the participant and if they  would like t o participate, they will be told the survey is 
completely confidential, voluntary, and they may refuse to answer any question  that will 
make them feel uncomfortable. If the caregiver is not with the participant, we will give 
the participant a study flyer w ith research staff contact information. The study may be 
administered  via phone, in person, or via email, based on the caregivers' preference. If 
the caregiver would like to participate, they will assigned a participant identification 
number which will be randomly assigned by REDCap.   
 
Texas Hospital Inpatient Discharge Public Use Data File (PUDF) analysis:  Because 
both arms of the study technically had an intervention simply participating in the study 
may have also had an impact. A way to assess this would  be to compare the rate of 
hospital events at the end of life to the rate observed in the study. A retrospective chart 
review of Texas Hospital Inpatient Discharge Public Use Data File (PUDF) will be 
conducted in which patients have the principal discharge  diagnosis field contained an 
ICD-9 code for a malignant neoplasm (codes 140* through 208*, where the asterisk 
represents a wild card operator) and the patient was discharged to either hospice -home 
or hospice –medical facility.  
 
Incentives:  
Promotora study:  Each participant will receive $70 for completion of the entire survey 
set: Participants in the study group will receive $25 at randomization, $10 at the first 
meeting with the promotora, $10 for the second meeting with the promotora, and $25 for 
the third  meeting with the promotora. Participants in the control group will receive $25 at 
randomization, $15 will be mailed after the first phone interview, and $30 will be mailed 
to participant after second/final phone interview.    
 
 
Caregiver study:  The caregiv er will not receive an incentive.  
 
Challenges:  
We anticipate that a potential difficulty will be participant retention. Additionally, as we 
will be recruiting many patients at the end of life, we recognize that hospitalization and 
death may prevent study completion. As participants are individuals with advanced 
stage cancer, death is a likely occurrence in many cases and will not be considered an 
adverse or unexpected event. We will accommodate timing issues by providing the 
educational meetings every othe r week . The participants will also be compensated for 
their time. Additionally, we will enable in person collection of survey materials at the 
location of patients who are either hospitalized, become confined at home, or who 
transfer into inpatient hospice  over the course of the study. As the participants will have 
complex medical issues, we will have the support of a gynecologic -oncologist and a 
medical oncologist for any emergent medical concerns that may arise until the patient 
may be seen by his or her treating oncologist. We anticipate that the study will take 1 
year to complete accrual, 18 months to complete data acquisition and an additional 4 -6 
months for data analysis, interpretation and reporting. We strongly believe this project 
will lay the groun dwork for a larger, comprehensive, and culturally sensitive palliative 
program that may be generalized to other centers to decrease the cancer care burden 
in the Hispanic community.  
 
 
Statistical Analysis:  
For the caregiver portion of the study, we are co nducting a pilot study with a working 
number of 150 participants.  
 
For the patient portion of the study; a  required sample size of 150 eligible patients was 
estimated  based on a preliminary power calculation. It was determined with an alpha of 
.05 and pow er of 0.8 that a reduction of Emergency Department visits of 79%, 39 
patients per arm would be required, however, as the differences in the FACT -G will be 
more subtle, we would like to recruit 75 patients per arm.  
 
For the PUDF portion of the study, we wi ll be reviewing 588 records.  
 
The data will be  analyzed as an intent -to-treat analysis. Because of the multiplicity of 
Quality of Life (QoL) outcome measures  and potential correlations among the scales, 
each QoL scale was tested at a  significance level of .01 (.05/5) to control for the overall 
type I error at .05. As  the overall measure of QoL was the F unctional Assessment of 
Cancer Therapy scale –General (FACT -G), it will be  considered the primary  QoL 
outcome.  
 
We will be performing a standard cost -effect iveness analysis using TreeAge software.  
 
Tentative timeline:  
 
 Program Development  May-September 2017  
 IRB/Funding  October -November 2017  
 Hiring/Training  April 2018  
 Rolling recruitment  May 2018 -January 2020  
 Program Implementation  May 2018 - January 2020  
 Interim Data analysis, 
Final data analysis  November 2019 (Interim), 
January 2020 (Final)  
 Program evaluation  January -February 2020  
 Written Paper/Poster 
presentation  January -March 2019  
 
 
References : 
 
Hanchate, A., Kronman, A., Young -Xu, Y., Ash, A., & Emmanuel, E. (2009). Racial and 
Ethnic Difference in End -of-Life Costs: Why do Minorities Cost More Than 
Whites? Arch Intern Med , 169(5), 493 –501.  
 
Harris, P. A., Taylor, R., Thielke, R., Payne, J., Gonzalez, N., & Conde, J. G. (2009). 
Research elec tronic data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology 
and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 42(2), 377 –81. 
http://doi. org/10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010   
 
Hay, C. M., Lefkowits, C., Crowley -Matoka, M., Bakitas, M. A., Clark, L. H., Duska, L. 
R., … Schenker, Y. (2017). Gynecologic Oncologist Views Influencing Referral to 
Outpatient Specialty Palliative Care. International Jour nal of Gynecological 
Cancer , 0(0), 1. http://doi.org/10.1097/IGC.0000000000000893   
 
Temel J.S., Greer J.A., Muzikansky A., Gallagher E.R., Admane S., Jackson V.A., 
Dahlin C.M., Blinderman C.D., Ja cobsen J., Pirl W.F., Billings J.A., Lynch T.J. 
(2010). Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non -small -cell lung 
cancer. New England Journal of Medicine , 363(8), 733 –742. 
http://doi.org/10.1 056/NEJMoa1000678   
 
Jaramillo, S., & Hui, D. (2016). End -of-Life Care for Undocumented Immigrants With 
Advanced Cancer: Documenting the Undocumented. Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management , 51(4), 784 –788. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2015.11.009   
 
Riley, G. F., & Lubitz, J. D. (2010). Long -term trends in medicare payments in the last 
year of life. Health Services Research , 45(2), 565 –576. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475 -6773.2010.01082.x   
 
Rocque, G. B., Pisu, M., Jackson, B. E., Kvale, E. A., Demark -Wahnefried, W., Martin, 
M. Y., … Oncology, A. S. of C. (2017). Resource Use and Medicare Costs During 
Lay Navigation for Geri atric Patients With Cancer. JAMA Oncology , 15(3), 1 –15. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2016.6307   
 
Shen, M., Gai, Y., & Feng, L. (2016). Limited Access to Healthcare among Hispanics in 
the US -Mexico Border Region. American Journal of Health Behavior , 405(5), 
624–633. http://doi.org/American journal of health behavior  
 
Shen, M. J., Prigerson, H. G., Paulk, E., Trevino, K. M., Penedo, F. J., Tergas, A. I., … 
MacIejewski, P. K. (2016). Impact of end -of-life discussions on the reduction of 
Latino/non -Latino disparities in do -not-resuscitate order completion. Cancer , 
122(11), 1749 –1756. http://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.29973   
 
Su, D., Pratt, W., Stimpson, J.  P., Wong, R., & Pagán, J. A. (2014). Uninsurance, 
underinsurance, and health care utilization in Mexico by US border residents. 
Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health , 16(4), 607 –612. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10903 -013-9828 -2 