 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 1  
 
Social and Behavioral Sciences Human Research Protocol  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:  
Ravi Parikh, MD, MPP, FACP  
Assistant Professor, Medical Ethics and Health Policy and Medicine 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania  
3400 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia PA 19104 
Ravi.Parikh@pennmedicine.upenn.edu 
 Samuel U. Takvorian, MD, MS  
Assistant Professor , Division of Hematology & Oncology  
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania  
3400 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104 
Samuel.Takvorian@pennmedicine.upenn.edu  
 PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Behavioral Economic Strategies to I mprove PRO adherence (BEST -PRO)  
 IRB NUMBER  
852748  
UPCC NUMBER  
34923 
 
NCT NUMBER  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
ABSTRACT  
Routine monitoring of patient-reported outcomes  (PROs) for patients  with advanced  solid 
malignancies is an evidence-based practice that improves symptoms and quality of life, reduces 
unplanned acute care, and extends overall survival. However, patient-level adherence and clinician-
level adoption to PRO monitoring is suboptimal. We will conduct a three-arm randomized pragmatic 
trial to test the implementation and effectiveness  of patient- and nurse-directed strategies to improve 
engagement in PRO monitoring across in -clinic and remote monitoring settings . Participants  will 
include patients initiating systemic cancer treatment for solid malignancies at participating 
Implementation Laboratory sites  within the Penn Implementation Science Center in Cancer Control. 
Eligible  patients  will be randomized independently  to: (1)  usual practice (i.e., encounter -based PRO 
administration via patient portal or tablet) ; (2) encounter -based PRO monitoring with patient 
reminders and nurse alerts; or (3) remote PRO monitoring with patient reminders and nurse alerts . 
The primary outcome will be PRO adherence, measured at the patient level as the proportion of 
expected PRO questionnaires completed per patient over a 3 -month follow -up period.  Secondary  
outcomes  will include  measures  of clinical adoption of PROs , and patient health-related quality of life, 
duration of therapy, acute care utilization, and treatment delay/modification.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Routine monitoring of patient-reported outcomes  (PROs) for patients  with advanced  solid 
malignancies is an evidence-based practice that improves symptoms and quality of life, reduces 
unplanned acute care, and extends overall survival.
1-8 Still, there is variation in adoption of and 
adherence to routine PRO monitoring, owing to multilevel barriers to implementation and concerns among clinicians  regarding the utility  of PROs  in actual  practice.
9-14 While  high levels  of patient 
adherence to PRO monitoring have been reported in clinical trials,2,7,8,15 -17 real-world adherence is 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 2  
 
suboptimal. Our preliminary research shows that in a large, multi -site rollout of PROs, patient-level 
adherence was less than 50 percent, with patients from racial and ethnic minority groups even less 
likely to complete PRO questionnaires and more likely to report uncontrolled symptoms. Moreover, 
only half of Penn medical oncologists  report that routine PRO  monitoring is useful  in practice. There is 
critical need to develop,  test, and disseminate strategies to improve patient-level PRO adherence to 
ensure optimal and equitable symptom management, quality of life, and survival for patients with 
advanced cancer. 
Implementation strategies informed by behavioral economics are ideally suited to address 
this challenge, as it is fundamentally one of clinician and patient behavior change. For PRO 
monitoring programs to succeed in transforming cancer care, patients must longitudinally complete 
PRO questionnaires and clinicians must use the resultant patient-reported data in clinical decision-
making. Clinician engagement and use of PRO data begets patient engagement,9-12 in part by 
signaling an approved behavior  (injunctiv e norm)  to which  patients  desire to conform. Repeated 
feedback  is important for sustaining other health -promoting behaviors such as medication 
adherence.18 In particular, gamification strategies, which  harness  game design elements  and patient 
heuristics  to motivate behavior change, have shown promise.19-25 However, little research has 
harnessed these insights to promote longitudinal PRO adherence.  
 
OBJECTIVES:  
(1) Evaluate the implementation and effectiveness of patient- and nurse-directed strategies across in-
clinic and remote monitoring settings , using a three-arm pragmatic cluster RCT.  
• H1a: Nudges to patients and alerts to nurses will improve  patient-level PRO completion and 
clinician -level PRO engagement 
 
(2) Evaluate moderators of implementation effects, using a quantitative evaluation of secondary data 
from the electronic health record, area-level data via geocoding, and clinician surveys.  
• H2a: The impact of nudges  will be moderated by clinician, patient,  and outer  setting 
factors.  
• H2b: Baseline PRO adherence rates will differ by race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status.  
• H2c: The nudge arms  will not be significantly  differentially  effective across  subgroups.  
 BACKGROUND:  
Routine PRO monitoring is an evidence-based practice that improves patient outcomes. 
Patients with cancer commonly experience symptoms which go unrecognized by clinical teams up to half of the time.
26,27 PROs are a powerful tool to bridge this gap, amplifying the patient experience and 
improving communication between patients and clinicians.1,28,29 Basch et al. conducted a seminal 
clinical trial in  which weekly  PRO symptom  assessments  with care team  alerts  led to reduced care 
utilization, improved quality of life, and lengthened overall survival among patients receiving active treatment for advanced solid tumors.
2,3 Subsequent randomized trials have corroborated the quality of 
life and survival advantages of PRO monitoring in other cancer populations and practice settings.4-8 
Real-world adherence to PRO monitoring is lower than in seminal clinical trials, with potential 
racial/ethnic disparities. Multilevel barriers to PRO implementation exist at the patient, clinician,  
practice, and system  levels.7,9,10,12 While  patient adherence to PRO  monitoring in seminal  trials ranged 
from 70 to 90 percent,2,8,15 -17 real-world adherence is much lower and more variable. Our preliminary 
research (under review) demonstrates that in a large, multi -site rollout of PRO monitoring, mean 
patient-le vel adherence was less than 50 percent. Moreover, compared to non-Hispanic White 
patients, Black and Hispanic patients were 9% and 4% less likely to complete PRO questionnaires, respectively, but more likely to report more severe symptoms. These results hi ghlight that historically 
marginalized subgroups may benefit less from current methods of PRO administration, potentially reinforcing existing disparities in symptom management if not remediated.
30 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 3  
 
This will be the first study to apply behavioral economic strategies to align clinicians and 
patients in achieving sustained patient-level PRO adherence, and addresses limitations of current 
PRO approaches. Current approaches  to PRO  collection are  limited  by: (1) suboptimal  clinician  
engagement, (2) encounter -based assessments which preclude longitudinal monitoring of PROs 
outside of the clinic, and (3) insufficient automated effectors actively linking reported symptoms with 
clinical response. This proposal addresses these limitations by employing behavioral strategies directly targeting clinician engagement, utilizing novel electronic rem ote monitoring methods to 
maximize real -time PRO capture, and linking these with pathway -driven automated effectors.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION: 
  
1. Target Population and Accrual:  
The target population will include  approximately 480 patients with solid malignancies  cared for 
at the following practice sites of the Penn Medicine Abramson Cancer Center (ACC) , referred 
to hereafter as the “Implementation Laboratory” : Perelman Center for Advanced Medicine 
(PCAM)  and Princeton Health.  In this pragmatic trial, eligible patients will accrue as they 
initiate a new  line of systemic cancer treatment.  
 
2. Key Eligibility Criteria : 
Key inclusion criteria  
Eligible patients must meet the following criteria: 
• Initiate a new line of systemic cancer therapy ( ie, intravenous chemotherapy or 
immunotherapy)  at a participating Implementation Lab site  
 
Key exclusion criteria  
Patients will be ineligible for ANY of the following reasons:  
• Active enrollment in a therapeutic clinical trial  
• Patient opts out of pragmatic research  
 
3. Subject Recruitment and Screening: 
Subjects  will accrue to the study when initiating a  new line of systemic cancer therapy ( ie, 
intravenous chemotherapy  or immunotherapy) . Subject recruitment and screening will occur 
pragmatically  via weekly queries of upcoming Epic/Beacon treatment plans , identifying patients 
scheduled to initiate a new line of systemic cancer therapy  in the following week . 
Given the pragmatic nature of this study  and its objective to test implementation strategies 
to promote engagement in an evidence-based practice in routine cancer care, we are requesting 
a waiver of informed consent . There are several reasons to justify this request. First, we are 
assessing the impact of implementation strategies delivered to patients through adjustments in  
existing clinical workflow s using the electronic medical record and other patient communication 
tools. Second, it would not be feasible to consent every patient enrolled in the trial . Third , 
individual informed consent might impact patient behavior , thereby complicating the study design 
and interpretation of its findings. Fourth, none of the proposed strategies  forces behavior change. 
No one will be coerced or forced to engage in PRO  monitoring; rather , the goal of nudges is to 
promote evidence-based practices  while preserving autonomy and freedom of choice.  
 
4. Early Withdrawal of Subjects: 
We are requesting a waiver of informed consent, so the option to withdraw early from this study is 
not applicable.   
5. Vulnerable Populations:  
We will not be targeting c hildren, pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or  prisoners in this research 
study . 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 4  
 
 
6. Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion: 
We will not be targeting participants who are likely to be vulnerable to undue influence or coercion 
in this research study.  
 
STUDY DESIGN:  
 
1. Study design:  
This hybrid type 2 study design31 will simultaneously evaluate implementation and effectiveness 
outcomes. We will conduct a three -arm randomized pragmatic trial to  test the effect of patient 
reminders and triage nurse alerts, in the context of remote vs encounter -based PRO monitoring, 
on implementation and effectiveness outcomes.  Participants meeting eligibility criteria will be 
randomized 1:1:1 to:  
(1) usual practice, consisting of encounter -based PRO monitoring;  
(2) encounter -based PRO monitoring plus  patient reminders and triage nurse alerts;  
(3) remote PRO monitoring plus patient reminders and triage nurse alerts  
Across arms, the administered PRO questionnaire will consist of 13 validated metrics spanning 
patient-reported symptoms, quality of life, and performance status. [Appendix 1]  We will employ  
rapid cycle  approaches  to optimize implementation strategies  prior to conducting the clinical  trial.  
 
2. Study Duration:  
The study duration will be  approximately 6 months , including a 3-month accrual period and 3-
month follow -up period per participant over which primary outcomes will be ascertained.  
 
METHODS : 
 
1. Study Instruments: 
We do not anticipate the use of study instruments beyond the PRO questionnaire [Appendix 1], 
which is already administered in routine practice. Any additional study instruments will be 
submitted to the IRB as a modification prior to use.  
 
2. Administration of Surveys and/or Process:  
We do not anticipate the use of surveys  beyond the PRO questionnaire [ Appendix 1], which is 
already administered in routine practice. Any  additional  surveys will be submitted to the IRB as a 
modification prior to use.  
 3.  Data Management : 
To minimize the risk of breach of data and confidentiality, we will use secure, encrypted servers to host the data and conduct the analysis. The Penn Medicine Academic Computing Services 
(PMACS) will be the hub for the hardware and database infrastructure that will support the project. The PMACS is a joint effort of the University of Pennsylvania's Abramson Cancer Center, the 
Cardiovascular Institute, the Department of Pathology, and the Leonard Davis Institute. The PMACS provides a secure computing environment for a large volume of highly sensitive data, 
including clinical, genetic, socioeconomic, and financial information. PMACS requires all users of 
data or applications on PMACS servers to complete a PMACS -hosted cybersecurity awareness 
course annually, w hich stresses federal data security policies under data use agreements with the 
university. The curriculum includes Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
training and covers secure data transfer, passwords, computer security habits and knowledge of 
what constitutes misuse or inappropriate use of the server. We will implement multiple, redundant 
protective measures to guarantee the privacy and security of the participant data. All investigators 
and research staff with direct access to the identifiable data will be required to undergo annual responsible conduct of research, cybersecurity, and HIPAA certification in accordance with 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 5  
 
University of Pennsylvania regulations. Data will be stored, managed, and analyzed on a secure, 
encrypted server behind the University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) firewall. All study 
personnel that will use this data are listed on the IRB application and have completed training in 
HIPAA standards and the CITI human subjects research. Data access will be password protected. 
Whenever possible, data will be de-identified for analysis.  
 4.  Subject Follow -up: 
Subjects will be followed for approximately 3 months after enrollment.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES : 
 
1. Detailed Description: 
Eligible patients will be identified pragmatically  using the criteria listed above, and will be 
independently randomized  to study arms using a three-arm  design. A description of the three 
study arms follows:  
 
(1) Usual practice. This arm will consist of encounter -based PRO monitoring, in which 
patients have an opportunity to complete PRO questionnaires via patient portal in advance of clinical encounters  or via tablet during clinical encounters . While clinicians will be  
encouraged to view and discuss PROs with patients during clinical encounters, they  will 
not be prompted to do so in real -time, nor will there be alerts for escalating symptoms . 
 
(2) Encounter -based PRO monitoring plus patient reminders and triage nurse alerts. 
This arm consists of usual practice  (described above)  plus the addition of patient 
reminders to complete PRO questionnaires  and triage nurse alerts for severe symptoms. 
Patient reminders will be operationalized through the Epic patient portal. Triage nurse alerts will be routed to Epic symptom management pools in response to a patient reporting 
moderate or severe symptoms. Patients will have the opportunity to decline or opt-out of 
triage nurse support. Clinical interventions stemming from triage nurse alerts will be up to the discretion of clinical teams –  ie, clinical responses will  be neither  prescriptive nor 
mandatory. Notably, the  entry point for triage nurse alerts (ie, Epic symptom management 
pools), as well as resultant clinical responses, are existing standard operating 
procedures/practices for patients reporting symptoms by phone. 
 
(3) Remote PRO monitoring plus patient reminders and triage nurse alerts. This arm will 
consist of weekly PRO questionnaires administered via the patient portal , de-linked from 
clinical encounters . Patient reminders and triage nurse alerts will be operationalized as 
described in Arm (2).  
 
We will use rapid cycle approaches (RCA)  to optimize implementation strategies to ensure face 
validity and maximum effect. We will focus on optimizing content, messaging, and design. RCA 
procedures will involve design meetings  with study team , discussions with administrators and 
clinicians who are members of our Implementation Lab, as well as piloting of nudges with potential 
participants  to elicit feedback.  
 
2. Data Collection: 
The electronic medical record and other Penn Medicine secondary databases  used to collect data 
in routine care will be used to collect information on study participants . We will also collect data 
from the U.S. Census via publicly available datasets.  
 
Aim 1  
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 6  
 
The primary outcome will be PRO adherence, measured at the patient level as the proportion of 
expected PRO questionnaires completed per patient. Secondary specifications will include:  
• % patients completing at least one PRO questionnaire during study period  
• % patients completing at least one PRO questionnaire per month during the study period 
 
Secondary implementation outcomes will include:  
• % patients with at least one note documenting PROs during study period  
• % patients with at least one note documenting PROs per month during study period  
• For Arms 2 -3 only: time to alert response 
 
Secondary effectiveness outcomes will include:  
• Symptom burden, measured as a composite and for each PRO/ symptom  
a. For Arms 2 -3 only: % patients who trigger alert  
• Acute care utilization, measured as % patients with ED visit or hospitalization  
• Treatment delays/modifications , measured as % patients with treatment delay/modification  
• Duration of therapy  
 
Aim 2  
Aim 2 measures, collected through the electronic medical record and using publicly  available U.S. 
Census  data, will include:  
• Patient-level data: age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, marital status, cancer type, cancer 
stage, health insurance (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, c ommercial);  
• Clinician -level data: years in practice and patient panel size;  
• Practice-level data: setting (community vs. hospital -based), urban vs. non -urban location, 
and health insurance mix;  
• Ecologic -level data linked at the patient- and practice-level, including median income and 
educational attainment.  
 
3. Genetic Testing: 
Not applicable 
 
4. Use of Deception:  
Not applicable  
5. Statistical Analysis: 
 Aim 1  
The design is a three-arm randomized trial, resulting in three independent study arms: (1) usual 
practice,  (2) encounter -based PRO monitoring with  patient reminders and triage nurse alerts , (3) 
remote PRO monitoring with patient reminders and triage nurse alerts . Implementation and 
effectiveness outcomes will be assessed across arms. The main comparison for the purposes of 
power calculations will be Arm 2 vs Arm 1. Multivariable linear regression will be used to model 
patient PRO adherence as a function of nudge exposure (i .e., study arm  assignment) . Covariates 
will be  assessed across study arms and included in the model if unbalanced across arms. 
Significance will be determined using the z -score corresponding to each of the estimated effects, 
using a two sided type 1 error of 5%. All enrolled patients will be  included in the intention-to-treat 
analysis.  
 
The secondary outcomes will be similarly modeled except using logistic  models as appropriate for 
binary outcome variables . All hypothesis tests will use a two- sided alpha of 0.05  as the threshold 
for statistical significance. 
 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7/ 30/2024  Page | 7 
 
Power and Sample Size 
For our primary comparison of patient-level adherence across study arms, we expect to have 8 0% 
power to detect a 14.5 percentage point difference in patient -level adherence, assuming baseline 
adherence rates of 0.50 (SD 0.40) [based on our preliminary data], a two-sided alpha of 0.05, and 
a mean of approximately 3 opportunities for each patient to complete the survey . Based on prior 
trends in Beacon plan treatment starts in 2022, this assumes accrual of approximately 1 00 
patients per month for three months totaling approximately n=300 patients. Over the course of the 
pragmatic trial, enrollment exceeded expectations at both participating sites. As such, the target accrual was updated to total approximately 480 patients.      
Aim 2  
We will evaluate for heterogeneity of implementation effects on PRO adherence by including an 
interaction term between study arm and, separately, patient-level age (dichotomized), sex, 
race/ethnicity, income, and  geographic location. Evidence for effect modification will be judged 
based on the z-score corresponding to the ratio of hazard ratios (interaction term ) using again a 
two-sided alpha of 0.05 as the threshold for statistical significance.  
 
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT : 
 
1. Risks:  
There are minimal risks to participants in this trial. There is a risk of breach of data and 
confidentiality; however , we described the precautions in place to manage this data securely in the 
Data Management section of this protocol.  
 
2. Benefits: Strong data support routine PRO monitoring as an evidence- based practice that improves patient 
outcomes  including health-related quality of life and overall survival. This study is designed to 
improve patient engagement in this practice and thus may lead to better symptom monitoring/management and improved health outcomes. However, it is possible that patients will receive no benefit from this study.  
 
3. Subject Privacy: 
Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed research. No 
research activities involve any direct interaction with subjects that would pose risk to their privacy.  
 4. Subject Confidentiality: 
Confidentiality refers to the subject’s understanding of, and agreement to, the ways in which  
identifiable information will be stored and shared.   
 How will confidentiality of data be maintained?    
  
 Paper-based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel 
involved in the study.  
 Computer-based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study 
through the use of access privileges and passwords. 
 Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign 
statements agreeing to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information. 
 Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7/ 30/2024  Page | 8 
 
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the 
subject at risk of criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, 
employability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between 
the subject and the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of 
confidentiality.  (This is not an option for FDA-regulated research.)  
 Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by using passwords and encryption, 
because the research involves web- based surveys.   
 Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible 
identification of subjects.  
 Other (specify):     
 
 To protect participant confidentiality, only the research team outlined in HSERA will have access to review identified research records. Confidentiality will be protected to the fullest extent allowable under the law. See the Data Management section for more details.  
 If any data needs to be transmitted, it will be done through a Penn-approved secure encrypted file transfer solution as is described Penn IRB’s Guidance on Electronic Data Protection Requirements for Research Involving the Use of PHI. Records will not be released without the participant’s consent unless required by law (e.g., imminent risk of harm to self-suspected) or court order. When results of 
the research are presented at scientific meetings or published, no identifying information will be 
included.  
 All identifiable data, including the master list linking identifiers to the ID number and recordings, will be destroyed in 2031 , seven years after the award period ends.  
 
5. Protected Health Information 
• Name  
• Address  
• Date of Birth 
• Phone number(s)  
• Electronic mail address  
• Medical record numbers  
 
6. Compensation:  
Participants will not be compensated for participating in this study .  
 
7. Data and Safety Monitoring: 
The nature of the project poses minimal risk to participant safety and privacy . Yet, we will constitute a 
formal Data Safety Monitoring Board. The specific aspects of the DSMB for this study are as follows: 
• The DSMB will consist of 4 members: 1) Erin Aakhus, MD, Assistant Professor of Clinical 
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Associate Director of the Hematology Oncology Fellowship Program 2) Kate Courtright, MD, MSHP, Assistant Professor of 
Clinical Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania 3) Kit 
Delgado, MD, MS, Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Associate Director of Center for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics 4) Meghan Lane-Fall, MD, MSHP, David E. Longnecker Associate Professor of Anesthesiology and Critical Care & Associate Professor of Epidemiology at the 
Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Associate Director of the Center 
for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics 
 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 9  
 
• The DSMB will perform several duties. First, they will review and approve research protocols and 
plans for data and safety monitoring prior to any study commencement. Second, they will evaluate 
the progress of any eligible trial. This will include assessment of data quality, participant 
recruitment, accrual and retention, participant risk versus benefit, and study outcomes. This 
assessment will be performed at meetings every six months during eligible trials and, more 
frequently, if decided by the DSMB. Thi rd, they will make recommendations to ensure that all of 
the issues above are appropriately addressed. The corresponding project teams will be 
responsible for responding to all recommendations of the DSMB and submitting DSMB reports to 
the University of Pennsylvania IRB.  
 Data Safety and Monitoring Plan.  Oversight and evaluation will be accomplished using standard 
University procedures for safety monitoring. The specific elements of our oversight plan are as above: 1) all project staff will complete certification in the protection of research participants; 2) the principal 
investigator will supply the IRB with annual progress reports, or more frequently as determined by the 
IRB, which may in turn suspend, terminate or restrict the study as appropriate; and 3) any serious 
adverse events will be reviewed in real time by the PI and reported to the IRB as required. Individual -
level data for participants will be kept confidential and will only be stored on highly secure servers available for patient-level data. Only authorized project personnel will have access to the data and the 
data will only be stored on servers a nd not stand -alone PCs or laptops. All data will be reported at 
units of aggregation which make impossible the identification of individual patients or clinicians.  
 
The data and safety monitoring plan will have 3 parts. First, the study MPIs, biostatistician, and 
Director of the Data Management Unit will develop and implement methods of verifying entered data 
and of quality control. Second, the MPIs will be directly r esponsible for identifying and reporting all 
adverse events, protocol deviations/violations and unanticipated events to the IRB and funding 
agency promptly, as appropriate. The PIs will also report all adverse events, accrual rates, retention 
rates, and al l other logistical issues to the DSMB (described above) at least biannually (and more 
frequently if there are serious adverse events). Third, there will be a DSMB responsible for monitoring the trial.  
 A written research protocol will undergo formal institutional scientific and institutional review board (IRB) review at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) to ensure protection of the rights and welfare of 
human research subjects. Specifically, the MPIs and the IRB will be responsible for ensuring risks to 
human subjects are minimized, risks are reasonable, subject selection is equitable, the research team 
has access to adequate resources to conduct the study, the informed consent process (or waiver) 
meets regulatory and ethical requirements, adequate provision is made to protect human subjects by 
monitoring the data collected and there are adequate provisions to protect subject privacy per HIPAA 
regulations and confidentiality of data.  
 
All senior/key personnel and research staff who will be involved in the design and conduct of the study must receive education in human research subject protection from a training program that is approved 
by a properly constituted independent Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board. The MPIs will be responsible for ensuring project faculty and staff have the equipment and training required to 
protect privacy and confidentiality and will monitor and document that these individuals are properly 
certifi ed. If new senior/key personnel and staff become involved in the research, documentation that 
they have received the required education will be included in the annual progress reports. The UPENN Office of Regulatory Affairs currently requires HIPAA training upon designation as research 
investigator/staff and recertification in human research subjects protection every three years.  
 
The Penn IRB will serve as the IRB of record for any external ethics review boards or IRBs applicable 
to researchers from other institutions who may have access to human research subjects identified 
data. 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 10 
 
 
8. Investigator’s Risk/Benefit Assessment : 
This study presents minimal risk that is balanced by the potential benefits of the research to society.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT : 
 1. Consent Process: Since this is a pragmatic trial focused on improving implementation of evidence-based practices with 
minimal risk to patients, we are requesting a waiver of informed consent from patients. We have received this in the past for these types of trials.  
 
2. Waiver of Informed Consent : 
We are requesting a waiver of informed consent and HIPAA authorization from patients ( see attached 
request for waiver of HIPAA authorization). A waiver of informed consent is reques ted for the following 
reasons. First, it is not feasible to consent every patient randomized to nudges . Second, if members of 
the control group were consented, they would know they were being studied and this could change 
their behavior. This could potential ly disrupt the design of the study and make interpretation of the 
findings challenging. Third, patients are not being forced to engage in the PRO surveys. In all arms, 
care team members  can still engage or refrain from using the PRO data according to their best clinical 
judgment, and patients can refuse to complete the PRO survey .  
 
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION: 
Adequate facilities are available at the ACC . The members of the research team are outlined in 
HSERA and include appropriate personnel to successfully implement this project. The entire team will be overseen by the PI. All personnel will complete required training before being granted access to 
any identifying information. This includes training on confidentiality through the Collaborative IRB 
Training Initiative (CITI) course. All personnel will be trained in the procedures for reporting 
unintentional breaches in confidentiality to the PI. All personnel will be aware that violations of 
participants’ confidentiality, either unintentional or deliberate, may result in termination of hire. The PI 
will conduct training with all research personnel regarding data, limits of confidentiality, maintaining 
confidentiality and proper s tudy procedures.  
 
REFERENCES 
1. Kotronoulas  G, Kearney N, Maguire R, et al. What Is the Value of the Routine Use of Patient- 
Reported Outcome Measures  Toward Improvement of Patient Outcomes, Processes of Care, 
and Health Service Outcomes in Cancer Care? A Systematic Review of Controlled Trials. 
JCO. 2014;32(14):1480-1501. doi:10.1200/JCO.2013.53.5948 
2. Basch  E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al. Symptom  Monitoring With Patient-Reported Outcomes  
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. JCO . 2016;34(6):557-
565. doi:10.1200/JCO.2015.63.0830  
3. Basch  E, Deal AM, Dueck  AC, et al. Overall  Survival  Results  of a Trial Assessing  
Patient- Reported Outcomes for Symptom Monitoring During Routine Cancer 
Treatment. JAMA . 2017;318(2):197. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.7156 
4. Denis  F, Basch  E, Septans  AL, et al. Two-Year  Survival  Comparing Web-Based 
Symptom Monitoring vs Routine Surveillance Following Treatment for Lung Cancer. JAMA . 2019;321(3):306. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.18085 
5. Absolom  K, Warrington L, Hudson E, et al. Phase III Randomized Controlled Trial of 
eRAPID: eHealth Intervention During Chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol . 2021;39(7):734-747. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.20.02015  
6. Basch E, Stover AM, Schrag D, et al. Clinical Utility and User Perceptions of a Digital System for Electronic  Patient-Reported Symptom  Monitoring During Routine Cancer  Care: Findings  
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 11 
 
From  the PRO -TECT Trial. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics . 2020;(4):947-957. 
doi:10.1200/CCI.20.00081 
7. Patt D, Wilfong L, Hudson KE, et al. Implementation of Electronic  Patient-Reported 
Outcomes  for Symptom  Monitoring in a Large Multisite Community  Oncology  Practice:  
Dancing the Texas  Two- Step Through a Pandemic. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics . 
2021;(5):615-621. doi:10.1200/CCI.21.00063  
8. Basch  E, Schrag  D, Jansen J, et al. Digital  symptom  monitoring with patient-reported 
outcomes  in community oncology practices: A U.S. national cluster randomized trial. J Clin 
Oncol . 2021;39(suppl 36; abstr 349527). 
9. Snyder CF, Aaronson NK, Choucair  AK, et al. Implementing patient-reported 
outcomes assessment in clinical  practice:  a review  of the options  and considerations. 
Qual  Life Res. 2012;21(8):1305-1314. doi:10.1007/s11136-011 -0054-x  
10. Howell D, Molloy S, Wilkinson K, et al. Patient-reported outcomes in routine cancer clinical 
practice: a scoping review  of use, impact on health outcomes, and implementation factors. 
Annals of Oncology . 2015;26(9):1846-1858. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv181 
11. Snyder  C, Brundage M, Rivera  YM, Wu AW. A PRO -cision  Medicine Methods  Toolkit to 
Address the Challenges  of Personalizing Cancer  Care Using Patient-Reported Outcomes: 
Introduction  to the Supplement. Medical Care. 2019;57(Suppl 1):S1-S7. 
doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000001089 
12. Sandhu S, King Z, Wong M, et al. Implementation of Electronic  Patient- Reported 
Outcomes  in Routine Cancer Care at an Academic Center: Identifying Opportunities and 
Challenges. JCO Oncology Practice. 2020;16(11):e1255-e1263. 
doi:10.1200/OP.20.00357 
13. Nic Giolla Easpaig B, Tran Y, Bierbaum M, et al. What are the attitudes  of health 
professionals regarding patient reported outcome measures  (PROMs) in oncology  
practice? A mixed -method synthesis  of the qualitative evidence. BMC  Health Serv Res. 
2020;20(1):102. doi:10.1186/s12913- 020-4939 -7 
14. Stover AM, Haverman L, van Oers HA, et al. Using an implementation science approach to implement and evaluate patient-reported outcome measures  (PROM) initiatives  in 
routine care settings. Qual Life Res . 2021;30(11):3015-3033. doi:10.1007/s11136-020 -
02564-9  
15. Basch  E, Iasonos  A, Barz A, et al. Long-Term  Toxicity  Monitoring via Electronic  Patient-
Reported Outcomes in Patients Receiving Chemotherapy. JCO . 2007;25(34):5374-5380. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.11.2243  
16. Judson TJ, Bennett AV, Rogak LJ, et al. Feasibility of Long- Term Patient Self-Reporting of 
Toxicities  From  Home  via the Internet During Routine Chemotherapy. JCO. 
2013;31(20):2580- 2585. doi:10.1200/JCO.2012.47.6804 
17. Basch  E, Dueck AC,  Rogak  LJ, et al. Feasibility  of Implementing the Patient-Reported 
Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events in a Multicenter Trial: NCCTG N1048. J Clin Oncol . Published online September 11, 2018:JCO2018788620. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2018.78.8620  
18. Thaler  RH, Sunstein CR. Nudge: Improving Decisions  about Health, Wealth, and Happiness . 
Rev. and expanded ed., with a new afterword and a new chapter. Penguin; 2009. 
19. Edwards  EA, Lumsden J, Rivas  C, et al. Gamification for health promotion: systematic  
review  of behaviour change techniques in smartphone apps. BMJ Open . 
2016;6(10):e012447. doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2016 -012447  
20. Kawachi I. It's All in the 
Game-The Uses of Gamification to Motivate Behavior Change. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(11):1593. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.4798 
21. Sardi  L, Idri A, Fernández -Alemán JL. A systematic  review  of gamification  in e-Health. 
Journal  of Biomedical Informatics . 2017;71:31-48. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2017.05.011 
22. Patel MS, Benjamin EJ, Volpp KG, et al. Effect of a Game-Based Intervention Designed to Enhance Social  Incentives  to Increase  Physical  Activity  Among Families: The BE FIT 
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7 /30/2024   Page | 12 
 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(11):1586. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.3458 
23. Kurtzman GW, Day SC, Small DS, et al. Social Incentives and Gamification to Promote Weight Loss: The LOSE  IT Randomized, Controlled Trial. J GEN  INTERN MED . 
2018;33(10):1669-1675. doi:10.1007/s11606- 018-4552- 1 
24. Patel MS, Small DS, Harrison JD, et al. Effectiveness of Behaviorally Designed Gamification 
Interventions  With Social  Incentives  for Increasing Physical  Activity  Among Overweight and 
Obese Adults Across the United States: The STEP UP Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2019;179(12):1624. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.3505 
25. Patel MS, Small DS, Harrison JD, et al. Effect of Behaviorally Designed Gamification With 
Social Incentives on Lifestyle Modification Among Adults With Uncontrolled Diabetes: A 
Randomized Clinical  Trial. JAMA  Netw Open.  2021;4(5):e2110255. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.10255 
26. Basch  E, Iasonos  A, McDonough T, et al. Patient  versus  clinician  symptom  reporting using 
the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events: results of 
a questionnaire-based study. The Lancet Oncology . 2006;7(11):903-909. 
doi:10.1016/S1470- 2045(06)70910- X 
27. Basch  E. The Missing  Voice  of Patients  in Drug -Safety  Reporting. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;362(10):865-869. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0911494 
28. Detmar  SB, Muller MJ,  Schornagel  JH, Wever  LDV,  Aaronson NK. Health-Related Quality -of-
Life Assessments and Patient-Physician Communication: A Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA . 2002;288(23):3027. doi:10.1001/jama.288.23.3027 
29. Velikova G, Booth L, Smith  AB, et al. Measuring Quality  of Life in Routine Oncology  
Practice Improves Communication and Patient Well -Being: A Randomized Controlled 
Trial. JCO. 2004;22(4):714-724. doi:10.1200/JCO.2004.06.078 
30. Sisodia RC, Rodriguez  JA, Sequist TD. Digital  disparities: lessons  learned from a patient 
reported outcomes program during the COVID -19 pandemic. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association. 2021;28(10):2265-2268. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocab138 
31. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid 
designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Med Care. 2012;50(3):217-226. 
doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182408812 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Protocol  version 3, dated 7/ 30/2024  Page | 13 
 
APPENDICES  
 
Appendix 1. Content of Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) questionnaire 
 PRO -CTCAE items  
Frequency  
Diarrhea  In the last 7 days, how often did you have loose or watery stools (diarrhea)?  
Nausea  In the last 7 days, how often did you have nausea?  
Scale  0, Never | 1, Rarely | 2, Occasionally | 3, Frequently | 4, Almost constantly  
Severity  
Anorexia  In the last 7 days, what was the severity of your decreased appetite at its worst?  
Constipation  In the last 7 days, what was the severity of your constipation at its worst?  
Neuropathy  In the last 7 days, what was the severity of your numbness or tingling in your hands or feet at its worst?  
Scale  0, None | 1, Mild | 2, Moderate | 3, Severe | 4, Very severe  
Interference with activities of daily living  
Anxiety  In the last 7 days, how much did anxiety interfere with your usual or daily activities?  
Depression  In the last 7 days, how much did sad or unhappy feelings interfere with your usual or daily activities?  
Dyspnea  In the last 7 days, how much did your shortness of breath interfere with your usual or daily activities?  
Fatigue  In the last 7 days, how much did fatigue, tiredness, or lack of energy interfere with your usual or daily 
activities?  
Scale  0, Not at all | 1, A little bit | 2, Somewhat | 3, Quite a bit | 4, Very much  
PROMIS items  
Global health  In general, would you say your quality of life is  
Scale  0, Excellent | 1, Very good | 2, Good | 3, Fair | 4, Poor  
PG-SGA items  
Activity level  In the last 7 days, how would you generally rate your activity level?  
Scale  0, Normal with no limitations  
1, Not my normal self, but able to be up and about with fairly normal activities  
2, Not feeling up to most things, but in bed or chair less than half the day  
3, Able to do little activity and spend most of the day in bed or chair  
4, Pretty much bedridden, rarely out of bed  
Final question – randomized to be sent to patients in  Arms in 2 and 3   
Triage nurse 
team outreach  Would you like your triage nurse team to reach out to you regarding the symptoms you have reported 
in this survey?  
Scale  
Yes 
No 
  
PRO -CTCAE ™ = Patient -Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
PROMIS® = Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System  
PG-SGA© = Patient -Generated Subjective Global Assessment  