 
 
1 
  
 
 
Official Title: Group Motivational Interviewing (GMI) For Homeless Veterans In VA Services  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: 1/8/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  
Medical University of South Carolina  
Protocol Study Versi on 7; January 8, 2019  
 
PI Name: Elizabeth J. Santa Ana, Ph.D.  
Study Title: Group Motivational Interviewing (GMI) For Homeless Veterans in VA Services  
 
A. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Objectives:  Study objectives are consistent with VA housing recommendations focusing on patient recovery, 
health services promotion, and treatment implementation evaluation. GMI will be compared to a control treatment 
condition (CT) on (Specific Aim I; Five outcomes : (Primary H1): treatment engagement; (Primary H1): 
substance use; (Secondary H2): psychosocial integration (e.g., social support, community participation); 
(Secondary H3) quality of life/psychiatric indices; and (Secondary H4): number of days engaging in 
structured/productive work activities in the 6 -month follow up. Specific Aim I I involves a process evaluation for 
documenting (A) formative (e.g., developmental), (B) process, and (C) summative outcomes; and Specific Aim 
III involves estimation of cost of intervention in terms of direct costs, indirect costs of staff, costs of capit al and 
workload measures for future implementation and dissemination research.  
 
B. BACKGROUND/ SIGNIFICANCE  
B1. Supportive housing for homeless Veterans is a national priority within VA . Veterans account  for 13% 
(tens of thousands) of all homeless adults at  any given point in time19 and suffer unmet need for health/social 
services20-21 and high mortality . Combining initiatives, $941 million was  proposed for FY 2014 for VA homeless 
programs23. Two cardinal VA housing programs c ollectively referred to as ‘VA h ousing’, are: Housing and Urban 
Development -Veterans Affairs Supported Housing  (HUD -VASH, n= 56,850 slots) and Grant & Per  Diem (GPD, 
n= 15,500  slots as of August, 2013 ). HUD -VASH combines rental assistance for homeless Veterans with case 
management ; whereas GPD  awards grants to community agencies for transitional housing programs that help 
Veterans regain social function and re -enter wor k and housing. Together, VA housing programs support over 
150,000 homeless Veterans, reflecting massive expansion in the last 4 years.  
 
B2. Substance abuse is common  among homeless Veterans . Over  60% of Veterans are admitted into VA 
housing with a SUD9. About  50% have both alcohol and drug use disorders. Some clients with severe  alcohol 
dependence  reduce drinking once house d24, although most comparative studies have not found  an overall 
beneficial impact of housing on the SUD  itself25-26. Despite a major expansion in clinical services, substance 
abuse overdose is the leading cause of death among formerly and currently homele ss adults4. Substance use is 
a risk factor  for recidivism to homelessness27-29 and h aving a co-existing psychiatric disorder (e.g., PTSD) 
increases the risk of loss of housing  by 85 percent28. The potential success of supportive housing for homeless 
Vetera ns in VA h ousing depends  on effective treatment approaches that are respectful and impart autonomy .  
 
B3. Veterans in VA h ousing  are at high risk of continued impairment in health and social functioning . In 
one national study of 29,143 Veterans  in VA h ousing, participants with a SUD  reported greater psychopathology, 
engaged in more substance use over time, and showed more problems with alcohol and drugs at 6 months 
compared to VA h ousing  participants without a substance use problem, indicating that active s ubstance use 
impedes quality of life and functioning3. A significant number of Veterans in VA h ousing also report continued 
social isolation and show  limited improvement in social integration despite being housed30. Supportive  housing 
is not adequate by it self to address the mental health, psychosocial, and substance abuse treatment 
needs of Veterans  in VA h ousing3.  
 
B4. Housing First , adopted  as VA’s official approach to VA h ousing servic es, n ecessitate s additional 
“wraparound” treatment services.  Housing  First (HF) is an evidence -based approach to supportive housing 
that emphasizes provision of subsidized housing as well as  recovery support and case management services to 
the most vulnerable Veterans  without preconditions of sobriety  or involvement  in tre atment31,32. HF combine s 
rapid hous ing with “wraparound”  services, thereby addressing mental healt h and addiction treatment needs . 
Pathways to Housing2 is an evidence -based HF model that uses  Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) teams . 
ACT teams have been d eployed on a pilot basis in 14 VA Medical Centers, and are well positioned to have a 
key role. However, alternatives to ACT also are needed because they  are costly, not all clients require them5,6, 
and case managers handling ratios of 25 -36 clients per man ager remains the default method of assuring clinical 
 
 
3 
 support7,8. VA leadership mandates that support services should  be “wrapped around the Veteran ” to advance 
housing stabilization, quality of life, health outcomes, and long -lasting strides to recovery (E lectronic 
communication sent October 15th, 2012 to all VHA VISN Directors on behalf of W. Schoenhard).   
 
B5. The ‘wraparound’ treatment mandate highlights a potential void in optimizing S UD support in both 
types of VA h ousing . With HUD -VASH, where harm red uction is a guiding philosophy and case managers are 
focused on logistics of housing, there is need for addiction interventions that respect client priorities, are relatively 
non-directive (consonant with harm reduction) and not staff -intensive. In GPD, cu rrent provision of SUD 
supportive care varies in relation to client needs and by program site. National leaders have expressed strong 
interest in diverse, non -resource intensive recovery support mechanisms (Personal Communication ; GPD 
National Director J . Quarles, 11/7/ 2013).  Given the uneven execution of SU D treatment support in both VA 
housing modes, our study offers a potentially valuable remedy to a pressing system need.  
 
B6. Addiction recovery supports for VA h ousing  are required that operate on lean s taffing models fully 
aligned  with the philosophic emphasis of HF on consumer autonomy.  There remains a  need  for SUD 
programs  that are shorter in duration, efficient to deploy, easily laye red onto existing VA h ousing services, require 
minimal staff to opera te, and provide several paths of SUD assistance (e.g., lowered substance use, dual 
diagnosis recovery  awareness , higher treatment engagement) . Our proposed  study addresses this gap in 
VA services and will  investigate  the effectiveness, implementation, and process of an adaptation of 
motivational interviewing  (MI) in a group format (i.e., GMI) that is provided in VA h ousing  for Veterans 
with SUDs and comorbid  psychiatric disorders.  GMI is based on MI ; the latter possesses a significant 
evidence  base for addi ctive disorders11,33 and has well-established effectiveness in real world settings34-35. 
 
B7. Group motivational interviewing  (GMI) , an understudied intervention, may be a feasible/ practical 
mode  of treatment  delivery  and is consonant with HF . For years an  effective group -based MI intervention for 
addictive disorders eluded investigators due to difficulties with translating key individual MI therapeutic 
components into a group format36. Only a few controlled trials examined  MI in groups13-14,37 and few clin icians 
are trained to provide MI in groups . As a consequence, MI is underutilized in practice despite it s high potential 
to benefit dually diagnosed Veterans. Dr. Santa Ana developed and pilot tested a 4-session manualized GMI 
intervention addressing these  translation issues prior to her CDA -2, (see Research Plan outlining innovative GMI 
components), referred to as  ‘Group Motivational Interviewing Treatment (GMI) for Individuals with Psychiatric 
and Comorbid Substance Use Problem s38; also see treatment manu al in Appendix ). GMI is designed to foster 
important aspects of group therapy that offers advantages over individual treatment12,36,39 (i.e. peer support, 
group cohesiveness), opportunities to share information, role modeling, peer feedback, altr uism, and instillation 
of hope , while remaining consistent with the MI principles11. To date, only 2 controlled trials evaluated GMI for 
substance use and treatment engagement among dually diagnosed patients13-14,37 with promising results  (see 
section C ). GMI is a u seful intervention that is easily layered on to existing treatment for enhancing treatment 
engagement and reducing substance use among dually diagnosed Veterans.  Given the recent adoption of HF 
as an approach  in VA h ousing for homeless Veterans with SUDs , the delivery of MI for these individuals comes  
at a critical time for promoting  their stabilization and quality of life.  
 
B8. GMI concept description . In GMI, group  members are introduced to a ‘GMI culture’ (Phase I ) involving MI 
consistent group norms for maintain ing MI Spirit11 (e.g., a void giving unsolicited advice). Second, the MI 
processes11 and core MI microskills are facilitated through a set of group therapy dynamics (Phase II ) that, 
according to Irvin Yalom12, are most effective in group therapy. It is the interplay between MI and these central 
organizing group dynamics that is the essence of GMI.  The schematic  below shows the two primary GMI phases  
and the  10 dynamic aspects of group therapy and associated GMI strategies  to accomplish the dynamic aspect :  
(See ‘Project Logic Mod el’ in Table 5  for Summative Intervention Impacts and Outcomes)  
 
                             Phase  I: GMI Normative Culture (group norms, MI therapist modeling, group MI practice)  
                             Phase  II: Yalo m’s (1995) Group Dynamics and Associated GMI Activities  
Altruism  
-Brainstorming 
treatment 
obstacles/solutions  
-Dual diagnosis 
recovery : Three 
legged stool  Group cohesiveness  
-Normalizing 
ambivalence/emotions  
-Brainstorming 
treatment 
obstacles/solutions  
 Universality  
-A Hard Choice: Finding 
Your own pace  
-Values exploration  
-Interacting relationship 
between substance use 
and mental health  Interpersonal Learning  
-Personal strengths  
-Values clarification  
-Proactive behavi or: good 
mental health/positive 
outcomes  Guidance  
-Establishing GMI culture  
-Brainstorming treatment 
obstacles/solutions  
-Decisional balance  
-Personal feedback  
 
 
4 
  -Therapist four open -
ended questions  -Brainstorming treatment 
obstacles/solutions  
 -Proactive behavior: good 
mental health/positive 
outcomes  
Identification  
-Proactive behavior: 
good mental 
health/positive 
outcomes  Catharsis  
-Normalizing 
ambivalence/emotions  
-Therapist four open -
ended questions  
-Personalized feedback  Self-Understanding  
-Values Clarification  
-Decisional Balance  
-Dual Dia gnosis recovery  
-Personalized feedback  
-Importance/confidence  
 Instillation of Hope  
-Normalizing  ambivalence  
-Personal strengths  
-Importance/confidence  
-Personalized feedback  
-Brainstorming t reatment 
obstacle s/solutions  Existential Factors  
-Dual diagnosis recovery: 3-
legged stool (staying sober , 
taking meds, attending 
treatment ) 
-Values exploration  
-Personal strengths  
 
B9. Significance to Veterans: Homeless Veterans with SUDs represent one of the largest and most chronic 
groups of psychiatric patients trea ted in the VA Healthcare System. With the ongoing execution of VA’s “Plan to 
End Veteran Homelessness, ” Veterans entering housing require interventions that can  be feasibly implemented 
with minimal reorganization of existing services. GMI  is based on MI, an empirically valid treatment that aligns 
with Veteran -centered recovery models including Harm Reduction and more traditional treatment philosophies. 
The investment in GMI for VA h ousing may be minimal as it requires only a few staff to operate in relative ly short 
time (e.g., 4 sessions , 90-min each)  with modest (20 h ours) staff training . It can be layered onto existing services 
with little interruption or reorganization of staff, and it has potential to be offered to larger numbers of Veterans 
with SUDs in  VA housing  who would otherwise not receive this intervention.   
 
C. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
C1. Study Overview: GMI for Homeless Veterans in VA h ousing  
The primary objective of this 4 -year prospective, randomized, between groups, repeated measures eff ectiveness 
trial is to compare (a) GMI to a (b) control treatment condition (CT) for dually diagnosed Veterans with SUDs in 
VA h ousing. The study intervention, GMI, will serve Veterans who attend a workshop addressing their substance 
abuse and mental healt h problems regardless of their level of commitment for undertaking behavioral change. 
This study is designed to recruit dually diagno sed Veterans in two primary VA h ousing programs, HUD -VASH 
and GPD . The programs share in common that they receive Veterans with substance use, and the dynamic of 
moving toward preserving housing even when lapse or relapse occurs. According to Jeffrey Quarles, National 
Director of VA GPD , GPD will be moving more “in-line” with VA Housing First over time (personal communication,  
Nov. 7, 2013).  Thus, t here is no a -priori reason to suggest that participants who volunteer to enroll in the study 
will experience differential benefits based on where they reside , and this study is not powered to test for such 
differences.  We will conduc t a process evaluation to document formative (e.g., plan for intervention), process, 
and summative indicators. A logic model containing our plan for document ing aims, inputs, outputs, outcomes, 
and impacts is presented in Table 5 (below).  Our third aim includes estimation of cost (direct and indirect costs, 
workload measures, costs of capital)17-18. Estimated costs of the intervention will be used in implementation and 
dissemination research. A racially/ethnically diverse sample of 186 Veterans with current  alcohol/drug 
dependence or abuse will be recruited. Male and female Veterans with co -existing  DSM -IV-TR Axis I  disorder s40 
(e.g., MDD, PTSD) will be eligible. Participants will be randomized using a variant of block randomization, where 
“recruitment week”  is the unit of randomization; this will facilitate the process of forming “closed treatment group s” 
(e.g., approximately 6 members) . Participants will be randomized to participate in 4 consecutive 90 -minute GMI 
or CT sessions. Timing for conducting GMI/CT  and completion of assessments is as follows: Consent & Baseline 
interviews  (Week 1 ) ➔ GMI or CT  (4 sessions back -to-back; Week 2 ) ➔ one-month follow -up; Week 4 ) ➔ 3-
month follow -up (Week 12 ) ➔ 6-month follow -up (Week 24 ).  
 
Table 1. Participant Characteri stics  
Characteristic  GMI (n = 59)  TAU (n = 59)  
Mean age (SD)  52.9 51.1 
 
 
5 
 C2. Feasibility and Preliminary Data : Data and clinical 
research presented below provide a strong foundation for the 
current study.  
C2a. Project 1 : GMI resulted  in higher treatment 
engagement and lower substance use  compared to 
standard treatment37. We conducted a NIH-NIDA funded 
Stage I -pilot  controlled trial comparing GMI ( N = 50) to 
standard treatment (ST; N = 51)  among  101 dually diagnos ed 
psychiatric inpatients37 randomized to two 120 -minute GMI or 
ST sessions. Participants  were  those with at least one current 
SUD  and a nonsubstance -related major Axis I disorder. All 
patients and colla terals were interviewed at 1 and 3 -month follow -up. Three main outcomes  of the pilot study 
showed that:  1) GMI reduced the number of inpatient hospital detoxification re -admissions  after initial 
hospitalization  compared to ST: GMI pa rticipants were re -admitted to inpatient detoxification fewer times (GMI: 
6.8%; ST: 25.6%; p = .03) duri ng the 3 -month follow -up period37; 2) Participants in  GMI attended more outpatient 
aftercare treatment  sessions  compared to participants  in ST  (M=5.7 [SD= 6.7] vs. M=2.5 [1.9]; p=.001) and 
attended more  12-Step or AA/NA self -help sessions  (M=21.7  [18.8] vs. M=6.8 [6.8]; p<.01) by 3 -month follow -
up; and 3) GMI was associated with reduced substance use : Participants in GMI drank less alcohol  (measured 
in standard ethanol content units),  compared to their count erparts in ST by 3 -mont h follow -up (M=117.3  [182.8 ] 
vs. M=262.3  [312.9 ], p=.04), engaged in less binge drinking  (M=4.6 [3.2] vs. M=13.9 [10.5], p=.001) and had 
fewer days of  illicit drug use  (M=5.2 [7.2] vs. M=13.0  [12.0]; p=.01) at 1 -month follow -up. A smaller proportion of 
GMI participants reported binge drinking (34.1% in GMI vs. 55.8%  in ST , p = .02) at the 3 -month follow -up.  
II. Project 2:  GMI resulted in lower alcohol use, higher outpatient treatment attendance, and greater 
participant change talk compared to TAU13-14. In her CDA -2 (CDA -2-016-08S) titled: ‘Impact of Group 
Motivational Interviewing on Dually Diagnosed Veterans’ , Dr. Santa Ana  compared GMI to treatment -as-usual 
(TAU) among  118 Veterans with current alcohol dependence or abuse, an accompanying drug abuse diso rder, 
and a co-existing  Axis I psychiatric disorder recruited through the Charleston VAMC Substance Abuse Treatment 
Center (SATC) . Participants we re randomized to GMI ( n=59) or TAU (n=59). All p articipants  were interviewed at 
1 and 3 -month follow -up. Patie nts attended four 75 - minute sessions of GMI or TAU across 4  consecutive  days. 
TAU was designed as a psycho -educational group (e.g., addiction as a chronic disease). Dr. Santa Ana modified 
her GMI protocol  for application in the VA outpatient SATC , trained  five clinicians to provide intervention s, and 
provided consultation for continued therapist adherenc e/competence to the protocol. Participant characteristics 
and DSM -IV-TR substance use and comorbid Axis I diagnoses are listed in Tables 1 and 2. A study c oordinator 
blind to study conditions evaluated  participants at  baseline and at a 1 and 3 -month follow -up. Treatment 
utilization was assessed via CPRS. Researchers counted the number of outpatient substance  abuse treatment 
encounters and individual mental h ealth treatment appointments with mental health staff (e.g., case -managers, 
psychiatrists, psychologists) that occurred in the 3 months following the patient’s consent (at the Charleston 
VAMC only).  Substance use was assessed using the Time -Line Follow Bac k41. We measured daily and peak 
alcohol consumption in standard drinks at 3 -month follow -up. Data analyses were conducted using ANCOVA 
with ZINB  distribution. Although analyses remain ongoing, preliminary results for primary outcome variables 
reveal the fo llowing:  A) Participants in GMI attended significantly more general  outpatient mental health 
treatment sessions compared  to TAU by 3 -month follow up13, b = .944 (.307), t = 3.079, p < .001;  Cohen’s d=.54. 
No baseline differences in treatment engagement wer e found.   Gender  
   Male  
   Female  
  
54 (92%)  
5 (8%)   
54 (92%)  
5 (8%)  
Race  
  Caucasian  
  African -American  
  Hispanic   
27 (46%)  
32 (54%)  
0 (0%)   
22 (37%)  
36 (61%)  
1 (2%)  
Education  
   ≤ High School Grad  
      College  
   ≥ College graduate  
  
28 (48%)  
18 (30%)  
13 (22%)  
  
24 (40%)  
28 (48%)  
 7 (12%)  
Table 2. DSM -IV-TR Substance Use  GMI TAU 
  Alcohol Abuse/dependence  59 
(100%)  59 
(100%)  
  Opioid dependence    1 (16%)  3 (5%)  
  Sedative/hypnotic dependence  1 (2%)  0 (0%)  
  Cocaine abuse/dependence  16 (27%)  18 (31%)  
  Marijuana abuse/depende nce 7 (12%)   8 (14%)  
DSM -IV Comorbid Axis I Diagnoses    
Depressive Disorders   30 (51%)  30 (51%)  
Bipolar I/II Disorders  4 (7%)  2 (3%)  
Anxiety Disorders (PTSD, panic, GAD, 
social phobia)    30 
(51%)  32 (54%)  
Mood Disorders NOS  2 (3%)  0 (0%)  
Substance In duced Mood Disorder    7 (12%)  3 (5%)  
 
 
6 
  B) Participants in GMI relative to TAU consumed less 
alcohol  in standard drinks, b=-155.3 (70.9), t=-2.19, 
p=.03; Cohen’s d=.36) and drank fewer standard 
drinks in terms of their peak (highest) drinking day14, 
b=-4.78 (2.03), t=-2.4, p=.02. No baseline differences 
between groups were found on alcohol consumption.   
 C) Change talk mediates the effect of GMI and substance use outcome and is more prevalent in GMI compared 
to TAU14. Change talk is client language in favor of change and its enh ancement is the primary goal of MI  (e.g., 
“I want to quit drinking for my family”)42. Change  talk variables, such as “ ability ” language and its underlying 
dimensions  (e.g., ‘desire, reason, need, commitment, taking steps’) underlie the efficacy of MI43, such that 
stronger change talk predicts substance use42. Therapist adherence to MI increases change talk,  which serves 
as a mediator between therapist behavior and lowering alcohol use consumption44. Studies on change talk 
indicate that it is the strongest indicator of mechanism of action in MI contributing to outcome42. GMI activities 
intentionally evoke change talk by design, although studies examining change talk in GMI have not been 
conducted. The   
presence of change talk  in GMI provides evidence show ing that similar mechanisms of action that are present 
in MI are als o present in GMI. Using a coding manual ( adapted from the Motivational Interviewing Treatment 
Integrity (MITI) Code, version 3.1.1. )45, two trained raters blind to treatment condition code d 138 audio recorded 
GMI/TAU sessions for change talk  [GMI=68; TAU=70] , 8 on which they overlapped for  establishing rater 
reliability . ICC’s were excellent, ranging from lowest .92 to highest .99 across all six change talk  categories. 
Using group clustered  latent growth models  examini ng 
between group frequency of change talk  ratings, w ith 
the exception of ‘commitment’ [t=1.8; p=.07] , all types 
of change talk  (‘desire ’ [t=4.9; p<.001], ‘ability ’ [t=3.0; 
p=.002] , ‘reason ’ [t=5.1; p<.001] , ‘need ’ [t=3.8; p<.001], 
and ‘taking steps ’ [t=5.1; p<.001])  was higher in GMI  
relative to TAU14 and remained above TAU across all 4 
sessions, as seen in  Figure 3 . To examine whether 
change talk  predicts su bstance use outcome, we 
conducted a group clustered path mediation anal ysis. 
By 3-month follow up, ‘Ability’ change talk  predicted 
less alcohol consumption (Estimate: -71.5; CI: -165.74, 
-2.0), while ‘Need’ change talk  predicted greater alcohol consumption (Estimate: -104.9; CI: 28.0, 208.2),  
indicating that ‘Ability’ should be enhanced in GMI. These data provide preliminary evidence that GMI enhance s 
change talk  and predicts substance use outcome  among dually diagnosed Veterans . Note : 19% (n=23; 
GMI=15/TAU=8) of Dr. Santa Ana’s  dually diagnosed sample (n=118) were homeless Ve terans receiving 
VA h ousing services. 78% (n=18) completed all 4 treatment sessions (GMI=73%, n=11/TAU=88%, n=7) ; 
91% (n=21) completed all study interviews (GMI= 87%, n=13/TAU=100%, n=8) , showing evidence of 
feasibility among homeless Veterans.  
 
C3. Recrui tment Plan and Feasibility of Recruitment   
The VA h ousing program of the Charleston, SC  VAMC will be the primary site of recruitment , incl uding 
Myrtle Beach and Savannah . As there are no competing studies, we anticipate no difficulties with recruiting the 
needed participants  within  the 30 month recruitment period . Recruitment will occur through: 1) VA h ousing  
Referral s: study personnel will attend  weekly VA h ousing  staff meetings  to discuss  potentially eligible patients ; 
2) Invitation letters : Provided IRB approval , conducting VISTA queries  (every 3 months) of Veterans with VA 
housing admission s and a DSM -V Axis I substance use disorder diagnosis . Letters of invitation describing the 
study and its eligibility requirements  will be sent  out by study personnel  to patients so they who can return -mail 
their interest in participating ; 3) General referrals : We will recruit participants who have not formally entered SUD 
treatment  from Tracks 1 and 2 ‘pre -treatment’ groups of  the Charleston VAMC SATC outpatient progra m, and 
receive referrals from VA physicians and clinic staff, social workers, nurses, mental healthcare physicians, or 
patients themselves in response to study  flyers. Approved recruitment flyers will be posted in prominent locations 
in the study clinics; 4) Interest (wait) list referrals : consisting of names and contact information of patients waiting 
to enroll in HUD -VASH. Wait list referrals are comparable to participants in HUD -VASH; the only exception being 
that they applied when vouchers were not avai lable.  Only study personnel will recruit participants to prevent 
potential coercion by VA housing staff.  Schizophrenia/psychotic Disorder  1 (2%)  2 (3%)  
Schizoaffective Disorder  1 (2%)  1 (2%)  
Borderline Personality Disorder  1 (2%)  0 (0%)  
Antisocial Personality Disorder  0 (0%)  1 (2%)  
No co -existing Axis I Disorder    6 (10%)     8 (14%)  
Session1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4
GMI 1044 402 431 662
TAU 133 72 156 94020040060080010001200Figure 3. Overall between Group Change Talk across the Four Sessions  
 
 
7 
 Feasibility of Recruitment : This study requires  186 Veterans currently in VA h ousing  or newly entering 
VA h ousing , but not  yet housed . We will recrui t 50% (n = 93) of participants from HUD -VASH  and the other 50% 
(n = 9 3) from GPD within  30 months  between Year 1, Month 7 and Year 3, Month 12  (see Gantt c hart in Table 
6 of Project Timeline) . As of 10/2013  there  are 385 vouchers  (i.e., participants curren tly enrolled in HUD -VASH ), 
65 anticipated new vouchers  for Fiscal Year 2014  (P. Bra dford, personal communication, 10 /2014 ), and 41 (x 
2.5 years) patients on the interest list. Additionally there are ~104 new clients entering the system annually due 
to part icipant departure/turnover . Taken together, at least 813 patients (385 + 65+ 41*2. 5 years  [103] +104*2. 5 
years [260] = 813 ) will be screenable over the course of 2.5 recruitment years. 50 to 60% of HUD -VASH 
participants have an SUD9. Taking the most conser vative estimate of participants having any SUD (i.e., 50%) 
provides  407 participants eligible  (813*.50 = 407 ); a figure well above the  186 participants needed for the study. 
80% of residents in VA GPD  have a n SUD. In the GPD program , there are approximatel y 285 new (non -
overlapping) adm issions per year  providing 570 participants eligible to participate  (285*2. 5 years = 713*.80 = 
570). All combined, there are approximately 977 potentially eligible participants (407+570 = 977 ) during the 30 
months of study recruitment, resulting in 32 new admissions, on average, per month.  
Attrition and Retention : This study’s recruitment of 186 subjects (9 3 per trial arm) reflects a po wer 
calculation in which up to 3 0% could  be lost to follow up . This conservative attrition estimate is well above the  
13% study drop-out rate in Dr. Santa Ana’s CDA -2. Additionally, it  is consistent with average participant drop -
out rat es in the addiction field, and is well within NIDA recomm ended guidelines of at least 80% retention in 
research . This rate is conservative given that the majority of VA h ousing  patients  in the current protocol will 
already be “engaged ” in ongoing VA service s and these patients tend to remain in VA care.  
Participant Payments : All participants will receive  subject  fees based on an  increasing  incremental plan  
to enhance study retention: $25.00  for the baseline assessment , $25 for each of four treatment sessions,  $25 
for the Booster session, $50.00 for the one -month  follow -up, $ 50.00 for the 3 -month follow -up, and $ 50.00 for 
the 6 -month assessment for a combined possible total of $ 300.00. As participants in this study are likely to be 
unemployed , most will  lack sufficient funds to obtain transportation to the group therapy site  for the sessions .  
 
C4. Participant Eligib ility Criteria. Participants will need to meet t he following inclusion criteria : Veterans 
currently in HUD -VASH  and GPD , newly entering the program but not yet  housed, or  Veterans on the HUD -
VASH interest (wait) list, able to comprehend English, m eeting  DSM-V criteria for current subst ance use disorder , 
use of substances in past 30 days prior to date of consent , able to provide informed consent, function ing at an 
intellectual level sufficient to allow accurate completion of all assessment instruments, and w illing to commit to 
4 group therapy sessions, the booster session, and baseline, 1, 3, and 6 month follow -up assessments.  We will 
record recruitment site from where participan ts were derived (HU D-VASH/GPD) as well as amount of time in VA 
housing to explore  site effects (as covariate and effect -modifier) in the analytic phase. If there are differences 
based on these variables, they will become covariates and adjusted in the analysis.  
 
C5. Randomization Procedures.  Participants will be assigned to GMI or CT using a block randomizatio n 
procedu re successful in shortening the amount of time needed to fill a group . This  procedure was successfully 
utilized in Dr. Santa Ana’s CDA. In this procedure,  a set of consecutively admitted participants will be assigned 
to the same treatment condition with ‘recruitment week’ being the unit of randomization (i.e., recruitment weeks 
themselves are randomized). A computer randomizes recruitment weeks; there fore, all participants entering the 
study in a treatment week enter the sa me treatment condition. Since session attrition occurs infrequently (i.e., 
some participants may elect to not attend a particular session for various reasons) and is typically no more than 
1 to 2  absent  individuals, we  will recruit at least 6 participants per workshop  to ensure that there will be enough 
attendees present. Thus, we anticipate between 3 to 6 participants will attend any one session; providing a 
maximum of  (up to)  62 workshops each containing four sessions for a maximum total of 31 workshops i n GMI 
(124 sessions) and 31  workshops  in CT  (124 sessions). Once a Veteran is randomized he or she will be entered 
into the study and included in intent -to-treat analy sis. We will track session attendance. Should there be a 
difference on group member atten dance between treatment conditions, we will account for within session 
correlations of outcome by including random effects corresponding to the clusters.   
 
C6. Description of Proposed Novel Intervention (see appendix for GMI treatment manual) . GMI & CT g roup 
sessions will take place in various  community locations (e.g., HUD -VASH apartment complexes /GPD residential 
programs  [e.g., Charleston Vets ]).  
Group motivational Interviewing (GMI):  Following randomization, participants will be scheduled with their stu dy 
therapist (see therapist training in section C8) in a closed group. GMI participants will receive four structured , 
 
 
8 
 back -to-back,  90-min sessions consistent w ith the central principles and spirit  of MI11. GMI, which is based on a 
manualized protocol38, is specifically designed for dually diagnosed Veterans. A focus of the intervention creates 
awareness of the relationship between the substance use and c o-existing psychiatric disorder  and the 
importance of treating  both.  The primary aim of GMI Session 1  is to introduce the guidelines of group behavior 
(e.g., the GMI normative c ulture ), explore common emotions (e.g., anxiety, fear) associated with ambivalence to 
change, instill autonomy , evaluate pros/ cons of substance use, and evaluate readiness/ confidence to change . 
The primary aim of GMI Session 2  is to enhance discrepancy, a key element in building motivation for change. 
Participants are provided  a sealed “Personalized Graphic Feedback Report ” (PFR; An updated version will be 
engineered by Datstat Inc.  and is discussed  in the budget ) based on the baseline assessment  summarizing  the 
participant’s  drinking and drug use patterns  compared to the population,  combined with 12  other feedback 
components  (e.g., SUD consequences, liver enzym es). The primary aim of G MI Session 3  is to explo re and 
clarify goals/values, increase self -efficacy, and engage members in a discussion on the interrelationship between 
their substance use and c o-existing psychiatric disorder . The focus of this discussion relates positive  (e.g., 
healthy) menta l health and proactive behavior , such as engaging in a productive job or structured activity, 
fostering relationships with fri ends, family, and the community , taking medication, staying clean and sober, and 
going to treatment  with positive ou tcome . The primary aim of GMI Session 4  is to enhance intrinsic motivation to 
go to  treatment and engage in productive work or other structured activities, and introduce an activity to increase 
self-efficacy for continuing treatment and enhancing social activities .  
 
C7.  Description of Comparator/Control Conditions  
Control Treatment Condition (CT ): Participants  in CT  will attend  four sessions equal in time and length to 
GMI (i.e., 90 minutes)  and will involve the following topics: A popular ‘box activity’ : participants will anonymously 
write evocative questi ons on slips of paper involving their personal concerns that are placed in a box and, when  
randomly selected, opened  for group discussion (e.g., “How do I talk to my family about my alcohol problem ?”), 
money management with  feedback (2 sessions) ,psychoeducation about substance use,  and cooking -home 
maintenance.  
Session timing : We will aim to complete GMI and CT sessions over the course of one week (Tuesday – 
Friday) when feasible and practical. Our sess ion timing aim is based on evidence from the PI’s prior work, given 
her success with this approach in her pilot and CDA, whereas the efficacy of GMI delivered over a longer period 
of time is less certain. We plan to make every effort to complete group sess ions on 4 consecutive days , as that 
approach was used in prior successful efforts. However, at times, we may encounter participants  within a 
particular group who have limited availability to attend consecutive sessions within one week; thus, we will make 
reasonable efforts to reduce barriers to attend sessions (e.g., holding sessions  every other day ).   
Description of Booster Session: Participants in both GMI and CT will be asked to attend a 1 hour booster 
session 2 months after they receive the interventio n to maintain consistency with the treatment, reduce 
participant drop out (as there are no formal assessments being conducted at the second month) and to increase 
potential to motivate and enhance proactive behaviors among group members to engage in the th erapeutic 
material discussed in both GMI and the TCC interventions.  
 
 
C8. Treatment Fidelity to GMI.  
 Therapist Training and Supervision : Therapis ts for the project will be 2  part-time social workers serving 
Charleston, Myrtle Beach, and Savannah. Therapi sts will  facilitate  equa l numbers of groups (e.g., maximum of 
31 groups or 124 sessions each) . Therapists will receive a 20 -hour training facilitated by the PI, who is an expert 
trainer in  Motivational Interviewing , over the course o f three days, followed by a 4 -week supervised training with 
non-study participants with the PI . Therapists will follow the GMI treatment manual and undergo weekly clinical 
supervision with the PI  to maintain therapist adherence (for preventing  protocol  drift) and competence ( for 
facilitating GMI skillfully) . Treatment Fidelity Checks:  All treatment sessions will be audio -taped. 15% of these 
will be randomly selected and rated by trained independent raters to evaluate therapist a dherence and 
competence and to ensure treatment disc riminability between treatment conditions on the MI Global Scales (i.e., 
the combined global scores) and the MI Behavioral Frequency Counts  (i.e., combined frequency of the 
behavioral categories) using  the Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity (MIT I) Code, version 3.1.1.45. Prior 
to seeing stud y participants, therapists will facilitate GMI sessions with patients not enrolled in the study and will 
be required  to demonstrate adequate us e of GMI consistent strategies, achieving MITI behavioral competen cy 
levels45, during each session and for these strategies, demonstrate minimum competence on global scale ratings 
 
 
9 
 of 4 or higher  in all 4 sessions to be certified  before seeing study participants . Coding will occur at the beginning 
of year 3 and be complet ed by the end of year 3 . 
 
C9. Outcomes and Assessments  
Measures used in this  study include those  for est ablishing eligibility and baseline descriptive information 
(e.g. demographics). To reduce follow -up losses, participants will be asked to list the names /contact information 
of 2 family members (or close contacts).  We listed specific assessments in clusters associated with their specific 
aims and primary / secondary hypotheses (H1 to H4) for ease of reference . Assessments  will be administered at  
baseline, 1, 3 –and 6-month  follow -up visits.  A project coordinator trained in the administration of assessment 
interviews will conduct baseline assessments and a full-time research assistant blind to study condition 
(independent assessor ) will administer follow -up a ssessments  (see budget justification for more detailed role 
designations). Afte r informed  consent  proce dures,  participants  will complete  a battery  of assessments taking 
~ 94 minutes  at baseline and ~70 minutes at follow -ups.  
C9a. Measures under Specific A im I: Primary Hypothesis (H1); Substance Use and Treatment 
Engagement : are described in this section. Information regarding additional measures can be found in Table 
4. The Timeline  Follow -Back  (TLFB)41 obtains  retrospective  self-report  of alcohol /drug use (e.g., cocai ne, 
marijuana,  stimulants,  sedatives,  opioids) frequency/quantity via estimates of daily drinking/drug use, # days 
spent drinking alcohol, and # binge drinking days by using  a calendar a nd memory  prompts to stimulate 
substance use recall.  Alcohol consumption data will be converted into standard ethanol content (SEC) units (or 
standard drinks) equivalent to 0.5 oz of ethanol ; Urine  Drug  Screen:  samples  will be tested  with a 
RapidCHEC K® Multi -Drug  10 Panel  Test, which  allows  for the detection  of THC/marijuana, cocaine,  
phencyclidine,  opiates,  methamphetamines, methadone,  amphet amines, barbiturates, and  benzodiazepin es; 
Alcohol  Breathalyzer  Tests  will be used  to measure  participant’s blood  alcohol concent ration  (BAC) at follow -
ups. Samples  >0.01  g/dl will be considered positi ve; Ethyl Glucuronide (EtG):  is a conjugated alcohol metabolite 
formed by the enzymatic conjugation of glucuronic acid with alcohol in the liver and remains positive in urine for 
several days following cessation and can detect e ven small levels of drinking46. (NOTE: Biologic data will not 
be made available in CPRS records or to VA h ousing  staff) . The Treatment Attendance Calendar  (TAC; 
Based on the TLFB41) will be used to assess number of days treated for a substance abuse/mental  health 
problem in the VA or any other outpatient aftercare setting and number of visits with a VA or outside physician 
for help related to a psychiatric or substance use problem . Researchers will count the number of outpatient 
substance abuse and mental h ealth treatment encounters  in Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS) 
medical records at the Charleston VAMC (e.g., with case -managers, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers 
at the Charleston VAMC only); Twelve -Step Participation Questionnaire  (TSPQ-21)47 is a measure of 
involvement with 12 -Step meetings (AA, NA) including self -help ‘steps’ that the patient worked and number of 
12-Step meetings attended ; Treatment Motivation Questionnaire (TMQ)48 is a 29 -item self -report that measures 
reasons for e ntering and remaining in treatment.  
Table  4. Timeline of Assessment  Instruments  (18 items, not  including informed consent; ~94  mins or less)  
 
 Instrument  Name Purpose/Domain  Time 
(min)  Rater Assessment 
Time Point  
 A. Diagnostic/Screening Measures      
Informed  Consent Obtain informed consent  10 min  I BL 
1. 1. Dem ograph ic form /Homelessness History  Characterize sample  2 min  I BL 
2. 2. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5: SCID49 DSM -I psychiatric  disorders  20 min  I BL 
B. MEASURES under  SPECIFIC AIM I: Prima ry Hypothesis (H1): 
Substance  Use 
 
s 
     
3. 3. Timeline Fol low-Back (TLFB) 41 Assess s ubstance use  7 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
4. 4. Urine Drug Screen (UDS)  Assess illicit drug use  5 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
5. 5. Alcohol Brea thalyz er Assess alcohol use  2 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6 
6. 6. Ethyl Glucuronide (EtG) Alcohol Biomarker46 Assess alcohol use  5 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
B1. SPECIFIC AIM I: Primary Hypothesis (H1):  
Substance Use Related Problems      
7. 7. Addiction Se verity Index -Lite (ASI -Lite)50 Assess substance use sever ity 15 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
8. 8. Short Inventory of Problems (SIP -R)51 Assess substance use 
consequences  3 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
B2. SPECIFIC AIM I: Primary Hypothesis (H1):  
Treatment Engagement      
9. 9. Treatment Attendance Calendar (TAC)41 Assess treatment attendance  7 min RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
 
 
10 
 10. 10. 12-Step Participation Questionnaire47 Assess 12 -step attendance  2 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
11. 11. Treatment Motivation Questionnaire (TMQ)48 Assess treatment motivation  2 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
C. SPECIFIC AIM I: Secondary Hypothesis (H2):  
Psychosocial Integrative Activities      
12. 12. Social Support Survey52 Assess social support  3 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
13. 13. Community Participation Survey53 Assess community 
particip ation  3 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
D. SPECIFIC AIM I: Secondary Hypothesis (H3):  
 Quality  of Life      
14. 14. SF-12 Health Survey54 Assess changes in health  5 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
15. 15. Quality of Life Scale (QOLS)55 Assess quality of life  4 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
16. 16. Brief Symptom Inventory -18 (BSI -18)56 Assess psychiatric distress  2 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6 
17. 17. Medical Symptom Validaty Test (MSVT)  Assess Executive functioning  5 min  RA BL, 3 
18. 18. A/B Trailmaking Test  Assess executive functioning  10 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
E. SPECIFIC AIM I: Secondary Hypothesis (H4):  
Structured/Productive Work Activities      
19.. Productive Work Activities Calendar (PWAC)41 Assess work/volunteer 
activities  4 min  RA BL, 1, 3, 6  
F. SPECIFIC AIM II: Process Measures      
19. 20.. Charleston  Psychiatric  Outpatient  Satisfaction  Scale  (CPOSS -
VA)57 Assess participant satisfaction  2 min  RA 1 
20. 21.. Helping Alliance Questionnaire (HAQ -II)58 Assess therapist alliance  1 min  RA 1 
21. 22.. Group Cohesion Scale  Assess group cohesion  1 min  RA 1 
I = Inve stigator (e.g., PI,  Co-Is, Project Coord inator); RA = Research Ass istant; BL = Baseline  
C9b. Proc ess Evaluation : Measures under Specific Aim II & Analysis Plan for Formative, Process, 
and Summative Evaluation; (Specific AIM II) : To conduct a process evaluation for documenting (A) Formative 
(e.g., developmental), (B) Process, and (C) Summative indicato rs15-16 for: (1) identifying facilitators/ barriers to 
intervention delivery and plan for treatment (formative); (2) documenting and monitoring treatment 
implementation (process); and (3) assessing whether results of intervention met its stated goals (summ ative 
indicators).  
A) Formative Quantitative Process Evaluation  Measures: 1) Participant T reatment  session dropout 
proportion (GMI/CT), scores on GMI session quiz (e.g., evaluates GMI learning to ensure that participants 
received the intervention as inten ded), and participant satisfaction (see table 5 below). GMI/CT treatment session 
attendance records will be maintained. We will compare process outcomes (e.g. treatment session attendance 
dropout proportion, participant satisfaction, and GMI learning) betw een intervention groups using the generalized 
linear mixed model  (GLMM ) framework , as described  in section C12 , with appropriate link functions 
corresponding to different data types. The binomial link function will be used for comparison of treatment sessi on 
dropout proportion between GMI/CT (equivalent to logistic regression). GMI specific endpoints (e.g., group 
session attendance) will be described using standard descriptive analyses (e.g., proportions along with 
corresponding 95% CI).  Reasons for treatm ent session dropout, missed sessions and protocol noncompliance 
will be obtained and described by frequency distributions and 95% CI. 2) Patient S atisfaction : Charleston  
Psychiatric  Outpatient  Satisfaction  Scale  (CPOSS -VA; See Table 4, # 18) is a 16-item measure  with a Likert -
scale  response  format  based  on a general  measure  of patient  satisfaction. In  a sample  of Veterans , preliminary 
data showed  excellent reliability  (alpha = .96) and good  convergent  validity56 that provides a second process 
measure. 3) The rapist adherence and competence (treatment fidelity) will be examined  with interclass 
correlation coefficients (ICC) using a random effects model59 to provide: (1) an estimate of scale reliability within 
the sample of audio taped sessions with separate ind ependent t -tests used to determine whether therapists 
successfully altered the treatment approach according to protocol and that the treatment conditions were 
discriminable from each other and; (2) that therapists adhered to manual guidelines and were deli vered with 
adequate level of skill45. All audiotapes of the GMI/CT sessions will be rated by two independent raters to evaluate 
degree to which GMI was implemented as intended and could be discriminated from CT. A logic model15-16 (based 
on the framework f or containing our plan for documenting and evaluating formative, process (e.g., intervention 
fidelity, dose delivered/received, reach, context), and summative intervention aims, inputs, outputs, outcomes, 
and impacts is presented in Table 5 (below). 4) Pat ient Perceived Process M easure: Helping  Alliance  
Questionnaire  (HAQ -II)58 (See Table 4, #19) is a well-validated measure  of therapeutic alliance, a construct that 
has been shown to predict outcomes for  psychot herapy in substance use disorders .  
Table 5: P ROJECT LOGIC MODEL PLAN  
A. Formative Evaluation of the Intervention (adapted from Stetler and colleagues, 2006)   
Specific  Aim  Inputs  Outputs  Outcomes  Impacts  
 
 
11 
 1) Identify facilitators/barriers to 
treatment implementation: Conduct 
Veteran and staff focus groups to 
discuss project and GMI/CT treatments  Recruit focus group Veterans 
and staff, schedule focus 
groups, and develop focus 
group meeting agendas  Record, transcribe, & code 
focus group meeting 
discussions for  
themes   Interpretation of focus group 
themes, facilitators and 
barriers described, and 
findings prepared for 
publication  Refine & alter  
GMI/CT based on 
focus group info; 
share lessons 
learned  
2) Plan for Intervention 
Implementation : assemble team, train 
therapists on GMI/CT, assess therapist 
adherence/competence; plan GMI/CT 
delivery  Hire study team, update 
GMI/CT interventions, design 
and schedule staff training  
 Conduct GMI/CT training, 
therapists conduct practice 
sessions with actual 
patients, conduct pre/post 
therapist training 
assessment  Study therapists trained to 
deliver GMI/CT; therapists 
practice sessions rated/coded 
as certified to deliver 
treatment  
 Study therapists 
provide GMI/CT to 
participants, 
participants recruited 
for the study  
 
B. Process Evaluation of Intervention Implementati on (adapted from Saunders and colleagues 2005)  
Specific  Aim  Inputs  Outputs  Outcomes  Impacts  
1) Intervention Fidelity  
Therapists deliver GMI/CT adherently 
and competently and follow a GMI 
treatment manual  
  Update/refine 
adherence/competence 
manual; PI listens to GMI/CT 
sessions and provides 
consultation to study therapists  
 Collect session recordings, 
study therapists improve 
protocol adherence based 
on PI feedback; two raters 
trained to code GMI/CT 
sessions.  GMI/CT delivered 
adherently/competently; IC C’s 
calculated for therapist 
adherence/ competence; 
GMI/CT delivered as intended  Fidelity to GMI/CT; 
ICCs  indicate GMI 
discriminable from 
CT  
2) Intervention dose 
delivered/received:  
Participants attend full dose of 
intervention &  
received all study ma terials; participant 
knowledge enhanced  Create session attendance log; 
therapist session checklists 
provided; GMI/CT sessions 
recorded; GMI quiz provided to 
study participants  Participant session 
attendance, delivery of 
handouts, & utilization of 
therapist  checklists 
documented; Raters code 
GMI/CT sessions for 
change talk; GMI quiz 
collected and scored  GMI/CT dropout is minimized; 
participants receive study 
materials as planned, 
therapists deliver GMI/CT as 
intended; raters rate change 
talk in GMI/CT; GMI quiz 
indicates participants 
understand GMI material  GMI/CT delivered as 
planned; Majority 
participants attend 
full dose of GMI/CT  
sessions; change 
talk in GMI > CT  
3) Reach (participation)  
Study team successfully distribu tes 
knowledge of project to VA h ousing 
community; success in sufficient number 
of priority target audience being aware 
of & enrolling in the study  
 
  Consultations held with VA 
housing staff; study personnel 
track & maintain contact with 
study participants; number of 
participants 
inquiri ng/consenting to be in 
the study tracked.   
 Study  personnel 
collaborate with VA 
housing staff to identify 
eligible participants & 
ensure participants are 
informed of the study, 
number of eligible patients 
who inquire, consent, or 
state knowledge of the 
study documented  Records indicate that eligible 
participants are successfully 
informed of the study; at least 
80% of all eligible participants 
are aware of the study  
 
 VA h ousing staff 
reports that the 
project is a reliable 
resource for their 
patients; suff icient 
target participants  
are informed, 
invited, and recruited 
for the study  
4) Context:  Aspects of the study 
environment promote successful study 
implementation in terms of: 
communication with study team; and 
documentation of protocol process; 
obstacle s to participant involvement are 
minimized  Study team completes weekly 
checklist of duties; arrives at 
project meetings with duties 
accomplished or proposed; and 
PI Works out any study 
complications or issues with 
study team  Study team meet in 
designated o ffice for 
weekly study meetings; PI 
& PC talk daily by 
regarding project planning, 
directives, managing issues  
 PI assesses PC on a monthly 
basis (first six months) and 
then quarterly; assesses RA 
on a monthly basis (first six 
months) and then quarterly, C  
resolves contextual obstacles  Issues identified to 
ensure efficient 
operation of the 
project  
C. Summative Indicators of Intervention Implementation  (Logic Model of Intervention)  
Specific  Aim  Inputs  Outputs  Outcomes  Impacts  
1) Participant outcome:  
Participants resolve ambivalence in:  
Primary H1: Substance use/problems 
and Treatment engagement;  
Secondary H2: Productive work 
activities; H3: Social integration;  
H4: Quality of life;  
2) Link between Process & Outcome: 
Satisfaction with GMI/CT, therapist 
alliance & change talk analyzed for 
relationship to H1 substance use and 
treatment engagement outcomes  Therapists are 
adherence/competent to 
GMI/CT; study personnel 
conduct standardized follow -up 
assessments; study personnel 
provide CPOSS -VA & HAQ -II 
to pa rticipants at end of 
GMI/CT  
 Therapists adherent to MI 
Spirit; MI processes; and 
MI microskills combined 
with GMI activities; 
CPOSS -VA; HAQ -II 
Assessment s scored/ 
examined for completion  Participants engage in 
‘change talk’ mediators: 
‘Desire, Ability, Rea sons, 
Need, Commitment, 
Activation, Taking Steps ’ 
(DARN -CAT) & learn 
relationship between 
substance use and co -existing 
psychiatric disorder and 
importance of treating both   Measurable change 
in study outcomes 
based on follow -up 
assessments  
 
 
B. Qualitati ve Process Evaluation:  1) Stakeholder Perceptions of Treatment : Using an exploratory 
constructivist grounded theory approach to qualitative evaluation60, a total of 4 focus groups (2 in year 1 prior to 
data collection; 2 in year 4 at end of data collection ) will be conducted with a sample of Veterans (n= 6); and a 
second focus group with therapis ts, housing staff and providers;  to discuss perceptions, including perceived 
utility & satisfaction, difficulty, value/commitment, intervention attributes, and unin tended consequences of GMI 
& CT. Focus groups will be recorded and transcribed, with identifiers removed. Coding and interpretation will 
examine themes related to treatment perception. This approach first uses open coding to generate categories  
from the d ata, then theoretical coding as conceptual connectors are identified between categories and their 
properties through constant comparison. This approach lends itself to axial codin g as particular patterns  
emerge, such as common actions, events, assumptions , and relationships contributing to themes.  
2)  Qualitative documentation of plan for intervention  implementation : Field notes will be collected 
regarding preparation of the study team for intervention delivery and fidelity of roll -out ( See Table 5: 
 
 
12 
 ‘Intervention Fidelity ’). During study implementation, treatment, treatment fidelity, dose delivered/received, 
reach, and context will be documented using checklists, activity logs, and coding sheets for maintaining careful 
records of each area.  
C) Summative Ev aluation/Link to Process Measures : In two exploratory process analyse s, we will 
examine : 1) the association between patient satisfaction, therapist alliance, and MI therapist Spirit and H1 
substance use (e.g., quantity as measured by days, SECs) and treatm ent engagement (e.g., # sessions 
attended)  outcome variables. We will evaluate whether ratings on these 3 process measures are higher in GMI 
compared to CT and their association to outcome will be examined using GLMM ; and 2) whether participant 
change talk  mediates the effect of intervention and substance use outcome and whether it is more prevalent in 
GMI compared to CT using group clustered path mediation analysis.    
C9c. Cost Assessment.  We will assess treatment cost following Rosenheck:17  1) Total cost  of the 
salary/fringe  will be determined for two part time licensed social workers  at GS level 9  for the time spent providing 
the intervention . Per-minute costs will be estimated using the annual salary based on the Federal General 
Schedule for salaries fo r the year 2014, with the addition of the cost -of-living adjustment (COLA) for a person 
federally employed in Charleston and the cost of benefits (base salary+COLA at (variable)% rate+35% for 
benefits); 2) Total cost of equipment and administrative supply costs  will be calculated for each site: Charleston, 
Savannah, and Myrtle Beach and will include digital audio recorders, easels, a color printer, etc. Supplies will 
include lamination services, urine drug screening, and lab services for Ethyl Glucuronide ( EtG) Alcohol 
Biomarker test . 3) Participant travel costs  will be calculated for travel to the treatment site using modal cost per 
trip to represent the typical cost of participant travel for each year (using the mean cost provides too much weight 
to outlie r costs). These travel costs will include the Federal government allowance per mile and the average 
number of miles the Veteran travels from home to VA once that Veteran has exceeded the threshold (currently 
100 miles); 4) Participant per -session costs  will be assessed using the number of participants in each treatment 
condition. A per -person cost for each treatment session will be calculated on the following variables: (A) 
personnel per session, (B) patient travel; 5) Total cost per participant  will be est imated using the product of the 
per-session cost for the total treatment attendance for each person. All costs will be converted to 2014 dollars, 
depending on end of study data collection using the Consumer Price Index 
(http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm ) as of the last month in which study data is collected; 6) Cost 
per unit of service  will be estimated by dividing costs by a measure of services delivered (e.g., the number of 
patient contacts per year and hours of direct participant care service provided per patient each year). A log will 
be kept specifying number of contacts and hours of direct care service provided; 7) Indirect costs  will be assessed 
by gathering data on cost f rom VA accounting records for engineering, administration and maintenance 
departments and service lines; 8) Costs of capital18 will be assessed by contacting local realty agents for the 
market value of the land on which the VAMC is located. Disaster insura nce records will be examined to ascertain 
the cost of replacing the VAMC building.  
 
C10. Data Management. Data will be compiled using codes in lieu of personal identifiers. Access to study data 
will be limited to research personnel. All paper -based assess ments will be entered within 1 week after collection 
from the participant. As a result of double -data entry, two analyzable databases will be created. The validity of 
the databases will be checked by comparing the databases and macro programs will be writt en to check the 
data for logical consistency and values out of possible range. Quarterly database management and data integrity 
audits will be conducted. We will adhere to all data security procedures that are in place for our COIN (the 
Charleston Health E quity and Rural Outreach Innovation Center [HEROIC] ). All data containing PHI will be 
stored on the HEROIC  Server; no data with identifying information (PHI) is stored on individual hard drives. The 
server sits behind a secure firewall maintained by the VA .    
 
C11. Sample Size Calculation and Power Analyses.  
For sample size calculations, preliminary data from Santa Ana and colleagues13-14 were used.  In Santa 
Ana and colleagues13, participants in GMI attended a significantly higher number of outpatient SUD  treatment 
sessions compared to their counterparts in TAU. Using zero inflated negative binomial regression (ZINB) and 
accounting for group level nesting, at 3 -month follow -up, participants in GMI attended significantly more 
outpatient mental health treatm ent sessions compared to TAU, b = .944 (.307), t = 3.079, p < .001; Cohen’s d = 
.54. The efficacy of GMI relative to TAU for lowering substance was assessed among the same sample of dually 
diagnosed Veterans using ZINB14. At 3 -month follow -up, participants  in GMI consumed significantly less alcohol 
in standard drinks ( b = -155.3 (70.9), t = -2.19, p = .03; Cohen’s d = .36) and drank fewer standard drinks in 
terms of peak (highest) alcohol drinking day ( b = -4.78 (2.03), t = -2.4, p = .02). No baseline diffe rences between 
 
 
13 
 groups were found on alcohol consumption. For comparing the longitudinal profile of the substance use 
outcomes (standard drinks/day, peak standard drinks/day, # drinking days, # binge drinking days) using repeated 
measures analysis assuming 3 measurement time points, level of significance =0.05, two -tailed comparison, 
correlation between pairs of measurements within participants no larger than =0.5, we estimate that 50 
participants per group (total n=100) are needed to achieve a power of 89 % to detect a difference of 0.5 standard 
drinks between GMI and CT. A sample size of 65 (n=130) will provide 83% power to detect a difference of 0.4 
standard drinks between treatment conditions. The corresponding sample size requirements after adjusting fo r 
a 30% dropout rate are 142 (71 per group) and 186 (93 per group), respectively. To account for the “fraction of 
missing” information that must be imputed in the intent -to-treat (ITT) sample and the dilution effect of ITT 
analyses, we further inflate the sample size by 30% to achieve a final ITT sample size of 93 participants 
randomized to GMI and CT (total N = 186) to detect a difference of 0.4 standard drinks between treatment 
conditions61. For the global statistical test (GST), when the collection of ou tcomes (e.g., standard drinks/day, 
etc.) show consistent directionality with regard to improvement, GST will have higher power than that of tests of 
single outcomes62.  
 
C12. Overview of the statistical analysis plan.  
Effectiveness analyses : all health ser vices and participant outcomes (see section C9) will be obtained at three 
time points (month 1, 3 and 6 -months post -randomization). These variables include: (a) Substance use outcomes  
(e.g.,  standard drinks/day  (SEC) , peak standard drinks/day, # drinking days, # binge drinking days , # illicit drug 
use days, etc.); (b) Treatment engagement  (e.g. # of substance abuse/mental health treatment sessions 
attended, # AA sessions attended, # AA sponsor contacts; (c) Psychosocial adjustment  (social support, 
communit y participation) and (d) Quality of life/psychiatric indices  (QOLS, SF -12, BSI -18); (e) Engagement in 
structured/productive work activities  (% of days each month engaged in work or volunteer activities); (c) Process 
measures  (CPOSS -VA, HAQ) will be assesse d at 1 -month follow up.  
Analysis sets .  The ITT sample comprises all randomized participants. The per -protocol/completer sample 
comprises participants who are compliant with protocol requirements and for whom all required measurements 
have been made. Prim ary analyses will be carried out using the ITT analysis set.   
 C12a. Premature exits (study drop -outs) and missing data .  We will employ longitudinal data methods 
(generalized linear mixed models [GLMM]), which allow for missing at random  (MAR) data63-64. Analyses will be 
carried out separately for the ITT and per protocol samples to test sensitivity of conclusions to study drop -
outs/non -adherence. For dichotomous outcomes, in additional “worst case” sensitivity analyses, we will assume 
that missing data a re “failures” (non -successes), e.g. in calculating # of days not using alcohol, we will assume 
that missing entries in daily log regarding alcohol use are days in which alcohol was used.  In addition, to 
understand the missing data and study drop -out proces s, we will fit a missing data model with a dichotomous 
outcome (1=missing, 0=not missing) using logistic regression. We will also use information on study drop -outs 
as one of the feasibility (process) outcome measures of the interventions being compared. T o investigate 
potential limits on generalizability, we will compare characteristics of the non -completers/non -compliers with the 
completer/protocol adherent groups. These comparisons will be carried out for the total group and within 
treatment allocations.  To describe potential bias due to missing observations, we will carefully document reasons 
for missing data. We will use this information to manage and correct for potential bias that could arise from 
informative study drop -out. 
 C12b. Measurement error : to account for measurement error we will put a structure into the R -side 
matrix of the GLMM. Given that deviating from the diagonal R matrix adds complexity to model fitting, we will try 
AR(1) and CS covariance structures to parsimoniously account for meas urement error65. 
C12c. Multiple outcome variables . We acknowledge concern about inflation of Type I error. This 
concern must be balanced with the need to avoid overly conservative Type I (false positive) error rates that may 
result in excessively high Type  II (false negative) error rates. As a standard method of balancing these concerns, 
we will use multivariate GLMM64,66 to jointly model the correlated outcomes and study the relationship between 
the multiple outcomes and treatment. For each outcome (Yij), we consider the model, E(Y ijk |Xij(t),Z ij)=g-1(Xij(t)β k 
+ Z ibik), where g is a monotone link function, b ik~N(O,G k) and Yij is the response for the ith subject at the jth time 
with ni (ni -1,…,10) repeated measurements, Xij and Zij represent vectors of fixed and random effect covariates, 
respectively, and G  is the covariance matrix for bi. If bi is a vector of random intercept and slope, it indicates that 
there is natural heterogeneity among individuals in both their baseline level and changes in the expected 
outcomes over time65,67. In addition to the varia bility in the random effects, a diagonal R -side covariance matrix 
of the form 2In is included to account for random error. When the random error is suspected to have more 
measurement error than what is typically expected then we will use AR(1) R -side covar iance matrix68. Additional 
 
 
14 
 sensitivity analysis will be made to balance between model complexity and reduction in bias. We will use Poisson 
distribution with a log -link for count outcomes (e.g., # drinking/drug use days, # days SUD treatment, # days 
struct ured work activities), Binomial distribution with logit -link for binary outcomes (e.g. attended treatment/did 
not attend treatment) and Gaussian distribution with identity -link for continuous outcomes (e.g., standard drinks). 
When we suspect over -dispersio n in the count models that is beyond what is assumed by the Poisson GLMM 
then we will use Negative Binomial distribution. To deal with zero inflation, we will use zero -inflated Poisson (ZIP) 
and negative binomial (ZINB) models. For multiple outcomes, we wi ll use a joint model based on linking the 
GLMM models for each outcome type by assuming a joint statistical distribution for the random coefficients 
(intercept and slopes). Let Yijk be the response from the kth outcome for subject i at occasion or time j ( i=1, …n; 
k=1, …K; j=1,2,…,ni). The GLMM can be given as, E(Y ijk |Xij(t),Z ij)=g-1(Xij(t)β k + Z ibik), where b ik~N(O,G k) and Xi 
and Zi  and Zi represent vectors of fixed and random effect covariates, respectively, and Gk is the covariance 
matrix for bik. We w ill use a random coefficient model with shared random intercept and random slope for each 
outcome. The resulting ‘over all’ covariance matrix (D) from this model will provide standard error estimates that 
account for correlation among the multiple outcomes . A key assumption for these models is conditional 
independence where the responses are independent given the random effects65,67.These models can be fitted 
using Proc NLMIXED or GLIMMIX in SAS v9.3.  
C12d. Analysis plan for Clinical, Social, and Quality of  Life outcomes (Specific AIM I; Hypotheses 
1 through 4):  To evaluate the relative efficacy of (a) GMI  and (b) CT  on (a) five health services outcomes  (i) 
substance use (ii) treatment engagement, (iii) psychosocial integration (e.g., social support, communi ty 
participation), (iv) quality of life/psychiatric indices, and (v) # of days engaging in structured/productive work 
activities. The longitudinal trajectory of efficacy outcomes will be compared using the GLMM  approach, which 
accommodates missing at rando m (MAR) data and a wide range of data types/distributional assumptions: counts 
(e.g., # AA sessions, # times talking with AA sponsor, # substance abuse treatment sessions attended); 
dichotomous (e.g., abstinent/not abstinent), proportions (proportion days not drinking alcohol or using illegal 
drugs), and ordinal (e.g. CPOSS -VA, QOLS).  When the number of zeroes is in excess of what is normally 
expected from a poisson model, we will fit GLMM to accommodate zero -inflation. We will use negative binomial 
regres sion to deal with over dispersion. Logit link for dichotomous outcomes, log link for count outcomes will be 
considered. The basic modeling procedure involves using the longitudinal outcome measurements within each 
of the domains separately as the dependent  (outcome) variable, with intervention group (fixed effect),  time 
(random effect), and time by intervention as the primary independent variable s.  In further multivariable modeling, 
additional covariables (as appropriate for a given dependent variable) wil l be added to the basic model to adjust 
for potential confounding effect of these variables. GLMM accommodates both fixed and time -varying covariates.  
For example, for the treatment engagement variable, the # of AA sessions measured monthly for 6 months w ill 
be an outcome variable, intervention group (GMI, CT), time, and time X intervention will be the primary 
independent variables in the basic (unadjusted) model, and psychiatric comorbidity (number and severity), age, 
race, and gender will be added in the  subsequent (adjusted) model to adjust for the possible confounding effect 
of these variables.  Unadjusted and covariate -adjusted least squares means for each outcome variable will be 
compared at the primary time point (month 1) and at intermediate seconda ry time points (months 3 and 6) using 
appropriate model contrasts and the Tukey -Kramer adjustment for multiple comparisons for the secondary time 
points.  These contrast comparisons, along with corresponding 95% CI, will provide estimates of the difference 
in outcome means (effect sizes) for the hypothesized comparisons. For longitudinal dichotomous outcomes (e.g., 
maintenance of sobriety), we will compare unadjusted and covariate -adjusted proportions across the longitudinal 
trajectory (at 1, 3 and 6 months)  for GMI and CT . For the end -of-active treatment time point, this analysis is 
equivalent to a logistic regression analysis.      
C12e. Analysis Plan for Cost Estimation of Intervention (Specific Aim III):    
Descriptive statistics will be used to describe t he estimated cost of intervention for Veterans living at various 
distances from the VAMC where care is provided. Differences in mean VA costs for GMI vs. CT will be 
estimated. We will employ GLMM as for the clinical outcomes, to estimate the independent as sociation of 
Veteran demographic and clinical factors with cost as well as test for sensitivity of cost results across clinical 
outcomes and workload63-64. Research economists ( if they have access to PHI)  will evaluate VINCI health 
services utilization and  cost data up to one year post intervention for all participants in the study. To be 
consistent with this time period as well as to provide greater methodological rigor to the study, we would like to 
evaluate a comparison group of Veterans similar to study  participants in that they are deemed homeless or 
have used the homeless clinic.  
 
 
 
 
15 
 C13. Dissemination/Implementation Plan  
Given positive findings from this study, future dissemination/implementation efforts of GMI within VISN 7 may 
positively impact a subs tantial numb er of Veterans with SUDs in VA h ousing. Findings from this study will be of 
interest to administrators and VA mental health professionals in local (e.g., Charleston VAMC), regional,  
 (e.g., VISN 7) and national offices, particularly the Nationa l Center on Homelessn ess among Veterans 
(NCHAV), VA h ousing services, Veterans Homelessness Prevention Demonstration Program (VHPD), Mental 
Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Centers (MIRECC), and Supportiv e Services for Veteran Families.  
C.13a. A s ystematic plan of five dissemination activities to impact these agencies will involve :  
1) Presentations, courses, seminars, invited grand rounds, and workshops  describing project results  and 
demonstrating GMI application in VA housing programs starting in  Columbia, Alabama, Atlanta, Birmingham, 
and Tuscaloosa; (2) Synthesizing and summarizing data for distribution  to relevant stakeholder groups (e.g., 
NCCHV, VA’s within the VISN) using descriptive materials outlining  the study and its objectives in the for m of 
white papers and brochures . In-person and Live Meeting presentations will be conducted for NCCHV, HUD -
VASH, GPD, MIRECC, and VHPD with the coordination and direction of Patricia Bradford, VISN 7 Network 
Homeless Coordinator  of the VA Southeast Network , Keith Harris, Ph.D. National Director of VHA Clinical 
Operations of the Homeless Program Office ; and Stefan Kertesz, MD, HUD -VASH research investigator at 
Birmingham VAMC. Other presentations and workshops will occur at scientific conferences (e.g., APA,  ABCT, 
CPDD, VA Housing First meetings); (3) Publication of study results  and brief executive summaries in professional 
and non -professiona l outlets (e.g., psychiatric, psychological, medical journals, VA newsletters ). The PI will draft 
publication guideli nes within the first three months of the study. An additional responsibility will be development 
of a standardized dissemination “package” when the primary manuscript is accepted for publication. Such a 
package might include a model cover letter or memo, a  press release, and repr ints of the primary manuscript 
and secondar y manuscripts already published;  (4) Contacting and informing the newly created VA Evidence 
Based Practice EBP representatives  in order to ‘get the word out’ to practitioners . Nationwide, 3 /8 support of a 
senior clinician at every VAMC has been designated by Central Office for this program. Representativ es attend 
a national conference  and work within their VA to enhance dissemination of evidence based clinical strategies ; 
(5) A social market ing plan  will be assembled by the PI and Patricia Bradford for launching the seven structured 
implementation activities below.  
C.13b. A  structured  plan of seven implementation activities will involve : (1) Reviewing data from the study 
and discussing the im plications of study findings among members of the project team  (Drs. Santa Ana , Kertesz , 
Rosenheck, and Ms. Bradford ) with reference t o immediate relevance to the Housing First  initiative . GMI  may 
serve as a key tool and may become a permanent part of the dissemination package within VA housing,  
designated as an in initial ‘wraparound’ treatment service in the newly adopted Housing First  initiative within VA;  
(2) In their VISN level roles, Dr. Santa Ana and Ms. Bradford will set up consultation with  Dr. Keith Harris, National 
Director of VHA Clinical Operations of the Homeless Program Office , Mr. Jeffrey Quarles, National Director GPD, 
and Mr. Vince Kane, Director of NCCHV and for support  with the aim of discussing dissemination throughout 
VISN 7  and to cre ate a plan of promulgating directives and implementation activities for moving GMI forward; (3) 
As the Evidence -Based Training Program Coordinator in VISN 7 and based on the findings of her  
implementation research, Dr. Santa Ana will develop a set of stan dard operating procedures  necessary for 
creating a successful GMI program, consisting of training tasks, intervention location, patient recruitment tasks, 
program/administrative support requirements, and treatment monitoring tasks; (4) SOP procedures will be 
disseminated with the as sistance of Ms. Bradford, Dr. Harris, and Mr. Quarles  in each HUD -VASH /GPD  program , 
giving Dr. Santa Ana a VISN -wide impact with respect to training and GMI adoption; (5) Dr. Santa Ana  will 
conduct a series of VISN 7 VA housing s ite visits  starting in Columbia, Alabama, Atlanta, Birmingham, and 
Tuscaloosa to evaluate GMI implementation needs, conduct organizational readiness/attitude belief surveys and 
perceptions of the GMI program to diagnose potential obstacles as necessary, ev aluate feasibility, and identify 
staff/MI leads to enhance program support (these data will be used in a QUERI SDP proposal -see below); (6) 
These five  tasks will support a GMI VISN 7 initiative   directed by Dr. Santa Ana that moves beyond Charleston 
so tha t a GMI VA housing program is operating in other locations within the VISN. This will involve a) Staff 
agreement/adoption; b) GMI staff training; c) identifying MI ‘site’ leads; and d) disseminating standard operating 
procedures; (7) A Service Directed Pro ject (SDP) will be sought  as a potential ‘next step’ through the Quality 
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), after evidence for GMI is shown to be substantial, for providing 
implementation support for translating research into practice.  
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 Table 6. PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN  
                                    Task Description                                                                   PI              Project Staff           Co-I’s 
Study Design/Set 
up Coordinate GMI/CT training  X X  
 Coordinate IRB  submission  X X  
 Update/Refine GMI protocol/feedback report  X  SM 
 Assemble study team  X   
 Coordinate study design  X X  
 Assemble project documents (assessments)  X X  
 Oversee patient recruitment, consent, retention  X X  
 Implementation, Formativ e, Process, & Summative 
Evaluation  X                 
X X 
X  
CP, MG  
 Statistical Analysis  X  MG, RR, LD  
Data Management 
& Programming  Set up project databases  X X  
 Oversee/conduct data cleaning/data checks  X X  
 Cost estimation  X  RR, LD  
 Track Forma tive, Process, and Summative Evaluation  X  CP 
 Update therapist fidelity protocol  X  SM 
 Rate GMI/CT sessions  X X SM 
 Oversee therapist adherence/competence data  X  SM 
Dissemination  Oversee development of study materials  X  ALL-Co-I 
 Oversee publicat ion of study results in professional/ non -
professional outlets  X  ALL-Co-I 
 Oversee development of presentations (invited grand 
rounds, meetings, workshops) describing project results  X  ALL-Co-I 
Project meetings  Lead  X   
Project budget  Ongoing budget r eview  X   
 
Table 7.       PROJECT TIMELINE  
                                                             
Months      
        Year 1                            Year 2                          Year 3                            Year 4                           
   1-6           7 -12               1 -6          7 -12               1 -6          7 -12              1 -6          7 -12      
Submit IRB protocol for full review       X 
Datstat refines computerized GMI 
PFR/troubleshoot       X 
Update/refine GMI treatment manu al      X 
Hire project coordinator and research assistant       X 
Hire study therapists       X                    
Compile study assessments & process measures       X                    
Co-I Bob Rosenheck meet for cost estimation       X             X-IP             X              X                 X              X             X -IP 
Conduct Veteran &staff stakeholder focus groups       X                                                                                                       X  
Develop & conduc t GMI Training for therapists       X                     
Establish/conduct therapist fidelity monitoring       X              X                X              X                 X              X                
Develop quantitative process assessments & 
moni toring       X                                X                                  X                              X  
Participant consenting/recruitment/enrollment                       X                X              X                 X               X                             
Establish project database       X 
Conduct participant F/U assessments                       X                X              X                 X               X              X               
     Conduct data entry and data checks                       X                X              X                 X               X              X  
Update GMI adherence/competence manual                       X                    
Train raters on therapist  adherence/competence                                                                             X                                     
Raters rate therapy tapes using MITI                                                                             X              X                     
Meet with economi st for cost estimation        X             X                X              X                 X              X              X  
Meet with statistician for analyses                       X                                X                                  X              X              X   
Statistical analyses for main outcomes                                                                                                              X              X              
Manuscript preparation/submission                                                                                                              X              X                    
*IP = In Person   
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN PARTICIPANTS  
1. Risks to the Participants  
 
A. Human Participants Involvement and Chara cteristics  
 
 
 
17 
 The PI and Co -Is have all completed the University of Miami computer -based CITI Human Participant s Research 
Education Course.  One hundred eighty -six (186) ethnically/ra cially diverse male and female Veterans  with 
current alcohol /drug  dependence  or abuse will be recruited over a 30-month period . Participants with a non -
substance related major DSM -IV-TR Axis I disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, anxiety 
disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, psychotic disorder ) will be eligible.  
 
Additional inclusion and exclusion criteria are described below.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
 
1) Men and women Veterans  currently in HUD -VASH or GPD , newly entering the program but not  yet housed, 
or Veterans on the HUD -VASH interest (wait) lis t. 
2) Able to comprehend English.  
3) Meets DSM -V criteria for a current substance  use disorder and have used substances in the 30  days prior to 
treatment entry. Participants on medications targeting their substance use must be stabilized on medications for  
at least 2 weeks before therapy initiation.  
4) May meet criteria a mood, anxiety or other psychiatric disorder. Participants on maintenance medications for 
a mood or anxiety disorder must be stabilized on medications for at least 2 weeks before therapy in itiation.  
5) Able to adequately provide informed consent and function at an intellectual level sufficient to allow accurate 
completion of all assessment instruments.  
6) Willing to commit to 4  group therapy sessions, baseline, 1, 3, and 6 month  follow -up assessments .  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
  
1) Active suicidal or homicidal ideation with a plan as this is likely to require hospitalization or other interventions 
that could  interfere with study participation.   
2) Unstable psychiatric condition that is likely to  require hospitalization or other interventions that would interfere 
with study participation .  
3) Unstable medical condition or one that may require hospitalization during the course of the study.  
 
 
B. Sources of Materials  
 
1. Research material obtained f rom individual participants includes self -report questionnaires, structured 
interviews with study personnel, taped therapy sessions as well urine and breathalyzer samples.  
 
2. The research material will be obtained specifically for research purposes. Writt en research material obtained 
will be stored in a locked file cabinet in an office that is locked when not in use.  The master list of participants 
linking study numbers to any source identifying information will be in a separate locked file cabinet at the 
Charleston VAMC in the PI’s office ( Room A562a). Urine samples will be discarded after results are documented.  
 
3.  Therapy sessions will be digitally audio -recorded to be used for supervision and adherence monitoring. They 
will be transferred electronical ly and stored behind the VA firewall  and accessible only to project staff.  
 
C. Potential Risks  
Risks to the patients include feeling distress being interviewed regarding substance use  and other sensitive 
information, adverse events related to the study in tervention (see adverse event definitions below) and risk of 
loss of confidentiality regarding the information obtained during the assessment and follow -ups and taped 
therapy sessions. Potential psychological risk of the treatment includes exacerbations of  distress and increase 
in substance use during the assessment and/or treatment sessions.  
 
2. Adequacy for Protection Against Risk and Harm to Participants  
 
 
 
18 
 A. Recruitment and Informed Consent  
 
Participants will be recruited from the  Charleston (VAMC) HUD -VASH and GPD housing programs. Housing or 
project staff (Note : The PI, Dr. Santa Ana, works in the housing program and she is considered housing staff) 
will invite  patients to inform them about the study and elicit interest. Interested potential  participan ts will be 
screened for major inclusion/exclusion criteria including substance use  and psychiatric/health/medication status.  
Prior to any study procedures being performed, t he Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved informed consent 
will be obtained by r esearch staff trained in informed consent procedures.  Informed consent will be collected at 
the study research offices, in a private and interruption -free environment. Explanation of the informed consent 
document will include a detailed description of the study in easy to understand detail with the participant, along 
with statements regarding participants’ rights to withdraw from the procedure at any time without consequences. 
The participant will be asked to read the document and if he or she has any quest ions, they will be answered 
prior to participant signature. Consent will be documented by the date and signature of the participant on an 
informed consent agreement and by the date and signature of the individual obtaining the consent. A HIPAA 
authorizatio n form will also be signed, and copies of both documents  will be  provided to the participant.  Potential 
participants  may decide to discuss participation with their fam ilies and/or significant others prior to making a 
decision to sign consent.   
 
B. Protecti on against Risk  
 
All investigators and project personnel have completed a certified program of instruction in the protection of 
human participants in research, the University of Mia mi CITI course. These courses on the  responsible conduct 
of research and th e protection of human research participants will be completed on a regular basis, in compliance 
with MUSC institutional regulations.  All research activity, informed consents and continuing reviews will be 
reviewed by MUSC’s IRB in compliance with 45CFR46 b efore the research is started and continuing review will 
occur annually. The research staff will ensure that all information needed for the continuing review is at the IRB 
in accordance with IRB requirements.  
 
We will take careful precautions to maintain c onfidentiality for all participants , using procedures we have use d 
with similar previous studies.  All data will be stored in a confidential manner (i.e., in locked fi les in  the Study 
Coordinator’s research office  and behind the VA computerized firewall ) so as to protect the confidentiality of 
participant  information. Access to research records (paper and computerized) will be restricted to the project 
staff. Specifically, access to de -identified study data will be limited to named project investiga tors, the  Study 
Coordinator and MUSC IRB  or R&D  audit personnel.  Binders  with study data  will have a study number that will 
be kept locked separately from any source documents with identifying information. The master list of participant s 
linking study numbers to an y source identifying information will be kept in a separate locked file cabinet in the 
PI’s office at the Charleston VAMC . When study results are published or presented, only aggregate reports of 
the results will be used and participant s’ identity will not  be revealed. All analyses will be conducted on de -
identified data only.  
 
Therapy sessions will be digitally audio -recorded to be used for therapist supervision and adherence monitoring. 
They will be transferred electronically and stored behind the VA fir ewall  and accessible only to project staff.  
 
Exclusion criteria are crafted to exclude potential participants at higher risk for adverse effects, including those 
with co -occurring medical or psychiatric disorders where they may be more likely not to benef it from the 
intervention and/or to be hospitalized during the course of the study.  The informed consent document specifically 
reviews potential psychological distress as a potential outcome of participation.  
 
Measures to avoid potential risk associated wit h psychological distress/substa nce use include exposure to the  
intervention that includes non -judgmental therapist feedback, imparting autonomy (e.g., participants are free to 
decide what they want to do about their substance use), and  reduction of substan ce use through enhancing 
participant motivational change talk . Additional measures include informing participants that they are free to 
terminate treatment sessions at any time. Risks associated with assessment include the possibility that 
participants mig ht be upset by questions pertaining to their emotional functioning. Some participants might be 
offended by detailed questions about health status and impairment. Our past research suggests that data 
collection using many of these measures can be conducted without undue psychological distress or exacerbation 
 
 
19 
 of symptoms among adult participants. This experience includes resear ch with younger and older adult Veterans , 
victims of violence, and substance abusing individuals asking questions about similar topics  with general 
population samples.  
 
Social risks are present if another person or parties observe participants attending treatment or learn by other 
means of participants receiving treatment. Participants will not be overtly identified as research particip ants or 
participants for psychological intervention.  
 
In the event participants experience extreme psychological distress secondary to participation, they will be 
encouraged to talk with the Principal Investigator (PI) or the Co -I’s. In addition, they wil l have access to the 
VAMC treatment services. Any such adverse effects noted by any project personnel in response, or in potential 
response to any project intervention, assessment protocol, or study involvement will be immediately  reported to 
the PI and Co -I’s. Participants will also be given the PI’s name and telephone number and the Study 
Coordinator’s contact information. Moreover, if research or clinical staff  believes that a participant is significantly 
distressed by participation, the PI will be notif ied and will contact the participant to assess distress and assure 
participant safety. If called by participants, the PI will attempt to address all participant concerns and if indicated, 
set up an alternate referral for counseling for those who desire it from outside the project.  
 
If at any point during the assessment, treatment or follow -up period, participants are in need of medical 
management, psychiatric consultation or psychiatric hospitalization, they will be evaluated and if indicated, 
referr ed to a more intensive level of treatment. If a participant becomes suicidal, emergency psychiatric 
assessment will be arranged. The participant will be closely monitored clinically until they are no longer suicidal 
or an appropriate safety  plan is in place. A pr ocedure for clinical deterioration has been established based upon 
our experience with previous studies.  Therapists will be instructed to use their best clinical judgment regarding 
emergencies and inform the PI, Co -I’s or PC as soon as possible.  In additio n to relying on clinical judgment on 
the part of the treating therapists(s) who are experienced with this population, substance use, and psychiatric 
indices  will also be monitored at follow -ups (TLFB, BSI) in order to detect any symptom worsening requiring  
further evaluation. Additionally, participants are advised to observe any signs of worsening substance use, 
depression and anxiety  symptoms and to discuss these with their therapist or other project staff . If in the clinical 
judgment of the therapist in c ollaboration with the PI/Co -I’s, it is determined that the participant symptoms are 
worsening at any point during study participation , appropriate referrals will be made.  These decisions will be 
dealt with in training and supervision  of project staff  and will be monitored carefully.  
 
Patients will be terminated from the study and referred for more intensive treatment if there are: 
 
a. Increases in alcohol or drug use leading to the need for a more intensive level of care (i.e., medical 
detoxification, inpat ient).  
 
b. Active suicidal or homicidal ideation.  
 
c. Inability to manage psychiatric symptoms within the inclusion/exclusion criteria of the study (i.e., need for the 
initiation of maintenance psychotropic medications; development of psychosis). If it is determined, based on 
clinical criteria, that a participant needs to be started on maintenance medications for anxiety, mood or psychotic 
symptoms during the course of the study, they will be discontinued from the treatment trial.   
 
At the VAMC , there is a well-established protocol for emergency psychiatric evaluation, crisis intervention and/or 
psychiatric hospitalization for suicidal, homicidal, psychotic or other acutely distressed patients. Immediately on 
detection of these needs, the PC, RA, or research  therapist will contact the PI or on -site Co-I’s to review the 
patient' s situation. If appropriate, PI or on -site Co-I’s will personally evaluate the patient. During evenings or 
weekends, the PI/Co -I’s will be on call for emergencies. At these times, acute ly distressed patients will be 
instructed to go to the psychiatric emer gency room for evaluation by a  psychiatric resident. The PI/Co -I’s will 
notify the resident in advance of the patient's situation. Acute psychiatric hospitalization  is available for 
emergencies.  
 
3. Potential Benefits of Proposed Research to Participants and Others/ Importance of Knowledge to be 
Gained  
 
 
20 
  
The benefit to participants is a potential reduction in substance use and related problems . In addition, they may 
benefit from the cogni tive realization that, through their volunteer efforts, they are helping to advance the state 
of knowledge as it applies to mental health care for substance use disorders . The proposed study has the 
potential benefit of developing an effective intervention  for substance use disorders delivered in group format. 
The study will help inform critical questions about rehabilitation  options for individuals with substance use 
disorders . Such a finding would have the potential benefit of (1) improving long -term outc omes for Veterans with 
substance use disorders  and (2) reducing functional impairment and  related health care costs associated with 
substance use disorders  in Veterans .  
 
4. Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
It is estimated the study sample will be appro ximately 46% African American (AA),15% other minorities, and 
11% female, as this represents the proportion of AA, other minorities, and females in VA housing within the 
VISN, according to demographic records extracted by the VISN 7 Deputy Network Homeless Coordinator .  
 
5. Inclusion of Children  
 
Children are persons who have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in 
the research under the applica ble law of the jurisdiction in  which the research will be conducted.   (VHA H andbook 
1200.05, 3. i. ) . Individuals above the age of 18 will be admitted to the study. The intervention has not been 
tested in children less than 18 years of age. The reason c hildren under the age of 18 will not be included in this 
study because the focu s of this preliminary investigation is to determine the effectiveness of the intervention in 
adult men and women with substance use disorders.  
 
6. Data Monitoring and Safety Plan  
 
Data Management and Analysis : A data analysis plan is outlined in the Data A nalysis section. Briefly, the primary 
outcome s are (Hypothesis 1): Substance use (e.g.  standard drinks, peak standard drink day, # drinking days, 
drinks per drinking day, binge drinking days , # illicit drug use days, etc); and (b) Treatment engagement  (e.g. 
number of substance abuse /mental health  treatment sessions  attended , # AA sessions  attended , # AA sponsor  
contacts).  
 
Secondary outcome measures will be : (c) Psychosocial adjustment  (Hypothesis 2; social support, community 
participation) ; (d) Quality o f life/psychiatric indices  (Hypothesis 3; QOLS, SF -12, BSI -18); (e) Engagement in 
structured/productive work activities  (Hypothesis 4; percent of days each month engaged in work or volunteer 
activities); and (c) Process measures  (CPOSS, HAQ ) will be assess ed at post -treatment (1-month follow up ).  
 
The longitudinal trajectory of efficacy outcomes will be compared using the generalized linear mixed models 
(GLMM) approach. GLMM accommodates missing at random (MAR) data and a wide range of data 
types/distribut ional assumptions: counts (e.g., # AA sessions, # times talking with AA sponsor, # substance 
abuse treatment sessions attended); dichotomous (e.g., abstinent/not abstinent), proportions (proportion days 
not drinking alcohol or using illegal drugs), ordinal  (e.g. CPOSS -VA, QOLS).  When the number of zeroes is in 
excess of what is normally expected from a poisson model, we will fit GLMM that can accommodate zero -
inflation. We will use negative binomial regression to deal with over dispersion. Unadjusted and l east squares 
adjusted means from the GLMM contrast comparisons, along with corresponding 95% CI, will provide estimates 
of the difference in outcome means (effect sizes) for the hypothesized comparisons. For longitudinal 
dichotomous outcomes (e.g., mainten ance of sobriety), we will compare unadjusted and covariate -adjusted 
proportions across the longitudinal trajectory (at 1, 3 and 6 months) for the intervention groups using GLMM for 
a binary outcome. For the end -of-active treatment time point, this analysi s is equivalent to a logistic regression 
analysis.      
 
Quality Assurance : Data quality will be monitored by random inspection of the completed forms by research staff 
and any irregularities or problems detected will be discussed with the PI. Therapists w ill receive standardized 
 
 
21 
 training and adherence will be monitored using audio tapes and individual supervision. If therapy drift is observed 
the therapists will be re -trained.  
 
DSM Plan and Administration : The research assistant and project  coordinator wil l be responsible for data 
collection, entry and checking. The research staff will examine data for errors or gaps on the day of collection, 
and immediately make the correction. The PC  will be responsible for conducting and supervising coding, entry, 
cleani ng and processing of raw data. All paper -based assessments will be entered into a standard software 
package, using double data entry. Completed assessments will be entered within 1 week  after the information 
has been collected from the participant. As a re sult of the double data entry, two analyzable databases will be 
created. The validity of the databases will be checked by comparing the databases, and macro programs will be 
written to check the data for logical consistency and values out of possible range . Quarterly database 
management and data integr ity audits will be conducted.  
 
The PI will be responsible for monitoring the study. The PI will regularly examine the outcomes database for 
missing data, unexpected distributions or responses, and outliers.  
 
Regulatory Issues : All unexpected Adverse Events (AEs) will be reported to the MUSC Committee on Human 
Research within 48 -business hours. Serious AEs (SAEs) will be reported within 24 -business hours. Follow -up of 
all unexpected and serious AEs will also be  reported . All AEs are reviewed weekly by the PI, bi -annually by the 
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) and yearly by the IRB. Any significant actions taken by the local IRB and 
protocol changes will be reported to the federal funding agency . AEs and SAEs  occurring during the course of 
the trial will be collected, documented, and reported in accordance with protocol and IRB reporting requirements. 
All research staff involved with adverse event reporting will receive general and protocol specific AE/SAE tra ining 
including identification, assessment  and evaluation, and documentation and reporting. The research assistant, 
Study Coordinator, or Project Therapists will identify any potential AEs during the course of the study from 
participant  self-report and adm inistration of assessments and procedures. This information will be provided to 
the PI, Co -I’s (MD, PhD) , who will be responsible for AE/SAE assessment and evaluation including a 
determination of seriousness and study relatedness.  
 
A. Adverse Events  Report ing and Documentation  
 
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study and all events will be followed to resolution or stabilization. 
All serious adverse events will be collected and reported immediately to the IRB. If complete information is not 
available when the initial 24 -hour SAE report is disseminated, follow -up information will be gathered to enable a 
complete assessment and outcome of the event.  This information may include hospital discharge records, 
autopsy reports, clinic records, etc.  The research staff will attach copies of source documents to the SAE report 
for review by IRB.  
 
We will report adverse events to the MUSC IRB online as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days 
after the investigator first learns of the event. The MUSC IRB AE reporting requirements are as follows: All deaths 
that occur during the study or 30 days post termination from the study are required to be reported as adverse 
events even if they are expected or unrelated.  Other adverse events are reportable t o the MUSC IRB if the AE 
is unexpected AND related or possibly related AND serious or more prevalent than expected. All three criteria 
must be met for an AE to be reported to the MUSC IRB. The IRB definition of unexpected is that the AE is not 
identified i n nature, severity or frequency in the current protocol, informed consent, investigator brochure or with 
other current risk information. The definition of related is that there is a reasonable possibility that the adverse 
event may have been caused by the intervention.  Reportable AEs are reviewed by the IRB Chair and reported 
to the IRB Board at the next meeting.  
 
Serious Adverse Events : Each Adverse Event will be categorized as serious or not. Serious adverse events are 
defined as any fatal, life -threateni ng, permanently and/or substantially disabling condition; or one that is a 
congenital anomaly, requires an initial hospitalization or prolongs a hospitalization, or is an event  which requires 
intervention to prevent permanent impairment or damage. The PI, Co -I (Ph.D., MD ) should be consulted if 
questions arise as to whether an AE should be categorized as serious.  Initial notification of an SAE to the IRB is 
 
 
22 
 to be followed by sub mission of the Serious Adverse Event Form within 24 hours. Failure to comply with reporting 
requirements can result in serious negative consequences, including criminal and/or civil penalties.  
 
Trial Safety : The potential risks and benefits and methods to  minimize these risks are outlined above. Protocols 
for reported AEs and SAEs are outline d above. All unexpected AE and SAEs will be monitored until resolved. A 
detailed summary of all AEs will be prepared weekly by the research staff. At the weekly team m eetings (or 
before if urgent), the research staff will report any premonitory sympto ms of clinical deterioration.  
 
  