Protocol Title:  Behavioral Activation and Medication Optimization for 
Perioperative Mental Health Feasibility Study  
 
 
Protocol ID#  202101103 
  
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
    
 
Page 1 of 18 
  
BEHAVIORAL ACTIVATION AND MEDICATION OPTIMIZATION FOR 
PERIOPERATIVE MENTAL HEALTH   
FEASIBILITY STUDY  
 
  
PI:     Michael Avidan , MBBCh, FCASA  
  Professor, Anesthesiology and Surgery  
  Head, Department of Anesthesiology   
Washington University School of Medicine  
660 S. Euclid Ave.  
Campus Box 8054 St. Louis, MO 63110 
                                                PI phone:  314-273-4136            avidanm@wustl.edu
   
  
 
Research Protocol #        202101103 
 
Protocol v1.0 Date :    January 29, 2021  
               v.2.0 Date:    October 8 , 2021  
    v.3.0 Date:    December 22 , 2021  
    v.4.0 Date:   January 0 7, 2022 
   v.5.0 Date :   April 11, 2022 
        v.6.0 Date :   July 1, 2022 
    v.7.0 Date :   August 1, 2022  
  
1 Background and Significance  
Inadequate management o f preoperative mental health disorders often contributes to poor 
postoperative outcomes  [1], including increased rates of readmission, delirium, falls, and mortality  
[2-5]. However,  very little work has been done to improve perioperative mental health. In particular, 
there ha s been limited systematic efforts that identify evidence -based behavioral  and pharmacological  
strategies  that were originally developed for depression and anxiety in otherwise medically well 
psychiatric patients .  A mental health intervention bundle, composed  of behavioral and 
pharmacological strategies, can mitigate anxiety and depression symptoms during the perioperative 
period  [6]. However, we currently lack conclusive evidence on effectiveness of  such an intervention 
bundle focused on the delivery of perioperative mental health care in older surgical patients. Towards 
this end, we will develop and test  an intervention bundle that encompasses:  (1) behavioral activation, 
and (2) medication optimization  (see more details on the intervention bundle in section 4.2).  
 
2 Objective s 
 
 
    
 
Page 2 of 18 
 The study will address the following objectives: (1) demonstrate the feasibility  of our study 
procedures including patient recruitment, screening and outcome measures, and feasibility of 
adapting our intervention bundle and its intervention delivery process  within  three older surgical 
patient  populations (i.e., orthopedic, oncologic, and cardiac) ; (2) empirically test the effectiveness  of 
our adapted perioperative mental health intervention bundle  with clinically significant sympto ms of 
depression and/or anxiety ; and lastly (3) identify implementation strategies  to ensure acceptability, 
feasibility, and adoption of our intervention bundle by patient and clinician stakeholders . Insights 
gained from this pilot study will inform the design of three clinical trials t hat are planned to start in 
Jan 2023. This project is led by research team members of the newly established Center for 
Perioperative Mental Health  https://perioperativewellness.wustl.edu/ that strives to  improv e 
perioperative mental health and well -being  for older adults .  
 
3 Study Setting  and Participants  
The study will be conducted at Barnes -Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of 
Medicine  locations, including Siteman Cancer Center and Barnes -Jewish West County Hospital.  
Participants will include patients and caregivers.  We expect to recruit and enroll up to  70 participants 
total in this study : up to 45 patients, up to 12- 15 in each of 3 surgical cohorts; up to 25 caregiver 
participants.  
 3.1 Patient Participants  
3.1.1 Inclusion criteria  
Patients will be included if they meet all of the following eligibility criteria:  
1. Age ≥60 years on the day of surgery;   
2. Scheduled major orthopedic surgery, or major surgical resection of a thoracic or 
abdominal malignancy, or majo r cardiac procedure;  
3. Clinically significant depression or anxiety symptoms screened by the PHQ -ADS 
(Patient Health Questionnaire Anxiety and Depression Scale) ≥ 10 [7].  
3.1.2 Exclusion criter ia 
Patients will be excluded f rom the study if they meet any  of the following:  
1. Estimated life expectancy < 12 months ;  
2. Unable to read, speak, and understand English;   
3. Current alcohol or other substance abuse ;   
4. Severe cognitive impairment screened by the  SBT (Short Blessed Test)  >10;   
5. Acutely suicidal ( see instruments in Appendix A) .  
Data related to patient inclusion and exclusion will be gathered either via EHR chart review, and/or 
clinical PI discretion, and/or self-reported by patient during telephone  screening process.  Eligible 
patients  will be offered the opportunity to participate in the study regardless of gender or minority 
status. Thus, the sample composition will reflect the composition of community -living older adults in 
the St. Louis area. All  of our studies actively encourage the participation of minorities in the research.  
 
3.2 Caregiver participants  
 
 
    
 
Page 3 of 18 
 Caregivers offer a unique perspective on a patient’s mood and health status, and can be in a position 
to help effect change, engagement in activities and potentially our intervention bundle. Patient 
caregivers will be identified by the patient  as a family member or friend who cares for the patien t as 
needed to support health and safety, and often have add itional c are-related responsibilities in the 
perioperative period.  
 
3.3 Participant Recruitment and Screening  
We have outlined our multi- pronged approach to recruit patients, caregivers and clinicians for this 
study.  
 
3.3.1 Patient recr uitment   
In all three cohorts, patients may be contacted by the study team and invited to screen if interested. 
Prospective patients w ill be identified by Epic workbench reports customized to limit results to those 
at least 6 0 years of age with an eligible surgery scheduled at BJH/WUSM. For the WUSM 
Orthopedic Surgery clinics, patients complete a PROMIS questionnaire as standard routine practice at appointment check -in. Given that  the PROMIS scores are available for the ortho pedic surgical 
patients , the EHR report will be further customized as needed based on PROMIS  scores . 
 
Initial contact by research coordinator may be made by phone, or in -person if the patient is on 
campus for a clinical visit in one of the collaborating departments.  We will use a n information sheet 
or phone script ( see Appendix A) to introduce the goals of the center and the study. Additionally,  
recruitment flyers ( see Appendix B) will be utilized to invite interested patients to contact the study 
team to screen.  The IRB -approved f lyers will be distributed to the waiting rooms and clinical offices 
of the clinicians seeing our target population, as well as the CPAP which many surgical patients visit prior to scheduled surgery . Lastly, patients can also  be referred to the study by their clinician, either 
by offering a recruitment flyer to any patients who meet our inclusion criteria, or by the clinic team  at 
the time of their clinic visit. Clinica l teams may refer patients to the study team for screening, some 
by phone, or email to study team members, or email to cpmh@wustl.edu
. Some prospecti ve 
participants may have clinic  visits at the included Departments’ satellite sites, and some orthopedic 
procedures scheduled through Washington University take place at Barnes -Jewish West County 
Hospital, where those patients ma y also be enrolled and  have study visits.  However, the majority of 
consenting and  study procedures will take place within  the WUSM and BJH Medical Center Campus.   
  
3.3.2 Patient screening  
We will then screen the patients who are interested to proceed in  the study  and provide a verbal 
consent . (Appendix A) The screening checklist (also in Appendix A) will be based on our eligibility 
criteria (see criteria above). To avoid burdening patients with the full PHQ -ADS at the time of 
screening, patients will first be asked to complete the brief PHQ-4 (i.e., first 4 questions of PHQ -
ADS related to anxiety and depression) Patients who score >3 w ill continue with the remaini ng 
questions in the PHQ- ADS . Patients with a total score  of PHQ-AD S ≥10, and a SBT  (Short Blessed 
Test)  score of < 9 will be invited to consent  to participate in the stud y (Table 1) . This will be 
completed at the time of recruitment by a trained member of the research team , and  the screener can 
be collected by phone or in person  per patient preference.   
 
Table 1. Scored Instruments  for Screening (see details in  Appendix A ) 
 
 
    
 
Page 4 of 18 
  
Screening 
Instrument  Eligibility Criteria  Cut-off for 
Eligibility  Source  
PHQ -4 Pre-screen Depr/Anx sx  Inclusion  >  3 Self-report in screening instrument  
PHQ -ADS  Clinically Significant Sx  Inclusion > 10 Self-report in screening instrument  
SBT Cognitive health  Exclusion  > 10 Self-report in screening instrument  
 
 
3.3.3 Caregiver recruitment   
Patients may refer their caregivers (e.g., spouse, partner, children, friend) to contact the study team if 
interested, or if they prefer to share the caregiver’s phone number, the stud y team contact them by 
phone and invite them.  With the patients’ consent, patients’ caregivers are also  invited to participate by 
phone, or mail. They will participate in a brief REDCap survey to report  any changes related to 
confusion or delirium in the patient once before  surgery, and once per week for 4 weeks  after surgery 
(FAM -CAM  attached ). Additionally, some patients’ care givers  (up to 25) will be invited to participate 
in a semi-structured interview  (see Appendix J) after the patient’s participation in the intervention has 
been completed .  
  
3.4 Participant Consent ing and Enrollment  
3.4.1 Patient consent  
Patients will be invited to read, discuss, review and ask any questions they may have about study 
participation with a study team member, and then complete the Informed Consent Form (Appendix 
C). The informed consent will be a vailable  either via a paper collected by mail or in person, or by 
secure REDCap link to e -consent, as per patient preferen ce. Patients who meet all eligibility criteria 
in 3.1 and provide consent may be enrolled into the study  per PI discretion . Some patients who meet 
the eligibility criteria but who may require additional clinical input  before enrolling them into the 
study, will be discussed with the study team clinicians and the PI.  
 
3.4.2 Caregiver consen t 
Caregivers will be invited to participate in semi- structured interviews about the intervention bundle 
that can be conducted via Zoom/Phone or in -person depending on part icipant convenience and 
choice. Hence, they will be consented verbally or with a written consent  depending on their 
participation .  If they consent  to a semi -structured interview (Appendix J) . The interviews with 
study patient caregivers, will provide valuable feedba ck on the intervention bundle. Caregivers may 
also consent verbally to participate in the FAM -CAM confusion and delirium assessment via 
phone, mail, or email link to REDCap survey.   
 
4 Study Design  
This is a feasibility  study utilizing  mixed  methods . All eligible and consenting patients will receive 
the intervention bundle and will undergo a standard battery of assessments prior to the intervention and will be followed for approximately 3 months in the postoperative period . In conjunction with the 
 
 
    
 
Page 5 of 18 
 quantitative data collected, qualitative methods will be employed to evaluate acceptability, 
implementation and practicality  of the intervention .   
            4.1 Assessments  
At enrollment, a research coordinator will administer  a battery of baseline assessments (see Appendix 
D) to characterize patient participants. Patient p articipants will complete these  baseline assessments 
after consent :    
• Demographics survey  
• Medical History of Comorbidities  
• Brief Pain survey  
• BADS (Behavioral Activation Depression Scale)  
• Brief survey of P atient Reported Falls past 3mo  
• VR-12 Quality of Life survey 
• SDM -4 (Shared Decision Making)  
• PHQ- ADS (Patient Health Questionnaire Anxiety and Depression Scale, 
collected at screening in Appendix A ) 
• SBT ( Short Blessed Test , collected at screening in Appendix A )    
• Review of Medication list  (at initial intervention visit)    Ultra Brief Confusion 
Assessment Method (and 3D -CAM if UB -CAM is positive) or FAM -CAM , 
and/or  delirium may be assessed by EHR review using the CHART -DEL  [23] 
method (Appendix M) .   
Anxiety and depression assessment will use the PHQ -ADS, as described above.  The use of this tool 
for this population is supported by a recent meta -analysis suggesting that the PHQ9 (on which this 
tool is based) has good sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of depression  in older adults  [9]. 
Quality of Life  (QoL) will be assessed using the Veterans RAND 12 Item Health Survey (VR -12) 
[10]. The questions in this patient -reported survey correspond to the QoL domains of general health 
perceptions, physical functioning, role limitations due to physical and emotional problems, bodily 
pain, energy/fatigue levels, social functioning and mental healt h. Cognitive function assessment will 
be performed using the  Short Blessed Test  (SBT)  as described above. The SBT  is a reliable test  for 
characterizing cognitive functioning in this setting  [22] . Falls data will be collected by monthly 
Patient -Reported Falls Questionnaire, which will be collected  
by phone  with other assessments  or via a REDCap survey which can  be emailed to participants one 
time per month asking about any falls over the last month.  
 
4.2 Perioperative Mental Health Intervention Bundle  
Our intervention bundle will  be initiated prior to surgery  and continue postoperatively,  and will span 
for approximately 3 to 4 months across the perioperative period (including pre - and 3 month post-
operative periods) . The personalized intervention bundle is comprised  of behavioral activation and 
medication optimization , both facilitated by specially trained interventionists on the research team.  
  
4.2.1 Behavioral Activation  
 
 
    
 
Page 6 of 18 
 The behavioral intervention will consist of behavioral activation (BA) , the basic premise of which is 
to help people with mental health problems to engage in activities that are reinforcing or meaningful 
and guided by their personal values  [13]. The interventionists in this component of the interve ntion 
bundle , Perioperative Wellness Partners, are qualified social workers and therapists with relevant 
mental health experience , in addition to specific training to implement this intervention .  Patients will 
be asked to check with their physicians if there is any question about the safety of any physical activities that are included in the behavioral activation plan.  Behavioral activation as the core 
intervention allows for uniformity across participants from each cohort, yet enough flexibility for the actual components of behavioral activation to be individually adapted based on patient preferences.  
In a recent meta- analysis, behavioral activation programs improved depression and anxiety  [14], as 
well as disability in older adults  [15]. In addition, BA  delivered by telehealth to older adults was cost -
effectiv e and lowered health care utilization costs over 1 year  [16]. In addition to the core 
intervention of behavioral activation, study participants will be able to adapt the intervention by 
choosing activities, per their preference, with demonstrated benefit in improving depression and  
anxiety symptoms in older adults  [17, 18] . BA will span across approximately 3 months 
postoperatively and will  begin pre -operatively, with sessions approximately weekly  or biweekly, 
depending on patient preference and health condition . For example, participants with hospital  stays 
>1 week , behavioral intervention may  continue weekly in the hospital  setting , if the patient chooses . 
Finally, after discharge  during the postoperative period, the behavioral intervention will continue  for 
the remaining months/sessions . The timing, format and frequency of the behavioral activation 
sessions will b e adapted and tailored based on patient preferences and needs. T he behavioral  
activation  process will be guided by the internal study team manual, (Appendix F)  which will be 
adapted and calibrated as needed  throughout th is feasibility study,  along with the  adaptations to the 
BA patient worksheet s (see Appendix H) which the patient and perioperative wellness partners  may 
use to guide  these intervention sessions and activities . We will track all adaptations to BA conduct 
and content during this study  for our future intervention study.  
 
4.2.2 Medication Optimization  
Medications will be reviewed and optimized, as appropriate, by our team of interventionists  including 
a psychiatrist, pharmacologist, perioperative wellness partners, and pharmacists . In several clinical 
trials including thousands of older adults, we have developed and refined a process for this review 
and medication optimization, including adjusting suboptimal dosing for anti -depressant s and 
discontinuing medications that are harmful for brain health (such as anticholinergics  [19] ). 
Medication optimizati on consists of a simple set of principles: reconcile patient’s medications, 
identify the patient’s likely need for, and interest in, a medication adjustment, make the adjustment, and assess the response to that adjustment. B enzodiazepines,  non-benzodiazepi ne sedatives,  strong 
centrally acting anticholinergics , and antihistamines  may be deprescribed as they increase the risk for 
falls and delirium. We will follow the principles of shared decision -making with patients for 
medication changes , identifying DEMS (deprescribing eligible medications) which worsen functional 
recovery, impair cognitive function, and increase medical risks like falls, delirium, and bleeding   
With the patients’ consent, we will initiate communication with t he prescribing provider regarding 
any changes to medications (DEMs in particular) which they have prescribed.  While the participant 
is in-hospital , the interventionist’s role will include coordinating with the hospi tal team to ensure that 
medication chang es that were introduced preoperatively are maintained in -house and that no new 
inappropriate medications are initiated. We will give voice to patient and family concerns by helping 
 
 
    
 
Page 7 of 18 
 them communicate with the hospital  (and subsequent transitional) provider t eam. After discharge, 
and up to approximately 3 months postoperatively, the interventionist will ensure that medication 
changes are reconciled during transitions of care. The interventionists will ensure the agreed -upon 
changes are implemented, or an alternative course of action is justified.  The internal study team 
manual for medication optimization  will be updated as needed in the feasibility study . Please see 
Medication Optimization SOP in Appendix F.   
 
4.3 Evaluation Measures and Outcomes  
Preoperative assessments along with preoperative and postoperative surveys  (assessments described 
in 4.1 above)  regarding quality of life, depression, and anxiety will be obtained from all study 
participants. Study participants will be followed for  approximately  3 months after their scheduled 
procedure. They will complete follow -up surveys  at approximate ly 1 month and approximately 3 
months after surgery by either web- based survey, mail, or via a telephone interview  (or in person if 
the visit coincides with a clinic visit). Collection of falls data will occur approximately monthly for 3 
months by phone wi th study coordinator, or REDCap,  or in person.  The results of follow -up surveys  
will be obtained via secure R EDCap e-mail link, mail, or telephone survey. Rehospitalizations will be 
obtained from  patient self -report  and/or EHR at the end of study follow -up. Please see Table 2 .1 for 
list of outcomes and details.  
Additional pre -operative data related to patient medical, social and surgical history, problems, 
diagnosis and medication lists will be retrieved from the patient electronic health record using the 
research data core (RDC). Post -operative data including post -operative acute diagnoses (e.g., 
complications), additional procedures, postoperative opioid use, pain scores will also be retrieved.  
 
4.3.1 Primary  Feasibilit y Outcomes   
Reach of the study: patients who agreed to participate in the study out of total eligible to participate.  
Reach of the intervention bundle: patients who completed the interventions out of patients who 
agreed to participate in the pilot .   
 
4.3.2 Secondary Feasibilty Outcomes  
Completeness of planned RCT primary outcome data collection at specified timepoints  
 
4.3.2.1  Potential Study Primary Outcomes  for Planned RCT   
Effectiveness outcomes will include the primary outcome measure of PHQ -ADS, a validated 
composite scale of depressio n and anxiety symptoms  [7] measured at  baseline, 1, and 3 months after 
surgery. The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale, or BADS (activation subscale),  is our 
primary measure of target engagement. BADS is a sensitive and pragmatic assessment of the 
mechanism of change in Be havioral Activation. Approximately t hree months post-operative  is the 
primary endpoint.   
 
4.3.2.2 Potential Study Secondary Outcomes for Planned RCT  
The secondary outcomes will include QoL measured via the VR -12 Health Survey, and other 
perio perative outcomes of interest, nominated by our stakeholders as key outcomes of interest, 
including:  
 
 
    
 
Page 8 of 18 
 1. In-hospital: (i) Delirium incidence, assessed by trained research coordinators  using the Ultra 
Brief and 3 -D Confusion Assessment Method,  [20] as in ou r prior work  [19], and/or  Delirium 
incidence may be assessed by EHR review using the CHART -DEL [23] method ;   (ii) Length of 
Stay (hospital and ICU), assessed by EHR review.  
2. Post-discharge: (i) Falls, prospectively assessed monthly falls reported by patients. (ii) All- cause 
rehospitalization out to approximately 3 months  postoperative, assessed from  EHR report , 
supplemented by review with patient and caregiver.   
3. Process outcomes: Shared Decision Making ( modified collaboRATE ) 3 item surv ey will be 
administered at post -end of study . CAHPS modified survey will be administered after the 
intervention is complete, as part of post -end of study surveys.  
4. Implementation -potential surveys : Acceptability of Intervention Measure, Intervention 
Appropriateness Measure, Feasibility of Intervention Measure. 
 
4.3.3 Exploratory Feasibilty Outcomes  
Impletmentation potential  
Completeness of planned RCT primary outcome data collection at specified timepoints  
 
Table 2. Feasibility study outcomes and potential study primary and secondary outcomes for 
planned RCT. Note: The surveys and questionnaires will be administered via email or research 
coordinators over the telephone.  
Outcomes  Specific measure: description  Source  Timepoint  
Reach  
(Primary)  Reach of the study: patients who agreed to 
participate in the study out of total eligible to 
participate  
Reach of the intervention bundle: patients who completed the interventions out of patients who agreed to participate in the pilot  Electronic 
Health Record, Research data 
warehouse End of Study  
Completeness of 
planned RCT 
primary outcome 
data collection at 
specified timepoints  
(Secondary) Defined as a percentage of instrument or data 
fields completed for - Patient Health 
Questionnaire Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(PHQ -ADS)62: 16-item scale with components of 
the Patient Health Questionnaire -9 and 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (collected at baseline; 1 mo; 3 mo)  Research data 
warehouse End of Study  
Implementation -
Potential  
(Exploratory) Acceptability, appropriateness and feasibility of 
the interventions: The Acceptability of 
Intervention Measure (AIM), the Intervention 
Appropriateness Measure (IAM), and the Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FIM).
77 
Each survey has 4 items in a Likert scale ranging from completely disagree to completely agree.  Surveys  
 End of Study  
 
 
 
    
 
Page 9 of 18 
 Completeness of 
planned RCT 
secondary outcomes data collection at specified timepoints  
(Exploratory) We will be measuring the completeness of data 
collection for the following potential secondary outcomes for the planned RCT secondary outcomes: 
• Quality o f Life (collected at baseline; 1 
mo; 3 mo)  
• In-hospital delirium incidence (collected 
at baseline; in -hospital/postoperatively)  
• Post-discharge falls (collected at 
baseline; 1 mo; 2 mo; 3 mo)  
• Medication optimized and adherence to medications(collected at baseline; 1 mo; 
3 mo)  
• Length of stay (both hospital and ICU)  
• All-cause rehospitalization (collected in 
the hospital/postoperatively; 1 mo; 3 mo) 
• Persistent postsurgical pain (collected at 
1 mo; 3 mo)  
• Patient experience (collected at end of 
study ) 
• Shared decision making (collected at end 
of study)  Research data 
warehouse End of Study  
 
 
Table 2.1 Details on  Potential Study  Outcomes  for Planned RCT   
 
Effectiveness Outcomes  Data Source  Description  Data Collection 
Mechanism  
 Time points   
(Baseline, 1, 
2, 3 month -
post-op or 
EOS)  
Primary 
(Clinical)  Anxiety and 
Depression  Patient 
Health 
Questionnaire Anxiety and Depression Scale (PHQ -
ADS)  A validated composite 
of symptoms of depression and anxiety  Patient  Self-Report  Baseline;  
1 mo and 3 mo 
Primary (Target 
Engagement measure ) Anxiety and 
Depression / Target Engagement  Behavioral 
Activation for Depression Scale 
(BADS)  A validated scale 
utilized to measure target engagement in studies of geriatric 
depression  Patient  Self-Report  Baseline; 
1mo; 2mo; 3mo 
Secondary 
(Clinical) Quality of Life  The Veterans 
RAND 12 Item Health 
Survey (VR -
12)
43 A patien t-reported 
global health measure. 
The questions in this 
survey correspond to 
the QOL domains of 
general health Patient  Self-Report  Baseline;  
1 mo and 3 mo 
 
 
    
 
Page 10 of 18 
 perceptions, physical 
functioning, role 
limitations due to physical and emotional problems, bodily pain, energy/fatigue levels, 
social functionin g and 
mental health.  
In-hospital delirium 
incidence  
 Ultra Brief 
CAM to 
screen for 3D CAM, and if UBCAB positive, then 3D 
CAM Confusion Assessment 
Method
44  
 UB-CAM  and 3D 
CAM are  
standardized, 
evidence -based 
interview that enables researchers and clinicians, following 
structured training, to reliably and reproducibly identify the four cardinal 
features of delirium.  
 
 UB-CAM and 3D 
CAM Research 
Coordinator- Administered   Baseline/pre -
op; In-
hospital: During post-
op hospital  
stay; up to 
twice daily for 3 days; if not in person, UB-CAM 
may be 
collected by 
phone.   
 
 
Family Confusion 
Assessment Method  FAM -CAM  The FAM -CAM is 
intended to evaluate for evidence of delirium based on observations from family members o r 
caregivers. The instrument facilitate 
and educate caregivers 
to pick up acute changes in mental status, and the earliest signs of cognitive changes in frail or cognitively impaired 
older persons.  Survey or phone  Baseline/pre -
op; post-op, once every week for 4 
weeks.  
Post-discharge falls  Patient 
Reported Falls  A Patent Reported 
Falls survey will be collecte d monthly 
either by phone or  
REDCap link, at follow -up clinic 
appointments.  Patient  Self-Report  Baseline; 
1mo; 2mo; 3mo 
Medication list  Data 
collection Appendix D ; 
Appendix G  Review of all patient 
medications, confirming accuracy of EHR med list , 
number of medications optimized and medication 
adherence  Patient Self -Report/  
study team member  
verifie s EHR meds 
list with patient  Baseline , 
initial intervention visit; approximately 1mo; approximately 
3mo at end of 
 
 
    
 
Page 11 of 18 
 intervention.  
Length of stay (both 
hospital and ICU) Research 
Data Core  Standardized reports 
on the research data 
core (RDC) warehouse will generate statistics of enrolled patients regarding the length of 
stay, rehospitalization, and related clinical 
metrics.  EHR report  In-hospital: at 
ICU and hospital 
discharge  
All-cause 
rehospitalization  Research 
Data Core  EHR report  Post-op: 1 mo 
and 3 mo  
Secondary 
(Process)  Patient experience  Modified -
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems 
(CAHPS)45 The modified CAHPS 
asks patients about their experience before surgery, during surgery, and after surgery.  Patient  Self-Report  Post-EOS   
 
  
 
       
  Shared decision 
making  Shared 
decision making 
process  
CollaboRAT
E modified  A 3-item survey  
modified to measure 
shared decision making, 
following a encounters 
with study 
interventionists and 
perioperative wellness 
partners  Patient Self -Report  Post-EOS  
Implementation Outcomes  
 Data Source  Description  Data Collection 
Mechanism  
 Time points  
 Implementation -
Potential (I)  Acceptability 
of 
Intervention 
Measure,  
Intervention Appropriateness Measure, Feasibility of Intervention 
Measure  Acceptability, 
Feasibility and 
Appropriateness 4 -item 
Likert scale survey  Patient Self -Report  Post-EOS  
In addit ion to these outcomes, we will also be assessing fidelity of our intervention bundle which will 
assess the extent to which an intervention bundle is carried out by our perioperative wellness partner, 
as intended and consistently across different settings, and patients.  To track this, we will observe and 
take notes on  the patient and the perioperative wellness partner  during the  behavioral intervention and 
medication optimization sessions with the patient and clinician. Observations will  involve a member 
of the research  team  observing the wellness partner over a period of time or number of  intervention  
sessions . We will  capture data on patient  interactions with the wellness partner, their delivery of the 
intervention bundle , any observed barriers and facilitators to the intervention adherence, acceptance 
and fit within the perioperative workflow.  These observation sessions of patients and their wellness 
 
 
    
 
Page 12 of 18 
 partners will be selected based on a convenience sample.   If the patient agrees to audio/video 
recording, th e intervention sessions will be audio recorded (or audio/video if the patient prefers to 
meet by Zoom teleconference).  The observations may be made by a member of the research team 
reviewing the recorded sessions.   
Lastly, we will also obtain various stakeholder perspectives on the intervention bundle after the 
intervention period  has been completed  using semi -structured interviews. We will conduct interviews 
with patients,  and caregivers, and the topics of discussions will be guided by an implementation 
science framework referred to as CFIR (Consolidated Framework of Implementation  Research) . The 
interviews will explore the participants’ perceptions, attitudes, experiences with  the intervention  
bundle, intervention bundle acceptability and detailed accounts of participants' experiences after the 
intervention has been stopped with regards to intervention sustainability and maintenance. These 
insights will inform whether the intervention bundle needs to be changed or ad apted before our  future 
trials  (see interview guides in Appendix J) . Interviews will be conducted via Zoom or telephone and 
will be digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim.  
 
5 Data Analysis  
The quantitative data will be used to provide baseline and post-intervention comparisons on a number 
of outcome variables relevant to the intervention, with the hypothesis that performance on these measures will improve post intervention. These data will also be used to estimate effect sizes for 
further trials so that these are suitably powered.  Quantitative data will be tabulated for descriptive 
purposes. Given the small sample size, a non -parametric approach will be used to calculate effect size 
data (r = Z/ √ (N)), where Z is the standardized test -statistic from a Wilcoxon signed -rank test and N 
is the sample size, along with the associated 95% confidence interval. The r values will be  calculated 
for the timepoint as compared to baseline.  
 
The observation data will be analyzed using  open coding and FRAME analytic framework  that helps 
track any adaptations to intervention bundle and delivery . The interview data  will be analyzed using 
thematic  analysis [8].  
 
Table 3. Study Calendar  
 
 Time 0  Baseline/  
Time 1   
In-
Hospital  / 
Post-Op 1 mo 
follow up  2 mo 
follow up  3 mo 
follow up  Post-
EOS 
Patient Consent  X       
Patient Screening   
(Appendix A)  X       
Patient Baseline surveys  
(Appendix D)    X  
  
  
Caregiver Consent  
 X  
  
  
X 
Patient Delirium Assessment  
(Appendix K)  pt UB/ 3 -D CAM ; &  
Caregiver if applicable, FAM -CAM  X (pt)  X(pt) 
twice 
daily x 3 FAM -
CAM if 
applicable    
 
 
    
 
Page 13 of 18 
 1x weekly for 4 weeks.  days post -
op 
 (weekly x 
4wks) 
Patient Follow -up 1 & 3 mo S urveys  
(Appendix G)     
X  X  
Patient Monthly Surveys  
(Appendix L)     
X X X  
Patient Post -EOS Surveys  
(Appendix I)     
   X* 
Patient Semi -Structured Interview  
(Appendix J)        X* 
Caregiver  
Semi -Structured Interview  
(Appendix J)     
  
 X* 
Behavioral Activation and 
Medication Review  Intervention 
Sessions    
Approximately 6-12 sessions as needed (per Pt 
preference) from Baseline , continuing for up to 
approximately 3 months  post-op during study 
data collection, until EOS .   
*Post -End of Study (E OS) implementation surveys and semi -structured  interview s will be completed approximately  2 
weeks after EOS assessment.  
 
 
6 Patient Participant Retention  
Participant  retention strategies wil l include flexibili ty in sche duling follow-up visit s and coo rdination 
of research (both data collection and intervention)  visits with the clinical visits. Remuneration for 
each data collection study visit will be provided after the final follow -up visit to  encourage retention 
as well.  For patients who are difficult to reach by phone, we may utilize a reminder,  the Attempting to 
Reach You Letter (Appendix N) to remind them to contact either the Perioperative Wellness Partner 
or the Study Coordinator for a study session.  
 
 
7 Protection of Human Subjects  
The study will be conducted under appropriate Washington University Institutional Review Board 
guidance,  and use only IRB -approv ed study procedures and instruments. The study  team will follow 
the protocol  under the supervision of the PI, a mentor with several years of experience in the conduct 
of human volunteer studies, and co -Investigators  with extensive expertis e in human subject research.  
All members of the study team are IRB -approved and trained in Good Clinical Practice and Human 
Subjects Research education.   
 8 Data Management  for Participant  Privacy  
A unique patient number (UPN) will be assigned at enrollment and used wherever possible on the case report forms (CRF) to identify data, minimizing use of patients’ names or personal identifiers in 
data.  
 
 
    
 
Page 14 of 18 
 All paper data will be stored under lock and key ( two locked doors, e .g., office, file cabinet) and all 
electronic data will be hosted on a password -protected, firewall -secured server that is only accessible 
to the research team through password -protected departmental computers. Surveys  that are completed 
electronically will be administered via the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) server. All 
REDCap email correspondence will be sent using secure survey links. Similarly, interview data from 
caregivers will follow the same security and storage policies.  
 8.1 List of Protected Health Information c ollected for study 
For Patient and Caregiver Participants , the HIPAA -protected identifiers that will be collected for 
this study include:  
• Name  
• Date of bi rth 
• Contact information  
• Mailing address  
• Phone number  
• Electronic mail address  
• SSN for the purpose of remuneration   
For Patient Participants only , these additional HIPAA -protected identifiers will also be collected 
for study:  
• Dates of services (surgical procedure, hospitalization)  
• Medical record number  
 
9 Potential Risks  
This study involves minimal risk to subjects. Unlikely but potential risks include error s in medication 
recommendations or medication withdrawal symptoms, an d breach of confidentiality. The risk of 
medication withdrawal (i.e., from benzodiazepines) is mitigated by slowly tapering rather than 
stopping these medications. Patients who are identified as being acu tely suicidal will be excluded 
from the study. Nevertheless, since the rate of completed suicide in the USA remains high (i.e., about twice the rate of homicide) and most Americans who commit suicide suffer from depression, all 
participants eligible to par ticipate in this study are statistically at a relatively higher risk for suicide 
than the general population. However, the participants’ absolute risk for completing suicide during this brief study remains very low (i.e., about 1 in 3,000 to 10,000) and pa rticipation in the study does 
not create or increase the risk of completed suicide; rather, most experts believe that one of the most efficient ways to decrease suicidal risk in older depressed individuals is to treat their depression. 
Furthermore, all par ticipants will be formally assessed frequently throughout the study. If the study 
personnel identify that a participant has become acutely suicidal, this participant will be referred to a mental health professional for further evaluation and treatment (see  section: Procedures to Minimize 
Risks). This may lead to a clinical intervention that is lifesaving and may not have occurred had the participant not been participating in the study.  
 
10 Adverse Experiences   
 
 
    
 
Page 15 of 18 
 Based on the nature of this study, which involves surveys, a cognitive test, and a behavioral 
intervention,  adverse events are exceedingly unlikely. The principal investigator and study 
coordinator will monitor for breaches of confidentiality and other adverse events on an ongoing basis.  
If the PI or study coordinator becomes aware of a reportable adverse event, the event will be reported 
to HRPO according to institutional guidelines.   
 
11 Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks  
Professor Eric Lenze , MD  (PI on the Center for Perioperative Mental Health; Co -I on this stu dy) will 
manage the  oversight  of the intervention s making medication optimization recommendations to 
reduce the risk of medication error or medication withdrawal symptoms. Algorithms for tapering medications that  should not be abruptly discontinued will be employed. We have carried out this 
deprescribing protocol in several large RCTs and have not seen any problems occur.  
 
Suicide R isk Management:  As discussed above, at each assessment point, the research staff will 
assess for passive death wish, and suicidal ideation, intent or plan when they administer the PHQ -
ADS. If a participant endorses suicidal ideation, intent, or plan, the rater will be trained to follow an 
operationalized protocol ( Appendix E) that has been developed to manage high -risk participants in 
other studies of depressed participants potentially at risk for suicide. This protocol has already been used successfully by Dr. Lenze’s team to manage acutely suicidal patients. Brief ly, the protocol 
entails a specific determination of the suicidal risk and prescribes a set of actions. If a participant is 
determined to be at high and immediate risks, the rater is instructed to stay w ith the participant until 
he or she has contacted a study psychiatrist (Dr. Lenze) to discuss the situation and to devise a plan. In case of extreme emergency, raters are instructed to call their hospital security team or 911 for 
immediate help and to initiate commitment proceedings.  
 Patients will be encouraged to check with their physician if there is any question about the safety of 
any physical activities that are included in the behavioral activation plan. It is possible that the 
participant may feel uncomfortable completing the su rveys or participating in the study sessions.  The 
study sessions and interview can be discontinued at any time, and the patient may refuse to answer any questions that s/he does not wish to answer.  
To minimize the risk of breach of confidential ity, we wil l ensure that protected health information 
will only be shared with members of the research team. Only data necessary to complete the study 
will be collected. Data will be coded with UPN wherever possible, and the master list linking names 
to UPNs will be secur ely accessible only to the PI, C o-Investigators, data analyst , and primary 
research coordinator.  Electronic data will be stored as detailed in section 8.    
 
12 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
The specific monitoring plan for this investigation is commensurate with the risks and the size and 
complexity  of the studies planned. Given the nature of the protoc ol, the risks are likely limited to 
breach of confidentiality. Data will be monitored and protected  as described in Section 8 , with PI 
oversight of data management.  
 Participation in this study does not entail any physical or medical risks that are greater than those 
ordinarily encountered in daily life. It is possible that the participant may feel unco mfortable 
completing the questionnaires. If a participant becomes upset, the PI will talk to the participant either 
 
 
    
 
Page 16 of 18 
 at that time or will contact the participant by telephone. If any further referrals are deemed necessary 
(i.e., social work or psychiatry), these referrals will be made in collaboration with the patient’s 
primary medical team.  
 There is also a risk of breach of confidentiality. All reasonable steps will be taken to ensure that 
patient privacy is maintained. Hard copy data (i.e. signed informed consent forms) will be maintained 
in a locked office within a locked suite. Electronic data will be stored on a Washington University password -protected server and never stored on a portable hard drive or laptop computer. Patient data 
will be identified b y a study ID only, with a master key linking patient names with study IDs kept in a 
separate file accessible only to the Primary Investigator and Research Study Assistant.  
 The only interventions outside the standard of care for management of the patient’s  diagnosed 
condition in this study are the administration of questionnaires, a cognitive test,  and medication 
optimization. We expect that the occurrence of a serious adverse event as it relates to these study 
interventions to be extremely rare. If a breach of confidentiality were to occur, it would be reported to 
QASMC and HRPO within 10 days of notification.  
 The study principal investigator and study coordinator will monitor for breaches of confidentiality 
and other adverse events on an ongoing basis. Once the PI or study coordinator becomes aware of a 
reportable adverse event, the event will be reported to HRPO and QASMC according to institutional 
guidelines. This study does not require QASMC audit or submission of DSM reports.  
 
13 Premature Discontinuat ion 
Subjects will be withdrawn if the investigator decides that discontinuation is in the best interest of the 
subject, or the subject requests withdrawal from the study.  As part of the informed consent process, 
patients will be notified they may choose to  not participate in the study or withdraw at any time with 
no penalty, and no effect on the standard care they receive.  
 
14 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Participants and Others  
Altho
u gh the study is designed to impro ve symptoms of depre ssion and anxiety and other outco mes 
of care, there is no guar antee that the study par ticipants will receive any clinica l benefits by 
participating in the stud y. This may l ead to a clinica l intervention that is lifesaving and may not have 
occurred had the par ticipant not been par ticipating in the study. Given the under treatm ent of 
depre ssion and anxiety in older adult s, the mini mal risks are acc eptable in comparison to the po tentia l 
benefits in improving the mental health of older adults under going surger y. 
 
15 R
emuneration  
It will not cost the patient anything to participate in the study, and with the flex ible design allowing 
for phone visits, they will not be required to make any extra study visits to the medical center (some 
visits may be concurrent with a clinic or procedure appointment).  Patients will receive remuneration 
by debit  card of $25 for completi on of each data collection study visit at Baseline, 1, 2, 3  month post -
op, Post -EOS data collection surveys , and semi -structured interview, up to $125 after completion of 
their participation .  
 
16 Funding  
 
 
    
 
Page 17 of 18 
 The study is funded by the National Institute of Me ntal Health (NIMH)  (P50 MH122351-01A1). 
                               
 
17 References  
1. Mangusan, R.F., et al., Outcomes associated with postoperative delirium after cardiac surgery.  
Am J Crit Care, 2015. 24(2): p. 156-63. 
2. Blumenthal, J.A., et al., Depression as a risk factor for mortality after coronary artery bypass 
surgery.  Lancet, 2003. 362 (9384): p. 604- 9. 
3. Connerney, I., et al., Relation between depression after coronary artery bypass surgery and 12-month outcome:  a prospective study.  Lancet, 2001. 358(9295): p. 1766- 71. 
4. McKenzie, L.H., J. Simpson, and M. Stewart, A systematic review of pre- operative predictors 
of post -operative depression and anxiety in individuals who have undergone coronary artery 
bypass graf t surgery.  Psychol Health Med, 2010. 15 (1): p. 74 -93. 
5. Takagi, H., et al., Perioperative depression or anxiety and postoperative mortality in cardiac 
surgery: a systematic review and meta -analysis.  Heart Vessels, 2017. 32(12): p. 1458 -1468. 
6. Abraham, J ., et al., A Qualitative Study of Perioperative Depression and Anxiety in Older 
Adults.  Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, 2020.  
7. Kroenke, K., et al., Patient Health Questionnaire Anxiety and Depression Scale: Initial Validation in Three Clinical Trials.  Psychosom  Med, 2016. 78(6): p. 716-27. 
8. Ritchie, J. and J. Lewis, Qualitative research practice: a guide for social science students and researchers. 2003, London: Sage Publications.  
9. Levis, B., et al., Accuracy of Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) for screening to detect 
major depression: individual participant data meta-analysis.  BMJ, 2019. 365: p. l1476.  
10. Selim, A.J., et al., Updated U.S. population standard for the Veterans RAND 12- item Health 
Survey (VR -12).  Qual Life Res, 2009. 18(1): p. 43-52. 
11. Arias, F., et al., Rapid In- Person Cognitive Screening in the Preoperative Setting: Test 
Considerations and Recommendations from the Society for Perioperative Assessment and 
Quality Improvement (SPAQI).  Perioper Care Oper Room Manag, 2020. 19 . 
12. Vila, M .R., et al. Cognitive flexibility and persistent post- surgical pain: the FLEXCAPP 
prospective observational study . British Journal of Anaesthesia, 2020.  
13. Puspitasari, A.J., et al., A randomized controlled trial of an online, modular, active learning training program for behavioral activation for depression.  J Consult Clin Psychol, 2017. 85(8): 
p. 814-825. 
14. Stein, A.T., et al., Looking beyond depression: a meta- analysis of the effect of behavioral 
activation on depression, anxiety, and activation.  Psyc hol Med, 2020: p. 1 -14. 
15. Choi, N.G., et al., Improving Social Connectedness for Homebound Older Adults: Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Tele -Delivered Behavioral Activation Versus Tele- Delivered Friendly Visits.  
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry, 2020.  
16. Egede, L.E., et al., Cost -Effectiveness of Behavioral Activation for Depression in Older Adult 
Veterans: In -Person Care Versus Telehealth.  J Clin Psychiatry, 2018. 79 (5). 
17. Farhang, M., et al., Impact of mind -body interventions in older adults with mild cognitive 
impairment: a systematic review.  Int Psychogeriatr, 2019. 31(5): p. 643-666. 
18. Lenze, E.J., et al., Mindfulness- based stress reduction for older adults with worry symptoms 
and co- occur ring cognitive dysfunction.  Int J Geriatr Psychiatry, 2014. 29(10): p. 991 -1000. 
 
 
    
 
Page 18 of 18 
 19. Wildes, T.S., et al., Effect of Electroencephalography -Guided Anesthetic Administration on 
Postoperative Delirium Among Older Adults Undergoing Major Surgery: The ENGAGES 
Randomized Clinical Trial.  JAMA, 2019. 321(5): p. 473-483. 
20. Inouye, S.K., et al., Clarifying confusion: the confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium.  Ann Intern Med, 1990. 113 (12): p. 941- 8. 
21. Lamb, S.E., et al., Development  of a common outcome data set for fall injury prevention trials: 
the Prevention of Falls Network Europe consensus.  J Am Geriatr Soc, 2005. 53(9): p. 1618- 22. 
22.  Katzman R, Brown T, Fuld P. Validation of a short orientation -memory -concentration test of 
cognitive impairment. Am J Psychiatry. 1983; 140:734–9. 
23. Xu G, Fong TG, Yee J, Inouye SK. Delirium Identification: A training guide to a chart -based 
delirium inst rument. 2011; Hebrew Rehabilitation Center, Boston, MA.  