NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
1 
  
 
 
  
Protocol Title : Reducing Duration of Untreated Psychosis Through 
Early Detection in a Large Jail System - Surveys of Correction Officers 
NYSPI 7771  
PI: Michael Compton, MD, MPH  
Version Date: 05/02/2022  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
2 
 Lay Summary  
Persons with serious mental illnesses are overrepresented in jails. Criminal justice (CJ) involvement,  
including jail detention, is common among those with first -episode psychosis (FEP) and frequently 
precedes  psychiatric treatment engagement. Yet, no documented i nterventions currently exist 
specifically to identify/engage such individuals while in jail and connect them to Coordinated Specialty 
Care (CSC) in the  community upon release. Expansion of CSC programs across the U.S. provides an 
opportunity for  partnershi p with the CJ system —one that has the potential to reduce the duration of 
untreated psychosis  (DUP) and thus improve outcomes. To detect FEP and reduce DUP among detainees 
in a large, urban jail,  we propose to implement: (1) a “Targeted Educational Campaig n” (TEC), and (2) a 
Specialized Early  Engagement Support Service (SEESS) in 3 jails on Rikers Island in New York City (NYC): 
Anna M.  Kross Center (AMKC), Rose M. Singer Center (RMSC) and Robert N. Davoren Complex (RNDC). 
We expect the multi -media TEC to generate referrals to the Correctional Health Services (CHS), and to 
reduce  our DUP -1 (psychosis onset to antipsychotic initiation). Then, the jail -based SEE SS (a Social 
Worker and  Peer Specialist) will link those identified to community -based CSC (primarily OnTrackNY 
sites in NYC),  thus reducing DUP -2 (psychosis onset to CSC enrollment). We will examine a set of 
hypothesized  targets/mediators (the “how’s”). These are key ingredients that underpin the 
intervention’s ability to reduce  DUP. The multi -media TEC will generate referrals to the CHS. How will it 
do that? By improving the  behavioral capabilities, expectations, and self- efficacy (constructs from Social 
Cognitive Theory) of the  Correction Officers trained. We will assess feasibility and  acceptability to lay the 
groundwork for a multi-site, definitive effectiveness trial.  
 
Background, Significance and Rationale  
 Treatment delay, or longer DUP, is linked to poorer outcomes (e.g., greater symptom severity, less  
remission, poorer quality of life) in FEP patients [1 -4]. Early intervention for psychosis, as exemplified by  
CSC, leads to improved outcomes, especially when DUP is shorter. The NIMH RAISE -ETP study found  
that young people w ho initiate treatment within 1.5 years of symptom onset remain in treatment longer 
and show improved quality of life and work/school functioning [5]. An international movement is 
underway to  determine ways to reduce DUP; however, it has largely neglected those with FEP who have 
become  entangled in the CJ system.  
 Even with mounting evidence about the importance of early intervention, early detection programs have  been concentrated mainly in mental health (e.g., inpatient psychiatric units), primary care (e. g., 
clinics), and  educational settings (e.g., colleges) to date, and thus continue to miss a significant number 
of young people  who do not traverse traditional pathways to care. Pathways for FEP patients are often 
delayed or  bottlenecked by common sequelae  of psychosis such as social withdrawal and loss of social 
support.  Additionally, social factors like unemployment, residing in public housing, ethnic minority 
status, being underinsured, and —central to our intervention —a history of being locked up, can 
postpone accessing care and lengthen DUP [6 -8]. There is very little literature worldwide on this, but 
there is evidence that CJ involvement is common in many FEP samples prior to treatment engagement [9-13]. In the PI’s study of 191 urban, disadvantaged, pr edominantly African American FEP patients —the 
only study that has examined the link between DUP and jail detention history —59% had a history of 
detention (primarily in jails for misdemeanors) prior to their first treatment and 37% had been detained at some  point during their DUP [14]. Prior detention predicted a much longer DUP [14]. Further, national 
estimates show that 24% of people in jail have had psychotic symptoms in the past 12 months [15]. Large jails have become “public health outposts” in screening and, if appropriate, treating, large numbers of individuals who might not otherwise seek or be exposed to care in the community. Jails 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
3 
 likely have an enriched population for the detection of FEP, and thus need to collaborate with 
community -based CSC.  
 The development and implementation of a TEC and SEET in 3 jails seeks to reduce DUP for detained  
young people with FEP through “supply side” approaches. The TEC will educate Correction Officers about early signs and referring to correctional health services (CHS) staff. The SEET will forge referral networks that fast- track the initiation of CSC upon release from jail. The SEET will be comprised of two 
people: one professional social worker and one peer worker. Dr. Genevra Jones, Co -Investigator, will 
serve as  an expert in peer support theories. Dr. Jones will advise on all aspects of the training and 
supervision of the peer specialist. Four interrelated bodies of knowledge guide this work. Three guide our TEC + SEET intervention: (1) the Scandinavian Early Tre atment and Intervention in Psychosis (TIPS) 
model, (2) person -centered treatment and shared decision -making, and (3) Critical Time Intervention; 
and one guides our selection of targets/mediators (and thus intervention development): (4) Social Cognitive The ory. 
 Our intervention is critically informed by the TIPS study in Scandinavia, the largest experimental study of  
early detection to date. TIPS successfully reduced median DUP in FEP patients from 15 weeks to 4.5 using two core strategies: intensive, multi -media public information campaigns, and easy -access, low -
threshold mobile early detection teams [16]. A wide body of literature attests to the pivotal role education campaigns can play in improving professional and public recognition of early warning sign s 
and symptoms of many disorders [17]. TIPS developed a mass media campaign to both enhance the public’s knowledge of psychiatric disorders in general and early signs of psychosis in particular, and to reduce stigma associated with schizophrenia and psychi atry. Information was tailored to 3 target 
groups: the general public, general practitioners and healthcare workers, and teachers. Information was 
distributed systematically and repeatedly over several years. Notably, when a lack of funding 
interrupted the campaign for a period of time, the rate of referrals dropped (particularly from general 
practitioners) and DUP increased again, further showing the importance of information campaigns in reducing DUP [18]. The success of the TIPS campaign has led to efforts to replicate the approach in other places. In the US, the Specialized Treatment Early in Psychosis (STEP) clinic implemented the STEP -ED 
campaign that includes: public education, outreach to and academic detailing of professionals, and rapid access to t he STEP clinic [19]. Our proposed intervention will take place in an urban jail setting rather 
than in the community; as such, it will focus on the same two  interlocking strategies (TEC and SEET) used 
by TIPS to shorten DUP for people experiencing FEP, but tailored within the confines of the jail. The NYC 
jail system has over 55,000 admissions and roughly the  same discharges each year, with high 
correctional staff turnover; a continuous and broad -reaching “Targeted  Education Campaign” is 
essential to ensure  the messaging works.  
 Studies show that person -centered communication (e.g., asking open -ended questions, involving 
patients  in treatment decisions) has positive effects on satisfaction, treatment adherence, and health 
status [20 -22]. Both the content of communication  (e.g., creating space for the person’s interpretations 
of illness) and the  context of communication (e.g., clinicians’ interpersonal behaviors, expectations 
about communication  style, use of simplified language) influence treatment initiation  and participation 
[23]. Clinician communication behaviors, such as building rapport, using open -ended questions, and 
answering questions, are a key mechanism for engagement. Communication functions that are key to 
promoting improved health outcomes include: establishing and maintaining the provider -patient 
relationship, exchanging information, validating and responding to emotions, managing uncertainty, 
sharing in making treatment decisions, and enabling patient self- management. Some of the pathways 
through which effective communication may lead to better health outcomes include improved patient 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
4 
 knowledge and shared understanding, improved access to care, improved therapeutic alliances, and 
improved patient agency [24]. Even though the health care provided in the jail system is not necessarily person- centered or oriented around shared decision -making, the work of the SEET— trained by the 
expert resources available at the Center for Practice Innovations and among the PI, Co -Investigators, 
and Consultants —will be framed by an approach that treats communication strategies as central to the 
future engagement of detainees in community -based CSC.  
 Our SEET will use a Critical Time Intervention (CTI) model to mobilize support for people with FEP during a period of transition from jail to the community. CTI was developed in the US in the 1990s based on the principles of case management and Assertive Community Treatment. CTI has been used with persons with mental illnesses, as well as those who are incarcerated. It has been evaluated extensively, with good evidence for its efficacy [25 -26]. In a study of CTI among men with a serious mental illness 
who were leaving prison, CTI was effective at increasing engagement with services at 6 weeks; differences between the intervention and control group persisted through 6 months [27]. CTI will 
organize the activities of our SEET in that it is time -limited, focused, and designed to enhance support 
and engagement in services during critical periods of transition. Assertive outreach and ongoing 
engagement in jail, combined with brokering relationships with CSC leading up to and upon release (and telephonic support after release until CSC engagement) will ensure that individuals are adequately supported while detained and following their return to the community.  
 The jail- based TEC (and our targets/mediators) are also heavily influenced by Social Cognitive Theory  
and its concepts of behavioral capabilities (knowledge and skills), self- efficacy, and expectations. Social  
Cognitive Theory,  developed by Bandura [28 -29], posits that behavior is underpinned by personal  
(cognitive, affective, and biological), behavioral, and environmental factors that interact and influence 
each other bidirectionally. As applied to the field of health promotion, Social Cognitive Theory specifies 
a core set of determinants, the mechanisms through which they work, and the optimal ways of translating them into health practices. Five determinants are central: (1) behavioral capabilities —or 
knowledge and skills about  health risks and benefits —that create the preconditions for change; (2) 
perceived self -efficacy about one’s ability to successfully perform tasks; (3) expectations about the 
outcomes of certain actions or health habits; (4) personal goals for change; and (5) perceived facilitators and barriers to change [30]. As described in more detail below, the TEC is an intervention that will target Correction Officers' knowledge about the early symptoms of psychosis, and how to make a referral to the CHS, their self -efficacy to detect symptoms of psychosis and make referrals, and their expectations 
about their ability to be successful in making that referral (and for referrals to result in beneficial 
outcomes). All aspects of the TEC will be designed to improve behavio ral capabilities, expectations, and 
self- efficacy. That is, regardless of the media (e.g., poster, flyer, brief roll- call training for Correction 
Officers), all TEC materials will target very specific knowledge and skills, increase expectations about the 
benefits of the SEET and CSC/OnTrackNY, and increase self- efficacy about one’s ability to make a 
referral. Messaging will be specific, straight -forward, as simple as possible, and repetitive, so that we 
can effectively improve knowledge/skills, expectations , and self -efficacy in a focused way. These 
changes will ultimately influence rates of identifying detainees with undetected FEP and referral to CHS. Social Cognitive Theory, as well as everyday experience, suggests that in order to successfully carry out a behavior, one must have the necessary knowledge/skills, the beliefs that what is expected to occur actually will occur, and the self- confidence to carry out that specific behavior. In targeting these 
mediators, our TEC will therefore have the greatest chances of generating referrals to the CHS (especially referrals of quietly psychotic young people who would have otherwise gone undetected and  
thus not referred to CHS).  
 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
5 
 Abundant evidence documents racial and ethnic disparities in access to mental health s ervices [31 -33]. 
While the underlying root causes of these disparities are complex— explained by patient -level, provider-
level,  and system -level factors —studies show that they persist even when controlling for differences in  
socioeconomics [32]. Racial and ethnic disparities also occur in pathways to care in FEP patients. Stigma  
remains a significant barrier to treatment and African Americans are more likely to experience negative  
routes to psychiatric care such as through the CJ system or involuntary hospit alizations [34 -38]. Given 
that the population in the NYC jail system is 87% Black and Hispanic and that no specialized FEP 
treatment  services currently exist within the jail system, our intervention has the potential to 
significantly improve  treatment access for a population of young minorities with FEP who traditionally 
experience significant  barriers to care.  
 
Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
 
Implement a Targeted Educational Campaign (TEC) within 3 jails at NYC's Rikers Island. The TEC  
is designed to lead to  referrals of detainees (previously not detected as having potential mental health  
concerns) to Correctional Health Services (CHS) by Correction Officers. We expect that referral will occur  
via changes in scores on behavioral capability (knowledge/skills),  expectations, and self -efficacy (among  
Correction Officers). Although this R34 feasibility study is meant to determine likely effect sizes rather than  demonstrate statistical significance (which would be the goal of a subsequent, larger, multi- site 
study) , using the data that we collect, we hypothesize that the number of referrals to CHS will be 
associated with:  cumulative changes in Correction Officers' survey scores on behavioral capability, 
expectations, and self -efficacy.  
 
Description of Subject Population 
 Specify subject population: Correction Officers  
Number of completers required to accomplish study aims : 
540 Projected number of subjects who will be enrolled to obtain required number of completers : 
540 Age range of subject population: over 21  
The i mplementation of the Target Educational Campaign (TEC) will involve Correction Officers working 
at three jails: the Anna M. Kross Center (AMKC), the Rose M. Singer Center (RMSC), and the Robert N.  
Davoren Complex (RNDC), all located on Rikers Island in New  York City. Correction Officers in these  
three jails will be approached to complete brief surveys. The study will need 540 completed surveys over  
the course of the three time points (180 surveys at each). Since identifying information is not being 
collecte d from the Correction Officers, it is possible that some of Correction Officers will participate 
more than once,  meaning less than 540 Officers total will participate.  
 
Recruitment Procedures  
 
Recruitment of the study sample will take place in 3 jails on Rikers Island in New York City (NYC): Anna 
M. Kross Center (AMKC), Rose M. Singer Center (RMSC), and the Robert N. Davoren Complex (RNDC).  
 How and by whom will subjects be approached and/or recruited?  
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
6 
  
Correction Officers in these three jails will be expo sed to the Targeted Educational Campaign (TEC).  
Correction Officers will be approached and recruited during roll call and in the staff canteen where they take their meal breaks, or at a time/location agreed upon by the Department of Correction, to complete  
brief surveys to assess engagement of Target C at three different times: pre-exposure, after 6 months, 
and after 12  months from the beginning of the TEC. Jason Tan de Bibiana and Adria Zern, coordinated 
and supervised  by Dr. Pope and Dr. Compton, will approach Correction Officers briefly presenting the 
study and asking for  completion of the survey.  
 In the event that social distancing guidelines pertaining COVID -19 prevent the research team for going 
to the jails to survey the Officers at the 6 and 12-month follow -up time periods, we will coordinate with 
our study partners to administer the anonymous survey. The Deputy Wardens and/or Captains at the 
jails will introduce the survey during the daily roll -call meetings, and they will distribute the part icipant 
information  document and survey to each Officer for their review. The Deputy Wardens and Captains 
will tell the  Officers that the survey is voluntary and anonymous, but if they wish to complete it, they 
can put their  completed survey in a container in the Officer's canteen or other communal space.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Exposure to the Targeted Educational Campaign  
2. Aged at least 21 years  
 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Children under the age of 21  
 
Consent Procedures  
 Correction Officers staff will receive an information sheet at the beginning of the questionnaire 
explaining  the study, confidentiality, and possible risks and benefits. Continuing on to the questionnaire 
will imply that  the subject consents to take part to the study . The survey takes about 10 minutes. We 
will not be using a  signed informed consent form so that this study can be anonymous in addition to 
being confidential.  
 
Waiver of Documentation of Consent  
 We will not be collecting any identifiable information from  survey participants (Correction Officers); the  
surveys will be anonymous. Our plan to use a “Participant Information Document” (rather than signed  
Informed Consent Form) will allow us to not collect name and signature.  
 
Study Procedures  
 We will collect p re-Targeted Educational Campaign (TEC) and during -TEC (at 6 months and 12 months)  
survey data, which will be used to test engagement of Target C: changes in mean scores for behavioral  
capability, expectations, and self- efficacy, which are three key constructs from Social Cognitive Theory.  
The brief (10 -minute) survey will assess knowledge and skills (behavioral capability), expectations, and  
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
7 
 self- efficacy. It will be offered to any staff in the jail, regardless of whether they have received an in -
person (e.g., in roll call) training, since the various types of TEC materials are hypothesized to influence 
behavior,  expectations, and self -efficacy.  
 
Assessment Instruments  
 
Correction Officer Surveys: will measure three constructs from Social Cognitive Theory (b ehavioral  
capabilities (knowledge/skills), expectations, self- efficacy), as well as social distance stigma, while 
keeping  the survey to approximately 10 minutes.  
 
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences  
 We do not foresee any risks for Correction Officers. Their participation is completely voluntary and the  
information collected will be confidential and anonymous, and will not be disclosed outside of the 
research  team.  
 
Procedures for Minimizing Risks  
 Any risk of perceived coercion will be addressed by fully informing participants that their decision to participate is voluntary and will not be reported to anyone outside of the research team. We (or in the event  that we cannot distribute the surveys due to social distancing, the Deputy Wardens and Captains) 
will explain that their decision will in no way impact their relationship with their employer or others. 
Risks to  confidentiality also will be minimized. Participants’ names and other potential identifiers will not 
be included in the dataset and each particip ant will be assigned a unique ID number. Surveys will be 
made  anonymous by using a unique code created by the participant, as in Dr. Compton’s prior survey -
based  research. For example, on the front page of the survey, respondents will be asked:  
• What is the first letter of your middle name?  
• What is the first letter of the street you live on?  
• What is the last digit of the year you were born?  
• What is the last two digits of your Social Security Number?  
Doing so will create a unique identification code for each participant (e.g., JB223, TF189) to ensure  
anonymity, while allowing us to match any participants who complete a later survey (at 6 months or 12  
months).  
 
Method to Protect Confidentiality  
 We will collect some identifiable information that will be  used for the purpose of determining basic  
eligibility criteria, and we will carefully protect such information. All information collected will be  
confidential and will not be disclosed outside of the research team. We will keep all records private and  
confidential to the extent permitted by law.  
 All initial screenings and interviews will be conducted in the same private interview rooms/spaces used by Correctional Health Services staff for meetings and counseling sessions. Consent forms with 
participants'  signatures will be securely stored in a locked file cabinet in a locked research office in a 
secure building.  
Subjects' name and other potential identifiers will not be included in the notes or dataset, and each  
participant in the study will be assigned a unique ID number. The only link between identifying information  and the unique ID number will be the paper consent forms. Information pertaining to 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
8 
 individual participants  will only be released with their informed and written consent, except in unusual 
cases where withholding such information might pose a serious risk or danger to the participant or 
others. Publications and  presentations will not report names, initials, or descriptors that could in any 
way violate confidentiality.  These efforts to protect against potential risks are expected to be very 
effective, as they have been for our  prior research.  
 
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
 
There may be no definite direct benefits to individual participants of the proposed study. Given the minimal  risks and potenti al benefits of the proposed research to participants and the significant 
potential benefit of  knowledge gained, there is no evidence that the risk- benefit ratio would suggest 
changes to the research plan  at the present time.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 The Targeted Educational Campaign (TEC) is designed to lead to referrals of detainees (previously not 
detected as having potential mental health concerns) to Correctional Health Services (CHS) by Correction Officers  within 3 jails at NYC's Rikers Island. We expect that referral will occur via changes in 
scores on behavioral c apability (knowledge/skills), expectations, and self- efficacy (among Correction 
Officers). Although this R34 feasibility study is meant to determine likely effect sizes rather than demonstrate statistical significance (which would be the goal of a subsequent, larger, multi- site study), 
using the data that we collect, we hypothesize that the number of referrals to CHS will be associated with: cumulative changes in Correction Officers' survey scores on behavioral capability, expectations, and self -efficacy.  
 Although survey participants who complete  a short series of questions allow  us to generate unique IDs 
that would be consistent across time, we expect that the number of surveys that matched from baseline 
to 6-months, from baseline to 12 -months, and fr om 6 -months to 12- months will be low. Therefore, 
rather than calculating changes in measurement scores as the primary outcome, each independent cohort (at each time point) will be considered to be a representative sample of the overall correction 
officer population over time, and we will use  the measurement scores at 6 -months as the primary 
outcome.  
 
References  
 1. Marshall M, Lewis S, Lockwood A (2005) Association Between Duration of Untreated Psychosis and  
Outcome in Cohorts of First -Episode Patients: A Systematic Review. Archives of General Psychiatry  
62:975- 983.  
2. Norman RMG, Lewis SW, Marshal M (2005) Duration of untreated  psychosis and its relationship to  
clinical outcome. The British Journal of Psychiatry 187(48):s19 -s23. 
3. Perkins DO, Boteva GH, Lieberman JA (2005) Relationship Between Duration of Untreated Psychosis  
and Outcome in First -Episode Schizophrenia: A Critical Review and Meta -Analysis. The American Journal  
of Psychiatry 162(10):1785 -1804.  
4. Addington J, Van Mastrigt S, Addington D (2004) Duration of untreated psychosis: Impact on 2 -year  
outcome. Psychological Medicine 34:277 –84. 
5. Gonzalez G, Goperlund E, Sh ern D (2016) Coordinated Specialty Care – First episode psychosis  
programs: Why specialty early intervention programs are a smart investment. Policy Brief.  
https://www.nasmhpd.org/sites/default/files/Policy_Brief- 
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
9 
 Coordinated_Specialty_Care_First_Episode_Psychosis_Programs.pdf 
6. Singh SP, Grange T (2006) Measuring pathways to care in first -episode psychosis: A systematic  
review/ Schizophrenia Research 81:75 -82. 
7. Compton MT, Broussard B (2011) Conceptualizing the Multifaceted Determinants of the Duration of 
Untreated Psychosis. Current Psychiatry Reviews 7(1):1 -11. 
8. Broussard B, Kelley ME, Ramsay Wan C, Cristofaro SL, Crisafio A, Haggard PJ, Myers NL, Reed T,  
Compton MT (2013) Demographic, socio -environmental, and substance -related predictors of duration 
of untreated psychosis. Schizophrenia Research 148:93 -98. 
9. Marion -Veyron R, Lambert M, Cotton SM, Schimmelmann BG, Gravier B,McGorry PD, Conus P (2015)  
History of offending behavior in first episode psychosis patients: a marker of specific clinical need s and a  
call for early detection strategies among young offenders. Schizophrenia Research 161(2 -3):163- 168.  
10. Munker R, Haastrum S, Joergensen T, Kramp P (2003) The Temporal Relationship between  
Schizophrenia and Crime Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric E pidemiology 38:347 -353.  
11. Wallace C, Mullen PE, Burgess P (2003) Criminal Offending in Schizophrenia Over a 25 -Year Period  
Marked by Deinstitutionalization and Increasing Prevalence of Comorbid Substance Use Disorders.  
American Journal of Psychiatry 161: 716-727.  
12. Hodgins S, Calem M, Shimel R, Williams A, Harleston D, Morgan C, Dazzan P, Fearon P, Morgan K,  
Lappin J, Zanelli J, Reichenberg A, Jones P (2011) Criminal offending and distinguishing features of  
offenders among persons experiencing a first episode of psychosis,” Early Intervention in Psychiatry  
5:15- 23. 
13. Prince JD, Akincigil A, Bromet E (2007) Incarceration rates of persons with first -admission psychosis.  
Psychiatric Services 58(9):1173 -1180.  
14. Ramsay Wan C, Broussard B, Haggard P, Compton MT (2014) Criminal justice settings as possible  
sites for early detection of psychotic disorders and reducing treatment delay. Psychiatric Services 
65:758– 764.  
15. James DJ, Glaze LE (2006) Mental health problems of prisoners and jail inmates. Bureau o f Justice  
Statistics Special Report. NCJ 213600. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.  
16. Joa I, Johannessen JO, Larsen TK, McGlashan TH (2008) Information Campaigns: The Experience in  
the Early Treatment and Intervention in Psychosis (TIPS) Study. Psychiatric Annals 38(8):512 -520.  
17. Grilli R, Ramsay C, Minozzi S (2002) Mass Media Interventions: effects on health services utilization.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 1:CD000389.  
18. Joa I, Johannessen JO, Auestad B, Friis S, Opjordsmoen S, S imonsen E, Vaglum P, McGlashan TH,  
Larsen TK (2007). Effects of referral patterns of reducing intensive informational campaigns about 
firstepisode  
psychosis. Early Intervention in Psychiatry 1(4):340 -345.  
19. Srihari VH, Tek C, Pollard J, Zimmet S, Keat J,  Cahill JD, Kucukgoncu S, Walsh BC, Li Gueorguieva  
R, Levine N, Mesholam -Gately RI, Friedman- Yakoobian M, Seidman L, Keshavan MS, McGlashan T,  
Woods SW (2014) Reducing the duration of untreated psychosis and its impact in the U.S.: the STEPED  
study. BMC Ps ychiatry 14:335- 349.  
20. Laplan SH, Greenfield S, Ware JE (1989) Assessing the effects of physician -patient interactions on the  
outcomes of chronic disease. Medical Care 27:S110 –S127.  
21. Stewart MA (1995) Effective physician -patient communication and heal th outcomes: a review.  
Canadian Medical Association Journal 152:1423 -1433.  
22. Kreyenbuhl J, Nossel IR, Dixon LB (2009) Disengagement from mental health treatment among  
individuals with schizophrenia and strategies for facilitating connections to care: A review of the  
literature. Schizophrenia Bulletin 35(4):696 -703.  
23. Aggarwal NK, Pieh MC, Dixon L, Guarnaccia P, Alegria M, Lewis -Fernandez R (2016) Clinician  
descriptions of communication strategies to improve treatment engagement by racial/ethnic minorities  
NYSPI 7771 
Compton, Michael  
10 
 in mental health services: A systematic review. Patient Education and Counseling 99(2):198 -209.  
24. Duggan A, Street RL (X) Interpersonal communication in health and illness. In: Glanz K, Rimer BK,  
Viswanath K (Eds) Health Behavior: Theory, Rese arch, and Practice, 5th Edition. Wiley. 243 –267.  
25. Herman DB, Conover S, Gorroochurn P, Hinterland K, Hoepner L, Susser E (2011) Randomized trial of  
Critical Time Intervention to prevent homelessness after hospital discharge. Psychiatric Services, 62:713 - 
719.  
26. Jarrett M, Thornicroft G, Forrester A, Harty M, Senior J, King C, Huckle S, Parrott J, Dunn G, Shaw J  
(2012) Continuity of care for recently released prisoners with mental illness: a pilot randomized  
controlled trial testing the feasibility of a  Critical Time Intervention. Epidemiology and Psychiatric  
Sciences, 21:187 -193 
27. Shaw J, Conover S, Herman D, Jarret M, Leese M, McCrone P, Murphy C, Senior J, Susser E,  
Thornicroft G, Wright N, Edge D, Emsley R, Lennox C, Williams A, Cust H, Hopkin G, S tevenson C  
(2017) Critical time intervention for Severely mentally ill Prisoners (CrISP) : a randomised controlled  
trial. Health Services and Delivery Research 5(8).  
28. Bandura A (1986) Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood  
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall.  
29. Bandura A (1999) Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Asian Journal of Social Psychology  
2:21- 41. 
30. Bandura, A (2004). Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health education & behavior, 31(2),  
143-164.  
31. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2001) Mental Health: Culture, Race, and Ethnicity —
A Supplement to Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of 
Health  and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Ment al Health Services Administration, Center for 
Mental  Health Services.  
32. Smedley BD, Stith AY, Nelson AR (2003) Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic  
Disparities in Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.  
33. McGuire TG, Miranda J (2008) Racial and ethnic disparities in mental health care: Evidence and 
policy  implications. Health Affairs 27(2):393 -403.  
34. Burnett R, Mallett R, Bhugra D, Hutchinson G, Der G, Leff J (1999) The first contact of patients with  
schizophrenia with psych iatric services: social factors and pathways to care in a multi- ethnic population.  
Psychological Medicine 29:475 –483.  
35. Morgan C, Mallett R, Hutchinson G, Leff J (2004) Negative pathways to psychiatric care and ethnicity:  
the bridge between social science and psychiatry. Social Science and Medicine 58:739 –752.  
36. Compton MT, Esterberg ML, Druss BG, Walker EF, Kaslow NJ (2006) A descriptive study of pathways  
to care among hospitalized urban African American first -episode schizophrenia -spectrum patie nts. Social  
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 41:566 –573.  
37. Archi S, Akhtar -Danesh N, Norman R, Malla A, Roy P, Zipursky RB (2010) Ethnic Diversity and  
Pathways to Care for a First Episode of Psychosis in Ontario. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36(4):688 -701. 
38. Franz L, Carter T, Leiner AS, Bergner E, Thompson NJ, Compton MT (2010) Stigma and treatment  
delay in first -episode psychosis: a grounded theory study. Early Intervention in Psychiatry 4(1):47 -56. 