Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol   
 
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
 
Image -Guided  Stereotactic Biopsy of  High  Grade Gliomas  
MSKCC  NON -THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Michelle  Bradbury  MD, PhD Department  of Radiology/  
Neuroradiology  Service  
Co-Principal  
Investigator (s)/Department:  Cameron  Brennan,  MD 
Ingo Mellinghoff,  MD 
Heiko  Schöder,  MD Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurology  
Department  of Radiology/  
Nuclear  Medicine  Service  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Steven  Larson,  MD 
 
John Humm,  PhD 
Pat Zanzonico,  PhD 
Philip  H. Gutin,  MD 
Eric Holland,  MD PhD 
Vivianne  Tabar,  MD 
Andrew Lassman,  MD 
Andrei  Holodny,  MD 
Sasan  Karimi,  MD 
Eric Lis, MD 
Jason Lewis,  PhD 
Chaya  Moskowitz,  MD 
 
Marc  Rosenblum,  MD Department  of Radiology/  
Nuclear  Medicine  Service  
Department  of Medical  Physics  
Department  of Medical  Physics  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurology  
Department  of Radiology/  
Neuroradiology  Service  
Department  of Radiology/  
Neuroradiology  Service  
Department  or Radiology/  
Neuroradiology  Service  
Cyclotron  and Radiochemistry  Core  
Department  of Epidemiology  and 
Biostatistics  
Department  of Pathology  
Consenting  
Professional(s)/Department:  Cameron  Brennan,  MD 
Philip  H. Gutin,  MD 
Viviane  Tabar,  MD 
Eric Holland  MD, PhD 
Andrew Lassman,  MD 
Michelle  Bradbury  MD, PhD Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurosurgery  
Department  of Neurology  
Department  of Radiology  
 
 
Please Note: A Consenting  Professional  must have  completed  the mandatory  Human  
Subjects  Education  and Certification  Program.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended: 12/27/11  Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
1275 York  Ave.  
New  York,  NY 10021  

Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol   
 
IRB#:09 -060 A(4) 
 
 
Table  of Contents  
MSKCC  NON -THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  ................................ .....................  1 
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................  1 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ..........  2 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ...................  2 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ .....................  6 
4.2 DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
4.3 INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 9 
5.1 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
5.2 SUBJECT  INCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ .... 12 
5.3 SUBJECT EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ... 13 
6.0 RECRUITMENT PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 13 
7.0 ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ...........  13 
8.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ .........................  13 
9.0 PRIMARY OUTCOMES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 13 
10.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................  14 
11.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  14 
12.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  AND RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  17 
12.2 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  ................................ ...................  17 
13.1 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ................................ ................................ .......................  17 
13.2 QUALITY  ASSURANCE  ................................ ................................ ....................  17 
13.3 DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING  ................................ ...............................  18 
14.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ........  18 
14.2 PRIVACY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  19 
14.3 SERIOUS  ADVERSE EVENT (SAE) REPORTING  ................................ ..............  19 
15.1 INFORMED CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ........  20 
15.2 RESEARCH AUTHORIZATION  ................................ ................................ ........  20 
16.0 REFERENCE(S)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amended:  12/27/11  

Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 1 -  
  
1.1 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA  
 
This is a baseline  feasibility  study  using  fluorine -18-labeled  fluorothymidine  (18F-FLT),  a proliferation  
tracer,  and highly  focal  MR image -guided  biopsy  to evaluate  whether  characteristic  metabolic/MR  
imaging  findings  can be linked  to distinct  molecular  phenotypes  and improve  our understanding  of the 
molecular  and pathological  heterogeneity  within  individual  tumors.  In addition,  this study  will assess  
the feasibility  of voxel -wise estimation  of proliferation  and tracer  delivery  from  overall  FLT uptake  
assessments,  as against  traditional  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  approaches.  The quantitative  accuracy  
of these  parametric  images  will be investigated  through  comparison  of histologic  determinations  of 
tumor  cell proliferation,  CD31  expression,  and gene expression  differences,  obtained  at different  biopsy  
locations,  with the PET-MRI  imaging  features  at those  same  locations.  The results  of these  studies  will 
lay the groundwork  for larger  prospective  studies  assessing  18F-FLT proliferative  response  in trials  of 
targeted  therapy,  relating  estimates  of proliferation  with prognosis,  survival, and clinical  outcome.  
 
Please  note that all patients  entered  on this protocol  will undergo  the standard  of care for their brain  
tumor.  The information  obtained  from  the use of 18F-FLT PET scans  will NOT  be used to guide  
patients’  surgical  planning  on this protocol.  Since  FLT PET is considered  investigational,  subjects  
enrolled  in this protocol  will only undergo  FLT PET scans  under  an FDA -approved  institutional  IND 
(#104742).  
 
Schema:  
a. Evaluation  and consent  of 15 patients  with initial  presentation  of presumptive  glioblastoma  
based  on MRI  appearance.  
b. Baseline  pretreatment  MRI  studies  following  injection  of gadolinium  (GdDTPA)  and pre- 
surgical  dynamic 18F-FLT PET study  with CT for attenuation  correction.  
c. Planned  tumor  resection  volume  will be pre-determined  by the operating  neurosurgeon  using  
anatomic MRI  per routine, who will be blinded  to the  results  of the preoperative PET study.  
d. Two neuroradiologists  and a nuclear  medicine  attending,  blinded  to the surgical  planning,  will 
independently  select  “patterns  of interest”  or sites of heterogeneity  within  the tumor  on co- 
registered  PET-MRI  scans for targeted  biopsy.  
e. Surgical  resection  will take place  per routine  with frameless  stereotactic  tracking  of resection  
location,  updated  by intraoperative MRI  (iMRI,1.5T  Siemens  magnet).  
f. Histopathological  and molecular  characterization  of the biopsied  tumors:  immunohistochemical  
staining  for MIB -1 and gene expression  profiling.  
g. Data  analysis : physician  interpretation  of brain  MRI  and PET scans;  volumetric  region -of- 
interest  (ROI)  analysis  for derivation  of tumor  and contralateral  brain  activity ; 18F-FLT time 
activity  curves  (TACs)  and steady -state SUVs;  non-invasive  determination  of plasma  TACs  
(venous  and arterial  input curves);  voxel -based  and ROI-based  pharmacokinetic modeling.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 2 -  
  
2.0       OBJECTIVES  AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS  
 
Primary  Aim: To investigate  relationships  between  voxel -based  determinations  of proliferation  rate 
and observed  MR imaging  features  (i.e., Ktrans  or microvascular  permeability;  fBV,  tissue  fractional  
blood  volume),  as well as with spatially  registered  histologic  measures  of tumor  cell proliferation  
(Ki67) and  microvascular density  (CD31) at  corresponding  locations.  
 
Secondary  Aim #1: To attempt  to corroborate  voxel -based  parameter  estimates  reflecting  tumor  cell 
proliferation  with estimates  derived  using  standard  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  modeling  methods,  for 
improving  the characterization  of high-grade  gliomas  using  dynamic 18F-FLT PET -CT. 
Seconda ry Aim #2: To assess  whether  static  measures  of 18F-FLT uptake  can adequately  serve  as non- 
invasive  biomarkers  of proliferative  activity  or whether  parametric  images,  based  on compartmental  
analyses  of the FLT pharmacokinetics,  are required  by correlating  findings  of both approaches  with 
regional  histologic  assays  of tumor  cell proliferation.  
 
Exploratory  Aim: To evaluate  whether  differences  in gene expression  seen between  areas  of increased  
and decreased  proliferative  activity  on parametric  maps  define  consistent  differential  transcriptome  
signatures  for comparison  with known  molecular  subclasses  of GBM  and known pathways.  
 
3.1 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
 
3.2 Introduction  
3'-deoxy -3'-18F-fluorothymidine  (FLT)  is a PET radiotracer  used to assess  tumor  cell proliferation1. 
Tumor -cell proliferation  has been identified  as an important  surrogate  marker  of survival  in brain  tumor  
patients,  as determined  by staining  of ex vivo biopsy  specimens  with proliferative  markers  such as Ki- 
672,3. Imaging  with FLT takes  advantage  of the fact that pyrimidine  nucleosides  and several  of their 
analogues  are phosphorylated  to the respective  monophosphate  (MP)  by thymidine  kinase  1 (TK-1) and 
are incorporated  into DNA.  FLT is also a substrate  for TK-1, which  has been  demonstrated  both in 
vitro4 and in vivo5,6. TK-1 activity  is up-regulated  in cells entering  the S-phase,  whereas  the protein  is 
nearly  undetectable  in growth  arrested  cells.  TK-1 catalyzes  the phosphorylation  of FLT to FLT- 
monophosphate.  Because  it lacks  a 3'-hydroxyl  group,  very little FLT is incorporated  into DNA.  Thus,  
in the amounts  used for a radiotracer,  it has no pharmacological  properties  and measures  an early  event  
in DNA  synthesis  rather  than DNA  incorporation.  Intracellularly,  phosphorylated  FLT remains  trapped.  
Nevertheless,  many  reports  have shown  a positive  correlation  between  FLT uptake  and S-phase  fraction  
of cells in vitro and in vivo7. Its limited  transport  across  the intact  blood -brain  barrier  and the absence  
of proliferating  cells in the normal  adult  brain  result  in low levels  of 18F-FLT accumulation  within  the 
brain.  Accordingly,  FLT-PET has been used to assess  tumor  proliferative  status  in high-grade  glioma  
patients  using  static  tracer  uptake  estimates  and/or  assessing  time-dependent  kinetic  changes  in uptake  
following  intravenous  administration  of 18F-FLT7-18. 
FLT has been  synthesized  by the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility  for more  than 2 years,  and has been  
used in humans  here and in several  institutions  in this country  and Europe.  For the purpose  of this 
protocol,  the synthesis  will be done  according  to practice  guidelines  set forth  in the NCI IND file. The 
primary  source  of the FLT will be the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility;  however,  alternative  commercial  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 3 -  
  
sources  are available  to ensure  consistent  supply of FLT.  If a commercial  supplier  of FLT is used for a 
particular  study,  the supplier  will be required  to meet  all of the acceptance  criteria  outlined  in the FDA - 
approved  MSKCC  FLT IND (#104742) prior to administration.  
3.3 18F-FLT  Tracer  Kinetic Modeling:  
The utility  of static  (SUV)  versus  dynamic  measures  (i.e., k3) of 18F-FLT PET as an imaging  
biomarker  represents  different  schools  of thought,  with examples  of both found  in the literature,  and 
without  a clear  consensus  offered7,19,20. Static  measures  of brain  tumor  18F-FLT uptake  at various  times  
post-injection  have been shown  to correlate  with histopathologic  proliferation  markers  (Ki-67) in 
patient  studies9,19. More  recently,  measured  FLT SUV  values  were  used to assess  treatment  response  in 
recurrent  malignant  gliomas18. However,  it is not clear  what  the FLT SUV  measurements  in such 
studies  reflect,  as both changes  in tracer  delivery  and/or  metabolic  trapping  will contribute  to net tracer  
uptake.  As an alternative  approach,  several  previous  clinical  investigations  have  assessed  uptake  in 
brain  tumors  dynamically,  generally  using  ROIs  having  maximum  proliferative  activity,  in conjunction  
with two-tissue  compartment  (four -rate constant)  models7,8,10,16, in order  to estimate  kinetic  rate 
constants  reflecting  tracer  transport  and cellular  proliferation.  Both  methods  continue  to be utilized  for 
in vivo brain  tumor  applications,  noting  that recently  recommended  18F-FLT data acquisition  and 
analysis  techniques  have  included  static  PET imaging  at 40-60 min and corresponding  SUV  
measurements  of tumor  activity  concentration  for brain  tumors20. 
Accurate  assessment  of proliferation  in brain  by 18F-FLT PET requires  analysis  of uptake  kinetics  to 
extract  separate  rate constants  for the initial  transport  (K1) and subsequent  metabolic  (trapping  or 
phosphorylation)  phases  of 18F-FLT uptake  (k3), the latter  rate constant  being  directly  proportional  to 
the number  and/or  rate of proliferating  cells within  the tumor  volume.  This pharmacokinetic  tracer  
uptake  analysis  requires  knowledge  of the fraction  of 18F-FLT in the blood,  given  known  variations  in 
in-vivo blood  clearance.  In addition  to direct  arterial  or arterialized  venous  blood  sampling21, a number  
of alternative  methods  have been utilized22-28. Non-invasive  ROI assessments  of blood  pools  identified  
on PET images  have also been successfully  performed  using the  internal  carotid  arteries29-31 and venous  
sinuses32,33. However,  the small  size of these  vessels  (relative  to the spatial  resolution  of PET 
tomographs)  will require  corrections  for partial  volume  effects  and spillover.  The use of a venous,  
rather  than an arterial,  input  function  assumes  that the tracer  has a very low permeability,  with no 
measurable  extraction  occurring  in a first pass through  the vascular  bed34. Under  these  conditions,  
tracer  concentrations  in the large  venous  structures  will be good  approximations  for those  in the 
cerebral  capillaries.  
 
3.4 Voxel -wise Pharmacokinetic Modeling  of Dynamic 18F-FLT -PET  Data:  
Pharmacokinetic  modeling  software  for performing  voxel -wise parameter  estimates  across  the entire  
tumor  volume  has recently  become  available  for multi -compartmental  kinetic  analyses.   BioGuide™  is 
a research  software  module  that operates  from  within  the Philips  radiotherapy  planning  Pinnacle™  
software.  BioGuide™  includes  a module  that performs  voxel -based  pharmacokinetic  modeling of  
dynamic  PET image  data as well as co-registered  serial  PET images.  This kinetic  modeling  algorithm  
will compute  voxel -wise parameter  estimates  of the compartmental  model  parameters  (K1, k2, k3, and 
k4) defining  tracer  exchange  between  the blood  and tumor  tissue  compartments,  as well as Vb, the 
intravascular blood volume  fraction,  which  will be estimated  as a fifth parameter.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 4 -  
  
Voxulus,  a Bio-Guide™  software  program,  is currently  being  used by the Department  of Medical  
Physics  for pharmacokinetic  modeling  of dynamically -acquired  radiotracer  (18F-FMiso)  uptake  on a 
voxel -by-voxel  basis  in both experimental  models  and head  and neck  cancer  patients.  BioGuide™  will 
be applied  to brain  18F-FLT images  using  defined  volume -of-interest  measurements  within  the tumor  
and contralateral  brain  at the same  location  for generating  voxel -wise parameter  estimates.  Parametric  
maps  will then be determined  using  the estimated  proliferation  rate constant  (k3) values  that, for kinetic  
FLT PET data,  are expected  to reflect  the spatial  distribution of  rates of cellular proliferation.  
 
3.5 Multimodal  Image -Guided  Surgical  Targeting:  
With  the exception  of one recent  investigation  in which  multiple  targeted  biopsy  specimens  were  
retrieved  along  a single  biopsy  tract17, image -based  measurements  of 18F-FLT uptake  have  not been  
made  in the region  of histologic  sampling.  Given  the high degree  of heterogeneity  of glial tumors,  it 
would  be preferable  to correlate  several  imaging  measurements  per patient  with histologic  analyses  in 
the same  areas  of the tumor  in order  to detail  relationships  between  tumor  metabolism,  physiology,  and 
specific  malignant  features.  Local  relationships  between  histologic  features  and radiotracer  uptake  or 
anatomic/functional  MR imaging  findings  will additionally  influence  image  analysis  and interpretation  
of gliomas.  Multimodal  image -guided  stereotactic  biopsies  have  been  previously  performed  by co- 
registering  functional  MR and PET imaging  studies17,35 -37. By combining  anatomic  scans  with 
metabolic  and functional  data from  PET imaging,  complementary  information  may be obtained  that 
permits  tumor  heterogeneity  and extension to  be better  defined,  in addition to adding  prognostic  
value37. These  studies  have  sought  to detail  relationships  between  functional  imaging  parameters  
reflecting  tumor  vascularity  (relative  microvascular  blood  volume,  rCBV)  and tumor  metabolism  using  
11C-methionine  or 18F-FDG,  and their relationship  to malignant  features,  MVD,  or VEGF  by 
histopathologic  correlation.  However,  these  correlations  generally  relied  on representative  tissue  
samples  obtained  from  biopsy  or resection,  not in the region  of image -based  measurements35,37. Thus,  
local  comparisons  between  imaging  and tissue  measurements  could  not be performed.  Correlations  
between  brain  tumor  18F-FLT uptake  and histopathologic  proliferation  markers  have also been  based  on 
representative  biopsy  or resection  specimens9. Neuronavigated  surgery,  however,  facilitates  increased  
precision  of tissue  sampling  at locations that correspond with imaging  measurements.  
 
3.6 Rationale  
Improved  molecular  imaging of  brain  tumors  has been linked  to several  research  priorities,  identified  
in the report  published  by the NCI/NINDS  Brain  Tumor  Progress  Review  Group  (November  2000),  
including  (1) a need  for establishing  noninvasive  markers  of early  treatment  response  and (2) the need  
to understand  treatment -relevant  molecular  alterations  in relation  to anatomic  site and tumor  
heterogeneity.  There  has been  limited  advancement  on both fronts,  in large  part due to the difficulty  of 
systematically  acquiring  targeted  biopsies  and correlating  imaging  with tissue  measures.  The clinical  
relevance  of this proposal  is the demonstration  of feasibility  for (1) highly  focal  image -guided  biopsy  
that can power  a prospective  study  of FLT as a marker  of prognosis  or early  response  (2) identifying  
molecular correlates  of imaging  heterogeneity.  
Although  a number  of clinical  FLT-PET investigations  have  assessed  uptake  in newly  diagnosed  or 
recurrent  high-grade  gliomas,  using  either  static  measures  or dynamic  approaches  to estimate  tracer  
kinetic  parameters,  these  studies  have not established  FLT-PET as a prognostic  or predictive  marker.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 5 -  
  
This baseline  study  will serve  to establish  feasibility  of performing  analyses  of prognostication  post- 
hoc using  the derived  SUVs  and/or  rate constants  reflecting  proliferation/metabolic  flux. If 
prognostication  can be established,  a larger  patient  cohort  will be followed  prospectively  to assess  
clinical  outcomes  over longer  time intervals.  While  baseline  FLT-PET studies  have not offered  
prognostic  information,  changes  in FLT SUV  values  during  treatment  have been investigated  as a 
predictor  of long-term outcome.  It is important  to determine  the component  of FLT uptake  
measurements  that may correlate  with tumor  cell proliferation  (Ki-67), which  is intriguing  as  a 
potential  biomarker,  given  that it was predictive  of overall  survival  in bevacizumab - and irinotecan - 
treated  recurrent  gliomas  as early  as 1-2 wk after treatment.  By establishing  such response  predictors  
and refining  our ability  to detect  response  to novel  therapies  in malignant  brain  tumor  clinical  trials,  
treatment  protocols  can be more  efficiently  optimized,  expediting  the evaluation  of promising  
compounds  in clinical  trials  for assessing  patient  outcomes.  
Tailoring  targeted  therapies based  on an individual  tumor’s  unique  molecular  and biochemical  
signatures  is an ultimate  goal in managing  brain  tumor  patients.  Characterizing  tumors  at multiple  sites,  
guided  by heterogeneous  metabolic/functional  imaging  findings,  may capture  variation  in potential  
tissue  biomarkers,  such as EGFR  amplification  or MGMT  methylation,  which  are frequently  
heterogeneously  distributed.  To meet  this challenge,  it will be necessary  to determine  clinically  useful  
biomarkers  with prognostic  and predictive  value  to improve  selection  of specific  therapeutics  and to 
assess  early  response/progression  for modifying  treatment  protocols.  High  throughput  molecular  
analyses  of surgica lly procured  tissue  have  enhanced  the characterization  of gliomas,  resulting  in the 
definition  of novel  tumor  sub-classes,  better  diagnostic  accuracy,  and improved  prognostication.  
Prolonged  progression -free and overall  survival  in glioblastoma  patients  treated  with DNA  alkylating  
agents,  for instance,  has been  linked  to MGMT  hypermethylation  in the majority of  tumors.  The results  
of such studies  have  suggested  that gene expression  profiling  will impact  future  clinical  practice  in 
terms  of cancer  diagnosis,  prognosis,  and choice  of optimal  treatment.  Under  certain  conditions,  
however,  such as during  the course  of treatment,  brain  tumor  biopsy  may be impractical,  and given  that 
radiographic  disease  progression  is often  associated  with morbid  decline,  there  is a critical  need to 
establish  early  and reliable non -invasive biomarkers  of treatment  response.  
This study  will also lay the groundwork  for establishing the  interpretability  of 18F-FLT heterogeneity  
within  and across  tumors  on a voxel -wise basis.  The feasibility  of voxel -wise estimation  of 
proliferation  will be established,  and validated  against  traditional  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  
approaches.  The results  of these  studies  may inform  the design  of larger  prospective  studies  assess ing 
18F-FLT proliferative  response  in trial of targeted  therapies,  as well as determine  the potential  for FLT- 
PET to serve  as a biomarker  for proliferation  at the tissue  level.  An FDA -approved  IND has been  
issued  for 18F-FLT (#104742)  at this institution.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 6 -  
  
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.2 Design  
 
This is a two-year open -label  pilot study  at Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  that will enroll  15 
patients  with initial  presentation  of presumptive  glioblastoma  based  on prior  radiographic  studies  for 
18F-FLT PET imaging  correlation  with histologic  and molecular  markers.  Standard  baseline  
pretreatment  MRI  studies  will be obtained  following  injection  of gadolinium  (GdDTPA)  and a pre- 
surgical  dynamic  18F-FLT PET study  with CT for attenuation  correction  will be performed  on Day 1. 
Surgical  resection  will be performed  within  a 7 day period  of these  imaging studies.  The planned  tumor  
resection  volume  will be pre-determined  by the operating  neurosurgeon  on the basis  of 
anatomic/functional  MRI  per routine,  and blinded  to the results  of the preoperative  PET study.  Two 
neuroradiologists  (Drs.  Michelle  Bradbury  and Sasan  Karimi)  and a nuclear  medicine  attending  (Dr. 
Heiko  Schöder),  blinded  to the surgical  planning,  will independently  identify  “patterns  of interest”  or 
sites of heterogeneity  within  the tumor  on co-registered  PET-MRI  scans  for targeted  biopsy.  Fused  
images  containing  the marked  biopsy  sites will be uploaded  to the BrainLAB  VectorVision®  
neuronavigation  system  for viewing  by the neurosurgeon  in the operating  room.  Selected  targeted  sites 
will be marked  as potential  biopsy  targets  if they are: (1) contained  with the pre-determined  planned  
tumor  resection  volume,  (2) over 1cm3, and (3) abnormal  on intraoperative  visualization.  Surgical  
resection  will take place  per routine  with frameless  stereotactic  tracking  of resection  location,  updated  
by intraoperative  MRI  (iMRI,  1.5T Siemens  magnet).  As target  sites are encountered,  up to 1gm of 
tumor  will be marked  as a separate  biopsy  specimen  and flash  frozen  in liquid  nitrogen.  Biopsy  
specimens  will be taken  only after adequate  material  has been  acquired  for routine  pathology.  Prior  to 
histopathologic  and molecular  characterization,  biopsy  specimens  will be inspected  by the pathologist  
to insure  adequacy  of tumor  tissue  sampling  and to definitively  diagnose  tumor.  Histopathologic  and 
molecular  characterization  of the biopsied  tumors  will be performed,  specifically  immunohistochemical  
staining  for MIB -1, in addition  to gene expression  profiling.  Data  analysis  will include  physician  
interpretation  of brain  MRI  and PET scans,  volumetric  region -of-interest  (ROI)  analyses  of tumor  and 
contralateral  brain,  generation  of 18F-FLT time activity  curves  (TACs)  and steady -state SUVs,  non- 
invasive  determination  of plasma  TACs  (venous  and arterial  input  curves),  as well as voxel -based  and 
ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  modeling.  Periodic  meetings  will be held to discuss  issues  related  to data 
acquisition,  collection,  and analysis,  as well as to  discuss  the imaging  and histopathology  data.  
 
Primary  Aim Study  Design:  Preoperative  anatomical  MRI  images  will be uploaded  to the BrainLAB  
VectorVision®  neuronavigation  system,  a frameless  stereotaxy  and image -guided  surgical  navigation  
system  integrated  with the Intraoperative  MRI  suite.  Planned  resection  volume  will be contoured  by the 
neurosurgeon  conventionally,  based  on the anatomic  MRI.  18F-FLT PET-MRI  studies  will then be 
uploaded  and registered  by a radiologist.  For each patient  undergoing  resection,  up to four prescribed  
ROIs  within  the planned  resection  volume  will be selected  for potential  targeted  biopsy  based  on 
concordance/discordance  or heterogeneity  of PET and MRI  imaging  characteristics  (i.e., increased  18F- 
FLT uptake/MRI -enhancing;  increased  18F-FLT uptake/MRI -non-enhancing;  low 18F-FLT uptake/MRI - 
enhancing;  increased  18F-FLT uptake/MRI -nonenhancing).  ROIs  will be no smaller  than a cubic  
centimeter.  The operative  plan,  in terms  of the tumor  resection  volume,  will not be guided  by decisions  
regarding  sites of potential  biopsy  selected  on the co-registered  FLT PET-MRI  study.  It is expected  that 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 7 -  
  
the majority of  target  sites selected  for each patient  (up to 4) will be confined  within  the  area 
determined  for resection;  these  tumors  are usually  large  at presentation  with heterogeneous  
enhancement  and rim enhancement.  Thus,  it is expected  that several  areas  selected  by the 
neuroradiologists  and nuclear  medicine  attending  will be biopsied.  Frameless  stereotaxy  will be utilized  
to estimate  proximity  to an ROI during  resection.  An intraoperative  MRI  will be obtained  when  one or 
more  ROIs  are accessible  for biopsy.  Multiple  biopsies  will then be acquired  from  the vicinity  of the 
ROI with recording  of the stereotactic  locations  of the sites and collection  in separately  numbered  
tubes.  
Brain  shift and deformation  will likely  be present  at the time of biopsy,  shown  by intraoperative  
MRI  performed  immediately  before  or after biopsy,  limiting  our ability  to determine  whether  or not an 
ROI has been  accurately  sampled  until after the procedure.  Non-linear  registration  algorithms  will be 
applied  to correct  for geometric  distortions,  and will be applied  after maximizing  global  imaging  
registration  using  a linear  registration  algorithm.  Non-linear  registration  methods  will permit  us to 
further  adjust  and refine  post-hoc accuracy  of tumor  tissue  sampling  with regard  to the preselected  
target  ROIs,  thereby  enabling  biopsied  samples  to be accepted  or rejected.  We have  chosen  to perform  
this compensation  of brain  shift post-hoc because  it is procedurally  time-consuming  and might  be 
subject  to errors  that could  potentially  misdirect  the surgeon  if used to directly  guide  biopsy.  Instead,  
our method  relies  on the ability  to take multiple  biopsies  from  the vicinity  of an ROI,  annotating  each 
with accurate  localization  based  on intraoperative  MRI.  The accuracy  of localization  is about  1 cm3. 
Such  piecewise  acquisition  of tissue  is a routine  approach  for obtaining  pathology  and banking  
specimens  at our institution.  
Post-hoc mapping  of biopsy  sites into presurgical  image  coordinates  will determine  which  samples  
were  in fact within  the target  ROI.  The primary  limitation  of the approach  is that it relies  on the 
surgeon's  estimation  of where  an ROI has shifted  intraoperatively  in order  to direct  biopsies:  it is 
possible  that some  ROIs  may be missed  or deemed  to be outside  the resection  volume  and hence  
unavailable  for biopsy.  However,  the minimum  proposed  ROI size of 1.0 cm3 is within  the range  of 
intraoperative  accuracy  routinely  used by neurosurgeons  during  resection  to avoid  vascular  and 
neuroanatomic  structures.  Therefore  it is anticipated  that at least one specimen  be taken  from  the 
vicinity  of the ROI,  as judged  by the surgeon;  it will be established  post-hoc as being  accurately  
mapped  to within  an ROI. Acquiring  tissue  from  surgically  exposed tumor,  as proposed  here,  avoids  the 
significant  risk of parenchymal bleeding  from  deep  needle  biopsy.  If difficulties  are encountered  
implementing  the above  plan,  needle  biopsy sampling  through  an initial  minimal  surgical  exposure  will 
be employed  under  a separate  IRB-approved  protocol.  
Biopsy  specimens  will be acquired  for research  purposes  after pathologic  specimens  are submitted  
for the patient  per routine  by neurosurge ry. A minimum  of 1.0 g of biopsy  tissue  will be acquired  per 
patient  for research  purposes,  as the priority  for the study  is histologic  validation.  We will ensure  that 
as much  tissue  as possible  is sent for histology,  aiming  for roughly  half of the specimens  to be further  
processed  as frozen  sections for research  purposes.  
Biopsy  specimens  will be frozen  immediately  in liquid  nitrogen  and stored  at -80 °C until later use. 
All biopsy cores  will be divided  in half, with one half of the frozen  tissue  specimen  sectioned  for RNA  
and DNA  expression  analysis,  and the remaining  half processed  as a formalin -fixed  paraffin -embedded  
(FFPE)  specimen  for immunohistochemistry  by fixing  the tissue  in 10% neutral  buffered  formalin  for 2 
days,   followed   by paraffin  embedding.     Tissue   markers   for tumor  cell  proliferation   (MIB -1)  and 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 8 -  
  
microvessel  density  (CD31)  will be applied  to FFPE  sections.  Serial  sections  will be reviewed  by an 
experienced  neuropathologist.  Ki-67 staining  will be evaluated  and a score  designated  indicating  the 
percentage of positively stained  tumor  cells per quartile  of tumor  tissue.  All cells with nuclei  staining  of 
any intensity  will be defined  as positive.  The proliferative  activity  score,  quantified  as the percentage  of 
MIB -1 stained  nuclei  per total nuclei  in the sample,  will be estimated  from  a representative  slide  
selected  by the neuropathologist.  For MVD  assessment  using  CD31,  tumor  sections  will be scanned  at 
low magnification  (x40)  to identify  the region  of the section  with the highest  microvessel  density.  This 
area will be counted  at a magnification  of x200  for CD31 -positive  expression,  and the proportion  of 
CD31 -positive cells  computed  for all  specimens.  
Histologic  findings  at a given  biopsy  site will be compared  with ROI analyses  at the same  location  
on the co-registered  PET-MRI  studies.  Pharmacokinetic  modeling  will be applied  to these  ROI 
measurements  in order  to generate  parametric  maps  reflecting  the proliferation  rate constant,  k3, and 
Ktrans  (microvascular  permeability).  Estimated  parameter  values  will be correlated  with the presence  of 
molecular  markers  (MIB -1, CD31),  and compared  with imaging  features  at the prospectively  defined  
biopsy  sites.  
 
Secondary  Aim #1 Study  Design:  The objective  will be to investigate  the feasibility  of applying  a 
novel  imaging  software  platform  to the measured  dynamic  brain  PET imaging  data.  Voxel -based  
parameter  estimates  will be generated  using  ROIs  selected  for targeted  biopsy  and, in turn, utilized  to 
construct  parametric  images  (maps)  reflecting  the spatial  distribution  of the rate of 18F-FLT cellular  
trapping  (or proliferation).  These  estimates  will be compared  with kinetic  parameters  determined  using  
traditional  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  modeling  methods.  As input  to the model,  venous  time-activity  
curves  will be derived  non-invasively  at the level  of the confluence  of the sagittal,  straight,  and 
transverse sinuses,  and corrected  for hematocrit  and partial  volume  effects.  
Venous  input  functions  will be generated  using  previously  described  protocols32. We will use a 
summed  image  of the first 2 frames  (1 min)  of the study  and place  small  ROIs  (5 mm)  on two to five 
successive  planes  in the image  at the level  of the confluence  of the superior  sagittal,  transverse,  and 
straight  sinus,  covering  a total axial  depth  of 1.0-1.5 cm. The co-registered  MRI  and PET-CT will be 
used to confirm  our interpretation  of the vascular  anatomy  revealed  by PET and to verify  the position  
of the ROIs.  In addition,  threshold  values  of 50% of the peak  activity  in the sinuses  will be used for 
further  guiding  the placement  of the ROIs,  with data for the ROIs  on successive  planes  averaged.  The 
resulting  time course  of the SUV  will be automatically  corrected  for detection  efficiency,  scatter  
attenuation,  and decay.  In order  to correct  for partial  volume  averaging  effects,  the transverse  
dimension  of the confluence  of sinuses  will be measured  on axial  T2-weighted  imaging.  Using  the PET 
system  recovery  coefficient,  derived  from  phantom  studies  as a function  of the source  dimension,  a 
recovery  coefficient  for the confluence  of sinuses  will be determined.  Each  TAC  data point  will be 
divided  by this recovery  coefficient  to yield  the corrected  TAC  data.  
Venous  input  functions  will be compared  with non-invasively  derived  arterial  input  functions,  the 
latter determined  from  the internal  carotid  arteries  at the level  of the skull base  on PET after  fusing with 
MR images  for artery  identification.  The feasibility  of using  arterial  structures  at this level  will be 
investigated  using  the same  method  described  above  for determining  venous  input  functions.  The 
agreement  of kinetic  parameter  values  calculated  using  both venous  and arteria l input  functions  will be 
examined.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 9 -  
  
A number  of studies  have compared  rate constants  estimated  using  non-invasive,  image -based  input  
functions  versus  time-activity  curves  (TACs)  generated  from  sampled  arteries  or arterialized  veins,  and 
have  found  no statistically  significant  differences  for rate constants  obtained  with these  input  
functions32,39,40. More  recently,  image -derived  input  functions  for transverse  and cavernous  sinuses  
have  been  used in conjunction  with compartmental  modeling  to investigate  the kinetic  behavior  of 
malignant  brain  tumors , with the resulting  rate constants  found  to adequately  describe  18F-FLT uptake  
characteristics7. Thus,  as the  collective  results  of these  studies  have  demonstrated  no statistically  
significant  differences  between  blood  samples  and tomographically  obtained  input  functions  in terms  of 
the kinetic  parameters  estimated,  it is not essential  that blood  samples  be acquired  for determining  an 
input  function.  However,  up to 4 blood  samples  (approximately  3-milliliter  per sample)  may be taken  
post-injection,  within  the 1 hr imaging time  period  (i.e., roughly  15, 30, 45, and 60 min),  for calibrating  
the corresponding  image -based  FLT TAC  and/or  improving  pharmacokinetic  parameter  estimates,  as 
well as for test consistency.).  It should  be noted  that a range  of post-injection  time points  (ultimately  
defining  the blood  TAC)  can be selected  for blood  draws,  as estimated  pharmacokinetic parameters  will 
not be critically  dependent  on the exact  times  chosen.  This procedure  will be performed  in a number  of 
patients  to establish  whether  there  is a relatively  constant  calibration  factor  or improved  
pharmacokinetic  data that can be derived,  which  in turn would  be applied  to all the remaining  patient  
data analyzed.  
 
Secondary  Aim #2 Study  Design:  Voxel -wise parameter  estimates  derived in secondary  aim #1 will be  
compared  with static  measures  of 18F-FLT uptake  using  ROIs  selected  for targeted  biopsy.  To obtain  
static  18F-FLT images,  data will be summed  between  30 and 60 minutes  post-injection.  Estimated  
parameter  values  will be correlated  with the proliferative  activity  score  or the percentage  of MIB-1 
stained  nuclei  per total  nuclei in the  sample as  described  under  the Primary  Aim Study  Design.  
 
Exploratory  Aim Study  Design:  Biopsy  samples  will be acquired  from  regions  of increased/decreased  
proliferative  activity  (FLT  uptake).  Gene  expression  from  microdissected  portions  will be assayed  by 
Affymetrix  U133Plus2  arrays.  Differential  gene expression  signatures  will be derived  for each pair of 
samples  in a resection,  representing  differences  between  FLT uptake  values.  Signatures  will be 
compared  across  samples  to attempt  to characterize  a core signature.  Core  signatures  will be 
investigated  by comparison  to known  transcriptome  signatures  of molecular  subclasses  of GBM  as well 
as compared  with other pathways  and signatures.  
 
4.3 Intervention  
 
PET scan  protocol  
• Fifteen  (15) patients  with newly  diagnosed  or recurrent  gliomas,  deemed  appropriate  for this scan 
by the investigator  on the basis  of imaging  studies  and surgical  management  considerations,  will 
undergo  the FLT-PET study  for purposes  of collecting  pilot data (in compliance  with RDRC  
regulations).  
 
• All studies  will be performed  using  a dedicated  PET/CT,  which  integrates  a dedicated  PET scanner  
and a spiral  CT with proprietary  fusion  software.  Images  are acquired  with the patient  in the fasted  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 10 -  
  
state (about  four to six hours),  but water  for hydration  is allowed.  A low dose spiral  CT is performed  
first, followed  by acquisition of  PET images  (emission images  only),  of the brain.  Attenuation  
correction  of the PET/CT  images  is performed  using  the CT data.  PET,  CT and fusion  images  are 
displayed  on a standard  workstation.  
 
• A IV catheter  will be placed  in a superficial  hand  or arm vein for administration  of 18F-FLT 
(approximately  370 MBq),  prepared  by the MSKCC  Radiochemistry  Core  Facility.  A second  venous  
catheter  will be placed  in the opposite  hand  or arm for venous  blood  sampling.  If a central  venous  
catheter  is present,  it will be used for blood  sampling or  radiopharmaceutical  administration,  and only 
a single  venous  catheter  will be placed.  Sequential  blood  samples  may be obtained  following  18F-FLT 
infusion  for assaying  whole  blood  and plasma  radioactivity.  All catheters  will be removed  at the end 
of the day. 
 
• Dynamic  PET/CT  images  of the brain  will be acquired  for up to 1-hr on a dedicated  PET/CT  
machine,  with image  acquisition  starting  immediately  after injection  using  the following  sequence:  6 
frames  of 30sec, 7 frames of  1-minute,  then 10 frames  of 5-minutes.  
 
• The intravenous  line will be removed  at the end of the study.  
 
• Venous  blood  samples  (up to four)  may be  drawn  from  a vein in the arm opposite  to that used to 
inject  FLT by research  staff.  A single  sample  (approximately  3 milliliters)  will be acquired  at the 
end of the study  (i.e., 60 min)  for calibrating  the FLT TAC,  with the option  to perform  additional  
blood  sampling  (i.e., 15, 30, 45 min post-injection)  for improving  estimates  of pharmacokinetic  
parameters.  18F radioactivity  in the 18F-FLT blood/plasma  samples  will be measured  by research  
staff.  
• Dynamic  FLT scans  will be reconstructed  by both filtered  back projection  and iterative  
reconstruction  in order  to check  for quantitative  accuracy  at the smaller  time segments  immediately  
post injection . 
 
• 18F-FLT PET and CT examinations  will be fused  using  a Vector -Vision®  cranial  navigation  
software  (BrainLab  AG, Heimstetten,  Germany),  after being  transferred  to a commercial  
workstation,  BrainLab  1 (BrainLab  AG).  
 
• The 18F-FLT PET-CT and baseline  MRI  studies  will be uploaded  onto BrainLab  1 and co-registered  
by the neuroradiologist  using  Vector -Vision®  cranial  navigation  software.  This will not be done  in 
the operating  room.  The PET and MR image  sets will be co-registered  by applying  the 3D rigid 
transformation  (translations/rotations)  to the PET image  set, which  aligns  the CT image  set of the 
PET-CT study  and the MR image set.  
 
• The operating  neurosurgeon  will be blinded  to the pre-operative  PET study,  and planned  tumor  
resection  volume  will be pre-determined  solely  on the basis  of anatomic  MRI  per routine.  
Preoperative   MRI   images  will  be  uploaded   to  the  BrainLAB   VectorVision®   neuronavigation  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 11 -  
  
system,  a frameless  stereotaxy  and image -guided  surgical  navigation  system  integrated  with the 
Intraoperative MRI  suite.  
 
• On co-registered  PET-MRI scans  and prior  to surgical  resection,  up to four prescribed  ROIs  within  
the planned  resection  volume  will be marked  for potential  targeted  biopsy  by two neuroradiologists  
and a nuclear  medicine  attending,  blinded  to the surgical  planning.  These  ROIs  will be selected  
based  on heterogeneity  of PET and MRI  imaging  characteristics  (e.g.,  high 18F-FLT uptake/no  
enhancement;  low 18F-FLT uptake/enhancement).  Fused  images  containing  the marked  biopsy  sites 
will be uploaded  to the BrainLAB  VectorVision®  neuronavigation  system  for viewing  by the 
neurosurgeon  in the operati ng room.  As noted  above,  however,  the operative  plan,  in terms  of the 
tumor  resection  volume,  will not be guided  by decisions  regarding  sites of potential  biopsy  selected  
on the  co-registered  FLT PET-MRI  study.  
 
• ROI analyses  for determination  of tracer  uptake  measurements  and the generation  of time-activity  
curves  for blood  and tumor  will be performed  on an AW Workstation  (GE Healthcare)  that runs the 
Voxulus  software  module  for voxel -based  pharmacokinetic  modeling.  Voxel -based  
pharmacokinetic  modeling,  traditional  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  modeling  (SAAM  II program),  
and static  uptake  determinations  will all be performed  on this workstation.  The information  derived  
from  these  analyses  will not be used for surgical  planning  or uploaded  for use in the operating  
room.  
 
• Non-invasive  input  functions  for blood  will be obtained  non-invasively  using  post-injection  region - 
of-interest  measurements  of the superior  sagittal  sinus.  These  measurements  will be compared  with 
arterial  blood  activity -concentrations  from  an image  containing  the internal  carotid  artery,  and will 
be calibrated  using  the measurement  of a single  intravenous  blood  sample  acquired  at one post- 
injection  time point.  If additional  blood  sampling  (i.e., 15, 30, 45 min post-injection)  has been  
acquired,  these  measurements  will be compared  with non-invasively  derived  values  and used to 
improve estimates  of pharmacokinetic parameters.  
 
• Surgical  resection  and tissue  specimen  acquisition  will take place  with frameless  stereotactic  
tracking  of resection  location and updated  by intraoperative MRI.  
 
• The radiation  dose from  the FLT studies  was calculated  based  on published  data.  Given  a realistic  
1- hour voiding  interval,  the target  organ  is the liver,  receiving  a dose of 0.168  rad/mCi,  
corresponding  to 1.68 rad/10mCi.  This is below  the 5 rad single  organ  permissible  dose.  Total  body  
dose is calculated  at 0.046  rad/mCi,  and 0.46 rad for a 10 mCi injection,  the maximum  dose that 
will be used (see Table  below).  With  a 1 hour voiding  interval,  the dose to the urinary  bladder  wall 
will be 0.146  rad/mCi.  Recent  CT dosimetry  literature  quotes  a dose of 0.9 rad/single  organ  from  a 
typical  CT scan,  performed  for the purpose  of PET attenuation  correction  on a PET-CT scanner.  
The diagnostic  protocol  described  here will not exceed  the permissible  limit  of 5 rad/organ/single  
study  and will also remain  below  the maximal  permissible  dose acceptable  to the radioactive  drug 
research.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 12 -  
  
• F18-Fluorothymidine (FLT)  Patient  Dosimetry  
Dosimetry  for one PET FLT - CT scan 
 
 
Absorbed  Dose  
  
 
One FLT PET-CT scan  0.9 rad 3 + 
 F18-FLT2   10 mCi F18-FLT   
Target  Organ  rad/mCi  rad/10  mCi rad 
Adrenals  0.077  0.766  1.67 
Bone  Surfaces  0.058  0.585  1.48 
Brain  0.013  0.125  1.03 
Breasts  0.031  0.310  1.21 
Heart  Wall 0.062  0.618  1.52 
Kidneys  0.132  1.317  2.22 
Large  Intestine  - Lower  Wall 0.048  0.477  1.38 
Large  Intestine  - Upper  Wall 0.046  0.459  1.36 
Liver  0.168  1.680  2.58 
Lungs  0.037  0.374  1.27 
Pancreas  0.085  0.851  1.75 
Red Marrow  0.089  0.888  1.79 
Small  Intestine  0.053  0.525  1.43 
Stomach  Wall 0.052  0.522  1.42 
Testes  0.049  0.488  1.39 
Thyroid  0.038  0.385  1.28 
 0.110  1.098  2.00 
 0.146  1.463  2.36 
 0.220  2.195  3.10 
 0.293  2.927  3.83 
 
5.1 CRITERIA FOR SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  
 
The patient  population  will be  comprised  of patients with newly -diagnosed  or recurrent  high grade  
gliomas.  
 
5.2 Subject Inclusion  Criteria  
 
5.1.1.  Age > 18 years  old. 
 
5.1.2.  Radiographic appearance  of a lesion  presumed  to be  high-grade  glioma.  1 FLT PET-CT scans  
Urinary  Bladder  Wall  
45-min Voiding  Interval  
1-hr Voiding  Interval  
1.5-hr Voiding  Interval  
2-hr Voiding  Interval  
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 13 -  
  
5.1.3.  Planned  surgical  resection.  
 
5.2 Subject Exclusion  Criteria  
 
5.2.1. Pregnant  (confirmed  by serum b-HCG in women of  reproductive age) or breast  feeding  
 
5.2.2  Patients  with other active malignancies  or prior  treatment  for non-CNS malignancies.  
 
6.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
Patients  will be evaluated  by attending  physicians  from  the Departments  of Neurosurgery  and 
Radiology  entered  onto the study  if they are appropriate  candidates.  The attending  physician  will 
obtain  informed  consent  from  the eligible patient.  
 
7.0 ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION PLAN  
 
Patient  assessment  and evaluation  will be based  on region -of-interest  (ROI)  measurements  of tumor,  
non-tumor -bearing  brain,  the dural  venous  sinus/arterial  blood  pool,  as well as additional  data from  
whole  blood/plasma  radioactivity  measurements.  These  assessments  will be used to obtain  static  and 
dynamic  18F-FLT uptake  measurements,  namely  SUV  values and estimated  kinetic  rate constants  
(including  proliferation)  using  both voxel -wise and ROI-based  tracer  kinetic  modeling  approaches.  
SUV  values  and rate constants  will be compared  with molecular  markers  (percentage  of Ki-67 and 
CD31  expressing  cells, differential  gene expression  signatures)  determined  at corresponding  sites of 
biopsy.  This evaluation  is detailed  in Section  4.0. 
 
8.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
The radiotracer,  18F-FLT,  has been synthesized  by the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility  for about  two 
years,  and has been  used in humans  in this and other  institutions  in this country  and Europe.  The 
primary  source  of the FLT will be the MSKCC  cyclotron  facility;  however,  alternative  commercial  
sources  are available  to ensure  consistent  supply of FLT.  If a commercial  supplier  of FLT is used for a 
particular  study,  the supplier  will be required  to meet  all of the acceptance  criteria  outlined  in the FDA - 
approved  MSKCC  FLT IND (#104742)  prior  to administration.  18F-FLT synthesized  at MSKCC  has 
been  tested  for toxicity  and pyrogenicity.  The product  synthesized  at MSKCC  has met all requirements.  
No side effects  are expected  as a result  of this study.  However,  in the unlikely  event  that an adverse  
reaction  to the radiopharmaceutical  occurs,  the results  must  be documented  and reported  by the 
Principal  Investigator to the  Institutional  Review Board  Chairman  and IND Committee.  
 
9.0 PRIMARY OUTCOMES  
 
Primary  study  measurements  will be FLT uptake  (SUV  values);  estimated  rate constants,  including  
that reflecting  proliferation,  derived  from  voxel -wise and ROI- based  tracer  kinetic  modeling;  and 
molecular  markers  (percentage  of Ki-67 and CD31  expressing  cells,  differential  gene expression  
signatures).  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 14 -  
  
 
10.1 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY  
 
10.1.1.  Patients  will not be removed  from  the protocol unless  they request  so. 
 
10.1.2.  If at any time,  the patient  develops  unacceptable  protocol -associated  toxicity,  he/she  will be 
removed  from  study.  
 
10.1.3.  If at any time the patient  is found  to be ineligible  for the protocol,  as designated  in the section  
on Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility  (i.e., a change  in diagnosis),  the patient  will be removed  from  
the study.  
 
11.0     BIOSTATISTICS  
 
This is a pilot study  intended  to collect  preliminary  data on 15 patients  diagnosed  with untreated  
high-grade  glioma who  are scheduled  to undergo  surgical  resection.  
 
 
Primary  Aim: To investigate  relationships  between  voxel -based  determinations  of proliferation  rate 
and observed  MR imaging  features,  as well as with spatially  registered  histologic  measures  of tumor  
cell proliferation  (Ki67)  and microvascular density  (CD31)  at corresponding  locations.  
 
Statistical  Methodology  for Primary  Aim:  In this aim, we will first explore  the relationship s 
between  18F-FLT PET parameters  and MR imaging  features  (Ktrans  or microvascular  permeability).  
The 18F-FLT PET parameters:  K1 (tracer  delivery  rate constant),  k2 (rate constant  reflecting  flow 
from  the tumor  interstitial  compartment  back  to blood),  k3 (rate constant  reflecting  proliferation),  
and k4 (rate constant  reflecting  flow from  tumor  cells back into the tumor  interstitial  space)  will be 
compared  to Ktrans  on MR imaging.  We will also explore  relationships  between  Ktrans, each of the 
18F-FLT PET parameters,  and the histological  markers  Ki67  and CD31.  All of the parameters  and 
markers  are measured  on a continuous  scale.  Initially  graphical  methods  such as pair-wise scatter  
plots  will be used to assess  the relationships.  The relationships  between  each pair of variables  will be 
more  formally  evaluated  using  methods  that account  for correlated  data (there  may be up to four 
observations  per patient)  such as random  effects  regression  models  or generalized  estimating  
equations.  
 
It is unlikely  but possible  that it may be determined  at surgery  that a patient  does not have a high- 
grade  glioma  but instead  has a metastasis  or PCNSL.  The likelihood  that this will occur  will be 
infrequent,  if at all, given  the constellation  of distinctive  imaging  features  that generally  serve  to 
differentiate  these  tumor  types.  If it does occur,  however,  we will continue  accrual  until 15 high 
grade  glioma  patients  have been  enrolled.  In this case,  two sets of analysis  for the primary  aim and 
all other  aims  will occur,  one including  all enrolled  patients  and one including  only patients  with 
high-grade  gliomas.  Patients  found  to have  a metastasis  or PCNSL  may not yield  different  values  
than patients  with glioma  so the decision  to include  them  in the analysis  may not be unreasonable.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 15 -  
  
However,  we will descriptively  assess  any differences  in results  between  the two sets of analysis  as 
much  as the data permits if  this situation  arises.  
 
Secondary  Aim #1: To attempt  to corroborate  voxel -based  parameter  estimates  reflecting  tumor  cell 
proliferation  with estimates  derived  using  standard  ROI-based  pharmacokinetic  modeling  methods,  
for improving  the characterization  of high-grade  gliomas  using  dynamic 18F-FLT PET -CT. 
 
Statistical  Methodology  for Secondary  Aim #1: To corroborate  the voxel -based  method  with the 
ROI-based  approach,  pharmacokinetic  modeling  will be assessed  by comparing  the estimated  
parameter  values  for the entire  intra-tumor  ROIs  to the average  of the voxel -by-voxel  parameter  
values  among  the voxels  comprising  the same  ROIs.  This analysis  will focus  on the k3 value.  For 
each ROI,  we would  like to see the estimated  k3 value  derived  from  the entire  ROI to be within  25% 
of the average  k3 value  determined  for the multiple  voxels.  The ratio of two k3 values  will be 
computed  for this purpose.  As an additional  analysis,  we will calculate  the concordance  correlation  
coefficient  (CCC)  to evaluate  the agreement  between  the ROI-based  and the average  voxel -based  
parameter  values.  A modified  version  of the CCC  that allows  for clustered  data will adjust  for the 
fact that there  may be multiple  observations  per patient contributing  to the  estimates38. 
Secondary  Aim #2: To assess  whether  static  measures  of 18F-FLT uptake  can adequately  serve  as 
non-invasive  biomarkers  of proliferative  activity  or whether  parametric  images,  based  on 
compartmental  analyses  of the FLT pharmacokinetics,  are required  by correlating  findings  of both 
approaches  with regional  histologic assays  of tumor  cell proliferation.  
 
Statistical  Methodology  for Secondary  Aim #2: Using  the same  methods  described  for the primary  
arm, the relationship  between  Ki67  and the static  measure  of 18F-FLT (the SUV),  and the parametric  
measure  (k3) will be explored.  The strength  of the relationship  between  these  two parameters  and 
Ki67  will be compared  descriptively.  
 
Exploratory  Aim: To evaluate  whether  differences  in gene expression  seen between  areas  of 
increased  and decreased  proliferative  activity  on parametric  maps  define  consistent  differential  
transcriptome  signatures  for comparison  with known  molecular  subclasses  of GBM  and known  
pathways.  
 
Statistical  Methodology  for Exploratory  Aim:  
 
ACGH:  Array CGH  data will be analyzed  through  the software  pipeline  developed  within  MSKCC's  
Cancer  Genome  Characterization  Center  within  The Cancer  Genome  Atlas  Project.  This includes  
extensive  QC annotation,  normalization  and artifact  reduction,  and segmentation analysis.  
 
Expression  analysis  for gene  signatures:  Expression  array  data will be normalized  by RMA  and 
differential  expression  of paired  samples  determined  by Significance  Analysis  of Microarrays  
(SAM).  Methods  of analysis  cross -sample  will aim at determining  core signature  genes  which  are 
commonly  differentially expressed  in relation  to imaging  features.  These  methods  will depend  on the 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 16 -  
  
number  of samples  from  each tumor  that represent  differential  features.  For larger  sample  sets, 
simple  Venn  intersection  may reveal  core signature  genes.  Sparser  samplings  of feature  contrasts  
will be analyzed  by pairwise  Gene  Set Enrichment  to identify  a subset  of mutually  expressed  
signature  genes.  
 
Analysis  of gene signatures:  Gene  signatures  representing  contrasting  imaging  features  will be 
compared  with known  signatures  representing  previously  described  molecular  subclasses  of GBM,  
including  the "Proneural",  "Proliferative"  and "Mesenchymal"  classes,  as well as molecular  
subclasses  already  emergent  in the analysis  of 206 GBM  samples  in The Cancer  Genome  Atlas  pilot 
project  to date.  Signatures  will be compared  by GSEA  and gene ontology.  GSEA will  also be used to 
analyze  feature -derived  signatures  in an exploratory  process  to characterize  possible  enrichment  for 
altered  expression  within  canonical  pathways.  The Connectivity  Map offers  another  potentially  
valuable  resource  for mining  feature -derived  signatures,  and can be approached  with specific  
hypothesis:  that differential  proliferation  and permeability,  as image -derived  features,  may be 
associated  with transcriptome  evidence  of PI3 kinase  signaling  or VEGF  signaling,  both of which  
are well represented  in the database.  Analysis  will include  exclusion  of gene  subsets  such as cell 
cycle  members  whose  differential  regulation  is likely to  correlate  with simple  histologic  measures  of 
proliferation.  
 
For the exploratory  aim, we can evaluate  the power  we will have to detect  a difference  in gene  
expression  levels  between  areas  of high and low tracer  uptake  (or signal  intensity)  within  an 
individual.  With  15 subjects  contributing  a sample  from  both a high and low uptake  area,  we expect  
to be able to detect  a twofold  difference  in base 2 log intensity  levels  with a Type  I error  of 0.001  
and a Type  II error  of 0.05 if the standard  deviation  for the expression  levels  is 0.75 (using  base 2 
logarithms) or less. A  standard  deviation  of 0.75 is within  the range of what we expect  to see41. 
 
Sample  size justification:  
For this pilot study,  we expect there to be  15 eligible patients  per year,  and we will  aim to reasonably  
accrue 8 of these  patients  per year for two  years.  
 
All analyses  are purely  exploratory  and intended  to generate  data for future  studies.  We do not plan 
to conduct  any rigorous  hypothesis  testing.  To explore  what  we might  be able to say using  this 
limited  sample  size, we find that with data on 15 patients  we expect  to be able to detect  a moderately  
high correlation  coefficient  of 0.60 with 80% power  using a  two-sided  0.05 level  test42. This 
calculation  assumes  that each patient  contributes  only one  observation,  but in our case,  we expect  an 
average  of two observations  for each patient  (up to four samples  per patient)  which  may increase  our 
power  to draw  any conclusions.  Simulation  studies  assuming  an average  of two observations  per 
patient  indicate  that we can estimate  the concordance  correlation  coefficient  to within  (half-width  of 
95% confidence  interval)  ±0.27  for a CCC  equal  to 0.8, ±0.20  for a CCC  equal  to 0.9, and ±0.05  for 
a CCC equal  to 0.99.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 17 -  
  
12.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES  
 
12.1   Research  Participant Registration  
 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined in the  section  entitled  Criteria for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
 
Obtain  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  Consent  
Procedures.  
 
During  the registration  process  registering  individuals will be required  to complete  a protocol  
specific Eligibility  Checklist.  
 
All participants  must be  registered  through  the Protocol Participant  Registration  (PPR) Office at  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center.  PPR is  available Monday  through Friday  from  
8:30am  – 5:30pm at 646-735-8000.  The PPR fax numbers  are (646) 735-0008 and (646) 735- 
0003. Registrations  can be phoned  in or faxed. The completed  signature page of the written  
consent/verbal  script and a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  must be  faxed  to PPR.  
 
 
13.1 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of the RSA  
include  project  compliance,  data collection,  abstraction  and entry,  data reporting,  regulatory  
monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization,  and coordinating  the activities  of the protocol  
study  team.  
 
The data collected  for this study  will be entered  into a  secure database.  Source documentation  will 
be available to support  the computerized  patient  record.  All research  material  from  this study  will be 
handled  with the same confidentiality  as the patient’s other medical  data.  
 
 
13.2 Quality  Assurance  
 
Eligibility  of patients  will be verified  with the principal  investigator.  Only  the designated  
investigators  can obtain  informed  consent.  
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials  are monitored  for data,  safety  and 
quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protocol  monitoring,  
compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff education  on clinical  
research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality control,  plus there  are two institutional  
committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our clinical  trials  programs.  The 
committees:  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  for Phase  I and II clinical  trials,  and 
the Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Board  (DSMB)  for Phase  III clinical  trials,  report  to the Center’s  
Research  Council and Institutional  Review Board.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 18 -  
  
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each protocol  will be assessed  for the level  of 
risk and the degree  of required  monitoring.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH sponsored,  in-house  
sponsored,  industrial  sponsored, NCI  cooperative  group,  etc.) is reviewed  and monitoring  procedures  
are established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
 
13.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data  and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM) Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  were  
approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute in September 2001. The plans  address  the new policies  set 
forth  by the NCI in the  document entitled  “Policy  of the National  Cancer  Institute for Data and  
Safety  Monitoring  of Clinical Trials” which  can be found  at 
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html . The DSM  Plans at MSKCC  were  
established  and are monitored  by the Office of Clinical  Research.  The MSKCC Data and  Safety  
Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the  MSKCC  Intranet  at: http://mskweb2.mskcc.org/irb/index.htm . 
 
 
14.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
 
There  are no foreseen  additional risks to the  patients  from  this study.  
 
Risks of  Study  Participation:  Patients  in this  study  will be receiving  current standard  of care for their 
specific disease  site. 
 
Financial  costs/burdens:  
Because  all diagnostic  and therapeutic  interventions  except  for the FLT-PET scans  are part of the 
current  routine  care of patients/subjects  eligible  for this study  and that a research  grant  will cover  the 
cost of the FLT-PET scans,  there  are no additional  financial  cost or burden  to the patient  beyond  the 
charges  routinely  incurred as part of standard  medical  care.  
 
Patient  Confidentiality:  
Patient/subject  privacy  and confidentiality  will be maintained  according  to MSKCC  guidelines  and all 
data derived  from  this study will be kept in a secure  database.  All data and results  will be anonymously  
reported  with regard  to individual subjects.  
 
Voluntary  nature of the study:  
Subjects  will be made  aware  of the voluntary  nature  of the study  as part of the informed  consent  
process.  They  will be allowed  to withdraw  participation  at any time without  the risk of alteration  in the 
quality  of their medical  care.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 19 -  
  
14.2 Privacy  
 
 
MSKCC’s  Privacy  Office  may allow the use and disclosure of protected  health information  
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization form.   The use and disclosure of 
protected  health information  will be limited  to the  individuals  described  in the  Research  
Authorization  form.   A Research  Authorization  form must be  completed  by the Principal  
Investigator and  approved by the IRB and Privacy  Board.  
 
14.3 Serious  Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting  
 
Any SAE must be  reported to the  IRB/PB  as soon as possible  but no later than  5 calendar days.  
The IRB/PB  requires  a Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB) SAE  report  be submitted  
electronically  to the  SAE Office  at sae@mskcc.org  containing  the following  information:  
Fields  populated  from  the CRDB : 
• Subject’s  name (generate  the report  with only initials if it will be sent outside of 
MSKCC)  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number and  title 
 
Data needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse event occurred  
• The adverse event  
• Relationship  of the adverse event  to the  treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  information:  
o A explanation  of how the AE was  handled  
o A description  of the subject's  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the  study  
o If an amendment  will need to be  made to the  protocol and/or consent  form  
The PI’s  signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the  completed  report.  
For IND/IDE protocols:  
The CRDB  AE report  should be  completed  as above  and the FDA assigned  IND/IDE  number  
written  at the top of  the report.  If appropriate,  the report  will be forwarded  to the  FDA by the 
SAE staff through  the IND Office.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 20 -  
  
15.0     INFORMED CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain  full 
details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  prior  to 
their inclusion  in the study.  Participants  will also be informed  that they are free to withdraw  
from  the study  at any time.  All participants  must  sign an IRB/PB -approved  consent  form  
indicating  their consent  to participate.  This consent  form  meets  the requirements  of the Code  of 
Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  The 
consent  form  will include the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive  care for 
therapeutic studies.)  
4. The name of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right  of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw from  participation at any time.  
 
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully  explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific   information.   In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  agree  to the Research  
Authorization  component  of the informed  consent form.  
 
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must  
receive          a         copy          of         the         signed          informed          consent          form..  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 21 -  
  
16.0    REFERENCE(S)  
1. Mier  W, Haberkorn  U, Eisenhut  M. [18F]FLT:  Portrait  of a proliferation  marker.  Eur J Nucl  
Med  Mol Imaging.  29:165-169, 2002  
2. Reavy -Cantwell  JF, Haroun  RI, Zahurak  M, et al. The prognostic  value  of tumor  markers  in 
patients  with glioblastoma  multiforme:  analysis  of 32 patients  and review  of the literature.  J. 
Neurooncol.  55:195 -204, 2001  
3. Wakimoto H, Aoyagi  M, Nakayama T,  et al. Prognostic  significance of Ki-67 labeling  indices  
obtained  using  MIB -1 monoclonal  antibody  in patients  with supratentorial  astrocytomas.  
Cancer . 77:373 -380, 1996  
4. Rasey  JS, Grierson  JR, Wiens  LW, Kolb  PD, Schwartz  JL. Validation  of FLT uptake  as a 
measure of thymidine kinase -1 activity  in A549  carcinoma cells. J Nucl  Med.  43:1210 -7, 2002  
5. Wagner  M, Seitz  U, Buck  A, Neumaier  B, Schultheiss  S, Bangerter  M, Bommer  M, 
Leithäuser  F, Wawra  E, Munz ert G, Reske  SN. 3'-[18F]fluoro -3'-deoxythymidine  ([18F]-FLT)  as 
positron  emission  tomography  tracer  for imaging  proliferation  in a murine  B-Cell lymphoma  
model  and in the  human  disease.  Cancer Res.  63:2681 -7, 2003  
6. Vesselle  H, Grierson  J, Muzi  M, Pugsley  JM, Schmidt  RA, Rabinowitz  P, Peterson  LM, 
Vallières  E, Wood  DE. In vivo validation  of 3'deoxy -3'-[18F]fluorothymid ine ([18F]FLT)  as a 
proliferation  imaging  tracer  in humans:  correlation  of [18F]FLT  uptake  by positron  emission  
tomography  with Ki-67 immunohistochemistry  and flow cytometry  in human  lung tumors.  Clin 
Cancer Res. 8:3315 -23, 2002  
7. Schiepers  C, Chen  W, Dahlbom  M, et al: 18F-fluorothymidine  kinetics  of malignant  brain  
tumors.   Eur. J. Nucl.  Med.  Mol. Imaging . 34:1003 -1011,  2007.  
8. Muzi  M, Spence  AM, O’Sullivan  FO, et al. Kinetic  analysis  of 3’-Deoxy -3’-18F- 
fluorothymidine in patients with gliomas.  J. Nucl.  Med.  47:1612 -1621,  2006.  
9. Chen  W, Cloughesy  T, Kamdar  N, et al. Imaging  proliferation  in brain  tumors  with 18F-FLT:  
comparison  with 18F-FDG.   J. Nucl.  Med.  46:945 -952, 2005  
10. Jacobs  AH, Thomas  A, Kracht  LW, et al. 18F-fluoro -L-thymidine  and 11C-methylmethionine  
as markers  of increased  transport  and proliferation  in brain  tumors.  J. Nucl.  Med.  46:1948 -1958,  
2005  
11. Choi SJ,  Kim JS, Kim JH, et al. [18F] 3’-Deoxy -3’-18F-fluorothymidine  PET for the diagnosis  
and grading  of brain tumors.  Eur. J. Nucl.  Med.  Mol. Imaging . 32:653 -659, 2005  
12. Vesselle  H, Grierson  J, Peterson  LM, Muzi  M, Mankoff  DA, Krohn  KA. 18F-fluorothymidine  
radiation  dosimetry  in human PET imaging  studies. J Nucl  Med.  44:1482 -8, 2003.  
13. Shields  AF, Mankoff  DA, Link JM, et al. Carbon -11-thymidine  and FDG to measure  therapy  
response.  J Nucl  Med. 39:1757 -1762,  1998.  
14. Buck  AK, Bommer  M, Stilgenbaue r S, et al. Molecular imaging  of proliferation  in malignant  
lymphoma.  Cancer Res.  66:11055 -11061,  2006.  
15. Saga  T, Kawashima  H, Araki  N, et al. Evaluation  of primary  brain  tumors  with FLT-PET:  
usefulness  and limitations.  Clin Nucl  Med.  31:774 -780, 2006.  
16. Ullrich  R, Backes  H, Hongfeng  L, et al. Glioma  Proliferation  as Assessed  by 3‘-Fluoro -3’- 
Deoxy -L-Thymidine  Positron  Emission  Tomography  in Patients  with Newly  Diagnosed  High - 
Grade  Glioma.  Clin.  Cancer Res.  14:2049 -2055,  2008.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 22 -  
 IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
 
17. Price  SJ, Fryer  TD, Cleij  MC, et al. Imaging  regional  variation  of cellular  proliferation  in 
gliomas  using  3’-deoxy -3’ [18F]fluorothymidine  positron -emission  tomography:  an image -guided  
biopsy  study.  Clin.  Radiology.  64:52 -63, 2009.  
18. Chen  W, Delaloye  S, Silverman  DH, et al. Predicting  treatment  response  of malignant  
gliomas  to bevacizumab  and irinotecan  by imaging  proliferation  with [18F] fluorothymidine  
positron  emission  tomography:  a pilot study.  J Clin Oncol.  25:4714 -4721,  2007.  
19. Mankoff  DA, Shields  AF, Krohn  KA. PET imaging  of cellular  proliferation.  Radiol  Clin 
North  Am 43:153 -167, 2005.  
20. Bading  JR and Shields  AF. Imaging  of Cell Proliferation:  Status  and Prospects.  J. Nucl.  
Med.  49:64S -80S, 2008.  
21. Phelps  ME, Huang  SC, Hoffman  EJ, Selin  C, Sokoloff  L, Kuhl  DE. Tomographic  
measurement  of local  cerebral  glucose  metabolic  rate in humans  with (F-18)2-fluoro -2-deoxy -D- 
glucose:  validation of  method. Ann Neurol   6:371 -388, 1979.  
22. Carson  RE, Channing  MA, Blasberg  RG, et al. Comparison  of bolus  and infusion  methods  
for receptor  quantitation:  application  to [18F]cyclofoxy  and positron  emission  tomography.  J 
Cereb  Blood Flow  Metab  13:24 -42, 1993.  
23. Takikawa  S, Dhawan  V, Spetsieris  P, et al. Noninvasive  quantitative  fluorodeoxyglucose  
PET studies  with an estimated  input  function  derived  from  a population -based  arterial  blood  
curve.  Radiology  188:131 -136, 1993.  
24. Lammertsma AA,  Bench  CJ, Hume SP, et al. Comparison  of methods  for analysis  of clinical  
[11C]raclopride studies.  J Cereb  Blood Flow  Metab  16:42 -52, 1996.  
25. Di Bella  EV, Clackdoyle  R, Gullberg  GT. Blind  estimation  of compartmental  model  
parameters.  Phys  Med  Biol 44:765 -780, 1999.  
26. Gunn  RN, Ranicar  A, Yap JT, et al. On-line measurement  of exhaled  [11C]CO 2 during  PET.  
J Nucl  Med  41:605 -611, 2000.  
27. Koeppe  RA, Holden  JE, Polcyn  RE, Nickles  RJ, Hutchins  GD, Weese  JL. Quantitation  of 
local  cerebral  blood  flow and partition  coefficient  without  arterial  sampling:  theory  and 
validation.  J Cereb  Blood Flow  Metab  1985; 5:214 -223. 
28. Nelson  AD, Miraldi  F, Muzic  RF, Jr., Leisure  GP, Semple WE. Noninvasive arterial  monitor  
for quantitative oxygen -15-water blood  flow studies.  J Nucl  Med  1993; 34:1000 -1006.  
29. Litton  JE. Input  function  in PET brain  studies  using  MR-defined  arteries.  J Comput  Assist  
Tomogr 1997; 21:907 -909. 
30. Chen  K, Bandy  D, Reiman  E, et al. Noninvasive  quantification  of the cerebral  metabolic  rate 
for glucose  using  positron  emission  tomography,  18F-fluoro -2-deoxyglucose,  the Patlak  method,  
and an image -derived  input function.  J Cereb  Blood Flow  Metab  18:716 -723, 1998.  
31. Carroll  TJ, Rowley  HA, and Haughton  VM. Automatic  Calculation  of the Arterial  Input  
Function  for Cerebral  Perfusion  Imaging  with MR Imaging.  Radiology  227:593 -600, 2003.  
32. Wahl  LM, Asselin  MC, Nahmias  C. Regions  of interest  in the venous  sinuses  as input  
functions  for quantitative  PET.  J Nucl  Med   40:1666 -1675,  1999.  
33. Asselin  MC, Wahl  LM, Cunningham  VJ, Amano  S, Nahmias  C. In vivo metabolism  and 
partitioning  of 6-[18F]fluoro -L-meta -tyrosine  in whole  blood: a  unified  compartment  model.  
Phys  Med  Biol 47:1961 -1977,  2002.  
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer Center  
IRB Protocol  
IRB#:  09-060 A(4) 
Amended: 12/27/11  
- 23 -  
  
34. Iannotti  F, Fieschi  C, Alfano  B, et al. Simplified,  noninvasive  PET measurement  of blood - 
brain  barrier permeability.  J Comput Assist Tomogr  11:390 -397, 1987.  
35. Sadeghi  N, Salmon  I, Tang  BN, et al. Correlation  between  dynamic  susceptibility  contrast  
perfusion  MRI and methionine  metabolism  in brain  gliomas:  preliminary  results.  J Magn  Reson  
Imaging . 24:989-994, 2006.  
36. Sadeghi  N, Salmon  I, Decaestecker  C, et al. Stereotactic  comparison  among  cerebral  blood  
volume,  methionine uptake,  and histopathology  in brain  glioma.  AJNR  28:455 -461, 2007.  
37. Aronen  HJ, Pardo  FS, Kennedy  DN, et al. High  microvascular  blood  volume  is associated  
with high glucose  uptake  and tumor  angiogenesis  in human  gliomas.  Clin Cancer  Res. 6:2189 - 
2200, 2000.  
38. King  TS, Chinchilli  VM, Carrasco  J. A repeated  measures  concordance  correlation  
coefficient.   Statistics  in Medicine 26:3095 -113, 2007.  
39. Schiepers  C, Hoh CK, Dahlbom  M, et al. Factor  analysis  for delineation  of organ  structures,  
creation  of input  and output  functions,  and standardization  of multicenter  kinetic  modeling.  Proc  
SPIE  3661:1343 -1350,  1999.  
40. Schiepers  C, Hoh CK, Nuyts  J, et al. Factor  analysis  in prostate  cancer:  delineation  of organ  
structures  and automatic  generation  of input  and output  functions.  IEEE  Trans  Nucl  Sci 
49:2338 -2343,  2002.  
41. Simon  R, Radmacher  MD, and Dobbin  K.  Design  of studies  using  DNA  Microarrays.  
Genetic Epidemiology  23: 21-36, 2002.  
42. Cohen  J. Statistical  Power  Analysis  for the Behavioral  Sciences.  Lawrence  Erlbaum  
Associates,  New  Jersey,  1988.  