A Feasibility Study to Evaluate the Safety and Effect of the Optimization of Vagus 
Nerve Stimulation in Epileptic Patients to Induce Cardioprotection  
PI: Olujimi Ajijola, MD, PhD 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol: Version 8.0
11/10/2022
Version 8.0 
11/10/2022  
Page 1 of 15 STUDY TITLE: A FEASIBILITY STUDY TO EVALUATE THE SAFETY AND EFFECT OF THE OPTIMIZATION OF
VAGUS NERVE STIMULATION IN EPILEPTIC PATIENTS TO INDUCE CARDIOPROTECTION  
PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR :  OLUJIMI AJIJOLA MD, PHD 
TABLE OF  CONTENTS  PAGE 
STUDY SUMMARY…………………………………………………..  2 
1.INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………….  3
A. BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE …………………….  3 
B. SUMMARY OF PRECLINICAL STUDIES ………………..  4 
C. OBJECTIVES …………………………………………  4 
2.STUDY DESIGN………………………………………………….  4
3.SUBJECT SELECTION …………………………………… ………. 5
A. STUDY SITES …………………………………………  5 
B. RECRUITMENT ……………………………………….  5 
C. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ………………………… ……..5 
D. INCLUSION …………………………………………..  5 
E. EXCLUSION …………………………………………..  5 
4.STUDY METHODS ………………………………………………..  5
A. SCREENING AND ENROLL MENT ……………………… 5 
B. PATIENT SELECTION …………………………………  6 
C. PATIENT CONSENT …………………………………...  6 
5.STUDY PROCEDURES …………………………………………….  6
A. DATA COLLECTION ………………………………….. .6 
B. STUDY PROTOCOL………… ……………… …… …..7 
C. STUDY DURATION ………………………………… …8 
6.STATISTICAL PLAN……………………………………………… 9
7.RISKS AND BENEFITS……………………………………………. 9
A. RISKS………………………………………………...  9 
B. BENEFITS…………………………………………….  10 
8.ADVERSE EVENTS……………………………………………….  10
A. DEFINITION OF ADVERSE EVENTS ……………………. 10 
B. ADVERSE EVENT MONITORING ………………………. 10 
C. ADVERSE EVENTS ……………………………………. 10 
D. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS …………………………..  11 
E. REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS ……………………….. 11 
9.DATA SAFETY MONITORING …………………………………….  11
10.DATA HANDLING ………………………………………………... 12
11.FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS ……………………………………  12
12.APPENDIX 1 ………………………………………………  ……..13
13.REFERENCES …………………………………………………….  14
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 2 of 15 
 STUDY SUMMARY 
 
 
TITLE  A Feasibility Study to Evaluate the Safety and Effect of the 
Optimization of Vagus Nerve Stimulation in Epileptic Patients to 
Induce Cardioprotection  
PRIMARY OBJECTIVES /AIMS The primary objective is to evaluate in epilepsy patients the effects of 
adjusting vagus nerve stimulation parameters to engage known 
cardioprotective aspects.  
SECONDARY OBJECTIVES  The secondary objective is to quantify the effects of vagus stimulation 
on cardiac function by metrics of autonomic testing and a 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing.  
FDA APPROVED DEVICES  LivaNova VNS Therapy ( Vagus Nerve Stimulator (VNS)  
PROTOCOL NUMBER  UCLA: IRB  # 19-002279 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  Olujimi Ajijola , MD, PhD  
CO-INVESTIGATORS  Kalyanam Shivkumar, MD PhD, Olujimi Ajijola, MD, PhD , Jason 
Bradfield, MD, Marmar Vaseghi, MD, PhD, Jeffrey L. Ardell, PhD , 
Ausaf A. Bari MA MD PhD FAANS 
 
STUDY SITE  University of California Los Angeles (UCLA)  
FUNDING SOURCE (S) NIH-NCATS National Center For Advancing Translational Science  
NUMBER OF SUBJECTS 12 
 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 3 of 15 
 1.  INTRODUCTION  
 
A. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
The autonomic nervous system controls every aspect of cardiac function . This fine control is 
maintained by a concerted interplay of afferent impulses that reach the central nervous system (CNS) 
via multiple afferent pathways, and this information results in appropriate efferent sympathetic and 
parasympathetic responses. Thus,  the nerves control cardiac excitation on a beat -by-beat basis. In the 
setting of myocardial injury, the autonomic nervous system plays an important role in the genesis and 
maintenance of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VT). Sympathetic activation and parasy mpathetic 
dysfunction accompany cardiomyopathy and predispose to VT and ventricular fibrillation (VF). The 
neurohormonal response, although acutely beneficial, is chronically damaging. Blockade of the 
sympathetic nervous system has been the target of multi ple successful therapeutic strategies, including 
beta-blockers and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors.   
 
Cardiovascular effects of vag us nerve stimulation  (VNS) and delineation of optimal parameters  
VNS has shown mixed results in studies of heart fai lure patients likely due a variety of different 
stimulation parameters (frequency, pulse -widths, outputs) utilized, without clear human data on which 
parameters would provide optimal cardiac effect. In this study, a range of stimulation parameters will 
be evaluated in epilepsy patients with structurally normal hearts to delineate the “neural fulcrum” for 
cardiovascular effects. We will then utilize these “optimal” parameters to assess whether sympathetic 
responses to autonomic stressors are mitigated and ex ercise tolerance increased.  
 
Parasympathetic dysfunction accompanies cardiomyopathy and increases the risk of sudden cardiac 
death.  Indirect markers of parasympathetic dysfunction, such as decreased heart rate variability and 
abnormal baroreceptor reflex  sensitivity (BRS), are associated with VT/VF in cardiomyopathy 
patients. Furthermore, in animals with myocardial infarction (MI), a higher parasympathetic tone 
portends a greater likelihood of survival in the setting of ischemia. The mechanism behind the 
cardiomyopathy -induced parasympathetic dysfunction is poorly understood, and could provide new 
targets for therapies.  VNS is an emerging technique that has the potential to impact cardiac function, 
the neural networks that control cardiac function and hig her centers of the central nervous system.   
 
VNS for epilepsy  
 
30-35% of patients with epilepsy do not respond to medical treatment and benefit from surgical 
intervention.  Neurostimualtion is a less invasive alternative to resective surgery and one of the the few 
successful options for those for whom resection in not an option.  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is 
the oldest neurostimulation technique, FDA approved to tr eat refractory generalzied and focal epilepsy 
with outcomes showing over 50% seizure reduction in 70% of patients.  
 
Epilepsy patients are at increased risk for sudden cardiac death. Mechanism behind this predisposition 
is poorly understood but parasympath etic dysfunction is heavily implicated. VNS protocols as 
currently set for seizure management are poorly optimized for cardioprotection, therefore this patient 
population presents a unique opportunity to assess VNS control of cardiac function, when VNS is 
appropriately titrated for cardiac and seizure benefit.  
 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 4 of 15 
  
This proposed study leverages recent advances in VNS stimulation protocols that were developed 
primarily for treatment of heart failure.  From these studies we have defined what is referred to as th e 
neural fulcrum hypothesis for VNS.  When VNS is delivered at the neural fulcrum, both ascending 
(afferent) and decending (parasympathetic efferent) nerves are functionally engaged such that 
homogeneous control is restored  to cardiac reflex control.  This  applies to both right and left cervical 
vagal stimulation.  VNS as current delivered for epilespy trea tment is below that neural fulcru m point.  
This represents a missed opportunity to improve quality of life and patient outcomes.  
 
B. SUMMARY OF PRE-CLINICAL  STUDIES 
The cardiac nervous system, composed of the intracardiac ganglia, intrathoracic extracardiac ganglia, 
spinal cord, brainstem, and higher centers, coordinates regional cardiac function on a beat -to-beat 
basis. Globally, the cardiac nervous system i s optimized to handle physiological stressors (e.g. 
orthostatic changes). However, it has not evolved a mechanism to adequately deal with catastrophic 
events such as myocardial infarction or the central and peripheral consequences of epilepsy.   
 
Progression of cardiac disease reflects maladaptive interactions between the cardiac nervous system 
and the heart. Epilepsy patients are particularly susceptible to heart attacks with a survival rate ¼ of 
that of other populations (Stecker, Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol, 6, 912 -916, 2013). Our recent work 
has demonstrated that targeting select elements within this neural network can lead to efficacious 
results in select cardiac disease states, including atrial arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and 
congestive heart failure. With appropriate neuromodulation therapy, myocytes are rendered stress 
resistance, autonomic responsiveness for control of the heart is preserved, and the potential for fatal 
arrhythmias is reduced  (Hanna, Card Fail Rev 4, 92 -98, 2018). Cervical VNS is at the forefront of such 
neuromodulation.   
 
C.   OBJECTIVES  
The primary objective is to evaluate in epilepsy patients the effects of adjusting vagus nerve 
stimulation parameters to engage known cardioprotective aspects.  
 
The secondary objective is to quantify the effects of vagus stimulation on cardiac function by metrics 
of autonomic testing and a cardiopulmonary exercise test  (CPX). 
 
2.  STUDY DESIGN  
 
This is a single -center feasibility study. We plan to enroll 12 subjects (6 female, 6 male). Screening 
data will be reviewed to determine subject eligibility.  All subjects will undergo baseline autonomic 
testing and cardiopulmonary exercise testing.  Patients that agree to continue in the study will have  
VNS titration over a 2 - 4 week period  to achieve the neural fulcrum for control of cardiac function 
(heart rate and heart rate variability index.  The neural fulcrum will be defined by less than 2 % change 
(+/-) in heart rate, and a 5% shift (+/ -) in variability in the SD1 -SD2 (RR interval beat N=1 vs beat N).  
The Poincaré plot analysis is a geometrical and nonlinear method to assess the dynamics of HRV. It is 
a diagram in which each R -R interval is  plotted as a function of the previous R -R interval where the 
values of each pair of successive R -R interval define a point in the plot.  SD refers to interval between 
beats. Once individual neural fulcrum is achieved,  the patient will return after 4 weeks  for the final 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 5 of 15 
 visit in which  autonomic  testing and cardiopulmonary exercise testing will be repeated.  Subjects will 
be monitored for changes in seizure frequency or duration at each clinic visit as well as any adverse 
events during the study by having continuous 24 hours per day/ 7 days per week  access to the study  
team with the  neurologist on call.  
 
3.  SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
A. STUDY SITES 
The study will be performed at the University California Los Angeles (UCLA).  
 
B. RECRUITMENT  
Subjects with a diagnosis of epilepsy with scheduled or  implanted VNS devices will be recruited. The 
investigators of this study will identify patients . Along with being told about the study, it will also be 
made clear to the subjects that they have the ri ght to refuse to be in the study and that refusal will not 
affect their healthcare in anyway.  
 
C. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
Eligible patients will be enrolled in the study by the principal investigator after meeting inclusion and 
exclusion criteria and informed consent is obtained.  
 
D. INCLUSION  
1. Clinical diagnosis of refractory epilepsy and implanted with a VNS device or are scheduled to 
be implanted with a VNS device.  
2. 18 years of age or older  
3. Subjects must demonstrate willingness and ability to comply with study requirements  
 
E. EXCLUSION  
1. Other implantable neuromodulatory device (e.g., brain stimulator)  
2. Treatment with cholinergic or anticholinergic medication in the past month  
3. Pre-existing cardiac arrhythmia or presence of cardiac pacemaker/defibri llator 
4. History of dysautonomias  
5. History of vasovagal syncope  
6. Progressive neurological diseases other than epilepsy  
7. Women that are pregnant  
8. Cognitive or psychiatric deficit that in the investigator's judgment would interfere with the 
subject's ability to ac curately complete study assessments  
 
4.  STUDY METHODS 
 
A. SCREENING  AND ENROLLMENT  
All patients who are being considered for enrollment into the clinical trial will be screened by the site 
investigator or a member of the designated study staff for study eligibility. Subjects who meet the 
inclusion criteria based on routine care and agree to participate in the study will be asked to sign a 
written informed consent that has been approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). No study 
related testing or procedures will take place until the informed consent is signed. The patient will be 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 6 of 15 
 assigned a study number after the consent is signed and the patient is enrolled. Study data will be 
stored using the study code.  
 
B. PATIENT SELECTION  
 
▪ Twelve (12) subjects with a clinical diagnosis of refractory epilepsy and implanted with a VNS 
device or are scheduled to  be implanted with a VNS device will be enrolled.  
 
 
C. PATIENT CONSENT 
 
▪ Patient consent will be conducted in a private setting.  
 
▪ Member(s) of the study staff will meet with the prospective subjects/families to review the 
consent document(s) and/or provide an oral explanation of the study. Individuals will be given 
a chance to ask questions before making a considered decision about w hether or not to 
participate in the study.  
 
▪ Prospective subjects/families will have the opportunity to review the consent form and/or take 
the consent form(s) home and to discuss the documents with others prior to deciding whether or 
not to participate in the study.  
 
▪ The consent form and other study documents will be available in the subjects’ primary 
language. Study staff or qualified translators will discuss the study in the subjects’ language.  
 
▪ Subjects will be given as much time as they need to consider  enrollment. If they are not sure 
and believe they need more time  they will not be enrolled.  
 
5.  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
A. DATA COLLECTION  
The following data will be collected from the patient’s medical record . Study data will be stored using 
the patient’s study code.  
 
After written informed consent is obtained, the following screening procedures will be performed:  
▪ Demographics (date of birth, gender, race)  
▪ Medical History  
▪ Concomitant medication review  
▪ Assessment for presence of VNS  or patient is s cheduled to have a VNS implant  
▪ Seizure history over the last 3 month s (semiology, frequency, duration of seizures) . These 
parameters will be assessed at every study visit . 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 7 of 15 
 B. Study Protocol   
The study protocol involves changing the output current/frequency of the default device settings in a 
FDA approved device for VNS therapy systems manufactured by LivaNova. The LivaNova VNS 
Therapy Systems include the following models: Model 103, Model 105, Model 106, Model 1 000, 
Model 302, Model 303, and Model 304. LivaNova’s Programming Wand Model 2000 version 1.1 will 
be used to change the device settings. The proposed frequency changes in this study are within the 
FDA approved output current/frequency levels.  
The VNS progr ammer device as used in current clinical practice comes with pre -set options, but no set 
standards exist given a physician freedom to decide how to change these parameters within the safety 
zone (duty cycle) as defined by the manufacturer.  Changing the pa rameters is done on a regular basis 
with hopes of improving seizure control.  However, there are times when parameter changes lead to 
worsening seizures; patients are routinely warned about this risk and are able to turn off the VNS 
themselves by a simple magnet (provided to them by the manufacturer or provider)  
The following are the available parameter ranges which could be modified during this study:  
Output current (miliamps, mA) - range:  0-3.5 [typical: 1 -2] 
Signal frequency (Hz) – range: 1-30 [typical:  20-30] 
Pulse Width (microseconds) -  range: 130 -1000 [typical: 250 or 500]  
Signal on -time (seconds) – range: 7-60 [typical: 30]  
Signal off -time (minutes) – range: 0.2 -180 [typical: 5]  
 Duty cycle is proportional to the time device is on  
 
 
Our objective for the parameter optimization is to define the neural fulcrum , i.e parameters which 
should be cardioprotective, for the individual patient based on the base frequency that have been 
titrated to (Ardell et al., 2017). Based on our prior experienc e with the ANTHEM studies, we 
anticipate that we will be able to define the neural fulcrum in 90% of patients. This protocol that has 
been validated in humans with quantitative beat -to-beat analysis (Libbus et al., 2016; Nearing et al., 
2016) and with effi cacy for HFpEF (DiCarlo et al., 2018) and HFrEF (Premchand et al., 2016).  
 
Defining the neural fulcrum will be achieved in 1-5 sessions over a 2 – 4 week period. Each of the 
sessions may take up to one hour.    Autonomic studies and/or cardiopulmonary exercise stress tests are 
expected to take  a maximum of 2 hours with the VNS turned off  or on. The study neurologist will 
work with the patient to decide if they can do all of the testing or some of the testing.  Our prior studies 
have indicated the VNS has a memory function for up to 30 min after termination of VNS.  We allow 
time between stresses to control for that memory function and for the hemodynamic status to return to 
baseline. Stimulation protocols as outline d above are within design for treatment of epilepsy and for 
cardiac disease – no IDE is required.  
 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 8 of 15 
 The following protocol will be used:  
Consent and Baseline Testing : Autonomic  testing and/or cardiopulmonary exercise testing will be 
performed  on all subjects . The study neurologist will work with the patient to decide if they can do all 
of the testing or some of the testing.   The VNS will be turned off or on during autonomic and 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. The baseline visit will take up to 4 hours. Subjects that agree to 
baseline only w ill have completed the study.  
 
VNS Titration  Visits: Subjects that agree to participate in titration visits will continue in the study. 
There will be up to 5 titration visits over 2 – 4 weeks.  The number of sessions will depend on how 
many parameters wil l need to be changed to achieve neural fulcrum and on the subject’s tolerability of 
change in parameters . Titration visits will take up to one hour. Subjects will be instructed to contact the 
study’s neurologist and/or study team with any issues in the int erim. 
 
Final Visit:   Subjects that participated in titration visits  will return to the clinic for the final visit 4 
weeks after the neural fulcrum was achieved. Autonomic testing and /or cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing will be performed.  The study neurologist will work with the patient to decide if they can do all 
of the testing or some of the testing. The final visit will take up to 3 hours .  
 
Subjects will be monitored for changes in seizure frequency or duration at each clinic visit as well as 
any adverse events during the study by having continuous 24 hours per day/7 days per week access to 
the study team with the neurologist on call.  
 
C. STUDY DURATION 
Subjects will be in the study up to 9 weeks. All subjects will undergo baseline autonom ic testing and/or 
cardiopulmonary exercise. Subjects that complete the baseline only testing will complete the study in 
one visit. Subjects that participate in titration visits will have VNS titration over a 2 -4 week period. 
After titration is complete, th e IPG’s will be programmed to the neural fulcrum stimulation protocol 
and left there for 4 weeks . Following the 4 week phase, the autonomic testing and/or cardiopulmonary 
exercise test will be repeated.    
D. Procedures to assess efficacy  
Autonomic Testing 
▪ Valsalva Maneuver : Improvements in late phase II and in pha se IV of the Valsalva maneuver,  
and a normalized pressure recovery time (PRT) after up -titrated VNS. Poor adrenergic response 
is indexed by a prolonged PRT, absent or blunted phase IV or late phase II. A 10% 
improvement in these parameters in response to up -titrated VNS will be considered a 
significant clinical benefit.  
▪ Tilt Test: (orthostatic stress) A 10% decrease in tilt -induced hypotension or a 10% decrease in 
the heart rate response to a 70  degree heads up tilt after up -titration of VNS will be considered 
a significant clinical benefit.  
▪ Oximetry  
▪ Electrocardiogram : The ECG will be used to assess Tp-Te (a measure of repolarization 
heterogeneity in the heart).  
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 9 of 15 
 ▪ Cold Pressor Test: A 10% reduction in evoked heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP)  
response to cold stimulus is considered a significant response of clinical benefit.  
Cardiopulmonary Testing  
This is a progressive dynamic exercise test. A 10% improvement in exer cise duration and/or a 10% 
improvement heart rate recovery after exercise will be considered a significant clinical benefit.  Heart 
rate and blood pressure will also be plotted against time. At 85% of the maximum exercise achieved 
before up -titration of VN S a 5% decrease in heart rate at the same intensity point will be considered a 
significant clinical benefit with VNS.  
 
E. Procedures to assess safety  
 
▪ Incidence of adverse events  
 
F. Schedule of study visits  
 
▪ Please see Schedule of Events in Appendix 1  
 
 
6.  STATISTICAL PLAN  
 
This is primarily an exploratory study. Descriptive statistics will be used including paired Student’s T 
test to detect difference in cardiac physiology parameters at baseline vs. during stimulation, for the 
sample size of n=12. The s ample size ‘n’ will consist of 6 females and 6 males. Each subject will be 
their own control . 
 
7.  RISKS AND BENEFITS 
 
Risks associated with stimulation are addressed in the standard consent form  and are considered 
acceptable in the opinion of the investig ator.  
 
A.  RISKS 
 
▪ The subject can experience coughing and hoarseness during VNS changes. If this occurs the 
parameters will be immediately reversed to previously tolerated parameters.  
▪ A risk to VNS changes is a change in seizure frequency. The subject will be asked his/her 
seizure history at ea ch visit and have access to the neurologist. The study neurologist will 
adjust the VNS parameters per routine seizure management guidelines. .  
 
▪ Additional risk of VNS modulation can include a decrease in heart rate and blood pressure. 
The parameters can be adjusted or set back to those before the study initiation and if deemed 
necessary, the subject will exit the study.   
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 10 of 15 
 ▪ Risks related to monitor pa ds and electrodes: Some people can have minor skin irritation or an 
allergic reaction from the sticky patches that are placed on the chest and limbs. The irritation 
should go away once the patches are removed.  
▪ Risks related to tilt table test, valsalva ma neuver or deep breathing: Some people may report 
feeling dizzy or lightheaded from these tests. The technician can stop the test at any time if this 
is reported.  
▪ Risk related to cold pressor test: Some people may be uncomfortable with having their arm 
cooled for 15 minutes.  The technician can adjust the temperature or stop the test if this is 
reported. 
▪ Risks related to Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test (CPX): Some people may report feeling short 
of breath, fatigu e, dizzy, or have an arrhythmia. The technician can stop the test at any time if 
this is reported.  
▪ As with any use of electronic means to store data, there is a risk of breach of data security. A 
special code (number combination) and the patient initials w ill be used to identify personal 
health information. No personal health information about the patient, their illness, or their 
treatment will be made public.  
 
B. BENEFITS 
 
This study is not being done to immediately improve the patient’s condition or health. It is aimed at 
acquiring scientific information regarding the heart’s electrical behavior. Information obtained in this 
study does not have any immediate application for planning treatments for any heart condition. 
Patients have the right to refuse  to participate in this study. There will be no personal benefit for 
participating in this study. However, information gained from this study helps us better understand the 
mechanisms of sudden cardiac death, which effects >400,000 people each year in the U.S. 
 
8.  ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
A. DEFINITION OF ADVERSE EVENT  
 
An adverse event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure 
regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or procedure (attribution of 
unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable, or definite). 
 
All Adverse Events (AE) will have the following assessed by the study team, as defined below:  
 
▪ Diagnosis  
▪ Event description  
▪ Dates of onset and resolution  
▪ Causality: assessment of relatedness to procedure  
▪ Severity 
▪ Outcome 
 
 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 11 of 15 
 B. ADVERSE EVENTS MONITORING  
The patient’s status will be closely monitored  by the study team to assess adverse events. The study 
team that includes neurosurgery, neurology, and electrophysiolog y, will be conducting the study 
protocol and are the primary care team for the patient.  
 
C. ADVERSE EVENTS 
All reported AEs will be monitored by the study tea m until they are adequately resolved or explained.   
 
Potential Adverse Events  
Most common adverse events seen in long -term treatment with VNS (12mo and 5yrs) as reported in 
the literature. These symptoms were rated as mild -moderate and did not r equire adjustment of 
parameters : 
• Voice alternation 55/18.7%  
• Headache 16%  
• Cough 15/1.5%  
• Pain 15/4.7%  
• Paresthesia (abnormal skin sensation) 15/1.5%  
• Dyspnea 13/12.3%  
• Pharyngitis 10%  
• Depression 5%  
• Infection 6%  
 
Increase in seizure frequency is also a potential adverse event and will be discussed with patients 
during screening.  
 
D. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
▪ An event that is fatal, resulting in death  
▪ An event that is life threatening. In the opinion of the study center physician, the patient was at 
immediate risk of death due to the event as it occurred;  
▪ An event that results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
▪ An event that requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs hospitalization;  
▪ An important medical event that, based upon app ropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the 
patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed 
above. 
 
NOTE: Prolonged  hospitalization s for a pre -existing condition  is not considered a serious adverse 
event. 
 
E. REPORTING SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
The site investigator is responsible for ensuring that all SAEs are fully recorded and reported to the IRB 
per IRB reporting requirements . 
 
 
 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 12 of 15 
 9. DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (DSMP) 
 
The Principal Investigator and co-investigators  will be the primary data safety monitors  for this clinical 
trial.  They will  provide “real time” adverse event review and actively monitor the trial for adverse event 
reporting, regulatory and protocol compliance, and data accuracy. A physician group that is separate 
from the study will also provide Data Safety Monitoring. The group will  review the protocol, study data , 
and safety information , such as any adverse events, twice per year. This group will include a cardiologist, 
a neurologist  that specializes in autonomics  and epilepsy, and a statistician.  
 
The following may be reviewed:  
 
▪ Annual accrual numbers and study drop -out rates.   A description of any problems with 
recruitment or enrollment, study enrollment, and a determination as to whether the current 
accrual rate is sufficient to meet the intended accrual goal.  
 
▪ A summary of any problems with study implementation.  
 
▪ A list of all adverse events and each one’s frequency from the study population.  
 
They may determine at any time, that the study should be modified or terminated due to patient harm  
and/or futility considerations.  
 
10. DATA HANDLING 
 
The patient will be assigned a study number after the consent is signed and the patient is enrolled. 
Study data will be collected and stored using the study code. Personally, identifiable data will not be 
collected, transmitted, or stored via the internet.   A secure network server will be used to store data. A 
study code will link the data to the study subject. A key to the code exists. Only the study team 
members listed in the IRB will have access to the code.   
 
This is a safety and feasibility study, there fore the data will be maintained for future research in the 
case that:  
 
▪ The study team wants to use the data set to investigate any additional research questions.  
▪ The study team uses the data set as part of a larger study in the future.  
 
11. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
▪ Subjects will be not bil led for any r esearch procedures.  
▪ Subjects will be provided a parking voucher for each research visit.  
▪ Patients w ill receive a gift card for each visit completed, up to $200 for the entire study:  
o Screening and Baseline: $ 100 
o VNS Titration Visits (up to 5 visits): $ 50 
o Final Visit: $50   
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 13 of 15 
 APPENDIX  1.  SCHEDULE  OF STUDY  VISITS 
 Screening 
and Baseline 
Visita VNS Titration 
Visits (up to 5 
visits at UCLA)  Final Visit  Early Study 
Withdraw Visit  
Informed Consent  X    
Medical History  X    
Seizure History  X X X X 
     
VNS Titration   X   
Autonomics Test:  
Tilt Table Test  
Deep Breathing  
Valsalva Maneuver  
Cold Press or Test X  X  
Cardiopulmonary 
Exercise Test X  X  
Medication Review  X X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X 
  
a  ±2 days 
  
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 14 of 15 
 References  
1. Ajijola OA, Lux RL, Khahera A, Kwon O, Aliotta  E, Ennis DB, Fishbein MC, Ardell JL, 
Shivkumar K (2017). Sympathetic modulation of electrical activatino in normal and infarcted 
myocardium: implications for arrhythmogenesis. Am J Heart Circ Phys 312: H608 -21. 
2. Ardell JL, Andresen MC, Armour JA, Billman G E, Chen PS, Foreman RD, Herring N, O'Leary 
DS, Sabbah HN, Schultz HD, Sunagawa K & Zucker IH. (2016). Translational 
neurocardiology: preclinical models and cardioneural integrative aspects. J Physiol 594, 3877 -
3909. 
3. Ardell JL, Nier H, Hammer M, Southerland  EM, Ardell CL, Beaumont E, KenKnight BH & 
Armour JA. (2017). Defining the neural fulcrum for chronic vagus nerve stimulation: 
implications for integrated cardiac control. J Physiol 595, 6887 -6903. 
4. Ardell JL, Rajendran PS, Nier HA, KenKnight BH & Armour JA. (2015). Central -peripheral 
neural network interactions evoked by vagus nerve stimulation: functional consequences on 
control of cardiac function. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 309, H1740 -1752. 
5. DiCarlo LA, Libbus I, Kumar HU, Mittal S, Premchan d RK, Amurthur B, KenKnight BH, 
Ardell JL & Anand IS. (2018). Autonomic regulation therapy to enhance myocardial function 
in heart failure patients: the ANTHEM -HFpEF study. ESC Heart Fail 5, 95 -100. 
6. Elinor Ben -Menachem (2001). Vagus Nerve Stimulation, Side  Effects, and Long -Term Safety. 
Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology. 18(5):415 –418. 
7. Irie T, Yamakawa K, Hamon D, Nakamura K, ShivkumarK, Vaseghi M (2017). Cardiac 
sympathetic innervation via middle cervical and stellate ganglia and antiarrhythmic mechanism  
of bilateral stellectomy. Am J Phys Heart Circ Phys 312, H392 -H405. 
8. Haws CW, Lux RL. (1990). Correlation between in vivo transmembrane action potential 
durations and activation -recovery intervals from electrograms. Effects of interventions that 
alter repo larization time. Circulation 81, 218 -8. 
9. Libbus I, Nearing BD, Amurthur B, KenKnight BH & Verrier RL. (2016). Autonomic 
regulation therapy suppresses quantitative T -wave alternans and improves baroreflex sensitivity 
in patients with heart failure enrolled i n the ANTHEM -HF study. Heart Rhythm 13, 721 -728. 
10. Millar CK, Kralio FA, Lux RL (1985). Correlation between refractory periods and activation - 
recovery intervals from electrograms: effects of rate and adrenergic interventions. Circulatoin 
72, 1372-9. 
 
11. Nakahara S, Vaseghi M, Rarmirez RJ, Fonseca CG, Lai CK, Finn JP, Mahajan A, Boyle NG, 
Shivkumar K (2011). Characterization of myocardial scars: electrophysiological imaging 
correlates in porcine infarct model. Heart Rhythm, 1060 -7. 
12. Nearing BD, Libbus I, Amurthur  B, Kenknight BH & Verrier RL. (2016). Acute Autonomic 
Engagement Assessed by Heart Rate Dynamics During Vagus Nerve Stimulation in Patients 
With Heart Failure in the ANTHEM -HF Trial. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 27, 1072 -1077. 
13. Premchand RK, Sharma K, Mitta l S, Monteiro R, Dixit S, Libbus I, DiCarlo LA, Ardell JL, 
Rector TS, Amurthur B, KenKnight BH & Anand IS. (2016). Extended Follow -Up of Patients 
With Heart Failure Receiving Autonomic Regulation Therapy in the ANTHEM -HF Study. J 
Card Fail 22, 639 -642. 
14. Salavatian S, Beaumont E, Gibbons D, Hammer M, Hoover DB, Armour JA & Ardell JL. 
(2017). Thoracic spinal cord and cervical vagosympathetic neuromodulation obtund nodose 
sensory transduction of myocardial ischemia. Auton Neurosci 208, 57 -65. 
Version 8.0 
 
11/10/2022    
Page 15 of 15 
 15. Salavatian S, Beau mont E, Longpre JP, Armour JA, Vinet A, Jacquemet V, Shivkumar K & 
Ardell JL. (2016). Vagal stimulation targets select populations of intrinsic cardiac neurons to 
control neurally induced atrial fibrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 311, H1311 - 
H1320. 
16. Shivkumar K, Ajijola OA, Anand I, Armour JA, Chen PS, Esler M, De Ferrari GM, Fishbein 
MC, Goldberger JJ, Harper RM, Joyner MJ, Khalsa SS, Kumar R, Lane R, Mahajan A, Po S, 
Schwartz PJ, Somers VK, Valderrabano M, Vaseghi M & Zipes DP. (2016). Clinical 
neurocardiology defining the value of neuroscience -based cardiovascular therapeutics. J 
Physiol 594, 3911 -3954. 
17. Vaseghi M, Salavatian S, Rajendran PS, Yagishita D, Woodward WR, Hamon D, Yamakawa 
K, Irie T, Habecker BA & Shivkumar K. (2017). Parasympathetic  dysfunction and 
antiarrhythmic effect of vagal nerve stimulation following myocardial infarction. JCI Insight 2.  
18. Vaseghi M, Lux R, Mahajan A, Shivkumar K (2012). Sympathetic stimulation increases 
dispersion of repolarization in humans with myocardial infa rction. Am J Heart Circ Phys 
302,H1838 -46. 
19. Yamakawa K, So EL, Rajendran PS, Hoang JD, Makkar N, Mahajan A, Shivkumar K & 
Vaseghi M. (2014). Electrophysiological effects of right and left vagal nerve stimulation on the 
ventricular myocardium. Am J Physiol H eart Circ Physiol 307, H722 -731. 
 