  
 
 
 
 
Neural Response to Food Stimuli: FMRI Changes Following Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy for Binge Eating Disorder  
 
Principal Investigator:   Ariana M. Chao, Ph.D., CRNP  
University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Dep t. of 
Biobehavioral Health Sciences  
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Dep t. of Psychiatry  
418 Curie Blvd, Room 323  
Philadelphia, PA 19104  
215-746-7183  
arichao@nursing.upenn.edu  
   
IRB Number:    829018  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Number   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study Site:    Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania;  
Neuroscience Neuroimaging Center  
University of Pennsylvania;  
Center for Weight and Eating Disorders  
                       University of Pennsylvania  
 
Initial Version:   January 22, 2018 , version 1. 1 
 
Amended:    June 12, 2018, version 2.0  
    September 26, 2019, version 3.0  
    August 21, 2020, version 4.0  
 
  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
Study Summary  
Title Neural response to food stimuli: fMRI changes following cognitive 
behavioral therapy for binge eating disorder  
Short Title  NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
IRB Number  829018  
Phase  Phase  4 
Methodology  Randomized, waitlist controlled, open label  
Study Duration  3 years  
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  The purpose of this research is to conduct a randomized controlled trial 
(RCT) assessing the impact of CBT on neural responses to binge eating 
stimuli. Females with a BMI>25 kg/m2 and BED will be randomized to 
either a 16 -week, one -on-one CBT intervention (n=20) or a waitlist 
control (WL; n=20). Both groups will have blood oxygen level -
dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
scans at baseline and after the 16 -week intervention. During the scans, 
participants will complete the following  tasks: 1) food -specific stop 
signal task (SST), and 2) script -driven imagery of binge foods. 
Number of 
Subjects  40 
Main Inclusion and 
Exclusion Criteria  Key Inclusion: BMI >25 kg/m2; binge eating disorder as diagnosed by 
DSM -5 criteria; female  
 
Key Exclusion:  Weight > 158.8 kg; left -handedness; pregnancy or 
lactation; current diagnosis of severe major depression or other 
psychiatric disorder that significantly interferes with daily living; active 
suicidal ideation; presence o f conditions that may int erfere with 
magnetic resonance imaging; use of weight loss medications or other 
agents known to affect body weight or blood glucose; type 1 or 2 
diabetes mellitus; visual, auditory, or other impairment affecting task 
performance  
Reference therapy  Waitlist control group  
Statistical 
Methodology  Mixed -effect s linear models  
Safety Evaluations  Adverse events   
Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan  Drs. Chao an d the co -investigators  will be resp onsible for  monitoring 
the data quality and the ongoing safety of subjects.   
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
1. BACKGROUND AND STUDY RATIONALE  
1 Background and Relevant Literature  
Binge Eating Disorder (BED). BED is a serious public health problem. It is characterized by 
eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is larger than most people would 
consume under similar circumstances. Patients report a sense of loss of control over eating, 
followed by distress about their behavior.1 The p revalence of BED is 2.8% among US adults.2 
BED effects twice as many females as males but is comparable in prevalence across racial/ethnic 
groups.2 BED has a chronic course and leads to progressive weight gain if left untreated .3,4 BED 
and obesity are highly comorbid, and the frequency of binge eating episodes is strongly 
associated with body mass index (BMI).5 Individuals with BED have a higher prevalence of 
medical and psychiatric morbidities compared to individuals without BED, including metabolic 
syndrome, functional impairment, and  lower quality of life.6,7 Patients with BED differ behaviorally, 
psychologically, genetically, and physiologically from persons with other forms of obesity and 
eating disorders7-11; notably,  these individuals have high levels of dietary disinhibition and food 
reward sensitivity.12,13 BED re presents a vulnerable phenotype of obesity for which there is an 
urgent need for better treatment approaches.  
 
Critical Need for Better BED Treatment Approaches. Treatment options for BED remain limited 
and are often not sufficient for patients. Current available treatments include psychotherapy, 
behavioral weight loss, and pharmacotherapy. A specific type of psychotherapy, cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT), is the most effective treatment for BED.14 CBT is associated with 
significantly higher binge eating abstinence rates than no treatment and abstinence rates are 15 -
44% higher in CBT than behavioral weight loss.15-17 Unfortunately, even with CBT, roughly half of 
patients with BED do not achieve full remission of binge eating,15,17 -19 and there are no reliable 
predictors of treatment response. Further knowledge is needed about how to best prevent and 
treat BED. Effective prevention and treatment strategies rely on a better understanding of both 
the etiology and maintenance of binge eat ing behaviors.  
 
Neurobehavioral Aspects of BED. Neurobehavioral studies have revealed distinct 
vulnerabilities in individuals with BED that may underlie the emergence and maintenance of their 
symptoms. Behavioral studies have demonstrated two primary defi cits in people with BED relative 
to in dividuals without this disorder —disinhibition and food reward sensitivity.12,13 Recent 
neurobiological evidence has provided in sight into the mechanisms underlying these behavioral 
data. Compared to obese patients without BED, individuals with BED have diminished activation 
in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) when 
completing  inhibitory control tasks.20 These regions are associated with executive functioning, 
decision making, and impulse control.21 Individuals with BED, relative to those without, have 
increased activation in neural regions associated with reward sensitivity (i.e., PFC, OFC, insula, 
ventral tegmen tal area (VTA), and ventral striatum (VS).22-26 Only one study has examined the 
relationship between neural mechanisms and BED treatment outcomes. In that study, participants 
completed a monetary incentive delay task during a pre -treatment fMRI. Compared to individuals 
who achieved remission with BED, those who continued to binge following treatment with 
sibutramine and/or CBT showed less a ctivation of specific frontostriatal brain regions during pre -
treatment fMRI scans.27   
 
Neural Responses to CBT.  To our knowledge, no studies have examined the impact of CBT on 
neural response in patients with BED. However, several converging lines of research have 
emerged that use fMRI, a safe and noninvasive way to image neural activity,28 to assess the 
impact of CBT on brain function. The most common method of fMRI measures the blood 
oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal, which uses cerebral blood flow to delineate regional 
activity in the brain.28 These studies have been conducted among individuals with various 
conditions including anxiety  disorder,29-32 major depressive disorder,33,34 chronic pain,35 and 
substance use disorder.36,37 This literature has demonstrated that CBT, which promotes changes 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 2 in the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of patients, also promotes neural changes that are 
discernible immediately after treatment.33,34,38,39 These studies have helped to develop cognitive 
neuroscience models of diseases and to identify neural processes that mediate symptom 
expression. This research will be used to develop novel,  neurobiologically -informed treatments 
for BED such as cognitive training interventions, which may help patients capitalize on the 
adaptive capacity of the brain to improve self -management behavior.  
 
Predictors of CBT Response.  A significant barrier to pre cisely targeting treatment for BED is 
that there are no reliable predictors of outcomes. This study will also form the basis of a line of 
inquiry that uses neural biomarkers in predictive models of BED outcomes. A growing body of 
literature in anxiety and depression has shown that relative to baseline demographic or clinical 
information, pre -treatment variance in neural activity is a better and more reliable predictor of 
response to both pharmacological and psychological interventions.40-42 Identification of 
neuroimaging biomarkers associated with CBT intervention response can help identify vulnerable 
and treatment -responsive groups. Our lack of understanding of neural function in relation to BED 
forms a critical barrier to the development of efficacious, patient -centered treatment approaches.   
 
This document is a clinical research protocol and the described study will be conducted in 
compliance w ith the protocol, Good Clinical Practice standards, associated federal regulations, 
and all applicable University research requirements. This study will be conducted in full 
accordance all applicable University of Pennsylvania Research Policies and Procedu res and all 
applicable Federal and state laws and regulations including 45 CFR 46 , and Good Clinical 
Practice . All episodes of noncompliance will be documented.  
2 Study Objectives  
The purpose of this research is to conduct a randomized controlled trial (RCT) assessing the 
impact of CBT on neural responses to binge eating stimuli. Females with  a BMI >25kg/m2 and 
BED will be randomized to either a 16 -week, one -on-one CBT intervention (n=20) or a waitlist 
control (WL; n=20). Both groups will have blood oxygen level -dependent (BOLD) functional 
magnetic resonance imaging  (fMRI) scans at baseline and after the 16 -week intervention. During 
the scans, participants will complete the following tasks: 1) food -specific stop signal task (SST), 
and 2) script -driven imagery of binge foods. 
2.1 Primary Objective  
Aim 1:  Compare differenc es between the CBT and WL groups at week 16 in changes in BOLD 
fMRI response to the food -specific SST.  
Hypothesis 1: Since CBT for BED involves successful management of dietary disinhibition, we 
propose that participants will have favorable pre - to post -treatment changes in regions of interest 
(ROIs) that are associated with inhibitory control. We hypothesize that the CBT group, compared 
with the WL group, will have increased activation in the PFC, IFG, OFC, and insula during the 
food-specific SST.  
 
Aim 2:  Compare differences between the CBT and WL groups at week 16 in changes in BOLD 
fMRI response to recall of binge foods (i.e., script -driven imagery).  
Hypothesis 2: CBT teaches participants how to reduce responsiveness to binge foods. Thus, we 
propose that  CBT will alter neural responses in regions that promote food reward. We hypothesize 
that after treatment, the CBT group, compared to the WL group, will have decreased activation in 
the PFC, OFC, insula, VTA, and VS in response to script -driven imagery of binge foods.  
 
Aim 3: Determine whether pre -treatment neural activation on the SST and script -driven imagery 
task predict differences between CBT responders and non -responders ( >1 binge eating episode 
in the past 28 days).  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 3 Hypothesis 3: Results from other p sychiatric disorders show that patients with greater 
dysfunction in neural circuitry related to their disease are less likely to respond to treatment. We 
predict that relative to CBT responders, non -responders will have lower pre -treatment BOLD 
activation in the inhibitory control ROIs during the SST and higher pre -treatment BOLD 
activation in the reward ROIs during the script -driven imagery task.  
2.2 Secon dary Objectives  
Aim 4:  Assess the associations between pre - to post -treatment behavioral changes in reported 
binge eating episodes (percent reduction and categorical response), in reward -based eating drive, 
and in dietary inhibition, and pre - to post -treatment neural changes on the SST and script -driven 
imagery task.  
3 Study Endpoints  
3.1.1  Primary Study Endpoints  
The primary endpoints are baseline to 16 -week changes in BOLD fMRI response to food -specific 
SST and to binge -eating script -driven imagery.  
3.1.2  Secondary Study Endpoints  
Secondary study endpoints include changes in binge eating episodes (percent reduction and 
categorical response), in reward -based eating drive, and in dietary inhibition . 
4 Investigational Plan  
4.1 General Design  
We propose a randomized, waitlist -controlled trial of a 16 -week CBT intervention for females with 
a BMI >25 kg/m2 and BED as diagnosed by DSM -5 criteria (n=40).1 We will assess the effects of 
CBT on neural responses to binge -eating stimuli and neural  predictors of treatment response. 
Participants will have assessments at baseline and after 16 weeks, with each assessment 
including neuroimaging with BOLD fMRI. We use 16 weeks for our follow -up assessment based 
on previous studies in different conditions  (e.g., depression33,34 and anxiety38) demonstrating 
discernible changes in neural function immediately after CBT. Also, CBT treatment effects for 
BED are most robust at 16 weeks, which will maximize our effect sizes.43-45 
 
5 Study Population and Duration of Participation  
5.1 Total Number of Subjects and Sites  
This is a single -site study. We will randomly assign 40 females with BED to either CBT or a waitlist 
control.   
5.2 Inclusion Criter ia 
1. Women who meet the DSM -5 criteria for BED as diagnosed by the Eating Disorder 
Examination Interview  
a. Recurrent episodes of binge eating characterized by  consuming an abnormally 
large amount of food in a short period of time compared with what others might 
eat in the same amount of time under the same or similar circumstances , and 
experiencing a loss of control over eating during the episode.  
b. These episodes feature at least 3 of the following:  
i. consuming food more rapidly than normal;  
ii. eating until uncomfortably full;  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 4 iii. consuming large amounts of food when not hungry;  
iv. consuming food alone due to embarrassment;  
v. feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty after eating a large amount of food.  
c. Significa nt distress about the binge episodes is present.  
d. Binge episodes must occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months.  
2. Ages 18 to 45 years of age  
3. BMI >25 kg/m2 
4. Premenopausal  
5. Able to provide informed consent  
6. Right -handed  
7. Eligible female patients will be: 
• Non-pregnant, evidenced by a negative urine dipstick pregnancy test  
• Non-lactating  
• Surgically sterile or postmenopausal, or they will agree to continue to use an 
accepted method of birth control during the study  
Acceptable methods of birth control are:  hormonal contraceptives; double barrier 
method (condom with spermicide or diaphragm with spermicide); intrauterine 
device; surgical sterility; abstinence.  
8. Understand and be willing to comply with all study -related procedures and agree to 
participate in the study by giving written informed consent  
5.3 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Weight > 158.8 kg (350 lbs, due to scanner weight restrictions)  
2. Supine abdominal width (with arms folded above) > 70 cm or sagittal diameter > 50 cm 
(due to scanner dimension re strictions)  
3. Pregnant or nursing (or plans to become pregnant in the next 5 months)  
4. Evidence of psychiatric disorder that significantly interferes with daily living  
5. Active suicidal ideation  
6. Self-reported t ype 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes  
7. Use of weight loss  medications or other agents known to affect body weight (e.g., oral 
glucocorticoids, second -generation antipsychotic medications)  in the past 3 months  
8. Psychiatric hospitalization within the past 6 months  
9. Self-reported alcohol or substance abuse within the  past 12 months, including at -risk 
drinking (current consumption of ≥ 14 alcoholic drinks per week)  
10. Self-reported use of illicit drugs within the past 30 days  
11. Presence or history of orthopedic circumstances, metallic inserts, pacemaker, 
claustrophobia, or other conditions that may interfere with magnetic resonance imaging  
12. Loss of ≥ 10 lb of body weight within the past 3 months  
13. History of (or plans for) bariatric surgery  
14. Visual, auditory, or other impairment that would affect  task performance  
15. Epilepsy or oth er brain injury  
16. Participation in individual psychotherapy for BED in the prior 3 months  
17. Inability to attend treatment and lack of capacity to provide informed consent  
18. Any serious or unstable medical or psychological condition that, in the opinion of the 
investigator, would compromise the patient’s safety or successful participation in the 
study  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 5 5.4 Duration of Study Participation  
The approximate duration of study participation for subjects assigned to the CBT group is 5 
months. The approximate duration of study participant for those assigned to the wait -list control 
is 9 months  (5 months on the waitlist and then 4 months of CBT treatment) . 
6 Procedu res 
6.1 Recruitment, accrual, and retention.   
We will recruit participants at a single site – the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA - through local media advertisements and 
news shows/outlets, as we ll as Internet -based advertising outlets and flyers  and brochures  around 
our community.  We also will advertise using clinician referrals from primary care clinics affiliated 
with the University of Pennsylvania Health System . We will be recruiting from the  university -based 
website, iConnect, which allows access to their volunteer registry data of potential participants . We will 
use study condition terms such as  “binge eat* ”; “eating disorder *”; and/or obesity.  Recruitment may 
also use Penn media services (e.g., communications) and social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter ; 
please see attached for information about Facebook recruitment ). We conservatively estimate a 
drop-out rate of 25% based on prior experience in our labs and will enroll 4 0 participants to have 
30 complete the study. Based on prior studies of BED in our labs,17,46,47 we expect to screen 50 
to 75 females who respond to our advertisements per month and enroll about 5 females each 
month. To minimize attrition we will use multiple evidence -based strategies that i mprove retention 
rates including scheduling sessions at convenient times, maintaining close contact, and providing 
compensation for assessment visits and travel costs.48 Travel compensation will be given at the 
end of each CBT session , as applicable.  Our research group has successfully completed a 
number of long -term intervention and fMRI trials that have lasted >4 months with attrition rates 
<20%.49-51 
6.2 Screening  
Phone screening. Interested subjects will call in and be consented verbally, over the phone, by 
study staff to participate in the initial telephone screening. Study staff  from the Center for Weight 
and Eating Disorders will describe the study, explain that the research is completely voluntary, 
and conduct a brief screening of candidates who express an interest in proceeding ( e.g., check 
for handedness, substance use history, binge eating, and MRI eligibility). We request  a waiver of 
written documentation of c onsent for the telephone and  questionnaire screen. Those who appear 
to meet eligibility criteria and remain interested in the trial will  be scheduled for an in -person 
interview.  
 
Screening and intake visit. Following the initial telephone screening assessment, eligible 
participants will attend a 3.5 -hour intake visit at the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders at the 
University of Pennsylvania. At the screening visit, candidates will meet individually with study 
staff, including a study nurse practitioner or physician . We will obtain the following:  
• Informed consent  (general and individual consents for audiorecording)  
• MRI-eligibility checklist  
• Diagnostic and psychological interview to assess for BED and frequency of binge  
episodes (Eating Disorder Examination52) 
• Psychiatric exam using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)53 and 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale54 
• Routine medical history and physical exam including height, we ight, and urine pregnancy 
test 
• Interview for script -driven imagery of bin ge foods task (described below)  
• Practice session of the food -specific SST to minimize the learning effects of the 
experiment  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 6 • Questionnaires  (emailed via REDCap or printed)  
o Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire52 
o Eating Inventory55 
o Reward -Based Eating Drive Scale56 
o Loss of Control Over Eating Scale57 
o Yale Food Addiction Scale58 
o Food Craving Questionnaire – Trait and State versions59 
o Beck Depression Inventory -II60 
o Barratt Impulsiveness Scale61 
o Clinical Impairment Assessment Questionnai re62 
o Short  Form 36  Health Survey  63 
o Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive  Scale - Binge Eating64 
o National Institute of Nursing Research  Index of Self -Regulation65 
 
Throughout the study, participants will be asked to keep a menstrual cycle diary. Individuals who 
do not wish to participate in the research study will receive recommendations for alternative 
treatments for binge eating disorder if they are interested.  
 
6.2.1  FMRI Study Assessment Visits   
After participants complete the screening procedures, provide their informed consent to 
participate, and are enrolled into the study, they will complete two study assessment visits (one 
at baseline and one after the 16 week treatment).  
 
Planning for the Assessment Visit  
Study assessment visits will be scheduled for the morning and last approximately 105 minutes 
(60 minutes in the fMRI scanner and 45 minutes to complete questionnaires and physical 
measurements; Figure 1). The visit will be held at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. 
Participants will be asked to fast (including no caffeine or alcohol) for at least 8 hours prior to the 
appointment to increase the stimulus salience67 and create a more homogeneous hunger state 
across participants. Participants will be asked to remove all jewelry and metal obje cts at the visit. 
Participants who require vision correction will be instructed to wear contact lenses or will be 
provided with MRsafe glasses in their prescription strength.  
 
Imaging Procedures  
Pre-scan preparation. Visits on imaging days 
will begin in the morning at the Hospital of the 
University of Pennsylvania. Upon arriving, 
participants will be greeted by research staff 
who will re-administer the MRI -eligibility 
checklist to ensure no changes have occurred 
that would render MRI unsafe or 
uncomfortable. The MRI technician will review 
this checklist. All participants will be asked 
about pregnancy status. For those who are 
unsure, a urine pregnancy will be completed 
prior to the scan. Those who attest to being 
pregnant or test positive will be withdrawn. 
Participants will change into a hospital gown and be weighed, without shoes, on a calibrated 
electronic scale (BWB 800S, Tanita Corp ., Tokyo, Japan) and will have their waist circumference 
and blood pressure measured. They will then complete a self -report measure of current mood 
(i.e., the Profile of Mood States, Brief Form68) and visual analog scales for stress, hunger, food Figure 1 . Summary of Assessment Visit. POMS -BF=Profile of  Mood States, Brief Form; VAS=Visual 
analog scales for stress, hunger, food cravings, fatigue; RSDI Scale=Response to Script -Driven Imagery 
Scale; BE=binge eating; EDE=Eating Disorder Examination; RBEDS=Reward -Based Eating Drive 
Scale; TFEQ=Three Factor Ea ting Questionnaire; BDI=Beck Depression Inventory  
 

NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 7 cravings, and fatigue level. They also will be required to demonstrate understanding of the task 
and use of the response device prior to entering the scanner .    
 
Imaging equipment.  We will use a clinically approved 3.0 Tesla Siemens Prisma  scanner 
equipped with 64-channel head coil. BOLD fMRI sequences include automatic higher order 
shimming and both prospective and retrospective motion correction.  Gradient performance allows 
4 mm isotropic voxels at TR=2 sec and 3 mm isotropic voxels at TR=3 sec (3T). The system uses 
a transmit/receive head coil.  
 
The research scanner is equipped with stimulus delivery and monitoring systems for fMRI 
research. Thi s includes Sanyo SXGA 4200 lumens projectors with Sanyo Long Throw zoom lens  
for rear -view/rear projection onto Mylar screens. Video signals are carried into the magnet room 
using a Lightwave FiberLynx  optical -fiber VGA connection. Both the projector and the FiberLynx 
units are housed in custom RF shield boxes with filtered power receptacles. Images are viewed 
through mirrors mounted on the head coils.  
Audio stimuli will be presented via air-conduction headphones and  an Avotec audio system which 
is equipped with two different styles of head phones to accommodate variance in patient head 
size. Responses will be monitored using a color -coded keypad made of non -ferromagnetic 
components (FORP Current Design Inc., Philadelphia, PA) installed at the 3T system.  
The MRI scan procedures have been designed to last 55 minutes. To ensure completion of all 
scans, each procedure will be timed and every effort will be made to keep as close to the 
designated schedule as  possible. In respect of time and data quality, if necessary, scans will be 
skipped or re -run at the discretion of the research team.   
 
Protocol for structural MRI (5 minutes).  A magnetization -prepared, rapid acquisition gradient 
echo (MPRAGE) image will be acquired for anatomic overlays of functional data and spatial 
normalization using the following parameters: TI/TR/TE=1100/1810/3.51ms, flip=9°, 
matrix=256x192, FOV=240x180mm, slices=160, slice thickness=1mm.  
 
Protocol for BOLD fMRI (~10 minutes).  Resti ng and Task fMRI data will be acquired using a 
whole -brain, single -shot, multi -slice, gradient -echo EPI sequence with the following parameters: 
TR/TE = 3000/32 ms, flip = 90°, FOV = 192 × 192 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, 46 slices, slice 
thickness/gap = 3 mm/0 mm . The resulting nominal voxel size was 3.0 × 3.0 × 3.0 mm. EPI 
acquisitions include a 20 second dummy -scan period allowing the magnetic resonance signal to 
reach steady -state.  
 
FMRI Tasks. We will use two tasks to assess the impact of CBT on neural activi ty to food -cue 
tasks. Our tasks have been selected to target relevant cognitive and neural models of BED. The 
timing of the stimulus presentation will be synchronized with trigger pulses from the magnet in 
order to ensure precise temporal integration of st imulus presentation and fMRI data acquisition. 
These tasks will presented in a fixed order with the food -specific SST occurring first and the binge -
eating script -driven imagery second.  
 
BOLD fMRI Task (Food -Specific SST; ~25 Minutes ). The SST is a measure of response 
inhibition, or the ability to inhibit a prepotent response. In this task, we will use an event -related 
design. Participants will be asked to perform the SST using a modified version with high and low 
calorie food images as we have used in a current ongoing trial. Neutral items will include office 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 8 supplies. This task will be run twice including: Run 1) 2 blocks with each block consisting of  high-
calorie foods vs neutral items, and Run 2) 2 blocks with each block consisting of  low-calorie foods 
vs neutral items. Participants will use the response pad and be randomized to either indicate the 
left most button for the food pictures and the right  most button on the response pad for neutral 
items or vice versa. Within subjects assignment will remain the same at pre and post scans. 
Participants are instructed to press keys as quickly and as accurately as possible to indicate the 
direction of the foo d or the office supplies . Following a 32 -trial practice, stop signals ( change in 
the color of the frame around the image ) are presented on 25% of trials for a 32 -trial practice and 
task blocks of 64 trials each.  The initial stop delay in each block is 250 ms and adjusts by 50 ms 
increments depending on whether the participant is able to successfully inhibit a response.69 The 
adjusting stop delay allows the determination of the delay at which  inhibition occurs on 
approximately 50% of trials. All trials consist of a 500 -ms warning stimulus followed by a 1,000 -
ms go signal (left - and right -facing arrows) and 1,000 -ms blank screen intertrial interval. Pictures 
have been matched for complexity, br ightness, and color composition. Stimuli are digital 
photographs of food items depicted in the ready -to-eat state on identical backgrounds that are 
validated and are available in publically available databases.70,71 Each high -calorie block will 
contain at least one image from each of the following categories: salty snacks; sweet snacks; fast 
foods; and desserts. Each low -calorie block will contai n at least one image from each of the 
following categories: non -starchy vegetables; fruit; leafy vegetables; and starchy vegetables.  
 
BOLD fMRI Task (Binge -Eating Script -Drive Imagery; ~15 minutes).  During  the intake visit we 
will collect information for the binge eating script -driven imagery task using methods previously 
established.72,73 We will use both binge eating and neutral scripts that are customized for each 
participant. Binge scripts will be based on the participants’ descriptions of two binge episodes that 
have occurred in the past year. Participants will be instructed to describe the episode in detail. 
Neutral -relaxing scripts will be developed by asking the participant to describe a neutral -relaxing 
situation that they have experienced. We will ask the par ticipant to describe two binge situations 
and two neutral -relaxing situations. Scripts will be developed using a Scene Construction 
Questionnaire, which includes specific stimulus and response details.74,75 A female research 
coordinator will then record the script on an audiotape. Each script will be 2.5 minutes in length 
when read aloud. Each individual will receive training on how to generate and maintain a mental 
image for 30 seconds during the intake visit and will be reminded of these techniques on 
assessment days.73  
 
During the task, participants will be instructed to lie quietly with eyes closed. Each script will be 
presented in randomized, counter -balanced order with four trials pres ented using a block design 
(two trials each of binge eating and two trials of neutral control). Each trial will include a 1 -min 
quiet baseline period followed by a 2 .5-minute imagery period where the participant will be 
instructed to remember the experienc e as vividly as possible, in all of its details, both while the 
2.5-minute  recording plays (script listening) and for an additional 30 seconds after where they 
continue imaging the story while lying in silence (scene imagery). Next, there will be a 1 -minut e 
quiet recovery period. A beep will be played 15 seconds into the recovery period. Participants will 
be required to push a button on the response pad when they hear the beep to confirm accurate 
performance and compliance with task instructions. Participan ts will remain blind to the order until 
presentation during imaging. Personal scripts will be used as personal events trigger greater 
physiological reactivity than imagery of standardized nonpersonal situations.76 The same 
recordings will be used during pre - and post -treatment scans.  
 
Task Assessments, Questionnaires, and Interview.  After the fMRI is completed , participants 
will complete questionnaires to assess response to the fMRI tasks and manipulations and 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 9 treatment outcomes. To assess the response to the tasks using the food images, participants will 
be asked about their liking and wanting and palatability  of the presented foods on an 11 -point 
Likert scale. To assess the response to the symptom provocation task, participants will complete 
the Responses to Script -Driven Imagery Scale.77 Participants will also be asked to indicate the 
date of their last menstrual period at each visit to assess the curren t phase of their menstrual 
cycle as this impacts food reward response.78 Participants will complete physical measurements 
and additional questions , if they have not been completed before their screening visit.  
6.2.2  Post -Treatment Visit (Waitlist Group Only)   
After individuals in the WL group complete their second fMRI assessment, they will be offered 
CBT treatment. For Specific Aim 3,  the WL group will be asked to complete a brief assessment 
after their last CBT session to measure treatment response (i.e., the number of BE episodes in 
the past 28 days).  
6.2.3  Allocation to Interventional Group  
Subjects who meet eligibility criteria and com plete their baseline assessment visit will be randomly 
assigned to the intervention or waitlist condition. We will use a permuted randomized block design 
that randomly mixes blocks of different sizes (2 to 6) to assign 40 eligible participants to CBT or 
waitlist conditions using a one -to-one allocation ratio. This randomization design was selected 
due to the need to create exactly the same group sizes with a small sample.79 A statistician will 
conduct the ra ndomization using a computer -generated  algorithm.80 
7 Study Intervention s 
CBT Intervention. The CBT intervention (Table 1) will consist of weekly, 50 -minute individual 
meetings for 16 weeks with a clinician trained in CBT for binge eating disorder. The treatment will 
be administered us ing a manualized treatment protocol adapted from Fairburn81 and Mitchell.82 
The overall goals of CBT  for BED are to interrupt binge -eating behavior, learn self -management 
strategies to help reinstitute more normal eating habits, change erroneous beliefs about weight 
and shape and develop healthier attitudes towards one’s body. Participants are taught a v ariety 
of skills including identifying triggers of binge eating episodes, correcting beliefs or thought 
patterns related to binge eating, and altering attitudes regarding food and eating. Homework is 
assigned at each session so participants can practice th e skills that they have learned. To monitor 
treatment integrity and adherence, treatment sessions will be reviewed under the supervision of 
Drs. Wadden  or Chao . This treatment has been tested in a number of trials for BED43 and we 
anticipate seeing 50% of individuals with full remission from binge eating and a 68 -90% reduction 
in the number of binge eating episodes.83  
 
Table 1. CBT for BED Intervention  
Stage  Aim Weeks  
1: 
Introduction  • Jointly creating a formulation of the processes maintaining the eating 
disorder  
• Establish real -time monitoring of eating and other relevant thoughts and 
behavior  
• Provide education about body weight regulation and fluctuations, the 
physical complications and the adverse effects of dieting  
• Introduce weekly weighing  
• Introduce a pattern of regular eating  1-4 
 
2: Transition  • Jointly reviewing progress  
• Identify barriers to change  
• Modify the formulation as needed  5-6 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 10  
Waitlist Control Group.  Participants who are ass igned to the wait -list group will complete their 
assessment visits at baseline and 16 weeks . We will request that they not seek treatment for 
weight or binge eating disorder during the wait period. This will be verified at a brief telephone call 
check -in at week 8 where we will also update the patient on their study status, as well as at the 
week 16 visit. After they complete their post -treatment assessment, they  will be offered the 16 -
week cognitive behavioral therapy treatment. At their last treatment ses sion, they will be asked to 
complete a brief as sessment on the effect of the CBT treatment.  
7.1 Vulnerable Populations:  
Children, pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or prisoners are not i ncluded in this research study.  
Although not directly targeted, mentally  disabled persons, economically or educationally 
disadvantaged persons, and/or employees or students of the University of Pennsylvania will not 
be denied enrollment and any special protections and/or additional safeguards will be undertaken 
in order to pro tect the rights and welfare of these subjects from coercion or undue influence as 
appropriate.  
 Plan Stage Three  
3: Main body 
of treatment  Address key mechanisms that are maintaining BED  
• Overevaluation of shape and weight  
• - Provide education about overevaluation and its consequences  
• - Reduce unhelpful body checking and avoidance  
• - Relabel unhelpful thoughts or feelings such as “feeling fat”  
• - Develop previously marginalized domains of self -evaluation  
• - Explore the origins of the overevaluation  
• Dietary restraint  
• - Change inflexible dietary rules into flexible guidelines  
• - Introduce previously avoided food  
• Event triggered changes in eating  
• - Develop problem -solving skills to directly tackle such events  
• - Develop skills to accept and modulate intense moods  7-14 
4: Final stage  • Provide education about realistic expectations  
• Devise a short -term plan for the months following treatment  
Devise a long -term plan to minimize relapse in the future  15-16 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 11  
7.2 Subject Withdrawal  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time without impact to their care.  They may also be 
discontinued from the study at the discretion of the Investigator for lack of adherence to 
intervention or study procedures or visit schedules, AEs, or due to subject pregnancy or intention 
of becoming pregnant. The Investigator may also withdraw subjects who violate the study plan, 
or to protect the subject for reasons of safety or for administrative reasons.  It will be documented 
whether or not each subject c ompletes the clinical study.  
 Table 2. Study Assessment Schedule   
 Waitlist Group Only  
 Screen  T1 Intervention  
or Waitlist  
(16 weeks)  T2 Intervention 
(16 weeks)  T3 
Informed Consent - General  X      
Informed Consent - Audiorecording 
BED Assessment  X   X  X 
Informed Consent - Audiorecording 
treatment sessions  X  X  X  
Demographic and Clinical Variables        
Review inclusion/exclusion criteria  X      
Demographics  X      
Medical history and physical exam  X      
Prior/concomitant medications  X   X  X 
Review medication changes and 
updates     X  X 
Vital signs (BP, HR)  X      
Pregnancy test  X      
MINI  X      
Menstrual diary  X X X X   
BMI X X X X  X 
Profile of Mood States (Brief Form)   X  X   
Scales for stress, hunger, food 
cravings, fatigue   X  X   
Responses to Script -Driven Imagery 
Scale   X  X   
Outcome Measures  
fMRI scan (SST, Script -driven imagery)   X  X   
Eating Disorder Examination  X   X  X 
Reward -Based Eating Drive Scale   X  X   
Three Factor Eating Questionnaire   X  X   
Additional Questionnaires  (described in 
Section 6.2)   X  X  X 
Intervention adherence/fidelity  
Sessions attended, skill builders 
completed    X    
Adverse event/unanticipated problems 
assessment   X X X  X 
 Note. T1=Baseline; T2=16 week follow -up. T3=Assessment of post -CBT treatment outcomes for the 
waitlist group only. SST=Stop signal task.  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 12 Lost to follow -up: In the case of subjects who do not return to the  Center  for study procedures 
and cannot be contacted, study personnel will make vigorous and repeated attempts (minimum 
of 3) to contact the subject. These at tempts will include at least 1 mailing . If all attempts to contact 
the subject fail, that subject will be considered to be lost to follow -up and discontinued from the 
study.  
 
Subject Replacement  
Subjects who prematurely discontinue from the study or become ineligible will not be replaced 
once they have been randomized.   Every effort will be made to obtain follow -up data on all 
participants randomized.  
 
8 Statistical Plan  
8.1 Sample Size and Power Determination  
The power calculation is based on current standards in exploratory neuroimaging studies. 
Previous fMRI studies that used groups of 15 subjects per condition were sufficient to detect 
significant differences in BOLD signal response to behavioral tasks.84,85 Due to resource 
limitations, our sample size will be limited. The  sample size will allow us to detect effect sizes of 
0.93 or larger in BOLD signal between groups with 80% power controlling for type 1 errors at 5% 
using a one -sided test.  
 
8.2 Statistical Methods  
8.2.1  Baseline Data  
Baseline and demographic characteristics will be  summarized by standard descriptive statistics 
(including mean and standard deviation for continuous variables such as age and standard 
percentages for categorical variables such as gender).  
 
8.2.2  Efficacy Analysis  
Baseline to 16 -week changes self -report and b ehavioral variables will be examined using mixed -
effect general linear models, fit with the between -subject factor of treatment group and the within -
subject factor of time. Differences between groups in percent of participants classified as 
responders will  be analyzed using a chi -square test.  Statistical significance will be defined as 
p<0.05 in analyses.  
 
The primary analysis will only include responses to high calorie food, since the CBT intervention 
is designed to improve inhibition to “bad” (i.e., high-calorie) foods. Response -inhibition -related 
BOLD activity will be tested using similar analytic strategies as previous trials.86-88 Analysis of data 
indicating changes in each ROI will be conducted using a mixed -effects general linear model with 
time (baseline vs 16 weeks) an d trial type (stop vs go) as within -subject factors and group (CBT 
vs WL) as a between -subjects factor.89 Percent reduction in binge eating episo des will be included 
as a statistical covariate . Since no significant differences have been found between successful vs 
unsuccessful stops, we will not distinguish these a priori . 90 Exploratory contrasts will be 
conducted using the same analysis procedures to examine specificity to energy density (contrast 
with high - and low -calorie foods) and general inhibitory behavior (high -calorie food vs neutral and 
low-calorie  food vs neutral). We will also examine differences among the CBT and WL groups in 
brain -behavior correlations using correlations between BOLD activation in the ROIs with the 
behavioral measure (SSRT).  
 
The primary analysis  for aim 2 will be the  script -listening time-block . We will use a similar 
approach as above to examine data from recall of binge eating episodes. In the mixed -effects 
general linear model, analysis of data indicating changes in each ROI will be conducted using 
time (baseline vs 16 weeks) and trial type (binge food vs neutral) as within -subject factors and 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 13 group (CBT vs WL) as a between -subjects factor. Percent reduction in binge eating episodes will 
be included as a statistical covariate.  
8.3 Subject Population(s) for Analysis  
We will use an intention -to-treat approach of all randomized participants for all primary analyses. 
Additional analyses will be conducted with protocol -compliant participants.    
9 Safety and Adverse Events  
9.1.1  Definitions  
9.1.1.1  Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in 
severity during the course of the study.  Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as 
adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be  adverse events 
if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by the investigator to be of  clinical significance  
9.1.1.2  Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE 
that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospital stay  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly 
of major clinical significance.   They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to 
prevent one of the othe r serious outcomes noted above. All adverse events that do not meet any 
of the criteria for serious should be regarded as non-serious adverse events .  
10 Recording of Adverse Events  
At each contact with subjects, study personnel will be responsive to reports of adverse events 
with specific questioning , and, as appropriate, by examination . The investigator will report all 
adverse events includi ng serious adverse events (SAE) and  suspected unexpected seri ous 
adverse reactions (SUSARs) (as defined below) to the Penn IRB. Information on all adverse 
events will be recorded immediately in the source document and reported immediately, and also 
in the appropriate adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  Information on study 
name, subject identifica tion, event (i.e., diagnosis), and reporter identification (e.g., name) will be 
collected and recorded in the source document (as detailed below). All serious adverse events 
will be reported to the IRB within 2 4 hours.  
 
All events meeting the definition of an adverse event will be collected and reported from the first 
trial related activity after the subject has signed the informed consent and until the end of the post -
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 14 treatment follow -up period . Serious adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the study 
period will be followed up until either resolved or stable .  Any serious adverse event that occurs 
after the study period and is considered to be possibly related to the study interventi on or study 
participation will be recorded and reported immediately.  
11 Relationship of AE to Study  
• Probable: Good reasons and sufficient documentation to assume a causal relationship  
• Possible: A causal relationship is conceivable and cannot be dismissed  
• Unlikely: The event is most likely related to an etiology other than the trial product  
The PI will evaluate all unexpected events and adverse reactions.  
12 Outcome Categories and Definitions:  
• Recovered: Fully recovered or by medical or surgical treatment the condition has returned to the 
level observed at the first trial related activity after the subject signed the informed consent  
• Recovering: The condition is improving and the subject is expected to recover from the event. 
This term should on ly be used when the subject has completed the trial  
• Recovered with sequelae: As a result of the AE, the subject suffered persistent and     significant 
disability/incapacity (e.g. became blind, deaf, paralysed). Any AE recovered with sequelae 
should be r ated as an SAE  
• Not recovered  
• Fatal  
• Unknown  
13 Reporting of Adverse Events, Adverse Device Effects and Unanticipated Problems  
All events meeting the definition of an adverse event will be collected and reported from the first 
trial related activity after the subject has signed the informed consent and until the end of the post -
treatment follow -up period as stated in the protocol.   
At a minimum the following information will be reported:  
• Study identifier  
• Study Center  
• Subject number  
• A description of the event  
• Date of onset  • Current status  
• Whether study intervention was discontinued  
• The reason why the event is classified as 
serious  
• Investigator assessment of the association 
between the event and study intervention  
 
Additionally all  other events (unanticipated  problems, adverse reactions, unanticipated adverse 
device effects and subject complaints  will be recorded and report ed with respect to institutional 
and federal policies as described in the Penn Manual . 
14 Medical Monitoring  
The Principal Investigator will  oversee the safety of the study.  This safety monitoring will include 
careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events as noted above.  Medical 
monitoring will be performed by the Principal Investigator and study healthcare providers.   
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 15 15 Study Administration, Data Handling and Record Keeping  
15.1 Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those 
regulat ions require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
All electronic PHI will be maintained by using an institutionally secured and managed network 
drive, institutionally secured and managed devices, and institut ionally approved third -party 
computing environments.  Should PHI need to be transferred, it will be done so through the use 
of a Penn -approved encrypted portable drive or a Penn -approved secure encrypted file transfer 
solution.  
 
In the event that a subject  revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by 
regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject 
authorization. For subjects who have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempt s will 
be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the 
end of their scheduled study period.  
 
Where possible, data will be entered directly into our password protected database, REDCap. 
All data pertaini ng to the study will be saved on the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders’ 
password -protected server.  Paper copies of informed consent, questionnaires, interviews, lab 
results, and any correspondence will be kept in the case record in locked offices.   
 
The consent form will clearly state that the research involves use of audiorecording and 
participants will be fully informed about the purposes, procedures, storage, security, 
confidentiality, and use of the recordings. Audio recording will be used to eva luate CBT 
intervention fidelity. They will not be transcribed. Individuals will be informed that participation in 
the study is not contingent  upon agreeing to be recorded during CBT sessions . All participant 
recordings will be kept in a locked filing cabin et and password -protected computer. Participants 
can request that the recordings be paused or stopped at any time, and they will be informed that 
they have the right to refuse audiorecording at any time. Records will be maintained, retained, 
and destroyed per applicable Federal and local regulations. The recordings will not be used 
publically. Research staff will have access to recordings.  
16 Privacy  
Steps will be taken to protect subject privacy. Informed consent and study procedures will be 
conducted in a p rivate room , and the collection of sensitive information will be limited to the 
minimum necessary to achieve the aims of the project . 
17 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the EC/IRB, the 
sponsor, government regulatory bodies, and University compliance and quality assurance groups 
of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data collection 
instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator w ill ensure the capability for inspections of 
applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 16 Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by 
government regulatory authorities a nd applicable University compliance and quality assurance 
offices.  
18 Ethical Considerations  
The principal investigator (PI) will initiate and enroll subjects only after receiving IRB approval of 
the protocol and the informed consent documents. All recruiting materials used in the study will 
have IRB approval. Progress reports regarding the study will be submitted to the IRB in 
accordance with institutional and regulatory guidelines.  
 
The study will be performed in compliance with the FDA Code of Federal Regulations for Good 
Clinical Practice (GCP). These procedures ensure the protection of the rights and the integrity of 
the subjects, adequate and correct conduct of all study procedure s, adequate data collection, 
adequate documentation, and adequate data verification.  
 
Before being enrolled, subjects will be provided informed consent. The nature, scope, and 
possible consequences of the study will have been explained in a form understan dable to them. 
A copy of the consent document will be given to the subject. The PI will retain the original signed 
consent document.   
 
Subject confidentiality will be maintained throughout the study according to applicable guidelines, 
regulations and IRB requirements. All laboratory samples, study clinical data, and reports of 
results will de -identify individual subjects. Subjects will be identified by initials, date of birth, 
gender and subject number only for use in data collection. Published data will p rovide subject 
numbers only if needed for clarity of presentation (e.g., in individual event listings).  
 
The study will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The study will be 
conducted in accordance with the ICH GCP guidelines. The investigators will comply with all 
applicable regulatory and legal requirements, ICH GCP guidelines, and the Declaration of Helsinki 
in obtaining and documenting the informed consent.  
19 Risks  
The risks to participants in this trial have been carefully consi dered and minimized to the extent 
possible. The known risk of receiving CBT and completing the study assessments are minimal. 
Every effort has been made to provide a study in which the safety of research participants is 
protected.  
 
Potential Study Risks  
 
Risks of Assessments, CBT Treatment, and Waitlist  
Occasionally a person suffering from BED may find answering questions about their illness 
distressing. Some of the questions in the interview that assess history of psychological conditions 
may be of a pers onal nature. Additionally, some of the topics discussed and audio recorded during 
cognitive behavioral therapy will be sensitive and may induce emotional responses or discomfort 
for some participants. All such questions will be asked by trained clinicians and a licensed clinical 
psychologist will be available at all times to consult with the participant should this occur. 
Appropriate referrals will be given as necessary.  
 
Participants in the waitlist group will be contacted at week 8 via phone by a research  assistant 
to keep participants engaged and enhance study retention. All waitlist participants will be 
provided with the 16 -week CBT intervention after they complete the end -of-study testing at 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 17 week 16. Though we considered other designs, a waitlist contro l comparison was selected as it 
was deemed ethical, while also permitting a non -intervention comparison and maximizing power 
to detect differences between groups. Patients seeking treatment for BED in the community are 
often on waitlists for more than 4 mo nths due to the lack of skilled clinicians available. For the 
majority of participants, the waitlist will still be shorter than routine services. Attrition is no worse 
with waitlist control groups than with active BED treatment. 91 88 87 86 
 
Risks of MRI  
Flying objects : The known risks associated with this study are minimal. Implanted medical devices 
and metallic foreign fragments inside a participant’s body may pose a risk if the participant were 
to enter the MRI magnet room. The greatest risk is a magnetic object flying through the air toward 
the magnet and hitting someone. To reduce this risk, we require that all people involved with the 
study remove all metal from th eir clothing and all metal objects from their pockets. No metal 
objects are allowed to be brought into the magnet room at any time. In addition, once participants 
are in the magnet, the door to the room will be closed so that no one inadvertently walks int o the 
magnet room.  
Magnetic fields health risks:  There is no known health risk associated with exposure to magnetic 
fields during an MRI.  
Discomfort.  Some people become uncomfortable or claustrophobic (fearing the enclosed space) 
while inside the scanner. Fatigue, anxiety and discomfort are potential adverse effects associated 
with the fMRI study. There are minimal risks from the loud noise associated with the MRI scanner 
and from the discomfort of lying on a hard surface. We will attempt to minimize these risks by 
familiarizing participants with the personnel and setting, and by closely monitoring them during 
the study. In our experience, participants who are well informed of the purpose of the study and 
who are accompanied throughout the procedures by a re sponsible member of the research team 
tolerate the testing well and without complications. Tests are administered by trained and 
supervised personnel and participants are debriefed after each session. Exposure to radiation 
with magnetic resonance measureme nts is far less than that resulting from a single X -ray. 
Thousands of patients have been safely studied at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania 
using magnetic resonance techniques. However, some individuals become uncomfortable or 
claustrophobic while inside the magnet. Participants who are uncertain whether they can tolerate 
the scanning environment can complete a “mock” scan on similar equipment prior to the research 
scans.  If participants become uncomfortable during completion of study procedu res, they may 
withdraw immediately from the study.  
 
Incidental findings : This MRI is not a clinical scan. It is possible that during the course of the 
research study, the research staff may notice an unexpected finding(s). In the event of abnormal 
findings , the participant will be contacted and Center Staff will arrange for the radioloigst’s report 
and structural images to be sent to participants and/or their physician. These possible finding(s) 
may or may not be significant and m ay lead to anxiety about a person’s condition and to further 
work -up by a physician.   
 
Pregnancy:  Although there are no known risks related to MRI on pregnant women or a fetus, there 
is a possibility of yet undiscovered pregnancy related risks. Since there is no possible benefit fro m 
participating in this protocol for a pregnant woman, we will exclude pregnant women.  At fMRI 
scans, participants will be asked to attest to pregnancy status. Participants who are unsure or 
who believe that they may be pregnant will be given a urine pregn ancy test.  
 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 18 Computer tasks. There are no known risks associated with the computer tasks the participant will 
be asked to perform during the study. Participants could become tired when performing them.  
 
During MRI scans, participants have occasionally repor ted tingling or twitching sensations in their 
arms or legs. Further, because of the strong magnetic field, participants with pacemakers, certain 
metallic implants, or metal in the eye cannot participate in this study. These exclusions will be 
reviewed care fully with the research technician prior to scanning. Although there are no known 
risks of MRI on pregnant women or the fetus, there is a possibility of yet undiscovered pregnancy 
related risks.  
 
Loss of Confidentiality Risk  
Because information about part icipant’s identity and voice recordings will be collected and stored 
for research purposes, there is a chance that the information could be viewed or heard by others 
not associated with the research team and therefore, there is a potential for loss of conf identiality. 
Participants will only be audio recorded with their express permission, though there is a risk of 
loss of privacy or breach of confidentiality that may occur from disclosure of private information 
while being recorded. The study team will work  to uphold the privacy of the participants in several 
ways. Communications made among study staff regarding participants will use ID numbers only 
and never include names or other personal information. All participant data and recordings will be 
kept in loc ked files. In all data sets, we will use ID numbers only. A separate dataset linking names 
with ID numbers will be accessible only by the primary study investigators.  
 
If unforeseen risks are seen, they will be reported to the Office of Research Integrity and 
Compliance.  
20 Benefits  
All participants who enroll in this study will receive individual CBT for BED. Participants should 
have reductions in the number of binge eating episodes they experience. They may also 
experience an improvement in their mood and a reduction in eating disor der psychopathology. 
However, it is possible that they may not receive any benefits from participating in this study (i.e., 
they may not experience improvements in their symptoms of BED). Study participants may also 
gain satisfaction from the knowledge tha t they are contributing to a better understanding of brain 
function and the etiology of BED, which may lead to improved prevention and treatment options.  
21 Risk Benefit Assessment  
The benefits of this research to the subjects studied, and to society at larg e, far surpass the risks. 
We believe that this study poses minimal risk to participants, while providing potential benefit to 
women who are overweight with BED. The treatments and procedures, including fMRI, used in 
this study have been shown to be relativ ely safe. Numerous clinical trials have demonstrated the 
safety of fMRI scans and efficacy of CBT for BED. Research staff will monitor subjects closely 
during their participation. We anticipate that after CBT treatment  participants will show reductions 
in their symptoms of binge eating disorder. Results of this study hold promise of significantly 
improving the management of BED and its associated complications.  
22 Informed Consent Process / HIPAA Authorization  
Following the screening telephone call, trained c linical assessors will meet in person with all 
potential participants to describe the study, its requirements, and its likely risks and benefits. 
Participants will be provided a written copy of the Consent Form/HIPAA Authorization at this 
meeting and will be given an opportunity to read it and have all of their questions answered. 
Persons who wish to participate in the study will be asked to give their written consent at the time 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 19 of consent discussion and will then continue with the screening visit. Participants will also be 
permitted to discuss the consent form and procedures and return the signed form and continue 
with the screening at a later date  (within 2 months) , if they prefer. Participants will be told that 
they can contact the Principal Investigator at any time if they have questions about the study. The 
study team member who reviews the consent document will emphasize that participation in the 
study is voluntary and that medical care will not b e influenced by the participants decision to 
participate or not.  The consent process will take place in a private office or exam room to help 
protect subject privacy.  Subject comprehension of the nature of the study will be assessed using 
interactive conse rvation methods (e.g., asking the potential subject to paraphrase different points 
of discussion, asking open -ended questions, encouraging questions).  
Audiorecordings. Study staff will ask participants if they are willing to have their eating disorder 
exam ination interview audiorecorded. This will be done at the time of recording and is optional, 
however it will be helpful to assess interrater reliability. Participants will also be asked if they are 
willing to have their CBT sessions recorded  before each se ssion . Recordings will be used to 
assess treatment fidelity, but are not mandatory to participate in the study.  
22.1.1.1  Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent  
We are requesting a waive r of the requirement to obtain a signed consent form for the phone 
screenin g. The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent document 
and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each 
subject will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the 
research, and the  subject's wishes will govern.   
23 Conflict of Interest  
All University of Pennsylvania Investigators will follow the University of Pennsylvania Policy on 
Conflicts of Interest Related to Research .  
24 Subject Stipends or Payments  
Participants will be compensated $100 for each of the MRI scans completed, for a total of $200. 
Participants will also receive $5 at each of the 16 CBT treatment sessions (total of $80 during the 
study) to help cover travel  costs . “Greenphire ClinCard” will be used as a payment option.
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
25 References  
 
1. DSM -5 APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Arlington: American Psychiatric 
Publishing 2013.  
2. Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG, Kessler RC. The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in 
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biol Psychiatry 2007;61:348 -58. 
3. Pope Jr HG, Lalonde JK, Pindyck LJ, et al. Binge eating disorder: a stable syndrome. Am J 
Psychiatry 2006.  
4. Fairburn CG, Cooper Z, Doll HA, Norman P, O'Connor M. The natural course of bulimia nervosa 
and binge eating disorder in young women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000;57:659 -65. 
5. Grucza RA, Przybeck TR, Cloninger CR. Prevalence and correlates of binge eating dis order in a 
community sample. Compr Psychiatry 2007;48:124 -31. 
6. Javaras KN, Pope HG, Lalonde JK, et al. Co -occurrence of binge eating disorder with psychiatric 
and medical disorders. The Journal of clinical psychiatry 2008;69:266 -73. 
7. Hudson JI, Lalonde  JK, Coit CE, et al. Longitudinal study of the diagnosis of components of the 
metabolic syndrome in individuals with binge -eating disorder. The American journal of clinical nutrition 
2010;91:1568 -73. 
8. Branson R, Potoczna N, Kral JG, Lentes K -U, Hoehe MR,  Horber FF. Binge eating as a major 
phenotype of melanocortin 4 receptor gene mutations. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1096 -103. 
9. Geliebter A, Yahav EK, Gluck ME, Hashim SA. Gastric capacity, test meal intake, and appetitive 
hormones in binge eating disorder. Ph ysiol Behav 2004;81:735 -40. 
10. Johnson J, Spitzer R, Williams J. Health problems, impairment and illnesses associated with 
bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder among primary care and obstetric gynaecology patients. Psychol 
Med 2001;31:1455 -66. 
11. Striegel‐Moore RH, Dohm FA, Wilfley DE, et al. Toward an understanding of health services use 
in women with binge eating disorder. Obes Res 2004;12:799 -806. 
12. Schag K, Teufel M, Junne F, et al. Impulsivity in binge eating disorder: food cues elicit increas ed 
reward responses and disinhibition. PLoS One 2013;8:e76542.  
13. Schag K, Schönleber J, Teufel M, Zipfel S, Giel K. Food ‐related impulsivity in obesity and Binge 
Eating Disorder –a systematic review. Obes Rev 2013;14:477 -95. 
14. Berkman ND, Brownley KA, P eat CM, et al. Management and Outcomes of Binge -Eating Disorder. 
2015.  
15. Vocks S, Tuschen ‐Caffier B, Pietrowsky R, Rustenbach SJ, Kersting A, Herpertz S. Meta ‐analysis 
of the effectiveness of psychological and pharmacological treatments for binge eating disorder. Int J Eat 
Disord 2010;43:205 -17. 
16. Grilo CM, Masheb RM. A randomized controlled comparison of guided self -help cognitive 
behavioral therapy and behavioral weight loss for binge eating disorder. Behav Res Ther 2005;43:1509 -25. 
17. Grilo CM, Mash eb RM, Wilson GT, Gueorguieva R, White MA. Cognitive –behavioral therapy, 
behavioral weight loss, and sequential treatment for obese patients with binge -eating disorder: A 
randomized controlled trial. J Consult Clin Psychol 2011;79:675.  
18. Wilfley DE, Welc h RR, Stein RI, et al. A randomized comparison of group cognitive -behavioral 
therapy and group interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of overweight individuals with binge -eating 
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;59:713 -21. 
19. Ricca V, Castellini G , Mannucci E, et al. Comparison of individual and group cognitive behavioral 
therapy for binge eating disorder. A randomized, three -year follow -up study. Appetite 2010;55:656 -65. 
20. Balodis IM, Molina ND, Kober H, et al. Divergent neural substrates of inh ibitory control in binge 
eating disorder relative to other manifestations of obesity. Obesity 2013;21:367 -77. 
21. Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends Cogn Sci 
2004;8:170 -7. 
22. Schienle A, Schäfer A, H ermann A, Vaitl D. Binge -eating disorder: reward sensitivity and brain 
activation to images of food. Biol Psychiatry 2009;65:654 -61. 
23. Dodds CM, O’Neill B, Beaver J, et al. Effect of the dopamine D 3 receptor antagonist GSK598809 
on brain responses to re warding food images in overweight and obese binge eaters. Appetite 2012;59:27 -
33. 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 2 24. Filbey FM, Myers US, DeWitt S. Reward circuit function in high BMI individuals with compulsive 
overeating: similarities with addiction. Neuroimage 2012;63:1800 -6. 
25. Weygandt M, Schaefer A, Schienle A, Haynes JD. Diagnosing different binge ‐eating disorders 
based on reward ‐related brain activation patterns. Hum Brain Mapp 2012;33:2135 -46. 
26. Simon JJ, Skunde M, Walther S, Bendszus M, Herzog W, Friederich H -C. Neural signa ture of food 
reward processing in bulimic -type eating disorders. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2016:nsw049.  
27. Balodis IM, Grilo CM, Kober H, et al. A pilot study linking reduced fronto –Striatal recruitment during 
reward processing to persistent bingeing follo wing treatment for binge ‐eating disorder. Int J Eat Disord 
2014;47:376 -84. 
28. Poldrack RA, Mumford JA, Nichols TE. Handbook of functional MRI data analysis: Cambridge 
University Press; 2011.  
29. Brooks SJ, Stein DJ. A systematic review of the neural bases  of psychotherapy for anxiety and 
related disorders. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2015;17:261.  
30. Klumpp H, Fitzgerald DA, Phan KL. Neural predictors and mechanisms of cognitive behavioral 
therapy on threat processing in social anxiety disorder. Prog Neuropsyc hopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
2013;45:83 -91. 
31. Goldin PR, Ziv M, Jazaieri H, Hahn K, Heimberg R, Gross JJ. Impact of cognitive behavioral therapy 
for social anxiety disorder on the neural dynamics of cognitive reappraisal of negative self -beliefs: 
randomiz ed clinical trial. JAMA psychiatry 2013;70:1048 -56. 
32. Lipka J, Hoffmann M, Miltner WH, Straube T. Effects of cognitive -behavioral therapy on brain 
responses to subliminal and supraliminal threat and their functional significance in specific phobia. Biol 
Psychiatry 2014;76:869 -77. 
33. Yoshimura S, Okamoto Y, Onoda K, et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy for depression changes 
medial prefrontal and ventral anterior cingulate cortex activity associated with self -referential processing. 
Soc Cogn A ffect Neurosci 2014;9:487 -93. 
34. Fu CH, Williams SC, Cleare AJ, et al. Neural responses to sad facial expressions in major 
depression following cognitive behavioral therapy. Biol Psychiatry 2008;64:505 -12. 
35. Seminowicz DA, Shpaner M, Keaser ML, et al. Cognitive -behavioral therapy increases prefrontal 
cortex gray matter in patients with chronic pain. The Journal of Pain 2013;14:1573 -84. 
36. DeVito EE, Worhunsky PD, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ, Kober H, Potenza MN. A preliminary study 
of the neural eff ects of behavioral therapy for substance use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend 2012;122:228 -
35. 
37. Konova AB, Moeller SJ, Goldstein RZ. Common and distinct neural targets of treatment: changing 
brain function in substance addiction. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 201 3;37:2806 -17. 
38. Young KS, Burklund LJ, Torre JB, Saxbe D, Lieberman MD, Craske MG. Treatment for social 
anxiety disorder alters functional connectivity in emotion regulation neural circuitry. Psychiatry Research: 
Neuroimaging 2017;261:44 -51. 
39. Patricia  Ribeiro Porto M, Oliveira L, Mari J, Volchan E, Figueira I, Ventura P. Does cognitive 
behavioral therapy change the brain? A systematic review of neuroimaging in anxiety disorders. 2014.  
40. Ball TM, Stein MB, Ramsawh HJ, Campbell -Sills L, Paulus MP. Sing le-subject anxiety treatment 
outcome prediction using functional neuroimaging. Neuropsychopharmacology 2014;39:1254 -61. 
41. Klumpp H, Roberts J, Kennedy AE, et al. Emotion regulation related neural predictors of cognitive 
behavioral therapy response in soc ial anxiety disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
2017;75:106 -12. 
42. Thompson DG, Kesler SR, Sudheimer K, et al. FMRI activation during executive function predicts 
response to cognitive behavioral therapy in older, depressed adults. The Amer ican Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry 2015;23:13 -22. 
43. Berkman N, Brownley K, Peat C, et al. Management and Outcomes of Binge -Eating Disorder. 2015.  
44. Eldredge KL, Agras WS, Arnow B, et al. The effects of extending cognitive -behavioral therapy for 
binge  eating disorder among initial treatment nonresponders. Int J Eat Disord 1997;21:347 -52. 
45. Excellence NIfC, Britain G. Eating disorders: Core interventions in the treatment and management 
of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related eating disorders:  National Institute for Clinical Excellence; 
2004.  
46. Wadden TA, Faulconbridge LF, Jones ‐Corneille LR, et al. Binge eating disorder and the outcome 
of bariatric surgery at one year: a prospective, observational study. Obesity 2011;19:1220 -8. 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 3 47. Allison K C, Grilo CM, Masheb RM, Stunkard AJ. Binge eating disorder and night eating syndrome: 
a comparative study of disordered eating. J Consult Clin Psychol 2005;73:1107.  
48. Robinson KA, Dennison CR, Wayman DM, Pronovost PJ, Needham DM. Systematic review 
identi fies number of strategies important for retaining study participants. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:757 -65. 
49. Faulconbridge LF, Ruparel K, Loughead J, et al. Changes in neural responsivity to highly palatable 
foods following roux ‐en‐Y gastric bypass, sleeve g astrectomy, or weight stability: An fMRI study. Obesity 
2016;24:1054 -60. 
50. Wadden TA, Berkowitz RI, Womble LG, et al. Randomized trial of lifestyle modification and 
pharmacotherapy for obesity. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2111 -20. 
51. Wadden TA, Volger S, Sarw er DB, et al. A two -year randomized trial of obesity treatment in primary 
care practice. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1969 -79. 
52. Cooper Z, Fairburn C. The eating disorder examination: A semi ‐structured interview for the 
assessment of the specific psychopatholog y of eating disorders. Int J Eat Disord 1987;6:1 -8. 
53. Sheehan D, Lecrubier Y. The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Version 6.0 (MINI 6.0). 
Medical Outcomes System Inc: Jacksonville, FL 2010.  
54. Posner K, Brent D, Lucas C, et al. Columbia -suicide severity rating scale (C -SSRS). New York, 
NY: Columbia University Medical Center 2008.  
55. Stunkard AJ, Messick S. Eating inventory: Psychological Corporation; 1988.  
56. Epel ES, Tomiyama AJ, Mason AE, et al. The reward -based eating drive scale: a se lf-report index 
of reward -based eating. PLoS One 2014;9:e101350.  
57. Latner JD, Mond JM, Kelly MC, Haynes SN, Hay PJ. The loss of control over eating scale: 
development and psychometric evaluation. Int J Eat Disord 2014;47:647 -59. 
58. Gearhardt AN, Corbin WR, Brownell KD. Development of the Yale Food Addiction Scale Version 
2.0. Psychol Addict Behav 2016;30:113.  
59. Cepeda -Benito A, Gleaves DH, Williams TL, Erath SA. The development and validation of the state 
and trait food -cravings questionnaires. Behav T her 2001;31:151 -73. 
60. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Beck depression inventory -II. San Antonio 1996;78:490 -8. 
61. Patton JH, Stanford MS. Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. J Clin Psychol 
1995;51:768 -74. 
62. Bohn K, Fairburn CG. The clinical impairment assessment questionnaire (CIA). Cognitive 
behavioral therapy for eating disorders 2008.  
63. Jenkinson C, Coulter A, Wright L. Short form 36 (SF36) health survey questionnaire: normative 
data for adults of working age. BMJ 1993;306:1437 -40. 
64. McElroy SL, Arnold LM, Shapira NA, et al. Topiramate in the treatment of binge eating disorder 
associated with obesity: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:255 -61. 
65. Fleury J. The index of self -regulation: development  and psychometric analysis. J Nurs Meas 
1998;6:3 -17. 
66. Committee IE. International Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis 
of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1327 -34. 
67. Stice E, Burger K, Yokum S. Caloric deprivation incre ases responsivity of attention and reward 
brain regions to intake, anticipated intake, and images of palatable foods. Neuroimage 2013;67:322 -30. 
68. Shacham S. A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. J Pers Assess 1983;47:305 -6. 
69. Logan GD, Sc hachar RJ, Tannock R. Impulsivity and inhibitory control. Psychological Science 
1997;8:60 -6. 
70. Blechert J, Meule A, Busch NA, Ohla K. Food -pics: an image database for experimental research 
on eating and appetite. Food cravings 2015:40.  
71. Foroni F, Perg ola G, Argiris G, Rumiati RI. The FoodCast research image database (FRIDa). 2013.  
72. Jastreboff AM, Sinha R, Lacadie C, Small DM, Sherwin RS, Potenza MN. Neural Correlates of 
Stress -and Food Cue –Induced Food Craving in Obesity Association with insulin lev els. Diabetes Care 
2013;36:394 -402. 
73. Sinha R. Modeling stress and drug craving in the laboratory: implications for addiction treatment 
development. Addict Biol 2009;14:84 -98. 
74. Sinha R, Lovallo WR, Parsons OA. Cardiovascular differentiation of emotions. Psychosom Med 
1992;54:422 -35. 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 4 75. Miller GA, Levin DN, Kozak MJ, Cook III EW, McLean Jr A, Lang PJ. Individual differences in 
imagery and the psychophysiology of emotion. Cognition and Emotion 1987;1:367 -90. 
76. Sinha R. Chroni c stress, drug use, and vulnerability to addiction. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008;1141:105 -
30. 
77. Hopper JW, Frewen PA, Sack M, Lanius RA, Van der Kolk BA. The Responses to Script -Driven 
Imagery Scale (RSDI): assessment of state posttraumatic symptoms for psychob iological and treatment 
research. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment 2007;29:249 -68. 
78. Frank TC, Kim GL, Krzemien A, Van Vugt DA. Effect of menstrual cycle phase on corticolimbic 
brain activation by visual food cues. Brain research 2010 ;1363:81 -92. 
79. Schulz KF, Grimes DA. Generation of allocation sequences in randomised trials: chance, not 
choice. The Lancet 2002;359:515 -9. 
80. Efird J. Blocked randomization with randomly selected block sizes. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
2010;8:15 -20. 
81. Fairburn CG. Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders: Guilford Press; 2008.  
82. Mitchell JE, Devlin MJ, de Zwaan M, Crow SJ, Peterson CB. Binge -eating disorder: Clinical 
foundations and treatment: Cambridge Univ Press; 2008.  
83. Dingemans A , Bruna M, Van Furth E. Binge eating disorder: a review. Int J Obes 2002;26:299 -307. 
84. Thirion B, Pinel P, Mériaux S, Roche A, Dehaene S, Poline J -B. Analysis of a large fMRI cohort: 
Statistical and methodological issues for group analyses. Neuroimage 20 07;35:105 -20. 
85. Desmond JE, Glover GH. Estimating sample size in functional MRI (fMRI) neuroimaging studies: 
statistical power analyses. J Neurosci Methods 2002;118:115 -28. 
86. Boehler CN, Appelbaum LG, Krebs RM, Hopf J -M, Woldorff MG. Pinning down respo nse inhibition 
in the brain —conjunction analyses of the stop -signal task. Neuroimage 2010;52:1621 -32. 
87. Criaud M, Boulinguez P. Have we been asking the right questions when assessing response 
inhibition in go/no -go tasks with fMRI? A meta -analysis and cr itical review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2013;37:11 -23. 
88. Pawliczek CM, Derntl B, Kellermann T, Kohn N, Gur RC, Habel U. Inhibitory control and trait 
aggression: neural and behavioral insights using the emotional stop signal task. Neuroimage 2013;79:264 -
74. 
89. Monti MM. Statistical analysis of fMRI time -series: a critical review of the GLM approach. Front 
Hum Neurosci 2011;5.  
90. Verbruggen F, Logan GD. Models of response inhibition in the stop -signal and stop -change 
paradigms. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009;33:647 -61. 
91. Masson PC, von Ranson KM, Wallace LM, Safer DL. A randomized wait -list controlled pilot study 
of dialectical behaviour therapy guided self -help for binge eating disorder. Behav Res Ther 2013;51:723 -8. 
 