 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trial of Oxaloacetate in Alzheimer’s Disease (TOAD)  
IND #  125788  
 
Amendment 5 
 
08/3 1/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
Russell H. Swerdlow, MD  
Principal Investigator  
Professor of Neurology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neurology  
University of Kansas Medical Center  
3901 Rainbow Blvd  
Kansas City, KS 66160  
Phone: 913-945-6632  
Fax: 913-945-5035  
Email: rswerdlow@kumc.edu  
 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 2 of 19 
 Contents  
1.0 I NTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  3 
2.0 O BJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  3 
3.0 BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  4 
4.0 PARTICIPANT SELECTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  5 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 6 
6.0 EXPECT ED TOXICITIES AND DOSING DELAY/DOSING MODIFICATIONS  ................................ ................  11 
7.0 DRUG FORMULATION AND ADMINISTRATION  ................................ ................................ .....................  11 
8.0 CORRELATIVE STUDIES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  13 
9.0 STUDY CALENDAR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 
10.0 MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
11.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  ................................ ................................ ...................  16 
11.1 Notifying the FDA  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  16 
12.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  16 
13.0 REGULATORY CONSIDERATIO N................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  17 
14.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  18 
15.0 PUBLICATION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  18 
16.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 3 of 19 
 1.0 INTRODUCTION  
Introductory Statement  
 Since abnormal brain bioenergetic function may contribute to neurodysfunction  and 
neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), manipu lating brain bioenergetics may affect the 
symptoms or alter the course of  this disease.  Oxaloacetate (OAA) could offer a  potential 
approach for manipulating brain bioenergetics.  There is evidence that OAA,  a Krebs cycle and 
gluconeogenesis intermediate, enhance s glycolysis flux, supports  oxidative phosphor ylation, and 
favorably modifies bioenergetics -related infrastructures.  Our pre -clinical studies have also shown 
that OAA activates the brain’s insulin signaling pathway, reduces neuroinflammation, and 
activates hippocampal neurogenesis  [1]. Based on these preclinical  findings,  a phase I 
pharmacokinetic (PK) study in six human AD subjects (the Pharmacokinetics of Oxaloacetate 
Study, or POX Study ; [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) was performed . The POX Study found  AD subjects 
tolerate 100 mg BID of OAA when administered over a one month period.  No adverse events 
were reported.       
 The next logical step is to conduct a combination safety and target engagement (phase Ib) 
study to define an OAA dose that is safe a nd which engages brain bioenergetic metabo lism. This 
study, the “Trial of OAA in AD” (TOAD) trial, is designed  to accomplish these goals.  The 
TOAD trial’s  primary endpoint is safety, with OAA d oses that have not previously been studied 
in human AD subjects.  One of the secondary endpoint s is target engagement of brain 
bioenergetics by OAA.  The TOAD trial will use magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( MRS ) and 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tom ography (FDG PET)  to assess brain bioenergetic 
target engagement .  Exploratory target engagement data generated during this study will inform 
future study design. Another secondary endpoint is establishment of a pharmacokinetic profile of 
OAA at doses that  have not been previously tested.       
 It is hypothesized that OA A, when orally ingested in adequate amounts, is safe and will alter 
brain bioenergetics. We further hypothesize that the doubling of the OAA dose will result in a 
doubling of the plasma OAA concentrations and that plasma OAA levels will correlate with our 
brain bioenergetics engagement outcomes (FDG PET and MRS). The following objectives are 
proposed t o test these hypotheses .                 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objective  
 The primary objective of the TOAD trial is to determine  the safety and tolerability o f OAA at 
doses up to 2 g/day.  A dose escalation strategy will be used, which will involve first testing a  1 
g/day OAA  dose (500 mg po BID)  taken for 4 weeks in 15 AD subjects .  If this dose p roves to be 
safe, 2 g/day OAA (1000 mg po BID), taken for 4 weeks in 15 subjects , will be tested.  As part 
of the  safety analysis , the following measures will be obtained: pre and post -treatment vital 
signs, safety labs , physical and neurological examinations, and cognitive test ing data.  We 
predict both OAA treatment doses will prove to be safe and well -tolerated.  
 
Secondary Objective s 
 One of the secondary , exploratory objective s will be to test whether OAA (administered at 
500 mg BID or as 1000 mg BID) has an observable  effect on brain bioenerge tics.  Enhancement 
of brain glucose utilization  on FDG PET, and  changes in brain metabolism intermediates on 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 4 of 19 
 MRS , will be evaluated in both the 1 g/d ay dose and the 2 g/day dose cohorts.   FDG PET and 
MRS will be  measured at pre -treatment (just  prior to starting OAA ), and a t post -treatment (just 
prior to stopping OAA, after approximately one month  of treatment ).  The pre and post -treatment 
scans will be  quantitatively analyzed and compared.  We predict a dose will be found at which 
the post -treatment FDG PET scans show increased cortical glucose utilization, and that a dose 
will be found at which the post -treatment MRS scans show increased lactate and po ssibly other 
metabolite changes.     
 Another secondary objective is to define OAA PK properties .  Specifically, we will 
determine  plasma OAA levels after 500 mg and 1000 mg dose s, to determine if a maximum 
absorption  capacity is reached with these  doses . We will also test for correlations between 
plasma OA A levels and brain bioenergetic biomarker, as revealed by  FDG PET and MRS.  
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  
Prevalence  
 The elderly constitute a rapidly growing demographic.  This reflects pub lic health initiatives 
and medical advances that reduce risks and provide treatments for many previously terminal 
disorders.  An increasing population of neurodegenerative disease victims is arguably the biggest 
downside to this success.  For several commo n neurodegenerative diseases incidence rises with 
advancing age and prevalence is quite high [2].  Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common 
neurodegenerative disease, affects 5.4 million Americans and one in every eight Americans over 
65 is estimated to have it [3].  Society is also affected, as families and friends of AD patients 
provide most day -to-day care and altogether AD now costs our economy $385 billion annually 
[4].   
 
Rationale for Use  
 Mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in AD and is felt by many to be disease -relevant and a 
promising therapeutic target [5].  In AD brains various mitochondria -localized enzyme s show 
reduced activity, and in most neurons intact mitochondria are numerically reduced [5].  Glucose 
utilization, as demonstrated by FDG PET , is also reduced in the AD bra in [6].  For these reasons 
we believe that for A D, increasing mitochondrial mass, mitochondrial respiration, and glucose 
utilization are all well -justified mitochondrial medicine approaches and we are currently 
exploring ways to accomplish th ese endpoints [7]. Our efforts are informed by caloric restriction, 
which promotes liver mitochondrial biogenesis in some but not all studies, and exercise, wh ich 
promotes muscle mitochondrial biogenesis. While we and others find caloric restriction and 
exercise do affect the brain in specific ways, and may even induce some degree of brain 
mitochondrial biogenesis, our impression is that these interventions at b est affect brain 
mitochondrial biogenesis less robustly than they affect liver and muscle. We therefore feel 
approaches that directly and robustly enhance bioenergetic fluxes (glycolysis and respiration -
related) and brain mitochondrial biogenesis pathways are needed, and predict such approaches 
will benefit persons with AD.  
 The ideal agent would be systemically safe, cross the blood brain barrier, access neurons and 
astrocytes, activate mitochondrial biogenesis, increase respiratory capacity, and increase 
glycolysis capacity .  OAA putatively meets these criteria (see preliminary data in section 8.0 
CORRELATIVE STUDIES ).   
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 5 of 19 
  
Description of Study Agent  
 OAA is a Krebs cycle and gluconeogenesis intermediate.  It  forms a redox pair with malate 
and is re duced to malate in a reaction that consumes NADH and generates NAD+.  This would 
predictably shift cell redox balances towards more oxidized states, an effect reported to initiate 
mitochondrial biogenesis and mediate at least some health benefits of calori c restriction and 
exercise. OAA, following its reduction to malate, can also access mitochondria and thereby 
supply carbon to the Krebs cycle  and respiratory chain.  Finally, OAA is converted to 
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) by PEP carboxykinase  (PEPCK), a reaction that comprises part of 
the gluconeogenesis and glyceroneogenesis pathways.  Muscle PEPCK overexpression, possibly 
due to enhanced glyceroneogenesis, induces a profound muscle mitochondrial biogenesis, 
enhances respiratory fitness, and robustly extends lifespan [8]. Currently, OAA is commercially 
available and marketed as a nutritional s upplement.  
 
4.0 PARTICIPANT SELECTION  
 Subjects will be recruited through the University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center’s 
(KU ADC) Clinical Core  Cohort / Registry program .  As part of their participation in the KU 
ADC Clinical Core Cohort /Registry, individuals receive clinical dementia rating (CDR) and 
Uniform Data Set (UDS) evaluations.   Participant  diagnoses, which are primarily based on CDR 
and UDS data, are determined through a consensus conference that includes subspecialty -trained 
cognitive neurologists and an exp ert neuropsychologist.  Participants  diagnosed with AD further 
meet current McKhann el al. criteria for that diagnosis [9].   
 The TOAD trial will enroll  participants w ith mild A D as determined at the last KU ADC 
Clinical Core/ Registry evaluation.  Each participant  must have a study partner.   The study 
partner will be someone who knows the participant well (typically a spouse, relative, or friend of 
the participant) and is able to  answer questions about the participant’s changes in health and/or 
behaviors over the course of the study.  In addition, the study partner will administer the study 
medication and agree to accompany the participant to all study visits.  
 
Enrollment Informat ion 
 The TOAD trial w ill enroll a total of up to 36 participants , to ensure 15  participants in each 
dose cohort , 1 g/day  and 2 g /day, complete the full intervention .  No participant w ill be enrolled 
into the 2 g/ day cohort until all 15 participants have completed the 1 g per day dose and it is 
established that the maximum acceptable dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) event rate has not been 
exceeded and it is safe to test the higher dose  (See Safety section). Participants who complete t he 
1 g/day dose study  may be invited to participate in the 2 g /day dose study, if still eligible and the 
principal investigator deems safe to do so.   
 
Inclusion Criteria  
 Individuals are eligible  if they meet the following criteria:  
 
1. Age 50 -85;   
2. Have a diagnosis of probable A D per McKhann et al . criteria  [9]; 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 6 of 19 
 3. Have a c linical dementia rating (CDR) score of 0.5 or 1 AD at time of their last KU 
ADC assessment ; 
4. Have a Mini Mental S tatus Exam (MMSE) score of 15 -28 at the TOAD screening 
visit;  
5. Have a reliable and competent study partner who is willing to accompany the 
participant to all study visits, monitor compliance of study medication administration, 
and observe/report any changes in the participant’s health throughout the study 
duration ;   
6. Are on stable doses of concurrent medications for at least 4 weeks pr ior to the TOAD 
screening visit ; and   
7. Speaks English as his/her primary language . 
8. If female of child -bearing potential, must have a negative urine pregnancy test at 
TOAD screening visit (and must agree to use of contraception throughout the trial)  
 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 Individuals are ineligible  if they meet  any of the following criteria:  
  
1. Dementia due to causes other than A D; 
2. Potentially confounding, serious, or unstable medical conditions such as:  
• insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus  
• cancer within the past 3 years (except basal cell , squamous cell , or localized 
prostate cancer ) 
• a recent cardiac event (i.e. heart attack, angioplasty, etc. within the 6 months 
prior to screen ing visit)  
• other conditions that pose a potential safety risk or confounding factor in the 
investigator’s opinion ; 
3.   Any abnormal physical examination assessment or vital sign assessment at TOAD 
screening visit  that is deemed to be clinically significan t by the principal 
investigator;  
4.  Any abnormal clinical laboratory test result at TOAD screening visit  that is 
deemed  to be clinically significant by the principal investigator . 
5.   Any contraindication for undergoing MR S, such as the presence of metal 
implants, a cardiac pacemaker  that is not compatible with MRS , or severe 
claustrophobia  
 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
Study Design  
 The TOAD  protocol is designed as a phase Ib  study  that will provide information needed to 
plan a phase II study, or else indicate additional development work that is required before 
pursuing a phase II study.  A dose escalation st rategy will be uti lized to contribute knowledge to 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 7 of 19 
 the safety profile of OAA and to establish an effective target engagement dose. The p rimary 
outcome measure is the  safety of currently untested OAA doses (1 g and 2 g per day) in AD 
subjects , as defined by safety laboratory  tests, vital signs, physical and neurological 
examinations, cognitive changes, and reports of adverse events .  Our  secondary exploratory 
meas ures will determine a) whether these OAA doses have a n observable  effect on  brain glucose 
utilization, as determined by  FDG PET, and on levels of metabolism -relevant neurochemicals, as 
demonstrated by MRS  and b) the PK properties of OAA at 500 mg and 1000 mg dose s and 
whether OAA plasma leve ls at these doses correlate  with FDG PE T and MRS  biomarker data .   
 
Safety Outcomes  
 1 g/day and 2 g/day doses  were selected for the following reasons.  The POX Study has 
already indicated 100 mg BID is well -tolerated in AD subjects.  Higher doses have not been 
specifically tested in AD subject s, but in a 1968 OAA clinical study (in diabetics) OAA dosed to 
1 g/day for up to 44 days was found to be safe [10].  Also, we are aware that humans with 
glioblastoma have tolerated 2 -3 grams per day for extended periods (in 2012, OAA was given 
“orphan drug status” for the treatment of gliomas).  Ranging o ur study between 200 mg/day and 
2 g/day, therefore, seems justified , especially since we are using a dose escalation approach in 
which safety at the 1 g/day dose determines whether we attempt the 2 g/day dose.      
 Safety will be  assessed through pre-and post-treatment collection of:  safety labs , physical 
and neurological exams, cognitive measures, and study partner reports of changes in the 
participant’s health (new medical conditions, symptoms, or changes in functioning).  Clinical  
safety labs will cons ist of complete blood count, serum electrolytes, serum liver function tests, 
and fasting glucose testing.  To ensure our clinical intervention does not exacerbate cognitive 
decline, we will include pre and post -treatment cognitive testing (ADAS -Cog, MMSE, 
immediate and delayed Logical Memory, and Stroop  Color Word Test ).  At the time of 
enrollment the participant’s  medical history and baseline of current symptoms will  be collected 
from the participant  (with study partner input ).  This symptom checklist will be rep eated at the 
end of the ~4 week  treatment period, and again ~4 weeks after the treatment is discontinued  as a 
structured method to probe for any adverse events. A study clinician will conduct a pre and post -
treatment physical and neuro logical examination to  observe for any change in status.  
 Adverse events will be collected from the time the informed consent document is signed until 
approximately 4 weeks following the last dose of study medication. The frequency and severity 
of adverse events (AE’s) will be examined and their potential causal relationship to the study 
drug (as determined by the PI ) will be assessed at the time of data collection.    
 Any adverse event that results in the study medication dose being stopped or permanently  
reduced will be considered a dose limiting toxicity (DLT).  The maximum acceptable dose -
limiting toxicity (DLT) event rate will be capped at 13.4% in each cohort.  Based on a sample 
size of 15 subjects per cohort, a binomial distribution analysis indicates if the true probability of 
a DLT event is 5% there is a 99% chance of concluding the dose is safe, with a 10% true 
probability of a DLT event t his chance falls to 94%, and with a 25% true probability of a DLT 
event this chance falls to 46%.  Thus , if more than 13.4% of currently enrolled or completed 
participants in a dose cohort experiences a DLT, that dose will be discontinued.  The dose cohort 
will be considered safe if, at its completion, 2 or fewer of the total 15 participants experience a 
DLT.    
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 8 of 19 
     The maximum number of subjects in an arm who at any time are at risk of experiencing a dose 
limiting toxicity event will be capped at 3; at no time will the number of subjects that can 
potentially experience a dose limiting toxicity event in an a rm exceed 3. This limitation will be 
achieved through curtailment.  If any 2 among the first 6 subjects experiences a dose limiting 
toxicity we will discontinue that arm at that time.  For a given arm, therefore, the risk to our 
subjects will be no greater  than the risk of a traditional 3+3 design.  The occurrence of a dose 
limiting toxicity event in 3 subjects in an arm terminates that arm, or 2 dose limiting toxicity 
events if among the first six.  The appearance of even 1 non -serious dose limiting toxici ty event 
will put a hold on further enrollment pending review by our Data Safety Monitoring Committee, 
while the appearance of any serious adverse event will require placing the entire study on hold 
pending review by the Data Safety Monitoring Committee, o ur Institutional Review Board, the 
FDA, and the PI.  In order to advance to the higher dose arm, only up to 1 of the first 6 subjects 
(16.7%) or up to 2 of the planned 15 subjects (13.4%) can experience a dose limiting toxicity; 
the occurrence of dose limi ted toxicity events in 2 of the first 6 subjects or 3 of the planned 15 
subjects terminates the arm.   
 No participants will be enrolled into the 2 g/day dose cohort until the 1 g/day cohort is 
completed within the acceptable DLT range .  If the 1 g/day dose  is discontinued due to an 
unacceptable rate of DLT events, instead of testing a higher dose we will instead test a lower 
dose (500 mg/day, given as 250 mg BID).  If the 1 g/day cohort  is found to be safe but the 2  
g/day cohort  is not, remaining subjects will be switched to (if already in the study) or placed on 
(if not already in the study) 750 mg/day (375 mg BID).    
 
Biomarker Outcomes  
 The TOAD study will  utilize FDG PET and MRS  as target engagement biomarkers .  FDG 
PET and MRS data interpreta tion, however,  is complicated by the fact that different 
interpretation strategies can be utilized and obviously with MRS there are multiple potential 
outcome measures.  For these reasons, FDG PET and MRS data will be treated as secondary 
outcomes.  Change s in these outcomes will nevertheless greatly inform the design of future OAA 
clinical trials.    
 In our preclinical mouse MRS studies, pre and post -treatment scans performed on 8 mice 
were sufficient to show treatment -associated lactate differences  [1].  Increased lactate levels in 
the brains of  mice receiving daily 2 g/kg intraperitoneal (IP)  OAA injections  could potentially 
reflect an OAA -mediated increase in glucose utilization.  If so, FDG PET may provide a 
reasonably sensitive wa y to detect increased glucose utilization.  Further, considering MRS and 
FDG PET data together could provide novel insight into bioenergetic fluxes present with in the 
brains of AD subjects.  
 Fifteen participants per cohort is a reasonable enrollment goal t o examine this secondary 
objective.  In our preliminary mouse MRS studies, pre and post -treatment scans performed on 8 
mice were sufficient to show treatment -associated lactate differences.  This is not to imply 15 
subjects per group is “conservatively pow ered”, since there is at best a very limited ability to 
extrapolate data from mice receiving 2 g/kg IP OAA and scanned by a 9.4T magnet to humans 
receiving 500 or 1000 mg po BID and scanned by a 3T mag net.   
 More applicable are FDG PET data previously reported by Keller et al . [11].  That study was 
able to demonstrate an increase in the FDG PET -determined cerebral metabolic rate of glucose 
(CMRglu) in 13 AD subjects placed on galantamine and subsequently  maintained on the drug for 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 9 of 19 
 12 months.  If OAA at the doses in the current TOAD  study is able to influence glucose 
utilization as robustly as galantamine, an n=15 per group should provide a reasonable chance of 
detecting a treatment -induced change if one exists, while providing a small cushion in the event 
of subject -drop out or if, as is possible, occasional individual scans prove to be of limited quality.  
Moreover, t he short study duration (4 weeks ) will ideally minimize drop-outs.  In this respect, to 
our knowledge this will be the first study to compare pre and post -treatment PET FDG data at a 4 
week  time point.  This is justified given our preliminary data, which indicate OAA rapidly 
affects brain bioenergetics  [1].   
 Assuming safety outco mes are met for a particular cohort , lack of change on both the MRS 
and FDG PET target engagement biomarkers would argue that rather than progressing to a more 
advanced clinical trial phase, we will need to acquire additional very -early stage test data, such 
as the PK of 500 mg and 1000 mg doses to see if there is a linear relationship, and ideally to test 
the safety of higher OAA doses.  If there is a more robust degree of target engagement with 2 
g/day than the 1 g/day  dose, further studies will examine safety and target engagement 
biomark ers at doses above 2 g/day to see if the higher doses provide more robust target 
engagement.  If equivalent target engagement biomarker changes are seen at 1 g/day and 2 g/day 
OAA, the 2 g/day dose  will move forward in subsequent studies .  Ultimately, futu re studies will 
utilize the data from the TOAD study to define a specific target engagement biomarker analysis.  
Specifically, i f positive MRS data emerge, results from this study will inform which metabolites 
are informative.  Positive FDG PET data will t ell us which brain regions are most informative.    
 
Pharmacokinetics  (PK)  
  We recently conducted an OAA PK -Safety study in AD subjects (see section 8.0 Correlative 
Studies / Clinical Studies).  To measure PK in this study, plasma was prepared and analyze d for 
OAA concentration using a commercially -available coupled enzyme assay kit. Our data indicate 
that following oral administration the Tmax for OAA occurs between 1 and 1.5 hours.  
 We have recently developed a liquid chromatography -tandem mass spectros copy (LC -
MS/MS) based assay for OAA quantification that will provide sensitivity greater than what can 
be obtained through the coupled enzyme method.  For the TOAD -PK analyses, we will use the 
LC-MS/MS -based assay to quantify OAA across a broader range of plasma concentrations.    
 
Study Procedures  
 At the initial screening  visit (V1), participants  will undergo the following procedures:  
informed consent, medical history and symptom inventory, review of concurrent medications, 
Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE), fasting  safety labs (to include complete blood count, 
serum electrolyte s, serum liver function tests, glucose)  vital signs, and a physical and 
neurological examination.  If the partici pant is a female of childbearing potential, a urine 
pregnancy test must be conducted.   Once eligibility for the study is confirmed and within 14 days  
of this , participants will complete the baseline visit (V2). The baseline visit will include FDG 
PET, MRS,  and the safety c ognitive battery  which consists of the ADAS Cog, Logical Memory I 
and II, and the Stroop Color Word Test .  After all other baseline procedures are completed, study 
medication will be dispensed.  
 Participants (and their study partners) will  be instructed to take the s tudy medication two 
times a day  in both the 1 g/day and the 2 g/day cohorts.  In the 1 g/day do se cohort, participants 
will take  500 mg OAA BID for 4 weeks .  The 2 g/day cohort will take 1000 mg OAA  BID for 4 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 10 of 19 
 weeks . Participants will take their first dose of study medication in the clinic in  each cohort and   
blood samples will be drawn just prior to administration of study medication, at 60 minutes post 
ingestion, and at 90 minutes post ingestion.  
 At the end of week s 1, 2, and 3 of OAA administration we will place a phone call to enrolled 
subjects and their caregivers to ascertain side effects that could indicate emerging toxicity.  
Approximately 4 weeks (+/ - 7 days) after starting study medication, participants will  be asked to 
complete V3, which will include a post -treatment FDG PET, MRS, a repeat cognitive battery 
(including MMSE), review of symptoms ( to check for adverse events), review of concurrent 
medications, fasting  safety labs, vital signs, and  physical/neurological examination.  All used 
and unused study medication will be returned and study medication compliance will be 
calculated.  The V3 FDG PET and MRS will be conducted while still taking study medication 
but just prior ( within 7 days ) to stopping.   
 A final phone interview (V4) will be conducted approximately 4 weeks (+/ - 7 days) after 
stopping study medication to review the symptom inventory and determine if any adverse events 
were experienced in this time period.  
 
Description of FDG PET Procedures  
 FDG PET images will be obtained at a satellite location of the University  of Kansas Hospital . 
The scanner is accredited by the American College of Radiology (ACR), and our physicists 
perform annual required testing by scanning an Esser PET phantom with 18F to assess SUV 
range, contrast resolution, spatial resolution, and uniformity. In addition to  the ACR annual 
testing, the nuclear medicine department routinely performs quality control procedures on a 
daily, weekly, and quarterly basis.  Subjects will arrive for FDG PET after having fasted for a 
minimum of 6 hours and will have a catheter placed f or IV administration of FDG.  Subjects will 
receive a single IV bolus of FDG.  After the appropriate amount of time has elapsed, frames are 
reconstructed to a single PET image in native space. Adverse events will be continuously 
monitored during the imagin g session. The radiation dose from the two FDG PET scans our 
subjects will receive will not exceed 2100 mrem. While this amount of radioactivity obviously 
exceeds the amount obtained through normal background exposure, it is still considered by 
Radiation S afety to be well below the risk levels acceptable in research and medical practice.  
 
Description of MRS  Procedures  
 MRS scans will be obtained using a 3T system (Skyra, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) fitted 
with a 12 -channel receiver head coil. After position ing the participant supine in the magnet, 
three -plane scout MR images are acquired followed by an oblique -axial MP -RAGE sequence 
oriented parallel to the AC -PC line. We will collect several MRS sequences to sample a large 
spectroscopic imaging slab at the same angle, superior to the lateral ventricles.   From this we will 
determine concentrations of several neurochemicals including lactate, glutamine, and glutamate 
which are of specific relevance to the current proposal.  We will also quantify glutathione fr om 
the same locations using a double -quantum filtered sequence developed at the Hoglund Brain 
Imaging Center .  In addition, based on our animal results we will also acquire a single voxel 
spectrum that includes the hippocampus.  Scan time will be approximately 1 .5 hours, which from 
our experience is feasible in this subject group. Spectra will be analyzed using LCModel and 
corrected for tissue fraction in each voxel using the segmented MP -RAGE images corresponding 
to the spectroscopic imaging slab,  and using existing laboratory routines.  
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 11 of 19 
  
Description of Pharmacokinetic Procedures  
 In each cohort (500 mg OAA bid and 1000 mg OAA bid) , the participant will consume the 
first dose of study medication in the clinic, after having fasted for a minimum of 8 hours.  Just 
prior to administration of this first dose, a blood PK sample (approximately 4 mL of blood) will 
be drawn to provide a  baseline measurement .  A second PK sample will be drawn at 60 minutes 
post ingestion and a third PK sample will be drawn at 90 minutes post ingestion.  Each PK 
sample will immediately be placed on ice, and will be processed into plasma within 10 minutes 
of col lection.  Aliquots of plasma (approximately 0.5 mL each) will be frozen and stored at -
80°C immediately until analyses. Quantitation of OAA in plasma will be performed using the 
LC-MC/MS based assay described above.  
 
Procedure Timeline  
 The timing of study procedures/ schedule of events  are summarized  in the STUDY  
CALENDAR  in Section 9.0  
 
6.0 EXPECTED TOXICITIES  
 There are no expected toxicities.   
 
7.0 DRUG FORMULATION AND ADMINISTRATION  
Drug Production Site  
 OAA  will be purchased from Terra Biological LLC, which is based in San Diego, CA. OAA 
sold by Terra is produced according to good manufacturing practices.   
 
Drug Transportation  
 Study  medication will be shipped to the study site by express mail.  
 
Drug Formul ation  
 Terra markets OAA as a nutritional supplement in capsules that contain 100 mg of OAA and 
150 mg of ascorbic acid.  To prevent ascorbic acid from complicating interpr etations, Terra will 
provide the study site with capsules containing 250  or 500  mg OAA and no ascorbate.  This will 
limit  the number of capsules participants  must ingest.  
 
Drug Quality Assurance  
Ten of our 250  or 500  mg capsules, from the same lot being di spensed at that time, will be 
randomly selected each month for the duration of our study and will be analyzed according to the protocol 
summarized in the Table below.  
 
 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 12 of 19 
  
Monthly analysis and quality parameters of our 250 /500 mg oxaloacetate capsules.  
Method  Specification  
HPLC Oxaloacetic Acid Assay  Greater than 95%  
 
 If the average oxaloacetate content in ten analyzed oxaloacetate capsules at any point falls 
below 95%, or if any other parameter does not meet our specifications, a new set of capsules will 
be synthesized and reanalyzed.  If meeting this standard requires  synthesizing a new batch of 
oxaloacetate, the new batch will also be fully analyzed by the protocol summarized below before 
being packaged into capsules. The new batch will then be dispensed to participants to ensure all 
participants are taking the proper  dosage of oxaloacetate above 95%.  
 
Monthly analysis and quality parameters of our 250  mg oxaloacetate capsules.  
Method  Specification  
HPLC Oxaloacetic Acid Assay  Greater than 95%  
Appearance  White to Off -White Crystalline Powder  
Sulfated Ash  Max: 0.5%  
Loss on Drying  Max: 1.0%  
Water (Karl Fisher)  Max: 1.0%  
Solution (10% in Water)  Clear  
Heavy Metals as Lead (USP <231>  Max: 0.001%  
Identification (IR)  Consistent with Structure  
 
Monthly analysis and quality parameters of our 500 mg oxaloacetate capsules.  
Method  Specification  
HPLC Oxaloacetic Acid Assay  Greater than 95%  
Appearance  White to Off -White Crystalline Powder  
Sulfated Ash  Max: 0.5%  
Water (Karl Fisher)  Max: 1.0%  
Heavy Metals as Lead (USP <231>  Max: 0.001%  
Identification (IR)  Consistent with Structure  
 
 For the 500 mg capsules, microcrystalline cellulose (MC) has been added to the capsules to 
assist with packing the OAA in the capsules.  With the 500 mg capsules, we allow for cloud iness 
in the solution because the presence  of MC renders the solution cloudy, therefore  the Solution 
test is not used as a parameter for the 500 mg capsules .  Also with the 500 mg capsules, we will 
define acceptability of the ca psules using the Karl Fisher test, as this test is more sensi tive to 
water content than the Loss on D rying t est.  Levels less than 1.0% on the Karl Fisher test are 
considered acceptable.   
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 13 of 19 
  The oxaloacetate capsules we use in these studies will be stored in plastic bottles containing a 
desiccant.  The bottles will be kept in a locked cabinet in the KU Alzheimer’s Disease Center  
which is monitored for temperature changes or in a secure -20 deg ree freezer  in the University of 
Kansas Clinical Research Center building.  Every month 10 capsules from the same lot used for 
dispensing will be delivered to the company that performs the analysis.  The company that will 
perform the analysis is Expert Che mical Analysis (ECA), which is located in San Diego, CA.  
ECA is registered and audited by the FDA (www.ecalab.com).  There is a possibility that loss of 
oxaloacetate integrity could occur as an artifact of the shipping process (when the capsules are 
brief ly outside of our controlled environment), but this approach will ensure that the quality of 
the oxaloacetate distributed to our trial subjects meets or exceeds the quality of the assayed 
oxaloacetate capsules.      
 
Drug Administration  
 Participants  in the 1 g/day dose cohort will take 2 - 250 mg OAA  capsules in the morning and 
2-250 mg OAA  capsules in the evening for approximately 4 weeks.  Participants in the 2 g/day 
dose cohort will take 2-500 mg OAA capsules in the morning and 2-500 capsules in the evening 
for approximately 4 weeks.  
 
 
8.0 CORRELATIVE STUDIES  
Pre-Clinical Studies  
 In one recent study using C. elegans , OAA extended median and maximum lifespan through 
AMP kinase (AMPK) and forkhead O -box (FOXO) transcription factor -dependent pathways 
[12].  In mammals, it can  be inferred that systemically administered OAA accesses the brain.  
This inference is based on rodent studies that report OAA prevents kainate -induced seizures and 
neuron damage, decreases ischemia -induced stroke volume, decreases cortical impact -induced 
traumatic brain injury, and slows glioma growth rates [13-16].    
 Over the past five years we have completed our own preclinical target validation studies.  
Initially, we evaluated the effects of OAA on cell culture bioenergetic fluxes and found that in 
undifferentiated and differentiated human neuronal SH -SY5Y cells OAA increased the 
maximum glycolysis capacity, spare g lycolysis capacity, enhanced the mitochondrial respiratory 
flux, and blunted the Crabtree effect.  To extend our studies to animals, we next administered 
OAA to mice in order to test its impact on genes, proteins, and pathways that monitor, regulate, 
and m ediate brain bioenergetic fluxes.  We also ascertained the effect of OAA on brain insulin 
signaling, inflammation, and hippocampal neurogenesis as relationships exist between these 
parameters and bioenergetics.  We further probed for changes in metabolic f luxes by using MRS 
to measure in vivo levels of detectable neurochemicals.  
 In these studies  [1], male C57Bl/6 mice receive d IP OAA, 1 -2 g/kg once per day for 1 -2 
weeks.  Both doses induced brain changes; we did not determine a minimum effective dose.  
Observed changes were consistent with an activation of mitochondrial biogenesis pathways. 
Brain peroxisome proliferator activa ted receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α) and peroxisome 
related coactivator (PRC) mRNA levels increased, and brain PGC1α and PRC protein within 
cells redistributed such that their nucleus:cytoplasm ratios increased.  mRNA levels of nuclear 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 14 of 19 
 respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and transcription factor A of the mitochondria (TFAM) increased. 
OAA treatment also increased cytochrome oxidase subunit 4 isoform 1 (COX4I1) mRNA and 
protein.  AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation, p38 MAPK phosphorylation, and cAMP -response 
element bindi ng (CREB) Ser133 phosphorylation each increased.  
 OAA treatment enhanced the brain insulin signaling pathway activation state.  Akt Ser473, 
mTOR  Ser2448, and P70S6K Thr389 phosphorylation increased.  OAA treatment also reduced 
markers of neuroinflammation.  Hippocampal C -C motif chemokine 11 (CCL11) mRNA, 
hemisphere nuclear factor κB (NFκB) protein levels, and NFκB nucleus -to-cytoplasm ratios 
were  lower than in control mice.   
 It was previously reported in mice that CCL11 retards  subgranular layer neurogenesis [17].  
Because CCL11 gene expression was reduced in the hippocampus of OAA -treated mice, and 
because Akt and mTOR activation promotes cell growth, we evaluated hippocampal 
neurogenesis  and found enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis.  Hippocampal vascular endothelial 
growth factor A (VEGF) mRNA levels increased.  Hippocampal mRNA and protein levels of 
doublecortin (DCX), which is commonly used as a surrogate measure of new neuron formation,  
increased.  The number of intensely DCX -positive neurons increased.  Relative to the control 
group, DCX -positive neurites were longer in the OAA -treated mice.  
 1H-MRS was performed on mice before receiving any treatment, and on the same mice after 
they re ceived 2 g/kg/day OAA IP for one week (the 1 g/kg/day dose was not studied).  OAA 
induced changes in several neurochemicals. After one week of OAA, brain lactate, GABA, and 
glutathione (GSH) levels were respectively 21%, 15%, and 27% higher than they were on the 
pre-treatment scans.  
 
Clinical Studies  
 Prior to our own recent OAA studies, the literature reported only one human study of OAA, a 
1968 study that evaluated its potential anti -hyperglycemic effects.  This study, performed in 
human diabetics, report ed OAA was well -tolerated and also limited PK data [10].  Levels were 
not increased 30 minutes but were increased 60 minutes after 200 mg were orally administered to 
three subjects.  On average, OAA levels rose from 0 ug/100 ml to 2.3 ug/100 ml.     
 We recently conducted an OAA PK -safety study in AD subjects.   OAA 100 mg capsules 
(obtained from Terra, Inc., which markets OAA as a nutritional supplement) were administered 
to 6 subjects recruited from the University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center (KU ADC) 
clinical cohort.  The first 100 mg capsule was admi nistered at the University of Kansas Clinical 
Translational Science Award (KU CTSA) Clinical Trials Unit (CTU), and over a four hour 
period PK blood samples were obtained at 15, 30, or 60 minute intervals.  Basic safety labs 
(CBC, chemistries) and cognitiv e tests (MMSE, ADAS -Cog) were performed. Subjects 
continued on 100 mg BID OAA for one month, and then returned to the CTU where blood 
samples were again taken for PK determinations, safety labs and cognitive tests were repeated, 
and a formal side effect qu ery were completed.  There were no drop -outs, pre and post treatment 
cognitive scores were comparable, safety labs were unremarkable, and no side effects were 
reported.  
 Further human experience data are available from the case series of Kesari.  In the Kesari 
case series human subjects with gliomas were administered oxaloacetate at doses far greater than 
500 mg BID.  This case series includes 8 subjects whose single dose amount w as 1000 mg and 6 
subjects whose single dose amount was 2000 mg (500 mg doses were not used in this case 
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 15 of 19 
 series).  Among the subjects maintained at these high doses a single side effect was reported to 
be oxaloacetate -related, and included a single subject who experienced nausea on the 2000 mg 
dose. Neither discontinuation nor a reduction in dosage was required.  Oxaloacetate was 
administered TID in this case series, and the mean treatment duration for the group was over 2 
months. Therefore, well over 2000 d oses of over 500 mg have been administered to humans 
without incurring a dose limiting toxicity event.        
In the Kesari case series , the 8 subjects dosed with 1000 mg TID were followed for an 
average of 2.3 months (minimum duration=1 month, maximum dur ation=8 months).  The 
average cumulative dose for these 8 subjects was therefore ~210,000 mg (minimum=90,000 mg, 
maximum=720,000 mg).  The 6 subjects dosed with 2000 mg TID were followed for an average 
of 4.2 months (minimum duration=1 month, maximum durat ion=8 months). The only reported 
side effect in this series was one reported case of nausea in the 2000 mg TID group, and this did 
not require discontinuation or a change in dosing. The average cumulative dose for these 6 
subjects was therefore ~756,000 mg  (minimum=180,000 mg, maximum=1,440,000 mg); the 
cumulative ~1 month amount at 500 mg BID would be ~30,000 mg.  
It is important to note that oxaloacetate has been available for years as a supplement in the 
United States and other countries, and no toxicity  has been reported.  This is consistent with the 
fact that marketed oxaloacetate is produced from tartaric acid, a GRAS compound.  As it is 
produced from a GRAS compound, oxaloacetate itself could also technically be considered to 
meet GRAS status.  
9.0 STU DY CALENDAR  
Trial of Oxaloacetate in Alzheimer’s Disease (TOAD) Schedule of Events  
Procedure  Visit 1 
(Screening)  
 -14 to 0 days  Visit 2 
(Baseline)c 
 Day 0  Visit 3f** 
 Week 4 (+/ - 
7 days)  Visit 4  
 4 weeks post V 3 
End D ate (+/ - 7 
days)  
Informed Consent  X    
Medical History Review  X    
Symptom Checklist/ Adverse Event Review  X X X X 
Concurrent Medication Review  X X X X 
Vital signs  X X X  
Physical & Neuro Exam  X  X  
Safety Labs (fasting)  X  X  
Pharmacokinetic labs (fasting)   X   
Urine pregnancy test*  X    
MMSE  X  X  
Review of Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria  X    
ADAS Cog   X X  
Logical Memory I & II   X X  
Stroop Color Word Test   X X  
FDG PETa  X X  
MRSb  X X  
Dispense Study Medication/Begin Study 
Medicationd  X   
Stop Study Medication/ Medication Compliance 
Checke   X  
aFDG PET=fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography. At V2, FDG PET may be performed any time after participant is deemed  eligible 
for st udy but must be done prior to administration of first dose of study medication. At V3, FDG PET must be completed prior to sto pping study 
medication.  
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 16 of 19 
 bMRS=magnetic resonance spectroscopy. At V2, MRS may be performed any time after participant is deemed elig ible for study but must be 
done pr ior to first dose of study medic ation prior to administration of first dose of study medication. At V3, MRS must be completed prior to 
stopping study medication.   
cAll V2 procedures must be completed no later than 14 days after V1.  
dDispensing of study medication and administration of first dose may take place on the same day as other V2 study procedures ( such as PET or 
MRS or cognitive testing) but  must be the last procedure completed at V2.     
eStopping study medication/medication compliance check must be the last procedure completed at V3.  
fV3 procedures may be completed on multiple days, but should begin 4 weeks +/ - 7 days from Day 0. Once first V3 procedure is completed, all 
other V3 procedures must be completed within 7 days . 
*For females of childbearing potential only  
**Phone call to participant/caregiver will take place at end of Week 1, Week 2, & Week 3 of OAA administrationi to ascertain side effects that 
could indicate emerging toxicity.  
 
10.0 MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 The primary and secondary outcomes will be assessed as described under section 5.0 
TREATMENT PLAN , Study Design.    
 
11.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  
11.1 Notifying the FDA  
 The study sponsor will report adverse events  in an expedited fashion to the FDA.  These 
written notifications of adverse events (IND safety reports ) will follow the following guidelines:  
• Within 7 calendar days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug  
– unexpected,  
– fatal or life -threatening, and  
 
• Within 15 calendar days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug,  
– unexpected, and  
– serious, but not fatal or life -threatening  
-or- 
– a previous adverse event that was not initially deemed reportable but is later found to 
fit the criteria for reporting (reporting within 15 calendar days from when event was 
deemed reportable).  
 
12.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
Data Collection  
The PI w ill ov ersee all data collection.  
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 17 of 19 
  
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
  A medical monitor, Jeffrey Burns, MD, will assess adverse events to determine severity 
and causality.  A protocol for handling adverse events is provided in the Figure below.  Adverse 
events will be reported to the local IRB according to IRB reporting poli cies and to the FDA 
according to the above requirements.  An internal safety committee will meet quarterly to review 
adverse events and the overall s afety of the ongoing trial.  The following individuals will serve 
on this committee : Richard Dubinsky, MD,  Michael Abraham, MD, and Kelly Lyons, PhD .   
 
13.0 REGULATORY CONSIDERATION  
Protection of Human Subjects and Informed Consent  
 Regulation s in regard to Human Subjects Protection and Informed Consent will be followed 
in accordance with 21 CFR 50.  All inst itutional, FDA, state , and federal regulations concerning 
informed consent will be followed.    
Institutional Review Board  (IRB)  
 Regulations regarding initial and continuing review of the study by an Institutional Review 
Board will be followed.  The University of Kansas Medical Center has a federally approved 

  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 18 of 19 
 Institutional Review Board, which will be involved in all aspects of study  planning and 
considerations as per 21 CFR 56.  The KUMC IRB FWA# is FWA00003411.   
 
Financial Disclosure  
 There are no financial disclosures to be made.   
 
Obligations of Investigators  
 The Principal Investigator/Sponsor, Dr. Russell Swerdlow , will be res ponsible for all 
elements of 21 CFR 312 subpart D.  Dr. Swerdlow  will maintain oversight of the clinical trial 
ensuring relevant regulatory requirements are met and necessary guidelines are followed .  The 
following are co -investigators:  
• Jeffrey Burns, MD  
• Jonathan Mahnken, PhD  
• William Brooks, PhD  
• Eric Vidoni, PhD  
• Janna Harris, PhD  
 The Principal Investigator has confirmed all co -investigator  credentials, ex perience , and 
training.  He has also ensured additional personnel  will follow the appropriate investigational 
plans and guidelines as submitted in this IND.  All changes to the study, including modifications 
to this IND, will be communicated by the Principal Investigator, and he will be the primary 
liaison to the IRB.   
 All detected and newly discovered adverse effects and risks will be reported by the involved 
investigator at the time of the event, per institutional guidelines.  Each investigator is also 
responsible for privacy and welfare of his patient.  Record -keepi ng and data is strictly 
confidential, only to be shared between investigators in the study and only those who are directly 
involved in the care of the patient.  
 
14.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATION  
 The statistical analysis will be conducted as described under  5.0 TREATMENT PLAN, 
Study Design.  
 
15.0 PUBLICATION PLAN  
 Publications resulting from this study will be prepared by the PI.  Co -authors will include 
personnel from the study site who have meaningfully contributed to study execution or 
development, as well as  a project consultant (Dr. Lisa Mosconi, NYU Medical Ce nter).  Only co -
authors who agree with the final manuscript will be listed as authors on the final manuscript.  
   
  TOAD 10/25/2016  
Page 19 of 19 
 16.0 REFERENCES  
1. Wilkins, H.M., et al., Oxaloacetate activates brain mitochondrial biogenesis, enhances the insulin 
pathway, reduces inflammation and stimulates neurogenesis. Hum Mol Genet, 2014. 23(24): p. 
6528 -41. 
2. Swerdlow, R.H., The neurodegenerative mitochondriopath ies. J Alzheimers Dis, 2009. 17(4): p. 
737-51. 
3. Hebert, L.E., et al., Alzheimer disease in the US population: prevalence estimates using the 2000 
census. Arch Neurol, 2003. 60(8): p. 1119 -22. 
4. Alzheimer's Association.  2011 Alzheimer’s disease facts an d figures. Alzheimer's and Dementia, 
2011. 7: p. 208 -244.  
5. Swerdlow, R.H., Mitochondria and cell bioenergetics: increasingly recognized components and a 
possible etiologic cause of Alzheimer's disease. Antioxid Redox Signal, 2012. 16(12): p. 1434 -55. 
6. Mosconi, L., et al., FDG -PET changes in brain glucose metabolism from normal cognition to 
pathologically verified Alzheimer's disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging, 2009. 36(5): p. 811 -22. 
7. Swerdlow, R.H., Bioenergetic medicine. Br J Pharmacol, 2014. 171(8): p. 1854 -69. 
8. Hakimi, P., et al., Overexpression of the cytosolic form of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 
(GTP) in skeletal muscle repatterns energy metabolism in the mouse. J Biol Chem, 2007. 
282(45): p. 32844 -55. 
9. McKhann, G.M., et al., The diagn osis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease: Recommendations 
from the National Institute on Aging -Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic 
guidelines for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement, 2011. 7(3): p. 263 -9. 
10. Yoshikawa, K., Studies on the anti -diabetic effect of sodium oxaloacetate. Tohoku J Exp Med, 
1968. 96(2): p. 127 -41. 
11. Keller, C., et al., Long -term effects of galantamine treatment on brain functional activities as 
measured by PET in Alzheimer's disease  patients. J Alzheimers Dis, 2011. 24(1): p. 109 -23. 
12. Williams, D.S., et al., Oxaloacetate supplementation increases lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans 
through an AMPK/FOXO -dependent pathway. Aging Cell, 2009. 8(6): p. 765 -8. 
13. Yamamoto, H.A. and P.V.  Mohanan, Effect of alpha -ketoglutarate and oxaloacetate on brain 
mitochondrial DNA damage and seizures induced by kainic acid in mice. Toxicol Lett, 2003. 
143(2): p. 115 -22. 
14. Campos, F., et al., Oxaloacetate: a novel neuroprotective for acute ischemic stroke. Int J 
Biochem Cell Biol, 2012. 44(2): p. 262 -5. 
15. Ruban, A., et al., Blood glutamate scavengers prolong the survival of rats and mice with brain -
implanted gliomas. Invest New Drugs, 2012.  
16. Zlotnik, A., et al., Effect of glutamate and blood glu tamate scavengers oxaloacetate and 
pyruvate on neurological outcome and pathohistology of the hippocampus after traumatic brain 
injury in rats. Anesthesiology, 2012. 116(1): p. 73 -83. 
17. Villeda, S.A., et al., The ageing systemic milieu negatively regulat es neurogenesis and cognitive 
function. Nature, 2011. 477(7362): p. 90 -4. 
 