 
 
 
 
Sucralfate to Improve Oral Intake in Children with Infectious Oral Ulcers: A Randomized, 
Double -blind, Placebo -Controlled Trial  
 
NCT Number: 2017 -06-0024  
 
Date of Document: 07 -31-2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Objectives /Hypothesis  
Specific Aim 1:  To evaluate  comparative effectiveness of sucralfate versus placebo on the 
improvement of oral fluid intake (in ml/kg) 60 minutes post administration in children between 
6 months and 5 years  of age with oral infectious ulcers presenting to an urban p ediatric 
emergency departments with concern for decreased oral intake or dehydration.   
 Hypothesis: Sucralfate will lead to a clinically significant improvement in oral intake 
relative to placebo in pediatric patients diagnosed with oral infectious ulcers  and a history 
consistent with poor oral intake or dehydration presentin g to the emergency department.  
 
Specific Aim 2: To explore the difference in the rates of intravenous fluid (IVF) adm inistration, 
admission rates , ED length of stay , rates of unschedu led visits  and physician perception of 
adequate oral intake  in children between 6 months and 5 years with oral infectious ulcers treated 
with sucralfate versus placebo .  
Hypothesis: Pediatric patients receiving sucralfate will have decreased rates of IVF 
administration , hospital admission , unscheduled return visits, as well as  shorter ED length of stay 
compared to the placebo group.  
 
II. Methods  
Study Design and Setting  
The study will take place in an urban pediatric ED with approximately 80,000 visits per year, of 
which about 700 visits per year are due to oral infectious ulcers. This study will be a double -blind, 
randomized, placebo controlled trial comparing sucralfate to placebo for improving ora l intake 
in children with oral ulcers . Due to lack of benefit from clinical trials, and the potential for harm, 
placebo was chosen as a comparator over combination diphenhydramine, aluminum hydroxide, 
and lidocaine . A randomized control trial will be the b est study to determine  efficacy of the 
therapy, while minimizing bias.   
 
Selection of Participants  
This will be a convenience sample bas ed on study staff availability. Subjects will be identified in 
triage  based on a history of oral ulcers or by physician s during examination. They w ill be screened 
and enrolled by a member of the study team.  
 
Subject Eligibility:  
Inclusion:  
Age ≥6 months and <5 years of age  
Present with oral infectious ulcers such as gingivostomatitis, herpangina, or hand, foot 
and mouth disease  
History of poor oral fluid intake by parent or guardian  
English or Spanish speaking parents or guardians  
Exclusion : 
Severely dehydrated or toxic, requiring immediate resuscitation  
Exclusively Breastfed  
Dental disease  
Mouth trauma  
Active Malignancy  
Preexisting upper airway obstruction or swallowing difficulties  
Received IV F within 24 hours  
Administration of BOTH acetaminophen AND ibuprofen within 4 hours of enrollment  
 
Interventions  
After consent is obtained from the parents or guardians, study patients will be randomized to 
receive treatment with either the experimental drug ( sucralfate) or placebo. Simple 
randomization allocation will be performed with a computerized randomization process. The 
research pharmacy will maintain a treatment a rm allocation key . The pharmacist will send an 
amber colored syringe with a number and no other identifying factors. This will blind patients, 
family, nurses, physicians and study staff from the assignment.  
 
Subsequently , the study personnel will  collect b aseline data from the patient’s guardian. Data 
will be recorded on a standardized form and will include subject demographics (including age, 
ethnicity, and sex), historical information about prior analgesia at home  (medication, dose and 
time prior to arriv al), duration of current symptoms , an initial set of vital signs (temperature, 
heart rate, blood pressure and peripheral pulse oximetry),  and the baseline clinical dehydration 
score. The Clinical Dehydration Score (CDS) will be used  since prior  research ex hibited  moderate 
inter -observer rel iability (23) and it has been previously validated for the evaluation of 
dehydration (24-26).  
 
All patients will receive analgesia, either acetaminophen 15mg/kg or ibuprofen 10mg/kg 
depending on medication administration prior to arrival in the ED  and the discretion of the 
treating physician . Some pat ients may receive these medications  in triage if they are febrile, the 
rest of the participants will  receive analgesia as part of the study protocol.  
 
Patients randomized to the experimental arm will receive therapy with oral sucralfate. 
Administration will be by the treating nurse using  a measured syringe provided by the pharmacy 
to the oral cavity, aiming to cover the inflamed mucosa and ulcerative lesions. Give n the young 
nature of the patients in the study, the swish and swallow method is not feasible.  A weight base d 
dose of sucralfate will be administered - 20mg/kg/dose up to 1g, consistent with published 
recommendations for other indications  (27). Studies have shown doses from 15 -50mg/kg/dose 
to be relatively safe in the pediatric population (15-17). If a patient spits the medication out within 
5 minutes of administration, the dose will be re -administered.  
 
Patients randomized to the placebo arm will re ceive therapy with a solution of water and ora -
sweet syrup. Using prepared syringes from the pharmacy, the nurses will administer a placebo 
volume that will be equivalent to the volume of the weight based sucralfate suspension .                                     
Ora-sweet syrup is essential ly a sweet base, normally  used as a vehicle for  other pediatric  
suspension medications. The ingredients glycerin, sorbitol, sodium saccharin, xanthan gum, 
flavoring, buffered with citric acid, so dium citrate and preserva tives provide a  solution similar in 
color, taste, and smell. Both will be dispensed in amber syringes to conceal any minor differences 
in appearance. S imilar ingredients have been used in other stud ies as placebo , and have not 
impe ded the ability to demons trate  efficacy of sucralfate (3, 19) .  
 
After the administration of the study drug, subjects will be actively encouraged to drink fluids . 
The study staff or nursing staff will provide oral hydration supplements in the form of age 
appropriate formula or  pedialyte  (instead of breastfeeding) , apple  juice, Gatorade or popsicles. 
The study staff will have a script of instructions explaining to the family the importance of 
encouraging oral intake with small sips every few minutes , which is the current standard of care 
at our institution . The study staf f or nurses will check in at 30 minutes post administration to 
make sure parents are trialing fluids and offer alternative fluids if patient prefers.  
 
At 60 minutes post administrations, the study staff will document the volume of the fluids in ml. 
Fluid amount  ingested will be measured by research staff according to calculated measurements 
of cups, other containers, and syringes in the ED or packaged frozen rehydration solution. In 
addition, they will record the dose and timing of analgesia provided in th e hospital, an  updated 
set of vital signs (temperature, heart rate, blood pressure and peripheral pulse oximetry),  and 
any side effects. Physicians will be asked if they feel the  oral intake is sufficient per their 
impression. Both the treating physician a nd parent/guardian will be asked their best guess of 
treatment allocation to assess the adequacy of blinding.  
 
Following completion  of the experimental stage as detailed above, patients will be released to 
receive standard of care therapy as determined by  the a ssigned attending ED physician. After the 
patient is discharged from the ED, study staff will record the need for further IV h ydration, ED 
length of stay, the final disposition , and whether or not a prescription for sucralfate is provided . 
The resear ch nurse will contact each family approximately 72 (72-96) hours after initial visit to 
inquire about unscheduled visits elsewhere , and ED records will be reviewed for any unscheduled 
return visits.  
 
Methods of Measurement and Outcome Measures  
The primary outcome will be the amount of fluid ingested within 60 minutes of administration of 
the study drug, expressed in milliliters per kilogram.  
 
The secondary outcomes measured will include (1) whether the oral intake is deemed adequate 
at 60 minutes (as determined by the treating clinician) ; (2) whether patient required fluid 
administration by intravenous l ine (oral hydration failure); (3 ) whether participant required 
hospital admission; (4) dura tion of stay in the ED; ( 5) incidence of unscheduled visits.  
 
Sample Size  
The treatment groups will be analyzed on an intention -to-treat basis. The only prior study in the 
literature with a similar endpoint  of fluid intake between  2 treatment groups (viscous lidocaine 
versus placebo) with oral infectious ulcers dem onstrated  a baseline fluid intake rate of 8.4  ml/kg , 
mean difference of 4.3ml/kg  and SD 7ml/kg ingested during a 60-minute  fluid trial. A panel of 
experts convened for the study design deem ed an effect size of 4 ml/kg to be clinically 
meaningful (12). Using this data, with an alpha of 0.05 and beta of 0.20, sample size calculations 
yield n=50 per group (100 total) . No allowance is made for loss to follow -up because of the short 
timeframe of this st udy. The calculations were performed using STATA (version 13.0; Statacorp, 
College Station, TX).  
 
Statistical Analysis   
Baseline group characteristics will be summarized in a table with means and standard deviations 
for continuous data, percentages for ca tegorical data, and medians with interquartile ranges for 
ordinal data.   
 
The primary outcome of oral fluid intake in milliliters per kilogram will be compared between the 
two groups using a two -tailed t -test, or non -parametric equivalent if the data is non -normally 
distributed. The data will be presented with mean intake in each group and its standard 
deviation, with comparison between the groups presented as a difference in means and  its 95% 
confidence interval , and resultant p value . 
 
Secon dary outcomes for this study will include IVF administration rates, hospital admission ra tes, 
ED LOS,  rates of unscheduled visits, and physician perception of adequate oral intake. Analysis of 
these variables will be completed using appropriate statistical  analysis depending on the nature 
of the data (t -test for continuous, chi square of Fisher’s exact test for categorical, and Mann -
Whitney U test for ordinal). Non -parametric tests will be used when appropriate.  
 
Finally, if significant baseline difference in the groups occur, linear multivariable regression 
analysis of the primary endpoint will be performed to adjust for potential confounders.  