Title: An expanded Phase I stu dy of paz opanib and everolimus in patients with 
advanced solid tumors and previous ly treated advanced urothelial cancer.  
 
 
 
 
NCT Nu mber: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
IRB Appr oval Date: 27 -Aug-2010  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
CON FIDENTIAL 
This document is co nfidential. Do n ot disclose or  use except as au thorized.  1  
  
 
NCI Protocol  #: N/A 
 
 
Local  Protocol  #: 10-166 
 
 
Protocol  Version Date: 11/3/16  
 
 
Title : An expande d Phase I stud y of pazopani b and everolimu s in patient s with 
advance d solid tumor s and previousl y treate d advance d urothelia l cancer.  
 
Principal  Investigat or: 
Mark Po merantz,  MD 
Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute  
450 Brookline  Avenue  
D1230  
Boston,  MA 02215  
Phone:  (617) 632 -6328  
Fax: (617) 632 -2165  
 
Coordinating Center:  Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute  
 
Co-Princi pal Investigator : 
Lauren  Harsh man, MD 
Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute  
450 Brookline  Avenue  
D1230  
Boston,  MA 02215  
Phone:  (617) 632 -4524  
Fax: (617) 632 -2165  
 
Sub-Investigator:  
Joaquim  Bellmunt, MD, PhD 
Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute 
Associate  Professor of Medici ne 
Harvard  Medical  School  
 
Agents:  
Pazopanib  (NSC 737754;  IND 65, 747) – Novartis  
Everoli mus (NSC 733504;  IND 79, 707) – Novartis  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
CON FIDENTIAL 
This document is co nfidential. Do n ot disclose or  use except as au thorized.  2  
 Start at 
dose level 0 Treat  cohort  
(3 participants) No further 
escalation   
 
 
 
SCHEMA  
 
 
Phase I Portion  
 
 
 
Start at 
dose level 0  
Treat  cohort  
(3 participants)  
Number 
of DLTs 
 
0 
1 2 or 3   
 
No further 
escalation  
 
 
Recruit 3 more 
participants 
 
 
Escalate dose  
 
 
No Yes 
Additional  
DLT s?  
Stop 
 
 
 
 
Expansion Cohort  
 
 
 
 
Definitions  
Treat ment  Respon se Treat ment 
 
R 
CR CR - Complete Resp onse E 
PR - Partial Res ponse G Restage  every PR Continue  
PD - Progressive Disease   I  2 cycles  SD 
SD - Stable Disease  S everolimus 
T P azop a n i b PD (o ff   s t ud y)  
 
E 
R 
 
1 cycle  = 28 days  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
CON FIDENTIAL 
This document is co nfidential. Do n ot disclose or  use except as au thorized.  3  
  
 
TABLE OF  CONTENTS  
 
 
 
Page  
 
SCHE MA 2 
 
1: OBJECTIVES 6 
1.1 Study  Design  6 
1.2 Phase I Study  6 
1.3 Expansion  Cohort  (Urothelial  Carcino ma) 6 
 
2: BACKGROUND 7 
2.1 Investigational  Agents  7 
2.2 Study  Disease  15 
2.3 Rationale  17 
 
3: PARTICIPANT SELECTION 21 
3.1 Eligibility  Criteria  for Dose Escalation  Cohort  21 
3.2 Eligibility  Criteria  for Expansion  Cohort  23 
3.3 Exclusion  Criteria  for Dose Escalation  Cohort  27 
3.4 Exclusion  Criteria  for Expansion  Cohort  30 
3.5 Inclusion  of Wo men, Minorities  and Other Underrepresented  Populations  35 
 
4: REGISTRATION PROCEDURES 35 
4.1 General  Guidelin es for DF/HCC and  DF/PCC Instit utions 35 
4.2 Regist ration  Process for DF/HCC and  DF/PCC Instit utions 35 
4.3 General  Guidelin es for Other  Parti cipating  Institutions  36 
 
5:  T REATMENT PLAN 37 
5.1 Phase I  37 
5.2 Pre-treatment Criteria  37 
5.3 Agent  Administration  39 
5.4 Definitio n of Dose -Limitin g Toxicit y 41 
5.5 General  Conco mitant Medication  and Supportive  Care  Guidelines  43 
5.6 Duration  of Therapy  47 
5.7 Duration  of Follow  Up 48 
5.8 Criteria  for Removal from  Study  48 
 
6: EXPECTED TOXICITIES AND DOSING DE LAY/D OSE MODIFICATIONS  48 
6.1 Anticipated  Toxicities  50 
6.2 Toxicity  Manage ment 54 
6.3 Dose Modifications/Delays  61 
CON FIDENTIAL 
This document is co nfidential. Do n ot disclose or  use except as au thorized.  4 Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16  
 7: DRUG FORMULATION  AND ADMINI STRATION  69 
7.1 Everoli mus 69 
7.2 Pazopanib  71 
 
8: CORRELATIVE/SPECIAL STUDIES 72 
8.1 Pharmacokinetic  Studies  72 
8.2 Exploratory  Studies  73 
 
9: STUDY  CALENDAR  73 
9.1 Phase I  74 
9.2 Expansion  Cohort  75 
 
10: ME ASUREMENT OF EFF ECT 76 
10.1  Anti-tumor Effect – Solid Tumors 76 
 
11: ADV ERSE EVENT REPOR TING  REQUIREMEN TS 81 
11.1  General  81 
11.2  Definitions 81 
11.3  Record ing Adverse  Even ts 83 
11.4  Repor ting Adverse  Events 83 
11.5  Novartis  and GlaxoS mithKline  Notification by Investigator  84 
11.6  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB) Noti fication  by Investigator  85 
11.7  Food and  Drug Ad ministration  (FDA) Notificati on by Sponsor -Investi gator 85 
11.8  NIH Office  of Biotechnology  Activities  (OBA) Notification  by Investigator  86 
 
12: DATA  AND  SAF ETY MONITORING  86 
12.1 Data Repor ting 86 
12.2 Safety Meetings 86 
12.3 Mon itoring 87 
 
13: REGULATORY CONSIDERATION 87 
13.1  Protocol  Review  and Amendments  87 
13.2  Informed Consent  88 
13.3  Ethics  and Good Clinical  Practice  (GCP)  89 
13.4  Study  Docu mentation  89 
13.5  Records  Retention 90 
13.6  Multi-center Guidelines 90 
 
14: ST  ATISTICAL CONSIDERATION 90 
14.1 Study  Design/Endpoints  90 
14.2 Sample Size/Accrual  Rate 92 
14.3 Stratification  Factors  92 
14.4 Analysis of Secondary  Endpoints  92 
14.5 Reporting  and Exclusions  94 
 
15: P UBLICATION PLAN 95 
CON FIDENTIAL 
This document is co nfidential. Do n ot disclose or  use except as au thorized.  5 Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16  
 16. REFERENCES  96 
17: APPENDICES  100 
 
Appendix  A 100 
Perfor mance Status  Criteria  
 
Appendix B  101 
 
Pazopanib  Blood Pharmacokinetic  collection  and Handling  
 
Appendix  C 107 
Instructions  for Collecting,  Processing, Storing,  and Shipping  everoli mus 
Pharmacokinetic  Samples 
 
Appendix  D 110 
Drug Supply  Request  Form  
 
Appendix E  111 
Genes in  Next -Gen Sequencing  Assay  
 
  
1. OBJECTIVES  
 
 
 
1.1 Study Design  
This is a Phase I study  with an expansion  coho rt in advanced  urothelial  cancer  patients.  The 
Phase I portion  of the study  was be an open -label  standard  3+3 dose escalation  study  to 
deter mine the maximum tolerat ed dose (MTD) of the  combination  of pazopanib  (GW786034) 
and everolimus  in patients  with solid  tumors who have  no standard  treatment options  available. 
Starting  doses will  be set at everolimus  5 mg PO QD and  pazopan ib 400 mg  PO QD. Cycle 
length  will be 4 weeks. One dose de -escalation  will be allowed if the MTD is  exceeded  in dose 
level  0 (indicated  as do se level  -1). Initial  phase  I testing  identified  pazopanib  400 mg  PO daily 
and everolimus  5 mg PO daily  as the  MTD. Bas ed on the  phase  I response data,  an expansion 
cohort  of 25 patients  with metastatic urothelial  cancer  who have  received  prior  chemotherapy, 
but no pri or mTOR  or VEGF inhibitors,  will be enrolled.  
 
 
The protoc ol is being  amended  to accrue  urothelial  carcin oma patients  rather  than kidney  cancer 
patients  in the expansion  cohort  given  the significant  unmet need  in urothelial  carcino ma and 
findings  of significant  activity  of the regimen in at least a subset of urothelial  carcinoma  patients,  
 
 
The primary endpoint  of the  expansion  coho rt will be objective  response proportion  with 
secondary  endpoints  including  safety, progression -free survival,  and duration  of response.  
 
 
 
1.2 Phas e I study  
 
 
1.2.1 Primar y Objective  
 
To deter mine the maximum  tolerated dose and dose li miting toxicities  of the 
combination  of pazopanib  and everoli mus. 
 
1.2.2 Secondary Objective 
 
To deter mine the pharmacokin etics of the  combination  of pazopanib  and everoli mus. 
 
 
1.3 Expansion Cohort (Urothelial  Carcinoma)  
 
 
1.3.1 Primary  objective  
To deter mine the objective  response rate  in patients with locally  advanced  or metastatic 
urothelial  cancer  who have  had previous  treatment with cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  
 
 
1.3.2  Secondary Objectives  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 7 -  
  
 
1.3.2.1  To deter mine the safety,  progression -free survival,  and duration  of response  of 
pazopanib  and everolimus  in patients  with metastatic  urothelial  cancer. 
 
 
 
 
1.3.3  Exploratory  Objective  
1.3.2.2  To perform  either  whole  exome or targeted  sequencing  of selected  genes  to 
evaluate  whether  somatic DNA alterations  are associated  with response or progression 
with pazopanib  and everoli mus treatment. 
 
 
2. BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Study Agent(s) 
2.1.1 Everolimus  
 
Everoli mus, a novel  oral derivative  of rapamycin, has been  in clinical  develop ment since  
1996 as an  immunosup pressant  in solid  organ  transplantation  and has obtained  marketing 
authorization  (Certican®)  for prop hylaxis  of rejection  in renal and cardiac trans plantation in 
a number of countries,  including  the majority  of the  European  Union. Everoli mus has been  in 
develop ment for patients  with various  malignancies  since  2002. Everoli mus was FDA 
approved  in 2009 (Afinitor®)  for the treatment of kidney  cancer  that has progressed after 
suniti nib or sora fenib.  Everoli mus is being  investigated  as an  anticancer  agent based  on its 
potential  to act: 
 
• Directly  on the  tumor cells by inhibiting  tumor cell growth and  proli feration  
• Indirectly  by inhibiting  angiogenesis  leading  to reduced  tumor vascularity  (via potent 
inhibition  of tumor cell HIF-1 activity,  VEGF  production  and VEGF -induced  proliferation 
of endothelial  cells).  The role of angiogenesis  in the maintenance  of solid  tumor growth is 
well established,  and the mTOR  pathway  has b een implicated  in the regulation  of tumor 
production  of proangiogenic  factors  as well  as modulation  of VEGFR signaling  in 
endothelial  cells.  
 
At weekly  and daily  schedules  and at various doses explored,  RAD0001  is generally  well 
tolerated.  The most frequent  adverse events  (rash,  mucositis,  fatigue  and headach e) 
associ ated with everolimus  therapy  are manageable.  Non-infectious  pneumonitis  has been 
reported  with mTOR  inhibitors  but is commonly  low-grade  and reversible.  
 
2.1.1.1 mTOR path way and mechanism of action  
 
At cell ular and molecul ar level everolimus acts as a signal transduction  inhibitor. 
Everoli mus selectively  inhibits  mTOR  (mammalian  target  of rapa mycin),  a key and a 
highly  conserved  serine -threonine  kinase, which  is prese nt in all cells and is a central 
regulator  of protein  synthesis  and ultimately  cell grow th, cell  proliferation,  angiogenesis 
and cell survival. mTOR  is the only currently  known target  of eve rolimus (Reviewed  in 
Boulay  and Lane,  2007 )1. mTOR is downstream  of PI3K/AKT pathway,  a pathway  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 8 -  
  
 
known to  be dysregulated  in a wide  spectrum  of hu man cancers  (e.g. through 
loss/mutation  of the  PTEN negative  regulator;  through  PI3K mut ation/amplification;  
through  AKT/PKB overexpression/overactivation;  through  modulation  of TSC1/TSC2 
tumor suppressor s). In addition,  activ ation of the  PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway  is 
frequently  a characteristic  of worsen ing prognosis through  increased  aggressiveness, 
resistance  to treatment and progression. The  main known functions  of mTOR include  the 
following  1,2: 
 
• mTOR  functions  as a sensor of mitogens, growth factors  and energy  and nutrient 
levels,  facilitating  cell-cycle  progression from  G1 to  S phase  in appropriate  growth  
conditions.  
• The PI3K -mTOR  pathway  itself is frequently  activated in many human cancers,  and 
oncogenic  transfor mation  may sensitize  tumor cells to mTOR  inhibitors.  
• Through  inactivating  eukaryotic  initiation  factor  4E binding  proteins  (4E-BP1) and  
activating  the 40S riboso mal S6 kin ases (i.e., p70S6K1), mTOR regulates 
translation  of important  massages,  including  those  encoding  the HIF-1 proteins,  c- 
myc,  ornithine  decarbo xylase,  and cyclin  D1, as well  as ribo somal protei ns 
themselves.  
• The activation  of mTOR  pathway  leads to the increased  production  of pro - 
angiogenic  factors  (i.e., VEGF) in  tumors  and to tumor, endothelial  and smooth 
muscle  cell growth and  proliferation.  
• The regulation  of mTOR signaling  is complex and involves  positi ve regulators, such 
as AKT that  phosphorylate  and inactivate  negative  regulators  such as the  Tuberous 
Sclero sis Complex  (TSC1/TSC2).  
 
mTOR  is represented  by two stru cturally and function ally distinct multi-protein signaling 
complexes,  mTORC1  (mTOR  complex  1, rapamycin  sensitive)  and mTORC2  (mTOR 
complex 2, rapa mycin insensitive).3 mTORC1  is mainly  activated  via the PI3 kinase 
pathway  through  AKT (also known as PKB, protein  kinase  B) and  the tuberous  sclerosis 
complex (TSC1/TSC2)  2. Activated  AKT phosphorylates  TSC2, which  lead to the 
dissociation  of TSC1/TSC2  complex,  thus inhibiting  the ability  of TSC2  to act as a 
GTPase activating  protein.  This allows  Rheb, a small G-protein,  to remain in a GTP bound 
state and to activate  mTORC1.  AKT can  also activate  mTORC1  by PRAS40 
phosphorylation,  thereby  relieving  the PRAS40 -mediated  inhibition  of mTORC1 .4 
mTORC2  (mTOR  complex  2) is activated  through  a currently  unknown mechani sm, 
possibly  by rece ptor tyrosine  kinase (RTK) signaling .4 It has been  suggested  that 
mTORC2  phosphorylates  and activates a different  pool of AKT, which  is not upstream  of 
mTORC1.  PHLPP phosphatase  plays  a role of a negative  regulator.  mTORC2  is 
rapamycin insensitive  and is required  for the organization  of the  actin  cytoskeleton .3 
 
mTORC1 -mediated  signaling  is subject  to modulation  by the  macrocyclic  lactone 
rapamycin and its derivatives,  such as evero limus. Once  these  agents  bind to the 12 kDa 
cytosolic  FK506-bindi ng protein  immunop hilin FKBP12, the  resulting  rapamycin- 
FKBP12 complexes  bind to a specific  site near the catalytic  domain of mTORC1  and 
inhibit  phosphorylation  of mTOR substrates.  As a consequence,  downstream  signaling  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 9 -  
  
 
events  involved  in regulation  of the  G1 to  S-phase transition  are inhibited.  This 
mechani sm is thought  to be responsible  for the immunosuppressive  effects  of rapa mycin 
as well  as its  putative  antineoplastic  activity. As many cancers  are characterized  by 
dysregulation  of G1 transit  (for example,  overexpression  of cyclin or cyclin -depende nt 
kinases),  inhibition  of mTOR  becomes  an intriguing  target  for inducing  cytostasis.2 
 
2.1.1.2 Preclinical  studies  
 
Pre-clinical  investigati ons have demonstrated  that everoli mus is a potent  inhibitor  of 
theproliferation  of a range  of human tumor cell lines in-vitro with IC50s ranging  from 
sub/low  nano molar to micro molar concent rations,  concentrations  capable  of being 
reached  in patients at the doses used in  clinical trials.  
 
Everoli mus was shown to  have  activity  in human tumor cell lines  originating  from  lung, 
breast,  prostate,  colon,  kidney,  melano ma and glioblasto ma. In a clonogenic  assay using 
cells derived  from  81 patient -derived  tumor xenografts  never  cultured  in vitro (11 hu man 
tumor types  with 3 to 24 tu mors each:  bladd er, colon, gastric,  NSCLC [adeno,  squamous 
epithelium  and large  cell],  SCLC,  breast,  ovary,  pancreatic,  renal,  melano ma, and 
pleura mesothelio ma), Everoli mus inhibited  colony  formation  in a concentration - 
dependent  manner.  In addition,  normal hematopoetic  stem  cells were  insensitive  to 
everoli mus, with an IC50 about  15 fold  higher  than the tumor lines.  Everoli mus also 
inhibits  the proliferation  of hu man umbilical  vein endothelial  cells (HUVECS), with 
particular  potency  against  VEGF -induced  proliferation.  The inhibition  of endothelial  
proliferation  and antian giogenic  activity  of everoli mus was confir med in vivo, as 
everoli mus selectively  inhibited  VEGF -dependent  angiogenic  response. Mice  with 
primary and metastatic  tumors  treated with everolimus  showed a  significant  reduction  in 
blood  vessel  density  when co mpared  to controls  at well tolerated  doses. Additio nally, 
activity in a VEGF -impregnated  subcutaneous  implant  model of angiogenesis  and 
reduced  vascularity  (vessel  density)  of Everolimus - treated  tumors (murine  melanoma) 
provided  evidence  of in vivo effects  of angiogenesis.  
 
Everoli mus also inhibits  tumor growth in-vivo in xenografted,  syngen eic and orthotopic 
animal models,  residing  longer  in tumor  tissue  than in plasma  and demonstrating  high 
tumor penetration  in a rat panc reatic  tumor model.  These  effects  occurred within  the dose 
range  of 2.5 to  10 mg/kg p.o. daily.  Typically,  the antitu mor activity of everoli mus 
monotherapy  was that  of reduction  of tumor growth rates  rather  than producing 
regressions or stable  disea se. Everoli mus, administred  p.o., was a  potent  inhibitor  of tumor 
growth and  well tolerated in: 
 
• subcutaneous  mouse xenograft  model,  establi shed from  a variety  of tumor  cell lines  of 
diverse  histotypes  (NSCLC, pancreatic,  colon, melano ma, epider moid), including  a 
Pgp170 over -expre ssing multi -drug resistant  tumor  line; 
• in a series  of low -passage  tumor xenografts  established  directly  from  human tumor 
material,  maintained only in vivo  and considered  highly  predictive  of therapeutic 
outco me in patients.  These  included  breast  (5 lines), colorectal  (9 line s), gastric  (3 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 10 -  
  
 
lines),  lung (22 lines  includ ing adenocarcino mas, epider moid cell, large  cell and small 
cell histotypes),  melano ma (6 lines),  ovarian  (4 lines),  pancreatic  (3 lines)  and renal  (6 
lines); 
• in two syngeneic  models  (CA20948 rat  pancreatic,  B16/Bl6  mouse orthotopic 
melanoma) 
Taken  together,  these  data indicate  the broad  anti-proliferati ve potential  of everoli mus. 
It is not clear  which  molecular  deter minants  predict  responsiveness  of tumor  cells to 
everoli mus. Molec ular analysis  has revealed  that relative sensitivity to everolimus in vitro 
correlates  with the degree  of phosphorylation  (activation)  of the  AKT/PKB protein  kinase 
and the S6 riboso mal protein.  PTEN status  alone  may not be predictive  of everoli mus 
relative in vitro sensitivity,  however  in some cases  (i.e., GBM) there  is also a correlation 
with PTEN status.  In preclinical models, the administration  of everoli mus is associated 
with reduction  of protein  phosphorylation  in target  proteins  downstream  of mTOR, notably  
phosphorylated  S6 (pS6) a nd p4E-BP1,  and occasi onally  with an increase  in 
phosphorylation  AKT (pAKT).  
 
2.1.1.3 Pre -clinical  safety  
 
In safety  pharmacology  studies,  everoli mus was devoid  of relevant  effects  on vital 
functions  including  the cardiovascular,  respiratory  and nervous syste ms. Everoli mus had 
no influence  on QT interval  prolongation.  Furthermore,  everoli mus show ed no antigenic 
potential.  Although  everoli mus passes the  blood -brain barrier,  there  was no indication  of 
relevant  changes  in the behavior  of rodents,  even  after single  oral doses up to  2000 mg/kg 
or after  repeated  administration  at up to  40 mg/kg/day.  Based  on these  findings,  the 
potential  of everoli mus to affect  vital functions  in patients  is considered  to be low. 
Everoli mus is considered  to have  no genotoxicity  or carcinogenicity  potenti al. All 
significant  adverse  events  observed in preclinical  toxicology  studies  with everoli mus in 
mice, rats, monkeys  and minipigs  were  consistent  with its anticipated  pharmacologic 
action  as an antiproliferative  and immunosuppressant  and at least in part reversible  after a 
2- or 4-week  recovery  period  with the exception  of the  changes  in male reproductive 
organs, most notably  testes.  Ocular effects  (lenticular  disorde rs) observed  in rats were  not 
observed  in any other  species  and are consi dered to be a species -specific  disord er. 
 
2.1.1.4 Everolimus  Pharmacokinetics  
 
Everoli mus is rapidly  absorbed  with a median  tmax of 1-2 hours. The  bioavailability  of 
the drug is  believed  to be 11% or greater.  The AUC0-τ is dose-proportional  over the dose 
range  between  5 to 70 mg  in the weekly  regimen and 5 and  10 mg in the daily  regimen. 
Cmax is dose-proportional  between  5 and  10 mg for both  the weekly  and daily  regimens. 
At doses of 20 mg/week  and higher,  the increase in Cmax is less than  dose-proportional. 
The coefficient  of variation  between  patie nts is approxi mately  50%. Trough  levels  (24 
hour post -dose) correlate  well with AUC0 -τ at steady -state during  daily  administration.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 11 -  
  
 
In whole  blood,  at a daily  dose of 10 mg, about  20% of everoli mus is confined  in plasma 
with 26% being  unbound. The  remaining  80% is  sequestered  in blood  cells.  
 
Everoli mus is extensiv ely metaboli zed in the liver and eliminated  in the bile. Major 
metabolites  are inactive.  Elimination  half-life is approxi mately  30 hours. The  cleara nce 
of everoli mus is approxi mately  halved  in patients  with mild-moderate  hepatic  impairment 
(Child -Pugh  Class  A or B), while  renal  impairment  has little  or no i mpact on the 
pharmacokinetics  of everoli mus. Age, weight  and gender  in the adult  population  do not 
affect  the pharmacokinetics  of ever olimus to a clinically  relevant extent.  The clearance  of 
everoli mus is reduced  in children. Pharmacokinetic  characteristics  are not notably different  
between  Caucasian  and Japanese  subjects,  whereas  in Black  patients  population 
pharmacokinetic  studies  have  shown an  average 20% higher  clearance.  A high-fat meal 
altered  the absorption  of everoli mus with 1.3 hour delay  in tmax, a 60% reduction  in Cmax 
and a 16% reduction  in AUC.  
 
Everoli mus is a substrate  of CYP3A4 and  a substrate  and a moder ate inhibitor of the 
multi -drug efflux pump P-glycopr otein (P-gP, MDR1, ABCB1). Hence,  its metabolism is 
sensitive  to drugs which  modify  these  enzy mes (substrates,  inducers,  or inhibitors  of 
these  enzymes).  Competitive  inhibition  could  occur when Everoli mus is combined  with 
drugs which  are also CYP3A4 or P -glycoprotein  substrates.  Section  5.4.5 lists  examples 
of clinically  relevant  CYP3A inhibitors  and inducers.  Please  refer  to Section  5.4.5 for 
more  information  on the  conco mitant use of CYP3A4 inhibit ors/inducers  and other 
medications.  More infor mation  on everoli mus pharmacokinetics  is provided  in the 
Investigator’s  Brochure.  
 
2.1.1.5 Everolimus  Pharmacodynamic  studies  
 
Pharmacokinetic/phar macodyna mic modeling  based  on inhi bition of the  biomarker 
p70S6 kinase  1 [S6K1] in  peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells [PBMC]) suggests that  5- 
10 mg daily  should  be an adequate  dose to  produce  a high-degree  of sustained  target 
inhibition.  Further more, molecular  pharmacodyna mic (MPD) studies,  using 
immunocytoche mistry (IHC) in  biopsied  tumor tissue,  assessed the  degree  of inhibition 
and its duration  for pS6, p4E -BP1 and pAKT  expression  with the daily  and weekly 
dosing.  There  was high  inhibition  of the  downstream  markers  S6K1 and  4E-BP1 at 
5mg/day,  which  was complete  at 10 mg/day,  while preliminary  results suggest  increase in 
pAKT expression  with maximal effect at 10 mg daily  5. More infor mation  is provided  in 
the Investigator’s  Brochure.  
 
2.1.1.6 Clinical  experience  with everolimus  
 
Everoli mus has been  investigated as a component  of multi-drug immunosuppression  in 
solid  organ  transplantation  since  1996 and was approved  for the  indication  of prophylaxis 
of organ  rejection  in adult  patients  receiving  an allogeneic  renal  or cardiac  transplant  on 8 
Jul 2003 by the  European  Union under  the trade  name of Certican®.  The most  frequent 
adverse  drug reactions  in this context are highly  specific  to the trans plant conte xt. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 12 -  
  
 
However, certain  events  are generalizable,  most notably  myelosuppression,  skin disorders 
and increases  in blood  lipid levels.  
 
 
Everoli mus is a novel  derivative  of rapamycin.  It has been  in clinical  develop ment since  
1996  as an immunosup pressant  in solid  organ  transplantation.  Everoli mus is approved  in 
Europe  and other  global  markets  (trade  name: Certic an®) for cardiac  and renal 
transplantation,  and in the United  States (trade name: Zortress®)  for the prevention  of 
organ  rejection  of kidney  transplantation.  
Afinitor® and  was approved  for adults  with advanced renal  cell carcinoma (RCC)  after 
failure  of treatment with sunitinib  or sorafinib  in 2009.  In 2010,  Afinitor®  received 
United  States  (US)  approval  for patients  with subependy mal giant  cell astrocyto ma 
(SEGA)  associated  with tuberous  sclero sis complex  (TSC).  everoli mus is also available 
as Votubia® in  the European  Union (EU)  for patie nts with SEGA  associated with  TSC 
who require  therapeutic  intervention  but are not candidates  for curative  surgical  resection. 
Afinitor®  was approved  for “progressive  pancreatic  neuroendocrine  tumor (PNET)  in 
patients  with unresectable,  locally  advanced,  or metastatic  disease”  in 2011  in various 
countries, including the  US and Europe.  In 2012  Afinitor® received  approval  for the 
treatment of postmenopausal  women with advanced  hormone receptor-positi ve, HER2 - 
negative  breast  cancer  (advanced  HR+  BC) in combination  with exemestane, after failure 
of treatment with letrozole  or anastro zole. Further more in  2012,  Afinitor®  received 
approval  for the treatment of patie nts with TSC who have  renal  angio myolipo ma not 
requiring  immediate  surgery.  
 
Approxi mately  25,645  cancer  patients  have  been  treated  with everoli mus as of 30-Sep- 
2012:  
• 13,229 patients  in Novartis -sponsored  clinical  trials  
• 2,624 patients  in the individual  patient  supply  program  
• 9,792 patients  in investigator -sponsored  studies.  
• In addition,  healthy  volunteer  subjects  and non-oncology  hepatically  impaired 
subjects  have  participated  in the clinical  pharmacology  studies  as described  in 
Section  7.2. 
 
A phase  II study  of single  agent  everoli mus in locally  advanced  or metastatic  urothelial 
cancer  after failure  of platinum  based  chemotherapy  reported  a response rate  of 5% in 
this setting(Partial  response in  2 of 37 patients).(6)  
 
Overall,  the most  frequent  mild-moderate  Grade  1/2 adverse  effects  have  been  rash, 
stomatitis,  fatigue,  neutropenia  and to a lesser extent gastrointestinal  disorders  (naus ea, 
anorexia,  diarrhea,  vomiting),  and headache.  The primary DLT  has been  severe  (Grade  3) 
stomatitis,  and occasio nally fatigue,  hyperglyce mia, and neutrope nia. Reduced  blood 
counts,  hyperlipide mia (mainly  hypercholest erolemia) and hyperglyce mia are relatively 
frequent  laboratory  findings.  Infections  have  not been  notably  frequent  or severe.  Non- 
infectious  low- Grade  (Grade  1/2) pneumonitis  has led  to development of treatment 
guidelines  for the  disorder  (Section  6.2.3 ). Further  detailed  infor mation  regarding  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 13 -  
  
 
everoli mus clinical  develop ment, safety  and efficacy  is provided  in the Investi gator’s 
Brochure.  
 
2.1.2 Pa zopanib  (GW786034)  
 
Pazopanib  is a potent,  multi-targeted  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitor  (TKI) of VEGFR -1, -2, -3, 
PDG FR-α and -β and c-kit, with half-maximal inhibition  (IC 50) values  of 10, 30, 47, 71, 84 
and 74nM, respectively.  It inhibits  VEGF -induced  VEGFR -2 phosphorylation  in human 
umbilical  vein endothelial  cells (HUVEC) as well  as in mouse lungs  in a dose-dependent 
manner.  Data  from  preclinical  studies  show pazopanib  has significant  growth inhibition  of a 
variety  of hu man tumor xenografts  in mice, and also inhibits  basic  fibroblast  growth factor - 
(bFGF -) and  VEGF -induced  angiogenesis  in two mouse  models  of angiogenesis,  viz., the 
Matrigel  plug assay and  the cornea  micropocket  model.  
 
2.1.2.1. Safety  
 
As of September  2007, approxi mately  1400 cancer  subjects  have  received  pazopanib  in 
clinical studies. The most common adverse  events (AEs) reported  to date include  diarrhea, 
fatigue,  nausea, hyperte nsion,  hair color chan ges (hair  depigmentation),  anorexia,  vomiting, 
dysgeusia,  headache,  abdo minal pain,  rash, aspartate  aminontransferase  (AST) and  alanine 
aminontransferase  (ALT)  increases,  constipation,  cough,  and arthralgia.  Most of these  events  
were  Grade  1 or 2 using  the NCI Common Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse Events Version 
3.0 (NCI -CTCAE). The  most frequent  Grade 3 or 4 events  were  hypertension, fatigue,  
diarrhea,  and AST and ALT  increases.  Less common AEs of note  include  hand - 
foot syndro me, mucositis/ stomatitis,  proteinuria,  venous thr ombotic  events, and bleeding. 
Intestinal perforations  and arterial  thromboses  were  uncom mon. 
 
The most common  serious adverse  events  (SAEs) occurring  in subjects  enrolled  in 
pazopanib  studies  regardless  of treat ment assign ment include  vomiting,  diarrhea, abdo minal 
pain,  hypertension/hypertensive  crisis, dyspnea,  pleural  effusion,  pyrexia, ane mia, 
dehydration,  and pulmonary  embolism. Evaluation  of the  safety  and efficacy  of pazopanib  
in advanced  RCC  subjects  include  a recently  completed  Phase II study  in subjects  with 
advanced  RCC,  and a Phase  III rand omized,  double -blind  study  against placebo  which  
completed  enrol ment in April,  2007 and  is currently  on-going.  To date,  660 subjects  with 
advanced/ metastatic  RCC have  been enrolled  in these  two clinic al trials. Safety  data from  
the Phase II RCC  trial VEG102616 (n=225)  are summarized  here.  The most  common  AEs 
(defined  as AEs experienced  by ≥10% of subjects)  regardless  of causality  in decreasing  
order  of frequency  were  diarrhea  (63%), fatigue  (46%), hair  color change  (43%), nausea  
(42%), hypertension  (41%), anorexia  (24%), dysgeusia  (24%), vo miting (20%), headache  
(20%), cough  (17%), abdo minal pain,(16%),  rash (16%),  consti pation  (15%) ALT  
elevation (14%), arthralgia  (13%),  AST elevation  (12%), back 
pain (12%), dizziness  (12%), handfoot  syndro me (11%),  alopecia,  (10%),  dyspepsia  (10%), 
and perip heral edema (10%). The  majority  of these events were  Grade  1 and  2 with  
hypertension  being  observed  in 9% of subjects  as a Grade  3 event.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 14 -  
  
 
The most common  hematological  toxicities  of any grade  (graded  accor ding to NCICTCAE) 
include  lymphopenia  (47%), thro mbocytopenia  (28%), neutropenia  (23%), and  anemia 
(26%) with  combined  Grade  3 and  4 abnor malities occurring  in 7%, 3%, <1%,  and 4% of 
subjects,  respecti vely. The most common  chemistry abnor mality was hy perglyce mia, 
observed  in 46% of subjects  (of which  2% w ere Grade  3 and  no Grade  4). Hyponatre mia of 
any grade  was observed  in 37% of subjects,  with Grade  3 or Grade  4 hyponatre mia in 8% 
of subjects.  Hyperkale mia of any  grade  was r eported  in 27% of subjects,  with Grade  3 or 4 
hyperkale mia in 5% of subjects.  Hyponatre mia and hyperkale mia have  not occurred  
concurrently  in the same subject to indicate  adrenal insufficiency.  Elevations  in amylase 
and lipase  of any  grade  were  reported  in 23% and  27% of subjects,  respectively, with Grade  
3 or Grade  4 events  in 4% and  9% of subjects,  respectively.  There  were  2 reports  of 
pancreatitis.  Increase  in TSH  was reported  in 28% of subjects  and a decrease  in thyroxine 
(T4) in 1% of subjects.  Three  subjects  initiated  treatment with thyroid replace ment therapy 
(synthroid  or levothyroxine)  during  the study.  ALT elevations  of any  Grade  were  reported 
in 53% of subjects  with Grade  3 and  Grade  4 elevations  in 9% and  <1%  of subjects, 
respectively.  AST elevations  were  reported  in 53% of subjects  with Grade  3 and  Grade  4 
elevations  in 5% and  <1%  of subjects,  respectively.  Hyperbilirubine mia of any  Grade 
occurred  in 28% of subjects  with Grade  3 elevations  in <1%  of subjects.  No Grade  4 
elevations  have  been  reported.  Conco mitant elevations  in transa minases and bilirubin  have 
been  observed  in 2 (<1%  ) subjects.  Neither  of these  patients  met the criteria  for Hy’s rule. 
Risk factors  that may have  contributed  to the liver dysfunction  were  identified in the some 
of these  subjects,  (e.g.,  large  mass at the porta  hepatis,  hepatotoxic  conco mitant 
medications).  Liver  enzy me elevations  were  reversible  upon dose interruption.  Two 
patterns  of transa minase changes  have  been  observed:  (1) transa minase elevations  that 
declined  over time without  dose i nterruption.  (2) transa minase elevations  that declined  over 
time upon dose interruption.  In so me subjects,  elevations  in transa minase recurred  upon 
rechallenging  and these  subje cts were  permanently  discontinued  from  study  treatment. Serial  
adrenocorticotropic  hormone (ACTH) st imulation  tests were  conducted  in two Phase I and 
two Phase II trials  in cancer subjects with data availa ble in 47 subjects.  Twenty -one 
of them  had data beyond  24 weeks and  5 subjects  had data beyond  52 weeks. None of these  
47 subjects  had adrenal  insufficiency.  
 
Certain  uncommon AEs with  significant  clinical  consequences  reported  in pazopanib 
clinical  trials  (deno minator  for total  subject  enrol ment n=1000  used for calculating 
frequency)  include  pulmonary  embolism  (0.6%), venous thrombosis  (0.3%), venous 
thrombosis  and pulmonary  embolism  (0.2%), serious he morrhage  (1.4%), bowel 
perforation  (0.5%), myocardial  infar ction/angina  (0.7%), cerebrovascular 
accide nts/transient  ische mia (0.6%), cardiac  failure (0.2%), atrial  fibrillation  (0.3%), renal 
failure  (0.8%) and  seizures  (0.3%).  
 
2.1.2.2. Preliminary  Efficacy  Summary  
 
VEG102616 is  a Phase II study  to evaluate  the efficacy  and safety of pazo panib in subjects 
with advanced/ metastatic  RCC.  Of the 225 subjects  enrolled,  155 (69%) had  no prior 
syste mic therapy,  and 70 (31%) had  1 prior  therapy  of either  a cytokine  or bevacizumab  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 15 -  
  
 
based  therapy.  The study  utilized  a rando mized discontinuati on design  that includes  a 12- 
week  lead-in phase  during  which  all subjects  received  800mg  pazopanib  daily  dose. Based 
on the  disease  assess ment at Week 12, subjects  with a complete or partial  response would 
continue  pazopanib  treatment until disease  progression;  subjects with progressi ve disease 
(PD) at  or prior  to Week 12 would discontinue  pazopanib  treatment; and subjects  with stable  
disease  (SD) at  Week  12 were  rando mized to receive  blinded  treatment with 800mg 
pazopanib  or placebo  for 16 weeks. An interim  analysis  was perfor med in Septe mber 2006 
when the  first 60 enrolled  subjects  had completed the 12-week  Lead -In phase.  Based  on the 
review  of both  interim  efficacy  (12-week respon se rate) and safety  data from  this study, the 
Independe nt Data  Monitoring  Committee  recommended  halting  further  rando mization,  
unblinding  the study  and offering  pazopanib  treatment to subjects  on the  placebo  arm of the 
rando mization  phase  of the  study.  As a result  rando mization  at 12 wks was discontinued, 
subjects  previously  rando mized to placebo  were  crossed over  to pazop anib, and all subjects 
could  receive pazopanib  until progressive disease (PD), unac ceptable  toxicity,  or consent 
withdrawal.  
 
In 2009, the  FDA granted  approval  to pazopanib  for the  treatment of patients  with advanced 
renal  cell carcino ma. This was based  on the  results of a phase  III intern ational, rando mized, 
double -blind  trial comparing  pazopanib  to placebo  in patients  with previously  untreated 
advanced  renal  cell carcino ma or patients  who had  progressed on cytokine  therapy.  This 
study  demonstrated  a progression -free survival  advantage  of 9.2 months  with pazopanib  vs. 
4.2 months  with placebo(7).  In 2012 the  PISCES phase  III rando mized trial results  were 
presented  st the annual  European  society  of Medical  Oncology  meeting,  In this  study  the 
tolerability  of pazopanib  was compared  to sunitinib  and results  showed that  pazopanib  was 
associated  with significantly  better health  related  quality  of life  compared  to suniti nib and it 
resulted  in less fatig ue and less dysgeusia.  In 2012, the  FDA approved  pazopanib 
hydrochloride  tablets  for the  treatment of patients  with advanced  soft tissue  sarco ma (STS) 
who have  received  prior  chemotherapy  after it was shown to  improve  median  PFS to  4.6 
months for patients  receiving  pazopanib  hydrochloride  compared  with 
1.6 months  for patients  recei ving placebo  in a phase III stud y. 
 
 
 
2.2 Study Disease  
 
While  front -line cisplatin -based  combination  chemotherapy  is highly  active,  more than 85% of 
patients  will relapse  following  initial  therapy.  There  is no standard  2nd-line regimen following 
failure  of front -line chemotherapy.  Many agent s, including  docetaxel,  paclitaxel,  pemetrexed, 
and ifosfamide, have  shown single  agent  responses (between  10-20%, which  improve  with 
combination  therap y), yet no rando mized trial has shown the  benefit of one  over another.  In fact, 
no second -line trial has de monstrated  improved  survival  with any chemotherapy  agent.  
9 
 
 
The importance  of angiogenesis  in invasive  and advanced  urothelial  cancer  is well docu mented. 
Increased  microvessel  density  has been  shown to  predict  advanced  disease  and poor prognosis in 
urothelial  cancer .10-17 Preclinical  models  in bladder  cancer  suggest that anti-angioge nic thera pies 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 16 -  
  
 
may inhibit  progression of bladder  cancer .18 VEGF appears  to be a major angiogenic  factor  in 
urothelial  carcino ma.15,19-21  The importance  of angiogene sis in invasive TCC  is well 
docu mented.  Both  VEGF mRNA and protein  are over-expressed  in advanced  bladder  cancer  
compared  with normal bladder  epithelium.22-24 In addition  to its pro-angiogenic  properties,  recent 
in vitro  experi ments also suggest  a role for VEGF signaling  as an autocrine  and paracrine  growth 
factor  to directly  promote bladder  cancer  growth .25 Furthermore,  retrospective  evaluation  of serum  
VEGF levels  in the metastatic  setting  appears to correlate  high levels  with poor disease - free 
survi val.26 Baseline  VEGF mRNA expression  levels  and microvessel  density  were  found to  be 
independent  prognostic  factors  for recurrence  and metastasis  in 51 patients  treated  with 
neoadjuvant  MVAC ch emotherapy  and cystectomy.11 In addition  to its pro-angiogenic  role, 
elevated  levels  of VEGF in  tumors lead to abnor mal microvasculatu re. Excessive  angiogenic 
factors  recruit  endot helial and perivascular  cells to form tortuous  and dilated  blood  vessels with 
poor rheological  characteristics,  leading  to abnor mal tumor blood  flow. Elevated  VEGF levels  in 
tumors leads  to increased  vascul ar permeability.27 By reducing  VEGF levels,  not only are the 
aberrant  tumor-associated  blood  vessels eli minated, but the microvasculature  also appears  to be 
remodeled,  leading  to more “normal” blood  vessel architecture.  This leads  to improved 
transvascular  drug delivery  directly  to tumor cells.  
 
VEGF inhibition  alone,  which  primarily targets  endothelial  cells does not  appear  to be sufficient 
as an  anti-cancer strategy in advanc ed urotheli al carcinoma. Suniti nib and pazopanib  have  shown 
modest  activity as single agents,  with few patients  having  objective  responses,  and rates  of stable 
disease  are low.28-31 Nearly  all patients  progress on these  agents, and a the majority  of patients  do 
not have  any significant  disease  response or s tabiliz ation. 
 
Autocrine  and paracrine  growth signals  to cancer  cells are frequently  mediated  via the PI3 
kinase/Akt  pathway.32 PI3 kinase  activity  results  in membrane localiz ation of Akt, leading  to the 
generation  of activated  phospho -Akt. This  activated  Akt phospho rylates  and inactivates  TSC2. 
TSC1  and TSC2  form a complex that normally suppresses  signaling  through  mTOR.  Inactivation 
of TSC2  results in increased  signaling  through  the mTOR complex,  which  then leads  to 
increased  cell metabolism,  growth, and  survival.  These  effects  appear  to be abrogated  by mTOR  
inhibition  with rapamycin.33 In addition,  mTOR  may also be directly  activated  by Akt .34 
 
The PI3 kinase/Akt/ mTOR  pathway  is frequently  activated in advanced  urothelial  carcino ma 
speci mens.35,36  mTOR pathway  signaling  appears  active  in many urothelial  carcino ma 
speci mens37 and appears  associated  with worse s urvival.38 In addition,  deletion  of chromoso me 
9q spanning  the region  containing  TSC1  is the most  frequent  genet ic alteration in transitional  cell 
carcino ma.39 TSC1  is believed  to represent  a tumor suppressor gene  deleted  at that site. 
Inactivating  mutations  are observed  in TSC1  in 10-30% of cases.40,41 
 
In addition  to chromosome 9q and  TSC1  alterations,  chromosome 10q loss is  frequent  in 
transitional  cell carcino ma. PTEN,  a negative  regulator  of the  Akt pathway  located  on 
chromosome  10q, shows loss of heterozygosity  in approximately  25% of transitional  cell 
carcino mas, as well  as ho mozygous  deletions  and point  mutations  in a small  subset of cases .42,43 
Bladder  cancer  has also  been  reported  in patients  with Cowden disease,  caused  by aut osomal 
dominant mutations  in PTEN.44,45 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 17 -  
  
 
 
Preclinical  evaluation  of mTOR  inhibition  with everoli mus demonstrates  that it inhibits  
urothelial  carcino ma cells in vitro46, although  did not affect  the growth  of urothelial  carcino ma in 
a chemically -induced  mouse urothelial  carcino ma model47. A phase  II trial  of everolimus  as a 
single  agent  enrolled  45 patients.  Two partial  responses were  noted.48, suggesting  modest  activity 
of this  agent.  
 
Based  on these  data,  the PTEN/PI3  kinase/Akt/mTOR  pathway  may play an important  role in 
transitional  cell carcino ma, and inhibition  of this  pathway  may be therapeutically useful in 
advanced  transitio nal cell carcinoma patie nts. The utility  of these  agents in combination  with 
anti-VEGF  agents  has not  yet been  thoroughly  tested, as synergy between  these  pathways  is 
predicted.  
 
2.3 Rationale 
 
 
Dose Escalation  Cohort:  Both  anti-angiogenic  therapy  and mTOR inhibiti on provide  significant 
clinical benefit  in metastatic  kidney  cancer  patie nts, although  responses to  each thera py are 
limited in duration  and extent.  
 
Expansion  Cohort:  There  are no standard  thera pies available  for patients  with metastatic 
urothelial  carcino ma who have  progressed foll owing front -line chemotherapy.  Novel  approaches 
are needed. 
 
Currently  approved  anti-VEGF  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitors exhibit significant side effects, inclu ding 
rash, diarrhea,  endocri ne abnor malitie s, cardi otoxicity,  and fatigue. Pazopanib  appears  to have  a 
somewhat  improved  therapeutic  index  and may be associa ted with less toxicity  yet with 
comparable  efficacy.  
 
Pazopanib  has been  tested  in a rando mized discontinuation  study  in patients with metastatic 
clear  cell renal  cell carcino ma. Pazopanib  has resulted  in 40% of patients  with a partial  response 
to induction  therapy,  and a signif icant improvement in progression  free survival  in patients 
rando mized to active  drug in  the rando mized discontinuation  portion  of the  protocol.  
 
The most prominent  significant  toxicity  observed  has been  hypertension.  Hepatotoxicity  may be 
higher  with this agent  but fewer  dermatologic  and gastr ointestinal  toxicities have  been  observed 
compared  to other  anti-VEGF  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitors.  The lower  toxicity,  enhanced 
tolerability,  and high activity  of pazopanib  make it an ideal  candidate  to combine with other 
targeted  therapies.  
 
Addition  of another  agent  targe ting other  anti-angiogenic  pathways  may provide  either  additive  
or synergistic  effects  with existing  anti-VEGF  agents.  Downstream  signal  transduction  inhibition 
of the  PTEN/Akt/ mTOR  pathway  by everoli mus may comple ment upstream  VEGF  receptor  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 18 -  
  
 
inhibition  by either  simple additive  effects  when both targets  are inhibited,  or by downstream 
blockade  of pathways  if there  is partial  resistance  to receptor  inhibition.  Loss of PTEN function 
via methylation  is common  in metastatic  kidney  cancer  and appears  common  in bladder  cancer, 
leading  to increased Akt acti vity and cell proliferation .49 Activation  of mTOR,  a downstream 
effector  of Akt, has been  shown in  preclinical  models  to increase tumor cell proliferation  and 
promote angiogenesis.  Everoli mus, an oral inhibitor  of mTOR, decreases  tumor and endothelial 
cell proliferation  and tumor  cell VEGF production,  leading  to antitu mor and potential  anti- 
angiogenic  effects.  In phase  I studies,  objective  tumor responses with  everoli mus have  been  seen 
in a variety  of tumor types.  Combination  of everolimus with angiogenesis  inhibitors  in 
preclini cal studies  has led to syner gistic anti-angiogenic  and antitumor effects .50 Although  pre- 
clinical  studies  with everoli mus and pazopanib  in combination  have  not been  done,  the pre- 
clinical evidence of synergy b etween  anti-VEGF  and anti-mTOR  drugs provides  the rationale  to 
test everolimus  in combination  with pazopanib.  Everoli mus is FDA approved  for the  treatment of 
advanced  kidney  cancer,  pancreatic  neuroendo crine tumors, and subependy mal giant  cell 
astrocyto mas. – In 2012 Afinitor)®  ( received  approval  for the  treatment of pos tmenopausal 
women with advanced  hormone receptor -positive,  HER2 - negative  breast cancer  (advanced  HR+ 
BC) in combination  with exemestane,  after failure of treat ment with letrozole  or anastrozole.  
 
Results  from  drug-drug interac tion studies  conducted  in subjec ts with cancer  suggest that 
pazopanib  is a weak  inhibitor  of CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and  CYP2D6 in vivo , but had no clinically 
relevant  effect  on CYP1A2, CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 metabolis m. Everolimus  is a substrate  of 
CYP3A pathways,  and a competiti ve inhibitor of CYP3A and  CYP2D6 enzy mes. These  potential 
interactions  require  pharmacokinetic  evaluation  of drug levels  of both  everoli mus and pazopanib. 
As a result,  pharmacokinetic  data for both  drugs will  be obtained  at day 1 and  15 of  cycle  1 for 
all patients  on the  phase  I portion  of this  study.  
 
 
The starting  dose for the  initial  Phase 1 cohort  was chosen  as 3/4  of the  standard  single -agent 
dose of pazopanib,  and half-dose of everoli mus, primarily based  on available  pill size. While 
these  starting  doses were  arbitrary,  they were  both at levels  consiste nt with activity against  the 
targets  as single  agents.  
 
For the  dose escalation  cohort:  Esca lation  occurred  in a 200 mg  incre ment for pazopanib  up to 
the standard  dose of 800 mg  daily.  Everoli mus will be escalated  from  5 mg  to 10 mg. One drug 
is escalated alternately  in each successive  cohort. De-escalation  will be allowed  to dose level -1 
if there  are excessive  DLT’s observ ed in the starting dose le vel. In ad dition, dose lev el +2A will 
be considered  if there  is a DLT  at dose level  +2. This dose level  would test  full dose pazopanib  
800 mg daily  in combination  with everoli mus 5 mg  daily.  
 
 
Phase I update as of 3/19/14  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 19 -  
  
 
The first portion  of this  study  of everoli mus plus pazopanib  in genitourinary  and other 
solid  malignancies  was carried  out at the Dana-Farber  Cancer  Institute.  Nine  patients were  
enrolled  of which  five had urothelial  carcino ma of the  bladder.  These  nine patients were  
either  treated  on Dose Level  0: Pazopanib  600 mg PO QD and  everoli mus 5 mg PO QD 
(n=3)  or Dose Level  -1: Pazopanib  400 mg PO QD and  everoli mus 5 mg  PO QD (n=6).  
Pharmacokinetic  data were  collected  on everoli mus and pazopanib  to deter mine 
whether  drug-drug interactions  occur.  These  data are from  the 5 patients  (3 lung  cancer,2 
bladder  cancer,1  adrenal  cortical  carcino ma) treated  with pazopanib  400 mg  daily  and 
everoli mus 5 mg daily(Dose  Level  -1). T he Day 15 steady -state whole  blood  everoli mus 
PK para meters were: 
 
 
 
 everolimus  
(mean  ±  SD values)  O’Donnell,  et al JCO 2008(51)  
(mean ± SD values)  
AUCss(0 -24h) 335 ±  189 ng*h/ mL (median,  
348 ng*h/mL;  range,  162- 
868 ng*h/mL).  238 ±  77 ng*h/ mL 
Cmax,ss 37.9 ±  2.1 ng/mL 32 ± 9 ng*h/mL  
Cmin,ss 6.1 ±  4.9 ng/mL  5.4 ±  1.8 ng/mL  
 
 
 
 
The perce nt difference  between  the mean values of the  steady -state PK para meters  for 
everoli mus given  in combination  with pazopanib relative to everoli mus alone  were:  
+13%  for C min,ss,  +18%  for C max,ss,  and +100%  for AUCss(0 -24h).  These  findings 
demonstrate  a significant  pharmacokinetic  interaction  between the two drugs resulting  in 
a marked  decrea se in the appare nt clearance  of everolimus. Pharmacokinetic  data for 
pazopanib  from  the phase  I combination  trial indicates  that there is no effect  of 
everoli mus on pazopanib  pharmacokinetics  when evaluated  in the context  of known 
pazopanib  pharmacokinetic  data:  
 
 
 
 Pazopanib  
(CV, %) Hurwitz,  et al. Clin Canc Res 
2009 (CV, %)  
AUC0-24 
(µg·h/ mL) 451.6 (41.2)  447.1 (31.3)  
Cmax (µg/mL) 26.8 (35.5)  21.8 (56.3)  
C24 (µg/mL) 13.9 (49.8)  10.4 (86.6)  
 
 
 
 
Toxicity  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 20 -  
  
 
Nine  patients  were  enrolled  in the phase  I portion  of this  study.  Two patients  on dose level 
0 (pazopanib  600 mg daily  and evero limus 5 mg daily)  experienced  dose limiting toxicities  
(grade  3 rash and  pruritus  and grade  3 thro mbocytopenia  requiring  a dose reduction).  
Therefore,  three  patie nts were  treated  at dose le vel -1 per  protocol.  None of these  three  
patients experienced  a protocol -defined  dose-limiting toxicity.  Therefore, another  three  
patients  were treated  at dose level  -1 (pazopanib  400 mg daily  and everoli mus 5 mg daily)  
without  any dose-limiting toxicities.  Therefore,  per protocol, dose level  -1 was defined  as 
the maximum tolerated  dose.  
 
 
 
 
Toxicity  Maximum Grade 
G1 G2 G3 G4 
Febrile  neutropenia  - - 1 - 
Neutropenia  1 - - - 
Thro mbocy topenia  3 1 1 - 
 
Hematologic  toxicities  (see table above) included  febrile  neutropenia  (11%), neutropenia 
(11%), thrombocytopenia  (56%), a nd anemia (36%). Grade  3 febrile  neutropenia  and 
thrombocytopenia  each occurred  in 1 patien t. Non-hematologic  toxicities  were  varied, 
though  many were  expected  based  on the  known  toxicities  of everoli mus and pazopanib. 
One patient  did experience  a grade  3 pneu mothorax,  which  was possibly  related  to study 
therapy.  Other  non-hematologic  toxicities  included  anorexia  (11%), bone  pain (11%), 
diarrhea  (22%, 11% G3), fatigue  (56%), dy sgeusia  (11%), headache  (11%), hypertension 
(22%), mucositis  (33%),  musculoskeletal  (muscle  stiffness after  prolonged  periods  of 
sitting,11%),  nausea  (44%), pal mo-plant ar erythrodysesthesia  syndro me (11%), 
pneu monia (11% G3), pruritus  (11% G3),  rash (33%, 11% G3), vo miting (33%), and 
weight  loss (11%). Toxicities  noted  in laboratory  evaluations  were  generally  consistent 
with what  is expected  with both agents administered  separately.  G3 and  4 laboratory 
toxicities  included  increased  ALT,  hypophosphate mia, and hypourice mia each in 1 
patient,  and increased  lipase in 2 patients.  
Treat ment was gene rally well tolerated at the MTD. Two of 6 patients  came off treat ment 
after 2 cycles  because  of toxicity.  The others  stopped treatment due to disease 
progression or physician  decision.  
 
Antitu mor activity 
 
Encouraging  antitu mor activity was noted in the bladder  cancer  patients  treated  on 
pazopanib  and everolimus.  Of five  urotheli al cancer patie nts evalua ble, 3 had  stable 
disease  for 4 months,  4 months  and 5.5 months  respectively.  One patient  had a complete  
response which  lasted  14 months.  
 
Tumor type (n) Best objective  response  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 21 -  
  
 
 
Bladder  
Lung  small cell carcino ma 
Adrenocortical  carcino ma  
5 
3 
1  
3 SD, 1CR,  1 NE  
2 SD, 1 PD  
1 SD  
Median  Age (range)  59 (49 -77)  
 
 
 
SD: stable  disease;  NE: not evaluable;  CR: complete response;  PR: partial  response;  PD: 
progressive  disease.  
 
Based  on these  findings  of preli minary  increased  activity of the regimen in at least a subset 
of urothelial  carcino ma patien ts, the protocol  is being  amended  to accrue  urothelial 
carcino ma patients  rather  than kidney  cancer  patients  in the expansion  cohort  given  the 
significant  unmet need  in urothelial  carcino ma. Since  there  are no ap proved treatments for 
patients  with progressive  disease  after front -line cytotoxic  chemotherapy,  testing  novel 
approaches  is rational.  Metas tatic urothelial  carcino ma patients treated  with 1-3 prior 
regimens of syste mic chemotherapy  including  at least a platinum agent,  a taxane,  or 
gemcitabine  will be enrolled. No pri or VEGF receptor  or mTOR  pathway  inhibit ors are 
allowed.  Patients  will continue  therapy  until progres sion or unacce ptable  toxicity. 
 
 
 
3.  PART ICIPANT SELECTION  
 
3.1 Eligibilit y Criteri a for the Dose Escalation cohort 
Participa nts must  meet the following  criteria  on screening  examination  to be eligible  to 
particip ate in the study: 
 
3.1.1 Phase I : Participants must have  histologically  confir med malignan cy that is metastatic 
or unresectabl e and for whic h stand ard curativ e or palliativ e measure s do not exist 
or are no longer effective (or who are intoleran t of such therapy). 
 
 
3.1.2 Age ≥ 18 years.  
 
 
3.1.3 Life expectan cy of greate r than 3 month s. 
 
 
3.1.4 ECO G perfo r manc e statu s < 1 ( Karnofsk y > 70% , see Appendi x A) . 
 
 
3.1.5 Participants must have normal organ and marrow functio n as define d below: 
• Leukocyte s > 3,000 / mm3 
• Absolut e neutr ophil count > 1,500/m m3 
• Platelets > 100,000 / mm3 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 22 -  
  
 
• Hemoglobi n > 9 g/dL ; subject s may not have had an RBC transfusio n within 7 
days of screening assessment. 
• Total bilirubi n ≤ 1.5 X normal institutional limits 
• AST (SGOT)/AL T (SGPT) < 2.5 X institutiona l uppe r limit of normal 
• Creatinine ≤ 1.5 mg/dL or creatinine clearanc e > 50 mL/min for subjects with 
creati nine level s about institutiona l normal 
• Partia l thromboplasti n time (PTT )  1.5 X institutional ULN unless patients are on 
therapeuti c anticoagul ation with warfarin  
• Urine prote in to urine creatin ine ratio (UPC) < 1.0. If UPC ≥ 1 then a 24 hour urine 
prote in must be assessed. Subjec ts must have a 24-hour urine protein value < 1g to 
be eligible  
• Total cholestero l ≤300 mg/dL AND  fasting  triglycerides ≤ 2.5 x institutional  ULN.  
NOTE:  In case  one or both  of these  thresholds are exceeded,  the patient  can only 
be inclu ded after initiation  of appropriate  lipid lowering  medication.  
 
 
3.1.6 Able to swallo w oral medications  
 
3.1.7 Resolution of any pre-existing toxicity from prior therap y to NCI CTCA E V4.0 grade  
1 except neuropathy (≤ grade 2) and tinnitus (≤ grade 2), and hearing loss (≤ grade 4) 
 
 
3.1.8 A female is eligibl e to enter and participa te in this study if she is of: 
 
 
3.1.8. 1 Non-childbearing  potentia l (i.e., physiological ly incapabl e of beco ming 
pregnant) , includin g any female who has had: 
• A hysterecto my 
• A bilatera l oophorecto my (ovariecto my) 
• A bilatera l tubal ligation  
• Is post-menopausal  
 
 
Subject s not using hormone replacemen t therap y (HRT) must have experienced 
total cessatio n of menses for ≥ 1 year and be greater than 45 years in age, OR, in 
questionabl e cases , have a follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) value >40 
mIU/mL and an estradio l value < 40pg/ mL (<140 pmol/L). 
 
 
Subjects must discontinue HRT prior to study enroll ment due to the potentia l for 
inhibitio n of CYP enzy mes that metabol ize estrogen s and progestins.  For most 
forms of HRT, at least 2-4 weeks must elaps e betwee n the cessatio n of HRT and 
deter minatio n of menopausa l status ; lengt h of this interva l depend s on the type 
and dosag e of HRT .  If a female subject is determined not to be post- 
menopausal , they must use adequat e contraceptio n as defined immediately  
below durin g the trial and for 8 week s after the last dose. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 23 -  
  
 
3.1.8. 2 Childbea ring potentia l, including any female who has had a negative serum 
pregnanc y test within 2 weeks prior to the first dose of study treatment, 
prefe rably as close to the first dose as possible, and agrees to use adequate 
contraception. Acceptable contraceptive methods , when used consistentl y and 
in accordance with both the product label and the instructions of the physician,  
are as follow: 
• An intrauterine device with a docum ented failur e rate of less than 1% per 
year.  
• Vasecto mized partne r who is sterile prior to the female subject’s entry and 
is the sole sexua l partne r for that female. 
• Doub le-barrier contrace ption (condo m with spermicidal jelly, foam 
suppository , or film; diaphrag m with spermicide; or male condo m and 
diaphragm with spermicide).  
 
 
Note: Oral contraceptives are not relia ble due to potential drug-drug 
interactions. 
 
 
3.1.8. 3 Female subject s who are lactatin g shoul d not be included in the trial. 3.1.8. 4 A 
male with a female partne r of childbearing potent ial is eligibl e to enter and 
participat e in the study if he uses a barrie r method of contraception or 
abstinence during the study. 
 
3.1.9  Subjects  must provide  written  infor med consent  prior  to perfor mance of study -specific 
procedures  or assess ments, and must be willing  to comply with treatment and 
follow -up. Procedures  conducted  as part  of the subject’s  routine  clinical  manag ement 
(e.g.,  blood  count,  imaging  study) and  obtained  prior  to signing  of info rmed consent 
may be utilized  for scr eening or bas eline purposes provided  these  procedures are 
conducted  as specified  in the protocol.  
 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteri a for the Dose  Esca lation Cohort  
 
 
Participants  who exhibit  any of the  following  conditions  at screening  will not be eligible 
for ad mission  into the dose e scalation  cohort  of this  study.  
 
3.2.1  Participant s who have had chemotherap y or radiotherap y withi n 4 week s (6 
week s for nitrosourea s or mitomycin C) prior to entering the study or those who 
have not recovere d from advers e event s due to agent s administere d more than 4 
weeks earlier.  Current  treatment with leupr olide or other  GnRH agonists  is permitted 
on the  Phase I portion  of the  study.  
 
3.2.2  Participant s may not be receivin g any other study agent s durin g the study or 
withi n 4 weeks of the start of the trial. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 24 -  
  
 
3.2.3  Prior everoli mus or pazopani b therapy. Othe r mTOR inhibitor s and tyrosine 
kinas e inhibitor s are allowed.  
 
3.2.4  Histor y or clinica l evidenc e of centra l nervou s system (CNS ) metastase s or 
lepto meningea l carcino matosis , excep t for individual s who have previously - 
treate d CNS metastases , are asymptomatic, and have had no require ment for 
steroid s or anti-seizur e medicatio n for 6 week s prior to the first dose of study 
drug . Screenin g with CNS imaging studie s (compute d tomograph y [CT] or 
magneti c resonanc e imaging [MRI] ) is requ ired only if clinicall y indicate d or if 
the subjec t has a histor y of CNS metastases. Treated  brain  metastases  are defined  as 
having  no evidence  of progression or he morrhage  after treatment and no ongoing 
require ment for dexa methasone,  as ascertai ned by clinical examination  and brain 
imaging  (MRI or CT)  during  the scree ning period.  Anticonvulsants  will not be 
allowed.  Treatment for brain  metastases may include  whole  brain  radiotherapy  
(WBRT),  radiosurgery  (RS; Gamma Knife,  LINAC, or equivalent)  or a combination  
as dee med appropriate  by the  treating  physi cian. Patients  with CNS  metastases  treated 
by neurosurgical  resection  or brain  biopsy  perfor med within  3 months  prior  to Day 1 
will be excluded.  
 
3.2.5 Know n immediat e or delaye d hypers ensitivit y reactio n or idiosyncras y to 
drug s chemically related to pazop anib or everol imus (such as sirolimus or 
temsirolimus)  
 
 
3.2.6 Patients  who have  any severe  and/or  uncontrolled  medical  conditions  such as: 
a.   Unstable  angina  pectoris,  symptomatic congestive  heart  failure,  myocardial 
infarction  ≤6 months  prior  to start of evero limus, serious uncontrolled  cardiac 
arrhyth mia, or any  other  clinically  significant  cardiac  disease  
b.   Sy mptomatic congestive  heart  failure  of New York heart  Association  Class III or 
IV 
c.   Active  (acute  or chronic)  or uncontrolled  severe  infection,  liver disease  such as 
cirrhosis,  deco mpensated  liver disease,  and chronic  hepatitis  (i.e. quantifiable 
HBV -DNA and/or  positive  HbsAg,  quantifiable  HCV -RNA ), 
d.   Known severely  impaired  lung function  (e.g spiro metry and DLCO 50% or less 
of no rmal and O2 saturation  88% or less at  or less at  rest on room  air), 
e.   Active,  bleeding  diathesis;  
 
3.2.7   Poorly  controlled  hypertension  [defi ned as systolic  blood  pressure (SBP) of  ≥140 
mmHg  or diastolic  blood  pressure (DBP) of  ≥ 90mmHg].  Initiation  or adjust ment 
of antihypertensi ve medicatio n(s) is permitted prior  to study entry.  Blood 
pressure must be re-assessed on two occasions  that are separated  by a minimum 
of 24 hours. The  mean SBP /  DBP values  from  each blood  pressure assess ment 
must  be < 140/90mmHg  in order  for a subject to be eligible  for the  study.  
 
3.2.8   History of cerebrovascular  acciden t, pulmonary  embolism  or untreated  deep 
venous thrombosis  (DVT) wit hin the past 6 months.  Subjects  with recent  DVT  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 25 -  
  
 
who have  been  treated  with therape utic anti-coagulating  agents for at  least 6 
weeks are  eligible  
 
3.2.9   Prior major surgery (required  as defining  general  anesthesia)  or trau ma within  28 
days prior  to first dose of  study  drug, and/or  not recovered  from  effects  of that 
surgery, and/or  presence  of any  non-healing  wound, fracture,  or ulcer  (procedures 
such as cat heter placement not considered  to be major),  or patie nts that may require 
surgery during  the course  of the  study.  
 
3.2.10 Evidence  of active  bleeding  or bleeding  diathesis.  
 
3.2.11 Known endobronchial  lesions  or involve ment of large  pulmonary  vessels by tu mor 
 
3.2.12 Hemoptysis  within  6 weeks of first  dose of study  drug.  
 
3.2.13 Use of an  investigational  agent,  including  an investigational  anti-cancer agent, 
within  4 weeks, whichever  is longer,  prior  to the first dose of  study  drug.  
 
3.2.14  Clinically  signi ficant gastrointestinal  abnormalities  that may increase the risk for GI  
bleeding  including,  but not limited to: 
A.  Active  peptic  ulcer  disease  
B.  Known intr aluminal metastatic lesion/s with suspected  bleeding 
C.  Inflam matory bowel  disease  
D.  Ulcer ative colitis,  or other gastroi ntestinal conditions  with increased risk of 
perforation  
E.  History of abdo minal fistula,  gastrointestinal  perforation,  or intra -abdo minal 
abscess within  28 days prior  to beginning  study  treatment. 
 
3.2.15 “Currently  active”  second  malignancy  other  than non-melano ma skin cancers.  
Patie nts are not consi dered to have  a “currently  active”  malignancy  if they have 
completed  therapy  more than 3 years  ago and are considered  to have  a less than  30% 
risk of relapse  based  on the  enrolling  investigator’s  assess ment and docu mented  in 
the medical  record.  A history  of prostate  cancer  that was ide ntified incidentally 
following  cystoprostatecto my or cystecto my for bladder  cancer  is accepta ble, 
provided  that the following  criteria  are met: Stage  T2N0M0 or lower;  Gleason  score  
≤ 7, negative  margins  at surgery,  and PSA undetectable  after surgery.  
 
3.2.16   Presence  of uncontr olled infection  
 
3.2.17   Liver  disease  such as chronic  cirrhosis,  active hepatitis,  or chronic  and persistent 
hepatitis  
 
3.2.18   Uncontrolled  diabetes  mellitus  as defined  by HbA1c >8%  despite  adequate therapy.  
Patients  with a known history  of impaired  fasting  glucose  or diabetes mellitus  
(DM) may be included,  however  blood  glucose  and antidiabetic  treatment must  be 
monitored  closely  throughout  the trial and adjusted  as necessary;  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 26 -  
  
 
 
3.2.19   Current  treatment on another  clinical trial 
 
3.2.20   Pregnant  or breastfeeding.  Pregnant  women are excluded  from this study  because 
pazopanib  and everolimus  are agents  with the potential  for terato genic or 
abortifacient  effects.  Because  there is an unknown but  potential risk of adverse 
events  in nursing infants  secondary  to treatment of the  mother with either  of these 
agents,  breastfeeding  should  be discontinu ed if the mother  is treated with either 
pazopanib  or everoli mus. These  potential  risks may  also apply  to other  agents  used 
in this study.  
 
3.2.21   Chronic  treatment with syste mic corticosteroids  or other  immunosuppressive 
agent.  Topical  or inhaled  corticosteroids  are allowed.Patient  is unable  or 
unwilling  to discontinue  prede fined prohibited  medications  listed  in the protocol 
for 4 weeks of a  drug (whichever  is longer)  prior  to Visit  1 and for the  duration  of 
the study.  
 
3.2.22   Treat ment with strong CYP3A4  inhibitors:  
•   Cardiovascula r: verapamil and diltiazem 
•   Antibiotic s: clarithromycin,  telithromycin,  trolea ndomycin,  erythro mycin 
•   HIV: protease  inhibitors  (ritonavir,  indinavir,  saquinavir,  nelfinavir,  amprenavir, 
lopinavir)  
•  Antifungals : itraco nzaole, ketoconazole, voriconazole,  fluconazole  
•  Antidepre ssants : nefazodone  
 
3.2.23  Other  prohibited  medications  : 
• Oral hypoglyce mics: tolbuta mide, chlorpropa mide 
• Ergot  derivatives:  dihydroergota mine, ergonovine,  ergota mine, 
methylergonovine  
• Neuroleptics:  pimozide  
• Antiarrh ythmics: amiodarone,  bepridil, flecainide, lidocaine,  mexilitine,  
quinidine,  propafenone  
• Immune  modulators:  cyclospo rine, tacroli mus, siroli mus. 
• Miscellaneous:  theophylline,  quetiapine,  risperidone,  tacrine,  clozapine,  
atomoxetin  
 
3.2.24  Treat ment with strong CYP3A4  inducers:  
•  Anticonvulsants : phenytoin,  carbemazepine,  Phenobarbital,  oxcarbazepi ne 
•  HIV antir etrovirals: efavirenz,  nevirapine  
•  Antibiotic s: rifampin (rifampicin),  rifabutin,  rifapentene  
•  Miscella neous: St. John’s Wort, modafinil,  pioglitazone,  troglitazone  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 27 -  
  
 
3.2.25  Patie nts should not receive  immunization  with attenuated  live vacci nes within  one 
week  of study  entry  or during  study  period.  Patient  should  also avoid  close  contact 
with others  who have  received  live attenuated  vaccines.  Examples  of live  
atten uated vaccines  include  intrana sal influenza,  measles,  mumps, rubella,  oral 
polio,  BCG, yellow  fever,  varicella  and TY21a  typhoid  vaccines;  
 
3.2.26   Prolongation  of corrected  QT interval  (QTc)  > 480 msecs.  
 
3.2.27   History of malabsorption  syndro me, disease  significantly  affecting  gastrointestinal 
function  or major resection  of sto mach or small bowel  that could interfere  with 
absorption,  distribution,  metabolism, or excretion  of study  drugs.  
 
3.2.28   Any ongoing  toxicity  from  prior  anti-cancer  therapy  that is > Grade  1 and/or  that is 
progressing  in severity.  Hypothyroidism  treated  with medication  is not excluded  if 
TSH is  within  normal limits. 
 
3.2.29   Any serious and/or  unstab le pre-existing  medical,  psychiatric,  or other  condition 
(including  lab abnor malities)  that could interfere  with subject  safety,  obtaining 
infor med consent  or compliance  to study  procedures.  Examples  of such include 
uncontrolled  diabetes,  nonhealing  wound, s evere or uncontrolled  infection,  severe 
malnutritio n, sever ely impaired  lung function  as defined as spiro metry and DLCO 
that is 50% of the  normal predicted  value and/or 02 satur ation that is 88% or less 
at rest on room  air, ventricular  arrhyth mias, active ische mic heart  disease,  chronic 
liver or renal  disease,  or active  upper  GI tract  ulceration.  
 
3.2.3 0  HIV-positiv e individua ls on combinatio n antiretrovira l therapy are ineligible 
becaus e of the potentia l for pharmacokinet ic interactions with pazopani b and 
everolimus. In addition , these individual s are at increase d risk of lethal 
infection s when treate d with marrow-suppressive therapy . Appropriat e studies 
will be undertake n in participant s receivin g combinatio n antiretrovira l therapy 
when indicated.  
 
3.2.31   Patie nts unwilling  or unable  to comply  with protoc ol therapy,  tests,  and visits,  or 
with a history  of noncompliance  with medical  regimens. 
 
 
3.3 Eligibilit y Criteri a for the expans ion cohort  in urothe lial carcinoma  
Patients  must have  baseline  evaluations  performed prior  to the first dose of study  drug 
and must meet all inclusion  and exclusion  criteria. Results  of all baseline  evaluations, 
which  assure that  all inclusion  and exclu sion criteria  have  been  satisfied,  must  be 
reviewed  by the  Principal  Investigator  or his/her  designee  prior to enroll ment of that 
patient.  In addition,  the patient  must be thoroughly  infor med about  all aspects  of the 
study,  including  the study  visit schedule  and required  evaluations  and all regulatory 
require ments for informed  consent.  The written  infor med consent  must be obtained  from  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 28 -  
  
 
the patient  prior to enrollment. The following  criteria  apply  to all patients  enrolled  onto 
the study  unless otherwise  specifie d. 
 
 
Participa nts must  meet the following  criteria  on screening  examination  to be eligible  to 
participate  in the expan sion cohort  of this  study:  
 
3.3.1 Metastatic  or locally  advanced  unresect able urothelial  carcino ma with histologic  or 
cytologic  confir mation  at DFCI or MSKCC.  
 
 
3.3.2 Participants  must  have  measura ble disease,  as defined  by RECIST  v1.1.  
 
 
3.3.3 Previousl y treate d with at least one and not more than 3 lines of syste mic 
chemother apy including at least one of the following : a platinu m agent, a taxane, or 
gemcitabine. 
 
 
3.3.4 Age ≥ 18years.  Because  no dosing  or adverse  event  data are currently available  on 
the use of pazopanib  as an  anti-cancer  agent  in patie nts <18 years of age,  children 
are excluded  from this study but may be eligible for futur e pediatri c trials.  
 
 
3.3.5 Life expectan cy of greate r than 3 month s. 
 
 
3.3.6  Karnof s ky  >  70%  or  ECO G  ≤ 1  (see  Appendi x  A).  
 
3.3.7  Participant s must have normal organ and marrow function as defined below:  
• WBC > 3,000 / mm3 
• Absolut e neutr ophil count > 1,500/m m3 
• Platelets > 100,000 / mm3 
• Hemoglobi n > 9 g/dL ; subject s may not have had an RBC transfusio n within 7 
days of screening assessment. 
• Total bilirubi n ≤ 1.5 X normal institutional limits 
• AST (SGOT)/AL T (SGPT) < 2.5 X institutiona l uppe r limit of normal 
• Creatinine clearance > 40 mL/min 
• Prothro mbin time (PT) or international normalized ratio (INR )  2X institutional 
uppe r limit of normal (ULN ) unless patien ts are on therapeuti c anticoagu lation with 
warfarin 
• Partia l thromboplasti n time (PTT )  1.5 X institutional ULN unless patients are on 
therapeuti c anticoagul ation with warfarin  
• Urine prote in to urine creatin ine ratio (UPC) < 1.0. If UPC ≥ 1 then a 24 hour urine 
prote in must be assessed. Subjec ts must have a 24-hour urine protein value < 1g to 
be eligible  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 29 -  
  
 
• Total cholestero l ≤300 mg/dL AND  fasting  triglycerides ≤ 2.5 x institutional  ULN.  
NOTE:  In case  one or both  of these  thresholds are exceeded,  the patient  can only 
be inclu ded after initiation  of appropriate  lipid lowering  medication.  
 
 
3.3.8 Able to swallo w oral medications  
 
3.3.9 Resolution of any pre-existing toxicity from prior therap y to NCI CTCA E V4.0 grade  
1 except neuropathy (≤ grade 2) and tinnitus (≤ grade 2), and hearing loss (≤ grade 4) 
 
 
 
3.3.1 0 A female is eligibl e to enter and participat e in this study if she is of: 
 
 
3.3.10. 1 Non-child bearing  potentia l (i.e., physiologicall y incapabl e of beco ming 
pregnant) , includin g any female who has had: 
• A hysterecto my 
• A bilatera l oophorecto my (ovariecto my) 
• A bilatera l tubal ligation  
• Is post-menopausal  
 
 
Subject s not using hormone replacemen t therap y (HRT) must have experienced 
total cessatio n of menses for ≥ 1 year and be greater than 45 years in age, OR, in 
questionabl e cases , have a follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) value >40 
mIU/mL and an estradio l value < 40pg/ mL (<140 pmol/L). 
 
 
Subjects must discontinue HRT prior to study enroll ment due to the potentia l for 
inhibitio n of CYP enzy mes that metabol ize estrogen s and progestins.  For most 
forms of HRT, at least 2-4 weeks must elaps e betwee n the cessatio n of HRT and 
deter minatio n of menopausa l status ; lengt h of this interva l depend s on the type 
and dosag e of HRT .  If a female subject is determined not to be post- 
menopausal , they must use adequat e contraceptio n as defined immediately  
below durin g the trial and for 8 week s after the last dose. 
 
 
NOTE : Women are considered  post-menopausal  and not of child -bearing  
potential  if they have  had 12 months  of natural  (spontaneous)  amenorrhea  with an 
appropriate  clinical  profile  (e.g. age appropriate,  histo ry of vaso motor sympto ms) 
or have  had surgical  bilateral  oophorecto my (with  or without  hysterectomy)  or 
tubal  ligation  at least six weeks prior  to rando mization.  In the  case of 
oophorectomy  alone,  only when the  reproduc tive status  of the  woman has been 
confir med by follow  up hor mone level  assessment is she co nsidered  not of child - 
bearing  potential. 
 
 
3.3.10. 2 Childbearing  potential , includin g any female who has had a negative serum 
pregnanc y test within 2 weeks prior to the first dose of study treatment, 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 30 -  
  
 
prefe rably as close to the first dose as possible, and agrees to use adequate 
contraception. Acceptable contraceptive methods , when used consistentl y and in 
accordance with both the product label and the instruction s of the physician , are 
as follow:  
• An intrauterine device with a docum ented failur e rate of less than 1% per 
year.  
• Vasecto mized partne r who is sterile prior to the female subject’s entry and 
is the sole sexua l partne r for that female. 
• Doub le-barrier contrace ption (condo m with spermicidal jelly, foam 
suppository , or film; diaphrag m with spermicide; or male condo m and 
diaphragm with spermicide).  
 
 
Note: Oral contraceptives are not relia ble due to potential drug-drug 
interactions. 
 
 
3.3.10. 3 A male with a female partner of childbearin g potenti al is eligibl e to enter and 
participat e in the study if he uses a barrie r method of contraception or 
abstinence during the study and for 8 week s after the end of treatment. 
 
3.3.11  Subjects  must provide  written  infor med consent  prior  to perfor mance of study -specific 
procedures  or assess ments, and must be willing to comply with treatment and follow -up. 
Procedures  conducted  as part of the  subject’s  routine  clinical  manag ement (e.g.,  blood  count, 
imaging  study) and  obtained  prior  to signing  of informed consent  may be utilized  for screening 
or baseline  purposes provided  these  procedures  are conducted  as specified  in the protocol.  
 
 
3.4 Exclusion Criteria for the Expansion Cohort  
 
Participants  who exhibit  any of the  following  conditions  at screening  will not be eligible 
for ad mission  into the study.  
 
3.4.1  Participant s who have had chemotherap y or radiotherap y withi n 4 week s (6 
weeks for nitrosourea s or mitomycin C) prior to entering the study or those who 
have not recovere d from advers e event s due to agent s administere d more than 4 
weeks earlier.  
 
3.4.2  Participant s may not be receivin g any other study agent s durin g the study or 
withi n 4 week s of the start of the study.  
 
3.4.3  Prior mTO R pathwa y inhibito r or VEG F recepto r inhibito r therapy.  
 
3.4.4  Histor y or clinica l evidenc e of centra l nervou s system (CNS ) metastase s or 
lepto meningea l carcino matosis , excep t for individual s who have previously - 
treate d CNS metastases , are asymptomatic, and have had no require ment for 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 31 -  
  
 
steroid s or anti-seizur e medicatio n for 6 week s prior to the first dose of study 
drug.  
•  Screenin g with CNS imaging studie s (computed tomograph y [CT] or magnetic 
resonanc e imaging [MRI]) is require d only if clinically indicate d or if the 
subjec t has a histor y of CNS metastases.  
•  Treated  brain metasta ses are defined  as having  no evidence  of progression or 
hemorrhage  after treatment and no ongo ing require ment for d examethasone,  as 
ascertai ned by cli nical examination  and brain  imaging  (MRI or CT)  during  the 
screening  period.  
•  Anticonvulsants  will not be allowed.  
•  Treat ment for brain  metastases  may include  whole  brain  radiotherapy  (WBRT),  
radiosurgery  (RS; Gamma  Knife,  LINAC, or equivalent)  or a combination  as 
deemed appropriate  by the  treating  physician.  Patients  with CNS metasta ses treated 
by neurosurgical  resection  or brain  biopsy  perfor med within  3 months  prior  to Day 
1 will  be excluded.  
 
 
3.4.5  Know n immediat e or delaye d hypersensiti vity reactio n or idiosyncras y to drugs 
chemically relate d to pazopan ib or everol imus (such as sirolimus or 
temsirolimus)  
 
3.4.6   Any serious and/or  unstable  pre-exist ing medical,  psychiatric,  or other  condition 
(including  lab abnor malities)  that could  interfere  with subject  safety,  obtaining 
infor med consent  or compli ance to study  procedures.  
 
a.   Unstable  angina  pectoris,  symptomatic congestive  heart  failure,  myocardial 
infarction  ≤6 months  prior  to start of evero limus, serious uncontrolled  cardiac 
arrhyth mia, ventricular  arrhyth mias, active ischemic heart  disease,  or any other 
clinically  significant  cardiac  disease,  
b.   Sy mptomatic congestive  heart  failure  of New York heart  Association  Class III or 
IV 
c.   Active  (acute  or chro nic) or uncontrolled  severe  infection  
d.   Liver  disease  such as cirrhosis,  decompensated  liver disease,  and chronic hepatitis  
(i.e. quanti fiable HBV -DNA and/or  positive HbsAg, quanti fiable HCV - RNA)  
e. Known severely  impaired  lung function  (e.g. spiro metry and DLCO 50% or less 
of no rmal and O2 saturation  88% or less at  rest on room  air)active,  bleeding 
diathesis  
f. Severe  or uncontrolled  infection,  severe  malnutrition  
g.   Chronic  renal  disease  
h.   Active  upper  GI tract ulceration  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 32 -  
  
 
3.4.7  Poorly  controlled  hypertension  [defi ned as systolic  blood  pressure (SBP) of ≥140 
mmHg  or diastolic  blood  pressure (DBP) of  ≥ 90mmHg].  Initiation  or adjust ment 
of antihypertensi ve medicatio n(s) is permitted prior  to study entry.  Blood pressure 
must  be re-assessed on two occasio ns that are separated  by a minimum of 5 
minutes.  The mean SBP /  DBP values  from  each blood  pressure assessment  must be 
< 140/90mmHg  in order  for a subject  to be eligible  for the  study.  
 
3.4.8   History of cerebrovascular  accident,  pulmonary  embolism  or untreated  deep  venous 
thrombosis  (DVT) within  the past 6 months.  
 
•  Subjects  with recent DVT who have  been treated  with therapeutic  anti- 
coagulating  agents  for at  least 6 weeks are  eligible 
 
3.4.9   Prior major surgery (required  as defining  general  anesthesia)  or trau ma within  28 
days prior  to first dose of  study  drug, and/or  not recovered  from  effects  of that 
surgery, and/or  presence  of any  non-healing  wound, fracture,  or ulcer  (procedures 
such as cat heter placement not considered  to be major),  or patie nts that may require 
surgery during  the course  of the  study.  
 
3.4.10 Evidence  of active  bleeding  or bleeding  diathesis.  
 
3.4.11 Known endobronchial  lesions  or involve ment of large  pulmonary  vessels by tu mor 
 
3.4.12 Hemoptysis  within  6 weeks of first  dose of study  drug.  
 
3.4.13 Use of an  investigational  agent,  including  an investigational  anti-cancer agent, 
within  4 weeks, whichever  is longer,  prior  to the first dose of  study  drug.  
 
3.4.14  Clinically  signi ficant gastrointestinal  abnormalities  that may increase the risk for GI  
bleeding  including,  but not limited to: 
• Activepe ptic ulcer  disease 
• Known intr aluminal metastatic lesion/s with suspected  bleeding 
• Inflam matory bowel  disease  
Ulcer ative colitis,  or other gastroi ntestinal conditions  with increased risk of 
perforation  
 
3.4.15  History of another  malignancy  within  3 years,  except the following:  cured 
basal/squamous  cell carcino ma of the  skin,  excised  carcino ma in situ of the cervix. 
A history  of prostate  cancer  that was identi fied incidentally  following 
cystoprostatecto my or cyste ctomy for bladder  cancer  is acceptable  provided  that that  
following  criteria  are met: Stage  T2N0M0 or lower,  gleason  score  ≤7, negative 
margins  at surgery, and  PSA undetectable  after surgery.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 33 -  
  
 
3.4.16  Liver  disease  such as chronic  cirrhosis,  active hepatitis  or chronic  persistent 
hepatitis  
 
3.4.17  Uncontrolled  diabetes  mellitus  as defined  by HbA1c >8%  despite  adequate  therapy.  
Patients  with a known history  of impaired  fasting  glucose  or diabetes  mellitus 
(DM) may be included,  however  blood  glucose  and antidi abetic treatment must be 
monitored  closely  throughout the trial and adjusted  as necessary  
 
3.4.18  Current  treatment on another  clinical trial within one month prior  to dosing.  
 
3.4.19  Pregnant  or breastfeeding.  Pregnant  women are excluded  from this study  because 
pazopanib  and everolimus  are agents  with the potential  for terato genic or 
abortifacient  effects.  Because  there  is an unknown but  potential risk of adverse 
events  in nursing infants  secondary  to treatment of the  mother with either  of these 
agents,  breastfeeding  should  be discontinued  if the mother  is treated with either 
pazopanib  or everoli mus. These  potential  risks may  also apply  to other  agents  used 
in this study.  
 
3.4.20  Chronic  treatment with syste mic cortico steroids  or other  immunosuppressive  agent.  
Topical  or inhaled  corticoster oids are allowed.  
 
3.4.21  Patient  is unable  or unwilling  to discontinue  predefined  prohibited  medications 
listed  in the protocol  for 4 weeks of a  drug or 5 ti mes the half life of a drug 
(whichever  is longer)  prior  to Visit 1 and  for the  duration  of the  study.  
 
3.4.22  Treat ment with strong CYP3A4  inhibitors:  
•   Cardiovascula r: verapamil and diltiazem 
•   Antibiotic s: clarithromycin,  telithromycin,  trolea ndomycin,  erythro mycin 
•   HIV: protease  inhibitors  (ritonavir,  indinavir,  saquinavir,  nelfinavir,  amprenavir, 
lopinavir)  
•  Antifungal s: itracon zaole, ketoconazole,  voriconazole,  fluconazole  
•  Antidepressants : nefazodone  
 
3.4.23  Other  prohibited  medications  : 
•  Oral hypoglyce mics: tolbuta mide, chlorpropa mide 
•  Ergot  derivatives:  dihydroergota mine, ergonovine,  ergota mine, 
methylergonovine  
•  Neuroleptics:  pimozide  
•  Antiarrh ythmics: amiodarone,  bepridil, flecainide, lidocaine,  mexilitine, 
quinidine,  propafenone  
•  Immune  modulators:  cyclospo rine, tacroli mus, siroli mus. 
•  Miscellaneous:  theophylline,  quetiapine,  risperidone,  tacrine,  cloza pine, 
atomoxetin  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 34 -  
  
 
3.4.24  Treat ment with strong CYP3A4  inducers:  
•  Anticonvulsants : phenytoin,  carbemazepine,  Phenobarbital,  oxcarbazepi ne 
•  HIV antir etrovirals: efavirenz,  nevirapine  
•  Antibiotic s: rifampin (rifampicin),  rifabutin,  rifapentene  
•  Miscella neous: St. John’s Wort, modafinil,  pioglitazone,  troglitazone  
 
3.4.25  Patie nts should not receive  immunization  with attenuated  live vacci nes within  one 
week  of study  entry  or during  study  period.  Patient  should  also avoid  close  contact 
with others  who have  received live attenuated  vaccines.  Examples  of live  attenuated 
vaccines  include  intranasal  influe nza, measles,  mumps, rubella,  oral polio, BCG, 
yellow  fever,  varicella  and TY21a  typhoid  vaccines;  
 
3.4.26  Prolongation  of corrected  QT interval  (QTc)  > 480 msecs.  
 
3.4.27  History of malabsorption  syndro me, disease  significantly  affecting  gastrointestinal 
function  or major resection  of sto mach or small bowel  that could interfere  with 
absorption,  distribution,  metabolis m, or excretion  of study  drugs.  
 
3.4.28  Any ongoing  toxicity  from  prior  anti-cancer  therapy  that is > Grade  1 and/or  that is 
progressing  in severity.  Hypo thyroidism  treated  with medication  is not excluded  if 
TSH is  within  normal limits. 
 
3.4.29  Any serious and/or  unstable  pre-existing  medical,  psychiatric,  or other  condition 
(including  lab abnor malities)  that could  interfere  with subject  safety,  obtaining 
infor med consent  or compliance  to study  procedures.  
 
3.4.30  HIV-positiv e individua ls on combinatio n antiretrovira l therapy are ineligible 
becaus e of the potentia l for pharmacokinet ic interactions with pazopani b and 
everolimus. In addition , these individual s are at increase d risk of lethal 
infection s when treate d with marrow-suppressive therapy . Appropriat e studies 
will be undertake n in participant s receivin g combinatio n antiretrovira l therapy 
when indicated.  
 
3.4.31  Patie nts unwilling  or unable  to comply  with protoc ol therapy,  tests,  and visits,  or 
with a history  of noncompliance  with medical  regimens. 
 
3.4.32  Female subject s who are pregn ant or lactatin g are not eligible to participate in this 
study.  
 
 
3.4.32  Male  patients  whose sexual  partner(s)  are WOCBP  who are  not willing  to use 
adequate  contraception,  during  the study  and for 8 weeks after the end of treat ment 
 
 
3.5 Inclus ion of Women , Minoritie s and Othe r Underrepresente d Populat ions 
Women, minorities,  and other  underrepresented  populations  are all eligible  for this trial. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 35 -  
  
 
 
 
 
Screening  for hepatitis  B 
 
Prior  to rando mization/s tart of everoli mus, patients  should  be tested for hepatitis  B viral  load and 
serolo gic markers,  that is, HBV-DNA, HB sAg, HBs Ab, a nd HBc Ab.  
 
The manage ment guidelines,  in Section  6.2.4  are provided  according  to the results  of the baseline  
assess ment of viral  load and serological markers  for hepatitis  B. 
 
Screening  for hepatitis  C 
 
Patients  should  be tested  for hep atitis C using  quantitati ve RNA -PCR.  
 
The manage ment guidelines,  in Section  6.2.4  are provided  according  to the results  of the baseline 
assess ment of hepatitis  C viral load.  
 
 
4. REGIS TRATION PROCEDURES  
 
4.1 Genera l Guideline s for DF/HC C and DF/PCC Instituti ons 
 
Institution s will register eligibl e participa nts with the DF/HC C Quality Assurance 
Office for Clinical Trials (QACT ) central registratio n system . Registratio n must 
occu r prior to the initiatio n of therapy . Any pa rticipant not registered to the protocol 
before treatm ent begins will be considered ineligibl e and registratio n will be denied. 
 
 
A member of the study team will confirm eligibilit y criteria and complete the 
protoc ol-specific eligibility chec klist. 
 
 
Followin g registration , participant s may begin protoco l treat ment withi n 14 days. 
Issue s that would cause treatment delay s should be discu ssed with the Principal 
Investigator.  If a participant  does not  receive  protocol  therapy  following  registration,  the 
participant’s  protocol  status  must be changed.  Notify  the QACT Registrar  of participant 
status change s as soon as possible.  
 
4.2 Registration Process for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Instituti ons 
 
 
The QAC T registratio n staff is access ible on Monda y throug h Friday , from 8:00 AM to 
5:00 PM Easter n Standar d Time . In emergenc y situation s when a participan t must 
begin treatment durin g off-hours or holiday s, call the QAC T registratio n line at 617- 
632-3761 and follow the instruction s for registerin g particip ants after hours. 
The registratio n procedu res are as follows: 
1. Obtai n writte n informe d consen t from the participan t prior to the performance 
of any study relate d procedures or assessments. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 36 -  
  
 
2. Complet e  the   protocol -speci fic  eligibility  checklis t  using  the   eligibility 
asses sment document ed in the participant’ s medical/researc h record . To be 
eligibl e for registratio n to the study, the participan t must meet each 
inclusio n and exclusion criteri a listed on the eligibilit y checklist.  
 
Reminder : Confirm eligibilit y for ancillar y studie s at the same time as 
eligibilit y for the treatment study . Registration to both treatment and ancillary 
studies  will not be completed  if eligibility require ments are not met for all 
studies.  
 
3. Fax the eligibility  checklist(s) and all pages of the consent form(s) to the 
QACT at  617-632-2295.  
 
Exception: DF/PC C Affiliate sites must fax the entire signe d consen t form 
includin g HIPA A Privac y Authorizatio n and the eligibilit y checklis t to the 
Networ k Affiliate Office. The Networ k Affiliate Office will registe r the 
participan t with the QACT.  
 
4. The QACT  Regist rar will ( a) validate  eligibility, (b) register the particip ant on 
the study,  and (c) rando mize the participant  when applicable.  
 
5. The  QACT  Registrar  will  send  an  email  confirmation  of  the  registration 
and/or  rando mization to  the person  initiating  the registration  immediately 
following  the registration  and/or  rando mization.  
 
4.3 Genera l Guideline s for Other Participati ng Instit utions 
 
 
Eligibl e participant s will be entere d on study centrall y at Dana -Farbe r Cancer 
Institute by the Stud y Coordinato r and researc h Nurse . All sites shoul d call the Study 
Coordinato r and research Nurs e to verif y treatmen t availability.  
 
Followin g registration , participant s shoul d begin protoco l treat ment withi n 72 hours 
or as soon as possible . Issue s that woul d cause treatment delays shoul d be discussed 
with the Principa l Investigator.  If a participant  does not  receive  protocol  therapy 
following  registration , the participant’s  protocol  status  must be changed.  The Study 
Coordinator  should  be notified of participant status changes as soon as possible. 
 
Except  in very unusual  circu mstances,  each participating  institution  will order  the study 
agent(s ) directl y from the supplier . A participatin g site may order the agent(s ) only 
after the initial  IRB approval  for the  site has been  forwarded  by the Coordinating  Center 
to the supplier.  
 
 
 
5. TREATMEN T PLAN 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 37 -  
  
 
Treatmen t will be administere d on an outpatien t basis . Expected toxicitie s and potential 
risks as well as dose modification s for pazopa nib and everolimus are described in Section 6 
(Expecte d Toxicitie s and Dosin g Delays/Do se Modifications). No investigational or 
commercial  agents  or therapies  other than those described  below  may be administered  with 
the intent to treat the participant 's malignanc y other than describe d in the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
 
 
Phas e I dose escalatio n schema  
 
 Dose Level  Pazopanib  Everolimus  
 -1 400 mg PO QD 5 mg PO QD 
Starting dose → 0 600 mg PO QD 5 mg PO QD 
 +1 600 mg PO QD 10 mg PO QD 
 +2 800 mg PO QD 10 mg PO QD 
 +2A 800 mg PO QD 5 mg PO QD 
* Dose level +2A is only to be used if the MTD is exce eded on dose level +2. 
 
5.1 Expansion Cohort  
The dose for the expansion cohor t is listed below:  
Agent  Dose  Route  Schedule  Cycle  
Length  
Pazopanib  400 mg Oral Daily 28 days  
(4 weeks)  Everolimus 5 mg Oral Daily  
 
 
 
 
5.2 Pre-treat ment Criter ia 
 
5.2.1 Screenin g evaluation  
 
Withi n 28 days prior to start of treatment  
• Complet e physica l examination  
• Complet e medica l histor y and demographi cs 
• Karnofsk y or ECO G perfo rmance status  
• Reco rd conco mitant medications  
• Diseas e assess ments: Baselin e CT or MRI of the abdome n and pelvi s and CT or 
X-ray of the chest . In patients with osseou s lesions, bone X-rays and/o r bone 
scans should be obtain ed. 
 
Withi n 14 days prior to start of treatment  
• Evaluatio n of vital signs includ ing pulse , respiratory rate, body weight , and height  
• Two blood pressur e measurements shou ld be taken at least 5 minutes apart 
• Urin e beta-HCG pregnanc y test for wom en of childbearin g potential 
• Electrocard iogram  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 38 -  
  
 
• Urinalysi s, urine protein , and urine creatinine  
• Labora tory asses sment s. Screening laborator y testin g performed within 7 days of 
initiatio n of study therap y may be used for cycle 1 day 1. 
• Compet e blood count with differ ential and platelets  
• Compr ehensiv e Metaboli c Pane l including : sodiu m, potassium, chloride, 
bicarbonat e, BUN , creatinine , calcium, alanin e aminotr ansferase, aspartate  
aminotran sferase , alkal ine phosp hatase, total bilirubin , albumin  
• Magnesium , phosphorus , LDH , amylase, lipase, thyro id stimulating 
hormoneTotal cholesterol ≤300 mg/dL AND fasting  triglycerides  ≤ 2.5 x 
institutional  ULN.  
• Fastin g lipid panel  
• Screening  for hepatitis  C (using quanti tative  RNA -PCR) and  hepatitis  B using 
serolo gical markers  (HBsAg, HBs Ab, and  HBcAb) for all  patients.  
• Prothro mbin time (PT) or internationa l normalized ratio (INR )  2X 
institutiona l uppe r limit of normal (ULN ) unless patien ts are on therapeutic 
anticoagulatio n with warfarin  
• Partia l thromboplasti n time (PTT )  1.5 X institutional ULN unless patients are 
on therapeuti c anticoag ulation with warfarin  
 
 
 
5.2.1 Day 1 ever y cycle  
 
The followin g will be undertake n prior to initiatin g study therap y and on day 1 of 
every subsequen t cycle:  
• Vital signs includin g blood pressu re, pulse, respirator y rate and body weigh t. 
Heigh t will be recorde d on cycle 1, day 1 only.  
• Karnofsk y or ECO G perfo rmance status  
• Complet e physica l examinatio n and toxicit y evaluatio n (CTCA E v 4.0) 
• Updat e conco mitant medications  
• Compet e blood count with differ ential and platelets  
• Comprehensiv e Metaboli c Panel : sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate, 
BUN , creat inine, calcium , alanin e aminotr ansferase, aspartat e aminotransferase, 
alkalin e phosphatase , total bilirubin , albumin  
• Magnesium , phosphorous , LDH , amylase, lipase, thyroid stimulatin g hormone 
• Fastin g lipid panel  
• Urin e pregnanc y test in wome n of childbearin g potentia l (at screenin g and cycle  
1 day 1 only) 
• Urinalysis  
• Urine protei n & creatinine  
• EKG (for cycle s 1-2 only)  
 
5.2.2 Cycle s 1-2 day 15 
The followin g will be undertake n day 15 of cycles 1 and 2: 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 39 -  
  
 
 
• Vital signs includin g blood pressu re, pulse, respirator y rate, body weight, 
and height  
• Karnofsk y or ECO G perfo rmance status  
• Complet e physica l examinatio n and toxicit y evaluatio n (CTCA E v  4.0) 
• Updat e conco mitant medications  
• Compet e blood count with differ ential and platelets  
• Comprehensiv e Metaboli c Panel : sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate, 
BUN , creat inine, calcium , alanin e aminotr ansferase, aspartate 
aminotran sferase , alkal ine phosp hatase, total bilirubin , albumin  
• Magnesium , phosphorous , LDH  
 
5.2.4 Every  8 weeks 
 
Radiologic  disease  evaluation:  Radiological  assessments include  a CT or X-ray of the 
chest  and abdo minal and pelvic  CT or MRI scan.  In patients  with osseous lesions,  bone 
X-rays and/or  bone  scans should  be obtain ed. Tumor  measure ments should  occur  every  
8 weeks (within  7 days prior  to day 1 of the  subsequent  cycle).  
 
5.2.5 End of Study  
 
The following  will be underta ken 28 days after  last dose of study  medicatio n: 
 
•  Vital signs includin g blood pressu re, pulse, respirator y rate, body weight, 
and height  
•  Karnofsk y or ECO G perfo rmance status  
•  Complet e physica l examinatio n and toxicit y evaluatio n (CTCA E v 4.0) 
•  Updat e conco mitant medications  
•  Compet e blood count with differ ential and platelets  
•  Comprehensiv e Metaboli c Panel : sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate, 
BUN , creat inine, calcium , alanin e aminotr ansferase, aspartate 
aminotran sferase , alkal ine phosp hatase, total bilirubin , albumin  
•  Magnesium , phosphorous , LDH , thyroi d stimulating hormone 
•  Fastin g lipid panel  
•  Urinalysis  
•  Urine protei n & creatinine  
 
This visit can be foregone  for patients  who are  too unwell  to attend  or for other  reasons at 
the investigators  discretion.  Patients  may be contacted  thereafter  by phone  to assess 
resolution  of toxicities,  and may be contacted  for survival  follow  up. 
 
5.3 Agent Administrati on 
Pazopan ib and everolimus may be taken at the same time. Patients  will be instructed 
to take the everoli mus AND Pazopanib  at the same time every  morning,  without  food, at 
least one hour before  or two  hours after  a meal. Before  discharge  from  the clinic,  subjects  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 40 -  
  
 
will be given a study  dosing diary  to take home. The subject  will be instructed  to record 
the date and time that each dose of pazopanib  and everoli mus is self administered.  Study 
diaries  will be reviewed  and collected  at each visit during  the remainder  of the  study.  
 
5.3.1 Pazopanib  
 
Pazopanib  will be self administer ed (by the  patients  themselves).  Pazo panib will be 
administered  orally  as once  daily  dose continuously  from  study  day 1 until  progression 
of disease  or unacceptable  toxicity.  Pazopanib  should be taken orally  without food at 
least one hour before  or two hours after  a meal. The tablets  should  be swallowed  whole 
and must not be crushed  or broken.  The time of day  the tablets  are taken  should  be 
relatively  constant.  Dietary  habits  around  the time of pazopanib  intake  should  be as 
consistent  as possible  throughout  the study.  If a dose is  missed,  the subject  should  take 
the dose as soon as possible,  but not if there  are less than  12 hours before  the next dose 
is due. If the  next dose is  due in less t han 12 hours, the  subject  should  skip the missed 
dose and  take the next dose as scheduled.  
 
If vomiting occurs  after taking  pazopanib,  another dose is  not permitted on that  day. 
The subject  should  resume taking  pazopanib  at the next scheduled  dose.  If vo miting 
persists, the  subject  should be instructed to notify the investigator. 
 
5.3.2 Everolim us 
 
Dosing regimen 
 
The investigator  should  promote compliance  by instructing  the patient  to take the study 
drug exactly  as prescri bed and by stating  that compliance  is necessary  for the patient’s 
safety  and the validity  of the study.  The patient should  be instructed  to contact  the 
investigator  if he/she  is unable  for any  reason  to take the study  drug as prescribed. 
Everoli mus should  be administered  orally  once  daily  at the same time every  day, without 
food, at  least one hour before  or two hours after  a meal, at the same time as the 
Pazopanib.  If a dose is  missed,  the subject  shou ld take the dose as soon as possible,  but 
not if there  are less than  12 hours before  the next dose is  due. If the  next dose is  due in 
less than  12 hours, the  subject  should  skip the missed dose and  take the next dose as 
scheduled.  
 
Tablets  
 
The tablets  should  be swallowed  whole with a glass  of water  and should  not be chew ed 
or crushed. For  patients  unable  to swallow  tablets,  the tablet(s) should  be dispersed 
completely  in a glass of water  (containing approxi mately 30  mL) by gently  stirring, 
immediately  prior  to drinking.  The glass  should  be rinsed  with the same volume of water 
and the rinse completely  swallowed  to ensure the entire  dose is  administered.  
 
If vo miting occurs,  no atte mpt should  be made to replace  the vomited dose.  
 
5.4 Definitio n of Dose -Limitin g Toxicity  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 41 -  
  
 
 
5.4.1 Dose escalatio n rules 
 
General  rules: 
• Initial  dose is dose lev el 0 for this  trial 
• All patients  in a dose c ohort will complete  28 days (1 cycle)  of co mbination  treatment 
prior  to the treatment of any  patient  at a higher  dose level.  
• If a patient  does not  complete  the 28 days of treat ment for reasons that  are clearly  not 
adverse  events related  to treatment, then that patient  will be replaced,  up to  three  per 
dose level.  
• If more than three  patients need  to be replaced on a dose le vel, then the reasons  will 
be re-evaluated  before  continuing.  
• There  will be no intrapatient  dose escalation.  
• To deter mine that a subject  has received  study  treatment without  experiencing  DLT, 
the subject  must  have  missed  no more than 5 days of dosing  during  cycle  1, either 
nonconsecutively  or consecutively.  
 
Pazopanib  and everolimus  doses will  be escalated  accor ding to the follo wing standard 
3+3 dose escalation  rules:  
 
1. If 0 of 3 patie nts in a cohort  experience  dose li miting toxicities,  then the next cohort of 
3 patie nts will be treated at the next higher  dose level.  
 
2. If 1 of 3 patients  in a cohort  experiences  a DLT  then the cohort  will be expanded  to 
treat an additional three patie nts. If only one of 6 patie nts experiences a DLT, then the 
next cohort  of patients  will be treated  at the next higher  dose level.  
 
3. If two or more  patients  in a cohort  experience  a DLT,  then the MTD has been  
exceeded.  The previous  dose lev el will be consi dered the MTD. If only  3 patie nts were 
treated at the previous  dose lev el, an additional  three  patients will be treated at that dose 
level to confirm the MTD.  
 
4. If the  doses of both  drugs are  escalated  to dose level  2 with  0 of 3 or 1 out  of 6 patients 
experiencing  a DLT,  then this will be considered  the recommended  Phase II dose 
(RP2D) for the  expansion  cohort.  
 
5. If the  MTD is  exceeded  on dose level  0, then  a de-escalati on cohort  to dose level  -1 
will be enrolled.  Up to  six patie nts will be treated at this dose level.  If one or fewer  of 
six patients  experiences  a DLT,  then this will be the RP2D. If two or more patients 
experience  a DLT  on dose lev el -1, then the combination  will be deemed not feasible 
and the study will be closed. 
 
6. If the  MTD is  exceeded  on dose level  2, then  a de-escalati on level  will be accrued 
(dose level  2A). If 0 of 3 or 1 out  of 6 patients  experience  a DLT on dose level  2A, 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 42 -  
  
 
then this will be considered  the RP2D  for the  expansion  cohort.  If the  MTD is 
exceeded  on dose level  2A, then  dose level  1 will  be the RP2D.  
 
5.4.2 Definition  of a DLT 
 
Dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) is based  on the  CTEP  Active  Version of  the NCI 
Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse Events  (CTCAE  v4.0).  
 
 
For the purposes of Phase  I dose escalation,  a DLT will be defined  as toxicity  occurring 
within  the first 28 days of combination  therapy related  to therapy that meets the criteria 
spelled  out below:  
 
1.   Grade  3 or 4 non-hematologic toxicity  excluding:  
 
•  Toxicity  attributed  to underlying  malignancy  
 
•  Nausea/vomiting  controlled  with antiemetics 
 
•  Grade  3 hypertension  that resolves  to ≤150/90  within  7 days of adjust ment or 
addition  of oral  blood  pressure medications.  
 
a.   Hypertension   that   requires   admission   to   the   hospital   or   intravenous 
medication  for contr ol will be consi dered a DLT.  
 
b.   Grade  3  or  greater  hypertension  that  does  not  respond  to  adjust ment  or 
addition  of oral blood  pressure  medicines  to ≤150/90  within  7 days from 
blood  press ure medicati on modification  will be considered  a DLT.  
 
•  Grade  3 asympto matic, clinically  insigni ficant laborat ory abnormalities,  inclu ding 
LDH,  alkaline   phosphatase   due   to   bone   metastases,   and   asymptomatic 
hypophosphate mia 
 
2.   H ematologic  toxicity  defined  as: 
 
1. Grade  4 thrombocytopenia  or grade  3 thro mbocytopenia  with bleeding  
 
2. Grade  4 neutropenia  which  persists for >7  days 
 
3. Grade  4 neutropenia  associated  with fever  >38.5C  
 
4. Excludes  lymphopenia  or ane mia of any  grade  
 
3.   R emoval of a patient  from  therapy  due to toxicity  attributable  to treatment 
 
4.   Patients  who miss more than 5 days of the planned  doses  for drug-related intolerable 
grade  2 toxicity will be conside red to have  experie nced a  DLT.  During  cycle  1, 
patients  who miss fewer than 5 days of dosing  for drug-related toxicities  that do not 
immediately  meet the criteria  for DLT  must recover  to </= grade 1 within  two weeks, 
or they  will be considered  to have  experienced  DLT.  
 
5.   Toxicity  related  to therapy  severe enough  to requi re a dose-reduction  
 
Manage ment and dose modifications  associated  with the above  adverse  events  are 
outlined in Section 6 (Expec ted Toxicities and Dosing Delays/Dos e Modi fications ). 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 43 -  
  
 
 
 
5.5 Genera l Concomitan t Medicatio n and Supportiv e Care Guidelines  
5.5.1 Patients  should  receive  full supportive  care,  including  analgesic  medication, 
transfusions of blood  and blood  products,  antibiotics,  antie metics,  etc., when 
appropriate.  Although  aceta minophen  at doses of  2 g/day  is permitted,  it should  be 
used with  caution  in subjects  with impaired  liver funct ion. Anti-diarrheals,  such as 
lopera mide, may be administered  as needed  in the event  of diarrhea.  The reason(s) for 
treatment, dosage,  and the dates  of treat ment should  be recorded  in the medical  record.  
 
5.5.2 Palliative  radiation  therapy  may not be administered  while  the patient  is on study 
treatment. A symptomatic lesion or one which may produce  disability  (e.g.,  unstable 
femur) may be irradiated  before  study  initiation,  provided  other  measurable  or 
evalua ble disease  is present and radiation  thera py is completed  ≥ 4 weeks before  start 
of therapy.  All eligibility  criteria  for progression must still be met. Any other 
indic ations  for radi otherapy after protocol  treatment  has beg un will constitute  disease 
progression, and  the patient  will stop protocol  treatment. 
 
5.5.3 Erythropoetin/  Darbepoetin:  Use of erythropoietin  or darbepoetin  in this protocol  is 
permitted at the discretion of the  treating  physician  after cycle  1 (ie.,  after the DLT 
deter mination  period).  
 
5.5.4 Filgrastim  (G-CSF), pegfilgrastim,  and sargra mostim (GM -CSF) after  cycle  1 (ie.  
After the DLT  deter mination  period) 
1. Filgrastim/pegfilgrastim  and sargramost im should not be used to  avoid  dose 
reductions.  
2. Filgrasti m, pegfilgrastim,  or sargramo stim, may be used for secondary  prophylaxis 
following  an episode  of febrile  neutropenia.  
3. For the  treatment of febrile  neutropenia,  the use of CSF 's should  not be routinely 
instituted  as an  adjunct  to appropriate  antibiotic  therapy.  However, the  use of CSF 's 
may be indicated  in patients  who have  prognostic  factors  that are predictive  of 
clinical deterioration  such as pneu monia,  hypote nsion,  multi-organ dysfunction 
(sepsis syndro me) or fungal  infection,  as per  the ASCO guidelines.  Investigators 
should  therefore  use their  own discretion  in using  the CSF's in this setting.  The use 
of CSF (filgrasti m, pegfilgrastim  or sargra mostim)  must be docu mented  and 
reported  in the medical  record.  
4. If filgrastim,  pegfilgrastim  or sargramost im are used, they  must  be obtained  from 
commercial  sources.  
 
 
5.5.5 Drug Interact ions 
 
 
Because there is a potential for interaction of pazopanib and Everolimus with 
other concomitantl y administer ed drug s throug h the cytochrom e P450 system, the 
case repor t form must captur e the concurrent use of all other drug s, over-the- 
counte r medications , or alternativ e therapies . The Principa l Investig ator (or 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 44 -  
  
 
Protoco l Chair ) shou ld be alerte d if the participant is taking any agent  known to 
affect  or with  the potential  to affect  selected  CYP450 isoenzy mes. 
 
 
5.5.5.1 Permitted  Medications  
 
All subjects will be asked to provi de a complete  list of prescription  and over-the- 
counter  medications  that have  been  taken  within the 4 weeks prior  to screening.  The 
investigator  must  be infor med as soon as possible  about  any new medication(s)  taken 
from the time of screeni ng until the completion  of the post-treatment follow -up visit. 
All conco mitant medications  taken during  the study will be recorded  in the case report 
form  (CRF) with  indication,  dose i nformation,  and dates  of ad ministration.  
 
5.5.5.2 Permitted  Medications  – Use with Caution  
 
• Specific  recommendations  regarding  anticoagulants:  
Results  from  drug-drug int eraction  studies  conducted  in subjects  with cancer  
suggest that  pazopanib  has no effect  on the  metabolism  of S-warfarin. 
Hemorrhagic  events,  however,  have  been  reported  in clinical  studies  with 
pazopanib;  therefore,  pazopanib  should  be used with  caution  in subjects  with 
increased  risk of severe  bleeding  or who are  receiv ing conco mitant anticoagulant 
therapy  (e.g.,  warfarin  or its derivatives,  low molecular  weight  heparin,  
unfractionated  heparin).  Subjects  taking  conco mitant anticoagulant  therapy 
should  be monitored  regularly  for changes  in relevant  coagulation  parameters  as 
clinically  indicated,  as well  as for any  clinical  bleeding  episodes.  
 
Oral anticoagulants  such as warfarin  are CYP2C9 substrates  and, as such, no 
interaction  with everolimus  is expected.  However, drug -drug interaction  studies 
between  macrolide  antibiotics  and warfarin have  produced  mixed outcomes  and 
the disparity in these findings  has led to the conclusion  that multiple  factors may 
alter the clearance  of warfarin.  The co-administration  of everoli mus and oral 
anticoagulants  is possible  but should  be subject  to verific ation of coagulation 
(INR) once  steady  state is reached  (after  one week’s treat ment). 
 
• Specific  recommendations  regarding  hypoglycemic  therapy including  insulin: 
Results  from  drug-drug interaction  studies  conducted  in subjects  with cancer 
suggest that there will be no clinically  relevant pharmacokinetic  interaction 
between  pazopanib  and hypoglycemic  agents.  Transient  decreases  in serum 
glucose  (mainly  Grade  1 and  2, rarely  Grade  3) have  been  observed  in clinical 
studies  with pazopanib.  In addition,  decreases  in blood  sugar have  been  recently 
reported  in subjects  treated  with another  small molecule  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitor, 
suniti nib (British  Journal  of Cancer  2008:  99, 1380).  Such c hanges  may require  
an adjust ment in the dose of hypoglyce mic and/or  insulin  therapy.  Subjects 
should  be advised  to report  symptoms  of hypoglyce mia (e.g.,  confusion,  visual 
disturbances,  palpitations,  sweating).  Serum  glucose  should  be tested  during 
treatment with pazopanib  as outlined  in the protocol  and as clinic ally indicated.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 45 -  
  
 
 
 
• Specific  recommendations  regarding  oral hypoglycemic s: Co-administr ation of 
pazopanib  with some oral hypoglyce mics, including  glipizide,  glyburide 
(glibencla mide), glimepiride,  nateglinide,  repaglinide,  gliclazide,  acetohexa mide, 
carbuta mide, glibornuride,  glymidine,  metahexamide,  and tolaza mide, may result  in 
an increase  in plasma concentrations  of the  oral hypoglyce mic agent.  This increase  
may result  in hypoglyce mia. Therefore,  the dose of the  oral 
hypoglycemic  agent  should  be reduced  by 50% when pazopanib  administration 
starts.  The blood  glucose  should  be monit ored closely,  and the subject  should  be 
instructed  to measure  their blood  glucose if they experience  sympto ms of 
hypoglycemia  and inform  their physician  if their blood  glucose  concentration  is 
low. After  at least 14 days of pazopan ib administration,  the dose of the  oral 
hypoglycemic  agent may be increased  as necessary  to maintain  adequate  blood 
glucose  control.  
 
• The Effects  of Pazopan ib on Other  Drugs  
In vitro data indicate  that pazopanib  is a potential  inhibitor  for CYP3A4,  
CYP2C8, CYP2D6, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and 
CYP2E1.  Pregnane  X recept or transient transfection  assay suggested  some 
potential  for hu man CYP3A4 induction  at high concentrations.  Results  from 
drug-drug interaction  studies  conducted  in subjects  with cancer  suggest that 
pazopanib  is a weak  inhibitor  of CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and  CYP2D6 in vivo , but 
had no clinically  relevant  effect  on CYP1A2, CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 metabolis m. 
Therefore,  conco mitant use of pazopanib  with certain  medications  (substrates  of 
CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and  CYP 2D6) with  a narrow therapeutic  window should  be 
undertaken  with CAU TION due to the potential for alt erations in the 
pharmacologic  effects  of these  medicatio ns or an  increased  risk for serious or life 
threatening adve rse even ts assoc iated with such medications  (see below) 
secondary  to the inhibition of specif ic CYP enzymes  by pazo panib.  In ad dition, 
the potential  for drug interaction  with such medications,  although  diminished, 
may persist  after the last dose of pazop anib due to its long half-life (i.e., mean 
30.9 hours);  therefore,  continue  to exercise  CAUTION  for at  least 7 days and  up 
to 15 days after  the last dose of pazopan ib when ad ministeri ng these  medicatio ns. 
These  medications  include (but are not limited to): 
• Ergot  derivatives:  dihydroergo tamine, ergonovine,  ergota mine, 
methylergonovine  (potential  increased  risk for developing  ergot  toxicity 
that includes  severe  vasospasm  leading  to perip heral as well  as cerebral 
ische mia) 
• Neuroleptics:  pimozide  (potential  increased  risk for QT  interval 
prolongation,  ventricular  arrhythmia, and sudden  death)  
• Antiarrh ythmics: bepri dil, flecainide, lidoc aine, mexiletine,  amiodarone, 
quinidine,  propafenone  (potential  increased  risk for QT interval 
prolongation  and Torsade  de Pointes)  
• Immune  modulators:  cyclosporine,  tacroli mus, siroli mus (potential 
increased  risk for nephrotoxicity  and neurotoxicity)  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 46 -  
  
 
• Miscella neous: quetiapine,  risperid one, cloza pine, atomoxetine.  
 
• The Effects  of Other  Drugs on P azopanib  and Everolimus  
Results  from in vitro studies  suggest that  the oxidative  metabolism  of pazopanib  
in human liver microsomes  is mediated  primarily by CYP3A4, with  minor 
contributions  from  CYP1A2 and  CYP2C8.  Further more, in vitro data suggest  
that pazopanib  is a substrate  for p -glycop rotein.  Substances  that induce  or inhibit 
CYP3A4 may  alter the pharmacologic  effects of pazopanib  and should  be used 
with CAU TION .  Co mpetitive  inhibition  could occur  when everoli mus is 
combined  with drugs which  are also CYP3A4 substrates.  Therefore  caution should  
be exercised  in such cases.  
 
1.   Concurrent  administration  of everolimus  and moderate  CYP3A4 inhibitors  (such 
as erythromycin,  fluconazole,  calcium  channel  blockers,  benzodiazepines)  and 
moderate  CYP3A4  inducers  (e.g. carba mazepine,  phenobarbital,  phenyt oin) 
should  also be avoided  if possible,  or used subject  to caution  (e.g. increased 
frequency  of safety  monitoring,  temporary  interruption  of everoli mus). 
2.   Grapefruit  and grapefruit  juice  affect  cytochro me P450 and  P-glycoprotein  
activity  and should  therefore  be avoided.  In addition,  patients  should  avoid  Seville 
oranges  and star fruit,  as well  as the  juice  of these  fruits,  which  are potent  
CYP3A4 -inhibit ors. 
 
 
5.5.5.3 Prohibited  Medicat ions 
 
 
Participa nts must  be instructed  not to take any medications  (over -the-counter  or 
other  products)  during  the protocol  treatment period  without  prior  consultation  with 
the investigator.  The investigator  should  instruct  the participant  to notify  the study 
site about  any new medications  he/she  takes  after the start of study  drug. All 
medications  (other  than study  drug) and significant  non-drug therapies  (including 
physical  therapy  and blood  transfusions) taken  within 28 days of starting  study 
treatment through  the 30-day safety  follow up visit  should  be reported  on the  CRF.  
 
• Subjects  should not receive  other  anti-cancer  therapy  [cytoto xic, biologic, 
radiation,  or hor monal (other  than leuprolide  or other  GnRH agonists)]  while  on 
treatment in this study.  
 
• No chronic  treatment with syste mic steroids  or other  immunosuppressive  agents 
are allowed.  Topical  or inhal ed corticoster oids are allowed.  
 
• Medications  that inhibit  strongly  CYP3A4 may result  in increased  plasma 
pazopanib  and everolimus  concentrations.  Selection  of an  alternate  conco mitant 
medication  with no or minimal potenti al to inhibit  CYP3A4 is  required. Strong 
CYP3A4 inhibitors  which are prohibited  include:  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 47 -  
  
 
•   Antibiotic s: clarithromycin,  telithromycin,  trolea ndomycin 
•   HIV: protease  inhibitors  (ritonavir,  indinavir,  saquinavir,  nelfinavir, 
amprenavir,  lopinavir)  
•   Antifungals : itraconzaole,  ketoconazole,  voriconazole,  fluconazole  
Antidepre ssants: nefazodone  
 
• Specific  recommendation  regarding  non-dihydropyridine calcium  channel  
blockers  (verapam il and diltia zem):  co-administration  of pazopanib  with 
calcium  channel blockers  may result  in increased  plasma concentrations  of the 
calcium  channel blocker.  Non-dihydropyridine  calcium  channel  blockers, 
verapa mil and diltiaze m, have  potential depressive  effects  on cardiac  conduction 
and contractility.  When pazopanib  therapy  is initiated, the administration of an 
anti-hypertensive  or anti-anginal  agent  other  than verapa mil and diltiazem  is 
recom mended  in the setting  of a prolonged  PR interval  (greater  than 200 msec), 
sinus bradycardia  (less than  60 beats  per minute),  or second  or third  degree  heart 
block,  unless the  subject  has a  permanent  pacemaker.  
 
• Strong CYP3A4 indu cers may decrease  plasma pazopanib  concentrations.  
Selection  of an alternate  conco mitant medication  with no or minimal enzy me 
induction  potential  is required.  Drugs that induce  CYP3A4 and may decrease  
pazopanib  and everolimus  plasma concent rations  include  (but are  not limited 
to): 
• Glucocorticoids : cortisone  (>50  mg), hydroco rtisone  (>40  mg), prednisone  
(>10  mg), methylprednisolone  (>8 mg), dexa methasone  (>1.5  mg) 
• Anticonvulsants : phenytoin,  carbamezepine,  phenobarbital,  oxcarbazepi ne 
• HIV  antivi rals: efavirenz,  nevirapine  
• Antibiotic s: rifampin (rifampicin),  rifabutin,  rifapentene  
• Miscella neous: St. John’s Wort, modafinil,  pioglitazone,  troglitazone  
 
Everoli mus may affect the response to  vaccinations  making  the response to  the 
vaccination  less effecti ve. Live vaccines  should  be avoided  while  a patient  is 
treated with everoli mus. 
 
Vaccinatio ns 
Immunosuppressa nts may affect  the response  to vaccination  and vacci nation  during 
treatment with everolimus may therefore  be less effective.  The use of live  vaccines 
should  be avoided  during  treatment with everolimus  Examples of live  vaccines  are: 
intranasal influenza,  measles,  mumps, rubella,  oral polio,  BCG, yellow  fever, 
varicella,  and TY21a  typhoid  vaccines.  
 
 
5.6 Duration of Therapy  
 
Duratio n of therap y will depend on individua l respo nse, evidenc e of disease  
progressio n and toleran ce. In the absence of treatment delays due to adver se events, 
treatment may continue until one of the followin g crite ria applie s: 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 48 -  
  
 
• Disease progression,  
• Intercurren t illnes s that prevent s furthe r administratio n of treatment, 
• Unaccepta ble adver se event( s), 
• Participan t decide s to withdra w from the study , or 
• General or specific changes in the participant's condition render the 
participant unaccep table for further treatment in the opini on of the 
treating investigator. 
 
5.7 Duration of Follow  Up 
Participant s will be followe d for 30 days after treat ment discontinuatio n or until 
death, whicheve r occur s first. Participant s remove d from study for unacce ptable adverse 
events  will be followed  until resolution  or sta bilization  of the adverse  event. Patients  may 
be contacted  thereafter  by phone  to assess r esolution  of toxicities,  and may be contacted 
for survival  follow  up. 
 
5.8 Crite ria for Removal  from  Study  
Participant s will be removed from study when any of the criteri a listed in 
Sectio n 5.6 applies.  The reason  for study  removal and the date the participant 
was re moved must be docu mented  in the study-specific  case report  form 
(CRF). Alternative  care options  will be discus sed with the participa nt. 
 
In the event of unusua l or life-threatenin g complications , participating 
investigato rs must immediatel y notify the Principa l Inves tigator , Dr. Mark 
Pomerant z, at (617 ) 632-6328 or (617 ) 632-3353 (page operator).  
 
 
 
6. EXPECTED TOXICITIES AND D OSING DE LAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS Dose 
delays  and modifi cations  will be made using  the following  recom mendations.  Toxicity 
assess ments will be done  using  NCI Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse Eve nts (CTCAE  
v4.0) which  is available  at http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting//ctc.ht ml). 
 
If possible,  symptoms should  be managed  symptomatically.  In the  case of toxicity,  appropriate 
medical  treatment should  be used (including  anti-emetics,  anti-diarrheals,  etc.).  
 
All adver se events  experienced  by participa nts will be collected from the time of the  first dose of 
study  treatment, through  the study  and until the final study  visit. Participa nts continui ng to 
experience  toxicity  at the off study  visit may be contacted  for additional  assessments until the 
toxicity  has resolved  or is deemed irreversible.  
 
Phase I Dose Esca lation Cohort:  
 
Individua l patien t dose reduction s for toxicit y will be determine d by initia l startin g dose level 
in the Phas e I dose escalat ion cohort.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 49 -  
  
 
 
 
For patient s on dose level -1 there will be 1 dose reductio n allowed:  
 
 
 
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
 
Starting  dose level  -1 400 mg PO QD 5 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
200 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QOD  
 
If a patie nt on dose level  -1 requires  more  than one dose red uction,  then the patient  will stop 
study  therapy  
 
For patient s on dose level 0 there will be only one dose reduction:  
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
 
Starting  dose level  0  
600 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
400 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QOD  
If a patient  on dose level  0 requires  more  than one dose reduction,  then the patient  will stop study 
therapy.  If a patie nt has pneumonitis  related  to everoli mus, then pazopanib  dose level  may be 
maintained  and everolimus  dose reduced  or discontinued  (see Table  6.2.3).  
 
 
For patient s on dose level +1 there will be 2 dose reduction s allowed:  
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
 
Starting  dose level  +1  
600 mg PO QD  
10 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
400 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QD 
2nd dose reduction   
200 mg PO QD   
5 mg PO QOD  
 
If a patient on dose level +1 requires more than 2 dose reductions, then the patie nt will stop study 
therapy . If a patie nt has pneumonitis  related  to everolimus, then pazopanib  dose lev el may be 
maintained  and everolimus  dose reduced  or discontinued  (see Table  6.2.3).  
 
 
For patient s on dose level +2 there will be 2 dose reduction s allowed:  
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
 
Starting  dose level  +2  
800 mg PO QD  
10 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
600 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QD 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 50 -  
  
 
 
2nd dose reduction  400 mg PO QD  5 mg PO QOD  
 
If a patient on dose level +2 requires more than 2 dose reductions, then the patie nt will stop study 
therapy . If a patie nt has pneumonitis  related  to everolimus, then pazopanib  dose lev el may be 
maintained  and everolimus  dose reduced  or discontinued  (see Table  6.2.3).  
 
 
For patient s on dose level +2A there will be 2 dose reduct ions allowed:  
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
Starting  dose level  
+2A  
800 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
600 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QOD  
2nd dose reduction   
400 mg PO QD   
discontinue  
If a patient on dose level +2A require s more than 2 dose reductions, then the patien t will stop study 
therapy . If a patie nt has pneumonitis  related  to everolimus, then pazopanib  dose lev el may be 
maintained  and everolimus  dose reduced  or discontinued  (see Table  6.2.3).  
 
Phase I expansion cohort: 
 
Individua l patien t dose reduction s for toxicit y will be determine d by initia l startin g dose level 
in the Phas e I expansion cohor t which was dose level -1 as per result s of the first phas e of the 
study. 
 
 
 
For patient s on dose level -1 there will be 1 dose reductio n allowed:  
 
 
Tabl e 6 Dose Expansio n cohort: Dose levels. 
 
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
 
Starting  dose level  -1 400 mg PO QD 5 mg PO QD 
1st dose reduction   
200 mg PO QD  
5 mg PO QOD  
If a patie nt on dose level  -1 requires  more  than one dose red uction,  then the patient  will stop 
study  therapy.  If, however,  a patient  is deriving  benefit  from  one agent,  as displayed  by stable 
disease  or better  at restaging,  and cannot  tolerate  the other,  the patient  may continue  on 
monotherapy  of the  tolerated  agent after discussion  with the overall  PI, Mark Po merantz,  MD. If 
one agent  is discontinued  for toxicity,  a patient  may dose-increase  to the standard  monotherapy 
dose (see  Table 7) of the  other  agent  after discussion  with the overall  PI. 
 
 
Table  7 Standard  Monotherapy  Dose Levels  
Dose Level  Pazopan ib Everolimus 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 51 -  
  
 
Dose level  when other 
agent  is discontinued 
due to toxicity  800 mg PO QD 10 mg PO QD 
 
 
 
If a patie nt has pneu monitis  related to everoli mus, then pazop anib dose le vel may be maint ained 
and everolimus  dose reduced  or discontinued  (see Table  6.2.3).  
 
6.1 Antic ipated Toxicities  
 
6.1.1 Everolimus  
 
Adverse ev ents most frequently  observed with everolimus are rash, sto matitis/oral mucositis, 
fatigue,  headache,  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhea.  Infections  have  not been  notably 
frequent  or severe.  Non-infectious  pneumonitis  has also  been observed.  The majority  of these 
AEs have  been  of mild to moderate  severity  (CTC grade  1-2). Overall,  the most frequently 
observed  laboratory  abnormalities  include  reduced blood  counts, hyperli pidemia mostly 
reported  as hypercholesterole mia and/or  hypertriglyceride mia. 
 
Hyperlipide mia was reported  as a serious adverse  reaction.  It is a recognized  side-effect  of 
rapamycins.  Use of lipid -lowering  drugs should  be associated  with dietary  recom mendations. 
Monitoring  of blood  lipid levels  requires  patients  to be fasting  so that  this aspect  must be 
verified  when interpreting results.  
 
Hyperglyce mia was reported  as a serious adv erse reaction.  Similarly,  the fasting  state of 
patients  should  be verified  when interpreting  results.  
 
Pneu monitis  is a recognized  adverse  effect  of rapamycins  (siroli mus, temsirolimus, and 
everoli mus). Numerous  case reports  in the literature  suggest that  rapamycin-associated 
pneu monitis  is relatively  unaggres sive, limited in extent,  and reversi ble upon drug 
discontinuation.  The term ‘pneu monitis’ is used here  to describe  non-infectious,  nonmalignant 
infiltration  in the lungs  which  is evident  radiologically.  More precise  diagnosis  should  follow 
histocytological  examinat ion following  lung biopsy,  generally  during  bronchoscopy  which 
may or may not be symptomatic. Advice  on the  manage ment of pneu monitis  has been 
provided  in Table  6.2.3. In  oncology  studies  with everoli mus, severe  pneu monitis  suspected  as 
drug-related has been  reported  as a serious adv erse event on 13 occasions  and additionally in  
the following  associated  preferred  terms including  acute respirat ory distress  syndrome (n=2),  
alveolitis  (n=1) and allergic alveolitis  (n=1),  interstitial  lung disease  (n=10),  lung infiltration  
(n=23),  cryptogenic  organizing  pneu monia,  lung consolidation,  pulmonary alvealoar  
haemorrhage,  pulmonary  toxicity  and pulmonary  fibrosis (n=1,  each). One fatal  case of drug -
related  pneumonitis  was r eported  for a patie nt with metastatic  infiltrating ductal car cinoma of 
the breast  treated with 10 mg/day,  which  
developed  approxi mately  two months  after starting everolimus.  Cytology  for both  the pleural 
and pericardial  fluids  were  positive  for malignancy.  The death  was considered  possibly  related  
to the underl ying late stage  tumor and study drug. Additio nally, one patient  treated  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 52 -  
  
 
with 10 mg/day died due to severe  acute  respiratory  distress  syndro me and septic  shock. 
Thoracic  CT scan demonstrated  condensation  in the majority  of the left lower lobe and 
frosted  glass appearance  in the left upper  lobe,  lingula,  and right lung.  Along with  the cases 
of non -infectious  pneu monitis,  serious opportunistic  infecti ons have  also been  reported in 
cancer  patients treated  with everolimus:  mycobactriu m, aspergillus,  and fatal candid al sepsis, 
and fatal pneu mocystis  carnii  in particular.  Because everolimus,  as other  rapamycins,  inhibits 
proliferation  of activated  lymphocytes  and reduces  neutrophil  counts,  treatment with 
everoli mus must  be considered  as predisposing  patients to the risk of i nfection.  This risk will 
be higher  in patie nts severely  immunoco mpromised because  of their underlying  disease  and/or 
co-medications.  Outco me may be fatal in case of serious infections.  
 
A reduction  in blood  cell counts  is frequent  when  everoli mus therapy  is initiated.  Without 
clinical significance  and infrequentl y, anemia and thrombocytopenia  have  been  reported.  In 
heavily  pretreated  patie nts with aggressive  lymphoma, the incidence  of grade  3 ane mia, 
neutropenia,  and thrombocytopenia  was reported  to be 11%, 16%, and  30%, respectively. 
Serious, suspected  drug-related  hemorrhages  have  been  exceptional.  Nevertheless, 
everoli mus should  be considered  as predisposing  patients  to hemorrhage,  potentially  fatal, 
should  they develop  severe  drug-related  thrombocytopenia.  
 
Discrete,  reversible  changes  in liver enzy mes have  been  found to  occur  in numerous  patients 
during  treatment with everoli mus in oncology  clinical studies,  and in a study  in rheumatoid 
arthritis.  In oncology  studies,  these  changes  may be evident  only in patients  without  severe 
underlying  morbidity.  The increase  in transa minase’s  (AST and  ALT)  generally  appears  after 
4 weeks of treat ment. In all  but a few cases  it does not  exceed  Grade  1 (≤ 2.5 x institution  
ULN).  
 
Similarly,  mild increases  in alkaline  phosphatases  can coexist.  Spontaneous  corrections  or 
intermittent  correction  with continued treatment can occur.  Serum  biliru bin is not increased. 
In studies  of patients  with advanced  cancers,  clinically  relevant changes  in liver enzy mes 
have  been  invaria bly associated  with the presence of liver  metastases  and/or  progression of 
the underlying  cancer.  
 
Renal  failure  has been  reported  in five suspected  cases  to date.  One patient  with no 
alternative  explanation  made a complete  recovery  following  study  drug adjust ment and no 
treatment/therapy  for the  event.  The rest or the  patients had concurre nt morbiditi es, which 
might have  contributed  to the reported events.  
 
Hypophosphate mia, hypo magnese mia, hyponatre mia and hypocalce mia have  been  reported 
as serious adverse  reactions.  Electrolytes  should  be monitored  in patients  treated  with 
everoli mus. 
 
6.1.2 Pa zopanib  
 
The most common  adverse  events  (AEs) reported  to date include  diarrhea,  fatigue,  nausea, 
hyperten sion, hair color changes  (hair depig mentatio n), anorexia,  vomiting,  dysgeusia,  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 53 -  
  
 
headache,  abdo minal pain,  rash, asparta te aminontransferase  (AST) and  alanine 
aminontransferase  (ALT)  increases,  constipation,  cough,  and arthralgia.  Most of these  events 
were  Grade  1 or 2 using  the NCI Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse Events  Version  
4.0 (NCI -CTCAE). The  most frequent  Grade  3 or 4 events  were hypertension,  fatigue, 
diarr hea, and AST and  ALT  increa ses. Less common  AEs of note  include  hand -foot 
syndro me, mucositi s/stomatitis,  proteinuria, venous thrombotic  events, and bleeding. 
Intestinal perforations  and arterial  thromboses  were  uncom mon. 
 
The most common  serious adverse  events  (SAEs)  occurring  in subjects  enrolled  in pazopanib 
studies  regardless  of treat ment assign ment include  vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdo minal pain, 
hypertension/hypertensive  crisis,  dyspnea,  pleural  effusion,  pyrexia,  anemia, dehydration,  
and pulmonary  embolism.  
 
Evaluation  of the  safety  and efficacy  of pazopanib  in advanced  RCC  subjects  include  a 
recently  completed  Phase II study  in subje cts with advanced  RCC,  and a Phase III 
rando mized,  double -blind  study  against  placebo  which  completed  enrol ment in April,  2007 
and is currently  on-going.  To date,  660 subje cts with advanced/ metastatic  RCC  have  been 
enrolled  in these  two clinical  trials.  Safety data from  the Phase II RCC  trial VEG102616  
(n=225)  are summarized  here.  The most  common AEs (defined  as AEs experienced  by ≥10% 
of subjects)  regardless  of caus ality in decreasing  order  of frequency  were  diarrhea  (63%), 
fatigue  (46%), hair  color  change (43%), nausea  (42%), hypert ension  (41%), anorexia  (24%), 
dysgeusia  (24%), vo miting (20%), headache  (20%), cough  (17%), abdo minal pain (16%), 
rash (1 6%), consti pation  (15%), A LT elevation(14%),  arthralgia  (13%),  AST  elevation 
(12%), back  pain (12%), dizziness  (12%), handfoot  syndro me (11%), alopecia,  (10%), 
dyspepsia  (10%), and  peripheral  edema (10%).  The majority  of these  events  were  Grade  1 
and 2 with  hypertension  being  observed  in 9% of subjects  as a Grade  3 event.  
 
The most common  hematological  toxicities  of any grade  (graded  accor ding to NCI-CTCAE) 
include  lymphopenia  (47%), thro mbocytopenia  (28%), neutropenia  (23%), and  anemia (26%) 
with combined  Grade  3 and  4 abnormalities  occurring  in 7%, 3%, <1%,  and 4% of subjects, 
respectively.  The most common chemistry abnor mality was hyperglyce mia, observed  in 46% 
of subjects  (of which  2% were  Grade  3 and  no Grade  4). Hyponatre mia of any  grade  was 
observed  in 37% of subjects,  with Grade  3 or Grade  4 hyponatre mia in 8% of subjects. 
Hyperkale mia of any  grade  was reported  in 27% of subjects,  with Grade  3 or 4 hyperkale mia 
in 5% of subjects.  Hyponatre mia and hyperkale mia have  not occurred  concurrently  in the sa me 
subject  to indicate adrenal  insufficiency.  Elevations  in amylase  and lipase  of any  grade were  
reported  in 23% and  27% of subjects,  respectively,  with Grade  3 or Grade  4 events  in 
4% and  9% of subjects,  respecti vely. There  were  2 reports  of pancreatitis.  Increase  in TSH 
was reported  in 28% of subjects  and a decrease  in thyroxine  (T4) in 1% of subjects.  Three 
subje cts initiated  treatment with thyroid replacement therapy  (synthro id or levothyroxine) 
during  the study.  
 
ALT  elevations  of any  Grade  were  reported  in 53% of subjects  with Grade  3 and  Grade  4 
elevations  in 9% and  <1%  of subjects,  respe ctively.  AST elevations  were  reported  in 53% of 
subjects  with Grade  3 and  Grade  4 elevations  in 5% and  <1%  of subjects,  respectively.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 54 -  
  
 
Hyperbilirubine mia of any Grade  occurred  in 28% of subjects  with Grade  3 elevations  in 
<1%  of subjects.  No Grade  4 elevations  have  been  reported.  Conco mitant elevations  in 
transa minases  and bilirubin  have  been  observed  in 2 (<1%)  subjects.  Neither  of these  patients 
met the criteria for Hy’s rule.  Risk factors  that may have  contributed  to the liver dysfunction 
were  identified  in the some of these  subjects,  (e.g.,  large  mass at the porta  hepatis,  
hepatotoxic  conco mitant medications).  Liver  enzyme elevations  were  reversible  upon dose 
interruption.  Two patterns  of transaminase  changes  have  been  observed:  
(1) transa minase elevations  that decli ned over time without  dose interruption.  
(2) transa minase elevations  that declined  over time upon do se interrupti on. In some subjects, 
elevations  in transa minase recurred  upon rechalleng ing and these  subjects  were  permanently 
discontinued  from  study  treatment. 
 
Serial  adrenocorticotropic  hormone (ACTH) st imulation  tests were  conducted  in two Phase I 
and two Phase II trials  in cancer  subjects  with data available  in 47 subjects.  Twenty -one of 
them  had data beyond  24 weeks and  5 subjects  had data beyond  52 weeks. None of these  47 
subjects  had adrenal  insufficiency.  
 
Certain  uncommon AEs with  significant  clinical  consequences  reported  in pazopanib  clinical 
trials  (deno minator  for total  subject  enrolment n=1000  used for calculating  frequency)  
include  pulmonary  embolism  (0.6%), venous t hrombosis  (0.3%), venous thro mbosis  and 
pulmonary  embolism  (0.2%), serious he morrhage  (1.4%), bowel  perforation  (0.5%), 
myocardial  infarction/angina  (0.7%), cerebrovascular  acciden ts/transient  ische mia (0.6%), 
cardiac  failure  (0.2%), atrial  fibrillation  (0.3%), renal  failure  (0.8%) and  seizures  (0.3%)  
 
6.2 Toxici ty Managem ent 
 
All toxicities , both durin g and after the DLT -determinin g perio d will follow the guideline s laid 
out here in section s 6.2 and 6.3. 
For definitio n of a DLT , refer back to sectio n 5.4. 
 
6.2.1 Management  of stomatitis/ oral mucositis/mouth ulcers  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 55 -  
  
 
Adverse Dr ug Reaction Severity  Everolimus  Dose  Adju stment and Management  
Recommendations  
Stomatitis Grade 1 No d ose adjustme nt required. 
  Manage with n on-alcoh olic or salt water  (0.9%) mouth 
wash se veraltimes a day. 
 Grade 2 Temporary dose interru ption until reco very to grade ≤1. 
  Re-initiate e verolimus at same d ose. 
  If stomatitis rec urs at gra de 2, interru pt dose until reco very 
to grade ≤1. Re-initiate e verolimus at l ower dose. 
  Manage  with topical analges ic mouth treatments (e.g. 
benzocaine ,butyl aminobenzoat e, tetracaine hydro cholor ide, 
methol or phenol)with or w ithout topical corticosteroids 
(i.e. triamcinolone  oral paste )*. 
 Grade 3 Temporary dose interru ption until reco very to grade ≤1. 
  Re-initiate e verolimus at l ower dose. 
  Manage  with topical analges ic mouth treatments (i.e. 
benzocaine ,butyl aminobenzoat e, tetracaine hydro cholor ide, 
methol or phenol) with or without topical cortic osteroids 
(i.e. triamcinolone oral paste)* 
 Grade 4 Disco ntinue ever olimus and treat with appropriate medical 
therapy. 
* usi ng agents contain ing hydrogen peroxide, iodine, a nd thyme derivati ves in manage ment of stomatitis  as they 
may wors en mouth ulcers. 
 
 
 
 
Stomatitis/ oral mucositis/ mouth ulcers  due to everolimus should  be treated  using  local 
supportive  care.  Investigators  in earlier trials  have  described  the oral toxicities  associated 
with everolimus  as mouth ulcers,  rather than mucositis  or stomatitis.  If the examination 
reveals  mouth ulcers  rather  than a more  general  inflammation  of the  mouth, the adverse  
event  should  be classified  as mouth ulcers.  Please follow  the paradigm  below  for 
treatment of sto matitis/oral mucositis/mouth  ulcers: 
1. For mild toxicity  (Grade  1), use  conservative  measures  such as non-alcoholic  mouth 
wash or  salt water (0.9%) mouth wash several  times a day until resolution.  
2. For more severe  toxicity  (Grade  2 in which case patients  have  pain but are able to 
maintain  adequate  oral alimentation,  or Grade  3 in which  case patients  cannot  maintain 
adequate  oral alimentati on), the suggested  treatments  are topical  analgesic  mouth 
treatments  (i.e., local  anesthetics  such as benzocaine,  butyl aminoben zoate, 
tetracaine  hydrochlori de, menthol, or  phenol) with or without  topic al 
corticoster oids, such as tria mcinolone  oral paste 0.1% (Kenalog  in Orabase®).  
3. Agents containing  hydrogen  peroxide,  iodine,  and thyme derivatives  may tend to 
worsen mouth ulcers.  It is preferable  to avoid  these  agents.  
4. Antifungal  agents  must be avoided  unless a  fungal  infection  is diagnosed.  In particular, 
syste mic imidazole  antifungal  agents  (keto conazole,  fluconazole,  itraconazole,  etc.) 
should  be avoided  in all patients  due to their strong inhibition  of everoli mus 
metabolis m, thereby  leading  to higher  everoli mus exposures. Therefore,  topical  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 56 -  
  
 
antifungal  agents  are preferred  if an infect ion is diagnosed.  Similarly,  antiviral  agents 
such as acyclovir  should  be avoided  unless  a viral infection  is diagnosed.  
 
Note:  Stomatitis/ oral mucositis  should be appropriately  graded  using  the functional 
grading  given  on the  NCI-CTC for adverse  events,  CTCAE  v 4.0.  Dose reductions  are 
made according  to section 6.3.1 (Non -hematological  toxicity) and Section  6.3.3.  
 
6.2.2 Management  of hyperlipidemia  & hyperglycemia  
 
 
 
Adverse Dr ug Reaction Severity  Everolimus  Dose  Adju stment and Management  
Recommendations  
Meta bolic events 
(e.g. 
hyperglycemia, 
dyslipidemia) Grade 1 No dose adjustme nt required. 
Initiate ap propriate medical therapy and monitor. 
 
 
 
Grade 2 No dose adjustme nt required. 
Manage  with appropriate medical t herapy and monitor. 
Grade 3 Temporary  dose interruption. 
Re-initiate e verolimus at l ower dose. 
Manage  with appropriate medical t herapy and monitor. 
Grade 4 Disco ntinue ever olimus and treat with appropriate 
medical therapy.  
 
 
 
Treat ment of hyperlipide mia should  take into account  the pre-treatment status  and dietary  habits 
of the patient.  Grade  2 or higher  hypercholest erolemia (>300  mg/dL  or 7.75 mmol/L) or  grade  2 
hypertriglyceride mia or higher  (>2.5x  upper  normal limit) should  be treated with  a 3-hydroxy -3- 
methyl -glutaryl (HMG) -CoA  reduct ase inhibitor  (e.g. atorvastat in, pravastatin,  fluvastatin)  or 
appropriate  triglyceride -lowering  medication,  in addition  to diet. 
 
Note:  Conco mitant therapy  with fibrates  and an HMG -CoA  reductase  inhibitor is associated  with 
an increased  risk of a rare but serious skeletal  muscle  toxicity  manifested by rhabdo myolysis, 
markedly  elevated  creatine  phosphokinase  (CPK)  levels  and myoglobinuria, acute  renal  failure 
and sometimes death.  The risk versus  benefit  of using  this therapy  should  be deter mined for 
individual  patients  based  on their  risk of ca rdiovascular  complications  of hyperlipide mia. 
 
Dyslipide mia (including  hypercholesterole mia and hypertriglyceride mia) has been  reported  in 
patients  taking  everolimus.  Monit oring of blood  cholester ol and triglycerides prior to the  start of 
everoli mus therapy  and perio dically  thereafter  as well as manage ment with  appropriate  medical 
therapy  is recommended.  
 
Hyperglyce mia has been  reported  in patients  taking  everoli mus. Monitoring  of fasting  serum 
glucose  is  recom mended prior  to  the  start of  everoli mus and  periodic ally thereafter.  More 
frequent  monitoring  is recom mended when  everoli mus is co-administer ed with  other  drugs  that 
may induce  hyperglyce mia. Optimal glyce mic control  should  be achie ved before  starting  a 
patient  on everoli mus. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 57 -  
  
 
 
6.2.3 Management  of non-infectio us pneumonitis  
 
Both  asymptomatic radiological  changes  (grade 1) and  symptomatic non-infectious 
pneu monitis  (grade  2 = not interfering with activities  of daily  living  or grade 3 = 
interfering  with activities  of daily  living  and oxygen  indicated)  have  been  noted  in patients  
receiving  everolimus  therapy.  Non-infectious  pneu monitis has been  associated with  
everolimus  and other  mTOR inhibitors  (Atkins 2004). In order  to monitor  for 
asymptomatic (grade 1) pul monary  infiltrates, a chest  X-ray is required if a CT scan of 
chest  is not used for bi -monthly  disease  evaluations.  Additional  chest  CT scans may be 
perfor med, when clinically  necessary.  If noninfectious  pneumonitis  develops,  a 
consultation  with a pulmonologist  should  be considered.  If the  patient develops  grade  3 
pneu monitis,  treatment with everolimus  should  be interru pted and the patie nt should  be 
treated  as medically  indicated  (short course  corticosteroids,  oxygen,  etc). Manage ment of 
non-infecti ous pneu monitis  suspected  to be associated  with everoli mus and dose 
modifications  instructions  are provided  in Table  6.2.3.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 58 -  
  
 
Table 6.2.3  Mana gement of non -infectious 
pneumonitis  
 
Worst  grade 
pneumonitis   
Suggested  investigations  Management  of 
pneumonitis   
everolimus  dose  adjustment  
Grade  1 CT scans  with lung windows  and 
pulmona ry function  testing  including: 
spiro metry, DLCO, and room  air O2 
saturation  at rest. Repeat chest x-ray/CT 
scan every 2 Cycles  until return to 
baseli ne. 
Grade  2 CT scan with lung windows.  Consider 
pulmona ry function  testing  includes: 
spirometry, DLCO, and room  air O2 
saturation  at rest. Consider  a 
bronchosco py with biopsy and/or  BAL. 
Monitoring  at each visit until return to ≤ 
grade  1 or baseline. Return to initial 
monitoring  frequency if no  recur rence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  3                  CT   scan   with   lung   windows   and 
pulmona ry function  testing includes: 
spiromet ry, DLCO,  and room  air O2 
saturation  at rest. Monitoring at each 
visit until return to  ≤ grade  1. Return to 
initial  monitoring frequency  if no 
recurre nce. Br onchosco py with biopsy 
and/or  BAL  is recommended.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  4                  CT   scan   with   lung   windows   and 
required p ulmona ry function testing, if 
possible,  inclu des: spiromet ry, DLCO, 
and room  air O2 saturation at  rest. 
Monitoring  at each visit until return to ≤ 
grade  1. Return to initial monitoring 
frequency  if        no        recurrence. 
Bronchosco py with biopsy and/or BAL  No specif ic therapy 
is requi red 
 
 
 
 
Symptomatic only. 
Consider 
corticosteroids 
and/or  other 
supportive  therapy if 
symptoms are 
troublesome.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consider 
corticosteroids  if 
infective   origin   is 
ruled  out.  Taper  as 
medically indicated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consider  
corticosteroids  if 
infective   origin   is 
ruled  out.  Taper  as 
medically indicated. No dose adjustment  required for 
Pazopanib  or everolimus. 
Initiate approp riate monitorin g. 
 
 
 
Rule  out infection and consider 
interru ption of everolimus  (and 
optional  pazopanib)  until symptoms 
improve  to Grade ≤ 1. 
Re-initiate everolimus at one dose 
level lowe r. 
Discontinue  everolimus if failure to 
recover  within ≤ 28 da ys. 
Pazopanib  may resume  at the 
discretion  of the treating  physician 
and principal investigat or once 
toxicity  is reco vered to ≤ Grade  1 
even  if evero limus is discontinued.  
Rule  out infection and interrupt 
everolimus  and pazopa nib until 
symptoms improve  to Grade  ≤ 1. 
Consider  re-initiating everolimus at 
one dose level lower (appro ximately  
50% lower  than the dose previously 
administered  depending  on individual  
clinical circu mstances)  
Discontinue  everolimus if failure to 
recover  within ≤ 28 da ys. 
If toxicity recurs at Grade  3, con sider 
discontinuation  of everolimus.  
Pazopanib  may resume  at the 
discretion  of the treating  physician 
and principal investigat or once 
toxicity  is reco vered to ≤ Grade  1 
even  if evero limus is discontinued.  
 
Rule  out  infection  and  discontinue 
evero limus. 
 
Pazopanib  may  resume  at  the 
discretion  of  the  treating  physician 
and  principal  investigator  once 
toxicity  is  recovered  to  ≤  Grade  1 
even  if evero limus is discontinued.  
  is recommended  if possible.    
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 59 -  
  
 
* A bronchoscopy  with biopsy  and/or  bronchoalveolar  lavage  is recom mended.  
 
 
6.2.4  Management  of hepatitis  reactivation  / flare  
 
Reactivation of  Hepatitis  B (HBV)  has been  observed in patients  with cancer receiving 
chemotherapy  (Yeo  2004).  Sporadic  cases  of Hepatitis B  reactivation  have  also been  seen in this 
setting  with everoli mus. Use of antivir als during anti-cancer  therapy  has been  shown  to reduce 
the risk of Hepatitis  B virus  reacti vation  and associated morbidity  and mortality  (Loomba  2008). 
A detailed  assess ment of Hepatitis  B/C medical  history and risk factors  must be done  for all 
patients  at screening,  with testing  perfor med prior  to the first dose of everoli mus. 
 
Monito ring and prophylactic  treatment  for hepatitis  B reactivation  
 
Table  6.2.4.1  provides  detail  of monitoring  and prophylactic ther apy according  to the screening 
results  of viral  load and serolo gic markers  testing.  
 
Table  6.2.4.1 Action  to be taken  based on screening  hepatitis  B results  
 
Test Result  Result  Result  Result  Result  
HBV-DNA + + or - - - - 
HBsAg  + or - + - - - 
HBsAb  + or - + or - + 
and no prior HBV  
vaccination  + or - - 
or + with prior 
HBV  vaccination  
HBcAb  + or - + or - + or - + - 
Recomme ndation Prop hylaxis trea tment should 
be started 1-2 weeks prior to 
first dose of everolimus 
 
 
Monitor HBV-DNA 
approximately every  4-8 
weeks  No prop hylaxis 
 
Monitor HBV-DNA 
approximately every  3-4 we eks No specific ac tion 
 
Antiviral  prophylaxis  therapy  should  continue  for at least 4 weeks  after last dose of everoli mus. 
For HBV reactivation  definition  and manage ment guidelines,  see Table  6.2.4.2  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 60 -  
  
 
Table  6.2.4 .2 Guidelines  for the  manag ement of hepatitis  B reactivation  
 
HBV  reactivation (with or without clinical si gns and  symptoms)* 
 
For patients  with baseline 
results:  
Positi ve HBV -DNA  
OR 
positive HBsAg  
-------------------------------------- 
react ivation  is defin ed as: 
[Increase  of 1 log in H BV- 
DNA  relati ve to baseline 
HBV-DNA value OR new 
appe arance of measurable 
HBV-DNA] Treat : Start a sec ond antiviral medication 
AND 
Interrupt everolimus administration until res olution: 
1. ≤ baseline  HBV-DNA levels 
If resolution occurs within  ≤ 28 days, everolimus should be re-started at one 
dose lower, if  available.  If the patient  is already rece iving the lowest  dose of 
everoli mus according  to the protocol, the  patient should  restart at the same 
dose after res olution. Both antiviral t herapies sh ould continue at least  4 wee ks 
after last dose of ev erolimus. 
If resolution occurs >  28 days  Patients should dis continue everolimus but 
continue both antiviral t herapies at lea st 4 weeks after last dose of everolimus. 
For patients  with baseline 
results:  
Negative HBV-DNA and 
HBsAg 
AND 
[Positi ve HBsAb (with no prior 
history of vac cination against 
HBV), OR positive HBcAb ] 
------------------------------------- 
Reactivation is defin ed as: 
New  appe arance of measurable  
HBV-DNA Treat  : Start f irst antiviral medication 
AND 
Interrupt  everolimus administrati on until res olution: 
2. ≤ undetecta ble (negative) HBV-DNA le vels 
If resolution occurs within  ≤ 28 days, everolimus should be re-started at one 
dose lower, if  available.  If the patient  is already rece iving the lowest  dose of 
everoli mus according  to the protocol, the  patient should  restart at the same 
dose after reso lution. Antiviral therapy should  continue at least 4 wee ks after 
last dose  of everolimus. 
If resolution occurs >  28 days  Patients should dis continue everolimus but 
continue antiviral therapy at least 4 wee ks after last d ose of everolimus. 
* All reacti vations of HBV are to be record ed as grade  3 (e.g. CT CAE Version 3.0 - Investigations/Other: Viral 
Reactivation),  unless  considered life threat ening by the investigator, in which case they should be recor ded as 
grade 4. Date  of viral reacti vation is the date on which the  rise or  reappear ance of H BV-DNA was  recorded. 
 
Monito ring for hepatitis  C flare  
 
The following  two categories  of patients  should  be monitored  every  4–8 weeks for HCV flare:  
 
• Patie nts with detectable HCV  RNA -PCR test  at scree ning. 
 
• Patients  known  to have  a history  of HCV  infection,  despite  a negative  viral load test at 
screening  (including  those  that were  treated  and are considered  ‘cured’)  
 
For definitions  of HCV flare  and actions  to be taken  in the event  of a flare,  please  refer  to 6.2.4.3  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 61 -  
  
 
Table  6.2.4.3  Guidelines  for the  manage ment of hepatitis  C flare 
 
Baseline resu lts HCV f lare definitio n* HCV f lare management  
Detectable  HCV -RNA > 2 log10 IU/mL i ncrease in HCV -RNA  
AND 
ALT  elevation > 5 x ULN or 3 x baseli ne 
level, w hichever is  higher. Disco ntinue ever olimus 
Knowled ge of past hepatitis  C 
infection with no detecta ble 
HCV-RNA  New appe arance of  detectable HCV -RNA  
AND 
ALT  elevation > 5 x ULN or 3 x baseli ne 
level, w hichever is  higher. Disco ntinue ever olimus 
* All flares  of HCV are to be rec orded as grade 3 (e.g. CTCAE Vers ion 3.0 - Investi gations - Other: Viral Flare), 
unless  considered life threatening by the investigator; in which case they should be recorded as  grade  4. Date of 
viral flare is the date on which both the clinical cri teria described above were met. (e.g., for a patient whose 
HCV-RNA increased by  2 logs on 01 JAN 2011 and whose ALT  reached > 5 x U LN on 22 J AN 2011, the date 
of viral flare is 22  JAN 20 11). 
 
 
 
6.2.5 Management  of infections  
 
Everoli mus has immunosuppressive  properties  and may predispose  patients to bacterial, 
fungal,  viral or protozoal  infections,  including  infections  with opportunistic pathogens. 
Locali zed  and  syste mic  infectio ns,  inclu ding  pneu monia,  other  bacterial  infections, 
invasive  fungal  infections,  such  as  asperg illosis  or  candidiasis  and  viral  infections 
inclu ding reactivation of  hepatitis  B virus,  have  been  descri bed in patients  taking 
everoli mus Some of  these  infections  have  been  severe  (e.g. leading  to respiratory  or 
hepatic  failure)  and occasionally  have  had a fatal outco me. 
 
Physicians and  patients  should  be aware of the increased risk  of infection  with everolimus 
Treat  pre-existing  infections  prior to starting  treatment with everolimus. While taking 
everoli mus, be vigilant  for symptoms  and signs  of infection; if  a diagnosis of  infection  is 
made, institute  appropriate  treatment promptly and consider  interrup tion or discontinuation 
of everoli mus. 
 
If a diagnosis  of invasive  syste mic fungal  infection  is made, disco ntinue everoli mus and 
treat with appropriate  antifungal  therapy.  
 
6.2.6 Management  of skin toxicity  
 
For  patients  with  grade  1  toxicity,  no  specific  supportive  care  is  usually  needed   or 
indicated.  Rash  must be reported  as an AE. Patients  with grade 2  or higher  toxicity  may be 
treated  with the following suggested suppo rtive measures  at the discretion of  the 
investigat or: oral minocycli ne, to pical tetrac ycline,  topical clinda mycin, topical silver 
sulfadiazine,  diphenhydra mine, oral prednisolone  (short  course),  topical  corticosteroids,  or 
pimecroli mus. 
 
6.3 Dose Modifications /Delays  
 
6.3.1 General dose modification /Delays 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 62 -  
  
 
Dose modi fication s for toxiciti es not otherwis e covere d in section 6.2 are listed in the table 
below . Patient s who do not recove r to grade 2 or less toxicit y within 28 days will be removed 
from protoco l therap y excep t wher e noted (ie. pneumonitis) . In addition , patie nts may hold 
study  intervention  (pazopanib  and everoli mus) for greater  than 28 days if  the patient 's 
physician  and the overall  principal  investigator,  Mark Po merantz,  MD, agree  that the patie nt 
is deriving  clinical  benefit  from  the study  drugs.  Dose modi fication s for speci fic toxicitie s are 
covere d in section s 6.2 and 6.3. 
 
All toxicities , both durin g the DLT perio d and after it has been completed , will follow the 
guideline s laid out here in section s 6.2 and 6.3. 
 
For definitio n of a Dose Limiting Toxicity , refer back to sectio n 5.4. 
 
Non-hematologic al toxicity 
Toxici ty Actions 
Non-Infectious Pneu monitis Please r efer to section  6.2.3 
Reactivation of HBV or HCV flare Please  refer to secti on 6.2.4 
Non-hematological toxicity  
Grade  2 
(except pneumon itis – refer to section 6.2.3) 
(except hypertension, p roteinuria, venous or arter ial 
thrombosis, QTc prolongation- refer  to 
secti on 6.3.2)  
(except hepatotoxicity – refer to section 6.3.3) 
(except elevated amylase and lipas e- refer to section 
6.3.5)  
If the toxicity is tole rable to the patient, maintain the 
same  dose. If the toxicity is “intole rable” to patient, 
interrupt pa zopanib  and everolimus until  recovery to 
grade ≤1. Th en reint roduce pazopanib and 
everolimus  at same  dose. If event returns  to 
“intolerable”  grade  2, then interrupt  pazopanib and 
everolimus  until recovery to g rade ≤1. Then 
reintroduce  pazopanib  and everolimus  at one dose 
level lower. If event is recu rrent “intolerable”  grade  
2 despite two dose  redu ctions, dis continue pazopanib 
and eve rolimus.  
Grade  3 or 4 
(except hyperlipidemia1) 
(except pneumon itis – refer to section 6.2.3) 
(except hypertension, p roteinuria, venous or arter ial 
thrombosis, QTc prolongation- refer  to section 6.3.2) 
(except hepatotoxicity – refer to section 6.3.3) Interrupt  pazopanib  and everolimus until  recovery to 
grade ≤1. Th en reint roduce pazopanib and 
everolimus  at one dose  level  lower. No  more than  2 
dose  redu ctions al lowed. 
Stomatitis /  oral mu cositis /  mouth  ulcers  See sect ion 6.2.3 Management of sto matitis / oral 
mucositis /  mouth ulcers 
Recurrence  of grade 3 toxic ity after  dose reduct ion Reduce d ose to the next l ower dose le vel, if available. 
The l owest possible d ose level of everolimus is  5 mg 
every other d ay (2.5 mg d aily). Bel ow this le vel, 
everolimus  must be dis continued.  
 Interrupt  everolimus  admin istration 
until re solution to ≤ grade 1 or baseline  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 63 -  
  
 
Intolerable  grade 2 mucositis, or grade  3 AE, except 
hype rglycemia or hype rtriglyceridemia  or 
hyper cholesterolemia  (see Section 6.2.2.)  grade / value. 
If resolution occurs within  ≤ 7 days, 
everolimus  should  be re-started  at the 
dose le vel pr ior to interrupti on. 
If resolution takes  > 7 days, or if event r ecurs 
within 28  days, h old everolimus until reco very 
to ≤ grade 1 or baseline grade / value and 
reintroduce everolimus  at one dose l evel 
lower, if  available. 
Patients will be withdr awn from the study if they f ail 
to recover  to  grade 1 or baseline  grade / value 
within 28  days. 
Any other  grade  4 Hold everolimus until recovery to grade  1 or 
baseline  value 
Reintr oduce e verolimus at  one d ose level lower, if 
available. 
Grade 3 or 4 clinic al liver failure ( asteri xis or 
encephalopathy/coma)  Disco ntinue  everolimus  and Pazopanib 
Recurrence  of intolerable  grade 2 mucositis or grade 
3 event after dose  reduct ion Reduce dose  to the next l ower dose le vel, if 
available. The l owest  possible d ose le vel of 
everolimus is  2.5 mg daily. Below this  
level, everol imus must  be discontinued.  If 
toxicity recurs  at Grade 3, consider 
disco ntinuation. 
Recurrence  of grade 4 after  dose  redu ction Disco ntinue  everolimus  and Pazopanib 
Any non-hematologic 
toxicity requi ring 
everolimus  interrupt ion 
for > 28 days Disco ntinue  everolimus  and Pazopanib 
1Grade 3 hyperlipidemia (hypercholeste rolemia and/or hypertrigl yceridemia) should be  managed usi ng medical 
therapies wi thout dose reduction (see Section 6.2.2). 
 
Hemat ological  toxicity 
 
Grade  2 Th rombocytopenia (p latelets  <75 -50x109/L) 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  3 or 4 Throm bocytopenia (platelets <50 
x109/L) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  1& 2 Neut ropenia (neutrophils  ≥ 1 x 109/L) 
Grade  3 Neutropen ia (neutrophils <1, ≥0.5 x109/L) Interrupt  pazopanib  and everolimus until  recovery to 
grade ≤1 (≥75 x109/L). Then  reintroduce  pazopanib 
and everolimus at init ial dose. If thr ombocytopenia 
again returns to grade 2, interrupt pazopanib and 
everolimus  until recovery to g rade ≤1. Then 
reintroduce everolimus  at one d ose level lower.  No 
more  than two dose redu ctions are allowed. 
 
Interrupt  pazopanib  and everolimus until  recovery to 
grade ≤1 (platelets  ≥ 75 x109/L). Then resume 
pazopanib and eve rolimus  at one dose level lower.  If 
grade  3 or 4 thrombo cytopenia recu rs, discontinue 
pazopanib and eve rolimus.  
 
 
 
 
No modification  of dose.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 64 -  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  4 Neutropen ia (neutrophils  < 0.5 x109/L) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  3 febrile ne utropenia  (not lif e-threateni ng) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade  4 febrile ne utropenia  (life-threaten ing)  
 
Interrupt  everolimus  and Pazopanib  until  resolut ion 
to grade ≤1 or baseline v alue 
If AE re solution occu rs ≤ 7 days,  
reintroduce everolimus  and pazopanib at 
the same dose  level.  
If AE re solution occu rs > 7 days  (within  28 days), 
reintroduce everolimus  and pa zopanib at one dose 
level lower, if  available. Discontinue  patient  from 
study  therapy if recurr ent grade  3 or greater 
neut ropenia after  two dose reduct ions. 
 
 
Interrupt  pazopanib  and everolimus until  recovery to 
grade ≤ 1 (neutrophils ≥ 1.5 x 109/L). Then resume 
pazopanib and eve rolimus  at one lower  dose level. If 
grade 3 or grade 4 neutropenia occurs  despite two 
dose  redu ctions, dis continue pazopanib and 
everolimu s. 
 
 
 
 
 
Hold  further pazopanib and eve rolimus  until the 
ANC ≥ 1,500/mm3 a nd fever has resolved  and 
antib iotics  are disco ntinued. Then re sume pazopanib 
and everolimus at  one dose level lower.  If febrile 
neut ropenia recurs,  disco ntinue pazopanib and 
everolimu s. 
 
 
Disco ntinue  pazopanib  and everolimu s. 
Any hematological  or non-hematological  toxici ty 
requiring  interrupt ion for ≥ 4 weeks  Disco ntinue  pazopanib  and everolimus  
 
 
 
6.3.2 Management  of hypertensio n, proteinuria,  hemorr hage/blee ding, venous and 
arterial  thrombosis, QTc  prolongation  
 
 
AE Terms  & Descript ions  
Dose Mod ification A lgorithms  
 
Hype rtension 
 
(A). As ymptomatic and pers istent 
SBP of  140 and <170 mmHg, or 
DBP  90 and < 110 mmHg, or a 
clinically si gnificant increase  in 
DBP  of 20 mmHg.  
Step 1.  Pazopanib and everolimus at the current dos e. 
Step 2. Adjust current or initiate new a ntihypertensive medicati on(s). 
Step 3. Titrate antihypertensive medication(s) during next 2 weeks 
as indicated  to achieve well-controlleda blood pres sure (B P). If BP  is 
not well-controlled  within 2 weeks, consider referral to a specialist 
and go to scenario ( B). 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 65 -  
  
 
 
AE Terms  & Descript ions  
Dose Mod ification A lgorithms  
 
(B). Asymptomatic SBP 170 
mmHg, or DBP 110 mmHg, or 
failure  to achieve well-contro lled 
BP within 2 weeks in scenario (A).  
Step 1 .Interrupt  pazopanib and everolimus. 
Step 2. Adjust current or initiate new a ntihypertensive medicati on(s). 
Step 3. Titrate antihypertensive medication(s) during next 2 weeks 
as indicated  to achieve well-controlled BP.  a 
 
Step 4. Once BP is well -controlled, dose reduce  pazop anib and 
everoli mus and restart at  one dose level lower. 
 
(C). S ymptomatic hypertension or 
recurring SBP  170 mmHg, or 
DBP  110 mmHg, despite 
modificati on of antihypertensive 
medication( s)  
Step 1. Interrupt pazopanib and everolimus 
Step 2. Adjust current or initiate new a ntihypertensive medicati on(s). 
Step 3. Titrate antihypertensive medication(s) during next 2 weeks 
as indicated  to achieve well-controlled B Pa. Referral to a specialist  
for further evaluati on and follow-up is also recommended. 
 
Step 4. Once BP is well -controlled, dose reduce  pazop anib and 
everoli mus and restart at  one dose level lower. 
 
(D). Refractory hypertensi on 
unresponsive to above 
interventions.  
Discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue follow-up per 
protocol. 
a. Well -controlled BP defined as mean SBP <140 mmHg and mean DBP  <90 mmHg. 
 
Proteinuria  
 
24-hr urine protein > 3 grams  
Step 1. Interrupt pazopanib and everolimus. 
 
Step 2. The 24-hour urine protein  will be tested wee kly until the 
level is < 3 gr ams.  Then, res tart pa zopanib and everolimus dose 
reduced one dose level.  
 
Step 3. If 24-hour urine protein ≥ 3 gra ms recurs  once,  repeat Steps  
1 and 2. 
 
Step 4.  If 24-hour urine protein ≥ 3 gra ms recurs after 2 d ose 
reductions, di sconti nue pa zopanib and everolimus 
 
Hemor rhage /Bleeding  
 
Grade 1  
Conti nue pa zopanib and everolimus with c urrent dose; monitor as 
clinically i ndicated. 
 
Grade 2  
Step 1. If pulmonary or GI bleed (o ther than hemorrhoidal  bleedi ng), 
discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue follow-up per 
protocol. Oth erwise,  interrupt pazopanib and eve rolimus until the 
AE resolved to  Grade 1. 
 
Step 2.  Restart pazop anib and everolimus; reduce  dose by one dose 
level and  consult with stu dy PI, monitor as  clinically i ndicate d. 
 
Grade 3 or 4, or 
 
Recurrent  Grade  2 event after  
Discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue with follow-up 
per protocol. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 66 -  
  
 
 
AE Terms  & Descript ions  
Dose Mod ification A lgorithms  
dose interruption/reduction.  
 
Venous Thrombosis  (DVT,  PE) 
 
Grade 2  
Continue everolimus and pa zopanib at the same dose  
 
Grade 3  
Step 1. Interrupt pazopanib and everolimus. 
Step 2. Initiate a nd monitor antic oagulation  as cli nically i ndicate d. 
Step 3.  Resume pazopanib and everolimus with one  dose reducti on 
only if all of the f ollowing criteria are met: 
 
• The subject must have  been treated  with anticoagulant at 
the desired  level of anticoagulati on for at least o ne week.  
 
• No Grade 3  or 4 or cli nically s ignific ant Grade 2, 
hemorrhagic events have occurred w hile on a nticoagulation 
treatment. 
 
Subject should be monitored  as cli nically i ndicated during 
anticoa gulation treatment a nd after resuming study treat ment. When 
treati ng with warfari n, international normalized ra tio (INR) sh ould 
be monitored wit hin three to five da ys after any ch ange in pazopanib 
and everolimus dosing (eg,  re-initiating, escalating/de-escalati ng, or 
discontinuing pazop anib and everolimus), and then at least  weekly 
until the INR is stable. The dose of warfarin (or its  derivatives) may 
need to be adjusted  to maintain the desired le vel of a nticoagulation 
 
Grade 4 and/or PE   
Discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue follow-up per 
protocol. 
 
Arter ial Thrombosis/Isch emia  
 
Any Grade  
Discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue follow-up per 
protocol. 
Prolongation of QTc  Interval: If 
the QTc is prolonged, the ECG 
should be manually read to  ensure 
accuracy  of the  reading.  The  
values below refer to manuall y-read 
ECGs.   
 
QTc   480 < 500 msec  
Conti nue pa zopanib and everolimus; monitor as clinically indicate d. 
 
QTc 500 msec  
Discontinue pazopanib a nd everolimus and continue follow-up per 
protocol. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 67 -  
  
 
6.3.3 Dose Interruptio ns/Modific ations  for Hepatotoxicity  
 
Recommendations  for everoli mus and pazopanib  dose interruptions/ modifications  in case of 
liver-related  treatment-emergent  AEs are  provided below.  As a general  rule, since  many 
subjects  are taking  multiple  concurrent  medications,  it is critical  to (a) do a thorough 
evaluation  of the  subject’s  concurrent  medications, and (b) identify and discontinue  those 
with known hepatotoxicity  and replace  with a non-hepatotoxic  equivalent  for the  same 
indication  if necessary.  
 
 
Event  Dose  Mod ification Algorithms 
(A). ALT  of ≤ 3.0 x upper 
limit of normal (ULN) Conti nue pa zopanib and everolimus at current dose with full panel li ver 
function tests (LFTs)3 monitored as per protocol. 
(B). ALT >3.0 x ULN to  
≤8.0 x ULN  without bilirubin 
elevation (def ined as total 
bilirubin <2.0 x ULN or  direct 
bilirubin ≤35%) and without 
hypersensiti vity symptoms 
(e.g., fever, rash) 2 1.   Conti nue everolimus and pa zopanib at current dose. 
2.   Perform  the following assessme nts for e xcluding hypersensiti vity and 
other contributing fact ors: 
• Eosinophil count 
• Viral ser ology for hepatitis A, B and  C 
• Liver imaging 
3. Monitor subject closely for cl inical signs and symptoms; perform 
full panel LFTs wee kly or more fre quently if cli nically i ndicated 
until ala nine ami notransferase ( ALT)/as partate aminotransferase  
(AST) reduced to Gr ade 1. 
(C). ALT >8.0 x ULN wi thout 
bilirubin elevation (defined as 
total bilirubin <2.0 x ULN  or 
direct bilirubin ≤35%) and 
without hypersensitivity 
symptoms (e.g ., fever, rash)2 1st occurrence  
Interrupt everolimus and pazopanib until to xicity res olves to   Grade 1 
or basel ine 
2.   Perform  the following assessme nts for e xcluding hypersensiti vity and 
other contributing factors: 
• Eosinophil count 
• Viral ser ology for hepatitis A,  B, C a nd E, cyt omegalovirus, 
Epstein -Barr virus IgM antibody, or hetero phile antibody, or 
monos pot testi ng) 
• Liver imaging 
3.   Monitor su bject cl osely for cl inical sig ns and symptoms; perform full 
panel LFTs wee kly or more fre quently if clinically i ndicated  until ala nine 
aminotran sferase (ALT)/asp artate aminotran sferase  (AST) reduc ed to 
Grade 1. 
 
• * If the potential benefit for reinitiating pazopanib treat ment is 
consider ed to outweigh  the risk for hepa totoxicity, then  reintroduce 
pazopanib at a reduced dose and measure serum  liver tests weekly 
for 8 weeks.  Re-challen ge may be considered if ALL following 
criteria  are met: 
• ALT /AST  reduced to  Grade  1 
• Total bilirubin <1.5 x ULN  or direct bilirubin 35% 
• No h ypersensitivity signs  or symptoms 
• Subject is  benefiting f rom therapy. 
• Pazo panib and everolimus will be decreased  by one dose level if 
treatment resu mes. 
• If AST  or ALT  elevati on is > 2 0x ULN, everolimus should be 
discontinued if resolution takes >  7 days 
Recurrence  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 68 -  
  
 
Event  Dose  Mod ification Algorithms 
 Discontinue everolimus and pazop anib p ermanently a nd monitor subject  
close ly for clinical signs and symptoms; per form full panel LFTs  weekly or 
more fre quently if cli nically indicated.  
(D). ALT  >3.0 x ULN with 
concomitant elevation in 
bilirubin (defined  as total 
bilirubin 2.0 x ULN;  with 
direct bilirubin >3 5%) or  with 
hypersensiti vity symptoms 
(e.g., fever, rash). 1.   Discontinue everolimus and pazop anib immediately  
2.   Consult a gast roenterologist /  hepa tologist a nd perform the following 
assess ments to i dentify potential c o-factors:  
• Eosinophil count 
• Viral ser ology for hepatitis A,  B, C a nd E, cyt omegalovirus, 
Epstein -Barr virus IgM antibody, or hetero phile antibody, or 
monos pot testi ng) 
• Anti-nuclear a ntibody, anti-smooth muscle a ntibody, anti- 
mitochondrial a ntibody 
• Serum  creatinine  phosphokinase for poss ible muscle injury caus ed 
LFT elevat ion 
• Liver imaging (ultraso und or CT scan)  
3.   Monitor su bject cl osely for cl inical sig ns and symptoms; perform full 
panel LFTs wee kly or more fre quently if clinically i ndicated  until LFTs 
reduc ed to Gr ade 1. 
If everolimus 
For isolated t otal bilirubin 
elevati on wit hout concurrent 
ALT increas es (defined as 
ALT < 3 X ULN) 1.   Isolated hyperbilirubinemia (ie in  the absence of ele vated ALT  or other 
signs/symptoms of li ver inj ury) d oes not require dose modificati on. 
Pazopanib inhibits UGT1A1 and OATP1 B1, which can c ause el evation 
of indirect (unconjugat ed) bi lirubin in the absence of li ver injury. 
2.   If bilirubin is > 1.5 x ULN in the absence  of ALT ele vation, fractio nation 
of bilirubin elevation should be perfor med.  If the bilirubin is 
predominantly  indirect  (unconjugated), continue  everolimus and 
pazopanib at the sa me dose. If bilirubin is >35% direct (co njugated),  
stop ev erolimus and pazopanib and further evaluati on for underlying 
cause  of cholestasis should be performed. 
3.   If the subject is benefiting  from  the study trea tment, contact Pr incipal 
Investi gator for possible re-challeng e. Re-treatment may be  considered if  
ALL  following criteria are met: 
• ALT <  3X ULN 
• Total bilirubin <1.5 x ULN  or direct bilirubin 35% 
• No h ypersensitivity signs  or symptoms 
• Subject is  benefiting f rom therapy. 
Pazo panib and everolimus will be decreased  by one dose level if 
treatment resu mes. 
a. 3Full panel LFTs i nclude: AST,  ALT, alkaline  phosphatase, -GT (GGT)  and total 
bilirubin. 
 
2 Should HCV flare be confirme d, the guidelines for flare  must take pre cedence (See section 6.2.4) 
* Please refer to the Pazopanib Investigator’s Brochure, Summ ary of Data  and Guidance for Investigat or, Warnings 
and Precautions, H epatic Effects for information about rechallenge  dose 
 
 
 
6.3.4 Dose modificatio ns for elevated  amylase  and lipase 
Event  Dose  Mod ification Algorithm 
Grade 2 elevation of a mylase  
and lipase without symptoms 
of pancreatitis  Monitor a mylase and lipase  every other week, continue study therapy at the same 
dose level 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 69 -  
  
 
Grade 2 elevation of a mylase  
and lipase with sy mptoms of 
pancreatitis  Hold study therapy until both labs and symptoms are gra de 1 or less. Consider 
restarting study t herapy with a dose reduction  if the patient is known to be deriving 
clinical benefit 
Grade 3 elevation of a mylase 
and lipase without symptoms 
of pancreatitis  Check a mylase and  lipase wee kly until grade 2 or less, monitor for sy mptoms 
weekly (phone contact or  visit) u ntil grade 2 or less, and  continue study thera py at 
the same dose  level.  Consider GI consultation. 
Grade 3 elevation of a mylase  
and lipase with sy mptoms of 
pancreatitis  Hold study therapy until both laboratory test ing and sy mptoms are grade 1 or less.  
GI consultation is recommended.  Consider restarting study therapy with a dose 
reduction  if the patient is known to be deriving cli nical b enefit f rom treatment. 
Grade 4 elevation of a mylase  
and lipase without symptoms 
of pancreatitis  Hold study therapy until grade 2 or less, r estart with o ne dose-level reduction if the 
patient is  known to be  deriving clinical benefit from treatment. GI c onsultation 
recommended.  
Grade 4 elevation of a mylase  
and lipase with sy mptoms of 
pancreatitis  Hold study therapy until both laboratory test ing and sy mptoms are grade 1 or less.  
GI consultation is recommended.  Consider restarting study therapy with a dose 
reduction  if the patient is known to be deriving cli nical b enefit f rom treatment. 
 
 
 
 
7. DRUG FORMULATION  AND ADMINI STRATION  
 
 
7.1 Everolimus  
Everoli mus will be provided  by Novartis.  Tablets  are blister  packed  under  aluminum  foil in units 
of 10 tablets,  which  should  be opened  only at the time of ad ministration,  as everoli mus is both 
hygroscopic  and light sensiti ve. 
 
7.1.1 Description  
 
 
everoli mus, an inhibitor  of mTOR, is an antineoplastic  agent. The chemical name of 
everoli mus is (1R,9S,12S,15R,16E, 18R,19R,21R,23S,24E,26E,28E,30S,32S,35R) -1,18- 
dihydroxy -12-{(1R) -2-[(1S,3R,4R) -4-(2-hydroxyethoxy) -3-methoxycyclohexyl] -1- 
methylethyl} -19,30 -dimethoxy -15,17,21,23,29,35 -hexa methyl -11,36 -dioxa -4-aza- 
tricyclo[30.3.1.04,9]hexatriaconta -16,24,  26,28 -tetraene -2,3,10,14,20 -pentaone.  The 
molecular  formula is C53H83NO14 and the molecular  weight  is 958.2.  
 
7.1.2 Form  
Everolimus is supplied as tablets for oral adminis tratio n contain ing 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 7.5 
mg,  and 10 mg of everoli mus together with butylated hydroxyto luene , magnesium 
stearate, lactose monohydra te, hyprom ellose, crospov idone and lactose anhydrous as 
inactive ingredients. Everoli mus 5 mg tablet is a white to slightly yellow elong ated 
tablet with bevele d edge and no score engrave d with “5” on one side and “NVR ” on 
the other. Everoli mus 10 mg tablet is a white to slightl y yello w elongat ed tablet with 
bevele d edge and no score engrave d with “UHE ” on one side and “NVR” on the other 
side. 
 
7.1.3  Storage and Stability 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 70 -  
  
 
Store  everoli mus tablets  at 25° C (77°F);  excursions  permitted between  15°–30°C  (59°– 
86°F). Store  in the original  container,  prote ct from  light and moisture.  Keep this and all 
drugs out  of the  reach  of children.  Everolimus is both hygroscopic  and light-sensitive.  
 
7.1.4  Handling  
Qualified  personnel,  familiar  with procedures  that minimize undue  exposure  to 
themselves  and the environ ment, should  undertake  the preparation,  handling,  and safe 
disposal  of the  chemotherapeutic  agent  in a self-contained  and protective  environ ment. 
Everoli mus tablets  should  not be crushed.  Direct  contact  of crushed  tablets with the skin 
or mucous  membranes  should  be avoided.  If such contact  occurs,  wash thoroughly  as 
outlined in the references.  Study  personnel  should  avoid  exposure  to crushed tablets.  
 
7.1.5  Compatibility  
N/A 
 
7.1.6 Availability  
Ever olimus is considered an investigatio nal agent in this study and will be suppl ied free- 
of-charg e from Novartis.  
 
 
7.1.7 Preparation  
N/A 
 
 
7.1.8 Adm inistration  
Patients  will be instructed  to take the evero limus in the morning,  without  food, at  least one 
hour before  or two hours after  a meal, at the same time as the  Pazopanib.  
 
7.1.9   Order ing 
Everolimus can be ordered from Novarti s using a drug order form e-mailed to Novart is. 
 
7.1.1 0  Accou ntability 
All missed  doses must be docu mented  in the drug accountability  log and the subject’s 
medical  record.  Unused agent  that is returned  by subject  is not held,  but destroyed 
accor ding to institutional  policy.  The investiga tor, or a responsibl e party desig nated by 
the investi gator, must maint ain a careful record  of the  inventory  and disposition  of the 
agent.  This should  be kept current  and contain:  
• Dates  and quantities  of investigati onal product  received  from  Novartis  
• Packaging  lot numbers for product  received  
• Subject’s  identification 
• Date  and quantity  of investigational  product  dispensed  
• The initials  of the dispenser 
 
7.1.1 1  Destructio n and Return  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 71 -  
  
 
At the end of the study , unus ed supplie s of everolimus shoul d be destroyed according 
to institutiona l policie s unles s otherwi se instructe d by supplie r Novartis. 
Destruction/retur n will be documente d in the Drug Accountabilit y Recor d Form.  
 
 
7.2 Pa zopanib  
 
7.2.1 Descri ption 
Pazopanib, 5-[[4-[(2,3 -Dimethyl-2H=indazol -6-yl)-2-pyrim idinyl]amino]-2- 
methylbenzenesulfonam ide monohydro chloride, is an orally bioavailable angiog enesis 
inhibitor. Its molecula r formula is C21H23N7O2S ●HCl. Excipients in the tablet 
include microcrystall ine cellulose, povidone, sodium starch glycolate, magnesium 
state, and a film-coat. 
 
 
7.2.2 Form 
Pazopanib  monohydrochloride  is supplied  as a series  of aqueous  film-coated  tablets 
containing  200mg and 400mg of the  freebase:  
• 200mg,  oval-shaped,  white,  packaged  in bottles  containing  34 tablets  each 
• 400mg,  oval-shaped,  white,  packaged  in bottles  containing  68 tablets  each 
 
7.2.3 Storag e and Stability  
Pazopanib  200mg and 400mg should  be stored  up to  25°C.  Pazopanib  has a  48 month 
shelf-life. 
 
 
7.2.4 Handling 
Qualified  personnel,  familiar  with procedures  that minimize undue  exposure  to 
themselves  and the environ ment, should  undertake  the preparation,  handling,  and safe 
disposal  of the  chemotherapeutic  agent in a self-contained  and protective  
environ ment. Pazopanib  tablets  should  not be crushed.  Direct  contact  of crushed 
tablets with  the skin or mucous  membranes  should  be avoided.  If such contact  occurs, 
wash thoroughly  as outlined  in the refer ences.  Study  personnel  should  avoid  exposure 
to crushed  tablets.  
 
7.2.5 Compatibility 
N/A 
 
7.2.6 Availability 
Pazopanib will be provided by GlaxoSmithKlin e free of charge.  
 
7.2.7 Preparation  
N/A 
 
 
7.2.8 Adm inistration  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 72 -  
  
 
Patients  will be instructed  to take the Pazopanib  in the morning,  without  food, at  least 
one hour before  or two hours after  a meal, at the same time as the  everolimus.  The 
tablets  should  be swallowed  whole  and must not be crushed  or broken.  
 
 
7.2.9 Ordering 
GlaxoS mithKline  will ship labeled  pazopanib  bottles  in a sealed  carton  (68 tabs  per 
bottle  for pazopanib  400mg  and 34 tabs  per bottle  for pazopanib  200mg). A label will  
be affixed to each carton  identifying  the product,  strength  and number of bottles. In 
addition,  a packing  slip will be enclosed  with the drug name,  stren gth, lot/batch 
number, storage  conditions,  and expiration/retest  date.  
 
7.2.1 0   Accountability  
All missed  doses must be docu mented  in the subject’s  medical  record and patie nt 
diary.  Unused agent  that is returned  by sub ject is not held,  but destroyed  according  to 
institutional policy. The investigato r, or a responsibl e party designate d by the 
investigat or, must maintain  a careful  record  of the  inventory  and disposition  of the 
agent.  This should  be kept current  and contain:  
• Dates  and quantities  of investigational  product  received  from  GlaxoS mithKline  
• Packaging  lot numbers for product  received  
• Subject’s  identification 
• Date  and quantity  of investigational  product  dispensed  
• The initials  of the dispenser 
• Dose preparation  recor ds 
 
7.2.1 1  Destr uction and Return  
At the end of the study , unus ed supplies of Pazopani b shoul d be destroyed 
accordin g to institutiona l policies . Destructio n will be docu mented in the Drug 
Accountabi lity Record Form. 
 
8. CORR ELATIVE/ SPECIAL STUDIES  
 
 
8.1 Phar macokinetic Studies 
Phase I:  Patients  will have  pharmacokinetic  speci mens drawn at  0, 1, 2, 4, 6 and  24 hours post - 
dose on cycle  1 days 1 and  15. If patients  are treated  on dose level  -1, there will be a 48 hour 
blood  draw (pre -dose)  as well.  Two samples will be drawn for each  time point. Phar macokinetic  
speci mens should  be collected  as close  to the indicated  window as possible. Whole  blood  
samples (2 mL) should  be collected  in EDTA vacutainers  for everoli mus phar macokinetics.  
Whole blood  samples for the deter mination  of plas ma pazopanib concentrati ons will be 
collected  into separate  2mL EDTA vacutainers.  The 24 hour phar macokinetic  speci men should  
be collected  prior  to drug dosing  on day  2 and  day 16. If patients  are treated  on dose lev el -1, 
there  will be an addit ional 48-hour post -dose blood  draw obtained  prior  to everolimus  dose. In 
addition,  two 2mL blood  samples for everoli mus and pazopanib  concent ration  deter mination  
will be obtained  cycle  2 day  1 and cycle  4 day 1. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 73 -  
  
 
Testing  will be done  on whole  blood  including  plasma. See Appendices  B and C for details  on 
blood  speci men procure ment and shipping.  
 
 
Expansion  Cohort:  Pharmacokinetic  studies  will not be perfor med in the expansion  cohort  
 
 
 
9. STUD Y CALENDAR  
Scan s must be done <4 week s prior to the start of therapy . In the even t that the participant's 
condition is deteriorating, laboratory evaluations shoul d be repeate d withi n 48 hours prior to 
initiatio n of the next cycle of therapy. 
 
All assessments must be performed prior to administratio n of any study medication . All 
study assess ments and medication s shoul d be administered within + 3 days of the 
protocol -speci fied date, unles s otherwise noted. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 74 -  
 X X X X X X X X  
 
9.1 Phas e I: 
 
Trea tment cycles  
 
 
 
 
Screenin g1 Cycles  1, 2 Subseque nt 
cycles  
 
 
Day 1 Day 15 Day 1  
 
 
Off Study  
 
Informe d Consent X 
Histo ry X X X X 
Concu rrent meds X X X X 
Physical exam (Ht, 
Wt, BSA ) X X X X X 
Vital Signs X X X X 
Performa nce Status X X X X X 
CBC with differential/  
platelets 
EKG X X B 
 
Urina lysis, urine 
protei n & creatinine2 
Seru m chemistry 3 X X X X X 
Fasting Lipid Panel X X X X 
Qualitative -HCG4 X X X 
Hepat itis B and C 
screen 5 X 
Pazopanib X--------------------------------------------------X 
Everolimu s X--------------------------------------------------X 
Adverse event 
evaluation  
X--------------------------------------------------X X 
Tumor measurem ents X A A X 
 
Radiolo gic evaluatio n X A X 
 
1. Screening labs may be used as cycle 1 day 1 labs if performed within  7 days of initiation  of study therapy. 
2. If UPC ≥ 1 then a 24 hour urine  protein  must  be assessed.  
3: Albumin,  alkaline phosphatase,  total bilirubi n, calcium,  fasting  glucose,  LDH,  phosphorus,  total protein, 
SGO T [AST], SGPT [ALT], serum sodium,  potassium,  chlorid e, bicarbo nate, BUN, magnesium,  uric acid, 
amylase, lipase, thyroid stimulating hormone  (day 1 of each  cycle only). 
Monitor  serum  liver tests befo re initiation of treatment with pazopanib and at weeks 3, 5, 7 and 9. Therea fter, 
monitor  at Month  3 and Month  4, and as clinically  indicated.  Periodic  monito ring should  continue  after Month  
4. Urine  or serum pregnancy  test (women  of childbearing  potential)  at screening  and day 1 of  each cycle (+/- 3 
days). 
5. Scree ning for hepatitis B : Prior to registrations, patients will be tested for hepatitis B viral load and 
serologic  marke rs, HBV -DNA, HBsAg, HBs  Ab, and HBc Ab. Patients  with risk factors  for hepatitis  C should  
be tested  using  quantitati ve RNA-PCR  
 
A. Tumor  meas urements  should  occur  in the cycle 2 week 3, and  every 2 cycles thereafter. Confirmato ry scans 
should  also be obtained 4 weeks  following  initial  docume ntation  of an objective response. If  scans  have  been 
performed  within 30 days before coming  off treatment,  they do not need  to be  repeated. If scans  cannot  be 
obtai ned (patients  coming  off treatment  to go to hospice or have died), please  document  in stu dy file. 
B. Pre-dose EKG obtai ned at baseline,  cycle 1 days 1, 15, and cycle  2 day 1 only. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 75 -  
  
 
9.2 Expansio n cohort  
 
 
 
Test/Proced ure  
 
 
Screening  Trea tment Cycles  1, 2 
(28 day cycles)   
 
Subseque nt cycles 
(28 day cycles)  Off Study  
 
 
Survival  
-28 
days  
 
Informe d Consent X -14 
days  Day 11 
(±3 days) Day 15 
(±3 days) Day 1 
(±3 days) 28 days  after  
last dose (+/- 
7 days)9 
Histo ry                                              X                        X                   X                         X                         X 
Concu rrent Medication s                   X                       X                   X                         X                         X 
Physical Exam                                  X                       X                    X                         X                         X 
Vital Signs                                                     X            X                    X                         X                         X 
Performa nce Status                           X                       X                    X                         X                         X 
CBC with Differential/  
Platelets                                                         X            X                    X                         X                         X 
Amylase and lipase                                       X            X                                                X 
EKG                                                               X            X 
Urina lysis, Urine Protein & 
Creatini ne2                                                                               X            X                                                X                         X 
Serum Chemistry 3                                                            X            X                    X                         X                         X 
TSH                                                               X            X                                                X 
PT/INR , PTT                                                 X 
HbA1 c7                                                                                       X 
Fasting Lipid Panel                                       X            X                                                X                         X 
Qualitative -HCG4                                                          X            X 
Hepat itis B and C Screen 8                                          X 
Pazopanib                                                               X----------------------------------------------------X 
Everolimu s                                                               X--------------------------------------------------X 
Adverse Event Evaluation                                     X----------------------------------------------------X           X 
Radiolo gic Evaluation5,6                            X                                                                            X                        X 
Surviv al Follo w-Up                                                                                                                                                                         X 
 
1. Cycle 1 Day  1 evaluations  are to be conducted  within  1-week  prior  to start of protocol  therap y. Screening  labs may be used as Cycle 1 Day 1 
labs if drawn  within  7 days of initiating  study  therapy.  
2.     If UPC  ≥ 1, then a 24 hour urine  protein must be asses sed. 
3. Albumin, alkaline  phosphatase,  total bilirubin,  calcium, fasting  glucose, total protein,  SGOT  [AST],  SGPT [ALT],  serum sodium, potassi um, 
chloride,  bicarbonate,  BUN, uric acid, magnesi um, LDH, phospho rus 
4.     Urine  pregnancy  test (women of childbearing  potential)  at screening  and cycle 1 day 1 only.  
5.     Radiological  imaging  shou ld occur  every 8 weeks,  following  cycle 1 day 1. 
6. If scans  have been  performed within  30 days before  coming off treatment, they do not need  to be repeated  as an  off-study  asses sment. If scans 
cannot  be obtained  (e.g. patients  coming off treatment to go  to hospice  or patien ts have  died),  please  document in study  file. 
7.     Applies  to patients  with uncontrolled  diabetes  mellitus  
8. Screening  for hepatitis:  Prior  to regis trations,  all patients will be tested  for hepatitis  B serologic  markers (HBsAg,  HBs Ab, and HBc Ab, HBV - 
DNA)  and for hepatitis  C (using  quantitative  RNA -PCR) 
9.     This visit can be foregone  for patients  who are too unwell  to attend  or for other  reasons  at the investigator’s  discretion.  Patients  may be 
contacted  by phone to assess  resolut ion of toxiciti es and may be contact ed for survival  follow up. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 76 -  
  
 
10. MEASUREMENT OF  EFFECT  
Objective response rate is the primary endpoint of the expans ion cohort of this trial and 
participants will be assesse d by RECIS T v1.1 criteria . For the purpose s of this study, 
participant s shou ld be reevalua ted every 8 weeks . In additio n to a baselin e scan,  
confirmatory scan s should also be obtained at least 4 weeks followin g initial 
docu mentatio n of an objective response.  
 
10.1 Antit umor Effect– Solid Tumors  
Response a nd progres sion will be evaluated  in this study  using the new i nternational 
criteri a propose d by the Respons e Evaluatio n Criteri a in Solid Tumor s (RECIST) 
Com mittee v. 1.1 57. Changes in only the largest diameter (unidimensional 
measure ment) of the tumor lesions are used in the RECIST criteria.  
 
10.1. 1   Definitions  
 
Evaluable for toxicity. All participant s who receiv e at least one dose of study treatment 
will be evaluab le for toxicit y from the time of their first treatment. 
 
Evaluable  for objective  response . All participant s who receiv e at least one dose of study 
treatmen t will be evaluable for respons e from the time of their first treatment. These 
participant s will have their respons e classified accord ing to the definitio ns stated 
below.  
 
 
10.1. 2  Disea se Parameters  
 
 
Measura ble disea se. Measura ble disea se is the presence of at least one (1) lesion 
that can be accurately measure d in at least one dimension with longest diameter  >20 
millimeters (mm) using conventiona l techniques (CT, MR1, x-ray) or  >10 mm with 
spiral CT scan. Measurable lesions must be at least 2 times the slice thicknes s in mm. All 
tumo r measurement s must be recorde d in millimeter s (or decimal fraction s of centi meters).  
 
Malignant  lymph nodes:  To be considered  pathologically  enlarged  and measurable,  a lymph 
node  must be ≥ 15mm  in short axis  when assessed by CT  scan (CT scan slice thickness 
recom mended  to be no greater  than 5 mm). At baseline  and in follow -up, only the short axis 
will be measured  and followed.  
 
A lesion  in a previously  irradia ted area is not eligible for measurable  disease unless there  is 
objective  evidence  of progression of  the lesion  prior  to study  enroll ment. Lesions  in 
previou sly irradiated  areas  must be clearly  identified  as such.  
 
Non-measurable  diseas e. All other lesion s (or sites of disease) , includin g small lesions 
(longes t diameter <20 mm with conventiona l technique s or <10 mm using spira l CT scan), 
are cons idered non-measurabl e disease. Bone lesions , leptomeningeal  disease,  ascites, 
pleur al/pericardial effusions,  lymphangitis  cutis/pul monis,  inflammatory  breast  disease, 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 77 -  
  
 
abdo minal masses  (not followed  by CT  or MRI),  and cystic  lesions  are all considered  non- 
measurable.  
 
 
Target  lesions. All measurabl e lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesion s per organ and 5 
lesions in total, representative of all involved organs , shoul d be identified as targe t lesions 
and recorded and measured at baseline . Target lesions should be selecte d on the basis of their 
size (lesion s with the longes t diameter ) and their suitabilit y for accurat e repeated 
measurements (eithe r by imaging technique s or clinically) . A sum of the longes t diameter 
(LD) for all targe t lesion s will be calculated and repor ted as the baseline sum. If lymph 
node s are to be include d in the sum, then as noted above , only the short axis of the 
lymph node is adde d into the sum. The baseli ne sum will be used as the reference by 
which  to characterize  the objective  tumor  response.  
 
 
Lymph nodes.  Lymph nodes  identified  as target  lesions  should  always  have  the actual  short 
axis measure ment recorded  (measured  in the same anato mical plane as the  baseline 
examination),  even  if the nodes regress to  below  10mm  on study.  This means  that when 
lymph nodes are included  as tar get lesions,  the ‘sum’ of lesions  may not be zero even  if 
complete  response criteria  are met, since  a normal lymph node  is defined  as having  a short 
axis of <10mm.  Case  report  forms or oth er data collection  methods  may therefore  be 
designed  to have  target  nodal  lesions  recorded  in a separate  section  where,  in order  to qualify  
for CR,  each node  must achieve  a short  axis <10m m. For PR,  SD and  PD, the  actual short 
axis measure ment of the  nodes is  to be included  in the sum of target  lesions.  
 
 
Non-target lesions . All other lesion s (or sites of disease ) includin g any measurabl e lesions over 
and above  the 10 target  lesions  should  be identified  as non -target  lesions and shoul d also be 
recorde d at baseline . Measure ments of these lesion s are not required , but the presenc e or 
absenc e of each shoul d be noted at each follow-up. 
 
 
10.1.3  Methods for  Evaluation  of Meas urable  Disease  
 
 
All measur ements should be taken and recorded in metri c notation , using a ruler, calipers, or 
digita l measurement tool. All baselin e evaluation s shoul d be perfo rmed as closel y as possible 
to the beginnin g of treatment and never more than 4 week s before the beginnin g of the 
treatment. 
 
 
The same method  of assess ment and the same technique  should  be used to  characterize each 
identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow-up. Imaging -based  evaluation  is 
preferred  to evaluation  by clinical  examination  when both  methods  have  been  used to  
assess the  anti-tumor effect  of a treatment. 
 
 
Clinical  lesions . Clinica l lesion s will only be considere d measurabl e when they are superficial 
(e.g. , skin nodule s and palpabl e lymp h nodes) . For the case of skin lesions, 
docu mentatio n by color photography , includin g a ruler to estimate the size of the  lesion, is 
recom mended.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 78 -  
  
 
Chest  x-ray. Lesion s on chest x-ray are acceptabl e as measurabl e lesion s when they are 
clearl y defined and surrounde d by aerated lung; howeve r, CT is preferable. 
 
Conventional  CT and MRI. Thes e technique s shoul d be perfor med with cuts of 10 mm or 
less in  slice thickness  contiguously.  Spiral  CT should  be performed using  a 5 mm contiguous 
reconstruction  algorithm.  This applies  to tumors of the chest, abdomen , and pelvis . Head  
and neck tumor s and those of extremitie s usuall y require specific protocols. 
 
 
10.1.4  Response Criteria  
10.1.4. 1 Evaluation  of Target  Lesions  
Complete  Respon se (CR) : Disappea rance of all targe t lesions.  
 
 
Partial  Response (PR):  At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the longest diameter 
(LD) of target lesions (or short axis for lymph nodes) , takin g as referenc e the 
basel ine sum. 
 
Progress ive Disease  (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum of the targe t lesions, 
takin g as referen ce the s m a l l e s t s u m r e c o r d e d s i n c e t h e treatment starte d or the 
appearan ce of one or more new lesions (new  lesions must be > slice thickness).  
 
Stable Disease (SD) : Neither  sufficient  shrinkage  to qualify  for PR nor sufficient 
increas e to qualif y for PD, takin g as refere nce the smalles t sum since the 
treatment started.  
 
 
Unknow n (UN) : Assess ment of targe t lesion s canno t be made due to insufficien t or 
unevaluabl e data. In this case, a concise explanation must be given.  
 
Note : If tumo r respons e data is missing , an overal l assess ment canno t be done. 
However , if there is missing or unevaluabl e data for non-targe t lesions , but data is 
availabl e for all targe t lesio ns, the overall response for that time point will be assigned 
based on the sum of all targe t lesions . Additionally , the assess ment of CR canno t be 
made if there is missing or unevaluabl e data for non-targe t lesions . In this case, the 
overal l assess ment woul d be PR. 
 
10.1.4. 2 Evaluatio n of Non-Targe t Lesions  
Complete  Response (CR): Disappearance  of all  non-target  lesions  and 
normalizatio n of tumor marker level.  
 
Note : If tumor markers are initially above the upper normal limit, they must 
normalize for a subjec t to be conside red in complet e clinical response 
Incomplete Response/Stable Diseas e (SD): Persistence  of one or more non- 
target lesions and/or  maintenance  of tumor marker  level above the normal limits. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 79 -  
  
 
Progressive   Diseas e  (PD) :  Appearanc e  of  one  or  more  new  lesions  (new 
lesion s must be > slice thickness ) and/or unequivocal  progression  of existing 
non-target  lesions.  
 
Unknow n (UN) : Assess ment of targe t lesion s canno t be made due to insufficien t or 
unevaluabl e data. In this case, a concise explanation must be given.  
 
 
Note : Althoug h a clear progressio n of "non -target " lesion s only is exceptional , in 
such circu mstances, the opinion of the treatin g physic ian should prevail and the 
progression  status  should  be confirmed  at a later time by review  of the Principal 
Investigator (or Protoc ol Chair). Additionally , the cytologica l confirmation of the 
neoplasti c origi n of any effusion that appears or worsens during treatment is 
mandator y to differentiat e between stable or progressive disease status. 
 
 
10.1.4. 3 Evaluatio n of Best Overal l Response  
The best overall  response is  the best response recorded  from  the start of the  treatment 
until diseas e progression/recurrenc e (takin g as referenc e for progressive disease the 
smallest  measure ments recorded  since the treatment  started) . The partic ipant's best 
respons e assignmen t will depen d on the achievement of both measurement and 
confir mation criteria. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 80 -  
  
 
 
Target 
Lesions  
Non-Target 
Lesions  
New  
Lesions  
Ov era l l 
Response  
Best Res ponse  for this  
Category Also Re quires:  
CR CR No CR >4 wks confir mation  
CR  
Non-CR/Non -PD No PR  
 
>4 wks confir mation  
PR Non-PD No PR 
SD Non-PD No SD  
Docu mented  at least once 
>4 wks from baseli ne 
PD Any Yes or No  PD No prior  SD, PR or CR  
Any PD* Yes or No  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
* In exceptional circumstances , unequivocal prog ression in non-target lesions may be 
accepted as disease progression.  
 
Note : Partici pants with a globa l deterioration of health status requ iring discon tinuation 
of treatment without objective evidenc e of disease progression at that time shou ld 
be reported as "symptomatic deterioration". Every effort should be made to 
document the objectiv e progression even after discontinuation of treatment. 
 
 
10.1.5  Duration of Response  
 
Duration  of overall  respons e: The duratio n of overal l response is measured 
from the time measure ment criteri a are met for CR or PR (whic hever is first 
recorded ) until the first date that recurrence or PD is objecti vely documented, 
takin g as referenc e for PD the small est measurement s recorde d since the 
treatment started.  
 
 
Duration  of overall  complete  response:   The duration  of overall  CR is 
measured  from the time measur ement criteria are first met for CR until the 
first date that recurren t diseas e is objectivel y documented. 
 
 
Duration  of stable  diseas e: Stabl e disease is measure d from the start of the 
treatment until the criteria for progre ssion are met, taking  as reference  the 
smallest measure ments recor ded since the treatment starte d. 
 
 
10.1. 6   Progressio n-Free Survival  
Progression -Free Survival  (PFS) is  defined  as the  duration  of time from start of 
treatment to time of objective  disease progre ssion or death,  or is censored at the 
time of last  disease  evaluation.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 81 -  
  
 
11. ADVERS E EVEN T REPORTIN G REQUIREMENTS  
 
11.1General  
 
Adverse event  collection  and reporting  is a routi ne part of every  clinical  trial. This study 
will use the  descri ptions and grading  scales  found  in the NCI Common  Terminology 
Criteria  for Adverse Events  version  4.0 (CTCAE  v4.0) that  is available  at 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/ reporting//ctc.ht ml. 
 
Infor mation  on all  adverse events,  whether  reported  by the  participa nt, directly  observed, 
or detected  by physical  examination,  laboratory  test or other  means,  will be collected, 
recorded,  followed  and reported  as described  in the following  sections.  
 
Adverse ev ents expe rienced by participants  will be collected  and reported from initiation 
of study  medication,  throughout  the study,  and within  30 days (or 5 half -lives,  whichever 
is longer)  of the  last dose of study  medic ation. Participants  who experience  an ongoing 
adverse  event  or related  to a study  procedures  and/or  study  medication  beyond  30 days 
will continue to be contacted  by a member  of the study  team  until the event is resol ved, 
stabilized,  or deter mined to be irrever sible by the  participating  investigator.  
 
Participants  should  be instructed  to report  any serious po st-study  event(s)  that might 
reasona bly be related  to particip ation in this study.  The investigator  should  notify  the IRB 
and any other  applicable  regulatory  agency  of any unanticipated  death  or adverse  event  
occurring  after a participant  has discontinued  or ter minated  study  participation  that may 
reasonably  be related  to the study.  
 
11.2 Definitions  
 
11.2.1  Adverse Event (AE)  
 
An adverse  event  is any undesirable  sign,  symptom  or medical  condition  or 
experience  that develops  or worsens in  severity after starting the first dose of study  
treatment or any  procedure  specified  in the protocol,  even  if the event  is not 
considered  to be related  to the study.  
 
Abno rmal laboratory  values  or diagnostic  test results  constitute  adverse  events 
only if they induce  clinical  signs or s ymptoms or require  treatment or further 
diagnostic  tests.  
 
11.2.2  Serious  adverse  event (SAE)  
 
A serious a dverse  event is an undesirable  sign, sympto m, or medical  condition 
which:  
• is fatal or life-threateni ng; 
• requires  or prolongs inpatient  hospitalization;  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 82 -  
  
 
• results  in persistent or signi ficant  disability/inca pacity; 
• constitutes  a congenital  anomaly or birth  defect;  or 
• jeopar dizes the partici pant and requires  medical  or surgical  intervention  to 
prevent  one of the  outco mes listed  above.  
 
Events  not considered  to be serious adverse  events are hospitalizations  for: 
• routine  treatment or monitoring  of the  studied  indication,  not associated 
with any deterioration  in condition,  or for elective  procedures  
• elective  or pre -planned  treatment for a pre-existing  condition  that did not 
worsen  
• emergency  outpatient  treatment for an  event  not fulfilling  the serio us 
criteria  outlined  above  and not resulting  in inpatient  admission  
• respite  care and social  reasons in  the absence  of any  deterioration  in the 
patient’s  general  condition  
 
11.2.3  Expectedness  
 
Adve rse event s can be 'Expected' or 'Unexpected.'  
 
11.2.3.1  Expected  adverse  event 
 
Expected  adverse  events are those that have  been  previou sly identified  as 
resulting  from  administration  of the  agent.  For the  purposes of this  study, 
an adver se event  is considered  expected  when it  appears  in the curre nt 
adverse  event list, the Investi gator’s Brochure,  the package  insert  or is 
included  in the infor med conse nt document as a potential  risk. 
 
Refe r to Sectio n 6.1 for a listin g of expecte d adverse event s assoc iated 
with the study agent( s). 
 
11.2.3.2.  Unexpected  adverse  event  
 
For the  purposes of this  study,  an adverse  event  is considered  unexpected  
when it  varies in nature, inten sity or frequency  from  information  
provided  in the current  adverse  event  list, the Investigator’s Brochure, 
the packa ge insert  or when it is not included  in the infor med consent 
docu ment as a potential  risk. 
 
11.2.4  Attribution  
 
Attrib ution is the relationship  betw een an adverse  event  or serious adverse  event 
and the study treatment. Attrib ution will be assigned as follows: 
 
• Definite – The AE is clearly related to the study  treatment. 
• Probable  – The AE is likely  related  to the study  treatment. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 83 -  
  
 
• Possible  – The AE may be related  to the study  treatment. 
• Unlikely - The AE is doubtfully  relate d to the study treatment. 
• Unrelate d - The AE is clearly  NOT relate d to the study treatment.  
 
11.3 Recording  Adverse Events  
 
Adverse ev ent information  will be obtained  at each conta ct with the participant.  All 
adverse  events will be recorded  on the  approp riate study-specific case report forms 
(CRFs).  
 
11.4 Reporting Adverse Events  
 
Each  adver se event  will be asses sed to determine if it meets the criteria  for serious 
adverse  event.  If a serious adverse  event  occurs,  expedited  reporting  will follow  local 
policies, and federal  guidelines and regulations  as appropriate.  
 
It is the responsibility  of the participating investigator to notify the Principal 
Investigator  (or Protocol  Chair), IRB,  and others  of all serious adverse  events  as 
required  in the protocol.  
 
The Principal  Investigator  (or Protocol  Chair)  will provide  infor mation  with respect  to 
adverse  events  and safe use of the  study  treatment (e.g.,  safety  reports,  Action  Letters) 
to all participating  investi gators  as soon as the  information  beco mes available.  
 
 
 
All SAEs, regardless  of “expectedness”  or “causality”  must be reported  to the Principal 
Investigator  (or Protocol  Chair), Dr. Mark Po merantz,  via fax within  24 hours of 
learning of the  event.  In the  event that the participating  investigator  does not  beco me 
aware  of the  serious adverse  event  immed iately  (e.g.,  participant  sought  treatment 
elsewhere),  the partici pating  investigator is to report the event  within  24 hours a fter 
learning  of it and document  the time of his  or her first aware ness of the  adverse  event. 
All SAEs should  be recorded  on a MedWatch 3500a  form. Please  fax all supporting 
docu mentation  as it beco mes available.  
 
The contact  infor mation  for SAE reporting  is as follows: 
Mark Po merantz,  MD 
Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute  
mark_po merantz@dfci.harvard.edu  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 84 -  
  
 
 
11.5 Novartis a nd GlaxoSmithKline  Notification  by Investig ator 
 
11.5.1  Serious  Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
 
All events  meeting  the criteria  for Ser ious Adverse Event  (see Section  11.2.2) 
that occur  after the start of the initial  dose of study  treatment, during  treatment, 
or within  30 days of the  last dose of  treatment must be reported  as serious 
adverse  events.  
 
The participating  investigator  must report  each serious  adverse event, 
regardless  attribution,  to the Principal  Investigator  (or Protocol  Chair)  within  
24 hours of learning  of the  occurrence.  In the  event  that the participating 
investigator  does not  become aware  of the  serious  adverse  event  immediately 
(e.g.,  participant  sought  treatment elsewhere),  the participat ing investigator  is 
to report  the event  within  24 hours after  learning  of it and docu ment the time of 
his or her  first aware ness of the  adverse  event.  
 
Within the following  24-48 hours,  the participating  investigator  must provide 
follow -up information  on the  serious adverse  event.  Follow -up infor mation 
should  describe  whether  the event  has resolved  or continues,  if and how the 
event  was t reated,  and whether  the participa nt will continue  or disco ntinue study  
participation.  The principal  investi gator has the  obligation  to report  all serious 
adverse  events to the FDA, IRB,  Novartis  Pharmaceuticals  Drug Safety and  
Epide miology  Depart ment (DS&E), and  Glaxo -Smithkline.  All events reported  
to the FDA by the  investigator  are to be filed utilizing the Form  FDA  
3500A (Med Watch Form). All events must be reported  to both Novartis  
Pharmaceuticals  DS&E Department [by FAX (877 -778-9739)], and to 
GlaxoSmit hkline  [by e -mail  to USNAPS@gsk.com and  
kamalnayan.h.bhatt @gsk.com OR fax to US -Case Management  Group 
(fax 919 -483-5404) and Kamal  Bhatt (fax: 610 -675-2632) within 24 hours 
of lear ning of the event’s occurrence.  This includes  serious, related,  labeled 
(expected)  and serious, related,  unlabeled  (unexpected) adverse  experien ces. 
All deaths during  treatment  or within  30 days following  completion  of active 
protocol  therapy  must be reported  within 5 working days. Any serious adverse 
event  occurring  after the patient  has started  the first dose of study  treatment 
and until 30 days after  the patient  has stopped  study  participation  must be 
reported.  This includes  the period  in which  the study  protocol  interferes  with 
the standard  medical  treatment given  to a patient  (e.g. treatment withdrawal 
during  washout period,  change  in treatment to a fixed  dose of conco mitant 
medication).  Serious adverse  events  occurring  more  than 30 days after  study 
discontinuation  need  only be reported  if a relationship  to the GlaxoS mithkline 
or Novartis  study  drugs is  suspected.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 85 -  
  
 
If the SAE  is not previously  docu mented in  the everoli mus Investigat or 
Brochure  or Package  Insert  (new  occurren ce) and is thought  to be related  to the 
Novartis  study  drug,   a   DS&E  associa te  may  urgently  require  further 
infor mation  from  the investigator  for Health  Authority  reporting.  Novartis  may 
need  to issue an Investigator Notification (I N), to inform all investigators 
involved in  any study  with the same drug that this SAE  has been  reported. 
Suspected  Unexpected Serious  Adverse  Reactions (SUSARs)  will be collected 
and reported to the competent  authori ties and  relevant  ethics  committees  in 
accorda nce with Directi ve 2001/20/EC or  as per national  regulat ory 
require ments in participating  countries.  
 
For Concomita nt Medic ations,  all serious adve rse experiences  will be 
forwarded  to the product  manufacturer  by the  investigator.  
 
11.5.2  Non-Serious Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
 
Non-serious  adverse  events will be reported to the Principal Investi gator (or 
Protocol  Chair)  on the  toxicity  Case  Report  Forms. 
 
11.6 Instit utional Review  Board  (IRB)  Notification  by Investigator  
 
The partici pating  investigator  will report all adverse  events and serious  adverse  events 
to the Principal  Investigator (or Protocol  Chair)  and to the IRB accordi ng to the local 
IRB’s policies  and procedures  in reporting  adverse  events.  
 
In the  event of a multi-center  study,  the Principal  Investigat or (or Prot ocol Chair)  will 
report  adverse  events  and serious a dverse  events from all participating  sites to the DFCI 
IRB according  to the IRB’s policies  and proced ures in reporting  adverse  events.  
 
11.7 Food  and Drug Administration (FDA) Notifi cation  by Sponsor -Investigator  
 
If this  study  is not IND-exempt, the Sponsor -Investigator  will report  to the FDA any 
adverse  event  that is serious, unexpected  and reasonably  related  (i.e., possible,  probable, 
definite)  to the study  treatment. 
 
Unexpected  fatal or life -threatening  exper iences  associated  with the use of the  study 
treatment will be reported to FDA as soon as pos sible but in no event  later than 7 
calendar  days after  initial  receipt  of the  infor mation.  
 
All other  serious unexpected  experiences  associated  with the use of the  study  treatment 
will be reported  to FDA as soon as possible  but in no event  later than 15 calendar  days 
after initial recei pt of the  infor mation.  
 
Events  will be reported  to the FDA by  telephone  (1-800-FDA -1088) or by fax  (1-800- 
FDA -0178) using  Form  FDA 3500A (Mandatory  Reporting  Form for investigational  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 86 -  
  
 
agents)  or FDA Fo rm 3500 (Voluntary  Report ing Form  for commercial  agents).  Forms 
are available  at http://www.fda.gov /medwatch/getfo rms.htm. 
 
 
 
11.8   Hospital  Risk Management  Notification  by Investigator  
 
The partici pating  investigator  will report to the Principal Investigator (or Protocol  Chair) 
and to local  Risk Manage ment any subject  safety  reports  or sentin el events that require 
reporting  according  to institutional policy.  
 
12. DAT A AND SAFETY MONITORING  
 
12.1 Data Reporting  
 
12.1. 1 Method 
 
The QAC T will collect, manage , and monito r data for this study.  
 
12.1. 2 Data Submission  
 
The schedul e for completio n and submission of case repor t forms (pape r or 
electronic ) to the QAC T is as follows: 
 
 
 
Form   
Submission Timeline  
 
Eligibilit y Checklist   
Complete prior to registration with QACT 
 
On Stud y Form  
Within 14 days of registration  
 
Baseline Assessment Form  
Within 14 days of registration 
 
Treatment Form  
Within 10 days of the last day of the cycle  
 
Advers e Even t Report Form  
Within 10 days of the last day of the cycle 
 
Respons e Assess ment Form  
Within 10 days of the completio n of the cycle 
required for response evaluation 
 
Off Treatment/Off Study Form  Within 14 days of completing treatment or 
being taken off study for any reason  
 
Follo w up/Survival Form  
Within 14 days of the protoco l define d follow 
up visit date or call 
 
 
12.2 Safety Meetings  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 87 -  
  
 
 
There will be monthl y conferenc e calls betwee n the researc h team at the DF/HC C and the 
researc h team at Memorial Sloan -Ketterin g Cancer Center durin g the expansion phase of 
the trial to monito r safety and accrual . The attendee’ s for this will routinel y includ e the 
principa l investigator s (or their designees) , research coordina tors, Resear ch Nurses , and, as 
needed , investigationa l pharmacists. In addition , input durin g these teleconferen ces may be 
obtaine d from the clinic al develop ment teams both at Novartis and GlaxoSmithKline , as 
needed.  
 
The DF/HC C Data and Safety Monitorin g Committe e (DSMC ) will revie w and monitor 
toxicit y and accrua l data from this trial. The committe e is composed of clinical specialis ts 
with experi ence in onco logy and who have no direct relationsh ip with the study. 
Information that raises any question s about participan t safety will be addres sed with the 
Principa l Investigato r and study team. 
 
The DSM C will meet quarterl y and/o r more often if require d to revie w toxicit y and accrua l 
data. Information to be provided to the committe e may include : up-to-date participan t 
accrual ; current dose level information ; DLT information ; all grade 2 or higher unexpecte d 
advers e events that have been reported; summar y of all deaths occurring  withi n 30 days for 
Phase I or II protocols; for gene transfer protocols , summar y of all death s while being 
treated and during activ e follow -up; any respons e information ; audit results , and a 
summar y provide d by the study team. Other information (e.g. scans, laborator y values ) will 
be provided upon request.  
 
12.3 Monitoring  
 
Involve ment in this study as a participating  investigator  implies  acceptance of potential 
audits  or inspections,  including  source  data verification,  by representatives  designated 
by the  Principal  Investigator  (or Protocol  Chair)  or DF/HCC.  The purpose of these 
audits  or inspectio ns is to examine study -related  activities and docu ments to determine 
whether  these  activities  were conducted  and data were  recorded,  analyzed,  and 
accurately  reported  in accordance  with the protocol, institutional  policy,  Good Clinical 
Practice  (GCP), and  any appli cable regulatory  require ments. 
 
All data will be monitored  for ti meliness  of submission,  completeness,  and adherence  to 
protoc ol requirements. Monito ring will begin at the time of participa nt registration  and 
will continue during  protocol  perfor mance and completion.  
 
13. REGULATOR Y CONS IDERATIONS  
 
13.1 Protocol  Review  and Amendments  
 
This protocol, the propos ed informed cons ent and all form s of participan t information 
related to the study (e.g., advertis ements used to recruit partic ipants) and any other  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 88 -  
  
 
necessar y document s must be submitted , reviewe d and approve d by a properly 
constitute d IRB governi ng each study location.  
 
Any changes made to the protoco l must be submitted as amendments and must be 
approved by the IRB prior to implem entation. Any changes in study conduc t must be 
reporte d to the IRB. The Principal Investigator (or Protocol Chair ) will disseminate 
protocol amendment information to all partic ipating investigato rs. 
 
All decisions of the IRB conce rning the conduc t of the study must be made in 
writing. 
Any change  or addition  (excluding  administrative)  to this protocol  requires  a written 
protocol  amend ment that must be reviewed  by Novartis  and the investigator  before 
implementation.  Amendments significantly  affecting  the safety  of subjects,  the scope  of 
the investi gation  or the  scientific  quality  of the study  require  additional  approval  by the 
IRB at each study  center. A copy  of the  written  approval  of the  IRB must be provided  to 
Novartis.  Examples of amendme nts requiring  such approval  are: 
 
1.   Increases  in drug dose or duration  of exposure  of subjects,  
 
2.   Significant  changes  in the study  design  (e.g. addition  or deletion  of a control  group),  
 
3.   Increases  in the number of invasive  procedures,  
 
4.   Addition  or deletions  of a test procedure  required  for monitoring  of safety.  
 
These  require ments for approval  should  in no way prevent  any immediate  action  from 
being  taken  by the investigator  or by Novartis  in the interests of preserving  the safety  of 
all patients  included  in the trial.   If an immediate  change  to the protocol  is felt to be 
necessary  by the investigator and is implemented for safety  reasons  Novartis  must be 
notified  and  the  IRB  at  the  center  must  be  informed  immediately.      Amendments 
affecting  only administrative aspects  of the study  do not require  formal protocol 
amendments or  IRB approval  but the IRB must be kept infor med of such administrative 
changes.  Examples of administrati ve chang es not requiring  formal protocol  amendments 
and IRB approval  include:  
 
• Changes  in the staff used to  monitor  trials 
•  Minor changes  in the packa ging or labeling  of study  drug.  
 
13.2 Informed Consent  
All participants must be provide d a consen t form descr ibing this study and 
prov iding sufficient informat ion for participant s to make an infor med decision  
abou t their participatio n in this study . The formal consen t of a participant , using 
the IRB approved consent form, must be obtained before the participant is 
involve d in any study -relate d procedure. The consent form must be signed and 
dated by the participa nt or the partici pant’s legall y authorize d repres entative , and 
by the person obtaining the consent. The participan t must be given a copy of the 
signed and dated consen t docu ment. The origina l signe d copy of the consent  
docu ment must be retaine d in the medical record or research file. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 89 -  
  
 
 
13.3 Ethics  and Good  Clinical  Practice  (GCP)  
 
This study is to be conduct ed accordi ng to the follow ing considerat ions, which 
represent good and soun d resea rch practice:  
 
• ICH Consol idated Good Clinica l Practice : Guidelines (E6) 
www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/iche6.htm  
 
• US Code of Federa l Regulation s (CFR) gove rning clinical study conduct 
and ethical princ iples that have their origi n in the Decla ration of Helsinki  
 
▪ Title 21 Part 11 – Electroni c Records ; Electroni c Signatures 
www.access.gpo.gov /nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr11_02.h tml 
 
▪ Title 21 Part 50 – Protectio n of Huma n Subjects 
www.access.gpo.gov /nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr50_02.h tml 
 
▪ Title 21 Part 54 – Financia l Disclosur e by Clinica l Investigators 
www.access.gpo.gov /nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr54_02.h tml 
 
▪ Title 21 Part 56 – Institutiona l Revie w Boards 
www.access.gpo.gov /nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr56_02.h tml 
 
▪ Title 21 Part 312 – Investi gationa l New Drug Application 
www.access.gpo.gov /nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr312_02.h tml 
 
• State laws 
 
• Institutiona l research polic ies and procedures 
www.dfhcc.harvard.edu/cl inical-research -support/clinical -research - 
operations -cro/poli cies-and-procedures  
 
It is unde rstood that deviations from the protoco l shou ld be avoided, except when 
necessa ry to eliminate an immedia te hazar d to a research partic ipant. In such case, 
the deviation must be report ed to the IRB accordin g to the local reportin g policy.  
 
13.4 Study Documentation  
 
The investigator  must prepare  and maintain  adequate  and accurate  case histories  designed 
to record  all observations  and other  data pertinent to the study for each  research 
participant.  This information  enables  the study  to be fully  docu mented  and the study  data 
to be subsequently  verified.  
 
Original  source  docu ments supporting  entries  in the case report  forms include  but are not 
limited to hospital records, clinical charts, laboratory  and pharmacy records,  recorded  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 90 -  
  
 
data from  automated instru ments, microfi ches, photographic  negatives,  microfilm  or 
magnetic  media,  and/or  x-rays.  
 
13.5 Recor ds Retention 
All study -relate d docu ments must be retained for the maximum period requir ed by 
applicable federal regulat ions and guidelines or institutiona l policies.  
 
13.6 Multi -center Guidelines  
This protoco l will adher e to the policie s and requirement s of the Dana -Farber/Harvard 
Cance r Center. The speci fic responsibilitie s of the Princip al Investigato r (or 
Protocol Chair), Coordinatin g Center , and Participating Institutions are presented in 
the Dana -Farber/Harvard  Cancer  Center  Multi-Center  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan 
(see Appendix  D. 
 
 
• The Principal Investigator/Co ordinatin g Center is respons ible for distributing all 
IND Action  Letters  or Safety  Reports  to all participating  institution s for 
submission to their individua l IRBs for actio n as required.  
 
 
• Mechanis ms will be in place to ensure quality assurance, protocol compliance, and 
adverse even t reporting at each site. 
 
 
• Excep t in very unusua l circu mstances , each participatin g institutio n will order 
the agent(s ) directl y from the suppli er. A partic ipating site may orde r the 
agent(s) only after the initia l IRB approva l for the site has been forwarde d to the 
Coordinatin g Center.  
 
14. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
This is a standar d 3+3 desig n Phase I study with an expansio n cohor t at the recommended  
Phas e II dose to furthe r explor e the activit y and safet y of the regimen. 
 
14.1 Study Design/Endpoints  
 
Phase I:  
The primary endpoint  is to deter mine the MTD and DLT’s of the  combination  of everoli mus and 
pazopanib.  Safety and incidence  of dose-limiting toxicities will be the primary outcome 
parameters.  All patients  in a dose cohort  will complete  28 days (1 cycle)  of combination tre atment 
prior  to the treatment of any patie nt at a higher  dose level.  If a patient  does not co mplete the 28 
days of treat ment for reasons t hat are clearly  not adver se events  related to 
treatment, then that patient will be replaced,  up to  three  per dose lev el. If more  than three patients 
need  to be replaced  on a dose level,  then the reasons will be re-evaluated before  continuing.  
There  will be no intrapatient  dose escalation.  Pazopanib  and everoli mus will be escalated 
accor ding to the standard  3+3 Phase I methodolo gy and dose escalation  rules  (descri bed in detail 
in Section  5.3.1). Once  it is docu mented  that the last patient  in a cohort  has co mpleted  28 days of  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 91 -  
  
 
therapy  without evide nce of exc essive  dose li miting toxicity,  approval  will be requested  from  the 
DF/HCC DSMB for dose escalation  to the next dose lev el will occur.  Successi ve cohorts of 
patie nts will be accrued to deter mine the maximum tolerated  dose that  results in <33% dose- 
limiting toxicities  with the combination  of evero limus and pazopanib  in patients  with metastatic  
kidney  cancer.  Up to  six patients  will be treated  at the MTD before  proceeding  to the expansion 
cohort.  
 
The assess ment of safety will be based mainly  on the  frequen cy of adverse  events  and on the 
number of laboratory  values  that fall outside  of pre -deter mined ranges.  Toxicities  will be 
summarized  as nu mber and percent  of patients,  separately  by dose cohort.  Other  safety  data (e.g. 
electrocardiogra m, vital signs, special tests) will be considered  as appropriate.  
 
Adverse  events will be summarized by  presenting,  for each dose cohort,  the number and 
perce ntage of  patients  having  any adverse  event, having  an adverse  event  in each body system, 
and having  each individual adverse  event.  Any other  infor mation collected  (e.g. severity  or 
relatedne ss to study  medic ation) will  be listed  as appropriate. Descriptive  statistics  will be 
calculated  to characterize  the disease  and previous  treatment features  as well as the details  of 
protoc ol therapy.  Toxicities will  be tabulated  by grade  for each dose cohort and overall for all 
patients  accrued  to the Phase I study.  
 
The probabilities  of dose escalation  for vario us true DLT  rates  are summarized  below:  
 
 True  Probability  of DLT  at Current  Dose  
 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 
Probability  that 
dose is  escalated   
0.91  
0.71  
0.49  
0.31  
0.17  
0.08  
0.03 
 
 
Expansion  cohort:  
 
The primary objective  is to evaluate the safety and efficacy  of the  combination  of 
pazopanib  and everolimus  in previously treated  advanced  urothelial  carcino ma patients. 
The proportion  of patients  achieving  objective  response (OR) defined  as co mplete  or 
partial  response per  RECIST  criteria  as their  best overall  response is  the primary 
endpoint.  Simon’s  two-stage  design  is employed to minimize accrual  if treatment with 
pazopanib  and everolimus  is not effective.  Achieving  objective  response in  this 
population  has historically  been  difficult.  There  no FDA approved  second  line therapy  for 
urothelial  cancer.  The only European  approved  therapy  in this setting  is Vinflunine  with a 
response rate of 9%.(48) The  null hypothesis  for this  study  is assumed to be 10%.  
 
 
 
Twenty -nine patie nts will be enrolled. Only eli gible patients  who sta rt protocol therapy 
will be included in the response  analysis.  The first stage will accrue  n=20 patie nts (n=18 
eligible  treated  patients).  If 3 or more objective  respon ses are  observed  among the first 
stage  cohort then an additional  9 patients  will be accrued  (n=8 eligible treated  patie nts). If 
5 or more responses are  observed  in the 26 eli gible patients  who sta rted protocol  therapy  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 92 -  
  
 
then the combination  of pazopanib  with everolimus  will be considered  promising.  The 
operating  characteristics  of this  design are summarized  below.  If the true OR rate  is 10%, 
the proba bility of stoppi ng early  at the first stage  is 0.734 and  the proba bility of accepting 
treatment for further  study  is 0.099 (Type  I error). If the  true OR rate  is 30%, the 
probability  of concludi ng the treatment is promising  is 0.904  (power). Upon co mpletion  
of the  study,  the true response rate  will be estimated and an exact  90% c onfidence 
interval constructed. 
 
 
 True  Underlying  Response Rate  
   
20%  
25%  
30% 
Probability  of 
Stopping  Early 
(<3/18)     
 
 
0.271   
 
 
0.135   
 
 
0.060  
Overall  
Probability  of 
Concluding 
Effective  (>5/29)     
 
 
0.577   
 
 
0.781   
 
 
0.904  
 
 
14.2  Sampl e Size/Accrual Rate  
 
 
Phase I:  2 patients  per month,  with a maximum of 30 patients  
Expansion  cohort:  3 patients  per month,  with a maximum of 25 patients  
 
14.3   Strat ificatio n Factors  
N/A 
 
 
14.4 Analysi s of Secondar y Endpoints  
Phase I:  
 
Pharmacokinetic  parameters  will be analyzed  to deter mine whether  pharmacologically 
significant  drug interactions  are present  between  everoli mus and pazopanib.  The 
concentrati on of everolimus  in whole  blood  and plasma will be deter mined using  a 
validated  assay involving  high perfor mance liquid  chromatography  with electrospray 
ionization  mass spectro metric detection.  Time points  will be deter mined as the  
difference  between  the midpoint  of the  blood  collection  interval  and starting  time of dose 
administration.  Concentration -time profiles will be analyzed  by nonco mpartmental 
methods  and/or  nonlinear  least squares r egression  using  Professional  version  4.0.1 
software  package  (Pharsight  Corp., Cary,  NC).  Phar macokinetic  parameters  and 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 93 -  
  
 
varia bles will be calculated  accor ding to standard equatio ns.  Descriptive  summaries  of 
PK para meters (Ctroug h, T1/2  and Cmax) will be provided  by dose cohort.  
 
Secondary  
 
Secondary  endpoints  will evaluate  safety,  progression -free survival  (PFS),  overall 
survival  (OS) and  duration  of response. D uration  of response is  calculated  for objective 
responders and  defined  as the  time in months  from  the first observation  of a response 
(e.g.,  the first time that the appropriate  RECIST  1.1 criteria  was observed  for confir med 
responders) to  the first docu mented  progre ssion or death  due to any cause,  whichever 
occurs  first. Duration  of response is  censored  at the date of last  disease  evaluation  for 
patients  who are  known to be alive  and who have  not relapsed  after a CR or PR. 
Progression -free survival  is calculated  as the  months  between  registration  and 
docu mented  PD as deter mined by RECIST  1.1, or death  due to any cause,  whichever 
occurs  first. Overall  survival is defined as the  time in months  from  registration  to death 
due to any cause  or, censored  at the date last known alive.  Patients  alive  without  disease  
progres sion will be censored at the date of last disease  evaluation.  Time to event  data will 
be estimated with the Kaplan -Meier  method.  Efficacy will further  be described  by 4- and 
12-month PFS and  OS rates  along  with 90% CIs. Descriptive  statistics  will be used to  
characterize  the disease and previous treatment features  as well as the  details  of protocol 
therapy.  
 
Toxicity  
 
All patients  who recei ve treatment will be included  in toxicity  analy ses. A summary  of 
the incidence of all treatment-related grade  3-5 toxicities  will be provided  as maximum 
grade  by toxicity type  and body  system. Any  other infor mation  collected  (e.g. severity  or 
relatedness  to study  medication)  will be listed as appropriate.  Overall  maximum grade  3 
or higher  treatment-related toxicity  rates  in all treated patients will be calculated.  The 
table  below  shows  the 90%  confidence  intervals  for 0, 2, 4, and 6 patients  with grade  3 or 
higher  toxicity  in a total of 29 treated  patients.  
 
Observed  
Number of 
Patie nts with 
Grade  > 3 
Toxicity   
Grade  > 
3 
Toxicity  
Rate 90% Confidence  
Inter val for True 
but Unknown 
Grade  > 3 
Toxicity  Rate 
0 0.0%  (0.0%, 9.8%)  
2 6.9%  (1.3%, 20.2%)  
4 13.8%  (4.9%, 28.9%)  
6 20.7%  (9.4%, 36.8%)  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 94 -  
  
 
Exploratory  
Relevan t somatic and germline alteration s will be identified by adapt ation and 
modificatio n of discovery -oriented algorithm s in commo n use at the Broa d Institute 
and MSKCC . We will also apply a serie s of computationa l algorithms that predict 
neutral , detri mental or activating variants. Upon completion , we will delive r a list of 
somatic and germline variant s that perturb cance r genes and associate d cellular 
pathways , associate d with respons e to thera py in this cohort . Relevan t associations 
betwee n mutatio n statu s and treat ment outcome will be assesse d on an exploratory 
basis ,  and  relevan t  targete d  sequenc ing  may  be  perfor med  in  non-responder s  to 
furthe r understan d the associatio n betwe en respons e to study therap y and somatic 
alterations.  
 
 
14.5 Reportin g and Exclusions  
 
 
14.5.1   Evaluation of  toxicity.  Any participant  who has received  at least one dose of 
study  thera py will be evaluable  for toxici ty. Patients  who experie nce to xicity not 
meeting  the definition  of DLT  but do  not co mplete  28 days of study  treatment will 
be replaced.  Reasons for not  completing  28 days of therapy  will be reviewed.  
 
14.5. 2   Evaluation of respons e.  All participants who  receiv ed treatment will be asses sed 
for response  to treatment, e ven if there  are major protocol  treatment deviations. 
Patie nts who did not receive  any dose of study  medication  will not be included  in the 
analy sis.  Each  participant  will  be  assigned  one  of  the  following  categories:  1) 
complete response,  2) partial  response,  3) stable  disease, 4)  progressive  disease, and 
unknown (not  evaluable,  insufficient  data).  
 
All  conclu sions  should  be  based  on  all  eligible  and  treated  partic ipants  who 
receive d protoco l therapy. Subanalyse s will then be performed on  the basis of a 
subset  of participants,  exclud ing those for whom major protocol deviations have been 
identified. However , these subanalyse s will not serve as the basis for drawing 
conclusion s concernin g treatment efficacy , and the reason s for excludin g participants 
from the analysi s will be clearl y report ed. The 95% confidenc e inte rvals will be 
provided.  
 
Pregnancy  
 
Preclinic al data  regarding reproductive  toxicity is described  in the most recent 
Investigator  Brochure.  The potential  reproductive  risk for humans is unknown.  Women 
of childbearing potential  should  be advised  to use highly  effective  contraception 
methods  while  they are receiving  everoli mus and up to 8 weeks  after treatment has 
been  stopped.  
 
To ensure  patie nt safety,  each pregnancy occurring  while  the patient  is on study 
treatment must  be reported  to Novartis  within  24 hours  of learning  of its occurrence. 
The pregnancy  should  be followed  up to determine outco me, including  spontaneous or 
voluntary  termination,  details  of the birth,  and the presence  or absence  of any birth  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 95 -  
  
 
defects, congenit al abnormalities,  or maternal and/or  newborn  complic ations. The 
newborn will  be followed  for at  least 12 months.  
 
Pregnancy should  be recorded  on a Clinical  Trial  Pregnancy Fo rm and reported  by the 
investigator  to the oncology  Novartis  Drug  Safety  and Epide miology Department 
(DS&E).  Pregnancy  follow -up should  be rec orded on the sa me form and should  include 
an assess ment of the possible  relationship  to the study  treatment and any pregnancy 
outco me. Any SAE  experienced  during pregn ancy must be reported  on the SAE  Report 
Form. 
 
15. PUBL ICATION PLAN  
 
The phase  I results  of this study  will be submitted for presentation  as an abstract  in 
2012.  Full results  will plan on being  published  in a peer reviewed  publication  in 2013. 
The expansion cohort  results  will be submitted for  abstract  presentation in  2014  and 
submitted for publication  in 2015.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 96 -  
  
 
16. REFERENCE S 
1. Boulay  A, Lane  HA: The  mammalian  target  of rapa mycin kinase  and tumor  growth 
inhibition.  Recent  Results Cancer  Res 172:99 -124, 2007  
2. Bjornsti  MA, Houghton PJ: The  TOR pathway:  a target  for cancer  therapy.  Nat Rev 
Cancer  4:335 -48, 2004  
3. Wullschleg er S, Loewith  R, Hall MN: TOR signaling  in growth and  metabolis m. Cell 
124:471 -84, 2006  
4. Manning  BD, Cantley  LC: AKT/PKB sign aling: navigating  downstream.  Cell 129:1261 - 
74, 2007  
5. Tabernero  J, Rojo  F, Calvo  E, et al: Dose - and schedule -dependent  inhibition  of the 
mammalian  target  of rapa mycin pathway  with everoli mus: a phase  I tumor pharmacodyna mic 
study  in patients  with advanced  solid tumors. J Clin  Oncol  26:1603 -10, 2008  
6. Amato RJ, Jac  J, Giessinger  S, et al: A phase  2 study  with a daily  regimen of the  oral 
mTOR  inhibitor  RAD001 (everoli mus) in patients  with metastatic  clear  cell renal  cell cancer. 
Cancer  115:2438 -46, 2009  
7. Motzer  RJ, Escudier  B, Oudard S, et  al: Efficacy  of everoli mus in advanced  renal  cell 
carcino ma: a double -blind,  rando mised, placebo -controlled  phase  III tri al. Lancet  372:449 -56, 
2008  
8. Sternberg  CN, Szczylik  C, Lee E, et al: A rand omized, double -blind phase  III study  of 
pazopanib  in treatment-naive  and cytokine -pretreated  patients  with advanced  renal  cell 
carcino ma (RCC).  J Clin  Oncol  (Meeting  Abstracts)  27:5021 -, 2009  
9. Motzer  RJ, Russo P:  Syste mic therapy  for renal  cell carcino ma. J Urol 163:408 -17, 2000  
10. Bochner  BH, Cote  RJ, Weidner  N, et  al: Angiogenesis  in bladder cancer:  relationship 
between  microvessel  density  and tumor  prognosis. J Natl  Cancer  Inst 87:1603 -12, 1995  
11. Inoue  K, Slaton  JW, Karashi ma T, et al: The prognostic  value  of angiogenesis  factor 
expres sion for predicti ng recurrence  and metastasis  of bladder  cancer  after neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy  and radical  cystecto my. Clin Cancer  Res 6:4866 -73, 2000  
12. Philp  EA, Stephenson  TJ, Reed  MW: Prognostic  significance  of angiogenesis  in 
transitional  cell carcino ma of the  human urinary  bladder.  Br J Urol 77:352 -7, 1996  
13. El-kott AF, El -baz MA, Mokhtar  AA: Proliferating  cell nuclear antigen  (PCNA) 
overexpression  and microvessel  density  predict  survival in the urinary  bladder  carcino ma. Int 
Urol Nephrol  38:237 -42, 2006  
14. Chaudhary  R, Bromley M, Clarke  NW, et al: Prognostic  relevance  of micro-vessel 
density  in cancer  of the  urinary  bladder.  Anticancer  Res 19:3479 -84, 1999  
15. Dickinson  AJ, Fox SB, Persad RA, et  al: Quantification  of angiogenesis  as an 
independent  predictor  of prognosis  in invasive  bladder  carcino mas. Br J Urol 74:762 -6, 1994  
16. Jaeger  TM, Weidner  N, Chew K, et  al: Tumor angiogenesis  correlates  with lymph node 
metastases  in invasive  bladder  cancer.  J Urol 154:69 -71, 1995  
17. Canoglu  A, Gogus C,  Beduk  Y, et  al: Microvessel  density  as a prognostic  marker  in 
bladder  carcino ma: correlation  with tumor grade,  stage  and prognosis.  Int Urol Nephrol  36:401 - 
5, 2004  
18. Inoue  K, Slaton  JW, Davis D W, et al: Treat ment of hu man metastatic  transitional  cell 
carcino ma of the  bladder  in a murine  model  with the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor monoclonal  antibody  DC101 and  paclitaxel.  Clin Cancer  Res 6: 2635-43, 2000  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 97 -  
  
 
19. Dinney  CP, Bielenberg  DR, Perrotte  P, et al: Inhibition  of basic  fibroblast  growth factor 
expression,  angiogenesis,  and growth of hu man bladder  carcino ma in mice by syste mic 
interferon -alpha  administration. Cancer  Res 58:808 -14, 1998  
20. Tanaka  Y, Kaw amata H, Fuji moto K, et  al: Angiogenesis  inhibitor  TNP -470 suppresses 
tumorigenesis  in rat urinary  bladder.  J Urol 157:683 -8, 1997  
21. Campbell  SC, Volpert  OV, Ivanovich  M, et  al: Molecular  mediators  of angiogenesis  in 
bladder  cancer.  Cancer  Res 58:1298 -304, 1998  
22. Crew JP, O'Brien T,  Bradburn  M, et  al: Vascular endothelial  growth  factor  is a predictor 
of relapse  and stage  progression in  superficial  bladder  cancer.  Cancer  Res 57:5281 -5, 1997  
23. O'Brien T,  Cranston  D, Fuggle  S, et al: Different  angiogenic  pathways  characterize 
superficial  and invasive  bladd er cancer.  Cancer  Res 55:510 -3, 1995  
24. Yang CC,  Chu KC, Yeh WM:  The expression  of vascular  endothelial  growth factor  in 
transitional  cell carcino ma of urinary  bladder  is correlated  with cancer  progression. Urol Oncol  
22:1-6, 2004  
25. Wu W, Shu X, Hovsepyan H, et  al: VEGF receptor  expression  and signaling  in human 
bladder  tumors.  Oncogene  22:3361 -70, 2003  
26. Bernardini  S, Fauconnet  S, Chabannes  E, et al: Serum  levels  of vascular  endothelial 
growth factor  as a prognostic  factor  in bladder  cancer.  J Urol 166:1275 -9, 2001  
27. Dvorak HF, Brown LF,  Detmar M, et  al: Vascular  permeabil ity factor/vascular 
endothelial  growth fact or, microvascular  hyperpermeability,  and angioge nesis. Am J Pathol  
146:1029 -39, 1995  
28. Gallagher  DJ, Milowsky  MI, Gerst SR, et al: Phase II Study  of Sunitinib  in Patie nts 
With Metastatic  Urothelial  Cancer.  Journal  of Clinical  Oncology  28:1373 -1379,  2010  
29. Bellmunt J, Gonzalez -Larriba  JL, Maroto  JP, et  al: First-line treatment with sunitinib 
monotherapy  in patients  with advanced  urothelial  cancer  ineligible  for cisplatin -based 
chemotherapy:  Pretreat ment levels  of IL8  and Houn sfield units  as predictors  of clinical  benefit. 
ASCO Meeting  Abstracts  28:4540,  2010  
30. Necchi  A, Nicolai  N, Ortega  C, et al: Updated  results  of INT70/09  phase  II study  of 
pazopanib  (PZP) monotherapy  for patients  with relapsed/refractory  urothelial  cancer  (UC). 
ASCO Meeting  Abstracts  29:4618,  2011  
31. Pili R, Qin R,  Flynn  PJ, et  al: MC0 553: A phase  II safety  and efficacy  study with the 
VEGF receptor  tyrosine kinase  inhibitor pazopa nib in patie nts with metastatic  urothelial  cancer. 
ASCO Meeting  Abstracts  29:259,  2011  
32. Kwiatkowski DJ, Manning  BD: Tuberous  scler osis: a GAP at  the crossroads of multiple 
signaling  pathways.  Hum. Mol.  Genet.  14:R251 -258, 2005  
33. Edinger  AL, Thompson  CB: Akt maintains  cell size and survival  by increasing  mTOR - 
dependent  nutrient  uptake.  Mol Biol Cell 13:2276 -88, 2002  
34. Sekulic  A, Hudson CC,  Hom me JL, et  al: A direct  linkage  between  the 
phosphoino sitide 3-kinase-AKT  signaling  pathway  and the mammalian  target  of rapamycin in 
mitogen -stimulated  and transfor med cells.  Cancer  Res 60:3504 -13, 2000  
35. Wu X, Obata  T, Khan Q, et  al: The phosphatidylinositol -3 kinase  pathway  regulates 
bladder  cancer  cell invasion.  BJU International  93:143 -150, 2004  
36. Benistant  C, Chapuis  H, Roche  S: A specific  function  for phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase 
alpha  (p85alpha -p110alpha)  in cell survival  and for phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase  beta 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 98 -  
  
 
(p85alpha -p110beta)  in de novo  DNA synthesis  of hu man colon  carcino ma cells.  Oncogene  
19:5083 -90, 2000  
37. Park SJ, Lee  TJ, Chang  IH: Role  of the  mTOR Pathway  in the Progression and 
Recurrence  of Bladder  Cancer:  An Immunohistoche mical Tissue  Microarray  Study.  Korean  J 
Urol 52:466 -473, 2011  
38. Sun C -H, Chang  Y-H, Pan C -C: Activation  of the  PI3K/Akt/mTOR  pathway  correlates 
with tumour progression and  reduced  survival  in patients  with urothelial carcinoma of the urinary  
bladder.  Histopathology  58:1054 -1063,  2011  
39. Knowles MA, Habuchi  T, Kennedy  W, et al: Mutation  Spectrum  of the  9q34 Tuberous  
Sclerosis  Gene  TSC1  in Transitional  Cell Carcinoma of the  Bladder.  Cancer  Res 63:7652 -7656,  
2003  
40. Mhawech -Fauceglia  P, Cheney  RT, Schwaller  J: Genetic  alterations  in urothelial 
bladder  carcino ma. Cancer 106:1205 -1216,  2006  
41. Sjodahl  G, Lauss M, Gudjonsson S, et  al: A syste matic study  of gene  mutations  in 
urothelial  carcino ma; inactivating  mutations  in TSC2 and PIK3R1. PLoS One 6:e18583,  2011  
42. Cairns  P, Evron  E, Okami K, et  al: Point  mutation  and homozygous  deletion  of 
PTEN/MMAC1 in  primary  bladd er cancers.  Oncogene  16:3215 -8, 1998  
43. Aveyard  JS, Skilleter  A, Habuchi  T, et al: Somatic mutation  of PTEN in  bladder 
carcino ma. Br J Cancer  80:904 -8, 1999  
44. Laugier  P, Kuffer R,  Olmos  L, et al: [Cowden disease:  report of 8 cases  in 2 families 
(author 's transl)].  Ann Der matol Venereol  106:453 -63, 1979  
45. Hauser H, Ody B,  Plojoux  O, et  al: Radiolo gical findings  in multi ple hamartoma 
syndro me (Cowden disease):  a report  of three  cases.  Radiology  137:317 -23, 1980  
46. Chiong  E, Lee I-L, Dadbin  A, et  al: Effects of mTOR Inhibit or everoli mus (RAD001)  
on Bladder  Cancer  Cells.  Clini cal Cancer  Research  17:2863 -2873,  2011  
47.    Vasconcelos -Nóbrega  C, Pinto -Leite  R, Arant es-Rodrigues  R, et al: In vivo  and in vitro 
effects  of RAD001 on bladder  cancer. Urologic  Oncology:  Seminars and Original  Investigations 
Epub,  2011  
48. Milowsky MI, Regazzi  AM, Garcia -Gross man IR, et al: Final results  of a phase  II study 
of everoli mus (RAD001) in  metastatic  trans itional cell carcinoma (TCC)  of the uroth elium. 
ASCO Meeting  Abstracts  29:4606,  2011  
49. Puzio -Kuter  AM, Castillo -Martin  M, Kinkade  CW, et al: Inactivation  of p53 and  Pten 
promotes invasive  bladder  cancer.  Genes Dev 23:675 -80, 2009  
50. O'Reilly  T, Wood  JM, Littlewood -Evans A, et  al: Differential  anti-vascular  effects  of 
mTOR  or VEGFR pathway  inhibition:  A rational  basis for co mbining  RAD001 and 
PTK787/ZK222584. Proc A mer Assoc Cancer  Res 2005:3038,  2005  
51. DePri mo S, Bello  C, Smeraglia  J, et al: Circulating  protein  biomarkers  of 
pharmacodyna mic activity  of suniti nib in patients  with metastatic  renal  cell carcino ma: 
modulation  of VEGF and  VEGF -related  proteins.  Journal  of Translational  Medicine  5:32,  2007  
52. Wagle  N, Emery C, Berger  MF, et  al: Dissecting  Therapeutic  Resistance  to RAF 
Inhibition  in Melano ma by Tu mor Geno mic Profiling.  J Clin Oncol,  2011  
53. Wagle  N, Berger  MF, Davis MJ, et  al: High -throughput  detection  of actionable  geno mic 
alterations  in clinical  tumor  samples by targeted,  massively  paral lel sequencing.  Cancer  
discovery  2:82-93, 2012  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 99 -  
  
 
54. Li H, Durbin R:  Fast and accurate  long-read alignment with Burrows -Wheeler 
transfor m. Bioinfor matics 26:589 -95, 2010  
55. DePristo MA, Banks E,  Poplin  R, et al: A fra mework for variation  discovery  and 
genotyping  using  next-generation  DNA sequen cing data.  Nature  genetics  43:491 -8, 2011  
56. McKenna  A, Hanna  M, Banks E,  et al: The Geno me Analysis Toolkit:  A MapReduce 
framework  for analyzing  next-generation  DNA sequencing  data.  Geno me Research  20:1297 - 
1303, 2010  
57. Eisenhauer  EA, Therasse  P, Bogaerts  J, et al: New response evalu ation criteria  in solid 
tumours:  revised  RECIST  guideline  (version  1.1). Eur  J Cancer  45:228 -47, 2009  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 100 -  
  
 
17. APPEN DICES Appendix A 
 
 
Performance Status Criteria 
 
 
 
 
ECOG  Performance  Status Scale   
Karnofsky  Performance  Scale  
 
 
Grade  
 
Descrip tion  
 
Percent  
 
Descrip tion 
 
 
0 Norma l activity . Fully active, able 
to carry on all pre-disease 
performanc e withou t restriction.   
100 Normal, no complaints , no 
evidence of disease.  
 
90 Able to carry on normal activity; 
minor signs or symptoms of 
disease. 
 
 
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory.  
Restricted in physica lly strenuous 
activity , but ambula tory and able to 
carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light 
house work, office work).  
 
80 Norma l activit y with effort; 
some signs or symptom s of 
disease. 
 
 
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on 
normal activit y or to do active 
work.  
 
 
2 In bed < 50% of the time. 
Ambula tory and capabl e of all self- 
care, but unable to carry out any 
work activities . Up and abou t more 
than 50% of waking hour s.  
 
60 Requires occasiona l assis tance, 
but is able to care for most of 
his/he r needs.  
 
50 Requi res considerabl e assistance  
and frequent medical care. 
 
 
3 In bed >50% of the time. Capable 
of only limited self-care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hour s.  
 
40 Disabled, requires special care 
and assistance. 
 
 
30 Severel y disabled,  
hospitalizatio n indicated . Death 
not imminent.  
 
 
4 100% bedridd en. Comple tely 
disabled. Canno t carry on any self- 
care. Totall y confined to bed or 
chair.  
 
20 Very sick, hospi talizat ion 
indicated . Death not imminent.  
 
 
10 Moribund , fatal processes  
progre ssing rapidly. 
5 Dead. 0 Dead. 
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 101 -  
 
 
  
 
Appendix B 
Pazopanib  Blood  Pharmacokin etic Colle ction and Handling  
 
Pharmacokinetic  Sample  Supplies  
 
GlaxoS mithKline  will provide  all tubes  for blood  collection,  storage,  and labels  with the visit 
name and time of sample collection  (tubes  sent as bulk  shipment with separate  labels).  
 
Blood  samples for the  deter mination  of plas ma pazopanib  concentratio ns will be collected  into 
2mLEDTA  vacutainers.  The blood  samples will be collected  into tubes and immediately  placed 
on ice.  Samples  will be centrifuged  at 3000 RPM for 10 minutes  under  chilled  conditions 
(approxi mately  4C).  Transfer  no more than 750µL of the  resultant  plasma into 
appropriately  labelled  1.4mL Matrix  TrakMate  polypropylene  tubes  and 
stored  frozen  (within  60 minutes  of the  sampling  time) at -20C. 
 
PK Blood  Collection  Tubes Labels  
 
Please  place  labels  on the  tubes  vertically,  as they  are found in  the picture.  Do 
not place  them  horizontally  around  the tube,  resulting  in a tag. 
 
 
DMPK  Shipping Guide - Pazopanib  
 
Specific  regulations  exist for the  shipment of bio logical  speci mens. The 
Depart ment of Drug Metabolism  and Pharmacokinetics  (DMPK) requires 
the use of IATA/ICAO regulations  when speci mens are shipped  on our 
behalf.  
It is the se nder’s  responsibility  to abide  by all  regulations.  
Notification  of Shipment  
Please  remember  to notify  the depart ment of DMPK as soon as possible, but at least  two days  
in advance  of any  shipment.  DO NOT  leave  a message  on an  answeri ng machine.  Please  state 
protoc ol number,  expe cted shipping date,  carrier, estimated time of arrival  and airway bill 
number if applicable.  
Frozen  samples  should  be shipped  on solid  carbon  dioxide.  
Shipping  Days  
Please  ship MONDAY through WEDNESDAY only 
Please  ensure  that wherever  possible  samples are transported  so as to  arrive  between  the hours of  
09:00  and 16:00.  
UM Sample  Management  Contact  Details:  
The shipping  boxes must be clearly  labeled  with the following  address:  
GlaxoSmit hKline  
Department of Drug Metabolism  and PharmacoKinetics  
Mail  Stop  UW2710  
709 S wedeland  Road  
King  of Pr ussia, PA 19406  
USA  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 102 -  
  
 
Attn:  Kathl een Dolce/  Josh  Albert  
 
 Phone  # Mail  Code  FAX  
Kathleen  Dolce  610-270-6757  UW2710  610-270-4971  
Josh Albert  610-270-6549  UW2710  610-270-4971  
Michael  Adamek 610-270-4658  UW2710  610-270-4971  
 
Packaging  instruction s: 
 
NOTE: Do not let samples  thaw  while packaging!  
1.   Place  individual  tubes  into Matrix  96 well rack.  Place  rack into a large  bag with absorbent  material.  
Place  bags with racks  in bottom  of cooler. 
2.   Fill box completely  with dry ice and put top on coole r. 
3.   Enclose  a copy  of the requisition  forms, correspond ing to the samples in that box, in a bag or 
envelope  and place  on the top of the cooler.  
4.   Close  the flaps  and tape shut.  
5.   Complete the airbill  and shipping  labels,  according  to the directions  below.  Affix  airbill  to top of 
shipping  box. 
 
 
 
Example  UPS Airbill  
 
 
 
*Please  use one airbill  per box 
You must enter  on the  airbill:  
• Your site’s  address  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 103 -  
  
 
• The weight  of the  package  in lbs. 
• The weight  of the dry ice  in KG 
• Sender’s signature  
 
Shipping Box  
 
1.   Co mplete  the following  label  found on the  specimen  shipping  box: 
 
• Address/return  address l abel (fill in blanks)  
 
• Carbon  dioxide,  solid  [Dry Ice]  UN1845 #KG (f ill in blank).  Note:  This  weight  
should ma tch the weight  on the airbill.  
 
2.   Prior to  shipping,  notify  the following  individ uals of the  airbill  number(s),  the number of 
boxes shipped,  the nature  of the  shipment (i.e.: medical  speci mens),  and scheduled 
shipment/pick -up and arrival  date.  
 
• UPS Office  at 1-800-877-1497 and  give them  account#  301923 . 
 
• GlaxoS mithKline  DMPK via  the FAX page  located  in the PK Sample Information  and 
Shipping  Notebook  (Fax:  610-270-4971).  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 104 -  
  
 
Cycle  1 shipping Form  – Include with Pazopanib  PK samples  
 
 
 
STUDY  NUMBER  
Pazopanib  Plasma  Requisition  Form  
 
A copy  of this completed  page  must  accompany  the samples  being  shipped  to GlaxoSmithKli ne. Please  keep a 
copy  for your records.  Please use a new sheet  for each subject/shipment.  
 
 
Subject  Number:     
 
Cycle  1 
 Day Time - 
point  Time   if included  in 
this sh ipment  Comments  Rec'd  By  
1 0h     
1 1h     
1 2h     
1 4h     
1 6h     
1 24h     
1 48h   (If Applica ble)  
15 0h     
15 1h     
15 2h     
15 4h     
15 6h     
15 24h     
15 48h   (If Applica ble)  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 105 -  
  
 
Cycle  2 Shipping Form  – Include with Pazopanib  PK samples  
 
 
 
 
STUDY  NUMBER  
Pazopanib  Plasma  Requisition  Form  
 
A copy  of this completed  page  must  accompany  the samples  being  shipped  to GlaxoSmithKli ne. Please  keep a 
copy  for your records.  Please use a new sheet  for each subject/shipment.  
 
 
 
Subject  Number:    Cycle  2, 4 
 
 
 
Cycle Day Time - 
point  Time   if included  in 
this sh ipment  Comments  Rec'd  By 
2 1 0h     
4 1 0h     
       
       
       
       
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 106 -  
  
 
Sample  Collection  and Storage  for Pazopanib  
At each  of the  sampling  times, blood  samples (2 mL)  will be drawn into  a K3 EDTA  vacutainer, 
and centri fuged  for 10 minutes  to separ ate the plasma. The plasma will be trans ferred into pre- 
labeled  storage  tubes  for analysis  of pac litaxel  and stored  at approxi mately  -20C. Sample 
handling  from collection  to storage  should  not exceed 60 minutes.  A blo od sample will be taken 
prior  to the pazopanib  dose, and  at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, and 24 hours.  If patients  are treated  on dose level  
-1, there  will be a 48 hour blood  draw (pre -dose)  as well.  
 
 
All tubes  must be frozen  in an upright  position  to keep  the plasma in the bottom  of the  tube.  Until 
assayed, the samples must remain  frozen  in a freezer  set at appro ximately  -20°C  or when shipping 
in a box with  dry ice.  Prior to  collection,  the collection  tube and plasma storage  tube must  be 
labeled  with the corre sponding  bar-coded  labels  provided  by GSK.  The  sample  labels  will 
include  Protocol  Number,  Analyte,  Subje ct Number, Relative  Sample Time, Cycle  and Dosing 
Day.  The  labels  must  be placed  along  the length of the  tube so the  bar code  can be easily  read.  
Tape  must  not be used to secure the labels otherwise  the tube will not fit into the autoan alyzer  test 
tube rack. The labels  are high quality  and will not peel off of the tube even  under  extre me 
conditions.  
 
The sample will be centrifuged  at approxi mately 1000 x g for  10 to  15 minutes.  The resulting 
plasma will be transferred  to the corresponding  pre-labeled  polypropyle ne stora ge tube (2mL). See 
shippi ng instructions with regard to packing  the samples, enclo sing a manifold with a sample 
inventory,  and notification  of the analytical  sites prior  to shipping.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 107 -  
  
 
APP ENDIX C 
 
Instructions for  Collecting,  Processing,  Stori ng, and Shipping  
Everolimus  Pharmacokinetic  Sample  
 
C.1 Venous access 
 
Pharmacokinetic samples may be collecte d from a central cathete r for this study because 
everolimus is given orally. 
 
For patient s withou t a centra l cathete r, place a large gaug e peripheral cathete r (e.g., 19 or 20 
gauge angiocath straight set  with T-connect or, or similar IV  access  device) in an arm vein 
for the collectio n of pharmacokine tic blood samples on days when multipl e sample s are to 
be collected. Maintain patency  of the cathet er between  blood  draws  using either a heparin 
lock (e.g.,  10 U/mL in normal saline)  or a slow  drip of Normal Saline  for Injection, USP 
(e.g.,  10 mL/hr). 
 
Blood  may be obtained  directly  by venipuncture on  days when only a single 
pharmacokineti c blood speci men is schedule d for collection.  
 
When  sampling  through  a catheter,  begin  to clear the catheter  approxi mately  1 min before 
the specified  sample time  by withdrawing  the lock solution  and approximately  0.5 mL of 
blood  into a  syringe.  Remove  and properly  dispose  the syringe  used to clear  the catheter. 
The catheter  should  be well-flushed  after collecti ng each sample. 
 
C.2 Timing 
 
A battery -powered digital  timer/stopwatch programmed  to operate  continuously  as a 24- 
hr clock will be used to accurately  monit or drug administration  and sample  collection 
times.  The same timer must  be allowed  to run without  interruption  until the last blood 
speci men has been  obtained  from  the subje ct during  the first cycle  of therapy.  
 
Timer readings will  be noted  at the preci se time that the infusion  is started and ended, as 
well as at the beginning  and ending  times of the blood  sample collection  intervals.  
 
Readings  of the digital  timer must be directly  recorded  on a copy  of the appropriate  
DF/HCC Phar macokinetic  Dosing and  Blood  Collection  Time Form'  (see below). 
C.3 Sample collection  
As indicated in  section  8.1, two blood  samples are to be collected in  2.0 mL Vacutainer 
plastic  whole  blood collection  tube with spray -coated  K2-EDTA  (Becton -Dickinson,  item 
no. 367863) at  each and every  time point.  
 
C.4 Sample processing  and storage  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 108 -  
  
 
 
Promptly mix the blood  collection  tubes by gently  inverting  6-times. 
 
Transfer  the whole  blood  from  one tube collected  at each time point  directly  into a 4.5 
mL self-standing  polypropylene  microcentrifu ge cryogenic  tube with external  threads 
(Fisher Scientific,  cat. no. 12 -565-291).  
 
Centrifuge the  other  tube of blood  collected  at each time point  at 1,300  x g for 10 min 
within  15 min after collection.  Separate the  plasma from  the blood  cells using  a pipette 
and transfer  the plasma it into a polypropy lene cryogenic  storage  vial with external 
threads.  
 
Affix  a pre-printed labels  (protocol  number, patient  entry  no., sample no., scheduled 
sample time) to the cryotube,  oriented  length wise toward  the upper  part of the tube.  Do 
not place  the label  over the vial cap.  Hand -written infor mation  on sample tube labels  is 
absolutely  prohibited.  
 
Completely  cover  the label  with protective c ryogenic  freezer  tape (e.g., Fisher  Scientific, 
cat. no. 11 -867B).  
 
 
Place  the tube on crushed dry-ice until stored  in a freez er maintained  at -70°C  until 
packaged  for ship ment. 
 
C.5 Time forms and sample tube/vi al labels 
 
 
Computer  files for dose administration and  sample collecti on time forms and speci men 
tube labels  will be placed  in a subdirec tory located  on a secure  network  server 
(W:\PHASE1RD)  maintained  by Partne rs HealthC are System  (PHS)  Infor mation 
Resources.   All members of the clinical,  laboratory,  and administrative  staff involved 
with Phase  I studies  should  have read-only access  to this subdirectory,  which  may be 
obtained  by contacting  Susan Oliveira  by email (see PHS Global  e-mail directory).  
 
The files are placed  under  the following subdirectories:    PK_T ime_For ms; 
PK_Tube_Labels.  
 
Files  for the PK time forms are to be printed directly from  the file stored  on the network 
server  for each subject  study.  Since  changes  may be periodically  made to these  forms, 
they should  not be copied  onto user personal computers  and staff members are instructed 
not to make photocopies  of blank  forms. 
 
The PK_Tube_Label  files are templates that are intended  to be copied and edited by 
replacing the word  'code'  with the patient entry number using  the MS Word  edit/replace 
all function  and printed  on an Avery  5260  label sheet.   Hand -written  infor mation  on 
sample tube labels  is absolut ely prohibited.  There  are separate sets of labels  for blood 
collection  tubes  and sample  storage tubes.  Blood  collection  tubes should  be pre-labeled.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 109 -  
  
 
 
C.6 Sample  shipment 
 
Contact  Susan  Oliveira  (tel: 617-726-5868  or 617-726-5854; e -mail: 
soliveira2 @partners.or g) or Dr. Jeffrey  Supko  (email: supko.jeffrey@mgh.harvard .edu) 
to arrange  transp ortation of  each complete  set of samples to the DF/HCC  Cancer 
Pharmacology Core  at the Massachusetts G eneral  Hospital,  55 Fruit  Street,  Room 
GRJ1025, Boston,  MA 02114.  
Everolimus -Pazopanib Phase I  
v. 11/3/16 
- 110 -  
  
 
 
APP ENDIX D 
 
 
 
Drug  Supply  Request  Form  
 
 
PI: 
 
GSK Study Number: 
Title of S tudy: 
 
In order to facilitate your shipment for drug supply, please fill in the following i nformat ion. If  you have 
any questio ns regarding completing this  form, ple ase contact Ka mal Bhatt, v ia telephone at ( 610)917 - 
5768 or via email at Kamalnayan.H.Bhatt@gs k.com. 
 
 
The full shipping address  for drug supply:  
 
Institution  Name  
Full Street Address (with contact name/phone  #) 
 
Specific dosage reques ted 
Amount R equested  
 
For CRT (investigator initiated) stu dies, the PI holds the IND and is therefore responsible for following 
CFR and GCP  for labeling and dispensing  (21 CFR 312.6).  GSK will ship labeled pazopanib bottles in a 
sealed carton  (68 tabs per  bottle for pazopanib 400 mg and 34 tabs/btl for pazo panib 200mg).  A label 
will be affixed  to each carton identifying the product,  strength and number of bottles.  In addition,  a 
packing slip  will be enclosed with the drug nam e, strength, lot/batch #, storage conditio ns, and 
expirat ion/retest dat e. 
 
  
Appendix E:  Genes in  NGS  sequenc ing assay 
 
ABL1 BCL6 CDK8 DNMT3A  ERBB3 FLT3 HRAS KDM6A  MET NFKB1  PHOX2B  PTPN11  SMARCA4  TOP1 
ABL2 BCOR CDKN1A  DNMT3B  ERBB4 FLT4 HSP90AA1  KDR MITF NFKB2  PIK3C2G  PTPRD SMARCB1  TP53 
AKT1 BIRC2 CDKN2A  E2F3 ERG FOXL2  IDH1 KEAP1  MLH1 NKX2‐1 PIK3CA  PTPRS SMO TP63 
AKT2 BRAF CDKN2B  EGFR ESR1 FUBP1  IDH2 KIT MLL NOTCH1  PIK3CB  PTPRT SOCS1  TSC1 
AKT3 BRCA1 CDKN2C  EIF4EBP1  ETV1 GATA1  IGF1R KLF6 MLL2 NOTCH2  PIK3CD  RAF1 SOX2 TSC2 
ALK BRCA2 CEBPA  EP300  ETV6 GATA2  IGFBP7  KRAS MLL3 NOTCH3  PIK3CG  RARA SPOP TSHR 
ALOX12B  BUB1B  CHEK1  EPHA10  EZH2 GATA3  IKBKE LDHA MLST8  NOTCH4  PIK3R1  RB1 SRC U2AF1  
APC CARD11  CHEK2  EPHA2  FAM123B  GLI1 IKZF1 LGR6 MPL NPM1  PIK3R2  REL SRSF2 VHL 
AR CBL CIC EPHA3  FAM46C  GLI3 IL7R LMO1 MSH2 NRAS PIK3R3  RET STAG2  WAS 
ARAF CBLB CREBBP EPHA4  FAS GNA11  INPP4A  MAGI2  MSH6 NTRK1  PKM2 RICTOR  STK11 WNK1  
ARH GAP26 CCND1  CRKL EPHA5  FAT1 GNAQ  INPP4B  MAP2K1  MTOR  NTRK2  PLK2 RNF43  SUFU WT1 
ARID1A  CCNE1  CRLF2 EPHA6  FBXO11  GNAS INSR MAP2K2  MYB NTRK3  PNRC1  ROR2 TBK1 XPO1 
ARID2 CD79B  CSF1R  EPHA7  FBXW7  GOL PH3 IRS1 MAP2K4  MYC PAK7 PPP2R1A ROS1 TEK YAP1 
ASXL1 CDC42EP2  CTNNB1  EPHA8  FGFR1  GRIN2A  IRS2 MAP3K8  MYCL1  PALB2  PRDM1  RPTOR TERT YES1 
ATM CDC73  CYLD EPHB1  FGFR2  GRM3 JAK1 MCL1 MYCN  PARK2  PREX2  RUNX1  TET1 ZRSR2  
ATRX CDH1 DAXX EPHB2  FGFR3  GSK3B  JAK2 MDM2  MYD88  PARP1  PRKAA2  SDHB TET2  
AURKA  CDH11  DDR2 EPHB3  FGFR4  HDAC2  JAK3 MDM4  NCOA2  PAX5 PRKAR1A  SETD2  TGFBR2   
BAP1 CDK12  DICER1  EPHB4  FH HIF1A JUN MED12  NF1 PBRM1 PRKCI SF3B1 TMPRSS2   
BCL2L1  CDK4 DIS3 EPHB6  FLCN HMGA2 KCNJ5  MEF2B  NF2 PDGFRA PTCH1  SHQ1 TNFAIP3   
BCL2L11  CDK6 DNMT1  ERBB2 FLT1 HNF1A  KDM5C  MEN1 NFE2L2  PDGFRB PTEN SMAD4  TNFRSF14   
 