 TITLE: Rando mized Trial of Peer -to-Peer Versus Phar macist Education to 
I mprove Older Adults' Vaccination Knowledge Through the Senior Center 
Model of Care 
 
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
NCT NU MBER 
 
DOCU MENT DATE:   May 1, 2017 
 
 
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  1 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017   
 
 
 
 
Require ments fo r Sub mitting a Full Proposal  
 
 
Section #1 - MISP Protocol Identification  
 
Study Title:  
Rando mized Trial of Peer -to-Peer Versus Phar macist Education to I mprove 
Older Adults’ Vaccination Knowledge through the Senior Center Model of 
Care 
 
Request Date: May 2, 2016 
Institution Na me  Rutgers University  
 
Investigator Contact 
Infor mation: 
­ Full address  
­ Phone No. 
­ Fax  No. 
­ e-mail address  
Laura T. Pizzi, Phar mD, MPH  
Professor, Depart ment of Phar macy Practice  
Rutgers University   
160 Frelinghuysen Road  
Piscataway, NJ  08854  
Phone: (609) 638-5415 
Fax:  (732) 445-2533 
laura.pizzi @rutgers.edu  
 
 
  
      MISP Template: Protocol  2 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017   
Section #2 - Core Protocol 
 
2.1 Objectives & 
Hypotheses The main goal of this project is to conduct a rando mized trial to co mpare the 
efficacy and costs of two interventions to i mprove knowledge and beliefs 
regarding vaccine -preventable diseases. The interventions tested will be 
delivered to older adults in the Delaware Valley region using a senior center 
model of care and will co mpare a phar macist-led didactic teaching (PHAR M)  
to peer-to-peer teaching (PEER) . The project will be conducted by Rutgers 
University in partnership with Tho mas Jefferson University (TJU) and Center 
in the Park (CIP). CIP is a nationally -accredited senior center which has been 
recognized by the National Institute of Senior Centers (NISC) for its 
co m mit ment to wellness and evidence-based health pro motion.  PHAR M and 
PEER will be targeted towards African A merican (AA)  co m munities and will 
address major vaccine-preventable diseases . Intervention content will be 
focused on zoster and pneu mococcal infections but will co mpare and 
contrast influenza to these diseases  to further participants’ understanding of 
the differences between these diseases and vaccination reco m mendations . 
 
2.1 Objectives  
 
1) Co mpare the efficacy of PHAR M vs. PEER at i mproving participant’s 
knowledge regarding vaccine-preventable diseases  
2) Co mpare the efficacy of PHAR M vs. PEER at i mproving participants’ 
beliefs about vaccination  
3) Measure the costs of PHAR M and PEER fro m the senior center 
perspective 
4) Co mpare the percent of participants taking activation step(s) to get 
vaccinated following receipt of PHAR M vs. PEER  
5) Deter mine the extent to which participants are satisfied with and trust 
the PHAR M vs. PEER interve ntions 
 
2.1.1 Hypotheses  
 
1) PHAR M and PEER will achieve si milar i mprove ments in  older 
adults’ knowledge of vaccine preventable diseases  (pri mary 
hypothesis) 
2) PHAR M and PEER will  i mproved beliefs about vaccine-
preventable disease  
3) PEER will be a lower cost approach to educating participants in the 
senior center co mpared to PHAR M  
4) PHAR M and PEER will result in si milar rates of participants taking 
one or more activation step(s)  to obtain vaccination  
5) Participants will be highly satisfied with the PHAR M and PEER 
interventions 
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  3 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  2.2 Background & 
Rationale, 
Significance of 
Selected Topic & 
Preli minary Data  2.2.1 Background and Rationale  
 
Vaccination is the single best way to prevent co m mon infectious diseases in 
older adults, including those caused by pneu mococcus,  zoster, and influenza. 
Though influenza vaccination progra ms are  widespread, progra ms targeting 
pneu mococcal and zoster infections are fewer. According to the Centers of 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), many adults re main unvaccinated  for 
these diseases, including those at the highest risk of infection.  For exa mple, 
in 2013 the CDC esti mated that only 59.7 % of adults 65 years and older had 
ever received a pneu mococcal vaccination.1 In Pennsylvania the esti mates are 
considerably lower. According to a 2004 Southeastern Pennsylvania 
Household Health Survey, only 51.9 % of adults over 60 had ever received a 
pneu mococcal vaccination. Further more, only 43.6 % of the poor have ever 
had a pneu mococcal vaccination and only 41.6 % of African A merica ns (AA) 
have ever received a pneu mococcal vaccination  co mpared to 53.6 % of 
Caucasians.2 These values indicate concerning  disparities in pneu mococcal 
vaccination between AAs and whites .3 These disparities could be exacerbated 
by increased co mplexity of  pneu mococcal disease  vaccination 
guidelines; the Advisory Co m mittee on I m munization Practices (ACIP) now 
reco m mends that older adults receive two different pneu mococcal 
vaccinations (pneu mococcal conjugate vaccine and pneu mococcal 
polysaccharide vaccine).  4  
 
There are si milar population health concerns pertaining to zoster . 
Nearly one-third of people will experience a zoster infection, i.e., shingles, in 
their lifeti me.5  Many will also experience ongoing sequelae of zoster such as  
post-herpetic neuralgia  or ocular da mage, both of which may interfere  with 
activities of daily living.6,7  Despite de monstrated efficacy, Food and Drug 
Ad ministration Approval and ACIP reco m mendations, many patients 
eligible for the zoster vaccine have not received it.   According to the 
CDC, in 2013, 24.2 % of adults aged ≥60 years old reported receiving zoster 
vaccination to prevent shingles, an increase fro m the 20.1 % in 2012.8  While 
i mproved, the proportion of eligible adults receiving the herpes zoster 
vaccine re mains below the Healthy People 2020 target of 30 %.9  Further, 
while whites aged ≥60 years had higher rates of zoster vaccination (27.4 %) 
African A mericans (10.7 %) and Hispanics (9.5 %) had considerably 
lower rates.  To further understand zoster educational nee ds, we conducted 
a survey of Philadelphia senior center me mbers in 2015. Findings confir m an 
un met educational need for zoster education at the local level (see 
Appendix). These zoster data, considered together with si milarly concerning 
pneu mococcal vaccination data, reflect a critical need to educate older 
adults to i mprove vaccination rates and  reduce health disparities  
a mong minority populations.   
 
2.2.2 Significance of Selected Topic  
 
Because vaccination rates a mong older adults are subopti mal, new models 
of care are needed.  The senior center model of care uses a co m munity -
based senior center as the focal point of access to an older population and 
provides preventative health services through a facility the population  
already attends.  Through our prior work, Jefferson and Center in the Park 
      MISP Template: Protocol  4 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  have de monstrated that senior centers can be an effective, engaging, and 
accessible hub for health pro motion. These efforts ha ve included a 
depression support progra m, glauco ma detection progr a m, diabetes 
adherence intervention, and pneu monia education and vaccination 
(described below under Preli minary Data).10-17    
 
The proposed topic is significant because it will further our prior work to 
yield effective, sustainable and scalable interventions to educate older 
adults about vaccination . Though a prior intervention we tested 
(phar macist-delivered pneu monia intervention ) significantly i mproved 
vaccination knowledge, beliefs, and activation, the econo mic analysis of that 
progra m revealed that it is resource intensive and costly  
($119/participant). In fact, our i mple mentation experience suggests that the 
intervention was cu mberso me (required 3 co mponents: phar macist -delivered 
presentation, live actors skit, and phar macist -led breakout sessions) and too 
ti me consu ming for participants (approxi mately 3 hours of ti me required to 
attend the session).  Older adults who participated in the study were 
cooperative, but the a mount of ti me required made it challenging to 
coordinate with senior group calendars. Further, there were space 
li mitations at so me sites which were exacerbated by the intervention’s 
significant staffing require ments  ( mean staff require ments per session 
were 3.6 phar macists, 8.0 actors, 5.5 student assistants, and 2.0 co m munity 
health workers). 
 
This points to the  need for si mpler, shorter, and cheaper vaccine 
education progra ms to be delivered using senior center models .  In the 
proposed study, we will co mpare the efficacy of the main co mponents  of 
the prior pneu monia intervention: phar macist -led education co mpared to 
peer-to-peer education (e.g., role play exercises which are an adaptation of 
the live skit). We hypothesize that both interventions will i mprove 
vaccination knowledge, beliefs, and activation, but that the peer to peer 
intervention will be less costly than the phar macist -led education. Given 
the tendency to consult with and trust peers regarding healthcare concerns, 
peer-to-peer education has long been recognized as a potential sourc e of 
health pro motion within co m munities.  This has been particularly true a mong 
those that have inconsistent engage ment with the healthcare syste m.  
Perhaps the most widely docu mented health pro motion interventions have 
occurred within the African A merica n population at venues that serve as 
cultural and/or religious centers of the co m munity.18 For exa mple, African 
A merican owned barbershops represent cultural institutions that serve a loyal 
group of male patrons and that provides a foru m for peers to openl y discuss 
conte mporary and relevant topics.  Regarding health, these co m munity 
venues have served as locations for successful peer to peer health 
pro motion progra ms on hypertension, diabetes, depression, HIV/AIDS, 
sexually trans mitted diseases and cancer a mong others.19  
 
2.2.3 Preli minary Data  
 
The proposed study  builds upon the successful Jefferson/CIP research 
collaboration and the work co mpleted  through a prior Merck MISP -
funded project. That project was a single group observational cohort study 
      MISP Template: Protocol  5 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  testing the effect of the Phar macists’ Pneu monia Prevention Progra m 
(PPPP) on participant’s vaccination knowledge, beliefs, and activation. In 
addition, as described above, an econo mic analysis was conducted to 
measure PPPP’s intervention costs and to identify opportunities for 
increasing its efficiency.  
 
PPPP was delivered to 203 older adults at predo minantly African 
A merican senior centers and other co m munity based venues in 
Philadelphia eight ti mes in 2014, and consisted of: 1) a phar macist-delivered 
30 minute for mal presentation, 2) a 10 minute culturally -sensitive live skit 
perfor med by senior center actors , 3) s mall group action planning  facilitated 
by phar macists, and 4) optional pneu mococcal vaccination . Participants’ 
pneu monia and vaccination knowledge, beliefs, and activation were 
measured at baseline, post -test, and 3 months.  
 
Findings indicated that PPPP significantly i mproved knowledge of 
pneu mococcal disease and i m munization in an older, minority population 
using a novel senior center model of care. Specifically, there was a 54 % 
increase in the total mean knowledge score a mong participants fro m baseline 
to 3 months.  These findings are  i mportant because understanding 
pneu mococcal disease and vaccination i mportance have  consistently been 
linked to receipt of the vaccine 20-26  
 
In addition, an increase in activation was observed a mong PPPP 
participants. More than one-third of participants who had not received the 
vaccination or had an unknown vaccination status at the start of the progra m 
stated that they received the vaccination as a result of PPPP participation.  
Participants also reported taking  other activation steps including speaking 
with physicians and phar macists about pneu mococcal disease and 
vaccination as well as engaging in conversations with fa mily me mbers and 
friends about the topic.   
 
In addition to knowledge, beliefs about i m munizations can influence a person’s 
decision to receive a vaccine .27  At baseline in the PPPP study, 21 % 
believed that the pneu mococcal vaccine would prevent pneu monia.  This 
proportion more than doubled following the progra m , PPPP participants’ 
trust in phar macists also significantly i mproved; the proportion of participants 
who trusted phar macists as i m munizers was only 16 % at baseline but 
increased to nearly 50 % i m mediately after the progra m .  However, 
participants’ trust in phar macists was consistently lower than of physicians at 
the measure ment ti me points . This indicates that sustained trust in 
phar macists as i m munization providers is not so mething that can be attained 
through a single brief progra m. Trust takes ti me to build . The proposed study 
will help to further this trust  through additional  outreach and education.  
   
The econo mic analysis conducted as a part of the prior study revealed 
PPPP’s costs to be $119/per participant . Resources were driven by costs 
of planning ti me (36.2 %), progra m de livery (26.3 %), and vaccine related 
expenses (23.8 %). Vaccine costs were large despite only 18 attendees who 
received the vaccine ($7,861 total, including acquisition costs and storage ). 
These costs were high due to the acquisition prices of the product itself as well 
      MISP Template: Protocol  6 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  as supply manage ment by the institution’s Investigational Drug Service. 
Findings point to the need for cheaper interventions that are at least equally 
effective. The proposed study will co mpare the efficacy of two 
co mponents of the PPPP: phar macist education versus peer -to-peer 
education.  Each of these co mponents is likely to be less costly then PPPP, 
and easier to deliver . 
2.3 Study Design  
  
Rando mized trial co mparing outco mes in two intervention ar ms: Phar macist-
led (PHAR M) vs peer-led (PEER) education  
 
Rando mization to PHAR M or PEER will occur by progra m date since we 
anticipate that rando mizing at the participant level could lead to infor mation 
sharing between participants, thereby co mpro mising scientific integrity.  In 
addition, rando mizing at the participant level could lead to inefficiency since 
the staffing and space needs for the two interventions are different.  
 
The total nu mber of participants will be 316. 
 
2.4 Study Flowchart   
Figure 1. Study Flowchart  
 
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  7 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  2.5 Study 
Procedures  
2.5.1 Overview  
 
This study will test two different vaccine educational progra m s delivered 
to older adults in the Delaware Valley region . IRB approval and 
clinicaltrials.gov listing will be obtained prior to study initiation , and infor med 
consent will be obtained in accordance with IRB re quire ments. The project will 
be conducted under the leadership of Dr. Laura Pizzi  of Rutgers University , 
who will serve as Principal Investigator.   
 
The PHAR M and PEER interventions will be designed using the conceptual 
fra mework e mployed for our prior PPPP study  (Figure 2). This fra mework 
was developed by our tea m based on a March 2015 CIP me mber survey in 
co mbination with findings fro m our previous work on a p har macist-delivered 
pneu mococcal vaccination progra m with CIP and a review of the medical 
literature. The fra mework outlines barriers to vaccination in the target 
population, and indicates which of these barriers can be addressed through a 
senior center model of care as well a s which can be addressed through 
educational interventions.27-30 The area of overlap indicates barriers which 
we believe can be addressed both by use of the senior center model of care 
and a phar macist - and peer-led educational intervention.  
 
Inclusion criteria are 1) Age ≥50; 2) can attend a 2 -hour session (though 
both PHAR M and PEER entail 60 minutes of intervention, an additional hour 
is needed to allow for infor med consent and data collection); 3) speak and 
read English at ≥4th grade level as deter mi ned by a brief reading passage; 4) 
cognitively intact as evidenced by an Abbreviated Mental Status Test score 
≥7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  8 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  Figure 2. Potential Barriers to Vaccination in Older Adults to be 
Addressed by the Proposed Interventions  
 
 
The study will consist of two ar ms designed to educate participants about 
vaccine-preventable disease and vaccination:  1) PHAR M  will consist of a 
60-minute didactic lecture  delivered by a phar macist and video clips 
pertaining to 3 vaccine-preventable diseases (zost er, pneu monia, and 
influenza), and 2) a peer-led intervention (“PEER”) will consist of a 60 minute 
s mall-group session including roleplaying exercises  on these three vaccine -
preventable diseases .  The co mponents of these interventions will be 
designed to address specific ba rriers in our fra mework .   The 
interventions will focus on pneu mococcal disease and zoster but will include 
li mited content on influenza because participants are likely to have questions 
about how the flu and its vaccination differ fro m pneu mococcal diseases and 
zoster. 
 
Because the pri mary goal of the progra m is participant education, 
vaccination will not be included as a co mponent of the progra m.   As 
noted, vaccine costs in our prior study were  high, representing nearly a 
quarter of total progra m cost . In addition, only 10 % of participants opted to 
get vaccinated through that progra m (though many reported receiving  the 
pneu monia vaccination through other avenues , for exa mple physician’s office  
or co m munity phar macy).  For the proposed study, both PHAR M and PEER 
groups will receive a listing of local vaccination sites , including clinics 
and phar macies within a 3 mile radius of the progra m location.  
 
PEER will be delivered by 10 peer educators, each leading s mall groups of 
5-6 participants, for a total of 15 8 PEER participants.  PHAR M will be 
      MISP Template: Protocol  9 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  delivered to 3 groups of 50 -55 participants, or possibly 6 groups of 25 -30 
participants for a total of 15 8 PHAR M participants . 
 
2.5.2 Detailed Description of Interventions and Procedures  
 
Phar macist-Led Educational Intervention  (“PHAR M”) 
 
In the PHAR M intervention group , participants will be given a 60-minute 
for mal presentation on vaccine-preventable diseases  to address knowledge  
and beliefs related to zoster, pneu monia, and influenza  and to address 
barriers to receiving vaccination. In several studies, it has been 
de monstrated that those who believe it is wise to receive vaccinations and 
those that have discussed vaccination with their healthcare provider are 
more likely to receive a vaccine.31-33  
 
The presentation will be delivered by a phar macist  (Dr. Schafer, TJU), be 
appropriate for participants’ educational level, and ai m to establish an 
understanding of the vaccine preventable illnesses .  The presentation will 
specifically discuss the following: causes, sy mpto ms and potential 
co mplications of infection, risk factors for developing the infection, the 
incidence and prevalence of disease, modes of trans mission, and disease  
prevention through vaccination.   
 
To i mprove the interactivity of the presentation , brief 30-60 second video 
clips excerpted fro m interviews with co m munity me mbers and 
physicians will be shown. Co m munity me mber clips will consist of older 
adults fro m the AA population who have experienced vaccine-preventable 
infections.  These clips will provide culturally relevant testi mony to the 
progra m audience and reinforce participant understanding of concepts 
introduced during didactic teaching .  Previous studies have de monstrated 
that using patient testi monials can influence a person’s healthcare decision 
making.34,35   
 
 
Peer-Led S mall Group  Intervention (“PEER”) 
 
Training of the PEER Educators : Peer educators will be recruited fro m an 
experienced cohort of peer educators at CIP.  CIP is an experienced provider 
of peer facilitated heath education models. CIP staff has extensive 
experience recruiting and training peer educators.  CIP has a core group of 8 
volunteer peer leaders trained to facilitate CIP’s current health pro motion 
progra ms: the 6 week Stanford University model Chronic Disease Self -
Manage ment Progra m ; the Diabetes Self-Manage ment Progra m; and, Ask 
Me 3 (a health literacy progra m  where peers educate the co m munity to ask 
three si mple questions of their healthcare provide r). Additionally, CIP’s Living 
Well Players, a co m munity health theater group co mprised of older adults 
have used peer to peer approaches to develop and perfor m health education 
skits on a variety of topics including pneu monia (through our PPPP project).   
 
A phar macist (Dr. Schafer) will train the peer educators about vaccine -
preventable diseases over the course of two didactic sessions.   Following 
      MISP Template: Protocol  10 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  this training, a third session will be held to train the peer educators on the 
script that they will deliver t o participants. The  script will include the key 
learning points to be taught by the peer educators to participants  about 
vaccine preventable diseases and vaccination .  The script will also include 
role-play exercises.  In the role-play exercises, 3 vaccination-related 
scenarios (one for each disease - zoster, pneu monia, and influenza)  will be 
delivered to illustrate situations  participants might encounter when interacting 
with healthcare providers or friends/fa mily.  The skit and role-play exercises 
will be practiced as needed, under the leadership of CIP’s project manager, 
to ensure that the peer educators are confident and consistent when 
delivering PEER.  
 
After co mpleting the training , peer educators’ co mpetency on PEER progra m 
content will be assessed through a for mal multiple -choice knowledge test.  
Each peer educator  must achieve a mini mu m score of 80% correct over all 
ite ms assessed, and 100 % correct for all ite ms dee med “core” knowledge.   
 
It is anticipated that 1 0 peer educators w ill be needed to deliver PEER . To 
ensure consistency in how the peer educators are trained,  all 10 will be 
trained as a single cohort.  
 
Delivery of the PEER Intervention : PEER will be run over a 60 -minute 
session. On the day of the PEER progra m, participants will breakout into 
assigned s mall groups.  During this session, peer educators will deliver the 
skit and co mplete the role play exercises. P articipants will then be asked 
what key points they learned about vaccine -preventable diseases and 
vaccines. Finally, the peer educator will engage in a dialogue to clarify and 
su m marize these key points.  
 
Su m mary of PHAR M and PEER Interventions  and Procedures  
 
A su m mary of the PHAR M and PEER interventions and procedures is 
provided below. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Su m mary of Interventions and Procedures  
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  11 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017   
2.6 Study Duration   
Total study duration is 18 months, allowing for developing PHAR M and 
PEER interventions, training PEER educators, delivering both interventions, 
and reporting study results .  
 
2.7 Statistical 
Analysis and 
Sa mple Size 
Justification   
2.7.1 Overview of Statistical  Analysis  
 
The design is a rando mized trial  with rando mization to PHAR M or PEER 
perfor med at the progra m date level. The pri mary outco me measure  is a 
between-group co mparison of change in knowledge for PHAR M vs PEER 
at baseline vs. post -test and baseline vs. 1 month.  Secondary measures 
include between group exa minations of beliefs, trust, and activation  at all 3 
ti me points (baseline vs. post-test, and 1 month). We will also measure the 
intervention costs of PHAR M and PEER , including progra m develop ment, 
training, and i mple mentation.  
 
The analytic sa mple will include 316 participants who co mplete the study at 
one month. 
 
      MISP Template: Protocol  12 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  Study data will be recorded using  paper for ms and input into  IB M SPSS for 
analysis. Electronic data will be password -protected by CIP while enroll ment 
and data collection are ongoing. Files will be checked to ensure de -
identification prior to sharing with the Rutgers investigators who wil l co mplete 
the analyses. 
 
2.7.2 Definitions of Study Measures  
 
Study measures will be assessed at baseline, i m mediately following the 
progra m (“posttest”), and 1 month after the progra m.  The baseline and post - 
tests will be ad ministered in person  on the date of the intervention. The 1 
month follow up will be ad ministered by phone (with up to 4 atte mpts to reach 
the participant). It should be noted that the tea m considered a more distal 
follow up point (i.e., at 2 or 3 months), but based on experie nce with the prior 
PPPP study felt that an earlier follow up would make it easier to reach 
participants with fewer call atte mpts . If the reviewers of this proposal 
conclude that 1 month is too soon for a follow up, we are willing to revise 
our plan to include a follow up at 2 or 3 months.  
  
Knowledge and awareness of vaccine-preventable disease (Objective 1): 
 
Knowledge and awareness about the target vaccine -preventable 
diseases will be assessed with a 15-20 ite m inventory enco mpassing the 
following do mains: susceptibility to infection, sy mpto ms of disease, severity of 
illness, and vaccination with an e mphasis on vaccine efficacy, safety, and 
eligibility. These ite ms will be selected following a review of the  literature since 
no single validated instru ment exists to assess knowledge of all three target 
diseases.28,29,32,33,36-40 
 
Si milar to the prior pneu monia project, pneu monia knowledge  will be 
assessed using an instru ment developed by our group using previously 
published literature.  The prior instru ment consisted of 6 “check all that apply” 
questions.  Each ite m correctly checked was worth 1 point, for a maxi mu m 
possible score of 28 po ints (see Figure 4 for a su m mary) .  We plan to retain 
the sa me instru ment for the proposed study in order to enable co mparison of 
pneu monia knowledge between the studies.  However, we will also add a 
module pertaining to zoster knowledge  which takes the sa me for m as the 
established instru ment.  
 
Figure 4.  Su m mary of Pneu monia Knowledge Instru ment  
 
Knowledge Assess ment Questions  Maxi mu m Nu mber of 
Correct Responses 
Possible 
Who is at risk of getting pneu monia?  9 
How can you catch pneumonia fro m an infected 
person who is near you?  4 
Which of these are symptoms of pneu mococcal 
disease? 5 
      MISP Template: Protocol  13 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  I should call my doctor or get emergency help if I 
get any of the following problems after 
vaccination: 5 
Which of the following are possible side effects 
of the pneu monia vaccine? 5 
TOTAL SCORE 28 
 
 
Beliefs about Vaccine-Preventable Diseases  and Vaccination (Objective 
2): 
 
Belief measures will include participants’ beliefs about the target diseases and 
vaccination and trust in  healthcare providers  and peers as infor mation 
sources.  Multiple studies evaluating vaccinations in older and minority 
populations have found that people who do not receive certain vaccinations  
are unaware of their risk of disease, do not believe they are  susceptible 
to the disease, and are not aware of their eligibility to receive the vaccine 
or feel that the vaccine would not reliably prevent illness. 28,36-38 In 
contrast, literature indicates that those who reported receiving a vaccination 
understood their susceptibility to  infection, were aware of their eligibility to 
receive a vaccination, received a reco m mendation fro m a healthcare provider 
and felt that vaccination was the best way to prevent disease.28,40 
 
Our prior PPPP study de monstrated that a phar macist -delivered educational 
progra m can increase participants’ trust in phar macists both as vaccinators 
and sources of infor mation, but that such gains are short ter m (li mited to the 
post-test). This finding suggests that phar macist -delivered infor mation does 
not lead to sustained trust in phar macists.   However, peers may be more 
readily accepted as an infor mation source in this population , which may 
contribute to sustained trust.   Thus the change in beliefs fro m baseline to post 
test and one month after the  intervention will be assessed in both the PHAR M 
and PEER groups  to deter mine whether the PEER group experiences a 
greater level of sustained trust vs. the PHAR M group . 
 
Cost Analysis (Objective 3):  
 
We propose to conduct a detailed cost analysis which exa mines PHAR M an d 
PEER intervention costs in ter ms of what each of these two progra ms 
cost per progra m participant.  This will enable us to understand which 
approach, PHAR M or PEER, is less costly to deliver . We hypothesize  that 
PEER will be less costly then PHAR M due to differences in staffing 
require ments. In fact, the main reason for inclusion of cost in the proposed 
study is to deter mine whether PHAR M and PEER, each of which is less 
resource intensive then our prior pneu monia progra m, will be less costly but 
yield co mparable efficacy. 
 
Intervention costs for PHAR M and PEER  will be calculated as the monetary 
value of ti me and materials required to train involved personnel, and deliver 
PHAR M and PEER as well as personnel travel costs. Data on personnel ti me 
require ments for delivering PHAR M and PEER will be collected in real ti me by 
      MISP Template: Protocol  14 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  trained staff me mbers using ti me logs which docu ment the ti me and staff 
me mbers required for training and delivery of the progra m. These data will be 
monetized using the hourly wage rates plus fringe benefit costs of the involved 
personnel. Other costs include materials such as signage, a modest 
participant giveaway such as medication re minder cards and pill box, 
printing/duplication, and food/refresh ments. All costs will be reported in $US 
2017, consistent with the intervention ti me period .  
 
Activation (Objective 4):  
 
Participant activation will be measured as percent of participants who report 
taking one or more actions towards receiving vaccination  at one month 
post-intervention, such as discussion with a healthcare provider 
(physician/phar macist) or friends/fa mily and/or receiving vaccinatio n for either 
pneu monia or zoster. For participants who report vaccination, we will report 
which (pneu monia, z oster, or both). Influenza vaccination activation will be 
excluded fro m this measure since influenza vaccination is widely pro moted 
through other initiatives  which could influence activation , such as onsite flu 
shots at CIP.  
 
Satisfaction (Objective 5):  
 
Satisfaction measures will include participants’ overall satisfaction  with the 
content and delivery of PEER vs PHAR M, the extent to which the participant 
felt engaged, and their satisfaction with infor mation received. Satisfaction 
will be measured only at  post-test using a si mple 5 -10 ite m satisfaction survey  
adapted fro m our prior research . 
 
2.7.3 Sa mple Size Justification  
 
The sa mple size was calculated using G*Power 3.0.10  and is based on the 
pri mary outco me measure (difference between change in mean knowledge 
score fro m baseline to 1 month for PHAR M vs PEER).   We plan to use a two -
tailed independent sa mples t -test with α=0.05 to deter mine the between -group 
difference in mean k nowledge scores at each ti mepoint . We seek to exa mine 
the difference, if any, in the effectiveness of the two approaches, PHAR M and 
PEER; specifically, we wish to deter mine if the two approaches have si milar 
results to within 20 % difference  expecting large variability (50 % standard 
deviation).  This difference is detectable at a power of 0.8 with 121 participants 
in each ar m of the study.   To ensure an adequate sa mple size, we scaled up 
the sa mple size calculation using the attrition rate fro m the prior pne u monia 
project.  Attrition rate in PPPP was 203-143
203=0.296 ≈30 %; thus scaling up by 
30 % yields a total sa mple size of 316 (158 in each ar m).      
As a secondary outco me , consistent with the prior pneu monia project, we plan 
to use a two-tailed paired sa mpl es t-test to deter mine the within -group 
difference in mean knowledge score between ti mepoints.   However, because 
within-group differences are easier to detect than between -group differences, 
the sa mple size is powered to detect the 20 % between -group difference. 
      MISP Template: Protocol  15 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  2.8 Specific Drug 
Supply 
Require ments  None – vaccination is not included as a co mponent of this study. 
2.9 Adverse 
Experience 
Reporting Not required since vaccination is not being offered through this study. 
2.10 Ite mized Study 
Budget  Provided as attach ment.  
2.11 References  1. National Center for Health Statistics. Early Release of Selected Esti mates 
Based on Data Fro m the National Health Interview Survey. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/earlyrelease/earlyrelease201406.pdf. 
Published June 2014.  Accessed July 1, 2015.  
2. Co m munity Health Data Base.  Calling the Shots:  Flu and Pneu monia 
Prevention.  http://www.chdbdata.org/datafindings -details.asp?id=33. 
Accessed 24 Septe mber 2012.  
3. Prioli K, Schafer J, Fields Harris L, McCoy M, Barber E, Marthol -Clark M, 
Pizzi LT. Awareness and beliefs about pneu mococcal and influenza 
vaccination a mong older African A mericans: Results fro m a survey of 
co m munity-dwelling participants at an urban senior center. Poster 
presented at: The 18th Annual International Meeting of the International 
Society for Phar macoecono mics and Outco mes Research; May 20, 2013; 
New Orleans, Louisiana.  
4.  To mczyk S, Bennett N M, Stoecker C, Gierke R, Moore MR, Whitney CG, 
et al. Use of PCV -13 and PPSV-23 vaccine a mong adults aged 65 and 
older: reco m mendations of the ACIP. M M WR. 2014;63(37);822 -5. 
5. Forbes HJ, Tho mas SL, Langen S M. The epide miology and prevention of 
herpes zoster. Curr Der m Rep 2012;1:39 -47. 
6. Yawn BP, Saddier P, Wollan PC, St Sauver JL, Kurland MJ, Sy LS. A 
population-based study of th e incidence and co mplication rates of herpes 
zoster before zoster vaccine introduction. Mayo Clin Proc 2007;82:1341 –
9. 
7. Sch mader KE, Johnson GR, Saddier P, et al. Effect of a zoster vaccine on 
herpes zoster-related interference with functional status and he alth-related 
quality-of-life measures in older adults. J A m Geriatr Soc 2010;58:1634 –
41. 
8. Willia ms W W, Lu P -J, O'Halloran A, et al. Noninfluenza vaccination 
coverage a mong adults —United States, 2013. M M WR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2015;64:95–102. 
9. U.S. Depart ment  of Health and Hu man Services. Office of Disease 
Prevention and Health Pro motion. Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC. 
Available  at https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics -
objectives/topic/i m munization -and-infectious-diseases/objectives  . 
Accessed March 18, 2015.  
      MISP Template: Protocol  16 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  10. Pizzi LT, Jutkowitz E, Frick K, Suh DC, Prioli K M, and Gitlin LN for the Beat 
the Blues Study Tea m. Cost -effectiveness of a ho me-based non-
phar macological depression intervention for older African A mericans: 
results fro m the beat the blues rando mized trial. Journal of the A merican 
Geriatrics Society 2014:62(12);2288 –2295. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.13146  
11. Gitlin LN, Fields Harris L, McC oy M, Chernett NL, Pizzi LT, Jutkowitz E, 
Hess E, Hauck W. A ho me -based intervention to reduce depressive 
sy mpto ms and i mprove quality of life in older African A mericans: a 
rando mized trial. Annals of Internal Medicine 2013:159(4):243 -52. DOI: 
10.7326/0003-4819-159-4-201308200-00005. 
12. Gitlin LN Fields-Harris L, McCoy M, Chernett N, Jutkowitz E, Pizzi LT and 
the Beat the Blues Tea m. A co m munity -integrated ho me based depression 
intervention for older African A mericans: description of the Beat the Blues 
rando mized trial and intervention costs. B MC Geriatrics 2012, 12(4). 
doi:10.1186/1471 -2318-12-4. 
13. Hark L, Waisbourd M, Myers JS, Henderer J, Crews JE, Saaddine JB, 
Molineaux J, Johnson D, Se mbhi H, Stratford S, Sulei man A, Pizzi L, 
Spaeth GL, Katz LJ. I mpro ving Access to Eye Care a mong Persons at 
High-Risk of Glauco ma in Philadelphia —Design and Methodology: The 
Philadelphia Glauco ma Detection and Treat ment Project. Ophthal mic 
Epide miology  2016;  online  ahead  of  print  Mar  7.  DOI: 
10.3109/09286586.2015.1099683  
14. Waisbourd M, Shafa A, Delvadia R, Se mbhi H, Molineaux J, Henderer J, 
Pizzi LT, Myers JS, Hark LA, Katz LJ. Bilateral Sa me -day Laser Peripheral 
Iridoto my in the Philadelphia Glauco ma Detection and Treat ment Project. 
Journal of Glauco ma 2016; online ahead of  print Mar 4. DOI: 
10.1097/IJG.0000000000000409  
15. Alcusky MJ, Cannon -Dang E, Steele D, Schafer JJ, DeSi mone Jr. JA, Pizzi 
LT. Cost of a phar macist -led pneu monia education and i m munization 
progra m for older Philadelphians. Poster presentation at the ISPOR 20t h 
Annual International Meeting, May 16 -20 2015 Philadelphia, PA.  
16. Schafer JJ, Steele D, Marthol M M, Harris LF, Pizzi LT. Knowledge gaps 
about pneu monia in older adults: results fro m the phar macists’ pneu monia 
prevention project. Poster presentation at the I SPOR 20th Annual 
International Meeting, May 16 -20, 2015 Philadelphia, PA.  
17. Pizzi LT, Steele D, Se mbhi H, Hark L, Waisbourd M, Katz LJ. Cost analysis 
of the Philadelphia glauco ma co m munity detection and treat ment project. 
Poster presentation at the ISPOR 20th Annual International Meeting, May 
16-20, 2015 Philadelphia, PA.  
18. Luque JS, Ross L, Gwede CK. Qualitative syste matic review of barber -
ad ministered health education, pro motion, screening and outreach 
progra ms in African -A merican co m munities. J Co m munity Health 
2014;39:181-90. 
19. Linnan LA, D’Angelo H, Harrington CB. A literature synthesis of health 
pro motion research in salons and barbershops. A m J Prev Med 
2014;47:77-85. 
20. Schul man-Green D, Jaser S, Martin F, et al. Processes of self -
manage ment in chronic ill ness.  J Nurs Scholarship 2012;44:136 -44.  
21. Swende man D, Ingra m BL, Rothera m -Borus MJ. Co m mon ele ments in 
self-manage ment of HIV and other chronic illnesses: an integrative 
fra mework. AIDS Care 2009;21:1321 -1334. 
      MISP Template: Protocol  17 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  22. Kennedy DT, D mall RE. Develop ment and i mple m entation of a s moking 
cessation clinic in co m munity phar macy practice. J A m Phar m Assoc 
( Wash) 2002;42:83 -92.  
23. A merican Phar macists Association. Medication therapy manage ment in 
phar macy practice: core ele ments on an MT M service model (version 2.0). 
J A m Phar m Assoc 2003;48:341 -53. 
24. Updated Reco m mendations for Prevention of Invasive Pneu mococcal 
Disease A mong Adults Using the 23 -Valent Pneu mococcal 
Polysaccharide Vaccine (PPSV23). Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, Septe mber 3, 2010; 59(34): 1102 -1106. 
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Pneu mococcal 
Polysaccharide  Vaccine:    What  You  Need  to  Know. 
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/vis/downloads/vis -ppv.pdf. Accessed 
Septe mber 27, 2013.  
26. I m munization Action Coalition.  Pneu mococcal Polysaccharide 
Vaccination  Pocket  Guide.    Available  online  at 
http://www.i m munize.org/ppvguide/ pocketguide.pdf.  
27. Schneeberg A, Bettinger JA, McNeil S, et. al. Knowledge, attitudes, beliefs 
and behaviours of older adults about pneu mococcal i m munization, a Public 
Health Agency of Canada/Canadian Institutes of Health Research 
Influenza Research Network (PCIRN) investigation. B MC Public Health. 
2014; 14:442. 
28. Lu PJ, Euler GL, Ju maan AO, Harpaz R. Herpes zoster vaccination a mong 
adults aged 60 years or older in the United States,  2007: uptake of the first 
new vaccine to target seniors. Vaccine 2009;27:882 -887. 
29. Hurley LP, Harpaz R, Daley MF, Crane LA, Beaty BL, Barrow J, et al. 
National survey of pri mary care physicians regarding herpes zoster and 
the herpes zoster  vaccine. J Infect Dis 2008;197:S216–23 
30. Hurley LP, Lindley MC, Harpaz R, et al. Barriers to the use of herpes zoster 
vaccine. Ann Intern Med 2010;152:555 -560 
31. Zi m mer man RK, Santibanez TA, Fine MJ, et al. Barriers and facilitators of 
PV a mong the elderly. Vaccine 2003;21:1510-1517. 
32. Harris L M, Chin NP, Fiscella K, Hu miston S. Barriers to Pneu mococcal and 
Influenza Vaccinations in Black Elderly Co m munities: Mistrust. J Natl Med 
Assoc 2006;98:1678 -1684. 
33. Norwalk MP, Zi m mer man RK, Shen S, Jewell IK, Ray mond M. Barriers to 
pneu mococcal and influenza vaccination in older co m munity -dwelling 
adults (2000-2001). J A m Geriatr Soc 2004;52:25 -30. 
34. Hoff man S, Caro FG, Gottlieb AS, Kesternich I, Winter JK. Contributions 
of second opinions, outco me forecasts and testi monials to pati ent decision 
about knee replace ment surgery. Med Decis Making 2014;34:603 -614.  
35. Ubel PA, Jepson C, Baron J. The inclusion of patient testi monials in 
decision aids: effects on treat ment choices. Med Decis Making 
2001;21:60-8. 
36. Singleton JA, Santibanez TA, Wortley P M. Influenza and PV of adults aged 
> or = 65: Racial/ethnic differences. A m J Prev Med 2005;29:412 -420.  
37. Mieczkowski TA and Wilson SA. Adult PV: a review of physician and 
patient barriers. Vaccine 2002;20:1383 -1392.  
38. Zi m mer man RK, Santibanez TA, Fine MJ, et al. Barriers and facilitators of 
PV a mong the elderly. Vaccine 2003;21:1510 -1517.  
      MISP Template: Protocol  18 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  39. Jones LG, Zhang Y, Ah med MI, et al. Understanding the Reasons for the 
Underuse of PV by Co m munity -Dwelling Older African A mericans. J AGS 
2010;58:2323-2328.  
40. Santibanez TA, Nowalk MP, Zi m mer man RK, et al. Knowledge and beliefs 
about influenza, pneu mococcal disease, and i m munizations a mong older 
people. J A m Geriatr Soc 2002;50:1711 -1716. 
 
2.12 Publication 
Plan  
The major publication goal of this project is to publish one original research 
manuscript in a relevant and credible peer reviewed journal such as the 
A merican Journal of Public Health , Journal of the A merican Geriatrics 
Society, or Phar macoecono mics . Our target sub mission date will be April 
2018.  
 
In addition, we plan to publish  2 scientific abstracts at relevant meetings:  
 
1. Main study findings to be sub mitted to the A merican Society for 
Health Syste m Phar macy Midyear Clinical Meeting (held annually in 
Dece mber) or Gerontological Society of A merica Annual Meeting 
(held annually in Nove mber)  
  
2. Cost findings to be presented at the International Society for 
Phar macoecono mics and Outco mes Research Annual or European 
Congress (held annually in May and Nove mbe r, respectively)  
 
2.13 Curriculu m 
Vitae Each investigator’s date sta mped curriculu m vitae has been sub mitted as an 
attach ment through the Vision Tracker syste m.  
2.13 Protocol 
Sub mission for 
Investigator-
Initiated Studies  U.S. protocols should be sub mitted by US investigators directly or through 
the Global Research Specialist at  www. merckiisp.co m    
 
Non U.S. protocols should be sub mitted to the MSD office by the 
investigators. 
 
  
      MISP Template: Protocol  19 Final version updated for Rutgers University:  05.01.2017  Appendix. Results of a Local Needs Assess ment on Zoster  
 
Because little was known about the local need specific to zoster vaccination, a survey was fielded to  58 
older adults at CIP  in 2015.  The instru ment consisted of 20 Likert Scale ite ms assessing knowledge and 
perceptions of the zoster vaccine.  Responses to selected Likert ite ms are provided in Table 1 . 
 
The results de monstrate that there is uncertainty regarding the efficacy of the zoster vaccine, with 
less than 50 % of individuals agreeing that the vaccine can prevent shingles.   Additionally, many 
participants were unsure whether or not their physician or phar macist thought that a zoster vaccine 
was i mportant for the m . They were also unsure about whether they would want a zoster vaccine  if 
they were eligible or if they would reco m mend the vaccine to another.    
 
Table 1. Key Results fro m Likert Ite ms in the CIP Me mber Survey on Zoster Vaccination  
 
Survey Ite m Results 
“The shingles shot keeps a person 
fro m getting shingles”  28/58 (48.3 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or 
“so mewhat agree”  
 
30/58 (51.7 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” 
“co mpletely disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
“ My doctor thinks it is i mportant for 
me to get the shingles shot”  31/58 (53.4 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or 
“so mewhat agree” 
 
27/58 (46.6 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” 
“co mpletely disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
“ My phar macist thinks it is i mportant 
for me to get the shingles shot”  25/58 (43.1 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or 
“so mewhat agree”  
 
33/58 (56.9 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” 
“co mpletely disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
“If I a m eligible, I would want to get 
the shingles shot”  29/58 (50 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or “so mewhat 
agree” 
 
29/58 (50 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” “co mpletely 
disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
“If my friend/fa mily was eligible, I 
would encourage the m to get a 
shingles shot” 31/58 (53.4 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or 
“so mewhat agree”  
 
27/58 (46.6 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” 
“co mpletely disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
“It would be easy for me to get a 
shingles shot if I wanted one”  40 (69 %) responded “co mpletely agree” or “so mewhat 
agree” 
 
18 (31 %) responded “so mewhat disagree,” “co mpletely  
disagree,” or “unsure/I don’t know”  
 
A second key finding fro m the CIP me mber survey is that while many believed that it would be easy to 
get a zoster vaccine if they wanted one, nearly one -third either disagreed with this state ment or 
were unsure if they would be able to get the vaccine.  This finding also represents an opportunity for 
our program to provide access to the vaccine if participants are eligible.   
 
The uncertainties uncovered in this survey represent opportunities for our progra m to address these 
gaps by educating this population on zoster vaccine efficacy as well as develop skills t o engage their 
physicians and phar macists in discussions about zoster and deter mine their vaccine eligibility.      