1  Phase II Study of the Combination of Mitoxantrone, Etoposide and Gemtuzumab 
Ozogamicin (MEGO) for Patients with Acute Myeloid Leukemia Refractory to  
Initial Standard Induction Therapy  
 
July 25, 2022  
Version 5 
 
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  
Robert Redner , MD 
Clinical Instructor, Division of Hematology/Oncology  
UPMC  Cancer  Pavilion  
5115  Centre  Avenue,  4th 
Floor  Pittsburgh,  PA 15232  
Phone:  412-864-6625  
Email:  rednerrl@upmc.edu  
 
 
  
BIOSTATISTICIAN  
Daniel P. Normolle, PhD 
Biostatistics  Facility  
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center  
Suite  325 Sterling  Plaza  201 
North Craig  St. 
Pittsburgh,  PA 15213  
Phone:  412-383-1581 
Email:  dpn7@pitt.edu  
2  Table  of Contents  Page  
1.0 INTRODUCTION 4 
1.1 Study  objectives…………………………………………………………… 4 
1.2 Background and Rationale ……………………………………………….  4 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY  ASSESSMENT  AND ENROLLMENT  
2.1 Eligibility  Criteria………………………………………………………….....  9 
2.2 Exclusion criteria…………………………………………………………....  10 
2.3 Eligibility  evaluation…………………………………………………….......  11 
3.0 STUDY  IMPLEMENTATION  
3.1 Study  design and  treatment plan ………………………………………..  12 
3.2 Off study  criteria  for the trial ……………………………………………...  13 
3.3 Off treatment criteria for  the trial  ………………………………………… 13 
4.0 ON STUDY EVALUATION ……………………………………………………...  13 
5.0 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  AND METHODOLOGY  
5.1 Number  and evaluability  of patients  ……………………………………… 14 
5.2 Sample size / Accrual rate …………………………………………….......  15 
5.3 Study  Design………………………………………………………………… 15 
5.4 Statistical  Analysis  Plan………………………………………………….....  17 
7.0 ADVERSE EVENT  REPORTING  ………………………………........................  20 
8.0 DATA  SAFETY MONITORING  PLAN…………………………………………...  23 
3  9.0 STUDY  EVALUATION,  TREATMENT  SCHEMA  AND FLOW  CHART ….....  25 
10.0 Drug  information  ........................................................................................  32 
11.0 References ………………………………………………………………………… 40 
4   
 
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION  
 
 
1.1 Study  objectives  
 
Primary  Objective:  To evaluate the response rate and toxicity  of the combination  of 
mitoxantrone,  etoposide and gemtuzumab ozogamicin  
as second  line therapy  in patients  with acute  myeloid  leukemia  (AML)  
who have failed the  first induction  therapy.  
 
Secondary  Objectives:  To assess the progression- free survival,  overall  survival and treatment  
related mortality in patients with AML treated with the combination of  
mitoxantrone,  etoposide and gemtuzumab ozogamicin.  
To explore if age, cytogenetic status, percent of blast in the bone 
marrow  prior to therapy  or percent  expression of CD33  in the 
leukemia blasts are predictive of complete remission, overall survival  
or progression- free survival in patients with AML treated with the  
combination of mitoxantrone,  etoposide and gemtuzumab  
ozogamicin.  
 
 
 
1.2 Background and Rationale  
 
 
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by a clonal proliferation of myeloid 
precursors with reduced capacity to differentiate into more mature cellular elements. As a 
result, there is an accumulation of leukemic forms in the bone marrow, peripheral blood and  
other tissues, with a marked reduction in red cells, platelets, and neutrophils. The increased  
production of malignant  cells,  along with reduction  in these mature  elements,  results  in a 
5  variety of systemic symptoms and signs. These include anemia, bleeding and an increased  
risk of infection.  If left untreated,  AML can lead to death within weeks1. 
The standard treatment for newly diagnosed AML has not changed appreciably over the last  
few decades  and consists primarily  of an anthracycline (e.g. daunorubicin,  idarubicin)  
combined  with a nucleoside analogue,  cytarabine.  The goal of remission  induction 
chemotherapy is the rapid restoration of normal bone marrow function2. Obtaining complete 
remission (CR) varies substantially depending on several factors, most notably age and 
cytogenetic  abnormalities  at the time of AML diagnosis.  CR rates  of 65-80% can be expected 
in younger patients (variably defined as < 55- 60 years). CR rates decrease to 30% to 50% in 
older  patients3. 
There is no agreed standard of care for AML patients that do not respond to initial first line  
induction therapy. Although remission after second- line therapy may occur, the CR rate is  
considerably lower.  A number of chemotherapy regimens have been used in patients with  
resistant  disease  with overall  CR rates  of 20-40%.  These regimens  include different  
combinations  and doses  of agents that  are effective  in the treatment of AML such as  
fludarabine,  cytarabine,  etoposide,  and mitoxantrone4. 
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) is an antibody drug conjugate consisting of a recombinant  
humanized antibody to CD33 which is linked to calicheamicin5. Calicheamicin is a potent  
antitumor antibiotic that cleaves double- stranded DNA at specific sequences6. Approximately  
90% of AML patients  have  myeloid  blast  cells expressing  the CD33  surface antigen7. 
Monotherapy with GO resulted in CR of 20- 25% in adults with CD33 positive AML in first  
relapse8. GO was approved  by the United  States  Food  and Drug  Administration  (FDA) for use 
in patients age 60 or older with CD33+ AML in first relapse who were not considered  
candidates  for cytotoxic  chemotherapy  in 20009. However,  due to early  deaths  in a prospective 
phase 3 randomized study which incorporated GO in the induction phase in one of the arms  
(SWOG S0106)10 the manufacturer withdrew the product from the American market in 2010.  
The SWOG S0106 study used 6 mg/m2 of GO on day 4 of induction with cytarabine,  
daunorubicin. The treatment -related mortality (TRM) was 5% on the GO arm vs 1% on the  
other arm.  In 2017, FDA again approved GO for induction therapy in combination with 
chemotherapy based on a phase 3 prospective randomized, open -label study (ALFA -0701 
trial11) and as monotherapy  for patients  unfit for intensive  treatment  based  on the phase 3 
6  randomized EORTC- GIMEMA AML -19 trial12. The ALFA -0701 trial randomized 280 patients  
50-70 year-old to receive induction with daunorubicin and cytarabine or daunorubicin,  
cytarabine and GO 3mg/m2 on days 1,4,7 of induction. It showed that the addition of GO to  
the induction chemotherapy improved event -free survival. The AML -19 trial randomized 237  
patients  unfit for induction chemotherapy  to receive  either  best supportive  care or GO 6mg/m2 
on day 1 and 3mg/m2 on day 8. It showed that GO improved the overall survival in patients  
unfit for intensive treatment when compared to best supportive care with no difference in the  
adverse events. The NCRI AML17 trial13 studied further the dose of GO with induction  
chemotherapy showing that 3mg/m2 has the same efficacy but better safety profile than  
6mg/m2. The dosing regimen of GO as it is currently approved by the US FDA is 3mg/m2 
(maximum dose 4.5mg) on days 1,4,7 with induction chemotherapy or 6mg/m2 on day 1  
followed  by 3mg/m2 on day 8 if used  as monotherapy.  
The most  important  GO-associated hematologic  toxicity  is myelosuppression  
(thrombocytopenia, neutropenia). Infusion- related adverse reactions are similar to those of  
other  monoclonal  antibodies  (fever,  chills,  cutaneous  rash,  hypotension,  hypertension,  
dyspnea, nausea, emesis and headache). They are usually transient and respond well to  
symptomatic  therapy14. 
Hepatic veno- occlusive disease or sinusoidal obstructive syndrome (VOD/SOS) is the most  
frequently  reported  life-threatening  non-hematological  adverse event.  Overall,  among  all adult  
GO- treated AML patients evaluated in the clinical trial setting, SOS occurred at a rate of 3%  
when GO was administered as monotherapy at the initial FDA approved dose and schedule 
(for relapsed AML,  9 mg/m2 on day 1 and 14); 7% when the drug was used  in conjunction  with 
other  chemotherapeutic  agents  that are not known  to be hepatotoxic;  and 28% when  GO was 
combined with thioguanine, a hepatotoxic chemotherapeutic agent. SOS rates were between  
15% and 40% if stem  cell transplantation was performed within  3 months  of GO 
administration15. Another observational study showed an overall 9.1% risk of SOS with GO  
and 2.7% risk of death from SOS16. During the early 2000s when GO was used at higher  
doses  it was observed that patients  that received GO <3.5 months  before allogeneic  stem  cell 
transplantation had much higher incidence of SOS17, which was no longer observed in the  
modern era of lower  GO fractionated  doses18. 
7  Various clinical trials have evaluated the efficacy of GO as monotherapy in newly -diagnosed 
AML, refractory/relapsed AML and in combination with chemotherapy for induction.  Different  
dosing  schedules  of GO were  used  in these  trials.  In addition  to grade 3/4 neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia  some patients  also develop  transaminitis  and VOD  (Table 1).  
Table  1: Clinical trials  with gemtuzumab  ozogamicin  
Trial  No. of 
pts State  of 
disease  GO Dosing  Therapy  Results  Ref 
 
 
EORTC - 
GIMEMA  
AML-19  
 
 
237  
 
New diagnosis,  
unwilling  or unfit 
for treatment   
Induction:  6 mg/m2 
on day 1 and 3 
mg/m2 
on day 8. Maintenance:  
2mg/m2 monthly up to  
8 doses  Best 
Supportive 
Care  
 
GO +/-  
CR/CRi  27% on the GO arm. 
OS improvement at 1 year  
with GO 
(4.9 vs 3.6 months,  p=0.005)   
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
LRF AML  
14 
and 
NCRI  
AML 16  
 
 
 
495  
 
 
New diagnosis,  
unfit for intensive  
treatment   
 
5 mg (fixed  dose)  on 
day 1 of 42- day 
cycles for a  
maximum of four  
cycles  
 
LDAC  20mg  
BID on days  
1-10 of 
42-day cycles  
+/- 
GO Improved CR with GO  
(21%  vs 11%,  P= .002).  
No difference in OS.  
Patients in the GO arm had 
more nausea and vomiting,  
required more platelet  
transfusions and longer  
duration of antibiotics.  
No episodes  of VOD  were 
reported.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
MRC  
AML-15  
 
 
1113   
 
 
New diagnosis   
 
 
3mg/m2 on the first day 
of induction.   
DA or DAE or 
FLAG -IDA 
+/- 
GO No difference is OS but  
improved 5- year OS in 
patients with favorable  
cytogenetics. No excess  
hematologic or liver  
toxicity  on the GO arm  
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
ALFA- 0701   
 
 
278  
 
 
New diagnosis   
Induction:  3mg/m2 on 
days 1,4,7 
Consolidation:  
3mg/m2 on day 1 for  
up to two  cycles  
 
Induction  
DA +/- GO 
Consolidation:  
DA +/- GO Improved EFS, DFS on the  
intervention arm but no  
difference in OS.  Prolonged  
thrombocytopenia and 
neutropenia on the GO  
arm.3 cases of VOD were  
reported on the GO arm.  
 
 
 
 
11,21  
NCRI  
AML16 1115  New diagnosis  Induction:  3 mg/m2 
on day 1 DA +/- GO Improved  OS on the 
treatment  arm and similar  
TRM  22 
 
SWOG  
S0106   
 
595  
 
New diagnosis   
Induction 6 mg/m2 
on day 4 DA (with D at 
60 mg/m2) vs  
DA (with  D at 
45mg/m2)  plus GO  
No difference in OS with 
increased  TRM  in the GO 
arm (6% vs  1%)  
 
 
 
10 
8   
EORTC - 
GIMEMA  
AML-17  
 
472  
 
New diagnosis   
Induction:  6mg/m2 
on days  1 and 15   
 
MEC  +/- GO Similar  CR rate and OS. 
Higher TRM with GO  
(22% vs 18%) mainly  
driven by patients  >70 
years  old  
 
 
23 
 
NCRI  788 New diagnosis  Induction:  
randomization  To 3 or 
6 mg/m2 Randomi - zation  No difference in OS.  
Increased  TRM  with higher   
 
13 
AML17    on day 1 to ADE or DA , 
both + GO GO dose.   
HOVON -43 232 Consolidation  6 mg/m2 every  4 
weeks,  up to  3 cycles  
Observation vs GO No difference  in OS  
24 
 
Abbreviations: CR, complete remission; CRi, complete remission with incomplete hematologic recovery; GO,  
Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin; OS, overall survival; LDAC, low -dose cytarabine; VOD, veno- occlusive disease,  
DA, daunorubicin + cytarabine, DAE, daunorubicin + cytarabine + etoposide; FLAG -IDA, fludarabine +  
cytarabine + G- CSF + idarubicin;  EFS,  event -free survival;  DFS,  disease- free survival;  TRM,  treatment -related 
mortality;  MEC,  mitoxantrone + etoposide  + cytarabine;  ADE,  cytarabine + daunarubicin + etoposide  
 
 
Rationale  
 
The combination of mitoxantrone and etoposide is an active regimen in refractory/relapsed 
AML patients25. In a retrospective study, we evaluated the efficacy and toxicity  of mitoxantrone 
and etoposide in AML patients treated at our institution who did not respond to first induction 
therapy with cytarabine and an anthracycline. A total of thirty -five AML patients were treated 
with mitoxantrone (10 mg/m2/d) on days 1- 5 and etoposide (100 mg/m2/d) on days 1- 5. 
Thirteen  of thirty -five patients  (37%)  achieved  CR. There  were  no grade  3/4 hepatic  toxicities.  
The median duration of neutropenia in patients achieving CR was 29 days after reinduction.  
14% of patients  died from infectious  complications.  
In order to increase the efficacy of mitoxantrone and etoposide as second line therapy in 
patients with AML we propose to conduct a phase II clinical trial evaluating the safety and  
efficacy of the combination of GO, mitoxantrone and etoposide.  A similar  trial was open in our 
institution before Pfizer withdrew the drug from the market in 201026. Before the withdrawal 5  
patients were treated with a regimen consisted of mitoxantrone 10 mg/m2 administered  
intravenously  on days  1–3, etoposide  100 mg/m2  administ ered on days  1–5 and on day 6 GO 
3 mg/m2. Three of the five patients achieved a CR. There were no treatment -related deaths.  
All patients  developed grade 3–4 neutropenia and thrombocytopenia,  with complete 
responders  requiring a median of 19 days  (range,  17–34 days) from the completion  of 
9  treatment  to recover  their neutrophils  and a median of 24 days  (range,  17–34 days) to recover 
their platelets.  One patient  developed grade 3 ALT transaminitis  that resolved  within  24 h and 
one patient developed a transient ischemic attack. No patient developed clinical signs or  
symptoms of veno-occlusive disease.  
It has been demonstrated that high peripheral CD33- antigen load is an independent adverse 
prognostic factor in AML patients treated with GO.  Data indicate that a high peripheral  
CD33antigen load consumes  a large  portion of the GO, which  results  in reduced GO 
penetration into the bone marrow 27. As a consequence, CD33 saturation of AML blast cells  
present  in the bone  marrow  is incomplete,  which  may hamper  subsequent  cell kill. 
Administration of GO may be more effective after reduction of the leukemic cell burden with 
conventional chemotherapy. Thus, we plan to administer the GO after the administration of  
mitoxantrone and etoposide. Furthermore, since enrolled patients in the study will already be 
treated with combination of cytarabine and an anthracycline (1st regimen) and mitoxantrone  
and etoposide (2nd regimen)  and GO has been associated with neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia, we plan to use a single dose of GO 3 mg/m2 the day after the completion  
of the 5 days  of etoposide a nd mitoxantrone.  
 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY  ASSESSMENT  AND ENROLLMENT  
 
 
2.1 Eligibility  Criteria  
1. Able to understand and have the ability  to provide written  consent.  
2. Age: ≥18 and ≤75 years  old. 
3. Patients with newly diagnosed AML based on the World Health Organization classification  
who have persistent disease after their first course treatment with an anthracycline and  
cytarabine (the diagnosis  of persistent  disease,  which  is defined  as ≥10% blasts by  
morphology for this trial or >5% blasts if they have had an increase in blasts from the last  
bone marrow  biopsy,  will be based  on their assessment after bone  marrow  aspiration and/or  
biopsy after initial treatment). The bone marrow aspiration and/or biopsy will be evaluated  
by the Hematopathology Division of the University of Pittsburgh. In order to prevent any  
delays in starting therapy for eligible patients, a preliminary evaluation of the bone marrow  
will be sent  by the  hematopathologist via e- mail to the  investigator.  
10  4. Patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) based on the World Health Organization 
classification who have persistent disease after their treatment with an anthracycline and cytarabine (the diagnosis  of persistent  disease,  which  is defined  as ≥10% blasts by  
morphology for this trial or >5% blasts if they have had an increase in blasts from the last  
bone marrow  biopsy,  will be based  on their assessment  after bone  marrow  aspiration and/or  
biopsy  after initial treatment).  
5. CD33  expression  in ≥ 30% of leukemic  blasts  on the bone marrow.  
6. Eastern Cooperative Oncology  Group  Performance Status  of 0 -2 (see Appendix  I). 
7. Patients  must  have the following  laboratory  values  prior to beginning protocol  treatment:  
• Calculated creatinine clearance ≥ 30 mL/min (using the Cockcroft -Gault equation CL  
creatinine = ((140- age) x  body mass  X 0.85 if female)/72 x creatinine where age is  given 
in years,  body  mass  is given in Kg  and creatinine is  given in  mg/dl).  
• Aspartate  aminotransferase (AST)  ≤ 2.5 x upper  normal  limit. 
• Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≤ 2.5 x upper  normal  limit. 
• Total  bilirubin  ≤ 2 x upper  normal  limit. 
Note: As many eligible patients will be pancytopenic  secondary to their disease or prior  
treatments,  hematologic  abnormalities  will not be used  as criteria  for entry  or exclusion.  
8. Left ventricular  ejection fraction  (LVEF)  ≥50 %. 
9. Females of child- bearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test during screening  
and all subjects  must  agree to use an effective  method of contraception.  A woman  is eligible  
to enter  and participate  in the study if she  is of: 
a. Non-childbearing potential  (i.e., physiologically  incapable of becoming  pregnant)  
including  any female  who has had a hysterectomy  or has had a bilateral  oophorectomy  
(ovariectomy).  
b. Childbearing potential, has a negative serum pregnancy test during the screening  
period  and agrees  to avoid  sexual  activity  or use contraception from screening  through  
follow- up (method of birth control if the patient is not neutropenic include the use of a  
diaphragm, intrauterine device, contraceptive sponge and/or usage of male condom  
with a spermicide from the partner). A man with a female partner of childbearing  
potential is eligible to enter and participate in the study if he has either had a prior  
vasectomy or agrees to avoid sexual activity or use adequate contraception (as  
described above)  from screening  through follow- up. 
11   
2.2 Exclusion  criteria  
1. Patients  with a  diagnosis  of Acute Promyelocytic  Leukemia  (APL)  as defined by  the World  
Health Organization.  
2. Relapsed  acute  leukemia.  
3. Bi-lineage or bi-phenotypic  leukemia.  
4. Prior use of mitoxantrone or etoposide  or GO. 
5. Previous  allogeneic  hematopoietic  cell transplantation.  
6. First induction course  of acute myeloid leukemia  with CPX-351. 
7. Has a history or current evidence of any condition, therapy, or laboratory abnormality that  
might confound the results of the trial, interfere with the subject’s participation for the full  
duration of the trial, or is not in the best interest of the subject to participate, in the opinion  
of treating  investigator.  
8. Has known history of active Hepatitis B (HBsAg reactive) or Hepatitis C (detectable HCV  
RNA).  
9. Uncontrolled,  life-threatening  infection  that is not responding to antimicrobial  therapy.  
10. Has known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with 
cooperation with the requirements  of the trial. 
11. Patient may have not received any other investigational anti -neoplastic agents within 4 
weeks  from the start of therapy.  
 
12. Concurrent active malignancy; exceptions include patients who have been disease free  
for 5 years, patients with a history of completely resected non- melanoma skin cancer or  
successfully treated in situ carcinoma, or patients with another malignancy with better  
prognosis  than AML.  
13. Women  who are pregnant  or breastfeeding.  
14. Evidence of severe or uncontrolled systemic diseases (e.g., unstable or uncompensated  
respiratory  or cardiac disease).  
 
2.3 Eligibility  evaluation  
The following  clinical and laboratory  assessments  must  be performed for all eligible  patients  
within 14  days  of study  enrollment  and consent:  
12  1. Complete  medical  history  and physical  examination,  including height,  weight,  body  surface 
area (BSA), ECOG  performance status, and a neurological  evaluation.  
2. Echocardiogram  to evaluate cardiac  ejection fraction.  
3. CBC with differential  and platelets.  
4. Complete  metabolic  panel  (Na, K, Cl, CO2, glucose,  BUN,  Cr, Ca, total protein,  albumin,  
total bilirubin,  AST, ALT, and  alkaline phosphatase)  and magnesium  level.  
5. LDH,  uric acid,  and phosphorus  levels.  
6. PT/INR,  PTT.  
7. Urinalysis.  
8. PA and lateral  chest  x-ray. If clinically  indicated CT Chest/Abdomen/Pelvis  can be 
performed.  
9. EKG.  
 
10. Urine  pregnancy  test for all women  ≤ 60 years  old. 
 
The following  clinical  and laboratory  assessments  must have been performed for all eligible  
patients  within  12 weeks  from initiation  of treatment:  
1. Hepatitis  B surface antigen.  
2. Hepatitis  C antibody  and if positive  HCV  RNA.  
 
 
3.0 STUDY  IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
3.1 Study  design and treatment plan 
This study is an open- label, single arm phase II study which will examine the efficacy and 
toxicity  of the combination therapy  of GO, mitoxantrone and etoposide  in patients  who did not 
respond to  first line induction therapy.  
 
 
Treatment  plan 
 
Eligible patients will be treated at the UPMC Hillman Cancer Center inpatient leukemia  
service. Patients  will receive mitoxantrone  10mg/m2 administered  intravenous  piggyback  
13  (IVPB) in 50ml 0.9% normal saline over 15 minutes on days 1- 5 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 
administered  intravenously  in 500 ml of 0.9%  sodium  chloride  over 2 hours  on days  1-5. 
On day 6, patients  will receive  a single dose  of GO 3mg/m2 (maximum  dose  4.5mg).  Patients  
will be pre-medicated 1 hour prior to the GO infusion with diphenhydramine 50mg 
administered orally  or intravenously,  acetaminophen 650 mg administered orally  or 
intravenously  and 1mg/kg  methylprednisolone or an equivalent  dose  of alternative  
corticosteroid administered IV within  30 minutes  prior to infusion of GO. GO will be 
administered intravenously  in 50 ml (or other  suitable  volume  resulting in a final GO 
concentration between  0.075 mg/mL  to 0.234  mg/mL)  of 0.9%  sodium  chloride  over 2 hours.  
Doses of GO will be based on BSA calculated using actual body weight with a cap of 4.5mg.  
Vital signs will be recorded within one hour prior to the infusion and then every 30 minutes  
during the infusion and 30 minutes and one hour after completion of infusion.  An additional  
dose of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg IV may be given for any sign of infusion reaction, such  
as fever, chills, hypotension, or dyspnea occurring during the GO infusion or within 4 hours  
after the GO infusion.  
For dose modifications based on kidney and liver function please see the treatment  
schema at  the end of the  study.  
Supportive care including blood product transfusions, antiemetic medications, antiviral  
and antifungal medications, growth factor support, tumor lysis syndrome prophylaxis, or  
empiric  antibiotics  may be used at the clinical discretion of the  provider.  
 
3.2 Off study  criteria  for the study  
1. Request  by the patient  at any time for any reason.  
2. The patient may at any time be removed from the trial at the principal investigator’s  
discretion if the principal  investigator  deems  the patient  to be at unacceptable risk to remain  
on the study.  Reasons  for this action may include (but are not limited  to) disease progression  
with declining organ function/performance status  before treatment;  inadequate  
family/caregiver  support;  noncompliance.  
14  3.3 Off treatment  criteria  for the study  
1. Unacceptable adverse event(s)  due to the infusion  of any of the three  antineoplastic  agents  
which necessitates the  termination of the therapy.  
2. Intercurrent  disease that prevents  the administration of treatment.  
 
 
4.0 ON STUDY  EVALUATION  
All patients  enrolled in the study  will have  the following  evaluations:  
1. History and physical examination will be performed daily during the hospital stay and then  
weekly  (± 4 days) as an outpatient  for 4 weeks  after discharge and then every  2 weeks  until 
count recovery (defined as ANC ≥1000 with or without PLT ≥ 100,000). Daily weight will be  
measured (if clinically  possible)  while in  the hospital  and at each  outpatient  visit. 
2. If patients develop grade 3 or 4 non-hematologic toxicity during their treatment, they will be  
followed  weekly  after discharge until resolution of toxicity  or improvement  to grade 2 or less. 
3. CBC with differential, complete metabolic panel (Na, K, Cl, CO2, glucose, BUN, Cr, Ca, total  
protein, albumin, total bilirubin, AST, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase), phosphorus, uric acid,  
magnesium  level and LDH will be performed daily while  in the hospital.  After  discharge,  CBC  
with differential  and complete metabolic  panel  as defined above will be obtained weekly  (± 4 
days) until count  recovery  (defined as ANC ≥1000 with or without  PLT ≥ 100,000).  
4. Bone marrow  biopsy  and/or  aspirate  will be performed  no earlier  than 7 days  after the therapy  
completion to evaluate  disease response.  
5. Bone  marrow  biopsy/aspiration  to test for remission  will be performed once hematopoietic  
 
recovery  (defined  as ANC  ≥1000  with or without  PLT ≥ 100,000)  has been achieved.  It can 
be performed in the inpatient or outpatient setting. If the bone marrow is consistent with  
morphologic  complete  remission,  minimal  residual  disease testing  will be performed with flow 
cytometry. If, on diagnosis, the NPM1 mutation was detectable by PCR or next -generation 
sequencing, then NPM1 PCR will be performed as well if morphologic complete remission is  
achieved. If hematopoietic recovery has not been achieved by 5 weeks (± 7 days) after the  
completion  of therapy,  bone marrow  biopsy  and/or  aspiration for disease evaluation will be 
15  performed. If there is no evidence of leukemia, subsequent bone marrow biopsies will be  
performed based on count  recovery.  
6. After the assessment of the recovery marrow patients will be followed remotely from chart  
review to evaluate the disease- free survival and the overall survival. If information cannot be  
obtained from the chart  patients  may be contacted by telephone.  
 
 
5.0  STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  AND METHODOLOGY  
 
5.1 Number  and evaluability of patients  
This is a phase II study of the combination therapy of GO, mitoxantrone and etoposide as  
second line therapy  in patients  with acute myeloid  leukemia.  The study  is designed to assess 
the therapeutic  efficacy and the toxicity  profile  using  Simon’s  optimal  two-stage phase II design 
to permit early stopping of the trial if there is strong evidence that the studied treatment is  
inefficacious.  
To be evaluable  for clinical response,  a patient  must:  
1. Receive  a total of 5 days  of mitoxantrone and etoposide,  
2. Receive 1 dose of  GO and 
3. Have  a follow- up bone  marrow  biopsy  to evaluate  the response  to therapy.  
Additional participants will be recruited to replace those who are not evaluable for clinical  
response.  The accrual  target  is a maximum  of 44 response- evaluable  patients.  All participants  
who begin treatment  will be counted in the interim analysis  for excess mortality.  
 
5.2. Sample  Size/Accrual  rate 
5.2.1  Sample  size 
This study is expected to require a minimum of 16 patients (at the interim evaluation of  
response)  and a maximum  of 44 response- evaluable patients  unless  undue  toxicity  is 
encountered.  We anticipate  accruing up to 9 additional  patients  (~20%)  to account  for patients  
who may prove unevaluable  (i.e. ineligibility,  cancellations,  death or major  violations).  
Therefore, our  overall  sample size will be  a maximum of 53 patients.  
16  5.2.2.  Accrual  time and study  duration  
Based on previous efforts in recruiting patients at the UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, it is  
anticipated that at least  thirty  patients  per year will be enrolled in the protocol  and the accrual 
will be completed within  two years. The final evaluation of the study  to assess overall  survival 
will be conducted at 5 years or  if all subjects  expire,  whichever  comes  first. 
 
5.3. Study  design  
5.3.1  Definition of complete remission (CR):  An evaluable patient will be classified as  
having complete remission if they  meet  the criteria  in Appendix II.  
Decision Rule (Simon two -s tage design):  The largest CR rate where the proposed treatment  
regimen would  be considered ineffective in this population is 35%.  Subsequent  studies  will 
be warranted if the CR rate is 50% or higher or the CR rates are similar to historical data but  
the disease- free survival and the overall  survival are improved in comparison  to our 
institution’s historical cohort. The following optimal Simon two stage design uses 44 patients  
to test the null hypothesis  that the true CR rate in the given  patient  population is at most  35%.  
Stage 1:  Enter 16 evaluable patients. If 5 or fewer patients have a CR in this timeframe, we 
will consider  this early  evidence  that this treatment  regimen  is not  sufficiently  
efficacious  in this patient  population,  and the accrual  of patients  will be stopped.  If 
6 or more  patients  have  a CR, then accrual  will continue in the second stage  of this 
trial. 
Stage 2:  Enter an additional 28 evaluable patients to the trial. If 19 or more patients achieve a 
complete remission, the treatment will be promoted for further consideration.  This design has 
α=0.15 and β=0.20; the large value of α is appropriate in an early phase trial.  If the  probability 
of CR is 35%, the expected sample size is 30.3 patients, i.e., the probability that  the trial will 
be halted after 16 patients  is 48.9%.  
 
  
 
5.3.2  Monitoring for treatment -induced mortality  
The trial will be continually monitored to ensure that treatment -induced mortality is not  
excessive, defined  as >0.20 of patients  treated.  A safety -evaluable patient  is a patient  
17  who was consented and started the protocol chemotherapy. All safety -evaluable  
patients, not just those evaluable for clinical response, are counted in the interim  
analysis  for mortality.  The cutpoints are listed in Table 2.  
 
Table 2. Stopping rule for excessive mortality.  The trial will be halted if, for the number of  
patients  in the following  table, the number  of deaths  is greater  than or equal  to the given number.  
 
# Patients  # Deaths  # Patients  # Deaths  
4 3 24 7 
6 3 26 8 
8 3 28 8 
10 4 30 8 
12 4 32 9 
14 5 34 9 
16 5 36 10 
18 6 38 10 
20 6 40 11 
22 7 42 11 
 
Justification of the stopping rule:  It was assumed that under standard of care, the 
probability of death is π=0.2.  A beta -binomial model is assumed with α=2 and β=8.  If 
the number of deaths, x, is greater than the value in the Stopping Rule table for the 
number  of patients,  n, then:  
 
P(π>0.2|α,β,x,n)>0.75.  
 
Under different assumptions of the true probability of death (True P(Death)), the 
expected number of patients (E(n)) and the probability of the trial stopping early (P(Stop 
Early)) were  determined by Monte Carlo simulation:  
 
True P(Death)  E(n) P(Stop  Early)  
0.20 28.3 0.513  
0.25 22.9 0.720  
0.30 15.8 0.900  
0.35 11.5 0.973  
0.40 8.4 0.994  
0.45 6.9 0.996  
18  5.4. Statistical  analysis plan 
5.4.1.  Analysis of complete remission  
 
The probability of complete remission (CR, Appendix II) will be estimated by the number  
of CR divided by the total number of patients evaluable for response.  A 95% one- sided 
exact binomial confidence interval of the form (π L,1) for the true probability of CR will be  
calculated.  
 
5.4.2 Analysis of secondary  endpoints  
Overall and progression- free survival functions will be estimated by the product limit  
(Kaplan- Meier) method.  The median  survival and its 90% confidence interval  will also be 
reported.  
Proportional hazards (Cox) regression will be used to describe the relationship between  
age, cytogenetic status (poor, intermediate, favorable), percent of blast in the bone  
marrow  prior to therapy  and percent  expression of CD33  in the leukemia  blasts  to overall  
and progression- free survival.  Likelihood ratio tests will be used to identify statistically  
significant ratios and profile likelihood confidence intervals will be estimated for hazard  
ratios of statistically significant predictors.  Logistic regression will be applied i n a similar  
fashion to  determine predictors of complete remission.  
 
6. ADVERSE  EVENT  REPORTING  
Definitions  
The following  definitions  of terms  apply  to this section:  
 
Adverse  event : Any untoward  medical  occurrence  associated  with the use of a drug in humans,  
whether  or not considered drug related.  
Life-t hreatening adverse event or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction : An adverse  
event or suspected adverse reaction is considered "life- threatening" if, in the view of either  
the investigator  or sponsor,  its occurrence  places  the patient  or subject at immediate  risk of 
death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it  
occurred in  a more  severe form,  might have caused death.  
Serious  a dverse event  or serious  suspected adverse reaction: An adverse event  or 
19  suspected adverse reaction is considered "serious" if, in the view of either the investigator  
or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: death, a life- threatening adverse  
event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or  
significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions,  
or a congenital  anomaly/birth defect. Important  medical  events  that may not result  in death,  
20  be life-threatening,  or require hospitalization may be considered serious  when,  based  upon  
appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require  
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
Examples  of such  medical  events  include  allergic  bronchospasm  requiring intensive  
treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not  
result  in inpatient  hospitalization,  or the development  of drug dependency  or drug abuse.  
Suspected adverse reaction: Any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility  
that the drug caused  the adverse  event.  Suspected  adverse  reaction  implies  a lesser  degree  
of certainty about causality than adverse reaction, which means any adverse event caused  
by a drug.  
Adverse reaction means any adverse event caused by a drug.  Adverse reactions are a 
subset of all suspected adverse reactions where there is reason to conclude that the drug  
caused the event.  
Unexpected adverse event or unexpected suspected adverse reaction: An adverse event or  
suspected adverse reaction is considered "unexpected" if it is not listed in the investigator  
brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an 
investigator brochure is not required or available, is not consistent with the risk information 
described in the general investigational plan or elsewhere in the current application, as  
amended.  For example,  under  this definition,  hepatic  necrosis would  be unexpected  (by virtue  
of greater severity) if the investigator brochure referred only to elevated hepatic enzymes or  
hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected  
(by virtue of greater specificity) if the investigator brochure listed only cerebral vascular  
accidents. "Unexpected,"  as used  in this definition,  also refers  to adverse events  or suspected 
adverse reactions that are mentioned in the investigator brochure as occurring with a class of  
drugs  or as anticipated from the pharmacological  properties  of the drug,  but are not specifically  
mentioned as occurring with the particular  drug under  investigation.  
Eliciting  AE Information 
Research subjects will be routinely  questioned  about  AEs at study  visits. 
 
Recording Requirements  
21  All observed or volunteered adverse events (serious or non- serious) and abnormal test  
findings,  regardless  of study  group or suspected causal  relationship to the study  drug(s)  will 
be recorded  in the subjects’  case  histories.  For all adverse events,  sufficient  information  will 
be pursued and/or  obtained  so as to permit  1) an adequate determination of the outcome  of 
the event (i.e., whether the event should be classified as a serious adverse event ) and; 2)  
an assessment  of the casual  relationship between the adverse event  and the study  drug(s).  
AEs or abnormal test findings felt to be associated with the investigational drug or study  
treatment(s) will be followed until the event (or its sequelae) or the abnormal test finding  
resolves  or stabilizes  at a level  acceptable to the Sponsor -Investigator.  
Abnormal  Test Findings  
An abnormal test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following  
criteria are  met: 
• The test finding  is accompanied by clinical symptoms.  
• The test finding necessitates    additional  diagnostic  evaluation(s)  or 
medical/surgical  intervention;  including  significant  additional  concomitant  drug 
treatment or  other  therapy.  
Note : simply  repeating  a test finding,  in the absence of any of the other  listed  criteria,  
does  not constitute an AE. 
• The test finding leads to a change in study dosing or discontinuation of subject  
participation in  the clinical study.  
REPORTING  OF SERIOUS  ADVERSE EVENTS 
All events  meeting  the definition  of a serious  adverse event,  from the date of first dose of 
study  drug until 30 days  after last dose,  should be reported according to the departmental  
SAE checklist and SAE form. The initial SAE form should be sent to the following within  
24 business  hours  / 1 business  day of the Principal  Investigator  becoming aware:  
1.  Robert Redner , MD  
2. CRSSafetySubmissions@upmc.edu  
3. Loc al  Institutional  Review  Board  when reporting requirements  are met. 
4. Pfizer  Safety  @ SAEFaxmailbox@Pfizer.com  
22   
In addition to completing  appropriate patient  demographic  and suspect medication  
information, the report should include as applicable the following information that is  
available at the time of report  within  the Sections  B and C of the departmental  SAE form:  
 
• CTCAE(5.0)  term(s)  and grade(s)  
• current  status  of study  drug 
• all interventions  to address  the AE (testing  and result,  treatment  and response)  
• hospitalization  and/or  discharge dates  
• event  relationship  to study  drug 
 
Follow- up reports:  
Additional information may be added to a previously submitted report by adding to the  
original departmental SAE form and submitting it as follow -up or creating supplemental  
summary  information  and submitting  it as follow- up with the original  departmental  SAE form.  
Special  Interest Serious  Adverse Events  
 
The following  events  also require reporting  to Pfizer  at the fax number  provided  above.  
 
1. Exposure during Pregnancy, Exposure during Lactation, Occupational Exposure, and Lack of 
Effect . Even though there may not be an associated SAE, exposure to the Pfizer drug product 
during pregnancy, exposure to the Pfizer drug product during lactation, and occupational exposure 
to the Pfizer drug product are reportable, and lack of effect od rh Pfizer drug product may also be 
reportable. The term SAE is understood to include exposure during pregnancy, exposure during 
lactation,  occupational exposure, and reportable instances of  lack of  effect.  
2. H y’s  Law Cases . Cases  of potential drug-induced liver injury as  assessed  by laboratory test values  
are reportable. If a Subject develops abnormal lab values in aspartate transaminase (AST) or  
alanine transaminase (ALT) or both, concurrent with abnormal elevations in total bilirubin and no other known cause of liver injury, that event would be classified as a Hy’s Law Case. The term SAE  is understood to include Hy’s Law  Cases.  
 
7. DATA SAFETY  MONITORING  PLAN  
 
Investigator/Sub- investigators,  regulatory,  CRS  management,  clinical 
research coordinators, clinical research associates, data managers, and clinic staff meet  
regularly in the disease center Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to review and 
discuss study  data to include,  but not limited to, the following:  
23  • serious  adverse events  
• subject  safety  issues  
• recruitment  issues  
 
• accrual  
 
• protocol  deviations  
• unanticipated problems  
• breaches  of confidentiality  
Minutes from the disease center DSMB meetings are available to those who are unable to  
attend in  person.  
All toxicities encountered during the study will be evaluated on an ongoing basis according 
to the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria Version 5.0. All study treatment associated adverse 
events  that are serious,  at least  possibly  related and unexpected will be reported to the IRB. 
Any modifications  necessary to ensure  subject  safety  and decisions  to continue  or close  the 
trial to accrual  are also discussed  during these  meetings.  If any literature  becomes  available  
which  changes  the risk/benefit  ratio or suggests  that conducting the trial is no longer  ethical,  
the IRB will be notified in the form of an Unanticipated Problem submission and the study  
may be terminated.  
All study data reviewed and discussed during these meetings will be kept confidential. Any  
breach in subject confidentiality will be reported to the IRB in the form of an Unanticipated 
Problem  submission.  The summaries  of these meetings  are forwarded  to the UPMC  Hillman  
Cancer  Center  DSMC  which also  meets  monthly  following  a designated format.  
For all research protocols, there will be a commitment to comply with the IRB’s policies for  
reporting unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others (including adverse  
events). DSMC progress reports, to include a summary of all serious adverse events and 
modifications, and approval  will be submitted to the IRB  at the time of renewal.  
Protocols with subjects in long- term (survival) follow -up or protocols in data analysis only, will  
be reviewed bi-annually.  
24  Both the UPMC Hillman Cancer Center DSMC as well as the individual disease center  
DSMB have the authority to suspend accrual or further investigate treatment on any trial  
based on  information  discussed at these meetings.  
All records related to this research study will be stored in a locked environment. Only the  
researchers  affiliated  with the research  study  and their staff will have access to the research  
records.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
8. STUDY  EVALUATION,  TREATMENT  SCHEMA AND FLOW  CHART  
 
 
Pre-treatment  evaluation  
 Within last 6 weeks  
from  
day of consent  
Anti-Hepatitis  C antibody  and if positive  HCV  RNA  PCR  X 
25  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen  X 
 Within  14 days  from  
day of consent  
Medical  history  and physical  examination  X 
Height,  weight,  BSA,  ECOG  performance  status  X 
Toxicities  from prior therapies  X 
Cardiac  echocardiogram  X 
Bone  marrow  biopsy  and aspiration  X 
Urine  βHCG  in women  ≤ 60 years  old (pregnancy  test) X 
PT/INR,  PTT X 
Complete metabolic panel (Na, K, Cl, CO2, glucose, BUN, Cr, Ca,  
total protein, albumin, total bilirubin, AST, ALT and alkaline 
phosphatase)  X 
Magnesium,  Phosphorous,  Uric Acid,  LDH X 
CBC  with differential  X 
Urinalysis  X 
Electrocardiogram  (12 lead)  X 
Chest  radiograph  X 
CT Chest,  Abdomen  and/or  Pelvis  if indicated  X 
  
 
Treatment  Schema  
 Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Day 6 
Mitoxantrone  X X X X X  
Etoposide  * X X X X X  
Gemtuzumab  
ozogamicin  **      X 
 
* Dose  modification  of etoposide  for patients  who develop  elevated total bilirubin  and/or  AST 
or decrease in creatinine clearance  
26   
Adverse  event  Dose  modification  of etoposide  
CrCl 10 – 50 ml/min  administer  75% of normal  dose  
CrCl < 10 ml/min   
administer  50% of normal  dose 
CrCl <50 ml/min  
AND 
Total bilirubin >3 mg/dL or AST >3 
times  ULN Hold etoposide  
 
**If enrolled patients on day 6 of therapy have levels of aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST)  ≥ 2.5 x UNL or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≥ 2.5 x UNL or total bilirubin ≥ 2 
x ULN the administration of GO  will be on  hold until  recovery  of total  bilirubin to  less 
than or equal  to 2 × ULN and AST and ALT to less than or equal  to 2.5 ×  ULN prior to 
each dose.  Daily  values  of LFTs  will be obtained. The GO dose  can be delayed up to 
the 10th day after the initiation of therapy due to toxicity or unexpected events (ie 
infection). Doses of GO will be capped at 4.5mg. Administration of a FLT3 inhibitor will  
be prohibited until CR is achieved. The use of a FLT -3 inhibitor is not prohibited after CR  
has been achieved for patients  with FLT3 -ITD or  FLT- TKD mutations.  
 
ON STUDY  EVALUATION  TIMING  
History  and physical  examination  Daily during the hospital stay at UPMC  
Shadyside Hospital and then weekly as  
outpatient  for 4 weeks, and then every  2 
weeks  until count  recovery  
CBC  with differential  CBC with differential will be performed daily  
during the inpatient stay and weekly as  
outpatient until  count  recovery  
27  Complete  metabolic  panel  including  LFTs  Complete metabolic panel including liver  
function tests (LFTs) will be performed daily  
during the admission. After discharge, they  
will be followed  weekly  as outpatient  until 
count  recovery  
Bone  marrow  aspiration  and biopsy  (to 
evaluate disease status)  At least 7 days after the completion of  
treatment  
Weight  Daily (if clinical possible) while in  
hospital  and during each  visit outpatient  
 
Bone  marrow  biopsy,  aspirate with flow cytometry  studies,  cytogenetics and molecular  studies  
will be performed no earlier  than 7 days  after the completion  of treatment.  Once  hematopoietic  
recovery has been achieved patients will undergo bone marrow biopsy and/or aspiration for  
disease evaluation which can be performed in the inpatient or outpatient setting. If the bone 
marrow is consistent with morphologic complete remission, minimal residual disease testing 
will be performed with flow cytometry. If on diagnosis the NPM1 mutation was detectable by  
PCR or next-generation sequencing  then NPM1  PCR  will be performed  as well if morphologic  
complete  remission  is achieved  If hematopoietic  recovery  has not been  achieved by 5 weeks  
after the completion of therapy bone marrow biopsy and/or aspiration for disease evaluation 
will be performed.  
 
 
 
Study  Flow  Chart  
Screening  Period  Treatment  Days  Post-treatment  
 Main 
Study  
Screening   
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6 Daily  
during 
Inpatient  
stay Follow  
Up 
Visits  Survival  
Follow  
upa 
 
Scheduling  Window  
(Days)   
 
-14 to 0  
Can delay each dose 
up to 3 days.  Up to 5 days  
from the last  
dose of  
etoposide/  
mitoxantroneb   
 
Weeklyc  
Informed  Consent  X          
Inclusion/Exclusion  
Criteria  X          
28  Medication  
Reviewd X X X X X X X X   
Trial Treatment  
Administration   X X X X X X    
Post-study  
anticancer  therapy  
status            
X 
Survival  Status           X 
Review  Adverse  
Events  X (from  1st 
induction  
therapy)   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
Full Physical  
Examination  X        X  
Directed  Physical  
Examination   X X X X X X X   
Vital Signs  and 
Weight  X X X X X X X X X  
ECOG  
Performance Status   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
Urine  or Serum  β- 
HCG  X          
PT/INR  and aPTT  Xe          
CBC  with 
differential  Xe X X X X X X X Xf  
Comprehensive  
Serum  
Chemistry  Panelg  
Xe  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
Xf  
Magnesium,  
Phosphorus,  
Uric Acid,  LDH  
Xe  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X   
Urinalysis  Xe          
Chest  Radiograph  Xe          
Echocardiogram  Xh          
EKG  Xe          
Bone  Marrow  
Biopsy  Xi        Xj  
Archival  or Newly  X          
Obtained  Tissue  
Collection            
 
a Survival will be assessed daily during inpatient stays and then in the follow up visits. After the  
assessment  of the recovery  marrow  or the marrow  after 5 weeks  from the completion of therapy  patients  
will be followed remotely from chart review to evaluate the disease- free survival and overall survival. If  
information cannot be obtained from the chart, patients may be contacted by telephone. b Administration 
of a FLT3 inhibitor will be prohibited until CR is achieved. The use of a FLT -3 inhibitor is not prohibited 
after CR has been achieved for patients  with FLT3- ITD or FLT-TKD mutations.  
29  c After  discharge the patient  will be followed  weekly  for 4 weeks  and then every  2 weeks  until count  
recovery (defined as ANC ≥ 1000 with or without PLT ≥ 100,000). If patients develop grade 3 or 4 
nonhematologic toxicity during their treatment they will be followed weekly after discharge until resolution  
of toxicity or improvement to grade 2 or less. There is ± 4 days window for each visit.  d Medication review  
will be performed from the day of screening until the day of discharge. e All screening laboratory  
assessment must occur within 14 days after consent is signed.  f After discharge, CBC with differential  
and complete metabolic panel will be obtained weekly until count recovery (defined as ANC ≥ 1000 with  
or without PLT ≥ 100,000). g Includes Na, K, Cl, HCO3, BUN, Cr, glucose, Ca, total protein, albumin, total  
bilirubin, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase. h Transthoracic Echocardiogram must be performed after the 
administration of 7 days of cytarabine with 3 days of idarubicin and before the first day of the study  
treatment.  i Bone  marrow with  persistent  disease as  described in  eligibility  criteria  section  and CD33  
expression in ≥ 30% leukemic blasts on the bone marrow. j Bone marrow biopsy and/or aspirate will be 
performed no earlier than 7  days after the therapy completion to evaluate disease response.  Bone  
marrow biopsy/aspiration to test for remission once hematopoietic recovery has been achieved will be 
performed in the inpatient or outpatient setting. If hematopoietic recovery has not been achieved by 5  
weeks after the completion of therapy bone marrow biopsy/aspiration for disease evaluation will be  
performed. If the recovery bone marrow is consistent with morphologic complete remission, minimal  
residual disease testing will be performed with flow cytometry. If at AML diagnosis the NPM1 mutation was detectable by PCR or next generation sequencing then NPM1 PCR will be performed as well. 
k Blood  
will be collected prior to the initiation of therapy with mitoxantrone and etoposide, prior to the initiation of  
therapy with GO, after the administration of GO and weekly while in the hospital. Blood and bone m arrow  
aspirate will be collected at the time of bone marrow evaluation following therapy and at the time of bone  
marrow  evaluation following  hematopoietic  recovery or  prolonged cytopenias.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
APPENDIX  I 
 
 
Performance  Status  Criteria  
30   
ECOG  Performance  Status  Scale 
Grade  Descriptions  
0 Normal activity.  Fully active, able to  
carry  on all pre-disease performance 
without  restriction.  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory.  
Restricted in physically strenuous  
activity, but ambulatory and able to  
carry  out work  of a light or sedentary  
nature (e.g., light housework, office  
work).  
2 In bed <50% of the time.  Ambulatory  
and capable of all self-care,  but 
unable to carry  out any work  activities.  
Up and about more than 50% of  
waking hours.  
3 In bed >50% of the time.  Capable of  
only limited  self-care,  confined  to bed 
or chair more than 50% of waking  
hours.  
4 100%     bedridden.  Completely  
disabled.  Cannot  carry  on any 
selfcare.  Totally confined to bed or  
chair.  
5 Dead.  
 
 
 
APPENDIX  II 
  
RESPONSE CRITERIA FOR  ACUTE  LEUKEMIA 
 
 
Morphologic  leukemia- free state  
Bone marrow  < 5% blasts  in an aspirate with spicules  
31  No blasts with Auer rods or persistence of extramedullary disease 
Absolute neutrophil  count  < 1000/ mcL AND platelets  <100,000/mcL  
 
Complete  remission  
Bone marrow < 5% blasts in an aspirate with spicules Absolute 
neutrophil  count  > 1000/mcL 
Platelets  ≥100,000/mcL 
No residual evidence of extramedullary disease Morphologic  CR - patient  independent  of transfusions  
Cytogenetic CR -  cytogenetics normal (in those with previously abnormal cytogenetics)  
Molecular  CR - molecular  studies  negative  
 
Complete  remission  with incomplete  hematologic  recovery  
Bone marrow < 5% blasts in an aspirate with spicules  
No residual  evidence of extramedullary  disease  
Absolute neutrophil  count  > 1000/mcL  or platelets  ≥100,000/mcL  
No residual  evidence  of extramedullary  disease  
 
 
Partial  remission  
Decrease of at least 50% in the percentage of blasts to 5 to 25% in the bone marrow  
Patients  failing  to achieve a complete remission  are considered  treatment  failures  
 
Relapse  
Relapse following complete remission is defined as reappearance of leukemic blasts in 
the peripheral blood or the finding of more than 5% blasts in the bone marrow, not  
attributable to another  cause  (eg, bone marrow  regeneration after consolidation therapy)  
 
Cheson BD, Bennett  JM, Kopecky  KJ et al. J Clin Oncol  2003;21 (24):4642 -4649  
 
 
9. DRUG  INFORMATION  
32  Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin  
 
 
Other  Names:  Mylotarg 
 
 
Classification:  Antibody -drug conjugate  
 
 
Mechanism of Action: Antibody -drug conjugate to CD33 antigen. Binding results in  
internalization of the antibody -antigen  complex.  Following  internalization,  the 
calicheamicin derivative is released inside the myeloid cell. The calicheamicin derivative  
binds  to DNA  resulting in double strand  breaks  and cell death.  Pluripotent  stem  cells and 
nonhematopoietic  cells are not affected.  
 
Storage and Stability: GO is supplied as a sterile, pyrogen- free, unpreserved, white  
lyophilized  powder  in amber  glass  vials.  The unopened  vials of GO should  be stored at 
2 - 8 ° C (refrigerated) and protected  from light and should  be used within  8 hours  of 
reconstitution.  GO is light sensitive and should be reconstituted,  prepared,  and 
administered under  protection from direct/indirect  sunlight  and Ultraviolet  (UV) light.  
 
Dose Specifics: GO will be administered at 3 mg/m2 (cap at 4.5mg) on day 6. BSA will be 
calculated based  on actual  body weight.  
 
Preparation : GO is light sensitive and must  be protected from direct  and indirect  sunlight  
and unshielded fluorescent light during the preparation and administration of the infusion.  
ALL PREPARATION  SHOULD BE DONE  IN A BIOLOGIC  SAFETY  HOOD  WITH  
FLUORESCENT LIGHT OFF.  Prior to reconstitution, allow vials to come to room  
temperature for approximately 5 minutes. Reconstitute the contents of each vial with 5  
mL sterile  water  for injection,  USP,  using  sterile  syringes. Gently  swirl each vial. The final 
concentration is 1 mg/mL.  Use reconstituted solution  immediately  or after being  
refrigerated at 2-8 °C for up to 1 hour.  Protect reconstituted solution from light.  Do not  
freeze  reconstituted solution.  Dilute  the desired volume  of GO into a 50-milliliter  
33  intravenous bag of 0.9% sodium chloride injection or other appropriate volume of 0.9%  
sodium  chloride to make  a final GO concentration between  0.075 mg/ml  to 0.234 mg/mL.  
Gently invert the infusion container to mix the diluted solution. Do not shake. Following 
dilution with 0.9% sodium chloride injection, GO solution should be infused immediately.  
If not used  immediately,  store  at room  temperature (15–25°C;  59–77°F)  for up to 6 hours,  
which includes the 2- hour infusion time and 1 -hour, if needed, to allow the refrigerated 
diluted solution  to equilibrate to room  temperature.  The diluted solution  can be 
refrigerated at 2– 8°C (36–46°F)  for up to 12 hours  which  includes  up to 1-hour in the vial 
post-reconstitution.  
 
Route of Administration: GO is administered as a 2 hour IV infusion. A 0.2- micron  
polyethersulfone filter is required on the IV line.  The IV bag must be protected from light  
using a light -blocking cover during infusion.  The infusion line does not need to be 
protected from  light.  
 
Compatibilities:  No information;  infuse via separate  line. 
 
 
Availability:  Commercially  available  
 
 
Side  Effects: 
 
 
Common (occurs in more than 10% of people -  more than 10 out of 100 people):  
fever  (79%),  infection  (42%),  increased  AST (40%),  sepsis (32%),  bleeding (23%),  
nausea and vomiting  (21%),  constipation (21%),  mucositis  (21%),  headache (19%),  
increased ALT (16%),  rash (16%)  
 
 
Infrequent  (occurs  in 1% to 10% of people - from 1 to 10 out of  100 people):  
pneumonia (7%),  bleeding (7%),  hyperbilirubinemia (7%),  mucositis (4%),  pain (4%),  
diarrhea  (2%),  headaches  (2%),  tachycardia (2%),  lung edema (2%)  
 
 
Rare  (occurs  in <1% of people,  mainly  identified  in post-marketing surveillance):  
34  neutropenic  colitis,  interstitial pneumonia,  hemorrhagic  cystitis 
 
 
Nursing Implications: Patients should be premedicated prior to administration of GO  
with methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg  IV, diphenhydramine 50 mg IV or PO and 
acetaminophen 650 mg PO 30 minutes prior to start of the infusion. Additional doses of  
acetaminophen and diphenhydramine may be administered every  4 hours  after the initial  
pretreatment dose. Repeat with the same dose of methylprednisolone for any sign of an  
infusion reaction, such as fever, chills, hypotension, or dyspnea during the infusion or  
within 4  hours  afterwards.  
 
During and after the infusion patients will be monitored with vital signs recorded every  
30 minutes  during the infusion and for  1 hour after completion of the infusion.  
 
GO should  be administered  in a setting  where  appropriate medical  support,  including life 
support equipment, is  available in case of an unexpected adverse event.  
 
 
 
Etoposide  
 
 
Other  Names: Toposar  
 
 
Classification:  Podophyllotoxin Derivative  
 
Mechanism of Action: Etoposide has been shown to delay transit of cells through the S  
phase and arrest cells in late S or early G 2 phase. The drug may inhibit mitochondrial  
transport  at the NADH dehydrogenase  level or inhibit  uptake  of nucleosides  into HeLa cells.  
It is a topoisomerase II inhibitor  and appears  to cause DNA  strand breaks.  Etoposide does  
not inhibit  microtubular  assembly . 
 
Storage and Stability: Unopened vials of etoposide are stable for 24 months at room  
temperature (25 degrees  Celsius).  Vials  of etoposide are stable  at room  temperature for 96 
35  hours  when  diluted  to concentrations  of 0.2 milligrams/milliliter  (mg/mL);  stability  is 24 hours  
with concentrations  of 0.4 mg/mL  at room  temperature.  The manufacturer  does  not 
recommend that etoposide be administered at concentrations greater than 0.4 mg/mL  
because time to precipitation is highly unpredictable and precipitate formation has been  
reported to occur  earlier  than the utility  times  listed  above.  Etoposide 20 mg/ml  is stable  in 
a plastic  syringe for  5 days  when  stored at room  temperature under  fluorescent  light.  
 
Dose Specifics: Patients will receive etoposide 100 mg/m2 administered intravenously in  
500 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride over 2 hours on days 1- 5 (for patients who have elevated  
total bilrirubin, AST or reduced creatinine clearance during the etoposide infusion see  
treatment schema for dose modification of the etoposide). BSA will be calculated based on  
actual  body  weight.  
 
Preparation: Etoposide Injection must be diluted prior to use with either 5% Dextrose  
Injection, or 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, to give a final concentration of 0.2 to 0.4  
mg/mL . If solutions are prepared at concentrations above 0.4 mg/mL, precipitation may  
occur. Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and  
discoloration prior to administration whenever  solution  and container  permit.  
 
Route  of Administration:  Etoposide should be given as a diluted  solution  via the IV route.  
 
Compatibilities: Variable stability (consult detailed reference) in D 5W, LR, NS.Y -site 
administration: Compatible: Allopurinol, amifostine, aztreonam, cladribine, doxorubicin 
liposome, fludarabine, gemcitabine, granisetron, melphalan, ondansetron, paclitaxel,  
piperacillin/tazobactam,  sargramostim,  sodium  bicarbonate,  teniposide,  thiotepa,  
topotecan,  vinorelbine.  Incompatible:  Cefepime,  filgrastim, idarubicin.  
 
Compatibility  when  admixed:  Compatible:  Carboplatin,  cisplatin,  cisplatin  with 
cyclophosphamide, cisplatin with floxuridine, cytarabine, cytarabine with daunorubicin,  
floxuridine,  fluorouracil,  hydroxyzine,  ifosfamide,  ifosfamide  with carboplatin,  ifosfamide 
36  with cisplatin, ondansetron. Variable (consult detailed reference): Cisplatin with mannitol  
and potassium  chloride,  doxorubicin with vincristine.  
 
Availability:  Commercially  available  
 
 
Side  Effects: 
 
 
Common (occurs in more than 10% of people - more than 10 out of 100 people):  
Alopecia  (8% to 66%),  ovarian failure  (38%),  Nausea/vomiting (31%  to 43%),  anorexia  
(10% to 13%), diarrhea (1% to 13%), leukopenia (60 to 91%), thrombocytopenia (22%  
to 41%),  anemia (up to 33%),  mucositis  
 
Infrequent (occurs in 1% to 10% of people - from 1 to 10 out of 100 people):  
Hypotension (1% to 2%), stomatitis (1% to 6%), abdominal pain (up to 2%), hepatic  
toxicity (up to 3%), peripheral neuropathy (1% to 2%), anaphylactic -like reaction (IV  
infusion 1% to  2%) 
 
Rare (occurs in fewer than 1% of people – fewer than 1 out of 100 people):  
Congestive heart  failure,  hyperpigmentation,  rash,  radiation- recall  reaction,  
StevensJohnson Syndrome, pruritus, toxic epidermal necrolysis, cyanosis, optic neuritis,  
transient blindness, diaphoresis, interstitial pneumonitis, pulmonary fibrosis, metabolic  
acidosis, thrombophlebitis,  extravasation  
 
Nursing Implications : For IV  use only; may  cause severe local tissue damage if 
extravasation  occurs. Do not administer  intrathecally;  may cause serious  and permanent  
neurologic damage.  Should be administered under the supervision of an experienced  
cancer  chemotherapy  physician.  
 
 
Mitoxantrone  
37  Other  Names:  Dihydroxyanthracenedione,  DHAD 
 
 
Classification:  Anthracenedione  
 
 
Mechanism of Action: Analogue of the anthracyclines, mitoxantrone intercalates DNA;  
binds to nucleic acids and inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis by template disordering and  
steric obstruction; replication is decreased by binding to DNA topoisomerase II and seems 
to inhibit the incorporation of uridine into RNA and thymidine into DNA; active throughout  
entire cell cycle  
 
Storage  and Stability:  Intact  vials should be stored between  15 and 25 degrees  Celsius  
(59 and 77 degrees Fahrenheit). DO NOT FREEZE.  After penetration of the stopper,  store  
the remaining solution  of undiluted mitoxantrone for no longer  than 7 days  between  15 to 
25 degrees Celsius (59 to 77 degrees Fahrenheit) or for no longer than 14 days  under  
refrigeration  (2 to 8 degrees  Celsius  or 36 to 46 degrees  Fahrenheit).  Mitoxantrone must  
be further  diluted  for infusion.  
 
Dose Specifics: Patients will receive mitoxantrone 10mg/m2 administered IVPB in 50ml  
0.9% sodium chloride over 15 minutes on days 1- 5. (Refer to Treatment Plan of Phase I  
and II sections).  BSA will be calculated  based  on actual body  weight.  
 
Preparation:  MITOXANTRONE  CONCENTRATE  MUST  BE DILUTED PRIOR  TO USE.  
Dilute  the dose  with at least  50 milliliters  (mL) of 0.9%  sodium  chloride  or 5% dextrose  in 
water.  Dilution  in volumes  greater  than 50 mL may be done in 5% dextrose in water,  0.9%  
sodium chloride, or dextrose 5% with 0.9% sodium chloride. Parenteral drug products  
should  be inspected visually  for particulate  matter  and discoloration  prior to administration  
whenever  solution  and container  permit.  
 
Route of Administration: Mitoxantrone should be given as a diluted solution via the IV  
route.  
38  
Compatibilities:  Stable  in D5NS, D5W, NS Y-site administration:  Compatible:  Allopurinol,  
amifostine,  cladribine,  etoposide  phosphate,  filgrastim,  fludarabine,  gatifloxacin,  
gemcitabine, granisetron, linezolid, melphalan, ondansetron, sargramostim, teniposide,  
thiotepa,  vinorelbine.  Incompatible:  Amphotericin  B cholesteryl  sulfate  complex,  
aztreonam,  cefepime,  doxorubicin liposome,  paclitaxel,  piperacillin/tazobactam,  propofol.  
 
Compatibility  when  admixed:  Compatible:  Cyclophosphamide,  cytarabine,  fluorouracil,  
hydrocortisone sodium succinate, potassium chloride. Incompatible: Heparin. Variable  
(consult detailed reference): Hydrocortisone sodium  phosphate.  
 
Availability:  Commercially  available  
 
 
Side  Effects: 
 
 
Common (occurs in more than 10% of people -  more than 10 out of 100 people):  
Arrhythmia  (3% to 18%),  ECG  changes  (11%),  fatigue (up to 39%),  fever  (6% to 78%),  
headache (6% to 13%),  alopecia (20%  to 61%),  nail bed changes  (11%),  amenorrhea  
(28%  to 53%),  menstrual  disorder  (26%  to 61%),  hyperglycemia  (10%  to 31%),  
abdominal  pain (9% to 15%),  anorexia (22%  to 25%),  nausea  (26%  to 76%),  
constipation (10%  to 16%),  diarrhea  (14%  to 47%),  GI bleeding (2% to 16%),  mucositis  
(10%  to 29%),  stomatitis  (8% to 29%),  vomiting  (6% to 11%),  urinary  tract infection  (7% 
to 32%),  neutropenia (79%  to 100%),  leukopenia (9% to 100%),  lymphopenia (72%  to 
95%),  anemia  (5% to 75%),  thrombocytopenia (33%  to 39%),  petechiae/bruising (6% to 
11%),  alkaline  phosphatase  increased (37%),  transaminases  increased  (5% to 20%),  
creatinine  increased (13%),  hematuria (11%),  dyspnea (6% to 18%),  upper  respiratory  
tract infection (7% to 53%),  fungal  infection (9% to 15%),  infection  (4% - 18%),  sepsis  
(31%  to 34%)  
 
 
Infrequent (occurs in 1% to 10% of people - from 1 to 10 out of 100 people): LVEF  
decreased ( 5%), CHF (2% - 5%), depression  (5%),  seizure  (2% - 4%), hypocalcemia  
39  (10%),  hypokalemia  (7% - 10%),  hyponatremia (9%),  menorrhagia (7%),impotence  
(7%),  jaundice (3% to 7%), myalgia (5%),  arthralgia (5%),  conjunctivitis  
(5%),  blurred vision  (3%),  renal  failure  (8%),  proteinuria (6%),  rhinitis  (10%),  pneumonia 
(9%),  sinusitis  (6%),  diaphoresis  (9%) 
 
 
Rare  (occurs  in fewer  than 1% of people – fewer  than 1 out of 100 people):  
Blue skin discoloration,  rash,  interstitial pneumonitis,  hypersensitivity,  extravasation  
 
 
May cause myocardial toxicity and potentially -fatal congestive heart failure (CHF); risk  
increases  with cumulative  dosing.  Predisposing factors  for mitoxantrone- induced  
cardiotoxicity  include  prior anthracycline  therapy,  prior cardiovascular  disease,  
concomitant  use of cardiotoxic  drugs,  and mediastinal/pericardial  irradiation.  Not 
recommended for  use when left ventricular  ejection fraction  (LVEF)  <50%.  
 
Nursing implications: For IV use only; may cause severe  local tissue damage if 
extravasation  occurs.  Do not administer  intrathecally;  may cause serious  and permanent  
neurologic damage. May cause urine, saliva, tears, and sweat to turn blue- green for 24  
hours  post infusion.  Whites  of eyes  may have  blue-green tinge.  Has been associated  with 
the development  of secondary  acute myelogenous  leukemia  and myelodysplasia.  Should  
be administered under  the supervision  of an experienced cancer  chemotherapy  
physician.  
 
10. REFERENCES  
 
 
References  
 
1. Dohner  H, Weisdorf  DJ, Bloomfield  CD.  Acute Myeloid Leukemia.  N Engl  J Med.  
2015;373(12):1136- 1152. 
2. Rowe  JM, Tallman  MS.  How I  treat acute myeloid leukemia.  Blood. 
2010;116(17):31473156. 
3. Kolitz  JE. Current  therapeutic strategies  for acute myeloid  leukaemia.  Br J Haematol. 
2006;134(6):555- 572. 
4. Orlowski  RJ, Mangan  JK, Luger  SM. Approach to  patients  with primary  refractory acute 
myeloid  leukemia. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015;22(2):97- 107. 
40  5. Hamann PR, Hinman LM, Hollander I, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin, a potent and 
selective anti -CD33 antibody- calicheamicin conjugate for treatment of acute myeloid  
leukemia.  Bioconjug Chem. 2002;13(1):47- 58. 
6. Yamauchi T, Matsuda Y, Tasaki T, et al. Induction of DNA strand breaks is critical to  
predict the cytotoxicity of gemtuzumab ozogamicin against leukemic cells. Cancer Sci.  
2012;103(9):1722- 1729.  
7. Khan N, Hills RK, Virgo P, et al. Expression of CD33 is a predictive factor for effect of  
gemtuzumab ozogamicin at different doses in adult acute myeloid leukaemia. Leukemia.  
2017;31(5):1059- 1068.  
8. Sievers EL, Larson RA, Stadtmauer EA, et al. Efficacy and safety of gemtuzumab  
ozogamicin in patients with CD33- positive acute myeloid leukemia in first relapse. J Clin  
Oncol. 2001;19(13):3244- 3254. 
9. Bross PF, Beitz J, Chen G, et al. Approval summary: gemtuzumab ozogamicin in relapsed  acute myeloid  leukemia.  Clin Cancer  Res.  2001;7(6):1490- 1496. 
10. Petersdorf  SH, Kopecky  KJ, Slovak M,  et al. A phase  3 study of  gemtuzumab  ozogamicin  
during induction and postconsolidation therapy in younger patients with acute myeloid leukemia.  Blood. 2013;121(24):4854- 4860.  
11. Castaigne S, Pautas C, Terre C, et al. Effect of gemtuzumab ozogamicin on survival of  
adult patients with de -novo acute myeloid leukaemia (ALFA -0701): a randomised, 
openlabel, phase  3 study. Lancet.  2012;379(9825):1508- 1516. 
12. Amadori S, Suciu S, Selleslag D, et al. Gemtuzumab Ozogamicin Versus Best Supportive  
Care in Older Patients With Newly Diagnosed Acute Myeloid Leukemia Unsuitable for  
Intensive Chemotherapy: Results of the Randomized Phase III EORTC -GIMEMA  
AML19  Trial. J  Clin Oncol. 2016;34(9):972- 979. 
13. Burnett A, Cavenagh J, Russell N, et al. Defining the dose of gemtuzumab ozogamicin in  
combination with induction chemotherapy in acute myeloid leukemia: a comparison of 3  
mg/m2  with  6 mg/m2  in the NCRI  AML17  Trial.  Haematologica. 2016;101(6):724- 731. 
14. Larson RA, Sievers EL, Stadtmauer  EA, et al. Final report of the efficacy and safety of  
gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg) in patients with CD33- positive acute myeloid  
leukemia  in first recurrence. Cancer. 2005;104(7):1442- 1452. 
15. Magwood- Golston JS, Kessler S, Bennett CL. Evaluation of gemtuzumab ozogamycin 
associated sinusoidal obstructive syndrome: Findings from an academic  
pharmacovigilance program review and a pharmaceutical sponsored registry. Leuk Res.  
2016;44:61- 64. 
16. Tallman MS, McDonald GB, DeLeve LD, et al. Incidence of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome following Mylotarg (gemtuzumab ozogamicin): a prospective observational  
study of  482 patients  in routine  clinical  practice. Int J Hematol.  2013;97(4):456- 464. 
17. Wadleigh  M, Richardson PG, Zahrieh  D, et al.  Prior gemtuzumab  ozogamicin  exposure  
significantly increases the risk of veno- occlusive disease in patients who undergo 
myeloablative  allogeneic stem  cell transplantation. Blood. 2003;102(5):1578- 1582. 
18. Battipaglia G, Labopin M, Candoni A, et al. Risk of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome in allogeneic stem cell transplantation after prior gemtuzumab ozogamicin treatment: a  
retrospective study from the Acute Leukemia Working Party of the EBMT. Bone Marrow  
Transplant. 2017;52(4):592- 599. 
19. Burnett AK, Hills RK, Hunter AE, et al. The addition of gemtuzumab ozogamicin to lowdose  Ara-C improves  remission  rate but does  not significantly  prolong survival  in 
41  older patients with acute myeloid leukaemia: results from the LRF AML14 and NCRI  
AML16  pick -a-winner  comparison. Leukemia.  2013;27(1):75- 81. 
20. Burnett AK, Hills RK, Milligan D, et al. Identification of patients with acute myeloblastic  
leukemia who benefit from the addition of gemtuzumab ozogamicin: results of the MRC  
AML15  trial. J  Clin Oncol. 2011;29(4):369- 377. 
21. Castaigne S, Pautas  C, Terré  C, et al. Final  Analysis  of the ALFA  0701 Study. Blood.  
2014;124(21):376- 376. 
22. Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hills RK, et al. Addition of gemtuzumab ozogamicin to  
induction chemotherapy improves survival in older patients with acute myeloid leukemia.  
J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(32):3924- 3931. 
23. Amadori S, Suciu S, Stasi R, et al. Sequential combination of gemtuzumab ozogamicin 
and standard chemotherapy in older patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia: results of a randomized phase III trial by the EORTC and GIMEMA  
consortium  (AML -17). J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(35):4424- 4430. 
24. Lowenberg B, Beck J, Graux C, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin as postremission treatment in AML at 60 years of age or more: results of a multicenter phase 3 study. Blood. 2010;115(13):2586- 2591. 
25. McHayleh W, Sehgal R, Redner RL, et al. Mitoxantrone and etoposide in patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia with persistent leukemia after a course of  
therapy  with  cytarabine and  idarubicin. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009;50(11):1848- 1853. 
26. Boyiadzis M, Redner RL, Raptis A, Hou JZ, Agha M, Foon KA. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin, mitoxantrone, and etoposide  in newly  diagnosed acute myeloid  leukemia  
patients with persistent leukemia after a course of induction therapy. Ann Hematol. 2011;90(6):733- 735. 
27. van der Velden  VH,  Boeckx  N, Jedema I, et al. High  CD33 -antigen  loads  in peripheral  
blood limit the efficacy of gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg) treatment in acute  
myeloid  leukemia  patients. Leukemia. 2004;18(5):983- 988. 
28. Boyiadzis M, Whiteside TL. Information transfer by exosomes: A new frontier in 
hematologic  malignancies. Blood Rev. 2015;29(5):281- 290. 
29. Boyiadzis  M, Whiteside  TL. The emerging  roles of  tumor -derived  exosomes  in 
hematological  malignancies. Leukemia.  2017;31(6):1259- 1268. 
30. Aung T, Chapuy B, Vogel D, et al. Exosomal evasion of humoral immunotherapy in 
aggressive B -cell lymphoma modulated by ATP -binding cassette transporter A3. Proc  
Natl Acad Sci U  S A. 2011;108(37):15336- 15341.  
31. Oksvold MP, Kullmann A, Forfang L, et al. Expression of B -cell surface antigens in  
subpopulations of exosomes released from B -cell lymphoma cells. Clin Ther.  
2014;36(6):847- 862 e841. 
32. Ciravolo V, Huber V, Ghedini  GC, et al. Potential role of HER2 -overexpressing  
exosomes  in countering trastuzumab -based  therapy.  J Cell Physiol. 2012;227(2):658- 667. 
33. Hong CS, Funk S, Muller L, Boyiadzis M, Whiteside TL. Isolation of biologically active  
and morphologically intact exosomes  from  plasma  of patients  with cancer. J Extracell  Vesicles.  
2016;5:29289. 