Effects of Post- Stroke Upper Extremity Assistance  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
July 8, 2022 
 
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary 
The purpose of this study is to quantify the improvement of post -stroke individua ls' 
ability to move their arms during and after robot  assisted therapy.  
 
While researchers know that robot assisted therapies improve motor performance over 
the course of weeks, they do not know how motor  performance is affected over the 
course of minutes or hours. A better  understanding of how robot assisted therapies affect 
motor  performance on short time scales may help us to prescribe more effective therapy 
doses to maximize motor recovery after neurological  injury.  
 The study will allow us to obtain a detailed understanding of the  performance of the 
device as described above.  
b. Objectives  
Clinicians and researchers cu rrently have a very limited idea of how  to best manage 
motor recovery from stroke. Recent studies have sought  to create robotic therapists to 
increase the dosage of physical therapy  that patients are able to receive, since physical 
therapists have limited time and limited physical stamina for administering  therapies. 
While these robotic assisted therapies have produced good  results, they have often fallen 
short of expectations. One hypothesis  is that rehabilitation doses remain low due to the 
expense and bulk of  robotic devices. We have developed inexpensive, lightweight 
devices to  provide similar assistance that will allow us to (1) examine the effects of a 
single dose of robot assisted therapy and (2) examine to the cumulative effects of multiple doses. The ultimate goal of this  work is to prescribe a program of therapy that 
produces the largest  rehabilitative effects, which is particularly important for patients 
recovering from stroke as they have a limited window of recovery of  about 6 weeks.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
This study seeks to understand the effects of assistive devices in  rehabilitation in human 
stroke patients, necessitating the inclusion  of human stroke patients.  
July 8, 2022   Page 2 of 12 2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Patients admitted to Stanford Hospital for stroke (e.g., in the  Stanford Neurology & 
Neurological Sciences Clinic) or receiving  rehabi litation services (e.g., in the Stanford 
Physical Medicine &  Rehab Clinic) or stroke survivors from the community who have 
indicated  interest in participating in research studies at Stanford will be  screened (under a 
waiver of authorization for recruitment ) to determine eligibility. During this screening 
process, physicians and  select coordinators may access medical records to check patient 
details against the inclusion/exclusion criteria specified. 
 
Final determination of patient eligibility and approach to inform of  eligibility will only be 
performed by treating personnel (e.g.,  physicians).  
 
Once an eligible stroke survivor has agreed to participate, he or she will be placed in 
contact with one of the study's key investigators for a final telephone screening (see 
attachment). If everything is as expected, the subject will be scheduled for sensorimotor 
assessments described below. The study should take approximately 4 hours (including 
breaks),potentially over the course of multiple days. The first assessment will be to assess baseline without the compliant passive arm support and the second will be with the 
compliant  passive arm support. Described in further detail below.  
 The research procedures used in this assessment do not include any  experimental drug 
treatments or patient randomization. All subjects  will receive complete standard of care.  
 When a participant arrives for the first study session, time will firs t be allocated to go 
through the consent document and answer any questions.  
 
Once participants have granted their informed consent, a subset of  non-invasive clinical 
assessments will then be administered by the study personnel. These assessment include one or more of the following:  Mini Mental State Exam, Line Bisection Test, Fugl -Meyer 
Assessment  (FMA), Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS), Action Research Arm Test 
(ARAT), Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT), and simple tests for joint range of  motion 
and visual/tactile neglect.  
 
The sensorimotor assessment evaluates a subject's ability to move the arm to acquire 
targets and range of motion. While subjects are seated,  their arm will be supported 
against gravity by compliant passive arm  support (described more below) or another 
passive support (also  described in more detail below). Motion will be recorded using an 
optical motion capture system (PhaseSpace). While seated, subjects will be asked to actively move their arm to acquire targets or explore the range of their workspace or will 
be passively moved by the experimenter.  
 The assessment will be performed using a subset of the following  devices:  
 (1) Mor-Medical Euro Style Rehab Shower Chair: Subjects using the  rigid arm support 
will be seated in a medical -grade rehab shower  chair. The chair's caster wheels allow for 
July 8, 2022   Page 3 of 12 precise adjustment of the subject relative to the linkage; this is necessary for alignment of 
the subject's joints with those of the linkage. The wheels lock in place to secure the 
subject in an aligned position. The chair is adjustable to four discrete heights to 
accommodate subjects of different sizes.  
A chest belt prevents motion of the torso relative to the rigid arm support.  
 (2) PhaseSpace motion -capture system: The motion -capture system  measures the three-
dimensional location in space of specialized  markers. These markers will be strapped to a 
subject to record and  analyze the kin ematics of his/her limbs in space. The data is 
processed and saved remotely by a computer.  
 
(3) Delsys surface EMG system: EMG records muscle activity via skin - mounted 
electrodes; these are passive and non -invasive. The signal  recorded by the sensors are 
processed and saved remotely by a computer.  
 
(4) Passive arm support: As a control for the compliant passive arm  support, participants 
might be asked to perform the same reaching tasks while their arm is supported passively by an arm support. These passive  arm supports will either consist of an arm rest mounted 
on bearings on top of a table such that the arm is free to slide across the table, but participants can rely on the arm rest for support against gravity.  
 Alternatively, the arm rest might be hung fr om the ceiling with high - strength nylon 
chord so that the height of the support can be adjusted while maintaining the low -friction 
gravity support.  
 
(5) Compliant passive arm support: The device consists of two linkages, 1 vertical 
linkage that runs from the waist to the shoulder and 1 that runs from the shoulder to the elbow, and elastic bands connecting the two linkages to lift the upper -arm linkage 
upwards relative to the vertical linkage. The vertical linkage connects to a commercial 
posture brace at t he waist while the upper arm linkage rests under the participant's arm 
and is secured with hook-and -loop fastener. The design of the device, with several 
compliant elements, ensures that one device fits many without joint alignment concerns.  
 Subjects may be asked to perform similar assessments on multiple days to check for 
lingering effects.  
 
Video will be recorded for the study. Video may be processed to extract additional 
motion data, which will extract the relative locations of parts of the body, such as the 
hand, elbow, and shoulder. Any motion data presented from video recordings of the 
motion capture system will thus not include identifiable characteristics. We will also 
record video of participants as they perform the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT) in 
accordance with the WMFT protocol. In these WMFT videos, we will use blur the faces 
of all participants. All videos will be archived on an internal lab server. The videos will 
be transferred to a secure encrypted database, RedCap or Stanford's Google Dr ive (only 
researchers on this protocol will have access to the videos). No other people outside the 
study team will have access to the videos.  
 
July 8, 2022   Page 4 of 12 Between uses, all components that contact human skill on the device  will be disinfected 
either two (purple top) Super Sani -Cloth wipes or a UV-C Sanitizing Wand. If the wipes 
are used, the surface will be wiped for a total of two minutes, ensuring the entr ies surface 
is wet the entire time. This will be repeated once more after drying. The device will be 
allowed to air dry for a total of two minutes.  
 We have active and completed protocols that have used similar devices and experimental 
procedures such as "Measurement of Post -Stroke  Sensorimotor Performance" -- which 
uses similar participants, devices,  and techniques as the current application -- and 
"Measurement  of Biomechanical Response to the Use of Robotic Assistance Devices for  
Human Runni ng" -- which uses similar measurement techniques as the current 
application.  
b. Procedure Risks  
Subjects will be recruited from the Stanford Neurology & Neurological  Sciences and 
Physical Medicine & Rehab clinics –  both outpatient, as  well as from Stanford databases 
in which stroke sur vivors from the  community have indicated their interest in 
participating in research  studies. The study will not interfere with patient care; patients 
will be allowed to continue taking any medications and attending therapy over the course 
of the study. Th e study will use non-invasive  measurement techniques to record the 
motion of the subject –  the minimum data need to perform this study.  
 Appropriate cleaning procedures will be utilized to prevent the spread of COVID -19. 
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
No deception will be used.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
Video will be recorded for the study. Video may be processed to extract  additional 
motion data, which will extract the relative locations of  parts of the body, such as the 
hand, elbow, and shoulder. Any motion data presented from video recordings of the 
motion capture system will  thus not include identifiable characteristics. We will also 
record video of participants as they perform  the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT) in  
accordance with the WMFT protocol. In these WMFT videos, we will use blur the faces 
of all participants. All videos will be archived on an  internal lab server. The videos will 
be transferred to a secure encrypted dat abase, RedCap or Stanford's Google Drive (only 
researchers on this protocol will have access to the videos). No other people outside the 
study team will have access to the videos.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
We are not offering or withholding any standard treatment. Any courses  of treatment 
offered by the Stanford Neurology & Neurological Sciences  or Physical Medicine & 
Rehab clinics could be adva ntageous to participants.  
 
These range from medication, such as Botox injectio ns for spasticity,  to physical therapy, 
such as targeted movement practice. Given that  participants are recruited from the clinic 
July 8, 2022   Page 5 of 12 and/or are allowed to  continue current medications and physical therapy, it is unlikely 
that there are alternative procedures or treatments known to be beneficial.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Lab-developed devices used in this study  are not intended as treatment but as tools for  
elucidation and quantification of the effects of assistance on  movement. Should subjects 
find an activity performed during our study to be particularly helpful, they can consult 
with their physical or  occupational therapists on ways to incorporate similar activities 
into their treatment. 
g. Study Endpoint(s)  
The study is not evaluating treatments.  
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Stroke results from significantly reduced blood supply to part of the  brain and is one of 
the leading causes of long -term adult disability  [1]. Stroke survivors can suffer from a 
large range of negative  effects such as pain, spasticity (continuous contraction of some 
muscles), muscle weakness, hemineglect (unawareness of half of space), and cognitive 
deficits. Some researchers believe that the main cause of  post-stroke motor impairment is 
abnormal muscle co -contractions [2].  These abnormal muscle co -contractions were first 
observed as the coupling of shoulder abductor with elbow flexor muscles and shoulder  
adductor with elbow extensor muscles [3]. Since then, post -stroke  abnormal muscle co -
contraction patterns have been observed for a range  of upper extremity tasks [4], as well 
as for walking [5]. While there  is a highly nonlinear relationship between the 
electromyographical (EMG) signals on which these analyses are based and the resultant 
joint torques, abnormal joint torque couplings have been found that match the  EMG -
based results [6]. These researchers have also demonstrated  substantial improvements in 
motor function, achieved by supporting the  weight of the hemiparetic arm with an air 
bearing, which unloads the  shoulder abductor muscles [ 7]. 
 
Many researchers are developing robots to work with humans wi th neuromotor 
impairments for assistance or re- habilitation. A large  number of these robots are 
designed to help users repeatedly perform a  task [8], [9], but this approach might not be 
optimal for stroke rehabilitation [10], [11]. Building on the results from [7], Ellis et  al. 
[12] designed and built an impairment -specific rehabilitation  robot, ACT3D, to provide 
shoulder abduction support. They then administered a therapy in which shoulder 
abduction support was  gradually reduced over a period of eight weeks and found several 
motor  improvements [12], [13]. However, the level of motor recovery is tied to the 
intensity of therapy, and most rehabilitation robots are  expensive, unwieldy devices 
confined to the lab or clinic where  patients have limited access to them.  
 
Many of the robots currently being developed for rehabilitation are  exoskeletal robots. 
Typical exoskeletal robots are constructed from  rigid linkages acting in parallel with the 
July 8, 2022   Page 6 of 12 user's skeleton. These linkages are then attached at various points on the body by cuffs or  
straps to transmit forces and torques.  
 
Motors or hydraulic actuators then actuate these linkages. By including  linkages acting in 
parallel with the user's skeleton, an exoskeleton transmits many of the forces that would 
otherwise need to be  transmitted through the user's skeleton. Such  exoskeletal robots 
have already been developed for stroke  rehabilitation [8], [12], [13]. These robots show 
promise in taking state-of -the-art rehabilitation out of the clinic. However, there are  many 
difficulties associated with the design and operation of  traditional exoskeletal robots, 
including cost, aligning  operator and  robot joint axes [14], safely handling the mass 
added by the  exoskeleton, and ensuring stable interactions with human users [15],  [16].  
 
Further, exoskeletal robots might be excessive for tasks that do not  require load -bearing 
beyond the capability of the human skeleton.  To address the problems associated with 
traditional exoskeletal  robots, several groups have recently built soft exosuits that forgo 
rigid linkages and directly apply forces and torques to the user's  skeleton instead. 
Eliminatin g rigid link -ages allows exosuits to be constructed of primarily compliant 
materials that require less precise design and machining, are lightweight, and are 
generally inexpensive.  However, without rigid linkages, applying forces and torques to 
the human body can be difficult. Some designs use inelastic cables intelligently  placed on 
the body and anchor points to transmit loa ds to specific body parts [17], [18]. While these 
designs have proven effective, they  increase the compressive load on the joints. Ano ther 
take on this  approach uses cuffs as attachment points for cables driven by motors  located 
elsewhere (typically in a backpack or offboard) [19], [20].  However, this design requires 
large standoffs to increase the moment  arm across the joint to be actuated that create a 
large device profile and might interfere with objects in the users' environments in daily 
life. Other approaches use pneumatically inflated bladders to  push against two parts of 
the body, causing expansive forces and  moments that extend the joint [21], [22]. Only a 
couple of these  devices currently exist and they tend to focus on simple, single  degree-of -
freedom joints, such as the elbow.  
 
We developed a l ightweight (350 g), inexpensive externally-mounted actuator that 
behaves as a compliant arm support [23]. We constructed a prototype exomuscle by 
reinforcing a plastic bladder with a fabric bag  that is sewn to supporting straps. The 
bladder can then be inf lated  with pressurized air to provide expansive forces between the 
user's torso and arm, supporting shoulder abduction. A seam acting as a hinge  joint 
connects the exomuscle to the torso. We demonstrate that our  exomuscle reduces 
muscular effort by 74% in isometric tasks and 72% in  dynamic reaching tasks while 
minimally affecting the range of motion of  the shoulder and elbow (average 4% 
reduction) on three  users ranging from 165 to 188 cm tall. Now we are seeking to  
demonstrate the rehabilitative and assist ive effects of our device.  In a previous (IRB 
approved) study, we examined the effects of our  device on a stroke subject who 
demonstrated a large increase in  workspace after using our device. We were also 
surprised to find that  he also demonstrated a linge ring benefit after less than 10 minutes 
of training with our device that quickly dissipated. We did not expect  this result. We 
would like to test a new compliant passive arm support  to determine if it can provide 
similar effects and determine if this effect is common and characterize it.  
July 8, 2022   Page 7 of 12 [1] D. Mozaffarian, E. Benjamin, A. Go, D. Arnett, M. Blaha, M. Cushman, S. De 
Ferranti, J. Desprs, H. Fullerton, V. Howard, M. Huffman, S. Judd, B. Kissela, D. 
Lackland, J. Lichtman, L. Lisabeth, S. Liu, R. Mackey, D. Matchar, D. McGuire, E. 
Mohler, C. Moy, P. Muntner, M. Mussolino, K. Nasir, R. Neumar, G. Nichol, L. 
Palaniappan, D.  Pandey, M. Reeves, C. Rodriguez, P. Sorlie, J. Stein, A. Towfighi, T. 
Turan, S. Virani, J. Willey, D. Woo, R. Yeh, and M. Turner, "Executive  summary: Heart 
disease and stroke statistics — 2015 update: A report  from the American Heart 
Association," Circulation, vol. 131, no. 4, pp.434 –441, 2015.  
[2] J. P. Dewald, V. Sheshadri, M. L. Dawson, and R. F. Beer, "Upper -limb 
disco ordination in hemiparetic stroke: implications for  neurorehabilitation," Topics in 
Stroke Rehabilitation, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1 –12, 2001.  
[3] J. P. Dewald, P. S. Pope, J. D. Given, T. S. Buchanan, and W. Z. Rymer, "Abnormal 
muscle coactivation patterns duri ng isometric torque  generation at the elbow and 
shoulder in hemiparetic subjects," Brain,  vol. 118, no. 2, pp. 495– 510, 1995.  
[4] V. C. Cheung, A. Turolla, M. Agostini, S. Silvoni, C. Bennis, P.  Kasi, S. Paganoni, P. 
Bonato, and E. Bizzi, "Muscle synergy patterns as physiological markers of motor 
cortical damage," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 109, no. 36, pp. 
14652– 14656, 2012.  
[5] D. J. Clark, L. H. Ting, F. E. Zajac, R. R. Neptune, and S. A. Kautz, "Merging of 
healthy motor module s predicts reduced locomotor  performance and muscle coordination 
complexity post -stroke," Journal of  Neurophysiology, vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 844– 857, 2010.  
[6] J. Dewald and R. F. Beer," Abnormal joint torque patterns in the paretic upper limb of 
subjects wi th hemiparesis," Muscle & Nerve, vol.  24, no. 2, pp. 273 –283, 2001.  
[7] R. F. Beer, M. D. Ellis, B. G. Holubar, and J. Dewald, "Impact of gravity loading on 
post-stroke reaching and its relationship to weakness," Muscle & Nerve, vol. 36, no. 2, 
pp. 242– 250, 2007.  
[8] T. G. Sugar, J. He, E. J. Koeneman, J. B. Koeneman, R. Herman,  H. Huang, R. S. 
Schultz, D. Herring, J. Wanberg, S. Balasubramanian et  al., "Design and control of 
rupert: a device for robotic  upper  extremity repetitive therapy," IEEE Transactions on 
Neural Systems and  Rehabilitation Engineering, vol.  15, no. 3, pp. 336– 346, 2007.  
[9] G. B. Prange, M. J. Jannink, C. G. Groothuis -Oudshoorn, H. J.  Hermens, and M. J. 
IJzerman, "Systematic review of the effect of robot -aided therapy on recovery of the 
hemiparetic arm after stroke," Journal  of Rehabilitation Research and Development, vol. 
43, no. 2, p. 171,  2006.  
[10] H. G. Wu, Y. R. Miyamoto, L. N. G. Castro, B. P. Olveczky, and  M. A. Smith, 
"Tem poral structure of motor variability is dynamically regulated and predicts motor 
learning ability," Nature Neuroscience,  vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 312– 321, 2014.  
[11] L. E. Kahn, P. S. Lum, W. Z. Rymer, and D. J. Reinkensmeyer, "Robot -assisted 
movement training for the stroke -impaired arm: Does it  matter what the robot does?" 
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and  Development, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 619 –630, 2006.  
[12] M. D. Ellis, T. Sukal, T. DeMott, and J. P. Dewald, "ACT3D  exercise targets 
gravity -induced discoor dination and improves reaching work area in individuals with 
stroke," in IEEE International Conference  on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2007, pp. 890– 895. 
[13] M. D. Ellis, T. Sukal- Moulton, and J. P. Dewald, "Progressive  shoulder abduction 
loading is a crucial  element of arm rehabilitation  in chronic stroke," Neurorehabilitation 
and Neural Repair, vol. 23, no.  8, pp. 862 –869, 2009.  
July 8, 2022   Page 8 of 12 [14] A. Schiele and F. C. van der Helm, "Influence of attachment  pressure and kinematic 
configuration on phri with wearable robots,"  Applied Bionics and Biomechanics, vol. 6, 
no. 2, pp. 157 –173, 2009.  
[15] H. Kazerooni and T. J. Snyder, "Case study on haptic devices:  Human -induced 
instability in powered hand controllers," Journal of  Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, 
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 108 –113, 1995.  
[16] V. Duchaine and C. M. Gosselin, "Investigation of human -robot  interaction stability 
using Lyapunov theory," in IEEE International  Conference on Robotics and Automation, 
2008, pp. 2189– 2194.  
[17] M. Wehner, B. Quinlivan, P. M. Aubin, E. Martinez -Villalpando, M. Baumann, L. 
Stirling, K. Holt, R. Wood, and C. Walsh, "A lightweight soft exosuit for gait assistance," 
in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,  2013, pp. 3362– 3369.  
[18] A. T. Asbeck, R. J. Dyer, A. F. Larusson, and C. J. Walsh,  "Biologically-inspired 
soft exosuit," in IEEE International Conference  on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2013, pp. 1–
8. 
[19] Y. Mao and S. K. Agrawal, "A cable driven upper arm  exoskeleton  for upper 
extremity rehabilitation," in IEEE International Conference  on Robotics and Automation, 
2011, pp. 4163– 4168.  
[20] E. A. Brackbill, Y. Mao, S. K. Agrawal, M. Annapragada, and V.  N. Dubey, 
"Dynamics and control of a 4-dof wearable cable-driven upper  arm exoskeleton," in IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 2300– 2305.  
[21] R. Natividad and C. Yeow, "Development of a soft robotic  shoulder assistive device 
for shoulder abduction," in IEEE  International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics, 2016, pp. 989– 993. 
[22] V. Oguntosin, W. S. Harwin, S. Kawamura, S. J. Nasuto, and Y. Hayashi, 
"Development of a wearable assistive soft robotic device for elbow rehabilitation," in 
IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2015, pp. 747 –752. 
[23] C. S. Simpson, A. M. Okamura, and E. W. Hawkes, "Exomuscle: An  inflatable 
device for shoulder abduction support," in IEEE  International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation, 2017, pp. 6651- 6657.  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments 
N/A 
4. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label) 
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  Compliant passive arm support  
Description:  The device consists of two  linkages, 1 vertical  linkage that runs from the 
waist to the  shoulder and 1 that runs from  the shoulder to the elbow, and 
elastic ban ds connecting the two linkages to lift  the upper-arm linkage 
upwards relative to the vertical  linkage. The vertical  linkage connects to a  
commercial posture brace at the waist  while the upper arm linkage  rests 
under the  participant's arm and is secured with  hook-and-loop fastener. 
The design of the  device, with several compliant elements,  ensures that 
one device fits  many without  joint alignment concerns. No motors or 
other actuators add energy into the  system, meaning th at it is stable.  
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  The device is not intended as an implant, is not used  
July 8, 2022   Page 9 of 12 to support or sustain human  
life, is not important for diagnosing, curing,  
mitigating, or treating disease, and  
does not present a potential for serious risk to the 
health, safety, or welfare of a  
subject.  
 
5. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
(i) Approximately 16 participants will be enrolled in the study, and 5 for the feasibility 
study.  
(ii) Stanford is the only site. (iii) All participants will be chronic stroke patients recruited from the Stanford Neurology 
& Neurological  Sciences and Physical Medicine & Rehab clinics (both outpatient), as 
well as from Stanford databases in  which stroke survivors from the community have 
indicated their interest in participating in research studies. 
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background 
Participants will be of age 18+, male or female, of any ethnic background.  
c. Vulnerable Populations 
No potentially vulnerable subjects will be enrolled in this study.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
The research will include women and minorities. Stroke in children is relatively rare, and 
demonstrates different recovery patterns than in adults. Children will not participate.  
e. Stanford Populations  
None 
f. Healthy Volunteers  
None  
g. Recruitment Details  
Candidate participants will be identified in one of the following manners:  
(1) referral from treating physician through the Stanford Neurology & Neurological Sciences and Ph ysical  Medicine & Rehab clinics (both outpatient). Patients with clinic 
appointments and history of stroke will be  screened under a waiver of authorization for 
recruitment, guided by inclusion/exclusion criteria ). The  charts of potentially eligible 
patients will be identified by the clinic physician members of the study team  using EPIC 
if they are patients of members of our study team and STARR if they are being referred 
by another physician. The physician will discuss the study with the patient and if the 
patient agrees, a physician  or coordinator from the study team will approach the patient 
after the patient's clinic appointment. 
July 8, 2022   Page 10 of 12 (2) through a database in which stroke survivors from the community have indicated their 
interest in  participating in Stanford stroke research studies and filled out a form to add 
themselves to a RedCap  database. Study personnel may contact individuals directly from 
that list. 
(3) from a list of subjects who enrolled in other stroke research studies at Stanford and 
indicate d on their  ICF that they are interested in participating in more stroke studies. 
These are current patients of the study  physicians. EPIC will be reviewed for eligibility. 
Study personnel may contact these individuals directly.  Once identified, candidate 
participants will be contacted via phone call and asked to answer a few questions to 
establish eligibility and interest. The script for said phone call is attached (waiver for 
telephone screening). Participants will be scheduled only if they express interest and meet 
the inclusion  criteria determined during the phone screening.  
 
The flier which has been attached may be disseminated to potential participants found 
through the above methods . 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criter ia 
All participants must:  
- be at least 18 years of age 
- be greater than 6 months post stroke  
- exhibit passive abduction t o 90 degrees at shoulder  
- exhibit reduced active flexion/extension at shoulder and elbow when shoulder is 
abducted to 90 degrees  
- exhibit reduced active elbow flexion/extension  
- fully vaccinated against COVID-19 or provide a negative COVID test within 72 
hours of visit  
- at least 5 feet tall  
- able to return to study location for the duration of the study  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
Participants will be excluded from all assessments if they:  
- are unable to give informed consent  
- are unable to comprehend and follow instructions  
- have a condition (other than stroke) affecting sensorimotor function 
- show evidence of unilateral spatial neglect  
- are unable to sit in a chair (without armrests) for at least 2 hours (transfer from 
wheelchair acceptable)  
- unable to passively abduct shoulder to 90 degrees without pain  
- unable to actively flex or extend their elbow at all  
- unable to stand by themselves or with the support of another individual  
- unable to maintain a standing position for at least 15 minutes (even with a cane or 
leaning against a table)  
- unable to change into a shirt by themselves or uncomfortable with a researcher or 
their caregiver helping them to change into a shirt  
- Painful or difficult to wear a strap over shoulder  
July 8, 2022   Page 11 of 12 i. Screening Procedures  
Stroke survivors from Stanford Hospital will be screened by their physicians according 
protected health  information (PHI) under a waiver of authorization for recruitment . 
Stroke survivors from  the community registered in Stanford databases as willing to 
participate in stroke research wi ll also be  screened based on their health information 
stored in an internal database. If a patient meets the inclusion/exclusion criteria , he or she 
will be informed by treating personnel (first his/her primary caregiver and then a team 
physician) about eligibility for the study. If the subject agrees to participate, his or  her 
contact information will be passed along to the study's key investigators for a final phone screening . 
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants can decide to enroll in any other study that does not yield changes to the 
above  inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
k. Planned Duration of the Study  
The total study will last no more than 2 years, including the analysis of participant data. For each participant in the study: (i) 30- minute screening (in clinic & over phone), (ii) 4-
hour active participation spread over two visits, (iii) we expect data analysis to require a 
month dedicated time including developing all necessary computer code – data analysis 
does not require involvement of the participant.  
6. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Procedures 
As described, assessments require subjects to either actively move their arm within their reachable workspace (e.g., to acquire a target). There are no risks associated with these 
procedures.  
ii. Physical well-being  
Physical fatigue from repeated movement. There will be frequent scheduled breaks, in 
addition to rest as  requested by the participant.  
iii. Psych ological  well-being 
Loss of privacy as a result of participation in the study and mental fatigue from repeated movements at the edge of the workspace. Again, there will be frequent scheduled breaks, 
in addition to rest as re quested by the participant. 
iv. Economic well -being  
There should be no economic risk to participants.  
v. Social  well-being 
There should be no social risk to participants.  
July 8, 2022   Page 12 of 12 vi. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low 
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
Participants will b e closely monitored by the study team for any fatigue or discomfort 
that arises over the course of the study. Drs. Maarten Lansberg is reachable at all times 
for any medical questions that may arise.  
 
All computers, external hard disks, USB thumb drives, tablet computers, smartphones 
with access to identifiable participant data are encrypted and password-protected in  
compliance with Stanford's security policies. Hard copies of consent forms will be locked in secure offices within the Mechanical Engineering Department. Digital PHI will be 
uploaded on RedCaps. Video files will be uploaded to Stanford's Google Drive which is secure for PHI according to Stanford IT.  
d. Study Conclusion 
The study will be terminated after data analysis is complete (no more than 2 years). Dr. Maarten Lansberg is reachable at all times for any medical questions that may arise.  
7. BENEFITS  
Participants will benefit from the knowledge that they are providing data that will be used to 
improve therapy for future stroke patients.  As noted , the long-term goal of this line of research is 
to develop more effective post-stroke therapies.  
8. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information and specimens are handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  