 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 1 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
  
 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
A Double -blind, Placebo -Controlled, Rando mized Withdrawal Following 
Open -label Therapy Study to Ass ess the Safety and Efficacy of L evoketoconazole 
(2S, 4R -ketoconazole) in the Treatment of Endogenous Cushing’s Syndrome  
Protocol Number  COR -2017 -01 
Compound  Levoketoconazole  
IND No.  115968  
EudraCT No.  2017-001219-35  
 
Phase  3 
Dates:   
Amendment 4  
Amendment 3  
Amendment 2  
Amendment 1  23 September  2019  
14 December  2018 
21 June 2018  
06 July 2017  
Original  17 April  2017  
  
Sponsor  Cortendo AB  
900 Northbrook Drive, Suite 200  
Trevose, Pennsylvania, 19053  
USA  
  
 Cortendo AB  
c/o TMF Sweden AB  
Sergels Torg 12  
111 57 Stockholm  
Sweden  
 
 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 2 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Revision Chronology  
Version  Date  
Final   17 April  2017 
Amendment 1:  
• Throughout , clarified and corrected references to the visits in Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase:   RW1  is the second visit of the Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase  and is the first time when loss of prior -established UFC response is 
assessed . Removed exploratory endpoint ‘ Changes from Baseline (RW0) in  late 
night salivary cortisol ( LNSC ) at all post -Baseline visits with these assessments 
through the final study visit (RES2) ’, as this endpoint is included as the 
secondary endpoint ‘Changes from Baseline (RW0) in mean urinary free cortisol 
(mUFC) and LNSC at all post -Baseline visits with these assessments through the 
final study visit (RES2)’ . 
• Clarified method of planned statistical analysis for primary endpoint and added 
additional details of planned statistical analys es for primary and secondary 
endpoints in synopsis .  
• Standardized definition of relapse throughout to match definition in Section 3.1 .  
• Revised planned target population to comprise approximately one-half SONICS 
completers and one-half levoketoconazole -naïve (rather than two -thirds and one -
third  as previously planned) and increased the maximum proportion of 
levoketoconazole- naïve subjects to 70% , if needed . 
• Clarified  subject categorization of prior levo ketoconazole use. Clarified screening 
and RW 0 procedures for subjects who have exited SONICS more than six months 
prior  to the Screening Phase and have been on a stable Therapeutic Dose 
throughout the previous 12- week period.  
• Inclusion criteria for all others: Corrected the dexamethasone value required.  
• Exclusion criteria: Added  a criterion for subjects e nrolled in SONICS who did  
not com plete SONICS through Visit M12; removed the need for central reading 
of electrocardiogram ( ECG ) for Screening determination of eligibility; added  
alkaline phosphatase ( AP) above 2X  upper limit of normal ( ULN ) as grounds for 
exclusion;  removed specification  of uncon trolled hypertension ( 180/120 mmHg) . 
• Clarified throughout that members of SONICS -Completer cohort must  have 
maintained treatment with a Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole for a 
minimum of 12 weeks prior to screening .  
• Clarified that an Open Label Extension ( OLE ) study is being planned for 
qualifying participants in the current study . 
• Clarified that the Signs and Symptoms of Cushing’s Syndrome can also be performed by a qualified home healthcare professional with training. Specified 
that the person completing the Signs and Symptoms of Cushing’s assessments 
should, when possible, remain consistent for individual subjects.  Specified that, 
in cases of clinically significant deterioration of clinical signs and symptoms of 
CS, home healthcare profe ssionals should refer the subject back to the physician 
for corroboration prior to initiation of early rescue therapy.  06 July  2017 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 3 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Removed descriptor of pharmacokinetic ( PK) Sample Collection as applying only 
to Levoketoconazole-naïve and re-titrations only.  Removed PK sampling from 
visits TM1, RW0 and RES2.  Corrected inconsistency of PK requirement at TM7.  
Clarified that PK samples collected at hours 6 to 8 post-dose will be collected at  a 
different visit (TM2 -TM6) than the other PK samp les. 
• Added instructions for SONICS -completers who require re-titration to Dosage 
and Administration section.  
• Clarified that additional safety visits were to occur for subjects receiving a total 
daily dose of 750 mg and above.  
• Removed requirement ‘and without evidence of cholestasis’ from grounds for 
discontinuation of investigational therapy in the case of : alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT ) or aspartate aminotransferase ( AST ) above 3X ULN and total bilirubin 
(TBN ) above 2X ULN or International Normalized Ratio  (INR) above 1.5 not 
explained by any other cause such as viral hepatitis .  
• Added section describing withdrawal due to adrenal insufficiency . 
• Clarified that approximately 3 minutes was to elapse between triplicate heart rate 
measurements . 
• Added gamma -glutamyl transpeptidase ( GGT ) to panel of liver safety monitoring 
tests. 
• Corrected spelling of levonorgestrel.  
• Revised and clarified section on pituitary magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ). 
• Corrected visit corresponding to dose escalation  for the 750-mg dose level to 
TM3 (not TM4 ) and revised subsequent visits  cited accordingly . 
• Clarified that when  adrenal insufficiency is observed at Dose Level 1 ( DL1), 
subjects may be provided  a lower dose of 150 mg QD (D ose Level [DL] 0) 
following  agreement with the Sponsor.  Subjects may resume the Dose Titration 
scheme after a dose reduction at the discretion of the Investigator and agreement of the Sponsor.   
• Added prohibition of donation of blood or blood products during the study.  
• Added that t he total final tablet count (active + placebo) during Restoration Phase 
will equal twice the total tablet count of the Therapeutic Dose, not to exceed 8 
tablets twice daily ( BID).  
• Added further details to dosage administration section ‘ For levoketoconazol e-
naïve subjects, the total daily dose will be titrated in 150 mg increments from a starting dose of 300 mg (dosed as 150 mg BID) up to a maximal daily dose of 
1200 mg (dosed as 600 mg BID) until a Therapeutic Dose is established.  The 
minimum daily dose i s 150 mg once daily ( QD) for subjects who cannot tolerate 
150 mg BID.  For subjects in the SONICS -completers cohort, the Therapeutic 
Dose will have been established prior to enrollment in this study.  For 
levoketoconazole- naïve subjects, the Therapeutic Dose will be established by the 
end of the Dose Titration / Maintenance Phase.  The Therapeutic Dose will be 
used as the target dose and dose- regimen during the Restoration Phase. ’ 
• Clarified that subjects who must re -establish  their Therapeutic Dose via re-
titration (at the outset of the study) may begin re-titration at their current or most 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 4 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 recently received dose at the discretion of the Investigator , rather than start at 
DL1.   
• Clarified that potassium supplements are encouraged to maint ain serum 
potassium levels within the normal range and above 4.0 mmol/L , which  may 
reduce the risk of drug-induced QT interval ( QTc) prolongation.  
• Clarified that timing of the first bi -annual Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB ) 
meeting may be adjusted based on subject accrual.  Removed the requirement for 
the DSMB charter to be executed prior to study initiation.  
• Added criterion to oral glucose tolerance test ( OGTT ) and Impaired fasting 
glucose  (IFG) (≥ 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and <  126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) , 
respectively.  
• Clarified that changes of pituitary tumor will be summarized from Screening to 
Visits RW0 and RW5 (for the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort) and from Visit 
RW0 to RW5 (for the SONICS -completers cohort) . 
• Clarified  the statistical  analyses of clinical  signs and symptoms . 
• Correct ed definition of prediabetic subjects from ‘above 100 mg/dL’ to ‘greater 
than or equal to 100 mg/ dL’. 
• Clarified the definition of AESI of p ersist ent QTc prolongation . 
• Clarified the definitions for adverse event s (AEs) consider ed unrelated and 
unlikely related to study drug. 
• Time and events schedule : Table 8 added row for OGTT, removed MRI row, 
removed optional PK sampling at TM1 , and made sampling at TM7 non -optional, 
added clarification footnote s regarding 24- h UFC/free cortisol/creatinine/ urinary 
volume (three  collections)  and that i n case of AESI, a PK sample should be 
obtained as  close to the time of the event  as possible .  
• Time and events schedule: Table 9 removed PK sampling  from RW0 and RES2 
but added footnote that that i n case of AESI, a PK sample should be obtained as 
close to the time of the event as possible. Footnotes edited for clarity.  
• Appendix B added salivary cortisol and dexamethasone for completeness.  
Amendment 2:  
• Updated typo graphical errors . 
• Corrected the date of Amendment 1 in the Summary of Changes  from 22 June 17 
to 06 July 2017.  
• Updates made to ensure consistency of wording and alignment of information 
between Protocol Synopsis and Protocol.  
• Corrected the changes in biomarkers of CS comorbidities list in the secondary 
objectives (Synopsis and Section 2.2), and Secondary Efficacy A nalysis 
(Synopsis and Section 12.5.3.2) to be a consistent listing of biomarkers.  
• Changed condition 2 of the Primary Endpoint in the Synopsis and Sections 3.1, 
3.4, as well as related footnotes, from “at or above the ULN (i.e. ≥ 1.0X ULN)” 
to “above the ULN (i.e. >1.0 X ULN).”  
• Changed condition 2 of the Primary Efficacy Analysis in the Synopsis and 
Sections 12.5.3.1 and 12.5.3.3 from “was a t least 1.0X  ULN” to “is above ULN 
(i.e. >1.0X ULN).”  21 June 2018  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 5 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Changed condition 2 Partial loss of cortisol response from “below 1.5X ULN” to 
“no more than 1.5X ULN” in Early Rescue Criteria in the Synopsis and Section 
4.3.1. 
• Removed the phrase “necessitating open -label therapy” or “necessitating open -
label therapy to treat hypercortisolism” from condition 3 of the Primary Endpoint  
for early rescue in Synopsis  and Section s 3.1, 3.4, 12.2, 12.5.3.1 and 12.5.3.3 .  
• Added clarifying text in Synopsis and Section 4.2.2.1 for selected group of 
subjects who completed Visit M12 in SONICS either within 6 months or more than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and not on a stable Therapeutic dose 
throughout the previous 12- week period.  Procedures for these subjects should 
mimic those of the levoketoconazole-naïve subjects .  
• Added clarifying text to Appendix A Table 7 for subjects who completed SONICS more than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and have been on 
stable Therapeutic Dose to mimic Screening Procedures of the l evoketoconazole -
naïve subjects.   
• Corrected  the time to first n ormalization in Exploratory Endpoints beginning 
from “RES1” to “RW5” in the Synopsis and Section 3.4.  Removed from Section 
12.5.3.2. 
• Corrected the statement in the Primary Endpoint in the Synopsis and in Section 
3.1 from “…from of three 24 -hour UFC measurements…”. to read “…from three 
24-hour UFC measurements…”.  
• Revised  text and definitions throughout protocol in regard to screening 
procedures to ensure alignment with Appendix A Table 7. 
• Added clarification that the DST is not needed at screening for subjects on levoketoconazole in Section 6.4.5.3  and Appendix A Table 7.  
• Added clarification of OGTT test timing and definition of whom sho uld have the 
test performed in Appendix A Tables 8 and 9 footnotes.  
• Changed the population definition for the OGTT test from “non -diabetic” to “pre-
diabetic” in Appendix A Tables 8 and 9, and in the Other analytes/measures 
section of Appendix B Laboratory Analytes.  
• Updated wording throughout associated with the Dose Titration at Total Daily 
Doses of 750 mg or a bove and the need for additional safety visits in the Dose 
Titration and Maintenance Phase from “750 mg or higher ” or “750 mg and 
above” or “beyond 600mg/day” or “exceeds 600 mg” or “beginning with 750 
mg” or “above 600 mg/day to “750 mg/day or above” in the Synopsis and 
Sections 4.2.2.2, 4.2.2.4, 6.4.6.1, 6.5.2, 9.4, and Appendix A Table 8 footnotes.  
Removed the phrase “above 600 mg/day” when referring to additional safety visit 
necessary for certain dose escalations in Sections 4.2.2.4.  
• Added the timing of tablet count increase increments during the Restoration 
Phase titration beginning at RW5 will be “alternating AM and PM per Table 2 Dosing Titratio n Scheme” in Section 4.4,  and “alternating AM and PM” in the 
Synopsis.   
• Clarified t hat the DSMB will be assessing “ key” safety  data in the Synopsis.  
• Added statements that “Any subject who withdraw s after randomization will not 
be replaced ” and “Withdrawn subjects will not be re -entered into the study” , and 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 6 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 clarified the null and alternative hypothes es definition s and sample size 
determination  in the Synopsis and Section 12.2.1.  
• Clarified instrument  for measurement of QTc interval in Exclusion 11  in the 
Synopsis to be consistent with Section 5.3 . 
• Updated to include additional safety visits for subjects currently on 
levoketoconazole requiring re- titrating after TM0 through TM2, dependent on 
dose escal ations in Section 9.3 and Appendix A  Table 8 . 
• Changed Exclusion Criteria 21 serum potassium measurement from “below 3.0 
mEq/L” to “below 4.0 mEq/L” in the Synopsis, and Section 5.3.  
• Updated the SONICS enrollment from “is planned to enroll 90”  to “enrolled 94” 
in Section 1.1 . 
• Changed the most recent meeting date of the DSMB in Section 1. 1 from  “October 
2016” to “April 2018” and changed “approximately two thirds of the study 
enrolled” to “the study fully enrolled”.  
• Clarified durability of effic acy in Section 1.2.  
• Removed footnote in Inclusion C riteria for All O thers #5 in the Synopsis and 
added text as a note within the Inclusion Criteria for All Others #5 in the 
Synopsis to be in line with Section 5.2.  
• Added a note to Inclusion C riteria f or All others #4 and #5 in the Synopsis and in 
Section 5.2 to clarify that these two criteria do not apply to subjects currently on 
levoketoconazole.  
• Alignment of footnote for condition 2  of the Primary E ndpoint throughout 
protocol. 
• Clarified  timing for rest period prior to ECG measurement in 12- Lead ECG 
Section 6.4.3 from “ at least 1 minute” to “ at least 5 minutes”.  
• Information added to Blinding Section 8.3.3.1 to account for top line analysis.  
Also clarified use of open -label levoketoconazol e for subjects who require early 
rescue.     
• Added Section 12.6 Interim Analyses and Data Monitoring to the Data Analysis and Statistical Considerations section.  
• Added statement that “Drug accountability  will not be performed during visits by 
HHC professi onal” in Section 9.3  and statement that “Drug accountability and 
dispensation only to be completed when visits are performed in -clinic  and not 
applicable to HHC visits” to Appendix A Table 9.  
• Clarified collection of working shift and sleep hour s in Lifest yle and Dietary 
Restrictions Section 7.  
• Clarified  the subject  population definitions (Intent -to-Treat, Per -Protocol, 
Levoketoconazole -naïve, and SONICS -completer) in the Analysis Populations  / 
Populations for Analysis  sections in the Synopsis and Section 1 2.1, respectively . 
• Clarified Definition s of Baseline for some endpoints analyzed during the 
Restoration Phase only in section 12.5.1.  
• Added “TEAEs of special interest”  to the Adverse Events in Section 12.5.2.2.  
• Changed the reference from  “Hotline” to “Cont act Details” and “24 Hour Phone” 
to “24 -Hour Call Center Phone” in SAE reporting Section 13.7.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 7 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Changed RW5 marked the start of the “Rescue Phase” to RW5 marked the start 
of the “Restoration Phase” in the Synopsis and Section 4.1 .  
• Clarified statistical ter minology and corrected text pertaining to statistical tests 
throughout protocol and in the Data Analysis and Statistical Considerations in 
Synopsis and  Section 12.  
• Changed “lost UFC response” to “lost  (lose /loss of ) therapeutic response” in the 
Synopsis and Sections 12.2.1 and 12.4.  
• Added additional clarification to the rules to be applied when determining loss of 
therapeutic response when some or all mUFC data are missing in Section 12. 4. 
• Clarif ied the Time to Event  Analysis S ection 12.5.3.3 to be in alignment wi th 
statistical terminology and Exploratory E ndpoint s section.  
• Moved UFC and  LNSC Analyses -Partial loss of r esponse section  and Time to 
Event Analysis section, Cushing’s Syndrome Quality of Life Questionnaire,  and 
Beck’s Depression Questionnaire sections from the Secondary Efficacy S ection 
12.5.3 .2 to the Exploratory Efficacy S ection 12.5.3.3.  
• Changed the header in Section 9.2 to refer to drug as “ Investigational P roduct” 
rather than “ Product” to ensure consistency throughout the section . 
• Added the active medication/open -label levoketoconazole drug source for 
subjects rolling over from SONICS  and for subjects  entering from EAP in 
Section 4.1 and in Appendix A Table 7.  
• Added line item in Appendix A Table 7 to “Dispense study medication/diary ” 
during Screening for subjects who completed SONICS within the previous 6 months and currently receiving levoketoconazole.  
• Updated and added applicable footnotes to clarify text and ensure consistency 
between  protocol body and Appendix A  Tables 7, 8 and 9.   
• Renumbered and reordered footnotes throughout  Appendix A Tables 7, 8, and 9. 
• Removed ‘SONICS -completers  cohort’ and ‘L evoketoconazole- naïve cohort’ and 
updated descriptors in the column headers in Appendix A Table 7.   
• Clarified SONICS -completers (subjects who completed SONICS) versus 
SONICS -completers ‘cohort’ throughout the protocol.   
• Clarified that data may overlap between SONICS and LOGICS in the Synopsis and Sections 4.2.1 and 6.1.  
• Clarified subjects in levoketoconazole- naïve cohort “must” have their 
Therapeutic Dose established by end of Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase in 
Section 8.3.2.  
• Clarified subjects in SONICS -completers cohort will have their Therapeutic Dose 
confirmed at screening (prior to randomization ) in Section s 8.3 and 8.3.2.  
• Clarified timing of UFCs to indicate collections must  be collected prior to visit s 
in the Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase in the Synopsis, Sections 4.2.2.2., 
4.2.2.2.1, 4.2.2.2.2, and 6.4.5.1, and Appendix A Table 8.   
• Clarified washout must be prior to Baseline Assessments, including UFCs and LNSCs in Synopsis, Sections 4.2.2.1, 6.2, and Appendix J Table 12.  
• Added that urine volume can be measure by HHC professio nal in Section 6.4.5.1.  
• Clarified timing of UFC to indicate collections must  be collected prior to the visit 
in the Randomized Withdrawal and Restoration Phases in Appendix A Table 9.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 8 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Clarified timing of LNSC to indicate collections must  be collected befo re the visit 
in the Dose Titration and Maintenance, Randomized Withdrawal, and Restoration 
Phases in Section 6.4.5.2 and Appendix A Tables 8 and 9.  
• Added additional details for the use of SONICS M12 UFC and LNSC collection 
samples and required additional collection s for LOGICS screening for subjects 
rolling over from SONICS in Section s 6.4.5.1 and 6.4.5.2 and A ppendix A Table 
7. 
• Clarified MRI procedures need to be completed if not previously done within 6 
months for “TM0” to “TM0 or RW0” in the Synopsis, Section 4.2.2.1, 6.4.5.5, 
and Appendix A Table s 7 and 8.  
• Added SONICS M12 MRI may be used in Section 6.4.5.5 to ensure consistency with Appendix A Table  9. 
• For use of Local ECG machines in Appendix A Tables 7, 8, and 9; r emoved “not 
operational” or “unavailable” and clarified text to read “…non-operational . Local 
ECGs must  be transmitted to Spaulding for central reading via printou t.” 
• Added Ammonia to list of other laboratory tests for Liver Panel in Appendix O.   
• Added Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) to the list of abbreviations, list of laboratory tests for Liver Safety T ests in Section 6.3, Section 6.4.4, and Appendix 
B. 
• Added details  for grading and evaluating criteria for acne, hirsutism  (females 
only)  and peripheral edema to Appendix M.  
• Updated language in Appendix M to include the Assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms  of Cushing’s Syndrome can be completed by qualified trained 
HHC professional, in addition to the Investigator.  
• Modified line item for “A dminister/dispense drug/drug accountability/patient 
diary” in Appendix A Table 8 to 2 s eparate line items “Administer S tudy 
drug/patient study diary review” and “Drug accountability/dispensation of drug and study diary” to clarify that drug accountability and dispensation of drug and 
study diary will not occur at additional safety visits . 
• Modified line item for “A dminister/dispense drug/drug accountability/patient 
diary” in Appendix A Table 9 to 2 separate line items “Administer study  drug/ 
patient diary review and dispensation” and “Drug accountability/dispensation of drug” to clarify activities to be performed in  clinic versus during HHC visit.  
• Added a new v isit column in Appendix A Table 8 for “Additional safety v isit 
(HHC)” and added the caveat “(in office)” to the existing Additional safety visit column to distinguish procedures that should be completed by HHC  during the 
Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase.  
• Clarified text referring to concomitant drugs that are categorized into multiple 
categories and added text that the restrictions of the “most restrictive” category 
should hold  precedent in Appendix J.  
• Remov ed the duplicate medications (Buproprion and Phe ntermine) from 
Appendix J Table 16.  
• Changed the reference noted in Appendix J for the drug interaction checker to be used for Drug -drug interactions via CYP3A4.  
• Updated “unless no suitable alternative is avai lable after the Baseline Visit ” in 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 9 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Appendix J Table 20.  
• Added “Polycystic Ovary Disease (PCOD)” to the list of clinical features of CS 
and moved “Glucocorticoid resistance” from the clinical features list to the Unlikely to have any clinical features of CS  list in Appendix G . 
• Replaced Appendix O “Instructions for Liver Function Test Abnormalities Follow -up” with “Additional Information on Adverse Event of Special Interest 
(QTc Interval, Instructions for Liver Function Test Abnormalities Follow -up and 
Adrena l Insufficiency)” and added additional information schematics and 
instructions.   
• Added additional references to  Appendix O in the body of the P rotocol.   
• Removed +3-day window from collection of LNSC and UFC collection for 
Baseline measurements in Section s 6.2, 6.4.5.2, and Appendix A Table 8.  
• Clarified RW0 may occur concurrently with TM7 or no more than 11 (+3 days) later unless a dose change is required at TM7 in Section 6.2 and Appendix A 
Table 9.  
• Clarified expected creatinine excretion rates in Section 6.4.5.1 and Table 4.  
Amendment 3:  
• Corrected  typographical and formatting errors. 
• Updates made to ensure consistency of wording and alignment of information 
between the Protocol Synopsis and the Protocol, as well as alignment between 
sections of the Protocol.  
• Aligned use of terminology throughout the Protocol referencing the Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase to TM Phase for consistency.  
• Removed abbreviation for total bilirubin (TBN) and clarified instances where bilirubin should have been used instead of total bilirubin in Protocol Synopsis , 
Protocol  and Appendices .   
• Increased  target number of subjects for randomization to 54  with 27 in each 
treatment group , removed the reference to the target number of completin g 
subjects and changed the reference to the number of anticipated SONICS -completers to represent a minority of randomized subjects in the 
Synopsis and Section 12.2.1.  
• The secondary and exploratory objectives and endpoints have been realigned and clarified.   Only acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema as clinical signs and 
symptoms of CS have remained secondary; the other signs and symptoms have been shifted from secondary to exploratory objectives and en dpoints.  The health-
related quality of life and symptom s of depression have been shifted from 
exploratory to secondary objectives and endpoints.  The evaluation criteria for 
exploratory endpoint #2 for time from RW0 to first time of loss of response has 
been more clearly defined.  These changes have been made in the Synopsis and 
the corresponding sections for objectives (Section 2.2 and Section 2.3), endpoints (Section 3.2 and Section 3.3), and efficacy analyses (Section 12.5.3.2 and Section 
12.5.3.3). 
• Blood pressure and high -density lipoprotein cholesterol (HD L-C) have been 
removed from secondary objectives, endpoints  and the related analysis.  These 14 Dec 2018 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 10 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 changes have been made in the Synopsis and the corresponding sections for 
objectives (Section 2.2), endpoints (Section 3.2), and efficacy analys es (Section 
12.5.3.2). 
• Clarified that subjects on levoketoc onazole from SONICS or the Expanded 
Access Program must have confirmation of their Therapeutic Dose, as defined in 
the SONICS protocol, during the Screening Phase to confirm cohort placement 
for LOGICS in the Synopsis and Section 4.2.1.  
• Added clarification describing the eligibility of subjects who complete SONICS, 
including the Follow -up Visit in Section 4.2.2.1. The potential to use select data 
from the SONICS Follow -up Visit for the LOGICS Screening Visit is  also 
described.  
• Clarified that eligibility for entering the Randomized Withdrawal Phase requires levoketoconazole- naïve cohort subjects to have established and maintained a 
Therapeutic Dose for at least 4 weeks as confirmed by the average of 3 UFC 
values with results received prior to the RW0 Visit in Section 4.2.2.5.  
• Clarified throughout the document that the TM Phase is open- label and that once 
the Therapeutic Dose is achieved , the dose should  generally  not be further 
adjusted if the  mean UFC le vels are within normal limits .  However, the dose 
may be increased if medically necessary to maintain eucortisolemia or decreased 
if needed to address drug intolerance or AE.  Updates were made in the Synopsis 
and Section 4.2.2.  Section  8.3.2.1 was added to include this information.  
• Clarified that subjects who completed SONICS but are being treated as part of the 
levoketoconazole- naïve cohort must re -establish their Therapeutic Dose 
according to the LOGICS definition in Section 4.1.  
• Clarified the definition of a stable Therapeutic Dose for the SONICS -completers 
cohort in Section 4.1.  
• Clarified that subjects are not permitted a dose change during the Restoration 
Phase . They should be withdrawn from LOGICS owing to “loss of efficacy” and  
may be consi dered for enrollment in the OPTICS study or EAP program  in the 
Synopsis and Section 4.4.  
• Clarified that subjects  withdrawn due to suspected or confirmed drug-induced 
liver injury  will not be eligible to enroll in either the OPTICS study or EAP 
program in S ection 5.4.2.  
• Clarified that subjects who require early rescue during the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase, may receive open -label levoketoconazole and continue in the 
study.  The rapid titration of the Restoration Phase should be used to reestablish the Therapeutic Dose of open -label levoketoconazole used for the early rescue.  
Dose adjustments may be made, as medically indicated including adjustments to dose levels above the previous therapeutic dose to return subjects to 
eucortisolemia.  Updates were made in the Synopsis, Section 4.1, Section 4.3.1 , 
and Section 8.3.3.1. Section 8.3.3.3 was added to include this guidance information.  
• Clarified that subjects who may require lipid lowering drugs, they should be 
added and stabilized for at least 4 weeks prior to T M0 for the levoketoconazole-
naïve cohort or RW0 for the SONICS -completers cohort in Exclusion 
Criterion  #24 in the Synopsis and Section 5.3, and in Sections 10.1 and 10.2.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 11 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Clarified that at TM7, subjects may require more than 14 (± 3) days between 
TM7 and RW0 to allow for 4 weeks maintenance if a dose change is required at 
TM7  in the Synopsis and Section 4.2.2.2 . 
• Added clarification that blinding to the treatment code should be maintained 
during early rescue in Section 4.3.1 and Section 8.3.3.1.  
• Added s tudy number and name of  the open -label extension (OLE) study (Study 
COR-2017- OLE, aka OPTICS).  
• Added clarificatio n that procedures for LOGICS can only be performed during 
SONICS Visit M12 after the informed consent for LOGICS has been signe d in 
Section 6.4 .5.1 and Section 6.4.5.2. 
• Added clarification that subjects should remain awake within 2 hours before collecting the late- night salivary cortisol samples in Section 6.4.5.2.  
• Added clarification of information about the SONICS -completers cohort for 
subjects that finished SONICS within 6 months prior to screening for LOGICS 
and for those subjects who completed SONICS more than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase in Section 4.2.1.  
• Clarified in Figure 1 and in the Synopsis that  during the screening period for 
subjects that are SONICS -completers IP may be dispensed starting at TM0 (from 
LOGICS for those entering Screening directly from the SONICS study and from 
EAP for those entering Screening directly from the EAP program).  
• Study Hypothesis and Sample Size Determination information was updated to 
align with new assumption that approximately 20% of subjects in each treatment 
group will withdraw prior to RW4 and to decrease the assumption of loss of 
response to 10% in the levoketoconazole arm  in the Synopsis a nd Section 12.2.1. 
• For the Primary Efficacy Analysis, Loss of Therapeutic Response definition, the 
null hypothesis definitions were removed in Section 12.5.3.1.  
• Synopsis  Screening Phase wording was clarified to remove the word ‘blood’ to 
align with Section  4.2.2 and Section 6.2 regarding the washout of medications 
that are known to influence cortisol.  
• Added a heading for Eligibility and included statement clarifying that Cortendo 
will review each subject’s enrollment criteria in the Synopsis . 
• Included infor mation in Section 4.2.2.2 and Synopsis to allow for subjects still in 
the TM Phase when the randomization target of 54 subjects has been reached to be offered the opportunity to join the OPTICS study and receive open- label 
treatment provided they meet the OPTICS inclusion/exclusion criteria . 
• Included information in Section 4.3 that eligibility for entering the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase requires subjects to have established and maintained a 
Therapeutic Dose as confirmed by the average of 3 UFC values with results 
received prior to the RW0 visit.  
• Clarified that the interactive randomization system is via interactive response technology (IRT)  in Section 8.3.3.1. 
• Clarified that the duration of vital signs  described  in Section 6.4.2 was to occur 
over approximat ely 10 minutes . 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 12 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Updated Appendix B to classify fasting glucose and insulin as a CS 
cardiovascular co -morbidity biomarker and updated Appendix A tables (Table 7, 
Table 8, and Table 9) to include these tests as a unique laboratory assessment.  
• Clarified that for urine collections between RW5 and RES1, subjects should have 
received the previously achieved Therapeutic Dose of blinded study medication 
for at least 1 week before collections commence and complete and at least 1 week 
before the RES1 visit.  And for urine collections between RES1 and RES2, urine 
collection should commence at approximately Day 18 of the Restoration Phase.  These updates were made in Section 6.4.5.1 and Appendix A, Table 9.  
• Clarified Appendix A, Table 7 to match flowchart  including  providing a diary to 
subjects who were either levoketoconazole naïve or those who completed SONICS > 6 months prior to study entry.  
• Clarified Appendix A, Table 9 drug accountability and dispensation to include guidance on collection of information in IRT. 
• Clarified Section 6.4.5.5 and Appendix A, Table 9, Footnote 13 to include 
guidance that the MRI for RW0 and RW5 may be performed up to 2 weeks 
BEFORE the study visit.  
• Clarified Appendix M to allow for signature by assessor.  
• Clarified Appendix O, Recommended LFT Management Guidance algorithm where ALT or AST > 3X ULN or AP > 2X ULN or Total Bilirubin >2X ULN to be present “with” signs o r symptoms of liver dysfunction  and removed reference 
to Appendix O . 
Amendment 4:  
• Corrected typographical and formatting errors  
• Updates made to ensure consistency of wording and alignment of information between the Protocol Synopsis and the Pr otocol, as well as alignment between 
sections of the protocol.  
• Clarification of the term “SONICS -completer”. “SONICS -completer Cohort” is 
the current term used for the subset of subjects who completed the SONICS study and met the description of the cohort as provided in Section 4.1. These updates 
were made in the following sections:  Synopsis ( Eligibility, Methodology, 
Number  of subjects, Inclusion  Criteria, Investigational product, Statistical 
Methods); Section 2.1; Sections 4.1, 4.2.1, 4.3 and  4.3.1; Sections 5.1 and 5.3; 
Sections 6, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4.4.1, and 6.4.5.5; Sections 8.3 and 8.3.2; Section 10.1; 
Sections 12.1, 12.5.1, 12.5.2, and 12.5.3; and Appendix  A. 
• Clarification regarding expansion of time to achieve Therapeutic Dose in levoketoconazole- naïve subjects in the Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase.  
This change is reflected in the following sections: Synopsis (Methodology, Dose 
Titration and Maintenance  Phase [TM] Phase; Duration of treatment); 
Section  4.2.2.2; Section  4.2.2.2.2; and Section 6.2. 
• Clarification and updated wording on the number of potential randomized 
subjects and sample size determination.  The updated text provides a range of 
target sam ple sizes from 46 to 54 that are depend ent on the withdrawal rate prior 
to RW4 during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  The following sections are 23 Sep 2019 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 13 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 impacted by this change:  Synopsis (Methodology, Dose Titration and 
Maintenance [TM] Phase; Number of subject s (planned); and Study Hypothesis 
and Sample Size Determination); Section 4.2.2.2; and Section 12.2.1 .  
• Addition of one secondary endpoint  that addressed the proportion of subject s with 
normalized mUFC at the end of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  This c hange 
applies to the following sections: Synopsis (Criteria for evaluation) and Section 
3.2. The planned analysis of this endpoint has been added to Section 12.5.3.2 . 
• Addition of two exploratory endpoints  to analyze normalization rate of mUFC at 
TM7 and the rate of normalized mUFC or partial response at TM7 . These 
changes apply to the following sections: Synopsis (Criteria for evaluation) and 
Section 3.4.  The planned analyses of these endpoints have been added to Section 
12.5.3.3. 
• Addition of eligibility of non -responders in the Dose Titration and Maintenance 
Phase to enroll in OPTICS. This change applies to Section  4.2.2.2. 
• Clarification of procedures  for subjects requiring early rescue with open -label 
levoketoconazole during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase. This change applies 
to Synopsis ( Methodology, Safety monitoring and extended assessment) and 
Section  4.3. 1. 
• Clarification of Early Rescue Criterion  1 (second bullet point) .  This change 
applies to Sec tion 4.3.1. 
• Clarification of Early Rescue Criterion 2 (Partial loss of cortisol response). A 
subject must have a partial loss of cortisol response and clinically signi ficant 
worsening of CS symptoms to meet this criterion. This change applies  to 
Section  4.3.1. 
• Clarification regarding  the abnormal dexamethasone  suppression test (DST)  
values required for study i nclusion for those subjects who had not previously 
completed the SONICS Study. The following sections are impacted by this 
change:  Synopsis ( Inclusion Criteria for All Others ) and Section 5.2.  
• Addition s to the  study withdrawal criteria to include  failure to  achieve the 
Therapeutic Dose during the TM Phase and closu re of randomization while still 
in the TM Phase. These  change s impact Section 5.4.  
• Clarification regarding adequacy of urine samples . This change impacts 
Section  6.4.5.1. 
• Clarification on the timing of the LNSC ad UFC sample collections relative to 
dosing with dexamethasone to account for the half -life of dexamethasone . The 
following sections are impacted by this change: Section 6.4.5.3  and Appendix A 
(Table 7).  
• Clarification on the scope of the interim analysis  that will be performed and who 
will re main blinded at the individual subject level until the database lock at the 
end of the study . The following sections are impacted by th ese changes : Section 
8.3.3.1 and Section 12.6.  
• Clarification that the analyses for  the SONICS -completer Population will b e 
performed only if the size of this cohort is at least 30% of the ITT population . 
This change impacts the Synopsis (Analysis Populations) and Section  12.1.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 14 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Clarification that the calculation of study drug compliance  will be performed by 
phase and for the study overall instead of by visit . This change impact s 
Section  12.5.2.1. 
• Clarification on the categories to apply to the results from the oral glucose 
tolerance testing. Th is change impact s Section  12.5.2.6. 
• Clarific ation on the use of the two -sample t -test to compare the two randomized 
treatment groups.  The two -sample t -test will be performed on the changes from 
Baseline (RW0) at each applicable visit in the Randomized Phase only and will 
not be performed for visits  at the Restoration Phase.  This change impacts 
Synopsis (Statistical methods) and Section 12.5.3.2.  
• Clarification on the analysis time points for the Cushing’s Syndrome Quality of 
Life Questionnaire and Beck’s Depression Questionnaire.  The changes from Baseline (RW0) will be analyzed at the end of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase 
and Restoration Phase.  This change impacts Section 12.5.3.2.   
• Clarification on Pregnancy test (βhCG) to include all women regardless of childbearing potential. This change impacts Appendix B (Other 
analytes/measures).  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 16 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 INVESTIGATOR AGREEMENT  
I have read this protocol and agree:  
• To conduct the study as outlined herein, in accordance with current International 
Council for Harmonisation (ICH) Tripartite Guidel ine on Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) , the Declaration of Helsinki and comply with the obligations and requirements 
of Clinical Investigators and all other requirements listed in 21 CFR part  312 and in 
accordance with the study procedures provided by Cortendo and local regulations.  
• Not to implement any changes to the protocol without prior agreement from the 
Sponsor and prior review and written approval from the  Investigational Review 
Board  (IRB) or Independent Ethics Committee ( IEC), except as would be necessary 
to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subject(s), or for administrative aspects of 
the study.  
• To ensure that all persons assisting me with the study are adequately informed about 
the investigational product(s) and of their study -related duties as described in the 
protocol. 
• I agree to completely inform all subjects in this study concerning the pertinent details and purpose of the study prior to their agreement to participate in the study in 
accordance with GCP and regulatory authority requireme nts. 
• I will be responsible for maintaining each subject’s consent form in the study file and 
providing each subject with a signed copy of the consent form.  
• That I am thoroughly familiar with the appropriate use of the investigational 
product(s), as described in the protocol, and any additional information provided to 
me by, or on behalf of Cortendo.  
Investigator Name and Title:   
 
 
Institution/Address:   
 
 
Contact Information:   
 
Signature: ___________________________  Date: ________________  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 17 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Name of Sponsor/Company: Cortendo AB  
Name of Investigational Product: Levoketoconazole (previously COR -003) 
Name of Active Ingredient: (2S, 4R) -(-)-cis-Ketoconazole   
{2S,4R cis-1-acetyl -4-[4-[[2-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2- (IH-imidazol -1-ylmethyl)-1,3-dioxolan-4- yl] 
methoxylphenyl] piperazine}  
Title of Study:  A Double -blind, Placebo -Controlled, Randomized Withdrawal Following Open- label 
Therapy  Study to Assess the Safety and Efficacy of Levoketoconazole (2S, 4R-ketoconazole) in the 
Treatment of Endogenous Cushing’s Syndrome  
Study center(s): This is a multicenter study at approximately 40 sites in North America , Europe and the 
Middle East .  Addit ional sites may be added.  
Phase of development:  Phase 3  
Objectives :  
Primary:  To determine the effect of withdrawing to placebo versus continuing treatment with 
levoketoconazole on the cortisol therapeutic response previously established during open -label 
levoketoconazole therapy . 
Secondary:  
1. To compare the effects of levoketoconaz ole with placebo on cortisol status  (inferred from  mean  
urinary free cortisol [m UFC ] and/or  late night salivary cortisol  [LNSC ]) during the Randomized 
Withdrawal (RW) Phase and the subsequent Restoration Phase ; 
2. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on changes in biomarkers of CS 
comorbidities  (fasting glucose, fasting insulin, homeostatic model assessment -insulin resistance 
[HOMA- IR], hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c], total cholesterol, low -density lipopr otein -cholesterol 
[LDL -C], and high -sensitivity C -reactive protein [hsCRP]) ; 
3. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on changes in health -related quality of 
life (QoL) and symptoms of depression;  
4. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on changes in acne, hirsutism and 
peripheral edema;  
5. To assess the safety and tolerability of levoketoconazole;  
6. To evaluate the population pharmacokinetics (PK) of levoketoconazole in subjects with CS.  
NOTE: Secondary Objectives 5 and 6 are not subjects of hypothesis tests.  
Exploratory:  
1. To assess changes in anti -diabetic, anti- cholesterol, anti -hypertensive , and chronic 
anti-inflammatory therapies;  
2. To describe the effect s and duration s of levoketoconazole action with respect to cortisol status  and 
clinical signs and symptoms of CS other than acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema;  
3. To describe the dose- response relationship of levoketoconazole with respect to safety and 
tolerability ; 
4. To des cribe the effects of levoketoconazole on glucose tolerance among subjects with  impaired 
fasting glucose  (IFG). 
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 18 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Criteria for evaluation:  
Primary endpoint:  
Proportion of subjects with loss of therapeutic response to levoketoconazole upon withdrawing to 
placebo compared with the proportion of subjects with loss of therapeutic response upon continuing 
treatment with levoketoconazole.  Loss of therapeutic respon se (i.e. relapse) is inferred based on 
mUFC from  three 24 -hour urinary free cortisol ( UFC ) measurements obtained at any visit from second 
through final Randomized Withdrawal  Phase visits (RW1 through RW5 inclusive) when:  
(1)  mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN of  the central laboratory’s reference range, OR  
(2)  mUFC is more than 40% above the baseline ( RW0 ) value, if the RW0 value is above the ULN 
(i.e. >1.0X ULN)1, OR  
(3)  an early rescue criterion is met . 
Secondary endpoints:  
• Changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in mUFC  and LNSC at all post -Baseline  visits with these 
assessments through the final study visit  (RES2)—applies to Secondary Objective 1 ; 
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC at RES2 —applies to Secondary Objective 1; 
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC at the end of Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase —applies to Secondary Objective 1;  
• Changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in biomarkers of CS comorbidities (fasting glucose, fasting insulin, 
homeostatic model assessment -insulin resistance [ HOMA -IR], hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c ], total 
cholesterol, low density lipoprotein- cholesterol [ LDL -C], and high- sensitivity C -reactive protein 
[hsCRP]) at all post -Baseline visits with these measurements through the final study visit 
(RES2)—applies to Secondary Objective 2; 
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in health -related QoL and symptoms of depression at all post -
Baseline visits with these assessments through the final study visit (RES2) – applies to Secondary 
Objective 3;  
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema at all post -Baseline visits 
with these assessments through the final study visit (RES2) – applies to Secondary Objective  4; 
• Incidence and severity of adverse events (AEs), particularly adverse events of special interest (AESIs) during levoketoconazole open -label therapy in the Dose -Titration and Maintenance  (TM) 
Phase (levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort), and during blinded therapy  in the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase  (both cohorts) —applies to Secondary Objective 5. 
Pharmacokinetic endpoints and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic m odeling:  
• Estimates of the following PK parameters: clearanc e (CL/F), volume of distribution (V/F), 
absorption rate constant (Ka), with associated between -subject variability where feasible. These 
parameters will be used to calculate half -life (t½), area under the concentration time curve (AUC) 
and peak concentrati on (Cmax), if feasible —applies to Secondary Objective 6;   
• Estimates of the following pharmacodynamic  (PD) parameters: levoketoconazole concentration 
producing half maximal UFC suppression (IC 50), maximal suppression of UFC (Imax) and associated estimates of between -subject variability, if feasible. UFC concentrations in relation to 
dose and p lasma exposure will be explored —applies to Secondary Objective 6. 
Exploratory endpoints:  
• Frequency of usage and changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in frequency of usage of anti-diabetic, anti -
cholesterol, anti -hypert ensive, and chronic anti -inflammatory therapies at all post -Baseline visits ; 
changes in corresponding biomarkers accounting for changes in medication usage will also be explored —applies to Exploratory Objective 1 ; 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 19 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Time from RW0 to first time of loss of response , when : 
(1)  mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN of the central laboratory’s reference range, OR  
(2)  mUFC is more than 40% above the RW0 value, if the RW0 value is above the ULN [i.e. 
>1.0X ULN]2, OR  
(3)  an early r escue criterion is met —applies to Exploratory Objective  2;  
• Time to first normalization of mUFC beginning from RW5 (subset with mUFC above 1.5X ULN 
at RW5 )—applies to Exploratory Objective 2; 
• Time to first normalization of LNSC beginning from RW5 (subset with LNSC above ULN at 
RW5 )—applies to Exploratory Objective 2 ; 
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC at the end of Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase (TM7 )—applies to Exploratory  Objective 2;  
• Proportion of subjects with either normalization of mUFC or partial response (at least 50% decrease in mUFC) at the end of Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase (TM7 )—applies to 
Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Proportion of subjects with normalizati on of LNSC at RES2 —applies to Exploratory Objective 2 ; 
• Changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in serum cortisol and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) at all 
post-Baseline  visits with these assessments through the final study visit (RES2) —applies to 
Exploratory Objective 2; 
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in clinical signs and symptoms of CS excluding acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema at all post -Baseline visits with these assessments through the final study 
visit (RES2) —applies to Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Frequency and severity of common AEs and laboratory abnormalities in relation to dose of study 
drug administered at the time of the reported AE or laboratory abnorma lity—applies to 
Exploratory Objective 3; 
• Shifts from normality and concentration changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in serum transaminases, 
alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin  at all post -Baseline visits in relation to dose of study drug 
administered at the  time of the shift or change —applies to Exploratory Objective 3; 
• Durations and changes in durations from Baseline ( RW0 ) of the QT interval corrected for heart 
rate (QTc) in relation to dose of study drug administered proximal to  the measurement —applies to 
Exploratory Objective 3.  
• Change from Baseline in observed and derived glucose and insulin parameters during oral glucose tolerance test ( OGTT ) in the subset of subjects with IFG —applies to Exploratory Objective 4.  
Methodology:  A study schematic follows at the end of this section.  This is a double -blind, 
randomized, placebo -controlled withdrawal and restoration (or as needed early rescue) study in subjects 
with endogenous CS previously treated with single -arm, open- label levoket oconazole that will assess 
efficacy, safety, tolerability, and PK of levoketoconazole.   Two populations  or cohorts , are defined for 
analytical and procedural purposes  as follows:  
Levoketoconazole -naïve cohort:  Subjects who did not participate in the prior  clinical  study of 
                                                
1 This category applies only to subjects who have completed SONICS, who may have a Therapeutic Dose established 
with UFC above the ULN of the reference range.  Levoketoconazole- naïve subjects must have UFC at or below the 
ULN at RW0 to qualify for randomiza tion. 
2 This category applies only to subjects who have completed SONICS, who may have a Therapeutic Dose established 
with UFC above the ULN of the reference range.  Levoketoconazole- naïve subjects must have UFC at or below the 
ULN at RW0 to qualify for ra ndomization.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 20 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 levoketoconazole (COR -2012-01 aka SONICS ) plus subjects who completed Visit M12 of SONICS (final 
scheduled visit prior to safety follow -up) but who have not been treated with a Therapeutic Dose of 
levoketoconazole throughout the 12- week period immediately prior to Screening in the current study.   
SONICS -completer cohort:   Limited to s ubjects who have completed all visits in the SONICS study  
through M12 (final scheduled visit prior to safety follow -up) at any time prior to the current study  and 
who have been treated with a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12- week period 
immediately prior to Screening.    
Study methodology varies by cohort prior to randomization (RW0)  only.  Following initial Screening  
(washout as needed)  and Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM) Phase , as applicable, this study will be 
conducted in two randomized, double- blind treatment phases ( a Randomized Withdrawal Phase and a 
Restoration Phase ).   
Screening  Phase :   
Duration up to approximately 13 weeks to allow for washout , as needed.  
All subjects on levoketoconazole from SONICS or the Expanded A ccess Program ( EAP ) must have 
confirmation of their Therapeutic Dose , as defined in the  SONICS  protocol,  during the Screening Phase to 
confirm cohort placement for LOGICS.  During this time, subjects will continue their prescribed dose of 
levoketoconazole to ensure continuity of treatment.  
Subjects who have completed all vi sits in SONICS, through Visit 12 and have been on a stable 
Therapeutic Dose throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior to signing informed consent, will 
enter the Screening Phase to confirm eligibility.   
For subjects who have completed SONICS within 6 months prior to Screening  for LOGICS , the Screening 
Phase, relying primarily on data collected during SONICS and completed with data collected in LOGICS, will begin after Visit M12 of SONICS completion and end once eligibility is confirmed.  The t ime from 
confirmation of eligibility to RW0 should be no more than 11  (+3) days later (the minimum time 
requirement for Therapeutic Dose confirmation as dictated by tolerability and UFC results).  As data collected from the SONICS study will be used in this study as well, overlapping assessments only need to be performed once (e.g. the same vital signs data may be recorded in the eCRFs for both studies).  
For subjects who have completed SONICS more than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and have 
been on a stable Therapeutic Dose throughout the previous 12- week period, Screening procedures will 
mimic those for the levoketoconazole -naïve subjects to confirm eligibility for the current study.  After 
eligibility has been confirmed during the Screening Phase, subjects should proceed directly to the Open -label 
levoketoconazole Therapeutic Dose established from Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM) Phase  
for levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort, or prior to entry into LOGICS  for the 
SONICS -completer  cohort 
Randomization (RW0)    
Blinded 
Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase  Levoketoconazole  at Therapeutic  Dose  Placebo at equivalent tablet count to 
Therapeutic Dose  
Blinded Restoration 
Phase  Placebo  added as 1 tablet twice daily  
(BID) at RW5 then add 1  tablet every 2 
days, alternating AM and PM, until the 
total tablet count is double the count at 
RW0  Levoketoconazole  added as 1 tablet 
BID at RW5 then add 1 tablet every 
2 days, alternating AM and PM, until 
the total tablet count is double the 
count at RW0  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 21 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Baseline/Randomization Visit (RW0).  The time between Screening and RW0 should be no more than 
11±3 days.  
Following consent signature, subjects naïve to levoketoconazole receiving previous CS medical therapies 
or other prohibited medications must enter a washout period before completing screening assessments 
detailed in the Time and Events schedule.  The Screening Phase may last up to approximately 13 weeks .  
Baseline me asurements will be obtained as part of the Screening assessments (after washout); therefore, 
the time from confirmation of eligibility to TM0 (aka Baseline) should be no more than 11 (+3) days.  
Screening procedures completed within 3 weeks of TM0  (within 2 weeks for LNSC, QTc interval and 
liver safety tests) will be used as the TM0 value.  If Screening procedures were completed more than 3 
weeks prior to TM0, then they will be repeated at TM0 (except for pituitary magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI),  which may be completed up to 6 months of TM0 or RW0 ).  All blood samples (except for post 
dose PK samples) should be obtained prior to administering the first dose of levoketoconazole.  
Likewise, the final Baseline UFC specimen should be collected close t o the date of TM0  and never more 
than 6  weeks prior to TM0 .  NOTE: all Baseline UFC and L NSC values must be obtained after washout of 
any medications that are known to influence cortisol  levels .   
If a subject does not meet the eligibility requirements on initial Screening, they may be eligible to re -
screen only if worsening of their medical condition has increased the likelihood that they would meet the 
study eligibility criteria.  Such re -screenings will be exceptional circumstances, and all re -screenings  
require prior permission of the study Medical Monitor before they begin.  Repeating a Screening test (e.g. 
UFC) that has been found to be technically flawed will not be considered re -screening.   
For subjects who have completed Visit M12 in SONICS either within the previous 6 months or more than 
6 months prior to the Screening Phase and are NOT on a stable Therapeutic Dose throughout the previous 
12-week period, Screening procedures will mimic those for the levoketoconazole -naïve subjects as noted 
above to  confirm eligibility and progress the subject into the Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM) Phase 
of the study.   
 
Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM) Phase  (levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort  ONLY) 
After confirmation of eligibility, members of the levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort (including subjects that 
completed SONICS but require re- titration) will enter the TM Phase .  As detailed above, subjects who 
completed visit M12 of SONICS but who have not bee n treated with a stable Therapeutic Dose of 
levoketoconazole throughout the 12- week period immediately prior to screening must establish their 
Therapeutic Dose in the TM Phase and are thus members of the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort.  The 
starting dose for these subjects may be as high as the dose that was most recently or currently being 
received  or next higher dose level , at the discretion of the Investigator . The first dose of open -label therapy 
for this phase will be at TM0.   Dose titration will occur in increments of 150 mg over a period of 
approximately 3 to 19 weeks to achieve an effective and tolerable dose (the Therapeutic Dose). In 
exceptional situations, subjects may require additional time (i.e. greater than 19 weeks) to achieve the Therapeutic Dose.  These situations must be approved on a case by case basis by the Medical Monitor.  
Dose increases (and decreases, as needed) will be based on subjective and objective indicators of 
medication tolerance, UFC and other cortiso l measures.  Subjects will return to the clinic every 14 ( ± 3) 
days during the TM Phase  (note: to allow for 4 weeks maintenance, additional time may be required in the 
event  a dose change is required at TM7) .  Additionally , when a dose escalation during th e TM Phase is 
required to a total daily dose of 750 mg or above , subjects will be asked to return to the clinic or , 
optionally,  will be visited by a qualified home health care (HHC) professional  for one extra safety 
evaluation 5 days ( ± 2 days) after each dose escalation.   
Subjects will be advised to contact the Investigator immediately in the event of AESI -suggestive signs or 
symptoms (defined later) regardless of the onset timing relative to a schedule d visit.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 22 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Once the Therapeutic Dose has been reached and confirmed from the mean of a total of three  adequately 
collected 24 -hour urine specimens for UFC measurements, subjects will continue that Therapeutic Dose 
(i.e. in Maintenance) until the final open -label study visit (Visit TM7) in the TM Phase .  During the TM 
Phase (while treatment is open -label), o nce the Therapeutic Dose is achieved, the dose should generally 
not be further adjusted if the UFC levels are within normal limits .  However , the dose may be increase d if 
medically necessary to maintain eucortisolemia or decrease d to address drug intolerance or AE.  Prior to 
the final open- label visit (Visit TM7), three complete 24 -hour urine specimens will be obtained 
(collections need not be repeated if the final open- label visit coincides with the initial establishment of 
UFC normalization) to confirm maintenance of UFC normalization prior to randomization, denoting UFC -
eligibility for the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  To ensure  the TM Phase  occur s within  the allotted 
timeframe of no more than approximately 19 weeks, urine collections should ideally be made on 
sequential days  and prior to the actual scheduled visit for dose assessment, as results are needed to 
determine if dose escalation is required, or w hether a confirmatory UFC is needed to establish Therapeutic 
Dose .  The minimum duration of this phase and thus establishment of the Therapeutic Dose will be no less 
than approximately 14 weeks , even among subjects who reach a Therapeutic Dose more quickly .  
Randomization (RW0)  should occur as soon as possible after the final Titration -Maintenance visit (TM7) 
and no more than 11  (+3) days later  unless a dose change was required at Visit TM7 .  Regardless, in all 
cases a t least 4  weeks should elapse between reaching the Therapeutic Dose and RW0 to ensure 
tolerability  and stability (continued effectiveness ) of the Therapeutic Dose . 
Subject s still in the TM Phase when the randomization target of  46 to 54 subjects, depending on the 
observed withdrawal ra te trend during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase  is reached , will be offered the 
opportunity to join an open- label extension (OLE) study (Study COR -2017- OLE, aka OPTICS)  to receive 
open- label treatment .  Subjects must meet the OPTICS inclusion/exclusion cri teria to be eligible .  
 
Randomized Withdrawal (RW) Phase  (All Subjects)  
In the 8 -week, double -blind Randomized Withdrawal P hase, subjects will return to the clinical site  at least 
twice: on RW3 { Day 30( -4)} and RW5 { Day 58( -4)} relative to the Randomization Visit (RW0) for safety 
and efficacy evaluations  to determine if they are still responding to therapy , or if they have relapsed or if 
an early rescue criterion has otherwise been met. 
Three  additional  visits , either at -home (by a qualified HHC  professional ) OR on -site, will be conducted for 
all subjects on RW1 { Day 10( -2)}, RW2  {Day 20( -2)} and RW4 { Day 40 (-2)} relative to Randomization  
(RW0) .  These interim visits will be primarily for determining cortisol status as well as to monitor safety 
and tolerability  associated with the possible withdrawal of medication .  Partial loss of response or relapse 
should be confirmed by a repeat 24-hour urine  sample  or LNSC sample , which should be collected and 
analyzed as soon as possible .  Courier services will be provided, as desired, to collect UFC specimens for 
transport to the site on days when a qualified HHC  professional  is not present  or if subjects prefer courier 
pickup of collected sample s prior to visit . 
NOTE: Early rescue  criteria are described that provide for immediate  substitution of blinded study drug 
with open- label levoketoconazole treatment directed by the study Investigator  if continued use of blinded 
treatment is regarded as una cceptable owing to significant or rapid clinical deterioration.  Criteria to guide 
the Investigator  as to the possible need for early rescue medication are described in this protocol.  
Although UFC will be the primary measure of loss of therapeutic efficac y, cortisol status will be assessed 
through additional measures as described.  The rapid titration schedule used in the Restoration Phase 
should be used to reestablish the Therapeutic Dose if a subject requires early rescue with open -label 
levoketoconazole.   As treatment is open -label during early rescue, dose adjustments may be made, as 
medically indicated.   This includes adjustments to dose levels above the previous therapeutic dose if 
required to return subject to eucortisolemia.  
 
Restora tion Phase  (All Subjects)  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 23 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 All subjects completing the 8 -week Randomized Withdrawal Phase  who do not meet early rescue criteria,  
will enter the Double -blind Restoration Phase , wherein they will  continue to receive the randomly assigned 
blinded treatment reg imen and in addition will receive blinded restoration study medication (placebo for 
those already receiving levoketoconazole; levoketoconazole for those already receiving placebo) , 
beginning with 1 tablet BID and titrated in 1 tablet increments every 2  days alternating AM and PM , as 
described above, in order to return their treatment regimen to its status quo prior to randomization (i.e. 
subjects will resume the Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole if randomized to placebo  in the 
Randomized Withdrawal P hase).  The total tabl et number received during blinded Restoration  Phase will 
ultimately be twice the number received prior to randomization.   If, in the opinion of the Investigator, an 
increased dose of study drug is required for subjects who are unable to restore their prior cortisol control 
(i.e. mUFC >ULN) during the Restoration Phase at their prior Therapeutic Dose, those subjects should be withdrawn from this study owing to “loss of efficacy”.  Such subjects may be considered for enrollment in the lo ng-term OPTICS study or EAP if they otherwise qualify.  
Safety monitoring and extended assessment  
Throughout the study, safety data will be collected at regular intervals  of approximately: 5 to 17 days 
during Titration and Maintenance , 6 to 20 days during Randomized Withdrawal and 23 to 33 days  during 
Restoration  Phase (except for interim , remote [ via telephone ], safety checks during rapid titration) , per the 
Time and Events Schedule .  Adequate medical coverage must be provided by the study s ite continuously 
during the study to ensure that prompt safety decisions can be made and appropriate medical interventions provided.  The Investigator  will provide subjects with instructions for accessing medical staff at any hour  
to obtain prompt medical care.  An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will review key 
safety data at regular intervals throughout the study, including review of serious adverse events ( SAEs ) 
and AESIs shortly after they have been reported to the Sponsor.  
Study completion is defined as having:  completed all scheduled visits in the Restoration Phase  OR 
required early rescue with open -label levoketoconazole (or another rescue medication) during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase .  If early rescue is deemed appropriate with  open -label levoketoconazole, 
subjects continue in the study using Blinded Restoration  Phase procedures.   Subjects requiring rescue 
medication should complete all procedures for visit RW5 prior to entering the Restoration Phase . All 
subjects who complete the study  will be eligible to enter the open- label extension (OLE)  OPTICS  study to 
continue open -label treatment with levoketoconazole and enable assess ment of the  long- term e ffects on 
efficacy and safety.  The  OPTICS study is described in a separate protocol.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 24 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Levoketoconazole- naïve cohort  
[Levoketocon azole-naïve subjects (or re-titrations)] 
 
 
SONICS -completer cohort  
 
Note : RW5, the last visit of the Randomized Withdrawal, marks the start of the Restoration Phase  
NOTE: If there is a time gap between completion of Screening and TM0 or RW0 for subjects 
currently receiving levoketoconazole, then open -label levoketoconazole should be continued between 
Screening and TM0 or RW0 to maintain the Therapeutic Dose. If rolling over from SONICS, subjects 
will be dispensed LOGICS medication starting at the screening visit.  If entering from the expanded 
access program (EAP), subjects will stay on open- label levoketoconazole dispensed from EAP until 
the Baseline visit.  
Number of subjects (planned):  Forty- six (46) to 54 subjects , 23 to 27 in each treatment group,  will be 
enrolled into the Randomized Withdrawal Phase of the study.  A minority of randomized subjects are 
anticipated to be subjects in the SONICS -completer  cohort .  Any subject who withdraws after 
randomization will not be replaced.  Withdrawn subjects will not be re -entered into the study.       
Study Hypothesis and Sample Size Determination:  The null hypothesis is that the proportion of 
subjects with loss of therapeutic response, upon withdrawing to placebo compared with continued levoketoconazole, is not different between levoketoconazole and placebo.  The alternative hypothesis is 
that the two proportions are different, specifically that there is an increased loss of response for the 
placebo arm .  For the purpose of sample size estimation, it is assumed that among subjects in the ITT 
population who complete at least the RW4 visit in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, 10% will lose 
therapeutic response in the levoketoconazole arm vs. 75% in the placebo  arm.  For the analysis of the 
primary endpoint, subjects  in the ITT population who withdraw prior to RW4 will be considered a s losing 
therapeutic response.   
A minimum of 46 subjects (23 per arm) and a maximum of 54 subjects (27 per arm) will be targeted to be 
enrolled into the Randomized Withdrawal Phase based on the observed withdrawal  rate trend for the 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 25 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 phase. If the withdrawal rate is 10% per arm, a sample size of 46 subjects (23 per arm) randomized and 
treated during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase co rresponds to 42 subjects (21 per arm) completing 
RW4 and provides approximately 99% power to detect the alternative hypothesis of a loss of therapeutic 
response rate of 17% in the levoketoconazole arm and 78% in the placebo arm vs. the null hypothesis. If 
the withdrawal rate is 20% per arm, a sample size of 54 subjects (27 per arm) randomized and treated 
during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase corresponds to 44 subjects (22 per arm) completing RW4 and 
provides approximately 98% power to detect the alternative hypothesis of a loss of therapeutic response rate of 26% in the levoketoconazole arm and 81% in the placebo arm vs. the null hypothesis.  
 
Eligibility for Enrollment  
Cortendo will review each subject’s enrollment criteria to ensure that subjects meet the eligibility criteria.  
Inclusion Criteria for Specified Subjects Completing the SONICS Study :  
Subjects who have completed the SONICS study, within 6 months of the screening visit , including those 
receiving open- label treatment after SONICS as part  of an EAP, may be eligible for the study if the 
following criteria are met:  
1. Completed the final SONICS visit (M12) and have demonstrated maintenance of clinical response (partial or complete, as defined in the SONICS protocol, COR -2012- 01) on a stable The rapeutic Dose 
of levoketoconazole for at least 12 weeks prior to study entry (i.e. Visit RW0).  
2. Able and willing to provide written informed consent prior to any study procedures being performed; 
eligible subjects must be able to understand the informed co nsent form prior to inclusion into the 
study.   
Inclusion Criteria for All Others:  
The following categories of potential subjects, categorized by prior use of levoketoconazole, may be 
eligible if the following 11 inclusion criteria are all met:  
• Naïve to levoketoconazole (defined as having never participated in SONICS);  
• Completers of SONICS visit M12 more than 6 months of the screening  visit of the current study;  
• Completers of SONICS visit M12 within 6 months of the screening  visit who have not been 
receiving a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole for at least 12 weeks prior to the start of screening.  
1. Male or female and at least 18 years of age.  
2. Able and willing to provide written informed consent prior to any study procedures being performed; eligible subjects must be able to understand the informed consent form prior to inclusion into the study.  
3. Confirmed newly diagnosed, persistent or recurrent endogenous Cushing’s syndrome of any etiology, except secondary to maligna ncy (including pituitary or adrenal carcinoma).  Persistence will not be 
considered confirmed until 6 weeks or more post -surgery. 
The following historical evidence will be considered as sufficient to establish the cause of endogenous 
Cushing’s syndrome as being due to Cushing’s disease (i.e. ACTH -dependent of pituitary origin) 
specifically:  
• Pathological (e.g. adrenocorticotropic hormone  [ACTH] -staining) or post -surgical confirmation of 
the diagnosis of CD (i.e. documented adrenal insufficiency post -adenomec tomy or post -
hypophysectomy) OR 
• Intermediate, normal or elevated plasma ACTH (i.e. at least 5  pg/mL [1.1 pmol/L ]) PLUS  
For tumors 6 mm and above by imaging:  
a) Inferior petrosal sinus sampled (IPSS) ACTH central:plasma gradient at least 2 before 
corticotropin- releasing hormone  (CRH ) or at least  3 after CRH, OR in the absence of 
IPSS, either:  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 26 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 b) Positive ACTH and/or cortisol response to CRH or desmopressin or combined CRH -
desmopressin stimulation plus high -dose (8 mg) dexamethasone suppression of blood 
cortisol, ideally on more than one occasion OR  
c) Other adequate diagnostic testing.  Such cases must be discussed with and explicitly 
approved by the Medical Monitor, and the specific diagnostic criteria used to establish the diagnosis of CD must be document ed. 
For tumors below 6 mm or not visible by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):  
a) IPSS with ACTH central:plasma gradient at least 2 before CRH or at least 3 after CRH.  
b) Other adequate diagnostic testing.  In the absence of IPSS, an individual might be eligible 
if CD was otherwise confirmed via adequate testing.  Such cases must be discussed with 
and explicitly approved by the Medical Monitor, and the specific diagnostic criteria used 
to establish the diagnosis of CD must be documented.  
4. Elevated mean 24 -hour UFC levels at least 1.5X ULN of the normative range of the study’s central 
laboratory assay and from a minimum of three measurements from adequately collected urine; the study’s central laboratory must be used for all qualifying measurements.   
NOTE: This criterion does not apply to subjects currently on levoketoconazole.   
5. Presence of abnormal values from at least one of these two diagnostic tests
 (discrepancies between test 
findings will not be investigated nor considered exclusionary)  
• Abnormal Dexame thasone Suppression Test (DST): Elevated 8 AM blood cortisol at least 
1.8 µ g/dL (50 nmol/L) after 1 mg dexamethasone orally at 11 PM the evening prior with 
concurrent dexamethasone blood concentration greater than 5.6 nmol/ L (220 ng/dL) (results from 
within the 2 months prior to start of Screening or newly tested with results available by the Baseline Visit [TM0] ). If the DST cortisol is elevated and the dex amethasone value is at least 
3.9 nmol/L  (153 ng/dL) , then the subject  could qualify if at least 1 LNSC is greater than the ULN 
of the study’s central laboratory normative range  (the study’s test kit and lab must be used for all 
qualifying measurements ), wherea s a non -suppressed cortisol during DST with a dexamethasone 
value of at least 5.6  nmol/L (220 ng/dL)  would be required if LNSC is not done or if both LNSC 
values are low  (≤ ULN of the study’s central laboratory normative range; the study’s test kit and 
lab must be used for all qualifying measurements ).  
OR 
• Elevated LNSC concentrations (at least two measurements) each greater than the ULN of the study’s central laboratory normative range; the study’s test kit and lab must be used for all qualifying measurements.  
NOTE: Abnormal LNSC is required among eligible subjects with estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(eGFR as determined by Modified Diet in Renal Disease MDRD equation) above 40 and below 60 mL/min/1.73 m
2. 
NOTE: This criterion does not apply to subjects currently on levoketoconazole.  
6. Non-candidates for CS-specific surgery, refuse surgery or surgery will be delayed until after study 
completion  and agree to complete this study prior to surgery.  
7. If post -surgical for CS -specific surgery, then no significant post -operative sequelae remain and the 
risk of suc h sequelae is considered negligible.  
8. Agree to the following minimum washout periods prior to the Baseline Visit (TM0) (as applicable):  
• Ketoconazole or metyrapone: 2 weeks;  
• Dopamine agonists: bromocriptine (2 weeks), cabergoline (8 weeks);  
• Octreotide aceta te LAR, lanreotide Autogel®, pasireotide LAR: 12 weeks;  
• Lanreotide SR: 8 weeks;  
• Octreotide acetate (immediate release) or short -acting pasireotide: 1  week;  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 27 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Mifepristone (RU 486, KORLYM®): 4 weeks;  
• Megestrol acetate or medroxyprogesterone acetate (and selec ted other synthetic progestins): 
6 weeks.  
9. Females who are either of non -child bearing potential (i.e. incapable of becoming pregnant):  
• Post-menopausal, defined as age 50 or older with amenorrhea for more than 1 year or any age with 
serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) at least 23 mIU/mL and estradiol no more than 
40 pg/mL (140 pmol/L) OR  
• Surgically sterile —documented hysterectomy and/or bilateral oophorectomy or tubal ligation  
OR 
• Females of child -bearing potential who agree to use highly effective methods of birth control 
while participating and for 2 weeks after participation has completed (abstinence is considered 
acceptable if routinely practiced).  
10. Men who, if fertile, agree to use an acceptable form of birth control, including abstinen ce if routinely 
practiced, while enrolled and for 2 weeks after participation has completed.  
11. Able to comprehend and comply with all procedures.  
Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded from the study if ANY of the following criteria are met (NOTE: excl usion 
criteria  apply to and must be assessed in both cohorts):  
1. Enrolled in SONICS but have not completed SONICS through Visit M12.  
2. Pseudo- Cushing’s syndrome based on assessment of the Investigator.  
3. Cyclic Cushing’s syndrome with multi -week periods of apparent spontaneous CS remission.  
4. Non-endogenous source of hypercortisolism, including pharmacological corticosteroids or ACTH.  
5. Radiotherapy of any modality directed against the source of hypercortisolism within the last 5 years.  
6. Treatment with mitotane with in 6 months of enrollment.  
7. History of malignancy, including adrenal or pituitary carcinomas (other than low -risk, well -
differentiated carcinomas of thyroid, breast or prostate that are very unlikely to require further treatment in the opinion of the treating physician, or squamous cell or basal cell carcinoma of the skin).  
8. Clinical or radiological signs of compression of the optic chiasm.  
9. Major surgery within 1 month of Screening (or within 6 weeks for pituitary surgery).  
10. Clinically significant abnormality in 12 -lead electrocardiogram (ECG) during the Screening Phase 
requiring medical intervention (may be eligible once stable, to be determined case by case).  
11. QTc interval above 470 msec during the Screening Phase  via central reader interpretation . 
12. History of Torsades des Pointes, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, history of prolonged QT syndrome (including first -degree family history).  
13. Use of medications associated with possible, probable, or definite QT/QTc prolongation (unless subsequently washed out).  
14. Pre-existing hepatic disease (except for mild to moderate non- alcoholic fatty liver disease documented 
by imaging or biopsy and with transaminase values within allowed limits).  
15. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg) or hepatitis C -positive. 
16. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -positive.  
17. History of symptomatic cholelithiasis with intact gallbladder.  
18. History of pancreatitis.  
19. Liver safety tests during the Screening Phase as follows:  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 28 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and/or aspartate aminotrans ferase (AST) above 3X ULN  
• Alkaline phosphatase or Total bilirubin above 2X ULN.  
Subjects with isolated indirect bilirubin up to 3X ULN are presumed to have Gilbert’s syndrome 
and may be enrolled if all other liver safety tests are within normal levels.  
20. History of documented or suspected drug- induced liver injury to ketoconazole or any other azole drug.  
21. Serum potassium below 4.0 mEq/L (unless subsequently corrected and stable).  
22. Abnormal free thyroxine (FT4), unless subsequently corrected and stable for at le ast 4 weeks. Subjects 
with thyroid -stimulating hormone (TSH) less than the lower limit of normal (LLN) and normal FT4 
are potentially eligible without intervention.  
23. History of persistent, uncontrolled hypertension despite medical intervention.  
24. Hypercholest erolemia currently treated with atorvastatin, lovastatin or simvastatin and unwilling or 
unable to change to alternative therapy with: pravastatin, fluvastatin, pitavastatin or rosuvastatin (must 
switch statin at least 2 weeks prior to dosing) or another a llowed therapy.  For subjects for whom lipid 
reduction therapy is being considered, all lipid lowering drugs should be added and stabilized for at 
least 4 weeks prior to TM0 for the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort or RW0 for the SONICS -completer 
cohort, as i mprovements in lipids are being assessed as an endpoint for levoketoconazole treatment in 
this study.  
25. More than one hospitalization for hyperglycemia or complication of diabetes during the last 12 months  
26. Decreased renal function as defined by eGFR below 40  mL/min/ 1.73 m2, using MDRD equation for 
eGFR.  
27. Pregnant or lactating.  
28. Body habitus preventing repeated venipuncture as required by protocol.  
29. Any other clinically significant medical condition, as determined by the Investigator that precludes enrollment and  participation in the study through completion, including conditions that would 
preclude the subject from being able to follow instructions or perform necessary procedures (for example, psychiatric instability or severe disability).  
30. History of alcohol or drug abuse in the 6- month period prior to Screening.  
31. Currently participating in another study or has received any investigational treatment (drug, biological agent or device) other than levoketoconazole (COR -003), within prior 30 days or five ha lf-lives of 
treatment, whichever is longer.  
32. Current use of any H2 -receptor antagonists, proton- pump inhibitors, or sucralfate (all inhibit 
absorption of levoketoconazole; subjects may be allowed to enroll after washout).  A list of acceptable 
oral antacids  will be provided; if used, antacids must be ingested at least 2 hours after dosing of 
levoketoconazole. 
33. Current use of any prohibited concomitant medication that cannot be discontinued safely and washed 
out completely prior to the Baseline Visit (TM0 or R W0, for the levoketoconazole -naïve and 
SONICS -completer cohorts, respectively), including but not limited to the following (a more complete 
list is included in Appendix J ): 
• Weight loss medications (prescription or over the counter);  
• Acetaminophen (paracetamol) above 2 g total daily dose;  
• Strong inducers or inhibitors  of CYP3A4 enzyme system that may interfere with the metabolism 
of levoketoconazole and cannot be discontinued prior to first dose;  
• Herbal preparations: St John’s Wort, echinacea, gingko, goldenseal, yohimbe, red rice yeast, 
danshen, silybum marianum, Asia n ginseng, schissandra sphenanther, shankhapushi, and Asian 
herb mixture (Xiao chai hu tang and Salboku- to); 
• Topical or inhaled corticosteroids;  
• Carbamazepine, fenofibrate, carbenoxolone;  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 29 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Drugs that pose unacceptable risk due to overlapping or exaggerated toxicities or pharmacological 
action due to presumed PK or PD interactions with levoketoconazole;  
• Genuine licorice.  
Investigational product, dosage and mode of administration:  
Levoketoconazole (2S,4R -ketoconazole); 150 mg immediate release tablets for oral administration.   
For the levoketoconazole -naïve subjects , the total daily dose will be titrated in 150  mg increments from a 
starting dose of 300 mg (dosed as 150  mg BID) up to a maximal daily dose of 1200 mg (dosed as  600 mg 
BID) until a Therapeutic Dose is established.  Subjects re -establishing their Therapeutic Dose via re -
titration may begin titration at their current or most recently received dose at the discretion of the 
Investigator.  The minimum daily dose is 15 0 mg once daily ( QD) for subjects who cannot tolerate 150 mg 
BID.  For all subjects in the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort , the Therapeutic Dose will be established by 
the end of the TM Phase .   
For the SONICS -completer cohort, the stable Therapeutic Dose will have been established prior to 
enrollment in this study.   
The Therapeutic Dose will be used as the target dose and dose -regimen during the Restoration Phase.  
Duration of treatment:  
Prior to treatment, subjects in the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort  (including subjects who completed 
SONICS Visit M12 but who have not been treated with a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12 weeks immediately prior to screening ) will undergo Screening for up to approximately 
13 weeks (to allow for prior medication washout and to complete screening procedures); there is no required minimum Screening interval.  Dose titration is variable depending on clinical response.  However, all subject s in the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort will be treated for not less than 14  weeks in 
total and for no more than approximately 19 weeks (except on a case by case basis with  approval by the 
Medical Monitor) in total during the  TM Phase to confirm the Therapeutic Dose and to establish 
tolerability to levoketoconazole.  The Randomized Withdrawal Phase and the Restoration Phase are each approximately 8  weeks’ duration (maximum 9½ weeks), with the total of the two treatment phases not  to 
exceed approximately 19 weeks.  Therefore, the longest anticipated exposure to active study medication in this study is no more than approximately 38  weeks and the shortest approximately 8 weeks.  The longest 
anticipated exposure to placebo monotherapy is no more than 9½ weeks.  The longest anticipated total 
study participation duration is approximately 51 weeks.  
Reference therapy, dosage and mode of adminis tration :  
An active reference therapy will not be used.  Placebo tablets identical in appearance to levoketoconazole 
will be administered during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase using the same regimen as the Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole established during the  TM Phase (levoketoconazole -naïve cohort) or at study 
entry (SONICS -completer cohort).  During the Restoration Phase, blinded placebo to be added onto the 
levoketoconazole regimen will be started at 1 tablet BID and titrated every 2 days in 1 tablet inc rements 
per the Dosing T itration Scheme until the Therapeutic Dose -equivalent is achieved  unless the Therapeutic 
dose is DL0 .  The total final tablet count (active + placebo) during Restoration Phase will equal twice the 
total tablet count of the Therapeutic Dose, not to exceed 8 tablets BID.  
Analysis Populations:  
Intent -to-Treat Population (ITT): The ITT population will include all subjects who are randomized and 
receive at least one dose of blinded study medication  during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase .  The ITT 
population will be used for the primary analysis of efficacy and secondary analyses of efficacy and safety.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 30 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Per Protocol (PP) Population:   The PP population will consist of all subjects in the ITT population who 
have no major protocol deviations during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase that could affect the primary 
endpoint .  This population will be used in supportive analyses of the primary endpoint and secondary 
efficacy endpoints.  
Levoketoconazole- naïve  Population:   The levoketoconazole- naïve  population will consist of all subjects 
in the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort who receive at least one dose of study medication during the TM 
Phase .  This population will be used for supportive evaluations of safety and for exploratory efficacy, 
safety, and PK analyses.   
SONICS -completer Population:  The SONICS -completer  population will consist of all subjects in the 
SONICS -completer cohort who receive at least one dose of blinded study medication during the 
Randomized Withdraw Phase.  This population will be  used for supportive evaluation s of safety and for 
exploratory efficacy, safety, and PK analyses .  Because  only a minority of the subjects are anticipated to 
be in the SONICS -completer cohort, the analyses will be performed only if the size of this cohort is at 
least 30% of the ITT population . 
Statistical methods:  
Primary Efficacy Analysis :   The primary analysis will use the ITT population and supportive analysis will 
be repeated in the PP population.   
Statistical significance testing will be conducted using a logistic regression model containing fixed effect 
terms  for Randomized Withdrawal treatment group (levoketoconazole, placebo) and subject cohort 
(SONICS -completer  cohort , levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort ) and confirmed using a two- sided Fisher ’s 
Exact test.   
Secondary Efficacy Analysis :  Inferences derived from secondary efficacy analyses will be gated on 
results from the primary efficacy analysis.  Secondary efficacy analyses will be hierarchically structured to 
ensure control of the family -wise type I error rate at the 0.05 level.  Hypothesis tests for secondary 
endpoints will be based on null hypotheses that assume no a priori  differences between placebo and 
levoketoconazole treatments.  All seconda ry endpoints will be analyzed using the ITT population (primary 
analyses ) and the PP population (supportive analyses ). 
Changes from Baseline (RW0) in mUFC and LNSC during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase will be 
analyzed using repeated measures mixe d effect s models with fixed effect terms for treatment group, 
subject cohort, time (i.e. visit) and treatment- by-time interaction, with Baseline value as a covariate and 
subject as a random effect. The treatment groups will be compared using least squares mean differences 
between treatment groups and associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for each time point will be derived from the model.  Two-sample t-tests will also be performed to compare the two treatment groups 
for the mean change from Baseline to each nominal visit  during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase .   
Normalization of mUFC at RES2 will be calculated for each treatment group and presented as shift tables 
from RW5 to RES2 using three strata of mUFC status : at or below ULN, more than ULN and no more 
than 1.5X ULN, above 1.5X  ULN.  
The n umber and proportion of subjects with normaliz ation  of mUFC (at or below ULN) at the end of the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase (RW5) will be summarized for each treatment group and c ompared using 
Fisher’s Exact test (with corresponding 95% CIs) .  
Changes and percentage change s from Baseline (RW0) in the biomarkers of CS comorbidities (fasting 
glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA -IR, Hb1Ac, total cholesterol , LDL -C, and hsCRP) during the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase will be summarized by treatment group and time point and 
assessed using two -sample t -test comparison at each visit  in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  For CS 
comorbidities measured at more than one visit after RW0 during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, 
changes from Baseline during the Randomized Withdraw Phase will also be analyzed using repeat ed 
measures mixed effect s models.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 31 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Changes from Baseline (RW0) in health -related QoL, symptoms of depre ssion, acne, hirsutism and 
peripheral edema during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase will be summarized by 
treatment group and time point and mean changes from Baseline assessed using two- sample t -test 
comparison at the end of the  Randomized Withdrawal Phase . 
Safety Analyses:  Safety assessments, including AEs, vital signs, ECGs (inclusive of QTc), laboratory 
parameters, and physical examination results will be summarized descriptively by study phase and/or by 
time point, as applicable . 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 32 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
SPONSOR APPROVAL ....................................................................................................................... 15  
INVESTIGATOR AGREEME NT ....................................................................................................... 16  
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS ..................................................................................................................... 17  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ...................................................................................................................... 32  
TABLE OF TABLES ............................................................................................................................ 34  
TABLE OF FIGURES  .......................................................................................................................... 35  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  ......................................................... 36  
1 INTRODUCTION  ............................................................................................................ 39  
1.1 DISEASE BACKGROUND  ............................................................................................................. 39  
1.2 RATION ALE FOR STUDY DESIGN  ................................................................................................. 41  
2 OBJECTIVES .................................................................................................................. 43  
2.1 PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  ................................................................................................................. 43  
2.2 SECONDAR Y OBJECTIVES  ........................................................................................................... 43  
2.3 EXPLORATORY OBJECTIVES  ....................................................................................................... 43  
3 ENDPOINTS .................................................................................................................... 44  
3.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT  .................................................................................................................. 44  
3.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  ............................................................................................................ 44  
3.3 PHARMACOKINETIC ENDPOINTS AND PHARMACOKINETIC /PHARMACODYNAMIC MODELING ......... 45  
3.4 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS  ........................................................................................................ 45  
4 STUDY DESIGN  .............................................................................................................. 46  
4.1 OVERVIEW OF STUDY DESIGN  .................................................................................................... 46  
4.2 PRE-RANDOMIZATION  ............................................................................................................... 50  
4.2.1  SONICS-Completer Cohort Screening Phase  .................................................................... 50  
4.2.2  Levoketoconazole -Naïve Cohort  ....................................................................................... 51  
4.3 RANDOMIZED WITHDRAWAL PHASE (ALL SUBJECTS ) ................................................................. 58  
4.3.1  Early Rescue Criteria and Procedures ............................................................................. 59  
4.4 DOUBLE -BLIND RESTORATION PHASE  ........................................................................................ 62  
5 SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL CRITERIA ........................................ 63  
5.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA FOR SPECIFIED SUBJECTS COMPLETING THE SONICS  STUDY  ...................... 63  
5.2 INCLUSION CRITERIA FOR ALL OTHERS : ..................................................................................... 64  
5.3 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  ................................................................................................................ 66  
5.4 WITHDRAWAL CRITERIA  ............................................................................................................ 69  
5.4.1  Withdrawal due QTc Interval Prolongation  ...................................................................... 70  
5.4.2  Withdrawal due to Suspected or Confirmed Drug -induced Liver Injury  ............................. 70  
5.4.3  Withdrawal due to Adrenal Insufficiency  .......................................................................... 72  
6 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  ............................................................. 72  
6.1 SONICS- COMPLETER COHORT  .................................................................................................. 73  
6.2 LEVOKETOCONAZOLE -NAÏVE COHORT  ....................................................................................... 73  
6.3 DEMOGRAPHIC /MEDICAL HISTORY ASSESSMENTS  ...................................................................... 74  
6.4 SAFETY AND EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS  ....................................................................................... 75  
6.4.1  Physical Examination and Assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms of CS  ................... 75  
6.4.2  Vital Signs  ....................................................................................................................... 75  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 33 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 6.4.3  12-Lead Electrocardiograms (ECG)  ................................................................................. 76  
6.4.4  Clinical Laboratory Tests ................................................................................................. 79  
6.4.5  Disease -Related Assessments  ........................................................................................... 81  
6.4.6  Situations Requiring Additional Safety Monitoring  ........................................................... 86  
6.4.7  Pharmacokinetics ............................................................................................................ 87  
6.5 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR RISK MANAGEMENT  ............................................................ 88  
6.5.1  Instructions for Subjects  ................................................................................................... 88  
6.5.2  Considerations for the Investigator  .................................................................................. 88  
6.5.3  Adrenal Insufficiency ....................................................................................................... 89  
7 LIFESTYLE AND DIETARY RESTRICTIONS  ............................................................ 90  
8 INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS  ................................................................................ 91  
8.1 DESCRIPTION OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT  ............................................................................ 91  
8.2 DESCRIPTION OF REFERENCE THERAPY  ...................................................................................... 91  
8.3 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  ................................................................................................. 91  
8.3.1  Dose Rationale  ................................................................................................................ 92  
8.3.2  Dose Titration and Maintenance (TM) Phase (levoketoconazole -naïve cohort)  ................. 92  
8.3.3  Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase ..................................................... 94  
9 DRUG SUPPLIES, DISPENSING, STORAGE AND ACCOUNTING  .......................... 95  
9.1 PRODUCT STORAGE  ................................................................................................................... 95  
9.2 INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT ACCOUNTABILITY  .......................................................................... 96  
9.3 COMPLIANCE ASSESSMENT  ........................................................................................................ 96  
9.4 TREATMENT OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT OVERDOSE  ............................................................ 96  
10 CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS  ................................................................................ 96  
10.1 PERMITTED MEDICATIONS  ......................................................................................................... 96  
10.2 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS  ........................................................................................................ 97  
10.3 MEDICATIONS TO BE USED WITH CAUTION  ................................................................................. 98  
11 SUBJECT COMPLETION A ND WITHDRAWAL  ........................................................ 99  
11.1 SUBJECT COMPLETION  ............................................................................................................... 99  
11.2 SUBJE CT WITHDRAWAL PROCEDURES  ........................................................................................ 99  
12 DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERAT IONS .................................... 99  
12.1 POPULATIONS FOR ANALYSIS  ..................................................................................................... 99  
12.2 HYPOTHESIS  ............................................................................................................................ 100  
12.2.1  Sample Size Determination  ............................................................................................ 100  
12.3 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR DATA ANALYSIS  .................................................................... 101  
12.4 STUDY COMPLETION , PREMATURE WITHDRAWAL AND MISSING DATA ..................................... 101  
12.5 FINAL ANALYSES  .................................................................................................................... 102  
12.5.1  Defin itions of Baseline  ................................................................................................... 102  
12.5.2  Safety Analyses  .............................................................................................................. 103  
12.5.3  Efficacy Analyses  ........................................................................................................... 106  
12.5.4  Pharmacokinetics Analysis  ............................................................................................. 111  
12.5.5  Pharmacodynamics Analysis  .......................................................................................... 111  
12.5.6  Subgroup Analyses ......................................................................................................... 112  
12.6 INTERIM ANALYSES AND DATA MONITORING  ........................................................................... 112  
13 ADVERSE EVENTS (AE) AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (SAE)  .................... 113  
13.1 DEFINITION OF AN AE.............................................................................................................. 113  
13.2 DEFINITION OF A SAE  .............................................................................................................. 114  
13.2.1  Disease -Related Events  .................................................................................................. 115  
13.2.2  Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI)  ....................................................................... 115  
13.3 TIME PERIOD , FREQUENCY , AND METHOD OF COLLECTING AES AND SAE S............................... 116  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 34 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 13.4 RECORDING OF AES AND SAE S ................................................................................................ 116  
13.5 EVALUATING AES AND SAE S .................................................................................................. 116  
13.5.1  Severity Rating  .............................................................................................................. 116  
13.5.2  Relationship to Study Drug  ............................................................................................ 117  
13.6 FOLLOW -UP OF AES AND SAE S ............................................................................................... 117  
13.7 PROMPT REPORTING OF SAE S TO SPONSOR  .............................................................................. 118  
14 REFERENCES............................................................................................................... 119  
APPENDIX A  TIME AND EVENTS SCHE DULES  ................................................................. 123  
APPENDIX B  LABORATORY ANALYTES  ............................................................................ 130  
APPENDIX C  STUDY MANAGEMENT AND  MATERIALS ................................................. 132  
APPENDIX D  ADMINSTRATION AND REGULATORY POLICIES ................................... 133  
APPENDIX E  PUBLICATION POLICY .................................................................................. 135  
APPENDIX F  PROTOCOL AMENDMENT(S ) ........................................................................ 136  
APPENDIX G  CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PSEUDO -CUSHING’S SYNDROME  . 137  
APPENDIX H  CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSES OF PREDIABETES AN D DIABETES .......... 138  
APPENDIX I  GUIDELINES FOR HYPERTENSION  ............................................................. 139  
APPENDIX J  CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS PROHIBITED OR TO  BE USED ONLY 
WITH PRIOR PERMISSIO N ............................................................................ 140  
APPENDIX K  SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF CONDITIONS FOR RIS K MANAGEMENT 
PURPOSES  ......................................................................................................... 148  
APPENDIX L  QUALITY OF LIFE QUESTIONNAIRE  .......................................................... 149  
APPENDIX M  ASSESSMENT OF CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOM S OF CUSHING’S 
SYNDROME  ...................................................................................................... 152  
APPENDIX N  BECK DEPRESSION INVENTORY (BDI-II)  .................................................. 156  
APPENDIX O  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON ADVERSE EVENT OF SPECIAL 
INTEREST (QTC INTERVAL, INSTRUCTIONS FOR  LIVER FUNCTION 
TEST ANORMALITIES FO LLOW -UP AND ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY)
............................................................................................................................. 158  
 
TABLE OF TABLES  
Tab
le 1 Study Design ...................................................................................... 47  
Table  2 Dosing Titration Scheme  .................................................................... 53  
Table  3 Minimum Visit -to-Visit Serial Change in Biomarker that Could be 
Considered Potentially Relevant  ......................................................... 62  
Table  4 Expected Normal 24- Hour Creatinine Excretion from Adequate Urine 
Collections  ......................................................................................... 83  
Table  5 Vital Sign Values of Clinical Importance  ......................................... 105  
Table  6 QTc Interval Values of Clinical Importance ..................................... 105  
Table 7  Time and Events Schedule for Screening Procedures  ....................... 123  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 35 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  8 Time and Events Schedule for Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase 
(levoketoconazole -naïve Cohort)  ...................................................... 125  
Table  9 Study Time and Events Schedule for Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase (Both Cohorts)  .............................................. 127
 
Table  10 Blood Pressure Classification (for Adults Over 18 Years of Age)  ..... 139  
Table  11 Recommendations for Follow -up Based on Initial Blood Pressure 
Measurements for Adults without Acute End Organ Damage  ........... 139  
Table  12 Steroidogenesis Inhibitors and Systemic Corticosteroids  .................. 141  
Table  13 Dopamine Agonists  .......................................................................... 141  
Table  14 Synthetic Progestins that Bind with Moderate to High Affinity  to 
Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) or Mineralocorticoid Receptor (MR)  142  
Table  15 Somatostatin Analogs  ....................................................................... 142  
Table  16 Weight Loss Medications  ................................................................. 142  
Table  17 Drugs Predicted to Interfere with Levoketoconazole Absorption  ...... 142  
Table  18 Drugs Whose Systemic Exposure is Predicted to be Significantly 
Increased by Levoketoconazole via CYP3A4 Inhibition  ................... 143  
Table  19 Drugs That Are Pr edicted to Reduce (Top) or Increase Significantly 
(Bottom) the Plasma Concentration of Levoketoconazole via CYP3A4 
Induction or Inhibition, Respectively and Are Prohibited  ................. 144  
Table  20 Drugs that can Cause QTc Prolongation  ........................................... 145  
Table  21  Drugs Whose Systemic Exposur e is Predicted to be Increased 
Moderately by Levoketoconazole  ..................................................... 146  
Table  22 Topical or Inhaled Steroids  .............................................................. 146  
Table  23 Other Medications Contraindicated or Relatively Contraindicated with Ketoconazole  ................................................................................... 147
 
TABLE OF FIGURES  
Figure 1  Study Design Schematics  ................................................................... 48  
 
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 36 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  
ACTH  Adrenocorticotropic hormone  
ADA  American Diabetes Association  
AE Adverse Event  
AESI  Adverse Event of Special Interest  
ALT  Alanine aminotransferase  
ANA  Antinuclear antibody  
AP Alkaline Phosphatase  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
AUC  Area under the concentration -time curve  
βhCG  Beta human chorionic gonadotropin  
BDI-II Beck Depression Inventory  
BID Twice daily  
BMI  Body mass index  
CBG  Cortisol -binding globulin  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CD Cushing’s disease  
CI Confidence Interval  
CL/F  Apparent clearance following oral administration  
Cmax Peak concentration  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CRH  Corticotropin -releasing hormone  
CRO  Clinical Research Organization  
CRP  C-reactive protein  
CS Cushing´s syndrome  
CYP  Cytochrome P450  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
DBP  Diastolic blood pressure  
DCCT  Diabetes Control and Complications Trial  
DL Dose level  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
DST  Dexamethasone Suppression Test  
EAP  Expanded Access Program  
E/T Early termination  
ECG  Electrocardiogram/electrocardiograph  
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
eGFR  Estimated glomerular filtration rate  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FSH Follicle stimulating hormone  
FT4 Free thyroxine  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GGT  Gamma -glutamyl transferase  
GR Glucocorticoid receptor  
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen  
HbA1c  Hemoglobin A1C  
HDL -C High density lipoprotein  cholesterol  
HDPE  High Densitiy polyethylene  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 37 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  
HHC  Home health care agency  
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus  
HOMA -IR Homeostatic Model Assessment -Insulin Resistance  
HPLC/MS/MS  High pressure liquid chromatography tandem mass spectroscopy  
HR Heart rate  
hsCRP  High sensitivity C -reactive protein  
IC50 Half-maximal suppression  (50% inhibitory concentration)  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International Council for  Harmonization  
IEC Independent Ethics Committee  
IFG Impaired Fasting Glucose  
IgG Immunoglobulin G  
IGT Impaired Glucose Tolerance  
IgM Immunoglobulin M  
Imax Maximal suppression of UFC  
IPSS  Inferior petrosal sinus sampling  
INR International Normalized Ratio  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IRT Interactive Response Technology  
ITT Intent -to-treat 
IUD Intrauterine device  
Ka Absorption rate constant  
LDH  Lactate Dehydrogenase  
LDL -C Low density lipoprotein  cholesterol  
LLN  Lower limit of normal  
L-N Levoketoconazole -naïve cohort (or population)  
LNSC  Late night salivary cortisol  
LSMEAN  Least Squares Mean  
MCH  Mean corpuscular hemoglobin  
MCHC  Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration  
MCV  Mean corpuscular volume  
MDRD  Modified Diet in Renal Disease  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MR Mineralocorticoid receptor  
MRI  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
mUFC  Mean of three  24-hour UFC samples  
NCI-CTCAE  National Cancer Institute Common Terminology for Adverse Events,  
NGSP  National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program  
OGTT  Oral glucose tolerance test  
OLE  Open -label extension  
OPTICS  Acronym for Study COR -2017 -OLE, an open -label extension study  
PCR  Polymerase chain reaction  
PD Pharmacodynamics  
PK Pharmacokinetics  
PP Per protocol  
PT Prothrombin time  
PTT Prothromboplastin time  
QD Once daily  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 38 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 QoL Quality of life  
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate  
QTcB  QT interval corrected using Bazett’s correction  
QTcF  QT interval corrected using Fridericia’s correction  
RBC  Red blood cell  
RES Restoration Phase  
RCV  Reference change value  
RW Randomized Withdrawal Phase  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
SBP Systolic blood pressure  
S-C SONICS -completer cohort (or population ) 
SD Standard deviation  
SONICS  Acronym for Study COR -2012 -01 
SPM  Study procedures manual  
t½ Half-life 
T2DM  Type 2 diabetes mellitus  
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
TKI Tyrosine kinase inhibitors  
TM Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase  
Tmax Time of peak concentration  
TSH  Thyroid stimulating hormone  
UFC  Urinary free cortisol  
ULN  Upper limit of normal  
V/F Apparent volume of distribution following oral administration  
WBC  White blood cell  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 39 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Disease Background  
Endogenous Cushing´s syndrome (CS) is a rare, serious and potentially lethal endocrine 
disease caused by chronically elevated cortisol .  The incidence of CS has been estimated 
to be 0.7 to 2.4  cases per million per year [Sharma 2015].  The prevalence of CS has been 
reported to be approximately 79  cases per million [ Bolland 2011].   Patients with 
incompletely controlled disease are seriously ill and have a higher mortality rate than 
age-and gender matched controls, mainly due to metabolic and cardiovascular 
complications [ Bolland 2011, Clayton 2016, Dekkers 2013, Pivonello 2016].  
Treatment options for CS include surgery,  radiation therapy and medical treatment  
[Pivonello 2015] .  Medical treatment is used to suppress excessive cortisol production or 
activity and ameliora te its clinical manifestations prior to surgery, while  awaiting the 
effects of radiation therapy  [Nieman 2015], or in cases when surgery is delayed, 
contraindicated, or unsuccessful.  As such, normalization of 24 -hour urinary free cortisol 
(UFC) is considered a reliable marker of disease remissio n [Bertherat 2016 , Bochicchio 
1995].  More recently, late night salivary cortisol (LNSC) has also been shown to reflect 
remission but is not yet considered  to be as reliable as UFC [Amlashi 2015, Findling 
2016].   Conversely, the persistence of high or only modestly reduced UFC levels argues 
for treatment failure , i.e. persistent disease.  
Ketocona zole (Nizoral®, a true racemate comprised of two enantiomers: cis-2S,4R- and 
cis-2R,4S- ketoconazole) is an antifunga l agent that  reduces adrenal steroid production via 
inhibition of mult iple steroidogenic enzymes, notably  11β-hydroxylase (CTYP11B1) and 
C17,20-lyase / 17α-hydroxylase (CYP17A1) [ Engelhardt 1991, Sonino 1987, Nizoral 
2013].  One publication has reported a direct effect of ketoconazole on ectopic 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion [ Steen 1991].   Because of these 
properties, ketoconazole  is a commonly used off -label drug for treatment of CS  in the US 
and is approved for the treatment of CS in Europe and elsewhere [ DeMartin 2006, Daniel 
2015, Castinetti 2014, Nizoral 2013 Product Insert, Ketoconazole 2014  HRA Assessment 
Report].  
Adrenal insufficiency is avoided by adjusting the dose of ketoconazole to normal ize 
cortisol production .  The most frequent adverse effects of ketoconazole are n ausea, 
vomiting, ab dominal pain and pruritus.  When used orally as a treatment for fungal 
infection, ketoconazole has been associated with acute liver injury, typically asymptomatic elevated transaminasemia.  Rarely , however , acute severe hepatotoxicity 
has been reported, leading the Food and Drug Administration (F DA) to caution that use 
of oral ketoconazole should be restricted to serious fungal infection when no suitable 
alternative exists ( Outeiro 20 16, Lo Re 2016 , FDA 2016) .  Early markers for azole-
related liver  toxicities  include  elevations in serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST ), which are recommended to be  monitored at regular 
intervals during treatment [ Ketoconazole 2014  HRA Assessment Report, Nizoral 2013 
Product Insert, Lake -Bakaar 1987, Lewis 1984].   In addition to its adverse effects on 
liver, ketoconazole has dose- related effects to prolong the ECG QT interval ( Darpo 2013) 
and is associated with numerous po tential drug-drug interactions , principally via its 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 40 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 inhibitory effects on certain cytochrome s P450 (CYPs)  responsible for xenobiotic 
metabolism (Nizoral 2013 Product Insert ). 
Cortendo AB is developing levoketoconazole, also known as COR-003, the cis-2S,4R 
enantiomer of ketoconazole, as an investigational new drug for the treatment of cortisol 
hypersecretion in CS.  It is hypothesized that levoketoconazole may prove to be both 
safer and more efficacious than ketoconazole.   Levoketoconazole has a significantly 
lower IC 50 (50% inhibitory concentration) towards key enzymes regulating  cortisol 
synthesis (11β - hydroxylase, IC 50 = 150 nM; 17-α- hydroxylase , IC50 = 48 nM) than the 
2R,4S enantiomer of ketoconazole (IC 50 = 680 nM and 1800 nM, respect ively) , thus 
potentially allowing a lower dose of drug to achieve the same efficacy [ Rotstein 1992, 
Moulder Centre, 2012]. In  rats, levoketoconazole  reduced corticosterone (the major 
glucocorticoid in rodents) more potently and effectively than either 2R,4S-ketoconazole 
or ketoconazole [ Cortendo Report 2002-02-21].  
Preclinical data suggest that levoketoconazole may pose less risk to impair hepatic 
function than ketoconazole.  Levoketoconazole  has 12 -fold higher IC 50 towards CYP7A 
(IC50 = 2.4 μM) , i.e. lower potency,  than does 2R,4S -ketoconazole (IC 50 = 0.195 μM) 
[Rotstein 1992].  CYP7A is the first and rate -limiting enzyme in the major (classical) 
liver pathway for production of bile acids, catalyzing 7α- hydroxylation of cholesterol and 
other oxysterols.  Inhibition of this enzyme can lead to functional cholestasis and 
consequent accumulation of potentially toxic metabolites such as bilirubin and xenobiotics , including ketoconazole itself.   Another property that suggests potentially 
improved safety of levoketoconazole compared to ketoconazole relates to the 
pharmacokinetics (PK) of the 2S,4R - and 2R,4S -enantiomers, which have been studied in 
humans after oral administration of ketoconazole or levoketoconazole [ Gerber 2003, 
Schindler 2003, Schwartz 2008 ].  The enantiomers of ketoconazole are present in equal 
amounts, but following ketoconazole oral administration plasma  concentrations of the 
2S,4R- enant iomer exceed those of the 2R,4S -enantiomer b y approximately 3 -fold 
[Gerber  2003], suggesting preferred extraction of the 2R,4S enantiomer by the liver.  
Assuming that liver injury is a function of hepatocyte exposure to drug, r educed hepatic 
exposure to the 2S,4R enant iomer ( i.e. levoketoconazole) would be expected to be 
associated with reduced propensity for toxicity  dose-for-dose compared ketoconazole ; 
however, there are no published studies that directly address this hypothesis . 
Levoketoconazole  has been previously a dministered to healthy volunteers and human 
subjects with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM).  Doses of levoketoconazole  over the 
range of 200 mg to 600 mg once daily (QD) for up to 14 days and 150 mg to 450 mg for 
up to 4 months were shown to be generally we ll tolerated in these studies, with an 
adverse effect profile similar to ketoconazole, including sporadic cases of elevated transaminases in the Phase 2b study in T2DM .   
The first pivotal clinical trial investigating the safety and efficacy of levoketocon azole in 
subjects with endogenous CS, Study COR -2012- 01 (aka SONICS)  is ongoing, having 
begun in 2014.  This is an open- label, single -arm study with a Screening Phase, a Dose 
Titration Phase, a 6 -month Maintenance Phase, and a 6 -month Extended Evaluation 
Phase.  SONICS enroll ed 94 subjects in total.  SONICS  is monitored by an independent 
Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB) , which reviews  all serious adverse events  (SAEs)  
and adverse events of special interest (AESI) as they are reported and meets twice yearly 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 41 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 to review all available efficacy and safety data.  At the most recent meeting in 
April  2018, with the study fully enrolled, the DSM B indicated that the SONICS study 
should continue as planned .  The current study will include subjects who have previously 
completed SONICS  as well as subjects who have not been previously exposed to 
levoketoconazole.  
Please refer to the Investigator’s Brochure for a detailed description of all prior 
preclinical and clinical studies conducted with levoketoconazole . 
1.2 Rationale for Study Design  
This study, the second  pivotal clinical trial investigating the safety and efficacy of 
levoketoconazole i n subjects w ith endogenous CS,  is a double -blind, randomized, 
placebo -controlled withdrawal following single -arm, open -label, trial of therapy with 
levoketoconazole that will assess efficacy, safety, tolerability, and PK of levoketoconazole in subjects with endogenous CS.  
Randomization and blinding are used to minimize bias es.  A blinded- treatment 
Restoration Phase , in which all subjects are returned to active treatment with their 
Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole, is included for subjects who do not requi re early 
rescue and who tolerate the 8 -week blinded, randomized withdrawal to completion.  
Masking study drug during the Restoration Phase eliminates any potential for bias 
introduction via knowledge of the treatment assignment in the Randomized -withdrawal 
Phase .  An add -on of study medication (doubling the number of tablets ingested) during 
the blinded Restoration Phase was chosen over a direct substitute of blinded medication 
(holding the number of tablets ingested constant), owing to the desire to titrat e the 
Restoration Phase medication to minimize adverse effects of rapid re- introduction of 
levoketoconazole.  Titrating from Dose Level  (DL1) during Restoration Phase could 
potentially result in functional unblinding of subjects assigned to receive 
levoket oconazole during the Withdrawal Phase.  
Two populations, or cohor ts, have been defined for analytical purposes : subjects who 
have completed all visits in SONICS  through M12 ( the final scheduled visit prior to 
safety follow -up) at any time in the past  and who have been receiving a stable 
Therapeutic Dose throughout the 12 -weeks prior to Screening, hereafter referred to as the 
SONICS -completer  cohort, and subjects who did not participate in the prior clinical study 
of levoketoconazole (COR -2012-01 aka S ONICS ), plus subjects who completed Visit 
M12 of SONICS but who have not been treated with a stable Therapeutic Dose of 
levoketoconazole throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior to Screening in the 
current study, hereafter known as the levoketoconaz ole-naïve cohort .   
There is also a  procedure- only distinction made between those who have completed 
SONICS recently (those completing within 6 months prior to screening) and distant 
completers of SONICS (those completing more than 6 months from screening) .  Distant 
completers of  the SONICS  study will need to undergo additional Screening procedures to 
confirm eligibility . 
The concept of Therapeutic Dose originates in the parent SONICS study, wherein the 
Therapeutic Dose is considered established when : (a) mean UFC  levels determined from 
a total of four adequate 24 -hour urine collections are at or below the ULN of the central 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 42 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 laboratory’s reference range , or (b) the maximum dose allowed has been reached, or (c) a 
partial UFC response  has been determined  and the maximal tolerated dose has been 
reached.   Although this definition of Therapeutic Dose shall suffice for subjects who 
complete the SONICS  study entering LOGICS, for subjects in the levoketoconazole-
naïve cohort , the definition of Therapeutic Dose w ill be restricted  to the dose of 
levoketoconazole associated with normalization of UFC ( at or below the ULN of the 
reference assay ) only.   The choice to restrict the definition of Therapeutic Dose among 
subjects in the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort  was det ermined based on the design of the 
current study —interpreting the effects of withdrawal from active drug is “cleaner” when 
the Therapeutic Dose (i.e. a prior response to therapy) is defined singularly.  
The chosen design has considered the reported experience treating CS patients with 
ketoconazole [ Castinetti 2014].  Like ketoconazole, dosing of levoketoconazole needs to 
be individualized, since therapeutic need varies considerably among patie nts.  Response 
to therap y (e.g. as determined by reduction in  UFC and improved clinical signs and 
symptoms) is equally variable and results in a wide range of effective doses, each tailored 
to an individual patient.  As such, the design of this study includes a  Dose -Titration  and 
Maintenance (TM)  Phase  for subjects in the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort , including 
subjects who completed all visits in SONICS  but who have not been treated with a stable 
Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12 weeks prior to Screening that 
will identify a Therapeutic Dose for each subject  (see Section  4.2.2 for details) .   
Post-randomization, the blinded, randomized withdrawal design employs a placebo 
comparator to establish the efficacy and safety of levoketoconazole based on the 
expectation of  loss of prior -established response upon administration of placebo, and  
maintenance of response with active treatment .  The t ime allowance —approximately 
8 weeks  (maximum 9 ½ weeks) —provided for the demonstration of loss of efficacy is 
considered adequate based on the relationship between withdrawal of ketoconazole and 
loss of efficacy, as documented in published case reports and  series.  A longer period of 
withdrawal is neither necessary nor advisable, considering the higher  risk of exposure to 
unrecognized hypercortisolemia as the withdrawal interval increases.  Withdrawal to an 
active comparator was not considered as a practical matter, in that testing for superiority or non -inferiority to an active comparator would require a very large study  size beyond 
the ability to recruit  within  a reasonable timeframe .  Because of its efficiency, t he 
randomized withdrawal design exposes a small number of subjects to placebo  compared 
with most other designs .  As an additional protection, subjects may be “rescued” with 
open -label treatment at any time prior to the completion of  the 8-week Randomized 
Withdrawal phase if the Investigator determines such rescue is  needed based on pre-
defined criteria as set forth in  Section  4.3.1.  
The enrollment of subject s who have completed the SONICS  study will allow for 
controlled assessment of the durability of efficacy of levoketoconazole beyond 1 year.   
The randomized -withdrawal design can provide an inference concerning the duration of 
drug effect based on the activ e-therapy period preceding the R andom ized Withdrawal  
phase .  Specifically, when the following conditions are met, the duration of preceding 
active therapy is inferred as the demonstrated duration of efficacy durability: (1) the 
duration of active therapy was verified; (2) the therapy was dispensed and used 
continuously (within expected normal variability in adherence), and (3) the effect of 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 43 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 active drug on the disease state was measured regularly using a validated biomarker or 
clinic al outcome.  In the current study, all subjects who have completed SONICS will 
have received levoketoconazole continuously for more than 1 year, with drug use and 
effect on UFC  and LNSC  monitored at regular intervals by the same Investigators.  
Therefore, if efficacy is demonstrated in the overall study population, and the efficacy 
trend within the SONICS -completer cohort drives the overall study population effect, it 
will be reasonable to infer that the efficacy of levoketoconazole is reliably durable for up 
to the average (or median) time of drug exposure within the SONICS -completer cohort.  
2 OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Primary Objective  
To determine the effect of withdrawing to placebo versus continuing treatment with 
levoketoconazole on the cortisol therapeutic response pr eviously established during 
open -label levoketoconazole therapy . 
2.2 Secondary Objectives  
1. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on cortisol status (inferred from mean urinary free cortisol [ mUFC] and/or late night salivary 
cortisol [LNSC]) during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and the subsequent 
Restoration Phase ; 
2. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on changes in 
biomarkers of CS comorbidities ( fasting glucose, fasting ins ulin, homeostatic 
model assessment -insulin resistance [HOMA -IR], hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c], 
total cholesterol, low -density lipoprotein -cholesterol [LDL -C], and high-
sensitivity C -reactive protein [hsCRP] ); 
3. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with place bo on changes in 
health -related quality of life (QoL) and symptoms of depression;  
4. To compare the effects of levoketoconazole with placebo on changes in acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema;  
5. To assess the safety and tolerability of levoketoconazole;  
6. To evaluate the population pharmacokinetics (PK)  of levoketoconazole in 
subjects with CS.  
NOTE: Secondary Objectives 5 and 6 are not subjects of hypothesis tests.  
2.3 Exploratory Objectives  
1. To assess changes in anti -diabetic, anti- cholesterol, anti- hypertensive, and chronic 
anti-inflammatory therapies;  
2. To describe the effect s and duration s of levoketoconazole action with respect to 
cortisol status  and clinical signs and symptoms of CS other than acne, hirsutism 
and peripheral edema ; 
3. To describe the dose- response r elationship of levoketoconazole with respect to 
safety and tolerability ; 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 44 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 4. To describe the effects of levoketoconazole on glucose tolerance among subjects 
with impaired fasting glucose  (IFG). 
3 ENDPOINTS 
3.1 Primary Endpoint  
Proportion of subjects with loss of therapeutic response to levoketoconazole upon 
withdrawing to placebo compared with the proportion of subjects with loss of 
therapeutic response upon continuing treatment with levoketoconazole.   Loss of 
therapeutic response  (i.e. relapse)  is inferred  based on mUFC from three  24-hour 
UFC measurements obtained at any visit from second through final Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase visits (RW 1 through RW5  inclusive) when :  
(1)  mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN of the  central laboratory’s  reference range, OR  
(2)  mUFC is more than 40% above the baseline ( RW0 ) value , if the RW0 value is 
above the ULN  (i.e. > 1.0X ULN)1, OR  
(3)  an early rescue criterion is met.  
3.2 Secondary Endpoints  
• Changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in mUFC  and LNSC at all post -Baseline  visits 
with these assessments through the final study visit (RES2) —applies to 
Secondary Objective 1 ; 
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC at RES2 —applies to 
Secondary Objective 1 ; 
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC at the end of Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase —applies to Secondary Objective 1 ; 
• Changes from Baseline ( RW0 ) in biomarkers of CS comorbidities (fasting 
glucose, fasting insulin, homeostatic model assessment -insulin r esistance 
[HOMA -IR], hemoglobin  A1c [HbA1c] , total cholesterol , low-density 
lipoprotein- cholesterol [LDL-C] , and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein [hsCRP ]) 
at all post -Baseline visits with these measurements through the final study visit 
(RES2 )—applies to Secondary Objective 2; 
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in health -related QoL and symptoms of depression  
at all post -Baseline visits with these assessments  through the final study visit 
(RES2) —applies to Secondary Objective 3;  
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in acne, hirsutism and periph eral edema at all post -
Baseline visits with these assessments  through the final study visit (RES2) —
applies to Secondary Objective 4; 
• Incidence and severity of  adverse events  (AEs), particularly adverse event s of 
special interest ( AESI s) during levoketoconazole open -label therapy  in the TM 
                                                
1 This category applies only to subjects who have completed SONICS, who may have a Therapeutic Dose 
established with UFC above the ULN of the reference range.  Levoketoconazole-naïve subjects must have 
UFC at or below the ULN at RW0 to qualify  for randomization.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 45 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Phase  (levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort) and during blinded therapy in the 
Randomized Withdrawal  Phase  and Restoration Phase  (both cohorts) —applies to 
Secondary Objective 5. 
3.3 Pharmacokinetic Endpoints and P harmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic 
Modeling 
• Estimates of the following PK parameters: clearance (CL/F), volume of 
distribution (V/F), absorption rate constant (K a), with associated between -subject 
variability where feasible. These parameters will be used to calculate half -life 
(t½), area under the concentration time curve (AUC) and peak concentration 
(Cmax), if feasible —app lies to Secondary Objective 6; 
• Estimates of the following pharmacodynamic  (PD)  parameters: levoketoconazole 
concentration producing half maximal UFC suppression (IC 50), maximal 
suppression of UFC (I max) and associated estimates of between -subject 
variability, if feasible. UFC concentrations in relation to dose and plasma 
exposure will be explored —applies to Secondary Objective 6. 
3.4 Exploratory Endpoints  
• Frequency of usage and changes from Baseline (RW0) in frequency of usage of 
anti-diabetic, anti -cholesterol, anti -hypertensive, and chronic anti -inflammatory 
therapies at all post -Baseline visits ; changes in corresponding biomarkers 
accounting f or changes in medication usage will also be explored —applies to 
Exploratory Objective 1;  
• Time from RW0 to first time of loss of response, when:  
(1)  mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN of the central laboratory’s reference range, OR  
(2)  mUFC is more than 40% abo ve the RW0 value , if the RW0 value is above the 
ULN  (i.e. > 1.0X ULN)2, OR  
(3)  an early rescue criterion is met —applies to Exploratory Objective 2 ; 
• Time to first normalization of mUFC beginning from RW5  (subset with mUFC 
above 1.5X ULN at RW5 )—applies to Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Time to first normalization of LNSC beginning from RW5  (subset with LNSC 
above ULN at RW5 ) —applies to Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Proportion of subjects with normalization of mUFC  at the end of Dose Titration 
and Maintenance Phase ( TM7 )—applies to Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Proportion of subjects with either normalization of mUFC or partial response (at least 50% decrease in mUFC) at the end of Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase  
(TM7 )—applies to Exploratory Objective 2;  
                                                
2 This category applies only to subjects who have completed SONICS, who may have a Therapeutic Dose 
established with UFC above the ULN of the reference range.  Levoketoconazole-naïve subjects must have 
UFC at or below the ULN at RW0 to qualify for randomization.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 46 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Proportion of subjects with normalization of LNSC at R ES2—applies to 
Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in serum cortisol and ACTH at all post -Baseline  
visits with these assessments throu gh the final study visit (RES2) —applies to 
Exploratory Objective 2;  
• Changes from Baseline (RW0) in clinic al signs and symptoms of CS excluding 
acne, hirsutism and peripheral edema at all post -Baseline visits with these 
assessments through the final study visit (RES2) —applies to Exploratory 
Objective 2;  
• Frequency and severity of common AEs and laboratory abnor malities in relation 
to dose of study drug administered at the time of the reported AE or laboratory 
abnormality —applies to Exploratory Objective 3;  
• Shifts from normality and concentration changes from Baseline (RW0) in serum 
transaminases, alkaline phosph atase ( AP), and total bilirubin  at all post -Baseline 
visits in relation to dose of study drug administered at the time of the shift or 
change —applies to Exploratory Objective 3;  
• Durations and changes in durations from Baseline (RW0) of the QTc interval in 
relation to dose of study drug administered proximal to  the measurement —applies 
to Exploratory Objective 3.  
• Change from Baseline in observed and derived glucose and insulin parameters during oral glucose tolerance test ( OGTT ) in the subset of subjects with IFG —
applies to Exploratory Objective 4 . 
4 STUDY DESIGN  
4.1 Overview of Study Design 
This is a double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled withdrawal and restoration  (or as -
needed early rescue)  study in subjects with endogenous CS  previously treated with 
single -arm, open -label levoketoconazole that will assess efficacy, safety, tolerability, a nd 
PK of levoketoconazole.  
Two populations or cohorts, are defined for analytical and procedural purposes , 
levoketoconazole- naive and SONICS -completer, defined as follows :  
Levoketoconazole -naïve cohort : Subjects who did not participate in the prior clini cal 
study of levoketoconazole (COR -2012-01, aka SONICS) plus subjects who completed 
Visit M12 of SONICS (final scheduled visit prior to safety follow -up) but who have not 
been treated with a Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12 -week period 
immediately prior to Screening in the current study.   
SONICS -completer cohort :  Limited to subjects who have completed all visits in the 
SONICS study t hrough M12 (final scheduled visit prior to safety follow -up) at any time 
prior to the current study and who have been treated with a stable Therapeutic Dose of 
levoketoconazole throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior to Screening.  (Note: 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 47 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 A stable dose is defined as a Therapeutic Dose that has been received by the subject for 
12 weeks without requiring a change in dose.)  
Subjects completing all visits in SONICS  who have not been treated with a Therapeutic 
Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior to Screening  
must  re-establish their Therapeutic Dose in the TM Phase  as part of the 
levoketoconazole- naïve cohort .  Subjects re- establishing the Therapeutic Dose via re-
titration may begin titration at their current or next hig her level most recently received at 
the discretion of the Investigator .  However, all SONICS subjects  re-titrating must follow 
the 14 -week minimum Dose Titration and Maintenance  schedule.  
Study methodology varies by cohort prior to randomization (RW0) only.  Following 
initial Screening (washout  as necessary)  and Dose Titration and Maintenance  phases , as 
applicable, t his study will be conducted in two  randomized , double-blind treatment 
phases  (a Randomized Withdrawal P hase and a Restoration Phase ).  The overall design 
and the design s for each cohort are  described and schematized in Table  1 and Figure 1 
below.  
Table  1 Study Design  
Open -label 
levoketoconazole  Therapeutic Dose established in Dose  Titration and Maintenance (TM)  Phase  
for levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort , or prior to entry into LOGICS for the 
SONICS-completer cohort  
Randomization 
(RW0)   
Blinded Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase  Levoketoconazole  at 
Therapeutic Dose  Placebo  at equivalent tablet count to 
Therapeutic Dose  
Blinded Restoration 
Phase  Placebo  added as 1 tablet twice daily  
(BID ) at RW5  then add 1  tablet every 
2 days , alternating AM and PM,  until 
the total tablet count is double the 
count at RW0  Levoketoconazole  added as 1 tablet 
BID at RW5  then add 1 tablet every 
2 days, alternating AM and PM,  until 
the total tablet count is double the 
count at RW0  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 48 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Figure  1 Study Design Schematics  
Levoketoconazole -naïve cohort  
[Levoketocona zole-naïve subjects (or re -titrations)]  
 
SONICS -completer cohort  
 
Note : RW5, the last visit of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase marks the start of the Restoration  
Phase  
NOTE: If there is a time gap between completion of Screening and  TM0 or RW0 for subjects currently 
receiving levoketoconazole, then open -label levoketoconazole should be continued between Screening 
and TM0 or RW0 to maintain the Therapeutic Dose. If rolling over from SONICS, subjects will be 
dispensed LOGICS medication starting at the  screening visit.  If entering from the expanded access 
program (EAP), subjects will stay on open -label levoketoconazole dispensed from EAP until the 
Baseline visit.  
• Screening  Phase :  For the levoketoconazole-naïve cohort, screening duration 
may last up to approximately 13 weeks  to allow for as-needed wash  out of 
Cushing’s syndrome medications . For  the SONICS -completer cohort, screening 
duration is estimated to be 2 weeks and may begin concurrently with Visit M12 ; 
see Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2  for details.   
• Dose Titration and Maintenance  Phase  (TM Phase)  [levoketoconazole-
naïve subjects and re -titrations ONLY ]:  Duration is a minimum of 
14 weeks and up to approximately 19 weeks to achieve an effective and 
tolerable dose of levoketoconazole (i.e. the Therapeutic Dose);  see 
Section  4.2.2.2  for details .  Note that subjects who completed SONICS but 
are being treated as part of the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort (see above) 
and must re -titrate, must complete at least 14 weeks of dose titration and 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 49 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 maintenance , regardless of the duration needed to re- establish their 
Therapeutic Dose according to the LOGICS definition.  
• Double -blind, Randomized Withdrawal  Phase  (RW0 -RW5 ; all eligible 
subjects) : Duration is approximately 8 weeks (maximum 9½ weeks ) to evaluate 
the efficacy and safety of continued treatment with the  established  Therapeutic 
Dose of levoketoconazole compared to withdrawal to  a matched placebo 
(administered in same regimen as  the established  Therapeutic Dose).  Early rescue 
criteria are established to provide immediate use of active medication (open -label 
levoketoconazole) at any time during this phase if the subject’s clinical condition 
warrants it ; see Section  4.3 for details . 
• Double -blind, Restoration Phase  (RW5 -RES2; all eligible subjects) :  Duration 
is approximately 8 weeks  (maximum 9½  weeks ).  To maintain  the blind and 
ensure subjects are managed at their established Therapeutic Dose, subjects will 
be additionally dosed with  either placebo or levoketoconazole until t he addition of 
tablets equals the original levoketoconazole tablet count  (i.e. total tablet count will 
be twice the tablet count of levoketoconazole at the established Therapeutic 
Dose) .  Specifically, f or those subjects randomized to placebo during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase, levoketoconazole will be added during 
Restoration  Phase , and for those subjects randomized to levoketoconazole, 
matched placebo will be added  during Restoration  Phase  see Section  4.4 for 
details .   
The longest anticipated exposure to active study medication is no more than 
approximately 38 weeks and the shortest approximately 8 weeks ; these exposure 
durations exclude any exposure in SONICS  or in an EAP .  If rolling over from SONICS, 
subjects will be d ispensed LOGICS medication during screening phase which should be 
no more than 11 (±3) days.  If entering from EAP, subjects will stay on open -label 
levoketoconazole dispensed through EAP during the screening phase which should be no more than 11 (±3) days .  The longest anticipated exposure to placebo  monotherapy  is no 
more than 9½ weeks , with provisions for earlier  rescue with active drug in case of 
decompensation .  The longest anticipated total study participat ion duration is 
approximately 51 weeks.  
Effic acy will be assessed by measuring UFC levels and other endpoints at the times 
indicated in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ). 
Blood samples for PK determination will be collected as described in Section  6.4.7.1.  
Note that the times indicated in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ) are 
indicative of potential collection times . 
Safety data will be collected at the times indicated in the Time and Events Schedule s and 
as described in Section  6.4.   
Adequate medical coverage shall  be provided by the Investigator throughout  the study 
(including nights, weekends and holidays) to ensure that prompt safety decisions can be made and appropriate medical interventions provided.  The Investigator should provide 
all subjects with instr uctions how to access the site’s medical staff reg ardless of day and 
time to obtain medical care.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 50 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 An independent DSMB will review key safety d ata throughout the study.  The DSMB 
will be c omposed  of experts in aspects of drug safety and benefit -risk assessment 
germane to the therapeutic area and the known safety issues associated with 
levoketoconazole (e.g. liver injury, QT prolongation).   
All subjects who complete the study, where completion is defined as having completed 
Visit RES2  in the Restoration Phase  OR having required use of early rescue with open -
label levoketoconazole during the Randomized Withdrawal P hase, will be eligible to 
enter an open -label extension (OLE) study  (Study COR -2017- OLE, aka OPTICS)  to 
allow  open -label treatment with levoketoconazole and assess its long-term effects on 
efficacy and safety.  Th e OPTICS  study is described in a separate protocol . Subjects who 
are not eligible for or who do not consent to participate in the OPTICS study or the EAP  
for levoketoconazole  will be promptly referred to their endocrinologist (if not the 
Investigator) for further management.  
Early rescue procedures and visit schedule will mimic those described for the  rapid 
titration during the  Blinded Restoration Phase (Section  4.4), except that therapy will be 
administered as open -label therapy,  assuming the Investigator determines open -label 
therapy with levoketoconazole remains in the best interests of the subject.  It should be 
noted that during the early rescue period, as treatment is open -label, dose adjustments 
may be made as medically indi cated.   This includes adjustments to dose levels above the 
previous therapeutic dose if required to return subject to eucortisolemia.  
4.2 Pre-Randomization  
4.2.1 SONICS-Completer Cohort Screening P hase  
All subjects on levoketoconazole  from SONICS or the EAP  must have confirmation of 
their Therapeutic Dose, as defined in the SONICS protocol,  during the Screening Phase 
to confirm cohort placement for LOGICS.   During this time, subjects will continue their 
prescribed dose of levoketoconazole to ensure continuity of treatment.  Subjects who 
have completed all visits in SONICS, through Visit M12 and have been on a stable 
Therapeutic Dose throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior to signing informed 
consent, will enter the Screening Pha se to confirm eligibility.   
For subjects who have completed SONICS within 6 months prior to screening for 
LOGICS , the Screening Phase, relying primarily on data collected during SONICS  and 
completed with data collected in LOGICS, will begin after Visit M1 2 of SONIC S 
completion and end once eligibility is confirmed.  The time from confirmation of eligibility to RW0 should be no more tha n 11 (+3) days  later (the minimum time 
requirement for Therapeutic Dose confirmation as dictated by tolerability and UFC results).  As data collected from the SONICS study will be used in this study as well, 
overlapping assessments only needs to be performed once (e.g. the same vital signs data 
may be recorded in the eCRFs for both studies).    
For subjects who  have completed SONICS more than 6  months prior  to the Screening 
Phase , the screening  procedures will mimic those for the levoketoconazole -naïve  subjects 
to confirm  eligibility for the current study  (see inclusion criteria in Section  5).  After 
eligibility  has been confirmed during the Screening Phase, subjects should proceed 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 51 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 directly to the Baseline/ Randomization Visit  (RW0).   The time between Screening and 
RW0 should be no more than approximately 11±3 days.  
4.2.2 Levoketoconazole-Naïve Cohort   
4.2.2.1  Screening Phase  for Levoketoconazole-naïve Cohort 
Following consent signature, subjects naïve to levoketoconazole receiving  previous CS 
medical therapies or other prohibited medications must enter a washout period (see 
Section  5.2) before completing the screening assessments detailed in the Time and Events 
schedule  (Appendix A ).  The Screening Phase will last up to approximately  13 weeks. 
Baseline measurements will be obtained as part of the Screening assessments; therefore, 
the time from confirmation of eligibility to TM0 (aka baseline)  should be no more than 
11 (+3) days.  Screenin g procedures completed within 3  weeks of TM0 (within 2 weeks 
for LNSC , QTc interval and liver safety tests) will be used as the T M0 value.  If 
Screening procedures were completed more than 3 weeks prior to TM0, then they will be repeated at TM0, (except for pituitary magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ), which may be 
compl eted up to 6 months prior to TM0 or RW0 ). All blood samples  (except for post 
dose PK samples ) should be obtained prior to administering the first dose of 
levoketoconazole.  
Likewise, th e final Baseline UFC specimen must  be collected close to the date of TM0  
and never  more than 6 weeks prior to TM0  (NOTE: all Baseline UFC  and LNSC  values 
must be obtained after washout of any medications (except levoketoconazole) that are known to influence cortiso l).   
If a subject does not meet the eligibility requirements described in Section  5 on initial 
Screening , they may be eligible to re -screen only if worsening of their medical condition 
has increased the likelihood that they would meet the study eligibility criteria. Such re -
screenings will be except ional circumstances, and all re -screenings require prior 
permission of the study Medical Monitor bef ore they begin.  Repeating a Screening  test 
(e.g. UFC) that has been found to be technically flawed will not be considered re-
screening. 
For subjects who have completed Visit M12 in SONICS either within 6 months or more 
than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and are NOT on a stable Therapeutic Dose 
throughout the previous 12- week period, screening procedures will mimic those for the 
levoketoconazole- naïve subjects as noted above to confirm eligibility and progress the 
subject into the TM Phase of the study as indicated in Section  4.2.2.2 .  In such cases, the 
latest available data from SONICS (e.g. Visit M12 or the Follow -up Visit) may be 
applied to the LOGICS Screening Visit . 
4.2.2.2  Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase (levoketoconazole-naïve 
cohort  only ) 
After confirmation of eligibility, subjects in the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort  (including 
subjects that completed SONICS but require re- titration)  will enter  the TM Phase.  The 
first dose of open -label therapy for this phase will be at TM0.   Subjects who did not 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 52 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 complete Visit M12 of SONICS will always begin titration at D ose Level 1 (150 mg 
BID).  
Subjects who have completed Visit M12 in SONICS  who have not been treated with a 
Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole throughout the 12 -week period immediately prior 
to Screening  must also re-establish a Therapeutic Dose and remain in the TM Phase for 
the full 14 -week period, regardless of the duration needed to  establish their Therapeutic 
Dose  for this study  (i.e. even if it takes less than 14 weeks) .  As stated earlier, t hese 
subjects are considered as part of the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort for this st udy, 
despite not being naïve to levoketoconazole in the strict sense at the time of entry in the 
current study .  Note that subjects in this category  may begin dose -titration at their current 
or most recently received  dose of levoketoconazole, rather than D ose Level 1, at the 
discretion of the Investigator.   
Dose titration will occur in increments of 150 mg over a period of approxi mately 3 to 
19 weeks to achieve an effective and tolerable dose (the Therapeutic Dose).  Dose 
increases (and decreases, as needed) will be based on subjective and objective indicators 
of medication tolerance, UFC and other cortisol measures  (see S ection  4.2.2.2.1 ).  
In exceptional situations, subjects may require additional time (i .e. greater than 19 weeks) 
to achieve the Therapeutic Dose.  These situations must be approved on a case by case 
basis by the Medical Monitor.  
Subjects  must return to the clinic at least every 14 ( ± 3) days during the TM Phase  (note: 
to allow for 4 weeks maintenance, additional time may be required in the event a dose 
change is required at TM7) .  However, several additional safety checks, which may be 
performed outside the clinic,  will also be sc heduled: (1) 5 days ( ± 2 days)  after the first 
dose (DL1)  and after dose escalations to DL2 and DL3 during the TM Phase (if needed) , 
subjects will be contacted by site pers onnel  remotely (e.g. by phone or email) to inquire 
about the subject’s condition and note any adverse events .  (2) If  the total dai ly dose is 
escalated to  750 mg (DL4) or above , subjects will be asked to return to the clinic or , 
optionally,  will be visited  by a qualified home healthcare ( HHC ) professional  for one 
extra safety evaluation to occur 5 days ( ± 2 days) after each dose escalation.  
Subjects will be advised to contact the Investigator immediately in the event of AESI -
suggestive signs or symptoms ( see Section  13.2.2) regardless o f the onset timing relative 
to a scheduled visit.  
Once the Therapeutic Dose has been reached and confirmed  from the mean of three  
adequately collected 24 -hour urine specimens for UFC measurements  (i.e. from mUFC) , 
subjects will continue that Therapeutic Dose (i.e. remain in Maintenance) until the final 
open -label study visit (Visit TM7) in the TM Phase , which shall be a minimum of 
14 weeks from TM0 . During the TM Phase (while treatment is open -label), o nce the  
Thera peutic Dose is achieved, the dose  should generally not be further adj usted  if the  
UFC levels are within normal limits .  However, the dose may be increased if medically 
necessary to maintain eucortisolemia  or decreased to address drug intolerance or AE.   
Prior to  the final open -label visit  (Visit TM7) , three  adequate 24-hour urine specimens 
will again be obtained ( NOTE : collections need not be repeated if the final open -label 
visit coincides with the initial establishment of UFC normalization) to confirm 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 53 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 maintenance of UFC norm alization  prior to randomization , denoting  UFC -eligibility for 
the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  To ensure the TM Phase  occur s within the allotted 
timeframe of no more than approximately 19 weeks, urine collections should ideally be 
made on sequential days  and prior to the actual scheduled visit for dose assessment, as 
results are needed to determine if dose escalation is required, or whether a confirmatory 
UFC is needed to establish Therapeutic Dose.  The minimum duration of this phase and 
thus establishment of the Therapeutic Dose will be no less than approximately 14 weeks , 
even among subjects who reach a Therapeutic Dose more quickly .  Randomization  
(RW0)  should occur as soon as possible after the final TM Phase  visit (TM7) and no 
more than 11 (+3) days later  unless a dose change was required at Visit TM7 .  
Regardless, in all cases, a t least 4 weeks  should elapse between reaching the Therapeutic 
Dose and RW0 to ensure tolerability  and stability (continued effectiveness) of the 
Therapeutic Dose. 
Subject s still in the TM Phase when the randomization target ( approximately 46 to 
54 subjects , depending on the observed withdrawal rate  trend in the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase ) is reached , will be offered the opportunity to join the OPTICS study 
to receive open -label treatment.  While randomization is still open, n on-responders may  
also be eligible for OPTICS only if they achieve a partial UFC response, do not expect to 
require additional medication other than levoketoconazole to control cortisol, and 
levoketoconazole is well tolerated.   Subjects must meet the OPTICS inclusion/exclusion 
criteria to be eligible . 
4.2.2.2.1  Dose Titration and Adjustment Criteria  
Levoketoconazole  will be administered BID beginning at TM0 per the titration scheme in 
Table  2 until one of the following criteria has been met:  
• Mean 24 -hour UFC levels no higher than ULN as established for the assay being used 
at a central laboratory ; 
• Highest protocol -specified dose  (i.e. DL7)  reached ; 
• Highest tolerated dose reached (in the opinion of the Investigator) . 
Table  2 Dosing Titration Scheme  
Dose Level (DL)*  Morning dosing  Evening Dosing  
DL1 150 mg  150 mg  
DL2 150 mg  300 mg  
DL3 300 mg  300 mg  
DL4 300 mg  450 mg  
DL5 450 mg  450 mg  
DL6 450 mg  600 mg  
DL7 600 mg  600 mg  
*DL0, permitted for dose reductions, is a dose of 150  mg QD administered in the evening,  except 
on the day of the in -clinic or at-home visit procedures, when the dose should be administered 
during the visit (see Section  8.3.2).  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 54 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 All subjects will be asked to collect two adequate 24- hour urine specimens  for UFC 
measurements prior to their next scheduled visit that will be used to determine the need 
for continued dose titration .  The first 24 -hour ur ine collection will be on Day 8  
(± 2 days) and the sec ond collection will be on Day 9  (± 2 days) after start of each dose 
level.  Subjects should be  asked to bring or , preferably, ship per courier service, their two 
urine collections to the clinic, as soon as possible (by approximately Day 10) for 
measurement of 24 -hour UFC leve ls from each sample.  The UFC results are needed 
prior to the next scheduled visit in order to determine the need to escalate dose. Urine 
volume and creatinine will be measured as markers of the adequacy of each collection  
(see Section  6.4.5.1  for definit ion).  Subjects will continue  their current dose of 
levoketoconazole until  the UFC results have been obtained from the central laboratory 
(expected within 2 -4 days of shipment)  and reviewed by the Investigator .  Subjects 
should be contacted as soon as feasible after the results from the two 24-hour urine 
samples are received.   Based on these  UFC  results and reported tolerability  to 
levoketoconazole, subjects will be asked to do one of the following:  
• If UFC exceeds the ULN of the central lab reference range:  Return to the clinic for 
scheduled assessments and, as applicable,  receive the first dose of drug for the next 
Dose Titration interval;  OR 
• If UFC is at or below the ULN of the central lab reference range:  Collect one 
additional 24-hour urine sample for  confirmatory UFC testing  to determine if the 
Therapeutic Dose of lev oketoconazole has been reached; Section  4.2.2.2.2 ).   
4.2.2.2.2  Determination of the Therapeutic Dose of Levoketoconazole 
When normalized UFC results  from the mean of the first two adequately collected 
24-hour urine samples  are returned , one  additional  24-hour urine sample will be 
collected and returned to the clinic for submission to the central laboratory .  The UFC 
results must be received prior to the actual scheduled visit, as they are needed to determine if dose escalation is required. The mean of the three UFC results will be used 
to determine if UFC normalization has occurred.  
A Therapeutic Dose will be considered established only when the mUFC levels are no 
higher than the ULN of the assay  (i.e. mUFC has been normalized) .  Once the 
Therapeutic Dose has been reached the subject should continue with that dose (i.e. in 
Maintenance) until the end of the TM Phase of the study  (Visit TM7) .  During the TM 
Phase (while treatment is open -label), o nce the Therapeutic Dose is achieved, t he dose 
should generally not be further adjusted if the  UFC levels  are within normal limits . 
However, the dose may be increased if medically necessary to maintain eucortisolemia or 
decreased to address drug intolerance or AE.   The Therapeutic Dose must be stable (i.e. 
fixed), with normal mUFC established,  for at least 4 weeks before a subject may  be 
eligible for the Randomized Withd rawal Phase.  
Detailed Steps for Determination of Therapeutic Dose  
• If the mean value of UFC from at least two (up to three  if indicated by the first two 
tests being no higher than ULN —see below)  adequate 24 -hour urine collections is 
greater than the ULN  of the central lab’s reference range, the subject should 
continue to dose -escalate by 150 mg approximately once every 2 weeks  until a 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 55 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Therapeutic Dose, a maximally tolerated dose, or maximally all owed dose (DL7) is 
reached .   
• If the mean value for the first two UFC test s from two adequate 24 -hour urine 
collections is at or below  the ULN from  the central lab oratory’s  reference range, the 
subject should be notified immediately and asked to begin the additional  24-hour 
urine collection  as soon as possible to confirm  a biochemical response by mUFC 
normalization .  When UFC response -confirmatory urine  sample collection is required, 
the subsequent visit should be scheduled no later than 18 ( ± 3 days ) days after the 
prior dose -escalation visit.  Investigators must ensure that the subject has an adequate 
supply of levoketoconazole to cov er the duration between visits.  Refer to the Study 
Procedures Manual (SPM) for other confirmatory urine collection -day guidelines.  
• All subjects who achieve a Therapeutic Do se, evidenced by the mean of three  UFC 
values  at or below the ULN, must complete all 7 TM Phase  visits regardless of the 
Therapeutic Dose.  Thus , the total duration of the TM Phase should not be less than 
14 weeks and should not exceed  approximately 19 Weeks.  In exceptional situations, 
subjects may require additional time (i.e. greater than 19 weeks ) to achieve the 
Therapeutic Dose. These situations must be approved on a case by case basis by the 
Medical Monitor.   
Failure to Achieve Therapeutic Dose 
If the subject has reached the highest allowed  (i.e. DL7)  or highest tolerated dose level 
and mUFC levels remain greater than the ULN of the  central labora tory’s reference 
range , the subject will be considered a non -responder, will not be eligible for 
randomization  (RW0)  and should be withdrawn from the study .  Non-responders may be 
eligible for OPTICS  only if they achieve a partial UFC response, do not expect to require 
additional medication other than levoketoconazole to control cortisol, and 
levoketoconazole is well tolerated.  
4.2.2.3  Safety Factors to be C onsidered During the Dose Titration Phase  
4.2.2.3.1  Possible Prolongation of QTc Interval 
Subjects will have electrocardiogram ( ECG ) evaluation s at Baseline (Visit TM0 ) and 
within approximately 1 to 2 hours after each monitored drug administration during the 
TM Phase , ideally  using the provided Spaulding ECG device (Section  6.4.3).  If 
persistent levoketoconazole- related QTc interval prolongation is observed ( value above 
500 msec or more than  60 msec increase from Base line TM0 ), study medication will be 
temporarily held and/or the dose level reduced .  Refer to Section  5.4.1 and Appendix O , 
where guidance to the Investigator for assessing apparently  prolonged QTc interval is 
provided in detai l. In all cases, a PK sample should be collected as close to the time of the 
event as possible .   
4.2.2.3.2  Possible Adrenal Insufficiency 
If the subject develops signs and/or symptoms of adrenal insufficiency (e.g., 
hypoglycemia, hyperkalemia, orthostatic hypotension, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain), based on further investigation (see Section  6.5.3  and Appendix O  for assessment of 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 56 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 signs and symptoms of adrenal  insufficiency ) and clinical judgment, the Investigator may  
temporarily interrupt study medication to al low resolution .  In such cases, at the 
discretion of the  Investigator, the dose will be restarted at the preceding dose level.  
When adrenal insufficiency is observed  at DL1, subjects may be prov ided a lower dose of 
150 mg QD (DL0)  following  agreement with the Sponsor.  Subjects may resume the 
Dose Titration scheme after a dose reduction at the discretion of the Investigator and 
agreement of the Sponsor.  In all cases, a PK sample should be collected as close to the 
time of the event as possible . 
4.2.2.3.3  Possible Liver Injury   
Criteria have been developed to guide the Investigator towards frequent monitoring, 
temporary drug interruption, dose reduction, rechallenge, or permanent study medication 
cessation and study withdrawal in cases when liver injury is suspected or confirmed.   
Recommendations from  the FDA  Guidance on Drug -Induced Liver Injury: Premarketing 
Clinical Evaluation ( July 2009)  have been adopted for use in this study  to monitor for 
evidence of early liver injury.  Per FDA guidance, d iscontinuation of investigational 
therapy should be considered in the case of : 
• ALT or AST above 8X ULN; 
• ALT or AST rises to above 5X ULN in less than 4 weeks or persists for over 
2 weeks ; 
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN and total bilirubin above 2X ULN or International 
Normalized Ratio (INR) above 1.5 not explained by any other cause such as viral 
hepatitis ;  
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN with new onset of or worsening of fatigue, nausea, 
vomiting, fever, rash or eosinophilia, in the absence of other evident cause ; 
• Signs and /or symptoms suggestive of hepatic dysfunction (any of the following: 
nausea, anorexia, fever, fatigue, right upper quadra nt discomfort, pruritus, dark 
urine or acholic stool) coupled with ALT and/or AST above 3X ULN and/or AP 
above 2X ULN, and/or total bilirubin  above 2X ULN in the absence of evidence 
for obstruction or Gilbert syndrome.  NOTE: An ultrasound evaluation of th e 
gallbladder and bile duct should be conducted to exclude cholestasis as the cause 
for elevated AP and/or total bilirubin . 
• Not included in FDA guidance but additionally specified for this study as a 
finding that should prompt evaluation  and possible actio n:  Subjects with ALT or 
AST above 3X ULN or AP above 2X ULN (in the absence of evidence for 
cholestasis) or total bilirubin  above 2X ULN (in the absence of evidence for 
cholestasis and except for subjects enrolled with presumed Gilbert’s syndrome) . 
The above criteria are also found in Section  5.4.2 . and Appendix O , which describes 
considerations for study withdrawal due to suspected or confirmed drug- induced liver 
injury.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 57 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 When a clinically significant liver test abnormality is observed, t he battery of liver 
screening tests  should be repeated  as soon as possible after initial determination of the 
abnormality  and thereafter at 3 - to 4-day intervals or as the clinical situation dictates.   
The need for levoketoconazole interruption will be influenced by the Baselin e (TM0 for 
levoketoconazole-naïve) liver safety test  values and the subject’s clinical condition at the 
time of the abnormal liver safety test  finding.  For example, small increases in ALT/AST 
above a subject’s Baseline concentration that are unaccompanied  by symptoms may not 
warrant any medication interruption, whereas large increases from a subject’s Baseline, 
even if not to high absolute concentrations, might warrant withholding medication 
temporarily.  Even if ALT and/or AST continue to rise slowly ( but only if  
unaccompanied by  a concurrent rise in total bilirubin  exceeding the cut -offs for study 
drug cessation/early withdrawal), asymptomatic subjects may continue to receive study 
medication uninterrupted with cautious monitoring, depending on the clinical condition.   
If ALT and/or AST levels at any time exceed 8X  ULN or if AST/ALT are 
persistently higher than 5X ULN  and are accompanied by a concurrent rise on total 
bilirubin, or if abnormal liver safety test  studies are accompanied by clinical signs 
or symptoms referable to liver injury, the study medication must be interrupted 
immediately .   
In all cases, a PK sample should be collected as close to the time of the event as possible .  
If abnormally elevated liver safety tests  return near to the subject’s Baseline while the 
subject continues to be dosed with study m edication , serial , frequent liver safety test  
measurements may be discontinued, with usual safety monitoring thereafter .   
Appropriate diagnostic evaluations and interventions should be implemented based on the 
clinical presentation of the subject and foll owing the instructions for AESI -liver safety 
test abnormality follow -up (Appendix O ).   
Rechallenge  with Study Medication  
If levoketoconazole  dosing  has been interrupted and liver safety tests  normalize , subjects 
may be re -challenged (i.e. restarted on medication at prior or lower do se) at the discretion 
of the Investigator AND following  discussion with and approval by the Medical Monitor.  
Note that rechallenge has been associated with relatively more severe liver injury among 
some patients treated with ketoconazole who interrupted medication temporarily 
(Ketoconazole 2014  HRA Assessment Report ).  Therefore, it is important to re -check 
liver safety tests within 4 days after rechallenge or earlier if the subject develops 
symptoms referable to acute liver injury and recheck them again 7 to 10 days later.  
Subjects who are uneventfully rechallenged may remain in the study with usual safety 
monitoring thereaft er. 
4.2.2.3.4  Stopping Criteria During Dose Titration and Maintenance  
Dosing with study medication will cease permanently due to any of the following 
observations:  
• Intolerability to the study medication based on the subjects’ signs or symptoms in accordance with the Investigator’s medical judgment ; 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 58 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Lack of clinically relevant response at the maximally tolerated dose, in the 
opinion of the Investigator ; 
• QTc prolongation as specified in Section  5.4.1 at 150 mg/day ; 
• Liver safety test  abnormalities as specified in Section  5.4.2 ; 
• Adrenal insufficiency at the lowest dose of stud y medication (equivalent to 
150 mg daily) —See Section s 5.4.3 and 6.5.3  for details ; 
• Any withdrawal criteria met as specified in Section  5.4. 
4.2.2.4  Dose Titration at 750 mg/day  or Above  
The safety of levoketoconazole  at doses 750 mg/day or above is less established than at 
lower daily dos es.  For this reason, in addition to the assessments that are carried out at 
each dose- escalation, subjects t hat reach total daily doses of 750, 900, 1050, and 
1200 mg/day (dose levels DL4 to DL7) will be asked to  return to the clinic or will be 
visited by a qualified HHC  professional for one extra safety evaluation 5 days (± 2 days) 
after each dose escalation to inc lude the following assessments:  AEs, vital signs, routine 
safety laboratory assessments (including liver safety tests ), ECGs  and morning serum 
cortisol levels , as outlined in Time and Events Schedule  (Appendix A ) and in 
Section  6.4.6.1 .  Subjects should  also be advised to contact the Investigator immediately 
in the event of suspected  adrenal insufficiency (see Section  6.5) or other AEs between 
high-dose titration visits .   
Consult Section  4.2.2.2.2  for determination of the Therapeutic Dose via confirmatory 
urine collection for UFC, which is the same for the high -dose range.  
4.2.2.5  Transition from Dose Titration and Maintenance (TM) Phase to 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase  
Eligibility for entering the Randomized Withdrawal Phase requires the levoketoconazole-
naïve  cohort subjects to have established and maintained a Therapeutic Dose for at least 
4weeks  as confirmed by the average of  UFC values with results received prior to the 
RW0 Visit .  Prior to  the final open -label visit  in the Dose Titration and Maintenance  
(TM) Phase (Visit TM7) , three  complete 24 -hour urine specimens will be obtained 
(collections need not be repeated if the final o pen-label visit coincides with the initial 
establishment of UFC normalization , i.e. Therapeutic Dose) to confirm UFC -eligibility 
for the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.   Randomization (RW0) should occur as soon as 
possible after the final Titration -Maintenanc e visit (TM7) and no more than 11 (+3) days 
later unless a dose change was required at Visit TM7 .  At least 4  weeks should elapse 
between reaching the Therapeutic Dose and RW0 to ensure tolerability  and stability of 
effectiveness . 
4.3 Randomized Withdrawal Phase (All Subjects) 
In order to qualify for randomization , ALL subjects must have  established and 
maintained a Therapeutic Dose for at least 4 weeks  as confirmed by the average of 3 UFC 
values with re sults received prior to the RW0 Visit.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 59 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 All eligible subjects ( from both the SONICS -completer and levoketoconazole-naïve 
cohorts ) will enter the 8 -week, double-blind Randomized Withdrawal Phase .  At this 
point in the study, SONICS -completer and levoketoconazole- naïve  cohorts are treated 
identically.  In the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, subjects will return to the clinical site 
at least  twice: on  RW3  {Day 30  (-4)} and RW5 { Day 58  (-4)} relative to the 
Randomization Visit (RW0) for safety and efficacy evaluations, to determine  if they are 
still responding to therapy ( i.e. have maintained m UFC  within normal range or, for 
certain SONICS -completer cohort subjects , within previously establis hed therapeutic 
range ) or if they have partial loss of response or relapse, as defined in Section  4.3.1.  
In addition, all subjects will complete three further visits either at-home (by a qualified 
HHC  professional ) or on -site (if qualified HHC  professional  is unavailable or not 
allowed /preferred) on RW1 { Day 10  (-2)}, RW2 { Day 20  (-2)} and RW4 { Day 40  (-2)} 
relative to Randomization (RW0).  These interim visits will be primarily for determining 
cortisol status as well as to monitor safety and tolerability associated with the possible 
withdrawal of medication. Although U FC will be the primary measure determin ing loss 
of therapeutic efficacy , cortisol status  will also be assessed through additional measures , 
including LNSC.   Partial loss of response or relapse should be confirmed by a repeat  (i.e. 
one additional ) 24-hour urine sample  (or LNSC sample) , which should be collected and 
analyzed as soon as possible  after the preliminary mUFC  value is known.  Courier 
services will be provided, as desired, to collect UFC and LNSC specimens for transport 
to the site on days when a qualified HHC professional  is not present  or if subjects prefer 
courier pickup of collected samples prior to visit  (Appendix A ).  
Early -rescue criteria are described that provide for immediate  substitution of blinded 
study drug with open -label levoketoconazole treatment directed by the study Investigator 
whenever  continued use of blinded treatment in the R andomized Withdrawal Phase is 
regarded as unacceptable owing to significant or rapid clinical deterioration .  Criteria to 
guide the Investigator  as to the possible need for early rescue medication are described in 
Section  4.3.1.   
4.3.1 Early Rescue Criteria and Procedures  
Early rescue is a key safety component of the study that is intended to protect subjects from experiencing disease -related morbidity should  they experience a documented loss of 
therapeutic effect  at any time  during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase .  It is a nticipated 
that at least several subjects who are randomized to receive placebo will require early 
rescue treatment prior to completion of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  Before 
proceeding with  early rescue, the Principal Investigator must discuss with t he Medical 
Monitor.  If early r escue is needed, such subjects will be deemed Study Completers and 
may be considered as eligible for enrollment in the long -term OPTICS study or for EAP 
if they otherwise qualify.  If early rescue is deemed appropriate  with open-label 
levoketoconazole, subjects continue in the study using Blinded Restoration Phase 
procedures described in Section  4.4. Subjects requiring rescue medication should 
complete all procedures for visit RW5  prior to entering the Restoration Phase (see 
Table  9). 
Early rescue procedures and visit schedule will mimic those described for the Blinded 
Restoration Phase  (Section  4.4), except that therapy will be administered as op en-label 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 60 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 therapy, assuming the Investigator determines  open -label therapy with levoketoconazole 
remains in the  best interests of the subject.   The rapid titration schedule used in the 
Restoration  Phase should be used to reestablish the Therapeutic Dose if a subject requires 
early rescue with open label levoketoconazole.  During early rescue, the titration w ill 
increase in 1  tablet increments every 2 days alternating AM and PM per  Table  2.  As 
treatment is open -label during early rescue, dose adjustments may be made, as medically 
indicated.   This includes adjustments to dose levels above the previous therapeutic dose if 
required to return  the subject to eucortisolemia.   Blinding to the treatment code should be 
maintained as descri bed in Section  8.3.3.1, so as not to reveal the dosing assignment 
made during Randomized Withdrawal .  If the subject and Investigator  choose to 
administer a treatment other than levoketoconazole as early rescue therapy, such 
treatment will be a dministered outside of the study (i.e. the subject must be withdrawn 
from the study at that time).   
Subjects who require and choose early rescue with open -label levoketoconazole will 
undergo RW5 procedures  (Table  9) immediately prior to administration of open -label 
drug (except ECG to be done 1 -2 hours after administration of rescue medication).   
Early rescue during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase must  be considered when a 
subject demonstrates one or more of the following  criteria at any time after 
randomization : 
1. Relapse of hypercortisolemia  (i.e. loss of therapeutic response). Defined as:  
o mUFC  from three  urine collections  that is  above  1.5X ULN  
OR 
o mUFC from three  urine collections that was above 1X ULN at Baseline 
(RW0) and increases by more than 40% above the baseline value  for 
SONICS -completer  cohort subject s. 
NOTE:  Relapse as per UFC criterion should always  trigger early rescue as soon 
as it is observed  
2. Partial loss of cortisol response . Defined as:   
o mUFC from three  urine collections that increases  from Baseline  (RW0)  to 
greater  than 1X ULN but no more than 1.5X ULN   
OR  
o LNSC that was normal at Baseline (RW0; both values ≤ULN) and 
becomes abnormal (>U LN) based on each of two LNSC collections 
obtained on different nights  
AND  
In addition to one of the above partial -loss criteria, the subject  must exhibit  
clinically significant worsening of signs and symptoms of CS, as determined 
by: 
 Clinically significant deterioration in disease -related signs or 
symptoms (using the signs and symptoms validated instrument  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 61 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 and/or physical examination ). 
OR 
 Relevant d eterioration in one or more disease- related biomarkers 
(see Table  3). 
3. In the absence of loss or partial loss of cortisol response as defined above, 
clinically significant deterioration in disease -related signs o r symptoms (using the 
signs and symptoms validated instrument  and/or physical examination) AND 
clinically relevant deteriorations in two or more  disease -related biomarkers (see 
Table  3).   
The justification for early rescue must fall under one of the three scenarios above and 
must be described in the Case Report Form ( CRF ). 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 62 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  3 Minimum Visit -to-Visit Serial C hange in  Biomarker that Could be 
Considered Potentially Relevant 
 Reference C hange  Value (RCV)* Source  
Fasting Blood Glucose1 17.9% 
(e.g. an increase from 6.1 mmol/L to 7.2 
mmol/L is an 18% change and meets the RCV threshold)  Santaguida 2005 
Fasting Insulin2 79%  
(e.g. an increase from 173 pmol/L to 310 
pmol/L is a 79% increase and meets the RCV threshold)  Borai 2013 
Potassium  10%   
(e.g. a decrease from 4.0 to 3.6 mmol/L  is a 
10% change and meets the RCV threshold) Turner 2012 
Blood Leukocytes  
(WBCs)  33.8% (e.g. an increase from 7.0 to 9.4 x10
9/L is a n 
increase of 34% and meets the RCV threshold)  Ricos 2004  
Systolic/Diastolic blood pressure  Exceeds  threshold for intervention
3  
*The analyte reference change values (or intervention thresholds) are the minimum 
within -subject, between -visit (from RW0) change values that are to be considered 
potentially relevant  for purposes of early rescue.  A value exceeding the Reference 
Change Val ue (RCV ) need not be considered clinically relevant, as such a change might 
not be predicted to be associated with clinical sequelae.  Expert interpretation is therefore 
required  beyond the minimum requirement . 
4.4 Double- blind Restoration Phase  
All subjects c ompleting the Randomized Withdrawal Phase who do not meet early rescue 
criteria, will enter the 8-week Double-blind Restoration Phase, wherein they will 
continue to receive the randomly assigned blinded treatment regimen and in addition will receive blinded restoration  study medication (placebo for those already receiving 
                                                
1  Glucose must be fasting for at least 12 hours  
2 Must be fasting for at least 12 hours.  Biological variability in serum insulin reportedly depends upon the 
state of glucose tolerance. The RCV shown reflects an intermediate RCV , between the published RCVs for 
normal glucose tolerance and impaired glucose tolerance, i.e. equivalent to that for impaired fasting 
glucose. Subjects with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or diabetes may have higher expected variability 
in fasting serum  insulin.  
3 Visit -to-visit variability is known to vary substantially between people, regardless of actual SBP or DBP.  
Therefore, a clinically relevant deterioration cannot be based on a single reference change value or other 
threshold that is applicable to all study subjects.  Clinically relevant deterioration in mean SBP or DBP should be justified by exceeding an established intra -patient range of variability in blood pressure, ideally 
established with prior values from the current study or COR -2012-01.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 63 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 levoketoconazole, or levoketoconazole for those receiving placebo), in order to restore all 
subjects to a Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole while concealing from subjects and 
study personnel the identity of study medications used during Randomized Withdrawal .    
If, in the opinion of the Investigator, an increased dose of study drug is required for 
subje cts who are unable to restore their prior cortisol control (i.e. mUFC >ULN) during 
the Restoration Phase at their prior Therapeutic Dose, those subjects should be withdrawn from this study owing to “loss of efficacy”.  Such subjects may be considered for enrollment in the long -term OPTICS study or EAP if they otherwise qualify.  
Subjects who complete all Randomized Withdrawal visits will undergo RW5 procedures 
immediately prior to administration of blinded Restoration Phase study medication 
(except ECG to be done 1 -2 hours after administration of rescue medication).   Subjects 
will return to the clinical site every 28 (± 5) days (i.e., between Visits RW5 and RES1 
and between Visits RES1 and RES2) for safety and efficacy evaluations as indicated in 
the Time and  Events Schedule  (Appendix A ).  During the Restoration Phase starting at  
Visit RW5 , approximately w eekly contact  will be made between visits  (method 
unspecified) to inquire regarding AEs, subject status and to ensure compliance with study 
medication . 
The titration with blinded restoration t herapy will begin at  RW5 with 1 tablet BID and 
will increase in 1 tablet increments every 2  days alternat ing AM and PM per Table  2 until 
the prior -established  Therapeutic Dose regimen is matched  unless the Therapeutic Dose 
is DL0 .  Thus, for illustration, a subject with a Therapeutic Dose of 300 mg BID 
(2 tablets BID) randomized to levoketoconazole during the Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase would rapidly titrate over 8 days to a total of 4 tablets BID during the Restoration 
Phase  to include the ad dition of 2 tablets BID of placebo . 
The reason for adding blinded study medication (as opposed to open -label) to the 
regimen during Restoration Phase  is to maintain  the blinded treatment assignment that 
occurred via randomization.  This eliminates the risk  of bias introduction from this 
knowledge. 
RES2 procedures will also be performed by subjects who prematurely withdraw from the 
study during Restoration Phase.  
5 SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL CRITERIA 
Cortendo will review each subject’s enrollment criteri a to ensure that subjects meet the 
eligibility criteria.  
5.1 Inclusion Criteria for Specified S ubjects Completing the SONICS Study  
Subjects who have completed the SONICS study, within 6 months of the screening visit, including those receiving open -label treatment after SONICS as part of an EAP, may be 
eligible for the study if the following criteria are met:  
1. Completed the final SONICS visit (M12) and have demonstrated maintenance of 
clinical response (partial or complete, as defined in the SONICS protocol , COR-
2012-01) on a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole for at least 12 weeks 
prior to study entry (i.e. Visit RW0) .  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 64 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 2. Able and willing to provide written informed consent prior to any study 
procedures being performed; eligible subjects must  be able to understand the 
informed consent form prior to inclusion into the study.   
5.2 Inclusion Criteria for All Others : 
The following categories of potential subject s, categorized by prior use of 
levoketocona zole, may be eligible if the following 11 inclu sion criteria are all met: 
• Naïve to levoketoconazole (defined as having never participated in SONICS);  
• Completers of SONICS visit M12 more than 6 months of the screening visit of 
the current study;  
• Completers of SONICS visit M12 within 6  months of the screening visit who 
have not been receiving  a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole for at 
least 12 weeks prior to the start of screening.  
1. Male or female and at least 18 years of age.  
2. Able and willing to provide written informed consent prior to any stud y 
procedures being performed; eligible subjects must be able to understand the 
informed consent form prior to inclusion into the study.  
3. Confirmed newly diagnosed, persistent or recurrent endogenous CS of any 
etiology,  except secondary to malignancy ( includ ing pituitary or adrenal 
carcinoma) .  Persistence will not be considered confirmed until 6 weeks or more 
post-surgery. 
The following historical evidence will be considered as sufficient to establish the cause of endogenous CS as being due to Cushing’s Dise ase (C D) (i.e. ACTH -
dependent of pituitary origin) specifically:  
• Pathological (e.g. ACTH -staining) or post -surgical confirmation of the 
diagnosis of CD (i.e. documented adrenal insufficiency post -adenomectomy 
or post -hypophysectomy) OR 
• Intermediate, normal or elevated plasma ACTH (i.e. at least  5 pg/mL 
[1.1 pmol/L] ) PLU S 
For tumors 6 mm and above by imaging:  
a. Inferior petrosal sinus sampled (IPSS) ACTH central:plasma gradient at least 2 before corticotropin -releasing hormone  (CRH ) or at least  3 
after CRH, OR in the absence of IPSS, either:  
b. Positive ACTH and/or cortisol response to CRH or desmopressin or 
combined CRH -desmopressin stimulation plus high -dose (8 mg) 
dexamethasone suppression of blood  cortisol, ideally on more than one 
occasion OR 
c. Other adequate diagnostic testing.  Such cases must be discussed with and explicitly approved by the Medical Monitor, and the specific 
diagnostic criteria used to establish the diagnosis of CD must be documented. 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 65 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 For tumors below 6 mm or not visible by M agnetic Resonance Imaging : 
a. IPSS with ACTH c entral:plasma gradient at least 2 before CRH or at 
least 3 after CRH.  
b. Other adequate diagnostic testing.  In the absence of IPSS, an 
individual might be eligible if CD was otherwise confirmed via 
adequate testing.  Such cases must be discussed with and exp licitly 
approved by the Medical Monitor, and the specific diagnostic criteria used to establish the diagnosis of CD must be documented.  
4. Elevated mean 24 -hour UFC levels at least 1.5X ULN of the normative range of 
the study’s central laboratory assay and fr om a minimum of three measurements 
from adequately collected urine; the study’s central laboratory must be used for all qualifying measurements.  NOTE: This criterion does not apply to subjects 
currently on levoketoconazole.  
5. Presence of abnormal values from  at least one of these two diagnostic test s: 
(discrepancies between test findings will not be investigated nor considered 
exclusionary)  
• Abnormal Dexamethasone Suppression Test ( DST ): Elevated 8 AM blood 
cortisol at least 1.8  µg/dL (50 nmol/L) after 1 mg de xamethasone orally at 11 
PM the evening prior with concurrent dexamethasone blood concentration greater than 5.6 nmol/ L (220 ng/dL) (results from within the 2 months prior to 
start of Screening or newly tested with results available by the Baseline Visit 
[TM0]).  If the DST cortisol is elevated and the dex amethasone  value is at least 
3.9 nmol/L  (153 ng/dL) , then the subject could qualify if at least 1 LNSC is 
greater than the ULN of the study’s central laboratory normative range (the 
study’s test kit and lab must be used for all qualifying measurements) , 
whereas a non -suppressed cortisol during DST with a dexamethasone  value of 
at least 5.6  nmol/L  (220 ng/dL)  would be required if LNSC is not done or if 
both LNSC values are low  (≤ ULN of the study’s cen tral laboratory normative 
range; the study’s test kit and lab must be used for all qualifying 
measurements ). OR 
• Elevated LNSC concentrations (at least two measurements) each greater than 
the ULN of the study’s central laboratory normative range; the study’ s test kit 
and lab must be used for all qualifying measurements.  
NOTE:  Abnormal LNSC is required among eligible subjects with estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR as determined by Modified Diet in Renal Disease 
[MDRD ] equation) above 40 and below 60 mL/min/1.73 m
2. 
NOTE:  This criterion does not apply to subjects currently on levoketoconazole.  
6. Non-candidates for CS-specific surgery , refuse surgery or  surgery will be delayed 
until after study completion  and agree to complete this study prior to surgery.  
7. If post -surgical for CS -specific surgery , then no significant post -operative 
sequelae remain and the risk of such sequelae is considered  negligible.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 66 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 8. Agree to the following minimum washout periods prior t o the Baseline Visit 
(TM0)  (as applicable):  
• Ketoconazole or metyrapone: 2 weeks;  
• Dopamine agonists: bromocriptine (2 weeks), cabergoline (8 weeks);  
• Octreotide acetate LAR, lanreotide Autogel®, pasireotide LAR: 12 weeks;  
• Lanreotide SR: 8 weeks;  
• Octreotide acetate (immediate release) or short -acting pasireotide: 1  week;  
• Mifepristone (RU 486, KORLYM®): 4 weeks;  
• Megestrol acetate or medroxyprogesterone acetate (and selected other 
synthetic progestins): 6  weeks.  
9. Females who are either of non -child be aring potential (i.e. incapable of becoming 
pregnant) , defined as : 
• Post-menopausal—age 50 or older with amenorrhea for more than  1 year or 
any age with serum follicle stimulating hormo ne (FSH) at least  23 mIU/mL  
and estradiol no more than 40 pg/ml (140 pmo l/L) OR  
• Surgically sterile —documented hysterectomy and/or bilateral oophorectomy 
or tubal ligation.  
OR 
• Females of child -bearing potential who agree to use highly effective methods 
of birth control while participating and for 2 weeks after participation has 
completed (abstinence is considered acceptable if routinely practiced).  
10. Men who, if fertile, agree to use an acceptable form of birth control, including 
abstinence if routinely practiced, while enrolled and for 2 weeks after 
participation  has completed.  
11. Able to comprehend and comply with all procedures.  
 
5.3 Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded from the study if ANY of the following criteria are met 
(NOTE: exclusion criteria  apply to and must be assessd in both cohorts ): 
1. Enrolled in SO NICS but have not completed SONICS through Visit M12 .  
2. Pseudo- Cushing’s syndrome based on assessment of the Investigator (for details 
see Appendix  G).  
3. Cyclic Cushing’s syndrome with multi -week periods of apparent spontaneous CS 
remission.  
4. Non-endogenous source of hypercortisolism, including pharmacological 
corticosteroids or ACTH.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 67 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 5. Radiotherapy of any modality directed against the source of hypercortisolism 
within the last 5 years.  
6. Treatment with mitotane within 6 months of enrollment.  
7. History of malignancy, including adrenal or pituitary carcinomas (other than low -
risk, well -differe ntiated carcinomas of thyroid, breast or prostate that are very 
unlikely to require further treatment in the opinion of the treating physician, or 
squamous cell or basal cell carcinoma of the skin).  
8. Clinical or radiological signs of compression of the opti c chiasm.  
9. Major surgery within 1 month of Screening (or within 6 weeks for pituitary 
surgery). 
10. Clinically sign ificant abnormality in 12 -lead ECG during the Screening Phase 
requiring medical intervention (may be eligible once stable, to be determined case 
by case).  
11. QTc interval above 470 msec during the Screening Phase via central reader 
interpretation.  
12. History of Torsades des Pointes, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, 
history of prolonged QT syndrome (including first -degree family history).  
13. Use of medications associated with possible, probable, or definite QT/QTc prolongation (unless subsequently washed out).  
14. Pre-existing hepatic disease (except for mild to moderate non -alcoholic fatty liver 
disease documented by imaging or biopsy and with t ransaminase values within 
allowed limits).  
15. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg) or hepatitis C -positive.  
16. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -positive.  
17. History of symptomatic cholelithiasis with intact gallbladder.  
18. History of pancreatitis.  
19. Liver safety tests during the Screening Phase as follows:  
• ALT and/or AST above 3X ULN 
• AP or Total bilirubin  above 2X ULN.  
Subjects with isolated indirect bilirubin  up to 3X ULN are presumed to have 
Gilbert’s syndrome and may be enrolled if all other liver safety tests are w ithin 
normal levels.  
20. History of documented or suspected drug- induced liver injury to ketoconazole or 
any other azole drug.  
21. Serum potassium below 4.0 mEq/L (unless subsequently corrected and stable).  
22. Abnormal free thyroxine (FT4), unless subsequently correc ted and stable for at 
least 4 weeks. Subjects with thyroid- stimulating hormone (TSH) less than the 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 68 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 lower limit of normal (LLN) and normal FT4 are potentially eligible without 
intervention.  
23. History of persis tent, uncontrolled hypertension despite medical in tervention.  
24. Hypercholesterolemia currently treated with atorvastatin, lovastatin or simvastatin and unwilling or unable to change to alternative therapy with: pravastatin, 
fluvastatin, pitavastatin or rosuvastatin (must switch statin at least 2 weeks prior 
to dosing)  or another allowed therapy .  For subjects for whom lipid reduction 
therapy is being considered, all lipid lowering drugs should be added and 
stabilized for at least 4 weeks prior to TM0 fo r the levoketoconazole- naïve cohort 
or RW0 for the SONICS -completer  cohort, as improvements in lipids are being 
assessed as an endpoint for levoketoconazole treatment in this study.  
25. More than one  hospitalization for hyperglycemia or complication of diabetes 
during the last 12 months  
26. Decreased renal function as defined by eGFR below 40 mL/min/1.73 m
2, using 
MDRD equation for eGFR.  
27. Pregnant or lactating.  
28. Body habitus preventing repeated venipuncture as required by protocol.  
29. Any other clinically significant medical condition, as determined by the Investigator  that precludes e nrollment and participation in the study through 
completion, including conditions  that would preclude the subject from being able 
to follow instructions or perform necessary procedures (for example, psychiatric instability or severe disability).  
30. History o f alcohol or drug abuse in the 6 -month period prior to Screening.  
31. Currently participating in another study or has received any investigational treatment (drug, biological agent or device) other than levoketoconazole (COR -
003), within prior 30 days or five half-lives of treatment, whichever is longer.  
32. Current use of any H2- receptor antagonists, proton -pump inhibitors, or sucralfate 
(all inhibit absorption of levoketoconazole; subjects may be allowed to enroll 
after washout).  A list of acceptable oral antaci ds will be provided; if used, 
antacids must be ingested at least 2 hours after dosing of levoketoconazole.  
33. Current use of any prohibited concomitant medication that cannot be discontinued 
safely and washed out completely prior to the Baseline Visit (TM0 or  RW0, for 
the levoketoconazole -naïve  and SONICS -completer  cohorts , respectively), 
including but not limited to the following (a more complete list is included in 
Appendix J ): 
• Weight loss medications (prescription or over the counter);  
• Acetaminophen (paracetamol) above 2 g total daily dose;  
• Strong inducers or inhibitors  of CYP3A4 enzyme system that may interfere 
with the metabolism of levoketoconazole and cannot be discontinued prior to 
first dose;  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 69 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Herbal preparations: St John’s Wort, echinacea, gingko, goldenseal, yohimbe, 
red rice yeast, danshen, silybum marianum, Asian ginseng, schissandra 
sphenanther, shankhapushi, and Asian herb mixture (Xiao chai hu tang and Salboku -to); 
• Topical or inhaled corticosteroids;  
• Carbamazepine, fenofibrate, carbenoxolone;  
• Drugs that pose unacceptable risk due to overlapping or exaggerated toxicities 
or pharmacological action due to presumed PK or pharmacodynamic interactions with levoketoconazole;  
• Genuine licorice.  
 
5.4 Withdrawal Criteria  
Subjects have the right to discontinue participation in the study at any time.  Reasons for 
withdraw al during the study may include  but are not limited  to the following:  
• Withdrawal of informed consent;  
• Safety reasons, as stipulated in Sections 5.4.1,  5.4.2 , and 5.4.3  either at the 
discretion of the Investigator or at the subject’s request (see also Section 4.2.2.3.4 ); 
• Protocol violations a t the discretion of the Sponsor;  
• Concomitant therapy that could interfere with the results of the study (the 
Investigator will report all such information on the CRFs  and decide, in 
accordance with the Sponsor, whether the subject is to be withdrawn) ;  
• Failure to achieve the Therapeutic Dose during the TM Phase;  
• Closure of randomization while still in the TM Phase . 
All study withdrawals  and their causes must be carefully documented by the Investigator 
on the CRF, and, if need be, on the AE page.  The reason for withdrawal  will be entered 
in the CRF.  All data gathered prior to withdrawal  will be made available  to the Sponsor.  
All withdrawn subjects will be asked to report to the clinic to complete the assessments at 
the end of the relevant study phase at either Visit TM7 or RW5  or RES2 , as appropriate 
(see Appendix A ).  All AEs will be  followed until resolution or at least  30 days after the 
last dose of study medication.   
Consult Section  11.2 for study additional withdrawal procedures.  
Consideration of study withdrawals due specifically to QTc interval prolongation or 
suspected or confirmed liver injury are described in Section s 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 , 
respectively.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 70 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 5.4.1 Withdrawal due QTc Interval Prolongation  
See Section  6.4.3.1  for guidance on the assessment of QTc interval prolongation, 
including gathering evidence of persistence and confirmation  of causal relationship to 
study medication .  
Persistent, Confirmed as Related QTc Prolongation During Titration and Maintenance 
Phase  
If persistent and confirmed levoketoconazole -related QTc interval prolongation greater 
than 500 msec or increase from Baseline  (TM0) more than 60 msec  is identified, an 
attempt may be made to manage it by temporarily holding the dose or dose reduction , as 
described in Section  6.4.3.1.  However, if such prolongation is observed at the lowest 
levoketoconazole dose (150 mg/day), administration of the study drug must  cease 
permanently and the subject must  be withdrawn.  In al l cases, a PK sample should be 
collected as close to the time of the event as possible . 
Persistent, Confirmed QTc Prolongation During Randomized Withdrawal Phase or 
Restoration Phase  
QTc prolongation is unexpected during these phases owing to prior establi shment of the 
Therapeutic Dose.  However, in the event of a persistent confirmed as related, QTc 
prolongation greater than 500 msec or increase from Baseline  (RW0) more than 60  msec  
is identified , blinded study medication should be temporarily held, electr olytes and other 
correctable confounding factors addressed, and QTc re- checked within 2 to 4  days.  
Consideration should also be given to cardiology referral if the prolongation is considered 
clinically urgent.  
If QTc interval prolongation does not respond  to temporary blinded study medication 
stoppage or recurs after restarting study medication, the subject should stop study medication permanently and withdraw from the study.  If the QTc interval returns to a 
normal value and remains normal, the subject may continue in the study per the usual 
visit schedule, with interim QTc interval checks added for monitoring purposes.  
5.4.2 Withdrawal due to Suspected or Confirmed Drug -induced Liver 
Injury  
Although newly recognized liver abnormalities will be less likely for subjects who have 
completed the SONICS  study than for levoketoconazole -naïve  subjects, both coho rts will 
be monitored in the same way for liver abnormalities during the Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase and the Restoration Phase .  Study withdrawal due to abnormal liver -safety tests  
will likewise be prompted using the same criteria and evaluation procedures, as described 
below .  See Section  4.2.2.3 for details describing management of suspected liver injury  
other than study withdrawal.  
Recommendations from  the FDA Guidance on Drug -Induced Liver Injury: Premarketing 
Clinical Evaluation ( May 2009) have been adopted for use in this study  to monitor for 
evidence of early liver injury .  Per the FDA guidance, discontinuation of investigational 
therapy should be considered in the case of : 
• ALT or AST above 8X ULN 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 71 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • ALT or AST rises to above 5X ULN in less than  4 weeks or persists for over 
2 weeks  
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN and total bilirubin above 2X ULN or 
International Normalized Ratio (INR) above 1.5 not explained by any other 
cause such as viral hepatitis  
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN with new onset of or worsening of fatigue, 
nausea, vomiting, fever, rash or eosinophilia, in the absence of other evident 
cause  
• Signs and /or symptoms suggestive of hepat ic dysfunction (any of the 
following: nausea, anorexia, fever, fatigue, right upper quadrant discomfort, 
pruritus, dark urine or acholic stool) coupled with ALT and/or AST above 
3X ULN and/or AP above 2X ULN, and/or total bilirubin above 2X ULN in 
the abse nce of evidence for obstruction or Gilbert syndrome.   NOTE:  An 
ultrasound evaluation of the gallbladder and bile duct should be conducted to 
exclude cholestasis as the cause for elevated AP and/or total bilirubin . 
• Not included in FDA guidance but additiona lly specified for this study as a 
finding that should prompt evaluation  and possible action :  Subjects with ALT 
or AST above 3X ULN or AP above 2X ULN (in the absence of evidence for 
cholestasis) or total bilirubin  above 2X ULN (in the absence of evidence for 
cholestasis and except for subjects enrolled with presumed Gilbert’s 
syndrome)  
Guidelines for dose interruption, follow -up and rechallenge with study medication in 
cases meeting the above criteria are found in Section  4.2.2.3 . 
Upon reporting liver -safety lab test observations as AESIs, t he Sponsor will provide 
Investigator s with suggested evaluation procedures  to determine the etiology of the 
abnormalities as outl ined in Appendix O .  While liver safety tests  may be assayed at a 
local laboratory for immediate medical intervention, simultaneous samples must  be sent 
to the central laboratory to ensure consistency of assay and interpretation.   In all cases, a 
PK sample should be collected as close to the time of the event as possible . 
Withdrawal  from  Study 
Prior to considering study withdrawal, but after interrupting use of study medication, 
subjects meeting the above criteria at any visit should be evaluated with serial (repeated) 
liver safety test  and INR evaluations and potentially additional diagn ostic evaluative 
testing to establish an etiology of the abnormalities so that the etiology might be 
determined definitively while the subject remains available for evaluation.   
If liver safety test  abnormalities  persist for more than  4 weeks following  interruption of 
study medication  or demonstrate a trend of worsening following interruption, then the 
subject should remain off study medication permanently and be withdrawn from the 
study.  The subject wil l continue to be followed post -withdrawal until resolution or near-
normalization of the laboratory abnormality that resulted in the premature study 
withdrawal.   The withdrawn subject will not be eligible to enroll in either the OPTICS  
study or the EAP program . 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 72 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 5.4.3 Withdrawal due to Adrenal Insufficiency 
Guidelines for dose interruption, follow -up and rechallenge with study medication in 
cases meeting the above criteria are found in Section  4.2.2.3 . 
If adrenal insufficiency is suspected and the subject is taking the lowest levoketoconazole 
dose of 150 mg/d ay, the subject might be exhibiting exquisite sensitivity to the cortisol -
lowering effects of levoketoconazole.  In such cases, the subject should be informed of 
the heightened risk of future occurrences of adrenal insufficiency before resuming study 
medication, with consideration given to permanent drug discontinuation. In all cases, a 
PK sample should be collected as close to the tim e of the event as possible . 
6 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
There are two cohorts  of subjects  potentially eligible  (SONICS -completer  and 
levoketoconazole-naïve) ; study methodology varies by cohort only prior to 
randomization  as outlined in Section  6.1 (SONICS -completer cohort)  and Section  6.2 
(levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort) .   
The Baseline visit for purposes of the p rimary efficacy endpoint for both cohorts is the 
first visit in the Double- blind Randomized Withdrawal Phase (RW0 ).  RW0 may 
coinci de temporally with Visit M12 (in SONICS), or  RW0 may occur after this  visit, 
depending on the specific circumstances of the subject.    
For purposes of comparing  findings from  post-Baseline safety assessments to Baseline  
findings , TM0 should be used as the Baseline if the change or finding occurs during the 
TM Phase; otherwise RW0  will serve as the Baseline.   For purposes of comparing the 
QTc interval to Baseline  for determining if an  AESI  is has occurred  the shorter QTc 
interval from  the two baselines ( TM0 and RW0 ) will serve as the QTc Baseline.   Refer to 
Section  13.2.2 for information regarding the assessment of QTc prolongation  for 
determining  AESIs . 
All subjects must meet eligibility criteria prior to randomization.  A screen failure occurs 
when a signed informed consent has been  obtained , but the subject fails to meet some or 
all eligibility criteria at the Baseline visit (Visit RW0  for the SONICS -completer  cohort 
or, Visit TM0 for the levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort .   
The exact timings of each assessment are provided in the Time and Events Schedule s 
(Appendix A ).  Detailed procedures are provided in the SPM .  The study is being 
conducted as described in Appendix C  and reported in accordance with the guidelines 
presented in Appendix D  and Appendix  E.  Any change s to the study design are managed 
in accordance with Appendix F . 
In addition to the protocol -specified procedures, at any time during the study 
appropriate medical evaluations and safety interventions should be implemented, as necessary, based on the clinical pres entation of the subject per local standa rd of 
care.  Changes  to a subject’s medical condition or concomitant therapies resulting from 
such interventions,  must be documented in the CRF as an unscheduled visit.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 73 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 6.1 SONICS-completer Cohort  
For the SONICS -complete r cohort , the study will consist of the following Phases with 
approximate timings:  
• A Screening Phase ( of approximately 2 weeks’ duration)  
• Double- blind Randomized Withdrawal Phase  (approximately  8 weeks’ total 
duration , maximum 9½  weeks ) 
• Double-blind Restoration Phase  (approximately  8 weeks’ total duration , 
maximum 9½  weeks ) 
After signing the informed consent, subjects will attend the Screening /Baseline visit to 
check eligibility and, if eligible, proceed to be randomized and complete Base line 
procedures as  detailed in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ).  Visit RW0 may 
occur concurrently with SO NICS Visit M12 or  afterward, depending on the time wh en 
the subject exited SONICS  and the availability of UFC data to confirm  that UFC 
response has been maintained .  Data from the SONICS study and assessments that 
overlap may be utilized for this study  for purposes of determining eligibility and 
establishing Baseline values  (e.g. data from vital signs may be recorded in the eCRF for 
both studies . 
NOTE:  The duration between exiting SONICS and enrolling in the current study may in 
unusual cases be more th an 6 months.  In such cases, subjects must  undergo the same 
Screening procedures as levoketoconazole- naïve cohort  to confirm eligibility .  However, 
such subjects will NOT  have to dose -titrate  if they have been receiving levoketoconazole 
therapy at their stable Therapeutic Dose throughout the 12 weeks immediately prior to 
Screening.  
6.2 Levoketoconazole-naïve Cohort 
For the levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort , the study will consist of the following Phases 
with approximate timings:  
• Screening Phase ( approximately 13 weeks’ duration  to allow for prior medication 
washout; there is no required minimum Screening  interval ). 
• Dose Titration and Maintenance  Phase ( not less than 14 weeks in total and for no 
more than approximately up to 19 weeks’  total duratio n). In exceptional 
situations, subjects may require additional time (i.e. greater than 19 weeks ) to 
achieve the Therapeutic Dose.  These situations must be approved on a case by 
case basis by the Medical Monitor .  
• Double- blind Randomized Withdrawal Phase (approximately  8 weeks’ total 
duration , maximum 9½  weeks ). 
• Double-blind Restoration Phase  (approximately  8 weeks’  total duration , 
maximum 9½  weeks ). 
After signing written  informed consent, subjects will enter the Screening Phase.  After 
performing the initial Screening assessments, subjects on previous CS therapies or other 
prohibited therapies must enter a washout period, as applicable (see Section  4.2.2) before 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 74 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 completing all Screening assessments detailed in the Time and Events Schedule s 
(Appendix A ).   
Baseline evaluations for the TM Phase will be obtained as part of the Screening 
assessments and should be conducted AFTER completion of all initial Screening 
procedures and after subjects have und ergone a sufficient washout period from previous 
CS therapies (see Section  5.2), if applicable.  Collections of LNSC  and UFC obtained 
during Screening will provide the Baseline measurements if collected within 14 days of 
receiving first dose of levoketoconazole.  NOTE: all Baseline UFC and LNSC values 
must be obtained after washout of any medications (except levoketoconazole) that are known to influence cortisol. LNSC results that are unavailable from Screening within 2 
weeks of dosing should be re -collected prior to dosing at TM0.  Results from the Baseline 
assessments are necessary to determine if the subject remains e ligible for participation in 
the TM Phase  of the study.  
Visit TM0  is the Baseline visit for the TM Phase  of the study  for purposes of establishing 
QTc interval and safety laboratory Baseline  values, as well as certain secondary efficacy 
endpoint values .  TM0  is not the Baseline for purposes of the primary efficacy endpoint.   
RW0 is the Baseline for purposes of the primary endpoint.  
At the end of the TM Phase, subjects will attend the randomization Baseline visit (RW0) 
to check eligibility and, if eligible, proceed to be randomized and complete Baseline  
procedures as  detailed in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ).  Visit RW0 may 
occur concurrently with TM7 or no more than 11 (+3) days later unless a dose change is 
required at TM7.   
6.3 Demographic/Medical History Assessments  
NOTE : Subjects who have recently completed the SONICS  study (within 6 months of 
Screening) will undergo demographic and medical history assessments to confirm 
eligibility . Historical information from all SONICS visits will be used for this purpose 
and captured in the current study database, including ECG, imaging a nd laboratory data.  
While subjects who have distantly completed the SONICS  study (i.e. more than 6 months 
since completing Visit M12) will also have historical SONICS data available for use and 
import into the current study database, they must also have a complete Screening 
assessment  with updated testing, the same as the levoketoconazole-naïve cohort.    
The following demographic characteristics  will be captured at Screening:   
• Date of birth ; 
• Gender ; 
• Race and ethnicity . 
Medical and medication history will be assessed and collected as related to the Eligibility 
Criteria in Section  5), and will include but not be limited to the foll owing : 
• Documentation of diagnosis of CS, including but not limited to evaluations for CS during the previous 6 months . 
• Documentation of current CS co -morbidities . 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 75 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Documentation of prior man agement of CS during the previous 6 months, 
including medications , diagnostic tests (including imaging),  surgical or radiation 
therapies . 
• Documentation of c linical laboratory data from  the previous 3 months , if 
available ; specifically: liver safety tests  (ALT, AST, AP, LDH, direct and total 
bilirubin), HbA1c, fasting serum glucose  and glucose following an oral  glucose 
tolerance test  (OGTT ), serum lipid panel (LDL -C, HDL -C, total cholesterol, 
triglycerides), hsCRP, urinary albumin/creatinin e ratio, and testosterone 
concentration. 
• Documentatio n of blood pressure data for the previous 3 months , if available . 
• Medication history during the previous 3 mon ths, asking specifically about  blood 
pressure, anti -diabetic, cholesterol lowering and anti -inflammatory drugs . 
• Drug and alcohol use.  
6.4 Safety and Efficacy Assessments  
6.4.1 Physical Examination and Assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms 
of CS  
Full physical examinations will be performed by a study physician at the times indicated 
in the Time and Events Schedules  (Appendix A ).  The physical examinations will b e 
inclusive of all body systems, except that genitourinary  and rectal examinations may be 
waived at the discretion of the I nvestigator,  and should include height (cm) and weight 
(kg).  Abdominal girth  (cm)  will be measured in triplicate and body habitus will be 
assessed at the times indicated in the Time and Events Schedule and as described in the 
SPM.  Body mass index ( BMI ) will be calculated based on data entered in the CRF 
during that visit.   
The examining physician or a qualified HHC  professional with training will be asked to 
complete a questionnaire related to the assessment of Clinical Signs and Symptoms of CS 
(see Appendix M ).  The person completing the Signs and Symptoms of Cushing’s 
assessments should, when possible, remain consistent for individual subjects.   The results 
will be used to quantify changes in Clinical Signs and Symptoms of CS. In cases of 
clinically significant  deterioration of clinical signs and symptoms of CS, HHC  
professionals should refer the subject back to the physician for corroboration prior to 
initiation of early rescue therapy.   
6.4.2 Vital Signs  
Vital sign measurements will include temperature, sitting systolic blood pressure ( SBP), 
sitting diastolic blood pressure ( DBP ) and heart rate (HR) at Baseline and at each visit 
throughout the study (see Time and Events Schedule s in Appendix A ).   
For proper measurement of blood pressure, the following procedures should be followed:  
• An appropriately sized cuff for the size of the subject’s arm circumference should 
be used to minimize inaccurate readings.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 76 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Subjects should not smoke  or exercise for at least  30 minutes before blood 
pressure measurement s. 
• Subjects should sit in a chair with a back support and the arm supported at heart 
level with feet flat on the floor.  
• Subject s should void prior to the measurement.  
• Blood pressure measurements will be made  in triplicate , at least 3 minutes apart,  
over approximately 10 minutes , after the subject has rested in a sitting position for 
at least  10 minutes.   
 
Heart rate will also be recorded in triplicate, also approximately 3 minutes between each assessment .  The three measurements for heart rate and blood pressure will each be 
recorded individually in the CRF and a mean value for  heart rate and blood pressure for  
that visit calculated . 
Vital sign measurements must be repeated if reported as clinically significant or if 
machine/equipment errors occur.  Not clinically significant, out -of-range blood pressure 
or HR measurements may be repeated at the Investigator’s discretion.  Any confirmed, 
clinically significant adverse change from Baseline in vital signs must be recorded as an 
AE. 
Guidelines for classification of blood pressure readings and recommendations for follow -
up of abnormal values  are provided in Appendix  I. 
6.4.3 12-Lead Electrocardiograms (ECG)  
Male patients with CS have been reported to have prolongation of the QT interval 
[Giraldi 2011].  Thus, inclusion criteria ha ve allowed for this possibility; both males and 
females with mild QTc prolongation will be allowed into the study if Baseline QTc is not 
greater than  470 msec.  The potential r isk of protracted prolongation of the QTc interval 
is the development of an arrhythmia called Torsade de Pointes.  The development of 
Torsade de Pointes in the face of QTc interval prolongation is rare, and appears to occur 
primarily when the QTc interval is particularly pr olonged and generally longer than 
500 msec or more than 60 msec above Baseline.  
Therefore, subjects with prolonged QTc intervals above 500 msec or above 60 msec 
increase over the QTc interval at the Screening  or Baseline  visit mu st not receive study 
medication until the QTc has returned to a value no more than  500 msec or no more 
than 60 msec change from Baseline.  For purposes of comparing the QTc interval t o 
Base line, TM0 should be used as the Baseline value if the QTc prolongation occurs 
during the TM Phase ; otherwise RW0 will serve as the QTc Baseline.  If the QTc does 
not shorten sufficiently and stably, the subject will be ineligible for dosing.  Note that QTc interval is highly varia ble during the day, and f ood intake can transiently shorten 
QTc interval.  Nausea, vomiting, upset stomach, dizziness and electrolyte abnormalities 
(including hypokalemia/ hypo magnesemia) can also cause prolongation in the QTc 
interval.  Such factors should be considered and avoided during QTc measurements.  
Many drugs can prolong the QTc interval directly or indirectly through interference with 
the metabolism of QT-prolonging drugs.  L evok etoconazole appears to have the potential 
to prolong QTc both directly and indirectly.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 77 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 In this study, ECG monitoring is being performed at the designated times ( see Time and 
Events Schedule s in Appendix A ), using a Spaulding ECG device that acquires a 12 -lead 
ECG continuously  over a pre-programmed period  (minimum time of 1 minute to 
maximum time of 5 minutes) .  A summary of the ECG assessment will be generated  by a 
cardiologist employed by Spaulding, with the results serving as the definitive 
measurement of QTc .  Additionally, the Spaulding device will provide a real -time 
automated analysis (using the University of Glasgow diagnostic 12- lead algorithm , 
Macfarlane 2005) of the ECG that can serve as an unconfirmed  measurement  of QTc  
interval for purposes of safety monitoring.  
NOTE:  The Spaulding ECG device should be used for all assessments during the study  
unless it is non -operational,  in which case another ECG may be performed locally and 
transmitted to Spaulding for central reading via printout . 
The following procedures will apply to all ECG recordings:  
• ECGs will be obtained within approximately 1 to 2 hours after drug 
administ ration (i.e., at approximately T max of levoketoconazole)  
• No food should be consumed for a t otal of at least  2 hours prior to ECG 
acquisition, unless necessary to avoid hypoglycemia or to relieve nausea.  Food 
intake must  be recorded in the CRF.   
• ECGs will be obtained after the subject has rested in a supine position for at least  
5 minutes . 
6.4.3.1  Procedures for Evaluating and Managing Prolonged QTc Interval 
Greater than  500 Msec or More than  60 Msec Above Baseline  
If at any tim e during the study, the  Spaulding automated ECG reading indicates a QTc 
interval greater than  60 msec above  Baseline  or an absolute QTc  interval more than  
500 msec:  
• The other ECG findings and the subject ’s clinical condition must be considered to 
determine  the plan of action.  QTc prolongation that is accompanied by Torsades  
de Pointe s, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, or ECG abnormalities 
accompanied by clinical signs/symptoms of serious arrhythmia might require 
urgent intervention and inpatient monitoring; immediate cardiology consultation 
is recommended.   
• With one abnormal ECG r eading, the subject should first be questioned about : 
o Recent ingestion of food within the preceding 2 hours. If the subject has eaten, 
a repeat ECG evaluation should be conducted following a proper 2 -hour fast  
and rest .  
o The use of any other medications that may have increased QTc interval, either 
directly (via direct effect on the QTc interval ) or indirectly because of  a drug 
interaction that may have increased the concentrations of study medication  
(see Appendix J ).  If such a drug is identified, it should be stopped 
immediately.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 78 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 o Symptoms of nausea or vomiting just prior to the ECG assessment, or 
lightheadedness or similar  symptoms that may influence the QTc interval.   In 
such cases, an ECG evaluation should be repeated  once the subject's 
symptoms have abated.  Study medication may have to be withheld if the 
symptoms are protracted and the QTc interval prolongation remains evident. 
The Investigator should ensure that the symptoms as well as the ECG results 
are not due to a cardiovascular event, such as a myocardial infarction.  
• If the subject has not eaten, has no confounding medical symptoms/events,  does 
not have a concomitant medication that may be increasing the QTc interval, and 
there are no other significant abnormalities on the ECG warranting imm ediate 
medical intervention  then: 
o A repeat ECG evaluation should be undertaken within approximately 
30 minutes of the observed ECG prolongation or as soon as it is practical.  
• If the repeat ECG evaluation continues to demonstrate a QTc interval more than  
60 msec above Baseline  or an absolute value more than  500 msec,  blood sample s 
should be obtained from the subject for evaluation of electrolyte abnormalities, 
including  potassium, magnesium and calcium concentrations  and for  PK 
(levoketoconazole concentration) evaluation.  
o If electrolyte abnormalities are subsequently identified, these should be 
corrected b efore re -evaluation of the ECG.  Study medication  may be 
temporarily withheld until electrolytes can be normalized.   It is recommended 
to keep serum potassium concentration in the high -normal range.  
o If electrolytes are normal and no other cause can be identified to account for 
the absolute QTc interval above 500 msec (or above 60 msec above Baseline ), 
and the ECG evaluation on r epeat determination demonstrates  persistent QTc 
prolongation, a causal rel ationship to study medication should be assumed and 
study medication should be withheld.  If the ECG is otherwise benign, t he 
ECG should be monitored approximately once per week until resolution of the 
QTc prolongation  or until another etiology is identifi ed if the QTc 
prolongation does not correct.   
• In all cases, abnormal morphology of the ECG (especially T wave changes), if present, must  be recorded in the CRF.  
• Whenever persistent and confirmed QTc prolongation is observed  (defined 
below) , an additional PK sample should be collected as close to the time of the 
event as possible.  
Persistent, confirmed QTc prolongation   
Persistent and confirmation of QTc prolongation is  defined as follows:  
• Persistence:  An ECG repeated  (ideally ) within 30 minutes of the f irst ECG that also 
reveals  QTc prolongation . 
• Confirmation:  The Investigator should consider alternative possibilities as causative 
or contributory to the QTc prolongation as described above.  Once alternative 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 79 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 possibilities are ruled out and persistence is documented by automated interpretation, 
QTc prolongation may be considered as preliminarily confirmed for  safety reporting 
and immediate -intervention purposes.  Final confirmation of QTc prolongation, 
however, will be based on the Spaulding cardiologist over -read of the integrated 
ECG.  Final confir mation data will be used to summarize QTc findings.  
Regardless of seriousness or causality, instances of persistent , preliminarily or 
definitively confirmed  QTc prolongation should be reported to the Sponsor’s designated 
Pharmacovigilance group as an AESI within 24 hours from the time the persistence has 
been preliminarily confirmed, similar to the reporting for SAEs (see Section  13.7).  
6.4.3.1.1  Temporarily Stopping Study Medication for Prolonged QTc and 
Considerations for Restarting 
If the subject is on the lowest possible dose of study medication (150  mg/day) in the TM 
Phase and has persistent and presumed study medication -related QTc interval 
prolongation of more than 500 msec or a change from Baseline  longer than 60 msec, 
administration of the study drug will cease permanently  and the subject will be 
withdrawn .  See also Section  5.4.1  for withdrawal criteria for persistent, confirmed QTc 
prolongation.  
During any other phase of the study , or if the subject is receiving doses greater than  
150 mg/day in the TM Phase,  persistent and presumed study medication -related QTc 
changes may be managed by  temporarily withholding study medication.  Subsequen tly, if 
a confounding etiology is eventually identified,  study medication may be restarted.   
During the TM Phase , withheld s tudy medication  may be resumed at the same or lower 
dose after resolution of QT c prolongation is confirmed by two  ECG readings  and with  
prior  approval by the Medical Monitor .  After restart  of study medication , ECG 
evaluation should occur within 1 to 2 hours of  dosing, and future ECG monitoring should 
be continued per the visit schedule for increased safety monitoring . 
In all other study phases, temporarily withheld study medication for QTc prolongation 
may, in some cases, be resumed , using the same regimen, after confirmed QTc 
correction.  However, unless an etiology other than study drug has been implicated, QTc prolongation will usually result in permanent study medication discontinuation and study withdrawal (see  Sections  5.4.1 and 6.4.3.1 ). 
Additional information for evaluating and man aging prolonged QTc Interval is available 
in Appendix  O.  
6.4.4 Clinical Laboratory Tests  
Samples for clinical laboratory testing will be collected at the times indicated in the Time 
and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ).  A complete list of all the analytes is provided in 
Appendix B .  In addition to routine chemistry, hematology and urinalysis, laboratory 
analytes  will include : serum cortisol, ACTH, TSH,  FT4, prolactin , free and total 
testosterone,  coagulation measures  (prothrombin time [PT], partial thromboplastin time 
[PTT], INR ), triglycerides, lipid panel  (total cholesterol, LDL -C, HDL -C, LDL- c:HDL -C 
ratio) , fasting insulin  for calculation of  HOMA -IR, HbA1c , hsCRP , and spot urine for 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 80 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 albumin/creatinine ratio to determine microalbuminuria.  Also, in women only: FSH 
estradiol, and urine pregnancy test. Screening safety laboratory tests will also include the 
following:  HIV and antibodies against  hepatitis B and C. All scheduled testin g will be 
conducted in the fasted  state and in the morning unless stated differently in the Time and 
Events Schedule s (Appendix A ).   
Liver safety monitoring including AST, ALT, total bilirubin , LDH, GGT  and AP, will be 
performed throughout the study .  In addition, liver safety tests  should  be measured 
immediately if a subject develop s signs and symptoms suggestive of hepatic dysfu nction 
(any of the following: nausea, anorexia, fever, fatigue, right upper quadrant discomfort, 
pruritus, dark urine or acholic stool).  Nausea, anorexia, and fatigue are non -specific 
symptoms and may be caused by hypocortisolemia; however, medical evaluation of 
such symptoms must also include assessment of liver safety tests .   
6.4.4.1  Prevention of Pregnancy  
Regardless of menopausal status, all female participants  must have a negative pregnancy 
test at study visits indicated in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ).  Urine beta 
human chorionic gonadotropin (βhCG) will be assayed on site ; results of the test must be 
available before dosing can begin ( levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort ) or before 
randomization (SONICS -completer  cohort ). 
Post-menopausal is defined as age greater than 50 with amenorrhea for at least 12 
consecutive months, accompanied by elevated FSH ( at least  23 m IU/mL ) and low 
estradiol ( no more than 40 pg/m L [140 pmol/L] ) during the Screening Phase 
(Appendix B ).   
Women of child -bearing potential must agree to use an effective form of contraception 
for up to 2 weeks after study completion.  Acceptable methods include the following:  
• Male partner is sterile prior to female subject entry into the study, and this male p artner is the sole partner for that subject; or  
• Implant  of levonorgestr el inserted for at least  1 month prior to study 
medication administration but not beyond the third successive year 
following insertion  (must be replaced) ; or  
• Oral contraceptive (combi ned or progestogen only) administered for at 
least one monthly cycle prior to study medication administration  and 
throughout the study; or  
• Double barrier method: condom or occlusive cap (diaphragm or 
cervical/vault caps) plus spermicidal agent 
(foam/gel/f ilm/cream/suppository); or  
• An intrauterine device (IUD); or  
• Estrogenic vaginal ring; or Percutaneous contraceptive patches; or   
• If medical contraceptives and barrier methods are not feasible for medical 
or religious reasons, an assurance of abstinence will be deemed an 
acceptable form of contraception.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 81 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Fertile men must agree to use a double- barrier method of contraception (condom plus 
spermicide or diaphragm plus spermicide) or abstinence , if routinely practiced , while 
participating in the study and for 2  weeks after the last dose of study drug OR, the male 
subject or his female partner must be surgically sterile (e.g. vasectomy, tubal ligation) or 
the female partner must be post -menopausal.  
Reports of pregnancies in female subjects (or in female part ners of male subjects) will be 
collected after the start of dosing and until the final study visit .  Female subjects found to 
be pregnant will be withdrawn from the study.  
6.4.4.2  Action to be Taken if Pregnancy Occurs  
The Investigator will collect pregnancy information on any female subject or a male 
subject ’s partner  who becomes pregnant while participating in this study.  The 
Investigator will record pregnancy information on the appropriate form and submit it to 
the Sponsor within 24 hours of learning of the pr egnancy.  The subject will also be 
followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy.  Generally, follow -up will be no 
longer than 6  to 8 weeks following the estimated delivery date.   Premature termination of 
the pregnancy will be reported.  
All pregnancie s will be reported by the Investigator and documented per the same 
procedures as SAE.  While pregnancy will not be considered an SAE, any pregnancy 
complication or elective termination of pregnancy for medical reasons will be recorded as an AE or SAE , as indicated . 
Spontaneous abortion is always considered an SAE and must  be reported as such.  
Furthermore, any SAE accompanying and related to a post -study pregnancy, which is 
considered reasonably related to the investigational product by the Investigator, wi ll be 
reported to the Sponsor.  However, Investigators are not obligated to seek such 
information proactively from  former study participants . 
6.4.5 Disease-Related Assessments  
6.4.5.1  24-Hour Urinary Collections for Free Cortisol (UFC)  
24-hour  urine collections for determination of UFC are cr itical to drawing reliable 
inferences from this study.  Subject s should be fully informed  prior to initiating 
procedures that they will be asked to  collect 24 -hour urine samples frequently  
throughout the study, including during work days and possibly holidays . 
Please see the SPM for details on urine collection procedures. Note that, in addition to 
follow ing the lifestyle and dietary restrictions listed in Section  7, subjects should be 
instructed to avoid consuming more than  4 L/day of liquids on the day of urine 
collection s. 
Urine will be collected in the containers provided.  Subjects will be asked to provide 
either two or three  adequate 24 -hour urine c ollections , collected over  sequential days per 
the times indicated in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ) prior to the actual 
scheduled visit during the TM phase, as results are needed to determine if dose escalation is required, or whether a confirmatory UFC is needed to establish Therapeutic Dose.  If 
subjects immediately roll- over at SONICS M12, the two UFC samples collected for that 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 82 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 visit can be used (if within 6 weeks of the baseline visit) and one additional confirmatory 
sample will need to be collected for LOGICS screening  (after the informed consent form 
for LOGICS has been signed) .  The total volume of urine and urine creatinine excretion 
rates will be measured fr om the 24 -hour collections as marker s of collection adequacy,  as 
detailed below in this section. Collections judged to be inadequate may be repeated at the 
discretion of the Investigator  and/or the Sponsor; the rationale for repeat collections 
should be captured in the CRFs .   
Important: Subjects must  continue to be seen in clinic no less than approximately once 
every 2 weeks during the TM Phase  and no less than approximately once every 4 weeks  
during Randomized -Withdrawal , even if the need for repeated 24-hour urine collections 
delay s progress to a su bsequent study phase.  The time spent repeating inadequately 
collected 24 -hour urine specimens must be actively manag ed by the Investigator to 
minimize delays in progressing a subject through the study as per  the Time and  Events  
Schedules  (Appendix A ).   
For the levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort , 24-hour urine collections  for assay of UFC are 
required at Screening and throughout the TM Phase  as follows:  
• At Screening and the last visit in the TM Phase (TM7)  if applicable, subjects will 
be asked to provide a total of three adequate 24 -hour urine collections.   
• During the TM Phase , after progressing to a new dose level,  subjects will be 
asked to provide two 24-hour urine specimens  to assess the need for further dose 
titration . The first 24 -hour ur ine collection will be on Day 8  (±2 days) , relative to 
starting the dose level  (i.e. Day 1) , and the second collection will be on Day 9 
(±2 days).  Subjects will be asked to transport  or, preferably, ship via the provided 
courier service, their  urine collections to the clinic, as soon as possible after 
collection ends (ideally on or before Day 10).  Urine volume will be measured at 
the clinic  (or by HHC professional) prior to shipping to the central lab oratory .  
Aliquots of collected samples will be shipped frozen to the designated central 
laboratory for measuremen t of UFC  as soon as possible  after receipt to allow 
rapid turnaround of results to facilitate decision -making . 
 Section  4.2.2.2.1  includes additional details of the dose titration process and 
deter mination of the Therapeutic Dose.  As part of this process, an additional 
adequate 24 -hour urine collection  will be obtained to confirm if a Therapeutic 
Dose has been reached.   As described above t hree adequate 24 -hour urine 
collections will also be obtained routinely just prior to the last visit in the TM 
Phase (TM7).   
For all subjects who enter the Double- blind Randomized Withdrawal  Phase and 
Restoration Phase , either 2 or 3 24-hour urine collections  are required , depending on the 
visit,  as described in  Table  9.  For the urine collection between RW5 and RES1, subjects 
should have received  the previously achieved Therapeutic Dose of  blinded study 
medication  for at least 1 week before collections commence and complete and at least 
1 week before the RES1 visit.  For urine collections between RES1 and RES2, urine 
collection should commence at approximately Day 18 of the Restoration Phase.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 83 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Urine collections will begin after the first morning void (collection Day 1) and will be 
collected over 24 hours until the next morning, including the first void on the morning of 
collection Day 2.  Careful instructions must be provided to the subject on the process 
for proper urine collection and cold-storage of samples over 24 hours.  All supplies 
needed for proper collection and storage of urine will be provided by the Sponsor or its laboratory vendor to Investigators for distribution to subjects.  
Determining urine collection adequacy  
The total volume of urine and urine creatinine excretion rate will be measured f rom 
24-hour collections as  marker s of the adequacy of collection.   
Total urine volume should be between 400 and  4000 mL/day.  
Expected values for normal 24 -hour creatinine excretion rates up to age 70  years are 
provided in Table  4. 
Tabl e 4 Expected  Normal 24- Hour Creatinine Excretion from Adequate Urine 
Collections  
Males  1. Age 18 to 50:  18.5 mg/kg/day  
2. Age 51 to 70:  15.7 mg/kg/day  
 
Females  1. Age 18 to 50:  16.5 mg/kg/day  
2. Age 51 to 70:  11. 8 mg/kg/day  
 
In subjects over 70 years of age, creatinine excretion rates should 
be discussed on a case by case basis with the Medical Monitor.  
 
Note  that the above ranges were derived from populations of generally healthy 
individuals without kidney dysfunction. Due to the muscle wasting observed in CS and 
dependent on the length of the disease, subjects may have 24 -hour urine creatinine 
excretion rates below  the lower end of the ranges reported in Table  4 [Petersenn 2013].  
Therefore, creatinine excretion values that are somewhat below the normative value will 
be considered indicative of adequate collection when urine volume is adequate.  The 
Medical Monitor will provide guidance as to the adequacy of urine collection .  
Urinary Sample Analysis  
UFC levels from the 24 -hour ur ine collection will be assayed at a central laboratory as 
per validated methodology using high pressure liquid chromatography tandem mass 
spectroscopy (HPLC/MS/MS).   
6.4.5.2  Collection of Late-Night Salivary Samples for Free Cortisol (LNSC)  
Late night salivary samples will be collected by each subject at the times indicated in the 
Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ) for LNSC determination prior to the actual 
scheduled visit .  If subjects immediately roll- over at SONICS M12, one LNSC sample 
collected for that visit can be used (if within 2 weeks of baseline visit) and one additional 
confirmatory sample will need to be collected for LOGICS screening  (after the i nformed 
consent form for LOGICS has been signed) . Saliva collec tions must be done between 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 84 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 11 PM and midnight and following the lifestyle and dietary restrictions listed in 
Section  7.  Subjects should not sleep and subsequently awaken  within 2 hours before  
collecting the saliva sample.   
For the levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort , late night samples from 2  nights  are required  at 
Screening and  throughout the TM Phase  as follows:  
• Late night samples from 2  nights, will be collected at Screening  within 2 weeks  of 
Visit TM0  and at the end of the TM Phase (Visit TM7).  LNSC that is unavailable 
from Screening within 14 days  of schedu led dosing at Visit TM 0 should be 
recollected prior to dosing at TM0  (Appendix A ). 
For all subjects who enter the Double- blind Randomized Withdrawal  Phase  and 
Restoration Phase , late night salivary samples from 2  nights are required  as follows:  
• Late night samples from two nights, will be collected at the beginning (Baseline; 
Visit RW 0), at the end (Visit RW5 ) of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase , and at 
the end of the Restoration Phase (RES2) .  
Late-night salivary samples from a single  night ’s collection will be collected at the times 
indicated in  the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ). All samples will be analyzed 
at a central laboratory.  Details for collection an d handling of samples are provided in the 
SPM  and laboratory manual . 
6.4.5.3  Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST) (levoketoconazole-naïve 
cohort ) 
An overnight DST (1 -mg test as described below) will be performed during Screening if 
not previously performed within 2 months (up to 6 0 days) prior to the start of Screening 
Phase, to confirm eligibility for participation in the study.   The DST test is not needed at 
screening for subjects currently receiving levoketoconazole at the time of the Screening 
visit.  This test can be completed as a home visit during the Screening P hase.   To be 
considered adequate for this study, the procedure described below  must be used .  
Overnight 1- mg DST  
• A 1-mg dose of dexame thasone will be administered or ally between 11 PM and 
midnight ; 
• A blood  sample to measure serum cortisol and another to measure 
dexamethasone must be obtained at approximately 8 AM the next morning; the 
exact time of collection must be recorded in the CRF ; 
• Subjects will have nothing to drink or eat , except sips of water,  for at least  
10 hours before blood is taken . 
 
NOTE : If an LNSC sample is collected on the same night that  dexamethasone is 
administered, the LNSC sample should be taken prior to  dexamethasone administration.  
Because of the prolonged biological half -life of dexamethasone , to minimize the duration 
of Screening,  UFC and LNSC samples should  ideally  be collected just prior to dosing 
with dexamethasone (as an example LNSC can be collected at 11:00 pm on the night of 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 85 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 the day when the last UFC sample collection was complete and this could be followed by 
dosing with dexamethasone at 11:30 pm) . If collecting these samples after administering 
dexamethasone, do not collect LNSC until at least 5 days  after dexamethasone is 
administered; do not collect UFC until at least 14 days  after dexamethasone is 
administered.  
Medications that induce CYP3A4 activity or oth erwise interfere with the assay of cortisol 
may affect DST results .  Example include : barbiturates, corticosteroids, phenytoin, 
rifampin, and tetracyclines.    
6.4.5.4  Morning  Cortisol and Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone (ACTH)  
Morning serum cortisol (untimed) and ACT H levels will  be measured in all subjects  as 
described  in the Time and Events Schedule s in Appendix  A.   
6.4.5.5  Pituitary Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) 
Pituitary MRIs are not limited to subjects with a history of pituitary adenoma (e.g. CD), as this study will also assess the effects of levoketoconazole on pituitary size in subjects 
with ectopic ACTH or adrenal CS.  Pituitary MRIs will be obtained for subjects who are 
levoketoconazole-naïve or completed SONICS more than 6 months prior to s creening , if 
not previously done within 6 months of TM0  or RW0 .  For  subjects who have recently 
completed SONICS, the SONICS M12 MRI may be used.  If a pituitary MRI is not 
available, then results of a CT scan may be recorded.  
Pituitary MRIs will also be obtained for all subjects who enter the study at Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase (RW0)  [the SONICS visit M12 MRI may be used for subjects who 
completed the SONICS  Study within 6 months ] and again at Visit RW5 .  The Visit RW0 
and RW5 MRI may be performed up to 2 weeks BEFORE the visit.  The results of MRIs 
obtained during the study will be evaluated by a central reader (neuroradiologist)  and 
pituitary size determined, including measurement of tumor if one is visible . 
6.4.5.6  Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (pre -diabetic subjects with IFG  only) 
All pre-diabetic subjects (and only prediabetic subjects) with Baseline  fasting glucose 
concentrations at least  100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) but below 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) (i.e. 
with IFG)  and who are not receiving medications to lower blood glucose (i.e. 
antihyperglycemics)  will have an OGTT at the times indicated in the Time and Events 
Schedule s (Appendix A ).  Subjects with diabetes, as defined in Appendix H  will be 
excluded from the OGTT . 
After an overnight fast of at least  12 hours, subjects will be asked to drink 75 g of 
glucose.  Blood samples f or the determination of glucose and insulin  will be drawn 
before glucose administration and 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after administration.   
6.4.5.7  Quality of Life and Psychometric Assessments  
The Cushing QoL questionnaire (Webb 2008)  (Appendix  L) and the Beck Depression 
Inventory (BDI- II) (Appendix N ) instrument will be administered at the times indicate d 
in the Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ). 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 86 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 6.4.6 Situations Requiring Additional Safety Monitoring  
Additional safety monitoring will be required for the following situations.   This list is not 
intended to be an all -inclusive list of situations tha t could prompt additional safety 
monitoring.  
6.4.6.1  Dose Titration Levels 750 mg/day or Above  
If titration levels are 750 mg/day or above , subjects are required to return to the clinic or 
be seen at home by a qualified HHC  professional  for one extra safety evaluation 5 days 
(± 2 days) after each dose level escalation .  Additional safety evaluations will include the 
following assessments: AEs, vital signs, routine safety laboratory assessments ( liver 
safety tests), ECGs, and morning serum cortisol levels (see Secti on 4.2.2.4).  
6.4.6.2  QTc Prolongation 
In the event QTc prolongation occurs (as defined in Section  6.4.3.1), additiona l safety 
monitoring is required, including medical observation of the subject until the QTc 
interval has returned to a value no more than 500 msec or no more than 60 msec change 
from Baseline.  Additional evaluation of the subject, as described in Section  6.4.3.1 and 
Appendix O , will include the potential requirement for additional ECGs, laboratory 
assessments and PK samples.   Cases of persistent, confirmed QTc prolongation  should be 
reported to Chiltern  Pharmacovigilance as  AESIs (Section  13.7).  
6.4.6.3  Adrenal Insufficiency  
Subjects with suspected adrenal insufficiency should be assessed for signs and symptoms 
of adrenal insufficiency and co rtisol levels as described in Section  6.5.3 and Appendix O .  
Should mild adrenal insufficiency be deemed present, study drug should be temporarily 
discontinued .  For moderate or severe symptoms/signs, study drug will be temporarily 
discontinued and rescue glucocorticoids administered as indicated.   In all cases, a PK 
sample should be collected as close to the time of the event as possible .   
Study drug at an appropriately lower dose can be restarted once the medical situation is 
deemed sufficiently resolved by  the Investigator.  When adrenal insufficiency is observed  
at DL1, subjects may be provided a lower dose of 150 mg QD (DL0)  following  
agreement with the Sponsor.  Subjects may resume the Dose Titration scheme after a 
dose reduction at the discretion of the Investigator and agreement of the Sponsor.  Cases 
of suspected adrenal insufficiency should be reported to Chiltern  Pharmacovigilanc e as 
AESIs (Section  13.7).  
6.4.6.4  Liver Function Test Abnormalities  
Subjects with abnormal liver safety tests  as described in Section 5.4.1 will be monitored 
more intensively if they meet the criteria described.  Such monitoring consists of 
repeating the usual liver test battery and might include additional evaluations to evaluate the etiology of the suspected liver injury.  Guidance regarding temporary dose 
interrupt ion and rechallenge is found in Section 4.2.2.3   Cases of possible drug-induced 
liver injury  should be reported to Chiltern  Pharmacovigilance as AESIs (Section  13.7).    
The Sponsor will provide suggested diagnostic tests in cases that are reported as AESIs 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 87 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 (Appendix O ).  In all cases, a PK sample should be collected as close to the tim e of the 
event as possible .   
6.4.7 Pharmacokinetics 
6.4.7.1  Pharmacokinetics Sample Collection   
Blood samples (1 mL minimum) for the determination of plasma concentrations of 
levoketoconazole during a PK visit will be obtained at the following times relative to 
dosin g during the study visit per the Time and Events Schedules  (Appendix A ). 
During the TM Phase, PK samples should be drawn pre -dose and between 1.5 to 
2.5 hours afte r dosing  (i.e. at estimated T max) at TM0 and TM7 and at approximately 
6-8 hours after dosing at one interim visit (TM2 -TM6 or an additional safety visit) of the 
subject’s choosing.  The 6 -8-hour time point for PK sampling is not optional.   PK 
sampling at T M3, TM4, TM5, and TM6 could alternately be performed during additional 
safety visit s required for DL4, DL5, DL6 an d DL7 if those dose levels are needed .   
During the Restoration Phase, PK samples should be drawn pre -dose and between 1.5 to 
2.5 hours after dosing only at RES1.  
Subjects will be asked to provide the time of the last dose on the day prior to the PK 
sampling visit and to forego taking study  medication on the day of the scheduled visit , so 
that dosing can be done at the clinic .   
Actual dosing and PK sampling times can vary from nominal (i.e. ideal or scheduled) 
times.  The following time deviation windows will be allowed  for collection of PK 
samples :  
Sample timepoint  Allowed window (minutes)  
Predose  30 minutes  
1.5 to 2.5 hours  10 minutes  
6 to 8 hours  30 minutes  
 
For purposes of data entry, the actual dose administered, the actual time of drug 
administration, and the actual times of PK sample collection should  be recorded  rather 
than nominal times .   
Additional PK sampling  
To explore relationships between certain AEs (AESIs) and plasma exposure to drug, 
additional PK sampling is requested in the following situations : 
If persistent and confirmed QTc prolongation is observed, an additional PK sample 
should be collected as close to the time of the event as possible, ideally within 1 to 
2 hours of dosing (see Section  6.4.3).   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 88 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 PK samples should  also be collected in association with other A ESIs , i.e. liver test 
abnormalities considered possibly related to drug and suspected adrenal insufficiency,  as 
close to the time of the event as possible (Section  13.2.2).  
6.4.7.2  Pharmacokinetics Sample Analysis  
Sample analysis will be performed by Alturas Analytics (Moscow, Indiana USA) under 
the direction of Cortendo AB.  Concentrations of levoketoconazole (2S,4R- ketoconazole) 
in plasma will be determined using current validated methodology.  
6.5 Additional Considerations for Risk Management  
6.5.1 Instructions for Subjects  
Subjects will be instructed to always carry a card and/or other identifier (e.g. bracelet or 
pendant) t hat clearly indicates  the potential risk for adrenal insufficiency.  This card will 
include the subject’s information, contact information for the Investigator, and the 
potential need for glucocorticoids in cases of shock, surgery, and other conditions, as  
appropriate.  
Subjects should be regularly apprised  of the potential risk for adrenal insufficiency and 
be made aware of the signs and symptoms of this condition.  At any time during the study, subjects should contact the clinical site in the event of any  emerging clinical signs 
and symptoms suggestive of adrenal insufficiency .  Clear instructions should be provided 
to the subject on how to access the medical staff at the investigational site regardless of 
day or time of day.  
In addition, subjects will als o be asked to carry an emergency kit containing 
hydrocortisone or another appropriate glucocorticoid, per local medical practice, that can 
be administered immediately in case of adrenal insufficiency.  
6.5.2 Considerations for the Investigator 
Subjects in the  TM Phase will be contacted (method by subject preference) 
approximately 1 week after taking the first dose (DL1) and approximately 1 week after 
each dose adjustment  (DL0, DL2, and  DL3)  to check on subject status and ensure 
compliance with medication administration.  During the TM Phase, subjects will be asked 
to return to the clinic or will be visited by a qualified HHC  professional for one extra 
safety evaluation 5 days ( ± 2 days) afte r each dose adjustment when the total dai ly dose is 
750 mg/day or above.  
In the Restoration Phase , subjects will be contacted (method by subject preference)  
weekly between study visits.   
Throughout the study, subjects must be monitored and managed by the  Investigator for 
the following conditions  associated with CS or its treatment, per prevailing guidelines for 
diagnosis and standard s of care:  
• Diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance:  See Appendix H  for testing 
recommendations.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 89 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Hypertension :  See Appendix I  for guidelines for classification of blood pressure 
levels and follow -up recommendations.   
• Hypocortisolemia:  See Appendix K  for evaluations of signs and symptoms.  
• Hypominera locorticoidism:  See Appendix K  for evaluations of signs and 
symptoms.  
• Hypogonadism :  See Appendix K  for evaluations of changes in sexual function as 
reported by the subject.  
• Acute adrenal crisis:   Acute adrenal crisis is a life -threatening condition  that 
often occurs primarily because of mineralocorticoid deficiency ( Appendix K ).  In 
such cases, the major clinical problem is hypotension (low blood pressure or 
shock).  Adrenal crisis can result in seizures, shock, coma or death.  In patients 
treated for CS, adrenal crisis typically occurs in the setting of acute stress or 
pituitary infarction.  With pituitary infarction, glucocorticoid deficiency can 
predominate.  Note that levoketoconazole per se is not anticipated to incite acute 
adrenal crisis , as mineralocorticoid producti on is not anticipated to be affected to 
a clinically meaningful extent.  
• Adrenal insufficiency :  See the following section (Section  6.5.3 ) for assessment of 
signs an d symptoms of adrenal insufficiency and Appendix K  for evaluation of 
signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency.  
6.5.3 Adrenal Insufficiency  
All medical care providers identified by the subject, in addition to the Investigator, 
MUST be given sufficient written instructions about the potential risks of adrenal 
insuffi ciency associated with the use of cortisol synthesis inhibitors, such as 
levoketoco nazole . 
It is well recognized that subjects with a good response to treatment for CS resulting in 
decreased, but not necessarily low, cortisol concentrations may exhibit signs and 
symptom s of adrenal insufficiency ( a non- life-threatening condition) that can mimic  
those associated with  acute adrenal crisis , which is a life -threatening event  warranting 
immediate medical intervention.  Therefore, discrimination between the two conditions 
may not be readily evident by history or physical examination .  Furthermore, subjects 
may have adrenal insufficiency without abnormal cortisol concentrations, if the cortisol 
response is inappropriately low for the degree of physiological  stress being experienced . 
Symptoms attributable to adrenal insufficiency may include: nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, anorexia, malaise, fatigue, headache, arthralgias/myalgias, 
gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness (particularly upon standing), irritability, depression, 
sweating, and fever.  Signs of adrenal insufficiency are few a nd uncommonly observed, 
but postural hypotension and hypoglycemia can occur .   
Subjects should be assessed for sympt oms and objective measures relatable to adrenal 
insufficiency  as follows:  
• Random serum cortisol as close to the onset of the event as possib le (if possible 
early -morning serum cortisol) .  Laboratory evidence of hypoadrenalism  (or 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 90 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 hypocortisolism)  is defined as  morning serum cortisol level less than  3 μg/dL.  
Even if serum cortisol and/or 24-hour UFC are within the normal laboratory 
reference range, the possibility of adrenal ins ufficiency should be considered  
based on other  clinical signs and symptoms.  Please see Appendix K  for a fuller 
list of clinical signs and symptoms;  
• Random glucose and electrolytes;  
• Lying and standing (i.e. orthostatic or postural) blood pressure measurements and 
pulse to evaluate postural changes;  
• Full review of  systems.  
Should mild adrenal insufficiency be deemed confirmed or probable , study medication  
should be temporarily withheld .  For moderate or severe symptoms/signs, study 
medication  should  be temporarily withheld  and rescue corticosteroids  administered  until 
adrenal insufficiency and its underlying trigger, if one is identified, has abated and the 
subject is stable .  Study medication,  potentially administered  at a lower dose  if the eve nt 
occurs during the TM Phase , may be restarted once the clinical situation allows .  If 
adrenal insufficiency is suspected and the subject is taking the lowest levoketoconazole 
dose of  150 mg/d ay, the subject might be exhibiting exquisite sensitivity  to the cortisol -
lowering effects of levoketoconazole.  In such cases, the subject should be informed of 
the heightened risk of  future occurrences of adrenal insufficiency before resuming study 
medication , with consideration given to permanent drug discontinuation.  
All cases of suspected adrenal  insufficiency , whether  eventually considered to be drug-
related  or not , should be reported as AESIs to Chiltern  Pharmacovigilance (Section  13.7).  
7 LIFESTYLE AND DIETARY RESTRICTIONS 
Subjects must follow these lifestyle and dietary restrictions throughout the study.  
• Consumption of grapefruit, lime juice and Seville oranges (aka sour orange, 
bigarade orange, or marmalade orange)  and its products should be avoided;  
• Genuine licorice (not the same as licorice- flavored candy) should be avoided  or 
consumed in small amounts infrequently ;  
• Consumption of excessive alcohol should be avoided  (note: there is no known 
safe amount in relation to use of levoketocona zole) ; 
• Donation of blood or blood products is prohibited during the study.  
Subjects must follow the following lifestyle and dietary restrictions for study -specific 
assessments.  
• During the 24-hour urine collection  period, subjects must refrain  from the 
following:  
o Drinking  more than 1 gallon or 4 liters  of fluids  
o Use of medicines or other products containing  corticosteroids , whether 
administered topically (e.g. drops, creams), inhaled, or ingested.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 91 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • On the nights that samples are collected for LNSC , subjects must refrain from 
the following:  
o Within 2 hours prior to  the collection:  
 Brushing or flossing teeth or doing anything that could induce 
bleeding of the gums  
 Sleeping and subsequently awakening  
o Within 1 hour  prior to  the collection:  
 Eating or drinking or chewing anything (including tobacco)  
 Using any facial creams or lotions  
 Smoking cigarettes, pipe, cigar or any other substance.  
 
Information on each subject’s job related working shift and sleep hours will be collected.  
8 INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS 
8.1 Description of Investigational Product  
Levoketoconazole  will be provided as 150- mg immediate release tablets  for oral 
administration .  The tablets will be 3/8” round, biconvex, and unmarked with a pink film 
coat and supplied in foil induction sealed High Density P olyethylene (HDPE) bottles. 
Refer to the Pharmacy Manual for details of label ing of the investigational product.  
8.2 Description of Reference Therapy  
An active reference therapy will not be used.  Placebo tablets will be supplied to ensure 
adequate concealment  of study treatments during  the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and 
Restoration P hase.  
Placebo tablets  identical in appearance to levoketoconazole will be administered during 
the Randomized Withdrawal Phase using the same regimen as the Therapeutic Dose of 
levoketoconazole established during the TM Phase ( levoketoconazole- naïve  cohort ) or at 
study entry (SONICS -completer cohort) .  During the Restoration Phase , blinded placebo 
to be added onto a levoketoconazole regimen will be started at 1 tablet BID and titrated 
every 2  days in 1 tablet increments per Table  2 until the Therapeutic Dose- equivalent is 
achieved  unless the Therapeutic Dose is DL0 .  The total final tablet count (active + 
placebo) during Restoration Phase  will equal twice the total tablet count of the 
Therapeutic Dose, not to exceed 8 tablets BID . 
8.3 Dosage and Administration 
Levoketoconazole  or placebo  tablets  will be administe red BID, approximately every 
12 hours, per the titration scheme described in Section  4.2.2.2 .  For the levoketoconazole -
naïve cohort , the total daily dose will be titrated in 150 mg incremen ts from a starting 
dose of 300 mg (dosed as 150 mg BID) up to a maximal daily dose of 1200 mg (dosed as 600 mg BID) until a Therapeutic Dose is established.  The minimum daily dose is 
150 mg QD for subjects who cannot tolerate 150 mg BID.  For  subjects in the SONICS -
completer  cohort , the Therapeutic Dose will have been established prior to enrollment in 
this study  and confirmed in the screening phase .  For subjects in the levoketoconazole -
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 92 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 naïve cohort , the Therapeutic Dose will be established by the end of the TM Phase.  The 
Therapeutic Dose will be used as the target dose and dose- regimen during the Restoration 
Phase.  
Subjects will receive an adequate amount  of the investigational product at each visit, as  
prepared by the study pharmacist.   Please refer to the Pharmacy Manual for dispensing 
instructions. Although no specific restrictions are made regarding the ingestion of fluids 
or food around the time of dosing, it is believed , via inference from studies with 
ketoconazole, that gastric acidity is needed fo r absorption of levoketoconazole.  
Therefore, varying the timing of food intake, which affects gastric acidity, in relationship 
to dosing is not recommended, especially during dose titration, as doing so might  lead to 
excessive variability in levoketoconazole blood levels  and thus a variable response to 
therapy . 
8.3.1 Dose Rationale  
The effects of treating CS with any therapeutic agent is not generally predictable a priori . 
Ketoconazole a commonly used therapeutic agent has variable PK and is titrated to effect 
up to levels as high as 1800 mg daily to control severely ill CS patients.   In most patients 
responsive to ketoconazole, doses average approximately 600 to 800 mg/day with the range of 200 to 1800 mg having been utilized to achieve normalization of cortisol levels 
[Nieman 2002, Pozza 2012 ]. 
Like ketoconazole,  levoketoconazole  is not expected to be administered at a fixed dose 
but will be titrated to effect in each subject.  Levoketoconazole has been used in c linical 
trials up to a dose of 1200 mg daily . The highest dose o f 600 mg BID levoketoconazole  
(1200 mg total daily dose) is used during this study , because some CS subjects may 
require higher levels of cortisol suppression to achieve adequate therapeutic response.  
Doses of levoketoconazole  higher than 300 mg BID (600 mg total daily dose and higher) 
will be guided by enhanced tolerability and safety monitoring as described in Section  4.2.2.4 .  It is expected that titration to the highest dose will be the exception 
rather than the norm, based on prior experience with levoketoconazole in SONICS and 
nonclinical comparisons with keto conazole.  A detailed description of non clinical and 
prior clinical data with levoketoconazole  and rationale for dose selection is provided in 
the Investigator’s Brochure.  
8.3.2 Dose Titration and Maintenance (TM) Phase (levoketoconazole-naïve 
cohort ) 
For levoke toconazole-naïve subjects  and subjects who completed the M12 visit of 
SONICS who have not received a stable Therapeutic Dose of levoketoconazole for the 
12 weeks immediately preceding Screening , open -label levoketoconazole will be titrated 
to find an effec tive and tolerable dose for each subject  (i.e. the Therapeutic Dose).   
The total daily dose will be titrated in 150 mg increments from a starting dose of 300 mg 
(dosed as 150  mg BID) up to a maximal daily dose of 1200 mg (dosed as 600 mg BID) 
until a Therapeutic Dose is established  (Section  4.2.2.2.2 ).  Subjects re -establ ishing the 
Therapeutic Dose via re- titration may begin titration at their current or most recently 
received dose at the discretion of the Investigator .   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 93 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 The minimum daily dose is 150 mg QD for subjects who cannot tolerate 150 mg BID.  
For subjects in the levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort, the Therapeutic Dose must be 
established by the end of the TM Phase.  
For subjects in the  SONICS -completer  cohort , the Therapeutic Do se will have been 
established prior to  enrollment in this study  and will be confirmed at screening, prior to 
randomization .   
8.3.2.1  Dosage Changes During TM Phase  
During the TM Phase (while treatment is open -label), o nce the Therapeutic Dose is 
achieved, the dose should  generally  not be further adjusted if the UFC levels are within 
normal limits .  However, the  dose may be increased if  medically necessary to maintain 
eucortisolemia or decreased to address drug intolerance or AE.   The Therapeutic Dose 
must be stable (i.e. fixed), with normal mUFC established, for at least 4 weeks before a 
subject may  be eligible for the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  
8.3.2.2  Dosage Reduction s and Use of Dose Level 0 
Dose reductions are allowed and should be used judiciously to manage certain AEs . The  
following AEs are AESIs  for which dose reductions can sometimes be helpful : 
• Suspected or confirmed adrenal insufficiency (see Section  6.5.3); 
• Liver safety test  abnormalities (see Section  5.4.2); 
• QTc prolongation (see Section  6.4.6.2).   
Generally, if  levoketoconazole is restarted during the TM Phase following an AESI, the 
dose should be  reduced to the dose level  (i.e. one dose level) lower than that associated 
with the AESI to mitigate the risk of future occurrences of the event  (as described in 
Section  4.2.2.3).  Further titration is subsequently allowable if the Investigator, in 
consultation with the Medical Monitor, believes that the risk of AESI recurrence is 
outweighed  by the expected benefit of the higher dose, as supported by evidence from 
disease- related measures.   
If a suspected drug -related AESI is associated with the lowest usual dose level  (DL1, 
150 mg BID), the subject may receive the lowest possible dose of 150 mg QD (DL0) 
following discussion with the Medical Monitor.  Subjects in the TM Phase may 
subsequently resume the titration scheme if DL0 is not a Therapeutic Dose but a partial cortisol response is evident and there was evidence of a better response at D L1.  
Discussion of the benefits and risks of resuming titration with the Medical Monitor is 
required in such cases . 
The 150- mg dose for DL0 should  be administered in the evening, except on the day of 
the in- clinic or at-home  procedures, when the dose shoul d be administered during the 
visit to allow for post -dosing ECG and PK assessments.   
Subjects who experience an AESI during the Randomized Withdrawal or Restoration 
Phase  cannot reduce the dose of study medication, which is blinded.  However, study 
medication may be temporarily withheld and subsequently resumed at the prior dose once 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 94 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 the AE resolves, if the Investigator believes that continued use of the study medication 
remains in the subject’s best interest.  
8.3.3 Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase  
8.3.3.1  Blinding 
A randomized, double-blind, placebo -controlled design will be used in the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase and the Restoration Phase  of the study.  The Investigat or, study site 
personnel, representatives of the Sponsor and the Contract Research Organization (CRO) 
involved in the monitoring, data management, analysis, and other aspects of the study will be blinded to the randomized treatment assignments during the R andomized 
Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase.  Some individuals, not involved in the conduct 
of the study, will be unblinded for a planned interim  analysis after all subjects have either 
completed the Randomized Withdrawal Phase or discontinued prior t o the end of the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase. The rest of the individuals involved in the study will 
remain blinded at the individual subject level until after the database lock at the end of the study , except as described below.  Details on the interim analysis are provided in 
Section  12.6. 
The TM Phase is open -label.  Subjects who require early rescue during the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase may receive open -label levoketoconazole and continue in the study .  
The i nvestigational product  and reference therapy  are identical in appearance and the 
packaging and labelling will be identical to keep the study  blinded during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase and the Restoration Phase  (including when early rescue is 
needed) .    
For the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and the Restoration Phase , treatment- code breaks 
should occur only in exceptional circumstances when knowledge of the actual treatment is essential  for further management .  Investigators are encouraged to discuss with the 
Clinical Research Organization  (CRO)  Medical Monitor if they  believ e that unblinding is 
necessary  and, in any case, Investigators or other responsible site personnel must report 
unblinding to the Sponsor via telephone /email  as soon as feasible after the event .  If 
unblinding is deemed to be necessary, the Investigator  should use the main system for 
emergency unblinding through the interactive  randomization system  via interactive 
response technology  (IRT). 
Treat as indicated.  If unblindin g cannot be completed promptly , treatment of the  subject 
or other affected person  should proceed as if the ingested medication were 
levoketoconazole.   
Investigators are  encouraged to maint ain the blind except as need ed to manage the 
emergency , whether the emergency involves the subject or someone outsi de of the study 
who was exposed to the study medication (e.g. a child who ingests the study medication) .  
Treatment allocation must NOT be disclosed to the subject  and/or other study personnel 
including other site personnel, monitors, and S ponsor  or CRO st aff, nor should there be 
any written disclosure of the c ode in any of the corresponding source  documents.   The 
Investigator must report all treatment -code breaks (with reason) as they occur on the 
corresponding CRF  page.   Treatment allocation  information  after a code break  should be 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 95 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 held by the designated person at site and by the CRO Global Safety Officer for the study 
or designee.   Unblinding should not necessarily be a reason for study drug 
discontinuation.   Investigators are responsible for promptly notifying the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) in cases involving a 
treatment- code break.  
For purposes of reporting certain AEs to competent authorities, IRBs /IECs , and certain 
responsible Investigators, the Spon sor will design ate personnel  who will have access to 
information on unblinded study treatment.  Safety signal evaluation and trend analysis 
will remain the responsibility of the Sponsor, as described in the safety monitoring plan  
and DSMB charter . 
8.3.3.2  Randomiz ation and Treatment Assignment  
At the beginning of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase  (Visit RW0 ) eligib le subjects will 
be random ly assigned in  a 1:1 ratio to receive either:  
• Group 1: Levoketoconazole tablets in the same regimen as the Therapeutic Dose  
• Grou p 2: Matching placebo tablets in the same regimen as the Therapeutic Dose.    
The Therapeutic Dose will be used as the target dose and dose- regimen during the 
Restoration Phase . Treatments in this phase will continue to be double -blind.  Subjects 
will continue receiving the same treatment as in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and 
will receive additional rescue treatment with either:  
• Group 1 : Placebo tablets  
• Group 2: Levoketoconazole tablets.  
The starting Restoration Phase dose will be one tablet BID and the dose will be titrated in 
one tablet increments every 2 days until the Therapeutic Dose- equivalent tablet count is 
achieved  unless the Therapeutic Dose is DL0 . 
8.3.3.3  Early Rescue  
Subjects who require early rescue during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase may receive 
open -label levoketoconazole.  The rapid titration schedule of the Restoration Phase 
should be used to reestablish the Therapeutic Dose of open -label levoketoconazole used 
for the early rescue.  Dose adjustments may be made, as medical ly indicated, after rapid 
re-titration.   This includes adjustments to dose levels above the previous therapeutic dose 
if required to return subject to eucortisolemia.  During early  rescue, the titration will 
increase in 1 tablet increments every 2  days alt ernating AM and PM per  Table  2. 
9 DRUG SUPPLIES, DISPENSING, STORAGE AND ACCOUNTING 
9.1 Product Storage  
Levoketoconazole and matching placebo tablets should be stored at 15°C to 25° C (59°F 
to 77° F). 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 96 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 9.2 Investigational Product Accountability 
The Investigator is responsible for investigational product accountability, reconciliation, 
and record maintenance.  In accordance with all applicable regulatory requirements, the 
Investigator or designated site staff must maintain investigational product accountability 
records throughout the course of the study.  The responsible person(s) will document the 
amount of investigational  product received from and returned to Cortendo AB (when 
applicable), the amount supplied and/or administered to and returned by subjects, if 
applicable.  
9.3 Compliance Assessment  
Subjects will be asked to maintain a patient diary to record medication administration, 
urine sample collection, saliva sample collection, concomitant medications, and changes 
in condition.  In addition, subjects should bring all empty medication bottles a nd unused 
medication with them to all in-clinic visits except for additional safety visit s required in 
the TM Phase .  Drug a ccountability to determine compliance will be performed at all 
other in-clinic  visits.  Drug accountability will not be performed during visits by HHC 
professional.  
9.4 Treatment of Investigational Product Overdose  
There is no known direct antidote to levoketo conazole once absorbed .  However, if 
levoketoconazole was recently ingested, in addition to  maneuvers aimed at removing  
tablets  from the stomach, its absorption from the intestines into blood might  be reduced  
by ingesting  fatty food s/liquids .  
Subjects s hould be medically managed based on their clinical condition (e.g. monitor and 
treat for hypocortisolism) .   
Refer to Section  4.2.2.4  for additional safety monitoring for administration of daily doses 
750 mg/day or above .   
10 CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS 
10.1 Permitted Medications  
For management of dyslipidemia, pravastatin, fluvastatin, pitavastatin  and rosuvastatin 
are the only allowed  “statins” .  For subjects for whom lipid reduction therapy is being 
considered, all lipid lowering drugs should be added and stabilized for at least 4 weeks prior to TM0 for the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort or RW0 for the SONICS -completer 
cohort, as improvements in lipid s are being assessed as an endpoint for levoketoconazole 
treatment in this study.  
For management of hypokalemia, potassium supplements are encouraged.  It is advised that maintenance of serum potassium levels within the normal range and above 4.0 mmol/L ma y reduce the risk of drug- induced QTc prolongation.  
Most medications used to treat T2DM  are allowed.  Metformin is allowed, although its 
levels might be increased by levoketoconazole.  Routine monitoring of glucose, kidney, 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 97 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 and liver function is considered  sufficient to mitigate any risk of the combination with 
levoketoconazole.  
For managing dyspepsia, over -the-counter liquid and tablet antacids  containing e.g. 
aluminum, calcium, or magnesium,  are allowed  but must b e used in moderation and taken 
at least  2 hours after  dosing with levoketoconazole.  A list will be provided.  
Most commonly used treatments for osteopenia or osteoporosis —excluding certain 
hormonal treatments —are allowed .  Calcium should be taken at least  2 hours after 
ingesting study medication . 
All medications should be scrutinized during Screening, using Appendix J  as a guide and 
with help from the Medical Monitor if needed .  Medication additions or switches  after 
Screening  should be kept to a minimum and should likewise prompt a check against 
Appendix J , ideally prior to the decision to add or switch , to prevent untoward 
experiences, including loss of efficacy, resulting from drug interactions.  Any questions 
concerning concomitant medications should  be addressed with the Medical Monitor 
promptly.  
Blood pressure, diabetes, cholesterol, anti -inflammatory, and CS -specific medications 
will be captured with other medications but will  require Investigator specification of the 
medication types . 
10.2 Prohibited Medications 
During the study, subjects are not allowed to t ake the following medications. A  more 
complete list of prohibited medications and medications to be used with caution, 
categorized by primary reason for prohibition  or precaution,  is found in Appendix J .  The 
Investigator is encouraged to contact the Medical Monitor for any questions.  
• Total daily dose of acetaminophen (paracetamol) above 2 g (increased liver 
toxicity risk);  
• Prescription or over the counter H2 receptor antagonists  or proton-pump 
inhibitors  or sucralfate (inhibit ion of drug absorption ); 
• Statins other than pravastatin, flu vastatin , pitavastatin  and rosuvastatin; 
potentially eligible subjects should be switched to an allowed statin (or other 
allowed therapy) several weeks prior to the Baseline Visit for the TM Phase (Visit 
TM0) whenever feasible to allow equilibration of blood lipids  (Note: new lipid 
lowering medications should not be added after the screening period as described 
in Section  10.1);  
• Carbamazepine, fenofibrate (assay interference), carbenoxolone;  
• Genuine licorice (mineralocorticoid effects);  
• Steroidogenesis inhibitors or dopamine agonists (interference with drug effect, Appendix J , Table  12 and Table  13);  
• Megestrol acetate or medroxyprogesterone acetate and selected other synthetic progestins (see Appendix J , Table  14) [Schindler 2003];  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 98 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • Any other drug treatments used to lower cortisol in CS that are subject to washout 
(see Section  5.2 and Appendix J , Table  15) are prohibited throughout the study;  
• Weight loss medications (either prescription or over the counter, Appendix J , 
Table  16);  
• Drugs whose systemic exposure is potentially increased significantly by concomitant  use of levoketoconazole  (Appendix J , Table  18);  
• Medications that are strong  CYP3A4 inhibitors or CYP3A4 inducers as they may 
interfere with the metabolism of levoketoconazole . As examples, rifampicin, 
rifabutin, isoniazid, nevirapine and  phenytoin may significantly reduce 
levoketoconazole concentrations via CYP3A4 induction, and ritonavir may 
increase levoketoconazole concentrations via CYP3A4 inhibition, and are 
therefore prohibited ( Appendix J , Table  19);  
• Medications resulting in QTc prolongation as a direct effect or because of  
interaction with levoketoconazole , examples include: cisapride, dofetilide, 
pimozide, quinidine. ( Appendix J , Table  20).  However, in selected cases where 
no alternative medications are available, permission from the Medical Monitor 
may be sought;  
• Topical or inhaled corticosteroid preparations (interference with drug effect, 
Appendix J , Table  12);  
• The following herbal medicines: St John’s Wort, echinacea, gingko, goldenseal, 
yohimbe, red rice yeast, danshen, silybum marianum, Asian ginseng, schissandra 
sphenanther, shankhapushi, and Asian herb mixture (Xiao chai hu tang and 
Salboku -to). 
10.3 Medications to be Used with Caution 
• There are some medications that are often considered contraindicated when used 
with ketoconazole, due to an increased risk of AEs ( Appendix J , Table  23).  These 
medications should generally be avoided while the subject is participating in the 
study.  However, they may be used in selected cases, particularly when they are 
used prior to study entry and when no alternative medications are available.  Such 
usage should follow consultation with and explicit permission from the Medical 
Monitor.  
• Medications that are weak or moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors or CYP3A4 inducers 
or that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) an d plasma 
concentration that increase in exposure  moderately in the presence of 
ketoconazole, potentially resulting in increased drug effect, should be avoided if alternative therapy is available or should be used with caution .  In such cas es, 
careful monitoring, with possible adjustments in doses, is recommended (see 
Appendix J , Table  21). 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 99 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 11 SUBJECT COMPLETION AND WITHDRAWAL  
11.1 Subject Completion  
Subjects who complete the e nd of the Restoration Phase  (Visit RES2) of the study, 
regardless of their response status, will be considered to have completed the study and are 
eligible for inclusion into the OPTICS Study. 
Subjects who receive early “rescue” will also be considered to have completed the study and are eligible  for inclusion into the OPTICS Study .  
11.2 Subject Withdrawal Procedures  
All premature study withdrawals and their causes must be documented , to include the 
specific reason(s) prompting withdrawal, by the Investigator on the CRF, and, if need be, 
on the AE for m.   
If the subject chooses to withdraw or is otherwise withdrawn before completing the 
study, the Investigator should make every attempt to have the subject return to the clinic 
to complete safety and PK assessments as outlined in the Schedule of Events f or the TM7 
Visit (if in the Dose Titration and Maintenance  Phase), the RW5  Visit (if in the 
Randomized Withdrawal P hase) or the RES2 Visit  (if in the Restoration Phase ) in 
Appendix A .  All data gathered on the subject prior to termination will be made available 
to the Sponsor.   
12 DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
12.1 Populations for Analysis  
Intent -to-Treat Population (ITT): The ITT population will include all subjects who are 
randomized and receive at least one dose of blinded study medication  during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  The ITT population will be used for the primary analysis of efficacy and secondary analyses of efficacy and safety.   
Per Protocol (PP) Population :  The PP population will consist of all subjects in the ITT 
population who have no major protocol deviations during the Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase that could affect the primary endpoint. This population will be used in supportive 
analyses of the primary endpoint and secondary efficacy endpoints.  
Levoketoconazole -naïve  Population :  The levoketoconazole- naïve  population will consist 
of all subjects in the levoketoconazole -naïve cohort (defined in  Section  4.1) who receive 
at least one dose of study medication during the Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase.  
This population will be used for s upportive evaluations of safety and for exploratory 
efficacy, safety, and PK analyses.    
SONICS -completer Population : The SONICS -completer  population will consist of all 
subjects in the SONICS -completer cohort (defined in Section  4.1) who receive at least 
one dose of blinded study medication during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  This 
population will be used for supportive evaluation s of safety and for exploratory efficacy, 
safety, and PK analyses.  Because only a minority of the sub jects are anticipated to be in 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 100 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 the SONICS -completer  cohort, the analyses will be performed only if the size of this 
cohort is at least 30% of the ITT population . 
12.2 Hypothesis 
The primary endpoint for this study is the proportion of subjects with loss of therapeutic 
response to levoketoconazole upon withdrawing to  placebo  compared with continued 
levoketoconazole treatment.  Loss of response is based on the mean of three  24-hour 
UFC measurements (mUFC) obtained at any visit from second through final randomized -
withdrawal visits (RW 1 through RW5  inclusive) when:   
• mUFC is more than 1.5X the ULN of the central laboratory’s reference range 
OR  
• mUFC is more than 40% above the  Baseline ( RW0 ) value if the RW0  value 
was 1.0X ULN or greater for SONICS -completer  cohort subject s OR  
• an early rescue criterion is met . 
The null hypothesis is that the proportion of subjects with loss of response  upon 
withdrawing to  placebo  compared with  continued levoketoconazole, as defin ed above , is 
not different betwe en levoketoconazole and placebo.  The alternative hypothesis is that  
the two proportions are different, specifically that  there is an increased loss of response 
for the placebo arm.  
12.2.1  Sample Size Determination  
For the purpose of sample size estimation, it is assumed that among subjects in the ITT 
population who complete at least the RW4 visit in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, 
10% will lose therapeutic response in the levoketoconazole arm vs. 75% in the placebo arm.  The 10% loss of therapeutic response rate in the levoketoconazole arm is based on 
data from the SONICS study.   
For the analysis of the primary endpoint, s ubjects  in the ITT population who withdraw 
prior to RW4 are considered as losing therapeutic response.  As such, the assumed loss of 
therapeutic response rate in the overall ITT population in each arm depends on the 
withdrawal rate prior to RW4 during the Randomi zed Withdrawal Phase.  It is expected 
that the withdrawal rate will be no more than 10%, but up to 20% is considered in the sample size estimation.  If the withdrawal rate is 10% per arm, a sample size of 46 
subjects (23 per arm) randomized and treated dur ing the Randomized Withdrawal Phase 
corresponds to 42 subjects (21 per arm) completing RW4 and provides approximately 99% power, using two -sided Fisher’s Exact test,  to detect the alternative hypothesis of a 
loss of therapeutic response rate of 17% in the levoketoconazole arm and 78% in the placebo arm vs. the null hypothesis of no difference between the two arms.  If the 
withdrawal rate is 20% per arm, a sample size of 54 subjects (27 per arm) randomized 
and treated during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase corresponds to 44 subjects (22 per 
arm) completing RW4 and provides approximately 98% power to detect the alternative 
hypothesis of a loss of therapeutic response rate of 26% in the levoketoconazole arm and 
81% in the placebo arm vs. the null hypothesis of no difference between the two arms.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 101 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Because enrollment into the Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase will be closed prior to 
the last subject being randomized and treated in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, the 
actual sample size for the Randomized Withdrawal Phase is not prespecified.  The timing 
of enrollment  closure will be based on the rolling 4- week completion rate trend for the 
Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase.  A minimum of 46 subjects (23 per arm) and a 
maximum of 54 subjects (27 per arm) will  be targeted to be enrolled into the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase based on the observed withdrawal  rate trend  for the phase .   
A minority of randomized subjects are anticipated to be in the SONICS -completer cohort.  
Any subject who withdraws after randomization will not be replaced.  Withdrawn 
subjects will not be re -entered into the study.  
12.3 General Considerations for Data Analysis  
The SAS S ystem, Version 9.2 (or higher), will be used for all analyses, unless otherwise 
specified.  Continuous variables (e.g., age) will be summarized using the number of 
observations (n), mean, standard deviation (SD), median, minimum, and maximum. Categorical variables (e.g., sex, race) will be summarized using the number of observations (n) and percentage in each category.  
All data used in analyses and/or collected during the study will be provided in listings.  
12.4 Study Completion, Premature Withdrawal and Missing Data  
Definition of Study Completion  
Study completion for purposes of assessing the primary endpoint is defined as either of 
the following:   
(1) having completed Visits RW0 ( Randomized Withdrawal Baseline) and RW5  (i.e. 
final scheduled visit in Randomized Withdrawal P hase)  regardless of UFC status OR  
(2) having completed RW0 and having met criteria for  use of early rescue treatment with 
open -label levoketoconazole  (or another rescue medication) after RW0.   
Definition of Non -completion  
Subjects withdrawn from the study without meeting the definition of study completer above will be considered as prematurely withdrawn  (i.e. non -completers) .  All available 
data for subjects who are study non -completers  will be included in all analyses.  
Missing or Inadequate UFC Collections  
At any visits for which three 24- hour urine samples for UFC determination are scheduled  
to be collected, at least two  UFC collections must be deemed adequate to be able to 
derive a mUFC  value and thus be considered as non- missing .  When more than two 
UFC collections are made only those collections deemed adequate by the Sponsor will be inclu ded in the calculation of the mUFC . 
Study non-completion , reasons for non-completion , and missing or inadequate collections 
for determination of UFC will be summarized.  
Handling of Missing Data for Analyses of the Primary Endpoint  
The following rules will be applied for determining loss of therapeutic response when 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 102 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 some or all mUFC data are missing:   
1. A subject withd raws prematurely  during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase  (i.e. 
Visit RW5  is not completed nor is the subject in need of  early rescue treatment) 
and no post -randomization adequate mUFC determination is  available .  In this 
case, the subject will be assumed to have lost therapeutic response; OR  
2. A subject withdraws prematurel y during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase after 
RW0 and before RW5 , with no  early rescue, and at least one post -randomization 
mUFC  determination is available .  In this case, if the latest available adequate 
mUFC determination  is the one for RW4, all available  mUFC determination(s)  
will be used to determine if loss of therapeutic response occurred for that subject , 
but if the latest available mUFC determination is for a visit before RW4, the 
subject will be assumed to have lost therapeutic response ; OR  
3. A subjec t completes the Randomized Withdrawal Phase with one or more missing 
adequate mUFC determinations, with at least one post -randomization adequate 
mUFC determination available.  In this case, if the latest available adequate 
mUFC determination  is the one for  RW4 or RW5, all available mUFC 
determination(s)  will be used to determine if loss of therapeutic response occurred 
for that subject, but if the latest available mUFC determination is for a visit before 
RW4, the subject will be assumed to have lost therapeutic response .  
Supportive analyses of the primary endpoint that require more than one adequate mUFC 
determination during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase to be available will be 
performed.  For the secondary and exploratory efficacy endpoints, at- visit ana lyses will 
be performed using longitudinal models  without imputation  as the primary approach ; 
where specified; imputation s to replace missing values will be considered  as supportive.  
Details will be provided in the Statistical Analysis Plan ( SAP). 
12.5 Final Analyses  
12.5.1  Definitions of Baseline  
For the purposes of analyzing changes and shifts from Baseline, whether for safety or efficacy  evaluations, two Baseline s will be used, depending on the analysis population 
and the assessment timing.  The levoketocona zole-naïve  analysis population has its own 
Baseline at Visit TM0 ( including values obtained during Screening that are within 3 
weeks of TM0 ).  The TM0 Baseline will primarily be used to infer changes and shifts that 
occur during the TM Phase only.  Both the levoketoconazole -naïve  and SONICS -
completer analysis populations will use as Baseline Visit RW0, which is applicable to 
assessments that are made during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and the Restoration 
Phase , such as the analysis of primary efficacy .   
Thus, for most measures, analytical summaries will be created using two Baselines when 
the levoketoconazole -naïve  population is involved and one Baseline when only the 
SONICS -completer population is involved or when the analysis is concerned with the 
post- randomization period only (e.g. the primary efficacy analysis).  For some endpoints 
analyzed during the Restoration Phase only, there may be interest in looking at the changes and shifts from the start of the Restoration Phase for the subset of subjects who 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 103 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 were randomized to placebo for the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and received 
levoketoconazole during the Restoration Phase.  In such analyses, the Baseline of interest 
will be Visit RW5. If the Baseline is not obvious, care will be taken to describe the 
specific Baseline used in the description of the analysis.  
12.5.2  Safety Analyses  
The final analysis of safety will be  coincident with the last subject visit following 
completion of the Restoration Phase .   
Safety analyses will be conducted by study phase  and/or by time point, as applicable .  
Adverse events will be recorded from the date that informed consent was signed .  
Treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) will be summarized and reported by 
pooled- cohorts and  separately by SONICS -completer  and levoketoconazole -naïve 
cohorts . 
Interim analyses of safety will be performed and reported on a limited basis to satisfy 
requirements of study oversight, for example to IRB/IEC  and Competent Authorities.  
These limited analyses (e.g. common adverse reactions summary) will not be 
accompanied by assessments of potential benefits.  Any unplanned interim efficacy 
analyses will be accompanied by unplanned interim safety analyses.  
An independent  DSMB will review all SAEs and AESIs on a rolling basis a nd assess 
benefits and risk of therapy (unblinded) systematically at approximately 6 -month 
intervals.   The timing of the first bi -annual DSMB meeting may be adjusted based on 
subject accrual.   There are no plans to stop the study prior to completion based on these 
reviews, and therefore no stopping rules will be created.  The DSMB will not report its 
findings other than to indicate whether the protocol must be changed for the study to 
continue  as planned or otherwise make recommendations designed to ensure subject 
safety and study integrity.  Details of the DSMB procedures will be described in a separate charter.  
12.5.2.1  Extent of Exposure  
Study drug exposure will be summarized as the average daily dos e, cumulative dose, and 
total number of days on study drug.  Total number of days on study drug will be calculated for each subject as the treatment stop date minus treatment start date plus one 
day.  Drug exposure will be calculated separately for each an alysis population 
(Section  12.1).  
Study drug compliance at each study phase and cumulative study drug compliance for the 
study overall will be calculated by dividing the number of study drug tablets used (total 
number dispensed minus total number returned/lost/wasted) by the total number of study 
drug tablets that should have been taken and multiplying the result by 100.  
For subjects in the levoketo conazole- naïve  cohort , study medication dose levels will be 
listed by visit and days on study, with the Therapeutic Dose indicated .  All study 
medication interruptions or permanent discontinuations prompted by the Investigator or 
Sponsor will be listed for  each subject, along with the medication identity, timing and 
reason.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 104 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 12.5.2.2  Adverse Events (AEs)  
All AEs will be coded using MedDRA and graded per the National Cancer Institute 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0 3 [NCI CTCAE, 2010 ].  
The TEAEs will be of primary interest.  The number and proportion of subjects repo rting 
the following will be calculated and reported:  any TEAE, drug-related TEAE s, serious 
TEAEs , TEAEs of special interest, severe TEAE, TEAEs leading to discontinuation of 
study drug, and TEAEs leading to withdrawal from the study will be computed.  The 
most common TEAEs (frequency above 5% per treatment group) in pooled 
levoketoconazole and placebo groups will also be reported.   
TEAE s ummaries will include frequency by treatment group (pooled levoketoconazole), 
levoketoconazole dose (individual dose le vel) and relative onset time (by visit, by Phase, 
by study days, by days in Phase, etc.), depending on the analysis population.  Additional 
summaries and listings will be created to explore TEAE signals.  
12.5.2.3  Clinical Laboratory Evaluations  
A laboratory value t hat is within the central laboratory’s reference range will be 
considered normal.   A laboratory value that is outside the central  laboratory’s normal 
range  will be considered abnormal.  The number and percentage of subjects with 
abnormal laboratory values will be summarized for each scheduled visit.  Shift tables by 
visit will be constructed.  Differences in continuous laboratory values between Baseline 
and each scheduled assessment will be calculated for each analyte  and summarized 
descriptively.   
Liver f unction tests will be further summarized descriptively using modified eDISH plots 
and other displays.   
Further descriptions of laboratory analyses wil l be included in the SAP.  
12.5.2.4  Vital Signs  
Hear t rate,  SBP and DBP will be measured in triplicate at least 3 minutes apart at each 
visit.  The mean of these measurements will be used as the final value for each visit.   
Change s and shifts from normality  from Baseline  (RW0)  for each measurement at each 
visit will be summarized  by treatment group and by dose of levoketoconazole .  In 
addition, values of clinical importance ( Table  5) will be identified in the data listings.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 105 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  5 Vital Sign Values of Clinical Importance  
Vital Sign  Criteria  Flag  
Heart Rate (HR)  below 44 bpm  Low (L)  
 44-100 bpm  Normal   
 101-120 bpm  High (H)  
 above 120 bpm  Very High (VH)  
   
Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP)  below 90 mm Hg  Low (L)  
 90-139 mm Hg  Normal  
 140-169 mm Hg  High (H)  
 170 mm Hg  and above  Very High (VH)  
   
Diastolic Blood Pressure (DBP)  below 50 mm Hg  Low (L)  
 50-89 mm Hg  Normal  
 90-109 mm Hg  High (H)  
 110 mm Hg  and above  Very High (VH)  
12.5.2.5  Electrocardiograms (ECGs) and QTc Intervals 
Summary ECGs, based on the measurement of an ECG over 1 to 5 minutes as described 
in Section  6.4.3 will be used for each evaluat ion.  Quantitative ECG measurements (PR 
interval, QRS duration, HR, QT interval, QTcB interval, and QTcF interval) and changes 
from Baseline (RW0) will be summarized descriptively  by dose, treatment group and 
time point .  ECG results will be available to t he Investigator shortly after being obtained 
and all ECGs will be reviewed by a central consulting cardiologist  who will provide an 
“over -reading” that will serve as the definitive study value .  While on study treatment, a 
QTc above 500 msec or above 60 msec above Baseline will be an AESI  (See 
Section  13.2.2).  
Categorical changes from Baseline and QTc values from each visit wil l be summarized 
by worst chan ge, by visit , by treatment group and by dose of levoketoconazole. The 
clinically important categories ( Table  6) of actual and change values will be tabulated 
and provided as listings.  
QTc intervals will be assessed using paired t -tests of change values and QTc shifts from 
normality will be assessed by McNemar’s test .  All other analyses will be descriptive.  
Table  6 QTc Interval Values of Clinical Importance  
QTc Interval  Criteria (msec)  
Change from Baseline  below 30 
 30-60 
 above 60 
  
Actual Value  451-480 
 481-500 
 above 500 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 106 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 12.5.2.6  Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (pre-diabetic subjects with IFG ) 
For pre -diabetic subjects with IFG  at Baseline , the number  and percent of subjects after 
each study Phase will be summarized for each of the following categories.  
Pre-test:  
• Normal: glucose level < 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L)  
• Impaired fasting glucose: glucose level ≥ 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and 
< 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) ; 
Post-test: 
• Normal: 2 -hour glucose level  below 140 mg/dL; 
• Impaired glucose tolerance (pre- diabetic): glucose level at least  140 mg/dL and no 
more than  200 mg/dL ; 
• Provisional diagnosis of diabetes (diabetic): glucose level at least  200 mg/mL . 
Glucose and insulin values during the O GTT will also be summarized by ma ximum 
value, time to maximum value  and AUC, and statistically analyzed with a paired t -test for 
each assessment.   Exploratory analyses of insulin resistance and/or beta cell function will 
be described in the SAP. Changes in O GTT -derive d glucose values from  Baseline ( RW0 ) 
to RW5 and from  Visits  RW5  to RES2 will be summarized by treatment group.  
12.5.2.7  Other Safety Measures  
All other safety laboratory measures (e.g. morning serum cortisol, ACTH, prolactin, 
testosterone, urine albumin:creatinine ) will be listed by subject and time point and 
descriptively summarized , including changes from Baseline (RW0) by treatment group 
and dose of levoketoconazole.  
Changes in the size of pituitary tumor  (in millimeters of largest diameter and/or by 
estimated v olume)  from Screening  to Baseline ( RW0 ) and RW5  (for the 
levoketoconazole- naïve cohort) and from Baseline ( RW0 ) to RW5 (for the SONICS -
completer cohort) will be summarized descriptively by treatment group.   
12.5.3  Efficacy Analyses  
The ITT population (i.e. poole d cohorts) will be used in the main analyses of the primary 
endpoint and the PP  population in supportive analyses.  Handling of missing data for 
primary endpoint analyses is described in Section 12.4.   Exploratory efficacy analyses 
will also include the levoketoconazole -naïve  and SONICS -completer populations.  
12.5.3.1   Primary Efficacy Analysis  
Loss of  Therapeutic Response  
Mean UFC data obtained at Visit RW0 serves as the Baseline measure defining cortisol 
response.  As an entry requirement, all subjects who are enrolled into the Randomized 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 107 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Withdrawal P hase will have achieved a therapeutic cortisol response (though not 
necessarily a normalized mUFC  if a SONICS -completer  cohort subject ) and will be 
taking  an established dose of levoketoconazole, the Therapeutic Dose.  Considerations 
for loss of established cortisol response during the Randomized Withdrawal period makes 
an allowance for the subgroup of SONICS -completer cohort subjects   who do not have a 
normalized mUFC response at RW0 . 
Loss of response is assessed based on the mean of three  24-hour UFC measurements  
(mUFC)  (at least two measurements from adequate collections)  obtained at any visit from 
the second through the final Randomized W ithdrawal visits (RW 1 through RW5  
inclusive) when : 
• The mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN  of the central laboratory’s reference range; 
OR 
• The m UFC is over 40% above the Baseline (RW0) value if the RW0 value is 
above the ULN (i.e. >1.0X ULN)  for SONICS -completer  cohort subject s; OR  
• An early rescue criterion is met . 
The primary efficacy analysis will determine  the significance of the difference in 
proportions of subjects losing response among each of the two blinded treatment groups .     
Statistical significance testing will be conducted using a logistic regression mo del 
containing fixed effect terms for Randomized Withdrawal  treatment group 
(levoketoconazole, placebo) and subject cohort  (levoketoconazole- naïve cohort, 
SONICS -completer cohort ) and confirmed using a two -sided Fisher ’s Exact test.  
12.5.3.2   Secondary Efficacy  
Inferences derived from secondary efficacy analyses will be gated on results from the 
primary efficacy analysis.  Secondary efficacy analyses will be hierarchically structured 
to ensure control of the family -wise type I error rate at the 0.05 level.  Hypothes is tests 
for secondary endpoints will be based on null hypotheses that assume no a priori  
differences between placebo and levoketoconazole treatments.  All secondary endpoints 
will be analyzed using the ITT population (primary analyses ) and the PP populati on 
(supportive analyses , but only if PP population is notably different from ITT population, 
see SAP for details ). 
Additional details of the testing procedures not included here, including handling of 
missing data, will be described in a SAP to be finaliz ed prior to breaking the blind.  
UFC and LNSC Analyses 
Changes in UFC  and LNSC from Baseline  
Mean UFC will be calculated from adequate 24 -hour urine collections  only.  At Baseline 
(RW0) and at end of Randomized Withdrawal Phase and of Restoration Pha se, where 
three  samples are to be collected, the mUFC  will be calculated only if there are at least 
two adequate samples.  When the number of adequate samples is less than two at any 
visit,  the main secondary analyses will consider the UFC value as missing; sensitivity 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 108 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 analyses will use a single adequate urine sample or imputations of missing values.  The 
mUFC  from the collections at each visit will be used in the analysis of UFC.  
Mean  UFC and LNSC will be summarized by time point using descriptive statistics  and 
displayed over time .  Change s from Baseline (RW0) in mUFC  and LNSC during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase will be analyzed using a repeated measures mixed effects 
model with fixed ef fect terms for treatment  group , subject cohort, time (i.e. visit) , and 
treatment-by- time interaction, with Baseline value as a covariate and subject as a random 
effect.  The treatment groups will be compared using least squares mean differences 
between tre atment groups and associated 95% CIs for each time point will be derived 
from the model.  These CIs will be regarded as descriptive statistics.  Two-sample  t-tests 
will also be performed  to compare the two treatment groups for the mean change from 
Baseline  to each nominal visit  during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase .  
Normalization of UFC during Restoration Phase  
The number and proportion of subjects wit h normalization of mUFC  at RES2 is defined 
as the proportion of subjects with  abnormal m UFC at R W5 whose mUFC is at or below  
the ULN of the reference range at RES2.  Normalization of mUFC at RES2 will be 
calculated for each treatment group and presented as shift tables from R W5 to RES2 
using three strata of mUFC  status at or below ULN, more than  ULN and no more 
than 1.5X ULN, above 1.5X ULN.  
Normalization of UFC at the end of Randomized Withdrawal Phase  
The number and proportion of subjects in the Randomized Withdrawal Phase with mUFC 
normalization (at or below ULN) at the end of Randomized Withdrawal Phase (RW5) 
will be summarized for each treatment group and compared using Fisher’s Exact test (with corresponding 95% CIs).
  
 
CS Comorbidity Biomarkers  
The changes from Baseline (RW0) and percentage change from Baseline in individual 
biochemical markers of CS comorbidities (fasting glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA -IR, 
HbA1c, total cholesterol, LDL -C, and hsCRP) during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase 
and the Restoration Phase  will be summarized by treatment group and time point  and 
assessed  using two- sample t -test comparison at each visit  in the Randomized Withdrawal 
Phase .  In addition, shifts from Baseline (with regards to laboratory normal range) in 
individual biochemical markers of CS comorbidities will be summarized  at each 
scheduled vi sit. 
For CS comorbidities measured at more than one visit after RW0 during the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase, changes from Baseline during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase will 
also be analyzed using a repeated measures mixed effects model with fixed effect t erms 
for treatment  group , time (i.e. visit), and treatment -by-time interaction, the concurrent CS 
medical conditions (e.g. diabetes, hypertension) as Baseline covariates and with subject 
as a random effect.  Least squares mean differences between treatment  groups and 
associated 95% C Is for each time point will be derived from the model.  These CIs will 
be regarded as descriptive statistics.     
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 109 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Cushing’s Syndrome Quality of Life Questionnaire  
QoL ( Appendix L ) measures and changes from Baseline (RW0) at the end of the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase will be summarized by treatment 
group and time point using descriptive statistics and analyzed using two -sample t -test at 
the end of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.   
Beck’s Depression Questionnaire Changes from Baseline (RW0) for the Beck’s Depression questionnaire ( Appendix N ) at 
the end of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase will be summarized 
by treatment group and time point using descriptive statistics and analyzed using two -
sample t -test at the end o f the Randomized Withdrawal Phase. 
Acne, Hirsutism and Peripheral Edema  
Acne, hirsutism  (for females only)  and peripheral edema scores will be calculated as per 
their respective instrument -derived instructions,  provided in Appendix M , and results will 
be summarized at each visit, including changes from Baseline and score shifts from 
Baseline.  Changes from Baseline during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase and 
Restoration Phase will be summarized by treatment group and time point and mean changes from Baseline assessed using two -sample t -test at each visit  in the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase . 
12.5.3.3   Exploratory Efficacy  
Medication Changes  
Changes to concomitant medi cations (focusing on, but not necessarily limited, to anti-
hypertensive , anti -hyperglycemic,  anti-choleste rol and anti -inflammatory medica tions)  
will be listed by subject.  The number and proportion of usage of each  medication  class at 
Baseline and at all post-Baseline visits by treatment will be displayed.  In addition, the 
number and proportion of subjects with medicati on changes during the study will be 
summarized  by treatment group and time point .  The proportions with dose increases and 
decreases , including new and discontinued medications will be displayed.   
Time to Event Analysis  
The time will be calculated from RW0 to the first time when:  
• The mUFC is above 1.5X the ULN  of the central laboratory’s reference range; 
OR 
• The m UFC is over 40% above the Baseline (RW0) value if the RW0 value is 
above the ULN (i.e. >1.0X ULN) for SONICS --completer cohort subjects ; OR  
• An early rescue criterion is met . 
Time from RW0 to first loss of therapeutic response will be defined as the time from the first dose of blinded study drug (levoketoconazole or placebo) to the time when a subject 
meets one of the criteria above.  Time from RW0 to the need for early rescue medication 
is defined as the time from first dose of blinded study drug (levoketoconazole or placebo) 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 110 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 to the time at which the Investigator withdraws study drug in favor of other treatments 
including open -label levoketoconazole.   
Time to first normalizati on of mUFC beginning from RW5 (subset of subjects with 
mUFC above 1.5X ULN at RW5) will be estimated as the time from the first dose of add -
on study drug (levoketoconazole or placebo) at RW5 to the time when a subject has confirmed mUFC no more than ULN (i.e. <=ULN) for the assay reference range.   
Time to first normalization of LNSC beginning from RW5 (subset of subjects with LNSC 
above ULN at RW5) will be estimated as the time from the first dose of add -on study 
drug (levoketoconazole or placebo) at RW5 t o the time when a subject has an LNSC 
result no more than the ULN for the assay reference range.   
Each time -to-event endpoint will be analyzed using Kaplan- Meier methods.  Median time 
to each event along with the associated two -sided 95% CI will be presen ted by treatment 
group.  The time to event distributions will be compared statistically with a two -sided 
log-rank test.  The CI will be regarded as a descriptive statistic.  
Normalization of UFC during Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase  
The number and pro portion  of subjects meeting the following criteria will be summarized 
by therapeutic dose, along with 95% CI for the proportion:  
• Achieved normaliz ation of  mUFC  at the end of Dose Titration and 
Maintenance Phase  (TM7 )  
• Achieved either normaliz ation of mUFC or partial response (at least 50% 
decrease in mUFC) at the end of Dose Titration and Maintenance Phase  
(TM7 ) 
Normalization of LNSC during Restoration Phase  
The number and p roportion of subjects with normalization of LNSC at RES2  will be 
analyzed in the same way as the corresponding UFC analyses described in 
Section  12.5.3.2 . 
Serum Cortisol and ACTH  
Serum cortisol and ACTH are primarily considered to be safety endpoints (see 
Section  12.5.2.7).  
Clinical Signs and Symptoms  Excluding Acne, Hirsutism and Peripheral Edema  
Individual clinical sign s and symptom s, defined in Appendix M , will be summarized by 
treatment (or dose) group at each time point by number and percent of subjects .  For 
signs and symptoms other than acne, hirsutism and edema, e ach sign and symptom 
present at Baseline (RW0) will be graded on a 0 to 3 severity scale (0=absent, 1=mild, 
2=moderate, 3=severe, and  the severities reported at each visit will be added  to derive a 
total score.  Individual sign and symptoms severity scores will also be summarized using 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 111 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 shift tables at each visit. Total severity score and change s from Baseline of the severity 
total score will be presented by visit.  
Other Exploratory Endpoint Analyses  
Partial loss of response  
Proportions of subjects with partial loss of response (mUFC above normal but no more 
than 1.5X ULN, or LNSC that was normal at Baseline (RW0) and becomes abnormal 
(>ULN) based on each of two LNSC collections obtained on different nights ) AND 
clinically significant worsening of signs and symptoms of CS will be compa red between 
groups using a two -sided Fisher’s Exact test.  
Descriptions of other exploratory analyses will be provided in the SAP. 
12.5.4  Pharmacokinetics Analysis  
The PK model parameters will include: CL/F, V/F, K a with associated between subject 
variability whe re feasible.  Model parameters will be tabulated with associated precision.  
Derived parameters including t½, AUC and C max will be reported, if appropriate. 
Because the PK of ketoconazole are reported to change over time, time dependent 
changes in CL/F, AU C, and t½ will be investigated and, if identified, changes will be 
described in the model. Derived parameters will be tabulated with associated summary 
statistics.  
A population modeling- based approach will be used to evaluate PK data as implemented 
in NONMEM® (Version 7 level 2 or higher).  Subjects with at least one adequately 
documented dose and concentration record will be considered for inclusion in the 
population PK evaluation.  All evaluations will be conducted based on a pre -specified 
analysis plan. Standard model building and model evaluation procedures will be followed.  Derived parameters will be calculated from the final model.   The model will 
include data derived from the SONICS study.  
12.5.5  Pharmacodynamics Analysis  
The PD model par ameters including UFC I max, levoketoconazole dose producing UFC 
IC50, and associated estimates of between -subject variability will be reported.  Individual 
maximal UFC reductions achieved during the TM Phase  will be tabulated and summary 
statistics (mean, median, SD and percent coefficient of variation) will be presented.  
Stochastic simulations of the expected response for the preferred dose regimen will be 
generated to explore the range of UFC reduction.  
A population modeling- based approach  will be used t o evaluate PD data (UFC) as 
implemented in NONMEM® (Version 7 level 2 or higher).  Subjects included in the 
population analysis with at least one adequately documented dose, PK record and UFC 
record will be considered for inclusion in the population PD eva luation.  All evaluations 
will be conducted based on a pre- specified analysis plan. Standard model building and 
model evaluation procedures will be followed.  Derived parameters such as maximal 
response will be calculated from the final model as appropriat e.  The PK-PD models will 
include data from SONICS.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 112 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 12.5.6  Subgroup Analyses  
Subgroup analyses for the primary endpoint and biomarkers of CS comorbidities 
endpoints will be performed for a minimum subgroup size of at least  30% of the ITT 
population.  Details will be presented  in the SAP.  
12.5.6.1   Prior Therapy for Cushing’s Syndrome  
Subgroup displays for the primary endpoint and the biomarkers of CS comorbidities 
endpoints will be generated for subjects that enter the study as surgery- naïve versus 
surgery- experienced.  Subgroup analyses by number of prior surgeries, time since last 
surgery, and category of prior medical treatment will also be explored depending on 
subgroup size . 
12.5.6.2   Prior Radiation Therapy  
Subset displays for the primary endpoint and the biomarkers of CS comorbidities 
endpoint will be generated, excluding subjects who previously received radiation therapy.   
12.5.6.3   Hypertensive Subjects 
Subgroup displays for the primary endpoint and the biomarkers of CS comorbidities 
endpoint will be generated for subjects who enter the study while being prescribed 
antihypertensive medications versus not and subjects who enter the study with a Baseline 
SBP above 130 mmHg or DBP 90 mmHg or above regardless of antihypertensive 
medication s tatus versus those with lower blood pressure  recordings.  
12.5.6.4   Pre-diabetic/Diabetic Subjects  
Subgroup displays for the primary endpoint and the  biomarkers of CS comorb idities 
secondary efficacy endpoint  will be performed for subjects who enter the study as pre-
diabetic (Baseline fasting glucose greater or equal to  100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and less 
than 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)  without concomitant use of antihyperglycemic me dication) 
versus those with normal fasting glucose or diabetic (Baseline fasting  glucose 126 mg/dL or above  or lower fasting glucose while being prescribed antihyperglycemic 
medications) versus those without diabetes.  
12.6 Interim Analyses and Data Monitoring  
An interim analysis, also referred to as the End of Randomized Withdrawal Phase 
analysis , will be conducted after all enrolled subjects have either completed the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase or discontinued prior to the end of the Randomized 
Withdrawal Pha se.  The interim analysis will include unblinded efficacy and safety data 
up to the end of the Randomized Withdrawal Phase. Data from the Restoration Phase will not be analyzed.  Prior to the unblinding for the interim analysis, the data up to the end of 
the Randomized Withdrawal Phase will be cleaned and reviewed in a blinded manner to 
resolve data queries.  Details of the planned interim analysis will be provided in the SAP.  
The SAP will be finalized prior to the unblinding for the interim analysis  result s.   
Subjects, Investigators, study site personnel, representatives of the Sponsor and CRO 
involved in the monitoring of the study, and representatives of the CRO involved in the 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 113 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 data management of the study  will remain blinded at the individual subject le vel until 
after the database lock at the end of the study.  The names of individuals who will be 
unblinded at the individual subject level with respect to the interim  analysis activities 
and/or its results will be documented by the statistician who will lead the unblinded team 
that will conduct the interim  analysis.   
No changes to the design or conduct of the remainder of the study nor the pre- specified 
analyses in the SAP will be made based on the interim  analysis results.  The results from 
the interim  analysis for the primary endpoint and the secondary endpoints during the 
Randomized Withdrawal Phase will be considered as final.  There will be no statistical 
adjustments of the results at the final analysis that will be conducted after the study ends.  
Since some of the subjects will still be ongoing in the Restoration Phase at the time of the 
interim analysis, the results of the final analysis on the secondary endpoints during the 
Restoration Phase will be analyzed for potential bias resulting from the timing of the 
interim analysis.  These analyses will be descri bed in the SAP.   
An independent DSMB will review key safety data at regular intervals throughout the study, as described in Section  12.5.2.   The DSMB charter will include details on the 
restricted access to and the disclosure of the interim safety results presented to the 
DSMB.  
13 ADVERSE EVENTS (AE) AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (SAE)  
The Investigator and study staff are responsible for detecting and recording AEs and 
SAEs during scheduled safety evaluations and whenever such information is brought to their attention. This section of the protocol provides definitions and detailed procedures 
to be followed.  
During each visit, the Investigator will question the subject about AEs using an open 
question taking care not to influence the subject’s answers, e.g. "have you noticed any change in your health?”  
13.1 Definition of an AE  
An AE is any untoward me dical occurrence in a study subject that is temporally 
associated with the use of a medicinal product, regardless of its potential relationship to the medicinal product.  An AE, therefore, can be any unfavorable or unintended sign, 
including an abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease (new or exacerbated), 
whether related to the study drug or study conduct  or not .   
Examples of an AE include:  
• Exacerbation of a pre- existing condition including either an increase in frequency 
and/or intensity of the c ondition.  
• New conditions detected or diagnosed after investigational product administration 
even though it may have been present prior to the start of the study.  
• Signs, symptoms of a drug interaction.  
• Signs, symptoms of a suspected overdose of either inves tigational product or a 
concurrent medication.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 114 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 • A laboratory abnormality worsening or newly occurring after the start of the study 
(i.e., after Screening) that results in subject withdrawal from the study or medical 
treatment or further follow -up. 
NOTE : Abnormal values that reflect hypercortisolism (UFCs, LNSC  and serum cortisol) 
will not be recorded as AEs. AEs may include pre - or post -treatment events that occur 
because of  protocol- mandated procedures (i.e., invasive procedures, modific ation of 
subject’s previous therapeutic regimen).  
13.2 Definition of a SAE  
An SAE is any untoward medical occurrence that, at any dose:  
(a) results in death;  
(b) is life -threatening;  
NOTE:  The term 'life -threatening' in the definition of 'serious' refers to an event in which 
the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event.  It does not refer to an event, which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.  
(c) requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
NOTE :  In general,  hospitalization signifies that the subject has been detained (usually 
involving at least an overnight stay) at the hospital or emergency ward for observation 
and/or treatment that would not have been appropriate in the physician’s office or out -
patient s etting.  Complications that occur during hospitalization are AEs.  If a 
complication prolongs hospitalization or fulfills any other serious criteria, the event is 
serious.  When in doubt as to whether “hospitalization” occurred,  or was necessary, the 
AE sh ould be considered serious.  
(d) results in disability/incapacity;  
NOTE:  The term disability means a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life functions.  This definition is not intended to include experiences of 
relatively minor medi cal significance such as uncomplicated headache, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, influenza, and accidental trauma (e.g. sprained ankle) which may interfere or 
prevent everyday life functions but do not constitute a substantial disruption.  
(e) is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or  
(f) Medical or scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether reporting is 
appropriate in other situations, such as important medical events that may not be 
immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but  may jeopardize 
the subject or may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the above definition.  These should also be considered 
serious.  Examples of such events are invasive or malignant cancers, intensive 
treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm, blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization, or development of 
drug dependency or drug abuse.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 115 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 13.2.1  Disease-Related Events  
Although symptoms of CS are quite non-specific, all AEs and their attributions will be 
collected and reviewed.  The reduction in cortisol levels, regardless of therapeutic 
intervention, is known to cause symptoms (e.g., nausea, lethargy, muscle aches), and 
these too will be captured as AEs  for evaluation.  
13.2.2  Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI)  
A serious or non -serious event of scientific and medical concern specific to a Sponsor’s 
product or program, for which ongoing monitoring and rapid communication by the 
Investigator to the Sponsor can be appropriate. Such an event might warrant further 
investigation to characterize and understand it.  
AESIs should be reported to the designated safety group as per Section  13.7 
regardless of seriousness or causality .  Upon receipt, these AEs will be captured in the 
safety database, targeted follow -up queries will be sent to sites, and source 
documentation will be sent to the DSMB.  As deemed appropriate, analysis  of any 
unscheduled PK samples collected in association with AESIs may be expedited. Once 
uploaded and reconciled in the clinical database, these results will be forwarded to the 
DSMB.  
The AESIs for this study are defined as follows:  
 Persistent QTc prolongation:  Persistent elevation of the QTc interval is 
defined as absolute QTc interval above 500 msec (or above 60 msec above the 
Baseline),  with an ECG evaluation on repeat determination continuing to 
demonstrate QTc prolongation in the absence of plausible alternative 
explanations.   For purposes of comparing the  prolonged QTc interval to a 
Baseline interval for determining if an  AESI  has occ urred , the Baseline interval 
will be TM0 for events first occurring during the Titration and Maintenance Phase 
and RW0 for events first occurring during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase or 
Restoration Phase . 
 Potential hepatic events:  Signs of liver  dysfunc tion or injury , such as:  
• ALT or AST above 8X ULN; 
• ALT or AST rises to above 5X ULN in less than  4 weeks or persists for over 
2 weeks ; 
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN and total bilirubin above 2X ULN or INR above 
1.5 not explained by any other cause such as viral hepatitis ; 
• ALT or AST above 3X ULN with  new onset of or worsening of fatigue, 
nausea, vomiting, fever, rash or eosinophilia, in the absence of other evident 
cause ; 
• Signs and /or symptoms suggestive of hepatic dysfunction (any of the 
following: nausea , anorexia, fever, fatigue, right upper quadrant discomfort, 
pruritus, dark urine or acholic stool) coupled with ALT and/or AST above 
3X ULN and/or AP above 2X ULN, and/or total bilirubin above 2X ULN in 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 116 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 the absence of evidence for obstruction or Gilbert s yndrome. An ultrasound 
evaluation of the gallbladder and bile duct should be conducted to exclude 
cholestasis as the cause for elevated AP and/or total bilirubin . 
Please see Appendix O  for guidance on the assessment of abnormal LFTs.  
 Adrenal insufficiency:  A suspicion or diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency, 
based on the considerations laid out in Section 6.5.3. 
13.3 Time Period, Frequency, and Method of Collecting AEs and SAEs  
As a consistent method of soliciting AEs, the subject should be asked a non -leading 
question such as: "How  do you feel?"  
All AEs occurring after obtaining the informed consent until the end of the final visit 
must be reported.  All AEs must be recorded irrespective of whether they are considered 
drug- related.  
At each visit/assessment in the period defined above, AEs will be evaluated by the Investigator and recorded.  
Any AEs already documented at a previous assessment and designated as ongoing, 
should be reviewed at subsequent visits as necessary.  If these have resolved, this should 
be documented.  Changes in intensity or frequency of AEs should be recorded as separate 
events (i.e., a new record started).  
The recording of AEs and SAEs are described in Section  13.4 (“Recording of AEs and 
SAEs”).  
13.4 Recording of AEs and SAEs  
All clinical events, including either observed or volunteered problems, complaints or symptoms are to be recorded on the Adverse Events page(s) of the CRF.  The need to 
capture this information is not dependent upon whether the clinical event is associated 
with study treatment. Adverse clinical events resulting from concurrent illnesses or 
reactions to concurrent medications are also to be recorded.  To avoid vague, ambiguous, 
or colloquial expressions, the AE should be recorded in standard medical terminology 
rather than the subject’s own words.  
Each adverse clinical event is to be evaluated for duration, intensity, and whether the 
event  may be associated with the study drug or other causes.  Start and stop dates, 
relationship to study drug, medical management, and alternative causality of event must be recorded in the Adverse Events section of the CRF.  AEs believed to be possibly relate d to study drug must be followed until resolution.  
13.5 Evaluating AEs and SAEs  
13.5.1  Severity Rating  
The severity of AEs and SAEs will be graded per NCI CTCAE , Version 4.0.  
Grade 1  Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; 
intervention not indicated  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 117 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Grade 2  Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate 
instrumental activities of daily living  
Grade 3  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; hospitalization or 
prolongation of hospitalization indicated; disabling; limiting self -care activities of daily 
living  
Grade 4  Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated  
Grade 5  Death related to AE  
An AE that is assessed as severe should not be confused with an SAE.  An event is 
defined as ‘serious’ when it meets one of the pre -defined outcomes as described in 
Section  13.2 “Definition of a SAE”.  
13.5.2  Relationship to Study Drug  
For AEs , the relationship to study treatm ent is to be assessed using the following 
definitions:  
• Not related:  The AE is definitely not related to the drug.  This designation should 
be reserved for those events which occur prior to study treatment or for those events which cannot be even remotely related to study participation (e.g., injuries 
sustained in an autom obile accident  that itself was not precipitated by a possibly -
related adverse event ). 
• Unlikely:  There is no reasonable association between the study treatment and the 
suspected event, and a precipitant of the adverse event other than study treatment 
has be en identified (e.g., a therapy used outside of the study or the subject’s 
underlying clinical condition).  
o For purposes of expedited regulatory reporting, unlikely causality will be 
considered as not -related causality.  
• Possibly related:   The suspected even t may or may not follow a reasonable 
temporal sequence from study treatment administration but seems to be the type 
of reaction that cannot be dismissed as unlikely.  The event could have been 
produced or mimicked by the subject's clinical state or by othe r modes of therapy 
concomitantly administered to the subject.  
• Probably related : The suspected event follows a reasonable temporal sequence 
from study treatment administration, abates upon discontinuation of the treatment, 
and cannot be reasonably explained  by the known characteristics of the subject's 
clinical state.  
• Definitely related : This designation should be reserved for those events which 
have no uncertainty in their relationship to treatment administration.  
13.6 Follow- Up of AEs and SAEs  
After the initial AE/SAE report, the Investigator is required to proactively follow each 
subject.  Further information on SAEs will be provided to the Sponsor’s designated safety 
group on the subject’s condition within 24  hours as described in Section  13.7. 
New or updated information will also be recorded on the “AE” CRF within 24 hours.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 118 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 13.7 Prompt Reporting of SAEs to Sponsor  
Any SAE  reported by  a subject who has signed the informed consent whether during  the 
study or discovered during follow -up, must be reported by the Investigator to the 
Sponsor’s designated safety group within 24 hours  even if the SAE does not appear to 
be drug- related. This s hould be done by emailing or faxing a copy of the SAE Report 
form plus other related information to Sponsor’s designated safety group.  The SAE may 
be reported by telephone; however, this should be followed up within 24 hours with a 
copy of the SAE Report form.  Additionally, it may be necessary for the designated 
safety group to communicate with the Investigator if additional information is required.   
Regardless of seriousness or causality, AEs designated as AESI (instances of persistent 
QTc prolongation,  potential hepatic events, and potential adrenal insufficiency) should be 
reported to the Sponsor’s designated safety group within 24 hours, in the same manner as 
SAEs (see also Section  13.2.2).  
During both business and non- business hours, the email address  and telephone number 
listed below should be used to report SAEs and AESIs.  
 Reportable Events Contact Details  
Email: GlobalSAEInbox@Chiltern.com  
24-Hour Call Center Phone: +1 416 568 9804  
An SAE Report form must be completed and forwarded via email to Cortendo’s 
designated safety group using the email address  listed abov e within 24 hours of becoming 
aware of the event.  
All additional follow -up evaluations must be reported to Cortendo’s designated safety 
group.  Such data should be sent to the Sponsor within 24 hours.  All SAEs will be 
followed until the Investigator and Sponsor agree the event is satisfactorily resolved.  
The Sponsor will be responsible for completing the safety report and for notifying the 
relevant authorities of any SAE as outlined in the International Conference on 
Harmonization (ICH) Guidelines and per  local regulatory requirements.  The Investigator 
and Cortendo’s designated safety group will als o ensure that the appropriate IRBs / IECs  
are notified of the SAE.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 119 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 14 REFERENCES 
American Diabetes Association:  Classification and Diagnosis of Diabetes.  American 
Diabetes Association. Sec. 2. In Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes —2016. Diabetes 
Care 2016;39(Suppl. 1):  S13-S22. 
Amlashi FG, Swearingen B, Faje AT, Nachtigall LB, Miller KK, Klibanski A, et al. 
Accuracy of Late- Night Salivary Cortisol in Evaluating Postoperative Remission and 
Recurrence in Cushing's Disease.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Oct;100(10):3770 -7.  
Bertherat J.  The c hallenge of early diagnosis of C ushing disease recurrence. Endocr 
Pract. 2016 Nov;22(11):1356-1357. 
Bochicchio D, Losa M, Buchfelder M. Factors influencing the immediate and late 
outcome of Cushing's disease treated by transsphenoidal surgery: a retrospective study by 
the European Cushing's Disease Survey Group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1995 Nov;80(11):3114-20. 
Bolland MJ , Holdaway IM, Berkeley JE, Lim S, Dransfield WJ, Conaglen JV, et al . 
Mortality and morbidity in Cushing's syndrome in New Zealand.  Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 
2011 Oct;75(4):436 -42.  
Borai A, Livingstone C, Ferns G . Reference change values for i nsulin and insulin -like 
growth factor binding protein -1 (IGFBP -1) in individuals with varying degrees of glucose 
tolerance.  Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2013;73(4):274 -8. 
Brodovicz, KG, McNaughtan K, Uemura N, Meininger G, Girman CJ, Yale SH.  
Reliability and Feasibility of Methods to Quantitatively Assess Peripheral Edema.  Clin 
Med Res 2009;7(1/2):21-31. 
Castinetti F, Guignat L, Giraud P, et al. Ketoconazole in Cushing's disease: is it worth a 
try? J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:1623-1630. 
Clayton RN , Jones  PW. Reulen  RC, Stewart  PM, Hassan -Smith  ZK, Ntali  G, et al. 
Mortality in patients with Cushing’s disease more than 10 years after remission: a 
multicentre, multinational, retrospective cohort study . Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 
2016;4(7): 569-576. 
Cortendo Report Number 2002-02- 21, Cortendo Exp IIId and Report Number 2002-02-
21, Cortendo Exp IVa. 2002.  
Daniel E, Newell -Price JD. Therapy of endocrine disease: steroidogenesis enzyme 
inhibitors in Cushing’s syndrome. European Journal of Endocrinology, European 
Federation of Endocrine Societies.  2015;172(6):R263-280. 
Darpo B , Ferber G, Zhou M, Sumeray M, Sager P.  Lomitapide at supratherapeutic 
plasma levels does not prolong the Qtc interval --results from a TQT study with 
moxifloxacin and ketoconazole.  Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2013 Nov;18(6):577-
89.  Dekkers OM , Horváth- Puhó E, Jørgensen JO, Cannegieter SC, Ehrenstein V, 
Vandenbroucke JP, et al. Multisystem morbidity and mortality in Cushing's syndrome: a 
cohort study.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013  Jun;98(6):2277- 84.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 120 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 De Martin M, Pecori Giraldi F, Cavagnini F. Cushing's disease. Pituitary. 2006;9(4):279-
87. 
Doshi A, Zaheer A, Stiller MJ.  A comparison of current acne grading systems and 
proposal of a novel system.  Int J Derm. 1997;36:416-418. 
Enge lhardt D, Weber MM, Miksch T, Abedinpour F, Jaspers C. The influence of 
ketoconazole on human adrenal steroidogenesis: incubation studies with tissue slices. 
Clinical Endocrinology. 1991; Aug;35(2):163-8. 
FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA warns that prescribing of Nizoral (ketoconazole) 
oral tablets for unapproved uses including skin and nail infections continues; linked to 
patient death  (last update:19 May 2016) available at:  
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm500597.htm 
FDA Guidance on Drug -Induced L iver Injury: Premarketing Clinical Evaluation ( July 
2009)  Findling JW, Fleseriu M, Newell- Price J, Petersenn S, Pivonello R, Kandra A, et al . Late-
night salivary cortisol may be valuable for assessing treatment response in patients with 
Cushing's disease: 12 -month, Phase III pasireotide study.  Endocrine. 2016 
Nov;54(2):516-523. 
Gerber JD, Dilmaghania S, Gal J. Stereoselective pharmacokinetics (PK) of oral 
ketoconazole (K) in healthy subjects. Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chem otherapy (ICAAC) September 2003; poster #A -1569. 
Giraldi FP, Toja PM, Michailidis G, Metinidou A, De Martin M, Scacchi M, Stramba -
Badiale M, Cavagnini F. High Prevalence of Prolonged QT Interval Duration in Male 
Patients with Cushing’s Disease. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2011; 119:221-224. 
Hatch R, Rosenfield RL, Kim MH, Tredway D.  Hirsutism:  implications, etiology, and 
management.  Am J Obstet Gynecol.  1981;140:815-830. 
Ketoconazole HRA Assessment Report.  September 25, 2014.  Committee for Medicinal 
Products for Human Use.  EMA/CHMP/534845/2014.  
Lake -Bakaar G, Scheuer PJ, Sherlock S. Hepatic reactions associated with ketoconazole 
in the United Kingdom. Br Med J. 1987;294:419-422. 
Lewis JH, Zimmerman HJ, Benson GD, Ishak KG. Hepatic injury associated with 
ketoconazole therapy. Analysis of 33 cases. Gastroenterology. 1984;86:503-513. Lo Re V 3rd, Carbonari DM, Lewis JD , Forde KA, Goldberg DS, Reddy KR,  et al. Oral 
Azole Antifungal Medications and Risk of Acute Liver Injury, Overall and by Chr onic 
Liver Disease Status.  Am J  Med. 2016 Mar;129(3):283-91.  
Macfarlane PW, Devine B, Clark  E. The University of Glasg ow (Uni -G) ECG Analysis 
Program. Computers in Cardiology 2005;32:451−454. 
Moulder  Center for Drug Discovery Research, Temple University School of Pharmacy, 
2012. U npubli shed results  
National Cancer Institute. Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI 
CTCAE), version 4.0 3. June 14, 2010 http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopm ent/.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 121 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW , Murad MH , Newell -Price J, Savage MO , et al . 
Treatment of Cushing's Syndrome: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):2807-31.  
Nieman LK, Biller BMK, Findling JW, et al.  The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome:  an 
Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.  J. Clin Endocrinol & Met. 
2008;93(5):1526-1540. 
Nieman LK. Medical therapy of Cushing's disease. Pituitary. 2002;5(2):77-82. 
Nizoral® Product Insert.  Janssen Pharmaceuticals.  July 2013.  
Outeiro N , Hohmann N, Mikus G.  No Increased Risk of Ketoconazole Toxicity in Drug -
Drug Interaction Studies.  J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Oct;56(10):1203- 11.  
Petersenn S, Newell -Price J, F inding JW, Gus F, Maldonado M, et al . High variability in 
Baseline urinary free cortisol values in patients with Cushing’s disease. Clin Endocrinol. 
2013; 0: 1-9. 
Pivonello R, De Leo M, Cozzolino A, Colao A.  The Treatment of Cushing's Disease. 
Endocr Rev. 2015;36(4):385-486.  Pivonello R, Isi dori AM, De Martino MC, Newell -Price J, Biller BM, Colao A.  
Complications of Cushin g's syndrome: state of the art. Lanc et Diabetes Endocrinol. 
2016;4(7):611-29.  
Pozza C, Graziadio C, Giannetta E, Lenzi A, Isiori A. Management strategies for 
aggressive Cus hing’s syndrome:  from macroadenomas to ectopics.  J Oncol .  
2012;(2012), Article ID 685213, 9 pages.  
Ricos C, Cava F, Garcia- Lario JV, Hernandez A, Iglesias N, Jimenez CV. The reference 
change value: A  proposal to interpret laboratory reports in serial testing based on 
biological variation . Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2004;64(3):175-84. 
Rotstein DM, Kertesz DJ, Walker KA, Swinney DC. Stereoisomers of ketoconazole: 
preparation and biological activity. J Med  Chem. 1992 Jul 24;35(15):2818-25. 
Santaguida PL, Balion C, Hunt D, Morrison K, Gerstein H, Raina P, Booker L, Yazdi H.  
Diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of impaired glucose tolerance and impaired fasting 
glucose.  Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ). 2005 Aug ;(128):1-11. 
Schindler AE, Campagnoli C, Druckmann R, Humber J, Pasqualini JR, Schweppe KW, 
Thijssen JHH. Classification and pharmacology of progestins. Maturitas. 2003; 46S1: S7-S16. 
Schwartz SL, Rendell M, Ahmann AJ, Thomas A, Arauz- Pacheco CJ, Welles BR. Safety 
profile and metabolic effects of 14 days of treatment with DIO -902: results of a phase IIa 
multicenter, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel- group trial in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther. 2008 Jun;30(6):1081- 8. 
Sharma ST, Nieman LK , Feelders RA.  Cushing's syndrome: epidemiology and 
developments in disease management.  Clin Epidemiol. 2015 Apr 17;7:281-93. 
Sonino N. The use of ketoconazole as an inhibitor of steroid production. N Engl J Med. 
1987;317:812-8. 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 122 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Steen RE, Kapelrud H, Haug E, Frey H. In vivo and in vitro inhibition by ketoconazole of 
ACTH secretion from a human thymic carcinoid tumour. Acta endocrinologica. 1991 
Sep;125(3):331-4. 
The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) —Complete Report.  August 
2004. 
Turner HE , Peake RW, Allison JJ.  Seasonal pseudohyperkalaemia: no longer an issue?  
Ann Clin Biochem. 2012 Jan;49(Pt 1):94- 6.  
Webb SM, Badia X, Barahona MJ, et al.  Evaluation of health -related quality of life in 
patients with Cushing’s syndrome with a new questionnaire.  Eur J Endocrinol 
2008;158;623-30. 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 123 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX A TIME AND EVENTS SCHEDULES 
Refer to the Section  6 (Study Assessments and Procedures) and the Study Procedures Manual for more specific 
details on the assessments.  
Table  7 Time and Events Schedule for Screening  Procedures  
 Screenin g Phase1 
Assessments  Subjects who completed SONICS 
within the previous 6 months and 
currently receiving levoketoconazole2,3 Levoketoconazole naïve subjects and 
subjects who completed SONICS >  6 
months prior to study entry  
Informed Consent  X4 X 
Eligibility (Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria)  X X 
Medical history and demography  X X 
Prior/concomitant medication 5 X X 
Physical exam & assessment of 
appearance   X 
Cushing’s Signs & Symptoms Form   X 
Vital signs (BP and HR in triplicate  and 
temperature)   X 
Weight/height/BMI/body habitus   X 
HIV / Hepatitis B and C screens   X 
ECG – Local ECG machine   (X) 6 
ECG – Spaulding7  X 
Late night salivary cortisol (2 nights)8 X9 X 
TSH / FT4 and Prolactin   X 
Pituitary MRI   X if not within  6 months  of TM0  or RW0  
FSH and estradiol (women only)   X 
Urine βHCG, females   X 
Routine  clinical laboratory  tests 
(chemistry, hematology, urinalysis)   X 
Fasting glucose and insulin measurements   X 
INR/PT/PTT   X 
HbA1c   X 
                                                
1 Screening procedures to be performed following informed consent; Screening Phase for levoketoconazole -naive  cohort  may last up 
to approximately 13 weeks to allow prior medication washout before entering the TM Phase ( Table  8); Subjects confirmed as 
eligible for the SONICS -completer  cohort will proceed directly to Visit RW0 ; The Screening Phase, which will rely on data 
collected during SONICS, will not begin before  Visit M12 of SONICS and will end once eligibility is confirmed (the time from 
confirmation of eligibility and RW0 should be no more than 11 (+3) days ); the minimum time requirement is confirmation of the 
Therapeutic Dose as dictated b y tolerability and UFC results).  (see Table  9).  
2 If there is a time gap between completion of Screening and TM0 or RW0 for subjects currently receiving levoketoconazole , then 
open -label levoketoconazole should be continued between  Screening  and TM0 or RW0  to maintain the Therapeutic Dose.  If rolling 
over from SONICS, subjects will be dispensed LOGICS medication starting at the screening visit.  If entering from EAP, subjects 
will stay on open -label levoketoconazole dispensed from EAP until the Baseline visit.   
3 For subjects who have completed SONICS mor e than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and have not been on a stable 
Therapeutic D ose throughout the previous 12-week  period, Screening Procedures will mimic those for the levoketoconazole -naïve 
subjects to confirm  eligibility for the current study.   
4 Informed consent for subjects who completed SONICS is administered at or prior to the Screening visit prior to randomization or 
performance of any study procedures  for this protocol .  
5 Blood pressure, diabetes, cholesterol, anti -inflammatory, and CS -specific medications will be captured separately from other 
medications.  
6 Local machine to be used only when Spaulding device is non -operational. Local ECGs must be transmitted to Spaulding for central  
reading via printout.  
7 Spaulding ECGs will be obtained over a minimum of 1 minute up to a maximum of 5 minutes at Screening.  
8 Ideally, UFC and LNSC samples should be collected before DST. If collecting UFC and LNSC samples after administeri ng 
dexamethasone, do not collect the LNSC until at least 5 day s after dexamethasone  is administered; do not start collection of the 
UFCs until at least 14 days  after dexamethasone is administered  (see Section  6.4.5.3 ). 
9 Subjects rolling over from SONICS at the M12 visit (and after signing the informed consent form for LOGICS)  will need one 
additional LNSC collection for LOGICS screening (total of 2 collections).  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 124 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
  Screenin g Phase1 
Assessments  Subjects who completed SONICS 
within the previous 6 months and 
currently receiving levoketoconazole2,3 Levoketoconazole naïve subjects and 
subjects who completed SONICS >  6 
months prior to study entry  
OGTT10  X 
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST)11  X if not done within previous 60 days12 
ACTH   X 
Fasting lipid measurements, triglycerides   X 
Spot urine for albumin/creatinine ratio   X 
Dispense study medication/diary  X13 X14 
Testosterone, free/total   X 
Adverse Event assessment15 X X 
24-h UFC/free cortisol/creatinine/ urinary 
volume (3 collections)   X16 
X 
                                                
10 OGTT should only be performed in subjects with IFG (i.e. fasting glucose ≥ 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and < 126 mg/dL (7.0 
mmol/L)) who do not have diabetes and who are  not receiving medications to lower blood glucose (i.e. antihyperglycemics). 
11 DST is not needed at screening for subjects currently receiving levoketoconazole at screening.  
12 This procedure will necessitate a second visit that can be performed at home by a qualified HHC professional.  
13 If rolling over from SONICS, subjects will return SONICS medications and will be dispensed LOGICS medication starting at the 
screening visit.  If entering from EAP, subjects will stay on open- label levoketoconazole dispensed from EAP until the Baseline visit.  
14 Only the study diary  should be dispensed at Screening (and not study medication) for levoketoconazole -naïve subjects  and subjects 
curren tly receiving levoketoconazole via an EAP but who completed SONICS greater than 6 months ago.  
15 AEs at Screening will only include AEs reported after ICF signing.  AEs reported in SONICS protocol and present at Screening will 
be recorded as medical history .  
16 Subjects who completed SONICS  at M12 visit (and after the informed consent form for LOGICS is signed) will need one additional 
UFC collected at Screening (total of 3 UFC collections needed).   
NOTE: The UFC samples should not be collected within 2 wee ks (approximately 14 days) after administering DST.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 125 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  8 Time and Events Schedule for  Dose Titration and Maintenance  Phase ( levoketoconazole-naïve Cohort) 
Assessments  Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM)  Phase 1  
BL Visit interval 14 days ( ± 3) Additional 
safety visit 
(in office)2  Additional 
safety visit 
(HHC)2 TM03  TM1  TM2  TM3  TM4  TM5  TM6  TM74 
Prior/concomitant medication5  X X X X X X X X X X 
Administer Study drug/patient study diary review  X X X X X X X X X X 
Drug accountability/dispensation of drug and study diary  X X X X X X X X   
Physical exam & assessment of appearance  (X)   X  X  X   
Cushing’s Signs & Symptoms Form  (X) X X X X X X X   
Vital signs (BP and HR in triplicate  and temperature)  (X) X X X X X X X X X 
Weight/height/BMI/body habitus  (X)    X   X   
Abdominal Girth (in triplicate)  X    X   X   
ECG – Local ECG machine6  (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X)  
ECG – Spaulding7  X X X X X X X X X X 
Late night salivary cortisol (1 night)8  X X X X X X    
Late night salivary cortisol (2 nights)8   (X)8        X   
TSH / FT4 and Prolactin  (X)9        X   
Urine βHCG, females  X X X X X X X X   
Routine  clinical laboratory  tests (chemistry, hematology, coagulation, 
urinalysis)  (X) X X X X X X X X X 
Fasting glucose and insulin measurements  (X) X X X X X X X X X 
HbA1c  X       X   
                                                
1 The approximate usual interval between dose -titration visits will be 14 days (±3 days) [including reporting time for UFC levels and safety laboratory assessments ]. 
2 One extra safety evaluation 5 (±2)  days after each dose escalation to 750 mg/day or above during the TM phase to include: AEs, vital signs, routine safety, laboratory assessments (including liver safety 
tests), ECGs, morning serum cortisol.  PK sampling at TM3, TM4, TM5, and TM6 could alte rnately be performed duri ng additional safety visit required for DL4, DL5, DL6 and DL7 if required.  
Additional safety visit can occur anytime bases on dose escalations to 750 mg/day or above.  Safety visit can be performed at  home by a qualified HHC profe ssional.  
3 TM0 serves as Baseline for the  TM Phase.  Screening procedures completed within 3 weeks of TM0 (within 2 weeks for LNSC, QTc interval and liver safety tests ; and within 6 weeks for UFCs) will 
be used as the TM0 or Baseline value.  If other Scree ning procedures were completed more than 3 weeks prior to TM0, then they will be repeated at TM0, except for pituitary MRI, w hich may be 
completed up to 6 months prior to TM0 or RW0 and UFCs which may be completed up to 6 weeks prior to TM0.  Al l blood samples, except for post -dose PK samples, should be obtained pri or to 
administering the first dose of levoketoconazole.   
4 TM7 procedures will also be completed by subjects who prematurely withdraw from the study during the TM  Phase.  
5 Blood pressure, diabetes, cholesterol, anti -inflammatory, and CS -specific medications will be captured with other medications but will require specification of these medication types.  
6 Local machine to be used only when Spaulding device is non -operationa l. Local ECGs must be transmitted to Spaulding for central reading via printout.  
7 Spaulding ECGs will be obtained over a minimum of 1 minute up to a maximum of 5 minutes and within approximately 1- 2 h after drug administration at each visit.  
8 LNSC coll ections should be collected before each visit.  LNSC collections during Screening to provide the Baseline measurements should be collected within 14 days prior to dosing at TM0.   
9 TSH/FT4 and prolactin to be measured if not done at Screening.  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 126 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Assessments  Dose Titration and Maintenance  (TM)  Phase 1  
BL Visit interval 14 days ( ± 3) Additional 
safety visit 
(in office)2  Additional 
safety visit 
(HHC)2 TM03  TM1  TM2  TM3  TM4  TM5  TM6  TM74 
OGTT  (pre-diabetic subjects  with IFG only)10         X  X   
Serum cortisol ( morning ) X X X X X X X X X X 
ACTH  (X)   X  X  X   
Fasting lipid measurements, triglycerides  (X)    X   X   
hsCRP  X    X   X   
Spot urine for albumin/creatinine ratio (only i f abnormal at Screening)  (X)   X   X X   
Testosterone, free/total  (X)   X  X  X   
Safety contact11 X (X) (X)        
Adverse Event assessment  X X X X X X X X X X 
Cushing  QoL questionnaire  X       X   
BDI-II instrument  X       X   
24-h UFC/creatinine/ urinary volume (3 collections )12 (X)       X   
24-h UFC /creatinine/ urinary volume (2  to 3 collections)13   X X X X X X    
Pharmacokinetic sampling14  X  (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) X (X) (X) 
 
 
                                                
10 Levoketoc onazole -naïve cohort subjects with IFG should have OGTT prior to RW0 if still escalating at TM5 after the Therapeutic Dose has been e stablished in TM Phase (i.e. at TM7).  
11 Contact (method by subject preference) approximately 1 week after first dose and ea ch dose adjustment up to DL3.  
12 Prior to the final open -label visit (TM7), three complete 24 -hour urine specimens will again be obtained (NOTE: collections should be collected prior to the visit and need not be repea ted if the final 
open -label visit coinc ides with the initial establishment of UFC normalization) to confirm maintenance of UFC normalization prior to randomization,  denoting UFC -eligibility for the Randomized 
Withdrawal Phase. UFC results must be received before next TM visit in order to determ ine the need to escalate dose.   
13 First 24 -hour urine collection will be ~Day 8 (±2 days) and the second collection will be ~Day 9 (±2 days) after start of each dose le vel.  24 -hour UFC collections should occur prior to and not at the 
visit and resul ts mu st be received before next TM visit.  If UFC ≤ULN, there will be an additional 24 -hour urine collection to confirm UFC results.  
14 During the TM  Phase, PK samples should be drawn pre -dose, at 1.5 -2.5 hours after dosing at  TM0 and TM7 and at approximately 6 -8 hours after dosing at one  interim visit (TM2 -TM6 or an 
additional safety visit) of the subject’s choosing.  The subject should forgo taking study medication on the day of the scheduled visit, so that dosing can be done at the clinic or by HHC professiona l. The 
6-8-hour time point for PK sampling is non -optional.  In case of AESI, a PK sample should be obtained as close to the time of the event as possible.   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 127 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  9 Study Time and Events Schedule for Randomized Withdrawal Phase and Restoration Phase  (Both Cohorts)  
Assessments  Randomized Withdrawal Phase  1 Restoration Phase  
BL D10 D20 D30 D40 D58 Visit interval 28 days ( ± 5) 
RW0  2 RW1  RW2  RW3  RW4  RW5  3 RES1  RES24 
Concomitant medication 5 X X X X X X X X 
Administer study  drug/patient diary review and dispensation  X X X X X X X (X) 6 
Drug accountability/dispensation of drug7 X X X X X X X X 
Physical exam & assessment of appearance  X   X  X  X 
Cushing’s Signs & Symptoms Form  X X X X X X X X 
Vital signs (BP and HR in triplicate  and temperature)  X X X X X X X X 
Weight/height/BMI/body habitus  X   X  X  X 
Abdominal Girth (in triplicate)  X     X  X 
ECG – Local ECG machine  8 (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) 
ECG – Spaulding  9 X X X X X X X X 
Safety contact  (between visits)10       weekly  
                                                
1 Visits RW1, RW2 and RW4  are required but are optionally at-home visits  for which assessments may be made by a qualified HHC  professional appointed by the Sponsor and agreed to with the 
Investigator and subject.  For RW1, RW2 and RW4, the visit can be up to 2 days before D10, D20 and D40, respectively.  For RW3 and RW5, the visit can be up to 4 days before D30 and D58, 
respectively.  
2 RW0  serves as the Baseline Visit for the primary efficacy endpoint for all subjects.  The procedures done at Visits TM7 (for levoketoconazole -naïve  cohort) , at Screening (for subjects who have exited 
SONICS more than 6 months prior to the Screening Phase and have been on a stable Therapeutic Dose throughout the previous 12 -week period),  or at SONICS Visit M12 (for subjects who completed 
SONICS ) need not be repeated  at RW0  unless a dose chan ge was required at Visit TM7 ; however, the findings/assessments from those procedures will be entered into the clinical database at Visit 
RW0 for subjects continuing into the Randomized Withdrawal Phase, and Eligibility must be confirmed for all subjects a t RW0 to include confirmation of continuous therapy with a Therapeutic Dose 
of levoketoconazole for the requisite time period prior to RW0.  RW0 should be scheduled to occur no earlier than 14 weeks an d no later than ~19 weeks after TM0, depending on durat ion until 
reaching a Therapeutic Dose . At least 4 weeks should elapse between reaching the Therapeutic Dose and RW0 to ensure tolerability  and stability (continued effectiveness) of the Therapeutic Dose .  
Randomization (RW0) may occur concurrently with the  final TM Phase visit or no more than 11 (+3) days later unless a dose change was required at Visit TM7.  
3 Subjects who require early rescue with open -label l evoketoconazole will undergo RW5  procedures immediately prior to administration of open -label rescue medication (except ECG to be done 1 -2 
hours after administration of rescue medication).  Subjects who complete all Randomized Wi thdrawal visits will undergo RW5 procedures immediately prior to administration of blinded Restoration 
Phase  study medication  (except ECG to be done 1 -2 hours after administration of rescue medication ).  As this is open -label treatment, titration beyond the previously established Therapeutic D ose is 
permitted if medically necessary.   The visit interval between RW5 and RES1 is 28  (+5) days  
4 RES2 procedures will also be performed by subjects who prematurely withdraw from the study during Restoration Phase.  
5 Blood pressure, diabetes, cholesterol, anti -inflammatory, and CS -specific medications will be captured as specific categories on the eCRF . 
6 Accountability check only. Drug administration will not occur in conjunction with this study at RES2.  
7 Drug accountability and dispensation only to be completed when visits are performed in-clinic and not applicable to HHC visits.  No dispensation of drug to occur at RW1, RW2, RW4 and RES2.  All 
drug-dispensat ion visits including any unscheduled visit for distribution of drug should be recorded in the IR T. 
8 Local ECG machine to be used only when Spaulding device is non-operational. Local ECGs must be transmitted to Spaulding for central reading via printout.  
9 Spaulding ECGs will be obtained over a minimum of 1 minute  up to a maximum of 5 minutes at Screening and within approximately 1 – 2 h after drug administration at each visit . 
10 Weekly safety contact  during Restoration Phase (between RW5 and RES2) —method according to preference —to be made between visits to inquir e regarding adverse events, subject status and to 
ensure compliance with study medication.  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 128 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Assessments  Randomized Withdrawal Phase  1 Restoration Phase  
BL D10 D20 D30 D40 D58 Visit interval 28 days ( ± 5) 
RW0  2 RW1  RW2  RW3  RW4  RW5  3 RES1  RES24 
Late night salivary cortisol (1 night) 11  X X X X  X  
Late night salivary cortisol (2 nights)11 X     X  X 
TSH / FT4 and Prolactin 12 X     X  X 
Pituitary MRI13 X     X   
Urine βHCG, females  X X X X X X X X 
Routine  clinical laboratory  tests (chemistry, hematology, 
coagulation, urinalysis)  X X X X X X X X 
Fasting glucose and insulin measurements  X X X X X X X X 
HbA1c  X     X  X 
OGTT  (pre-diabetic subjects  with IFG only)     (X) 14     X  X 
Serum cortisol ( morning ) X X X X X X X X 
ACTH  X X X X X X X X 
Fasting lipid measurements, triglycerides  X     X  X 
hsCRP  X     X  X 
Spot urine for albumin/creatinine ratio (only if abnormal at 
Screening)  X     X  X 
Testosterone, free/total  X     X  X 
Adverse Event assessment  X X X X X X X X 
Cushing  QoL questionnaire  X     X  X 
BDI-II instrument  X     X  X 
24-h UFC/creatinine/ urinary volume (3 or 4 collections)15 X     X  X16 
24-h UFC /creatinine/ urinary volume (2  collections)15       X16  
24-h UFC /creatinine/ urinary volume (2  to 3 collections) 15,17  X X X X    
                                                
11 LNSC collections must be collected before the visit.  A second night’s collection should be done if LNSC is being used to establish the need for early rescue therapy during Randomized Withdrawal  
Phase . 
12 TSH/FT4 to be measured at TM7 Visit during the TM Phase.  If subjects reach their maximum dose before the TM7 visit during the TM Phase, they will have TSH/FT4 measured at Visit RW0 of the 
Randomized  Withdrawal Phase.  
13 SONICS -completer cohort subjects will have Pituitary MRI  done as part of SONICS Visit M12.  The Visit RW0 and RW5 MRI may be performed up to 2 weeks BEF ORE the visit.  
14 For those who completed SONICS and are pre -diabetic with IFG at the SONICS baseline should have OGTT done to become the Baseline value for current study.   Levoketoconazole -naïve subjects 
should have the test completed during the screening phase and prior to RW0 after the Therapeutic Dose has been established in the TM Phase (i.e. at TM7).  
15 24-hour UFC collections should occur prior to the visit.  
16 For the urine collection between RW5 and RES1, subjects should have received the previously achieved Therapeutic  dose of blinded study medication  for at least 1 week before collections  commence 
and complete and at least 1  week before the RES1 visit.  For urine collections between RES1 and RES2, urine collection should commence at approximately Day 18 of the Restoration Phase.  
17 First 24 -hour urine collection will be ~Day 8 (±2 days) and the second collection will be ~Day 9 (±2 days) after the clinic visit .  A third UFC collection should be done if UFC is being used to 
establish the need for early rescue therapy during the Randomized Withdrawal Phase.  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 129 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Assessments  Randomized Withdrawal Phase  1 Restoration Phase  
BL D10 D20 D30 D40 D58 Visit interval 28 days ( ± 5) 
RW0  2 RW1  RW2  RW3  RW4  RW5  3 RES1  RES24 
Pharmacokinetic sampling18       X  
 
                                                
18 During the Restoration Phase, PK samples should be drawn  pre-dose and between  1.5 to 2.5 hours after dosi ng only at RES1 . In case of AESI, a PK sample should be obtained as close to the time of 
the event as possible . 
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 130 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX B LABORATORY ANALYTES 
Laboratory studies to be collected as per Time and Events Schedule s (Appendix A ). 
 
Disease -related Assessments  
Urinary free cortisol, total creatinine and total volume from 24 -hour urine collections  
Salivary cortisol  
Serum cortisol  
Plasma ACTH  
Dexamethasone 
 CS Cardiovascular Co-Morbidity Biomarkers   
Fasting glucose  
Fasting insulin  
Hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c]   
High -sensitivity C -reactive protein [hsCRP]  
Fasting lipids and triglycerides: including t otal cholesterol, high density lipoprotein cholesterol 
[HDL -C], and low density lipoprotein- cholesterol [LDL -C] 
 
Routine Clinical Laboratory Tests  
 
Hematology  
Platelet Count   RBC Indices : Automated WBC Differential:  
RBC Count  MCV  Neutrophils  
WBC Count (absolute)  MCH  Lymphocytes  
 MCHC  Monocytes  
Hemoglobin   Eosinophils  
Hematocrit   Basophils  
 
Clinical Chemistry  
Blood Urea Nitrogen  Liver Safety Tests  
Creatinine  AST (SGOT)  
Sodium  ALT (SGPT)  
Potassium  GGT  
Chloride  Alkaline phosphatase  
Total CO 2 Total and direct bilirubin  
Calcium, Magnesium, Phosphate  Coagulation tests ( INR/PT/PTT ) 
Uric Acid  LDH  
Albumin   
Total Protein   
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 131 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Urinalysis  
Specific gravity  
pH, glucose, protein, blood and ketones by dipstick  
Microscopic examination (if blood or protein is > trace positive by dipstick)  
Other analytes/measures  
HIV 
Hepatitis B and C antibodies  
Free and total testosterone (both men and women)  
Estradiol and FSH (women only)  
Pregnancy test (urine βHCG , all women regardless of childbearing potential ) 
Spot urine for albumin/creatinine ratio —if normal at Baseline, no further testing is required 
throughout the study 
TSH/free T4 , Prolactin  
OGTT ( pre-diabetic subjects with IFG only)   
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 132 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX C STUDY MANAGEMENT AND MATERIALS 
Study Document ation 
The Investigator is required to prepare and maintain adequate and accurate case histories 
(i.e., source documents and/or Medical Record Supplement) designed to record all 
observations and other data pertinent to the study for each study participant.  This 
includes accurate documentation of accountability of study medications.  The medical records must contain adequate information to allow for verification of subject identity throughout the study.   
Electronic CRFs (eCRFs ) will be completed for each su bject who is enrolled in the study. 
Subject numbers will be assigned systematically immediately following the execution  of 
written informed consent.  A subject Screening /enrollment log, noting reasons for screen 
failure where applicable, will be maintained for all subjects who are consented.  
All information recorded on the CRFs for this study must be consistent with the subject’s 
source documentation (i.e., source documents and/or Medical Record Supplement).  The 
source documents may include the h ospital and/or the physician’s chart, X -rays, or 
laboratory test documentation.   
The CRFs for each subject will be periodically checked against the subject’s source 
documents at the study site by the site monitor.  Instances of missing or unclear data wil l 
be discussed with appropriate site personnel for resolution.  A quality assurance audit will 
be performed on the database.  
Archiving of Study Documentation  
The Investigator shall retain records for two (2) years following the date a marketing application  is approved for the indication pertaining to this clinical study; or, if the drug 
is planned to be terminated or if a regulatory application is not planned to be progressed, until two (2) years after the investigation is discontinued and the FDA or a comp etent 
regulatory authority is notified.  
The Sponsor will inform the Investigator, in writing, as to when these documents no longer need to be maintained.  
Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
During the study, a monitor will make routine site visits to review protocol compliance, 
compare CRFs with individual subject’s original source documents, assess drug 
accountability and ensure that the study is being conducted per pertinent regulatory 
requirement s.  The review of the subjects’ original medical records will be performed in a 
manner to ensure that subject confidentiality is maintained.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 133 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX D ADMINSTRATION AND REGULATORY POLICIES  
Ethical Conduct of Study  
The Invest igator(s) should conduct the study in accordance with this protocol, the 
Declaration of Helsinki and ICH GCP guidelines and FDA regulations.  The 
Investigator(s) and the Sponsor will sign the protocol and study contract, to confirm 
agreement.  The Investig ator(s) will not implement any amendment (deviation or changes 
of the protocol) without agreement by the Sponsor and IRB/IEC approval, except where necessary to eliminate immediate hazard(s) to study subjects, or when change(s) involve 
only logistical or a dministrative aspects of the study.  
Records that may reveal the identities of subjects must be well protected, with consideration given to confidentiality and the right to privacy of subjects.  
Informed Consent  
Each subject or his/her parent/legal representative must be provided with a statement that 
the investigation involves research and that the IRB/IEC has approved solicitation of 
subjects to participate; a fair explanation of the procedures to be followed and their 
purposes, including identification of any procedures that are experimental; a description 
in lay language of any possible side effects; a description of any attendant discomforts and risks reasonably to be expected; a description of any benefits reasonably to be 
expected; a disclosure of any appropriate alternative procedures that might be 
advantageous for the subject; an offer to answer any inquiries concerning the procedures, 
and instruction that the person is free to withdraw consent and discontinue participation 
in the project or activity at any time without prejudice to the subject.  Payment to research 
subjects for participation in the study is considered a benefit.  All information concerning 
payment, including the schedule of payments, must be set forth in the informed consent, 
including  a disclosure that the Investigator is being paid to perform the stated research.  
A subject (or the subject’s legally authorized representative) must give written consent to 
participate in the study.  This consent must be dated and retained by the Principa l 
Investigator as part of the study records.  A copy shall be given to the person signing the form.  The informed consent process must be documented in the subject’s source documents. 
The Investigator agrees that the Sponsor, its employees or agents will h ave the right fro m 
time to time during this study to audit and review pertinent medical records relating to 
this clinical trial.  A statement will be obtained from each subject participating in the 
study permitting the release of his/her medical records as  necessary for inspection by 
authorized personnel of the Sponsor, FDA, other Competent Authorities and the staff 
managing the clinical study.  
The release of medical records and review of their contents will comply  with the Health 
Insurance Portability and  Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA ) and applicable data 
protection regulations in the countries concerned.  
Institutional Review/Ethical Review  
The protocol and informed consent form for this study must be approved by an IRB/IEC.  
A copy of the Letter of Approval from the Board/Committee, which contains specific 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 134 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 identification of the documents approved, must be received by the Sponsor prior to 
shipment of drug supplies to the Principal Investigator.  
All changes to the protocol, as well as a change of Princip al Investigator, must also be 
approved by the Board/Committee and documentation of this approval provided to the study monitor.  Records of the IRB/IEC’s review and approval of all documents 
pertaining to the study must be kept on file by the Principal Inv estigator and are subject 
to FDA/Competent Authority inspection at any time.  IRB/IEC re -approval is required 
each year or per local regulations.  The Principal Investigator is to notify the study 
monitor, in writing, of the approval to continue the study.    
Clinical Monitoring/Record Keeping  
There shall be no alterations in the protocol design without the written consent and approval of the Sponsor and the approval of the IRB/IEC, except in the case that subjects 
are at immediate risk without immediate imp lementation of such alterations.  In such 
situation, the site should notify the Sponsor and IRB/IEC of the deviation as soon as possible, and should seek the written consent and approval of the Sponsor and the approval of the IRB/IEC.  
All results of this t rial must be recorded on eCRFs.  Each subject who has been enrolled 
must have a completed eCRF.  Reasons for termination must be stated in the early termination section.  Study subjects are not to be identified by name on eCRFs, but rather by coded identif iers and subject initials.   
The study monitor will verify the accuracy of the data by reviewing pertinent source documents such as office records or hospital charts of the subjects.  
Study records include eCRFs, signed FDA Form 1572, original reports of te st results, and 
signed informed consent forms.  IRB/IEC approval letters and other documents pertaining to the conduct of the study are to be kept on file by the Investigator.   If the 
study files are assigned to someone else or removed to another location, the Investigator 
is to notify the study monitor or Sponsor in writing of the change.  All study records are subject to FDA or Competent Authority inspection at any time.  
The Investigator shall retain records for a period as defined elsewhere (see Appendix  C, 
Study Management and Materials ).   
All information supplied to the Investigator by the Sponsor before, during, and after the 
study is confidential.  Such information is to be used solely in connection with the 
clinical study.  The study protocol, IB, and any other pertinent study -related materials or 
records provided are to be maintained in a confidential manner, reviewed carefully with 
attention to admonit ions and returned to the Sponsor upon request.  No part of these 
materials may be reproduced or transmitted in any form without prior written permission 
from the Sponsor.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 135 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX E PUBLICATION POLICY  
All data generated from this study are the property of Cortendo and shall be held in strict 
confidence along with all information furnished by Cortendo.  Independent analyses 
and/or publication of these data by an Investigator or any member of his/her staff is not 
permitted without prior written consent of Cortendo.   
Any formal presentation or publication of data from this trial will be considered as a joint 
publication by the Investigator(s) and appropriate Cortendo personnel.  A uthorships will 
be determined chiefly by merit, with rights of final authorship decisions to be held by 
Cortendo , unless superseded by an agreement stipulating otherwise.  Factors determining 
merit will include active participation in study design and conduct, as well as interest and ability to participate meaningfully in analyzing or interpret ing, writing or presenting 
study results.  The venue(s) selected for publication will be determined jointly by the publication authors.  T he first publication will be  based on data from all study centers and  
analyzed as stipulated in the protocol  and SAP.  Investigators participating in multicenter 
studies agree not to present data gathered from one study center or a subset  of centers 
before the first full public ation, unless formally agreed by Cortendo in advance.  Written 
permission to Investigators to publish subset or secondary results will be contingent on 
prior review by Cortendo of the proposed methodology and analytical plan.  A ny 
Investigator -led publication or presentation will provid e for nondisclosure of Cortendo 
confidential or proprietary infor mation.  In all cases, parties planning to publish data 
agree to submit all draft manuscripts or abstracts to Cortendo and other relevant parties  at 
least 60 days prior to publication submission.  This will enable involved  parties to protect 
proprietary in formation and to provide comments  to authors .   
Further details on the publication process may be  provided in individual contractual 
agreements signed by the Investigators and Cortendo.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 136 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX F PROTOCOL AMENDMENT(S)  
Each p rotocol amendment will be a stand -alone document.  All revisions dictated by the 
amendments will be made in the protocol proper.  A list of changes from the previous 
version will be provided.  Each time a protocol is amended, a new amended version date 
will be added to the cover page.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 137 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX G CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PSEUDO-
CUSHING’S SYNDROME  
 
Reference:  Nieman 2008. 48- hour, 2 mg dexamethasone suppression test may be 
necessary to exclude pseudo -Cushing’s disease.  
Some clinical features of CS may be present:  
• Pregnancy  
• Depression and other psychiatric conditions  
• Alcohol dependence  
• Morbid obesity  
• Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus  
• Polycystic Ovary Disease (PCOD)  
 
Unlikely to have any clinical features of CS  
• Physical stress (hospitalization, surgery, pain)  
• Malnutrition, anorexia nervosa  
• Glucocorticoid resistance  
• Intense chronic exercise  
• Hypothalamic amenorrhea 
• Cortisol- binding globulin (CBG) excess (increased serum but not urine cortisol)  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 138 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX H CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSES OF PREDIABETES AND 
DIABETES  
Refere nce: American Diabetes Association . Classification and diagnosis of diabetes. 
Sec. 2. In Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes —2016. Diabetes Care 
2016;39(Suppl. 1):S13–S22. 
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) standards for the diagnosis of prediabetes 
consider three different categories of prediabetes, based on measures of fasting glucose, 
HbA1c, or 2 -hour postprandial glucose during a 75- gram o ral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT). For purposes of this study, however, the diagnosis of prediabetes will be limited 
to a single prediabetes category of impaired fasting glucose (IFG), as follows:  
Prediabetes is defined by a fasting glucose of ≥ 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) and 
< 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) (after no caloric intake for ≥ 8 hours and in the absence of 
antihyperglycemic medications).   
ADA criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes will be used as follows.  
Diabetes Is Diagnosed by One of the Following Crite ria: 
• A fasting glucose of ≥ 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) after no caloric intake for ≥ 8 hours  
     
OR 
• A random plasma glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) associated with classic 
diabetes symptoms:  increased urination, increased thirst and unexplained weight loss    
OR 
• 2-hour post -glucose load plasma glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) following oral 
ingestion of a 75- gram anhydrous glucose solution in water.  NOTE : Oral glucose 
tolerance testing is not necessary if the subject has a fasting glucose level of 
≥ 126 mg/dL. 
OR 
• HbA1C ≥ 6.5% (48 mmol/mol). The test should be performed in a laboratory using a 
method that is National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP) certified 
and standardized to the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) assay.  
NOTE : In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, results indicating diabetes should 
be confirmed by repeat testing using any of the above measures.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 139 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX I GUIDELINES FOR HYPERTENSION 
Reference:  The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure ( JNC 7 ), 2004  
Table  10 Blood Pressure Classification ( for Adults Over 18 Years of Age ) 
Blood Pressure Classification  SBP (mmHg)  DBP (mmHg)  
Normal  < 120 and < 80 
Pre-hypertension  120-139 or 80 -89 
Stage 1 hypertension  140-159 or 90 -99 
Stage 2 hypertension  ≥ 160 or ≥ 100 
 
Table  11 Recommendations for Follow -up Based on Initial Blood Pressure 
Measurements for Adults without Acute End Organ Damage  
Initial Blood Pressure (mmHg)a Follow -up Recommendedb 
Normal  Recheck in 2 years  
Pre-hypertension  Recheck in 1 yearc 
Stage 1 hypertension  Confirm within 2 months c 
Stage 2 hypertension  Evaluate or refer to source of care within 1 month.  
For those with higher pressures (e.g. > 
180/110 mmHg), evaluate and treat immediately 
or within 1  week depending on clinical situation 
and complications.  
a. If systolic and diastolic categories are different, follow recommendations for shorter time follow -up (e.g. 
160/86 mmHg should be evaluated or referred to source of care within 1 month)  
b. Modify  the scheduling of follow -up according to reliable information about past BP measurements, other 
cardiovascular risk factors, or target organ disease  
c. Provide advice about lifestyle modifications.  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 140 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX J CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS PROHIBITED OR 
TO BE USED ONLY WITH PRIOR PERMISSION  
 
Table  12 through Table  20 provide examples of drugs that are PROHIBITED  for 
concomitant use in COR-2017-01. Table  21 through Table  23 provide examples of drugs 
that REQUIRE PERMISSION from the study Medical Monitor prior to concomitant 
use.  
Some drugs have been categorized into multiple drug -interaction categories (e.g. 
dexamethasone is both a systemic corticosteroid and a strong CYP3A 4 inducer). Where 
drugs are categorized into more than one category, the most restrictive category should 
hold precedent.   
Although an attempt was made to provide a comprehensive list of relevant medications 
that are believed to present a potential risk o f clinically significant drug interaction with 
levoketoconazole, the lists intentionally omit some medications that should not be used concomitantly with levoketoconazole , since concomitant use is not expected (e.g. some 
chemotherapeutic agents), and the l ists probably omit others unintentionally.  
Furthermore, these lists will evolve as new drugs come to market and more is learned 
about the pharmacology of levoketoconazole  and other medications. Therefore, they 
should be regarded as a minimum set  of exclude d and precautioned concomitant 
medications  rather than as a comprehensive set .  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 141 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Prohibited concomitant medications  
 
Table  12 Steroidogenesis Inhibitors and Systemic Corticosteroids  
Interferes with study drug assessment; must be avoided or washed out prior to Baseline 
Assessments, including UFCs and LNSCs  
Steroidogenesis Inhibitors: Systemic corticosteroids include any corticosteroid intended to 
act systemically, alone or in combinati on with other drugs, 
examples include:  
Metyrapone  Betamethasone, Budesonide, Cortisone, Deflazacort,  
Ketoconazole  Dexamethasone (except for DST), Hydrocortisone,  
Etomidate  Methylprednisolone, Prednisolone, Prednisone,  
Mitotane  Triamcinolone  
Trilostane   
 
Table  13 Dopamine Agonists  
Interferes with study drug assessment; must be avoided or washed out prior to Baseline 
Visit  
Apomorphine  Pergolide  
Bromocriptine  Piribedil  
Cabergoline (8 weeks’ washout)  Pramipexole  
Ciladopa  Propylnorapomorphine  
Dihydroergotamine/ergotamine  Quinagolide  
Dihydrexidine  Ropinirole  
Dinapsoline  Rotigotine  
Doxanthrine  Roxindole  
Epicriptine  Sumanirole  
Etilevodopa (alone or with inhibitors of dopamine metabolism)  
Levodopa (alone or with inhibitors of dopamine metabolism)  
Lisuride  
Melevodopa (alone or with inhibitors of dopamine metabolism)  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 142 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
  
Table  14 Synthetic P rogestins that Bind with Moderate to H igh A ffinity1 to 
Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) or Mineralocorticoid Receptor (MR)  
Interferes with study drug assessment and/or influence s underlying signs/symptoms of 
disease; must be avoided or washed out  
Medroxyprogesterone acetate Megestrol acetate  Micronized progesterone 
Segesterone (nesterone) acetate  Drospirenone  Gestodene  
 
Table  15 Somatostatin A nalogs  
Interferes with study drug assessment and/or influence s underlying signs/symptoms of 
disease; must be avoided  
Octreotide (all forms)  Lanreotide (all forms)  Pasireotide (all forms)  
 
Table  16 Weight Loss Medications  
Interferes with endpoints assessment; must be avoided or washed out  
Amfepramone  Diethylpropion Orlistat  
Benzphetamine  Ephedrine  Phendimetrazine  
Bupropion/naltrexone  Etilamfetamine  Phentermine  
 Fenfluramine   
Cathine  Lorcaserin  Rimonabant  
Clobenzorex  Mazindol  Sibutramine  
Dexfenfluramine  Mefenorex  Topiramate  
 Table  17 Drugs Predicted to Interfere with Levoketoconazole Absorption  
Must be avoided; use an allowed substitute or wash out  
Histamine H2 receptor antagonists:  
cimetidine, famotidine, nizatidine, ranitidine,  Sucralfate  
Proton -pump inhibitors:  dexlansoprazole, esomeprazole, 
lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole   
 
                                                
1 The listed drugs have been reported to bind with at least 50% relative binding affinity to GR or MR as 
compared with the natural ligand (set as 100%). Africander D. Et al. Steroids  76:636-652, 2011.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 143 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Note on Drug -drug Interactions via CYP3A4  
Levoketoconazole  is a substrate and potent i nhibitor of CYP3A4. Therefore, the 
following drug interactions may occur when levoketoconazole is co-administered with 
other drugs that interact with CYP3A4.  
• Levoketoconazole  may decrease the elimination of drugs metabolized by 
CYP3A4, thereby increasing their plasma concentrations. Increased exposure 
to these drugs may cause an increase or prolongation of their therapeutic 
and/or adverse effects. Concomitant use with levoketoconazole is 
prohibited for drugs known to present a risk of serious side effects with 
increased exposure (Table  18). 
• For other drugs that are metabolized by CYP3A4, monitoring of plasma 
concentrations is advised when possible. Clinical signs and symptoms associated with these drugs should be monitored, wi th dosage adjusted as 
needed.  
• Drugs that may significantly decrease or increase the plasma concentrations of levoketoconazole by induction or inhibition of CYP3A4 or by altering 
absorption are prohibited ( Table  19). 
The following drug interaction checker may be useful  (see “Interaction View” tab) . 
However, this checker will not supersede the protocol excluded medications lists nor the judgment of the Medical Monitor or delegate: https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxN av/search?searchBy=String&searchTerm=ketoconazole  
 
Table  18 Drugs Whose Systemic Exposure is Predicted to be Significantly 
Increased by Levoketoconazole via CYP3A4 I nhibition   
Must be avoided or washed out  
Systemic exposure to these drugs is potentially increased significantly  by the 
addition of levoketoconazole ; must be avoided  
Alprazolam, midazolam, triazolam  HMG -CoA reductase inhibitors: 
atorvastatin, lovastatin, simvastatin, ( NOT 
pravastatin, fluvastati n, pitavastatin  and 
rosuvastatin)  Cisapride  
Dofetilide  
Eplerenone  
Ergot alkaloids  
(ergotamine, dihydroergotamine)  Pimozide  
Quinidine  Nisoldipine  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 144 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  19 Drugs That Are Predicted to Reduce (Top) or Increase Significantly 
(Bottom) the Plasma Concentration of Levoketoconazole via CYP3A4 
Induction or Inhibition, Respectively and Are Prohibited 
Must be avoided  or washed out  
Strong CYP3A4 Inducers  
Avasimibe  Oxcarbazepine  
Carbamazepine  Phenobarbital  
Enzalutamide  Phenylbutazone  
Efavirenz  Phenytoin  
Fosphenytoin  Pioglitazone  
Griseofulvin  Rifabutin  
Isoniazid  Rifampicin  
Modafinil   Rifampin  
Nafcillin  Rifapentine  
Nelfinavir  St John's wort  
Nevirapine  Sulfinpyrazone  
Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors  
Atazanavir  Indinavir  Suboxone  
Boceprevir  Iopinavir  Telaprevir  
Ceritinib  Itraconazole  Telithromycin  
Clarithromycin  Mibefradil  Telaprevir  
Cobicistat & coformulations  Nefazodone  Telithromycin   
Conivaptan  Ombitasvir -combinations   
Darunavir  Posaconazole    
Idelalisib  Saquinavir   
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 145 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  20 Drugs that can Cause QTc Prolongation  
Must be avoided . Permission prior to use is required  unless no suitable alternative is 
available after the Baseline Visit  
Alfuzosin  Eliglustat   Perphenazine  
Amiodarone  Erithromycin  Pimozide  
Anagrelide  Fingolimod  Pipamperone  
Arsenic  Flecainide  Procainamide  
Artemether  Fluconazole  Propafenone   
Asenapine  Granisetron  Propofol  
Astemizole  Haloperidol  Quetiapine  
Atomoxetine  Hydrocodone ER  Quinine  
Azithromycin  Ibutilide  Ranolazine  
Bedaquiline  Iloperidone  Risperdone  
Buprenorphine  Imipramine  Solifenacin  
Chloroquine  Isradipine  Sotalol  
Cilostazol  Levofloxacin  Sulpiride  
Ciprofloxacin  Lopinavir  Tetrabenazine  
Citalopram  Lumefantrine  Thioridazine  
Clomipramine  Methadone  Tiapride  
Desipramine  Mirabegron  Tizanidine  
Dolasetron  Mirtazapine  Tolterodine  
Disopyramide  Moexipril/HCTZ  Toremifene   
Domperidone  Moxifloxacin  Trimipramine  
Donepezil  Norfloxacin  Tropisetron  
Dosulepin  Nortriptyline  Vardenafil  
Doxepin  Ofloxacin  Venlafaxine  
Dronedarone  Ondansetron   Ziprasidone  
Droperidol  Paliperidone  Zuclopenthixol  
 
  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 146 of 162 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Medications that require prior permission to be used  
concomitantly with study drug  
 
Table  21  Drugs Whose Systemic Exposure is Predicted to be Increased 
Moderately by Levoketoconazole 
Systemic exposure to these drugs is predicted to be increased by levoketoconazole: 
Substitute if possible and discuss with Medical Monitor prior to use. Careful monit oring 
is recommended, with possible adjustment in doses.  
 
Alfentanil, fentanyl, sufentanil  Docetaxel, paclitaxel  
Amlodipine, felodipine, nicardipine, nifedipine  Rifabutin  
Bosentan  Sildenafil  
Buspirone  Sirolimus  
Busulfan  Tacrolimus  
Cariprazine  Telithromycin  
Coumarin oral anticoagulants  Trimetrexate  
Cyclosporine  Verapamil  
Digoxin  Vinca alkaloids   
 
Table  22 Topical or Inhaled Steroids  
Interferes with study drug assessment . Should be avoided; to be used only with prior 
permission  
Inhaled corticosteroids:  Flunisolide  
Beclomethasone  Fluticasone furoate  
Betamethasone dipropionate  Mometasone  
Budesonide  Prednisolone  
Ciclesonide  Tixocortol  
Dexamethasone  Triamcinolone  
Topical/inhaled corticosteroids:     Fluticasone propionate  
Topical corticosteroids:   
Amcinonide  Halcinonide  
Clobetasol propionate  Halobetasol propionate  
Esocimetasone  Halometasone  
Diflorasone diacetate  Hydrocortisone butyrate  
Fluocinolone acetonide  Hydrocortisone valerate  
Fluocinonide  Mometasone furoate  
Flurandrenolide  Traimcinolone acetonide  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 147 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Table  23 Other Medications Contraindicated or Relatively Contraindicated with 
Ketoconazole  
Increased risk of AEs; to be used only with prior permission  
Afatinib  Ergoloid Mesylates  Nimodipine  
Alitretinoin  Ergonovine  Olaparib  
Almotriptan  Escitalopram   Oxycodone  
Amodiaquine  Estazolam  Palbociclib  
Aprepitant  Eszopiclone  Pazopanib  
Aripiprazole  Everolimus  Red Yeast Rice 
Artesunate  Fesoterodine  Reboxetine  
Avanafil  Flibanserin  Rivaroxaban  
Axitinib  Grazoprevir  Saccharomyces boulardii  
Barnidipine  Ibrutinib  Salmeterol  
Brexpiprazole  Pendetide  Silodosin  
Blonanserin  Irinotecan  Simeprevir  
Bosutinib*  Isavuconazonium Sulfate  Sonidegib  
Cabozantinib  Ivabradine  Suvorexant  
Cobimetinib  Lapatinib  Tamsulosin  
Crizotinib  Lercanidipine  Tegafur  
Cyclosporine  Levomilnacipran  Ticagrelor  
Dabrafenib  Lomitapide  Tolvaptan  
Dapoxetine  Lurasidone  Trabectedin  
Edoxaban  Macitentan  Udenafil  
Elbasvir  Methylergonovine  Ulipristal  
Eletriptan  Mirodenafil  Vorapaxar  
 Naloxegol    
*Examples of contraindicated tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are shown; all approved TKIs are also  
contraindicated for purposes of the study.  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 148 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX K SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF CONDITIONS FOR RISK 
MANAGEMENT PURPOSES 
Disease  Symptoms  Signs  Laboratory values  
Adrenal Insufficiency  Fatigue/Tiredness/Malaise  
Weakness  
Anorexia  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Constipation  
Abdominal pain  
Diarrhea 
Headache  
Salt carving  
Arthralgias/Myalgias Dizziness (esp. on standing)  
Less common:  
Irritability  
Depression  
Sweating  
Fever  Weight loss  
Hypotension  
Hyperpigmentation Less common:  
Hypoglycemia  
 Serum cortisol level < 
3 μg/dL 
Inadequate cortisol response to ACTH stimulation  
Hypoglycemia  
Moderate to high ACTH (assuming primary adrenal insufficiency)  
Hypocortisolemia  
 Fatigue  
Muscle weakness  
Loss of appetite  
Weight loss  
Nausea, vomiting  
Dizziness, esp. on standing  
Irritability  
Depression  
Sweating  
Joint aches and pains  Low blood pressure  
Symptomatic Orthostatic hypotension  
Reduction in weight  
 Reduced serum and 
salivary cortisol levels  
Hypoglycemia  
 
Hypomineralocorticoidism  
 Muscle weakness  
Fatigue  
Fainting  
Salt craving  
Irritability  Low blood pressure  
Severe orthostatic hypotension  
 Hyperkalemia  
Hyponatremia  
  
Hypogonadism  Erectile dysfunction  
Reduction in beard and body hair 
Enlarged breasts (in men)  
Fatigue  
Reduced libido  
Hot flashes 
Difficulty concentrating  Gynecomastia  
Reduced body hair Osteoporosis  
 Reduced testosterone 
levels (AE in males, beneficial in women)  
 
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 149 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX L QUALITY OF LIFE QUESTIONNAIRE 
CUS HING’S SYNDROME  QUALITY OF LIFE 
QUES TIONNAIRE  
(CushingQoL)  
 
The followi ng sentenc es refer  to what  you may think  or feel about  your Cushing’s 
syndrome. Your  answers  will help us to know  how you feel and how much  your 
illness has  interfer ed in your usual  activities  in the past 4 weeks . 
 
Below  each  sentence you will find several  response c hoices. Please read each 
sentence ca refully.  After  reading each sentence,  check the b ox next to the 
answer  that best  desc ribes what  you think  is happening  to you. 
 
There are NO right or wrong answers.  We are simply  interested in what  is 
happening  to you because of your Cushing’s  syndrome.  
 
1.  I have  trouble  sleeping (I wake  up during the night; it takes  me a long 
time to get  to sleep,  etc.).  
□ Always 
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
2.  I have  pain that keeps  me from leading a normal  life. 
□ Always 
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
3.  My wounds  take a long t ime to heal.  
□ Always 
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 150 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 4.  I bruise  easily.  
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
5.  I am more irritable, I have sudden mood swings  and angry 
outbursts.  
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
6.  I have  less self-confide nce; I feel more  insecure.  
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
7.  I’m worried about  the changes  in my physical ap pearance due to my 
illness.  
□ Very much  
□ Quite  a bit  
□ Somewhat  
□ Very little  
□ Not at all 
 
8.  I feel less like going  out or seeing  relatives  or friends. 
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 151 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 9.  I have  had to give up my social or leisure  activit ies due to my illness. 
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
10. My illness  affects  my everyday  activities such as working or studying.  
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
11. It’s difficult for me to remember  things. 
□ Always  
□ Often  
□ Somet imes  
□ Rarely  
□ Never  
 
12. I’m worried about  my health in the future. 
□ Very much  
□ Quite  a bit  
□ Somewhat  
□ Very little  
□ Not at all 
  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 152 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX M ASSESSMENT OF CLINICAL SIGNS AND 
SYMPTOMS OF CUSHING’S SYNDROME 
Visit                         Date    
       DD          MMM           YYYY  
SUBJECT NUMBER:           SUBJECT INITIALS:   
To be completed by the Investigator  or qualified trained HHC professional  
The severity of specific signs and symptoms will be rated at each visit by the Investigator 
on a categorical 4- point scale:  
1. Moon facies:   None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
2. Facial plethora:   None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
3. Striae:   None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
4. Bruising :   None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
5. Supraclavicular fat :  None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
6. Menstrual abnormalities (females only):   
A. Irregular menstruation:   
None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
Definition: A disorder characterized by irregular cycle or duration of menses.  
Mild - Intermittent menses with skipped menses for no more than 1 to 3 months  
Moderate – Intermittent menses with skipped menses for more than 4 to 6 months  
Severe - Persistent amenorrhea for more than 6 months  
B. Dysmenorrhea:  None   Mild  Moderate   Severe  
Definition: A disorder characterized by abnormally painful abdominal cramps during 
menses.  
Mild - Mild symptoms; intervention not indicated  
Moderate – Moderate symptoms; limiting instrumental ADL 
Severe - Severe symptoms; limiting self -care ADL  
 
  
7. Acne  
 
Grading System for Acne:  
Acne assessment s will be performed using the Global Acne Grading System described by 
Doshi   et al. 1997.  A total of six locations will be evaluated.  
 
Forehead   Left Cheek    Chin 
 Right Cheek    Nose     Chest and Upper Back  
   
 
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 153 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Grading Scale: 
 
0 = No Lesions  
1 = ≥ one comedone 2 = ≥ one papule  
3 = ≥ one pustule 4 = ≥ one nodule  
    Evaluate each of the six locations identified above and assign a grade.  Record the grading within the eCRF, which will calculate the Local and Global Scores.   
 
 
  8. Hirsutism (females only)  
Hirsutism will be evaluated using the rating system described by Hatch 1981. The degree of 
hairiness present will be evaluated for nine body areas:  
 
 Upper Lip  Abdominal  Thigh  
 
 Chin   Pubic    Back 
  Chest    Arm   Buttocks 
  
Location  Grade (0 -4)  
Forehead (I)  
Right Cheek (II)  
Left Cheek (III)  
Nose (IV)  
Chin (V)  
Chest and Upper 
Back (VI)  

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 154 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Grading Scale: [ NOTE : Use grade 0 for no hirsutism]  
 
Evaluate each of the nine locations identified above and assign a grade.  Record the grading within the eCRF.  
 
 
9. Peripheral edema  
Edema will be assessed according to the method established by  Brodovicz  2009. Three 
anatomical areas will be evaluated:  
 
• Lower calf at 7 cm proximal to the midpoint of the medial malleolus  
• Behind the medial malleolus  
• Dorsum of the foot  
 
Each location will be individually evaluated.  Using two fingers or thumb, press the skin firmly in the area to be evaluated and start the stopwatch or watch (second hand) immediately after release of pressure until completion of rebound to pre-pressure appearance.   
 Evaluate each of the three locations identified above and assign a grade.  Record the grading within the eCRF.   Body Area  Rating (0 -4) 
Upper Lip   
Chin   
Chest   
Abdominal   
Pubic   
Arm   
Thigh   
Back   
Buttocks   
 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 155 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
  
Grading Scale: [NOTE : Use grade 0 for no edema]  
 
 
 
 
Name of Assessor (PI or designated site personnel)  or qualified trained HHC professional 
completing assessment :  
(Printed)_______________________________  
 
Signature of Assessor (PI or designated site personnel)  or qualified trained HHC 
professional completing assessment :  
 ______________________________________  Date__________________________________  
 
Body Area  Rating (1 -4) Time to Rebound 
(sec)  
Lower calf at 7 
cm proximal to 
the midpoint of 
the medial 
malleolus    
Behind the medial 
malleolus    
Dorsum of the 
foot   
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 156 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX N BECK DEPRESSION INVENTORY (BDI-II)  
 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 157 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
  

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 158 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 APPENDIX O ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON ADVERSE EVENT 
OF SPECIAL INTEREST (QTC INTERVAL, 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR LIVER FUNCTION TEST 
ANORMALITIES FOLLOW-UP AND ADRENAL 
INSUFFICIENCY) 
Additional information for evaluation and management of prolonged QTc Interval  
 
 

Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 159 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Instructions for Liver Function Test Abnormalities Foll ow-up 
If a patient experiences a potential hepatic event, the following information will be 
requested.  
1. Pertinent details of the patient’s medical history (inclusive of alcohol use, 
recreational drug use, special diets, non -alcoholic steatohepatitis, and pr ior 
elevations in liver function tests), with start/end dates were known.  
2. Details of any recent or current use of acetaminophen/paracetamol (including 
cold/allergy medications containing acetaminophen/paracetamol) with start/stop 
dates and doses.  
3. Concomita nt medications (including herbal and non- prescription medications, and 
dietary supplements), with start/stop dates and doses.  
4. Potentially confounding factors for the event.  
5. Details of any symptoms present around the time of the event such as:  
Fatigue  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Rash/ pruritus 
Eosinophilia  
Dark urine  
Acholic stool 
Fever  
Right upper quadrant pain/tenderness  
6. Information regarding liver specialist consultation.  
7. Results of any liver function tests performed to date (including baseline and 
repeat testing).  
8. All INR, PT and PTT readings (including baseline).  
9. Imaging procedures.  
10. Any other tests performed (liver panel below can be ordered from central laboratory).
  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 160 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 HEPATITIS A ANTIBODY, IgM (Focus)  
HEPATITIS B CORE IGM AB (Centaur)  
Hepatitis B Virus DNA Quant PCR (Panel)  
Hepatitis D Antibody, Total  
Hepatitis E Ab IgM  
Cytomegalovirus IgM Antibody 
Epstein -Barr Viral Capsid Antigen IgM Antibody (Focus)  
Acetaminophen Adduct  
Actin (Smooth Muscle) Antibody  
ANA screen with reflex  
ANA screen with reflex to titer and pattern (Panel) -Bioplex 
Immunoglobulin G (IgG)  
Liver Kidney Microsome -1 Antibody 
Ammonia  
11. Dechallenge and rechallenge results.  
 
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 161 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
  
 
 
 Recommended LFT Management Guidance  
 
 
 ALT or AST > 3 x ULN AND  
Total Bilirubin > 2 x ULN  
or INR > 1.5  ALT or AST  
> 5 x ULN within < 4 weeks 
or persists > 2 weeks   
ALT or AST > 8 x ULN  
Temporarily interrupt study medication, 
obtain PK sample  
Safety Follow Up (performed as soon as possible ) 
 
• Liver -directed medical history and physical exam  
• Hepatitis screen  
• Abdominal ultrasound (liver and biliary tree)  
• Collect liver chemistry panel  
Continue follow up LFT monitoring every 3 -4 
days until resolution or return to baseline status  
Liver function test elevation persists  
> 4 weeks off drug or worsens  
Yes No 
Discontinue study 
and continue 
safety follow -up Resume study drug at 
original or lower dose 
level and recheck within 4 
days and at 7-10 days  
Discontinue study 
and continue 
safety follow -up ALT or AST > 3 x ULN  
or AP > 2 x ULN  
or Total Bilirubin  > 2 x ULN  
with  
signs or symptoms of liver 
dysfunction  
ALT or AST increase 
with rechallenge  Yes 
No 
Continue per protocol  
Cortendo AB  Protocol COR -2017 -01 
 
Amendment 4  
23 September 2019  Page 162 of 162     
 CONFIDENT IAL 
 Recommended for Management of Adrenal Insufficiency  
 
