COVER PAGE  
 
Project title : 
Lung and breast cancer prevention by an integrated intervention of maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding  
 
NCT number: STUDY00003067  
 
Date of the document: 04/01/2020   
 
PROJECT TITLE  
Lung and breast cancer prevention by an integrated intervention of maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding  
 
INVESTIGATORS  
Name  Title Institute  Role  
Xiaozhong Wen, MD, PhD  Associate  Professor  UB Dept. of Pediatrics  PI 
Yukiko Washio, PhD  Researcher  RTI International  Co-I 
Chi-Chen Hong, PhD  Asso ciate Professor  Roswell Park Comprehensive 
Cancer Center  Co-I 
Faye E. Justicia -Linde, MD  Clinical Assist ant Professor  UB Dept. of OB -GYN  Co-I 
Chang -Xing Ma, PhD  Associate Professor  UB Dept. of Bi ostatistics  Co-I 
 
ABSTRACT  (300 word s maximum ) 
The elevated risk of lung cancer due to cigarette or cigar smoking can be largely reversed by long -term 
smoking cessation . Pregnancy is a unique opportunity to quit  smoking . However,  most  quitters return to 
smoking ( “relapse”) after delivery. Sufficient b reastfeeding  protects  against breast cancer. But s mokers tend to 
not breastfeed. Our team has successfully developed two separate  interventions for smoking cessation during 
pregnancy and breastfeeding  maintenance , respectively . However, only 50% of quitters  in our sample remain 
smoking abstinent at 6 mont hs postpartum , and  only 21% of quitters still breastfeed at 6 months postpartum . 
Observational research s uggests smoking abstinence and breastfeeding reinforce each other . These 
reciprocal associations (a positive feedback loop) have not  yet been leveraged in the design of more effective  
interventions.    
We are proposing the first randomized controlled trial to integrate maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding interventions to enhance both cancer prevention behaviors. We will recruit 40 daily smoking 
women in their 1st or 2nd trimester of  pregnancy (≤2 8 weeks) from local obstetric clinics , communities, and 
social media . They will be r andomized into either the intervention (N= 20) or control group (N= 20). The two 
groups will complete the same number of sessions (6 during pregnancy and 3 postpartum), but focus on 
different topics . Specifically, the control group will receive instructions on general pregnancy and infant care . 
The intervention group will receive instructions on general pregnancy and infant care, plus an integrated 
multicomponent intervention that pro motes both smoking cessation and breastfeeding  (i.e., education and 
counseling, monitoring and feedback, and contingent financial incentives ). Two female Certified Lactation 
Counselors (interventionists) will be trained to run study session s during home visits . Interventionists will 
provide additional support via phone and text messaging until 6 months postpartum. Main outcomes include 
smoking abstinence and breastfeeding rates at 6 months postpartum within the duration of this award.  
 
Key words  (5 max)  
Smoking cessation; Breastfeeding; Lung cancer; Breast cancer; Pregnancy  
 
Project description for general s cientific audience  
We are proposing the first randomized controlled trial to integrate maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding interventions to enhance both cancer prevention behaviors.  We will recruit 40 daily smoking 
pregnant women , start integrated  intervention during pregnancy  and continue until 6 months postpartum.  
 
This study involves human subjects only.  
 
This study does not involve vertebrate animals.  
 
  
SPECIFIC AIMS  
Aim 1 : to develop  a protocol for training and mentoring Certified Lactatio n Counselors  to implement  an 
integrated intervention  of maternal smoking cessation and breastfeeding . We hypothesize  Certified Lactation 
Counselors  can be trained to implement our intervention protocol with high fidelity.  
Aim 2 : to examine  the efficacy  of an integrated intervention of maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding on smoking abstinence rate s. We hypothesize smoking abstinence rate s at delivery and  6 
months postpartum will be highe r in the intervention group than the control group . Among succ essful quitters 
during pregnancy  in the intervention group, we expect smoking abstinence rate at 6 months postpartum will be 
higher than the rate that we previously observed  when our smoking cessation intervention was delivered alone.  
Aim 3 : to examine the  efficacy of our integrated intervention on breastfeeding rate s. We hypothesize 
breastfeeding rate at 6 months postpartum in the intervention group will be higher than the control group. We 
also expect breastfeeding rate at 6 months postpartum in the inter vention group will be higher than the rate 
that we previously observed  among smokers when our breastfeeding intervention was delivered alone.  
 
 
1. BACKGROUND AND SIGNI FICANCE  
1.1 Smoking cessation and lung cance r. Prevention of lung cancer is a top public  health priority. 
Among U.S. women, lung cancer is the second most common cancer (102,625 new cases in 2014) and the 
leading cause of cancer death (70,667 deaths in 2014).1 Cigarette smoking is a well -established cause for lung 
cancer, causing 87% of lung cancer deaths in the U.S.2 Fortunately, the elevated risk o f lung cancer due to 
smoking can be largely reversed by long -term smoking cessation.3-5 Pregnancy is a unique opportunity for 
women to quit smoking. About 23% of U.S. women smoke at conception and 54% of them report  quitting 
smoking during pregnancy.6 But most women who quit smoking during pregnancy return to smoking (“relapse”) 
after delivery, e.g., 45%  and 81% relapse by 6  and 12 months postpartum, respectively.7,8 Temporary smoking 
abstinenc e only during pregnancy may have limited benefits against lung cancer, as the risk of lung cancer 
seems to begin to decrease after 2 years of abstinence.3 However, there is little demonstrated success in 
preventing long-term postpartum smoking relapse using  existing interventions.9  
1.2 Breastfeeding and breast cancer.  Among U.S. women, breast cancer is the most common cancer 
(236,968 new cases in 2014) and the second most common cause of death from cancer (41,211 deaths in 
2014).1 Sufficient  breastfeeding is a protective factor against breast cancer,10 besides its well -known nutritional 
and immunological benefits to the breastfed child.11 There is a dose -response inverse association between 
lifetime breastfeeding duration and risk of breast cancer: the longer breastfeeding lasts, t he lower the risk of 
breast cancer.10,12 According to a large meta -analysis, the relative risk of breast cancer decreases by 4.3% for 
every 12 months of lifetime breastfeeding.  Accordingly, National Cancer Institute  (NCI)  encourages women to 
breastfeed for 12 months or longer to reduce risk of breast cancer.13 The European Code against Cancer also 
recommends that, ‘‘ Breastfeeding reduces the mother’s can cer risk. If you can, breastfeed your baby ’’.14  
1.3 Rationale for an integrated intervention of maternal smoking cessation and breastfeeding.  
Interestingly, maternal smoking abstinence and breastfeeding can strongl y reinforce each other, which has 
been demonstrated by two lines of research. First, smokers  tend to not initiate breastfeeding or have short er 
breastfeeding duration  (e.g., a mean of 11 vs 28 weeks15) than non -smoking mothers ,15-18 which can further 
increase their already elevated cancer risk due to smoking.  Possible reasons include concerns of 
contaminated breast milk by smoking,19,20 smoking -related lactation inhibition ,21-25 and the infant’s refusal of 
breast milk from smoker s due to altered flavor26 and/or nutrient composition.22,27,28 In cont rast, smoking 
cessation during pregnancy is associated with increased breastfeeding intention and practices.29-32 Second ly, 
successful breastfeeding is associated with 30-60% lower  risk of postpartum smoking relapse ,7,33,34 which m ay 
be attributed to breastfeeding -related emotional benefits.  Breastfeeding mothers have lower perceived stress35-
37 and less negative affect (e.g., depressio n38-40 and anger38) than formula -feeding mothers.  High levels of 
postpartum s tress and negative affect are common  trigger s of postpartum  smoking relapse. However, the 
recipr ocal associations (a positive feedback loop) between maternal smoking abstinence and breastfeeding 
reported in previous observational  studies have been  not considered in existing interventions  yet. An integrated 
interve ntion may achieve larger effect s than traditional interventions that targeted each separately.  
1.4 Our supportive work . Our team has developed  and tested an effective  multicomponent smoking  
cessation intervention  for pregnant smokers  (PI, Wen) .41 As high as 63% (19/30) of our participants quit 
smoking successfully during pregnancy,41 compa red to 6% among pregnant smokers  receiving  usual care in a 
reference population.42 Participants’ intention of exclusively breastfeeding has been doubled by our smoking 
cessation interven tion (39.1% at post -test vs 19.4% at pre -test).43 Quitters are 3.5 times (75% vs 20%) more 
likely to initiate breas tfeeding than persistent  smokers.44 But only a small proportion of our participants remain 
smoking abstinent ( 50%) or  breastfeeding ( 21%) at 6  months postp artum , indicating the need of sustained 
postpartum support for relapse prevention and breastfeeding . In addition, we have developed  an effective 
intervention to maintain  breastfeeding  among low -income mothers  (PI, Washio ): the breastfeeding rate at 6 
month s postpartum was 72% in the intervention group, compared to 0% in the usual care group.45 
1.5 Clinical -translational relevance  and impacts . This phase 2A clinical trial (proof -of-concept ) will 
test the feasibility and preliminary impact  of an integrated intervention o f maternal smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding . It potentially advances this important field from  the observational  to intervention  phase.   
 
2. APPROACH  
2.1 Study d esign.  We are proposing the first randomized controlled trial to integrate maternal smoking 
cessation and breastfeeding interventions from pregnancy to 6 months postpartum (Table 1 ).  
Table 1. Study design (W -week, M -month)  
Recruitment  Randomization  Home -based, CLC -delivered intervention  Outco mes 
1st & 2nd trimesters of 
pregnancy (≤28  w) After baseline 
assessment  Pregnancy  
(6 weekly visits)  Postpartum   
(3 bi-monthly visits)  6 months  postpartum  
40 daily pregnant 
smokers  Intervention 
(N=2 0)  Integrated smoking cessation & breastfeeding interve ntion * 
+ Instructions  on general pregnancy and infant care  1. Smoking abstinence  
2. Breastfeeding  Control (N=2 0) Instructions  on general pregnancy and infant care  
*Education and counseling, monitoring and feedback, and contingent financial  incentives  
2.2 Recruitment and s creening . We will recruit 40 daily smoking pregnant women from Erie County 
and Niagara County, NY (36,731 births in 2014 -201646). Recruitment flyers will be distributed  in local obstetric 
clinics , communities , and Facebook . Eligible participants  must be at least 1 8 years  old, at ≤28 weeks of 
gestation to ensure adequate time for interventions , and daily smoking cigarettes and/or cigars in the past 7 
days verified by urine cotinine test ing. Exclusion criteria include being diagnosed with cancer , current heavy 
alcohol use , current  use of marijuana and illegal drugs , uncon trolled mental disorders,  with medical conditions  
contraindicating breastfeeding, and being strongly against breastfeeding.  
2.3 Randomization . After baseline assessments, the 40 eligible participants  will be random ized i nto 
either the intervention (N= 20) or control group (N= 20). A sequence of random numbers in blocks of 2 will be 
used to ensure equal numbers of participants for each group over time.  
2.4 Intervention 2.4.1 Intervention group: integrated intervention of smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding . The intervention group will receive an integrated intervention of smoking cessation and 
breastfeeding : education and counseling, monitoring and feedback, and contingent financial incentives.41 
Intervention s chedul e. Participants  need to complete 6 weekly prenatal visits and 3  bi-monthly 
postpartum visits  (1, 3, 6 months)  at their own home. T wo female Certified Lactation Counselors (CLCs) will be 
trained as interventionist to run these home  visits . Each home visit will last for  about 60 minutes , which will be 
divided between smoking cessation intervention  and breastfeeding promotion intervention.  Interventionists will 
provide additional support via phone and text messaging until 6 months postpartum.  
Theories -based intervention . Our integrated intervention of smoking cessation and breastfeeding is 
guided by two theories: the Health Belief M odel (HBM)  47,48 and Contingency M anagement  (CM) .49 According 
to the HBM , an individual behavior (e.g., smoking cessation) depends upon  several  factors: perceived 
susceptibility (e.g., smoking -related ri sk of low birth weight), p erceived severity (e.g., cost and burden to raise a 
low-birth-weight infant), p erceived benefits  (e.g., saving money for baby items, removal of guilt of harming the 
baby),  perceived barriers  (e.g., daily stress and fear of  nicotin e withdrawal symptoms), self-efficacy  (e.g., 
smoking craving management) , and  cues to a ction  (e.g.,  fetal ultrasound scan ).50 CM uses stimulus control 
and consequences to change behavior s. Positive behavior (e.g., smoking abstinence) is encouraged by 
providing reinforcing consequences  (e.g., financial incentives), while the undesired behavior (e.g.,  continuous 
smoking or relapse ) is discouraged by withholding reinforcing  consequences or providing punitive measures.   
Intervention component #1: Education and counseling .  Our educational materials include readings and 
video -taped lectures that address several perceptions in the Health Belief Model through information on 
negative consequences of smoking and non -breastfeeding, benefits of quitting smoking and breastfeeding, 
barriers to quit smoking or breastfeed and related strategies . At each visit, participants  will fi rst take a quiz with 
10 multiple -choice questions on  assign ed educational materials, an d receive  a $5 reward for passing it (two 
attempts) . Then, the interventionist will conduct behavioral counseling  that focusing on  self-efficacy 
enhancement through 1) planning  for quitting smoking , progress review , feedback, craving analysis, and 
relapse  prevention ; and 2)  making an individualized breastfeeding plan and addressing  concerns including 
previous unsuccessful experience if applicable. After delivery, interventionists will help participants to initiate 
breastfeeding as soon as possible, and solve everyday problems during breastfeeding practices .  
 Intervention component #2: Monitoring and feedback . We will use the Internet and related technology 
(e-Health) to facilitate d aily monitoring of smoking and breastfeeding behaviors. At the first prenatal 
intervention visit , participants will receive a  free personal smartphone -based iCOTM Smokerlyzer  breath carbon 
monoxide  (CO) monitor ( Bedfont Scientific Ltd, Kent, UK ) and be ins tructed to test their CO level at home 
every day . This device has high validity .51 Breath CO is a sensitive biomarker reflecting recent smoking levels 
and provides timely feedback on smoking reduction  or cessation.  Maternal breath CO levels will also be 
converted into the fetal carboxyhaemoglobin (%COHb)  OR “fetal blood CO”. A high fetal %COHb  indicat es 
fetal hypoxia (lack of oxygen), which can serve as a strong cue to action, i.e., smoking cess ation . After 
delivery, p articipants will receive  a free smartphone -based wireless baby weight scale  (“Hatch Baby Grow ”, 
Hatch Baby, Inc , Menlo Park, CA ) to monitor their breastfeeding by weighing their baby before and after each 
breastfeeding, which can provide accurate information on how much bre ast milk that the baby consumes. The 
two smartphone App s will automatically transmit results  to interventionists who can remotely monitor each 
participant’s progress  and provide timely feedback  and assistance .  
 Intervention component #3: Contingent financial incentives . During pregnancy, i f a participant reports 
smoking abstinence  and all her daily breath CO levels since the  last visit are within non -smoking range (≤4 
parts per million or ppm ), she will receive a financial in centive that starts at $10 at the second prenatal 
intervention visit  and escalat es by $5/visit  in next 4  weekly prenatal visits .41 After delivery, p articipants will 
receive incentives for breastfeeding if they are able to nurse or to provide breast milk by pumping in the 
presence of the interventionist . Contingent incentives will start at $2 0/visit at the 1 -month postpartum  visit and 
increase by $10 /visit at the 3 -month and 6 -month postpartum visits .45  
2.4.2 Control group: instructions on general pregnancy and infant care . Participants in t he control group  
will receive usual prenatal care from physicians, nurses, or social workers. They  will receive best standard care 
on smoking cessation and breastfeeding, including referral to the New York State Smokers' Quitline52 and t he 
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (W IC).53 Several efforts will be 
made to balance attention  and compensation between two groups. First, participants in the control group will 
complete the same frequency and duration of visits as their counterparts in the intervention group. Instead of  
focusing on  smoking cessation and  breastfeeding , they will receive instructions on general pregnancy and 
infant care. Specifically, they will review  educational materials with quizzes  ($5 reward/quiz),  and receive 
counseling g uided by two authoritativ e books : “Your Pregnancy and Childbirth: Month to Month ” published by  
the ACOG54 and “ Caring for Your Baby and Young Child: Birth to Age 5 ” published by the AAP,55 respectively.  
These materials will be also given to the intervention group but without quizzes or counseling . Secondly, the 
control group will earn a total amount of financial compensation ($2 5/prenatal visit and $ 30/postpartum visit) 
that is similar to the intervention group, regardless of smokin g status and feeding practice.  
2.4.3 Adherence and retention of participants . Adherence to intervention will be assessed by the 
number of complete d visits, completed activit ies at  each visit, passed quizzes , and self-monitoring of breath 
CO levels and infant feeding via smart -phone A pps.56 If we lose contact, we will reach out to the 3 contact 
people that participants indicated at enrollment .  
2.4.4  Training the interventionists . The interventionists need to complete 70 -hour training  (Table 2 ). In 
Step 1, they will study educational materials  on smokin g cessation and breastfeeding , the 5As model (ask, 
advise, assess, assist, arrange)  for smoking cessation ,57 behavioral change theories  (HBM47,48 and CM49), and 
counseling skills . In Step 2, they need to complete eth ical and compliance training (CITI) for being involved in 
human research. They  will also learn to follow research protocols, use visit instructions/checklists, run breath 
CO and urine cotinine tests , use wireless devices and small -phone apps to monitor breath CO and infant 
feeding , and ensure safety during home visits . In Step 3, they will observe 5 smoki ng cessation and 
breastfeeding intervention visits in the PI’s clinic. In Step 4, they will run 5 clinic -based visits u nder supervision. 
In Step 5, they  will practice 5 home visits along with the PI  and Project Coordinator . Careful evaluation of 
interventi onist s’ readiness will be conducted via exams and trial run s.  
Table 2. Schedule for interventionist  training  
Training content  Trainer  Location  Time  
1. Knowledge, theories, and skills  PI and Co -Is PI’s clinic  and online  40 hours  
2. Research ethics , tools , and safet y PI’s research staff  PI’s clinic  and online  10 hours  
3. Clinic visit observation (5 visits)  PI’s research staff  PI’s clinic  5 hours  
4. Clinic visit practice (5 visits)  PI’s research staff  PI’s clinic  5 hours  
5. Home visit practice  (5 visits)  PI and PI’s research staff Participants’ home  10 hours  
2.4.5 Monitoring intervention  (fidelity) . Step -by-step instructions with a 10-item checklist will be used for 
each visit. The interventionists  will take pictures of test sheets during home visits for later confirmation. H ome 
visits will be audio -recorded for quality assurance and 20% will be randomly sampled for review. The 
interventionists  and research staff  will attend biweekly group meetings to review participants’ process and 
share work experiences. Fidelity of interve ntion delivery will be used for quality improvement.58 
2.5 Outcome measures.  2.5.1 Maternal smoking status . The interventionist will administer a timeline  
follow -back interview59 at enrollment  to assess the participant’s use of cigarettes, cigars,  vapor and electronic 
cigarettes  since conception . Based on their recorded  daily numbers of cigarettes  and cigars  smoked after 
enrollment , we will classify smoking abstinence status in the past 7 days (7 -day point -prevalence).60,61 The self -
reported smoking abstin ence will be biochemically confirmed by urine cotinine tests (<50 ng/mL62) using LC -
MS/MS assay s (Kaleida Health Lab, Buffalo, NY) at the end of pregnancy  and 6  months postpartum . 
Participants will be informed that use of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT, e.g., gums and patches ), 
electronic cigarettes, or other nicotine -containing products will interfere with urine cotinine tests.  
2.5.2 Breastfeeding  intention and practices .  During pregna ncy, participants will report breastfeeding 
intention using questionnaire s modified from the Infant Feeding Practi ces Study II .63 During postpartum , 
mothers will report feeding method s, frequency and duration of breastfeeding and/or formula use  every month  
until 6 months postpartum . Breastfeeding status will be visually verified  by a female research er, looking for one 
of the following indicators of successful breastfeeding in the infant : audible swallowing, a regular 
suck/swallow/breath pattern, or visible milk in the infant’s mouth after they are not latched anymore.45  For 
mother s who pump milk, staff will observe pumping combined with the resulting milk being fed to the infant.  
2.6 Covariates . Covariates of interest  include socio -demographics, health motivation,64 parity, 
pregnancy  intention ,65,66 gestational age at enrollment,67 baseline smoking frequency,  intention to quit smoking,  
partner smoking , perceived stress,68 negative affect,69,70 breastfeeding intention, and breastfeeding experience.  
2.7 Statistical a nalysis . We will calculate the fidelity score  for each intervention visit using a 10-item 
visit checklist . Trajectories of fidelity score s will be fitted with mixed models with interventionist, visit sequence 
number, and their interaction term (intervention*visit sequence number) being independent variable  (Aim 1 ). 
Smoking abs tinence ( Aim 2) and breastfeeding (Aim 3) rates at 6 months postpartum  will be analyzed by Chi -
squared tests and multivariable logistic regression models. Independent variables in the model will include 
group (intervention vs control) , fidelity of interven tion delivery, and unbalanced covariates at enrollment. The 
timing of termination of breastfeeding (weaning) will be analyzed with Cox regression. We will use Intent -to-
Treat  analysis  by including all women as assigned at randomization. Multiple imputation  with 20 replicates will 
be used to impute missing data.71 
2.8 Sample size . Based on our smoking interventions29,41,60 and reported associations (~50% 
reduction) between breastfeeding and smoking relapse,7,33,34 we estimate smoking abstinence rate at 6 months 
postpartum to be 23.1% (= 30% smoking ces sation by the end of pregnancy x [1 00% - 23% postpartum relapse  
rate]) in the intervention group versus  5.5% (= 10% x [1 00% - 45%]) in the control  group. Accordingly, we need 
55 participants  per group  (110 in total)  to detect difference in smoking abstinenc e with  80% power at a 
significance level of 0.05 ( Aim 2 ). Based on our breastfeeding intervention45 and reported associations (~ 50% 
reduction) between smoking and breastfeeding ,29-32,44 we estimate  breastfeeding rate at 6 months postpartum 
to be 31% (=30% quitters x 80% breastfeeding rate + 70% persistent smokers x 10% breastfeeding rate) in the 
intervention group versus  17% (=10% x 80% + 90% x 10%)  in the  control group. Accor dingly, w e will need 126 
participants per group  (252 in total)  to detect difference in breastfeeding rate  in a larger R01  (Aim 3 ). 
Therefore, in this pilot study, recruiting 20 participants per group (a total of 4 0) will be sufficient  to test 
feasibility and preliminary impact  of our integrated intervention.  
 
3. STUDY TIMELINE AND  MILESTON ES  
4. ROLE OF PILOT STUDY  IN SECURING 
EXTRAMURAL FUNDIN G 
Preliminary data collected from this pilot study 
will be used to support  re-submission of our 
NIH R01 grant  application  (1R01CA230255 -01; 
NCI). Reviewers in the 1st submission rated our  
novel idea of integrating intervention  positively 
with 2 of 3 review ers giving a score of  1 for 
innovation criterion  (see the attached Summary 
Statement ). Primary  concerns  included  the lack 
of piloting on  efficacy of  integrated intervention , unclear role of run -in period  and feasibility of biological sample  
collection . These methodological concerns can be effectively addressed by  this pilot stu dy.   
TASKS  Month  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
IRB approval  (in advance)              
Materials and training staff  X            
Recruitment  X X X X X        
Prenatal intervention   X X X X X X      
Postpartum intervention     X X X X X X X X X 
Process & outcome evaluation   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Data analysis            X X 
Reports & manuscripts             X 