1 VA Office of Research and Development Results Record C0239- R  
Title:  Randomized Trial Comparison of Ototoxicit y Monitoring Programs 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol; Document Date:  9-29-17
2 Exper imental Methods  
 
A. Subjects.  
 
A1. Subject Recruitment:  An estimated 320 patients  from VA Portland Health Care System 
(VAPORHCS ) receiving chemotherapy will be identified by a search of the upcoming chemotherapy 
unit appointment list , pharmacy list  or by onco logy referral  including verbal referral and encrypted email . 
Additionally, approximately 120 healthy control subjects  (Veterans and non -Veterans)  not administered 
chemotherapy will also be recruited at the VAPORHCS  from posted recruitment advertisements an d 
from the NCRAR database of Veterans willing to participate in future hearing re search projects . 
Potential chemotherapy patients will be accessed using electronic medical records  (CPRS) to 
determine the diagnosis and treatment plan and to search for exclu sionary criteria. If the potential 
subject is not excluded based on initial CPRS search , oncology personnel will approach the potential 
subject to determine his/her  willing ness  to learn more about the study after hearing a brief description. 
The P rogram Evaluation  (PE) audiologist will then talk with  the patient, offer a more thorough 
explanation of the study, including the necessity for duplicate testing . If the potential subject remains 
interested in the project, informed consent will be obtained includin g an explanation of the goals of the 
study, requirements of the study protocol and the potential risks and benefits to the subject.  
Initial testing to establish inclusion in the study and to provide the first PE will be done in a quiet 
area. After the eva luation, if  the subject has met all  further  inclusion criteria, the subject will be 
randomized  to a treatment arm : Standard of care (SOC)  or C omprehensive Ototoxicity Monitoring 
Program for VA healthcare (COMP -VA). Study personnel  will then be informed tha t a subject has been 
consented, tested, and assigned to a study arm and is ready to receive a baseline evaluation.    
 
A2. Subject Exclusion Criteria : Subjects must be treat ed for cancer  and must provide a reliable 
hearing test  to be  enrolled in the treatme nt arms of this study. Criteria for excluding subjects 
(chemotherapy and controls subjects) from this study are: 1) cognitively or physically unable to 
participate (patient or nurse report patient is incapable of participating), CPRS indication that subjec t 
exhibits aggressive behavior, subject has documented dementia,  Alzheimer’s disease, or severe 
psychosocial disorder, CPRS notes indicate individual is not legally capable of providing informed 
consent (subject has a legal guardian); 2) exhibits Meniere's  disease or retrocochlear disorder based 
on hearing test results, patient report or notes in CPRS; 3) exhibits active or recent history of middle ear 
disorder based on otoscopy, tympanometry, patient report, or notes in CPRS; 4) unwilling to participate; 
and 6) hearing thresholds > 70 dB SPL at 4 kHz and below  (contr ol subjects only) .  
 
B. Experimental Techniques . Study m easurements are divided into three general groups: Program 
Evaluation measurements, S OC measurements (Arm 1) and COMP -VA measurements  (Arm  2). 
Measurements in non -clinical controls generally mirror  those done for the COMP -VA arm . Testing is 
done by an Audiologist. The SOC  protocol (A rm 1: SOC) is done according to the Audiology Service 
established  protocol . The COMP -VA (Arm 2) protocol includes hearing testing at baseline and at each 
treatment interval along with a one -month post -treatment evaluation.  Testing will be done using OtoID 
and/or the OtoID -Tablet and/or a standard audiometer. As part of this project, we have developed an 
updat ed ve rsion of the OtoID which involved migrating  to a tablet -controlled device. Like all 
audiometers, this audiometer is not a medical device since it is “non -invasive” and, therefore, does not 
require FDA oversight or approval. Rather, the OtoID -Tablet propert ies are defined and calibrated 
according to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S3.6 -2010 “Specification for 
Audiometers”. It was calibrated in 2017 and will be calibrated annually, per ANSI standards.  
 
B1. PE and Longitudinal Follow -up Measur ement : Program Evaluations  will be  completed  in a quiet 
area and include 1) otoscopy; 2) tympanometry; and 3 ) hearing  threshold testing  and 4) the audiologist 
can elect to include DPOAE testing at any session .  Various questionnaires  will be given  at the 
discretion of the audiologist.  A study team member may request a patient’s feedback in the form of a 
set of mostly open ended questions (Patient I nterview  Form ). A phone call from PE study personnel  will 
be made  at regular intervals  to inquire about the sub ject’s general well -being, to determine if the 
3 Veteran has experienced any recent noise exposure and retains adequate hearing protection, to ensure 
that contact information is accurate and not likely to change in the near future, and to remind  the 
Veteran that study personnel will require a final hearing te sting session  (PE #3). The Veteran may be 
asked if he /she received any audiological care since the previous contact  and requested to bring a 
report from this  contact to the final (longitudinal) program ev aluation . Subjects  consented and tested 
may receive  a longitudinal follow -up program evaluation  depending on the ir randomization date . 
 
B2. General Procedures  for Ototoxicity Monitoring : Attempts will be made to establish  baseline  
results  within approximat ely 24 hrs of treatment . Results from the baseline t est will be compared to all 
subsequent testing for the purposes of ototoxicity detection. Subjects will be provided with education 
about their hearing, potential changes in hearing and tinnitus associated  with ototoxicity  and the 
increased vulnerability of their auditory system to excessive noise  exposure  for at least a 1 -year period 
after treatment. Disposable -type hearing protection is readily available to subjects at the VA Audiology 
Clinic  and NCRAR .  
 
B2a. Monitoring  Procedures for Standard of Care  (SOC) : Hearing testing will be done according to 
their established protocol for ototoxicity monitoring in the Audiology Clinic.  
 
B2b. Monitoring  Procedures COMP -VA: COMP -VA hearing testing is done primarily using the OtoID  
and/or the OtoID -Tablet and/or  a standard audiometer . Baseline  and monitor  testing  may include: 1) 
otoscopy ; 2) tympanometry ; 3) pure  tone air -conduction threshold  testing ; 4) DPOAE testing  and 5) 
questionnaire s. If the test results suggest  a hearing change or that the Veteran is unable to complete 
the self -test, the subject  may complete  additional testing . Results will be entered into a CPRS progress 
note. A verified hearing change  will be report ed with  oncology medical staff. Approximately  one month 
after treatment ceases , subjects will be evaluated  using procedures  described above . The 
questionnaires  may be given at each  visit.  
 
B3a. DPOAE measures for SOC : DPOAE measurements will be done according to their ototoxicity 
monitoring protocol .  
 
B3b. DPOAE measures for COMP -VA: Testing will be done by study personnel  in a quiet area .  
 
B3b1. Baseline measurements  COMP -VA: This testing may be  done  following the hearing test.  
Further  testing is reserved  primarily  for those instances when the pat ient cannot take a reliable hearing 
test though t he audiologist may elect to include DPOAE testing wh en time permits.  
 
B4. DPOAE Reference Limits Testing on non-Clinical Control Subjects : 120 healthy control 
subjects  will have their hearing and DPOAEs mea sured serially.  Subjects must meet all establis hed 
exclusionary criteria . Subjects will be tested approximately 6 times over the course of about 3 to 6 
months. The variability in the numbers of tests and time frame is to allow our testing regimen to mimic 
several different cancer therapy regimens. In addition to DPOAE  testing , protocol includes : Otoscopy,  
tympanometry,  and hearing  testing . Testing of control subjects will be done in a quiet area .  
 
C. Instrumentation . 
C1. Behavioral Testing Instrumentation for SOC : Equipment and space used for testing at the 
VAPORHCS Audiology clinic will be used for SOC. Equipment undergoes full calibration  annually .  
 
C1a. Behavioral Testing Instrumentation for COMP -VA: The OtoID audiometer s (OtoID and OtoID -
Tablet)  are calibrated annually  with level checks done at least monthly .  
 
C2. Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emission Instrumentation for  SOC: Distortion -product otoacoustic 
emission testing is currently  accomplished using commercially -available equipment.  
 
4 C2a. Disto rtion Product Otoacoustic Emission Instrumentation for  COMP -VA: Either t he OtoID -based 
DPOAE testing  (or cart system) can be used to collect DP OAEs .  
 
C3. Other data to be gathered on study participants with cancer : Additional information obtained on 
each subject from the electronic medical records  (CPRS)  will be entered into the database , maintained by 
by study team member s including a biostatistician and research assistant(s) . Information to be obtained will 
include patient factors such  as name, gender, a ge, type of cancer and staging, drug treatment variables 
such as cisplatin dose and dosing (intensity)  and concomitant radiation  dose  and doublet medication  and 
other information related to treatment and patient factors as required to accomplish the study goals . CPRS 
clinical progress notes will be monitored by a study team membe r on each subject  (estimated n=80/yr)  
entered into either  study  arm in order to obtain  Audiology Service  utilization for up to one year  post-
randomization . In addition, in order to get a less biased estimate  of audiological services utilization rates, 
an historical cohort comprised of all patients identified  as receiving cisplatin approximately  3 years prior to 
the initiation of the study  will be searched in CPRS and the cancer regis try for audiological services used  
(estimated n=220 pts) . We estimate approximately  300 patient records may be accessed to complete this 
search . These data may be combined with data from other  studies  done by  these investigators i n an IRB -
approved manner .  
A study team member  may request  providers ’ feedback in the form of a simple checklist  (Oncology 
Practitioner S urvey) provided to them  at each treatment interval  by a study team member .  
We may also survey practitioners (oncolog ists, nurses,   and audiolog ists) to assess their beliefs about 
ototoxicity monitoring practices  using a n anonymous beliefs questionnaire (i.e., no PHI or PII ).  This survey 
will be made available at 2 intervals.  
In order to establish a benchmark for r elapse -free survivorship from wh ich to compare  COMP -VA 
subjects’  survivorship, we  will be evaluated  survivorship of Veterans with a diagnosis of cancer s treated 
with cisplatin  using the VA Cancer Registry  (or other)  which follows Veterans treated in VA  for 5+ years 
following treatment . We will follow current study participant s for cancer survivorship for approximately  2-3 
years  depending on enrollment date and resources available to do so .  
 
D1. Reporting Methods : All study related data are confidential and will be kept in secured locatio ns at 
the NCRAR , Chemotherapy Treatment  Unit 6C of the hospital,  and the Audiology Clinic using password 
protected computers, locked offices, and cabinets in locked offices. The oncology medical personnel 
will be notified verbally and/or via CPRS notes if behavioral hearing threshold shifts meet or exceed 
criterion level s. Communication with oncology may occur in 2 ways : oncology study personnel may  be 
sent a secure  encrypted and restricted Outlook email  to view  indicating the subject number and name 
of the  subject in order to find previous testing stored in  the OtoI D. The subject number is important 
since the data  (hearing test results)  stored on the OtoID contains only de -identified information 
including subject numbers  and no patient identifiers . In addit ion, a lock -box containing a copy of the  key 
that links the study subject name and th e study number may be stored on  the Chemotherapy Unit in the 
medication room (Rm 6C -157). This medication room is locked at all times and is only accessible to 
oncology me dical personnel. This lock box is password protected with only IRB -approved study team 
members given the code.  The study personnel nurse will be instructed to delete  any email after use.  
Electronically -stored data will be kept at: S:NCRAR/ DilleArchive /COMP -VA, including the linking key 
between the PII and  the data,  all of which are password protected.   
 
Once the study is completed, o ur intent is to bank all data collected und er this approved study protocol 
if the subject  allows (through written informed con sent) the information collected to be added to a 
repository. This study will contribute samples to the “Data Repository for the Normal and Abnormal 
Function ing of the Auditory System , PI: Dawn Konrad -Martin MIRB#  3589 ” located at the  VAPORHCS 
for future us e. If the subject opts out of the data repository, hard copies of data including identifiable 
data will be kept  per IRQ (11 -26-14) in a locked cabinet in a locked room ( P5F-189) at the NCRAR  
and/or  in a locked desk in a locked room ( 1D-116a ) the Audiology Clinic .  
 
5 E. Early Exit: Exit from study will occur  if the Veteran 1) m oves and will not live within proximity to 
permit continued participation; 2) elects to withdraw from the study; 3) fails to meet study protocol 
requirements.  
 