 
 
Official Title:  Study of the Combined Effect of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation 
(tDCS) and Physical Activity on Gait and Functional Mobility in 
Participants With Multiple Sclerosis   
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Number:  18-00534  
Document Type:   Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Date of the 
Document:  • September 9, 2020  
 
 
  Page i 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017    
  
Tool Revision History:  
Version Number  Version Date  Summary of Revisions Made  
6.0 6 AUGUST 2020  - tDCS sessions  2-10 and physical activity  to be 
complete d remotely  
-  follow -up visit will occur within 3 days after session 
10 and the original 4 week follow -up is optional  
- Removed i -1MW and i- TUG  assessments from 
sessions 2-10 
- Add internet access and adequate space to inclusion 
criteria  
- Add T25- FW and Berg Balance scale  
- Made closed- eyes portion of  posturography 
assessment as optional measure 
- Add BICAMS  cognitive assessment  
5.1 16 NOVEMBER 2018  Statistical Analysis of Exploratory Endpoint  
Study timeline  
5.0 23 OCTOBER 2018  Screening process modification  
Clarification of eligibility criteria  
Collection of EMR data  
4.0 08 AUGUST 2018  Modifications of eligibility criteria  
3.0 20 JULY 2018  Specified optional assessments and addition of 
posturography  
2.0 20 JUNE 2018  Added actigraph and EEG assessments  
1.0 23 MAY 2018  Initial submission  
  
  Page ii 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017   
  
A pilot, randomized, double -blind, sham -controlled study of the combined 
effect of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) and physical activity 
on gait and functional mobility in participants with Multiple Sclerosis  
 
  
Principal Investigator:  
 Dr. Leigh Charvet , Ph.D  
Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center  East 38th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA  
Leigh.Charvet@nyumc.org  
646-501-9257  
Additional Investigators:  
 Lauren Krupp, M.D.  
Director, Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center  
Depart ment of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center  
East 38th Street, New York, NY, 10016, USA  
Leigh.Charvet@nyumc.org  
646-501-7500  
 Giuseppina Pilloni, PhD 
Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Health  
222 East 41 Street, New York, NY, 10017  
(929) 455 -5568 
NYULMC Study Number:  18-00534   
Funding Sponsor:  Not Applicable  
IND/IDE Number:  Not Applicable  
Regulatory Sponsor:  Not Applicable  
Study Product:  Not Applicable  
Study Product Provider:  Not Applicable  
ClinicalTrials.gov 
Number                 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Initial version:  05/23 /18 
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page iii 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017   
Statement of Compliance  
 
This study will be conducted in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations on the Protection of 
Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46), 21 CFR Parts 50, 56, 312, and 812 as applicable, any other applicable US government research regulations, and institutional research policies and procedures. The International Conference on Harmonisation (“ICH”) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (“GCP”) (sometimes referred to as “ICH -GCP” or “E6”) will be applied only to the extent that it is compatible with FDA and DHHS regulations.  
The Principal Investigator will assure that no deviation from, or changes to the protocol will take place without prior agreement  and documented approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB), except where 
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants. All personnel involved in the conduct of this study have completed Human Subjects Protection Training.  
  
Study number:  18-00534   Page iv 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017   
Table of Contents  
List of Abbreviations  
 
ADL Activities of Daily Living  
AE Adverse Event/Adverse Experience  
eCRF Electronic Case Report Form  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
FSS Fatigue Severity Scale  
FWA  Federal  Wide Assurance  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
i-10MW  Instrumented 10 meter walking  
i-TUG  Instrumented Time Up and Go  
MS Multiple Sclerosis  
MFIS  Modified form of the Fatigue Impact  Scale   
MSWS  Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale  
N Number (typically refers to participants)  
NIBS  Non- Invasive Brain Stimulati on 
PA Physical Activity  
PI Principal Investigator  
pwMS  People With Multiple Sclerosis  
RR-MS Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis  
SP-MS Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis  
tDCS  Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation  
US United States  
VAS- F Visual Analogue Scale Fatigue  
VAS- P Visual Analogue Scale Pain  
i-2MWT  Instrumented 2 Minute Walk Test  
i-DPAS  Instrumented daily assessment of physical activity and sleep  
T25-FW Timed 25 - Foot Walk  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 5 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Protocol Summary 
Title A randomized, double -blind, sham -controlled pilot study of the combined effect 
of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) and physical activity on gait 
and functional mobility in participants with Multiple Sclerosis  
Short Title  tDCS and physical activity to improve mobility in M ultiple Sclerosis  
Brief Summary  This study is aimed to test the efficacy of transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS) combined with a physical activity (PA) program, in 80  individuals affected 
by Multiple Sclerosis (MS). In particular, t his study will evaluate the efficacy of 
tDCS when administered simultaneously with PA  on walking , functional mobility , 
and fatigue.  
The subjects enrolled will be randomly assigned to the active group (active 
tDCS+PA) or the sham group (sham tDCS+PA)  
Phase  N/A 
Objectives  The primary objective is to determine the efficacy and the feasibility of the 
combination of the tDCS and Physical Activity (PA) to improve gait performance 
objectively measured  by a 10- meter walk test (i -10MW)  using wearable inertial 
sensors.  
The secondary objective is  to determine the efficacy of tDCS combined with PA 
to improve functional mobility , brain activation during cognitive test performance,  
balance,  and fatigue.  
Methodology  Study Type:  Interventional  
Study Design: Allocation : Randomized  
                         Intervention Model : Parallel Assignment  
                         Masking : Double (Participant, Investigator)  
                         Primary Purpose : Treatment  
            Estimated Enrollment: 80 
 
Endpoint   
Primary outcome measures:  
• Comparison of  change in gait velocity and stride length at baseline and 
participation end between the active and sham conditions  
• The number of participants completing the study session ( goal: 80% of 
the participants)  
 
Secondary outcome measures:  
• % of remote tDCS sessions  completed  
• Comparison between the active and sham conditions on functional 
mobility parameters  (phase duration of Sit -to-Stand, Stand- to-Sit, Mid 
and End turning; acceleration and angular velocity)  and the Timed Up 
and Go Task (TUG)  
• Comparison between the active and sham conditions on EEG signals 
before and after  the first and final tDCS session  
• Comparison between the active and sham conditions on static balance 
ability  
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions on Fatigue 
Severity Scale (FSS) , 21-item Modified form of the Fatigue 
Impact  Scale , 12-item Multiple Sclerosis Walking Scale , Multiple 
Sclerosis Quality of Life- 54 (MSQOL- 54) 
 
Study Duration  Estimated study start date:  June 2018  
Estimated study end date:  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 6 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Participant Duration  Approximately 6 hours to 7 hours total over 9 remote sessions  plus a baseline 
and a follow -up visit.  
Duration of IP 
administration  20 minutes of tDCS in each daily session  
Population  Age Eligible for study : 18 years to 70 years  
Sex Eligible for stud y: All 
Condition : Multiple Sclerosis  
Study Sites  NYU Langone Health , USA 
Number of participants  80 part icipants  
Description of Study 
Agent/Procedure  • Device: Active tDCS  
tDCS is a therapeutic treatment  that utilizes low amplitude direct 
currents ( <4 mA) to induce changes in cortical excitability.  
Other Name: Soterix 1x1 tDCS mini -CT 
• Device: Sham tDCS  
During a sham session, the device is programmed to ramp up to the 
desired intensity (target 2. 5 mA) and ramp down for the initial 60 
seconds, with no current delivery during the session, and then again 
at the end of the session. These brief periods of stimulation serve to mimic the effects of a true stimulation session.  
• Behavioral : Physical Activity (PA) program  consisting of 20 minutes of 
cycling on an ergonomic cross- trainer . 
 
 
Reference Therapy  N/A 
Key Procedures  20 minutes of tDCS combined with 20 minutes of PA  
Statistical Analysis  Two way repeated- measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with tDCS (active, 
sham) and Time (baseline, end treatment, 4  week follow -up) 
 
  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 7 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Schematic of Study Design  
Flow diagram  
 
  
Subjects assessed for eligibility (N=80):  
•Obtain informed consent  
•Obtain demographic information, medical history, medication 
history  
•Neurological examination  (if participant outside of NYU)  
      
Administered study intervention  
Perform remotely -supervised TDCS sessions, assessments Pre and Post intervention:  
EEG (only 1st session), and self -report and rate adverse events  
Follow -up assessments of participation  end points and safety:  
•Perform i -10MW , i-TUG, i -2MW, Posturography test, and EEG 
evaluation  
•Administration of questionnaires ( 9-item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -
12, and VAS0-100 ) and cognitive tests  
Treatment 
end 
(Optional) 
4 Week 
Follow -Up 
Arm 1 (N= 40): 
Active tDCS + physical program  
Arm 2 (N= 40): 
Sham tDCS + physical program  
Randomize double -blind (1:1)  
 (N=80)  
Enrollment  
 Allocation  
Baseline  
Remote tDCS 
sessions  
Intervention  
Follow -up assessments of participation end points:  
• Perform i -10MW , i-TUG, i -2MW, Posturography test, and EEG evaluation  
• Administration of questionnaires ( 9-item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -12, 
54-MSQOL  and VAS0-100 ) 
• Assessment of returned Actigraph data  
 
Follow -up 
 Analysis  
Subjects screened for eligibility (N=100):  
•Obtain verbal consent  
•Screen potential subjects by inclusion and exclusion criteria  
  
Screening  
Day 0  
Final A nalysis  
• Two -way repeated -measures analysis of variance (RM -ANOVA) with 
tDCS and Time  
Perform baseline assessments: i-10MW , i-TUG, i -2MW,   administration of 
questionnaires ( 9-item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -12, 54- MSQOL, and VAS0-100), 
Posturography test,  cognitive tests, and instruction for using Actigraph device  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 8 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  1 Key Roles  
 
Principal Investigator  
Dr. Leigh Charvet, Ph.D  
Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center  
East 38th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA  
Leigh.Charvet@nyumc.org  
Co-Investigator s 
Lauren Krupp, M.D.  
Director, Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center  
Departent of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center  
East 38th Street, New York, NY, 10016, USA  
Leigh.Charvet@nyumc.org  
646-501-7500  
 Giuseppina Pilloni , PhD  
Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical C enter  
MS Co mprehensive Care Clinic  
222 East 41
st Street, New, York, NY 10017  
 
2 Introduction, Background Information and Scientific Rationale  
2.1 Background Information and Relevant Literature  
 
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a frequent and common neurological  disorder among young adults. Its course is 
characterized by a progressive neurological deterioration that can cause  motor, sensory  and cognitive 
dysfunction. Among the wide spectrum of signs and symptoms, tremor, spasticity, fatigue, and pain often 
present as well as  balance and gait dysfunctions, which can be caused by  a combination of fatigue, muscular  
weakness , and spasticity [Cameron and Wagner, 2011] . Gait alterations, which typically result in reduced 
speed, decreased step length and alteration of the physiological stance/swing phase duration [LaRocca et al., 
2011; Pau et al., 2016; Pau et al., 2017] represent a serious issue for a large portion of people with MS (pwMS ) 
(approximately 40%  [LaRocca et al. , 2011] ) and negatively affect s their quality of life . In fact,  physical inactivity 
or sedentary  lifesty le is common in patients with MS, and can i nitiate a cycle of deconditioning and worsening 
of symptoms  [Motl et al. 2005; Motl et al., 2010] . By contrast, physical activity  (PA) behavior, particula rly 
exercise training, have beneficial effects on the various processes of  MS [White et al., 2008] . 
 Given that MS is a chronic, long- lasting and disabling disease, physical training plays an important role in 
maintaining an independent lifestyle and good quality of life [Takemasa et al., 1998]. The goal is to minimize 
functional disability and optimize functional motor recovery . Exercise training, like cycling or treadmill protocol,  
is a planned, structured, and repetitive PA, and if undertaken over time, can lead to improved physical  fitness  
[Bouchard et al., 1994]. Exercise training has been considered the most effective nonpharmacological treatment 
in MS with robust evidence for improvements in walking outcomes  [Snook et al., 2009; Dalgas et a l., 2014; 
Pearson et al., 2015] . However, current protocols generally achieve only limited recovery of motor impairments 
[Sutliff et al., 2016]. Thus, there is the need to develop new methods capable of enhancing the effects of 
rehabilitation therapies.   
 
Recently, considerable attention has been drawn to non-invasive brain stimulation ( NIBS ) to help the brain to 
reach an optimal state of activity to facilitate subsequent training effects. Recent studies reported that the 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 9 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  positive effects of physical activi ties might be potentiated by NIBS  and that it has the potential to be considered 
an adjuvant tool able to enhance the rehabilitation effects.   
 
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non- invasive treatment option that has been found to reduce 
the intensity of a wide array of symptoms in neurological disorders such as Parkinson’s disease, cerebral palsy, 
stroke, multiple sclerosis, and depression among others. The effects of tDCS are thought to be mediated 
through alterations of the resting potential of neurons via distribution of direct electrical current. A mild electrical current ( ≈2mA) is typically applied through electrodes placed on the scalp. It is a relatively inexp ensive treatment 
modality that has been shown to be safe and tolerable  in many clinical populations.  
 
The
 tDCS method has several  advantages [Klooster et al., 2016] over other transcranial stimulation techniques  
(i.e. repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, theta burst stimulation or electroconvulsive therapy), such a s 
easiness  of application, affordable cost, lack of lasting or serious side effects,  possibility to be delivered remotely 
[Charvet et al., 2020; Kasschau et al., 2015; Chan et al., 2017] , and a superior persisting  modulating effect on 
the cerebral cortex [Woods et al, 2016].   
 T
he potential benefits of tDCS vary widely  as studies  have shown efficacious  treatment of symptoms such as 
pain, fatigue, spasticity , anxiety or depression [ Chalah et al., 2015; Hanken et al., 2016; Charvet et al., 2017].  
In pwMS active stimulation induces significant pain relief,  improvement of muscle strength, and motor dexterity  
[Meesen et al., 2014; Mori et al., 2010] . Studies , including our own  (Charvet et al., 2017), have reported that  
tDCS improves  symptoms of fatigue when compared to sham stimulation  with lingering benefit for several 
weeks following stimulation [Saiote et al., 2014; Chalah et al., 2017].  Beyond symptom management, tDCS has 
been theorized to improve both cognitive and physical learning processes with the chance for active rehabilitation (REFS).  
tDCS has been used to improv e physical performance and rehabilitation [ Angius et al., 2017; Ferrucci et al., 
2016; Sánchez -Kuhn et al., 2017]. In particular, it has recently been reported that the use of tDCS in conjunction 
with PAsuch as gait training, balance training, and occupational therapy results in significant improvements in 
motor functions (gait, balance, dexterity and hand task for daily living activity) in both healthy individuals and people with Parkinson disease, cerebral palsy and stroke [Bastani et al., 2012; Elsner et al., 2016; Pixa et al., 
2017] . Despite these reports, limited stud ies have been conducted to improve motor performance in PwMS.  
The combination of  tDCS and PA has been shown to induce positive changes in gait performance, specifically 
in regard to stride length, stride length variability , and gait velocity [Kaski et al., 2013; Satow et al, 2016; 
Yotnuengnit et al., 2017].  Pozzi et al. found that patients with cerebellar ataxia had significant objective and 
self-rated improvement of symmetrical step execution and reduction of step width (indicating improved gait) 
following 5 consecutive tDCS sessions  [Pozzi et al., 2014] .  
Based on the theoretical basis of tDCS as  well as promising previous evidence, we believe that tDCS is a 
suitable and favorable complementary technique for motor rehabilitation therap y in MS . This double- blinded, 
randomized pilot study will pair tDCS  (or sham)  with PA for 10 sessions to improve motor outcomes. PwMS will 
be recruited and assigned to either an active or sham (placebo) study condition to assess the efficacy of the tDCS treatment.    
2.2 Name and Description of the Investigational Agent  
 The equipment that will be em ployed to administer the tDCS stimulation is the Soterix mini -CT.  
The Soterix Medical 1x1 tDCS mini - stimulator unit is equipped with: 
• Internal rechargeable battery  
• Connector port for the anode and cathode cable  
• USB charger jack for charging the internal rechargeable battery  
• STATUS LCD displays that allows  the set- up of administration session (stimulation sequence, dose 
and time duration) 
• Connecting cables (1 Red anode cable and 1 Black cathode cable)  
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 10 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  This device is fully programmable and easy to use. It records session data (connection quality,  session duration , 
etc.) for all sessions. The device has built -in safety functions including an automatic abort feature, which ends 
the session if electrode contact  is lost. Sponge pads with rubber electrode inserts (Soterix Easypads)  are 
saturated with saline solution before use to conduct the mild electrical current across the scalp.   
2.2.1  Clinical Data to Date  
 
To the best of our knowledge, t here is no available clinical research data on the effects of the combination of 
tDCS and simultaneously performed PA in pwMS. However, PA has been proposed as a useful  and effective 
approach to improving some of the most typical motor impairments caused by  MS [Motl et al., 2005; Motl, 2010] .  
 
The most promising results , published for the improvement  of motor performances, are on hand dexterity  
where in tDCS was applied alone or in association with motor training [Iodice et al., 2017]. There is positive 
outcome data from other clinical trials conducted in patients with neurologic diseases with impair ed mobility  
including modulation of cortical excitability and enhanced motor skill learning, locomotion, and balance [Iodice 
et al., 2017 , Kaski et al., 2013, Pozzi et al. , 2014] . 
 
Our lab has conducted multiple tDCS trials to date, with two active IRB protocols through NYU Langone Health. We have conducted over 2000 sessions of tDCS paired with cognitive remediation with extremely high 
tolerability and feasibility (>99%). We have positive clinical outcomes with statistically significant improvement of cognitive processes and reduction in fatigue in pwMS.    
2.2.2  Dose Rationale  
 
tDCS does not induce direct activation of  the neural action potential because the electrical current  (typically in 
the 0.5–4.0 mA range)  does not depolarize the neuron to the threshold firing potential [Nitsche et al., 2007; 
Nitsche et al., 2008]. However, tDCS modifies the transmembrane neur on potential and thus influences the 
level of the cortical excit ability  [Wagner et al., 2007] . In clinical research, the employed current typically ranges  
from 1 to 2.5 mA across  a 20 cm2 electrode.  This configuration has been proven to be the safest maximum 
level tolerable  [Brunoni et al., 2012] . For this study we will be applying a maximum of 2.5 mA of current across 
a 20 cm2 electrode for 20 minutes per session.  
2.3 Rationale  
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a p rogressive neurological disorder that represents the most common cause of 
disability in young subjects  [Haussleiter et al., 2009 ]. T he course of MS is characterized by a  progressive 
deterioration due to the accumulation of several neurological dysfunctions  [Cameron and Wagner, 2011]  
including motor deficit, sensory dysfunction, and sphincter disorders , which greatly impact  the quality of life of 
the affected person. In particular, MS affects individuals during their most productive years decreasing their 
physical abilities and thus  causing difficulties in functional mobility,  walking  and performance of activities of daily 
living (ADL) . 
 
PwMS often undergo m otor rehabilitation programs t o reduce muscle tightness, prevent joint stiffness, improve 
muscle strength and correct postural instability and gait abnormalities. In particular , current gait rehabilitation 
strategies for pwMS include repeti tive adaptive physical activity , walki ng training, treadmill training, the use of 
orthoses and functional electrical stimulation  [White et al., 2004;  DeBolt et al., 2004;  Pedersen et al., 2006; 
Snook et al., 2009; Pau et al., 2017] .  
 
However, recent studies have reported that the positive effects of PA might be potentiated by non- invasive 
brain stimulation,  which can be considered to act as a catalyst that enhances the rehabilitation  effects . tDCS  is 
a technique that uses low amplitude direct currents to modify cortical excitability. With well -established  safety, 
tolerability , and eas e of administration, tDCS has been found to have the potential to ameliorate symptoms 
such as depression and pain in  a range of conditions as well as to enhance outcomes of cognitive and physical 
training.  
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 11 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Previous  studies suggest that tDCS, modifying cortical excitability , may prime or prepare the cortex for 
subsequent training and furthermore, may improve overall functional outcomes [ Webster et al, 2006; Brown & 
Pilitsis, 2006] . Hence, the working hypothesis of this pilot study is that the simultaneous administration of tDCS 
and physical activity training (using  a cycling protocol) enhances lower limb functionality, e xpressed in terms of 
improved gait and functional mobility performance,  by reinforcing synaptic connections within networks of motor 
cortex.  
 
In summary, this study aims to test  the efficacy of tDCS combined with a PA program to evaluate the capability 
of such approach in improving gait  and functional mobility.  In addition, this study will adopt our established and 
validated remotely -supervised tDCS (RS -tDCS) protocol  (Charvet et al., 2020)  to evaluate the feasibility to 
deliver  at-home a structured and supervised PA program paired with tDCS.   
 
The design is a randomized, double- blind,  sham -controlled study . Participants will be selected among 
individuals with a clinically established diagnosis of MS suffering from relapsing- remitting form, with a disability 
level (expressed through the Expanded Disability Status Scale, EDSS) compatible with the performance of the 
physical activity program  (EDSS Score less than 6.5) . 
 
P
articipants assigned to the control group will be subjected to “sham” stimulation protocol, which encompasses 
an initial ramping stimulation up and down like in the real stimulation condition, but limited to  the first and last 
minute of stimulation. In this way, even though subjects will perceive  the initial itching/tingling sensation, the 
stimulation duration will be too short to induce after -effects. By comparing the results in individuals  exposed to 
sham stimulation with the results of subjects exposed to anodal stimulation, it will be possible to assess whether the effect of tDCS combined PA is caused by the current stimulation, rather than by the placebo effect. No 
additional risks  are associated with the control group and for th is reason no particular restrictions are required 
for the randomization of eligible participants in the two arms  of the study .  
In regards to the stimulation parameters, previous studies were characterized by many different  variables such 
as:  intensity of  current, duration of each session, and total number of sessions. However, in clinical  research, 
intensities  ranging from 1 to 4 mA are typically used with a 20  cm
2 electrode since  this setup has been proven 
to be the safest maximum level that can be used [Woods et al., 2016; Nitsche and Paulus , ed2000; Nitsche et  
al. 2003]. The protocol design is defined according to the purpose of the study. For the induction of relevantly 
longer -lasting tDCS effects, spaced stimulation wit h intervals ≤ 30 min is suitable [ Monte- Silva et al.  2013b; 
Goldsworthy et al. 2014] .  
 
In terms of  protocol design , there will be 10 consecutive days of anodal stimulation  (anodal electrode attached 
at Cz position , along with a cathodal electrode will be attached at the supraorbital area on the forehead) , paired 
with simultaneously  physical therapy for 20 minutes  as was found to be effective in motor cortex 
neuromodulation [Kaski et al., 2013; Fleming et al., 2016] .  
2.4 Potential  Risks & Benefits  
2.4.1 Known Potential Risks  
The application of tDCS is associated with low risks as reported by  previous clinical and research studies  
[Bikson et al., 2016; Woods et al., 2016] . The most common side effects of tDCS are classified to be mild, 
benign, short -lived,  and the rates of common adverse effects did not differ between the active arms of the 
studies and the sham arms  [Bikson et al., 2016] . 
 The most immediate safety risk for tDCS is the potential for mild irritation resulting from tingling, itching, or warmth/ burning sensations  during and immediately following treatments. H owever, risk to subject  has be en 
substantially ameliorated through the implementation of several aforementioned recommendations  (included in 
the exclusion criteria), and standard parameters.  
 
Standard parameters  to date indicates  that the current is less than 5 mA, it is applied through electrodes that 
are known to minimize skin burns at the specific current level  (i.e. wet saline electrodes as used in this protocol) , 
the current application duration is less than 20- 60 min per session, and that the sessions are not more frequent 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 12 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  than twice per day.  
 
The most common adverse events (AE) of tDCS are [Brunoni et al., 2011]: itching (39.3%), tingling (22.2%), 
headache (14.8%), burning sensation (8.7%), and discomfort (10.4%).  Based on our extensive use in previous 
studies a physical burn or lesion has never occurred. The following figure (Fig. 1)  displays adverse events 
reported through our previous studies. AE rates were largely on par with those reported in the literature to date.  
 
Risks associated with the PA program are limited to mild risks from cycling including potentially uncomfortable 
physical exertion and increased heartrate.  
2.4.1.1  Risks of  Cubii Under -Desk Elliptical  
Cubii  elliptical is associated with minimal risks, limited primarily to proper set -up, usage, and maintenance of 
the equipment. These risks include: (1) utilizing the Cubii on a non- level surface; (2) utilizing the Cubii while 
standing; (3) utilization of a chair with unlocked wheels; and (4) improper securing of the pedals. Prior to each study session, participant safety per the aforementioned safety checks will be assessed by the study technician.  
2.4.2  Known Potential Benefits 
Previous research on the use of tDCS in pwMS reported a range of immediate potential benefits such as :  
• Improvement in cognitiv e functioning and working memory  [Charvet et al., 2017]  
• Reduction in depression symptoms and fatigue [Ferrucci et al., 2014; Saiote et al., 2014; Charvet et 
al., 2017] 
• Reduction in pain and anxiety [Mori et al., 2010]  
The long- term potential benefits of repeated applications of tDCS, their interaction with specific learning stages 
and tasks and the extent to which these performance improvements are retained in the long term remain to be addressed.  

Study number:  18-00534   Page 13 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  The use of our  established RS-tDCS protocol can improve access to physical activity programs, increase the 
engagement and remove the barriers of time and travel to clinic  appointments (Shaw et al., 2019; Charvet et 
al., 2020).  
3 Objectives and Purpose  
In pwMS comparing those receiving active stimulation versus those receiving sham stimulation, the objectives 
are as follows:  
3.1 Primary Objective  
• To determine the efficacy and the feasibility of the combination of the tDCS and PA to improve gait 
performance objectively assessed using wearable inertial sensors previously validated for use in 
pwMS (Pau et al., 2016; 2017).    
3.2 Secondary Objectives  
• To determine the feasibility of delivering at -home a structured and supervised PA program paired 
with tDCS  
• T o evaluate changes in functional mobility after tDCS and PA treatment by  instrumented Time Up 
and Go (i -TUG) performed using wearable inertial sensors at baseline, and at 4-week .  
• To evaluate change in non -motor  symptoms such as general perceived fatigue, cognitive and 
psychological aspects   
• To evaluate safety and tolerability  by assessing both experiences of minor adverse events and pain 
ratings  
• To evaluate changes in level of daily physical activity and sleep as assessed by the ActiGraph 
device (optional)  
• To collect pilot data on tDCS -related changes in brain activity as measured by 3- electrodes frontal 
EEG sensor  (optional)  
• To evaluate changes in standing balance measures provided by static Posturography test  
Study Design and Endpoints  
3.3 Description of Study Design  
This is an interventional, randomized, double- blind  (participant  and st udy staff ), sham -controlled, parallel 
design, pilot study of N=80 RR-MS and SP -MS participants , characterized by  mild to moderate gait  
dysfunctions. There will be a 1:1 random assignment of participants to receive either the active or the sham tDCS while performing the PA program. Blocked stratification will be used to randomize the participants to their 
respective study conditions. Block sizes of 4 and 6 will be used and the stratifying factor will be EDSS score (0 -
3.5 and 4.0- 6.5). Randomization will be done by an independent randomizer who takes no part in baseline, 
follow -up, or sessions to maintain the double- blind nature of the stud y. 
 
3.4 Study Endpoints  
3.4.1  Primary Study Endpoints 
 To determine the efficacy of the combination of tDCS and physical  training, the following primary outcome 
measures have been chosen:  
• Efficacy measured by comparison  between the active and sham conditions by comparing the 
changes in gait velocity and stride length at baseline and participation end   
• Compliance measured by 80% of participants having completed the study sessions  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 14 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  3.4.2  Secondary Study Endpoints  
 
• The feasibility  of delivering at -home supervised PA paired with tDCS will be assessed using the 
number of completed sessions at -home. It will be considered as “feasible” when participant 
complete successfully at least 80% of the total at -home sessions  
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions at baseline and at the end of the study by 
assessing  the changes in gait spatial -temporal parameters  (stance, swing and double support 
phase; cadence; step width) and functional mobility parameters  objectively assessed using  
wearable inertial sensors  
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions at baseline and participation end conditions 
by assessing  the changes in scores of 9-item FSS (physical aspect of fatigue) and 21- item MFIS 
(physical 9 items, cognitive 10 items,  psychosocial 2 items) , MSWS -12 (subjective measures of 
impact for walking ability and related pathology), and MSQOL- 54 (36 items for generic health-
related quality of life measures and 18 items for MS -specific measures).  
• Comparisons between the active and  sham conditions at baseline and participation end conditions 
by assessing  the changes in scores of VAS- F 0-10 (to assess the perceived general fatigue)  
• Review of experiences of minor adverse events and pain ratings. In particular, participants will have 
to report and rate any adverse events. Pain ratings will be measured, using a VAS- P 0-10 (rating 1 
for minimal to 10 for most severe), before and after each session (any experience of pain or other 
adverse event above an intensity rating of 7 will result in  study discontinuation)  
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions at pre and post tDCS- PA session by 
assessing the changes in the performance of the cognitive tests and EEG signal changes during 
the time of testing  
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions at baseline and participation end conditions 
by monitoring the changes in level of daily physical activity and amount of sleep as measured by 
ActiGrap h 
• Comparisons between the active and sham conditions at baseline and participation end conditions 
by monitoring the changes in sway parameters  as objectively measured by the instrumented 
Posturography test  and by monitoring changes in total score Berg Balance Scale.  
• Change in processing speed between baseline and immediately after the treatment end to assess 
improvement in cognitive function as indirect effect of aerobic PA.  
3.4.3  Exploratory Study Endpoint  
As an optional measure, we will collect participants’ electronic medical records , including MRI brain scans 
already  collected during previous clinical visits, to evaluate whether there is a correlation between the degree 
of brain atrophy and the participants’ clinical response to tDCS i.e., the level of improvement in gait, bal ance 
and cognitive measures after tDCS treatment.  Previous studies showed inter -individual variability in response 
to tDCS treatment. One of the factors that affects biological response to electrical current was shown to be the 
degree of brain atrophy [Lucia et al., 2015; Mahdavi et al., 2018]. Recent studies based on human head model showed how brain characteristics such as total brain and grey matter volume can perturb the current distribution density throughout the brain [Mahdavi et al., 2018]. Specifically, reduced grey matter volume was associated with low magnitude of current density in the brain.  
4 Study Enrollment  and Withdrawal 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
In order to be eligible to participate in this study, an individual must meet all of the following criter ia: 
 
1. Age 18- 70 
2. Definite MS diagnosis, subtype relapsing -remitting (RR -MS) or secondary -progressive (SP -MS) 
3. Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) from 1 to 6.5 with clinically significant gait deviations  
4. Clinically stable  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 15 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  5. Able to independently walk with or without an assisting device (i.e. cane, crutches or walking frames) 
for medium -long distance  
6. Absence of other associated medical conditions that would prevent participants from performing physical activity, such as cardiorespiratory and severe osteoarticular disorders  
7. Able to use study equipment  
8. Able to commit to 10 sessions of tDCS while performing physical program with baseline and follow -up 
visits  
9. Able to understand the informed consent process and provide consent to participate in the study  
10. Stable and continuous access to internet service at home  
11. Adequate home facilities (enough space, access to quiet and distraction free area)  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 An individual who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded from participation in this study:  
1. Visual, auditory and motor deficits that would prevent full ability to understand study, as judged by treating neurologist or study staff  
2. Primary psychiatric disorder that would influence ability to participate  
3. Receiving current treatment for epilepsy  
4. Uncontrolled headaches and migraines. In addition, if a subject has had a change in the rate or severity of head pressure, headache, or migraine in the past two weeks, they are excluded  
5. History of head trauma (e.g., head injury, brain surgery) or medical device implanted in the head (such as Deep Brain Stimulator) or in the neck (such as a Vagus Nerve Stimulator)  
6. Any skin disorder/sensitive skin (e.g., eczema, severe rashes), blisters, open wounds, burn including sunburns, cuts or irritation, or other skin defects which compromise the integrity of the skin at or near stimulation locations (where electrodes are placed)  
7. Treatment for a communicable skin disorder currently or over the past 12 months  
8. History of uncontrolled or labile hypertension  
9. Other serious uncontrolled medical condition (e.g. cancer or acute myocardial infarction)  
10. Wide Range Achievement Test -4th Edition (WRAT -4) Reading Recognition scaled score < 85  
11. History of clinically significant abnormalities on electrocardiogram (EKG)  
12. Presence of chronic medical illness and/or severe ataxia  
13. Botulinum toxin injection within the past 4 months  
14. Functional surgery  for lower limb  in the past 6 months  (e.g. hip or knee replacement)  
15. Alcohol  or other substance use disorder  
16. Pregnant or breastfeeding  
4.3 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention  
The MS Comprehensive Care Center of NYU Langone Medical Center has an extensive recruitment base. Patients will be recruited to participate in studies from all over New York and the other  regions within the  
continental United States. Patients who are seen by medical staff at NYU Langone Medical Center, who fit the eligibility criteria, will be referred for the study by the study PI and sub- investigators. All physicians and medical 
staff at the MS Care Center will be presented with the study description.  
 A patient who is seeing one of these medical staff members as their treating physician will be introduced to the study by that medical staff member. If the patient is interested and agrees  to be contacted by the study team , 
then a member of the study staff will contact them. Once a patient is identified, study staff will meet with the 
patient or call them to provide additional information regarding study participation. After the patient has reviewed 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 16 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  the consent form and asked all questions, and provides consent to participate, the patient will be enrolled in the 
study.  
 Advertisements :  
An IRB approved flyer will be posted in local physician offices and waiting rooms and throughout NYU, the surrounding community, and on Long Island. A description of the study will be posted on MS related websites  
4.4 Duration of Study Particip ation  
Participants will complete study activities for approximately 5 to 7 hours total over  the course of  10 sessions.  
 
> The baseline visit will last approximately 1.5- 2 hours (30 minutes to consent, 60 minutes for baseline 
measures and 20 minutes for tDCS session 1)  minutes where initial study measures are administered.  
 
At the baseline visit, participants may be provided with a wristwatch accelerometer Acti Graph. They will be 
asked to wear the ActiGraph wristwatch for the entire study duration until the follow- up visit, except for during 
water -related events such as bathing, showing and swimming. T he first tDCS and PA session will be schedule 
from 4 to 7 days after the baseline visit. During this window of time (baseline to first study session), participants daily activity will be recorded through the ActiGraph wristwatch.  Due to the limited availability of study actigr aph 
devices, use of the ActiGraph will be optional and at the discretion of study staff  If the Actigraph is not bein g 
used then the first session will  occur same day as baseline.  
 
> Remote s tudy sessions 2 through 10 will be approximately 20 minutes in duration, as follows:  20 min: tDCS 
(active or sham) session while performing PA  program lasts 20  min ( cycling paired with simultaneous tDCS) 
 
* Please note that while 10 sessions will be scheduled consecutively across a two -week period, the 
participant will be able to complete  any missed session s during the 3
rd week.    
> Follow -up (Visit 11) will take approximately 1 hour to repeat baseline measures . 
> A final follow -up visit will  be approximately 1 hour after around four weeks from the end of the treatment. 
Participants  will return the wristwatch accelerometer  (ActiGraph)  at the follow -up visit and complete gait 
assessment and self -reported questionnaires.  
 
 Gait and Balance 
assessment and 
self-report 
questionnaires  Gait,  Balance, 
and Functional mobility 
Measures  EEG with 
Cognitive Testing*  tDCS 
(active or 
sham) + 
PA Actigraph 
Wristwatch Assigned*  Actigraph 
Baseline*  Actigraph 
Wristwatch 
Returned*  
Baseline  x    X* X*  
Session 1   x x* x    
Session 2   x  x    
Session 3   x  x    
Session 4   x  x    
Session 5   x  x    
Session 6   x  x    
Session 7   x  x    
Session 8   x  x    
Session 9   x x* x    
Session 10  x   x    
Treatment -
End Visit  x  x*    x* 
Follow -up (4 
weeks ± 1 
week post -x*       
Study number:  18-00534   Page 17 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Session 10) -
Optional  
An asterisk next to a measure indicates that it is an optional assessment that may be foregone in the case of limited 
time and/or limited availability of the ActiGraph Wristwatch device  
 
4.5 Total Number of Participants  and Sites  
Recruitment will end when approximately N= 80 participants are enrolled. A 10% potential dropout rate will leave 
an approximate total of N=72 evaluable participants for the study (refer  to sample size estimation). 
4.6 Participant Withdrawal or Termination  
4.6.1  Reasons for Withdrawal or Termination  
 
Participants are free to withdraw  at any time upon request as  participation is completely voluntary.  
 
The study site’s Investigator can request a withdrawal.   An investigator may terminate participation in the study  if: 
• Any clinical adverse event (AE), or other medical condition or situation occurs such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest of the participant  
• The participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or  not previously recognized) that 
precludes further study participation  
Explicit subject stop criteria have been uploaded as a supporting document.  
4.6.2  Handling of Participant Withdrawals or Termination  
If a participant wishes to withdraw from the study  they m ay do so at any point . The participant can be contacted 
by e-mail, telephone or other minimum -level contact.  
4.7 Premature Termination or Suspension of Study  
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause. Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be provided by the suspending or terminating party to Leigh Charvet . If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI 
will promptly inform the IRB and will provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension.  
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stopping  
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
Study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance are addressed and satisfy  IRB. 
4.8 Study Behavioral  Intervention 
To date, despite significant pr ogress in the development of disease- modifying drugs, pharmacologic therapy 
alone does not warrant optimal care in pwMS . In fact, exercise has been recognized as a feasible form of self -
management for people with disease [White et al, 2004]. Regular exercise can improve daily activity, 
cardiovascular fitness, muscle strength, health perception, and fatigue indices in pwMS  [Motl et al., 2012] . For 
these reasons, physical activity has been used and recommended in pwMS to reduce muscle tightness, prevent joint stiffness, correct postural instability, and gait abnormalities. Cycling and walking training share similar 
locomotor patterns of reciprocal flexion and extensions movements and have alternating muscle activation of antagonists, and they are the most used physical exercise in rehabilitation settings.  
4.8.1  Administration of Intervention 
Physical activit y program based on cross -trainer machine  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 18 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Participants w ill perform the aerobic exercise- conditioning program  with the use of an ergonomic cross- trainer 
for 20 minutes while receiving concurrent tDCS . During the cycling protocol, participant will maintain a l evel of  
perceived exertion between 5 and 8 (Hard and Really Hard) on Borg Scale ( Halabchi et al., 2017). T he 
assessment  of perceived exertion will make sure that participant will train safely at the correct intensity to 
achieve physical benefits  for the PA program. Borg Scale will be administered by the study technician every 5 
minutes during the 20- minutes exercise training.  
4.9 Study Procedural Intervention Description  
4.9.1  Administration of Procedural Intervention  
Study technicians trained to oversee tDCS sessions will administer the tDCS treatments. Training includes 
familiarity with the device and all of its safety features. Furthermore, technicians will be trained to properly oversee the physical activity sessions to ensure a safe environment.  
 
Procedure for the administration of the treatment:  
Electrodes preparation:  the 5 × 5 cm2 carbon rubber  electrodes work w ith saline solution in order to increase 
conductance. Inject 5 ml of saline solution on the external surface of the carbon rubber  of each electrode.  
Electrodes montage:  The carbon rubber sponge electrodes will be placed according to the International 10- 20 
EEG System. The anodal electrode will be attached at Cz position on the scalp, which corresponds to the lower 
limb motor cortex. The cathodal electrode will be attached at the supraorbital area on the for ehead. Before 
starting stimulation session check the impedance. Study technicians will troubleshoot the connection if the 
impedance is high enough that the device cannot reliably stimulate.  
Arm 1 : A ctive tDCS and physical training 
Participants will receive  active tDCS while performing physical training (see detailed description in Section 6.3). 
A direct current of 2.5  mA will be applied throughout the stimulation session.   
 
Ar
m 2: Sham tDCS  and physical training  
Participants will receive a sham tDCS  while performing physical training (see detailed description in Section 
6.3). During a sham session, the device is programmed to ramp up to the desired intensity (target 2. 5 mA) and 
ramp down for the initial 60 seconds, with no current delivery during the session, and then again at the end of 
the session. These brief periods of stimulation serve to mimic the effects of a true stimulation session.  
 
Schedule of the intervention  procedure: 20 minutes of active/sham stimulation, once daily, scheduled for 10 
business days  over the course of approximately two weeks . The participant will be able to compensate for any 
missed session the week after to complete a total of 10 visits. The total duration of the treatment will be 
approximately 3.3 hours ( 20 mins x 10 sessions ). 
4.9.2  Remotely -Supervised tDCS Sessions 
Following procedures  for our validated protocol 25, 69, participants will receive training on the use of the study 
tDCS device and preconfigured laptop computer . Partic ipants will be given a study laptop computer which will 
be configured with VSee67 and TeamViewer68. VSee is a HIPAA compliant teleconferencing video  software that 
encrypts data before sending, creating a secure conn ection between two computers. TeamViewer is a HIPAA 
compliant program for remote access to directly provide technical support . A tDCS kit will be provided for  the 
participant to take home which will include the tDCS device, tDCS headset, and the one- time u se sponge 
pockets for electrodes . The Cubii will be  shipped to the participant’s address.   
 
The remotely -supervised sessions will be administered by study technicians who will be connected live with 
participants via the study provided laptop when initiating and delivering the treatment and can address and 
document any safety concerns that arise during treatment.  The tDCS device is pre -programmed with a single-
use unlock codes that must be entered each day in order for the stimulation to begin. The code will be provided by the study technician each day after the participant meets all safety checkpoints.  Study technicians will direct 
headset placement remotely  and will observe the patient for duration of the session in real- time. The technicians  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 19 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  are IRB approved study team members who completed CITI, HIPAA, and study -specific training in tDCS, Vsee, 
and Team Viewer.  
 
If the participant wishes to discontinue the session at any time, they will be instructed to press the "abort" key, which ramps down and ceases the stimulation current within 30 seconds and afterwards permits headset removal . 
 At each treatment session, participants will complete brief adverse event reports before and after treatment.  
 
 
Figure 1: Example of RS -tDCS equipment and setup  
 
4.9.3  Assessment of Participant  Compliance with Study Procedural Intervention  
Participant’s compliance to the intervention will be assessed with successful compliance being completion of more than 80% of the assigned sessions. Aborted sessions will be counted as unsuccessful or incompliant sessions.  
5 Study Procedures  and Schedule  
5.1 Study Locations  
• 240 East 38th Street, Ambulatory Care Center  
• 222 East 41st Street  
5.2 Study Procedures/Evaluations  
5.2.1  Study  Specific Procedures 
• Instrumented 10 meter walking (i -10MW)  
This test will be used to assess participants’ walking ability. The us e of a wearable inertial sensor allows  
for a quantitative measurement of  the main spatio- temporal parameters (i.e. speed, stride length, 
cadence, stance, swing and double support phase duration)  
 
i-10MW procedure 
The experimental t est will be performed in a clinical setting. The participants will be instructed to walk 
along a 10- meter hallway at their self -selected speed and natural gait.  The inertial sensor will be 
attached at the lower  lumbar level (centered on the L4-L 5 intervertebral disc) with a semi -elastic belt. 
The device receives  acceleration signals, which  are transmitted in real time via Bluetooth to a PC.  
 
Instrumented 2 Minute Walk Test ( i-2MWT ) 
This test will be used to assess participants’ physical endurance - w ith the same reliability of the 6MWT 
(Gijbels , 2011) . The objective of this test is to walk as far as possible for 2 minutes, without running or 
jogging.  
 

Study number:  18-00534   Page 20 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  i-2MWT procedure  
Participants can slow down, stop and rest as necessary, but resume walking as soon as they are able . 
The experimental test will be performed in a clinical setting. The participants will be instructed to walk, 
at maximal effort, back and forth in 30- meter (100- ft) hallway turning around cones for 2 minutes and 
will be permitted to use their habitual assistive devices. The inertial sensor will be attached at the lower lumbar level (centered on the L4- L5 intervertebral disc) with a semi -elastic belt. The device acquires 
acceleration signals, which are transmitted in real time via Bluetooth to a PC.  
 Device:  
Wireless inertial sensor device G -sensor (BTS Bioengineering S.p.A., ITALY) . 
The wearable unit includes a tri- axial accelerometer, a gyroscope, and magnetometer.  
 
• Instrumented Time Up and Go (i -TUG) 
This test will be used to assess participants’ functional mobility.   The us e of inertial sensor unite 
introduces a quantitative approach to motion analysis.  
 
i-TUG procedure  
The experimental test will be performed in a clinical setting with the participants will be instructed to sit on a standard office chair with a back support. Following a verbal signal, participants stand up, walk  
straight for 3 meters at a comfortable and safe speed [Podsiadlo et al., 1991], perform a 180° turn 
around a cone, walk back to the chair, and perform a second 180° turn to sit down . 
The inertial sensor will be attached at the lower lumbar level ( positioned at the cent er at the L4 -L5 
intervertebral disc  level) with a semi -elastic belt. The device acquires acceleration a nd angular velocity 
signals, which are transmitted in real time via Bluetooth to a PC.  
Participants will repeat the test twice: the first trial serves mainly for familiarization, while the second is 
actually measured and the resulting data will be processed.  
Device:  
Wireless inertial sensor device G -sensor (BTS Bioengineering S.p.A., ITALY) . 
The wearable unit includes a tri -axial accelerometer, a gyroscope, and magnetometer.  
 
• Electroencephalogram  (EEG) evaluation paired  with cognitive testing  (Optional) 
Participants may be asked to wear a miniature 3- electrode head strap device at the discretion of the 
study staff before and after  the first and final tDCS session. The EEG measures the electrical activity 
in the brain and quantifies and assesses  the effect of tDCS intervention.  EEG signal analysis may 
introduce a novel approach in quantifying measurements associated with cognitive load, emotional 
states, stress, and pain.  
During the EEG  measurement  period, participants  will complete testing using the Cogstate Brief 
Battery, a validated computer -based platform{CogState, 2015 #95}{Maruff, 2013 #96}{Charvet, 2018 
#462}    that takes approximately 10 minutes to compute, and the Symbol Digits Modalities Test (SDMT) 
, a 90 second paper and pencil measure of symbol to number matching.{Smith, 1982 #82}{Charvet LE, 
2014 #390}  
Device:  
Functional Brain Activity Sensor ( fBAS  
TM ) is a sticker -size, sticker -thin, wireless sensor (medical grade 
accuracy) that uses three EEG electrodes ( Neurosteɘ r, LTD ). fBAS device comprises of a EEG sensor 
and a Bluetooth transmitter. EEG recordings are co llected by 3 medical grade electrodes on via a 
forehead patch, and the captured signals are sent via low energy Bluetooth to a PC for the real -time 
processing.  
 
The EEG paired with Cognitive test assessment  will be an optional measurement and will be at t he 
study staff discretion when to perform these tests (limited time and/or limited availability of fBAS device).  
  
• ActiGraph Evaluation (Instrumented daily assessment of physical activity and sleep, i-DPAS)  
 Actigraphy testing involves the use of a portable device ca lled an actimeter which is w orn as  a 
wristwatch that records  the participant’s daily routine movement s over extended periods of time (days 
and nights) except when he/she is bathing or swimming. An Actigraphic device is worn on the wrist and 
includes several types of sensors to record movement, and the absence of movement for a given 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 21 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  continuous period of time is considered as sleeping. At the end of the test period, the data from the 
device is downloaded to a computer for analysis using software programs to extract  a number of 
parameters that suggest sleep and wake cycles.  The use of the wristwatch device allows quantitative 
measurement of the participant’s daily activity (based on Vector Magnitude and number of steps taken), the intensity of physical activity and hours of sleep.  
 i-DPSA  procedure  (Optional) 
The participants may be asked to wear a wristwatch  sensor - depends on the availability of the device- 
for the entire duration of the study, from the baseline visit to the follow -up visit  in which the data will be 
collected all throughout.  The participants will be instructed to wear the wirstwatch sensor each day for 
the entire duration of the study on the wrist  of non-dominant arm (it is considered to be less intrusive  
especially during s leep). Participants will return the device at the follow -up visit.  
Device:  
Tri-axial accelerometers ActiGraph wGT3X -BT (Actigraph ,Pensacola, FL), previously validated for  
pwMS (Motl et  al.,  2009) . 
 
The monitoring of daily activity with Actigraph will be optional measurement and will be at the study 
staff discretion when to perform this test  (limited time and/or limited availability of the Ac tiGraph device).  
 
• Static posturography Test This test will be used to assess participants’ static balance  ability . The use of static force platform  unite 
introduces a quantitative approach to the evaluation of balance and allow to compute the positions of 
the centre of pressure (COP)  on  the  ground  (this is estimated as compatible with the centre of gravity  
at about  97%). The COP  will be  used  to  calculate  the  following  time  domain measures: veloci ty of 
the COP on the anteroposterior (AP) or mediolateral (ML) axes (COP vel), the sum of the displacements 
of COP on the force p latform (COP path), and the 95% confidence ellipse area  
(COP area).  
 
Static posturography procedure  
Static posturography will be  performed according to a standardized procedure as follows:  
Each participant will be asked to stand barefoot on the force platform, in upright static condition, double-
leg stance, and with arms resting at their sides. The position of the feet on the force- platform is 
standardized, their feet will be placed on two 30°- oriented footprints (inter -malleolar distance 8 cm) 
drawn on a paper sheet placed on the force platform . Stance conditions are tested with open eyes (OE) 
and closed eyes (CE). Each test will be performed 2-3 times  based on the ability of each participant 
and lasts around 30 seconds.  The closed eyes static posturography will be an optional as sessment 
depending on the level of impairment of the participant.  Device: Wii Balance Board ( Nintendo) paired via Bluetooth device with a PC. It was previously 
validated for healthy controls and pwMS (Park and Lee, 2014, Pau et al., 2015, Pau et al., 2017).  
 
• Timed 25- Foot Walk (T25 -FW): it is a clinical tool that evaluates  participant s for quantitative mobility 
and leg function performance test in a timed, 25 foot walk. The scoring for the Timed 25- Foot Walk is 
the average of two trials.   
T25-FW procedure: the patient is directed to walk 25 feet quickly and safely as possible. Participant 
can use the assistive devices while doing this task.  
 
• Cognitive Assessment  
Brief International Cog n itive Assessment in MS (BICAMS)  (Benedict et al., 2016): this battery 
includes tests of mental processing speed and memory. Specifically, it includes the Brief Visiospatial 
Memory Test (BVMT), Symbol Digit Modality Test (SDMT), and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RVLT).  
Cogstate Brief Battery (Maruff et al., 2009) : brief, computer -administered cognitive test battery that 
requires approximately 10 minutes for administration and consists of four cognitive tasks that measure 
psychomotor function, attention, working memory and memory.   
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 22 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  • Balance Clinical Scale  
Berg Balance Scale (Berg et al., 2005): this scale objectively determine a patient's ability (or inability) 
to safely balance during a series of predetermined tasks. It is a 14 item list with each item consisting of 
a five -point ordinal scale ranging from 0 to 4, with 0 indicating the lowest level of function and 4 the 
highest level of function and takes approximately 20 minutes to complete.  
 
• Participants who are not associated with the NYU MS Care Center will need the following completed by a study physician:  
• Neurological examination  
• Medical history  
• Medication history   
• Physical examination  
Otherwise, this information will be provided by their physician before their baseline visit.  
• Administration of questionnaires  self-administered  
12-item MS Walking Scale (12-MSWS): Measuring the impact of MS on walking ability [Hobart et al., 
2003 ] 
9-item Fatigue Severity Scale  (9-item FSS): Measuring the physical aspect of fatigue [Krupp et al., 
1988]  
21-item Modified form of the Fatigue Impact Scale (21- item MFIS): 9 items for physical aspects, 10 
items for cognitive aspects and 2 items for psychosocial aspects [Fisk et al, 1994] 
Visual Analog ue Scale for fatigue  (VAS- F 
0-10): Measuring the perceived general fatigue on a scale 
from 0  mm ( no fatigue) to 10 mm  (extreme  fatigue)  [Hewlett et al., 2007]  
Visual Analogue Scale for pain (VAS- P 0-10): Measuring the pain rating on a visual analogue scale 
from 0 mm (no pain) to 10 mm (severe, worst pain)  
54 items Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life (54-MSQOL ): multidimensional health -related quality of 
life measure that combines both generic and MS -specific items into a single instrument  
5.3 Study Schedule  
5.3.1  Screening  
• Obtain informed verbal consent from potential participant to discuss study and medical history  
• Review medical history  to determine eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• Review medications history to determine eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• Schedule study enrolment visit  for participants who are eligible and available for the duration of t he 
study.  
5.3.2  Enrollment/Baseline (Visit 1)  
• Obtain informed consent of potential participant verified by signature on study informed consent form  
• Verify inclusion/exclusion criteria  (Section 5.1)  
• Obtain demographic information, medical history, medication history  
• Neurology Exam/Obtain EDSS  (If participant is outside of NYU)  
• Assess ment  of weight, height, and BMI  
• Baseline measure: gait assessment with i nstrumented 10- meter walk (i -10MW), functional mobility 
assessment with instrumented Time Up and GO (i -TUG),  Timed 25- Foot Walk ( T25-FW ),  instrumented 
2 minute walk (i -2MW)  test, balance assessment with static posturography test, administration of Berg 
Balance Scale, and administration of questionnaires (9- item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -12, 54-
MSQOL , and VAS - F 0-10) 
• Cognitive assessment using BICAMS and CogState brief battery  
• Provide instructions for wearing the ActiGraph device (optional)  
• First tDCS session  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 23 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  5.3.3  Intermediate Remote Visits  (Day 2 to Day 10) 
 
• Administer the study treatment for 9 visits  
(Active stimulation: 20 mins of tDCS (2 .5mA) while participants will complete physical training; Sham 
stimulation: 20 mins of tDCS sham stimulation, no current delivery during the session, while participants 
will complete physical training)  
• Record adverse events as reported by participant with pain ratings (VAS - P1-10) and self -reporting and 
rating possible adverse events during each stimulation session 
• Monitoring of perceived exertion using Borg scale. Borg scale will be administered by study technician 
every 5 minutes during the 20 minutes PA training  
• Instructions provided to participants after the session: no concurrent physical therapy for the entire 
duration of the study  
• Optional: Only for the first (day 1) and f ollow -up (day 1 1) may participants’ be asked to wear EEG 
electrodes. While performing cognitive tests (CogState and the SDMT) before and after the stimulation period, participant’s EEG signals will be simultaneously recorded for ten minutes.  
5.3.4  Treatment End visit (within 3 days after session 10)  
• G ait assessment with instrumented 10- meter walk (i -10MW), functional mobility assessment with 
instrumented Time Up and GO (i -TUG),  Timed 25- Foot Walk ( T25-FW ),  instrumented 2 minute walk 
(i-2MW)  test, balance assessment with static posturography test, administration of Berg Balance Scale, 
and administration of questionnaires (9- item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -12, 54-MSQOL , and VAS - F 
0-10) 
• Cognitive assessment using BICAMS and CogState brief battery 
5.3.5  Final Study Visit (within 4 ± 1 weeks from the end of treatment  i.e. Session 10 )  
 
• Gait assessment with instrumented 10- meter walk (i -10MW) , functional mobility with instrumented Time 
Up and GO (i -TUG) , and balance assessment with static posturography test, administration of Berg 
Balance Scale, Timed 25- Foot Walk ( T25-FW )  
• Administration of questionnaires (9- item FSS, 21 -item MFIS, MSWS -12, 54-MSQOL , and VAS - F 0-10) 
• Record participant’s adherence to treatment program  
• Cognitive assessment using BICAMS and CogState brief battery  
• Collect the ActiGraph device (Optional)  
5.3.6  Withdrawal /Early Termination Visit  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice to their care.  
6 Assessment of Safety   
A data safety monitoring plan (DSMP) will be implemented to ensure safety throughout the study. The study PI 
and Co -I Dr. Krupp will be responsible for the evaluation of safety .  
 There is a large body of literature indicating no known safety or tolerability risk for use of tDCS. Further, tDCS 
is currently being studied as an alternative to relatively higher risk treatments (such as medication) in special populations such as pregnant women and developmentally disabled children. Published studies in MS, including the work in our lab here at NYULH and Stony Brook Medicine, show tDCS to be a tolerable and safe 
treatment approach. Dr. Krupp and team at the MS Center are MS specialists with extensive experience in the 
assessment of patients with MS, including cognitive capacity, and including capacity to consent for numerous clinical drug trials where there is a substantially greater potential risk posed than what are the known risks for tDCS.  
 
EEG is also established as a safe and painless procedure, with the major side- effect only being a temporary 
discomfort from the gel applied on the electrode patch to improve conductivity. It poses low risks even for 
critically ill populations as well such that is used as a continuous monitoring tool for patients during anesthesia 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 24 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  and in intensive care environments (Jameson, et al. 2006). Previous literature suggests that the combined use 
of EEG after  tDCS does not increase any risks of harm. No complications or adverse events were reported for 
subjects whose EEG recordings were taken after performing motor tasks paired with tDCS stimulation (Polania, et al. 2012; Notturno, et al. 2013; Greecco, et al. 2014).   Actigraphy is also a safe tool that is increasingly utilized in clinical research.  In a number of clinical trials, it has 
been used to monitor patient’s responses to new treatments, and no safety  concerns were raised when worn 
on vulnerable populations such as nursing home patients with advanced dementia, (Erdal, et al. 2018) and 
hospitalized elderly with high risk of delirium (Jaiswal, et al. 2018). Therefore, taken together, we do not believe that neither  the simultaneous use of tDCS and EEG nor use of ActiGraph represents a situation where an 
independent party would be needed.  
 Weekly meetings between the PI, co- investigators, and study coordinators will review the clinical course and 
assessment s of each subject.  There are no pre- defined rules for stopping the study.  
 DSMP meetings will occur after the completion of every 10 study participants (all study procedures completed).  Information to be reviewed at DSMP meetings will include adverse event rates and protocol compliance to ensure that the study is being conducted safely and is line with the current safety expectations associated with tDCS (i.e. no serious adverse effects are associated with tDCS).   
 
Reports will be submitted at the annual review unless a change in the risk/benefit ratio has been identified from 
the safety and adverse event data (in which case a report will be promptly submitted to the IRB).  
Non-Significant Risk Device Justification:  
As described above, tDCS poses low risks to participants and our protocol is well- tolerated. To our knowledge, 
hundreds of tDCS studies in the US have all been designated Non- Significant -Risk (NSR) level (devices that 
are not: intended as an implant with potential for serious risk to health, safety, or welfare of subject; purported or represented to be for use in supporting or sustaining human life with a potential for serious risks; for use of substantial importance in diagnosing curing, mitigating, treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health with potential for significant risk; otherwise presents significant risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject). For these reasons, the Soterix Mini CT, as used in this study, also qualifies as a NSR device.  
 
While tDCS remains an investigational technique (simply because no company has applied to the FDA for 
approval to market tDCS for any given indication), tDCS is a broadly reproduced and tested techniques that is considered effective in modulating brain excitability in a manner that may support learning and with adverse events (different than sham) limited to tingling, itching, and redness that dispel after stimulation stops. In a prior study of use in a vulnerable population (developmentally disabled children), the FDA issued a NSR for tDCS device (see attached letter). The letter provided as an example of the FDA’s designation of tDCS devices as 
abbreviated IDE. Because of its prior designation of tDCS devices as abbreviated IDE, trials do not typically 
seek further declaration. In the letter provided, Dr. Wasserman specifically sought FDA review of the trial due to the use of tDCS in a vulnerable population (developmentally disabled children).   To date, hundreds of trials have been designated as non- significant risk by IRB  review which provides its 
abbreviated IDE status. Results of completed trials, including our own work in MS using this protocol, have supported the risk designation provided by IRBs. The Stony Brook Medicine IRB confirmed the NSR and abbreviated IDE status of tDCS for our study and others at the institution. We have learned that the NYU IRB has also confirmed tDCS devices (including those manufactured by Soterix) as abbreviated IDE for current ongoing studies at this institution. The safety of this technique has been addressed and tested by multiple researchers (e.g., Hummel, et al.117; Fregni, et. al.19, 118; Nitsche, et al. 13, 24, 119; Priori, et al.120) who 
have concluded that tDCS, as applied in a manner similar to our proposed protocol, induces only t emporary 
mood, cognitive / motor effects, and no negative side effects. For example, researchers at the National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), Iyer et al.19 conducted a safety study on tDCS, investigating 20-minute sessions of 1 m A and 2 mA current stimulation with healthy controls (n=103). No negative effects 
were identified. Nitsche and colleagues found no measurable structural changes in brain tissue due to tDCS 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 25 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  121. In a meta- analysis of over 200 tDCS studies conducted from 1998 to 2010, 56% of studies mentioned 
adverse events, which were generally minor.  
 
The most commonly reported side effects included itching, tingling, headache, burning sensation and discomfort 
limited to the scalp site where the tDCS electrodes were applied. To date, there have been no reports of seizures induced by tDCS. Importantly this is the case in normal volunteers, but also in different populations of patients, including patients with disorders where there might be an increased risk of seizures (e.g.  Alzheimer’s disease, 
recent stroke, epilepsy). A study from NYU on the use of tDCS in patients with epilepsy122 encountered no 
increase in complications of tDCS in the patients as compared with controls. Specifically, there were no 
instances of seizures induced by tDCS.  
 Non- invasive EEG is also considered to be a tolerable and safe routine procedure. As of today, it is designated 
minimal risk by IRB Review (a procedure in which the probability and the magnitude of harm or discomfort caused are not greater than those encountered in daily life).  The fBASfor use intended in this study  also 
qualifies as a minimal risk device .  
 Cubii Pro Elliptical complies with FCC part 15 FCC Rules. This equipment  is minimal risk because it is a non-
invasive  elliptical m achine widely available for at -home w orkout composed of  pedal bike cycle m otion with 
adjustable r esistance . Participants will be informed of all safety precautions:1) Use Cubii Pro only while sitting; 
2) Use Cubii Pro indoors on a level surface; 3) Cubii Pro only  by holding the handle; 4) For ensure maximum 
grip with the pedals, we recommended wearing soft sole shoes and straps.  
 ActiGraph also qualifies as a minimal risk by IRB because it is a non- invasive, physical sensor  or watch that is 
only applied to the surface of the body. To date, there are numerous actigraphy testing devices that have been cleared for 510(k) process, and specifically, ActiGraph wGT3X -BT, the  device that is used for this study, has 
already been approved as a Class II medical device by the  FDA.  More information are provided in the User 
Manual attached.   The static posturography test performed with force platform is not associated with any risks. The procedure of the posturography test is considered to be tolerable and safe procedure routin e.  
 
Participants in all groups may find the questionnaires time consuming and potentially bothersome. 
Neuropsychological testing and the physical activity sessions may, in some individuals, be stressful or anxiety producing.  
 There is a small risk of loss  of confidentiality. Participants will be assigned a study ID and their name will not be 
used on any of the information collected. The results of these data collected may be used for publication but 
will not include the participants’ names. Data will be stored in an IRB -compliant manner that is consistent with 
MCIT’s policies.  
6.1 Specification of Safety Parameters  
6.1.1  Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity during 
the course of the study.  Concurrent illnesses or injuries acquired during the course of the study should be 
regarded as adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be adverse events 
if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests 
• is considered by the investigator to be of clinical significance 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 26 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  6.1.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non- serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospital stay  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly of major clinical 
significance. They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention  to prevent one of the other serious 
outcomes noted above. For example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did not result in in- patient 
hospitalization, or intensive treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency department would typically be considered ser ious.  
 All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious should be regarded as non -serious adverse 
events.  
6.1.3  Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects or Others  
Any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all  of  the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency   (i.e. not described in study -related documents such as the 
IRB-approved protocol or consent form, the investigators brochure, etc)  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research ( i.e. possibly related means there is a 
reasonable possibility that the incident experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research)  
• Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm (
 including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social harm).  
 T
his definition could include an unanticipated adverse device effect, any serious adverse effect on health or 
safety or any life- threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, 
or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects (21 CFR 812.3(s)).  
6.2 Classification of an Adverse Event  
6.2.1  Severity of Event  
For AEs not included in the protocol defined grading system, the following guidelines will be used to describe severity.  
 
• Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s daily activities.  
• Moderate  – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic measures. 
Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
• Severe  – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic drug therapy or 
other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life- threatening or incapacitating.  
6.2.2  Relationship to Study Agent  
The clinician’s assessment of an A E's relationship to study agent (device) is part of the documentation process, 
but it is not a factor in determining what is or is not reported in the study. If there is any doubt as to whether a clinical observation is an AE, the event should be reported. All  AEs must have their relationship to study agent 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 27 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  assessed. In a clinical trial, the study product must always be suspect. To help assess, the following guidelines 
are used.  
 
• Related – The AE is known to occur with the study agent, there is a reasonable possibility that the study 
agent caused the AE, or there is a temporal relationship between the study agent and event. Reasonable possibility means that there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the study agent and 
the AE.  
• Not Related  – There is not a reasonable possibility that the administration of the study agent caused 
the event, there is no temporal relationship between the study agent and event onset, or an alternate etiology has been established.  
6.2.3  Expectedness 
The study PI  and Co- I Dr. K rupp will be responsible for determining whether an AE is expected or unexpected. 
An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study agent.  
6.3 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 
The occurrence of an AE or SAE may come to the attention of study personnel during study visits and interviews 
of a study participant presenting for medical care. All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for SAEs will be captured on the appropriate RF. Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, Co- I’s assessment of severity, relationship to study product (assessed only by those 
with the tra ining and authority to make a diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs 
occurring while on study must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution.  
Any medical condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE. UPs will be recorded in the data collection system throughout the study.  
 Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of onset and duration of each episode.  
 The PI will record all reportable events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent is obtained 
until 7 (for non- serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study participation. At each study visit, 
the investigator will inquire about the occurrence of AE/SAEs since the last visit. Events will be followed for 
outcome information until resolution or stabilization.   
 All unresolved adverse events should be followed by the investigator until the events are resolved, the subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event is otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled visit, the investigator 
should instruct each subject to report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to participation in this study.  
6.4 Reporting Procedures  – Notifying the IRB  
6.4.1  Adverse Event Reporting 
Adverse event rates will be calculated and reviewed at DSMP meetings. Adverse event rates will be reported to the IRB as described previously. Should adverse event rates exceed the normal rates observed in the literature, the study PI will place the study on hold and review the safety of the study.  
6.4.2  Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
Serious adverse events  that are related to the study device or interventions will be reported to the IRB within 
24 hours of occurrence.  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 28 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  6.4.3  Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
Incidents or events that meet the OHRP criteria for UPs require the creation and completion of an UP report 
form. It is the site investigator’s responsibility to report UPs to their IRB . The UP report will include the following 
information:  
 
• Protocol identifying information: protocol title and number, PI’s name, and the IRB project number;  
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• An explanation of the basis for determining that the event, incident, experience, or outcome represents an UP;  
• A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been taken or are 
proposed in response to the UP.  
 
To satisfy the requirement for prompt reporting, UPs will be reported using the following timeline:  
 
• UPs that are SAEs will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours  of the investigator becoming aware of the 
event.  
• Any oth er UP will be reported to the IRB within five business days  of the investigator becoming aware 
of the problem.  
• All UPs should be reported to appropriate institutional officials (as required by an institution’s written reporting procedures), the supporting agency head (or designee), and OHRP within five business days  
of the IR’s receipt of the report of the problem from the investigator.  
6.4.4  Reporting of P regnancy 
Participants that become pregnant during the course of the study will be discontinued from treatment and will 
be asked to complete a concluding participation end visit that includes no risk or involvement of treatment. Only 
assessment will occur at the participation end visit.  
6.5 Study Halting Rules  
There are no pre- defined rules for stopping the study . Individual participants may be removed from the study  
by the PI and/or Co- I.   
6.6 Safety Oversight  
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the safety of the study at his/her site.  This safety 
monitoring will include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events as noted above, as well 
as the construction and implementation of a site data and safety -monitoring plan. Medical monitoring will include 
a regular assessment of the number and type of serious adverse events  by Co -I Dr. Krupp . 
 Safety and tolerance of study protocols will be assessed via safety reports after every ten participants that complete the study. Signed memos including the details of the reports will be submitted to the IRB in a timely 
fashion.  
7 Stati stical Considerations  
7.1 Statistical Hypotheses 
 Research hypothesis  
There is  a significant difference between active and sham groups by compa ring primary and secondary 
outcomes at baseline and end treatment time.  
Null hypothesis  
There will  not be a significant  difference between active and sham groups  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 29 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  7.2 Description of Statistical Methods  
7.2.1  General Approach  
 
Study design of the study is a double - blind randomized controlled trial.  
The primary, secondary outcomes and demographic variables will be examined with summary statistics, 
including means, medians, standard deviations (SD), minimum, and maximum values for continuous variables, 
and frequencies and proportions for categorical variables.  
The characteristics of the participants in the two groups will be compared at baseline using two-  sample t -tests 
for continuous variables and the chi- square test for categorical variables.  
The Shapiro- W ilk test will be performed, histograms will be constructed, and measures of central tendency and 
dispersion will be calculated to test the assumption that distribution is normal. If the normality check will fail, a 
transformation of the data w ill be done as corrective procedures.  
The general approach of statisti cal analys es will be a repeated- measures analysis of variance (RM- ANOVA) 
with tDCS (2 levels: Active and Sham) as the between- independent variable and Time ( 3 levels: Day 1, Day 
10, and after 4- weeks) as the within- independent variable.  
In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% and all p- values is two -sided.  
7.2.2  Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint(s)  
 
Gait speed and Stride length 
• Continuous variable (repeated measure)  
• The Shapiro- Wilk test will be  performed: histograms will be constructed, and measures of central 
tendency and dispersion will be calculated to test the assumption that distribution is normal  
• If normality check will fail a transformation of the data will be done as corrective procedures 
(transformation will be made according to data distribution)  
• Repeated- measures analysis of variance (RM- ANOVA) with tDCS (2 levels: Active and Sham) as the 
between- independent variable and Time ( 3 levels: Day 1, D ay 10, and After 4 -weeks) as the within -
independent variable. In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% and all p- values is 
two-sided.  
7.2.3  Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s)  
 
Time Up and Go parameters  (temporal parameters: phase duration of Sit -to-Stand, Stand- to-Sit, Mid and End 
turning; speed rotation; antero- posterior, lateral and vertical acceleration in Sit -to-Stand and Stand- to-Sit 
phases)  
• Continuous variable (repeated measure)  
• The Shapiro- Wilk test will be  performed: histograms will be constructed, and measures of central 
tendency and dispersion will be calculated to test the assumption that distribution is normal  
• If normality check will fail a transformation of the data will be done as corrective procedures 
(transformation will be made according to data distribution)  
• Repeated- measures analysis of variance (RM- ANOVA) with tDCS (2 levels: Active and Sham) as the 
between- independent variable and Time ( 3 levels: Day 1, Day 10, and After 4 -weeks) as the within -
independent variabl e. In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% and all p- values is 
two-sided.  
 Static Posturography Parameters or Sway Parameters ( velocity of the COP on the AP or ML axes, COP 
velocity, COP path  and COP Area)  
 
• Continuous variable (repeated measure)  
• The Shapiro- Wilk test will be  performed: histograms will be constructed, and measures of central 
tendency and dispersion will be calculated to test the assumption that distribution is normal  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 30 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  • If normality check will fail a transformation of the data will be done as corrective procedures 
(transformation will be made according to data distribution)  
• Repeated- measures analysis of variance (RM- ANOVA) with tDCS (2 levels: Active and Sham) as the 
between- independent variable and Time ( 3 levels: D ay 1, Day 10, and After 4- weeks) as the within -
independent variable.  In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% and all p- values is 
two-sided.  
 
Questionnaire scores  
• Continuous variable (repeated measure)  
• The Shapiro- Wilk test will be performed: histograms will be constructed, and measures of central 
tendency and dispersion will be calculated to test the assumption that distribution is normal  
• If normality check will fail a transformation of the data will be done as corrective procedures 
(transformation will be made according to data distribution)  
• Repeated- measures analysis of variance (RM- ANOVA) with tDCS (2 levels: Active and Sham) as the 
between- independent variable and Time ( 3 levels: Day 1, Day 10, and After 4 -weeks) as the within -
independent variable. In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% and all p- values is 
two-sided.  
7.2.4  Safety Analyses  
Safety will be assessed through the number of adverse events that occur over the course of the study. Adverse 
event rates will be compared to that of published literature.  
7.2.5  Baseline Descriptive Statistics  
The demographic measurements and general characteristics (age, gender, height, BMI, EDSS scores) of the 
participants in the two groups will be compared at baseline  using two- sample t -tests for continuous variables 
and the chi -square test for categorical variables.  In the inferential tests statistical significance will be set at 5% 
and all p- values is two- sided.  
7.2.6   Analysis of the Exploratory Endpoint (s)  
The relationship between MRI measures  previously collected at Standard of Care vists  (total brain volume, 
white and gray matter volume, and degree of brain atrophy) and the participant’s level of  improvement (e.g. % 
change in gait and balance parameters such as walking speed and sway area) will be explored using Pearson’s correlation.  
7.3 Sample Size  
The sample size is calculated on the primary endpoint gait velocity measured before tDCS  treatments at 
baseline time in a population of individuals affected by MS  (0.98 ± 0.23  m/s).  According to previous study the 
variability of changes after tDCS combined with PA is on average around 20% in active group compared with baseline assessment . 
To recognize as significant change in gait velocity (alpha level = 0.05), equal to 20% difference between 
baseline and end of the treatment, a sample size of 19  cases for each arm will provide a power of 80%.  
7.4 Measures to Minimize Bias  
7.4.1  Enrollment/Randomization/Masking Procedures 
Blocked stratification will be used to randomize the participants to their respective study conditions. Block sizes of 4 and 6 will be used and the stratifying factor will be EDSS score (0- 3.5 and 4.0 -6.5).  
For the purposes of masking, the two conditions will be indistinguishable by the participant and administering study technician as all that separates the two conditions will be the sham tDCS. Sham tDCS is very effective in 
making participants believe they are receiving true treatment. A separate study technician or study PI will 
prepare the participant’s condition so as to ensure the double blind.  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 31 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  7.4.2  Evaluation of Success of Blinding  
Participants will be asked at the end of the study what condition they believed they were assigned to: Active, 
sham, or that they cannot determine which.  
7.4.3  Breaking the Study B lind 
Study blind will be broken at the participation end visit.  
8 Source Documents and Access to Source Data/Documents  
 The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for the study.  All data requested on the CRF must be recorded.  All missing data must be explained.  If a space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was not done or the question was not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  All entries should be printed legibly in black ink.  If any entry error has been made, 
to correct such an error, draw a single straight line through the incorrect entry and enter the correct data above 
it.  All such changes must be initialled  and dated.  DO NOT ERASE OR WHITE OUT ERRORS.  For clarification 
of illegible or uncertain entries, print the clarification above the item, then initial and date it.  
 Access to study records will be limited to IRB- approved members of the study team. The investigator will permit 
study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by the IRB/EC, the sponsor, government regulatory bodies, 
and University compliance and quality assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study dat a etc.).  The investigator will ensure 
the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by government regulatory 
authorities and applicable University compliance and quality assurance offices.  
9 Quality Assurance and Quality Control  
 
Quality control procedures will be implemented beginning with data entry on NYULH’s REDcap system . Any 
missing data or data anomalies will be communicated to the site(s) for clarification/ resolution to ensure quality 
of data.  
10 Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  
10.1 Ethical Standard  
 The investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with Regulations for  the Protection of 
Human Subjects of Research codified in 45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and/or the ICH E6.  
10.2 Institutional Review Board  
 The protocol, informed consent form, recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any participant is enrolled. Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study. All changes to the consent form will be IRB approved; a determination 
will be made regarding whether previously consented participants need to be re- consented.  
10.3 Informed Consent Process  
All potential participants will complete a telephone pre-screening interview to ensure general eligibility. The 
study staff member speaking to the subject will provide the subject with an overview of the study and verbally 
receive their consent , under a waiver of documentation of consent, to complete the general eligibility screening. 
This phone screen is minimal risk to the participant and collected information will be maintained in secured, 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 32 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  locked files. A study referral log created in Microsoft Excel,  in compliance with institutional policy, will be used 
to track participant eligibility prior to the process of informed consent and formal entry into the CRMS system . 
If a participant is not eligible, they will be considered a screen fail. No additional information will be collected. 
PHI will be destroyed immed iately if a participant is not eligible or does not return to sign written 
consent/authorization to participate. Only study staff will have access to these records. Once the participant is generally eligible, the PI, or one of the trained study team members will review the consent form with the subject and explain the purpose of the study, the procedures, as well as risks and benefits. All questions will be addressed before acquiring the participant’s signed consent. Dr. Lauren Krupp or one of the other IRB  approved 
study physicians will be responsible for assessing the capacity to consent.  We anticipate all eligible  participants 
to have the capacity to consent and do not expect any participants to lose capacity to consent during the study.  
An independent assessor will not be utilized.  
10.3.1  Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants  
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to participate in the study and continues throughout the individual’s  study participation. Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of 
participation will be provided to the participants and their families. Consent forms will be IRB -approved and the 
participant will be asked to read and review the document. The investigator will explain the research study to the participant and answer any questions that may arise. All participants will receive a verbal explanation in 
terms suited to their comprehension of the purposes, procedures, and potential risks of the study and of their 
rights as research participants. Participants will have the opportunity to carefully review the written consent form and ask questions prior to signing. The participants should have the opportunity to discuss the study with their surrogates or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The participant will sign the informed consent document prior to any procedures being done specifically for the study. The participants may withdraw consent at any time throughout the course of the trial. A copy of the signed informed consent document will be given to 
the participants for their records. The rights and welfare of the participants will be protected by emphasizing to 
them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline to participate in this study.  
 Consent forms describing in detail the study agent, study procedures, and risks are given to the participant and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to starting intervention/administering s tudy product.  
10.3.2  Consent Procedures and Documentation  
 A copy of the signed informed consent document will be stored in the subject’s research record. The consent 
process, including the name of the individual obtaining consent, will be thoroughly documented in the subject’s 
research record.  Any alteration to the standard consent process (e.g. use of an interpreter , consent document 
presented orally, etc.) and the justification for such alteration will likewise be documented.  
 Process to Document Consent in W riting : After review of the consent form and prior to the start of the first 
session, the PI or one of the coinvestigators will obtain written consent with a signature of the patient on the 
consent form. All original signed consent forms will be maintained in the study file, separate from the participant 
data.  
 
Subject Capacity : All participants will be confirmed to have the capacity to provide consent by Dr. Lauren Krupp 
as described above. Further, those participants with estimated premorbid intellectual functioning and/or 
impaired reading ability (as determined by the WRAT -4 Reading Subtest)  will be excluded.  
 
Debriefing Procedures : No information will be purposely withheld from the subjects. A clinical neuropsychologist 
(PI) and the treatment team will be available to answer any questions concerning the tests and results, and provide initial feedback as warranted, including referral for clinical neuropsychological assessment.  
 
Consent Forms : Participants will receive a NYU consent form to review and sign prior to participating in the 
study.  
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 33 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  Documentation of Consent : The PI is responsible for ensuring that valid consent is obtained and documented 
for all subjects. An enrollment log will be maintained and consent forms will be kept in secure location separate 
from the participant’s data.  
10.4 Participant and Data Confidentiality  
 
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject  of the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why 
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 All data collected will only be linked to the participants’  identity through their subject ID. Physical data will be 
stored in locked containers at the study site (NYU) and digital data will be stored using REDCap. Only those 
approved by the IRB to be on the study will have access to data and linking key.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, retains 
the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that have 
revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period.  
11 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
11.1 Data Collection and Management Responsibilities  
Data collection is the responsibility of the clinical trial staff at the site under the supervision of the site PI.  The 
investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported.  
 All source documents should be completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation of data. Black ink is required to ensure clarity of reproduced copies. When making changes or corrections, cross out the original entry with a single line, and initial and date the change.  It is not allowed  erase, overwrite, or use 
correction fluid or tape on the original.  
 
Copies of the electronic CRF (eCRF) will be provided for use as source documents and maintained for recording 
data for each participant enrolled in the study. Data reported in the eCRF derived from source documents should be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies should be explained and captured in a 
progress note and maintained in the participant’s official electronic study record.  
11.2 Study Records Retention  
 
Study documents  will be retained for 3 years after close -out, 5 years after final reporting/publication, or 2 years 
after the last approval of a marketing application is approved for the drug for the indication for which it is being 
investigated or 2 years after the investigation is discontinu ed and FDA is notified if no application is to be filed 
or if the application has not been approved for such indication. No records will be destroyed without the written 
consent of the sponsor, if applicable. It is the responsibility of the sponsor to inform the investigator when these documents no longer need to be retained.  
11.3 Protocol Deviations  
Protocol deviations  that are significant as judged by the Study PI  will be reported to the IRB.  Otherwise a note 
to file will indicate minor protocol deviations.   
Study number:  18-00534   Page 34 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  12 Study Finances  
12.1 Costs to the Participant  
There will be no cost to the participants.  
12.2 Participant  Reimbursements or Payments  
 
Payment for Participation Participant will receive up to $100 in total compensation. They will be compensated 
$50 for the initial screening and baseline visit, and $50 for the final follow -up visit.  
 
13 Conflict of Interest  Policy  
 
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence, such as by the pharmaceutical industry, is critical. Therefore any actual conflict of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect of  this trial will be disclosed and managed. Furthermore, persons who have a 
perceived conflict of interest will be required to have such conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their 
participation in the trial.  
Any investigator who has a conflict  of interest with this study (patent ownership, royalties, or financial gain 
greater than the minimum allowable by their institution, etc.) must have the conflict reviewed by the NYU 
Langone Conflict of Interest Management Unit (CIMU) with a Committee- sanc tioned conflict management plan 
that has been reviewed and approved by the study sponsor prior to participation in this study. All NYULMC 
investigators will follow the applicable conflict of interest policies.  
 
 
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 35 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  14 References  
 
1. Angius, L., Mauger, A. R., Hopker, J., Pascual -Leone, A., Santarnecchi, E., & Marcora, S. M. (2017). 
Bilateral extracephalic transcranial direct current stimulation improves endurance performance in 
healthy individuals.  Brain stimulation  
2. Bastani, A., & Jab erzadeh, S. (2012). Does anodal transcranial direct current stimulation enhance 
excitability of the motor cortex and motor function in healthy individuals and subjects with stroke: a 
systematic review and meta- analysis.  Clinical Neurophysiology , 123(4), 64 4-657 
3. Bikson, M., Grossman, P., Thomas, C., Zannou, A. L., Jiang, J., Adnan, T., ... & Brunoni, A. R. (2016). 
Safety of transcranial direct current stimulation: evidence based update 2016.  Brain stimulation , 9(5), 
641-661 
4. B ouchard, C. E., Shephard, R. J., & Stephens, T. E. (1994). Physical activity, fitness, and health: 
International proceedings and consensus statement. In International Consensus Symposium on 
Physical Activity, Fitness, and Health, 2nd, May, 1992, Toronto, ON, Canada. Human Kinetics Publishers  
5. Brunoni, A. R., Amadera, J., Berbel, B., Volz, M. S., Rizzerio, B. G., & Fregni, F. (2011). A systematic 
review on reporting and assessment of adverse effects associated with transcranial direct current 
stimulation.  International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology , 14(8), 1133- 1145  
6. Brunoni, A. R., Nitsche, M. A., Bolognini, N., Bikson, M., Wagner, T., Merabet, L., ... & Ferrucci, R. 
(2012). Clinical research with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future 
directions.  Brain stimulation ,  5(3), 175- 195 
7. Cameron, M. H., & Wagner, J. M. (2011). Gait abnormalities in multiple sclerosis: pathogenesis, evaluation, and advances in treatment.  Current neurology and neuroscience reports , 11(5), 507.  
8. Chalah,  M. A., Riachi, N., Ahdab, R., Créange, A., Lefaucheur, J. P., & Ayache, S. S. (2015). Fatigue 
in multiple sclerosis: neural correlates and the role of non- invasive brain stimulation.  Frontiers in cellular 
neuroscience, 9  
9. Chan, W., Dobbs, B., Shaw, M., Kasschau, M., Sherman, K., Krupp, L., & Charvet, L. (2017). Baseline 
affect predicts improved fatigue with telerehabilitation using remotely -supervised transcranial direct 
current stimulation (RS- tDCS) in adults with multiple sclerosis (MS)(P3. 343).  Neurolog y, 88(16 
Supplement), P3- 343 
10. Charvet, L. E., Dobbs, B., Shaw, M. T., Bikson, M., Datta, A., & Krupp, L. B. (2017). Remotely 
supervised transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of fatigue in multiple sclerosis: 
Results from a randomized, sham -controlled trial.  Multiple Sclerosis Journal  
11. D algas, U., & Stenager, E. (2014). Progressive resistance therapy is not the best way to rehabilitate 
deficits due to multiple sclerosis: No. Multiple Sclerosis Journal , 20(2), 141- 142 
12. DeBolt, L. S., & McCubbin, J. A. (2004). The effects of home- based resistance exercise on balance, 
power, and mobility in adults with multiple sclerosis. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, 85(2), 290- 297 
13. Döring, A., Pfueller, C. F., Paul, F., & Dörr, J. (2012). Exercise in multiple sclerosis -  an integral 
component of disease management.  EPMA Journal , 3(1), 2  
14. Elsner, B., Kugler, J., Pohl, M., & Mehrholz, J. (2016). Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for 
improving activities of daily living, and physical and cognitive functioning, in people after stroke.  The 
Cochrane Library  
15. Erdal, A., Flo, E., Aarsland, E., Selbaek, G., Ballard, C., Slettebo, DD., & Husebo, BS. (2018). 
Tolerability of buprenorphine transdermal system in nurinsg home patients with advanced dementia: a 
randomized, placebo- controlled trial (DEP. PAIN. DEM). Clin  I nterv Aging, 16(13), 935- 946 
16. Ferrucci, R., Vergari, M., Cogiamanian, F., Bocci, T., Ciocca, M., Tomasini, E., ... & Priori, A. (2014). 
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for fatigue in multiple 
sclerosis.  NeuroRehabilitation, 34(1), 121- 127 
17. F leming, M. K., Pavlou, M., Newham, D. J., Sztriha, L., & Teo, J. T. (2017). Non -invasive brain 
stimulation for the lower limb after stroke: what do we know so far and what should we be doing next?. Disability and rehabilitation, 39(7), 714- 720 
18. Fregni, F.,  B oggio, P. S., Santos, M. C., Lima, M., Vieira, A. L., Rigonatti, S. P., ... & Pascual ‐Leo ne, A. 
(2006). Noninvasive cortical stimulation with transcranial direct current stimulation in Parkinson's 
disease.  Movement disorders , 21(10), 1693- 1702  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 36 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  19. Halabchi, F. , Alizadeh, Z., Sahraian, M. A., & Abolhasani, M. (2017). Exercise prescription for patients 
with multiple sclerosis; potential benefits and practical recommendations.  BMC neurology , 17(1), 185.  
20. Hanken, K., Bosse, M., Möhrke, K., Eling, P., Kastrup, A., Antal, A., & Hildebrandt, H. (2016). 
Counteracting fatigue in multiple sclerosis with right parietal anodal transcranial direct current 
stimulation.  Frontiers in neurology , 7 
21. Haussleiter, I. S., Brüne, M., & Juckel, G. (2009). Psychopathology in multiple sc lerosis: diagnosis, 
prevalence and treatment.  Therapeutic advances in neurological disorders ,  2(1), 13- 29. 
22. Iodice, R., Manganelli, F., & Dubbioso, R. (2017). The therapeutic use of non- invasive brain stimulation 
in multiple sclerosis –a review. Restorativ e neurology and neuroscience, 35(5), 497- 509.  
23. Jaiswal, S.J., McCarthy, T.J., Wineinger, N.E., Kang, D.Y., Song, J., Garcia, S., van Niekerk, C.J., Lu, 
C.Y., Loeks, M., & Owens, RL. (2018). Melatonin and sleep in preventing hospitalized delirium: A randomiz ed clinical trial. Am J Med,  S0002- 9343(18), 30386- 3.  
24. Kaski, D., Dominguez, R. O., Allum, J. H., & Bronstein, A. M. (2013). Improving gait and balance in 
patients with leukoaraiosis using transcranial direct current stimulation and physical training: an 
exploratory study.  Neurorehabilitation and neural repair , 27(9), 864- 871 
25. Kasschau, M., Sherman, K., Haider, L., Frontario, A., Shaw, M., Datta, A ., … & Charvet, L. (2015). A 
protocol for the use of remotely -supervised transcranial direct current stimulation  (tDCS) in multiple 
sclerosis (MS).  Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE, (106)  
26. Klooster, D. C., de Louw, A. J., Aldenkamp, A. P., Besseling, R. M. H., Mestrom, R. M. C., Carrette, S., 
... & Carrette, E. (2016). Technical aspects of neurostimulation: focus on equipment, electric field 
modeling, and stimulation protocols.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 65, 113- 141 
27. LaRocca, N. G. (2011). Impact of walking impairment in multiple sclerosis.  The Patient: Patient -
Centered Outcomes Research, 4 (3), 189- 201 
28. Meesen, R. L., Thijs, H., Leenus, D. J., & Cuypers, K. (2014). A single session of 1 mA anodal tDCS -
supported motor training does not improve motor performance in patients with multiple 
sclerosis.  Restorative neurology and neuroscience, 32( 2), 293- 300 
29. Mori, F., Codecà, C., Kusayanagi, H., Monteleone, F., Buttari, F., Fiore, S., ... & Centonze, D. (2010). 
Effects of anodal transcranial direct current stimulation on chronic neuropathic pain in patients with 
multiple sclerosis.  The journal of pain, 11(5), 436- 442 
30. Mot l, R. W., McAuley, E., & Snook, E. M. (2005). Physical activity and multiple sclerosis: a meta-
analysis. Multiple Sclerosis Journal , 11(4), 459- 463 
31. Motl, R. W. (2010). Physical activity and irreversible disability in multiple sclerosis. Exercise  and sport 
sciences reviews, 38(4), 186 -191 
32. Nagano, H., James, L., Sparrow, W. A., & Begg, R. K. (2014). Effects of walking -induced fatigue on 
gait function and tripping risks in older adults.  Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 11(1), 
155 
33. N itsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2000). Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex by weak 
transcranial direct current stimulation. The Journal of physiology, 527(3), 633- 639 
34. Nitsche, M., Doemkes, S., 2007. Shaping the effects of transcranial direct current stimulation of the 
human motor cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 3109– 3117  
35. Nitsche, M.A., Cohen, L.G., Wassermann, E.M., Priori, A., Lang, N., Antal, A., Paulus, W., Hummel, F., 
Boggio, P.S., Fregni, F., Pascual -Leone, A., 2008. Transcranial direct current stimulation: state of the 
art 2008. Brain Stimul. 1, 206–223  
36. Palm, U., Segmiller, F. M., Epple, A. N., Freisleder, F. J., Koutsouleris, N., Schulte- Körne, G., & 
Padberg, F. (2016). Transcranial direct current stimulation in children and adolescent s: a 
comprehensive review.  Journal of Neural Transmission, 123(10), 1219- 1234  
37. Pau, M., Caggiari, S., Mura, A., Corona, F., Leban, B., Coghe, G., ... & Cocco, E. (2016). Clinical 
assessment of gait in individuals with multiple sclerosis using wearable inertial sensors: Comparison 
with patient -based measure.  Multiple sclerosis and related disorders , 10, 187- 191 
38. Pau, M., Corona, F., Coghe, G., Marongiu, E., Loi, A., Crisafulli, A., ... & Cocco, E. (2017). Quantitative 
assessment of the effects of 6 months of adapted physical activity on gait in people with multiple 
sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial.  Disability and rehabilitation, 1 -11 
39. Pau, M., Porta, M., Coghe, G., Corona, F., Pilloni, G., Lorefice, L., ... & Cocco, E. (2017). Are static and 
functional balance abilities related in individuals with Multiple Sclerosis?.  Multiple Sclerosis and Related 
Disorders , 15, 1-6 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 37 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  40. Pearson, M., Dieberg, G., & Smart, N. (2015). Exercise as a therapy for improvement of walking ability 
in adults with multiple sclerosis: a  meta- analysis. Archives of physical medicine and r ehabilitation, 
96(7), 1339- 1348  
41. Pedersen, B. K., & Saltin, B. (2015). Exercise as medicine–evidence for prescribing exercise as therapy 
in 26 different chronic diseases.  Scandinavian journal of medicine & science in sports , 20(S3), 1 -72 
42. Peruzzi, A., Zarbo, I. R., Cereatti, A., Della Croce, U., & Mirelman, A. (2017). An innovative training 
program based on virtual reality and treadmill: effects on gait of persons with multiple 
sclerosis.  Disability and rehabilitation , 39(15), 1557- 1563  
43. Pixa, N. H., Steinberg, F., & Doppelmayr, M. (2017). High- defi nition transcranial direct current 
stimulation to both primary motor cortices improves unimanual and bimanual dexterity.  Neuroscience 
Letters , 643, 84- 88 
44. Saiote, C.,  Goldschmidt, T., Timäus, C., Steenwijk, M. D., Opitz, A., Antal, A., ... & Nitsche, M. A. (2014). 
Impact of transcranial direct current stimulation on fatigue in multiple sclerosis.  Restorative neurology 
and neuroscience, 32(3), 423- 436 
45. Sánchez -Kuhn, A., Pérez -Fernández, C., Cánovas, R., Flores, P., & Sánchez -Santed, F. (2017). 
Transcranial direct current stimulation as a motor neurorehabilitation tool: an empirical 
review.  Biomedical engineering online, 16(1), 76  
46. Satow, T., Kawase, T., Kitamura, A., Kajit ani, Y., Yamaguchi, T., Tanabe, N., & Mima, T. (2016). 
Combination of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation and Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation 
Improves Gait Ability in a Patient in Chronic Stage of Stroke.  Case reports in neurology , 8(1), 39 -46 
47. Sn o ok, E. M., & Motl, R. W. (2009). Effect of exercise training on walking mobility in multiple sclerosis: 
a meta- analysis. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair, 23(2), 108- 116 
48. Takemasa, S. (1998). Factors affecting QOL of the home- bound elderly disabled. The Kobe journal of 
medical sciences, 44(3), 99 -114 
49. Wagner, T., Valero- C abre, A., Pascual -Leone, A., 2007. Noninvasive human brain stimulation. Annu. 
Rev. Biomed. Eng. 9, 527– 565  
50. White, L. J., & Dressendorfer, R. H. (2004). Exercise and multiple sclerosis.  Sports medicine, 34(15), 
1077- 1100  
51. W hite, L. J., & Castellano, V. (2008). Exercise and Brain Health —Implications for Multiple Sclerosis. 
Sports medicine, 38 (2), 91- 100 
52. Woods, A. J., Antal, A., Bikson, M., Boggio, P. S., Brunoni, A. R., Celnik, P., ... & Kn otkova, H. (2016). 
A technical guide to tDCS, and related non- invasive brain stimulation tools. Clinical Neurophysiology, 
127(2), 1031- 1048  
53. Yotnuengnit, P., Bhidayasiri, R., Donkhan, R., Chaluaysrimuang, J., & Piravej, K. (2017). Effects of 
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Plus Physical Therapy on Gait in Patients With Parkinson 
Disease: A Randomized Controlled Trial.  American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation  
54. Notturno, F., Marzetti, L., Pizzella, V., Uncini, A., & Zappasodi, F. (2014). Local and remote effects of 
transcranial direct current stimulation on the electrical activity of the motor cortical network. Human 
brain mapping, 35(5), 2220 -2232.  
55. Polanía, R., Paulus, W., & Nitsche, M. A. (2012). Modulating cortico‐ s triatal and thalamo‐ cortical 
functional connectivity with transcranial direct current stimulation. Human brain mapping, 33(10), 2499-
2508.  
56. Grecco, L. A. C., Mendonça, M. E., Duarte, N. A., Zanon, N., Fregni, F., & Oliveira, C. S. (2014). 
Transcranial direct current stimulation  combined with treadmill gait training in delayed neuro -
psychomotor development. Journal of physical therapy science, 26(6), 945- 950. 
57. Jameson, L. C., & Sloan, T. B. (2006). Using EEG to monitor anesthesia drug effects during surgery. 
Journal of clinical monitoring and computing, 20(6), 445- 472. 
58. Gijbels, D., Eijnde, B. O., & Feys, P. (2011). Comparison of the 2- and 6- minute walk test in multiple 
sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 17(10), 1269- 1272.  
59. Motl, R. W., McAuley, E., Doerksen, S., Hu, L., & Morris, K. S. (2009). Preliminary evidence that self -
efficacy predicts physical activity in multiple sclerosis. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 
32(3), 260- 263. 
60. Pau, M., Coghe, G., Corona, F., Leban, B., Marrosu, M. G., & Cocco, E. (2015).  Effectiveness and 
limitations of unsupervised home- based balance rehabilitation with Nintendo Wii in people with multiple 
sclerosis. BioMed research international, 2015.  
Study number:  18-00534   Page 38 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  61. Park, D. S., & Lee, G. (2014). Validity and reliability of balance assessment software using the Nintendo 
Wii balance board: usability and validation. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 11(1), 99.  
62. Pau, M., Porta, M., Coghe, G., Corona, F., Pilloni, G., Lorefice, L., ... & Cocco, E. (2017). Are static and 
functional balance abilities related in individuals with Multiple Sclerosis?. Multiple sclerosis and related 
disorders, 15, 1- 6.Shaw MT, Best P, Frontario A, Charvet LE. Telerehabilitation benefits p atients with 
multiple sclerosis in an urban setting [published online ahead of print, 2019 Jul 15].  J Telemed 
Telecare.2019;1357633X19861830.  
63. Charvet LE, Shaw MT, Bikson M, Woods AJ, Knotkova H. Supervised transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS) at home: A guide for clinical research and practice.  Brain Stimul. 2020;13(3):686-
693. 
64. B enedict RHB, Amato MP, Boringa J, Brochet B, Foley F, Fredrikson S, et al. Brief International 
Cognitive Assessment for MS (BICAMS): international standards for validation. BMC Neurol. 2012 Jul 
16;12:55.  
65. Maruff P, Thomas E, Cysique L, Brew B, Collie A, Snyder P, et al. Validity of the CogState brief battery: 
relationship to standardized tests and sensitivity to cognitive impairment in mild traumatic brain injury, schizophrenia, and AIDS dementia complex. Arch Clin Neuropsychol Off J Natl Acad Neuropsychol. 2009 Mar;24(2):165– 78. 
66. Berg K, Wood- Dauphinee S, Williams JI. The Balance Scale: reliability assessment with elderly 
residents and patients with an acute stroke. Scand J Rehabil Med. 1995 Mar;27(1):27– 36.  
67. Vsee: World's Largest Video Telemedicine Platform. 2015  
68. TeamViewer: TeamViewer - the All -In-One Software for Remote Support and Online Meetings. 2015  
69. Kasschau M, Reisner J, Sherman K, Bikson M, Datta A, Charvet LE: Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Is Feasible for Remotely Supervised Home Delivery in Multiple Sclerosis. Neuromodulation Journal of the International Neuromodulation Society 2016  
 
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 39 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  15 Attachments  
 
Type  Objective Measure Time Frame  Safety Issue 
Primary  
(Efficacy)  To determine the 
efficacy of  the 
combination of the tDCS 
and PA to enhance gait 
ability   
Change from baseline in 
walking abilities in 
instrumented 10 meter 
walking test (i -10MW)  
  
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Primary  
(Feasibility)  
To determine the 
feasibility of the protocol tDCS and PA  
 Number of participants 
who complete the 
treatment program  1. After treatment 
end 
 No 
Secondary  
(Feasibility) To determine the 
feasibility of remote 
supervised PA protocol 
paired with tDCS  Number of successfully 
completed sessions at -
home  1. After treatment 
end No 
Secondary  
 To determine the 
efficacy of the 
combination of the tDCS 
and PA to enhance 
functional mobility  Change from baseline in 
functional mobility in 
instrumented Time Up 
and Go (i -TUG)   
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up  No 
Secondary  
 To determine the 
efficacy of the 
combination of the tDCS 
and PA to enhance 
static balance  Change from baseline in 
S
way Parameters  1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment  
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Secondary  To determine the effect 
of the combination of 
the tDCS and PA on 
fatigue  Physical aspect of 
fatigue with 9- item FSS   
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Secondary (Optional)  To determine the effect 
of tDCS on brain activity 
during the performance of cognitive test  Change in EEG signal 
before and after tDCS 
session  1. Prior to treatment 
beginning ad 
after treatment 
end during Day1 
and Day 10 visit  No 
Secondary  To determine the 
globally effect of the 
combination of the tDCS and PA 
 Physical, cognitive and 
psychosocial aspect 
with 21-i tem MFIS   
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Secondary (Optional)  To determine the effect 
of tDCS treatment on 
level of daily physical 
activity and sleep  Intensity of physical 
activity, daily step count 
and number of sleeping 
hours  1. From baseline 
visit to follow -up 
visit No 
Secondary  To determine the effect 
of the combination of 
the tDCS and PA on  
walking ability  Subjective walking 
ability with MSWS -12  
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning 
2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Secondary  To determine the effect 
of the combination of 
the tDCS and PA on 
fatigue  Perceived general 
fatigue with VAS-  F 0-10  
1. Prior to treatment 
beginning No 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 40 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017   
  This section should contain all pertinent documents associated with the management of the study.  The following lists a few examples of potential attachments:  
• Investigator Agreement (for any investigator, other than sponsor -investigator, who participates in the 
study)  
• Sample Consent Form  
• Study Procedures Flowchart/Table  
• Study Monitoring Plan  2. After treatment 
end 
3. 4 weeks follow up 
 
Secondary   
To evaluate the 
presence of adverse 
events and subjective 
pain during stimulation  
  
Experience of AE and 
pain ratings with VAS-  
P0-10 
  
1. After treatment 
end Yes 
Secondary  To determine the effect 
of the intervention 
tDCS+PA on 
processing speed Change form baseline in 
processing speed 
(BICAMS, Cogstate 
Brief Battery)  
 4. Baseline  
5. After treatment 
end 
6. 4 weeks follow up 
 No 
Study number:  18-00534   Page 41 
Version: 08/06/2020    
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in 
writing by the study sponsor  
Interventional Template Version: 28 APR 2017  16 Schedule of Events  
 
Activity  Screening  
 Baseline  
  tDCS +activity 
sessions  
 Study visit 1 1/ 
Treatment End Visit 
(approx. 3 days after 
end treatment)  Follow -up visit 
(Optional)  
[4 ±1 week post -
Study Visit 10 ] 
 
Study team procedures            
Consent  X     
Medical History  X     
Physical Exam  X     
Height   X    
Weight   X    
Neurological examination  X     
Randomization  X     
tDCS+ PA treatment   X X X  
Participant device compliance 
check     X  
Assessment of perceived exertion 
(Borg Scale)    X   
Instrumented evaluation of 
mobility       
i-10MW test   X  X X 
Timed 25 -Foot Walk ( T25-FW)  X  X X 
i-TUG test   X  X X 
Static Posturography Test  X X  X X 
EEG assessment  (Optional)   X  X  
i-2MW test   X  X X 
i-DPAS (Optional)   X X X X 
Questionnaires , Clinical Scale 
and Cognitive Assessment       
BICAMS   X  X X 
Cogstate Brief Battery   X  X X 
Berg Balance Scale   X  X X 
FSS  X X X X 
54-MSQOL   X   X 
12-MSWS   X X X X 
21- MFIS   X X X X 
VAS- F 0-10  X X X X 
VAS- P 0-10  X X X  
Reported Adverse Events   X X X  
 
 