IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 1 of 9 Safety and efficacy of a suction cervical stabilizer compared to 
the standard tenaculum for intrauterine procedures in the clinic 
setting  
 
Alissa Conklin, MD, FACOG  
Assistant Professor  
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  
Indiana University  
550 N University Blvd  
Suite 2441 
Indianapolis, IN 46202  
 
 
 
Jeffrey Peipert, MD, FACOG 
Professor and Chair  
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology   
Indiana University  
Support Provided by:  
Aspivix  
  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 2 of 9 Table of Contents:  
Study Schema  
1.0 Background & Rationale  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
3.0 Outcome Measures  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.3 Tertiary/ Exploratory/ Correlative Outcome Measures 
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
4.3 Other Criteria  
5.0 Study Design  
6.0 Enrollment  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Study Calendar  
9.0 Reportable Events  
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
13.0 Data Management  
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention 
16.0 References  
Appendix
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 3 of 9 Abbreviations  
AE Adverse Event  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
PI Principal Investigator  
PHI Personal Health Information  
RCT Randomized Controlled Trial  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
US United States  
IUD Intrauterine Device  
EMB  Endometrial Biopsy  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 4 of 9 1.0 Background & Rationale 
When  intrauterine  procedures  are performed,  often  the cervix  needs  to be stabilized  to facilitate  
intrauterine  entry.   The standard  approach  for cervical  stabilization  is an invasive,  sharp  instrument  
called  a tenaculum.   This leaves  two punctures  on the cervix,  which  can be painful and bleed,  which  can 
prolong any intrauterine  procedure  (IUD  insertion,  endometrial biopsy,  etc).   Aspivix  ™ has created  a 
suction -based atraumatic  cervical  stabilizer  for use with  such  intrauterine  procedures.   The  First -in-
Woman study (RCT with 100 patients) completed in 2 renowned University Hospitals in Switzerland 
showed positive results (pain reduced by up to 73% and bleeding occurrence reduced by 78%). This new  
device  is fully  FDA approved.    
 
I've attached  the company's  data  and the clinical brochure  showing the device,  explaining  how  it is used,  
and data  on effectiveness.   In addition,  this is their  RCT publication  on the journal  Contraception on this 
device,  showing the data  cited  above  (Attachment #1). 
https://www.contraceptionjournal.org/article/S0010 -7824(23)00066- 5/fulltext  
 
Aspivix ™ launched the AMBASSADOR PROGRAM, a 3 –6-month program with free of charge devices for 
selected hospitals /clinics willing to test extensively Carevix ™ in multiple transcervical procedures.  
 
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.1.1 Primary Objective: to assess patient -reported pain and provider -reported 
bleeding.  Our hypothesis is that patient -reported pain and provider- reported 
bleeding comparing Carevix ™ to tenaculum will be similar in our American 
population and with all intrauterine procedures as it was in the European study 
and with only IUD insertions.  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.2.1 Secondary Objective: to assess provider- reported ease of use and provider 
satisfaction.  
 
3.0 Outcome Measures/Endpoints  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.1.1 Primary outcome measures: To assess patient -reported pain, a questionnaire 
provided by Aspivix ™ (Attachment #2) will be done after completing the 
procedure.  This takes, on average, 1 minute to complete.  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.2.1 Secondary outcome measures: To assess provider -reported bleeding, ease of 
use and provider satisfaction with the device, the provider will complete a 
questionnaire following the patient’s completion of their portion of the questionnaire (Attachment #2).  This takes, on average, 2 min utes to complete.  
 
 
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 5 of 9 4.1 Inclusion Criteria  (to be assessed prior to procedure)  
• Age 18 years or older  
• Speaks and reads in English  
• Able to consent on their own  
• Will undergo any intrauterine procedure using the Carevix ™ (for exposure 
group) or using Tenaculum (for Control Group)  
• Up to 20  providers performing this procedure  
• Provider is willing to use Carevix ™ for scheduled procedure  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  (to be assessed by provider at time of procedure)  
• Vaginal bleeding of unknown origin  
• Cervix less than 26 mm in diameter  
• Nabothian cyst on anterior lip of cervix  
• Cervical myomas  
• Cervical abnormalities /shape  
• Pregnant  
 
4.3 Other Criteria  
4.3.1 If the patient does not require ANY cervical stabilization after consent into 
either study  arm, the subject status will be consider ed ineligible and the patient 
will not be required to complete any surveys.  
  
5.0 Study Design  
Aspivix, the company that created Carevix ™, launched the Ambassador Program, a 3 -6 month program 
with free of charge devices for clinics willing to test Carevix ™ in multiple intrauterine procedures.  Our 
clinic, Coleman Center, will conduct a prospective cohort study for 3 -6 months where  patients who 
qualify via inclusion criteria who are also receiving an intrauterine procedure (endometrial biopsy, IUD insertion, manual aspiration, etc) o n the exposure (Carevix ™) arm will have the opportunity to receive 
the Carevix ™ device for cervical stabilization, per provider preference (i.e., providers may decline to use 
Carevix ™ for endometrial biopsy) .  
Once 25 participants have received Carevix™ , recruitment for the control (tenaculum) arm will begin . 
Participants  will receive the standard of care device if cervical stabilization is required . Each participant 
will be provided with a study information sheet and sign a consent form . They will then undergo their 
planned procedure, using the assigned device.  
Following completion of their procedure, they will also agree to fill out a survey about their experience, which takes about 1 minute to complete.  The provider performing the procedure will finish the survey with provider -specific questions about bleeding, ease of use and satisfaction. The purpose of this study 
is to compare Carevix ™ to the tenaculum and determine if the Carevix ™ shows similar results in the 
United States population as it has in the European study and with all intrauterine procedures.  
 
 
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 6 of 9  
Flow diagram for prospective cohort study  
Prior to enrollment    
 
 
Enrollment  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Total N 60: Screen potential participants by inclusion 
criteria.  Obtain informed consent.  Obtain history.  
Document.  
Recruited to Tenaculum or 
ineligible for Carevix ™ arm* Recruited to Carevix ™ arm* 
Fills out tenaculum  survey after 
procedure  Fills out Carevix ™ survey after 
procedure  
Provider fills out provider portion 
of survey after participant  
*Once 25 of 30  patients received 
Carevix ™, will commence control group 
collection  
N = 30 Once 60 total surveys 
collected, end study  No cervical stabilization 
required or excluded: off study  Receives tenaculum  Receives Carevix ™ if no 
exclusion criteria are met  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 7 of 9  
6.0 Enrollment  
We intend to enroll twenty -five evaluable Carevix  subjects prior to commencing the enrollment of the 
control -group tenaculum subjects.  An additional five Carevix subjects (for a total of N=30) will be 
concurrently enrolled while accruing the thirty additional tenaculum subjects  for a total enrollment of 
N=60 .  
7.0 Study Procedures  
Any intrauterine procedure already scheduled will otherwise proceed accordingly as part of clinical care.  
During the enrollment, patients who fit above inclusion criteria and are scheduled for an intrauterine 
procedure may be offered the opportunity to participate in this program and trial the new Carevix ™ 
device during the exposure recruitment period and complete a short survey. If the patient consents to 
the use of Carevix ™ Ambassador program, the suction -based cervical stabilizer will be used on their 
cervix to stabilize the cervix during the procedure instead of the traditional tenaculum. If the patient  or 
provider  opts out of the use of Carevix ™, they will be asked if they’d like to participate in the study with 
the tenaculum. During the tenaculum enrollment phase, patients will receive the standard of care 
device and complete a short survey.  
Following completion of the procedure, the patient will then fill out the patient -based survey .  Following 
the completion of the patient’s questions, the provider will then fill out the provider -based survey . 
The questionnaire for the Carevix ™ Ambassador program will be stored within the Aspivix company 
database (all questions are HIPAA compliant and do not reveal PHI).  The survey is labeled as originating from Indiana University for easy access to only our patient data.  
8.0 Study Calendar  
There is no study calendar –  the patient will have their intrauterine procedure scheduled and will decide 
if they wish to participate in the Carevix ™ Ambassador program or not.  The event will be a one -time 
procedure only when the Carevix ™ suction -based cervical stabilizer is used or the tenaculum is used.   
9.0 Reportable Events  
It is not anticipated that there will be Serious Adverse Effects as defined by the FDA (death, life -
threatening complications, need for hospitalization, disability or permanent damage, or an intervention needed to prevent permanent impairment or damage). H owever, if one occurs, it will be promptly 
reported to the IU IRB and sponsor (within 5 days of knowing about the occurrence) and per IU HRPP policy if unexpected, related/possibly related to participation and if the SAE suggests that the research places t he subject or others at greater risk of harm.  
Other adverse events (AE) that may occur with any cervical stabilization device, such as bleeding or 
injury at stabilization site needing medication or surgical intervention, are common and will be collected 
and reported as part of study data and at annual  regulatory reviews.  
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 8 of 9 This study is no greater than minimal risk. Data safety and monitoring will be performed by the database 
manager for the Qualtrics database and the PI. Data quality, subject recruitment data completion, outcome and adverse event data, and proper consent pr ocedures will be regularly reviewed by the PI, 
study coordinator, and data manager at least monthly. A formal Data Safety Monitoring Board is not 
required. While no formal stopping criteria are proposed, monitoring of AEs will be ongoing and will be 
discus sed by the PI and Department representatives if the AE rate (notably bleeding or injury to the 
stabilization site on the cervix) is above 50%.  
11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
Patients can decline participation and will receive standard of care if cervical stabilization is required. 
Patients who consent to receiving the Carevix ™ and who require no cervical stabilization or is assessed 
by the provider to be otherwise ineligible for the device will be considered ineligible  if they do not 
receive tenaculum (unless consented for tenaculum) and will not be required to complete any surveys or 
follow -ups.  
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
We performed sample size/power calculations with the primary outcome of pain (visual analog scale) at the time of Carevix ™/tenaculum  use. Thirty participants per group (total N= 60) are needed to achieve  at 
least  80% power and a two -sided 5% significance level. Descriptive characteristics of those in the 
Carevix ™ and control groups will be compared using standard statistical testing such as Chi- square and t -
tests. Differences in outcomes between the device and control groups will similarly utilize standard testing.  
13.0 Statistical Data Management  
Primary data for the exposure group (e.g. the Carevix ™ group) will be collected via Aspivix’s secure 
server.  Aspivix has agreed in the Ambassador Agreement to allow access to their data.  In the provider 
section of the survey will be a link to select location site and these data will be separately accessible .  
The surveys for the patient and provider are connected within the same survey.  The data for the control 
group (e.g. the tenaculum group) will be collected and stored via RedCap, using similar questions to the 
exposure survey . Aspivix will also furnish us with raw data that will allow us to correlate the date and 
time of the submitted survey with the date and time of the patient’s consented information. This data 
will be documented in RedCap for the purpose of data analysis. T he signed consent forms will be stored 
in a secure and lockable cabinet.  
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
None of the questions on the data collection questionnaire will contain PHI.  Data will be stored within 
the company Aspivix’s secure server and on RedCap.  
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention 
The study will last about 1 year (6 months for Carevix ™ exposure group and approximately 6 months for 
the control group (e.g. tenaculum).  The record retention will be indefinite.   
16.0 References  
IRB#: 19699  
Version Date: 2.9.24  Page 9 of 9 Yaron M, et al.  Safety and efficacy of a suction cervical stabilizer for intrauterine contraceptive device 
insertion: Results from a randomized, controlled study.  Contraception.  Vol 123, July 2023. https://www.contraceptionjournal.org/article/S0010 -7824(23)00066- 5/fulltext
 
17.0 Appendix 
Attachment #1: Carevix ™ data published in the journal Contraception. 
Attachment #2: Questionnaire for patients and providers (done through the same link).  
Attachment #3: Study information sheet and consent form.  
 