Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 1 of 7 
 Critical Care Research Subc ommittee Protocol Submission Template  
 
Title of the study:  Dual -plane ultrasound imaging during vascular access  procedures  
Princi pal Investigator: Robert Anderson APRN  
Co-investigators : Ben Da xon, MD; Anesthesia Resident M D (TB D). 
Research Coordinators : ACRU  
Statistician : TBD  
 
 
Abstract  
Obtaining reliable vascular access is “one of the most basic yet critical com ponents of patient care both 
in hospital and ambulatory patient settings”.1 Over one billion peripheral intravenous ca theters (PIVCs) 
are placed annually wo rldwide, with nearly 300 million annually in the United States; this does not take 
into account additional vascular catheters such as central venous catheters and arterial cath eters.2 Given 
that incidence it is concern ing that still, first -attempt success incidence varies between 18 -79%; 
illustrating a 21 -82% first -attempt failure rate.3 The use of ultras ound guidance in vascular access 
proce dures has gained si gnificant traction by both medical and nursing staff in inpa tient and outpat ient 
settings. Standar d ultrasound training for vascular access utilizes a cross -sectional viewing plane; 
however , the use of a longitudinal viewing plane is also beneficial. Utilization of  both planes is 
challenging by the end -user due to mechanical m anipu lation (rotation of probe) that must be done intra -
procedure. Th e goal of this proto col is to evaluate the rate of cannulation success and efficiency of a 
dual-plane ultrasound probe (Butterfly iQ+; Butterfly Netw ork, Inc. ; FDA approved ) in ultrasound -
guided vascula r access procedures as compared to a st andard single -view ultrasound probe in the 
operating room setting during placement of arterial catheters.  
 
Research Plan  
I. Specific Aims  
Utilization of ultr asound guidance for vascular acc ess procedures is commonp lace in inpatient and 
outpatient care setting s, specifically procedur al and critical care settings. Standard ultras ound probes 
offer the operator a  single-plane view, necessitating rotation of probe to att ain dual  views  which are 
complimentary to one another , albeit  dual-plane viewing is th us not sim ultaneous ; such a rotation 
maneuver increases the technical difficulty of ultrasound uti lization.  Consequently,  our proposed study 
has the following aims and hypothesis.  
 
1. Assess the clin ical efficiency of utilization of a dual -plane simul taneous view ultra sound 
probe (Butterfly iQ+; Butterfly Netw ork, Inc. ) during arterial catheter placement in the 
operating room. Outcome metrics to include: number of attempts for succ essful ca nnulation, 
amount of time to complete procedure, percent of failed attempts / total attempts . 
2. Assess end -user response to use o f dual-plane probe via subjective feedback.  
  
II. Background and Significance  
Obtaining reliable vascular access is “one of the most basic y et critical com ponents of patient care both 
in hospital and ambulatory  patient settings”.4 Over one billion peripheral intravenous catheters (P IVCs) 
are placed annually worldwide, with nearly 300 million annually in the United States; this does not take 
into account additional vascular catheters such as central venous cathet ers and arterial cath eters.5 Given 
that incidence it is concerning that s till, first -attempt success incidence varies between 18 -79%; 
illustrating a 21 -82% first -attempt failure rate.6 Couple that with reported infiltration and extravasation  
rates of up to  69.8% related to mispositioned  vascular catheters; the issue to solve is  clear.7 Ultrasound -
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 2 of 7 
 guidance is a tool that increases success of accurately placed vascular catheters, yet the te chnology at 
present does not setup the end -user for as much success as  possible.1 In pro viding the end -user multiple 
views during cannulation, the success rate and adoption of ultrasound as standard -of-practice across all 
vascular catheter placements is li kely to increase, thereby reducing the aforementioned negative 
sequela e of mispositioned  catheters thereby improving patient care. The patient experience is also 
purported to improve by reducing the number of repeated failed placement or replacement attemp ts, a 
frequently cited healthcare -fault on patient satisfaction survey s thus improving t ime-to-treatment and the 
efficiency of care.  
 
III. Progress Report and Preliminary Studies  
 
Standard , or common, ultraso und training for vascular access utilizes a cros s-sectional  or short -axis 
view (Figure 1). Additional benefit can be g ained by the end-user utilizing a longitu dinal or long -axis to 
assist in guiding the catheter into the vessel o nce initial venipu ncture is obtained vi a a cross -sectional 
view  (Figure 2) ; this view , however, can be challenging to maintain intra -procedure gi ven the narrow 
ultrasou nd array  window and the narrow anatomical size of vasculature.  However, current single -plane 
probes require the end -user to rotate the probe  90-degrees intra -proce dure in order to s witch between  
cross -sectional and longitudinal vie ws. Therefore, the utilization of  simul taneous dual -plane imaging 
incorporating both cross -sectional and lo ngitudinal viewing  would provide the end -user with the most 
comprehensi ve viewing  strategy without necessitating manu al rotation of the probe intra -procedure 
(Figure 3).  
 
Overall, there is limited literature regarding bi -plane or multi -plane imaging during vascular access 
procedures. The literature  does attest that utilization of nume rous views during vascular access 
procedures is beneficial, yet manual  rotation of  the probe during cannulation  is seen as a limitation .8 
There is also support for improved succ ess rates  and less redirection with trainees when using a long -
axis approach as  compared to short -axis, specifically for subclavian placement.9 Convissar, et al 
(2021)10 describe a case study utilizing the  Butterfly  iQ+ for arterial line inserti on with success after 
many failed attempts with standard ultrasound. In conclusion, it seem s reasonable to use this literature as 
a base to do a small research s tudy evaluating number of sticks, time to get IV, % of overall failures, etc 
– all the aforemen tioned literature is either case study or very small sample size . 
 
In addition to the Butte rfly iQ+ probe, the Phillips XL14 -3 xMATRIX Linear Array Transducer is  a 
diagnostic probe on -market capable of dual-plane viewing . The xMATRIX is limited for this application 
given its design for diagnostic use with extra measurement and processing functio ns and therefore, too 
high-cost and presumed low durability for point -of-care procedural applications.  
 
 
 
 
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 3 of 7 
       
    
  
           (Figure 1)      (Figure 2)  
 
.
  
      (Figure 3)  
 
 
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 4 of 7 
 Investigators  
The principal investigator in our study, Robert Anderson APRN  (Pulmonary / Critical Care) , has 
extensive experience in ultrasound -guided vascular access  both clinically and in the development of a 
didactic and hands -on training course for bedside staff nurses at the University of Iowa Hospitals a nd 
Clinics . Dr. Benjam in Daxo n (Anest hesia Consultant) al ong with a team of Anesthesia Residen ts (to be 
named and added to protocol ) will also be members of the research  team. A study coordinator will be 
enlisted for this study to assist with patient screening, data collection  and data transcription.  
 
IV. Research D esign and Methods  
 
Study Design  
This investigation will employ a pro spective , non-blinded randomized -control study . 
 
Study Subjects – 50 patients who meet enrollment criteria.  
 
Control Subjects  – 50 patients who meet  enrollment criteria.    
 
Provider subjects – Up to 50 anesthesia providers (trainee, CRNA, anesthesia staff physician)  
 
Inclusi on criteria  
• Elective surgical patients requiring  non-emergent ultrasound-guided radial arterial catheter 
placement  
• Anesthesia providers to include trainees, certified reg istered nurse anesthetists (CRNA) and 
attending anes thesia providers.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Age younger than 18 years or older than 85 years.   
• Pregnant  
• Patients in a moribund state or palliative care only  
• Vulnera ble p atients (i.e. Severe mental handicap, non-decisional)  
• History of  peripheral arterial disease  
• Placement of arterial catheter without ultrasound guidance  
• Provider: Medical students or CRNA students.  
 
Methods  
 
Anesthesia providers assigned to an upcoming rot ation in the main operating rooms will receive  a 
recruitment message via e -mail regarding participation in this study. If they c onsent to participate, they 
will be asked to view an online education al video  sent to them via email  (see below) and will be giv en 
an opportunity to practice use of the dual -view probe prior to use on a patient . Some providers may have 
utilized the dual -view technology previously.  
 
Instructional Video  for Providers : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBS3GaIrqqc  
 
 
 
Enrolled patients  will be randomized to two groups:  
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 5 of 7 
 • Contro l: Arterial line placement via “standard ” mechanism; u tilization of a single -plane 
ultrasound probe  
• Intervention: Arterial l ine placement utilizing dual -plane, Butterfly iQ+ ultras ound probe.  
 
A Butterfly iQ+ with attached large  iPAD or alterna te tablet devi ce will be utilized for this study to 
allow for a larger screen visualization as c ompared to a portable phone device.  
 
The anesthesia provider (attending physician , CRNA, or train ee) staffed in the patient ’s operati ng room 
will place the arterial line using standard practice besides randomization to the type of ultrasound probe.  
It will be recorded if the provider has previously utilized the dual -view probe . 
 
The an esthesia res idency program is already pr oviding their trainees with an individual Butterfly iQ+ 
ultrasound pr obe s ystem; ther efore , these already purchased  and implemented  devices will be utilized in 
this study.  
 
The res earch coordinator will util ize a sto pwatch to record the amount of time requ ired for successful 
placement of a peripheral arterial c atheter; time  recording will begin with the initial skin puncture and 
cease with observation of an approp riate arterial wave form on the in -room mon itor. 
 
If a patient is enrolled in the “Intervention ” group  and the anesthe sia provider requires more than 3 
attempts to  achieve  successful arterial catheter cannulation ; the provider will discontinue use of the dual-
plane probe and attempt placement with a te chnique of their choosing.  
 
A picture of the ultrasound imag e at the completion of the procedure, su ccessful or un successful, will be 
obtained; n o patient -specific information will be recorded.  
 
All data will be coll ected, organized, and analyzed with the aid of a dedicat ed bios tatist ician from the 
Health Science Research office. Estimate for their wor k are included in the attached budget.  
 
Endpoints  
Successful placement of peripheral  radial arterial catheter  as evi denced by transduction of arteria l 
wavefor m on beds ide mon itor. 
 
Primar y Outcome  
First-stick success rate of ultrasound -guided peripheral arterial catheter placement.  
 
Secondary Outcomes   
• Number of attempts to achieve successful arterial catheter cannulation ; “attempt ” will be de fined 
as a single insertion  of the  needle into the skin.  
• Amount of time required for successful arterial catheter cannulation . 
• Number of failed attempts leading to  unsuccessful arterial catheter cannulation  
• Subjective response from an esthesia provider regarding their exp erience util izing a  single -plane  
versus a dual -plane ultrasound probe.  
o Please explain your experience using this ultrasound probe.  
o If you used the dual -view probe, how do you feel that this dual -view prob e impacted your 
procedure as compared to a single -view ultrasoun d probe?  
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 6 of 7 
 o Do you feel that the dual -view ultrasound probe provides a procedural benefit over the 
single-view ultrasound probe; please explain.  
 
V. Data, Safety, and Monitoring Plan  
 
Data Coll ection  
The data collected for this study will be : 
• Number of attemp ts to achieve successful arterial catheter cannulation ; “attempt ” will be de fined 
as a single ins ertion  of the needle into the skin.  
• Amount of time required for successful arterial catheter cannulation . 
• Number of failed attempts leading to  unsucce ssful art erial catheter cannulation  
• Subject ive response from ane sthesia provider regarding their ex perience util izing a single -plane 
versus a dual -plane ultrasound probe.  
• Level of  training  of anesthesia provider: Trainee, CRNA, Atten ding physician  
 
This da ta will b e recorded on a paper form in the  operating room at the time of surgery ; the paper form 
will then be tr anscribed into RedCap by a member of the research team. No patient -specific  or provider -
specific  data will be collected.  
 
Feasibility and Time F rame  
Give n the high in cidence of periphe ral arterial cathe ter placement during elective cases in  the main 
operating room at both Saint Mary ’s Campus  and the Rochester Methodist Campus  (appro ximately 75 -100 
per day); we will plan to collect this data over t he course  of 2 months pending sufficient  enrollment.  
 
Subject Safety  
Enrolled patients will be e xposed to min imal additional risk. The additional risk may include additional  
peripheral ar terial catheter placement attempts which may lead to hematom a formati on, bleed ing, artery 
injury, and necessi tation to identify alternative anatomic sites for succes sful arterial  catheter placement.  
 
There will be no additional risk posed to the anesthesia providers.  
 
Given the fact that this is considered a low -risk inter vention, we will apply for a waiver of 
documentation of  informed consent from the patient  and anesthesia provider . 
 
Monitoring  
No addition al patient monitoring will be required for this study.  
 
Data Integrity     
All clinical data will be entered and comp iled i n a secure database maintained by the principal 
investigator, co -investigator s, and study coordinator. This database will be located in the Mayo C linic 
intranet, behind the Mayo Cli nic firewall and restricted only to authorized research group members  by 
password. No laptops, USB and/or websites will be used.  
Data Confidentiality  
Proto col versi on v5 11022021   
Page 7 of 7 
 All data recorded on paper form s at the time of surgery w ill be t ransc ribed by a member of the research 
team into a RedCap database . Immediately following transcription, the paper dat a copy will be 
destroyed. Access to the RedCap database will be limited to  the research team and study coordinator.  
Strengths  
This study is s imple, short, and straightforward and should b e completed within a year —more likely 
within six months. The study w ill be used to evaluate the potential benefi cial impact of a dual -plane 
ultrasound probe and its impact on efficiency and success  of vascular catheter placement procedures. 
Pending positive results from this study, consideration of incorporating d ual-plane  imaging training  into 
central line placement courses and peripheral c atheter placement  practices (PIVC  / PICC  / Midline). 
This w ill also serv e as the first identifi able randomized trial in the literature comparing simul taneous 
dual-plane ultrasou nd imagin g versus  single -plane ultrasound imaging in vascular access procedures.  
 
Limitations  
Simultaneous dual -plane  ultrasound imag ing is a new techn ology, therefore experience by providers  
with such technology is inherently limited.  
 
 
 
 
1 Cheung, E., Bae rlocher, M., Asch, M., Myers, A. (2009). Venous  access: a practical r eview for 2009. 
Canadian Family Physician, 55(5) -494-496. 
2 Alexandrou, E., Barruel, G., Carr, P., et al. (2015). International preval ence of the use of peripheral 
intravenous catheters. Journal of Hospital Medicine, 10(8), 530 -533. 
3 Carr, P., Rippey, J.,  Budgeon, C., et al. (2015). Insertion of peripheral intravenous cannulae in the 
emergency department: fac tors ass ociated with first -time insertion success. Journal of Vascular Access, 
17(2), 182 -190.  
4 Cheung, E., Baerlocher, M., Asch, M., Myers, A. (200 9). Venous  access: a practical review for 2009. 
Canadian Family Physician, 55(5) -494-496. 
5 Alexandrou, E. , Barrue l, G., Carr, P., et al. (2015). International prevalence of the use of pe ripheral 
intrave nous catheters. Journal of Hospital Medicine, 10(8), 530-533. 
6 Carr, P., Rippey, J., Budgeon, C., et al. (2015). Insertion of peripheral intravenous cannulae in the 
emergency department:  factors associated with first -time insertion success . Journal of Vas cular Access, 
17(2), 182 -190.  
7 Danski, M., Mingoran ce, P., J ohann, D., et al. (2016). Incidence of local complications and risk factors 
associated with perip heral in travenous catheter i n neonates. Journal of Nursing University Sao Paulo, 
50(1).  
8 Vogel, J. , Haukoos, J., Erickson, C., et al. (2015). Is long -axis view superior to short -axis view in 
ultrasound -guided central venous cathe terization? Critical Care Medicine , 43(4).  
9 Zhong, X., Hamill, M., Collier, B., et al. (2015). Dynamic multiplanar renal time ultrasound guided 
infraclavicular subclavian vein  catheterization. The American Surgeon, 81. 
10 Convissar, D. , Bittner, E., Chang, M. (2021). Biplane imagin g using portable ul trasound devices for 
vascular access. Cureus, 13. 