 
 
 
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
Yoga for Active Duty Military with CLBP and/or CNP  
 
 
 
Erik J. Groessl , PhD, Principal Investigator  
 
VA San Diego Medical Center  
3350 La Jolla Village Dr. #111 N -1 
San Diego, CA 92161  
 
Professor  
Department of Family Medicine and Public Health  
University of California San Diego  
858-642-6347  
 
Sponsored by:  NIH/NCCIH  
Grant # 5 R34 AT009073- 03 
07/01/2016 – 05/31/2020  
 
UCSD IRB# 16- 0341X  - Approved 03/01/20 19 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 2  
 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Instructions for completing the Research Plan are available on the HRPP website.  
The headings on this set of instructions correspond to the headings of the Research Plan.  
General Instructions: Enter a response for all topic headings.  
Enter “Not Applicable” rather than leaving an item blank if the item does not apply to this project.  
 
1. PROJECT TITLE  
Yoga for Active Duty Military with CLBP  and/or CNP  
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
Erik J. Groessl, PhD  
Associate Professor and Center Director  
UCSD Health Services Research Center  
Dept. of Family & Preventive Medicine 
University of California San Diego 
9500 Gilman Dr., #0994 La Jolla, CA 92093 
858-642-6347; egroessl@ucsd.edu
 
 
3. FACILITIES  
UCSD’S Health Services Research Center  
5440 Morehouse Drive, Suite 3500 
San Diego, CA 92121 (858) 622-4050 
 
Yoga of Oceanside 
1830 Oceanside Blvd., Suite E Oceanside, CA 92054  
Naval Medical Center San Diego (NMCSD)  
34800 Bob Wilson Dr. San Diego, CA 92134 
 
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY  
Three years.  
 
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one par agraph)  
Our primary aim is to assess the feasibility of conducting yoga research among active -duty military personnel with 
Chronic Low Back Pain (CLBP) or Chronic Neck Pain (CNP). In addition, we will evaluate the yoga intervention 
preferences and refine an existing yoga intervention to address those needs. The study w ill be conducted in two phases: 
Phase 1 involves collecting qualitative data on the style of yoga that most appeals to military personnel with CLBP, obtaining military IRB approval, and modifying the existing yoga intervention. Phase 2 includes recruitment and 
randomization of 60 military personnel with CLBP to active yoga or to restorative yoga. This will be conducted at two 
sites, one at NMCSD and one at Yoga Oceanside. (Please note:  before we begin Phase 2  we will also need to obtain 
IRB approval from NMCSD for activities that will take place at that site.  Once we obtain IRB approval from 
NMCSD, we will provide a copy to UCSD’s IRB  prior to commencing any activities at that site.)  Participants will 
complete assessments at baseline and end of interventions (12 -weeks).  Phase 1 will be completed over the first 12 
months of the 36-month project. Phase 2 will be completed over the remaining 24 months. Pain interference will serve as 
the primar y outcome with physical function and pain severity serving as important additional outcomes. The study will 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 3 prepare us for a R01 funded pragmatic clinical trial of yoga for CLBP and CNP in active -duty military.  
 
6. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Phase 1  -  includes Aims 1-3 and involves obtaining military IRB approval, using qualitative methods to understand the 
yoga preferences and attitudes of military personnel with CLBP/CNP, and refining the existing VA yoga intervention to 
better suit active-duty military personnel.  
• Aim 1: Assess and navigate barriers and facilitators for obtaining IRB approval to conduct randomized controlled intervention studies with active -duty military personnel. 
• Aim 2: Evaluate the acceptability of and preferences for yoga interventions among ac tive-duty military personnel 
with CLBP/CNP.  
• Aim 3: Modify an existing yoga intervention for the preferences of active -duty military and to address both CLBP 
and CNP.  
  
Phase 2  –we will accomplish Aims 4 -6 by conducting a pilot randomized control trial (RCT ) of yoga and a health education 
self-care control intervention.  
• Aim 4: Evaluate the feasibility of recruitment of active -duty military personnel with CLBP/CNP. 
• Aim 5: Evaluate adherence to the yoga interventions.  
• Aim 6: Obtain effect size estimates to inf orm power analyses for a full -scale RCT.   
 
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Chronic low back pain (CLBP) and chronic neck pain (CNP) are highly prevalent conditions that become chronic in 20 -
30% of those afflicted.1 In addition to pain, CLBP and CNP are a ssociated with decreased functional ability,2 work 
absence,3,4 increased psychological symptoms, (depression,5,6 anxiety7,8) and higher health care costs.9 Military 
personnel10,11 and veterans12 have higher rates of CLBP/CNP than the general US population, and CLBP/CNP are two of 
the most common reasons for disability among deployed personnel11 and the military in general.13 CLBP/CNP in military 
personnel are often exacerbated by co -morbidities14,15 that pose additional challenges and can interfere with treatment. 
Recommended treatment for CLBP/CNP begins with medication management and self -care instruction,16 but the limited 
effectiveness of these approaches and risks associated with pain medication creates a need for non -pharmacologic 
approaches.17,18 Of the non- pharmacological approaches, none have large effects for CLBP/CNP.  Because yoga can 
benefit health much more broadly and has few side effects, it is an increasingly valued care option among military personnel.
19,20 
Yoga interventions involve the integration of physical postures and movement, deep breathing, and focused attention. Thus, yoga interventions are multifaceted, with documented physical and psychological benefits including a) increased 
strength, flexibility, and conditioning through the per formance of physical postures, and b) stress reduction/ relaxation 
and improved psychological functioning facilitated by deep breathing exercises, concentration/ attention, and cognitive 
strategies.  
Although the evidence for yoga as a treatment for CLBP w as rated as “fair” in 2007 clinical guidelines,
18 two more recent 
large RCTs provide strong evidence that yoga reduces pain and disability among persons with CLBP.21-23  However, none 
of these studies were conducted in military populations. PI- Groessl has conducted preliminary studies showing that VA 
patients with CLBP/CNP will attend yoga sessions and that yoga improved their pain, physical function, and other outcomes.
24,25 He is currently finishing a full- scale RCT of yoga for CLBP/CNP in the VA system and collaborates on a 
similar NCCIH project with Dr. Rob Saper. However, military personnel with CLBP/CNP10 are on average, much 
different than VA patients with CLBP/CNP26. They are considerably younger and more active, have different co-
morbidities and career objectives, and require different treatment strategies. Creating interventions that can treat more 
than a single condition is also needed. Health organizations cannot easily offer a long menu of yoga interventions, each 
designed for a specific health condition. Our pragmatic clinical trial approach will address this barrier by designing an intervention to address two common and similar spinal conditions and compare two different  styles of yoga in one study.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 4   
 
8. PROGRESS REPORT  
N/A 
 
  
9. RESEARCH D ESIGN AND METHODS  
Overall  
This is a pilot study with an objective to examine the feasibility and acceptability of conducting a yoga RCT among 
active-duty military personnel with CLBP/CNP in military and community settings. The subject population will cons ist of 
80 adults, 70-75 active-duty military personnel with chronic low back pain (CLBP) or chronic neck pain (CNP) and 5-10 yoga instructors or healthcare providers who have provided yoga or care for active-duty military personnel with CLBP or 
CNP. The st udy will be conducted in two phases: Phase 1 will involve obtaining IRB approval to conduct research in 
military settings, collecting qualitative data from stakeholders on attitudes and preferences for yoga interventions, and 
refining the existing Yoga for CLBP intervention for the needs of active -duty military and persons with CNP. Phase 2 
will recruit and randomize 50 military personnel with CLBP or CNP to either active hatha or restorative yoga. Pain interference, pain severity, physical function, opioid medication use, and mental health outcomes are of primary interest. 
Mechanisms will also be studied.  
 
Phase 1   
Phase 1 includes Aims 1 -3 and involves obtaining military IRB approval, using qualitative methods to understand the 
yoga preferences and attitud es of military personnel with CLBP/CNP, and refining the existing VA yoga intervention to 
better suit active-duty military personnel.   
Aim 1: Assess and navigate barriers and facilitators for obtaining IRB approval to conduct randomized controlled 
interve ntion studies with active -duty military personnel. To achieve Aim 1, we will partner with Dr. Ian Fowler and Dr. 
Jeffrey Millegan from the NMCSD as described above. Both Dr. Fowler and Millegan are researchers /clinicians with 
experience obtaining IRB appr oval at NMCSD. Dr. Fowler has a research nurse with experience assembling the required 
IRB documents. They will work closely with Dr. Groessl and the UCSD Project Coordinator to meet NMCSD military IRB requirements, starting as soon as the study has been funded. We  expect the military IRB approval process to take 
approximately  6 months to complete. Yoga is not viewed as high risk or experimental given that it has been well studied 
elsewhere and few adverse events have been documented
21. However, to be conse rvative, we have allotted up to 12 
months for military IRB approval and Phase I activities can fully proceed under UCSD IRB approval.  
 
Aim 2: Evaluate the acceptability of and preferences for yoga interventions among active-duty military personnel with 
CLBP/CNP.   30 total Qualitative  Interviews  will be conducted with military personnel with CLBP or CNP and with 
healthcare providers who provide yoga or other healthcare to military personnel with CLBP or CNP.   
 
Qualitative Interview Methods:  
The proposed qualitative component of the study is both exploratory and inductive in nature. Semi- structured 
qualitative interviews will be employed to explore the participant preferences and experiences with yoga in relation to their CLBP/CNP.  This information will co ntribute to the refinement of an existing yoga intervention for veterans 
with CLBP so that it is optimal for active -duty military personnel. Interview techniques will use open- ended questions 
to stimulate a wider range of responses for a more complete understanding of the needs and attitudes encountered by study participants. Interviews are expected to last about 60 minutes in length. Open-ended questions during the 
interviews will address: 1) past experiences with non -pharmacological treatments for CLBP/CN P; 2) past experiences 
with yoga; 3) a brief presentation of the existing yoga program; 4) preferences in regard to the emphasis given to the various components the yoga intervention such as postures, pace of transition through poses, breathing techniques, 
meditation, ethical principles and spiritual aspects; 5) dosing of yoga; and 6) discussion of research participation and burden given military schedules. Interviews with yoga providers and other health care providers will follow the same 
set of questions but will ask for both their own preferences as a clinician and their perspective on how their patients 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 5 might typically respond. Of the 30 interviews, we will  interview 8 -10 participants with CLBP/CNP who have never 
done yoga. Those interviews will employ slightly different questions that are designed to elicit attitudes, beliefs, and 
perceptions about yoga as a treatment modality for CLBP/CNP in military personnel, and barriers to participation. Instead of a question about their past experiences with yoga, they will be asked to provide their perceptions of yoga as 
a treatment modality and any barriers or facilitators that may affect their future participation. All qualitative interviews will be digitally audio -recorded and digital tapes will be encrypted bef ore being confidentially submitted to 
a transcription consultant to transcribe the audio recordings verbatim for the purpose of coding and analysis. All names and locations mentioned during the course of the interviews will also be removed from the final t ranscripts 
prior to analysis.  
 
Qualitative Data Analysis:   
A salient strength of qualitative analysis is its focus on the context and meaning of human experience for the purpose of inductive and exploratory- driven research. Qualitative methods facilitate the collection of data when exact 
measures do not exist. Transcribed summaries from the interviews will be analyzed using directed content analysis 
(DCA) to identify and categorize meaningful and detailed information about participant’s opinions, perceptions and 
experiences participating in the mindfulness meditation intervention . Coding strategies will include highlighting 
passages for emergent themes and also a priori categories reflecting  questions from the interviews . Through this 
process and the comparison of new data, a template of open codes will be constructed to analyze all of the transcripts in accordance with standard qualitative analytic convention. Verification of emergent themes from interviews will be 
examined through investigator discussions of the coding framework. Disagreements during theme interpretation or 
coding hierarchy will be resolved early on through investigator discussions before completing the qualitative analysis. 
 
Aim 3: Modify an existing yoga intervention for the preferences o f active -duty military and to address both CLBP and 
CNP.  Based on the results of the qualitative interviews, the existing yoga intervention designed for VA patients with 
CLBP will be refined and adjusted to better fit the preferences of active- duty militar y personnel with CLBP or CNP. This 
process will start with the investigators and yoga experts reviewing Dr. Hurst’s report of the qualitative results. The team 
will also independently review a current Yoga for CLBP manual  being used by Dr. Groessl , the Cra mer et al. manuscript 
which lists the 14 yoga poses they selected for treating CNP, and other yoga texts. Investigators and experts will then convene at UCSD for an extended afternoon meeting to select of a pool of possible poses. The PI will then work with 
orthopedic surgeon Dr. Chang and yoga expert Dr. Schmalzl to propose specific changes to the intervention. The revisions will be presented to the other collaborators for review and additional discussion. Possible examples include a 
slightly faster pace, adding postures for additional challenge for those with less impairment (yet easily modified to be safe 
for all), additional attention tasks or imagery, and further trauma sensitivity. All changes and the rationale behind them 
will be documented.  
 
Phase 2  
Please note:  before we begin Phase 2 we will also need to obtain IRB approval from NMCSD for activities that will take place at that site.  Once we obtain IRB approval from NMCSD, we will provide a copy to UCSD’s IRB 
prior to commencing any activities at that site.   In Phase 2 we will accomplish Aims 4 -6 by conducting a pilot RCT 
with 2 yoga interventions .  We will recruit 25 people at each of two sites, one in a military medical facility  (NMCSD)  and 
one in a community yoga studio (Yoga Oceanside) near a l arge military base for a total of 50 participants. Once 25 people 
have been recruited at each site, they will be randomized to attend either active hatha yoga or restorative yoga.     
 
Screening and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria.  
50 active- duty military pe rsonnel with CLBP will be recruited and randomized to either active hatha yoga or to 
restorative yoga. Inclusion criteria are as follows: 
Inclusion: 
• Diagnosis of CLBP or CNP > 6 months 
• Willing to attend a yoga program for 12 weeks  
• Willing to complete 3 as sessments  
• English literacy  
• Have had no changes in pain treatments in the past month  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 6 • Willing to not change pain treatments during study unless medically necessary  
• Have not practiced yoga more than 2x in the last 12 months 
Exclusion: 
• Back or neck surgery wit hin the last year  
• Back or neck pain due to specific systemic problem (e.g., lupus, scoliosis) 
• Severe vertebral disk problems,  
• Persistent sciatica or nerve compression > 3 months  
• Coexisting chronic pain problem (e.g., migraine headaches, fibromyalgia) 
• Serious or unstable psychiatric illness (e.g., psychosis, mania, episode, or substance dependence)  
• Major coexisting medical illness (e.g., cancer, COPD, morbid obesity) 
• Positive Romberg test (with or without sensory neuropathy) 
 
No other exclusion criteria wi ll be employed. No special classes of subjects or other vulnerable populations will be 
recruited. We will make efforts to recruit at least representative proportions of women and racial and ethnic minorities. 
More detail is provided on the inclusion of wom en and minoritie s document in this application. 
 
Table 4 . Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria with Method used to Determine Eligibility for Study Participation  
Inclusion Criteria  Determined by:   Exclusion Criteria  Determined by:  
Active -duty military 
employmen t and age > 18 screening interview; 
medical record   back or neck surgery within the last 1 
year screening interview; 
medical record  
Diagnosis of chronic low back or 
neck pain > 6 months  screening interview; 
medical record   back or neck pain due to specifi c 
systemic problem (e.g., lupus)  screening interview; 
medical record  
Willing to attend 12 -weeks of 
yoga  screening interview; 
informed consent   severe vertebral disk problems  screening interview; 
medical record  
Willing to complete 2 
assessments  screenin g interview; 
informed consent   persistent sciatica or nerve compression 
> 3 months  screening interview; 
medical record  
English Literacy   screening interview; 
informed consent   coexisting chronic pain problem 
(migraine headaches, fibromyalgia) screening interview; 
medical record  
No changes in pain treatments in 
the past month.  medical record; 
screening interview   Serious or unstable psychiatric illness 
(e.g. psychosis, mania)  screening interview; 
medical record  
Willing to not change pain 
treatments dur ing study unless 
medically necessary.  screening interview; 
informed consent   major coexisting medical illness (e.g., 
cancer, COPD, morbid obesity)  screening interview; 
medical record  
Have not practiced yoga > 2x in 
the last 12 months  screening interview; 
informed consent   Positive Romberg test (with or without 
sensory neuropathy)  screening interview; 
medical record  
 
Recruitment staff will meet with p articipants to obtain informed consent and HIPAA authorization before a screening 
visit. Potential particip ants will undergo a physician screening exam to ensure they meet the study inclusion/exclusion 
criteria and can participate safely. Screening will be performed by Dr. Fowler at NMCSD or by Dr. Chang at UCSD for the community site and includes a review of the patients’ medical record, a brief interview, and a physical examination. 
Inclusion/ exclusion criteria and the sources of information used to determine them are listed in Table 4. Patients who 
have recently changed any professionally-delivered pain trea tment (e.g., medications, chiropractic) are not eligible until 
their treatment has been stable for 30 days. Participants are asked to keep all pain treatments stable during the 12- week 
intervention period unless a change is medically necessary and their ag reement and study participation are documented in 
their medical record. Staff will assess all treatments including non -prescription medication use and any treatment changes 
that do occur through self- report assessment at 4 -weeks, 8 -weeks, and the end of the 12 week study period. Participants 
are asked take their lowest usual dose of pain medications within 24 hours of each assessment.  Although we will exclude 
those with serious or unstable psychiatric  illness, we expect to enroll many patients with stable levels of depression, 
anxiety (including PTSD), substance use, etc. as these conditions are prevalent and contribute to disability among CLBP/CNP patients . Research suggests that yoga has beneficial effects on psychiatric symptoms. We will exclude 
patients who report active suicidal ideation at baseline or have recent suicide attempts.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 7 Assessments and Randomization:   
All eligible participants will be scheduled for assessments at two time points: pre (baseline) and post intervention (12 -
weeks).   The assessments consist of a battery of 8 -10 questionnaires taking about 20-30 minutes to complete. Next, 
physiological measurements will be  conducted by a trained research assistant and will take about 10 minutes to complete.  
Participants will receive $30 for comp leting each ass essments. Completed questionnaires will be coded with a study ID to 
protect confidentiality. All personal health information will be entered into a password protected secure server 
environment within UCSD- HSRC. After the baseline assessment,  participants will be  randomized  to either the Hatha 
Yoga Intervention or to the Restorative Yoga Intervention. Randomization will occur through a web portal linked to a 
secure file providing block randomized digits that was prepared by the study statistic ian. There will be one block file for 
each site, with 30 digits in each file, allowing each site to have a balanced randomization. Research staff will not have access to the randomization file. Participants will be told of their group assignment and will b e allowed to ask additional 
questions at that time.  
Assessment Questionnaires and Measurements : 
Screening :  Medical record information will be used by screening physicians to complete the Back Pain History 
Questionnaire which will allow the investigators to assign a descriptive diagnosis based on the Quebec Nomenclature on Activity Related Spinal Disorders
104. The measure has been used in previous VA studies105-107. 
Additional information on co-morbid diagnoses, opioid pain medication usage, and ongoing treatments will also be collected including information on TBI, PTSD and other psychological diagnoses, and substance use. 
Demograp hi
cs :  A brief questionnaire will assess age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, employment status, military 
rank and duties, and combat status.  
Pain interference with daily function and pain severity w ill be measured with the short version of the Brief P ain 
Inventory (BPI).108 Pain interference will serve as the primary outcome. The BPI has been validated with 
CLBP.109 The pain interference score is the mean of the 7 interference items. The pain severity score is the 
mean of 4 severity items. The BPI has good reliability (alpha 0.77 - 0.91).  
Disability/Physical Function . T he Roland-Morris Disability Questionnaire consists of 23 questions that ask about 
limitations experience d for a variety of daily activities. The scale has been shown to be reliable and is well 
validated110. It has been used in other studies of yoga studies102. The Neck Disability Index will be used to 
assess disability related specifically to neck pain. It is a well validate measure.111  
Depression.  Derived from the full  Center for Epidemiologic Studies Short Depression Scale112 (CES -D), the CES-
D 10113 consists of 10 items on the frequency of mood symptoms. Scores > 10 indicate depression.  
Anxiety.  The Brief A nxiety Inventory (BAI) measures the severity of anxiety symptoms and consists of 21 items. 
The BAI was developed with psychiatric outpatients114 and has good reliability and validity.115 
HRQOL.   The Short- form 12 (SF12) was derived the SF -36.116 The PCS- 12 and MCS -12 have been shown to be 
similar to the SF36 levels of precision and sensitivity to change. 
Self-ef ficacy.  Self-efficacy for managing pain reflects confidence in the ability to influence the intensity or  impact 
of CLBP/CNP on daily life. The questions are based on items developed by Lorig et al.117.  
Fatigue .  The Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) assesses the impact and severity of fatigue with 9 items. A score of > 4.0 
constitutes severe fatigue.118 The measure has good psychometrics for pain disorders.118,119 
Attendance/ Home practice.   Attendance of yoga sessions will be assessed using sign -in logs verified by the yoga 
instructor. Self -reported practice of yoga at home will be assessed using a weekly participant yoga log. The 
yoga log assesses the amount of time practiced, the use of instructions, the difficulty of poses, and the estimated 
level of exertion. 
Acceptability and Satisfaction Q uestions. We will assess program acceptability and satisfaction using 10 questions 
developed and used by the investigators in previous and current yoga studies. The questions will gauge factors 
affecting attendance and par ticipation levels.  
Patient Expect a tions  will be measured at baseline to determine whether the descriptions of the yoga interventions 
could result in different expectations for improvement. Dr. Karen Sherman will use the new patient expectation measure developed by her and her colleagues.
120 
Physical Measures. The integrity of physiological measure will be maintained by having multiple research staff 
trained by local UCSD experts in the use of the inclino meter, dynamometer, heart monitors, and core strength 
tests. Following initial training, research staff will conduct a series of 6 mock measurements to ensure reliability of measurement. Any problems will be tracked and addressed with re-training.  
Spinal Range of Motion (ROM)  will be measured using a digital inclinometer, which isolates lumbar 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 8 ROM (flexion and extension). The device uses a precise optical angular scanner placed along the 
spine. Device error is negligible with accuracy as high as 98%121 The device has been used in other 
yoga interventions.103 
Grip Strength will be measured using two trials for each hand with a hydraulic dynamometer. The best 
performance is selected for each side, and the average of the left and right hand is used for analysis. 
Painful or injured hands or wrists are not te sted and the result of the good hand is used. Reliability 
has been shown to be high: r=0.88-0.92. Good predictive validity of grip strength has been shown for disability and mortality.
122 
Core Stabilization and Strength.  Prone and supine bridge positions w ill assess core stabilization.123 
Participants begin on their elbows in the prone position with shoulders, hips, and ankles aligned. The supine position is tested next, with knees flexed 90 degrees and pelvis raise d from the floor with 
shoulders, hips, and knees aligned. Assessors record length of time (120 seconds max) that each position is held in proper form.  
Heart rate.  
 Physical exertion during yoga will be measured using Polar FT4 Heart Rate Monitors. Worn 
on the chest, they provide aggregate summary data such as maximum and mean heart rate during a workout. 
  
Interventions: 
There w ill be two interventions : Hatha Yoga and Restorative Yoga. Both interventions will meet 2 times a week for 12 
weeks with at least one day of rest between each class. Individual classes will be 60 minutes long and led by a certified 
yoga instructor . Additionally, participants will be encouraged to practice yoga at home as guided in a home practice 
manual.  
 
Hatha Yoga (HY)  
     Using in formation gathered during qualitative interviews in Phase I, the yoga intervention will be tailored to our 
target population. However, we do not anticipate significant changes to the existing yoga protocol for CLBP that was 
developed for Dr. Groessl ’s curr ent stud y, Yoga for CLBP  being conducted with veterans . Our team of experienced 
yoga instructors will also adapt the existing CLBP yoga intervention to be safe and effective for CNP. Our team consists of co -investigator Dr. Laura Schmalzl (researcher and e xperienced yoga instructor), Camilla Sinclair (current 
instructor of Yoga for CLBP at VASD), Danielle Fowler (owner of Yoga Oceanside), and Betty Michalewicz 
(military yoga instructor at NMCSD Wellness Program). We will also consult Anatomy of Hatha Yoga
79 and Yoga as 
Medicine which has a useful section on avoiding neck injuries.93  Poses known to put pressure on joints, muscles, or 
nerves in the neck such as head stands, shoulder stands including plow and other variations will not be used. 
The HY intervention will be led by a certified instructor at each site. Both instructors will be trained by Camilla 
Sinclair who has been practicing yoga for over 16 years and has over 8 years of teaching experience and is the main instructor for Dr. Groessl’s Yoga for Vets with CLBP .
  (NOTE:  We will model the HY intervention after the current 
Yoga for CLBP intervention  which is a  classical hatha yoga with influences from Viniyoga and Iyengar yoga.  Both 
Viniyoga and Iyengar yoga styles emphasize modifications and adaptations including the use of props such as straps 
and blocks in order to minimize the risk of injury and make the poses accessible to people with health problems and limitations. )  The cer tified yoga instructor s will lead participants through a series of 23 yoga poses (32 total 
variations) at a slow- moderate pace. Instructors will be asked to follow the manual which will help standardize the 
yoga intervention. The manual  contains pictures and a description of how to perform each pose with typical instructor 
dialogue. The dialogue may be paraphrased and varied slightly, yet promotes more consistent replication and generalization of results. The manual includes some poses that could aggravate back conditions if they are not 
modified for some people. That is why multiple modifications are shown and many of the poses shown are only 
worked up to after weeks of practice and individual attention from the instructor. The more challenging poses are not 
included in the home practice manuals. The importance of attending all sessions will be  stressed during session 1 and 
throughout all sessions. Participants who miss a session without notifying the instructor will be contacted to check on 
the reason for non -attendance. Participants will also receive a home practice manual containing  some basic, safe 
postures that can be performed in 10- 15 minutes on days they will not be attending the formal in-person sessions.  
Participants  will be  encouraged to not push themselves as much when practicing at home and to stop when pain or 
discomfort becomes noticeable. They will be  encouraged to consult with the instructor individually before and after 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 9 class about any problems or difficulties they are encountering at home o r in the formal sessions.  
During the formal sessions, participants will be  instructed to take slow, deep breaths in conjunction with specific 
phases of poses. Participants will be  encouraged to emulate the optimal alignment being demonstrated by the 
instru ctor. In addition, participants will be  encouraged to focus on a goal or positive direction for their yoga practice. 
The yoga classes are constructed to allow optimal flow from one pose to another. Each 60-minute session will begin  
with a few minutes of deep breathing and mindfulness/meditation followed by about 15 minutes of basic postures 
(Poses 1 -8) to warm -up the muscles/body by increasing circulation, providing more flexibility as the class progresses. 
Most poses will be  conducted once to each side or with the opposite foot leading. After warming-up, the instructor 
will lead  students through a series of standing poses (Poses 9-14) which include balance for about 15 minutes. After 
the standing poses, the class will move into floor poses (Poses 15- 22) for  about 20 minutes. Each session will end  
with about 5- 7 minutes of complete relaxation in the standard ending pose “savasana”. At this time, additional 
positive mental suggestions /affirmations  will be  provided. 
 
Restorative Yoga (RY)   
     RY will serve as the comparison intervention but is also of interest in itself as a possible treatment modality. For 
the purposes of this pilot  study (R34 proposal ), we are using the term “ Restorative Yoga” to refer to yoga 
interventions that emphasize relaxation and incl ude very little movement, and are non- strenuous. RY sessions 
typically include only 5-10 poses, mostly done lying down, eyes are often closed, with bolsters and/or blankets used for comfort and warmth,  Because eyes are often closed, and movement is limite d, the instructor typically provides 
more instructions on deep breathing techniques and guided imagery.   
The details of the RY intervention will be developed using the expertise of our team of experienced yoga 
instructors and the feedback from the Phase 1  Qualitative Interviews.  Our yoga experts have training and experience 
delivering RY sessions. The team will read and discuss
 The iRest Program for Healing PTSD ,101 a recent book that 
outlines the iRest approach to treating PTSD. The team will also review and discuss a RY practice manual developed for metabolic syndrome by our colleagues at UCSD and UCSF. The 42-page manual explains 5 different poses with an additional 8 modifications to those poses, and provides pictures and helpful tips. Bas ed on these materials, our 
yoga experts will develop our RY intervention and create an intervention manual and a home practice manual. The intervention will occur 2x weekly for 12 weeks – each class will be 60 minutes to match that timeframe of the active 
yoga intervention.  
 
 
Treatment Fidelity.   
Instructor fidelity to the yoga intervention manual will be evaluated using video recordings of yoga intervention sessions. 
All yoga sessions will be recorded with a digital camcorder and tripod placed in the back of the yoga room. Instructors 
and participants will be aware of and consent to the recordings. We do not plan to analyze all recorded sessions, but 
recording all sessions will standardize the presence of the camera across all sessions and result in more r apid habituation. 
Of the 24 sessions videotaped at each site, we will randomly select a session from weeks 1 -4, weeks 5-8, and weeks 9-12 
for review by a yoga instructor from Yoga Oceanside. They will review the sessions using a manual checklist for 
instru ctor adherence to the yoga manuals, which will consist of a Yes/No , blank , and 0-10 rating scale for each procedure 
or instruction. 
   
Data management.  Questionnaires will be formatted by the project coordinator under the supervision of Dr. Groessl (PI). 
Formatting will be designed to reduce recording errors and facilitate computer scanning and verification. Forms will be 
de-identified to protect confidentiality, and data will be scanned and verified by the data manager (and project 
coordinator). The projec t coordinator will monitor the quality of the questionnaire data as soon as they are collected to 
achieve prompt resolution of errors and omissions. Data will be stored on a password protected secure network server at 
UCSD. Access privileges are limited to  essential staff.  
 
Statistical Management and Analysis: Qualitative data will be managed and analyzed by Co- I Hurst. Results will be 
presented to the research team and additional sub -analyses will be conducted as needed before the intervention is 
modified . Health outcome data and mediational variables will be collected directly before and after the 12 -week yoga 
program using physiological assessments and questionnaires. We will assess the effect size of the difference in change in 
health outcomes (pain int erference, pain severity, and physical functioning) from pre - to post -intervention between 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 10  intervention groups using a linear random effects model. We will assess clustering by site with a likelihood ratio test.  The 
point estimate of difference in change score between two groups and the 95% confidence interval for the estimated 
difference will be provided. We will also perform multivariate analysis and an adjusted effects size (with 95% CI) by 
including baseline characteristics that are significantly imbala nced between two groups as covariates in the random 
effects model.  Analyses will be conducted by the biostatistician (Dr. Liu).  The effect size estimates (and CI width) will 
help inform power calculations for the subsequent R01 submission. R software pac kages will be used for all statistical 
analyses.  
  
 
 
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
The subject population will consist of 80 adults, 70 -75 active -duty military personnel with chronic low back pain (CLBP) 
or chronic neck pain (CNP) and 5-10 yoga instructors or healthcare providers who have provided yoga or care for active-
duty military personnel with CLBP or CNP. 
 
 
In Phase 1 :  
30 qualitative interviews will be conducted. 20- 25 active -duty military personnel and 5- 10 yoga instructors or healthcare 
providers who have provided yoga or care for active- duty military personnel with CLBP or CNP will participate in the 
interviews. Inclusion criteria for the qualitative interviews includes being active- duty personnel in the U.S. military, and 
having a self-reported history of CLBP or CNP. Inclusion criteria for instructors/providers includes having self-reported 
experience teaching yoga or providing other pain treatments for active-duty military personnel with CLBP or CNP.  
 
In Phase 2 :  50 active-duty military personnel with CLBP will be recruited and randomized to either active hatha yoga or 
to restorative yoga. Inclusion criteria are as follows:  
Inclusion: 
• Diagnosis of CLBP or CNP > 6 months 
• Willing to attend a yoga program for 12 weeks  
• Willing to complete 3 assessments  
• English literacy  
• Have had no changes in pain treatments in the past month 
• Willing to not change pain treatments during study unless medically necessary 
• Have not practiced yoga more than 2x in the last 12 months 
Exclusion: 
• Back or neck surgery within the last year 
• Back or neck pain due to specific systemic problem (e.g., lupus, scoliosis) 
• Severe vertebral disk problems,  
• Persistent sciatica or nerve compression > 3 months  
• Coexisting chronic pain problem (e.g., migraine headaches, fibromyalgia) 
• Serious or unstable psychiatric illness (e.g., psychosis, mania, episode, or substance dependence)  
• Major coexisting medical illness (e.g., cancer, COPD, morbid obesity) 
• Positive Romberg test (with or without sensory neuropathy) 
 
No other exclusion criteria will be employe d. No special classes of subjects or other vulnerable populations will be 
recruited. We will make efforts to recruit at least representative proportions of women and racial and ethnic minorities. 
More detail is provided on the inclusion of women and minori ties document in this application. 
 
11. RECRUITMENT AND PROCEDURES PREPARATORY TO RESEARCH  
Phase 1: Qualitative Interviews  
We will recruit a total of 30 stakeholders to participate in qualitative interviews. Of the 30 participants, 20 -25 will be 
military  personnel with CLBP and/or CNP and 5 -10 will be clinicians who provide yoga or other clinical care to military 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 11  personnel with CLBP or CNP. Of the 20 -25 participants with CLBP/CNP, we will enroll at least 8 -10 participants who 
have not done yoga before to explore reasons or perceived barriers to yoga participation. Recruitment will primarily occur 
through the posting of flyers and word of mouth with our military and community partners. A full Military  IRB approval 
is not required to post flyers at the military facility or to conduct qualitative interviews at community locations  off-base. 
Once we obtain permissions from the appropriate Public Affairs Office for the base, we will post flyers on military bases.  
For the 5 -10 instructors/healthcare providers, we will recruit using connections with our military/community partners, and 
if needed, our contacts with additional healthcare providers in the San Diego area including UCSD and VA San Diego. Participants will receive a $30  gift card for participating in a qualitative interview . 
 
  
Phase 2:  Yoga Classes  
(Please note:  before we begin Phase 2 we will also need to obtain IRB approval from NMCSD for activities that 
will take place at that site.  Once we obtain IRB approval from NMCSD, we will provide a copy to UCSD’s IRB 
prior to commencing any activities at that site.)    
Recruitment for Phase 2 will occur primarily through our military and community partners. However, we will use 
qualitative interview data to steer and refine our recruitment methods. The NMCSD is our military research partner and 
they provide care to over 100,000 active-duty military personnel each year. With an estimated 25% of the general 
population having chronic low back pain at any one time, and higher rates among military personnel, the pool of potential 
participants can safely be placed at over 20,000. Some will not meet study criteria for various reasons, but a large number 
will be eligible. Once military IRB approval is obtained, Dr. Fowler and staff can post the study flyer and information on a research op portunities website, request inclusion in widely distributed e -mails, notify primary care physicians, pain 
management staff, and other healthcare providers, and they can post flyers on medical center posting boards. Recruitment will als o occur at Yoga Oceanside and through the Connected Warriors organization. Flyers will be posted within their 
facilities and announcements will be at the end of classes. They will both use social media (e.g. Facebook) to communicate these research opportun ities to their communities (CW has 1600+ followers, and Yoga Oceanside has 
500+). If needed, the study will also advertise the study in local military newspapers including three online publications 
from Echo Media (Miramar Flight Jacket, Navy Compass, Camp  Pendleton Scout) which have a weekly readership of 
88,000 and/or the Military Press publication (bi-weekly readership of over 100,000 active- duty military).  
 
12. INFORMED CONSENT  
Prior to participation in this project, participants will be thoroughly ap prised of study considerations and will 
undergo an informed consent process. We will emphasize the key elements of the informed consent procedure: 
1) the research status of the study; 2) the prospect of physical or psychological risk and the provisions for it; 3) the lack of guarantee of benefit from participation; 4) the confidentiality of the participant's responses; 5) the voluntary nature of the study; and 6) the freedom to withdraw from the study or to refuse to answer specific questions at any time. Only individuals who consent to all study conditions will be enrolled. The participant will complete the informed consent process with the RA and will be given a copy of the signed document for his or her records.  
Trained research staff, who are experienced in recruitment for clinical trials and medical research , will facilitate 
the consenting for the qualitative interviews in Phase 1 and before the screening appointments in Phase 2.  Prior to beginning the study, the PI will ensure compliance with IRB requirements and protections by obtaining approval from University of California San Diego and the Naval Medical Center San Diego (for procedures done at that facility) and will insure all protections are followed.  
 
13. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTICIPATION  
The alternative to participation is not to participate.  
 
14. POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 12  In the focus groups of Phase 1, research staff will explore the thoughts, experiences, and opinions of participants with 
respect to CLBP and yoga as a treatment for CLBP. They wi ll also discuss perceptions of different aspects of a yoga 
intervention regarding their desirability, acceptability, and efficacy, none of which are anticipated to produce negative 
emotional reactions. However, participants will be given contact informatio n for sources of help that they can contact if 
they are feeling distressed or desire help.  
 
Phase 2 will involve participants attending two different yoga programs. Minor physical risks are always possible in yoga 
classes, although the frequency of injury has been low for CLBP and CNP patients in major studies. A small possibility also exists for injury during the physiological assessments, where someone may be asked to stand on one foot, hold a 
plank position, bend forward, or squeeze a dynamometer.   In the event that someone is injured, the usual procedure 
followed at that particular facility will be followed. For example, active-duty military doing yoga at NMCSD will receive 
care at NMCSD. Participants doing yoga through Yoga Oceanside and the Connected Warriors program can get free care 
through UCSD. These organizations require instructors to be fully insured through the Yoga Alliance.   
 
Summary of safety information . Like other exercise activity, the risks of injury from improperly performing yoga 
postures vary depending on how, where, and with whom the yoga is practiced. The initial practice of yoga under the 
direction of experienced yoga instructors, following a program that has modifications for people with limitations, and 
consulting a physician before starting a yoga program are all recommendations24 that will be followed in the proposed study. Data from RCTs of yoga for adults with CLBP reveal that the 3 serious adverse events among 309 persons doing 
yoga in these studies were all related to herniated discs, and at least one of these was found to be unrelated to yoga 
practice.22,23,102,103 Disc problems are common in this population in the absence of yoga practice, and thus yoga does 
not appear to greatly increase that risk. Among the 63 people with CNP who did yoga in two RCTs, no serious adverse 
events occurred. So despite popular media reports of the dangers of yoga, no specific data or evidence of risk has been 
presented. The poses specifically cited as being dangerous, usually head and shoulder stands and their variations probably 
do present some risk for novices, and are not being used in the proposed study. By screening out patients at greater risk, placing emphasis on slowly building a safe yoga practice, and hands on instruction from experienced instructors will be 
used to ensure that the yoga is practiced in the safest possible manner throughout the study.
 
 
In both Phase 1 and Phase 2, there is a risk of loss of confidentiality.  No physical, legal, or social risks are anticipated as a result  
of participating in other phases or aspects of this study. The assessment questionnaires ask participants to consider 
and/or report health symptoms and functioning, and medication use which are not anticipated to cause negative emotional 
reactions. However, participants in each phase of the study will be given contact information for sources of help that they 
can contact if they are feeling distressed or desire help. 
 
15. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
All participants will be provi ded the Principal Investigator’s and Project Coordinator’s phone numbers, whom they can 
contact if they have questions or need assistance. All participants are made aware that they can discontinue participation 
at any time. The PI and program staff will assist the participant in obtaining a referral to a mental health professional if requested or indicated. Risks to subject confidentiality will be addressed by identification of subject information only 
through code numbers: Data stored in the computer will only be identified with a code number. A separate file with 
corresponding identifying information and contact information will be kept in a separate computer file that will be 
password protected. Only the appropriate research staff will have access to specific subject information.  
 
Adverse events:  The investigators will track adverse events and report these on a daily basis to the Principal Investigator. 
Serious adverse events will be immediately reported by phone and in writing to the IMC and to the Instit utional Review 
Board of the University of California San Diego, or relevant military IRB. Serious adverse events include death, substantial risk of dying, hospitalizations, disability, or emergency medical intervention attributable to participation in t he 
study (http://www.fda.gov/medWatch/report/DESK/advevnt.htm).  We will conduct weekly research team meetings. 
Once a month at these research team meetings, all adverse events occurring over the previous month and over the course 
of the study will be reviewe d.  Serious adverse events will be reviewed immediately and reviewed again at the monthly 
meeting. All reported adverse events will be reported to the IRBs at that site as well as the University of California San 
Diego  IRB, which will be the primary IRB of the study.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 13  Additional precautions:  Any adverse events or protocol deviations by the PI or research assistant will be reported within 
72 hours of its coming to the PI’s attention. We will take regular precautions to protect human research participants 
during the course of the study. The investigators will be in regular contact on a daily or weekly basis by e-mail or phone 
so urgent problems will be addressed in a timely manner. The PI or other key personnel will inform the PI or research 
team about any va cation or absences so that coverage of study duties can be arranged.  
 
If this study is funded and carried out, we will assemble an Independent Monitoring Committee (IMC) to monitor the 
progress and safety of the study as it proceeds. The PI will recruit 3 content or scientific experts who are not involved 
with this grant to serve on the IMC.  One person will be a clinical psychologist or psychiatrist who specializes in diagnosing and treating psychological disorders among active- duty military; another will be an orthopedist or orthopedic 
surgeon; the third will be a statistician. The IMC will review the study protocol prior to activation and develop an IMC plan. The IMC will evaluate the data on an ongoing basis and assure participant safety and study integr ity. The IMC will 
be responsible for monitoring data and for making recommendations based on the data regarding appropriate protocol and 
any operational changes. The committee will meet every 6 months to review progress, preliminary data, and any adverse 
events.  They will meet with the PI to make recommendations regarding the progress of the study and will be able to 
report to the Institutional Review Board of the University of California San Diego. Following review, the IMC will write 
a report outlining recommendations. These recommendations will be forwarded to the Principal Investigator (Dr. Groessl) 
at the University of California San Diego and the IRB Chair at the University of California San Diego. 
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS INCL UDING DATA ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT  
All signed consent forms, HIPAA forms, and the video and audio recordings for Phases  1 and 2  will be transported 
directly to Dr. Groessl’s office at the UCSD Health Services Research Center at 5440 Morehouse Dr. #3500 San Diego, CA, 92121 where they will be stored in a locked file cabinet within the locked office. All questionnaires and other data 
recording forms will be pre- labeled with the participants’ ID # and stored at the UCSD Health Services Research Center. 
The key connecting participant identifiers with the ID number is also kept in a locked cabinet and on password protected computers that reside within a firewall and data security system.  
 
For all phases of the project, a secure, password protected encrypted databa se will be constructed for the names and 
contact information of participants that contact the Project Coordinator during recruitment . This information will be 
stored on a secure network server and password protected. Only the Project Coordinator and one tr ained research staff 
will have access to this database. Each participant will be assigned a study ID # which will be used for all assessment 
materials. All assessment information (questionnaires and measurements) will only labeled with the study ID. No nam es 
or other identifiers will appear on assessment materials.  A separate database will be constructed containing the de-
identified data.  No identifying information will be linked with respondent answers. 
 
Additionally, f or Phases I and II, participants ar e informed that audio -/video -recordings may be stopped at any time and 
that portions and/or the entire tape may be erased at the participant’s request.  Also, notes and audio-recordings will be 
anonymously transcribed. Following transcription, the audio- recordings will be destroyed.  
 
17. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
The primary purpose of the study is to examine feasibility of yoga research and refinement of a yoga intervention for 
active- duty military personnel.  Thus, no direct benefit to participants is anticipated. Yoga has been shown to improve 
health outcomes in other populations with CLBP /CNP , and may help some individuals, but our study is not powered to 
make scientific conclusions regarding efficacy.  Results of the study will provide important information that will prepare 
study investigators to conduct a full -scale randomized controlled trial of yoga for military personnel with CLBP /CNP . 
 The results of this study will provide essential information for medical and mental health professionals who treat veteran 
and active-duty US military regarding the dimensions of yoga perceived as most helpful and well- received for different 
conditions, and will guide future research asking specific questions regarding efficacy and effectiveness of specific interventions.   
 
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
The investigators believe that it is unlikely that confidentiality concerning personal medical information will be breached 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 14  given the security plan. It is also unlikely that patients will suffer serious emotional discomfort bec ause they are fully 
informed about what will happen during the study and have sufficient time to prepare and decline participation if 
necessary. They also can stop participating at any time without penalty. 
Rates of physical injury and adverse events from yoga in previous studies with similar populations are low, and appear no 
higher than natural rates of injury in this population.  
 
Yoga has been shown to improve health outcomes in other populations with CLBP /CNP , and may help some 
individuals.22-23 
Theref ore, the investigators believe that the potential benefits to participants and the potential of obtaining new scientific 
information and designing new interventions for people with chronic low back pain outweigh the potential risks.  
 
19. EXPENSE TO PARTIC IPANT  
The only  expense to the subjects would be transportation costs to travel to the yoga classes. Time is required for them to  
complete the questionnaires.  Some active duty military personnel may be unable to receive compensation for completing 
assessments, and would have to donate their time.  
 
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
Phase 1:  Qualitative Interviews  – 30 participan ts will receive a $30 gift card to Trader Joes for participating in 
a 60 minute interview. 
 
Phase 2:  Yoga Interventions – 50 pa rticipants will receive 24 free 1 -hour yoga classes (12 weeks of 2 classes 
per week), plus a $30 gift card to Trader Joes for each assessment attended ($30 x 2 assessments = total of $60 
in gift cards).  
 
21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH  TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
Principal Investigator:  Erik Groessl, Ph.D.  
Dr. Erik Groessl has a Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology and has conducted research at UCSD and the VA for over 12 years. He has conducted and published yoga research at the VA San Diego and has extensive experience with health measurement.  
Erik Grossel, Ph.D. is a psychologist and a faculty member in the Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, UCSD.  
Dr. Groessl will assist in overall study administration, oversee data collection, and perform analysis and report writing.  
 
Co-Investigator: Crystal Park, Ph.D. 
Dr. Crystal Park  is a Psychologist who has done extensive yoga research. Dr. Park will assist in all phases of the study 
design, implementation, analysis and interpretation. In year one of the project, Dr. Park will work closely with PI Groessl 
and staff to assist in successful launch. She will travel to San Diego to meet with the study team. In years two and three, 
Co-I Park will assist in interpretation and preparation of new grant proposals. Throughout the project, Dr. Park will have 
regular conference calls with the study team and be available for discussing issues and problems as they arise.  
 Project Coordinator – Danielle Casteel has a M.A. in Psychology (with an emphasis in Phys ical and Mental Health) from 
San Diego State University - May, 2015.  She has been working in human subjects research for 4 years and has experience 
providing informed consent, conducting participant assessments, data entry, data cleaning, and data analysi s. 
 
Site Principal Investigator: Dr. Ian Fowler, MD   
Dr. Fowler is t he Director of the Pain Management Center at Naval Medical Center, San Diego  
(NMCSD). He will serve as the site Principal Investigator at NMCSD . He will work closely with the Wellness prog ram at 
NMCSD, to screen and refer patients to the study.  He will assist with obtaining military IRB approval and conducting all 
aspects of research and  at NMCSD.  
 
Dr. Douglas Chang, MD, PhD , Co- Investigator is Chief of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitatio n and Assistant 
Professor in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at the University of California San Diego. He also has a PhD in bioengineering from UCSD. Dr. Chang is a researcher and clinician who specializes in orthopedic surgery of the spine, 
and tre atment of chronic low back pain. Dr. Chang will advise the research team concerning diagnostic/screening and 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 15  inclusion/exclusion criteria issues, and will assist with screening examinations as needed. He will meet with the research 
team on a regular basis and will contribute to the dissemination of results, and subsequent preparation for a full -scale R01 
study. 
 
Qualitative Expert:  Samantha Hurst, PdD, MA  received her Ph.D. in Biological Anthropology from the University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville and did her Post -Doctoral Fellowship training as a Medical Anthropologist in the Alcohol Research 
Center at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla. Dr. Hurst has extensive experience conducting qualitative interviews 
and analyzing qualitative data.    
Consultant:  Laura Schmalzl, Ph.D.  Laura Schmalzl received her Ph.D. in Cognitive Science from Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia.  Additionally, 
her contribution to the current project as a co-investigator is the combination of clinical, scientific, and Yoga related 
trainings. Laura trained and practiced as a Clinical Neuropsychologist, followed by a PhD and Post- doctoral work in 
Cognitive Neuroscience. In addition, she is a Yoga Alliance Registered Yoga Teacher (500-hour level). 
 
Yoga Instructor / Yoga Instru ctor Trainer: Camilla Sinclair  
Camilla Sinclair, RYT 500 is  a certified yoga instructor  who has been practicing yoga for over 16 years and has over 8 
years of teaching experience. She taught the VA Yoga for CLBP for over 5 years and helped design the inter vention. Ms. 
Sinclair will assist Dr. Schmalzl and Bettey Michalewicz with adapting the intervention in Phase 2 of the study based on 
results from Phase I. She will also assist with training instructors for the active yoga program.  
 
 
 
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Von Korff M, Saunders K. The course of back pain in primary care. Spine. Dec 15 1996;21(24):2833 -
2837; discussion 2838-2839. 
2. Guo HR, Tanaka S, Halperin WE, Cameron LL. Back pain prevalence in US industry and estimates of 
lost workdays. Am J Public Health. Jul 1999;89(7):1029-1035. 
3. Andersson GB. Epidemiological features of chronic low-back pain. Lancet. Aug 14 
1999;354(9178):581-585. 
4. Vallfors B. Acute, subacute and chronic low back pain: clinical symptoms, absenteeism and working 
environment. Sca ndinavian journal of rehabilitation medicine. 1985;11:1-98. 
5. Currie SR, Wang J. Chronic back pain and major depression in the general Canadian population. Pain. 
Jan 2004;107(1-2):54-60. 
6. Sullivan MJ, Reesor K, Mikail S, Fisher R. The treatment of depression in chronic low back pain: 
review and recommendations. Pain. Jul 1992;50(1):5-13. 
7. Manchikanti L, Pampati V, Beyer C, Damron K, Barnhill RC. Evaluation of psychological status in 
chronic low back pain: comparison with general population. Pain physician. Apr 2002;5(2):149-155. 
8. Thompson JW, Bower S, Tyrer SP. A double blind randomised controlled clinical trial on the effect of 
transcutaneous spinal electroanalgesia (TSE) on low back pain. European journal of pain (London, 
England). Sep 6 2007. 
9. Luo X, Pietrobon R, Sun SX, Liu GG, Hey L. Estimates and patterns of direct health care expenditures 
among individuals with back pain in the United States. Spine. Jan 1 2004;29(1):79-86. 
10. Knox J, Orchowski J, Scher DL, Owens BD, Burks R, Belmont PJ. The i ncidence of low back pain in 
active duty United States military service members. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). Aug 15 2011;36(18):1492-1500. 
11. Roy TC. Diagnoses and mechanisms of musculoskeletal injuries in an infantry brigade combat team 
deployed to Afghanistan evaluated by the brigade physical therapist. Mil Med. Aug 2011;176(8):903-908. 
12. Kang HK, Mahan CM, Lee KY, Magee CA, Murphy FM. Illnesses among United States veterans of the 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 16 Gulf War: a population -based survey of 30,000 veterans. Journal of occupation al and environmental 
medicine / American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. May 2000;42(5):491- 501. 
13. Patzkowski JC, Rivera JC, Ficke JR, Wenke JC. The changing face of disability in the US Army: the 
Operation Enduring Freedom and Operat ion Iraqi Freedom effect. The Journal of the American 
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 2012;20 Suppl 1:S23- 30. 
14. McGeary D, Moore M, Vriend CA, Peterson AL, Gatchel RJ. The evaluation and treatment of comorbid pain and PTSD in a military setting: an over view. Journal of clinical psychology in medical settings. 
Jun 2011;18(2):155- 163. 
15. Spelman JF, Hunt SC, Seal KH, Burgo- Black AL. Post deployment care for returning combat veterans. 
J Gen Intern Med. Sep 2012;27(9):1200- 1209.  
16. Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V , et al. Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: a joint clinical practice 
guideline from the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society. Ann Intern Med. Oct 2 2007;147(7):478- 491. 
17. Chou R, Huffman LH. Medications for acute and chronic low back pain: a review of the evidence for an American Pain Society/American College of Physicians clinical practice guideline. Ann Intern Med. Oct 
2 2007;147(7):505- 514. 
18. Chou R, Huffman LH. Nonpharmacologic therapies for acute and chronic low back pain: a review of the evidence for an APS/American College of Physicians clinical practice guideline. Ann Intern Med. Oct 2 2007;147(7): A A492- 504. 
19. Ananth S. Integrative healthcare for the military: a Samueli Institute/Department of Defense partnersh ip. Explore (New York, N.Y. Jul -Aug 2012;8(4):256- 257. 
20. Milano C. Less pain, lower costs: can integrative medicine do both? Managed care (Langhorne, Pa. Mar 2012;21(3):38- 40. 
21. Groessl EJ, Sklar M, Chang D. Yoga for Low Back Pain: A Review of Concepts  and Literature. In: 
Norasteh AA, ed. Low Back Pain 2. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech; 2012.  
22. Sherman KJ, Cherkin DC, Wellman RD, et al. A Randomized Trial Comparing Yoga, Stretching, and a Self-care Book for Chronic Low Back Pain. Arch Intern Med. Oct 24 2011.  
23. Tilbrook HE, Cox H, Hewitt CE, et al. Yoga for chronic low back pain: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. Nov 1 2011;155(9):569- 578. 
24. Groessl EJ, Weingart KR, Aschbacher K, Pada L, Baxi S. Yoga for Veterans with Chronic Low -Back 
Pain. Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New York, N.Y. Nov 2008;14(9):1123- 1129. 
25. Groessl EJ, Weingart KR, Johnson N, Baxi S. The benefits of yoga for women veterans with chronic low back pain. Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New York, N.Y. Sep 2012;18(9):832- 838. 
26. Yu W, Ravelo A, Wagner TH, et al. Prevalence and costs of chronic conditions in the VA health care system. Med Care Res Rev. Sep 2003;60(3 Suppl):146S -167S.  
27. Anderson G. The epidemiology of spinal disorders. In: Frymoye r J, ed. The adult spine: principles and 
practice.  2nd ed. New York: Raven Press; 1997:93- 141. 
28. Burstrom K, Johannesson M, Diderichsen F. Swedish population health- related quality of life results 
using the EQ -5D. Qual Life Res. 2001;10(7):621- 635. 
29. Kosinski MR, Schein JR, Vallow SM, et al. An observational study of health- related quality of life and 
pain outcomes in chronic low back pain patients treated with fentanyl transdermal system. Current medical research and opinion. Jun 2005;21(6):849- 862. 
30. Murray CJ, Atkinson C, Bhalla K, et al. The state of US health, 1990- 2010: burden of diseases, injuries, 
and risk factors. JAMA. Aug 14 2013;310(6):591- 608. 
31. Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Martin BI. Back pain prevalence and visit rates: estimates from U.S. natio nal 
surveys, 2002. Spine. Nov 1 2006;31(23):2724- 2727. 
32. van Tulder MW, Assendelft WJ, Koes BW, Bouter LM. Spinal radiographic findings and nonspecific 
low back pain. A systematic review of observational studies. Spine. Feb 15 1997;22(4):427 -434. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 17 33. Von Korff M, Moore JC. Stepped care for back pain: activating approaches for primary care. Ann Intern 
Med. May 1 2001;134(9 Pt 2):911- 917. 
34. Lee D. Low back pain intervention: conservative or surgical? Journal of surgical orthopaedic advances. 
Winter 2003;12(4):200- 202. 
35. Kerns RD, Otis J, Rosenberg R, Reid MC. Veterans' reports of pain and associations with ratings of 
health, health -risk behaviors, affective distress, and use of the healthcare system. Journal of 
rehabilitation research and development. Se p-Oct 2003;40(5):371- 379. 
36. Lew HL, Otis JD, Tun C, Kerns RD, Clark ME, Cifu DX. Prevalence of chronic pain, posttraumatic stress disorder, and persistent postconcussive symptoms in OIF/OEF veterans: polytrauma clinical triad. Journal of rehabilitation r esearch and development. 2009;46(6):697- 702. 
37. Smeeding SJ, Bradshaw DH, Kumpfer K, Trevithick S, Stoddard GJ. Outcome evaluation of the Veterans Affairs Salt Lake City Integrative Health Clinic for chronic pain and stress -related depression, 
anxiety, and post -traumatic stress disorder. Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New 
York, N.Y. Aug 2010;16(8):823- 835. 
38. Di Iorio D, Henley E, Doughty A. A survey of primary care physician practice patterns and adherence to acute low back problem guidelines. Archives of family medicine. Nov -Dec 2000;9(10):1015- 1021. 
39. Freburger JK, Carey TS, Holmes GM. Physician referrals to physical therapists for the treatment of spine disorders. Spine J. Sep-Oct 2005;5(5):530- 541. 
40. Bovim G, Schrader H, Sand T . Neck pain in the general population. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). Jun 15 
1994;19(12):1307- 1309.  
41. Manchikanti L, Singh V, Datta S, Cohen SP, Hirsch JA, American Society of Interventional Pain P. Comprehensive review of epidemiology, scope, and impact of spinal pain. Pain physician. Jul -Aug 
2009;12(4):E35- 70. 
42. Guez M, Hildingsson C, Nilsson M, Toolanen G. The prevalence of neck pain: a population- based study 
from northern Sweden. Acta orthopaedica Scandinavica. Aug 2002;73(4):455- 459. 
43. Cote P, Cassidy JD , Carroll L. The factors associated with neck pain and its related disability in the 
Saskatchewan population. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). May 1 2000;25(9):1109- 1117. 
44. Cook EL, Harman JS. A comparison of health- related quality of life for individuals with men tal health 
disorders and common chronic medical conditions. Public health reports. Jan -Feb 2008;123(1):45- 51. 
45. Hurwitz EL, Carragee EJ, van der Velde G, et al. Treatment of neck pain: noninvasive interventions: results of the Bone and Joint Decade 2000 -2010 Task Force on Neck Pain and Its Associated Disorders. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). Feb 15 2008;33(4 Suppl):S123- 152. 
46. Kozma CM, Provenzano DA, Slaton TL, Patel AA, Benson CJ. Complexity of pain management among patients with nociceptive or neuropathic ne ck, back, or osteoarthritis diagnoses. Journal of managed 
care & specialty pharmacy. May 2014;20(5):455- 466b. 
47. Salo P, Ylonen- Kayra N, Hakkinen A, Kautiainen H, Malkia E, Ylinen J. Effects of long- term home -
based exercise on health -related quality of life in patients with chronic neck pain: a randomized study 
with a 1 -year follow -up. Disability and rehabilitation. 2012;34(23):1971- 1977. 
48. Crow EM, Jeannot E, Trewhela A. Effectiveness of Iyengar yoga in treating spinal (back and neck) pain: A systematic  review. International journal of yoga. Jan 2015;8(1):3- 14. 
49. Ward L, Stebbings S, Cherkin D, Baxter GD. Components and reporting of yoga interventions for musculoskeletal conditions: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Complementary therapies in medicine. Oct 2014;22(5):909- 919. 
50. Ward L, Stebbings S, Sherman KJ, Cherkin D, Baxter GD. Establishing key components of yoga interventions for musculoskeletal conditions: a Delphi survey. BMC complementary and alternative medicine. 2014;14:196.  
51. Guez M, Hildingsson C, Nasic S, Toolanen G. Chronic low back pain in individuals with chronic neck pain of traumatic and non- traumatic origin: a population -based study. Acta orthopaedica. Feb 
2006;77(1):132 -137. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 18  52. Briggs J. Let's Get "Pragmatic" A bout Pain NCCIH Research Blog.  Vol 2015. 
https://nccih.nih.gov/research/blog/pragmatic2013. 
53. NIH Health Care Systems Research Collaboratory. Informed consent. In Rethinking Clinical Trials: A 
Living Textbook of Pragmatic Clinical Trials. 2014: 
http://sites.duke.edu/rethinkingclinicaltrials/informed -consent- in-pragmatic -clinical -trials/ . Accessed 
June 5, 2015. 
54. Yang H, Haldeman S, Nakata A, Choi B, Delp L, Baker D. Work- related risk factors for neck pain in 
the US working population. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). Feb 1 2015;40(3):184-192. 
55. Grossman A, Nakdimon I, Chapnik L, Levy Y. Back symptoms in aviators flying different aircraft. 
Aviation, space, and environmental medicine. Jul 2012;83(7):702-705. 
56. Harrison MF, Coffey B, Albert WJ, Fischer SL. Night vision goggle-induced neck pain in military 
helicopter aircrew: a literature review. Aerospace medicine and human performance. Jan 2015;86(1):46-55. 
57. Shiri R, Frilander H, Sainio M, et al. Cervical and lumbar pain and radiological degeneration among 
fighter pilots: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Occupational and environmental medicine. Feb 
2015;72(2):145-150. 
58. Seal KH, Shi Y, Cohen G, et al. Association of mental health disorders with prescription opioids and 
high-risk opioid use in US veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan. Jama. Mar 7 2012;307(9):940-947. 
59. Goertz C, Marriott BP, Finch MD, et al. Military report more complementary and al ternative medicine 
use than civilians. Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New York, N.Y. Jun 2013;19(6):509-517. 
60. Pain Management Task Force. Providing a Standardized DoD and VHA Vision and Approach to Pain Management to Optimize the Care for Warriors and their Families. Office of The Army Surgeon General;2010. 
61. Strengthening Collaborations with the U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs: Effectiveness Research on Mind and Body Interventions. Washington DC: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health; February 2015 2015. 
62. Stiles M. Structural yoga therapy. San Francisco, CA: Red Wheel/Weisel; 2000.  
63. Singleton M. Yoga Body: The originsof modern posture practice. New York, NY: Oxford Universi ty 
Press; 2010. 
64. Iyengar BKS. Light on Yoga. Revised ed. New York, NY: Schocken 1979. 65. Luskin FM, Newell KA, Griffith M, et al. A review of mind/body therapies in the treatment of 
musculoskeletal disorders with implications for the elderly. Alternative therapies in health and medicine. Mar 2000;6(2):46-56. 
66. Granath J, Ingvarsson S, von Thiele U, Lundberg U. Stress management: a randomized study of 
cognitive behavioural therapy and yoga. Cognitive behaviour therapy. 2006;35(1):3-10. 
67. Smith C, Han cock H, Blake-Mortimer J, Eckert K. A randomised comparative trial of yoga and 
relaxation to reduce stress and anxiety. Complementary therapies in medicine. Jun 2007;15(2):77-83. 
68. Sharma VK, Das S, Mondal S, Goswampi U, Gandhi A. Effect of Sahaj Yoga on depressive disorders. 
Indian journal of physiology and pharmacology. Oct-Dec 2005;49(4):462-468. 
69. Brazier A, Mulkins A, Verhoef M. Evaluating a yogic breathing and meditation intervention for 
individuals living with HIV/AIDS. Am J Health Promot. Jan -Feb 2006;20(3):192-195. 
70. Michalsen A, Jeitler M, Brunnhuber S, et al. Iyengar yoga for distressed women: a 3- armed randomized 
controlled trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:408727. 
71. Cramer H, Lauche R, Hohmann C, et al. Randomized-controlled trial comparing yoga and home- based 
exercise for chronic neck pain. The Clinical journal of pain. Mar 2013;29(3):216-223. 
72. Stoller CC, Greuel JH, Cimini LS, Fowler MS, Koomar JA. Effects of sensory-enhanced yoga on 
symptoms of combat stress in deployed military personnel. Am J Occup Ther. Jan -Feb 2012;66(1):59-
68. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 19 73. Libby DJ, Reddy F, Pilver CE, Desai RA. The use of yoga in specialized VA PTSD treatment programs. 
International journal of yoga therapy. 2012(22):79- 87. 
74. Holliday SB, Hull A, Loc kwood C, Eickhoff C, Sullivan P, Reinhard M. Physical health, mental health, 
and utilization of complementary and alternative medicine services among Gulf War veterans. Med 
Care. Dec 2014;52(12 Suppl 5):S39- 44. 
75. Pence PG, Katz LS, Huffman C, Cojucar G. Delivering Integrative Restoration -Yoga Nidra Meditation 
(iRest(R)) to Women with Sexual Trauma at a Veteran's Medical Center: A Pilot Study. International journal of yoga therapy. Sep 2014;24:53- 62. 
76. Stankovic L. Transforming trauma: a qualitative feas ibility study of integrative restoration (iRest) yoga 
Nidra on combat -related post -traumatic stress disorder. International journal of yoga therapy. 
2011(21):23- 37. 
77. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory: an agentic perspective. Annu Rev Psychol. 2001;52:1- 26. 
78. Bandura A, Jeffery RW, Gajdos E. Generalizing change through participant modeling with self -directed 
mastery. Behav Res Ther. Jun 1975;13(2- 3):141- 152. 
79. Coulter H. Anatomy of Hatha Yoga: A Manual for Students, Teachers, and Practitioners. Hones dale, 
PA: Body and Breath, Inc.; 2001. 
80. Bowman AJ, Clayton RH, Murray A, Reed JW, Subhan MM, Ford GA. Effects of aerobic exercise training and yoga on the baroreflex in healthy elderly persons. Eur J Clin Invest. May 1997;27(5):443-449. 
81. Cowen VS. Functional fitness improvements after a worksite -based yoga initiative. Journal of 
bodywork and movement therapies. Jan 2010;14(1):50- 54. 
82. Mandanmohan, Jatiya L, Udupa K, Bhavanani AB. Effect of yoga training on handgrip, respiratory pressures and pulmona ry function. Indian journal of physiology and pharmacology. Oct 
2003;47(4):387- 392. 
83. Tracy BL, Hart CE. Bikram yoga training and physical fitness in healthy young adults. Journal of 
strength and conditioning research / National Strength & Conditioning A ssociation. Mar 
2013;27(3):822- 830. 
84. West J, Otte C, Geher K, Johnson J, Mohr DC. Effects of Hatha yoga and African dance on perceived stress, affect, and salivary cortisol. Ann Behav Med. Oct 2004;28(2):114- 118. 
85. Groessl EJ, Schmalzl L, Mazzi M, Isz ak F. Yoga for Low -Income Older Adults: Silver Age Yoga. J 
Yoga Phys Ther. 2013;3(1). 
86. University of Dundee. The PRECIS -2 tool: Designing trials that are fit for purpose. BMJ. 2015 (in 
press);350.  
87. Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M, Oxman AD, et al. A pragmat ic-explanatory continuum indicator summary 
(PRECIS): a tool to help trial designers. J Clin Epidemiol. May 2009;62(5):464- 475. 
88. Patton MQ. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2002.  
89. Mayring P. Qualitative content analysis. Forum: Qualitative Social Research. 2000;1(2).  
90. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative health research. Nov 2005;15(9):1277- 1288. 
91. Potter WJ, Levine -Donnerstein D. Rethinking va lidity and reliability in content analysis. Journal of 
Applied Communication Research. 1999;27(3):258- 274. 
92. Saldaña J. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Los Angeles: Sage Publications; 2009. 
93. McCall T. Yoga as Medicine: The Yogic prescri ption for Health and Healing. New York, NY: Random 
House, Inc.; 2007.  
94. Danhauer SC, Mihalko SL, Russell GB, et al. Restorative yoga for women with breast cancer: findings from a randomized pilot study. Psychooncology. Apr 2009;18(4):360- 368. 
95. Danhaue r SC, Tooze JA, Farmer DF, et al. Restorative yoga for women with ovarian or breast cancer: 
findings from a pilot study. Journal of the Society for Integrative Oncology. Spring 2008;6(2):47 -58. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 20 96. Mustian KM, Sprod LK, Janelsins M, et al. Multicenter, ran domized controlled trial of yoga for sleep 
quality among cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. Sep 10 2013;31(26):3233- 3241. 
97. Peppone LJ, Janelsins MC, Kamen C, et al. The effect of YOCAS(c)(R) yoga for musculoskeletal 
symptoms among breast cancer survivors on hormonal therapy. Breast cancer research and treatment. Apr 2015;150(3):597- 604. 
98. Kanaya AM, Araneta MR, Pawlowsky SB, et al. Restorative yoga and metabolic risk factors: the Practicing Restorative Yoga vs. Stretching for the Metabolic Syndrome (PRYSM S) randomized trial. 
Journal of diabetes and its complications. May -Jun 2014;28(3):406- 412. 
99. Corey SM, Epel E, Schembri M, et al. Effect of restorative yoga vs. stretching on diurnal cortisol dynamics and psychosocial outcomes in individuals with the me tabolic syndrome: the PRYSMS 
randomized controlled trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology. Nov 2014;49:260- 271. 
100. Eastman -Mueller H, Wilson T, Jung AK, Kimura A, Tarrant J. iRest yoga -nidra on the college campus: 
changes in stress, depression, worry, and mindf ulness. International journal of yoga therapy. 
2013(23):15- 24. 
101. Miller RC, Schoomaker E. The iRest Program for Healing PTSD: A Proven- Effective Approach to 
Using Yoga Nidra Meditation and Deep Relaxation Techniques to Overcome Trauma. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger; 2015.  
102. Sherman KJ, Cherkin DC, Erro J, Miglioretti DL, Deyo RA. Comparing yoga, exercise, and a self -care 
book for chronic low back pain: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. Dec 20 2005;143(12):849- 856. 
103. Williams KA, Petronis  J, Smith D, et al. Effect of Iyengar yoga therapy for chronic low back pain. Pain. 
May 2005;115(1- 2):107- 117. 
104. Scientific approach to the assessment and management of activity -related spinal disorders. A 
monograph for clinicians. Report of the Quebec Task Force on Spinal Disorders. Spine. September 1987;12( 7 Suppl):S1- S59. 
105. Atkinson JH, Slater MA, Capparelli EV, et al. Efficacy of noradrenergic and serotonergic antidepressants in chronic back pain: a preliminary concentration- controlled trial. Jou rnal of clinical 
psychopharmacology. Apr 2007;27(2):135- 142. 
106. Atkinson JH, Slater MA, Wahlgren DR, et al. Effects of noradrenergic and serotonergic antidepressants on chronic low back pain intensity. Pain. Nov 1999;83(2):137- 145. 
107. Atkinson JH, Slat er MA, Williams RA, et al. A placebo -controlled randomized clinical trial of 
nortriptyline for chronic low back pain. Pain. Jun 1998;76(3):287- 296. 
108. Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore. Mar 1994;23(2):129- 138. 
109. Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd SL, Schein J, Mendoza TR, Cleeland CS. Validity of the brief pain inventory for use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncancer pain. The Clinical journal of pain. Sep-
Oct 2004;20(5):309- 318. 
110. Roland M, Fairbank J. The Roland- Morris Disability Questionnaire and the Oswestry Disability 
Questionnaire. Spine. Dec 15 2000;25(24):3115- 3124. 
111. Vernon H. The Neck Disability Index: state -of-the-art, 1991- 2008. J Manipulativ e Physiol Ther. Sep 
2008;31(7):491- 502. 
112. Radloff LS. The CES -D scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general population. 
Applied Psychological Measures. 1977;1:385–401. 
113. Andresen EM, Malmgren JA, Carter WB, Patrick DL. Screening  for depression in well older adults: 
evaluation of a short form of the CES -D (Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale). Am J 
Prev Med. Mar -Apr 1994;10(2):77- 84. 
114. Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, Steer RA. An inventory for measuring clinical anxi ety: psychometric 
properties. J Consult Clin Psychol. Dec 1988;56(6):893- 897. 
115. Fydrich T, Dowdall D, Chambless DL. Reliability and validity of the Beck Anxiety Inventory. J Anxiety 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 21  Disord. 1992;6:55 -61. 
116. Jenkinson C, Layte R, Jenkinson D, et al. A shorter form health survey: can the SF- 12 replicate results 
from the SF -36 in longitudinal studies? Journal of public health medicine. Jun 1997;19(2):179-186. 
117. Lorig K. Outcome measures for health education and other health care interventions. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications; 1996. 
118. Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir-Nash J, Steinberg AD. The fatigue severity scale. Application to patients 
with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Arch Neurol. Oct 1989;46(10):1121-1123. 
119. Pepper CM, Krupp LB, Friedberg F, Doscher C, Coyle PK. A comparison of neuropsychiatric 
characteristics in chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple sclerosis, and major depression. The Journal of 
neuropsychiatry and clinical neurosciences. Spring 1993;5(2):200-205. 
120. Sherman KJ, Eaves ER, Ritenbaugh C, Hsu C, Cherkin DC, Turner JA. Cognitive interviews guide 
design of a new CAM patient expectations questionnaire. BMC complementary and alternative medicine. 2014;14:39. 
121. Mayer TG, Kondraske G, Beals SB, Gatchel RJ. Spinal range of motion. Accuracy and sources of error 
with inclinometric measurement. Spine. Sep 1 1997;22(17):1976-1984. 
122. Rantanen T, Guralnik JM, Foley D, et al. Midlife hand grip strength as a predictor of old age disability. 
Jama. Feb 10 1999;281(6):558-560. 
123. Schellenberg KL, Lang JM, Chan KM, Burnham RS. A clinical tool for office assessment of lumbar 
spine stabilization endurance: prone and supine bridge maneuvers. American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation / Association of Academic P hysiatrists. May 2007;86(5):380-386. 
124. Hourani L, Bender R, Weimer B, Larson G. Comparative analysis of mandated versus voluntary 
administrations of post-deployment health assessments among Marines. Mil Med. Jun 2012;177(6):643-648. 
125. Sundin J, Fear NT, Iversen A, Rona RJ, Wessely S. PTSD after deployment to Iraq: conflicting rates, 
conflicting claims. Psychol Med. Mar 2010;40(3):367-382. 
126. Tanielian T, Jaycox LH, Schell TL, et al. Invisible Wounds of War. Summary and Recommendations for 
Addressing Psychological and Cognitive Injuries. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation; 2008. 
 
23. FUNDING SUPPORT FOR THIS STUDY  
Financial support for the study is pending NCCIH Council Review. This submission is part of the standard JIT 
process.  
 
24. BIOLOGICAL MA TERIALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
N/A 
 
25. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
N/A 
 
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
N/A 
 
27. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
None of the investigators have conflicts of interest with any aspect of the study.  
 
28. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTR UCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
N/A 
 
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 22  N/A 
 
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
N/A 
 
   
 
 
 