Protocol Template  Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-
0990   
 
 
Protocol #:  COMIRB 15 -0036  
Project Title:  Use of Ultrasonic Bone Scalpel in Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis – Randomized 
Clinical Trial      
Principal Investigator:  Sumeet Garg, MD  
Version Date:  7/6/201 5       
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :   
The primary purpose of this randomized trial is to compare the efficacy of an ultrasonic bone 
scalpel (or osteotome device) with standard  of care surgical instruments during posterior spin e 
fusion with instrumentation.  The primary outcome variable in this trial is estimated blood loss per 
spine level fused (EBL/level). Secondary outcome variables include the probability of meeting the 
intra operative blood transfusion criteria, incidence of adverse events, and incidence of surgical 
site infections . Subjects with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis undergoing planned posterior spinal 
fusion with instrumentation will be recruited from a single tert iary recruitment center for this 
trial.  
 
Primary Aim 1: Compare estimated blood loss per level fused  
 
Hypothesis 1: The average estimated blood loss per level fused will be significantly lower in the 
ultrasonic bone scalpel (USBS) group compared to the st andard of care group.  
 
Secondary Aim 1: Compare the incidence of adverse events in the two groups.  
 
Hypothesis 2: There will be no difference in the incidence of adverse events in the bone scalpel 
group compared to the standard of care group.  
 
Secondary Ai ms 2 -3: Compare the proportion of patients meeting intra -operative blood 
transfusion criteria in the two groups.  
 
Hypothesis 3: The proportion of subjects meeting the intra -operative blood transfusion criteria will 
be significantly lower in the bone scalpe l group compared to the standard of care group.  
 
II. Background and Significance :  
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis  (AIS) is a common spine deformity in children. In 
severe cases  posterior spinal fusion surgery  (PSF)  is indicated to correct the 
deformity and p revent curve progression . Due to the duration and invasiveness of 
this procedure , PSF is associated with high intraoperative blood loss.  On average, AIS 
patients typically lose 65 -150 mL per vertebral level during spinal fusion surgery. [1] 
With regard to total blood volume, AIS patients typically lose 25 -30% of their total 
blood volume during PSF. [1, 2] The percent of patients who receive an 
Protocol Template  Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 intraoperative transfusion during PSF surgery is variable, but has been reported as 
low as 20 -30% and as high as 50 -75%. [2-6] The amount transfused also widely varies 
and ranges from 1 -8 units of red blood cells. [2, 7] Minimizing  intraoperative blood 
loss (EBL) is of great importance  due to the association between increased blood loss 
and increased risk of postoperative complications .[8-10] 
The utilization of an FDA approved ultrasonic bone scalpel (USBS) may help 
decreas e EBL during PSF . The Misonix BoneScalpel® is a device that utilizes ultrasonic 
frequencies to “cut” through osseous structures. At the tip of the device is a blunt 
blade that vibrates longitudinally at a frequency of 22,500 times per second . This 
blunt, vibrating blade is selective be tween osseous tissue and softer,  connective 
tissue. Further, the tip is  irrigated by a sterile saline solution which helps to provide 
cooling and reduce the risk for thermal injury. [11, 12] This device has been used for 
various procedures in various specialties. It has been used in maxillofacial surgery in 
order to perform a more precise and controlled osteotomy. [13, 14] It has also been 
used in tumor resection and when performing surgery close to the spinal cord. [12, 
15-18]  
The literature surrounding the use of the USBS in pediatric spine surgery is more 
limited. Several retrospective studies cite the USBS as safe and effective for various 
procedures such as spinal decompression, posterior releases, posterior 
facetectomies, posterior osteotomies, and laminectomies. [16, 19-21] Bydon et al. 
(2014) reported that patients treated with the USBS showed a trend toward 
decreased complications. Bartley et al. (2014) observed a statistically significant 
difference in EBL between groups. Blood loss in the USBS group wa s 30-40% less 
than blood loss in the historical control group. The majority of studies involving 
pediatric spine surgery are retrospective in nature. The lack of randomization creates 
concern about potential for selection and/or indication bias. Therefore,  the purpose 
of this randomized trial is to compare the safety and efficacy of the USBS relative to 
standard of care instruments in a ped iatric population undergoing PSF .  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
No preliminary studies have been performed a t this institution. Please see 
the above section for studies performed at other institutions.  
 
IV. Research  Methods  not ony  
 
a. Outcome  Measure (s):   
 
Primary Clinical Outcome  
Estimated blood loss /level^ 
 
Secondary Clinical Outcomes  
Intraoperative  and postoper ative  complications (events that cause a deviation from routine 
care)^†‡ 
Probability of meeting blood transfusion criteria (see section )^† 
Procedure Time (first incision to close)^ 
 
Protocol Template  Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Demographics/ Covariates  (potential confounding variables)  
Age at surg ery* BMI percentile at surgery* 
Gender at surgery* Weight (kg) at surgery* 
Exposure to second hand smoke* Preoperative Lenke Classification* 
Preoperative major Cobb angle* Preoperative hemoglobin/hematocrit* 
Postoperative major Cobb angle†‡ Postoperati ve hemoglobin/hematocrit† 
Intraoperative use of intrathecal narcotics^ Donor hematocrit^ 
Vertebral levels fused^ Intraoperative use of antifibrinolytic^ 
 
Exploratory Variables  
Unplanned return to OR†‡ Surgical site infection‡ 
Procedure  Time^  
 
* Coll ected preoperatively or day of surgery (before surgery)  
^ Collected intraoperatively  
† Collected postoperatively: short term follow -up, during initial hospital stay  
‡ Collected postoperatively: long term follow -up, one year postoperative  
 
I. Description of Po pulation to be Enrolled :   
All patients with a diagnosis of Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis who are scheduled for spinal 
fusion surgery and meet the following criteria will be eligible to participate in the study : 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. 10-18 years  of age  
2. Diagnosis of AIS  
3. Scheduled for a posterior spinal fusion  (without Schwab Grade II or higher osteotomy ) 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Plan for a posterior column osteotomy  of Schwab Grade II or higher  
2. Prior spinal surgery  
3. MRI abnormalities (such as syrinx and/or chiar i malformations)  
4. Subjects with medical comorbidities (e.g. heart, lung, kidney disease)  
5. Subjects with bleeding diatheses  
6. Non-idiopathic etiology for scoliosis  
 
II. Study Design and Research Methods    
a. Power Analysis  
The purpose of this single blinded, randomize d, controlled, superiority trial is to compare 
the efficacy of an ultrasonic bone scalpel with standard of care surgical instruments 
during posterior spine fusion with instrumentation. The primary aim of this study is to 
compare differences in estimated bl ood loss per fusion level (EBL/level) between 
groups
 ). We aim to test the null hypothesis that the 
difference between groups is less than or equal to 0 (
 .  Based on a previous 
retrospective cohort study in a similar target populat ion[21], we anticipate the EBL/level 
in the proposed study will be 48 mL/level (±30) in the USBS group (
  and 72 
mL/level (±28) in the standard instrument group (
 . Although there are no 
universally established thresholds for defining a clinically meaningful difference in 
Protocol Template  Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 EBL/level, the investigators are confident that the 33% reducti on in blood loss per level 
observed in the previous study is representative of a clinically meaningful reduction in 
blood loss (
  or 
 . Based on a symmetric two sided, two stage 
group sequential design with O’Brien -Fleming stopping criteria and an alpha level of 0.05, 
we determined that a sample size of 62 subjects (31 subjects per group) would provide 
90% power to reject the null hypothesis of no difference between groups (See Trial 
Monitoring section for information about the stopp ing criteria). This estimate assumes a 
group difference of 24 mL/level and a standard deviation of ±28 in the standard 
instrument group and a standard deviation of ±30 in the USBS group. Assuming a dropout 
rate of approximately 15%, we intend to enroll 36 subjects per group to achieve the 
desired statistical power. The estimated dropout rate is based on previous studies in a 
similar patien t population, adolescents with idiopathic s coliosis.   
 
b. Subject Screening:  
All surgical patients under the care of two hi gh volume pediatric orthopedic 
surgeons will be screened for study eligibility. All patients who elect to undergo spinal 
surgery at Children’s Hospital Colorado under the care of the investigators of this study 
will be screened for study eligibility by the  research coordinator (research assistant). 
Patients who are determined to meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria from above will 
be approached by the study team . 
 
c. Enrollment and Consent:  
After a patient is determined to be eligible for study participat ion, they will be 
approached by the study team. Most often consent will be obtained at the preoperative 
appointment. The preoperative appointment occurs before surgery, at least a day prior 
to surgery. During this visit, patients and their families meet wi th members of the 
surgical team, nurses from the spine team, orthopedic research team personnel, and 
relevant members from hospital support departments. The study will be presented by a 
trained member of the research team who is listed under the COMIRB app roved 
personnel form (PI, Co -I, or research coordinator). Informed consent and assent will be 
obtained in this context. As patient schedules and preoperative appointments can vary, 
the timeline of obtaini ng consent will remain flexible. If a patient does n ot have a 
preoperative appointment or the study team is for some reason unable to meet with 
them during this time, the patient will be approached during an alternative preoperative 
appointment. If the patient cannot be approached during a preoperative visi t, the 
patient will be contacted via phone, email, or mail ahead of their surgical date by the 
surgeon and issued a copy of the consent/assent forms. They will be given contact 
information for any questions and concerns. If interested and willing to partic ipate in the 
study, an initialed and signed copy of the consent/assent form will be obtained before 
surgery. This method will be employed in order to allow the time for informed consent 
to occur as well as not to interfere with “on -time” start goals in the  operative room.  
Patients who elect to participate in the study will undergo the informed consent 
process. Assent will be obtained in one of two ways depending on the patient’s age and 
understanding. If the participant is 7 -12 years old, or if they are hav ing trouble 
understand the details of the study, they will read and sign a separate assent form. If the 
participant is aged 13 -17 years old, or if they understand completely the details of the 
study, they will initial and sign the consent form along with t heir parents, legal guardians, 
Protocol Template  Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 or legally authorized representative. The patient’s understanding of the protocol will be 
assessed by research team member who is obtain ing consent.  
 
d. Randomization  and Blinding : 
Patients will be randomized 1:1 into two diffe rent treatment groups using a bl ock 
randomization scheme. Using  the Proc Plan procedure within SAS 9 .4 (SAS Institute, Carey 
NC), b locks will be constructed based on surgeon and patient gender.  Each surgeon will 
have a randomization list generated, and pat ient assignment will be made after the 
informed consent process has been performed to the next assignment on the list. 
Randomization assignments will not be revealed to the study personnel until after the 
patient has been enrolled in the study so as not to  unduly bias the consent process.  
Blinded evaluators will be used to calculate the primary outcome variable of interest, 
estimated blood loss per level fused. All other study personnel, including the surgeons, 
will not be blinded to participant treatment assignment which is necessary to ensure the 
correct protocol is followed. Patients and their families will be blinded to study 
assignment to minimize the risk of assignment related study withdrawal.  Patients and 
their families will not have the assignment  revealed to them after the surgery as it will not 
affect their plan of care.  If desired , treatment allocation may be revealed at the final 
study visit at one year following surgery.  
 
e. Intraoperative Estimated Blood Loss  
Estimated blood loss will be deter mined by 3 different methods . The first and 
primary method  is to use  the estimated blood loss listed on the  cell saver  report . This 
measurement  is generated by the cell saver based on the blood collected . The other two 
methods determine blood loss through a calculation.  
  
Method 2:  
With this method, t he EBL measurements  will be based on the contents of the blood 
and fluid collection canisters  as well as the volume reports generated by the cell saver 
system . To ensure blinding, final levels of fluid bags an d canisters will be photographed by 
the study surgeon immediately after the procedure is complete . Photographs will be 
taken by the camera features from an iPhone 6. Photographs will be taken at a distance of 
two feet from the canisters and bags and such t hat the meniscus of the fluid is at eye -
level  with the lens . Photographs will be reviewed by blinded evaluators at two intervals, 
prior to the interim analysis and following final enrollment. Two blinded evaluators will be 
used for each measurement, and th eir measurements will be averaged for use in the final 
calculation.   
EBL will be cal culated in the following manner:  First, the total fluid volume will be 
calculated: T he volume of the contents of all of the blood and fluid canisters used during 
the cours e of the surgical procedure will be recorded  based on the photographs . To this 
we will add the cell saver intake fluid, taken from a report  generated by the cell saver 
system . Next, the total irrigation volume used during surgery will be calculated. The 
irrigation volume will be estimated as the difference in volume of the irrigation bag at 
surgery cut versus surgery close. For subjects in the USBS group, the total irrigation 
volume will also include the difference in volume of the USBS irrigation bag at su rgery cut 
versus surgery close. Estimated blood volume will be calculated as total fluid  volume 
minus irrigation volume.  
Protocol Template  Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
Method 3:  
To validate the above described method  2, the  study personnel will also use the 
same  method of calculated blo od loss as was  used  in a study by  Da Cunha et al  (2015) .[22] 
The blood loss calculation from  this study was adapted from the method proposed in 
Brechter et al  (1997) .[23] This method calculates blood loss  through the  following 
mathematical  model : 
 
EBL = [EBV*(Hb pre-Hb post)/Hb pre) + [Donor RBC normalized ] + [Cell Salvage RBC normalized ] 
 
Where:  
 EBV = Estimated Blood Volume = Patient Weight (kg) x 70 ml/kg  
Hb pre = preoperative patient Hemoglobin  
Hb post = postoperative Day One Patient Hemoglobin  
Donor RBC normalized  = [donor RBC volume]x[(donor Hct) /(Hct pre+Hct post)/2)]  
Cell Salvage RBC normalized  = [cell saver RBC volume]x[(cell saver Hct)/(Hct pre+Hct post)/2)]  
Hct pre = Preoperative Patient Hematocrit  
Hct post = Postoperatve Patient Hematocrit  
 
Patient’s weight will be measured the day of surgery. Hct pre and Hb pre will be  taken by the 
lead anesthesiologist prior to first incision through an ISTAT. Hct post and Hb post will be  
taken 12 -18 hours after the end of the procedure  through an ISTAT .  Donor  and cell saver  
Hct will be taken by the lead hematologist  before bags are sent up to the OR .  
 
f. Intraoperative Transfusion Guidelines  
Traditionally, CHCO does not have strict transfusion protocols for patients 
undergoing posterior spinal fusion surgery. Often these decisions are made at the 
discretion of the anes thesia provider in the operating room. This is due to the care 
involved and the differences between cases when caring for these incredibly complex 
patients. This is further complicated by differences in diagnosis, osteotomy procedures, 
and severity/flexibi lity of the scoliosis. Often in these complex surgeries, intangible 
variables such as estimated time remaining, perceived rate of blood loss, and trend of 
hematocrit levels all factor in to the decision. However, for this study, we have 
established  guideli nes for  determining the need for intraoperative transfusion . The study 
team feels comfortable with these guidelines because all enrolled patients in this study 
will have a consistent diagnosis of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, low rates of 
intraoperative  bleeding, and no complex osteotomies such as a vertebral column 
resection. Our guidelines are below:  
 
• Hematocrit will be checked every 30 minutes by the anesthesiologist  
• Hematocrit levels below 23%  will trigger a transfusion   
• Hematocrit levels between 23 -28% will trigger a transfusion if hypotension and/or 
tachycardia (>20% different from baseline) is present despite adequate fluid 
resuscitation  
 
g. Study Interventions  and Follow Up : 
Protocol Template  Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  After patients have enrolled in the study and been randomized to a treatmen t 
group, study interventions will take place. The above outcomes will be collected at three 
different time points: preoperatively, intraoperatively, and postoperatively. Depending on 
the treatment randomization assignment, patients will undergo surgery wit h either the 
powered ultrasonic bone scalpel or with standard of care orthopedic surgical tools such as 
curettes, rongeurs, or high -speed burrs. These tools will be used in either treatment 
group for superior and inferior facetectomies, as well as to aid e xposure of the pedicle for 
screw placement. All of these tools are commonly used at CHCO by facility pediatric 
orthopedic surgeons. Selection is most commonly made based on surgeon preference and 
familiarity. All surgeons involved in this study routinely u se the surgical instruments being 
investigated. They have all received training and have experience with these instruments.  
 Study follow up will occur postoperatively. Enrolled patients will return for their  
one month and one year  postoperative appointme nts with their spine surgeon as per 
their plan of care. No unique study interventions will take place, but the above 
postoperative outcomes will be collected from the medical records  by research 
personnel . All visits and collected data are considered to be  in line with the plan of care 
for these patients and not performed solely for research purposes. Interventions such as 
radiographs and laboratory samples are already performed for clinical purposes.  
 
III. Description, Risks and Justification of Proc edures and Data Collection Tools:  
a. Associated Risks and Justification of Study Intervention and Procedures  
The ultrasonic bone scalpel was approved by the FDA in May 2011 through 
application number K070313 for use in fragmentation and aspiration of hard and soft 
tissue in Orthopaedic surgery as well as a number of other specialties. The FDA found the 
safety profile of the device equivalent to an existing FDA approved device  with the same 
indications .  
Previous research has also validated the safety of the ultrasonic b one scalpel. 
Based on previous reports, risk for iatrogenic dural tears with the USBS is comparable to 
or less than the standard tools mentioned above. [13, 16, 18-20] Matsuoka et al. 
acknowledged the device as good for preserving surrounding soft tissue during bone 
dissection. [17] Concern for thermal injury appears minimal with this device.  Brooks et al. 
found that the heat generated by ultrasonic tools in cadaver bone did not differ from 
previously reported  temperatures generated by high speed drills and also credits the 
irrigation system with reducing potentially high temperatures that could be produced 
from ultrasonic devices. [24] Hu et al. cited one instance of dural tear associated with 
thermal injury, however also suggests th at the USBS, if used properly, can decrease the 
risk of soft tissue injury. The authors of this study recommended not allowing the blade to 
sit too long in one position to avoid thermal injury. [20] One study comparing 
laminectomy procedures with and without the USBS on an ovine model found no 
evidence of thermal injury, attributing the irrigation system with the ability to adequately 
cool surrounding tissues during osteo tomies. [12]  
Research shows the USBS to be a safe alternative to historically standard tools 
with the potential for reduced blood loss ( see section II. Background and Significance) . 
Both methods are common ly employed by pediatric spine surgeons at CHCO for 
performing a variety of orthopedic procedures, including the procedures used in this 
study. Below is a table summarizing incidence of dural tear  associated with the USBS in 
spinal surgery reported in prev ious studies.   
Protocol Template  Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  All other study interventions and procedures (such as hospital visits, radiographic 
analysis, and laboratory procedures) are already performed by the physician care team as 
part of a surgical patient’s normal plan of care. Data collected fr om these interventions 
will be extracted from CHCO’s electronic medical record system.  
 
 
 
 
Author  Year  Surgical Use  Number  Age (year)  Dural Tear  
in USBS  Dural Tear in 
Non -USBS  
Al-Mahfoudh et al. [16] 2014  osteotomy, laminoplasty  62 Not Provided  1 (1.6%)  N/A 
Matsuoka et al. [17] 2012  recapping 
hemilamino plasty  33 4-74 0 N/A 
Bydon et al. [18] 2014  spinal decompression  30 8-19 3 (30%)  9 (45%)  
Bydon et al. [19] 2013  spinal decompression in 
achondroplastic patients  337 41-78  5 (5.7%)  9 (3.6%)  
Hu et al. [20] 2013  osteotomy  128 12-85 11 (8.6%)  N/A 
 
b. Data Collection Tools  
Study data will be collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture). REDCap is a secure web application designed to support data capture for 
research studies, providing user -friendly web -based case report forms, real -time data 
entry validation (e.g. for data types and range checks), audit trails and a de -identified d ata 
export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). The 
system was developed by a multi -institutional consortium which includes University of 
Colorado –Denver and was initiated at Vanderbilt University. The database is hosted a t the 
University of Colorado –Denver Development and Informatics Service Center (DISC), which 
will be used as a central location for data processing and management. REDCap data 
collection projects rely on a thorough study -specific data dictionary defined in  an iterative 
self-documenting process by all members of the research team with planning assistance 
from the DISC. This iterative development and testing process results in a well -planned 
data collection strategy for individual studies. REDCap also include s a powerful tool for 
building and managing online surveys. The research team can create and design surveys 
in a web browser and engage potential respondents using a variety of notification 
methods. REDCap is flexible enough to be used for a variety of typ es of research and 
provides an intuitive user interface for database and survey design and data entry.  
 
c. Potential Scientific Problems : 
One potential scientific problem in this study has to do with the quantification of 
estimated blood loss. Past literature  has revealed this measurement to be variable. [2, 25] 
We hope to overcome this problem by strictly adhering to  the EBL collection protocol 
outlined above. Two research coordinators will take measurements and their 
measurements will be averaged for a final EBL. In this way, although the measurement is 
prone to misclassification, we anticipate misclassification to b e non -differential.  A 
calculated blood loss will be performed to attempt to find reproducibility between the 
two types of measurements and reduce potential bias. Furthermore, the research 
assistants, who will be performing EBL measurements and calculation s, will be blinded.  
Protocol Template  Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 A second potential scientific problem could be obtaining 72 study subjects (36 for 
each group) to consent and enroll in the study protocol. Between the two protocol 
surgeons, approximately 80 patients with AIS undergo PSF each year. Thi s population is 
actively involved in research at this institution and study personnel have been very 
successful in the past recruiting this patient population for research purposes. Based on 
the enrollment success rate of a current randomized clinical tria l, the authors expect 80% 
of patients who are approached regarding this study to consent for participation. This 
requires 90 eligible subjects to be approached in order to reach the enrollment goal of 72. 
As such, it is expected that enrollment is complete d within 2 years of study approval.  
Finally, as this study involves long -term follow -up, there is potential for subjects to 
become lost to follow -up. To accommodate this, our enrollment goal factors in a 10% 
dropout. For subjects who are lost to follow -up, two certified letters will be sent two 
week apart following the first missed clinic visit.  If there is no response, the subject will 
be contacted twice by phone.  If study staff is unable to contact the subject, they will be 
considered lost to follow -up. 
 
d. Data Analysis Plan  
An intent to treat analysis of all randomized subjects will be performed. Descriptive 
statistics will be used to compare the distribution of demographics and clinical 
characteristics in the two groups. Baseline covariates significantl y different between 
groups will be considered as potential confounding variables in subsequent statistical 
models. The primary aim of this study is to compare differences in estimated blood loss 
per fusion level (EBL/level) between the USBS and standard of  care groups 
(
 ). We aim to test the null hypothesis that the difference 
between groups is less than or equal to 0(
 ). An independent sample t -test or 
multiple variable linear regression analysis, as appropriate, will be used to compare total 
EBL/level in the two study groups. For the secondary outcome variables, Chi -square tests 
will be used to compare differences in the categorical variables (the risk of adverse 
events, proportion of subjects meeting the intra -operative blood transfusion criteria) 
between  the groups. Independent sample t -tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests will be used 
to compare differences in the continuous variables (operative time, post -operative length 
of stay, and intraoperative irrigation volume).  
 
e. Trial Monitoring/Human Subjects Resea rch Consideration  
Data Safety and Quality - All data will be collected and stored in a R EDCap database. 
Access to the d atabase  will be restricted to investigators involved the study protocol per 
study personnel section of the COMIRB protocol application an d/or the study delegation 
of duties log. Photographs obtained during surgery will be de -identified, assigned an 
appropriate study ID and will be stored on a secure departmental server that is managed 
by the IT department at Children’s Hospital Colorado. Th e study coordinators will review 
data stored in the REDCap database on an ongoing basis. Potential outliers and/or 
biologically implausible data points will be identified and reviewed on an individual basis 
with the Principal Investigator.  
 
Safety Monitor ing – Based on the advice of our clinical trial study design consultant, Dr. 
John Kittelson, a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will review the safety and 
efficacy of the study. The DMSB will consist of an orthopaedic surgeon not directly 
Protocol Template  Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 involved in th e study , an administrator, an anesthesiologist not involved in the study,  
and an independent biostatistician. The DSMB will meet a minimum of  three times. 
During the first meeting  (open session), the progress of the study will be reviewed and 
any issues re garding safety, study feasibility, and/or protocol compliance will be 
discussed. This meeting will occur 1 month after the enrollment of the first study subject. 
The second meeting  (closed)  will occur after 50% of the study enrollment has been 
achieved . Prior to this meeting, the investigators will send a clean, unblinded dataset to 
the independent biostatistician that includes information regarding the primary clinical 
outcome of interest, estimated blood loss per level fused. This dataset will be used to 
determine whether any of the study stopping thresholds has been met (see 
Decision/Stopping Criteria below). The DSMB will meet a minimum of one additional 
time  once 100% of the study enrollment has been achieved. Similarly, a clean , unblinded  
dataset will be sent to the statistician to determine whether the decision thresholds 
have been achieved (see Decision/Stopping Criteria below). Although unlikely, 
additional, emergent meetings will be s cheduled as needed. The f ormation of the DSMB 
and documentation of  DSMB related meetings will be done in accordance with CHCO’s  
DSMB  policy . See DSMB Charter and DSMB Reporting Form for additional information . 
 
Safety monitoring will also be performed on ongoing basis by the PI and members of the 
study team. All adverse events will be submitted  to the DSMB and will be reported to 
COMIRB within 5 business days.  
 
Decision/Stopping Criteria - This study will utilize a two -stage, group sequential design to 
monitor study progress. Under the alternative hypothesis, the two sided  rejection 
boundaries at Stage 1 and Stage 2 were calculated according to the Obrien -Fleming 
method (see Figures below). After 16 subjects per group have been enrolled, an interim 
analysis will be performed (Stage 1). If the standardized Z statistic repres enting the 
difference in estimated blood loss 
 ) exceeds the upper or 
lower rejection boundary (Z > 2.7965 or Z < - 2.7965), the trial will be stopped. Assuming 
the standard deviation of blood loss per level fused is 30 in the USBS group and 28 in the 
standard group, the trial will stop if 
  29.2 mL/level or 
  <-29.2 mL/level. If blood loss 
per level fused does not exceed the rejection bounds, the trial will continue until a total 
of 62 subjects have been enrolled (31 per group). At stage 2, the standardized Z statistic 
will be compared to the rejection bounds (Z>1.9774 or Z< -1.9774). Assuming the 
standard deviation of blood loss per level fused is 30 in the USBS group and 28 in the 
standard group, we will conclude the USBS  is superior to standard care instrument if  
 mL/level or inferior to standard care instruments if 
  mL/level.  
Sample size and stopping criteria were estimated using the RCTDesign package, R 3.1.2 
(R Foundation of Statistical Compu ting, Vienna, Austria) . 
 
Summary of Decision Criteria - The decision criteria and potential corresponding 
conclusions are described in the table below.  
 
  Stop For Harm  Stop for Benefit  
Stage  Enrollment  
 † 95% CI  pvalue*  
 † 95% CI  pvalue**  
Stage 1  50%  -27.1 -42.2 to -8.55  0.005  27.1  8.55 to 42.2  0.005  
Protocol Template  Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Stage 2  100%  -13.9  -29.01 to 0.00  0.05  13.9  0.00 to 29.01  0.050  
*Probability reject 
  
**Probability reject 
  
†Bias adjusted mean  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Plots of Rejection Boundaries (Red Lines) at Stage 1 and Stage 2 Relative to a 
Fixed Sample Design (Black Lines). 1.A Displays Rejection Boundaries on the Z Scale 1.B 
Displays Rejection Boundaries in Terms of EBL/level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Probability of Stopping at the Interim Ana lysis  To aid in the interpretation  of the stopping 
criteria, the probability of stopping the trial at the interim analysis (for benefit or harm) , 
under hypothetical scenarios in which theta is known,  has been estimated in the table 
below.  
 
True 
  Probability of 
Stopping for Harm  Probability of Stopping 
for Benefit  
A
. 
B
. 
Protocol Template  Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 -29 0.4930  0.0000  
-14 0.0729  0.0000  
0 0.0050  0.0050  
14 0.0000  0.0729  
29 0.0000  0.4930  
 
 
 
 
Power/Type I Error Rate The power and type I error rate associated with this group 
sequ ential design , under hypothetical situations in which theta is known,  is outlined in the 
table below.  
 
True 
  Power for Lower 
Rejection Boundary  Power for Upper 
Rejection Boundary  
-29 0.975  0.000  
-14 0.470  0.000  
0* 0.025  0.0250  
14 0.000  0.470  
29 0.000  0.975  
*Under null hypothesis (
 , the design maintains a 
type I error rate of 0.05.  
 
f. Summarize Knowledge to be Gained  
This study will help to identify any potential advantages and disadvantages with 
regard to the use of an ultr asonic bone scalpel used in posterior spinal fusion surgery for 
patients diagnosed with Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis. A better understanding of the 
intraoperative outcomes such as estimated blood loss and surgical time compared 
between the two groups co uld reveal if one technique is able to provide significantly 
better results during surgery. If one method is determined to be more effective or 
efficient than the other, then it could have a positive impact on spinal fusion surgery. 
Decreased blood loss co uld lead to decreased need of intraoperative and postoperative 
transfusions and the risks associated with them. Further, shorter operative time would 
decrease wound exposure time, which could have an effect on postoperative 
complications. Decreased operati ve time could also decrease the financial burden of 
surgery.  
 
V. References  
 
1. Shapiro, F. and N. Sethna, Blood loss in pediatric spine surgery.  Eur Spine J, 2004. 13 Suppl 
1: p. S6 -17. 
2. Thompson, M.E., et al., Predicting excessive hemo rrhage in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis 
patients undergoing posterior spinal instrumentation and fusion.  Spine J, 2014. 14(8): p. 
1392 -8. 
Protocol Template  Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 3. Diab, M., et al., Use and outcomes of wound drain in spinal fusion for adolescent 
idiopathic scoliosis.  Spine (Ph ila Pa 1976), 2012. 37(11): p. 966 -73. 
4. Koerner, J.D., et al., Blood loss during posterior spinal fusion for adolescent idiopathic 
scoliosis.  Spine (Phila Pa 1976), 2014. 39(18): p. 1479 -87. 
5. Yoshihara, H. and D. Yoneoka, National trends in spinal fusi on for pediatric patients with 
idiopathic scoliosis: demographics, blood transfusions, and in -hospital outcomes.  Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976), 2014. 39(14): p. 1144 -50. 
6. Yoshihara, H. and D. Yoneoka, Predictors of allogeneic blood transfusion in spinal fusion 
for pediatric patients with idiopathic scoliosis in the United States, 2004 -2009.  Spine (Phila 
Pa 1976), 2014. 39(22): p. 1860 -7. 
7. Yu, X., et al., Prediction of massive blood loss in scoliosis surgery from preoperative 
variables.  Spine (Phila Pa 1976), 20 13. 38(4): p. 350 -5. 
8. Jain, A., et al., Smaller body size increases the percentage of blood volume lost during 
posterior spinal arthrodesis.  J Bone Joint Surg Am, 2015. 97(6): p. 507 -11. 
9. Carreon, L.Y., et al., Non-neurologic complications following su rgery for adolescent 
idiopathic scoliosis.  J Bone Joint Surg Am, 2007. 89(11): p. 2427 -32. 
10. Minhas, S.V., et al., Assessing the Rates, Predictors, and Complications of Blood 
Transfusion Volume in Posterior Arthrodesis for Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis . Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976), 2015. 40(18): p. 1422 -30. 
11. Mixonix, BoneScalpel with SonicOne Technology , in Ultrasonic Osteosurgery , Misonix 
Surgical Devices.  
12. Sanborn, M.R., et al., Safety and efficacy of a novel ultrasonic osteotome device in an 
ovine mo del. J Clin Neurosci, 2011. 18(11): p. 1528 -33. 
13. Gilles, R., T. Couvreur, and S. Dammous, Ultrasonic orthognathic surgery: enhancements 
to established osteotomies.  Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg, 2013. 42(8): p. 981 -7. 
14. Gonzalez -Garcia, A., et al., Ultra sonic osteotomy in oral surgery and implantology.  Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod, 2009. 108(3): p. 360 -7. 
15. Sun, S., et al., Long -term outcomes of ultrasonic scalpel treatment in giant cell tumor of 
long bones.  Oncol Lett, 2014. 8(1): p . 145 -150.  
16. Al-Mahfoudh, R., et al., Applications of the ultrasonic bone cutter in spinal surgery --our 
preliminary experience.  Br J Neurosurg, 2014. 28(1): p. 56 -60. 
17. Matsuoka, H., et al., Recapping hemilaminoplasty for spinal surgical disorders usin g 
ultrasonic bone curette.  Surg Neurol Int, 2012. 3: p. 70.  
18. Bydon, M., et al., Spinal decompression in achondroplastic patients using high -speed drill 
versus ultrasonic bone curette: technical note and outcomes in 30 cases.  J Pediatr Orthop, 
2014. 34(8): p. 780 -6. 
19. Bydon, M., et al., Safety of spinal decompression using an ultrasonic bone curette 
compared with a high -speed drill: outcomes in 337 patients.  J Neurosurg Spine, 2013. 
18(6): p. 627 -33. 
20. Hu, X., D.D. Ohnmeiss, and I.H. Lieberman, Use of  an ultrasonic osteotome device in spine 
surgery: experience from the first 128 patients.  Eur Spine J, 2013. 22(12): p. 2845 -9. 
21. Bartley, C.E., T.P. Bastrom, and P.O. Newton, Blood Loss Reduction During Surgical 
Correction of Adolescent Idiopathic Scoli osis Utilizing an Ultrasonic Bone Scalpel.  Spine 
Deformity, 2014. 2(4): p. 285 -290.  
22. Da Cunha, R.J., et al., Intraoperative skull -femoral traction in posterior spinal arthrodesis 
for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: the impact on perioperative outcomes and health 
resource utilization.  Spine (Phila Pa 1976), 2015. 40(3): p. E154 -60. 
Protocol Template  Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 23. Brecher, M.E., T. Monk, and L.T. Goodnough, A standardized method for calculating blood 
loss.  Transfusion, 1997. 37(10): p. 1070 -4. 
24. Brooks, A.T., et al., Effect of an ultrasonic device on temperatures generated in bone and 
on bone -cement structure.  J Arthroplasty, 1993. 8(4): p. 413 -8. 
25. Adkins, A.R., et al., Accuracy of blood loss estimations among anesthesia providers.  AANA 
J, 2014. 82(4): p. 300 -6. 
 