Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -033 A(17)  
Approval date: 16 -Dec-2020   
 
 
 
 
MSK  PROTOCOL  COVER  SHEET  
 
A Phase 1/2 study of combination osimertinib and bevacizumab as treatment for patients with 
EGFR -mutant  lung cancers  
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Helena  Yu, MD/ Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065   
 
 
 
 
 
Page  1 of 47 

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -033 A(17)  
Approval date: 16 -Dec-2020  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  5 of 47  
  
 
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEM A ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 6 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ................................ ................................ .................  8 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ................................ ................................ ......................  8 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................ .. 9 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  9 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  10 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS ................................ ................................ ............  11 
6.0 CRITERIAFOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ...............  12 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ....................  12 
7.0 RECRUITMENT PLAN ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  12 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION ................................ ................................ ........................  13 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN ................................ ................................ .................  14 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ ....................  15 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 16 
12.0 CRITERIAFOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSES SMENT ........................  19 
13.0 CRITERIAFOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY ................................ ................................ ........  21 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  22 
15.0    RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES   24 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ ....... 24 
15.2 Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 25 
16.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT ISSUES ................................ ................................ ..........................  25 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ .........................  25 
16.2 Data and Safety Monitoring ................................ ................................ ..................  25 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ................................ ................................ ............. 26 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  27 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  ................................ ..........................  27 
17.2.1     ............................................................................................................................. ...... 29 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ .................  29 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  29 
20.0 APPENDICES ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  31 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -033 A(17)  
Approval date: 16 -Dec-2020  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  6 of 47  
 1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA 
 
Study  Title:  A Phase  1/2 study  of combination  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  as treatment  for 
patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung cancers  
Study  
Objectives:  Phase  1: 
Primary  Objective:   To determine  the maximum  tolerated  dose  of combination  
Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  in patients  with untreated  EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  
 
Phase  2: 
Primary  Objective:    Assess  the progression -free survival  at 12 months  of combination  
Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  in patients  with untreated  EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  
Secondary Objectives: 1) Measure overall response rate (CR+PR), 2) measure 
progression -free survival  3)measure  intracranial  progression -free survival  4) measure  
overall  survival  5) further  define  the toxicity  profile  of the combination  
 
Correlative  Studies:  
Objectives:  1) to identify  EGFR  T790M  in pre and post treatment  samples  and correlate  
with PFS on Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  2) perform  next-generation  sequencing  
based  mutation  testing  on tumors  before  treatment  and at progression.  
Patient  
Population:  Patients  with locally  advanced  or metastatic  lung adenocarcinomas  with a confirmed  
EGFR  mutation  not yet treated  with an EGFR  TKI. 
Number  of 
patients:  Phase 1: Maximum of 12 patients 
Phase 2: Maximum of 46 patients (including 6  from the phase 1) 
Inclusion  
Criteria:  All patients  must  have:  
• Written  informed  consent  
• Advanced  biopsy -proven  metastatic  non-small  cell lung cancer  
• Somatic  activating  mutation  in EGFR  
• No prior treatment  with an EGFR  TKI. 
• No prior treatment  with a VEGF  inhibitor.  
• Measurable (RECIST 1.1) indicator lesion not previously irradiated 
• Karnofsky  performance  status  (KPS)  ≥ 70% 
• Age >18 years  old 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  7 of 47  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Exclusion  
Criteria:  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -033 A(17)  
Approval date: 16 -Dec-2020  
 
 
Patients  are to be excluded  from the study  if they meet  any of the following  criteria:  
• Any contra -indications  to bevacizumab  as per the investigator’s  discretion.  
Possible  contra -indications  include  but are not limited  to recent  thromboembolic  
disease,  severe  uncontrolled  hypertension  (systolic  blood  pressure  >180 mmHg  
and/or  diastolic  blood  pressure  > 120mmHg),  cardiovascular  disease,  risk of 
bleeding,  hemorrhagic  brain  metastases,  history  of severe  proteinuria  (urine  
dipstick  ≥ 2+ or 24 hr urine  > 2gm/24hr))  
• Pregnant  or lactating  women  
• Any type of systemic  anticancer  therapy  (chemotherapy  or experimental  drugs)  
within  2 weeks  of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any major  surgery  within  4 weeks  of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any radiotherapy  within  1 week  of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any evidence  of clinically  significant  interstitial  lung disease  
• Any other  condition  that, in the opinion  of the investigator,  may compromise  the 
safety  of the patient,  or would  preclude  the patient  from successful  completion  
Study  drug:  Osimertinib  (also  known  as AZD9291) and bevacizumab  
 
 
 
 
Study  
Design:   
Phase  1: 
This portion  of the study  will assess  whether  combination  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  
given  at the doses  below  is safe and tolerable.  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  have  non- 
overlapping  toxicity  profiles  and we expect  that we will be able to utilize  the full doses  of 
both agents.  A 3+3 dose -escalation  design  will be utilized.  
 
Three  patients  will be enrolled  at a dose  level and assessed  for dose  limiting  toxicities  
(DLTs)  for 1 full cycle  (21 days).  Toxicity  will be graded  according  to NCI CTCAE  
version  4. If 2 or more  patients  develop  a DLT at dose  level 1, we will de-escalate  and 
utilize dose level -1.  If 2 or more patients develop a DLT at dose level -1, we will review 
toxicity  and consider  alternative  dosing  through  a protocol  amendment.  
 
The MTD (maximum tolerated dose)/recommended phase 2 dose will be the highest 
dose level at which <1 DLT is detected in the first cycle for 6 treated patients. If only 3 
patients are treated at a dose level being considered for the MTD, an additional 3 
patients  will be enrolled.  
 
Table  1: Dose  levels  
Dose  level Osimertinib  Bevacizumab  
-1 40mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
1 80mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
 
Phase  2: 
Once  the phase  1 portion   of the study  has been  completed,   patients   will be 
enrolled   in the phase  2 portion   of the single -arm  study  of Osimertinib   and 
bevacizumab.   A cycle  will be 21 days  in length.   Osimertinib   will be dosed  daily 
and bevacizumab   is dosed  once  every  3 weeks.  Response  to therapy   will  
initially   be assessed  by interval   imaging   every  3 cycles  of treatment   with CT 
scan  of the chest/abdomen/pelvis  with response  evaluated   by RECIST  1.1.   An 
additional   40 patients   (for a total  of 46) will be enrolled   at the MTD.  The six 
patients   treated   at the MTD in the phase  1 will be included   in the phase  2 study.  
 
Correlative  studies:  
Molecular   testing   will be performed   on archived   pre-treatment   tumor  specimens.  
A rebiopsy  at the time of clinical  progression  on EGFR  TKI will not be mandated  
per protocol,   but is typically   done  as per standard   of care.  
 
EGFR  T790M   is routinely   identified   in tumor  tissue  by several   standard   methods  
including   a mass  spectrometry   based  mutation   platform   (Sequenom),   locked  
nucleic   acid based  PCR  sequencing   or by next  generation   sequencing.   Our 
next-generation   sequencing   based  mutation   platform   (IMPACT)   will be 
performed   to compare  the molecular   alterations   in pre and post treatment  
specimens.  The sequencing   data will be analyzed   for base  mutations,  
insertions,   deletions,   copy number  alterations   and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
 
Page  8 of 47 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  9 of 47  
  
 
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
Phase  1: 
Primary  Objective:   To determine  the maximum  tolerated  dose  of combination  Osimertinib  and 
bevacizumab  in patients  with untreated  EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  
 
Phase  2: 
Primary  Objective:    Assess  the progression -free survival  at 12 months  of combination  Osimertinib  and 
bevacizumab  in patients  with untreated  EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  
Sec ondary  Objectives: 1) measure  overall  response  rate (CR+PR),  2) measure  progression -free 
survival  3) measure  intracranial  progression -free survival  4) measure  overall  survival  5) further  define  the 
toxicity  profile  of the combination  
 
Correlative  Studies:  
Objectives:  1) to identify  EGFR  T790M  in pre and post treatment  samples  2) perform  next- 
generation  sequencing  based  mutation  testing  on tumors  before  treatment  and at progression.  
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND  RATION  ALE 
 
EGFR -mutant  lung cancers  
Twenty  percent  of patients  with metastatic  lung adenocarcinoma  have  somatic  activating  mutations  in the 
epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  gene  (EGFR).  Patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung adenocarcinomas  have  a 
70% response  rate to first-line EGFR -TKI therapy  (erlotinib  or afatinib)  and a median  progression -free 
survival  of 9-12 months.(1)  First-line EGFR  TKI therapy  is superior  to cytotoxic  chemotherapy  and is 
recommended  as first-line treatment  for patients  with EGFR -mutant  
lung cancers.  All patients  will develop  resistance  to EGFR  TKI therapy  and clinical  progression.  The 
majority of patients acquire a second mutation, EGFR T790M,  as their dominant mechanism of 
resistance.(2)  
 
Third -generation  EGFR  TKIs 
There  are several  EGFR  T790M  inhibitors  in clinical  development  including  Osimertinib.(3)  These  agents  
were initially  tested  in the acquired  resistance  setting,  after progression  on first-line, first- generation  EGFR  
tyrosine  kinase  inhibitors.  The overall  response  rate to Osimertinib  in patients  who harbor  EGFR  T790M  in 
their lung cancers  is 61% and the overall  response  rate in all patients  was 
51%.  Osimertinib  inhibits  mutant  EGFR  selectively  over wild-type EGFR,  and avoids  significant  wild- type 
EGFR  toxicity.  The most  frequent  adverse  events  seen  with Osimertinib  in the phase  1 study  include  
diarrhea  (47%),  rash (40%),  nausea  (22%)  and decreased  appetite  (21%).  The side effect  profile  is mild 
and comparable  to what is seen  with erlotinib.  Treatment  with erlotinib  in BR.21  had an adverse  event  
profile  (all grades)  that included  fatigue  (79%),  rash (76%),  anorexia  (69%),  diarrhea  (55%),  and nausea  
(40%).  In contrast,  osimertinib  had an adverse  event  profile  (all grades)  that included  diarrhea  (47%),  rash 
(40%),  nausea  (22%),  anorexia  (21%),  and fatigue  (17%).   Osimertinib  received  accelerated  approval  in 
November  2015,  for the treatment  of patients  with NSCLC  with EGFR  T790M  mutation  who have 
progressed  on a previous  EGFR  TKI. The FDA approved  dose  of osimertinib  is 80mg  orally  once  daily.  
 
Due to its efficacy  and tolerable  side effect  profile,  Osimertinib  is beginning  evaluation  as first-line therapy  genomic   rearrangements   in all target   genes.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  10 of 47  
  
 
for patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung cancers  ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  FLAURA  is a first 
line study  randomizing  patients  to either  Osimertinib  versus  erlotinib  or gefitinib;  the primary  
endpoint  of the study  is progression  free survival.  In addition,  there  was a first line cohort  in the AURA  study  
of patients  who received  osimertinib  as first-line treatment  for metastatic  EGFR -mutant  lung cancer.  Interim  
data was presented  at ASCO  in 2015;  60 patients  were  treated.  The overall  response  rate was 73%.  The 
median  progression -free survival  was not yet reached,  but 72% of patients  (95%  CI 55%-84%)  were  
progression -free at 12 months.  
 
Use of VE GF inhibitors  in lung canc ers 
Rational  combinations  of targeted  therapies  have been  constantly  assessed  in order  to improve  patient  
outcomes.  Pro-angiogenesis  pathways  have been  an important  therapeutic  target  as they 
are essential  for tumor  growth  and metastases.  The best characterized  pro-angiogenesis  pathway  is 
vascular  endothelial  growth  factor  (VEGF)  signaling  pathway.  Several  studies  have  demonstrated  
improved  overall  survival  with the addition  of VEGF  inhibitors  to standard  cytotoxic  chemotherapies  in 
non-small  cell lung cancers.(4 -6) Recent  studies  have  combined  VEGF  inhibitors  (bevacizumab,  
ramucirumab  and nintedanib)   with first-line and second -line chemotherapy  and demonstrated  
improvements  in overall  survival.  Avastin  is approved  in non-small  cell lung cancer  for combination  use 
with cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  The FDA approved  dose  of bevacizumab  is 15mg/kg  given  once  every  3 
weeks.  
 
Preliminary  data/Feasibility  
EGFR  TKI and bevac  izumab  
The combination  of erlotinib  and bevacizumab  was first-tested  after progression  on first-line platinum  based  
therapy  in molecularly  unselected  patients.  These  studies  did not meet  their primary  endpoint  
but a subgroup  analysis  suggested  that in patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung cancer,  the combination  
of erlotinib  and bevacizumab  improved  progression  free survival  compared  to erlotinib  alone  (7, 8). Based  
on this data,  a phase  2 study  in Japan  randomized  untreated  patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung 
cancers  to erlotinib  or erlotinib  plus bevacizumab  with a primary  endpoint  of progression -free 
survival  (PFS).  The median  PFS was 16.0 months  on the combination  compared  to 9.7 months  with 
erlotinib  alone,  HR 0.54,  95% CI 0.36-0.79,  p=0.0015(9).  Higher  incidences  of hypertension,  bleeding  and 
proteinuria  were seen  in the patients  that received  bevacizumab  and erlotinib  compared  to erlotinib  alone.  
A separate  single -arm phase  2 was conducted  in Japan  that assess  the combination  of gefitinib  and 
bevacizumab  as first-line therapy  in patients  with advanced  NCLC  harboring  EGFR  mutations(10).  The 
objective  response  rate was 73.8%  and the median  PFS was 
14.4 months.  The PFS on the study  was 4 to 50 months  longer  with bevacizumab  and gefitinib  
compared  to historical  EGFR  TKI monotherapy(11 -14). Both studies,  erlotinib  plus bevacizumab  and 
gefitinib  plus bevacizumab,  treated  patients  with full, FDA-approved  doses  of both agents,  in large  
part due to their non-overlapping  toxicity  profiles.  
 
Innovation  
First-line Osimertinib  has the potential  to extend  progression  free survival  for patients  with EGFR - mutant  
lung cancers.  As the addition  of bevacizumab  to erlotinib  or gefitinib  appears  to significantly  improve  
outcomes,  the intuitive  next study  is to combine  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  in the first- line setting.  W e 
will perform  a phase  1/2 to further  assess  toxicity  and preliminary  efficacy  of osimertinib  and bevacizumab  
in the first line setting  in patients  with EGFR mutant  lung cancers.  Due to largely  non-overlapping  toxicity  
profiles,  we will treat patients  and full, FDA-approved  doses  of both agents  and allow  for a step-down  dose  
level -1 if the dose  level 1 is not well tolerated.  
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  11 of 47  
  
 
 
4.2 Design  
 
This is a phase  1/2 single  institution  study  of Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  in patients   with 
EGFR -mutant  lung cancer.  
 
 
 
 
 
Key Eligibility  
Untreated  Metastatic  EGFR+  NSCLC  
No prior treatment with  EGFR  TKI 
No contraindications to  bevacizumab  
 
 
Phase  1: 
3+3 dose  escalation  design  
2 dose  levels  Dose  level  -1: Osimertinib  40mg  daily  
Maximum  accrual  = 12  Bevacizumab  15mg/kg  q3 weeks  
Dose  level  1: Osimertinib  80mg  daily  
Bevacizumab  15mg/kg  q3 Weeks  
 
Phase  2: 
Use MTD  determined  during  phase  1 
Primary  endpoint:  PFS @ 12 months  
Maximum  accrual=  46 (including  6 from  phase  1) 
 
 
 
4.3 Intervention  
 
Phase  1: 
This portion  of the study  will assess  whether  combination  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  given  at the 
doses  below  is safe and tolerable.  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  have  non-overlapping  toxicity  
profiles  and we expect  that we will be able to utilize  the full doses of both agents.  A 3+3 dose - 
escalation  design  will be utilized.  
 
Three  patients  will be enrolled  at a dose  level and assessedfor dose  limiting  toxicities  (DLTs) for 1 
full cycle  (21 days).  Toxicity  will be graded  according  to NCI CTCAE  version  4. If 2 or more  patients  
develop  a DLT at dose  level 1, we will de-escalate  and utilize  dose  level -1. If 2 or more  patients  
develop  a DLT at dose  level -1, we will review  toxicity  and consider  alternative  dosing  through  a 
protocol  amendment.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  12 of 47  
  
 
The MTD (maximum tolerated dose)/recommended phase 2 dose will be the highest dose level at 
which  <1 DLT is detected  in the first cycle  for 6 treated  patients.  If only 3 patients  are treated  at a 
dose level being considered for the MTD, an additional 3 patients will be enrolled. 
 
 
Table  1: Dose  levels  
 
Dose  level Osimertinib  Bevacizumab  
-1 40mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
1 80mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
 
Phase  2: 
Once  the phase  1 portion  of the study  has been  completed,  patients  will be enrolled  in the phase  2 
portion  of the single -arm study  of Osimertinib  and bevacizumab.  A cycle  will be 21 days in length.  
Osimertinib  will be dosed  daily and bevacizumab  is dosed  once  every  3 weeks.  Response  to therapy  
will initially  be assessed  by interval  imaging  every  3 cycles  of treatment  with CT scan  of the 
chest/abdomen/pelvis  with response  evaluated  by RECIST  1.1.  An additional  40 patients  (for a total 
of 46) will be enrolled at the MTD. The six patients treated at the MTD in the phase 1 will be included  
in the phase  2 study.  
 
Correlative  studies:  
Molecular  testing will be performed on archived pre-treatment tumor specimens. A rebiopsy at the 
time of clinical  progression  on EGFR  TKI will not be mandated  per protocol,  but is typically  done  as 
per standard  of care.  
 
EGFR T790M  is routinely  identified  in tumor  tissue  by several  standard  methods  including  a mass  
spectrometry  based  mutation  platform  (Sequenom),  locked  nucleic  acid based  PCR  sequencing  or 
by next generation sequencing. Our next-generation sequencing based mutation platform (IMPACT) 
will be performed  to compare  the molecular  alterations  in pre and post treatment  specimens.  The 
sequencing  data will be analyzed  for base  mutations,  insertions,  deletions,  copy number alterations  
and genomic  rearrangements  in all target  genes.  
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS 
 
5.1 Osimertinib 
Osimertinib  will be provided  by Astra  Zeneca.  Osimertinib  is a crystalline  powder  presented  for oral 
administration  as a beige,  film- coated  tablet  containing  either  40mg  or 80mg  of Osimertinib.  
Osimertinib  beige  film-coated  tablets  contain  Osimertinib  mesylate,  mannitol,  microcrystalline  
cellulose,  low-substituted  hydroxypropyl  cellulose  and sodium  stearyl  fumarate.  Tablets  will come  in 
high-density  polyethylene  (HDPE)  bottles  with child-resistant  closures.  Tablets  should  be stored  in 
their original  packaging  at room  temperature.  Osimertinib  is administered  as a once  daily dose  
(fasting).  Patients  will be required  to fast (can take with water  only) for at least one hour prior to 
taking  a dose  until two hours  post-dose.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  13 of 47  
  
 
5.2 Bevac  izumab  
 
Bevacizumab  will be supplied  by Genentech.  Bevacizumab  is a humanized  monoclonal  antibody  that 
binds  all five isoforms  of human  VEGF.  It is FDA approved  for the treatment  of metastatic  non- 
squamous,  non-small  cell lung cancers.  It is a recombinant  human  antibody  consisting  of 93% 
human  and 7% murine  amino  acid sequences.  Bevacizumab  is supplied  as a clear  to slightly  
opalescent,  sterile  liquid  ready  for parenteral  administration.  Each  400mg  (25mg/mL - 16 mL fill)  
glass  vial contains  bevacizumab  with phosphate,  trehalose,  polysorbate  20 and sterile  water  for 
injection,  USP.  Bevacizumab  should  be stored  in the refrigerator  (2-8 degrees  Celsius)  and should  
be refrigerated  until just prior to use. Bevacizumab  is administered  intravenously  every  3 weeks.  It 
can be given  irrespective  of fasting  or fed state.  Bevacizumab  will be prepared  and administered   
per institutional  guidelines  outlined  in section  9.1.2.  
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• Written  informed  consent  
• Advanced  biopsy -proven  metastatic  non-small  cell lung cancer  
• Somatic  activating  mutation  in EGFR  
• No prior treatment  with an EGFR TKI. 
• No prior treatment  with a VEGF  inhibitor.  
• Measurable (RECIST 1.1) indicator lesion not previously irradiated 
• Karnofsky  performance  status  (KPS ) ≥ 70% 
• Age >18 years  old 
• Adequate  organ  function  
o AST,  ALT < 3 x ULN 
o Total bilirubin  < 1.5x ULN 
o Creatinine  < 1.5x ULN OR calculated  creatinine  clearance  > 60ml/min  
o Absolute  neutrophil  count  (ANC)  ≥ 1000  cells/mm3 
o Hemoglobin ≥8.0 g/dL 
o Platelets  ≥100,000/mm3 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
• Any contra -indications  to bevacizumab  which  include  but are not limited  to recent  
1. Any previous  venous  thromboembolism  > NCI CTCAE  Grade  3 
2. Severe  uncontrolled  hypertension  (systolic  blood  pressure  >150 mmHg and/or  
diastolic blood pressure >100mmHg) 
3. Cardiovascular  disease  including  stroke  of myocardial  infarction  <6 months  prior to study  
enrollment,  New York Heart Association  Grade  2 or greater  congestive  heart  failure,  serious  
cardiac  arrythmia  uncontrolled  by medication  
4. Hemorrhagic  brain  metastases.  Asymptomatic   (not requiring   escalating   doses  of 
steroids)   brain  metastases  are acceptable.  
5. History  of severe  proteinuria  (urine  dipstick  ≥ 2+ or 24 hr urine  > 2gm/24hr ) 
6. Prior history  of hypertensive  crisis  or hypertensive  encephalopathy  
7. History  of a central  nervous  system  disease  (e.g. seizures)  unrelated  to cancer  unless  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  14 of 47  
  
 
adequately  treated  with standard  medical  therapy  
8. Significant  vascular  disease  (e.g. aortic  aneurysm  requiring  surgical  repair)  <6 months  
prior to study  enrollment  
9. History  of hemoptysis   (>1/2 teaspoon  of bright  red blood  per episode)  within  the last 3 
months  
10. Evidence  of a bleeding  diathesis  or significant  coagulopathy  (in the absence  of 
therapeutic   anticoagulation)  
11. Current  or recent  (within  10 days of study  drug start)  use of aspirin  (>325mg  daily),  
clopidogrel  (>75mg  daily).  
12. Recent  initiation  of full dose  oral or parental  anticoagulants  that have not been  in place  
for at least 2 weeks.  
13. Tumor  invading  or abutting  major  blood  vessels  
14. Tumor  histology  classified  by squamous  cell histology.  
15. Any history  of abdominal  fistula  or GI perforation  within  6 months  of study  enrollment  
 
• Pregnant  or lactating  women  
• Any type of systemic  anticancer  therapy  (chemotherapy  or experimental  drugs)  within  2 weeks  
of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any radiotherapy  within  1 week  of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any major  surgery  within  4 weeks  of starting  treatment  on protocol.  
• Any evidence  of clinically  significant  interstitial  lung disease  
• Known  hypersensitivity  to any component  of bevacizumab  and osimertinib.  
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN 
A member of the patient’s treatment team, the protocol investigator, or research team at Memorial 
Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  will identify  potential  research  participants.  If the investigator  is a part of the 
treatment  team,  s/he will screen  the patient  as to eligibility,  and will discuss  the study  and the possibility  of 
enrollment  in the research  study  with the patient.  The preliminary  screen  of eligibility  
will be confirmation  for the diagnosis  of the following:  
 
• Patientswith metastatic  EGFR  mutant  lung cancers  
 
Potential  subjects  that meet  these  basic  criteria  will be referred  by their treatment  physician  to the 
investigator, co-investigators, or research staff of the study. Minority and women are well represented in 
the thoracic  oncology  clinics,  and we expect  that they will be well represented  in the trial accrual.  The 
principal  investigator , Dr. Helena  Yu, will be available  to all patients  for further  questions  and information  
through  a contact  number  which  will be provided  on the consent  form itself.  
 
During  the initial  conversation  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patient,  the patient  may be 
asked  to provide  certain  health  information  that is necessary  to the recruitment  and enrollment  process.  The 
investigator/research  staff may also review  portions  of their medical  records  at MSKCC in order  to further  
assess  eligibility.  They will use the information  provided  by the patient  and/or  medical  record  to confirm  that 
the patient  is eligible  and to contact  the patient  regarding  study  enrollment.  If the patient  turns  out to be 
ineligible  for the research  study,  the research  staff will destroy  all information  collected  on the patients   
during  the initial  conversation  and medical  records  review,  except  for any information  that must  be 
maintained  for screening  log purposes.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  15 of 47  
  
 
 
All recruited patients will be under the care of attending medical oncologists of the MSKCC Thoracic 
Oncology  Service.  There  will be no direct  advertising  for this study  and participants  will not be reimbursed  
for participation.   Patients  will be accrued  to this study  without  regard  for gender  or minority  status.  The 
study  will be available  to the public  and the details  of the inclusion  criteria,  exclusion  criteria  and study  
design  will be posted  at www.clinicaltrials.gov . 
 
8.1 PRETREATMENT EVALU ATION  
 
The following  tests  must  be completed  within  28 days of started  treatment  on study  unless  otherwise  noted.  
• Documented  presence  of the EGFR  mutation  within  the patient ’s tumor  (no time window)  
• Medical history 
• Baseline  tumor  assessment  with CT scan  of the chest/abdomen/pelvis  is preferred,  or other  
comparable  radiologic  study  (PET  scan)  can be utilized  if adequate  assessment  of target  lesions  
can be performed.  Tumor  burden  measurable  by RECIST  1.1 
• Baseline CNS assessment with contrast-enhanced MRI brain (or CT if MRI is 
contraindicated).  This can be within  8 weeks  of study  start.  
• Physical  examination,  vital signs  (pulse,  blood  pressure,  temperature,  respiratory  rate) as well 
as weight.  
• 12-lead electrocardiogram  (ECG)  (within  8 weeks  of study  start)  
• Performance  status  by KPS 
• Serum  or urine  pregnancy  test (for premenopausal  women  with child-bearing  potential)  
• Complete  blood  count  with differential  
• Comprehensive  metabolic  panel  (glucose,  blood  urea nitrogen,  creatinine,  sodium,  potassium,  
chloride,  bicarbonate,  calcium,  total protein,  albumin,  serum  bilirubin,  alkaline  phosphatase,  
ALT, AST)  
• Urinalysis,  dipstick  
• EGFR  T790M  plasma  blood  test 
 
9.1 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN 
 
9.2 Therapeutic Agents 
 
9.2.1  Therapeutic Agent –    Osimertinib 
Osimertinib  will be provided  by AstraZeneca.  A pill diary will be used  to track  adherence.  Osimertinib  is 
administered  daily,  at approximately  the same  time of day every  day. Osimertinib  should  be taken  on an 
empty stomach  (at least 1 hour before,  or 2 hours  after the ingestion  of food).  If the patient  forgets  to take 
his/her  daily dose,  he/she  should  take Osimertinib  within  12 hours  after the missed  dose.  If more  than 12 
hours  have elapsed,  that day’s dose  should  be omitted,  and the patients  should  continue  treatment  with the 
next scheduled  dose.  
 
9.2.2  Therapeutic Agent –    Bevac izumab 
Bevacizumab  will be provided  by Genentech.  Bevacizumab  is administered  intravenously  every  3 
weeks  (21 days)  at the FDA approved  dose  level of 15 mg/kg.  If an infusion  is not tolerated  well (ie. 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  16 of 47  
  
 
Fever,  chills)  then the subsequent  infusion(s)  should  be given  over a prolonged  infusion  time (i.e. 60 – 
90 min).  Premedications  (ie. Acetaminophen,  diphenhydramine,  corticosteroids)  may be given  to 
prevent/reduce  the incidence/severity  of reactions;  however  routine  prophylactic  use of premedications  
is not recommended.  
 
9.2 Treatment  arms  
All patients  will receive  daily Osimertinib  and every  3 week  bevacizumab  in this single -arm study.  
 
9.3 Phase  1 study  
This portion  of the study  will assess  whether  combination  Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  is safe and 
tolerable.  The study  will follow  a standard  3+3 dose  escalation  trial design.  Three  to six patients  will need  to 
be enrolled  at each  dose  level and assessed  for DLT for 1 full cycle  (21 days).  Toxicity  will be graded  
according  to NCI CTCAE  version  4.0. Patients  who do not complete  21 days of treatment  for reasons  other  
than experiencing  a DLT will be replaced.  For the purposes  of dose -escalation  decisions,  only DLTs  
occurring  during  the first cycle  (21 days)  will be considered.  Patients  in each  cohort  must  complete  the first 
3 weeks  of study  therapy  prior to enrollment  of subsequent  cohorts.  
 
9.4 Dose -Limiting  Toxicities  
The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version 4.0 (NCI-CTCAE) will be used to grade 
toxicities  during  the trial. Dose -limiting  toxicities  (DLT ’s) are defined  as any of the following  events  occurring  
during  the first cycle  of treatment  (i.e. 21 days)  that are, in the opinion  of the 
treating  physician,  possibly,  probably,  or definitely  related  to the investigational   regimen:  
• Death  related  to the investigational  regimen  
• Hematologic  toxicities  including:  
o Grade  4 neutropenia  lasting  > 5 days 
o Grade  4 thrombocytopenia  (<25,000/mm3) 
o Grade  ≥ 3 thrombocytopenia  with evidence  of clinically  significant  bleeding  
o Grade  4 anemia  
• Non-hematologic   toxicities  including:  
o Grade  ≥ 3 AST,  ALT, alkaline  phosphatase  or total bilirubin  
o Grade  ≥ 3 diarrhea,  nausea,  vomiting  that lasts > 72 hrs despite  optimal  maximal  
supportive  care 
o Grade  >3 rash that persists  >7 days despite  supportive  medications  
o Grade  >4 diarrhea,  nausea  or vomiting  
o Any other  non-hematologic  grade  ≥ 3 major  organ  toxicity  
9.5 Phase  2 Study  
Once  the phase  1 portion  of the study  has been  completed,  patients  will be enrolled  in the phase  2 
portion  of the single -arm study  of Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  in the treatment  of patients  with 
EGFR -mutant  lung cancers .  Response  to therapy  will be assessed  by interval  imaging  every  9 
weeks  +/- 1 week  (every  3 cycles)  with CT scan  of the chest/abdomen/pelvis  with response  
evaluated by RECIST 1.1. A maximum of 46 patients will be enrolled during this portion of the study. 
This phase 2 total accrual will include six patients treated at the MTD in the phase 1. To reach the 
primary  endpoint  of the phase  2 study,  43 patients  will need  to be response  evaluable.  As a result,  a 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  17 of 47  
  
total of 46 patients  will be enrolled  to account  for potential  patient -drop out. 
9.6  Correlative  Studies  
Molecular  testing will be performed on archived pre-treatment tumor specimens if available. A 
rebiopsy  at the time of clinical  progression  on EGFR  TKI will not be mandated  per protocol,  but is 
typically  done  as per standard  of care.  
 
EGFR T790M  is routinely  identified  in tumor  tissue  by several  standard  methods  including  a mass  
spectrometry  based  mutation  platform  (Sequenom),  locked  nucleic  acid based  PCR  sequencing  or 
by next generation sequencing. Our next-generation sequencing based mutation platform (IMPACT) 
will be performed  to compare  the molecular  alterations  in pre and post treatment  specimens.  The 
sequencing  data will be analyzed  for base  mutations,  insertions,  deletions,  copy number alterations  
and genomic  rearrangements  in all target  genes.  
 
9.6.1  Optional  Studies  
W e propose  to an obtain  biopsy  in patients  with metastatic  EGFR -mutant  lung cancer  at initial     
clinical  response  at 4 weeks  +/- 1 week  on study.  There  will be an optional  CT scan  at 4 weeks  to    
demonstrate  response,  and an optional  biopsy  of residual  disease  in patients  w ithout  disease  
progression  on that initial  scan.  Patients  that provide  consent  to the optional  4 week  scan  and 
biops  y will allow  us to better  understand  the molecular  mechanisms  underlying  intrinsic  and    
acquired  resistance.  W e will be performing  IMPACT  tes ting on these  obtained  samples,  and     
compare  to the pre-treatment  and post-treatment  tumor  samples.  
 
9.7 Treatment Beyond  Disease  Progression  
 
Subjects  will be permitted  to continue  study  treatment  beyond  initial  RECIST  1.1 defined  PD, 
assessed  by the investigator,  as long as they meet  the following  criteria:  
• Investigator -assessed  clinical  benefit,  and do not have  rapid  disease  progression  
• Tolerance  of study  drug 
• Stable  performance  status  
• Subject  provides  written  informed  consent  prior to receiving  additional  study  treatment  
acknowledging  the possibility  of any reasonably  foreseeable  risk or discomforts,  as well 
as the possibility  of alternative  treatment  options.  
The assessment  of clinical  benefit  should  take into account  whether  the subject  is clinically  
deteriorating  and unlikely  to receive  further  benefit  from continued  treatment.  
If the investigator  feels that the subject  continues  to achieve  clinical  benefit  by continuing  treatment,  
the subject  should  remain  on the trial and continue  to receive  monitoring  according  to the Study  
Calendar  in Section  10.0.   A radiographic  assessment  should  be performed  at the next scheduled  
time point to determine  whether  there  has been  a decrease  in the tumor  size or continued  
progression  of disease.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  18 of 47  
  
 
10.0 EVALU ATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION 
 
The table  below  outlines  the schedule  of assessments  applied  to patients.  All assessments,  
including  drug dosing,  have a window  of +/- 5 days for cycle  1, and +/- 7 days for cycle  2 and 
beyond  unless  otherwise  noted.  If the subject  is unable  to have a study  assessment  taken  within  
the defined  time window  due to an event  outside  of his or her control  (e.g. clinic  closure,  personal  
emergency,  inclement  weather,  vacation)  the assessment  should  be performed  as close  as 
possible  to the required  schedule,  at which  time the window  clock  will reset  and the patient  will have 
a +/- 7 day window  from the date of their visit. Tumor  assessments have  a window  of +/- 1 weeks.  If 
an appropriate  imaging  study  is done  for an unrelated  reason,  it can be used  for disease  
assessment  if it falls within  the appropriate  time frame.  Subjects  will return  to the study  site within  
30 days after their last dose  of Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  to complete  end of study  
assessments  outlined  below.  
 
Study  
Assessments   
Screening   
Cycle  1  
Cycle 2+ At 
Progression/Off  
Study  
Day Within  4 weeks  C1D1  C1D8  C2D1  +  
Informed  Consent  X     
Medical  History  X X X X X 
Physical  Exam  X X X X X 
Vital  Signs  X X X X X 
Adverse  Events   X X X X 
12-lead  EKG X     
Tumor  
Assessment1,  8 X   X X 
Pregnancy  Test6 X   X6  
CBC2 X X  X X 
CMP3 X X  X X 
Urinalysis,  
Dipstick5,10 X   X  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  19 of 47  
  
 
IMPACT  testing4 X X  
EGFR  T790M  
testing7 X X7 
Tumor  Biopsy9 
 
(optional)  X 9 X9 
 
1. CT chest/abdomen/pelvis  with or without  contrast  (preferred  and will be used  for all subsequent  scans  after screening).  CT 
will be done  at screening,  every  9 weeks  (+/- 1 week)  and at progression,  or when  patient  com es off study.  An MRI of the 
brain,  or a comparable  study,  will be done  every  18 weeks  (+/- 1 weeks),  unless  patient  is found  to have  brain  metastases  
after baseline/FU  1 scans  are completed.  If brain  metastases  are found,  the patient  will have  a brain  MRI completed  every  9 
weeks  instead  of every  18 weeks  . Patients  that do not have  brain  metastases  will still require  a brain  MRI every  18 weeks  on 
study.  
2. CBC - complete  blood  count  with differential  
3. CMP-com prehensive  metabolic  panel  (glucose,  blood  urea nitrogen,  creatinine,  sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  bicarbonate,  
calcium,  total protein,  albumin,  serum  bilirubin,  alkaline  phosphatase,  ALT, AST)  
4. IMPACT molecular  profiling  will be done  on pre-treatment  archived  tissue  if available.  If a post-progression  biopsyis  performed  
as standard  of care,  IMPACT molecular  results  will be obtained.  A post-progression  biopsyis  not mandatoryor  included  in the 
protocol.  
5. Urinalysis,  dipstick  will be done  at screening  and every  2 cycles  to monitor  for proteinuria.  If urine  protein  (dipstick)  is > 2+, then 
a 24 hour urine  protein  test will be administered.  
6. A urine  pregnancy  test will be done  every  4 cycles  for women  of childbearing  age . 
7. An EGFR  T790M  plasma  blood  test is to be completed  at screening  and at progression  or off study  . 
8. Optional  tumor  assessment  scans  will be completed  4 weeks  post Cycle  1 Day 1 (+/- 14 day window)  to determine  initial  clinical  
response.  
9. Optional  tumor  biopsywill  be completed  within  2 weeks  (=/- 14 day window)  post the optional  4 week  tumor  scan  if initial  
clinical  response  is confirmed.  Patient  must  consent  to both optional  assessments.  Initial  clinical  response  is defined  as stable  
disease,  a partial  response  or a complete  response  to treatment.  
10. Urinalysis,  dipstick  is not required  for patients  who have  discontinued  bevacizumab.  
 
 
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  
 
Adverse  events  occurring  in patients  treated  with Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  may be 1) 
overlapping  toxicities  seen  in both agents;  2) toxicities  typically  associated  with Osimertinib  (i.e. 
rash,  diarrhea)  or 3) toxicities  typically  associated  with bevacizumab  (hypertension).  However,  
toxicities  with individual  agents  may be potentiated  in the combination  or unanticipated  AEs may 
occur.  The dose  modifications  or discontinuations  may involve  one or both agents,  and should  be 
based  on the nature,  severity,  and attributions  of the AEs. Differentiation  of the causative  agent  for 
adverse  events  for the purposes  of dose  modifications  are at the discretion  of the treating  physician  
and/or  principal  investigator.  General  guidelines  are provided  below..  For safety  and adverse  event  
reporting,  see Section  17.0. 
 
W hile AEs may be thought  to be related  to individual  agents  for purposes  of dose  modifications,  all 
toxicities  will be considered  related  to combination  therapy  for description  of AE profile.  
 
11.1 Osimertinib  Related  Toxicities:  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  20 of 47  
  
 
 
Toxicities  with Osimertinib  that are likely  (>20%)  include:  
• Rash  
• Diarrhea  
• Nausea  
• Decreased  appetite  
• Dry skin 
 
 
Toxicities  with Osimertinib  that are less likely  (<20%)  include:  
• Itchy skin 
• Decreased  energy  
• Nail changes  
• Mucositis 
• Constipation  
• Cough  
• Vomiting  
• Low red blood  cell counts  which  can lead to fatigue  
• Shortness  of breath  
• Upper  respiratory  tract infections  
• Headache  
 
Side effects  of Osimertinib  that are rare,  but serious  include:  
• Pneumonitis  (inflammation  of the lung).  Fatal  events  of inflammation  of lungs  
have  been  reported  in patients  taking  Osimertinib.  
 
11.1 Bevacizumab  Related  Toxicities:  
 
Toxicities  with Bevacizumab  that are likely  (>20%)  include:  
• Mild to moderate increase in blood pressure 
• Protein  in urine,  which  rarely  leads  to damage  to the kidney  
• Shortness  of breath  
• Nosebleeds  
• Headache  
• Loss of appetite  
• Sore mouth  or throat  
• Constipation  
• Feeling  tired 
• Diarrhea  
• Nausea  and vomiting  
• Generalized  pain and pain in the abdomen  (belly)  
• Heartburn  
 
Toxicities  with Bevacizumab that  are less likely  (<20%)  include:  
• Mild to moderate decrease in blood pressure 
• Blood  clots in veins  or arteries,  which  may be life threatening  
• Mild to moderate bleeding in the tumor, stomach, intestines, vagina or lungs 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  21 of 47  
  
 
• Reactions  associated  with bevacizumab  infusion:  chills,  fever,  rigors  
• Rash,  skin ulcer,  hives,  welts  or itching  
• Infection  
• Dizziness  
• Pains  in the muscles  and joints  
• Chest  pain 
• Cough  
• Nasal  stuffiness,  sneezing,  post nasal  drip 
• Wheezing  
• Weight  loss 
• Voice  changes,  hoarseness,  laryngitis  
• Damage  to the heart  muscle  resulting  in decrease  in heart  function  
• Low white  blood  cell counts,  which  may make  you more  at risk for infection.  
 
 
Side effects  of Bevacizumab  that are rare,  but serious  include:  
• Problems  with wound  healing  
• Development  of an abnormal  opening  (fistula)  between  the large  intestine  
(bowel)  and another  organ,  most  commonly  the bladder,  uterus  or vagina  
• Bowel  perforation.  This can occur  when  an opening  forms  in the bowel  wall 
allowing  bowel  contents  to spill into the abdomen.  This is rare but often requires  
surgery  and can be life-threatening  and fatal. 
• Bowel  anastomotic  dehiscence:  This is a breakdown  in the surgical  connection  between  
two pieces  of bowel  in patients  with prior history  of bowel  surgery.  This is rare but often  
requires  surgery  and can be life-threatening  and fatal 
• Severe  allergic  reactions  that result  in difficulty  breathing  or drop in blood  pressure  
• Serious  or fatal bleeding  from the tumor,  brain,  gut or lungs  
• Heart  problems,  including  irregular  heartbeats,  heart  attack  or heart  failure  
• Reversible  changes  in the liver function  
• Nephrotic  syndrome,  a type of kidney  disease  caused  by damage  to the tiny blood  
vessels  in the kidney  
• Reversible  Posterior  Leukoencephalopathy  Syndrome  (RPLS)  or similar  
leukoencephalopathy  syndrome.  RPLS  is a medical  condition  related  to leakiness  of 
blood  vessels  in the brain.  This can cause  confusion,  blindness  or vision  changes,  
seizure  and other  symptoms.  This condition  is usually  reversible.  In rare cases  it 
can be life threatening  and may have  a long term effect  on brain  function.  
 
11.2 Dose  modifications  will not be allowed  for cycle  1 during  the Phase  1 portion  of the 
protocol in order to ensure accurate assessment of the MTD. General guidelines are below: 
 
Osimertinib  Dose  modifications  (Cycle  ≥2 only)  
Dose  at time of toxicity  Dose  reduction  levels  
80mg 40mg  
40mg 40mg  every  other  day 
 
If a patient  experiences  a CTCAE  grade  3 or higher  and/or  unacceptable  toxicity  (any grade),  where  
the Investigator  considers  the AE to be associated  with the study  drug,  dosing  will be interrupted  and 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  22 of 47  
  
 
supportive  therapy  administered  as required  in accordance  with local practice/guidelines.  If the AE is 
clearly attributable  to one drug and not the other,  only the culprit  drug will be held. If an AE is not 
clearly  attributable  to one drug,  both drugs  will be held until the AE resolves  as specified  below.  
 
If the toxicity  resolves  or reverts  to ≤CTCAE  grade  1 within  2 weeks  of onset,  study drug may be 
restarted  at the same  dose  (starting  dose)  or reduced  dose  using  the dose  reduction  in the table 
above.  If restarting  at the same  dose  level,  patients  should  be closely  monitored  for 3 days following  
the restart  of treatment.  If within  3 days there  is recurrence  of same  toxicity,  a dose  reduction  should  
be considered  at the Investigat or’s  discretion.  
 
If the toxicity  does  not resolve  to ≤CTCAE  grade  1 after 2 weeks,  then the patient  should  be 
withdrawn  from the study  treatment  and observed  until resolution  of the toxicity.  Resumption  of the 
study  drug at a lower  dose  would  require  discussion  with the sponsor  and Principal  Investigator.  If 
one drug is permanently  discontinued,  it is the treating  physician ’s discretion  as to whether  to 
continue  the other  drug as monotherapy.  
 
Patients  who develop  asymptomatic  Gr. 3 or Gr. 4 lymphopenia  without  clinical  correlate  (eg. 
Opportunistic  infection)  may continue  study  treatment  without  interruption  if approved  by the 
treating  physician.  
 
For any toxicity,  supportive  medications  should  be utilized.  For example,  for skin reactions,  mild to 
moderate  strength  steroids  creams,  either  topical  or systemic  antibiotics  should  be started,  as seen  
appropriate  by the investigator  upon  assessment  of the skin reaction.  For nausea/vomiting,  anti- 
emetic  therapy  should  be utilized.  For diarrhea,  after alternative  etiologies  are ruled  out, anti- 
diarrheal  medications  should  be utilized.  
 
QTC  prolongation:  For patients  with >CTCAE  grade  3 QTC  prolongation  should  have  study  drug 
interrupted  and monitoring  of ECGs  performed  until resolution  to baseline.  If the toxicity  resolves  or 
reverts  to ≤CTCAE  grade  1 within  2 weeks  of onset,  study  drug may be restarted  at the same  dose  
or reduced  dose  using  the dose  reduction  levels  in the table  above.  If the toxicity  does  not resolve  to 
≤CTCAE  grade  1 within  2 weeks,  the patient  will be permanently  withdrawn  from study  drug.  
 
Interstitial   lung disease/pneumonitis:  
If a new or worsening  of pulmonary  symptoms  (e.g.,  dyspnea)  or occurrence  of a radiological  
abnormality  suggestive  of ILD is observed,  an interruption  in study  drug dosing  is recommended.  
In the presence  of confirmatory  CT scans  where  other  causes  of respiratory  symptoms  have  been  
excluded,  a diagnosis  of ILD should  be considered  and study  drug permanently  discontinued.  In the 
absence  of a diagnosis  of ILD, study  drug may be restarted  following  consultation  with the Principal  
investigator  and sponsor.  
 
Please  refer to the package  insert  for further  details.  
 
Bevacizumab  
Bevacizumab  dose  will not be reduced  for reasons  other  than a >10%  change  in weight  from 
baseline.  Bevacizumab  treatment  may be either  temporarily  or permanently  suspended  in the case   
of bevacizumab -related  events  such  as fistulae,  GI perforation,  hypertension,  proteinuria,  
thrombosis/embolism,  hemorrhage,  CHF,  wound  healing  complications,  PRES  (or RPLS)  and 
hypersensitivity/allergic   reactions  in addition  to any other  serious  bevacizumab -related  toxicity  (grade  
3 or 4). 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  23 of 47  
  
 
 
In addition,  bevacizumab  should  be temporarily  withheld  in the event  of febrile  grade  4 neutropenia  
and/or  grade  4 thrombocytopenia  (regardless  of the relationship  to treatment),  since  these  conditions  
are predisposing  factors  for an increased  bleeding  tendency.   To summarize,  bevacizumab  s hould  
be held temporarily  or permanently  discontinued  in patients  (as per the clinical  judgment  of the 
treating  physician)  experiencing  any of the following  events:  
• Febrile  grade  4 neutropenia  and/or  grade  4 thrombocytopenia  regardless  of the relationship  to 
treatment  (hold  treatment  temporarily)  
• Grade  ≥ 2 fistula  (hold  temporarily  or permanently  discontinue)  
 
• GI perforation  (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Major  surgery  or wound  healing  complications  (hold  temporarily  or permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Medically   significant  hypertension   not  controlled  with antihypertensive   therapy,   hypertensive  
crisis  or hypertensive  encephalopathy  (permanently  discontinue)  
• Grade  ≥ 3 left ventricular  dysfunction  (CHF)  (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Nephrotic  syndrome  (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Arterial  thrombosis/embolism  (any grade)  (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Grade  ≥ 3 venous  thrombosis/embolism  (hold  temporarily  or permanently  discontinue  for grade  
4) 
• CNS bleeding  (any grade)  or  ≥ grade  3 bleeding  of any kind (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Grade  ≥ 2 hemoptysis  (hold  temporarily  or permanently  discontinue)  
 
• Hypersensitivity/allergic   reactions  related  to bevacizumab  (permanently  discontinue)  
 
• PRES  (or RPLS) (permanently  discontinue)  
 
If bevacizumab  is permanently  suspended,  patients   will no longer  need  to have  Urinalysis,  Dipstick  
done  every  2 cycles  to measure  proteinuria.  
Posterior  Reversible  Encephalopathy  Syndrome  (PRES/RPLS)  
There  have  been  rare reports  of patients  treated  with bevacizumab  developing  signs  and symptoms  
that are consistent  with PRES,  a rare neurological  disorder.  PRES  is also known  as reversible  
posterior  leukoencephalopathy   syndrome  or RPLS).  PRES  can present  with following  signs  and 
symptoms  among  others:  seizures,  headache,  altered  mental  status,  visual  disturbance  or cortical  
blindness,  with or without  associated  hypertension.  A diagnosis  of PRES  requires  confirmation  by 
brain  imaging.  In patients  developing   PRES,  treatment  of specific  symptoms  including  control  of 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  24 of 47  
  
 
hypertension  is recommended  along  with discontinuation  of bevacizumab.  The safety  of reinitiating  
bevacizumab  therapy  in patients  previously  experiencing  PRES  is not known.  Adequate  brain  
imaging  using  MRI must  be performed  as a follow -up measurement  for patients  with PRES.  
Gastrointestinal  Perforation  and Fistula  
Bevacizumab  has been  associated  with serious  cases  of GI perforation  in patients  with mCRC  and a 
few reports  of gallbladder   perforation  have  been  reported  from the post-marketing  experience.  The 
presentation  of these  events  has varied  in type and severity,  ranging  from free air seen  only on the 
plain abdominal  X-ray, which  resolved  without  treatment,  to a colonic  perforation  with abdominal  
abscess  and fatal outcome.  The common  feature  among  these  cases  was intra abdominal  
inflammation,  either  from gastric  ulcer  disease,  tumor  necrosis,  diverticulitis  or chemotherapy - 
associated  colitis.   Nevertheless,  a causal  association  of an intra-abdominal  inflammatory  process  
and GI perforation  to treatment  with bevacizumab  has not been  established.  However,  caution  
should  be exercised  when  treating  patients  with intra-abdominal  inflammatory  process  with 
bevacizumab.  Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  discontinued  in patients  who develop  GI 
perforation.  
Bevacizumab  use has been  associated  with serious  cases  of fistulae  including  events  resulting  in 
death.  Fistulae  within  the GI tract or GI tract and skin are common  in patients  with mCRC  and 
ovarian  cancer,  but are uncommon  or rare in other  indications.  Other  fistulae  (e.g. 
tracheoesophageal,  bronchopleural,   urogenital,  biliary)  have been  reported  uncommonly  in 
bevacizumab  clinical  trials patients  and in post-marketing  reports.  Temporarily  discontinue  
bevacizumab  in patients  with grade  2 or 3 non- tracheoesophageal  fistula  until resolution  to ≤ grade  
1. Permanently  discontinue  bevacizumab  in patients  with tracheoesophageal  fistula  or any grade  4 
fistula.  Limited  information  is available  on the continued  use of bevacizumab  in patients  with other  
fistulae.  In cases  of internal  fistula  not arising  in the GI tract,  discontinuation  of bevacizumab  should  
be considered.  
 
 
Wound  Healing  Complications  
Increased  incidences  of post-operative  bleeding  or wound  healing  complications  have been   
observed  in clinical  trials of bevacizumab  in relapsed  glioma  and mCRC  and BC. Bevacizumab  
therapy  should  not be initiated  for at least 28 days following  major  surgery  or until the surgical  wound  
is fully healed  as bevacizumab  may adversely  impact  wound  healing.  In patients  who experience  
wound  healing  complications  during  bevacizumab  treatment,  bevacizumab  should  be withheld  until 
the wound  is fully healed.  If the wound  does not fully heal despite  withholding  treatment,  should  be 
permanently   discontinued.  
Bevacizumab  therapy  should  be withheld  for an interval  of at least two half-lives (approximately  six 
weeks)  before  conducting  major  elective  surgery.  Emergency  surgery  should  be performed  as 
appropriate  without  delay  after a careful  risk-benefit  assessment.  
Hypertension  
An increased  incidence  of hypertension  has been  observed  in patients  treated  with bevacizumab.  
Clinical  safety  data suggest  the incidence  of hypertension  is likely  to be dose -dependent.  Pre- 
existing  hypertension  should  be adequately  controlled  before  starting  bevacizumab  treatment.  There  
is no information  on the effect  of bevacizumab  in patients  with uncontrolled  hypertension  at the time 
of initiating  therapy.  Blood  pressure  must  be assessed  before  each  bevacizumab  administration. In 
most  cases  hypertension  is controlled  adequately   using  standard  antihypertensive   treatment  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  25 of 47  
  
 
appropriate  for the individual  situation  of the affected  patient.  Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  
discontinued  if medically  significant  hypertension  cannot  be adequately  controlled  with 
antihypertensive  therapy,  or if the patient  develops  hypertensive  crisis  or hypertensive  
encephalopathy.  
Congestive  Heart  Failure  (CHF)  
Events  consistent  with CHF were  reported  in clinical  trials.  The findings  ranged  from asymptomatic  
declines  in left ventricular  ejection  fraction  (LVEF)  to symptomatic  CHF,  requiring  treatment  or 
hospitalization.  Most of the patients  who experienced  CHF had metastatic  breast  cancer  and had 
received  previous  treatment  with anthracyclines,  prior radiotherapy  to the left chest  wall or other  risk 
factors  for CHF were  present.  Caution  should  be exercised  when  treating  patients  with clinically  
significant  cardiovascular  disease  such  as pre-existing  coronary  artery  disease,  concomitant  
cardiotoxic  therapy  or CHF with bevacizumab.  Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  discontinued  in 
patients  with ≥ grade  3 CHF.  
 
Proteinuria  
In clinical  studies,  the incidence  of proteinuria  was higher  in patients  receiving  bevacizumab  in 
combination  with chemotherapy  compared  to those  who received  chemotherapy  alone.  Proteinuria  
reported  as an AE with bevacizumab  treatment  has ranged  in severity  from clinically  asymptomatic,  
transient,  trace  proteinuria  to nephrotic  syndrome  with the great  majority  as grade  1 proteinuria.  The 
proteinuria  seen  in bevacizumab  clinical  trials was not associated  with renal  dysfunction  and rarely  
required  permanent  discontinuation  of bevacizumab  therapy.  Patients  with a history  of hypertension  
may be at increased  risk for the development  of proteinuria  when  treated  with bevacizumab.  
Proteinuria  must  be assessed  by dipstick  before  each  bevacizumab  administration  unless  proteinuria  
has been  determined  by 24-hour urine  collection.  Patients  who have  permanently  discontinued  
bevacizumab  will not be tested  for proteinuria  with dipstick.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  26 of 47  
  
 
Table  11.1 Bevacizumab  Treatment  Management   for Proteinuria  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ntinue  bevacizumab  
 
 
 
Arterial  thrombosis/embolism 
Bevacizumab  should  be discontinued  in patients  who develop  arterial  thromboembolic  events.  A 
history  of arterial  thromboembolic  events  or age greater  than 65 years  has been  associated  with an 
increased  risk of arterial  thromboembolic  events  during  bevacizumab  therapy.  Patients  receiving  
bevacizumab  plus chemotherapy  with a history  of arterial  thromboembolism  and age greater  than 65 
years  have a higher  risk. Caution  should  be taken  when  treating  these  patients  with bevacizumab.  
 
Venous  thrombosis/embolism  
Bevacizumab  should  be held in patients  developing   a grade  3 thrombosis/embolism.  Bevacizumab  
may be resumed  once  the patient  is adequately  anti-coagulated  and on a stable  level of 
anticoagulation  for at least 2 weeks  prior to restarting  study  drug treatment.  Patients  on heparin  
treatment  should  have  an aPTT  between  1.5-2.5 x ULN (or patient  value  before  starting  heparin  
treatment).  Patients  on coumarin  derivatives  should  have  an INR between  2.0 and 3.0 assessed  in 
two consecutive  measurements  1-4 days apart.  Patients  on full dose  low molecular  weight  heparins  
should  receive  the appropriate  dose  based  on the weight  of the patient  according  to package  insert.  
An increased  risk of venous  thromboembolic  events  and bleeding  in patients  receiving  anti- 
coagulation  therapy  after first venous  thromboembolic  event  while  receiving  bevacizumab  has been  
observed.  In the event  of recurrent  grade  3 thrombosis/embolism,  the patient  should  be discontinued  
from bevacizumab.  Bevacizumab  should  be discontinued  in patients  with life-threatening   (grade  4) 
pulmonary  embolism.  NCI CTCAE 
v. 4.0  
Urinalysis Treatment Action  
Grade  1 1+ proteinuria  No bevacizumab  dose  modification  
urinary  protein  < 
1.0 g/24 hrs 
Grade  2 2+ proteinuria  For 2+ dipstick:  may administer  bevacizumab  
urinary  protein  without  dose  modification  and collect  24-hour urine  
1.0-3.4 g/24 hrs prior to subsequent   bevacizumab  administration.  
For 3+ dipstick:  must  obtain  24-hour urine  prior to 
administering  bevacizumab  
Suspend  bevacizumab  for urinary  protein  ≥2 g/24 
hrs. Resume  bevacizumab  when  proteinuria  is < 2 
g/24 hrs. 
Grade  3 urinary  protein  Suspend  bevacizumab . 
≥3.5 g/24 hrs Resume  bevacizumab  when  proteinuria  is < 2 g/24 
hrs. 
Nephrotic  syndrome  Permanently  disco   
 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  27 of 47  
  
 
Hemorrhage  
 
An increased  incidence  of bleeding  events  was observed  in study  patients  treated  with bevacizumab  
as compared  to control  treatment  arms.  The hemorrhagic  events  observed  in bevacizumab  studies  
were  predominantly  tumor -associated  hemorrhage  and minor  mucocutaneous  hemorrhage.  
Patients  with untreated  CNS metastases  were  routinely  excluded  from clinical  trials with 
bevacizumab,  based  on imaging  procedures  or signs  and symptoms.  Therefore,  the risk of CNS 
hemorrhage  in such  patient  has not been  prospectively  evaluated  in randomized  clinical  studies.  
Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  discontinued  for: 
o grade  3 or 4 bleeding  of any kind 
o any grade  of CNS bleeding.   Patients  should  be monitored  for signs  and symptoms  of CNS 
bleeding.  
Bevacizumab  should  be temporarily  held or permanently  discontinued  for grade  ≥ haemoptysis  
(defined  as ≥ 2.5 mL bright  red blood  per episode).  The safety  of re-initiating  bevacizumab  in 
patient’s  previously  experiencing  grade  ≥ 2 haemoptysis  has not been  evaluated.   If hemorrhagic  
complications  occur  in patients  on full dose  anti-coagulation   therapy,  permanently  discontinue  
bevacizumab  treatment  and follow  guidelines  of the treating  institution.  Standard  procedures  such  as 
antagonisation  with protamin  or vitamin  K and infusion  of vitamin  K dependent  factors  should  be 
considered  dependent  on the severity  of the bleeding.  
Hypersensitivity/Allergic Reactions and Infusion-Associated Reactions 
Bevacizumab  should  be permanently  discontinued  in patients  exhibiting   hypersensitivity/allergic  
reactions.  The NCI CTCAE  distinguish  between  hypersensitivity  reactions  and acute  infusion  
reactions  induced  by cytokine  release.  Despite  the different  possible  mechanisms  underlying  
hypersensitivity  and infusion  reactions,  the clinical  signs  and symptoms  associated  with these  
reactions  overlap.   Patients  may be at risk of developing  infusion  reactions  to bevacizumab.  Close  
observation  of the patient  during  and following  the administration  of bevacizumab  is recommended  
as expected  for any infusion  of a therapeutic  humanised  monoclonal  antibody.  If an infusion  reaction  
occurs,  the infusion  should  be discontinued  and appropriate  medical  therapies  should  be 
administered.  A systematic  premedication  is not warranted.  
Osteonecrosis  of the Jaw 
Osteonecrosis  of the jaw was reported  in patients  receiving  bevacizumab  mainly  in combination  with 
bisphosphonates  in the post-marketing  setting.   The pathogenesis  of the osteonecrosis  is unclear.  
For further  information,  please  refer to the Avastin®  Investigator’  Brochure.  
Ovarian  Failure  
Ovarian  failure  has been  reported  more  frequently  in patients  receiving  bevacizumab.  Ovarian  
function  recovered  in the majority  of women  after bevacizumab  discontinuation.  For further  
information,  please  refer to the Avastin®  Investigator’  Brochure.  
 
Bevacizumab  experience  in lung cancer  trials:  
Of patients  experiencing  pulmonary  hemorrhages  requiring  medical  intervention,   many  had  
cavitation  and/or  necrosis  of the tumor,  either  preexisting  or developing  during  bevacizumab  therapy.  
Patients  developing  lung cavitation  on treatment  should  be assessed  by the treating  physician  for 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  28 of 47  
  
 
risk-benefit.  In Study  E4599,  in which  squamous  cell carcinoma  was excluded,  the rate of any type of 
Grade   3 hemorrhage  was 1.0%  in the control  arm (carboplatin  and paclitaxel)  versus  4.1%  in the 
carboplatin  and paclitaxel  + bevacizumab  arm (Sandler  et al. 2006).   GI hemorrhages,  including  rectal  
bleeding  and melena  have  been  reported  in patients  with CRC,  and have been  assessed  as tumor -
associated  hemorrhages.  Tumor -associated  hemorrhages  were  also seen  rarely  in other   tumor  
types  and locations  and included  cases of CNS bleeding  in patients  with CNS metastases  and in 
patients  with glioblastoma.  
 
The incidence  of CNS bleeding  in patients  with untreated  CNS metastases  receiving  bevacizumab  
has not been  prospectively  evaluated  in randomised  clinical  studies.  In an exploratory  retrospective  
analysis  of data from 13 completed  randomised  trials in patients  with various  tumor  types,  3 patients  
out of 91 (3.3%)  with brain  metastases experienced  CNS bleeding  (all Grade  4) when  treated  with 
bevacizumab,  compared  to 1 case (Grade  5) out of 96 patients  (1%) that were  not exposed  to 
bevacizumab.  In two subsequent  studies  in patients  with treated  brain  metastases  (which  included  
around  800 patients),  one case  of Grade  2 CNS haemorrhage  was reported.  Intracranial  
haemorrhage  can occur  in patients  with relapsed  glioblastoma.  In study  AVF3708g,   CNS 
haemorrhage  was reported  in 2.4%  (2/84)  of patients  in the Avastin  alone  arm (Grade  1); and in 
3.8%  (3/79)  of patients  treated  with Avastin  and irinotecan  (Grades  1, 2 and 4). Patients  with 
untreated  CNS metastases  were  routinely  excluded  from clinical  trials with Avastin,  based  on 
imaging  procedures  or signs  and symptoms.  Therefore,  the risk of CNS haemorrhage  in such  patient  
has not been  prospectively  evaluated  in randomised  clinical  studies.  Patients  should  be monitored   
for signs  and symptoms  of CNS  bleeding,   and Avastin  treatment  discontinued  in cases  of intracranial  
bleeding.  
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT 
The same  method  of assessment  and the sametechnique (i.e. with or without  contrast)  should  be 
used  to characterize  each  identified  and reported  lesion  at baseline,  and every  nine weeks  (+/- 1 
weeks).  Designated radiologists at MSKCC (named on the study face sheet) will interpret the study 
CTs according  to RECIST  1.1 criteria.  
Tumor  response  will be assessed  using  RECIST  1.1. A CT chest/abdomen/pelvis  will be performed   
to demonstrate  all known  areas  of measurable  disease.  The baseline  study  will occur  no more  than 4 
weeks  prior to first study  drug administration.  A CT scan  with contrast  will be the preferred  method  
and modality  of imaging.  A CT scan  without  contrast  can be used  in patients  with contraindications  to 
radiographic  contrast  media  used  in CT scans.  All patients  must  have at least one measurable  
disease  lesion  by CT. MRI brains  (+/- spine)  will be required  as well to assess CNS involvement.  
All measurable  lesions,  up to a maximum  of 5 lesions  total, representative  of all involved  organs  
should  be identified  as target  lesions  and recorded  and measured  at baseline.  Target  lesions  should  
be selected  on the basis  of their size, should  be representative  of all involved  organs,  and should  
lend themselves  to reproducible  repeat  measurements.  All other  lesions  (or sites of disease)  should  
be identified  as non-target  lesions  and should  also be recorded  at baseline  as well. Definitions  of 
response  in target  and non-target  lesions  are described  in Table  12.1 and 12.3 below.  Table  12.3 
provides  overall  responses  for all possible  combinations  of tumor  responses  in target  and nontarget  
lesions.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  29 of 47  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table  12.1:  Evaluation  of target  lesions  
Complete  Response  (CR):  Disappearance  of all target  lesions  
Partial response (PR) At least  a 30% decrease  in the sum of the diameters  
of the target  lesions  
Progressive  disease  (PD):  At least  a 20% increase  in the sum of the diameter  of 
the target  lesions  or the appearance  of one or more  
new lesions  
Stable  disease  (SD):  Neither  sufficient  shrinkage  to qualify  for PR nor 
sufficient  increase  to qualify  for PD 
 
 
Table  12.2:  Evaluation  of non-target  lesions  
Complete  Response  (CR):  Disappearance  of all non-target  lesions  
Incomplete  response/Stable  disease  (SD):  Persistence  of one or more  non-target  lesions  
Progressive  disease  (PD):  Appearance  of one or more  new lesion  and/or  
unequivocal  progression  of existing non-target  lesion  
 
 
Table  12.3:  Combinations  of responses  
Target  lesions  Nontarget  lesions  New lesions  Overall  response  
CR CR No CR 
CR Incomplete/SD  No PR 
PR Non-PD No PR 
SD Non-PD No SD 
PD Any Yes or No PD 
Any PD Yes or No PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
 
Discontinuation  of treatment  
Early  death  is defined  as having  no repeat  tumor  assessments  following  initiation  of study  therapy  
resulting  from death  of the patient  due to disease  or treatment.  Patients  with global  deterioration  of 
health  status  requiring  discontinuation  of treatment  without  objective  evidence  of disease  
progression  will be recorded  as ‘symptomatic  deterioration ’. Every  effort  will be made  to document  
objective  progression  even after discontinuation  of treatment.  
 
Evaluation  of best overall  response  
The best overall  response  is the best response  recorded  from the start of treatment  until disease  
progression,  as defined  in Table  12.3.  
 
Other  definitions  
Evaluable  for toxicity:  All patients  who receive  ≥ 80% of all  treatment  doses  with osimertinib  and 
bevacizumab  during  cycle  1 of phase  I will be evaluable  for toxicity  during  the DLT period.  However,  
patients  who are replaced  during  the first cycle  of treatment  in the dose  de-escalation  phase  for any 
reason other than DLT will not be included in the assessment of MTD. 
Evaluable for efficacy: All patients at MTD will be included in the analysis of efficacy. Patients 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  30 of 47  
  
 
treated at the MTD with a DLT who do not continue treatment on study will not be included in the 
phase 2 portion of the study. If patients at the MTD with a DLT continue on study, they will be 
included  in the efficacy  analyses.  
Progression -free survival  (PFS)  is defined  as the duration  of time from first treatment  to time of 
progression  (in the CNS or systemically)  or death,  whichever  occurs  first. 
Intracranial  progression -free survival  (PFS)  is defined  as the duration  of time from first treatment  to 
time of progression  (in the CNS)  or death,  whichever  occurs  first. 
Overall  survival  (OS)  is defined  as the duration  of time from first treatment  to time of death.  
 
13.0 CRITERIAFOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY 
 
Patients  may withdraw  from the study  at any time.  Other  reasons  for study  discontinuation  include  
but are not limited  to: 
• Change  in patient  eligibility  
• Non-compliance  with the defined  treatment  plan 
• Protocol  violation  
• Investigator ’s decision  based  on patient ’s best interest  
• W ithdrawal  of consent  
• Severe,  unexpected  toxicities/side  effects  
• Lost to follow  up 
• Death  
• Progression  of disease  (defined  by RECIST  1.1) 
 
For the Phase  1 portion  of the study,  patients  who withdraw  from the study  for reasons  other  than 
DLT without  completing  a full treatment  cycle  will be replaced.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  31 of 47  
  
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS 
Phase  1: 
Primary  Objective:  To determine  the safety  and tolerability  of the combination  of osimertinib  and 
bevacizumab  in patients  with EGFR  mutant  lung cancers.  
Endpoints:  Identify  any doselimiting toxicities  of the combination  and establish  the MTD.  A dose  limiting  
toxicity  is a binary  outcome  where  a patient  either  experiences  a DLT or not. DLT is defined  as any of 
the toxicities  described  in Section  9.4 that occurs  within  one cycle  after initiation  of treatment  with 
osimertinib  and bevacizumab.  The MTD is defined  as the highest  dose  at which  not more  than 1/6 of the 
patients  experience  a DLT.  
Method: A standard 3+3 design will be used to find the maxim um tolerated dose (MTD). Wewill begin 
with dose  level 1 and de-escalate  to dose  level -1 if significant  toxicity  is seen  with the combination.  
Table  14: Dose  levels  
 
Dose  level Osimertinib  Bevacizumab  
-1 40mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
1 80mg  daily 15mg/kg  every  3 weeks  
 
Three  patients  will be enrolled  at dose  level 1 (Osimertinib  80mg  once  daily and bevacizumab  
15mg/kg  intravenously  once  every  three  weeks  and assessedfor dose  limiting  toxicities  (DLTs) for 1 
full cycle  (21 days).  Toxicity  will be graded  according  to NCI CTCAE  version  4.0. 
If 0-1 DLTs  occur  at dose  level 1 during  cycle  1, an additional  3 patients  will be treated  at dose  level 
1. If 0-1 DLTs occur  during  cycle  1 in the 6 patients  treated,  dose  level 1 will be determined  to be 
the MTD.  If 2 or greater  DLTs occur  at dose  level 1, we will de-escalate  to dose  level -1. 
 
The dose  escalation  scheme  is as follows:  
 
1. If zero to one of the initial  three  patients  at a given  dose  level experiences  DLT,  three  additional  
patients  will be treated  at the same  dose  level.  
2. If two or more  patients  experience  DLT at dose  level 1, 3 patients  will be treated  at dose  level 
-1. 
3. Should  two or more  patients  experience  the DLT at dose  level -1, the study  will be halted,  and 
alternative  combination  dosing  will be considered.  
4. If only three  patients  were treated  at a dose  under  consideration  as the MTD,  an additional  
three  patients  will be treated  at that level to confirm  previous  results.  
 
Thus,  the maximum  number  of patients  that will be enrolled  in the phase  I portion  is 12 (6 at each  
dose  level).  The probability  of escalation  given  different  true rates  of dose -limiting  toxicity  is given  
below  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  32 of 47  
  
 
Toxicity  rate 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 
Probability  of escalation  91% 71% 49% 31% 17% 
 
The MTD will be the recommende d dose for the phase 2 portion.  At the completion of the phase 1 
portion,  6 patients  will have been  treated  at the MTD. These  patients  will be followed  for response  
assessment and included in the phase 2 portion of the study. Patients treated at the MTD with a DLT 
who do not continue  treatment  on study  will not be included  in the phase  2 portion  of the study.  If 
patients at the MTD with a DLT continue on study, they will be included in the efficacy analyses. 
Given  an expected  accrual  rate of 2 patients  per month,  the phase  1 portion  of the study  will be 
completed  within  6 months  or less. 
 
 
Phase  2: 
 
Primary  Objective:  Assess  the progression -free survival  at 12 months  of combination  Osimertinib  
and bevacizumab  in patients  with untreated  EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  
Secondary Objective: 1) Measure overall response rate (CR+PR), 2) measure progression-free 
survival  3)measure  intracranial  progression -free survival  4) measure  overall  survival  5) further  define  
the toxicity  profile  of the combination  
Methods:  
A thirty  patient  subgroup  of the AURA  study  received  Osimertinib  80mg  daily as first-line treatment  
for EGFR -mutant  lung cancer  (Ram  lingam  PASCO  2015).  After 12 months  of follow  up, the  
median  PFS was not yet reached.  The percent  of progression -free surviving  patients  is 73% at 
12 months  with a 95% CI of 51% to 87%.  W e decided  to use the lower  bound   of the 95% CI of 1- 
year PFS from the AURA  study  with 51% as the historical  control.  
Hoping  to see an improvement  in 1-year PFS from 51% to 70%,  we will need  43 patients  to 
provide  80% power  while  controlling  the Type  I error at 5% in a single -stage  design.  W e will need  
to see at least 28 patients  alive and free from progression  at 12 months  in order  to consider  this 
treatment  strategy  promising.  Overall  survival  (OS),  progression -free survival  at 12 months  and 
progression -free survival  (PFS)  will be estimated  using  the Kaplan -Meier   method,  with the follow - 
up starting  at the initiation  of therapy.  Patients  will be censored  at the time of the last on-study  
evaluation  if they do not experience  the event  of interest.  Intracranial  progression  will be 
calculated  by looking  specifically  for growth  or new lesions  or leptomeningeal  disease  in the 
central  nervous  system.  Overall  response  rate (CR + PR) will be calculated,  utilizing  best overall  
response,  including  exact  95% confidence  intervals.  
Patients  who undergo  intra-patient  dose  escalation  from dose  -1 to dose  1 if dose  1 is established  
as the MTD,  will not be included  in the response  rates,  PFS,  or OS. Safety  and tolerability   will be 
summarized  using  descriptive  statistics.  The toxicities  and the adverse  events  will be assessed  for 
each  patient  according  to the NCI CTCAE  version  4.0 criteria.  Given  an expected  accrual  rate of 
2 patients  per month,  the accrual  for the expansion  portion  of the study  will be completed  in about  
19 months.  If an efficacy signal  is seen  when  assessing  the PFS at one year,  a larger,  multicenter,  
randomized  study  will be considered  to more  accurately  compare  the efficacy  of Osimertinib  
monotherapy  to Osimertinib  plus bevacizumab.  

Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  33 of 47  
  
 
Patients  will remain  on study  until progression  or they come  off study  treatment  for other  reasons.  
Patients  will have an end of treatment  visits  that concludes  study  follow  up. They  will not be contact  
directly  once  off study  treatment,  but every  effort  with be made  to document  their disease  
progression  and survival  status  for the progression -free survival  rate at 12 months  and overall  
survival  information.  If patient s’ disease  progression  status  is unobserved  at 12 months  despite  the 
effort,  they will be counted  as progression  so that the PF survival  rate at 12 months  will be a 
conservative  estimate.  
 
Correlative  Studies:  
 
Primary  Objective:  1) to identify  EGFR T790M  in pre and post treatment  samples  2) perform  next- 
generation  sequencing  based  mutation  testing  on tumors  before  treatment  and at progression.  
 
 
Correlatives:  For the correlative  studies,  the analysis  is primarily  exploratory  and hypothesis  generating.  
Correlative  studies  will be performed  on all patients,  (from  the phase  1 and 2 portions  of the study)  
including  descriptive  summaries  of mutation  testing.  The only exception  is the IMPACT  analyses  which  
will be limited  to patients  with samples  available.  There  is an  optional  tumor  biopsy  at best 
response.Tissue  will only be available  after protocol  treatment  from subjects  who agree  to a standard  
of care post-progression biopsy. W hile all the genes in the IMPACT pane l will be assessed, only those 
with at least 10% prevalence  in this trial will be statistically  analyzed.  
Method:  
EGFR  T90M  status  will be determined  pre-treatment  for all patients  and post treatment  in those  
patients  who progress  using  direct  sequencing.  The proportion  of patients  with T790M  mutation  in both 
tumor  tissue  will be calculated  along  with the exact  95% confidence  interval.  The pre- treatment  EGFR  
T790M  mutations  along  with the gene  mutations  identified  by the IMPACT  panel  will be 
univariately  correlated  with response  using  Chi-squared  test and with PFS and OS using  logrank  test. 
Since  the expected  number  of genes  to be analyzed  is in the order  of hundreds,  the Benjamini - 
Hochberg  procedure  (15) will be considered  to control  the false discovery  rate at 0.05 level.  
 
 
15.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND  RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES 
 
15.2 Research  Participant  Registration  
 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
 
Obtain  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  
Consent  Procedures.  
During  the registration  process  registering  individuals  will be required  to complete  a protocol  
specific  Eligibility  Checklist.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  34 of 47  
  
 
All participants  must  be registered  in the Clinical  Trial Management  Systems  (CTMS)  program  
at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. 
 
15.3 Randomization  
 
No randomization  will occur  in this study.  
 
16.1 DAT A M ANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 
A Clinical  Research  Coordinator  (CRC))  will be assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of the 
RSA include  project  compliance,  data collection,  abstraction  and entry,  data reporting,  regulatory  
monitoring,  problem  resolution  and prioritization,  and coordinate  the activities  of the protocol  study  
team.  The data collected  for this study  will be entered  into a secure  database  (Clinical  Research  
Database  (CRDB).  Source  documentation  will be available  to support  the computerized  patient  
record.  The principal  investigator  will maintain  ultimate  responsibility  for the clinical  trial. 
 
16.2 Quality Assurance 
 
W eekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  
of registration  data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data 
and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  and extent  and accuracy  of evaluations  and follow -up will 
be monitored  periodically  throughout  the study  period  and potential  problems  will be brought  
to the attention  of the study  team  for discussion  and action.   Random  -sample  data quality  
and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the study  team,  at a minimum  of two 
times  per year,  more  frequently  if indicated.  
 
 
16.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety Monitoring  (DSM) Plans at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 
were approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies  set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled  “Policy  of the National  Cancer  
Institute for Data and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials” which can be found at: 
http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/patientsafety/dsm   -guidelines/page1  
 
The DSM Plans at MSKCC were established and are monitored by the Office of Clinical 
Research. The MSKCC Data and Safety Monitoring Plans can be found on the MSKCC 
Intranet  at: 
http://smskps  ps9/dept/ocr/OCR%20W    ebs ite%20Doc  uments/Clinical%20Research%20Qualit   
y%20Assurance%20(CRQA)/MSKCC%20Data%20and%20Safety%20Monitoring%20Plan.p   df 

Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  35 of 47  
  
 
There  are several  different   mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials are monitored  for data safety  
and quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protocol  
monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff 
education  on clinical  research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control,  plus 
there  are two institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our 
clinical trials programs. The Data and Safety Monitoring  Committee (DSMC) reports to the 
Center’s Research  Council  and Institutional  Review  Board.  
 
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each  protocol  will be assessedfor its 
level or risk and degree  of monitoring  required.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH sponsored,  
in-house  sponsored,  industry  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be addressed  and 
the monitoring  procedures  will be established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
 
 
17.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
Prior to the enrollment  of each  patient,  the risks,  benefits  and objectives  of the study  will be reviewed  
with the participant,  including  a discussion  of the possible  toxicities  and side effects.  Alternative,  
non-protocol,  treatment  options  will be discussed  with the patient.  It will be reviewed  that 
participation  in this clinical  trial is voluntary  and that the patient  may withdraw  consent  at any time.  
The study  is designed  with careful  safety  monitoring  for toxicity  including  physician  visits  and serial  
cardiac  monitoring.  Specific  guidelines  for symptom  management  are in place  to protect  the study  
participant.  
 
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics: All patients at MSKCC who meet the inclusion 
criteria  will be eligible.  Up to 12 patients  will be enrolled  unto the phase  1 portion,  and an additional  
43 patients  will be enrolled  onto the Phase  2 portion.  Patients  eligible  will be 18 years  of age or older  
with a KPS of 70% or greater.  Both men and women  and members of all ethnic  groups  are eligible  
for this trial. Pregnant  and breast -feeding  women  are excluded  from this study.  This protocol  does 
not include  children  because  the number  of children  is expected  to be limited  for the patient  
population  expected  to be accrued  onto this study.  Also,  the majority  of children  are already  
accessed  by a nationwide  pediatric  cancer  research  network.  This statement  is based  on exclusion  
4b of the NIH Policy  and Guidelines  on the Inclusion  of Children  as Participants  in Research  
Involving   Human  Subjects.  
 
Consent process: All patients at MSKCC who meet the inclusion criteria will be eligible. Participation 
in the trial is voluntary.  All patients  will be required  to sign a statement  of informed  consent,  which  
must  conform  to IRB guidelines.  The informed  consent  procedure  is described  in Section  18.0.  
 
Possible  Toxicities/Side -Effects : There  are risks associated  with treatment  as described  in Section  
11.0;  however,  patients  screened  for enrollment  will be deemed  appropriate  for treatment  
independent  of this study.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  36 of 47  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benef  its: This alternative  regimen  of Osimertinib  and bevacizumab  has the potential  to prolong  
progression -free survival,  improve  the response  rate and/or  overall  survival  compared  to standard  
dosing  erlotinib  in the first-line treatment  setting.  Patients  who progress  on combination  Osimertinib  
and bevacizumab  can still receive  standard,  second -line chemotherapy  and/or  can participate  in an 
alternative  clinical  trial. 
 
Cos ts:  Patients  will be not be charged  for bevacizumab.  Patients  will be charged  forphysician  
visits,  routine  laboratory  tests  and radiologic  studies  required  for monitoring  their condition.  
The patients  will not be billed  for the Osimertinib.  
 
Alternatives : The alternative  to this trial would  be treatment  with erlotinib  or afatinib  monotherapy  or 
standard  cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  
 
Confidentiality : Every  effort  will be made  to maintain  patient  confidentiality.  Research  and hospital  
records  are confidential.  Patient s’ names  and any other  identifying  information  will not be used  in 
reports  or publications  resulting  from this study.  Other  authorized  agencies  and appropriate  internal  
personnel (e.g. qualified monitors from MSKCC) and external personnel, the FDA, and/or other 
governmental  agencies)  may review  patient  records  as required.  
 
The consent indicates  that individualized  de identified  information collected for the purposes of this 
study  may be shared  with other  qualified   researchers.  Only researchers  who have received  approval  
from MSK  will be allowed  to access  this information  which  will not include   protected  health  
information,  such as the participant’s  name, except for dates. It is also stated in the Research 
Authorization  that their research  data may be shared  with other  qualified   researchers.  
 
 
 
Patient  safety : Patients  are monitored  by physicians  and oncology  nurses  who are very familiar  with 
clinical  trials.  In the case  of an adverse  reaction,  immediate  medical  attention  is available.  In the 
evenings  and weekends,  we have  a 24-hour urgent  carefacility for outpatients.  The PI or co-PI will 
also be available  at all times  to organize  any necessary  intervention.  
Monitoring of data to ensure safety: This study is to be monitored by the institutional IRB. This 
incorporates  an independent  data and safety  monitoring  committee  established  by arrangement  with 
the National  Cancer  Institute.  The analysis  of safety  will include  all patients.  Adverse  events,  
including  all toxic effects  of treatment,  will be tabulated  individually,  and summarized  by severity  and 
causality.  
 
17.2 Privacy  
 
MSK’s Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health information 
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  37 of 47  
  
 
protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  
 
The consent  indicates  that individualized   de identified  information  collected  for the purposes  
of this study  may be shared  with other  qualified  researchers.  Only researchers  who have 
received  approval  from MSK will be allowed  to access  this information  which  will not include  
protected  health  information,  such  as the participant’s  name,  except  for dates. It is also 
stated  in the Research  Authorization  that their research  data may be shared  with other  
qualified   researchers.  
17.3 Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting 
Adverse Events 
An AE is any unfavorable  and unintended  sign, symptom,  or disease  temporally  associated  
with the use of an investigational  medicinal  product  (IMP)  or other  protocol -imposed  
intervention,  regardless  of attribution.  
This includes  the following:  
 
• AEs not previously  observed  in the subject  that emerge  during  the protocol -specified  
AE reporting  period,  including  signs  or symptoms  associated  with non-small  cell lung 
cancer  that were  not present  prior to the AE reporting  period.  
• Complications  that occur  as a result  of protocol -mandated  interventions  (e.g.,  invasive  
procedures  such  as cardiac  catheterizations).  
• If applicable,  AEs that occur  prior to assignment  of study  treatment  associated  with 
medication  washout,  no treatment  run-in, or other  protocol -mandated  intervention.  
• Preexisting  medical  conditions  (other  than the condition  being  studied)  judged  by the 
investigator  to have  worsened  in severity  or frequency  or changed  in character  during  
the protocol -specified  AE reporting  period.  
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period 
 
The study  period  during  which  AEs and SAEs  must  be reported  begins  after informed  consent  
is obtained  and initiation  of study  treatment  and ends  30 days following  the last administration  
of study  treatment  or study  discontinuation/termination,  whichever  is earlier.  After this period,  
investigators  should  only report  SAEs  that are attributed  to prior study  treatment.  
 
Assessment of Adverse Events 
All AEs and SAEs  whether  volunteered  by the subject,  discovered  by study  personnel  during  
questioning,  or detected  through  physical  examination,  laboratory  test, or other  means  will be 
reported  appropriately.  Each  reported  AE or SAE will be described  by its duration  (i.e., start 
and end dates),  regulatory  seriousness  criteria  if applicable,  suspected  relationship  to the 
osimertinib  and/or  bevacizumab  (see following  guidance),  and actions  taken.  
To ensure  consistency  of AE and SAE causality  assessments,  investigators  should  apply  the 
following  general  guideline:  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  38 of 47  
 
 
 
Yes 
There  is a plausible  temporal  relationship  between  the onset  of the AE and administration  of 
the osimertinib  or bevacizumab,  and the AE cannot  be readily  explained  by the subject’s  
clinical  state,  intercurrent  illness,  or concomitant  therapies;  and/or  the AE follows  a known  
pattern  of response  to osimertinib  and/or  bevacizumab;  and/or  the AE abates  or resolves  upon  
discontinuation  of the study  drug or dose  reduction  and, if applicable,  reappears  upon  re- 
challenge.  
No 
Evidence  exists  that the AE has an etiology  other  than the osimertinib  or bevacizumab  (e.g.,  
preexisting  medical  condition,  underlying  disease,  intercurrent  illness,  or concomitant  
medication);  and/or  the AE has no plausible  temporal  relationship  to osimertinib  and/or  
bevacizumab  administration  (e.g.,  cancer  diagnosed  2 days after first dose  of study  drug).  
Expected  adverse  events  are those  adverse  events  that are listed  or characterized  in the 
Package  Insert  (P.I) or current  Investigator  Brochure  (I.B). 
Unexpected  adverse  events  are those  not listed  in the P.I or current  I.B or not identified.  This 
includes  adverse  events  for which  the specificity  or severity  is not consistent  with the 
description  in the P.I. or I.B. For example,  under  this definition,  hepatic  necrosis  would  be 
unexpected  if the P.I. or I.B. only referred  to elevated  hepatic  enzymes  or hepatitis.  
For patients  receiving  combination  therapy,  causality  will be assessed  individually  for each  
protocol -mandated  therapy.  
 
Eliciting Adverse Events 
 
A consistent  methodology  for eliciting  AEs at all subject  evaluation  time points  should  be 
adopted.  Examples  of non-directive  questions  include:  
“How  have  you felt since  your last clinical  visit?”  
“Have  you had any new or changed  health  problems  since  you were  last here?”  
 
Specific  Instructions  for Recording Adverse Events  
Investigators  should  use correct  medical  terminology/concepts  when  reporting  AEs or SAEs.  
Avoid  colloquialisms  and abbreviations.  
a. Diagnosis  vs. Signs  and Symptoms : If known  at the time of reporting,  a diagnosis  
should  be reported  rather  than individual  signs  and symptoms  (e.g.,  record  only liver failure  or 
hepatitis  rather  than jaundice,  asterixis,  and elevated  transaminases).  However,  if a 
constellation  of signs  and/or  symptoms  cannot  be medically  characterized  as a single  
diagnosis  or syndrome  at the time of reporting,  it is acceptable  to report  the information  that is 
currently  available.  If a diagnosis  is subsequently  established,  it should  be reported  as follow - 
up information.  
b. Deaths : All deaths  that occur  during  the protocol -specified  AE reporting  period  (see 
Section  I), regardless  of attribution,  will be reported  to the appropriate  parties.  When  recording  
a death,  the event  or condition  that caused  or contributed  to the fatal outcome  should  be 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  39 of 47  
  
 
reported  as the single  medical  concept.  If the cause  of death  is unknown  and cannot  be 
ascertained  at the time of reporting,  report  “Unexplained  Death”  
c. Preexisting  Medical  Conditions:  A preexisting  medical  condition  is one that is 
present  at the start of the study.  Such  conditions  should  be reported  as medical  and surgical  
history.  A preexisting  medical  condition  should  be re-assessed  throughout  the trial and 
reported  as an AE or SAE only if the frequency,  severity,  or character  of the condition  worsens  
during  the study.  When  reporting  such  events,  it is important  to convey  the concept  that the 
preexisting  condition  has changed  by including  applicable  descriptors  (e.g.,  “more  frequent  
headaches”).  
d. Hospitalizations for Medical  or Surgical  Procedures  
Any AE that results  in hospitalization  or prolonged  hospitalization  should  be documented  
and reported  as an SAE.  If a subject  is hospitalized  to undergo  a medical  or surgical  
procedure  as a result  of an AE, the event  responsible  for the procedure,  not the procedure  
itself,  should  be reported  as the SAE.  For example,  if a subject  is hospitalized  to undergo  
coronary  bypass  surgery,  record  the heart  condition  that necessitated  the bypass  as the 
SAE.  
 
Hospitalizations  for the following  reasons  do not require  reporting:  
• Hospitalization  or prolonged  hospitalization  for diagnostic  or elective  surgical  
procedures  for preexisting  conditions  
• Hospitalization  or prolonged  hospitalization  required  to allow  efficacy  measurement  for 
the study  or 
• Hospitalization  or prolonged  hospitalization  for scheduled  therapy  of the target  disease  
of the study  
 
Assessment of Severity of Adverse Events 
 
The adverse  event  severity  grading  scale  for the NCI CTCAE  v4.0 will be used  for assessing  
adverse  event  severity.  Below  Table  should  be used  for assessing  severity  for adverse  events  
that are not specifically  listed  in the NCI CTCAE.  
 
 
 
 
Adverse  Event  Severity  Grading  Scale  for Events  Not Specifically  Listed  in NCI CTCAE  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  40 of 47  
  
 
Grade  Severity 
1 Mild;  asymptomatic  or mild symptoms;  clinical  or diagnostic  observations   only;  
or intervention   not indicated  
2 Moderate;   minimal,  local,  or non-invasive   intervention   indicated;  or limiting  
age-appropriate   instrumental  activities of daily living   a 
3 Severe   or medically  significant,  but not immediately  life-threatening;  
hospitalization  or prolongation   of hospitalization  indicated;  disabling;  or 
limiting  self-care activities of daily living  b,c 
4 Life-threatening   consequences   or urgent  intervention   indicated  d 
5 Death  related  to adverse   event   d 
NCI CTCAE  = National  Cancer  Institute  Common  Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events.  
Note:  Based  on the version  of NCI CTCAE  v4.0,  w hich can be found  at: 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm  
a. Instrumental  activities  of daily living  refer  to preparing  meals,  shopping  for groceries  or clothes,  using  the 
telephone,  managing  money,  etc. 
b. Examples  of self-care  activities  of daily living  include  bathing,  dressing  and undressing,  feeding  oneself,  using  
the toilet,  and taking  medications,  as performed  by patients  w ho are not bedridden.  
c. If an event  is assessed  as a "significant  medical  event,"  it must  be reported  as a serious  adverse  event  
d. Grade  4 and 5 events  must  be reported  as serious  adverse  events  
 
 
Pregnancy:  If a female  subject  becomes  pregnant  while  receiving  the study  drug or within  6 
months  after the last dose  of study  drug,  or if the female  partner  of a male  study  subject  
becomes  pregnant  while  the study  subject  is receiving  the study  drug or within  6 months  after 
the last dose  of study  drug,  a report  should  be completed  and expeditiously  submitted  to 
Genentech,  Inc. Follow -up to obtain  the outcome  of the pregnancy  should  also occur.  
Abortion,  whether  accidental,  therapeutic,  or spontaneous,  should  always  be classified  as 
serious,  and expeditiously  reported  as an SAE.  Similarly,  any congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
in a child born to a female  subject  exposed  to the study drug should  be reported  as an SAE.  
AEs of Special Interest (AESIs) 
 
AESIs  are a subset  of Events  to Monitor  (EtMs)  of scientific  and medical  concern  specific  to 
the product,  for which  ongoing  monitoring  and rapid  communication  by the Investigator  to the 
Sponsor  is required.  Such  an event  might  require  further  investigation  in order  to characterize  
and understand  it. Depending  on the nature  of the event,  rapid  communication  by the trial 
Sponsor  to other  parties  (e.g.,  Regulatory  Authorities)  may also be warranted.  
 
Adverse  events  of special  interest  for this study  include  the following:  
 
• Cases of potential  drug-induced  liver injury  that include  an elevated  ALT or AST in 
combination  with either  an elevated  bilirubin  or clinical  jaundice,  as defined  by Hy’s law: 
o Treatment -emergent  ALT or AST > 3 x ULN in combination  with total bilirubin  > 
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  41 of 47  
 
 
 
2 x ULN 
 
o Treatment -emergent  ALT or AST > 3 x ULN in combination  with clinical  
jaundice  
 
• Data related  to a suspected  transmission  of an infectious  agent  by the study  drug 
(STIAMP),   as defined  below:  
Any organism,  virus,  or infectious  particle  (e.g.,  prion  protein  transmitting  transmissible  
spongiform  encephalopathy),  pathogenic  or non-pathogenic,  is considered  an infectious  agent.  
A transmission  of an infectious  agent  may be suspected  from clinical  symptoms  or laboratory  
findings  that indicate  an infection  in a patient  exposed  to a medicinal  product.   This term 
applies  only when  a contamination  of the study  drug is suspected  
 
 
The Avastin  Events  of Special  Interest  are: 
 
o Hypertension  ≥ grade  3 
o Proteinuria  ≥ grade  3 
 
o GI perforation,  abscesses  and fistulae  (any grade)  
 
o Wound  healing  compli cations  ≥ grade  3 
 
o Haemorrhage  ≥ grade  3 (any grade  CNS bleeding;  ≥ grade  2 haemoptysis)  
o Arterial  thromboembolic  events  (any grade)  
 
o Venous  thromboembolic  events  ≥ grade  3 
 
o PRES  (or RPLS;  any grade)  
 
o CHF ≥ grade  3 
o Non-GI fistula  or abscess ≥  grade  2 
Other  Special  Situations  Reports  
 
The following  other Special  Situations  Reports  should  be collected  even  in the absence  of an 
Adverse  Event  and transmitted  to Genentech:  
Data related  to the Product  usage  during  breastfeeding  
Data related  to overdose,  abuse,  misuse  or medication  error  (including  potentially  
exposed  or intercepted  medication  errors)  
 In addition,  reasonable  attempts  should  be made  to obtain  and submit  the age or age 
group  of the patient,  in order  to be able to identify  potential  safety  signals  specific to  a 
particular  population  

Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  42 of 47  
  
 
Product  complaints  
 
A Product  Complaint  is defined  as any written  or oral information  received  from a complainant  
that alleges  deficiencies  related  to identity,  quality,  safety,  strength,  purity,  reliability,  durability,  
effectiveness,  or performance  of a product  after it has been  released  and distributed  to the 
commercial  market  or clinical  trial. 
Post-Study Adverse Events 
 
For studies  involving  collection  of survival  data the investigator  after the end of the adverse  
event  reporting  period  (defined  as 30 days after the last dose  of study  drug)  should  report  all 
deaths,  (regardless  of cause),  and any serious  adverse  event  including development  of cancer  
or a congenital  anomaly  in a subsequently  conceived  offspring  of a female  subject  who 
participated  in the study  that is believed  to be related  to prior exposure  to study  drug.  
Case  Transmission  Verification  will be performed  by both parties  during  this period  (half- 
yearly)  to ensure  successful  transmission  of Single  case  reports.  
Serious Adverse Events 
 
An AE should  be classified  as an SAE if any of the following  criteria  are met: 
 
▪ It results  in death  (i.e., the AE actually  causes  or leads  to death).  
▪ It is life threatening  (i.e., the AE, in the view of the investigator,  places  the subject  at 
immediate  risk of death.  It does  not include  an AE that, had it occurred  in a more  severe  
form,  might  have caused  death.).  
▪ It requires  or prolongs  inpatient  hospitalization.  
▪ It results  in persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity  (i.e., the AE results  in substantial  
disruption  of the subject’s  ability  to conduct  normal  life functions).  
▪ It results  in a congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  in a neonate/infant  born to a mother  exposed  
to the IMP. 
▪ It is considered  a significant  medical  event  by the investigator  based  on medical  judgment  
(e.g.,  may jeopardize  the subject  or may require  medical/surgical  intervention  to prevent  
one of the outcomes  listed  above).  
Note:  Hospital  admission  for a planned  procedure/disease  treatment  is not considered  an 
SAE.  
 
 
SAE reporting  is required  as soon  as the participant  starts  investigational  
treatment/intervention.  SAE reporting  is required  for 30-days after the participant’s  last 
investigational  treatment/intervention.  Any event  that occur  after the 30-day period  that is 
unexpected  and at least possibly  related  to protocol  treatment  must  be reported.  
Please  note:  Any SAE that occurs  prior to the start of investigational  treatment/intervention  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  43 of 47  
  
 
and is related  to a screening  test or procedure  (i.e., a screening  biopsy)  must  be reported.  
 
All SAEs  must  be submitted  in PIMS.  If an SAE requires  submission  to the HRPP  office  per 
IRB SOP  RR-408 ‘Reporting  of Serious  Adverse  Events’,  the SAE report  must  be submitted  
within  5 calendar  days of the event.  All other  SAEs  must  be submitted  within  30 calendar  days 
of the event.  
 
 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
 
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
 
• The adverse  event  
 
• The grade  of the event  
 
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment(s)  
 
• If the AE was expected  
 
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
 
o An explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the participant’s  condition  
o Indication  if the participant  remains  on the study  
 
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
 
 
 
17.2.1  SAE Reporting to AstraZeneca and Genentech 
 
Any AE from the time the first dose  of study  treatment  is administered  through  30 days after 
the last dose  should  be reported.  AstraZeneca  and Genentech  are required  to evaluate  and 
expedite  reporting  of serious  adverse  events  to worldwide  regulatory  authorities;  therefore,   
the appropriate  parties,  as specified  in this section,  must  be notified  immediately  (within  24 
hours  of awareness)  regarding  the occurrence  of any serious  adverse  event.   All investigators  
participating  in ongoing  clinical  studies  with the study  medication  will receive  copies  of these  
reports  for prompt  submission  to their Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  or Independent   Ethics  
Committee  (IEC).  
 
Exchange  OF SINGLE  CASE  REPORTS  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  44 of 47  
  
 
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  will be responsible  for collecting  all protocol -defined  
Adverse  Events  (AEs)/Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAEs),  other  Special  Situation  
reports,  AESIs  and Product  Complaints  with an AE where  the patient  has been  
exposed  to the Product  via the MSKCC  PIMS  report  form.  The completed  MSKCC  
SAE report  should  be sent to the Genentech  contact  specified  below.  Transmission  of 
these  reports  (initial  and follow -up) will be either  electronically  via email  or by fax and 
within  the timelines  specified  below:  
 
 
Fax: 650-238-6067  
Email:   usds_aereporting -d@gene.com  
 
All Product  Complaints  without  an AE should  call via: 
PC Hotline  Number:  (800)  334-0290  (M-F: 5 am to 5 pm PST)  
 
Transmission  of these  reports  (initial  and follow -up) will be either  electronically  or by fax and 
within  the timelines  specified  below:  
 
Serious  Adverse  Drug  
Reactions  (SADRs)  15 calendar  days of the 
awareness date 
Other  SAEs  30 calendar  days of the 
awareness  date.  
Special  Situation  Reports  
(Pregnancy)  
 
Special  Situation  Reports  
(Other)  30 calendar  days of the 
awareness  date.  
30 calendar  days of the 
awareness  date.  
Product  Complaints  15 calendar  days of the 
awareness  date.  
AESIs  15 calendar  days of the 
awareness  date.  
 
 
 
• Serious Adverse Drug Reactions (SADRs) 
Serious  AE reports  that are related  to the Product  shall be transmitted  to Genentech  within  fifteen  
(15) calendar  days of the awareness  date.  
 
• Other  SAEs  
Serious  AE reports  that are unrelated  to the Product  shall be transmitted  to Genentech  within  thirty  
(30) calendar  days of the awareness  date.  
• AESIs 
AESIs  shall be forwarded  to Genentech    within  fifteen  (15) calendar  days of the awareness  date.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  45 of 47  
  
 
• Special  Situation  Reports  
Pregnancy  reports  
While  such  reports  are not serious  AEs or Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (ADRs)  per se, as defined  herein,  
any reports  of pregnancy  (including  pregnancy  occurring  in the partner  of a male  study  subject),  
where  the fetus  may have been  exposed  to the Product,  shall be transmitted  to Genentech  within  thirty  
(30) calendar  days of the awareness  date.  Pregnancies  will be followed  up until the outcome  of the 
pregnancy  is known,  whenever  possible,  based  upon  due diligence  taken  to obtain  the follow -up 
information.  
 
Other  Special  Situation  Reports , as defined  above,  shall be transmitted  to Genentech  within  thirty  
(30) calendar  days of the awareness  date.  
 
• Product  Complaints  
All Product  Complaints  (with or without  an AE) shall be forwarded  to Genentech  within  fifteen  (15) 
calendar  days of the awareness  date.  
 
A Product  Complaint  is defined  as any written  or oral information  received  from a complainant  that 
alleges  deficiencies  related  to identity,  quality,  safety,  strength,  purity,  reliability,   durability,  
effectiveness,  or performance  of a product  after it has been  released  and distributed  to the 
commercial  market  or clinical  trial. 
 
• AESIs 
 
AESIs  requiring  expedited  reporting  (related  or possibly  related  to Genentech  product  or where  the 
causality  is assessed  as unknown  or not provided)  shall be forwarded  to Genentech  within  fifteen  (15) 
calendar  days of the awareness  date.  Others  (non-related  to Genentech  product)  shall be sent within  
thirty  (30) calendar  days.  
 
Case  Transmission  Verification  of Single  Case  Reports  
 
The Sponsor  agrees  to conduct  the Case  Transmission  verification  to ensure  that all single  case  
reports  have been  adequately  received  by Genentech  via Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
emailing  Genentech  a Quarterly  line-listing  documenting  single  case  reports  sent by Memorial  Sloan  
Kettering  Cancer  Center  to Genentech  in the preceding  time period.  
The periodic  line-listing  will be exchanged  within  seven  (7) calendar  days of the end of the agreed  
time period.  Confirmation  of receipt  should  be received  within  the time period  mutually  agreed  upon.  
 
If discrepancies  are identified,  the Sponsor  and Genentech  will cooperate  in resolving  the 
discrepancies.  The responsible  individuals  for each  party  shall handle  the matter  on a case -by-case  
basis  until satisfactory  resolution.   The sponsor  shall receive  reconciliation  guidance  documents  within  
the ‘Activation  Package’.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  46 of 47  
  
 
Following  Case  Transmission  Verification,  single  case  reports  which  have  not been  received  by 
Genentech  shall be forwarded  by Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  to Genentech  within  five 
(5) calendar  days from request  by Genentech.  
 
At the end of the study,  a final cumulative  Case  Transmission  Verification  report  will be sent to 
Genentech.  
 
 
GENENTE  CH REPORTING  GUIDELINES  
In addition  to completing  appropriate  patient  demographic  and suspect  medication  information,  the 
report  should  include  the following  information  within  form:  
 
• Protocol  number  and title description  
• Description  of event,  severity,  treatment,  and outcome  if known  
• Supportive  laboratory  results  and diagnostics  
• Investigator’s  assessment  of the relationship  of the adverse  event  to each  investigational  
product  and suspect  medication  
Follow -Up Information  
• Additional  information  may be added  to a previously  submitted  report  by any of the following  
methods:  
• Adding  to the original  report  and submitting  it as follow -up 
• Adding  supplemental  summaryinformation and submitting  it as follow -up with the original  form 
• Summarizing  new information  and faxing  it with a cover  letter  including  patient  identifiers  (i.e. 
D.O.B.  initial,  patient  number),  protocol  description  and number,  if assigned,  brief adverse  
event  description,  and notation  that additional  or follow -up information  is being  submitted  (The 
patient  identifiers  are important  so that the new information  is added  to the correct  initial  
report)  
 
Reporting to Regulatory Authorities, Ethics Committees and Investigators 
 
Genentech  as the Marketing  Authorization  Holder  will be responsible  for the reporting  of individual  
case  safety  reports  from the study  to the regulatory  authority  in compliance  with applicable  
regulations.  
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  will be responsible  for the expedited  
reporting  of safety  reports  originating  from the Study  to the Ethics  Committees  
and Institutional   Review  Boards  (IRB),  where  applicable.  
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  will be responsible  for the 
distribution  of safety  information  to its own investigators,  where  relevant,  in 
accordance  with local regulations.  
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  will be responsible  for the 
distribution  of safety  information  to Site IRB: 
MSK  Institutional   Review   Board  (IRB)  - 212-639-7592 . 
MSK  Patient   Representative   Department   - 212-639-7202.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  47 of 47  
  
 
For questions  related  to safety  reporting,  please  contact  Genentech  Drug  Safety:  
 
Tel: (888)  835-2555  
Fax: (650)  225-4682  or (650)  225-4630  
 
 
Other  Reports  
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  will forward  a copy of the Final  Study  
Report  to Genentech  upon  completion  of the Study.  
STUDY  CLOSE -OUT 
 
Any study  report  submitted  to the FDA by the Sponsor -Investigator  should  be copied  to 
Genentech.  This includes  all IND annual  reports  and the Clinical  Study  Report  (final study  
report).  Additionally,  any literature  articles  that are a result  of the study  should  be sent to 
Genentech.  Copies  of such  reports  should  be mailed  to the assigned  Clinical  Operations  
contact  for the study:  
Fiona  Yeh – yehf@mskcc.org  
 
 
And to Genentech  Drug  Safety  CTV oversight  mail box at: ctvist_drugsafety@gene.com  
 
QUERIES  
 
Queries  related  to the Study  will be answered  by Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  
Center.  However,  responses  to all safety  queries  from regulatory  authorities  or for 
publications  will be discussed  and coordinated  between  the Parties.  The Parties  agree  
that Genentech  shall have the final say and control  over safety  queries  relating  to the 
Product.  Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  agrees  that it shall not answer  such  
queries  from regulatory  authorities  and other  sources  relating  to the Product  
independently  but shall redirect  such  queries  to Genentech.  
 
Both Parties  will use all reasonable  effort  to ensure  that deadlines  for responses  to urgent  
requests  for information  or review  of data are met. The Parties  will clearly  indicate  on the request  
the reason  for urgency  and the date by which  a response  is required.  
 
SAFETY  CRISIS  MANAGEMENT  
 
In case  of a safety  crisis,  e.g., where  safety  issues  have a potential  impact  on the 
indication(s),  on the conduct  of the Study,  may lead to labeling  changes  or regulatory  
actions  that limit or restrict  the way in which  the Product  is used,  or where  there  is 
media  involvement,  the Party  where  the crisis  originates  will contact  the other  Party  
as soon  as possible.  
 
The Parties  agree  that Genentech  shall have the final say and control  over safety  crisis  
management  issues  relating  to the Product.  Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
agrees  that it shall not answer  such  queries  from media  and other  sources  relating  to the 
Product  but shall redirect  such  queries  to Genentech.  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  48 of 47  
  
 
 
COMPLIANCE WITH PHARMACOVIGILANCE  AGREEMENT / AUDIT 
 
The Parties  shall follow  their own procedures  for adherence  to AE reporting  timelines.  
Each  Party  shall monitor  and, as applicable,  request  feedback  from the other  Party  
regarding  AE report  timeliness  in accordance  with its own procedures.  The Parties  agree  
to provide  written  responses  in a timely  manner  to inquiries  from the other  Party  
regarding  AE reports  received  outside  the agreed  upon  Agreement  timelines.  If there  is 
any detection  of trends  of increasing  or persistent  non-compliance  to transmission  
timelines  stipulated  in this Agreement,  both Parties  agree  to conduct  ad hoc or institute  a 
regular  joint meeting  to address  the issue.  
In case  of concerns  related  to non-compliance  of processes,  other  than exchange  
timelines,  with this Agreement,  the Parties  will jointly  discuss  and collaborate  on 
clarifying  and resolving  the issues  causing  non-compliance.  Every  effort  will be made  by 
the non-compliant  Party  to solve  the non-compliance  issues  and inform  the other  Party  
of the corrective  and preventative  actions  taken.  
Upon  justified  request,  given  sufficient  notice  of no less than sixty (60) calendar  days,  an 
audit under  the provisions  of this Agreement  can be requested  by either  Party.  The 
Parties  will then discuss  and agree  in good  faith upon  the audit scope,  agenda  and 
execution  of the audit.  The requesting  Party  will bear the cost of the audit.  
 
 
18.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain  full details  
of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  prior to their 
inclusion  in the study.  Participants  will also be informed  that they are free to withdraw  from the study  
at any time.  All participants  must  sign an IRB/PB -approved  consent  form indicating  their consent  to 
participate.  This consent  form meets  the requirements  of the Code  of Federal  Regulations  and the 
Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  The consent  form will include  the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive  
care for therapeutic  studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw  from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.   In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  agree  to the Research  
Authorization  component  of the informed  consent  form.  
 
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  49 of 47  
  
 
receive  a copy  of the signed  informed  consent  form.  
 
 
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Janne  PA, W ang X, Socinski  MA, et al. Randomized  Phase  II Trial of Erlotinib  Alone  or W ith 
Carboplatin  and Paclitaxel  in Patients  W ho W ere Never  or Light Former  Smokers  W ith Advanced  Lung  
Adenocarcinoma:  CALGB  30406  Trial.  Journal  of clinical  oncology  2012;  30(17):2063 -9. 
2. Yu HA, Arcila ME, Rekhtman N, et al. Analysis of tumor specimens at the time of acquired 
resistance  to EGFR -TKI therapy  in 155 patients  with EGFR -mutant  lung cancers.  Clinical  cancer  
research  2013;19:2240 -7. 
3. Janne  PA, Yang  J, Kim DW , et al. AZD9291  in EGFR  inhibitor -resistant  non-small  cell lung 
cancer.  NEJM  2015;  372(18):  1689 -1699.  
4. Garon  EB, Ciuleanu  TE, Arrieta  O, Prabhash  K, Syrigos  KN, Goksel  T, et al. Ramucirumab  
plus docetaxel  versus  placebo  plus docetaxel  for second -line treatment  of stage  IV non-small -cell 
lung cancer  after disease  progression  on platinum -based  therapy  (REVEL):  a multicentre,  double - 
blind,  randomised  phase  3 trial. Lancet.  2014;384(9944):665 -73. 
5. Sandler  A, Gray R, Perry  MC, Brahmer  J, Schiller  JH, Dowlati  A, et al. Paclitaxel -carboplatin  
alone  or with bevacizumab  for non-small -cell lung cancer.  NEJM  2006;355(24):2542 -50. 
6. Reck M, Kaiser R, Mellemgaard A, Douillard JY, Orlov S, Krzakowski M, et al. Docetaxel plus 
nintedanib  versus  docetaxel  plus placebo  in patients  with previously  treated  non-small -cell lung 
cancer (LUME-Lung  1): a phase 3, double-blind, randomised controlled trial. The lancet oncology. 
2014;15(2):143 -55. 
7. Herbst  RS, O'Neill  VJ, Fehrenbacher  L, Belani  CP, Bonomi  PD, Hart L, et al. Phase  II study  
of efficacy  and safety  of bevacizumab  in combination  with chemotherapy  or erlotinib  compared  with 
chemotherapy  alone  for treatment  of recurrent  or refractory  non small -cell lung cancer.  Journal  of 
clinical  oncology.  2007;25(30):4743 -50. 
8. Herbst  RS, Ansari  R, Bustin  F, Flynn  P, Hart L, Otterson  GA, et al. Efficacy  of bevacizumab  
plus erlotinib  versus  erlotinib  alone  in advanced  non-small -cell lung cancer  after failure  of standard  
first-line chemotherapy  (BeTa):  a double -blind,  placebo -controlled,  phase  3 trial. Lancet.  
2011;377(9780):1846 -54. 
9. Seto T, Kato T, Nishio  M, Goto K, Atagi S, Hosomi  Y, et al. Erlotinib  alone  or with 
bevacizumab  as first-line therapy  in patients  with advanced  non-squamous  non-small -cell lung 
cancer  harbouring  EGFR  mutations  (JO25567):  an open -label,  randomised,  multicentre,  phase  2 
study.  The lancet oncology.  2014;15(11):1236 -44. 
10. Ichihara  E, Hotta  K, Nogami  N, Kuyama  S, Kishino  D, Fujii M, et al. Phase  II trial of gefitinib  
in combination  with bevacizumab  as first-line therapy  for advanced  non-small  cell lung cancer  with 
activating  EGFR gene  mutations:  the Okayama  Lung Cancer  Study  Group  Trial 1001.  Journal  of 
thoracic  oncology.  2015;10(3):486 -91. 
11. Mitsudomi T, Morita S, Yatabe Y, Negoro S, Okamoto I, Tsurutani J, et al. Gefitinib versus 
cisplatin  plus docetaxel  in patients  with non-small -cell lung cancer  harbouring  mutations  of the 
epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  (W JTOG3405):  an open  label,  randomised  phase  3 trial. The lancet  
oncology.   2010;11(2):121 -8. 
12. Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R, Vergnenegre A, Massuti B, Felip E, et al. Erlotinib versus 
standard  chemotherapy  as first-line treatment  for European  patients  with advanced  EGFR  mutation - 
positive  non-small -cell lung cancer  (EURTAC):  a multicentre,  open -label,  randomised  phase  3 trial. 
The lancet  oncology.  2012;13(3):239 -46. 
13. Zhou  C, W u YL, Chen  G, Feng  J, Liu XQ, W ang C, et al. Erlotinib  versus chemotherapy  as 
first-line treatment  for patients  with advanced  EGFR  mutation -positive  non-small -cell lung cancer  
Memorial   Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Page  50 of 47  
  
 
(OPTIMAL,  CTONG-0802): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 study. The lancet 
oncology.   2011;12(8):735 -42. 
14. Maemondo M, Inoue A, Kobayashi K, Sugawara S, Oizumi S, Isobe H, et al. Gefitinib or 
chemotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer with mutated EGFR. NEJM. 2010;362(25):2380-8. 
15. Benjamini,  Y., & Hochberg,  Y.. (1995).  Controlling  the False  Discovery  Rate:  A Practical  
and Powerful  Approach  to Multiple  Testing.  Journal  of the Royal  Statistical  Society.  Series  B 
(methodological),  57(1),  289–300.  Retrieved  from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2346101  
 
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES 
 
None  