 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testing Ultraprocessed  Front -of-Package Labels in Chile  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
April 10th, 2025  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol and Analytic Plan  
Introduction  
This study aims to examine t he effects of a warning label signaling that a product is 
ultraprocessed among a sample of Chilean parents . This document pre -specifies our 
planned  analytic approach prior to data collection.  
 
Study Protocol  
Participants will complete an online randomized experiment programmed in Qualtrics. 
After  providing informed con sent and completing a parent study , participants will be 
randomly assigned into 1 of 2 arms : a control arm or an ultraprocessed warning label 
arm. In the control arm, products will carry only nutrient warning labels  per Chile's 
current policy , while in the ultraprocessed warning label arm , products will carry both 
nutrient labels and an ultraprocessed warning label . 
Participants will see three different  mock bags of potato chips  with the same flavor 
(designed to mitigate confounding by product type or flavor) displayed in a random 
order . All three products will be  ultraprocessed . One product will not be high in any 
nutrients of concern, one will be high in sodium, and one will be high in sodium and 
saturated fat. For each product, participants will rate their purchase intentions , 
perceived produ ct healthfulness,  and indicate whether they believe the product to be 
ultraprocessed.  
 
Hypotheses  
Correct identification of UPFs  (co-primary outcome) : We predict that , compared to the 
control arm,  correct  identification of products  as UPFs  will be highe r among  participants 
in the UPF warning label  arm (H1). 
 
Purchase intentions  (co-primary outcome) : We predict that , compared  the control arm,  
product purchase intentions will be low er among  participants in the UPF warning label 
arm (H2). 
 
Perceived product healthfulness  (secondary outcome) : We predict that, compared  the 
control arm, perceived product healthfulness  will be lower  among  participants in the 
UPF warning label arm  (H3). 
 
Moderation hypotheses : We predict that the impact of the UPF label on purchase 
intentions (H4) and perceived product healthfulness (H5) will be greater for the product 
not high in any nutrients of concern than for the products high in one or two nutrients of 
concern.  
 
 
Main Analyses  
We will use a two -sided critical alpha of 0.05 to conduct all statistical tests. All 
confidence  intervals presented will use a 95% confidence level. Analyses of the primary 
and secondary  outcomes will include all participants according to the trial arm to which 
they were randomized.  
For correct identification of products as UPF  (dichotomous outcome) , we will first 
descriptively report unadjusted proportions of correct identification  for each product and 
for all three products  simultaneously (i.e., whether the participant identifies all three  
products as UPFs nor not)  in each experimental arm . To test H1, we will fit a logistic 
mixed -effects regression model . The model will include rando m intercept s to account for 
repeated measures w ithin participants.  The model will regress  identification of products 
as UPFs  on indicator variables for experimental  arm, indicator variables for product, and 
their interaction s. After model estimation, we will test the joint statistical significance of 
the interaction terms, and, if not statistically significant, we will drop the interactions from 
the models. Regardless of the presence of the interaction terms in the final model, we 
will obtain predicted probabilities of correct identification of products as UPF by 
experimental arm for each separate product, which we will use to conduct a joint test of 
statistical significance  of the differences in predicted probabilities across product s. If 
such differences are jointly significant, we will report the average differential effect  
(ADE)  of the UPF label (i.e., differences in predicted probabilities between  experimental 
arms) for each product . Alternatively, if these differences are not jointly significant, we 
will report  the ADE of the UPF label across product s. 
For purchase intentions and perceived healthfulness ( continuous outcomes ), we will first 
descriptively report unadjusted mean  scores  for each product and averaged across 
products  in each  experimental arm.  To test H 2 and H3, we will use linear mixed -effects 
regression models . Model s will include rando m intercept s to account for repeated 
measures w ithin participants. Model s will regress  each outcome on indicator variables 
for experimental arm, indicator variables for product, and their interactions. After model 
estimation, we will test the joint statistical significance of the interaction terms . If the 
interactions are joint ly significant , we will keep the m in the model and report the average 
differential effect (ADE) of the UPF label (i.e., differences in predicted means  between  
experimental arm s) for each product.  Alternatively,  if the interactions are not jointly  
significan t, we will drop them from the models and report  the ADE of the UPF label 
across products.  We will use complete case analysis  to handle any missing data . 
 
Sample Size and Power  
This study will occur in a survey that will follow a parent  experiment.  The total sample of 
3,300 size was calculated based on the primary outcomes of th e parent study.  Using 
G*Power3 .1, we determined that the minimum effect size we would be able to detect 
with this pre -determined sample size. With a n alpha of 0.05 , 80% power, and 1 degree 
of freedom, we would be able to detect an effect of d=0. 06 or larger. We concluded  that 
this sample size would be enough, given that, on a previous  study using similar labels, 
we found an effect size of d=0. 16 on correct identification of products as UPF.  
 
Exclusions and Outliers  
We will exclude participants who complete the survey implausibly quickly (defined as 
<1/3 of the median completion time) and those who completed less than 90% of the 
survey . 
 
Interim Analyses  
No interim analyses are planned.  