THOMAS JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY  
JEFFERSON HEADACHE CENTER  
 
 
PI: Stephen D. Silberstein, M.D.   Protocol # SDS/IVIb/01   
Version: 7/31/14  
 
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
Thomas Jefferson University/ Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version : 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
                                                                          Page 1  of 16   
“A DOUBLE BLIND PLACEBO CONTROLLED PILOT STUDY  TO COLLECT 
AND EVALUATE DATA ON THE USE OF INTRAVENOUS IBUPROFEN IN 
THE TREATMENT OF AN ACUTE MIGRAINE ATTACK ”  
(Protocol Number SDS/ IVIb / 01) 
 
 
STUDY SITE:  
Thomas Jefferson University  
Jefferson Headache Cen ter 
900 Walnut Street, Suite 200  
Philadelphia, PA   19107  
(215) 955 -2243  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Stephen D. Silberstein, M.D  
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
William B. Young, M.D.  
Stephanie Nahas -Geiger , M.D.  
Michael J. Marmura, M. D. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL:   
Kathleen C. Bradl ey, R .N., B.S.N. 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE : 
Migraine is a chronic neurologic disorder characterized by episodic attacks of headache 
and associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiti ng, photophobia and phonophobia  
(Headache Classification Committee, 2004) .  Migraine is a headache disorder often with 
unilateral location, pulsating quality, moderate to severe intensity and aggravation by 
routine physical activity. Migraine prevalence is approximately 18% in women and 6% in 
men (Lipton and Silberstein, 2001; Lipton et al., 2001; Lipton et al., 2007) .  About 90% 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 2 of 16 of migraine sufferers have moderate or severe pain.  Three quarters of migraineurs have a 
reduced ability to functi on and one third require bed rest during their migraine attacks 
(Lipton et al., 2001; Lipton et al., 2007).  Therefore, effective treatments and treatment 
strategies play a critical part in reducing the disability, burden, and cost of care for these 
patien ts (Matchar et al., 2000) .  
 
Patients that present to an ambulatory acute care setting or emergency  room with a severe 
migrain e have a limited number of treatment  options . NSAIDS, including ibuprofen, have 
been shown to be efficacious in the acute treatment of migraine. However, the use of oral 
NSAIDS is sometimes not an option, such as after abdominal surgery, or in a patient wi th 
a severe migraine, that may have emesis and digestion abnormalities such as 
gastroparesis.  IV opioids provide pain relief, but have the risk of respiratory and CNS 
depression, as well as a high propensity for addiction. For those patients who receive 
treatme nt in the ER, opioids are used for  approximately 64%  of patients , despite 
recommendations from the American Academy of Neurology that physicians should limit 
the use of opioids in the treatment of migraine  (Gupta et al., 2007).  
 
NSAIDs are not addict ive, do not cause urinary retention, constipation or ileus, in 
contrast to opioids. IV ibuprofen (Caldolor) has been approved by the FDA for the 
treatment of pain and fever. Besides ibuprofen, Ketorolac (Toradol) is the only other 
NSAID available in an inj ectable form. However, ketorolac  may result in severe 
gastrointestinal side effects. Thus, IV ibuprofen may offer  another option. This pilot 
study will assess the efficacy and tolerability of injectable ibuprofen for the treatment of 
migraine  headache  in the ambulatory acute care setting.  
 
 
OBJECTIVE:     
This is a pilot trial to collect and evaluate data on the use of intravenous ibuprofen (IVIb) 
in the treatment of an acute migraine attack .  Data will be collected on the efficacy of 
IVIb in subject s who are treated with study medication between 2 and 72 hours from time 
of onset of headache.  
 
Periodic safety and efficacy  assessments will be performed pr ior to and after study drug 
administration .  
 
 
STUDY DESIGN:  
This is a 3 visit trial : screening visit, trea tment visit, and final visit.  Screening visit  and a 
treatment visit  may occur on the same day.   Additionally, there will be one follow -up 
phone call at 24 hours post -dose. Subjects will be screened and the investigator will 
determine whether or not the sub ject experience s episodic migraine headaches .  When a 
potential subject is seen as an office patient at the Jefferson Headache Center, has a 
headache, and is referred by the PI or co -investigator to this study, the referring study 
physician will document t hat the subject’s cognition is intact and the subject is able to 
understand and sign the informed consent at that time. If the potential subject’s cognition 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 3 of 16 is affected by the migraine, the subject must return to the Jefferson Headache Center for 
the resea rch screening visit when the headache and cognitive difficulties have resolved. 
Subjects who are not being seen as an office patient on the day of screening must be 
headache -free at the time of screening.  
 
Those subjects who meet the qualifying criteria wi ll be eligible for treatment in the study. 
Subjects who qualify will be asked to come to the Jefferson Headache Center within  2 to 
72 hours following  the onset of  pain.   
 
IVIb or placebo will be administered intravenously as  the study  treatment .  For acti ve 
treatment, 800 mg of injectable  ibuprofen will be placed in 250 ml of normal saline, and 
infused over 7 -10 minutes .  (Infusion time may be increased up to 1 hour if necessary due 
to possible anatomical restrictions).   The placebo group will receive 250 ml of normal 
saline, infused over 7 -10 minutes . (Infusion time may be increased up to 1 hour if 
necessary due to possible anatomical restrictions).   Safety and efficacy assessments will 
be made periodically just prior to and after administration of study d rug.   Migra ine pain 
and associated symptom  assessments will be measured by the subjects  for 24 hours from 
the admin istration of study drug for the treated  attack.   If subjects still have a moderate to 
severe headache at 2 hours aft er receiving double -blind study drug, they will receive a 
rescue dose of 800 mg. IV Ibuprofen.  Subjects will be discharged at 4 hours post study 
drug dose, or when clinically indicated.  
 
Diagram Study Design  
 
Screening Visit:  
Screening 
Procedures   Treatment Visit:  
Treat qualify ing 
attac k within 2 to 
72 hours  following 
onset of  pain.   24 Hour Phone 
Call: 
Follow -up of any 
adverse events 
and compliance 
with diary.   Termination Visit:  
Collect diary.  
Capture AEs and 
concomitant 
medication 
changes.    
 
 
Study Procedure Flow Sheet  
 Screening 
Visit  Treatment Visit  Phone 
Follow -up Termination 
Visit  
Informed Consent Administration  X    
Inclusion/ Exclusion assessment  X    
Medical History Intake  X    
Headache History Intake  X    
Urine HCG test  X X  X 
Physical Examination  X    
LAB S: CBC, Chemistry  X    
Update medical history and 
concomitant medications   X   
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 4 of 16  
STUDY PROCEDURES:  
Screening: Visit 1  
 Informed Consent administration;  assess qualification criteria  
 Medical history intake  
 Headache History Intake  
 Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
 Physical examination performed by study investigator  
 Blood pressure and pulse measurements  
 Height and weight measurements  
 Obtain chemistry, hematology studies  
 Collect and record concomitant medications  
 
Treatment Visit : (visit may occur on same day as screening visit, but must occur within 6 
month s from screening)  
 Subject to contact site at onset of qualifying migraine attac k.  Determine whether 
subject will be treating this attack. Schedule subject to come to site accordingly.  
 Blood pressure and pulse measurements  
 Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
 Capture any changes in concomitant medications and/or m edical conditions since 
screening visit  Study Drug Administration   X   
Migraine pain and associated 
symptoms measurements   X  
(predose, 15 mins, 
30 mins, 1 hr, 1.5 
hrs 2 hrs, 4hrs, 8 
hrs, and 24 hrs  
post-dose)    
Study Drug Administration   X   
Vital Signs   
 X X  
(pre-dose, 30 mins, 
1 hr and 2 hrs post -
dose)   X 
2 hour in -clinic monitoring   X   
IV ibuprofen rescue if mod -severe 
HA at 2 hours   X   
Additional in -clinic 2 hr. 
monitoring if received IV 
ibuprofen re scue  X   
Height/ Weight measurement  X    
Concomitant Medications Capture  X X X X 
Adverse Events Capture   X X X 
Take home materials collected 
and reviewed (e.g. paper diary)   X  X 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 5 of 16  Review diary with subject  
 Migraine pain and associated symptoms assessments at pre -dose, 15 minutes, 30 
minutes, 1 hour, 1 ½ hours, 2 hours , 4 hours.   The 8 hours and 24 hours post -dosing 
assessments will be performe d by the subject at home . However, if the subject 
received rescue IV ibuprofen at 2 hours after double -blind dosing , subjects will  still 
be at the Jefferson Headache Center for observation at the 4 hour time point, and will 
complete the 4 hour diary in the  clinic.  
 Administer study drug ( 800 mg IV Ibuprofen or placebo)  
 Measure vitals pre-dose, 30 minutes, 1 -hour and 2 -hours post -dosing.  
 If subjects still have a moderate to severe headache at 2 hours after receiving double -
blind study drug, they will receive a rescue dose of 800 mg. IV Ibuprofen.  
 Capture and record any adverse events experienced.   Investigator to determine 
relatedness and reportability  
 Subjects will be discharged from the headache center at 2  hours after dose of double -
blind study medication if they have had headache relief, or  when it is clinically 
indicated . If subjects do not have headache relief at 2 hours after study medication 
administration, they may receive IV ibuprofen rescue and will be observed at the 
Jefferson Headache Center for a n additional 2 hours.  
 
24 hour post -dose phone follow -up: (Phone follow -up window: 20 -28 hours)  
 Coordinator to contact subject within 24 hours of  treatment  
 Capture any adverse events. Investigator to determine relatedness and reportability  
 Ensure diary e ntries completed by subject at appropriate time points  
 
Termination Visit : Visit to occur within 7 days from Treatment Visit  
(Visit Window: 5 -9 days)  
 Collect and review subjects take -home materials  
 Capture any changes in concomitant medications and/or med ical conditions since last 
visit 
 Capture and record any adverse events experienced. Investigator to determine 
relatedness and reportability  
 
 
NUMBER OF SUBJECTS:  
This is a single -site trial. 150 subjects will be screened in order to obtain 120 completers 
(60 subjects for each treatment group, placebo: active drug 1:1).  This should provide a 
power of 0.8, assuming an alpha of 0.05, a placebo response rate of 43%, and a response 
rate difference of 25% between placebo and active treatment.  
 
 
 
INCLUSION CRITE RIA: 
To be considered eligible to participate in this study, a patient must meet the following 
inclusion criteria : 
 Male and female subjects between the ages of 18 and 65, inclusive  
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 6 of 16  Subject diagnosed with episodic migraine, with or without aura according to  
ICHD -2 criteria for at least one -year prior to screening  
 Subject experiences between 2-10 migraine attacks per month (during the 
previous 6 months) with no more than 15 days of headache per month.  
 Subject is using or agrees to use for the duration of part icipation a medically 
acceptable form of contraception (as determined by investigator), if female and of 
child -bearing potential  
 Subject is able to come for 4 hour in -clinic treatment of an acute migraine attack  
 Subjects are able to understand and comply w ith all study procedures.  
 Subject provides written informed consent prior to any screening procedures 
being conducted  
 If subject is on an allowable migraine preventive  medication , the dose has been 
stable for at least 4 weeks prior to screening and the dose will remain stable 
throughout study participation.  
 
 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA : 
To be eligible for entry into the study, the patient must not meet any of the following 
exclusion criteria:  
 Unable to make a reliable self -report of pain intensity to pain relief  
 Use of analgesic  or opioid within 24 hours of onset of headache to be treated with 
study medication.   (If subject has an eligible headache and has taken a triptan or 
DHE within 24 hours , but greater than 2 hours before study drug dosing , they can 
be treated with study medication.)  
 Patients taking the following medications on a regular basis: warfarin, lithium, 
angiotensin converting enzyme i nhibitors, loop diuretics, thiazide diuretics, and 
angiotensin II receptor  blockers, methotrexate.  
 Patients with active,  clinically  significant anemia  
 Patients with a history or evidence of asthma  
 Patients with a history heart failure  
 Subjects with severely impaired hepatic or renal function, as determined by the 
investigator  
 Patients with a history of allergy or hypersens itivity to any component of IVIb, 
aspirin (or aspirin related products), NSAIDs, or COX -2 inhibitors  
 Pregnant or nursing  women  
 Patients who h ave a history of congenital bleeding diathesis (e.g., hemophilia) or 
any active clinically significant bleeding, or  have underlying platelet dysfunction 
including (but not limited to) idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation, or congenital platelet dysfunction  
 Patients who have  GI bleeding that required medical intervention within the  
previous 6 weeks (unless definitive surgery has been performed .) 
 Patients who h ave a platelet count less than 100,000, as determined wit hin the 28 
days prior to treatment  
 Pre-existing or current dependence on opioids . 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 7 of 16  Subjects who have participated in an investigational drug trial in the 30 days prior 
to the screening visit  
 Subjects with uncontrolled hypertension  
 
 
PERMITTED RESCUE MEDICATION  / PARAMETERS : 
Subjects that have a moderate to severe headache at 2 hours after the administration of 
study medicat ion will receive 800 mg. of IV ibuprofen  as rescue .  If the headache persists 
after IV rescue mediation or returns during the 24 hours of follow -up, s ubjects may take 
their usual migraine rescue medication,  if needed .  Rescue medication may be taken  at a 
minimum of 2 hours following IV study drug or IV rescue treatment .  Permitted rescue 
medications include:  DHE -45, triptans, antiemetics  and opioids. NSAIDS are excluded as 
rescue  medication .  
 
 
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS:  
150 subjects will be screened in or der to obtain 120 completers (60 subjects for each 
treatment group, placebo: active drug 1:1).  This should provide a power of 0.8, assuming 
an alpha of 0.05, a placebo response rate of 43%, and a response rate difference of 25% 
between placebo and active treatment.  
 
Primary end -point:  
 Comparison of p roportion of subjects in each treatment group (active treatment and 
placebo) who have pain relief at 2 hours after the completion of the double -blind 
treatment infusion. Pain relief is defined as a reduction i n headache pain level from 
severe or moderate decreased to mild or headache -free, respectively.  
 
Secondary end -points:  
 Comparison of the p roportion of subjects in each treatment group (active treatment 
and placebo) who are pain -free after the completion of  the double -blind treatment 
infusion.  
 Pain and associated symptom  assessments as measured at pre -dose, 15 minutes, 30 
minutes, 1 hour, 1 ½ hours, 2 hours, 4 hours, 8 hours and 24 hours post -dosing for 
each attack treated per subject in both treatment group s. 
 Sustained pain relief over 24 hours.  
 Subject ’s historical response to NSAID therapy  compared to response to IV 
ibuprofen.  
 Occurrence of adverse events . 
 Use of rescue therapy.  
 
INTERRUPTION OR DISCONTINUATION OF TREATMENT:  
A subject may be withdrawn from  the study because of an adverse event, unsatisfactory 
therapeutic effect, protocol violation, subject’s withdrawal of consent, lost to follow -up, 
or other reason deemed medically indicated by study physician.  
 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 8 of 16  
TREATMENT COMPLIANCE : 
Detailed records of st udy medication used by each subject will be maintained. 
Compliance to treatment will be checked by the investigat or based on the subject’s diary . 
The investigator and the study coordinator will also review drug accountability  on a 
regular basis, as each vi al is dispensed and at the completion of the trial.  The investigator 
and the clinical coordinator must maintain an accurate record of the dispensing and return 
of the study drug in a drug accountability ledger.  An accurate record of the date and 
amount o f study drug dispensed to each subject must be available for inspection at any 
time.  
 
 
SAFETY MEASURES:  
 Physical Examinations:  
Physical and neurological examinations will be performed by a study physician at the 
Screening Visit.  Weight and height will b e recorded at Visit 1. Subjects with 
clinically significant medical/psychological abnormalities, as determined by the 
investigator, will be excluded from the study.  
 Vital Signs:  
Blood Pressure and pulse rate will b e recorded at Screening Visit, Treatment  Visit , 
and Fina l Visit. During Treatment Visit , vital signs will be monitored prior to study 
drug administration, 30 minutes, 1 hour and 2 hours post -dosing.  Additional vital 
signs will be taken if clinically indicated.  
 Urine Pregnancy Tests:  
All women of childbearing potential will have pregnancy tests done at the Screening 
Visit. A negative result is required for participation.  Additional urine pregnancy tests 
will be performed at each follow -up visit.  
 Adverse Events:  
Throughout the course of the st udy, subjects will monitor any adverse effects or 
events experienced.  They will record start and stop times, intensity, and 
characteristics of these events.  This information will be collected at follow -up visits 
and Final Visit.  Subjects will be provide d a number that they may contact 24 hours a 
day to report any serious adverse events.  All adverse effects or events will be 
monitored and appropriate intervention will be applied as deemed necessary by the 
investigator.  Adverse events will be collected f ollowing signing of informed consent.  
 
 
Reporting of Adverse Events:   
Reporting of all adverse events will be in accordance with Good Clinical Practice.  
Information about all adverse events, whether volunteered by the subject, discovered by 
investigator questioning, or detected through physical examination, laboratory test or 
other means, will be collected and recorded on the Adverse Event Form and followed up 
as appropriate.  An adverse event is any undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition 
occurri ng after starting study drug, even if the event is not considered to be related to 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 9 of 16 study drug. Study drug includes the drug under evaluation given during any phase of the 
trial. 
Medical conditions/diseases present before starting study treatment are only c onsidered 
adverse events if they worsen after starting study treatment.  Abnormal laboratory values 
or test results constitute adverse events only if they induce clinical signs or symptoms, or 
indicate underlying pathology or require therapy.  These will b e recorded on the Adverse 
Events Form.  
As far as possible, each adverse event will also be described by:  
1. duration (start and end dates),  
2. severity grade (mild, moderate, severe)  
3. relationship to the study drug (suspected/not suspected),  
4. action(s) taken and,  as relevant, the outcome.  
 
Serious Adverse Events:  
A serious adverse event is an undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition that:  
 is fatal or life -threatening  
 requires or prolongs hospitalization  
 is significantly or permanently disabling or incapaci tating  
 constitutes a congenital anomaly or a birth defect  
 is medically significant, may jeopardize the subject, and may require medical or 
surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
Events not considered to be serious adverse event s are hospitalizations for the following:  
 treatment, which was elective or pre -planned, for a pre -existing condition that did 
not worsen;  
 treatment on an emergency, out subject basis for an event not fulfilling any of the 
definitions of serious given abo ve and not resulting in hospital admission.  
 
The Jefferson Headache Center will notify Thomas Jefferson University Institutional 
Review Board immediately in the event of a serious adverse event.  Additionally, the 
Jefferson Headache Center will notify Cum berland Pharmaceutical  of any SAE deemed 
by the principal investigator to be related to study dru g within 24 hours of awareness.  
 
 
Cumberland Pharmaceutical SAE Notification Contact Person:  
Anita Hays or Amy Rock for SAE reporting within 7 days of occurren ce:  
Phone: 615-255-0068/fax 866 -438-2372.  
 
 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 10 of 16 Disclosure and Confidentiality : 
All subject information will be maintained in strict confidence.   Study documents 
provided by the Jefferson Headache Center (protocols, source documents, case report 
forms and oth er material) will be stored appropriately to ensure their confidentiality and 
safety.  However, all study documents and subject records may be re viewed by the FDA  
or institution regulatory agencies  
 
Clinical Monitoring:  
Dr. Silberstein, the Principal Inves tigator, is responsible for ensuring that the clinical trial 
is conducted according to Good Clinical Practices, protecting the rights, safety and 
welfare of subjects.  During the course of the study trial, Dr. Silberstein will periodically 
review the progr ess of the trial.   He will mai ntain contact with study coordinator  as well 
as ensure that annual and continuing reports are submitted to the appropriate regulatory 
agencies.  In summary, Dr. Silberstein will oversee and be responsible for all clinical 
aspects of the trial, as detailed in 21 CFR 312.50 through 312.70.  
 
The co -investigators and clinical coordinators at the site will also ensure that Good 
Clinical Practices are followed, and will assure that that the protocol is adhered to  strictly . 
All modifi cations to the protocol will receive approval from the Thomas Jefferson 
University Institutional Review Board, before modifications to the protocol are 
implemented.  Amendments affecting only administrative aspects of the study do not 
require formal protoc ol amendments or IRB approval, but the IRB will be kept informed 
of such administrative changes.  Examples of administrative changes not requiring formal 
protocol amendments and IRB approval that can be treated as administrative amendments 
include, for exa mple, a change in study personnel (excluding investigators).  
 
Safety reports and annual reports will be submitted to the IRB, according to established 
guidelines.  
 
Role of Study Monitor:  
The study monitor will be a representative from the Jefferson Headac he Center who is 
not involved with the clinical trial.  The monitor will conduct periodic reviews of the 
study progress and performance.  The monitor’s role will include the following:  
 Ensuring that all eligibility inclusion criteria and no eligibility ex clusion criteria 
are met for all subjects.  
 Ensuring that consent forms are appropriately signed and dated.  
 Reviewing subject study records to ensure that study protocol has been strictly 
adhered to.  
 Ensuring accuracy and completeness of study records. Ens uring accuracy of data 
entry from source documents and case report forms into electronic database.  
 Reviewing IRB study records to ensure that all modifications to protocol were 
submitted and received approval prior to institution of protocol changes.  
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 11 of 16  Ensu ring that adverse events are appropriately reported.  
The study monitor will maintain a record of site visits.  The monitor will verbally review 
results of the site evaluation with the PI and submit written copies of the evaluation to the 
PI, which will be forwarded to the primary site IRB.  
 
 
IND STATUS : 
We propose this pilot trial to collect/evaluate data is exempt from IND status according to 
the following:  
21 CFR 312.2(b) (1), the clinical investigation of a marketed drug or biologic does not 
require subm ission of an IND if all six of the following conditions are met:  
i. it is not intended to be reported to FDA in support of a new indication for use or 
to support any other significant change in the labeling for the drug;  
ii. it is not intended to support a sign ificant change in the advertising for the product;  
iii. it does not involve a route of administration or dosage level, use in a subject 
population, or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the 
acceptability of the risks) associated with the use of the drug product;  
iv. it is conducted in compliance with the requirements for IRB review and informed 
consent [21 CFR parts 56 and 50, respectively];  
v. it is conducted in compliance with the requirements concerning the promotion and 
sale of dru gs [21 CFR 312.7]; and  
vi. it does not intend to invoke 21 CFR 50.24.  
 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 12 of 16 References:  
 
1. Intravenous ibuprofen (Caldolor). Med Lett Drugs Ther . 2010;52(1329):3 -4.  
2. Intravenous ibuprofen (Caldolor). Obstet Gynecol . 2010;115(5):1079 -1080. Accessed 
3 Septembe r 2010.  
3. Baer R. Caldolor: old drug, new route. S D Med . 2010;63(1):14 -15.  
4. Gupta MX, Silberstein SD, Young WB, Hopkins M, Lopez BL, Samsa GP. Less Is Not 
More: Underutilization of Headache Medications in a University Hospital Emergency 
Department. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain . 2007;47(8):1125 -1133. 
10.1111/j.1526 -4610.2007.00846.x.  
5. Headache Classification Subcommittee of the International Headache Society. The 
International Classification of Headache Disorders: 2nd edition. Cephala lgia. 2004;24 
Suppl 1:9 -160.  
6. Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Diamond M, et al. Migraine prevalence, disease burden, and the 
need for preventive therapy. Neurology . 2007;68(5):343 -349. 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000252808.97649.21.  
7. Lipton RB, Silberstein SD. The role of headache -related disability in migraine 
management: implications for headache treatment guidelines. Neurology . 2001;56(6 
Suppl 1):S35 -42.  
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 13 of 16 8. Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Diamond S, Diamond ML, Reed M. Prevalence and burden of 
migraine in the United States: data  from the American Migraine Study II. Headache . 
2001;41(7):646 -657.  
9. Matchar DB, Young WB, Rosenberg JH, et al.  Evidence -based  guidelines for 
migraine headache in the primary care setting:  pharmacological management of acute 
attacks. www.aan.com/public/practiceguidelines/03.pdf. 2001.  
10. Southworth S, Peters J, Rock A, Pavliv L. A multicenter, randomized, double -blind, 
placebo - controlled trial of intravenous ibuprofen 400  and 800 mg every 6 hours in the 
management of postoperative pain. Clin Ther . 2009;31(9):1922 -1935. DOI: 
10.1016/j.clinthera.2009.08.026.  
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 14 of 16  
APPENDIX A:  
International Classification of Headache Disorders -II (ICHD -II) 
 
1.1 Migraine without aura  
Diagnostic c riteria:  
A. At least 5 attacks1 fulfilling criteria B –D 
B. Headache attacks lasting 4 –72 hours (untreated  or unsuccessfully treated)  
C. Headache has at least two of the following  characteristics:  
1. unilateral location  
2. pulsating quality  
3. moderate or s evere pain intensity  
4. aggravation by or causing avoidance of  routine physical activity ( eg, 
walking or climbing  stairs)  
D. During headache at least one of the following:  
1. nausea and/or vomiting  
2. photophobia and phonophobia  
E. Not attributed to anothe r disorder  
 
1.2.1 Typical aura with migraine headache  
Description:  
Typical aura consisting of visual and/or sensory  and/or speech symptoms.   Gradual 
development,  duration no longer than one hour, a mix of positive  and negative features 
and complete reversi bility  characteriz e the aura which is associated with a  headache 
fulfilling criteria for 1.1 Migraine without  aura . 
Diagnostic criteria:  
A. At least 2 attacks fulfilling criteria B –D 
B. Aura consisting of at least one of the following,  but no motor weaknes s: 
1. fully reversible visual symptoms including  positive features ( eg, 
flickering lights, spots  or lines) and/or negative features ( ie, loss of  vision)  
2. fully reversible sensory symptoms including  positive features ( ie, pins 
and needles) and/or  negative  features ( ie, numbness)  
3. fully reversible dysphasic speech disturbance   
C. At least two of the following:  
1. homonymous visual symptoms  and/or unilateral  sensory symptoms  
2. at least one aura symptom develops gradually  over ≥5 minutes and/or 
different aura symptoms  occur in succession over ≥5 minutes  
3. each symptom lasts ≥5 and ≤60 minutes  
D. Headache fulfilling criteria B –D for 1.1 Migraine  without aura begins during 
the aura or follows  aura within 60 minutes  
E. Not at tributed to another disorder . 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 15 of 16 APPENDIX B:  
Caldolor Infusion Rate  
 
 
 
 
Thomas Jefferson University / Jefferson Headache Center  
Silberstein Clinical Protocol # SDS/ IVIb /01  
Version: 7/31/14      CONFIDENTIAL          
Page 16 of 16 APPENDIX C  
Caldolor Monograph and Package Insert  