 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
1  
 
 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT): 
A Randomized Control Trial to  
Improve Preventive Asthma Care for Urban Adolescent s 
 
 
 
Investigators:  
Jill S. Halterman, MD, MPH 
Belinda Borrelli, PhD 
Kristin Riekert, PhD 
Ekaterina Noyes, PhD, MPH 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
2 School Based Asthma Care for Teens – SB-ACT 
A Randomized Control Trial to  
Improve Preventive Asthma Care for Urban Adolescent s 
 
Investigators:  
 
Jill S. Halterman, MD, MPH 
Belinda Borrelli, PhD 
Kristin Riekert, PhD 
Ekaterina Noyes, PhD, MPH 
 
 
Background: 
Asthma is the most common chronic illness of childh ood, 1,2 affecting more than 10% of 
children in the city of Rochester.  Despite current  advances in asthma therapies, morbidity and 
mortality continue to increase.  While evidence-bas ed national guidelines recommend effective 
preventive medications for all children with modera te to severe asthma, 3,4 studies indicate that 
many children in the U.S. who should receive preven tive medications are not receiving them.5-7    
Low-income, minority teenagers have disproportionat ely high rates of asthma morbidity, 
including excess risk of emergency department care,  hospitalization, and death from asthma, 
compared to white adolescents.8,9 Although urban children suffer the largest burden from 
asthma, they are the least likely group to receive adequate preventive care,10,11  and this poor 
adherence plays a significant contributing role in asthma morbidity. Inner city adolescents with 
asthma are at particular risk of non-adherence. Thu s, there is a substantial amount of suffering 
that could be prevented with improvements in care.   
Preventive medicines for asthma, if used properly, reduce symptom and prevent asthma 
hospitalizations. 12    Current national guidelines specifically recomme nd the use of these 
evidence-based daily preventive medications for all  children with persistent asthma. 4    However, 
many children in the U.S. and in Rochester who shou ld receive these medications are not 
receiving them. 5-7  We found that 74% of children nationally with sig nificant asthma symptoms 
were not receiving daily preventive medications for  asthma.  
Adolescents, as a group, tend to have poorer medica tion adherence than younger 
children or adults. Early adolescence is a developm ental period that involves changes in 
cognitive processes, social influences, and biologi cal factors that may be significant contributors 
to the decrease in medication adherence seen in thi s age group.  During early adolescence, 
parents typically grant their child increased indep endence and responsibilities.  When the child 
has a chronic illness, age 7-8 years is the time th at parents often begin the transition of 
responsibility for illness management from parent t o child, and by age 15 the child typically 
assumes more responsibility than the parent for day -to-day management tasks. This transition 
in responsibility is often marked by decreased adhe rence. 10  Not surprisingly, poor adherence is 
associated with worse disease-related outcomes. 
The goal of this study is to evaluate the widesprea d implementation of a developmentally 
appropriate preventive asthma care intervention for  urban teens. The School Based Asthma 
Care for Teens (SB-ACT) program includes two core c omponents: 1) a trial of directly observed 
therapy (DOT) to allow the teen to experience the p otential benefits from adhering to guideline-
based asthma treatment, and 2) a developmentally ap propriate Motivational Interviewing (MI) 
Counseling Intervention to help the teen transition  to independent long-term medication 
adherence. We hypothesize that teens receiving the SB-ACT program will 1) experience less 
asthma-related morbidity than the asthma education (AE) attention-control comparison group, 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
3 and 2) have improved adherence, less urgent healthc are use, less absenteeism, improved 
quality of life, and reduced FeNO compared to AE. W e also hypothesize that participants 
receiving DOT-only will have improved asthma-relate d outcomes immediately following their 
DOT trial vs. teens receiving AE, but will not have  sustained, clinically significant improvement 
in outcomes once the DOT phase is complete. This re presents a unique opportunity to build 
upon existing community relationships with an innov ative and developmentally focused program 
to improve asthma outcomes for urban teens. 
 
Study Objectives: 
This study has the following objectives: 
1. To identify and recruit an urban sample of adole scents (12-16 year olds) with mild 
persistent to severe persistent asthma from approxi mately 30 schools throughout the 
Rochester City School District and surrounding scho ol districts. 
2. To enroll subjects into a 3-group randomized tri al of the School-Based Asthma Care for 
Teens (SB-ACT) program; 1) the SB-ACT program, whic h includes a 6-8 week trial of 
DOT plus 3 MI counseling sessions; 2) DOT-only (6-8  week grail of DOT alone); and 3) 
an asthma education (AE) attention-control comparis on group. 
3. To collect baseline morbidity data to characteri ze this group of teens with asthma and 
determine risk factors for the frequency and severi ty of recurrent symptoms.  
4. To follow these subjects prospectively through t he year following enrollment for clinical 
outcomes (symptom severity, health care use, exhale d nitric oxide) and functional 
outcomes (functional limitations, school absenteeis m, quality of life). 
5. To assess the effectiveness of the SB-ACT interv ention in reducing asthma morbidity. 
6. To explore potential mediators (motivation, conf idence, and beliefs about medication) 
and moderators (demographics, depressed mood, schoo l/neighborhood variables) of the 
intervention effect.  
7. To perform an economic sustainability analysis ( health and economic benefits of SB-
ACT, DOT-only and AE using cost-effectiveness metho dology).  
8. To evaluate the process of program implementatio n using RE-AIM metrics.  
 
Study Overview: 
A. Study Design 
We propose a 3-group randomized trial of the School -Based Asthma Care for Teens 
(SB-ACT) program.  430 teens with persistent asthma  will be randomized to either: 1) the SB-
ACT program, which includes a 6-8 week trial of DOT  plus 3 MI counseling sessions; 2) DOT-
only (6-8 week trial of DOT alone); and 3) an Asthm a Education (AE) attention-control 
comparison group.  Families and teens will be follo wed prospectively for one calendar year, with 
systematic assessments completed at 3-, 5-, 7-, and  12-months post-enrollment.   
 
B.  Subjects and Setting 
 Adolescents 12-16 years of age attending secondary  school in the Rochester City 
School District (RCSD) and surrounding school distr icts will be screened for eligibility at the start 
of the school year.  A total of 430 teens will be r ecruited over 4 years from approximately 20 
schools.  School-based screening, used successfully  in our past programs, will identify teens for 
the program.  In compliance with the Family Educati on Rights and Privacy Act, our study has 
access to the RCSD medical alert forms that include  whether or not the teen has a breathing 
problem.  For the surrounding school districts, sch ool nurses or administrators will contact 
caregivers of potentially eligible families, and if  the family is interested, will connect the 
caregiver with the study team for an eligibility as sessment.  Additionally, we will review 
potentially eligible teens from Dr. Halterman’s Fut ure Contact Database (RSRB# 31010) to 
inquire if prior study participants are eligible an d interested in the current study.  We will assess 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
4 eligibility for the study by a telephone survey wit h the primary caregiver.    
Eligibility requirements include:  
1) Physician-diagnosed asthma (based on caregiver r eport). 
2) Persistent asthma severity or poor asthma contro l (based on national guidelines 4 and 
caregiver report). Per NHLBI EPR-3 criteria, any 1 of the following: 
a. In past month, >2 days/week with daytime asthma symptoms 
b. In past month, >2 days/week with rescue medicati on use 
c. In past month, >2 times/month with nighttime awa kening due to asthma 
symptoms 
d. >2 asthma exacerbations during past year that re quired oral systemic 
corticosteroids 
3) Age >12 and <16 years 
4) Attending secondary school in the Rochester City  School District or surrounding 
school districts. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
1) Inability to speak and understand English. 
2) No access to a working phone for follow-up surve ys (either at home or an accessible 
alternate location). 
3) Diagnosed developmental or intellectual disabili ty. 
4) Other significant medical conditions, including congenital heart disease, cystic 
fibrosis, or other chronic lung disease, that could  interfere with the assessment of 
asthma-related outcome measures. 
5) Teens in foster care or other situations in whic h consent cannot be obtained from a 
legal guardian. 
Based on our previous studies, we anticipate <10% o f subjects to be excluded based on 
these criteria.  
 
C.  Study Procedures 
 
1. Screening procedures 
Screening will occur from late summer (as soon as s chool enrollment forms are 
available to the team) until the end of January (si nce new screening information becomes 
available during the first few months of school).  To evaluate subjects for eligibility, 
screening procedures occur up to 4 weeks prior to t he baseline assessment and 
randomization.  The baseline assessment includes sy mptom questions to be assessed for 
all teens and will be reviewed for teens that we ar e unable to complete the baseline within 4 
weeks of the screening survey.  
We will identify teens through school “medical-aler t” forms that include whether or not 
the child has a breathing problem or referral from school nurse. All teens who have a 
breathing problem indicated on their medical-alert forms will be identified.  We will conduct a 
telephone screening survey with the caregiver to as sess eligibility, and only teens with 
persistent symptoms or poor asthma control will be eligible.  Enrollment and randomization 
occur in a rolling fashion from the first day of sc hool until the end of February (since 
enrollment can occur up to 4 weeks after screening survey completion). 
 
2. Baseline 
Home visits will be used to explain the study, elic it informed consent from the parent and 
assent from the teen, and obtain baseline measureme nts.  Baseline evaluations include: 
confirmation of inclusion/exclusion criteria, asses sment of baseline severity, collection of 
demographic and health history variables, measureme nt of pulmonary function (using a 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
5 portable spirometer), exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO – for airway inflammation), salivary 
cotinine, height, and weight.  All surveys question s will be read aloud to caregivers and 
teens.  We will give a symptom diary to the teen an d caregiver for symptom tracking, assist 
in finding a prominent location for it, and review its use. For home interviews in which the 
child is not present, we will determine another tim e to come to the home to obtain the teen’s 
assent, conduct the baseline surveys, and collect s amples and measurements. If it becomes 
difficult to reach the child at home we will ask th e parent’s permission to meet with the child 
at the school nurse’s office to obtain assent, and collect the cotinine, FeNO, spirometry, and 
height and weight measurements. We will then contac t the child by phone to complete the 
baseline survey. (Note: If teen refuses to assent to the study, the study subject will be 
withdrawn and all study materials will be destroyed .) 
We will use portable spirometers and FeNO machines to measure the teen’s pulmonary 
function and airway inflammation. Some teens may ha ve difficulty with these procedures; we 
will only include data for teens able to perform th e procedures accurately.  We will use a 
portable scale and stadiometer to take objective me asurements for height and weight.  
Exposure to Secondhand Smoke will be assessed by bo th interview survey and cotinine 
measurements. A member of the research team will co llect salivary fluid samples from each 
child using a small sterile swab. Collection will b e made according to a standard protocol 
developed for use with children and adolescents. Sa livary samples will be stored frozen and 
shipped via courier to Salimetrics, LLC in State Co llege, PA for analysis. The Environmental 
Assessment will include a survey inquiring about en vironmental exposures and an 
observation checklist that a member of the study te am will perform. 
 
3. Randomization 
Following the baseline assessment, each teen will b e randomly assigned to one of 3 
groups: 1) the SB-ACT program, which includes a tri al of DOT plus a self-management MI 
counseling intervention; 2) DOT-only; or 3) an asth ma education (AE) comparison group.  
Randomization will be stratified by school and prev entive medication at baseline . Since 
enrollment will occur over a period of 1-5 months a t the start of the school year, a permuted 
block design will be used to assure approximately e qual allocation of teens in each group 
over time.  The randomization scheme will be indepe ndently developed by a programmer in 
the Biostatistics Center.  After baseline completio n, the interviewer will call the study 
coordinator who will provide the subject’s ID numbe r and treatment assignment. 
 
4. SB-ACT Intervention: 
School Nurse Assisted Preventive Medication Use (Di rectly Observed Therapy)  
We will communicate with the child’s healthcare pro vider about the child’s 
symptoms and if child is not already taking a preve ntive medication, to determine an 
appropriate preventive medication for the teen. We will facilitate the child receiving their 
preventive medication at school. If needed, new pre scriptions will be sent to pharmacies 
for parent pick-up or delivery (several local pharm acies provide delivery services) with 
instructions indicating one canister of preventive medication to be dispensed for the 
home and a second canister for the teen’s school.  This system has been successfully 
implemented in our prior studies. The school nurse and teen will meet at the beginning 
of the program to develop an individualized plan fo r the timing of DOT in the school to 
avoid disruption of classes and allow the teen choi ce in this process. For the first 6-8 
weeks after enrollment the teen will visit the scho ol nurse once a day to receive a daily 
dose of preventive asthma medication. Study personn el will review the DOT protocol 
and proper administration technique with the school  nurse.  The purpose of this 
intervention component is for teens to establish a relationship with the school nurse, 
learn proper medication technique, and experience p otential benefits of consistent 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
6 preventive therapy.  As in our prior studies, most teens will receive once daily dosing 
since it is effective and allows for administration  of medication during school hours; if 
more frequent dosing is needed additional doses wil l be taken at home.  The teen will 
use his/her home inhaler for doses on weekend days and other days in which he/she 
does not attend school. 
While many schools do not have a full time nurse, a ll schools are prepared for 
medication administration as many teens have daily medication needs (e.g., medications 
for attention deficit disorder).  In our prior stud y, medications were administered >95% of 
the time the teen was in school, even in schools wi th only part-time nurse coverage (the 
majority of schools).  All teens will be instructed  to rinse their mouth with water after 
each medication dose.  A medication dispensing log will be used for tracking purposes, 
and contacts with the nurse will be tracked.  While  adherence will be assured by the 
nurse on the days the teen attends school, adherenc e will simply be encouraged on 
days the teen does not attend school.  Guideline-ba sed medication adjustments (‘step-
up’) will be recommended to the child’s provider af ter the first follow-up if persistent 
symptoms continue. 
Since the goal of SB-ACT is to ultimately support t he teen’s transition to 
independent, sustained use of preventive medication s, MI counseling, the second 
component of the intervention, will start 4-6 weeks  after the commencement of DOT.  A 
brief survey tool will be administered by the schoo l nurse weekly, following the first 6 
weeks of DOT, to help determine collaboratively wit h the teen if they are ready to 
transition to independent medication use. The teen will report their motivation to use 
preventive medications independently (1-10 scale, ‘ readiness’ = score >8), their 
confidence in adhering to the treatment plan, and w hether they have obtained needed 
refill medications for ongoing use. 13    While the goal of the counseling sessions is to help 
the teen move towards autonomy with medications, so me teens may request to continue 
DOT for a longer time period.  We deliberately prov ide this choice to support teens’ 
autonomy in decision-making, which is appropriate f or this developmental stage.  We will 
track any contacts with the school nurse throughout  the school year. 
 
Motivational Interviewing (MI) to Transition the Te en to Independent Use of Preventive 
Medications:   
This intervention component consists of an evidence -based self-management 
program to help the teen begin to transition to ind ependence with preventive medication 
use.  A trained community nurse or counselor will c onduct three in-person MI sessions 
with the teen at school to enhance the teen’s motiv ation to adhere to their guideline-
based asthma treatment plan (developed during the D OT phase).  All sessions will take 
place in a quiet location at a mutually agreed upon  time that limits interference with 
classes and activities.  The three sessions consist  of an initial 40 minute counseling 
session (4-6 weeks after start of DOT), and two 30 minute follow-up sessions 2 and 6 
weeks later.  The teens will also have the option o f calling the nurse for reinforcement 
after the 3 rd  session if they desire additional support.  We wil l systematically track the 
number and length of contacts. 
a. Initial MI visit  
The focus of this intervention component is to buil d motivation for and to resolve 
ambivalence regarding asthma medication adherence.  Within the context of MI 
counseling delivery, asthma education (based on the  same content used for the AE 
group) will be provided in a non-prescriptive manne r using the MI technique of “elicit-
provide-elicit”. 14    The counselor will first elicit the teen’s knowl edge about the 
importance and health effects of proper medication adherence. The counselor then 
will offer recommendations in a non-confrontational  manner that supports and 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
7 respects the teen’s autonomous decision-making.  Te en-endorsed goal setting, 
problem solving and other behavior change strategie s will be utilized.  This approach 
does not regard the teen as a passive recipient of information, but rather an active 
collaborator in the change process.  Using MI, the counselor will use open-ended 
questions and reflections to explore the teen’s amb ivalence towards taking 
medications (e.g., pros and cons).  The counselor w ill empathize with the teen’s 
struggles, elicit concerns about changing and not c hanging medication taking 
behavior, and explore ways for the teen to communic ate their needs (e.g., with the 
PCP).  The teen will be encouraged to reflect on hi s/her experience with DOT in 
school, and the benefits gained from taking medicin es consistently.  The counselor 
will inquire about things the teen feels are import ant (values, goals, interests), and 
where appropriate address discrepancies between the  teen’s current behaviors (e.g., 
not taking medicine) and goals (e.g., being on bask etball team). 
The MI sessions are targeted towards the adolescent .  However, we recognize 
that the caregiver can provide valuable information  about the impact the teen’s 
asthma has on the teen and the family. It will be i mportant, particularly when the 
parent maintains significant influence over the tee n’s asthma management (e.g., 
getting medications/refills), for caregivers to pro vide input and consensus with the 
change plan that is developed.  The counselor will call the caregiver following each 
session. Using MI-compatible strategies, he/she wil l assess asthma control from the 
caregiver perspective, and the caregiver’s role in supporting or hindering the teen’s 
asthma self-management. 
b. Follow-up MI sessions  
Follow-up sessions will occur approximately 2 and 6  weeks following the initial 
session.  These sessions will focus on understandin g the teen’s perspectives and 
choices regarding asthma management, offering conti nued support for autonomous 
decision making around medication adherence, discus sing barriers to independent 
adherence, and identifying any benefits associated with ongoing preventive asthma 
care.  The teens will be asked about any anticipate d obstacles (e.g., getting 
medication refills, making a follow-up visit with t he provider).  If the teen is not using 
preventive medications daily, the nurse will contin ue to explore ambivalence and 
address discrepancies between the teen’s behavior a nd his/her current goals. 
 Supervision of MI sessions will be provided by an investigator (B. Borrelli) and 
coordinator to assure fidelity to the MI interventi on; all sessions will be audiotaped 
and a minimum of 20% will be reviewed.   
 
5. DOT-Only Group: 
As with the teens in the combined SB-ACT group, we will communicate with the child’s 
provider of those in the DOT-only group to assure e ach teen has preventive medications at 
home and school.  Teens in the DOT-only group will receive a trial of 6-8 weeks of directly 
observed administration of preventive asthma medica tions from the school nurse (with dose-
adjustments as needed), but will not receive MI cou nseling.  The school nurse will use the 
same survey tool as for the SB-ACT group to help de termine with the teen if they are ready 
to transition to independent medication use, and wi ll encourage the teen to reflect on their 
experience using these medications.  As in the SB-A CT group, teens may ask the nurse to 
continue DOT beyond the initial trial period; conta cts will be tracked.  Outcomes from this 
group will help determine whether a trial of DOT al one is sufficient to promote sustained 
adherence and reduced morbidity. 
 
SB-ACT and DOT-Only:  The medications and spacers ( if needed) will be purchased 
through the child’s health insurance.  Based on our  prior research, we anticipate that most of 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
8 the children will have some form of either private or public health insurance, with most being 
insured by Medicaid.  If a family does not have ins urance or insurance coverage status is 
uncertain, if there is an unexpected expense despit e insurance coverage, and when a family 
informs us they are unable to pay for the co-paymen t, we will pay for medications or 
medication supplies (e.g., spacer, nebulizer mask, etc.).   In all instances we will also assist 
the family in getting insurance, help them to proac tively plan for refills of medications, as well 
as link them with services to help them afford co-p ayments. 
 
6. Asthma Education (AE) Comparison Group: 
  We will notify the teen’s healthcare provider tha t teens in the AE group have persistent 
asthma symptoms that warrant use of effective guide line-based preventive  medications.  We 
also will provide an in-school asthma education pro gram, 15  provided by community asthma 
educators or nurses. The program will include asthm a management instruction and will be 
geared toward teens living in underserved neighborh oods. The program will match the time 
and attention of the MI counseling portion of SB-AC T.  Sessions will be delivered at school 
by a trained health educator, in a similar structur e and time-schedule to the MI intervention 
(i.e., each teen will receive three 1-on-1 educatio nal sessions at school).  Sessions will 
cover 3 main topics: 1) lung physiology and asthma basics, 2) triggers, symptoms, and 
warning signs, and 3) medications and self-advocacy .  As in SB-ACT, caregivers will be 
called after each session to reinforce key points a nd answer questions.   Bi-monthly 
supervision will be provided by the PI and research  coordinator to assure fidelity to the AE 
intervention; all sessions will be audiotaped and 2 0% will be reviewed.   
 
  Teens will not be blinded to group allocation; th ey will be told they are randomly 
assigned to different ways of approaching asthma ma nagement.  As in our prior work, to 
avoid differential attrition we assure sessions are  interactive and provide flexible scheduling 
and reminders.  
 
7. Asthma Control Status at Follow-Up 
Criteria for a preventive medication adjustment rec ommendation at the 3 month Follow-
Up assessment for the DOT-only and SB-ACT treatment  groups: 
1. Caregiver 3mo. FU ; one (or both) below evidencing poor control status : 
a. NHLBI criteria 
b. ACT score ≤ 19 
AND 
2. Teen 3mo. FU;  one (or both) below evidencing poor control status : 
a. NHLBI criteria 
b. ACT score ≤ 19 
AND 
3. Caregiver and/or teen reports making any effort to take/continue the 
prescribed preventive medication at school/home 
If the above conditions hold true, a step-up adjust ment recommendation (and/or a 
change to once daily dosing) will be made.  This wi ll happen regardless of whether school DOT 
is continuing or the teen has already transitioned to independent use. 
 
Medication Adjustment Procedure:  Generate a NHLBI symptom report to justify a 
preventive medication action and draft a prescripti on recommendation for PCP to consider and 
authorize (possibly with edits). After receipt of P CP decision, caregiver will be contacted to 
explain recommendation and obtain consent.  Submit new prescription to pharmacy and deliver 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
9 to school/home as needed.  If medication adjustment  is NOT agreed to by caregiver then notify 
PCP of decision not to adjust. 
Note:  If caregiver and teen both report NO attempt to be  adherent and asthma control is 
poor then Asthma Care Coordinator will encourage ca regiver/teen to restart the previously 
prescribed preventive medication and no adjustment recommendation will be initiated. 
 
For AE-only subjects who meet the criteria above: Send caregiver a poor control 
follow-up notification letter encouraging family to  pursue preventive asthma care due to teen’s 
continuing persistent symptoms.  Send PCP a notific ation letter calling attention to teen’s 
continuing persistent symptoms.  
 
8. Participant Follow-up 
Outcome measures will be assessed at 3, 5, 7 and 12  months after baseline for all 
subjects by an independent group blinded to treatme nt allocation.  We will use structured 
telephone interviews with both the teen and caregiv er for follow-up surveys.  We may also 
send reminders and schedule appointments through te xt messages and emails.  Text 
messages will be formatted in a manner that provide s research relevance in the absence of 
personal health information (PHI).  We may use a li mited data set when sending text 
messages that can include dates and times for visit s or telephone call reminders.  FeNO, 
spirometry, cotinine, height, weight and adherence measurements will be conducted through 
home or school visits at specific time-points (see below). Medical record review also will be 
performed. 
 
Measures (see below for Measurement Table with scales and ti ming of administration) 
Symptom Severity:   
a) The  primary outcome measure  will be the number of symptom-free days (SFDs) at the 
3, 5, and 7 mo. follow-ups.  This outcome measure i s consistent with the symptom 
monitoring suggested by the national guidelines, 16 and we collected prospective data on 
SFDs in our prior studies, enabling a realistic cal culation of sample size requirements.  At 
each follow-up, parents and teens will report the n umber of days the teen experienced no 
symptoms of asthma (defined as 24 hrs with no cough ing, wheezing, shortness of breath, 
and no need for rescue medicine) in the past 2 week s.  Symptom diaries will assist with 
recollection.   
b) Secondary measures : Parents and teens will be asked to report the num ber of “steroid 
bursts” for asthma, as well as urgent (ED visits, h ospitalizations, school exacerbations 
requiring treatment) and non-urgent (primary and sp ecialist care) visits.  With parent 
permission, we can access charts at each medical pr actice and will review medical records 
to verify visits.  We also will measure the number of nights with asthma symptoms, days 
needing rescue medications, days with limited activ ity, and asthma control with the asthma 
control test (ACT). 17,18   
Adherence:   We will use Horne’s adherence scale,19  and also will ask teens to report doses 
missed in the prior 2 weeks. To provide objective a dherence data for teens in each group, 
we will monitor dose counters that are integrated i nto medication canisters.  Almost all 
inhaled steroids now include counters, and in our p rior study 99% of children used 
medication that included integrated counters.  At b aseline, 5-months, and 7-months, we will 
use home visits to document the number of doses on the teens’ preventive medication 
inhaler (or count remaining pills for oral medicati ons, i.e.; Singulair), and return 2 weeks later 
to re-measure the doses used.  Based on the prescri bed regimen, we will calculate 
adherence (#actuations / #prescribed) over the prio r 2 wks.  For teens in the SB-ACT and 
DOT-only groups, we will also collect school medica tion administration logs and will record 
the time to transition to independent medicine use.  
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
10  Functional Outcomes and Services Utilization :  We will measure adolescent and 
caregiver quality of life using the Pediatric Asthm a Quality-of-Life Questionnaire and the 
Pediatric Asthma Caregiver's Quality of Life Questi onnaire .20 ,21  School absenteeism will be 
assessed by teen/caregiver report and school record s, and we will assess caregiver’s 
workdays missed for teen’s medical visits or illnes s. We will also assess other utilization, 
caregiver time costs, and out-of-pocket expenses (e .g., visits to the nurse’s office for 
exacerbations, loss of activities, urgent care util ization, medication costs, visit co-pays, and 
transportation costs).  
Airway Inflammation :  We will obtain exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) measu rements at 
baseline, 5 month follow-up, and 7-month follow-up.   We will use a NIOX VERO Airway 
Inflammation Monitor; a portable device that measur es FeNO using the electrochemistry 
method (range 5-300ppb).  Teens exhale into the dev ice for 10 seconds.   FeNO is elevated 
in inflammatory diseases and decreases with inhaled  steroid treatment.22  
Pulmonary function : At baseline, 5 month follow-up, 7-monthfollow-up teens will blow into 
a portable spirometer to assess lung function.  
Height & Weight:  At baseline, 5, month, 7 month follow-up, a portab le scale and 
stadiometer will be used to take objective measurem ent of the teen’s height and weight. 
Independent Variables/Potential Moderators:  We will collect caregiver-reported measures 
of demographic, personal, and community factors kno wn to be associated with asthma 
morbidity in high risk children or influence respon se to interventions.  These include 
demographics age, 7,23   race/ethnicity, 5,24,25   gender, insurance, 5,7,26  caregiver’s education 7, 
and caregiver and teen-reported depressed mood,27,28  using the Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies-Depression Scale 29  and the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depress ion Scale 
for Children. 30,31   Since smoke exposure is associated with asthma mo rbidity, 32,33  we will 
measure teens’ salivary cotinine levels (baseline, final). 34,35  For school/community variables, 
we use the Neighborhood Social Cohesion scale,36  school size, graduation rate, % 
free/reduced price lunch, and racial composition.   
Potential Mediators : To explore potential mediators related to the con ceptual model, we 
will use a Motivation and a Confidence Rating 37  to assess teens’ motivation to improve their 
asthma medication use, and the teens’ perceived con fidence in “how sure they are that they 
can take their medication every day,” (scale 1-10).   We will measure beliefs using the Beliefs 
about Medications Questionnaire. 38   The Beliefs About Medication Scale - Intent to Ad here 
Subscale (BAMS-IA) 39  will assess the teens’ intention to adhere to thei r medication regimen 
independently during the subsequent two weeks.  The  Asthma Readiness to Change 
Questionnaire 40  will assess readiness to change their medication u se.  We also will use the 
Health Care Climate Questionnaire 41-43  to assess the teen’s relationship with the school and 
MI nurses and health educators.  
   
9. Measures 
The table on the following page summarizes the use of all instruments used for this 
study including how the data is collected and the t imes of administration.  
 
 
Outcomes Measurement Strategy  Time of Administration  
Symptom Severity Teen and caregiver report, NHLBI g uideline-
based items  
Asthma Control Test (ACT) Baseline, each follow-up 
Airway Inflammation Objective Measurement:  FeNO Ba seline, 5 months, 7-month,  
Lung Function Objective Measurement: Spirometry Bas eline, 5 months, 7-month,  
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
11  Height and Weight Objective Measurement: Scale, Sta diometer Baseline, 5 months, 7-month,  
Medication Adherence Teen and caregiver report, Hor ne adherence 
scale  
 
Objective Measurement:  Monitoring of 
integrated medication counters Baseline, each follow-up 
 
 
Baseline, 5 months, 7-month,  
Functional Outcomes and 
Service Utilization   
Quality of Life Teen – Juniper PAQLQ 
Caregiver – Juniper PACQLQ  Baseline, each follow-up 
School Absenteeism Teen and caregiver interview 
School record review Baseline, each follow-up 
Health Care Utilization Teen and caregiver intervie w  
Medical record review Baseline, each follow-up 
Additional Cost Measures Caregiver interview (careg iver missed work, out 
of pocket expenses, transportation costs, etc.) Baseline, each follow-up 
Independent Variables   
Demographic, Medical Variables Teen and caregiver interview Baseline 
Depressed Mood* Caregiver – CES-D 
Teen – CES-DC Baseline, 7- month 
Baseline, 7- month 
 
Secondhand Smoke Teen and caregiver interview 
Objective Measurement: Salivary Cotinine Baseline, each follow-up 
Baseline, 7-month 
Potential Mediators    
Motivation Teen - Medication Adherence Motivation  and 
Confidence  Baseline, each follow-up 
Beliefs about Medications Teen and caregiver – Beli efs about 
Medications Questionnaire (BMQ) 
Teen – Beliefs About Medications – Intent to 
Adhere Subscale (BAMS-IA),  Asthma 
Readiness to Change Questionnaire  Baseline, 7-month 
 
Baseline, 7-month 
 
Process Evaluation   
RE-AIM  Summary Measures 
See detailed table in Process 
Evaluation section below RE-AIM Dimensions and Questions for 
Evaluating Health Education and Health 
Behavior Research At end of each study year 
* Parents and teens whose scores indicate they may be suffering from mild to severe depression will be  provided a 
list of mental health services and providers in the  community, and will be referred to their primary c are provider. 
 
10. Compensation 
 Teens and caregivers will each receive a $20 gift card following baseline survey, $10 
after the 3- and 5- month follow-ups, and $30 after  the 7- and 12- month follow-ups.  
Payment to participants will be in the form of a pr epaid Visa debit card from Bank of 
America.  The use of these cards allows for trackin g the use of lost or stolen cards and 
provides flexible options for participant use.   
 
11. Process Evaluation 
We will consider both individual and institutional level impacts and resources available in 
‘real world’ schools and communities. We will use RE-AIM 44  metrics  to assess : 1) the  
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
12  proportion of eligible subjects who participate and  the representativeness of participants 
compared to non-participants ( Reach ), 2) the intervention’s impact on primary outcomes and 
quality of life (Effectiveness), 3) characteristics of schools and program support by s chool 
administration, nurses, providers, and teens/caregi vers  (Adoption), 4 ) the consistency in 
delivery of each intervention component (including the efficiency of the delivery of 
medication to the schools, the % of days teens rece ive medications in school, % completed 
counseling sessions, and whether additional contact s with the nurses occur beyond the 
intervention period) ( Implementation ), and 5)  the extent to which intervention components 
continued or were modified post-study completion an d its long-term effects (Maintenance). 
The final interview will also include Likert-scale and open-ended questions to teens, parents, 
PCPs, school nurses and administrators about conven ience, scheduling, and satisfaction.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Data Storage and Confidentiality 
To maintain the integrity, security, and confidenti ally of study data, the data will be 
maintained in a secure and encrypted web-based data base and/or a password protected 
database on a secure university network drive. No s ubject data will be stored on the internal 
hard drives of any Strong Health computers. After d ata validation and analysis, subject 
information will be de-identified.  All consent for ms, paper surveys and additional 
correspondence will be locked in an office or filin g cabinet and will only be accessible by the 
study staff.  
 
Baseline, follow-up, and chart review data will be entered into a password-protected 
database.  This database is stored on a secure univ ersity network drive that is only 
accessible by the research team whom must use their  NetID and password to access the 
database.  Data may also be collected and stored us ing RedCap, a secure, password 
protected database (using University NetID’s and pa sswords) hosted through the University 
of Rochester. 
 
The counseling and education sessions will be audio  recorded.  These recordings will be 
saved on Box.net, a secure and University supported  database that will only accessible by 
investigators and study personnel.  These recording s will be used for supervision of the 
counseling and education sessions to ensure the pro tocol is being followed correctly. RE -AIM METRICS  
RE -AIM  QUESTIONS  ASSESSMENT METHOD  
Reach  
(Individual Level)  What percent of eligible participants: a) were 
excluded, b) took part and c) how 
representative were they?  Response rate and 
demographics  
Effectiveness 
(Individual Level)  Effect of intervention on primary outcomes 
and QOL? Were pre-determined NHLBI 
guideline-based targets achieved?   Primary analysis (symptoms, 
quality of life; economic 
evaluation)  
Adoption  
(Setting/Staff 
Level)  Characteristics of participating secondary 
schools, time and resource burden on school 
and community personnel.   School characteristics, 
demographics, staff surveys  
Implementation  
(Setting Level)  To what extent were the various intervention 
components delivered as intended by school 
and community staff members? Medication delivery log, session 
completion rate, contacts with 
nurses, surveys 
Maintenance  
(Individual Level)  Long term effects at 12 months? Attrition 
rate? Were drop-outs representative; how 
did attrition impact conclusions? Analysis of long-term outcomes 
(12 month assessment), 
attrition, demographics 
Maintenance 
(Setting Level)  a)To what extent were intervention 
components continued post-study 
completion, b)how was the program modified Survey and semi-structured 
interviews with school nurses, 
administrators, ALA leadership 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
13   
Portions of the final assessments with caregivers, nurses, and healthcare providers may be 
tape recorded too.  These recordings will be saved on a university network drive that is only 
accessible by study personnel whom must use their N etID and password to access these 
tape recordings.  Once the recordings have been tra nscribed, they will be deleted from the 
network drive. 
 
The Rochester City School District has partnered wi th the University of Rochester study 
team for this study, and all of the procedures foll ow the school district’s rules of privacy and 
confidentiality, as outlined in the letter from Dr.  Jeanette Silvers, Chief of Accountability for 
the Rochester City School District.  As deputies of  the school district, the study team is 
granted permission to review limited student inform ation and contact families to inquire 
about their willingness to participate in the study . 
For surrounding school districts, the study team wi ll not have access to student data until the 
family has consented to the study procedures. 
 
  
13. Safety 
This is not a drug investigational study since the effectivenes s and safety of the drugs 
are not being tested.  The randomized trial propose d will pose minimal risk to the teens, 
since the medications used by the teens (and delive red at school for the teens in the SB-
ACT and DOT-only groups) are FDA approved preventiv e medications that are 
recommended as the standard of care 45  for children and adolescents with the degree of 
symptom severity required for enrollment into the p rogram. The most common side effects 
of inhaled corticosteroids, including yeast infecti on of the mouth and facial rash, will be 
assessed during each follow-up interview.  Any sign ificant concerns will be relayed promptly 
to the study coordinator, the principal investigato r, the teen’s health care provider, the 
Institutional Review Board, the DSMB and the NIH.  There is a potential risk of adverse 
effects on linear growth from the use of inhaled st eroids;46  however, this risk is felt to be 
outweighed by the benefits for children and adolesc ents with persistent asthma.   In general, 
these medications are well tolerated and safe. Heal th care providers will prescribe all 
medications and will follow the teen for any potent ial side effects and monitor the teen’s 
growth during the course of the study.   
The frequency and severity of all reported adverse events will be systematically 
recorded. Telephone interviewers will inquire about  any adverse events, and specifically ask 
about any yeast infections of the mouth and facial rash.  Any teen experiencing an acute 
asthma exacerbation at the time of a home visit or follow-up phone call will be referred 
immediately to their health care provider for care,  and their caregiver will be notified.  In 
addition, school nurses will be instructed to conta ct the caregiver of any teen presenting to 
the nurses office with acute symptoms and refer the m promptly to their health care provider. 
There is a risk that the study team may discover an  unknown medical condition.  If this is 
to occur, we will refer the family to their health care provider or another appropriate health 
care professional for evaluation and treatment. 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP):   
This study also includes a Data Safety Monitoring P lan as submitted to and approved by 
the study sponsor: National Institutes of Health an d National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute.  A formal Data Safety and Monitoring Boa rd has been assembled for this project. 
The plan for safety and monitoring is as follows. 
 
14. Data and Safety Monitoring 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
14  Data Quality Monitoring 
Principal investigator, Dr. Halterman, will take re sponsibility that the study is 
adequately monitored and that the data are secure.  Co-investigators, Dr. Borrelli and Dr. 
Riekert each have human subject protection certific ations through their institutions.  All UofR 
recruitment staff will have human subject protectio n certifications prior to recruiting subjects 
into the study and will be included in the IRB appl ication. Recruitment will only occur at the 
University of Rochester.  There will be no enrollme nt of subjects at the University of Boston 
Medical Center or Johns Hopkins University.  
Research assistants/interviewers will be responsibl e for all assessments, and will 
receive training from key study personnel regarding  asthma terminology, symptoms, and 
medication understanding. They will be trained by t he study coordinator on the use of the 
spirometer, FeNO machine, scale, stadiometer, and s alivary collection methods.  
Data forms will be completed at each study home vis it or telephone interview and will 
be returned with a cover sheet and other source doc umentation support materials (informed 
consent, contact information, etc.).  Pre-intervent ion training of study staff will be conducted 
to increase knowledge about asthma, asthma medicati ons, and other important information 
in order to reduce the number of “real-time” data c ollection errors.  Through this training, 
staff will note any inconsistencies in parent repor ted data and will discuss them with the 
parent at the time of the interview. 
Once forms have been collected, errors that can be corrected over the telephone 
(legibility, incorrect dates, etc.) will be done us ing telephone interviews with the parents.  
Forms will be keypunched into the database using a double-entry system technique and 
checklists will be used to ensure that all data for ms have been received and entered into the 
database.  Simple range checks as well as cross-for m validation checks will be performed to 
ensure the accuracy and completeness of the data.  A list of all data checks performed will 
be maintained and any errors detected by this metho d will be noted on the form (initials and 
date of change).  In addition, data forms, valid in formed consent documents for each 
enrolled patient, and supporting source documentati on materials will be reviewed by the 
information analysts for accuracy.  Required regula tory documents (IRB approval, updates 
to the protocol, data monitoring documents) will be  maintained by the study coordinator.  All 
events during the course of the trial including stu dy enrollments, adverse events and study 
terminations will be reported to the study coordina tor (see Safety Monitoring section below). 
   
 
Safety Monitoring 
A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) including a p ediatric allergy and immunology 
specialist (Tamara Perry, MD; Arkansas Children’s H ospital Research Institute), an 
epidemiologist (Susan Fisher, MS, PhD; Temple Unive rsity), and a human subjects 
specialist (Nicholas Ferraio, MS, MPA; Department o f Pediatrics, University of Rochester) , 
has been assembled to provide ongoing oversight of the study. The DSMB will meet bi-
annually or more frequently as needed to review stu dy procedures and data.  Potential risks 
related to participation in this study are minimal since the medications delivered through this 
program are routinely recommended by national guide lines for asthma care.  In our previous 
school-based asthma program, which included 530 chi ldren, there were no reports of 
significant adverse events.  The frequency and seve rity of all reported adverse events will 
be systematically recorded at each follow-up interv iew.  Telephone interviewers will inquire 
about any adverse events, and specifically ask abou t any yeast infections of the mouth and 
facial rash.  Any significant adverse events will b e flagged by the follow-up research 
associates and relayed promptly to the senior study  coordinator, the principal investigator, 
the child’s health care provider, the Institutional  Review Board, the DSMB, and the NIH 
within 24 hours.  We will hold bi-weekly research r eview meetings with the study team to 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
15  provide an additional layer of monitoring to ensure  subject safety as well as treatment 
integrity.   
All records will be kept strictly confidential as r equired by the policies and procedures of 
the University of Rochester where data are collecte d, processed, and reported.   
 
15. Potential Benefits 
Adolescents may or may not benefit from the study.  They may experience improved 
asthma morbidity due to the additional time and att ention they receive around their asthma 
and asthma care.  Additionally, teens in the groups  receiving preventive medications may 
experience reduced symptoms due to taking their med ication daily.  In addition, the teen’s 
health care provider will be alerted of their asthm a severity, and families will receive 
telephone calls in order to assess the teen’s ongoi ng symptoms.  It is possible that an 
increased awareness of symptoms and enhanced commun ication with the health care 
provider will occur, and will result in improved as thma care and reduced morbidity for these 
adolescents.  
 
16. Analysis 
Sample Size and Power Justification: 
This study is designed to have adequate power to te st the primary hypothesis that teens 
receiving SB-ACT will have more symptom-free days a t the 3, 5, and 7 -month evaluations 
compared to AE.  Previous asthma interventions, inc luding the SBAT trial, have 
demonstrated that improvements of 0.9 SFD/2 weeks a re feasible and clinically 
meaningful. 47,48  Based on our prior data, we estimate a pooled stan dard deviation (SD) of 
SFD to be 2.6 and within-subject correlation (ICC) of 0.3-0.4. We calculated power for the 
intervention effect on SFD while justifying repeate d assessments for outcomes (5, 7, 12 
months). A sample size of 123 subjects per group wi ll obtain 94-96% power to detect a 
difference of 0.9 in SFD at a two-sided 5% signific ance level (assuming ICC: 0.3-0.4).  We 
anticipate <15% attrition, as attrition was minimal  (<5%) in the prior study, and therefore 
plan to enroll 430 teens. To test the short term in tervention effect of DOT-only vs. AE, the 
sample size of 123 per group will obtain 80% power to detect a difference of 0.93/2 weeks at 
3-month assessment with a two-sided 5% significance .  We expect the DOT-only 
intervention won’t sustain the effect at long term follow-up compared with AE. To test this, 
the proposed sample size will have 86% power at a o ne-sided 5% significance level, using a 
non-inferiority test with a margin of equivalence o f 0.9 and a SD of 2.6.  To compare the 
long-term effect of DOT-only vs. SB-ACT, we will ha ve 80% power to detect an effect size of 
0.4 at a two-sided 5% significance level.   
To evaluate the intervention effect within  each study arm, we anticipate in the SB-ACT 
group the rate of asthma control, asthma exacerbati on and no absences will reach a 
guideline-based target of 80%. 123 subjects will ha ve 80% power to claim a rate >80% with 
a non-inferiority margin to be 10%, at a one-sided significance level of 5%. 
There are 10,900 teens in 7 th -10 th  grade in the city school district and >6,000 enter ing 7th  
graders in a 3 yr. period.  Conservatively assuming  an asthma prevalence of 10%,1 >1,690 
of these students have asthma, and approximately ½ have persistent asthma.  In our prior 
study, we enrolled 74% of eligible subjects.  We ca n conservatively enroll 126 subjects/year 
(60%); which is more than adequate for sample size requirements.   
 
Primary Analysis:  
We will use graphs and descriptive statistics to su mmarize outcomes by intervention 
group at each time point.  We will assess for diffe rences between groups at baseline despite 
randomization (e.g., demographics, depressed mood, school/neighborhood factors) to 
enable the identification of covariates to be contr olled in later analyses. If distributional 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
16  assumptions associated with a particular statistica l procedure are violated, we will use 
appropriate transformations or non-parametric alter natives. Analysis will be performed under 
the intent-to-treat principle. 49  Hypothesis-driven comparisons will be made to cont rol the 
family-wise type I error rate at 0.05 (2-sided) for  primary hypotheses.  
We expect minimal loss to follow-up.13,47,50  Inferences are valid if missing data follows 
the missing completely at random (MCAR) assumption.51  However, the occurrence of 
missing data may depend on the observed response, t hus we will perform sensitivity 
analysis to examine the MCAR assumption. If it is s everely violated, we will report treatment 
effects using weighted GEE to address MCAR. Biased estimates may also arise in the case 
of non-ignorable non-response (NINR).  Although una nticipated, we will examine NINR 
using the joint modeling approach.52  For SEM, the maximum likelihood estimates (MLE) ar e 
valid under MAR, if the posited distribution models  are satisfied.  In the presence of missing 
data, estimates from LMM and SEM may be biased if p arametric assumptions are not met, 
even with the use of robust variance estimates. If this arises, we will change the distribution 
models and/or use clustered bootstrap methods for i nference.53  
 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
1. Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Liu X. Asthma prevalence,  health care use, and mortality: 
United States, 2005-2009. Natl Health Stat Report. Jan 12 2011;32:1-14. 
2. Bloom B, Dey AN. Summary health statistics for U.S . children: National Health 
Interview Survey, 2004. Vital Health Stat 10. Feb 2006;227:1-85. 
3. Expert Panel Report II: Guidelines for the Diagnosi s and Management of Asthma-
Update on Selected Topics 2002.  NIH publication no . 02-5075. Bethesda, MD: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; National H eart, Lung, and Blood Institutes; 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program;20 02. 
4. Expert panel report III: guidelines for the diagnos is and management of asthma. NIH 
publication No. 07-4051. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services; National Institute of Health; National He art, Lung, and Blood Institute; 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program;20 07. 
5. Bauman LJ, Wright E, Leickly FE, et al. Relationsh ip of adherence to pediatric asthma 
morbidity among inner-city children. Pediatrics. Jul 2002;110(1 Pt 1):e6. 
6. Diaz T, Sturm T, Matte T, et al. Medication use am ong children with asthma in East 
Harlem. Pediatrics. Jun 2000;105(6):1188-1193. 
7. Halterman JS, Aligne CA, Auinger P, McBride JT, Sz ilagyi PG. Inadequate therapy for 
asthma among children in the United States. Pediatrics. Jan 2000;105(1 Pt 3):272-276. 
8. Newacheck PW, Halfon N. Prevalence, impact, and tr ends in childhood disability due to 
asthma. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. Mar 2000;154(3):287-293. 
9. Akinbami LJ, Schoendorf KC. Trends in childhood as thma: prevalence, health care 
utilization, and mortality. Pediatrics. Aug 2002;110(2 Pt 1):315-322. 
10. McQuaid EL, Kopel SJ, Klein RB, Fritz GK. Medicati on adherence in pediatric asthma: 
reasoning, responsibility, and behavior. J Pediatr Psychol. Jul-Aug 2003;28(5):323-333. 
11. KyngAs HA, Kroll T, Duffy ME. Compliance in adoles cents with chronic diseases: a 
review. J Adolesc Health. Jun 2000;26(6):379-388. 
12. Wennergren G, Kristjansson S, Strannegard IL. Decr ease in hospitalization for treatment 
of childhood asthma with increased use of antiinfla mmatory treatment, despite an 
increase in prevalence of asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. Mar 1996;97(3):742-748. 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
17  13. Halterman JS, Riekert K, Bayer A, et al. A pilot s tudy to enhance preventive asthma care 
among urban adolescents with asthma. J Asthma. Jun 2011;48(5):523-530. 
14. Borrelli B, Riekert KA, Weinstein A, Rathier L. Br ief motivational interviewing as a 
clinical strategy to promote asthma medication adhe rence. J Allergy Clin Immunol. Nov 
2007;120(5):1023-1030. 
15. Magzamen S, Patel B, Davis A, Edelstein J, Tager I B. Kickin' Asthma: school-based 
asthma education in an urban community. J Sch Health. Dec 2008;78(12):655-665. 
16. Szefler SJ. Challenges in assessing outcomes for p ediatric asthma. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. May 2001;107(5 Suppl):S456-464. 
17. Schatz M, Sorkness CA, Li JT, et al. Asthma Contro l Test: reliability, validity, and 
responsiveness in patients not previously followed by asthma specialists. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. Mar 2006;117(3):549-556. 
18. Wallenstein GV, Carranza-Rosenzweig J, Kosinski M,  Blaisdell-Gross B, Gajria K, 
Jhingran P. A psychometric comparison of three pati ent-based measures of asthma 
control. Curr Med Res Opin. Feb 2007;23(2):369-377. 
19. Horne R, Weinman J. Patients' beliefs about prescr ibed medicines and their role in 
adherence to treatment in chronic physical illness.  J Psychosom Res. Dec 
1999;47(6):555-567. 
20. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Ferrie PJ, Griffi th LE, Townsend M. Measuring 
quality of life in children with asthma. Qual Life Res. Feb 1996;5(1):35-46. 
21. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Feeny DH, Ferrie PJ, Griffi th LE, Townsend M. Measuring 
quality of life in the parents of children with ast hma. Qual Life Res. Feb 1996;5(1):27-34. 
22. Beck-Ripp J, Griese M, Arenz S, Koring C, Pasqualo ni B, Bufler P. Changes of exhaled 
nitric oxide during steroid treatment of childhood asthma. Eur Respir J. Jun 
2002;19(6):1015-1019. 
23. Nelson BW, Awad D, Alexander J, Clark N. The conti nuing problem of asthma in very 
young children: a community-based participatory res earch project. J Sch Health. May 
2009;79(5):209-215. 
24. McDaniel M, Paxson C, Waldfogel J. Racial disparit ies in childhood asthma in the 
United States: evidence from the National Health In terview Survey, 1997 to 2003. 
Pediatrics. May 2006;117(5):e868-877. 
25. Gupta RS, Carrion-Carire V, Weiss KB. The widening  black/white gap in asthma 
hospitalizations and mortality. J Allergy Clin Immunol. Feb 2006;117(2):351-358. 
26. Halterman JS, Montes G, Shone LP, Szilagyi PG. The  impact of health insurance gaps on 
access to care among children with asthma in the Un ited States. Ambul Pediatr. Jan-Feb 
2008;8(1):43-49. 
27. Bartlett SJ, Krishnan JA, Riekert KA, Butz AM, Mal veaux FJ, Rand CS. Maternal 
depressive symptoms and adherence to therapy in inn er-city children with asthma. 
Pediatrics. Feb 2004;113(2):229-237. 
28. Weil CM, Wade SL, Bauman LJ, Lynn H, Mitchell H, L avigne J. The relationship 
between psychosocial factors and asthma morbidity i n inner-city children with asthma. 
Pediatrics. Dec 1999;104(6):1274-1280. 
29. McCallum J, Mackinnon A, Simons L, Simons J. Measu rement properties of the Center 
for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale: an Au stralian community study of aged 
persons. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. May 1995;50(3):S182-189. 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
18  30. Weissman MM, Orvaschel H, Padian N. Children's sym ptom and social functioning self-
report scales. Comparison of mothers' and children' s reports. J Nerv Ment Dis. Dec 
1980;168(12):736-740. 
31. Faulstich ME, Carey MP, Ruggiero L, Enyart P, Gres ham F. Assessment of depression in 
childhood and adolescence: an evaluation of the Cen ter for Epidemiological Studies 
Depression Scale for Children (CES-DC). Am J Psychiatry. Aug 1986;143(8):1024-1027. 
32. Mannino DM, Homa DM, Redd SC. Involuntary smoking and asthma severity in 
children: data from the Third National Health and N utrition Examination Survey. Chest. 
Aug 2002;122(2):409-415. 
33. Chilmonczyk BA, Salmun LM, Megathlin KN, et al. As sociation between exposure to 
environmental tobacco smoke and exacerbations of as thma in children. N Engl J Med. 
Jun 10 1993;328(23):1665-1669. 
34. Bernert JT, Jr., McGuffey JE, Morrison MA, Pirkle JL. Comparison of serum and 
salivary cotinine measurements by a sensitive high- performance liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry method as an indicator of exposure to tobacco smoke among 
smokers and nonsmokers. J Anal Toxicol. Jul-Aug 2000;24(5):333-339. 
35. Willers S, Axmon A, Feyerabend C, Nielsen J, Skarp ing G, Skerfving S. Assessment of 
environmental tobacco smoke exposure in children wi th asthmatic symptoms by 
questionnaire and cotinine concentrations in plasma , saliva, and urine. J Clin Epidemiol. 
Jul 2000;53(7):715-721. 
36. Sampson RJ, Raudenbush SW, Earls F. Neighborhoods and violent crime: a multilevel 
study of collective efficacy. Science. Aug 15 1997;277(5328):918-924. 
37. Riekert KA, Borrelli B, Bilderback A, Rand CS. The  development of a motivational 
interviewing intervention to promote medication adh erence among inner-city, African-
American adolescents with asthma. Patient Educ Couns. Jan 2011;82(1):117-122. 
38. Horne R, Weinman J, Hankins M. The beliefs about m edicines questionnaire: the 
development and evaluation of a new method for asse ssing the cognitive representation 
of medication. Psych Health. 1999;14:1-24. 
39. Riekert KA, Drotar D. The beliefs about medication  scale: development, reliability, and 
validity. J Clin Psychol Med Settings. 2002;9(2):177-184. 
40. Schmaling KB, Afari N, Blume AW. Assessment of psy chological factors associated 
with adherence to medication regimens among adult p atients with asthma. J Asthma. Jun 
2000;37(4):335-343. 
41. Williams G, Ryan R, Deci E. Self-Determination The ory. The questionnaires. n.d.; 
http://www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT/measures/hc_desc ription.php . Accessed August 16, 
2010. 
42. Williams GC, McGregor HA, Sharp D, et al. Testing a self-determination theory 
intervention for motivating tobacco cessation: supp orting autonomy and competence in a 
clinical trial. Health Psychol. Jan 2006;25(1):91-101. 
43. Williams GC, Gagne M, Ryan RM, Deci EL. Facilitati ng autonomous motivation for 
smoking cessation. Health Psychol. Jan 2002;21(1):40-50. 
44. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the publ ic health impact of health 
promotion interventions: the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public Health. Sep 
1999;89(9):1322-1327. 
 
RSRB#: 51912 / 544                        Protocol 
School Based Asthma Care for Teens (SB-ACT)          Revised 2.1.2021 
19  45. National Asthma E, Prevention P. Expert Panel Repo rt 3 (EPR-3): Guidelines for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma-Summary Report 2 007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
Nov 2007;120(5 Suppl):S94-138. 
46. Kelly HW, Sternberg AL, Lescher R, et al. Effect o f inhaled glucocorticoids in childhood 
on adult height. N Engl J Med. Sep 6 2012;367(10):904-912. 
47. Halterman JS, Szilagyi PG, Fisher SG, et al. Rando mized controlled trial to improve care 
for urban children with asthma: results of the Scho ol-Based Asthma Therapy trial. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. Mar 2011;165(3):262-268. 
48. Wilson SR, Latini D, Starr NJ, et al. Education of  parents of infants and very young 
children with asthma: a developmental evaluation of  the Wee Wheezers program. J 
Asthma. 1996;33(4):239-254. 
49. Fisher LD, Dixon DO, Herson J, Frankowski RK, Hear ron MS, Peace KE. Intention to 
treat in clinical trials. In: Peace KE, ed. Statistical Issues in Drug Research and 
Development . New York: Marcel Dekker; 1990:331-350. 
50. Halterman J, Fagnano M, Montes G, et al. The schoo l-based preventive asthma care trial 
(SB-PACT): Results of a pilot study. J Pediatr. In Press. 
51. Zeger SL, Diggle PJ. Semiparametric models for lon gitudinal data with application to 
CD4 cell numbers in HIV seroconverters. Biometrics. Sep 1994;50(3):689-699. 
52. De Gruttola V, Tu XM. Modelling progression of CD4 -lymphocyte count and its 
relationship to survival time. Biometrics. Dec 1994;50(4):1003-1014. 
53. Field C, Welsh A. Bootstrapping clustered data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: 
Series B (Statistical Methodology). 2007;69:369–390. 
 
 