Protocol Title: The central nervous system effects of pharmacologically induced  
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with and without estrogen and progesterone replacement.   
 
Protocol  Number:  92-M-0174  
 
Date  of This Submission/Version:  May 20, 2019  
Principal  Investigator  
 
 
 
Research  Contact  
Peter  J. Schmidt,  M.D.  NIMH/  SBE E-mail peterschmidt@mail.nih.gov  
 
Medical  Advisory  Investigator  
 
Total  requested accrual  
 0 Patients  
 150 Volunteers  
 
Human  Research  Protections  Program  Investigator  and Staff  Training:  
 
“Just in time” human subjects protection training courses are required for investigators and staff  
participating  on this protocol:  None  Peter  J. Schmidt,  M.D.  NIMH/  SBE E-mail peterschmidt@mail.nih.go v 
 
2  
 
Project  Uses  Ionizing  Radiation:   No 
Medically -indicated only 
Research -related  only 
Both  Yes (attach  RSC/RDSC  documentation)  
 
IND/IDE  No  Yes (attach  FDA  documentation)  
Drug/Device/#  depot Lupron 3.75 mg  
Sponsor  PJ Schmidt  
 
Durable  Power  of Attorney   No 
Multi -institutional  Project   No Yes  
Yes 
Institution  FWA  #   
Date  of IRB approval  (attach IRB  documentation)  
 
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Board   No Yes 
 
Technology  Transfer  Agreement  No  Yes 
Agreement  type and number   CTA 14 -10 Expiration  
Date    08/01/19    
 
Confidential  Disclosure  Agreement   No Yes 
 
Samples  are being  stored  No  Yes 
 
Flesch -Kincaid reading level of consent forms:  
Standard 6 month:  9.3 
MDE:  9.4 
Estradiol  Gel : 9.4  
 
Standard  5 month:  deactivated  
Stress  Reactivity  DEX/CRH:  deactivated  
Estradiol  suppository: deactivated  

3  
Precis : 
Evidence suggests that the gonadal steroids may exert clinically significant effects on  
central nervous system function.  For example, the menstrual cycle may influence the occurrence  
of seizures in some female epileptics and the performance on certain cognitive tests.  Central  
nervous system effects of gonadal steroids have been inferred largely from changes in behavior  
occurring in association with presumed changes in gonadal steroids du ring the normal menstrual  
cycle, during the administration of ovarian hormones, or in a gender -specific context.  These  
inferences are, by definition, indirect and associational in nature and further are incapable of  
disentangling the effects of hormones wh ich are simultaneously present in women of  
reproductive age.  This study is designed to address those problems by comparing measures  
during Lupron -induced hypogonadism with those during replacement with estrogen or  
progesterone.  On the basis of prior findin gs from our group and from others, we will be asking  
the following questions: 1)  Is the decreased r -CBF that we observed in the prefrontal cortex  
during  the hypogonadal  state confirmed  in individual women  using  new imaging techniques;  
2) Will variation  in genotype  (e.g.,  COMT  val/met,  BDNF  val/met)  confer  differential  sensitivity  
to ovarian steroids in brain circuitry and 3) Are the menstrual cycle phase -related changes in  
reward systems that we previously observed related to estradiol or progesterone actions within  
the brain  (1). Additionally,  this protocol will  serve  as a control  study  for protocol  # 90-M-0088.  
4  
Table  of Contents  
1) Introduction  page 6  
 
A. Gonadal  steroids,  sexual  dimorphisms,  brain,  and behavior  page 6  
 
B. Mechanism  by which  gonadal  steroids  may alter mood  and behavior  page 9  
 
C. Observations  since  Protocol  Commencement  page 13  
 
D. Medication  to be Employed  in this Protocol  page 14  
 
1. GnRH  agonists  page 14  
 
2. Estradiol  page 15  
 
3. Progesterone  page 17  
 
2) Study  Objectives  page 17  
 
3) Subjects  page 18  
 
a) Description  of study  populations  page 18  
 
b) Inclusion  criteria  page 18  
 
c) Exclusion  criteria  page 19  
 
4) Study  Design  and Methods  page 20  
 
a) Study  overview  page 20  
 
b) Recruitment  page 20  
 
c) Screening  page 22  
 
d) Study  Procedures  page 23  
 
e) End of Participation  page  31 
 
5) Management  of data and samples  page 32  
 
6) Additional  Considerations  page 32  
 
7) Risks  and Discomforts  page 32  
 
8) Subject  Safety  Monitoring  page 38  
5  
9) Outcome  Measures  page 38  
 
10) Statistical  Analysis  page 38  
 
11) Human  Subjects  Protection  page 39  
 
12) Anticipated  Benefits  page 42  
 
13) Classification  of Risk  page 42  
 
14) Consent  Documentation  and Process  page 42  
 
15) Data  Safety  Monitoring  page 43  
 
16) Quality  Assurance  page 44  
 
17) Reporting  of Unanticipated  Problems,  Adverse  Events  and Protocol  Deviations  
 
page 45  
 
18) Alternatives  to Participation  page 45  
 
19) Privacy  page 45  
 
20) Confidentiality  page 45  
 
21) Conflict  of Interest  page 46  
 
22) Technology  Transfer  page 46  
 
23) Research  and Travel Compensation  page 46  
 
24) References  page 49  
 
25) Appendices  
 
Blood  Drawing  Schedules  
Flow  Sheet  
Consent  Documents  
 
Clinical  Trials  Database  - Security  Overview  
6  
1) Introduction  
 
A. Gonadal  steroids,  sexual  dimorphisms,  brain,  and behavior  
 
For centuries medical observers have suggested that a special relationship exists between  
female reproductive fu nction and/or dysfunction and disturbances in central nervous system  
activity.  More recently a putative interaction between gonadal steroids, in particular estradiol  
and progesterone, and central nervous system function has been suggested to contribute to a 
number of observed epidemiologic, phenomenologic and treatment response characteristics in  
women compared to men.  Studies have consistently identified a two -fold increased prevalence  
of depression in women compared with men (2 -5). This increased prevalen ce has been observed  
in a variety of countries (4).  A two - to three -fold increased prevalence of dysthymia and  
threefold increase in seasonal affective disorder (6) in women has also been noted (7), while  
bipolar illnesses is equi -prevalent in men and wome n (2, 8, 9) (and reviewed in (10)).  Pre- 
pubertal depression prevalence rates are not higher in girls (11, 12), possibly reflecting  
ascertainment bias/reporting bias (depressed boys may be more likely to come to the attention of  
health care providers) or t he possibility that pre -pubertal major depression is premonitory of  
bipolar illness (13).  Women are more likely to present with anxiety, atypical symptoms, or  
somatic symptoms (6, 14 -21); are more likely to report symptoms, particularly in self -ratings (6,  
14, 19); are more likely to report antecedent stressful events (22, 23); manifest a more robust  
effect of stress on the likelihood of developing depression during adolescence (24); and display  
increased comorbidity of anxiety and eating disorders (25 -28), thyroid disease (29, 30), and  
migraine headaches (31), as well as lower lifetime prevalence of substance abuse and  
dependence (16, 28, 32).  Reported differences in treatment response characteristics in women  
compared  with men include  poor response to  tricyclics (33 -36) particularly  in younger  women  
7  
(34), superior response to SSRIs or MAOIs (37 -39), and a greater likelihood of response to  
triiodothyronine (T3) augmentation (30, 40).  The extent to which these differences reflect  
gender -related  differences  in pharmacokinetics  (41-47) remains  to be determined.  Finally,  while  
the prevalence of bipolar disorder is comparable in men and women, women are more likely to  
develop rapid cycling (10) and may be more susceptible to antidepressant -induced rapid cycling  
(48).  
The epidemiologic observations described above are increasingly complemented by  
demonstrations of sexual dimorphisms in brain structure and physiology in humans.  Structural  
and functional brain imaging studies, for example, have shown t he following: 1) differences in  
functional organization of the brain, with brain activation response to rhyming task lateralized in  
men but not women (49); 2) gender specific decreases in regional brain volume (caudate in  
males and globus pallidus, putamen  in females) during development (50); 3) increased neuronal  
density in the temporal cortex in women (51); 4) greater interhemispheric coordinated activation  
of brain regions  in women (52);  5) larger volume  hypothalamic nucleus (INAH  3) in men  (53);  
6) differences in both resting blood flow and the activation pattern accompanying self -induced  
mood change (54); 7) decreased 5 -HT2 binding in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and singular  
cortices in women (55); 8) differences in whole brain serotonin synthe sis (interpreted as  
decreased  in women  but possibly increased  if corrected  for plasma  free tryptophan  levels) (56);  
9) higher and more symmetric cerebral blood flow in women (57 -61); 10) greater asymmetry in  
the planum temporale in men (62); and 11) greate r brain glucose metabolism (19%) in women  
(63, 64).  The potential relevance of gonadal steroids in some of these differences has also been  
demonstrated  with the same  technologies.  Recent  brain  imaging  studies  in asymptomatic  women  
(i.e., women  without  PMD)  confirm  for the  first time  in humans  that physiologic  levels of  
8  
ovarian steroids have the capacity to modulate the neurocircuitry thought to be involved in both  
normal and pathological affective states.  First, Berman, et al. performed cognit ion-activated  
O15PET scans in women during conditions of GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism and gonadal  
steroid replacement.  They observed the elimination of Wisconsin Card Sort -activated regional  
cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in the dorsolateral prefrontal co rtex as well as an attenuation of  
cortical activation in the inferior parietal lobule and posterior inferior temporal cortex  
(bilaterally) during GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism (65).  The characteristic pattern of  
cortical activation re -emerged during bo th estradiol and progesterone addback.  Additionally,  
they observed a differential pattern of hippocampal activation with estradiol increasing and  
progesterone decreasing activation relative to hypogonadism.  This was the first demonstration  
that ovarian ste roids have activational effects on rCBF during cognitive stimulation in the brain  
regions  
(i.e., PFC) implicated in disorders of affect and cognition.  Recent observations also suggest that  
estrogen’s modulatory effects on PFC function could be influenced by variation in catechol -O- 
methyltransferase gene (66).  Second, Goldstein, et al. (67) observed an increase in amygdalar  
activity and arousal (as measured by fMRI and skin conductance, respectively) during the late  
follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (higher estradiol levels) compared to the early follicular  
phase  (characterized  by relatively  low estradiol  levels).  Third,  Protopopescu,  et al. 
(68)employed an affective pictures task in an fMRI study and observed increased OFC activity (a  
region  that in some  studies  exerts  inhibitory  control  over amygdalar  functioning)  during  the 
luteal compared with the follicular phase.  Moreover, preliminary data from these same  
investigators in women with PMD (69) suggest a relative loss of OFC activity (decreased  
inhibition)  in women  with PMD  during  the luteal  phase.  Notwithstanding the  caveat  that 
9  
decreased cortical “activity” also could reflect more efficient or optimal function, these data  
suggest that a reduction in OFC inhibition of amygdalar  function during the luteal phase is  
associated with PMD symptoms.  Finally, Dreher, et al. (1), have initiated an event -related fMRI  
study of reward processing across the menstrual cycle in women with PMD and controls.  The 
paradigm employed disentangles tr ansient reward error prediction (PFC) from sustained response  
to reward uncertainty (ventral striatum).  Preliminary data in the controls demonstrate, for the  
first time in humans, that ovarian steroids modulate reward system function, with increased  
follic ular phase activation of the OFC and amygdala during reward anticipation and of the  
midbrain,  striatum,  and left ventrolateral  PFC during  reward  delivery.  New  analytical  
approaches will allow for testing the hypothesis that the hormonally -induced alteratio n in 
function includes changes in interregional neural interactions.  These findings then suggest that  
cognitive and affective information processes may serve as probes to identify candidate circuits  
for the mediation of gonadal steroid -dependent affective dysregulation.  Additionally,  
neuroimaging studies in women suggest that ovarian steroids can influence many neural  
processes and systems relevant to PMD including arousal, stress -responsivity, and reward  
processing.  The contribution of these and other effe cts of gonadal steroids to observed gender  
dimorphisms and reproductive -related mood disorders must, obviously, await further  
determination.  
B. Mechanism  by which  gonadal  steroids  may alter  mood  and behavior  
 
Animal studies have identified that gonadal steroids influence several of the  
neuroregulatory systems thought to be involved in both the development of affective disorders  
and the putative mechanisms  underlying  the efficacy  of antidepressant  or convulsive therapies.  
10  
The manifold intera ction between gonadotropins/gonadal hormones and  
neurotransmitters/neuromodulators (70 -74) suggest a neurobiological basis for the effect of  
changes in reproductive endocrine function, such as the menopause, on mood and behavior.  For 
example, estrogen rece ptors (ER) (both α and β types of the ER) have been identified in several  
brain regions: in the preoptic area and the arcuate nucleus -median eminence region, where  
gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), dopamine, and B -endorphin neurons are concentrated;  
and in extra -hypothalamic sites, including the interstitial nucleus of the striae terminalis, medial  
amygdaloid nucleus, forebrain, and brainstem (75, 76).  Gonadal steroids have been shown to  
play a role in all stages of neural development, including neurog enesis, synaptogenesis, neural  
migration, growth, differentiation, survival, and death (77).  These effects occur largely as a  
consequence of the ability of gonadal steroids to modulate genomic transcription.  As 
transcriptional regulators, the receptors for  gonadal steroids direct or modulate the synthesis of  
the synthetic and metabolic enzymes as well as receptor proteins for many neurotransmitters and  
neuropeptides (78).  They additionally influence the levels of several critical enzymes involved  
in signal transduction.  These actions permit gonadal steroids to influence all aspects of  
neurotransmitter  activity.  
Estrogen’s role in mood regulation is not only suggested by its widespread actions on  
neurotransmitter system function but also by certain neuroregulatory actions shared by both  
estrogen and traditional therapies for depression (i.e., antidepressants, ECT).  In some, but not all  
(79), experimental paradigms, estradiol has been observed to inhibit SERT mRNA (80) and  
decrease activity at 5HT 1A receptors (81, 82), consistent with some reported actions of  
antidepressants on serotonergic system function.  Moreover, in one study estradiol replacement  
facilitated  imipramine -induced downregulation  of 5HT2 receptors  in the  rat frontal cortex (83).  
11  
Additionally, several candidate neural signaling systems have also been identified as potential  
mediators of the therapeutic actions of antidepressants and ECT (e.g., guanine nucleotide - 
stimulated adenylyl cyclase and c -AMP dependent protei n kinase (PKA) (84 -87)), based on  
observations that these systems are modulated by a range of therapies effective in depression  
(e.g., serotonergic and noradrenergic agents and ECT) and exhibit a pattern of change consistent  
with the long term effects of a ntidepressants on mood (88).  Similarly, estradiol has been  
reported to influence many of these same neuroregulatory processes.  Specifically, ovariectomy  
has been reported to decrease, and estradiol increase, BDNF levels in the forebrain and  
hippocampus (89 , 90).  Estrogen has also been reported to increase CREB activity (91, 92) in rat  
brain and, additionally, to increase  trkA (93).  In contrast, an estradiol -induced  decrease in  
BDNF has been reported to mediate estradiol’s regulation of dendritic spine forma tion in  
hippocampal neurons (94).  It is also of interest that interactions between glucocorticoid and  
estrogen response elements and their receptors suggest additional ways by which gonadal  
steroids may modulate neural activity (95).  For example, estrogen (ER) and glucocorticoid  
receptors  (GR)  compete  for CREB  binding  protein  (CBP)  and glucocorticoid  receptor  interacting  
protein (GRIP), with the relative amounts of these receptors increasing (ER) or decreasing (GR)  
transcription  at the AP -1 site (96, 97).  
Gonadal steroids may also exert important regulatory effects on the hypothalamic -pituitary - 
adrenal axis.  Studies in animals indicate that estrogen administration decreases glucocorticoid  
receptor mRNA production in the thymus (98) and the pituitary (99 -101), and enhances  
hypothalamic -pituitary adrenal (HPA) responses to stress (102 -105).  Moreover, evidence from  
animal studies further suggests that gonadal steroids may influence the serotonergic regulation of  
the HPA  axis by  altering the  function of  the 5 -HT1a and 5 -HT 2 receptor systems  in the  cortex and  
12  
hippocampus (106 -108).  In humans, gender dimorphisms in the physiologic responses to stress  
(including HPA axis function) have been reported (109 -115); however, the relationship between  
gonadal  steroid hormones and HPA axis activity has not been systematically examined in  
humans.  
Our studies  in women  using  an exercise  stressor  in the context  of GnRH  agonist -induced  
hypogonadism with and without estrogen and progesterone replacement, indicate that 
progesterone  is a more  important influence  on the stress  response  than is estrogen (116).  
Further,  in our menstrual  cycle  studies  using  the exercise  stressor,  we have  found  that 1) there  is 
a decreased cortisol and ACTH response to stress during the f ollicular as opposed to the luteal  
phase of the cycle (117) and 2) that women with a history of PMD fail to demonstrate this  
follicular phase blunting of the axis (116).  What accounts for the differential response to stress  
in women with PMD?  Since we know  that women with PMD respond differentially to gonadal  
steroids, such that they (but not controls) display mood dysregulation in this GnRH paradigm,  
one possibility is that the differences in HPA axis function that we observed in women with  
PMD may again r epresent a differential (abnormal) response to either estrogen or progesterone.  
To test this hypothesis, we will perform the exercise paradigm in patients (protocol # 90 -M- 
0088) and control women under conditions of GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism with and 
without estrogen and progesterone replacement.  Protocol # 92 -M-0174 provides a unique  
opportunity to investigate the effects of ovarian steroids on the regulation of HPA axis function  
in these women.  
Despite the possible effects of gonadal steroids on these neural systems, one cannot easily  
infer the mechanism underlying the observed psychotropic effects of these compounds.  The 
extent  to which  gonadal  hormones, gonadotropins,  catecholamines, and  neuropeptides may  
13  
interact in the developmen t of reproductive endocrine -related mood and behavioral disorders is  
purely a matter for speculation but may potentially elucidate relevant mechanisms in the  
pathophysiology  of mood disorders.  
Previous studies infer the effects of gonadal steroids on CNS a ctivity in humans from the  
occurrence of changes in CNS function in association with presumed changes in gonadal steroids  
during the menstrual cycle or during the administration of ovarian hormones (e.g., post  
menopausal estrogen replacement), or in the co ntext of gender specific behaviors.  As noted in  
the precis these methodologies suffer not only from their indirect and associational nature but as  
well from both their inability to disentangle the effects of hormones which are simultaneously  
present and th e effects of aging and menopausal status on CNS function.  In this study we  
propose to evaluate the selective effects of the gonadal steroids under three pharmacologically  
controlled conditions, specifically during GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism, GnRH ag onist - 
induced hypogonadism with estrogen replacement, and GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism  
with progesterone replacement.  Further, the mood and behavioral effects observed in subjects  
participating  in this protocol  will serve  to control for  our observations in  protocol #  90-M-0088.  
C. Observations  since  Protocol  Commencement : 
 
To date results of this protocol suggest the following: 1) the efficacy of GnRH agonist  
induced ovarian suppression compared to placebo in women with PMD; 2) the re -emergence of 
clinically significant dysphoria induced by both E2 and P4 (but not placebo) in women with  
PMD but not controls; 3) the absence of a significant effect of GnRH agonist induced  
hypogonadism, with or without E2 and P4 replacement, on the self -reports of c ognitive abilities  
or neuropsychological test scores in both patients and controls (with the exception of  
significantly  improved  performance  in motor  dexterity  tasks  during  progesterone  compared  to 
14  
other hormone conditions); 4) the eliminatio n of Wisconsin Card Sort Test -activated regional  
cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the dorso -lateral prefrontal cortex during Lupron induced  
hypogonadism (p > 0.2) and the re -emergence of the characteristic pattern of activated CBF  
during E2 or P4 addback in both patients and controls; 5) both the increase (E2) and decrease  
(P4) in N -back -activated regional CBF in the hippocampus; 6) the altered pattern of correlative  
relationships between the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus during hypogonadism compared to  
estradiol  replacement;  7) the significant  increase  in m-CPP stimulated  plasma  prolactin  secretion  
during P4 hippocampus;  8) the significant increase in exercise -induced cortisol, ACTH, and  
AVP secretion during P4 addback compared to hypogonadism; and 9) the  inability of estradiol  
suppositories at doses of 100 micrograms administered twice a day to maintain plasma estradiol  
levels  between 80 -120 pg/ml in  women receiving Lupron during  a 9 week  pilot trial. 
D. Medication  to be Employed  in this Protocol : 
 
1. GnRH  Agonists  
 
GnRH is produced by the hypothalamus and causes the anterior pituitary to release follicle  
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).  Leuprolide acetate (Lupron) is a  
synthetic nonapeptide that functions as an agonist that is 80 to 1 00 times more potent than  
synthetic native GnRH in inducing the release of LH (118, 119).  Depot Lupron is a GnRH  
agonist that, administered monthly, results in a reversible cessation of pituitary ovarian axis  
function; i.e., both the gonadotropin and ovari an steroid secretion are effectively prevented.  In 
the absence of ovarian activity, the effects of exogenously administered estrogen or progesterone  
on the CNS can be evaluated in isolation and free of the obfuscating effects of the usual changes  
in gonada l steroids.  During the first week of Lupron therapy, there is an initial increase in the  
pituitary  release  of LH and FSH leading  to a transient  increase in  levels  of the gonadal steroids  
15  
estrone and estradiol in premenopausal females.  However , with long -term administration of  
Lupron, there is a subsequent decrease in the number of GnRH receptors and an inhibition of  
pituitary elaboration of gonadotropins leading to levels of estrogens similar to those observed in  
post-menopausal women.  These d ecreases in gonadal steroid levels occur within two to four  
weeks after initiation of treatment.  Following a single Lupron depot injection (3.75 mg) to  
patients, mean peak leuprolide acetate plasma concentration was almost 20 ng/ml after four  
hours  and .36 ng/ml  at four weeks,  levels  associated  with effective  gonadotropin  suppression.  
The plasma half -life of depot Lupron is not known; however, the half -life in the non -depot form  
is approximately  three  hours.  
2. Estradiol  
 
The administration of 17β -estradiol via a transdermal system was chosen for this study  
because  it has several  relevant  advantages  over oral preparations  (120,  121).  First,  it delivers  the 
primary ovarian estrogen, estradiol, into the circulation at a constant rate and results in sustained  
and easily measurable plasma levels of estradiol and in estrone/estradiol ratios less than one (as  
seen in the pre -climacteric period of life) (122).  Second, it delivers sufficient estradiol into the  
circulation to raise estradiol plasma concentrations to le vels similar to those of women in the  
early follicular to mid -follicular phases of the menstrual cycle (120, 123 -125), levels reported by  
some investigators as the minimum necessary for the relief of menopausal symptoms,  
particularly hot flushes (123).  In contrast to oral estrogen preparations, both transdermal and  
transvaginal systems avoid first -pass effects of hepatic metabolism, and, therefore, have less  
impact on hepatic protein synthesis including clotting factors, C -reactive protein and renin  
substra te. An increase in renin substrate has been suggested to accentuate or initiate the  
development  of high blood pressure  in susceptible  women  with other  predisposing factors  (126)  
16  
and has been implicated as a factor in the association of hypert ension with the administration of  
oral conjugated estrogen (127).  In our experience with the transdermal estradiol patch in over  
100 women  in several  protocols,  it has been  well tolerated  and we have  observed  no unexpected  
adverse effects.  With the applica tion of the estrogen patch every three days, patient compliance  
has been reported to be excellent, and only occasional local irritation has been observed (123).  
Similarly, a transvaginal system has been employed to deliver progesterone in this protocol  
without expected adverse events (as detailed below).  
Formulation  of Estradiol  employed  in this protocol:  
 
1. From 1972 until September 2013 – transdermal estradiol patches were employed at a dose  
of 100 micrograms per day.  However, due to the unavailability of matched placebo  
patches  and the prohibitive  costs  of manufacturing  the small  quantities of  placebo  patches  
needed for this protocol we ceased the employment of estradiol skin patches in this and  
related  protocols (i.e., 90 -M-0088, 05 -M-0059).  
2. Between Septe mber 2013 and May 2014 – we performed a pilot study lasting  
approximately two months in which we evaluated estradiol vaginal suppositories (100  
micrograms once to twice daily) as a substitute for the transdermal estradiol patches.  
However,  we could  not achieve the desired  plasma  concentrations  consistently  in women  
and, therefore, we  could not employ  vaginal estradiol  administration in this  protocol.  
3. Between July 2014 and June 2016 – we performed a pilot study lasting approximately two  
months in which we evaluated estradiol transdermal skin gel (.06%) three to four  
applications per day (.75 to 3.0 mg estradiol per day) as a substitute for the transdermal  
estradiol  patches.  However,  we could  not achieve the  desired  plasma  concentrations  of 
17  
estradiol consistently in women and, therefore, we could not employ .06% estradiol gel  
administration  in this protocol.  
4. Amendment: we intend to conduct a pilot trial of a higher dose of estradiol gel (.36%  
estradiol in hydro alcoholic base) at doses of 6 t o 9 mg of estradiol per day (2 -3 
applications per  day) 
3. Progesterone  
 
In this protocol progesterone 200 mg will be administered twice daily.  Progesterone is  
widely prescribed in gynecologic settings with proved indications including dysfunctional  
uterine bl eeding, endometriosis, mastodynia, galactorrhea and precocious puberty (128).  In our  
experience with the use of progesterone vaginal suppositories in over 80 women in several  
protocols,  they have  been well  tolerated and  we have  observed no  unexpected adver se events.  
Mild to moderate perineal irritation has been experienced rarely and when it occurs it is  
responsive  to barrier creams such  as vaseline.  
Estrogel  .36%  pilot study  only:  we will prescribe  one of three  forms  of progestin  to induce  
 
endometrial she dding and menstruation after women complete the four weeks of unopposed  
estradiol  administration  (Estrogel  .36%).  The decision  to choose  a specific  form  of progestin  will 
be made by the PI and will depend on the availability of these progestins in the NIH CC 
Pharmacy. Thus, we will prescribe one of the following forms of progestin: progesterone by  
suppository at a dose of 200 mg twice a day for one week (as approved in the original protocol),  
or oral progesterone or oral medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera ) at standard clinical doses  
indicated  for the induction  of menses  after unopposed  estradiol exposure  in healthy  women.  
Finally, administration of depot Lupron up to a maximum of six monthly injections with  
and without  the concurrent administration  of the estraderm  patch  (alone  for four weeks and  in 
18  
combination with progesterone suppositories for one week) and progesterone suppositories (for  
five weeks) has been approved by the NIMH IRB for administration to patients with menstrual - 
related  mood disorder under NIMH  protocol # 90 -M-0088.  
2) Study  Objectives : 
 
The objectives of this study are to examine the effects of hypogonadism with and without  
physiologic replacement of estradiol and progesterone on measures of brain function and  
behavior.  The use of GnRH agonists to suppress ovarian function (hypogonadism) permits us to  
examine the effects of estradiol and progesterone on brain function separately, and to standardize  
the exposure to these hormones across individual women and in our comparison in women with  
premenstrual dysphoria (PMD), who participate in an identical companion protocol (90 -M- 
0088).  The outcome measures currently employed in this study are as follows: 1) brain imaging  
with 015 PET and fMRI to examine brain activation and connec tivity and the impact of genomic  
variation  on these neuroimaging  measures;  2) HPA  testing  with Dex/CRH  stimulation;  
3) metabolomic profile of neurosteroid and neuroactive steroid metabolites, and 3) cell culture  
studies (lymphoid and IPCs) to examine cellular  responses to exposures to ovarian steroids in  
controls  and women with PMD (90 -M-0088).  
3) Subjects : 
 
a) Description  of study  populations  
 
Healthy  asymptomatic  premenopausal  women  with no current  Axis  I diagnosis  and no 
evidence  of menstrual -related mood  or behavioral disturbances.  The targeted accrual  of 
150 women  reflects  the use of this protocol  to examine  specific  goals  that have  developed  over 
the course  of this protocol.  
b) Inclusion  criteria  
19  
Volunteers  participating  in this study  will be women  meeting  the following  criteria:  
 
• between  the ages of 18 and 50 years,  
 
• not pregnant,  
 
• in good medical  health,  
 
• medication  free, 
 
• no history of menstrual -related mood  or behavioral  disturbances.  
 
Additionally, we will recruit a subsample of 20 asympto matic women who will meet all  
inclusion and exclusion criteria in this protocol except they will have a history of a past major  
depressive  episode.  
Finally, a sample of 10 women who meet all the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed  
above for this protoc ol will be recruited to establish the dose range of transdermal .36% estrogen  
gel for this and related protocol (i.e., 90 -M-0088).  
c) Exclusion  criteria  
 
The following conditions will constitute contraindications to treatment with hormonal  
therapy  and will preclude  a subject's  participation in this  protocol:  
• Current Axis I psychiatric diagnosis (with the exception of those women with a past  
major  depression who  will be studied  in this protocol);  
• History  consistent  with endometriosis;  
 
• Diagnosis  of ill-define d, obscure  pelvic  lesions,  particularly  undiagnosed  ovarian  
enlargement;  
• Hepatic  disease  as manifested  by abnormal  liver function  tests;  
 
• History  of mammary  carcinoma;  
 
• History  of pulmonary  embolism  or phlebothrombosis;  
20  
• Undiagnosed  vaginal  bleeding;  
 
• Porphyria;  
 
• Diabetes  mellitus;  
 
• History  of malignant  melanoma;  
 
• Cholecystitis  or pancreatitis;  
 
• Cardiovascular  or renal  disease;  
 
• Pregnancy.  
 
• Any woman  meeting  the Stages  of Reproductive  Aging  Workshop  Criteria  (STRAW)  
for the perimenopause (129).  Specifically, we will exclude any woman with an  
elevated  plasma FSH  level  (> 14 IU/L) and  with menstrual  cycle variability of  
> 7 days different  from  their normal cycle length.  
 
NIMH employees/staff and their immediate family members will be exclude d from the  
study  per NIMH  policy.  
Subjects taking birth control pills will be excluded from the study.  Subjects taking  
diuretics, prostaglandin inhibitors, or pyridoxine (putative treatments for MRMD) will similarly  
be excluded from the study, as will pati ents taking psychotropic agents (e.g., lithium carbonate,  
tricyclic antidepressants).  All subjects will be required to use non -hormonal forms of birth  
control (e.g., barrier methods) to avoid pregnancy during this study.  Finally, participants who  
have an a ctive condition that places them at an increased risk for osteoporosis (see Table I) will  
be excluded from this protocol.  
4) Study  Design  and Methods : 
 
a) Study  overview  
21  
This is an out -patient study lasting approximately 5 -7 months.  Subjects will be asked to  
make visits to the clinic every one to two weeks.  Each visit will last up to two hours.  In 
addition, some subjects will complete additional procedures such as PET or fMRI scans for  
which  there  are separate  consents.  
b) Recruitment  
 
Recruitment  Screening  Methods  
 
Participants  will be sought  by advertising  for women  who do not experience  menstrually - 
related  mood disturbances.  
• Flyers  will be produced  with tear-offs. Posters  will not have  tear-offs. 
 
• Flyers/poster will be used in color as submitted, or may be printed in black and  
white.  Color changes to recruitment material will be made proportionately  
throughout  and will not be  used to change the  emphasis of the material.  
• The size of the flyers/posters/ads may vary, but all parts, including fonts and  
pictures, will be changed proportionately.  Disproportionate changes in size will  
not be used to change the emphasis of the material.  
• The size of the flyers/posters may vary, but all parts, including fonts and pictures,  
will be changed proportionately to the rest of that flyer.  Disproportionate changes  
in size will not be  used to change the emphasis  of the flyer.  
• Flyers/posters may be posted on bulletin boards on the NIH campus, and at coffee  
shops, grocery stores, bookstores, libraries, fitness centers, c ommunity centers, or  
placed in venues, such as at advocacy group offices, in doctor’s office waiting  
rooms, and retail establishments with approval of the venue or in accord with their  
policy.  
22  
• Flyers/posters  may be made  available  at outreach  exhibits,  speaking  engagements,  
support group meetings, parenting groups, professional meetings, and  
association/trade meetings with approval of the venue or in accord with their  
policy.  
• Flyers/posters  may be given  directly  to persons  requesting  study  information.  
 
• Flyers/posters  may be posted  electronically  on websites  such as such as NIH or 
NIMH websites, advocacy/parenting group websites such as PTAs, athletic  
groups or neighborhood groups, publications’ websites such as Washington  
Parent,  or Gazette.  
• Flyers/posters  may be sent electronically  to persons  requesting  study  information  
 
• Flyers/posters  may be sent electronically  to listserv  administrators.  SBE will not 
post directly to listservs.  Rather, an email with the material attached, including  
the following  statement  will be  sent to the  administrator  of the listserv:  
You are receiving the email because your email address is included on this  
listserv. The purpose of this message is to inform you of an NIMH study that is  
recruiting subjects.  The admin istrator of this listserv has permitted its use for this  
distribution . 
The administrator has the option of sharing the information with their list.  
Examples of types of listservs to be contacted include professional groups,  
parenting/  family,  school,  sport  groups,  women’s  health  and fitness.  SBE will 
retain copies of all correspondence with the administrator of each listserv and  
submit  as requested to the IRB.  
23  
• IRB-approved advertisements may be placed in local and national print  
publications of newspapers, magazines and support or health care organizations,  
such as The Washington Post, The Express, Washington Parent, Gazette,  
Washingtonian,  Washington Jewish  Week and others.  
• NIH Record  announcements will  appear  as text  in the  NIH Record.  
 
c) Screening  
 
Subjects are initially screened for this protocol via participation in screening protocol 81 - 
M-0126.  All subjects  will have  a two month  baseline  screening  period  during  which  mood  and 
behavioral ratings will be obtained.  The absence of menstrual -related mood disorders will be  
prospectively confirmed during a two month period prior to the study entry when subjects will  
complete daily visual analogue rating scales monitoring both mood and behavior as outlined in  
NIMH  protocol # 81 -M-0126.  
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (130) will be administered to controls  
prior to study entry.  Any control with a current or past axis I psychiatric diagnosis will be  
excluded  from  participating  in this protocol  (except  in the subgroup  of asympt omatic  women  
with a past major depressive episode  who participate in this protocol).  
Prior to treatment, a complete physical and neurological examination will have been  
performed  and the following routine laboratory data obtained:  
A. Blood  
 
Complete blood cou nt; thyroid function tests; cortisol; renal function tests, such as BUN  
and creatinine; electrolytes; glucose; liver function tests,  B-hCG for pregnancy test.  
B. Urine  
Routine  urinalysis.  
24  
GnRH  agonist  will not be administered  to any subject  with significant  clinical  or 
laboratory  abnormalities.  
Additional  tests.  
 
Results of Pap smear performed not longer than 12 months prior to onset of treatment  
will be obtained.  
d) Study  Procedures  
Medications:  
Following the baseline screening period, subjects will be administered 3.75 mg of GnRH  
agonist via intramuscular injection on a monthly basis in our clinic for a maximum of 24 weeks  
(see Figure  I). 
After week eight of GnRH agonist treatment participants will be randomized to either  
Group # 1 or # 2 and re ceive, in a sequential fashion, estradiol and progesterone as follows.  The 
subjects  who elect  to participate  in the brain  imaging  studies  will receive  three  months  of Lupron  
alone (rather than two) to permit their data to be compared with those from protocol # 90 -M- 
0088.  Consequently, subjects in the brain imaging studies will be randomized to Groups 1 or 2  
after week 12 of Lupron alone.  
Group  # 1: (Figure  1) While  continuing  on the GnRH  agonist,  subjects  will be administered  
 
0.1 mg/day of 17ß -estradiol  once or twice a day via vaginal suppository for a period of five  
weeks.  After  the fourth  week,  progesterone  suppositories  (200 mg BID)  will be added  to provide  
progesterone withdrawal induced shedding of the endometrium and menses in order to prevent  
any effects on the endometrium of prolonged exposure to unopposed estrogen.  After the four  
weeks  of estradiol  administration  and the one week  of combined  estradiol  and progesterone,  
there  will be a two week  washout  period  when  neither  estradiol  nor progesterone  will be given.  
25  
Subjects will then be administered progesterone suppositories (200 mg) twice daily for a period  
of five weeks  after which  no progesterone  will be taken.  
Group  # 2: Group  # 2 is identical  to Group  # 1 except  that the order  of estradiol  and progesterone  
 
treatments will be reversed: progesterone suppositories (200 mg) will be administered twice  
daily  for the first five weeks,  and after a two week  washout  period  estradiol  suppositories  will be 
administered  for five weeks  and in combination  with progesterone during  the fifth  week.  
Symptom  Ratings:  
 
Subjects will fill out the following symptom rating scales: (1) Self -ratings: daily ratings  
include a visual analogue scale (VAS) measuring the reported severity of 15 mood  and 
behavioral  symptoms,  and the Daily  Rating  Form  (131)  (modified  to include  selected  items  from  
the DRSP (132)), which measures the severity of 15 mood and behavioral symptoms and  
functional impairment; biweekly clinic ratings include the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)  
(133), the rating scale for Premenstrual Tension Syndrome (PMTS) – self (134), a self rating  
scale measuring the severity of mood and behavior symptoms, and a side effect checklist; the  
Derogatis Inventory of Sexual Function (135 ), which measures sexual interest and function, will  
be completed at baseline and during weeks 10 -12, 14 -16, and 21 -23; (2) Observer ratings: the  
PMTS -rater form (134) will be completed during biweekly clinic visits. Symptom ratings,  
diagnostic interviews,  and other questionnaires will be collected through an online system using  
a subject -specific log in and password to protect confidentiality (see Appendix I). Both  
participants and investigators will input data into CTDB/CTSS. Participant entered data will  be 
reviewed  during the clinic visit.  
Blood Samples - After the administration of the GnRH agonist, in addition to the  
completion  of daily  mood and  behavioral  rating  scales, blood  samples  (50 ml)  will be drawn at  
26  
each visit, if possible, for the duration of the study (20 -24 weeks).  Total blood volume will be  
550-660 ml.  All blood sampling will be obtained in the following fashion.  Subjects will arrive  
at the 4th or  9th floor outpatient  clinic  between 7:30  and 9:00 a.m.;  they will be seated  or placed  
at bed rest, a scalp vein needle will be placed in the forearm or hand via venipuncture, and  
approximately 50 ml of blood will be drawn.  This blood will then be analyzed for several  
measures  such as gonadotropins, estradiol,  progesterone, (and its  neurosteroid metabolites).  
Additionally,  blood  samples  and skin biopsies  (in combination  with those  obtained  in 
 
protocol # 90 -M-0088) will be analyzed for hormone and metabolic measures (as well as cellular  
function of the induced pluripotent cells from th e skin fibroblasts taken by biopsy or peripheral  
blood T lymphocytes) that could distinguish either the symptomatic state in women with PMD or  
women with from those without PMD.  In order to assess the effects of suppression of the  
hypothalamic pituitary go nadal axis and the re -introduction of (exogenous) estradiol and/or  
progesterone on cognitive function, subjects will be administered a series of cognitive test  
batteries at baseline, during the second month of depot Lupron treatment, and during the third  
weeks of both E2 and progesterone replacement.  Further, subjects will be approached for their  
consent to participate in a number of related protocols attempting to assess and investigate the  
central nervous system effects of hypothalamic pituitary ovarian a xis suppression as well as the  
effects of selective re -introduction of estradiol and/or progesterone.  Related projects will include  
measures of regional cerebral blood flow, O 15 water PET, BOLD signal (protocol # 90 -CC- 
0014),  lymphoblastoid cells, and  induced -pluripotent cells.  
Additional  Procedures : 
 
A. Skin Fibroblasts and Peripheral Blood Cells for Induced Pluripotent Cell Studies  
We wish  to perform  skin biopsies  and collect  an additional  sample  of venous  blood  in 
27  
women who have participat ed (or who currently are participating) in protocols 90 -M-0088, titled  
“The treatment of menstrually -related mood disorders with the gonadotropin releasing hormone  
(GnRH) agonist, depot leuprolide acetate (Lupron),” and 92 -M-0174, titled “The central nervo us 
system effects of pharmacologically induced hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with and without  
estrogen and progesterone replacement.”  Previous findings from these protocols have  
demonstrated a differential behavioral response (i.e., a recurrence of typical  mood and behavioral  
symptoms experienced premenstrually) to physiologic levels of the ovarian steroids estradiol and  
progesterone in women with premenstrual dysphoria (PMD) compared with asymptomatic  
controls.  The observed  differential  response  appears  to be tissue  specific  (i.e., neuronal)  since  
the effects of ovarian steroids at several other target tissues does not differ in women with and  
without PMD (e.g., endometrium, pituitary, breast).  The biological basis for this differential  
behavioral response to ostensibly the same physiologic stimulus is unclear; however, it is well  
established  that tissue  specificity  in the response  to sex steroids  is mediated  by factors  at the 
level of cellular function.  Receptors for both estradiol and progesterone are wide ly distributed  
throughout the brain, and recent neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that both estradiol and  
progesterone regulate the activation patterns in brain regions involved with the processes of  
affective  adaptation and stress  responsivity.  
We hypothesize  that the capacity  for phenotypic  differences  between  women  with and 
those without PMD will be preserved in the cellular function of induced pluripotential cells  
(IPCs).  Although  the phenotypic  difference  in response  to sex steroids  is tissue  specific,  the 
latent capacity for differential expression in response to steroids should be preserved in IPCs and  
expressed in the differentiation of the IPCs into neural elements.  Thus, we plan to obtain  
fibroblasts  from  skin biopsies  and T-lymphocytes  from  peripheral  blood  (136)  in order  to convert  
28  
these cells into IPCs to establish neuronal and glial cell lines in both women with PMD and  
controls.  This study will be done in collaboration with Dr. David Goldman at the NIAAA.  The 
goal of this project  will be to develop  neurons  and glial cells from  participants  and to 
characterize  their gene  expression  patterns,  morphological  properties,  and cell signaling  
pathways in response to exposures to physiologic levels of estradiol and progesterone.  These 
experiments, therefore, will allow us to evaluate the nature of the differential behavioral response  
by examining protein expression and changes in cellular behaviors associated with the exposure  
to physiologic levels of either estradiol or progesterone  across the two different behavioral  
phenotypes.  The two behavioral phenotypes will be constituted by those women with PMD  
whose symptoms remit during ovarian suppression and whose symptoms recur during  
physiologic addback of either estradiol or progesterone.  This assures the phenotypic fidelity of  
the subjects and avoids the false positives that would otherwise be generated if diagnoses are  
established solely on the basis of baseline behavioral ratings. The selection of each woman will  
occur afte r completion of the six month study to ensure both the proper characterization of the  
behavioral phenotype and to include comparable numbers of women in whom symptoms recur  
after estradiol and progesterone exposure.  To recruit sufficient numbers of women i n each group  
we will contact women who have previously participated in these protocols, have met our  
baseline criteria for PMD or asymptomatic controls, and have further demonstrated either the  
elimination of symptoms during GnRH agonist and return of symp toms upon re -exposure to  
estradiol or progesterone (PMD) or the absence of negative behavioral symptoms during both  
GnRH agonist and ovarian steroid addback phases (controls).  Each of these women who is  
interested  in participating will  be re -consented for this study.  
We hypothesize  that the skin  biopsy  of the  fibroblasts  and the  T-lymphocytes  obtained  
29  
from women with PMD and those from asymptomatic controls can be converted into IPCs and  
differentiated into model neuronal and glial cell lines.  The production of these pluripotential cell  
lines will retain genetic (or epigenetic) variations that will help us understand the differential  
behavioral  response at a cellular level in this condition.  
Women who participate in these protocols will be appr oached to obtain consent for the skin  
biopsies as part of the core consent documents.  Additionally, we wish to contact women who  
have previously participated in this study in order to obtain their consent to perform a skin  
biopsy.  Previous participants wil l be asked to provide consent using the new consent form  
accompanying this amendment.  All women will be asked to provide a skin sample to study  
functional genomics of neuronal and glial precursors.  Skin biopsies will be performed using an  
instrument that cuts out one or two 4 mm cylindrical pieces of skin.  These biopsies are  
performed under local anesthesia (2% Lidocaine with or without epinephrine).  The level of  
discomfort associated with the anesthesia is analogous to a PPD skin test for tuberculosis (TB ). 
The biopsy itself is painless.  This type of biopsy site usually heals by secondary intention and is  
covered  with a steri-strip type bandage.  If necessary,  it will be closed  with 1 or 2 non-absorbable  
sutures.  These sutures  can be  removed  by the  investig ator or his/her assistant,  in about  7 to 
10 days.  No more than two biopsies will be taken at any one time.  Samples derived from  
biopsies may be utilized for procedures such as special stains, immunohistochemistry, direct  
immunofluorescence or immunoelectron -microscopy for localization of immune deposits, PCR,  
or establishment of cell cultures.  In our protocol, the samples will be used to isolate fibroblasts  
to grow  a pluripotent cell  lines.  
If we are unable to produce cell lines from the initia l skin sample obtained then participants  
will be re-contacted  to allow  us to take  additional  samples  from a different  area of  the skin.  The 
30  
repeat sample will be obtained under the same conditions as those employed to obtain the first  
biopsy but from a different area of the body.  Risks and potential adverse reactions from a second  
skin sample  should  be similar  to those of  the initial sample.  
B. Procedures  for Sample  to Determine  Appropriate  Dose  of Transdermal  Estradiol  Gel: 
 
We wish to identify the lowest daily dose of transdermal estradiol gel  to achieve plasma  
estradiol levels  between  80 and 120 pg/ml;  blood  levels  of estradiol  comparable  to those  
obtained with the previously employed transdermal system in this protocol.  We do not expect  
sustai ned plasma estradiol levels above this range.  Nonetheless, the normal follicular phase  
range of plasma estradiol is between 60 and 300 pg/ml and it is possible that a single high level  
of estradiol will be observed depending on how soon after gel applicati on blood samples are  
obtained.  Thus, we will recruit up to 10 women who meet the protocol’s selection criteria.  Each  
woman will be administered Lupron for two months only.  After the first month of Lupron  
treatment when ovarian suppression has been achieved , we will administer 2 -3 applications  
(approximately 6.0 – 9.0 mg estradiol gel  (open label)) once a day for four weeks.  Estradiol gel  
(EstroGel® 0.36% estradiol in a hydroalcoholic absorptive gel base; Ascend Therapeutics,  
Herndon, VA) is dispensed in a co ntrolled release pump bottle calibrated to provide 1 ml of gel  
containing 3.0 mg of estradiol per pump. The colorless, odorless, and fast drying gel is applied to  
the skin over the arms, shoulders and outer thighs (as needed) once each day (usually in the  
morning). Plasma estradiol levels after use of 3.0 and 6.0 mg daily doses (i.e., 1 and 2 pumps  
respectively) for 7 days in men were approximately 86 and 125 pg/ml, respectively (137). Thus,  
we anticipate that plasma estradiol levels should reach approximat ely 100 pg/ml with the two to  
three applications proposed in this pilot study.  Blood samples will be obtained at weekly clinic  
visits  to evaluate  whether  this dose administered  once  a day is sufficient  to achieve  the plasma  
31  
estradiol  levels  targeted in  this study (i.e., 80 -120 pg/ml).  If after  one week of  two applications  
of estradiol gel once a day, we observe that this dose schedule is insufficient to consistently  
obtain the desired blood levels, we will increase the dose to three applicatio ns (9.0 mg) each day  
for the next three weeks.  Alternately, if adequate blood levels are observed after the two  
applications once a day regimen then women will continue at this dose  for the remaining three  
weeks to evaluate the stability of plasma estradio l levels with the  two applications each day  
regimen.  We do not anticipate needing a dose greater than three applications each day.  After the  
four weeks of estradiol treatment, all women will receive one week of progesterone suppositories  
(200 mg twice a da y) to precipitate a progesterone withdrawal -induced menses.  Upon  
completing this evaluation, we will provide the data to the FDA to modify the IND under which  
this protocol and its companion protocol (90 -M-0088) are conducted.  The duration of Lupron  
treatment is a third the length of time in which Lupron is administered in the regular six month  
protocol and the duration of estradiol treatment is the same as that approved in the original  
protocol.  Women participating in this component of the protocol w ill not be asked to participate  
in any of the additional procedures employed in the six month protocol (i.e., brain imaging, IPCs,  
or metabolomics).  
Blood Samples for this component of the protocol (10 ml) will be drawn at each visit, if  
possible, for the duration of the study (8 weeks).  Total blood volume will be 90 ml.  All blood  
sampling  will be obtained  as described  in the core protocol.  This blood  will then be  analyzed  for 
gonadotropins  and estradiol.  
 
 
e) End of Participation  
 
When  available,  the results  of this study  will be discussed  with each participant.  Controls  
32  
will be discharged  from  this protocol  with follow -up as needed  by their private  healthcare  
provider.  
5) Management  of Data  and Samples:  
 
a. Storage  
 
Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign.  Data will be kept in password - 
protected  computers.  Samples  will be kept in locked  storage.  DNA  samples  and cell lines  will 
be stored in locked freezers in David Goldman’s laboratory (NIAAA) on Fischer’s Lane in  
Rockville.  Only study investigators will have access to the samples and data. Upon the  
completion of the study, blood samples, DNA and cell lines will be retained. Any loss or  
destruction  of samples  will be reported to the  IRB.  
Data from structured diagnostic interviews a nd symptom ratings are kept in secure research  
files and electronically  on the Branch  server  space  or within  the CTDB  database.  Access  to 
these research files is only available to study investigators. Symptom ratings, diagnostic  
interviews, and other questionnaires will be collected through an online system using a subject - 
specific  log in  and password to  protect  confidentiality (see  Appendix).  
b. Data  and sample  sharing  plan 
 
This protocol is not subject to the Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) policy. The shar ing of  
Genomic  data according  to the GDS  policy  is covered  under  the screening  protocol  81-M-0126.  
Data and samples may be shared with dbGaP, collaborating laboratories at NIH or outside of  
NIH and/or submitted to NIH -designated repositories and databases if consent for sharing was  
obtained.  Repositories receiving data and/or samples from this protocol may be open -access or  
restricted access.  
Samples  and data will be stripped  of identifiers  and may be coded  (“de-identified”)  or 
33  
unlinked from an identifying code (“anonymized”). When coded data is shared, the key to the  
code will not be provided to collaborators, but will remain at NIH.  Data and samples may be  
shared with investigators and institutions with an FWA or operating under the Declarat ion of  
Helsinki (DoH)  and reported  at the time of continuing  review.  Sharing  with investigators  
without  an FWA  or not operating  under  the DoH  will be submitted  for prospective  IRB approval.  
Submissions to NIH -sponsored or supported databases and repositori es will be reported at the  
time of Continuing Review.  Submission to non -NIH sponsored or supported databases and  
repositories  will be submitted for prospective  IRB approval.  
Required approvals from the collaborating institution will be obtained and materials will be  
shipped  in accordance with  NIH and federal regulations.  
6) Additional  Considerations:  
 
Estradiol gel (EstroGel® 0.36% estradiol in a hydroalcoholic absorptive gel base) is  
manufactured  by Ascend  Therapeutics,  Herndon,  VA. Progesterone  suppos itories  will be 
manufactured  and supplied  by the  NIH Pharmacy.  
7) Risks  and Discomforts : 
 
A. Effects  of Medications  Administered  in this Protocol  
 
Lupron  
 
The most frequent adverse effect of Lupron is hot flushes (flashes) reportedly occurring in  
4-89% of patients receiving the drug.  Lupron -induced hot flushes have ranged in severity from  
occasional mild flushing to frequent sweating.  In general, episodes of flushing persist with  
continued  therapy in  most patients receiving  Lupron.  In  a recently completed  study  of 
400 women  of reproductive  age with either  uterine  fibroids  or endometriosis who  each received  
 
3.75 mg depot  Lupron every  month for  a period  of six  months, the most  common side  effects  
34  
reported  to occur  were  as follows: 1)  hot flashes  of mild  to moderate intensity  (89%),  
 
2) headache (22%), 3) nervousness or irritability (11%), and 4) insomnia (10%).  Local irritation  
at the injection site was complained of in less than 10% of the patients in this sample, and there  
was a mean dec rease in bone density, as measured by bone densitometry, of 3.4 to 4.0%, which  
totally reversed after the medication had been discontinued for six months.  Approximately ten  
patients of the original sample of 400 found the side effects to be severe enough t o discontinue  
therapy.  Regular menstrual cycle function returned within two months following the last  
injection of depot Lupron (Tapp Pharmaceuticals, personal communication).  Blurred vision,  
lethargy, memory disorder, and numbness have been reported in le ss than 3% of patients  
receiving the drug.  Thrombophlebitis, phlebitis and/or pulmonary embolism, and congestive  
heart failure have occurred rarely in patients receiving Lupron, but a causal relationship to the  
drug has not been established.  Adverse GI eff ects occurring in 2% or more of patients receiving  
Lupron include nausea and/or vomiting, constipation, and anorexia.  Diarrhea and a sour or  
unusual taste in the mouth have been reported less frequently.  Other adverse effects of Lupron  
occurring in less th an 3% of patients include decreased hematocrit and hemoglobin  
concentration, fatigue, fever, facial swelling, rash, hives, hair loss, and itching.  Limited  
information is available on the acute toxicity of Lupron.  Following subcutaneous administration  
of Lu pron in rats at dosages 250 -500 times the usual human dosage, dyspnea, decreased activity,  
and local irritation at the injection site were observed; however, there is no evidence to date that  
overdosage in humans produces  similar  adverse effects.  Lupron dosages up  to 20 mg daily  for 
up to two years have not produced unusual adverse effects in humans.  There has been one report  
of an anaphylactic reaction in a patient following administration of a GnRH agonist.  Recent  
longitudinal  follow -up studies  of girls and boys  receiving GnRH  agonists  as a treatment  for 
35  
precocious puberty report the development of normal reproductive function and fertility (138 - 
140).  The FDA recently published a caution about the effects of GnRH agonists in elderly  
males;  however, the safe use of these agents in younger adults and children (141) was not  
questioned  in the FDA statement.  
Estradiol  
 
Nausea is the most common side effect of estrogen administration.  At conventional  
replacement doses, higher than those employed in this protocol, this complaint seldom interferes  
with eating,  and no weight  loss has been  reported.  Breast  engorgement,  endometrial  hyperplasia  
and bleeding are also common side effects of estrogen administration.  Pre-existing fibroid  
tumors of the uterus may enlarge under the effects of estrogen; however, at the dosage and for  
the duration of estrogen administration in  this protocol this risk is small.  
The relationship between estrogen, both endogenous and exogenous, and the development  
of endometri al carcinoma  has been suggested  by several  different  lines  of investigation  (142).  
Numerous retrospective case control studies published since 1975 have indicated that post  
menopausal exposure to unopposed estrogens for more than one year results in a two to 12 fold  
increased relative risk for endometrial cancer.  A relationship between the dose and duration of  
estrogen use and the risk for endometrial cancer has also been shown, the risk being increased  
after one to four years of estrogen use and rising als o with the dosage employed.  However, the  
addition of progesterone to estrogen therapy appears to decrease the risk of endometrial  
hyperplasia and endometrial cancer to equal or below that of women receiving no hormonal  
treatment.  Recent studies suggest tha t the optimal regimen to prevent hyperplasia and thus,  
inferentially, the risk of carcinoma, consists of 12 to 13 days of progestin treatment each month  
when  estrogens  are administered  (143).  There  is an increase  in thromboembolism  and stroke  in 
36  
women receiving estrogen therapy (144 -151) (and, possibly, ovarian cancer (152) and lung  
cancer (153, 154)); however, these complications are unlikely at the dose and duration of  
estrogen therapy employed in this protocol and in the younger age of the women participating in  
this trial.  One study (123) reported no effect of the estrogen patch on the four clotting indices  
previously shown to be altered by oral contraceptive use (143, 155, 156).  Additionally, recent  
studies (151, 157, 158) obser ved that an increased risk of venous thromboembolism was  
associated with oral but not transdermal estrogen compared with nonusers (in one study (157)  
odds ratios = .42 [95% CI, 1.5 to 11.6] and 0.9 [95% CI, 0.4 to 2.1] respectively).  The 
mechanism underlyi ng this observed difference in the risk of thromboembolism is not known;  
however, it has been suggested to reflect a lower activation of hepatic metabolism by the  
transdermal  route  of administration  due to a smaller  first past effect.  Blood pressure, on  
average, appears to be unaffected by estrogen therapy, although both increases and decreases  
have been reported.  Post menopausal estrogen therapy has been observed to increase the relative  
risk of cardiovascular disease in some (148, 159) but not all studies  (160-162).  Indeed recent  
analyses of the Women’s Health Initiative demonstrate that the adverse effects of estrogen  
therapy on cardiovascular outcomes were largely confined to older women compared with  
younger perimenopausal women (150, 163 -171).  High dos es of oral estrogens have been  
reported to elevate hepatocellular enzyme levels and, less commonly, cause cholestatic jaundice.  
The risk for gall stones and hepatocellular adenomas has been reported to be increased in  
association with oral contraceptive us e, and although uncommon these complications may also  
occur with the use of replacement doses of estrogen (172 -174).  Further, most studies have  
suggested  an increased relative  risk of breast  cancer  after four  or five years’  use (150, 175 -187),  
37  
similar to the risk expected if the onset of menopause was delayed for a comparable length of  
time.  
Due to the publicity surrounding the cancellation of the treatment arm of the Women’s  
Health Initiative study (188) that involved the administration of co mbined conjugated estrogens  
and medroxyprogesterone acetate (Prempro), we have included the following statement in the  
consent documents:  
Adverse  Events  Related  to Combined  Hormone  Replacement  and the Results  of the Women’s  
 
Health  Initiative  (WHI):  
 
The WHI study demonstrated that continuous administration of one form of estrogen  
(conjugated estrogens) in combination with one form of progesterone (medroxyprogesterone  
acetate) is associated with an increased risk of dementia, heart attacks, stroke, blood c lots, and  
breast cancer.  Estradiol, the form of estrogen that we use in this study, is administered as a sole  
agent (with the exception of one week’s combination with progesterone) and, consequently, we  
do not expect that it will pose the increased risks o bserved with the chronic combination of the  
conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone administered in the WHI study.  Indeed, while  
the estrogen alone arm of the WHI trial was shown to be associated with an increased risk of  
stroke,  no increased  risk of  either heart  disease or breast  cancer was  observed (188,  189).  
Estrogens may precipitate migraine headaches, and depression has also been reported to  
occur with the use of estrogens.  In general, considering the dose and duration of treatment that  
we propos e to use in  this protocol,  the risk of  developing such  side effects  is negligible.  
Progesterone  
 
Progesterone and the synthetic progestins are widely prescribed, with indications including  
dysfunctional  uterine  bleeding,  endometriosis,  mastodynia,  galactor rhea,  and precocious  puberty  
38  
(128).  Side effects reported in women taking progestins are uncommon but may include  
breakthrough bleeding, edema, change in weight (increase or decrease), cholestatic jaundice,  
rash (with or without pruritus), de pression of mood, easy fatigue, lack of initiative, and  
chloasma.  Since progestins are often used in women with antecedent menstrual irregularity, it is  
not clear whether the breakthrough bleeding represents an effect of the medication or  
refractoriness to  treatment.  In the large majority of patients, menstruation occurs predictably  
following  withdrawal  of progestins  and is usually more  regular  than in spontaneous  cycles.  
For the sake of completeness, it is also notable that side effects have been observed in 
women receiving combined oral contraceptives, including nausea, breast soreness, vaginal  
discharge, fluid retention, hypertension, and clotting abnormalities, which have been associated  
with the estrogen component of the oral contraceptive.  Thromboembol ic disorders including  
thrombophlebitis, pulmonary embolism, and cerebral and coronary thrombosis appear to occur  
with greater frequency in women taking oral contraceptives.  While the increased incidence of  
these disorders has been associated with the estr ogen component of the oral contraceptives, it is  
now believed that the progestogen component may, to a lesser extent, contribute to the increased  
risk. There are relatively few reports associating oral contraceptives with the development of  
carcinomas (vag inal, uterine, hepatic, and mammary) despite the vast use of these agents,  
although this may reflect the latent period needed for cellular transformation.  Finally, several  
reports suggest an association between intrauterine exposure to female sex hormones and 
congenital  anomalies.  
B. Effects  of Additional  Procedures  
 
Skin  Biopsies  
39  
The risk of skin biopsy may be slight bleeding or infection.  To avoid these complications a  
sterile dressing will be applied for 7 -10 days until the scar is well formed.  On occasion, the  
wound may be closed with 1 or 2 non -absorbable sutures.  Acquiring skin fibroblasts from  
voluntary subjects is minimally invasive.  Skin biopsy procedures can be considered as minimal  
risk since  the risk is  not greater  than blood  draws, a  procedure already included  in the  protocol.  
The level of discomfort associated with the anesthesia is analogous to a PPD skin test for TB and  
the biopsy itself is painless.  
Blood  Drawing  
 
One discomfort of this study may occur due to the venipuncture  and multiple blood  
sampling.  Total  blood  withdrawal  (550-660 ml) falls within  NIH guidelines  (550 ml. per eight  
week  period during this 20 -24 month study).  
8) Subject  Safety  Monitoring : 
 
Subjects are evaluated by one of the associate investigators.  Medical history and physical  
assessments occur at each clinic visit including interviews, symptom assessments, vital signs,  
and laboratory testing when clinically indicated.  After completing the study, subjects will either  
be discharged from this protocol with a r eferral to the community, or will be referred to other  
NIMH  studies.  
Patients  will be warned  not to become  pregnant  during  the study  and will be advised  to 
employ  barrier contraceptive methods.  
9) Outcome  Measures : 
 
The outcome  measures are  as follows:  1) brain  imaging measures  including O15 PET and 
fMRI  (performed as part  of NIMH protocol  90-M-0014);  2) Dex/CRH stimulation tests;  
3) metabolomic profile;  4) DNA  for genotyping (performed  under protocol  81-M-0126; and  
40  
5) cell culture studies (ly mphoid and IPCs).  Additionally, we will employ the symptom ratings  
(described above) to evaluate the effects of GnRH -agonist -induced hypogonadism and estradiol  
and progesterone  replacement on measures of mood and  behavior.  
10) Statistical  Analysis : 
 
In this protocol we originally proposed using 30 subjects.  Calculations of the minimum  
sample size that will provide statistical significance between the three different hormonal states  
(hypogonadal, hypogonadal plus estrogen, and hypogonadal plus progesterone) with a power of  
80% were  performed  using  the results  obtained  in the Hampson  and Kimura  study  (190).  
Additionally, we supplemented this analysis with our own preliminary neuropsychological  
testing results from protocol # 90 -M-0088.  In the Hampson and Kimur a article standardized  
differences of 0.6, 0.7, and 0.5, were calculated for the finger tapping, Purdue Pegboard, and the  
manual  sequence  box, respectively.  The standardized  difference  obtained  from  five women  who 
have been tested during the hypogonadal an d during the hypogonadal plus estrogen phase of  
protocol # 90 -M-0088 results in a standardized difference of .6.  Thus, the originally calculated  
sample size required to provide 80% power at an alpha of 0.05 with the standardized difference  
obtained  from th ese two  investigations was  approximately 30  subjects.  
Amendments  to Sample  Size 
Brain  Imaging  
On the basis of our prior work (65), and as described in protocol # 90 -M-0014 we  
anticipate that the 20 subjects recruited for the HPA axis studies will be ample for showing  
differences in  rCBF.  
Skin Biopsies  
 
To recruit  sufficient  numbers  of women  in each group  we will contact  women  who have  
41  
previously participated in these protocols, have met our baseline criteria for PMD or  
asymptomatic controls, a nd have further demonstrated either the elimination of symptoms during  
GnRH agonist and return of symptoms upon re -exposure to estradiol or progesterone (PMD) or  
the absence of negative behavioral symptoms during both GnRH agonist and ovarian steroid  
addba ck phases (controls).  Each of these women who is interested in participating will be re - 
consented  for this study.  
11) Human  Subjects  Protection : 
 
a. Subject  selection  
 
All subjects must meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed in Section 6.  We will  
select  physically healthy  adult female  individuals.  The proportion  of ethnic  minorities  
(vs. Caucasians)  in the total sample,  will be approximately  consistent  with the overall  U.S. 
population proportions.  
We are limiting the upper age range of the women in  this study to 50 years of age to match  
the age ranges with  those in  the existing companion protocols, 90 -M-0088  and 05 -M-0059.  
Women over the age of 50 may have age -related changes in brain function, HPA axis function,  
or reproductive hormone secretion, which could have confounding effects on the outcome  
measures  in this and the companion protocols.  
b. Justification  for exclusion  of children  
 
We will exclude children or minors because the study population is menstruating  
premenopausal  women.  
c. Justification  for exclusion  of other  vulnerable  subjects  
 
We will exclude subjects that are unable to provide their own consent given the length of  
the protocol and associated risks.  
42  
d. Justification  of sensitive  procedures  N/A 
 
e. Safeguards  for vulnerable  populations  
 
Protections for NIH employees and staff participating in this study include 1) assuring  
that the participation or refusal to participate will have no effect, either beneficial or  
adverse, on the subject’s employment or position at the NIH, 2) giving employees and  
staff who are interested in participating the “NIH Information Sheet on Employee  
Research Participation” prior to obtaining consent, and 3) assuring that there will be no  
direct  solicitation of employees  or staff.  
f. Qualifications  of investigators  
 
Peter  J. Schmidt,  M.D.,  is an investigator  with the Section  on Behavioral  Endocrinology,  
NIMH.  He has over 20 years experience performing studies that examine the effects of  
reproductive hormones on mood and behavior in women with reproductive endocrine -related  
mood  disorders.  He  will be allowed to obtain consent.  
David R. Rubinow, M.D., is a special volunteer and collaborator within the Section on  
Behavioral Endocrinology, NIMH.  He has over 30 years experience in reproductive  
endocrinology and  psychiatry.  He will not be involved in obtaining consent nor will he have  
access  to PII.  
Lynnette K. Nieman, M.D., is a senior investigator in the Reproductive Biology and  
Medicine Branch, NICHD and has extensive experience with clinical research studies in 
endocrinology  and reproductive  biology.  She will not be  involved in  obtaining consent.  
Karen F. Berman, M.D., is a senior investigator within the Section on Integrative  
Neuroimaging,  CDBD,  NIMH.  Dr. Berman  has 25 years  of experience  in neuroimaging.  She 
will not be involved in obtaining consent.  
43  
Pedro E. Martinez, M.D., is a staff clinician within the Section on Behavioral  
Endocrinology, NIMH and has performed endocrine studies examining the effects of aging and  
reproductive hormones on moo d and behavior in both adults and children.  He will be allowed to  
obtain  consent.  
Shau -Ming Wei, PhD has an extensive experience in experimental design, and she has  
designed and implemented both behavioral and neuroimaging experiments over the past several  
years.  Her graduate training at the NIH/Brown Program included collaborative neuroimaging  
studies  on the effects  of genotype  and reproductive  hormones  on brain  function.  She has worked  
with our program for more than ten years (as part of our ongoing colla borations with Dr. Karen  
Berman’s group), first as a doctoral candidate, then as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, she is a  
research fellow within our Branch and in the future will be offered a position as a staff scientist.  
Over the last decade Dr. Wei ha s worked closely with our clinical program and this protocol  
involving the administration of a GnRH agonist with and without ovarian steroid hormone  
replacement. She will be involved in imaging data collection and analysis, and manuscript  
preparation.  She will not obtain informed consent.  
Qualifications  of telephone  interviewers:  
 
Screenings are performed by Annie Shellswick, who is a licensed social worker in our  
group, and who is in charge of our recruitment and outreach activities.  Personally  identifiable  
information is not obtained in callers who are determined to be ineligible, and the screening  
forms  are not retained in the research records.  
12) Anticipated  Benefits : 
 
There are no direct benefits to participants in this protocol.  This protocol allows us to  
selectively  examine  the central  nervous  system  effects  of the gonadal  steroids  and, thus,  provides  
44  
the opportunity to explore the linkages between changes in mood and behavior and gonadal  
steroid activity.  Further, as a control f or protocol # 90 -M-0088 this study will extend our  
understanding of potential biological mechanisms underlying menstrual -related mood disorders  
and offers the possibility of uncovering some etiopathogenic mechanisms involved in these and  
related mood  disor ders.  
13) Classification  of Risk : 
 
The overall  risks  for this  study  are more  than minimal.  
 
There are low risks to individual subjects in the use of medication and procedures under the  
conditions  stated in this protocol.  
14) Consent  Documentation  and Process : 
 
a. Designation  of those  obtaining  consent  
 
Study  investigators  designated  as able to obtain  consent  in section  12 above,  will obtain  
informed  consent.  
b. Consent  procedures  
 
Each patient will receive a verbal and written explanation of the purpose, procedures, and 
potential hazards of this project.  A record of the communication of this information and of the  
consent  to participate  in this study  will be placed  in the medical  record.  The right  of the subjects  
to withdraw from the study or to refuse any procedure w ill be made clear.  Any patient whose  
side effects become excessive during either the GnRH alone or estrogen/progesterone  
replacement phases will be offered the option to withdraw without completing the five or six  
month trial.  Confidentiality of patients w ill be assured according to the laws of the State of  
Maryland.  In case of published data resulting from the study, care will be taken to protect the  
anonymity of  patients.  
45  
c. Consent  documents  
 
Each consent contains all required elements.  There are 3 consent forms used for this  
protocol:  Standard  (6 months),  Estradiol  gel (pilot  study),  and MDE  (major  depressive  episode).  
15) Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
a) Data  and safety  monitor  
 
The PI will serve  as the data and safety  monitoring  official.  
 
b) Data  and safety  monitoring  plan 
 
As we are administering doses of estradiol and progesterone designed to produce  
physiologic levels, we expect - and have seen - no unexpected adverse events.  Similarly, we do  
not anticipate unexpected serious adverse events with the  dose of Lupron that we propose to use.  
Nonetheless, we see subjects every one to two weeks during their clinic visit and advise them in  
the consent form that if they experience side effects, they should notify the investigator  
immediately.  Any adverse eve nts will be reported as per NIH policy. The PI will review data  
and safety parameters at least annually. The PI will document the data and safety review in the  
research  records and at the time of continuing review.  
c) Criteria  for stopping  the study  or suspen ding enrollment  or procedures  
 
The study  will be stopped  if the estradiol  suppositories  become  unavailable  or if new 
findings emerge that indicate it would not be safe to continue the study. The study will be  
stopped  if there  is any  Serious  Adverse  Event  related  to the research.  
The PI and IRB will determine if changes are needed for the research to continue or if it will be  
closed.  
16) Quality  Assurance : 
 
A. Quality  assurance  monitor  
46  
Quality  assurance  will be monitored  by the PI, the research  team  and the NIMH  Office  of 
Regulatory  Oversight (ORO).  
B. Quality  assurance  plan 
 
ORO monitors intramural research studies to ensure compliance with GCP, organizational  
policies and regulations.  Audit frequency is determined by the ORO SOP based on the study  
level of risk.  Results of ORO audits are provided to the PI, The Clinical Director and the CNS  
IRB.  As an IND study,  this protocol  will be subject  to GCP  audits  at study  initiation  and after the 
first enrolled subject.  Timing of subsequent review will be e stablished by ORO but no less  
frequent  than every other year.  
17) Reporting  of Unanticipated  problems,  adverse  events  and protocol  deviations:  
 
The Principal Investigator is responsible for detecting, documenting, and reporting unanticipated  
problems, adverse events (AEs), including serious adverse events (SAEs), and deviations in  
accordance with NIH policy, IRB requirements, and federal regulations. Relatedness to the  
research  of all serious  adverse events  will be determined  by the  PI in consultation with  the CD. 
 
 
Serious unanticipated problems, serious adverse events (including deaths) that are not  
unanticipated problems, and serious protocol deviations will be reported to the IRB and CD as  
soon as possible and in writing not more than 7 days after the PI fir st learns of the event, unless  
immediate reporting is waived for specific serious adverse events as noted below.  Not serious  
unanticipated problems and not serious deviations will be reported to the IRB and CD as soon as  
possible and in writing not more than 14 days after the PI first learns of the event.  Written  
reports  will be submitted  in PTMS.  
47  
All adverse  events,  deviations,  and unanticipated  problems  will be summarized  and reported  at 
the time of Continuing Review.  
18) Alternatives  to Parti cipation : 
 
Subjects do not receive any treatment in this study or forego any treatment in order to  
participate  in this study.  The alternative, therefore,  is not to participate.  
19) Privacy  
 
All research  activities  will be conducted  in as private  a setting  as possible.  
 
20) Confidentiality  
 
a. For research  data and investigator  medical  records  
 
Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign.  Data will be kept in password - 
protected computers.  
No sensitive information is collected, so employee information will be treated the same as all  
other participants . 
b. For stored  samples  
 
Samples will be kept in locked storage.  Only study investigators will have access to the  
samples  and data.  Samples  and data will be stored  using  codes  that we assign.  DNA  samples  and 
cell lines will be stored in locked freezers in David Goldman’s laboratory (NIAAA) on Fischer’s  
Lane  in Rockville.  Only  study  investigators will  have  access to  the samples and  data.  
c. Special  precautions:  N/A 
 
21) Conflict  of Interest  
 
a. Distribution  of NIH guidelines  
 
NIH guidelines on  conflict of  interest have  been  distributed  to all  investigators.  
 
b. Conflict  of interest  
 
There  are no  conflicts -of-interest to  report.  
48  
22) Technology  Transfer  
 
There is an active CTA with Besins  Healthcare which was executed on 08/01/14 and  
expires on 08/01/19.  Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign.  Data will be  
kept in password -protected computers.  Samples will be kept in locked storage.  DNA samples  
and cell lines will be stored in locked freezers in David Goldman’s laboratory (NIAAA) on  
Fischer’s  Lane  in Rockville.  Only  study  investigators  will have  access  to the samples  and data.  
23) Research  and Travel  Compensation : 
 
Each  volunteer  will be compensated  according  to the follow ing schedule:  
 
Core  Protocol   
Initial  evaluation, physical  exam (2  hours)  100.00  
Screening  phase  100.00  
Clinic  visits (weekly) 2 hour x 13  390.00  
Multiple  venipuncture  x 13 260.00  
Psychological  testing  x 13 (at each clinic  visit)  100.00  
Symptom  rating  scales  x 6 months  150.00  
Investigational  drugs   
a) Depot  Lupron  injections 100.00  x 6 600.00  
b) Vaginal  suppositories/transdermal  patch  daily  x 3 months  800.00  
Total  2500.00  
Dose -finding  protocol  for estradiol  gel:  
Initial  evaluation, physical  exam (2  hours)  100.00  
Screening  phase  100.00  
Clinic  visits (weekly) 2 hour x 7  210.00  
49  
Multiple  venipuncture  x 9 180.00  
 
Symptom  rating  scales  x 2 months  50.00  
 
Investigational  drugs  : 
 
a) Depot  Lupron  injections  100.00 x  2 200.00  
 
b) Estradiol  gel application daily x  1 month  60.00 
 
Total  900.00  
 
Reimbursement of travel and subsistence will be offered consistent with NIH guidelines.  
Compensation  will be prorated  for parts  completed  if subjects  do not complete  the study.  No 
escort fee  will be provided.  
Employees and staff who participate during work hours must have permission from their  
supervisor. NIH employees must either participate outside of work hours or take leave in order to  
receive  compensation.  
 
 
Additional  Procedures  
 
Skin biopsies  $100 per biopsy  
 
Blood  Drawing  Schedules : 
 
(A) Core  Protocol  (24 weeks)  –660 ml (six months)  
50  
24) References : 
 
1. Dreher, J., Schmidt, P.J., Kohn, P., et al.: Menstrual cycle phase modulates reward - 
related  neural  function  in women.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U. S. A. 104:2465 -2470,  2007.  
2. Psychiatric:  Psychiatric  disorders  in America:  the epidemiologic  catchment  area study.  
The Free Press, New  York,  1991.  
3. Weissman, M.M., Klerman, G.L.: Sex differences in the epidemiology of depression.  
Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  34:98 -111, 1977.  
4. Weissman, M.M., Bland, R., Joyce, P.R., et al.: Sex differences in rates of depression:  
cross -national  perspectives. J.  Affective  Disord.  29:77 -84, 1993.  
5. Kessler,  R.C.,  McGonagle,  K.A.,  Swartz,  M., et al.: Sex and depressio n in the National  
Comorbidity Survey I: lifetime prevalence, chronicity and recurrence. J. Affective  
Disord.  29:85 -96, 1993.  
6. Leibenluft,  E., Hardin,  T.A.,  Rosenthal,  N.E.:  Gender  differences  in seasonal  affective  
disorder.  Depression  3:13-19, 1995.  
7. Diagnostic: Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders fourth edition.  
American  Psychiatric  Association, Washington,  DC, 1994.  
8. Weissman, M.M., Klerman, G.L.: Sex differences and the epidemiology of depression, in  
Major psychiatric disorders: ove rviews and selected readings, Guggenheim, F.G.,  
Nadelson,  C.C.,  eds. Elsevier Science  Publishing,  New  York,  pp. 95-114, 1982.  
9. Weissman, M.M., Klerman, G.L.: Gender and depression. Trends Neurosci. 8:416 -420, 
1985.  
10. Leibenluft, E.: Women with bipolar illness: clinical and research issues. Am. J.  
Psychiatry  153:163 -173, 1996.  
11. Anderson, J.C., Williams, S., McGee, R., et al.: DSM -III disorders in preadolescent  
children:  prevalence  in a large  sample  from  the general  population.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  
44:69 -77, 1987.  
12. McGee,  R., Feehan,  M., Williams,  S., et al.: DSM -III disorders  from  age 11 to age 15 
years.  J. Am. Acad.  Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 31:51 -59, 1992.  
13. Leibenluft, E.: Gender differences in major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder.  
CNS  Spectr. 4:25-33, 1999.  
14. Frank,  E., Carpenter,  L.L.,  Kupfer,  D.J.:  Sex differences  in recurrent  depression:  are there  
any that are significant? Am.  J. Psychiatry  145:41 -45, 1988.  
15. Winokur, G., Coryell, W., Keller, M., et al.: A prospective follow -up of patients with 
bipolar  and primary  unipolar  affective -disorder.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  50:457 -465, 1993.  
16. Kornstein, S.G., Schatzberg, A.F., Yonkers, K.A., et al.: Gender differences in  
presentation  of chronic  major  depression.  Psychopharmacol.  Bull.  31:711 -718, 1995.  
17. Ernst, C., Angst, J.: The Zurich Study. XII. Sex differences in depression. Evidence from  
longitudinal epidemiological data. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 241:222 -230, 
1992.  
18. Young, M.A., Fogg, L.F., Scheftner, W.A., et al.: Sex differences in the lifetime  
prevalence  of depression:  does varying  the diagnostic  criteria  reduce  the female/male  
ratio?  J. Affective Disord.  18:187 -192, 1990.  
19. Angst,  J., Dobler -Mikola,  A.: Do the diagnostic  criteria  determine  the sex ratio in 
depression?  J. Affective Disord . 7:189 -198, 1984.  
51  
20. Simon,  G.E.,  VonKorff,  M., Piccinelli,  M., et al.: An international  study  of the relation  
between  somatic  symptoms  and depression.  N. Engl.  J. Med.  341:1329 -1335,  1999.  
21. Silverstein,  B.: Gender  differences  in the prevalence  of somatic  versus  pure depression:  a 
replication.  Am. J. Psychiatry  159:1051 -1052, 2002.  
22. Bebbington, P.E., Brugha, T., MacCarthy, B., et al.: The Camberwell Collaborative  
Depression  Study,  I: depressed  probands  - adversity  and the form  of depression.  Br. J. 
Psychiatry  152:754 -765, 1988.  
23. Karp,  J.F., Frank,  E.: Combination  therapy  and the depressed  woman.  Depression  3:91- 
98, 1995.  
24. Silberg,  J., Pickles,  A., Rutter,  M., et al.: The influence  of genetic  factors  and life stress  
on depression  among  adolescent girls.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  56:225 -232, 1999.  
25. Blazer,  D.G.,  Kessler,  R.C.,  McGonagle,  K.A.,  et al.: The prevalence  and distribution  of 
major depression in a national community sample: the National Comorbidity Survey.  
Am. J. Psychiatry  151:979 -986, 1994.  
26. Regier, D.A., Burke, J.D., Burke, K.C.: Comorbidity of affective and anxiety disorders in  
the NIMH Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program, in Comorbidity of mood and anxiety  
disorders, Maser, J.D., Cloninger, C.R., eds. American Psychiatric Press, Washington , 
DC, pp. 113 -122, 1990.  
27. Judd, L.L.: When anxiety disorders are comorbid with major depression: social and  
clinical  burden. Abstr.  APA  147th  Ann.  Meeting1994.  
28. Fava,  M., Abraham,  M., Alpert,  J., et al.: Gender  differences  in Axis  I comorbidity  
among  depress ed outpatients. J.  Affective Disord.  38:129 -133, 1996.  
29. Reus,  V.I.: Behavioral  aspects  of thyroid  disease  in women.  Psychiatr.  Clin.  North  Am. 
12:153 -165, 1989.  
30. Whybrow, P.C.: Sex differences in thyroid axis function: relevance to affective disorder  
and its treatment. Depression  3:33-42, 1995.  
31. Moldin,  S.O.,  Scheftner,  W.A.,  Rice,  J.P., et al.: Association  between  major  depressive  
disorder  and physical illness. Psychol.  Med.  23:755 -761, 1993.  
32. Doran,  A.R.,  Rubinow,  D.R.,  Roy,  A., et al.: CSF somatostatin  and abnormal  response  to 
dexamethasone administration in schizophrenic and depressed patients. Arch. Gen.  
Psychiatry  43:365 -369, 1986.  
33. Old Age Depression  Interest  Group:  How  long should  the elderly  take antidepressants?  A 
double -blind placebo -controlled study of continuation/prophylaxis therapy with  
dothiepin.  Br. J. Psychiatry 162:175 -182, 1993.  
34. Raskin,  A.: Age-sex differences  in response  to antidepressant  drugs.  J. Nerv.  Ment.  Dis. 
159:120 -130, 1974.  
35. Glassman,  A.H.,  Perel,  J.M.,  Shostak,  M., et al.: Clinical  implications  of imipramine  
plasma  levels for  depressive illness.  Arch. Gen.  Psychiatry 34:197 -204, 1977.  
36. Coppen, A., Whybrow, P.C., Noguera, R., et al.: The comparative antidepressant value of  
L-tryptophan and imipramine with and without attempted potentiation by liothyronine.  
Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  26:234 -241, 1972.  
37. Davidson,  J., Pelton,  S.: Forms  of atypical  depression  and their response  to antidepressant  
drugs.  Psychiatry  Res. 17:87 -95, 1986.  
38. Steiner,  M., Wheadon,  D.E.,  Kreider,  M.S.:  Antidepressa nt response  to paroxetine  by 
gender.  Abstr.  APA  146th  Ann.  Meeting1993.  
52  
39. Kornstein,  S.G.,  Schatzberg,  A.F.,  Thase,  M.E.,  et al.: Gender  differences  in treatment  
response to sertraline versus imipramine in chronic depression. Am. J. Psychiatry  
157:1445 -1452, 2000.  
40. Prange, A.J., Jr., Wilson, I.C., Rabin, A.M., et al.: Enhancement of imipramine  
antidepressant  activity  by thyroid  hormone.  Am. J. Psychiatry  126:457 -469, 1969.  
41. Dawkins, K., Potter, W.Z.: Gender differences in pharmacokinetics and  
pharmacodynamics  of psychotropics:  focus  on women.  Psychopharmacol.  Bull.  27:417 - 
426, 1991.  
42. Yonkers,  K.A.,  Kando,  J.C., Cole,  J.O., et al.: Gender  differences  in pharmacokinetics  
and pharmacodynamics of psychotropic medication. Am. J. Psychiatry 149:587 -595, 
1992.  
43. Moody, J.P., Tait, A.C., Todrick, A.: Plasma levels of imipramine and  
desmethylimipramine  during  therapy.  Br. J. Psychiatry  113:183 -193, 1967.  
44. Preskorn, S.H., Mac, D.S.: Plasma levels of amitriptyline: effect of age and sex. J. Clin.  
Psychiatry  46:276 -277, 1985.  
45. Gex-Fabry, M., Balant -Gorgia, A.E., Balant, L.P., et al.: Clomipramine metabolism:  
model -based analysis of variability factors from drug monitoring data. Clin.  
Pharmacokinet.  19:241 -255, 1990.  
46. Greenblatt, D.J., Friedman, H., Burst ein, E.S., et al.: Trazodone kinetics: effect of age,  
gender,  and obesity. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.  42:193 -200, 1987.  
47. Warrington, S.J.: Clinical implications of the pharmacology of sertraline. Int. Clin.  
Psychopharmacol.  6:11-21, 1991.  
48. Altshuler , L.L., Post, R.M., Leverich, G.S., et al.: Antidepressant -induced mania and  
cycle  acceleration:  a controversy  revisited.  Am. J. Psychiatry  152:1130 -1138,  1995.  
49. Shaywitz,  B.A.,  Shaywitz,  S.E.,  Pugh,  K.R.,  et al.: Sex differences  in the functional  
organizat ion of the brain for language.  Nature  373:607 -609, 1995.  
50. Giedd,  J.N., Blumenthal,  J., Jeffries,  N.O.,  et al.: Brain  development  during  childhood  
and adolescence:  a longitudinal  MRI  study.  Nat. Neurosci.  2:861 -863, 1999.  
51. Witelson, S.A.: Neural sexual mosaicism: sexual differentiation of the human temporo - 
parietal  region  for functional  asymmetry.  Psychoneuroendocrinology  16:131 -153, 1991.  
52. Azari,  N.P.,  Pettigrew,  K.D.,  Pietrini,  P., et al.: Sex-differences  in patterns  of hemispheric  
cerebral metabolism -a multiple -regression discriminant -analysis of positron emission  
tomographic  data. Int. J.  Neurosci.  81:1-20, 1995.  
53. Allen,  L., Hines,  M., Shryne,  J., et al.: Two sexually  dimorphic  cell groups  in the human  
brain.  J. Neurosci.  9:497 -506, 1989.  
54. George, M.S., Ketter, T.A., Parekh, P.I., et al.: Gender differences in regional cerebral  
blood  flow during  transient  self-induced  sadness  or happiness.  Biol.  Psychiatry  40:859 - 
871, 1996.  
55. Biver, F., Lotstra, F., Monclus, M., et al.: Sex difference in 5HT 2 receptor in the living  
human  brain. Neurosci. Lett.  204:25 -28, 1996.  
56. Nishizawa,  S., Benkelfat,  C., Young,  S.N.,  et al.: Differences  between  males  and females  
in rates of serotonin synthesis in human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94:5308 - 
5313, 1997.  
57. Rodriguez,  G., Warkentin,  S., Risberg,  J., et al.: Sex differences  in regional  cerebral  
blood  flow. J.  Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.  8:783 -789, 1988.  
53  
58. Gur, R.C.,  Gur, R.E.,  Obrist,  W.D.,  et al.: Sex and handedness  differences  in cerebral  
blood  flow during  rest and during cognitive  activity. Science  217:659 -661, 1982.  
59. Gur, R.C., Gur, R.E., Obrist, W.D., et al.: Age and regional cerebral blood flow at rest  
and during  cognitive activity.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  44:617 -621, 1987.  
60. Shaw,  T., Meyer , J.S., Mortel,  K., et al.: Effects  of normal  aging,  sex, and risk factors  for 
stroke on regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in normal volunteers, in Cerebral blood  
flow and metabolism, Gotoh, F., Hagai, H., Tazaki, Y., eds. Munksgaard, Copenhagen,  
pp. 462-463, 1979.  
61. Esposito, G., Van Horn, J.D., Weinberger, D.R., et al.: Gender differences in cerebral  
blood  flow as a function  of cognitive  state with PET.  J. Nucl.  Med.  37:559 -564, 1996.  
62. Kulynych, J.J., Vladar, K., Jones, D.W., et al.: Gender differences in the normal  
lateralization of the supratemporal cortex: MRI surface -rendering morphometry of  
Heschl's  gyrus and  the planum  temporale.  Cereb. Cortex 4:107 -118, 1994.  
63. Baxter,  L.R.,  Jr., Mazziotta,  J.C., Phelps,  M.E.,  et al.: Cerebral  glucose  metabolic  rates  in 
normal  human females  versus normal  males. Psychiatry  Res. 21:237 -245, 1987.  
64. Andreason,  P.J., Zametkin,  A.J., Guo,  A.C.,  et al.: Gender -related  differences  in regional  
cerebral  glucose  metabolism  in normal volunteers.  Psychiatry  Res. 51:175 -183, 19 93. 
65. Berman, K.F., Schmidt, P.J., Rubinow, D.R., et al.: Modulation of cognition -specific  
cortical  activity  by gonadal  steroids:  a positron -emission  tomography  study  in women.  
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U.  S. A. 94:8836 -8841, 1997.  
66. Jacobs, E., D'Esposito, M.: Estrogen shapes dopamine -dependent cognitive processes:  
implications  for women's  health.  J. Neurosci. 31:5286 -5293, 2011.  
67. Goldstein, J.M., Jerram, M., Poldrack, R., et al.: Hormonal cycle modulates arousal  
circuitry  in women  using  functional  magnetic  reson ance imaging.  J. Neurosci.  25:9309 - 
9316, 2005.  
68. Protopopescu, X., Pan, H., Altemus, M., et al.: Orbitofrontal cortex activity related to  
emotional  processing  changes  across  the menstrual  cycle.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U. S. A. 
102:16060 -16065, 2005.  
69. Protopopescu, X., Tuescher, O., Pan, H., et al.: Toward a functional neuroanatomy of  
premenstrual  dysphoric disorder.  J. Affective  Disord.  108:87 -94, 2007.  
70. Majewska,  M.D.:  Actions  of steroids  on neuron:  role in personality,  mood,  stress  and 
disease.  Integr . Psychiatry 5:258 -273, 1987.  
71. Woolley, C.S., Schwartzkroin, P.A.: Hormonal effects on the brain. Epilepsia 39:S2 -S8, 
1998.  
72. Naftolin,  F., Leranth,  C., Horvath,  T.L.,  et al.: Potential  neuronal  mechanisms  of estrogen  
actions in synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Cell.  Mol.  Neurobiol. 16:213 -223, 
1996.  
73. McEwen, B.S., Woolley, C.S.: Estradiol and progesterone regulate neuronal structure and  
synaptic connectivity in adult as well as developing brain. Exp. Gerontol. 29:431 -436, 
1994.  
74. McEwen,  B.S.,  Alves,  S.E., Bulloch,  K., et al.: Ovarian  steroids  and the brain:  
implications  for cognition  and aging.  Neurology  48(Suppl  7):S8 -S15, 1997.  
75. Shughrue, P.J., Lane, M.V., Merchenthaler, I.: Comparative distribution of estrogen  
receptor - and - mRNA in the rat central nervous system. J. Comp. Neurol. 388:507 - 
525, 1997.  
54  
76. Shughrue, P.J., Scrimo, P.J., Merchenthaler, I.: Evidence for the colocalization of  
estrogen receptor - mRNA and estrogen receptor - immunoreactivity in neurons of the 
rat forebrain. Endocrinology 139:5267 -5270, 1998.  
77. Pilgrim,  C., Hutchison,  J.B.: Developmental  regulation  of sex differences  in the brain:  
can the role of gonadal  steroids  be redefined?  Neuroscience 60:843 -855, 1994.  
78. Ciocca, D.R., Vargas Roig, L.M.: Estrogen receptors in human nontarget tissues:  
biological  and clinical implications.  Endocr. Rev. 16:35 -62, 1995.  
79. Rubinow,  D.R.,  Schmidt,  P.J., Roca,  C.A.:  Estrogen -serotonin  interactions:  implications  
for affective regulation. Biol. Psychiatry  44:839 -850, 1998.  
80. Pecins -Thompson, M., Brown, N.A., Bethea, C.L.: Regulation of serotonin re -uptake  
transporter mRNA expression by ovarian steroids in rhesus macaques. Brain Res. Mol.  
Brain  Res. 53:120 -129, 1998.  
81. Clarke, W.P., Maayani, S.: Estrogen effects on 5 -HT 1A receptors in hippocampal  
membranes from ovariectomized rats: functional and binding studies. Brain Res.  
518:287 -291, 1990.  
82. Thomas, M.L., Bland, D.A., Clarke, C.H., et al.: Estrogen regulation of serotonin (5 -HT) 
transporter and 5 -HT 1A receptor mRNA in fema le rat brain. Abstr. Soc. Neurosci.  
23:1501, 1997.  
83. Kendall,  D.A.,  Stancel,  G.M.,  Enna,  S.J.: Imipramine:  effect  of ovarian  steroids  on 
modifications  in serotonin  receptor  binding.  Science 211:1183 -1185,  1981.  
84. Menkes,  D.B.,  Rasenick,  M.M.,  Wheeler,  M.A.,  et al.: Guanosine  triphosphate  activation  
of brain adenylate cyclase: enhancement by long -term antidepressant treatment. Science  
219:65 -67, 1983.  
85. Perez, J., Tinelli, D., Brunello, N., et al.: cAMP -dependent phosphorylation of soluble  
and crude microtubule fr actions of rat cerebral cortex after prolonged  
desmethylimipramine  treatment. Eur.  J. Pharmacol.  172:305 -316, 1989.  
86. Ozawa, H., Rasenick, M.M.: Chronic electroconvulsive treatment augments coupling of  
the GTP -binding protein Gs to the catalytic moiety of adenylyl cyclase in a manner  
similar  to that seen with chronic  antidepressant  drugs.  J. Neurochem.  56:330 -338, 1991.  
87. Nestler, E.J., Terwilliger, R.Z., Duman, R.S.: Chronic antidepressant administration alters  
the subcellular distribution of cyclic AMP -dependent protein kinase in rat frontal cortex.  
J. Neurochem.  53:1644 -1647, 1989.  
88. Duman,  R.S.,  Heninger,  G.R.,  Nestler,  E.J.: A molecular  and cellular  theory  of 
depression.  Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  54:597 -606, 1997.  
89. Singh, M., Meyer, E.M., Simpkins, J.W.:  The effect of ovariectomy and estradiol  
replacement on brain -derived neurotrophic factor messenger ribonucleic acid expression  
in cortical and hippocampal brain regions of female Sprague -Dawley rats. Endocrinology  
136:2320 -2324, 1995.  
90. Sohrabji, F., Mirand a, R.C., Toran -Allerand, C.D.: Estrogen differentially regulates  
estrogen and nerve growth factor receptor mRNAs in adult sensory neurons. J. Neurosci.  
14:459 -471, 1994.  
91. Panickar,  K.S.,  Guan,  G., King,  M.A.,  et al.: 17-estradiol  attenuates  CREB  decline  in 
the rat hippocampus  following seizure.  J. Neurobiol.  33:961 -967, 1997.  
92. Zhou, Y., Watters, J.J., Dorsa, D.M.: Estrogen rapidly induces the phosphorylation of the  
cAMP response element binding protein in rat brain. Endocrinology 137:2163 -2166,  
1996.  
55  
93. Sohrabji,  F., Greene,  L.A.,  Miranda,  R.C.,  et al.: Reciprocal  regulation  of estrogen  and 
NGF  receptors  by their ligands  in PC12  cells. J.  Neurobiol.  25:974 -988, 1994.  
94. Murphy, D.D., Cole, N.B., Segal, M.: Brain -derived neurotrophic factor mediates  
estradiol -induced  dendritic  spine  formation  in hippocampal  neurons.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  
Sci. U. S. A. 95:11412 -11417, 1998.  
95. Ankenbauer, W., Strahle, U., Schutz, G.: Synergistic action of glucocorticoid and  
estradiol  responsive  elements.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci. U. S. A. 85:7526 -7530,  1988.  
96. Uht, R.M., Anderson, C.M., Webb, P., et al.: Transcriptional activities of estrogen and  
glucocorticoid receptors are functionally integrated at the AP -1 response element.  
Endocrinology  138:2900 -2908, 1997.  
97. Uht, R., Anderson,  C.M.,  Webb,  P., et al.: Steroid  hormone  interactions  at the AP-1 site. 
Abstracts  of the 1998 American  Neuroendocrine  Society29,  1998.  
98. Peiffer,  A., Morale,  M.C.,  Barden,  N., et al.: Modulation  of glucocorticoid  receptor  gene  
expression in the thym us by the sex steroid hormone milieu and correlation with sexual  
dimorphism  of immune response. Endocr.  J. 2:181 -192, 1994.  
99. Peiffer,  A., Barden,  N.: Glucocorticoid  receptor  gene  expresion  in rat pituitary  gland  
intermediate  lobe following ovariectomy.  Mol.  Cell.  Endocrinol.  55:115 -120, 1988.  
100. Pfeiffer, A., Barden, N.: Estrogen -induced decrease of glucocorticoid receptor messenger  
ribonucleic acid concentration in rat anterior pituitary gland. Mol. Endocrinol. 1:435 -440, 
1987.  
101. Piroli, G., Grillo, C., Ferrini,  M., et al.: Restoration by bromocriptine of glucocorticoid  
receptors and glucocorticoid negative feedback on prolactin secretion in estrogen -induced  
pituitary  tumors. Neuroendocrinology 58:273 -279, 1993.  
102. Burgess, L.H., Handa, R.J.: Chronic estrogen -induce d alterations in adrenocorticotropin  
and corticosterone secretion, and glucocorticoid receptor -mediated functions in female  
rats. Endocrinology 131:1261 -1269, 1992.  
103. Handa, R.J., Nunley, K.M., Lorens, S.A., et al.: Androgen regulation of  
adrenocorticotropin  and corticosterone secretion in the male rat following novelty and  
foot shock  stressors.  Physiol.  Behav. 55:117 -124, 1994.  
104. Schlein,  P.A.,  Zarrow,  M.X.,  Denenberg,  V.H.:  The role of prolactin  in the depressed  or 
"buffered"  adrenocorticosteroid  response of  the rat. J.  Endocrinol.  62:93 -99, 1974.  
105. Viau,  V., Meaney,  M.J.:  Variations  in the hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal  response  to 
stress  during the estrous  cycle in the  rat. Endocrinology  129:2503 -2511,  1991.  
106. Biegon,  A., Reches,  A., Snyder,  L., et al.: Serotonergic  and noradrenergic  receptors  in the 
rat brain: modulation by chronic exposure to ovarian hormones. Life Sci. 32:2015 -2021,  
1983.  
107. Clarke, W.P., Goldfarb, J.: Estrogen enhances a 5 -HT 1A response in hippocampal slices  
from  female rats. Eur. J.  Pharmacol. 160:195 -197, 1989.  
108. Fuller,  R.W.:  The involvement  of serotonin  in regulation  of pituitary -adrenocortical  
function.  Front. Neuroendocrinol. 13:250 -270, 1992.  
109. Jezova,  D., Kvetnansky,  R., Vigas,  M.: Sex differences  in endocrine  response  to 
hyperthermia  in sauna.  Acta  Physiol. Scand.  150:293 -298, 1994.  
110. Horrocks, P.M., Jones, A.J., Ratcliffe, W.A., et al.: Patterns of ACTH and cortisol  
pulsatility over twenty -four hours in normal males and females. Clin. Endocrinol. 32:127 - 
134, 1990.  
56  
111. McLean , J.K., Sathasivam, P., MacNaughton, K., et al.: Cardiovascular and  
norepinephrine responses of men and women to two cold pressor tests. Can. J. Physiol.  
Pharmacol.  70:36 -42, 1992.  
112. Gerra, G., Volpi, R., Delsignore, R., et al.: Sex -related responses of beta -endorphin,  
ACTH,  GH and PRL to cold exposure  in humans.  Acta  Endocrinol.  126:24 -28, 1992.  
113. McAdoo, W.G., Weinberger, M.H., Miller, J.Z., et al.: Race and gender influence  
hemodynamic responses to psychological and physical stimuli. J. Hypertens. 8:961 -967, 
1990.  
114. Lashansky, G., Saenger, P., Fishman, K., et al.: Normative data for adrenal  
steroidogenesis in a healthy pediatric population: age - and sex -related changes after  
adrenocorticotropin  stimulation.  J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab.  73:674 -686, 1991.  
115. Greenspa n, S.L.,  Rowe,  J.W.,  Maitland,  L.A.,  et al.: The pituitary -adrenal  glucocorticoid  
response  is altered by  gender and disease. J.  Gerontol. 48:M72 -M77, 1993.  
116. Roca, C.A., Schmidt, P.J., Altemus, M., et al.: Differential menstrual cycle regulation of  
hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal  axis in women  with premenstrual  syndrome  and controls.  
J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab.  88:3057 -3063,  2003.  
117. Altemus, M., Roca, C., Galliven, E., et al.: Increased vasopressin and adrenocorticotropin  
responses to stress in the midluteal phase of the menstrual cycle. J. Clin. Endocrinol.  
Metab.  86:2525 -2530,  2001.  
118. Santen,  R.J., Warner,  B.: Evaluation  of synthetic  agonist  analogue  of gonadotropin - 
releasing hormone (Leuprolide) on testicular androgen production in patients with  
carcinoma  of the prostate. Urology  25:53 -57, 1985.  
119. Wilson, A.C., Vadakkadath Meethal, S.V., Bowen, R.L., et al.: Leuprolide acetate: a drug  
of diverse clinical  applications.  Expert  Opin.  Investig.  Drugs  16:1851 -1863,  2007.  
120. Cedars,  M.I.,  Judd,  H.L.:  Nonoral  routes  of estrogen  administration.  Obstet.  Gynecol.  
Clin.  North  Am. 14:269 -298, 1987.  
121. Setnikar, I., Rovati, L.C., Vens -Cappell, B., et al.: Pharmacokinetics of estradiol and of  
estrone during repeated transdermal or oral administration of estradiol. Arznei m. -Forsch.  
Drug  Res. 46:766 -773, 1996.  
122. Powers, M.S., Schenkel, L., Darley, P.E., et al.: Pharmacokinetics and  
pharmacodynamics of transdermal doseage forms of 17 B estradiol: comparison with  
conventional oral estrogens used for hormone replacement. Am. J.  Obstet. Gynecol.  
152:1099 -1106, 1985.  
123. Chetkowski,  R.J., Meldrum,  D.R.,  Steingold,  K.A.,  et al.: Biological  effects  of 
transdermal  estradiol. N.  Engl. J.  Med.  314:1615 -1620, 1986.  
124. Laufer, L.R., DeFazio, J.L., Lu, J.K.H., et al.: Estrogen replacement therapy by  
transdermal  estradiol  administration.  Am. J. Obstet.  Gynecol.  145:533 -538, 1983.  
125. Steingold, K.A., Laufer, L., Chetkowski, R.J., et al.: Treatment of hot flashes with  
transdermal  estradiol  administration.  J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab. 61:627 -632, 1985. 
126. Laragh, J.H., Sealey, J.E., Ledingham, J.G.G., et al.: Oral contraceptives. Renin,  
aldosterone,  and high blood pressure. J.  A. M. A. 201:918 -922, 1967.  
127. Crane,  M.G.,  Harris,  J.J., Winsor,  W.: Hypertension  oral contraceptive  agents  and 
conjugated  estrogens. Ann.  Intern. Med.  74:13 -21, 1971.  
128. Henzel, M.R.: Contraceptive hormones and their clinical use, in Reproductive  
endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology and clinical management, 2nd edition, Yen,  
S.S.C.,  Jaffe,  R.B.,  eds. W.B.  Saunders  Company,  Philadelphia,  pp. 643-682, 1986.  
57  
129. Soules,  M.R.,  Sherman,  S., Parrott,  E., et al.: Executive  summary:  Stages  of Reproductive  
Aging  Workshop (STRAW). Fertil.  Steril.  76:874 -878, 2001.  
130. First,  M.B.,  Spitzer,  R.L.,  Gibbon,  M., et al.: Structured  clinical  interview  for DSM -IV 
axis I disorders - patient edition. Biometrics Research Department, New York State  
Psychiatric  Institute, New  York,  N.Y.,  1996.  
131. Endicott, J., Nee, J., Cohen, J., et al.: Premenstrual changes: patterns and correlates of  
daily  ratings. J.  Affective Disord.  10:127 -135, 1986.  
132. Yonkers, K.A., Halbreich, U., Freeman, E., et al.: Symptomatic improvement of  
premenstrual  dysphoric  disorder  with sertraline  treatment:  a randomized  controlled  trial. 
J. A. M. A. 278:983 -988, 1997.  
133. Beck, A.T., Ward, C.H., Mendelson, M., et al.: An inventory for measuring depression.  
Arch.  Gen.  Psychiatry  4:561 -571, 1961.  
134. Steiner,  M., Haskett,  R.F.,  Carroll,  B.J.: Premenstrual  tension  syndrome:  the development  
of research diagnostic criteria and new rating scales. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 62:177 -190, 
1980.  
135. Derogatis,  L.R.:  The Derogatis  interview  for sexual  functioning  (DISF/DISF -SR): an 
introductory  report. J.  Sex Marital  Ther. 23:291 -304, 1997.  
136. Seki, T., Yuasa, S., Fukuda, K.: Generation of induced pluripoten t stem cells from a  
small amount of human peripheral blood using a combination of activated T cells and  
Sendai  virus. Nat.  Protoc. 7:718 -728, 2012.  
137. Archer, D.F., for the EstroGel Study Group: Percutaneous 17 -estradiol gel for the  
treatment of vasomotor symptoms in postmenopausal women. Menopause 10:516 -521, 
2003.  
138. Feuillan, P.P., Jones, J.V., Barnes, K., et al.: Reproductive axis after discontinuation of  
gonadotropin -releasing hormone analog treatment of girls with precocious puberty: long  
term follow -up comparing girls with hypothalamic hamartoma to those with idiopathic  
precocious  puberty. J.  Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84:44 -49, 1999.  
139. Feuillan,  P.P., Jones,  J.V., Barnes,  K.M.,  et al.: Boys  with precocious  puberty  due to 
hypothalamic hamartoma; reproductive  axis after discontinuation of gonadotropin - 
releasing  hormone  analog  therapy.  J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab.  85:4036 -4038,  2000.  
140. Magiakou, M.A., Manousaki, D., Papadaki, M., et al.: The efficacy and safety of  
gonadotropin -releasing hormone analog treatment in childhood and adolescence: a single  
center,  long-term follow -up study.  J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab. 95:109 -117, 2010.  
141. Pasquino, A.M., Pucarelli, I., Accardo, F., et al.: Long -term observation of 87 girls with  
idiopathic central precocious puberty treated  with gonadotropin -releasing hormone  
analogs: impact on adult height, body mass index, bone mineral content, and reproductive  
function.  J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 93:190 -195, 2008.  
142. Gambrell, R.D.: The role of hormones in the etiology and prevention of end ometrial  
cancer.  Clin. Obstet.  Gynecol.  13:695 -723, 1986.  
143. Nieman, L.K., Loriaux, D.L.: Estrogens and progestins, in Textbook of pharmacology,  
Reynard,  A., Smith,  C., eds. W.B.  Saunders  Company,  Philadelphia,  pp. 695-716, 1992.  
144. Gutthann, S.P., Rodriguez, L. G., Castellsague, J., et al.: Hormone replacement therapy  
and risk of venous thromboembolism: population based case -control study. Br. Med. J.  
314:796 -800, 1997.  
58  
145. Jick, H., Derby, L.E., Myers, M.W., et al.: Risk of hospital admission for idopathic  
venous thromboembolism among users of postmenopausal oestrogens. Lancet 348:981 - 
983, 1996.  
146. Daly,  E., Vessey,  M.P.,  Hawkins,  M.M.,  et al.: Risk of venous  thromboembolism  in users  
of hormone replacement  therapy. Lancet 348:977 -980, 1996.  
147. Grodstein , F., Stampfer,  M.J.,  Goldhaber,  S.Z.,  et al.: Prospective  study  of exogenous  
hormones  and risk of pulmonary embolism  in women. Lancet  348:983 -987, 1996.  
148. Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., et al.: Postmenopausal estrogen therapy and  
cardiovascular disease: ten -year follow -up from the Nurses' Health Study. N. Engl. J.  
Med.  325:756 -762, 1991.  
149. Vickers, M.R., MacLennan, A.H., Lawton, B., et al.: Main morbidities recorded in the  
women's international study of long duration oestrogen after menopause (WISDOM): a  
randomised  controlled  trial of hormone  replacement  therapy  in postmenopausal  women.  
Br. Med.  J. 335:239 -250, 2007.  
150. North American Menopause Society: Estrogen and progestogen use in postmenopausal  
women:  2010  position  statement  of The North  American  Menopause  Society.  Menopause  
17:242 -255, 2010.  
151. Olie,  V., Canonico,  M., Scarabin,  P.-Y.: Postmenopausal  hormone  therapy  and venous  
thromboembolism.  Thromb. Res. 127 Suppl  3:S26 -S29, 2011.  
152. Beral, V., Million Women Study Collaborators, Bull, D., et al.: Ovarian cancer and  
hormone  replacement  therapy  in the  million  women study.  Lancet  369:1703 -1710,  2007.  
153. Chlebowski,  R.T.,  Schwartz,  A.G.,  Wakelee,  H., et al.: Oestrogen  plus progestin  and lung 
cancer  in postmenopausal  women  (Women's  Health  Initiative  trial):  a post-hoc analysis  
of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 374:1243 -1251, 2009.  
154. Hampton,  T.: Lung  cancer  mortality  higher  in women  who used combination  hormone  
therapy.  J. A. M. A. 302:615 -616, 2009.  
155. Mandel, F.P., Geola, F.L., Meldrum,  D.R., et al.: Biological effects of various doses of  
vaginally administered conjugated equine estrogens in postmenopausal women. J. Clin.  
Endocrinol.  Metab.  57:133 -139, 1983.  
156. Melis,  G.B.,  Fruzzetti,  F., Paoletti,  A.M.,  et al.: Fibrinopeptide  A plasma  levels  during  
low estrogen oral  contraceptive treatment. Contraception 30:575 -583, 1983.  
157. Canonico, M., Oger, E., Plu -Bureau, G., et al.: Hormone therapy and venous  
thromboembolism among postmenopausal women: impact of the route of estrogen  
administration  and progestogens:  the ESTHER  study.  Circulation  115:840 -845, 2007.  
158. Laliberte, F., Dea, K., Duh, M.S., et al.: Does the route of administration for estrogen  
hormone therapy impact the risk of venous thromboembolism?  Estradiol transdermal  
system  versus  oral estrogen -only hormone  therapy.  Menopause  18:1052 -1059,  2011.  
159. Barrett -Connor, E., Bush, T.L.: Estrogen and coronary heart disease in women. J. A. M.  
A. 265:1861 -1867,  1991.  
160. Lobo, R.A.: Evaluation of cardiovascular event rates with hormone therapy in healthy,  
early postmenopausal women: results from 2 large clinical trials. Arch. Intern. Med.  
164:482 -484, 2004.  
161. Bush, T.L.: Preserving cardiovascular benefits of hormone replacement therapy. J.  
Reprod.  Med.  45:259 -272, 2000.  
162. Fitzpatrick,  L.A.,  Litin,  S.C.,  Bell,  M.R.:  The women's  health  initiative:  a heart -to-HRT  
conversation.  Mayo  Clin. Proc.  75:559 -561, 2000.  
59  
163. Grodstein, F., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J.: Hormone therapy and coronary heart  
disease: the role of time since menopause and age at hormone initiation. J. Womens  
Health  15:35 -44, 2006.  
164. Hsia, J., Langer, R.D., Manson, J.E., et al.: Conjugated equine estrogens and coronary  
heart  disease:  the women's  health  initiative.  Arch.  Intern.  Med.  166:357 -365, 2006.  
165. Clarkson, T.B.: Estrogen effects on arteries vary with stage of reproductive life and  
extent  of subclinical  atherosclerosis  progression.  Menopause  14:373 -384, 2007.  
166. Hodis, H.N., Mack, W.J.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy in clinical  perspective.  
Menopause  14:944 -957, 2007.  
167. Rossouw,  J.E., Prentice,  R.L.,  Manson,  J.E., et al.: Postmenopausal  hormone  therapy  and 
risk of cardiovascular disease by age and years since menopause. J. A. M. A. 297:1465 - 
1477, 2007.  
168. Manson, J.E., Bassuk, S.S.:  Invited commentary: hormone therapy and risk of coronary  
heart disease - why renew the focus on the early years of menopause? Am. J. Epidemiol.  
166:511 -517, 2007.  
169. Manson,  J.E., Allison,  M.A.,  Rossouw,  J.E., et al.: Estrogen  therapy  and coronary -artery  
calcification.  N. Engl. J.  Med. 356:2591 -2602, 2007.  
170. Taylor,  H.S.,  Manson,  J.E.: Update  in hormone  therapy  use in menopause.  J. Clin.  
Endocrinol.  Metab.  96:255 -264, 2011.  
171. Santen, R.J., Allred, D.C., Ardoin, S.P., et al.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy: an  
Endocrine  Society  scientific  statement.  J. Clin.  Endocrinol.  Metab.  95(7 Suppl  1):s1 -s66, 
2010.  
172. Petitt,  D.B.,  Sidney,  S., Perlman,  J.A.:  Increased  risk of cholecystectomy  in users  of 
supplemental  estrogen. Gastroenterology  94:91 -95, 1988.  
173. Uhler,  M.L.,  Marks,  J.W.,  Judd,  H.L.:  Estrogen  replacement  therapy  and gallbladder  
disease  in postmenopausal  women.  Menopause  7:162 -167, 2000.  
174. Liu, B., Beral, V., Balkwill, A., et al.: Gallbladder disease and use of transdermal versus  
oral hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women: prospective cohort study.  
Br. Med. J. Available at:  http://www.bmj.com/cgi/reprint/337/jul10_2/a386  Accessed:  
September  24, 2009.  
175. Wingo, P.A., Layde, P.M., Lee, N.C ., et al.: The risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal  
women  who have  used estrogen  replacement  therapy. J.  A. M. A. 257:209 -215, 1987.  
176. Grady,  D., Ernster,  V.: Does  postmenopausal  hormone  therapy  cause  breast  cancer?  Am. 
J. Epidemiol. 134:1396 -1400, 1991.  
177. Colditz, G.A., Hankinson, S.E., Hunter, D.J., et al.: The use of estrogens and progestins  
and the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. N. Engl. J. Med. 332:1589 -1593,  
1995.  
178. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer: Breast cancer and hormone  
replacement  therapy:  collaborative  reanalysis  of data from  51 epidemiological  studies  of 
52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast cancer. Lancet  
350:1047 -1059, 1997.  
179. Bergkvist, L., Adami, H.Q., Persson, I., et al.: The r isk of breast cancer after estrogen and  
estrogen -progestin  replacement. N.  Engl. J.  Med.  321:293 -297, 1989.  
180. Schairer, C., Lubin, J., Troisi, R., et al.: Menopausal estrogen and estrogen -progestin  
replacement  therapy and breast cancer  risk. J.  A. M. A. 283:485-491, 2000.  
60  
181. Chen,  W.Y.,  Manson,  J.E., Hankinson,  S.E.,  et al.: Unopposed  estrogen  therapy  and the 
risk of invasive breast  cancer. Arch.  Intern. Med.  166:1027 -1032, 2006.  
182. Stefanick, M.L., Anderson, G.L., Margolis, K.L., et al.: Effects of conjugated equine  
estrogens on breast cancer and mammography screening in postmenopausal women with  
hysterectomy.  J. A. M. A.  295:1647 -1657, 2006.  
183. Chlebowski, R.T., Hendrix, S.L., Langer, R.D., et al.: Influence of estrogen plus  
progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy postmenopausal women: the  
women's  health  initiative  randomized trial.  J. A. M. A. 289:3243 -3253, 2003.  
184. Li, C.I., Malone, K.E., Porter, P.L., et al.: Relationship between long durations and  
different  regimens of  hormone therapy  and risk of  breast cancer.  J. A. M. A. 289:3254 - 
3263, 2003.  
185. Fournier, A., Boutron -Ruault, M., Clavel -Chapelon, F.: Breast cancer and hormonal  
therapy in postmenopausal women - letter to the Editor. N. Engl. J. Med. 360:2366 -2367,  
2009.  
186. Chlebowski, R.T., Kuller, L.H., Prentice, R.L., et al.: Breast cancer after use of estrogen  
plus progestin in  postmenopausal women.  N. Engl.  J. Med.  360:573 -587, 2009.  
187. Beral, V., Reeves, G., Bull, D., et al.: Breast cancer risk in relation to the interval  
between menopause and starting hormone therapy. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 103:296 -305, 
2011.  
188. Writing Group for the Women's Health Initiative Investigators: Risks and benefits of  
estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the  
Women's  Health  Initiative  randomized  controlled  trial. J. A. M. A. 288:321 -333, 2002.  
189. The Women's Health Initiative Steering Committee: Effects of conjugated equine  
estrogen in postmenopausal women with hysterectomy. The women's health initiative  
randomized  controlled tri al. J. A. M. A. 291:1701 -1712,  2004.  
190. Hampson, E., Kimura, D.: Reciprocal effects of hormonal fluctuations on human motor  
and perceptual -spatial skills.  Behav. Neurosci.  102:456 -459, 1988.  
61  
Flow  Sheet : 
 
 
 
 
Central Nervous System Effects of GnRH Agonist &  
Gonadal Steroid Replacement in Asymptomatic Controls — 
Schematic  
 
 
 
Estradiol  0.1 mg/d  
Progesterone  200 mg BID 
OR 
(weeks)  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Leuprolide Acetate  (3.75  mg IM QM) 
62  
Table  I 
 
Conditions  Associated  with Increased  Risk for Osteoporosis  
 
AIDS/HIV  Hyperparathyroidism  Multiple  Sclerosis  
Amyloidosis  Hypogonadism  (primary  or Multiple  Myeloma  
Ankylosing  Spondylitis  secondary)  Pernicious  Anemia  
COPD  Hypophosphatasia  Rheumatoid  Arthritis  
Congenital  Porphyria  Hypophophosphatemia  Severe  Liver  Disease,  esp 
Cushings  Syndrome  Idiopathic  Scoliosis  PBC  
Eating  Disorders  Inadequate  Diet Spinal  Cord  Injury  
Female  Athlete  Triad  Inflammatory  Bowel  Sprue  
Gaucher’s  Disease  Disease  Stroke/CVA  
Hemochromotosis  Insulin -Dependent  Diabetes  Thallasemia  
Hemophilia  Lymphoma/Leukemia  Thyrotoxicosis  
 Malabsorption  Syndromes  Tumor  
 Mastocytosis   
 
 
Adapted  from  National  Osteoporosis  Foundation  Physician’s  Guide  
63  
Clinical  Trials  Database  - Security  Overview  
 
There are multiple aspects to the security framework for the Clinical Trials Database (CTDB) and  
Clinical Trials Survey System.  The following features allow for the safe and secure collection of  
research variables:  
 
• Application  Firewall - The NICHD  has recently  upgraded  their application  firewall  which  
protects both the front end web server and back end database server for the CTDB.  Strict  
policies are in place which control exactly who has pre -defined, limited access to the  
application.  This firewall is a state -of-the-art hardware solution which blocks access to  
everyone  but authorized users for the CTDB system.  
• Data Encryption and SSL Certificates - The CTDB system makes use of military grade  
encryption both for the session and the data storage.  The CTSS collects de -identified self - 
reported data.  Both systems protect information from interception by encrypting the data  
flow using SSL with a 1024 bit signed certificate.  The entire communication  session from  
the time a client requests a connection to the system to the time a user logs out is encrypted  
using a certificate from an industry recognized vendor.  The result is a secure  
communications channel for our partners, providing data confidential ity and integrity.  In 
further, the CTDB program encrypts data stored within the system, thereby providing an  
additional  layer or security for  the sensitive CTDB clinical data.  
• CTSS HIPAA Requirements - Below is the list of identifiers to be removed for the  de- 
identification of health information under HIPAA. This is found in 45 C.F.R.  
164.514(a),(b)&(c)  
 
(A) Names;  
(B) All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city,  
county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, except  for the initial three  
digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of  
the Census:  
(1) The geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial  
digits  contains more than  20,000 people; and  
(2) The initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or  
fewer people  is changed to 000.  
(C) All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual,  
including  birth  date,  admission  date,  discharge  date,  date of death;  and all ages over 89 
64  
and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages  
and elements may be  aggregated  into a single  category  of age 90 or  older;  
(D) Telephone  numbers;  
(E) Fax numbers;  
(F) Electronic  mail addresses;  
(G) Social  security  numbers;  
(H) Medical  record  numbers;  
(I) Health  plan beneficiary  numbers;  
(J) Account  numbers;  
(K) Certificate/license  numbers;  
(L) Vehicle  identifiers  and serial  numbers,  including  license  plate  numbers;  
(M) Device  identifiers  and serial  numbers;  
(N) Web  Universal  Resource  Locators  (URLs);  
(O) Internet  Protocol  (IP) address numbers;  
(P) Biometric  identifiers,  including  finger  and voice prints;  
(Q) Full face photographic images  and any comparable  images;  and 
(R) Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, except as permitted by  
paragraph  (c) of this section  
 
• Logical Access Controls (Role/Privileges) – Logical access controls are in placed using role  
based security for database access and application account access. Security controls are in  
place to de tect unauthorized access attempts. The application is further protected by the  
NICHD firewall and NIH firewall. Inactive user accounts are monitored and removed when  
not needed,  and users  are disconnected  after a specific  period  of inactivity.  Encryption  is 
used (1024bit SSL key) and data is HIPPA compliant. Access is monitored and apparent  
security violations are investigated when identified. Insecure protocols are disabled on all  
application  servers.  Guest  and anonymous accounts/access  is disabled.  
• Audit Trails – Activity involving access to and modification of sensitive or critical files is  
logged and monitored for possible security violations. Access to these audit trails is strictly  
controlled and can be used to support after -the-fact investigations of how, when and why  
normal operations ceased should this occur. Off -line storage of audit logs is retained for a  
period of at least 1 year. Suspicious activity is investigated and appropriate action is taken  
when  warranted.  
• Physical and Environmental Protection – The servers are physically located in a secured  
NIH data center with controlled limited access. All work products from the system including  
Data backup tapes are rotated to off -site storage with must be authorize and are recorded. All  
visitors  to sensitive  areas  are escorted  with entry  codes  changed  periodically.  Fire prevention  
65  
and suppression devices are installed and in working condition. All heating and air -cooling  
systems  are periodically checked to ensure  proper  working  condition.  
• Production Input and Output Control – Audit trails are in place to record data changes.  
Only authorized system administrators are allowed access to this data, as well as any data  
backup tapes. Damaged media is sanitized or destroyed, and any har dcopy media is shredded  
when  no longer needed.  
• Contingency  Planning  – All critical  data files,  database  files and web server  files have  been  
identified. A regularly scheduled data backup solution is in place with identified resources  
supporting critical operations. A comprehensive contingency plan has been developed and  
documented. This plan has been approved by key affected parties. The Contingency  
plan/Disaster  recovery plan is regularly tested and adjusted  as appropriate.  
• Hardware and Software System M aintenance – Access is limited to the hardware and  
software infrastructure. Restrictions are in place as to who performs maintenance activities.  
Procedures are in place to monitor the use of system resources. All new and revised hardware  
and software are t ested and approved before implementation. All system and application  
components are tested, documented and approved prior to promotion to production  
environment. Detailed system specification as prepared and reviewed by management. A  
version control system  is in place for all key application and operating system files. The  
systems  are actively  managed  to monitor  and reduce  vulnerabilities  with unnecessary  
services  eliminated.  
 
Strategic framework – The tactical security framework provides a mechanism whereby the  
Clinical Trials support personnel provide day -to-day operational support activities for the regular  
maintenance of the CTDB system.  These initiatives incorporate application and software  
security.  The CTDB application was designed using the lat est Java technology.  This allows the  
adaptation of the application to ever -changing business rules within the application.  An Oracle  
10g relational database provides the repository for the clinical data.  The use of a robust, industry  
standard relational da tabase provides a modular architecture design of CTDB which allows for  
the CTDB program to assign role based security to the participants in the system.  This allows  
roles to be defined and implemented for different users - such as investigators, study parti cipants,  
report writes, etc - in order to secure database access and the application data stored within the  
system.  This implies that the NICHD CTDB partners can implement custom roles and maintain  
their own clinical data with a high level of confidence tha t the data will not be compromised nor  
shared with non -participants.  As technology evolves, this attention to the strategic framework  
allows us to address individual software components and target them for enhancements or  
upgrades  all while  maintaining  the integrity  and confidentiality  of the CTDB  system.  Another  
66  
example of this strategic framework is the reporting interface.  The modular design of CTDB  
allows provides the ability to upgrade to Cognos reporting with the result being more detail ed 
comprehensive reporting abilities. The net result is a feature -enhanced system while maintain the  
strict  security framework of the  system.  