Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  
Page  1 of 23  
 OneMSK  Sites  
Manhattan  IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018  
 
 
 
 
RePPAIR –Reducing Procedural Pain and Improving Recovery of Quality of Life in 
Pediatric  Neuroblastoma  Patients  Undergoing  Bone  Marrow  Procedures:  A Prospective  
Randomized  Cross -over Clinical  Trial  
 
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR  
MSK   THER  APEUT  IC/DIAG  NOSTIC   PROTOCOL  
Principal  Sara Zarnegar -Lumley , M.D Pediatrics  
Investigator/Department:  
Co-Principal  Ellen  Basu,  M.D.,  
Investigator(s)/Department : Ph.D.  Pe diatrics  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Miho Nakajima -Hatano,  M.D. Pe 
Ugochi              Ogu,               M.D.  
Pe 
Michael             Ortiz,            M.D.  
Pe 
Katharine           Lange,           M.D.  
Pe 
Shakeel            Modak,            M.D.  
Pe 
Brian            Kushner,             M.D.  
Pe 
Stephen  Roberts,  M.D. Pe 
Nai-Kong  V. Cheung,  M.D.,  Ph.D  Pe 
Kay See Tan, Ph.D.  Ep 
Jamie            Fortunoff,             M.D.  
A 
Howard              Teng,              M.D.  
A 
Michael         Kellick,         PharmD   
Ph diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
idemiology  & Biostatistics  
nesthesiology  & Critical  Care  Medicine  
nesthesiology  & Critical  Care  Medicine  
armacy  
Consenting  Ellen  Basu,  M.D.,  Ph.D.  Pe 
Professional(s)/Department:  Sara Zarnegar -Lumley , M.D. Pe 
Miho Nakajima -Hatano,  M.D. Pe 
Ugochi  Ogu,  M.D. Pe 
Michael  Ortiz,  M.D. Pe 
Katharine  Lange,  M.D. Pe 
Shakeel  Modak,  M.D. Pe 
Brian  Kushner,  M.D. Pe 
Stephen  Roberts,  M.D. Pe 
Ellen  Basu,  M.D.,  Ph.D.  Pe 
Nai-Kong  V. Cheung,  M.D.,  Ph.D  Pe diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
diatrics  
 
 
 
 
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human  Subjects  
Education  and Certification  Program . 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  New York,  New York  10065  
Page  2 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA ................................ ................................ .... 3 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ................................ ................................ .............  4 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ................................ ................................ ..................  4 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................  7 
4.1 Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 7 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  7 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS ................................ ................................ ..........  8 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ .............. 8 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....8 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..9 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION ................................ ................................ .....................  9 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN ................................ ................................ ...............  9 
10.0 EVALUATION DURING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ .................  10 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 11 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESS MENT .....................  11 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY ................................ ................................ .... 13 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  13 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ ....................  15 
16.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT ISSUES ................................ ................................ .....................  16 
16.1 Quality  Assurance ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  16 
16.2 Data and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 17 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ................................ ................................ .........  18 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  18 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE) Reporting ................................ ................................ .............  18 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ................  20 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  21 
20.0 APPENDICES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  23 
Page  3 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
 1.0     PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
This is prospective  double -arm, randomized  cross -over clinical  trial that will assess  whether  the 
addition  of a local analgesic  agent,  ropivacaine,  to the standard  of care of propofol  will reduce  
the percentage  of pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  who require  opioid  analgesia  after bone  
marrow  procedures  compared  to propofol  alone . A “bone  marrow  procedure”  will be defined  as 
4 bone  marrow  aspirations  and 2-4 bone  marrow  biopsies.  Pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  will 
receive  the standard  of care (Intervention  A) or the standard  of care with the addition  of 
subcutaneous  and periosteal  infiltration  of ropivacaine  (Intervention  B). We will compare  the 
percentage  of patients  requiring  post-procedural  opioid  analgesia  in each  Intervention  as the 
primary  endpoint,  as well as total opioid  consumption,  time to first opioid,  percentage  requiring  
non-opioid  analgesia,  standardized  pain scores  and quality  of life metrics.  Based  on statistical  
considerations  and extrapolation  from an informal  needs  assessment,  we  expect   to  enroll  
enough  patients  for adequate  power  within  6 months  of study  opening.  
 
 Assess  for eligibility  
Randomize  
Allocate  to Arm 1 
st 
1   BM procedure  
Intervention  A: propofol  alone  Allocate  to Arm 2 
st 
1   BM procedure:  
Intervention  B: propofol  & ropivacaine  
Crossover  for second  BM procedure  
Intervention  B: propofol  and 
ropivacaine  Intervention  A: propofol  
alone  
Page  4 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
Primary  Objective:  
 
• Determine  whether  there  is a reduction  in the percentage  of pediatric  neuroblastoma  
patients  undergoing  a bone  marrow  procedure  who require  post-procedural  opioid  
analgesia  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  of the procedure  with the addition  of local 
ropivacaine.  
Secondary  Objective:  
 
Determine  whether  there  is a difference  in: 
 
• 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  post-procedure  opioid  consumption  in morphine  equivalents  
(mg/kg/day)  
• Percentage  of patients  requiring  non-opioid  analgesia  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  of 
procedure  
• Standardized  pain scores  (Wong -Baker  FACES®    Scale)  
• Time  to first opioid  medication  
• Short -term quality  of life 
• Adverse  outcomes  with the addition  of local ropivacaine  
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
3.1 Background  
 
Pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  undergo  bone  marrow  aspiration  (BMA)  and biopsy  
(BMB)  procedures  as a part of their extent  of disease  evaluation  at regular  intervals  during  
treatment  and surveillance.  Many  studies  of both pediatric  and adult oncology  patients  have 
shown  that bone  marrow  aspirations  and biopsies  are painful  procedures  .1-3 Not only do patients  
report  procedural  pain,  but health  care professionals  and parents  also acknowledge  that these  
procedures  are painful.  A study  asked  Italian  Pediatric  Hematology -Oncology  health  
professionals  (medical  directors,  physicians,  nurses,  psychologists)  their perceptions  of 
procedural  pain and found  that providers  considered  BMA  and BMB  to be above  5 on a scale  of 
0-10 in 97.5%  and 99.5%  of cases,  respectively.4 Another  study  looking  at pediatric  oncology  
patients  and their parents  showed  procedures  to be the most  frequent  cause  of distress.5 
Exposure  to repeated  painful  procedures  has been  found  to exacerbate  anxiety  and distress  in 
children.6,7 
The American  Academy  of Pediatrics  (AAP)  developed  a report  in 1990  stating  that 
strategies  to reduce  pain and anxiety  are integral   to the care of pediatric  oncology  patients.8 
Pediatric  oncology  departments  such  as the Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  (MSKCC) 
Department  of Pediatrics  have adopted  institutional  practices  in an effort  to reduce  bone -marrow  
procedure -related  pain and anxiety.  The standard  of care at MSKCC  for pediatric  patients  
undergoing  BMA  and BMB  is to receive  propofol.  While  propofol  has amnestic  and anesthetic  
properties,  it lacks  any analgesic  properties.9 
Page  5 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
3.2 Needs  assessment  
 
In order  to better  understand  bone  marrow  procedural  pain for pediatric  patients   at 
MSKCC,  we conducted  a needs  assessment  of 25 pediatric  patients  and 1 adult  patient,  asking  
about  their experience  with BMA  and BMB,  done  with the standard  of care administration.  We 
found  that 8/26 = 30.7%  of patients  required  opioid  analgesia  within  24 hours  of the procedure  - 
7/8 post-procedurally  and one patient  with systemic  opioid  given  with anesthesia.  We also 
discovered  that many  children  had persistent  pain and reduced  activity  level the day following  
the procedure  - 12/26  = 46% and 8/26 = 31%,  respectively.  Based  on this data,  we identified  a 
need  to improve  the experience  of pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  with bone  marrow  
procedures.  Although  there  are no standard  clinical  guidelines,  the AAP recommends  an 
individualized  and age-based  approach  and encourages  the use of both non-pharmacologic  and 
pharmacologic  interventions  that includes  both anesthesia  and analgesia.8 We also conducted  
an informal  survey  of seven  other  major  pediatric  oncology  centers  and found  that each  of these  
centers  uses analgesia,  either  systemic  or local,  in addition  to general  anesthesia  for bone  
marrow  biopsy  procedures.  
3.3 Rationale  
 
The purpose  of this study  is to investigate  whether  subcutaneous  and periosteal  
infiltration  of a local anesthetic  agent,  ropivacaine,  will reduce  the percentage  of  patients  
requiring  post-procedural  opioid  analgesia  and improve  quality  of life in the day following  the 
procedure.  A similar  study  recently  demonstrated  that topical  analgesia for lumbar  punctures  
reduced  the amount  of propofol  used  in pediatric  oncology  patients.9 However,  no study  has 
been  done  to investigate  the efficacy  of local analgesia  in combination  with propofol  for bone  
marrow  procedures.  For this reason,  a trial evaluating  the effect  of the addition   of  local 
analgesia  is both justified  and necessary.  Local  analgesia  acts to limit the initiation  of 
nociceptive  pathways  prior to the traumatic  insult,  in this case,  subcutaneous  and periosteal  
infiltration  by a bone  marrow  aspiration  or biopsy  needle.  Ropivacaine  is an example  of a local 
anesthetic  agent  that blocks  both the initiation  and conduction  of nerve  impulses  by decreasing  
the neuronal  membrane ‟s permeabilit y to sodium  ions.10 It is an amino -amide  local anesthetic  
that is a pure S-(-)-enantiomer  with lower  lipid solubility  than racemic  mixtures;  these  features  
allow  ropivacaine  to have  a higher  safety  profile  with less cardiovascular  and central  nervous  
system  toxicity  than racemic  lidocaine  and bupivacaine.10 Its onset  of action  is listed  as “fast”  
with infiltration.  i.e. within  3 to 15 minutes.11 Its duration  of action  is 3 to15 hours.11 Therefore,  
due to its effect  on nociceptive  pathways,  rapid  onset  and moderate duration  of action  while  
maintaining  a low toxicity  profile,  ropivacaine  is a reasonable  option  for local analgesia  for bone  
marrow  procedures.  This  is  the first time ropivacaine  will be directly  injected  into the bone  
marrow site  at MSKCC  Pediatrics.  
 
Primary  and secondary  outcome  measures  were  carefully  selected  after reviewing  
pediatric  pain literature.  Within  pain clinical  trials,  analgesic  efficacy  can be measured  by the 
ability  to reduce  or eliminate  the need  for rescue  analgesia.  “Rescue  analgesia-sparing” has 
been  identified  as practical  and feasible  surrogate  primary  endpoint  12,13. A systematic  review  of 
Page  6 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
33 pediatric  trials that used  opioid  as the study  drug showed  that percentage  requiring  rescue  
medication  was a useful  outcome  measure  in small  procedures  when  the time and amount  of 
rescue  medication  needed  was low relative  to surgical  procedures.13 This will be the primary  
outcome  in the current  study.  Time  to first rescue  opioid  and total opioid  dose  were  alternate  
outcomes  that are commonly  studied;13 in this protocol,  they are selected  as secondary  
outcomes.  Relative  differences  in pain scores,  either  over time or with an intervention,  are 
frequently  used  as an outcome  measure  in pain clinical  trials  and will be a secondary  outcome  
in this study.1 2,15 We selected  the Wong -Baker  FACES® Pain Rating  Scale  (WBFPRS)  
(Appendix  1) for this study  because  it is a validated  scale  intended  for use for our patient  
population.14,15  Advantages  of this scale  include  its reliability  over time,  ease  of administration,  
and children  have been  shown  to prefer  this scale  over others.15 It is routinely  used  clinically  at 
MSKCC  Department  of Pediatrics.  An extensive  review  of various  pediatric  pain scales  
concluded  that many  of the pain scales  in use are equivalent,  and encouraged  the use of a 
scale  familiar  to the institution  for clinical  purposes.16 
This study  will use a pain management  algorithm  for consistency  in post-procedural  pain 
management  (Appendix  2.1 and 2.2). This algorithm  relies  on the WHO  Analgesic  Ladder  for 
escalation  of therapy.  We referred  to the previously  mentioned  needs  assessment  as well as 
commonly  used  categories  for pain severity  to determine  the interventions  starting  from heat 
packs,  moving  to the non-opioid  analgesic:  acetaminophen  and escalating  to a low dose  strong  
opioid  for moderate  pain as defined  as pain greater  than but not equal  to a 4 on the WBFPRS.  
The decision  to use a low dose  strong  opioid  instead  of a weak  opioid  as suggested  by the 
WHO  Analgesic  Ladder  is based  both on institutional  practice  and recent  multi-center  study  in 
patients  with cancer  and moderate  pain demonstrating  better  pain relief  with a low dose  strong  
opioid  instead  of weak  opioid.17 
Groups  such  as the Pediatric  Initiative  on Methods,  Measurement,  and Pain Assessment  
in Clinical  Trials  (PedIMMPACT)  have recommended  multidimensional  outcome  domains  and 
measures  for pediatric  pain clinical  trials.15,18  The PediIMMPACT consensus  guidelines  for 
investigators  conducting  clinical  trials addressing  acute  pain include  6 domains  including  pain 
intensity,  physical  recovery  and emotional  response.18 We aim to incorporate  these  additional  
domains  into this study  by utilizing  a quality  of life metric  adapted  from a validated  pain 
interference  inventory.  We will use an abbreviated  version  of the National  Institutes  of Health  
(NIH)  Patient  Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS®) Parent  Proxy  
measure  for pain interference.19,20   This full item bank has been  validated  for use by the parents  
of 8-17 year olds and has been  extended  for use in 5-7 year olds.19,20  We will extrapolate  its use 
for our patient  population  and have  selected  4 of the 13 items  from the item bank to assess  how 
procedural  pain affects  physical  recovery  in the context  of activity  and sleep  as well as social  
and emotional  functioning  (Appendix  3). 
 
This study  is  clinically   relevant  in the care of pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  who 
undergo  repeated  painful  procedures  in an effort  to optimize  pain alleviation  and reduce  the 
potential  for  distress   related  to procedures.  We specifically  selected  pediatric   neuroblastoma  
Page  7 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
patients  since  they undergo  repeated  bone  marrow  procedures  during  the course  of their care 
and these  procedures  often  involves  four sites.  Therefore,  it would  benefit  these  young  patients  
to identify  pain associated  with recurrent  procedures  and optimize  its management.  We have 
selected  a single  patient  population  to allow  for better  standardization  in our assessment  and 
outcome  measures.  As a result  of this study,  we hope  to improve  standard  institutional  practice  
for any pediatric  patient  undergoing  a bone  marrow  procedure.  
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.2 Design  
 
This study  will be a prospective  double -arm randomized  controlled  single -blinded  crossover  
design.  The two interventions  are: 
 
• Intervention  A: MSKCC  standard  of care 
• Intervention  B: MSKCC  standard  of care plus local analgesia  with ropivacaine.  
 
Pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  will be enrolled  based  on eligibility  criteria  and randomized  to 
one of two arms  representing  a specific  sequence  of each  intervention.  
 
• Arm 1 (AB):  standard  of care only during  the first procedure,  then standard  of care plus 
ropivacaine  during  the second  procedure.  
• Arm 2 (BA):  Standard  of care plus ropivacaine  during  the first procedure,  then standard  
of care only during  the second  procedure.  
 
Each patient  will serve  as his or her own control.  The patients  and parents  will be blinded  to the 
study  arm. The procedural  attending  physicians  and pharmacy  will have  to coordinate  and 
administer  the treatment  agent  (ropivacaine),  and they will not be blinded  to the study  arm. The 
registered  nurse  (RN) in the procedure  room   will similarly  not be blinded  to the study.  The 
Pediatric  Day Hospital  (PDH)  Procedure  Recovery  Room  (PRR)  RNs will be blinded  as they will 
also be responsible  for data collection  as described  below.  The study  investigators  who will be 
responsible  for post-procedural  data collection  will similarly  be blinded  to the study  combination.  
 
4.3 Intervention  
 
Intervention  A: The standard  of care agent  will be administered  intravenously  by an 
anesthesiologist  as per current  institutional  practice.  An empty  decoy  syringe  will be provided  by 
the pharmacy  and taken  to the procedure  room  by appropriate  staff as sometimes  parents  
accompany  their children  into the procedure  room  prior to anesthesia  administration.  The empty  
syringe  will be clearly  marked  and discarded.  
 
Intervention  B: The standard  of care agent  will be administered  intravenously  by an 
anesthesiologist  as per current  institutional  practice.  Once  the anesthetic  effect  is achieved  as 
determined  by the anesthesiologist,  the proceduralist  physician  will inject  subcutaneous  and 
periosteal  ropivacaine  prior to bone  marrow  aspiration  and biopsy  at each  site (bilateral  anterior  
and posterior  iliac crests).  Ropivacaine  will be provided  by the MSKCC  PDH  Pharmacy  and will 
Page  8 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
be administered  at standard  dosing  of 2mg/kg  of a 0.5%  solution  (5mg/ml)  and delivered  to the 
procedure  room  by appropriate  staff.  
 
The following  process  occurs  after every  procedure.  Patients  will complete  the procedure  and 
recover  in the PRR  for an approximate  time of 30 to 90 minutes.  In the PRR,  trained  RNs who 
are blinded  to the study  combination  will assess  patient  pain based  on a validated  self-report  
pain scale  and administer  pain medication  when  necessary  based  on a standard  pain 
management  algorithm  (Appendix  2.2). After recovery  in the PRR,  patients  will be discharge  
home.  Parents/parent s will assess  their child‟s pain on a validated  self-report  pain scale  and 
administer  pain medication  when  necessary  based  on a standard  pain management  algorithm  
(Appendix  2.2). 
 
5.0     THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS  
5.1 Study agent: ROPIVACAINE11,  25-28 
 
5.1.1  Source  and Pharmacology:  A local anesthetic.  Mechanism  of action  is by 
blockade  of both the initiation  and conduction  of nerve  impulses  by  decreasing  the 
neuronal  membrane's  permeability  to sodium  ions, which  results  in inhibition  of 
depolarization  with resultant  blockade  of conduction.  The half-life is 5 to 7 hours  when  
used  as an epidural  infusion  and has a terminal  half-life of 111 ± 62 minutes.  It is 
metabolized  by the liver and excreted  through  the urine.  
5.1.2  Formulation  and Stability : Supplied  in single -dose  containers  in 2 mg/ml  (0.2%),  
5 mg/ml  (0.5%),  7.5 mg/ml  (0.75%)  and 10 mg/ml  (1%).  Store  at 20°C  to 25°C.  
In this study,  the PDH  pharmacy  will prepare  four (4) syringes  from a single  vial of the 
5mg/ml  (0.5%)  ropivacaine  at a dose  of 2mg/kg/patient  divided  evenly  into 
0.5mg/kg/syringe  with a maximum  dose  of a single  20 ml vial = 100 mg. 
5.1.3  Guidelines for Administration: Doses are administered via local infiltration. 
 
5.1.4  Supplier:  Commercially  available.  See package  insert  for further  information.  
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• Diagnosis  of neuroblastoma  as defined  by the International  Neuroblastoma  Risk 
Group  Staging  System  (INRGSS)22
 
• 3 - 18 years  of age 
• Patient  has had prior bone  marrow  procedures  
• English  speaking  
Page  9 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
• History  of allergy  to investigational  agent:  ropivacaine  or other  amino  amide  
analgesics  
• History  of allergy  to standard  agent:  propofol  
• Chronic  daily opioid  requirement  
• Lansky/Karnofsky  Score  < 60 
• Inability  to comply  with protocol  requirements  including  refusal  to forego  pre- 
procedural  opioid  use 
• Patient  is receiving  additional  potentially  painful  interventions  (e.g. central  line 
insertion/removal)  concurrent  with the bone  marrow  procedure  
7.0       RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
All consecutive  eligible  patients  will be offered  participation  in this study  by a physician  in the 
Department  of Pediatrics  at Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center.  No patients  will  be 
identified  by chart  review  or direct  advertising.  Every  week,  the Neuroblastoma  Personal  Office  
Assistant  (POA)  will circulate  an email  to the consenting  investigators  on this study  that includes  
the name  and medical  record  number  of every  neuroblastoma  patient  receiving  a bone  marrow  
procedure  in the following  week.  Every   day, the consenting  investigators  on this study   are 
included  on an email  notice  of new patients  being  seen  by the Pediatric  Neuroblastoma  service.  
In this way, potential  study  participants  will be identified  for recruitment.  The consenting  
professional  will be responsible  for explaining  the study  and obtaining  written  informed  consent.  
Participants  in the study  will receive  neither  financial  payment  nor  reimbursement.   Eligible  
patients  of all genders  and racial  groups  will be equally  offered  enrollment  in the study.  
8.0     PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
 
Before  each  bone  marrow  procedure,  the patient  will be re-evaluated  for continued  eligibility.  If 
the patient  does  not meet  eligibility  at the time of the scheduled  bone  marrow  procedure,  the 
intervention  may be postponed  until a subsequent  bone  marrow  procedure  when  the patient  
meets  eligibility  criteria.  
 
9.0     TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN  
 
Each  enrolled  patient  will serve  as his/her  own control.  On two  bone   marrow   procedures,  
patients  will receive  either  intervention  A or B. 
Each  procedure  will occur  at approximately  a two to four month  interval.  The timing  of bone  
marrow  procedures  will be determined  by the patient's  clinical  course.  
In Intervention  A, standard  of care dosing  and administration  will be at the discretion  of the 
anesthesiologist  according  to standard  of care in the Department  of Anesthesia  at Memorial  
Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center.  In Intervention  B, 2mg/kg  of 0.5%  ropivacaine  will be drawn  into 
Page  10 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
pre-filled syringes  with a maximum  dose  of 20ml  = 100mg.  The physician  performing  bone  
marrow  procedures  will administer  ropivacaine.  
 
Ropivacaine  will be injected  into the subcutaneous  tissue  in an area approximately  1 cm in 
diameter.  Subsequently,  the ropivacaine  will be administered  to the periosteum  in an area 
approximately  2-3 cm in diameter.  Four pre-filled syringes  will be provided  and proceduralist  
physicians  will be advised  to administer  one full syringe  volume  for each  site (0.5mg/kg)  with 
equal  distribution  between  the subcutaneous  and periosteal  injection  per site. Currently,  
propofol  alone  is the standard  of care in the Department  of Pediatrics   at  Memorial   Sloan  
Kettering  Cancer  Center.  While  ropivacaine  is a well described  local anesthetic  agent,   the 
addition  of ropivacaine  to propofol  to minimize  post procedure  pain is an experimental  
intervention.  
 
10.0   EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
Pain will be assessed  in the post-anesthesia  care unit (PRR).  Directly  upon  emergence  from 
anesthesia  after the procedure  and every  15 minutes  subsequently,  PRR  nurses  will use the 
Wong -Baker  FACES® Pain Rating  Scale  (Appendix  1). Nurses  will record  patient -reported  pain 
scores  and administered  analgesia  in the Electronic  Medical  Record  (EMR).  Analgesia  doses  
will be recorded  at the time of administration.  The PRR  nurses  will follow  a standardized  post- 
procedural  algorithm  (Appendix  2.1). Patients  will recover  in the PRR  for approximately  30 to 90 
minutes  prior to discharge  from MSKCC.  In some  instances,  patients  will be discharged  from the 
PRR  to the Neuroblastoma  Clinic  in the Pediatric  Day Hospital  (PDH).  We anticipate  that all 
patients  will be discharged  from MSKCC  before  6 hours  from the end of their procedure.  In the 
unexpected  case  that a patient  is admitted  to the hospital  for any reason  during  the study  period  
(28 hours  post-procedure),  study  investigators  will provide  the inpatient  RN with the post- 
procedural  opioid  management  algorithm  (Appendix  2.1). Only if the admission  is due to a study  
related  life-threatening  grade  4 toxicity,  will the admitted  patient  be removed  from the study  as 
described  in Section  13.0.  
Families  will be provided  a 2 part, 12 item written  questionnaire  with 4 items  and 8 items  in each  
part, respectively  (Appendix  3). They  will be asked  to complete  Part 1 at 6 hours  (+/- 1 hour)  
and Part 2 at 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  following  the procedure.  This questionnaire  will have items  
regarding  pain intensity  and management  to be answered  at both time points.  Families  will be 
asked  to follow  a post-procedure  pain management  plan (Appendix  2.2). Post-procedural  quality  
of life (QOL)  will be assessed  using  a four-item questionnaire  (Appendix  3) adapted  from the 
NIH PROMIS® Parent  Proxy  Item Bank  for Pain Interference  and approved  for use by the 
MSKCC  Behavioral  Research  Methods  Core  Facility.  These  four questions  will include   the 
domains  of physical  recovery,  emotional  and social  functioning.  QOL will be assessed  about  24 
hours  (+/- 4 hours)  following  the procedure.  Principal  Investigators,   Co-Investigators,  
Investigators  or appropriate  clinic  staff will call families  24-72  hours   following   procedure   to 
obtain  answers  to the questionnaire.  
Page  11 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
11.1 DEFINITION  OF TOXICITIES:  
 
• Common  - Happens  to 20-100 patients  out of every  100 
• Occasional  - Happens  to 4-20 patients  out of every  100 
• Rare  - Happens  to 3 or fewer  patients  out of every 100 
 
11.2 LOCAL  INFILTRATION  OF ROPIVACAINE11,  25-28 
 
Common  Occasional  Rare  
None  None  • Allergic  reaction  with any route  of 
administration  
• Arrhythmia  with intravascular  
administration*  
• Seizure  with intravascular  
administration*  
*Reported  with inadvertent  
intravascular  administration  
 
 
12.0   CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESSMENT  
 
12.1 To assess  primary  objective,  we will determine  and compare  for each  study  intervention  
the percentage  of patients  who required  opioid  analgesia  between  the time of bone  marrow  
procedure  and 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  after the procedure.  
12.2 For the secondary  objectives:  
 
a) We will determine  and compare  for each  study  intervention  the percentage  of patients  who 
used  any non-opioid  analgesia  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  after bone  marrow  procedure.  
b) We will calculate  and compare  for each  study  intervention  the total dose  of opioid  
consumption  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  of the bone  marrow  procedure  using  mg/kg/day  
morphine  equivalent.  
Page  12 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
 
Drug  IV conversion  
factor  PO conversion  
factor  
Morphine  10mg  30mg  
Fentanyl  0.250mg  
(250mcg)  ー 
Hydromorphone  2mg 8mg 
Oxycodone  ー 20mg  
Oxymorphone  1mg 10mg  
Codeine  75mg  130mg  
Methadone  1mg 2mg 
Hydrocodone  ー 30mg  
 
 
c) We will also determine  the time to the first opioid  administration.  The starting  point for this 
time will be the time of transfer  to the PRR  which  will be documented  by the PRR  RN. This time 
will be recorded  on the parent  worksheet  by the PRR  RN. 
d) We will assess  standardized  pain scores  at 3 time points:  (1) the maximum  recorded  pain 
score  in the PRR,  (2) at 6 hours  (+/-1 hour)  and (3) 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  after the bone  marrow  
procedure.  Pain scores  2 and 3 will be recorded  by the parent  after discharge  from MSKCC.  We 
will use the following  validated  pain scales:  Wong -Baker  FACES®  Pain Rating   Scale   for 
patients  between  3-18 years  of age for patient -reported  pain when  asked  by post-anesthesia  
recovery  room  nurses  upon  emergence  from anesthesia  and by inpatient  nurses  or family  
members  in the outpatient  setting  upon  discharge  from the post-anesthesia  recovery  unit. We 
will compare  pain scores  between  study  interventions.  
 
e) The QOL  metric  is a brief instrument  that will assess  post-procedural  quality  of life within  24 
hours  (+/- 4 hours)  of the bone  marrow  procedure.  This instrument  assesses  the following  
domains:  sleep,  physical  functioning,  emotional  functioning  and social  functioning.  This brief 
measurement  tool will be adapted  from a validated  metric  for pain interference  in pediatric  
patients:  NIH PROMIS® Parent  Proxy  Item Bank  v1.0 – Pain Interference,  which  is a 13-item 
questionnaire.  However,  given  that our study  has rapid,  frequent  assessments,  we will use an 
Page  13 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
abbreviated  version  for feasibility  purposes  and to minimize  participant  burden.  Parents  will be 
asked  to assess  QOL at 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  following  the procedure  by completing  the 
questionnaire  at that time.  Principal  Investigators  or Research  Staff will call families  24-72 hours  
following  procedure  to obtain  answers  to survey.  This phone  call will be for the purposes  of data 
collection  only and not for survey  administration.  
f) Patients  will be under  medical  observation  during  the expected  time when  most  adverse  
effects  from ropivacaine  will be experienced.  Families  will be advised  to call the hospital  for any 
symptoms  beyond  this time period.  
 
13.0   CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
 
a) A patient  will come  off study  if the patient/parent  administers  an opioid  or any analgesic  within  
24 (+4 hours)  after the bone  marrow  procedure  that is not in accordance  to the algorithm  
provided  to them.  
 
b) If at any time the patient  develops  life-threatening  grade  4 toxicity  during  the study  period,  
he/she  will be removed  from study.  
 
c) If a patient  is found  to be ineligible  for two sequential  bone  marrow  procedures  as designated  
in Section  6, the patient  will be removed  from study.  
 
d) The patient  may withdraw  from study  at any time if the patient/parent  desires.  
 
14.0   BIOSTATISTICS  
 
This is a randomized  two arm cross -over study  investigating  the effectiveness  of the 
addition  of ropivacaine  to the standard  of care on pain among  pediatric  neuroblastoma  patients  
undergoing  repeated  procedures.  The two drug combinations  are standard  of care (Intervention  
A) or standard  of care plus ropivacaine  (Intervention  B, see Section  4.1). Patients  will be 
randomized  to either  Arm 1 (AB sequence)  or Arm 2 (BA  sequence,  see Figure  in Section  1) to 
determine  whether  standard  of care or standard  of care plus ropivacaine  will be administered  in 
the first of two procedures.  Patients  will cross  over during  the second  procedure.  Sample  size 
calculation  is based  on the primary  outcome:  the proportion  of patients  requiring  post-procedural  
opioid  analgesia  (“rescue  opioids”)  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  post procedure.  A needs  
assessment  conducted  in pediatric  patients  at MSKCC  suggests  that this proportion  is about  
30% under  Intervention  A (standard  of care).  We plan to enroll  50 patients  (total  of 100 
procedures).  
 
This is a crossover  study  in which  we assume  that there  will be no period  effect  (i.e., if 
patient ‟s response  in the subsequent  procedure  is affected  by the drug from the first procedure).  
Due to the estimated  two month  interval  between  the two procedures  and the duration  of action  
of less than 15 hours  for either  drug combinations,  we can assume  no period  effect.  The primary  
outcome  (whether  the patient  received  rescue  opioids)  will be evaluated  with GEE (generalized  
estimating  equations)  for binary  data with logit link function  clustered  by patients  23. The model  
Page  14 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
will include  the drug indicator,  procedure  order,  and an exchangeable  correlation  structure  to 
address  the correlation  between  multiple  observations  from the same  patient.  GEE has the 
advantage  of being  able to include  data from only one of a patient ‟s two procedures,  in order  to 
accommodate  the (rare)  case  in which  the patient  drops  out / withdraws  prior to the second  
procedure.  With complete  data,  however,  this approach  simplifies  to a McNema r‟s test. The 
power  and sample  size calculations  will be based  on McNema r‟s test. 
 
There  is limited  publication  on the correlation  among  longitudinal  measures  of pediatric  
pain scores,  particularly  those  reported  by the parent  instead  of the child;  one study  reported  
correlation  of 0.63 between  times  1 and 2 (6 months  apart)  of parent -proxy  reported  pain 
scores24. Assuming  a conservative  correlation  of 0.4 between  the two outcomes  (from  two 
procedures)  of the same  patient,  a sample  size of 45 patients  will allow  80% power  to detect  an 
absolute  difference  of 20% in proportions  between  the treatments  at an alpha  level of 0.05 
(assuming  rates  of 30% in Intervention  A and 10% in Intervention  B). This sample  size allows  
for an interim  assessment  of futility  at the half way point (23 out of 45 patients  with both 
procedures  completed).  If p>0.703,  then the trial will stop for futility;  if p≤0.703  then the study  
will continue  until completion.  The target  enrollment  of 50 patients  allows  for an anticipated  
drop-out rate (due to any reason)  of 10% in the power  analysis  calculation.  This power  
calculation  was generated  using  the proc power  procedure  in SAS 9.4, specifying  paired  
proportions  and correlation  for McNemar exact  conditional  test. Based  on an accrual  rate of 15 
patients  in month  1, 10 patients  in months  2 and 3 and  5 patients  per month  in months  4, 5, and 
6, we anticipate  completion  of enrollment  in 6 months.  
 
The potential  variability  between  attending  physicians  performing  the procedure  will be 
explored  by including  specification  of patients  nested  within  physicians  as clusters  in the GEE 
models.  Other  potential  factors  to include  in the GEE models  as fixed effects  may include  total 
number  of biopsies  and aspirations  per procedure  and/or  different  dose  of ropivacaine.  
 
Secondary  outcome  of standardized  cumulative  opioid  consumption  within  24 hours  (+/- 
4 hours)  (morphine  equivalents,  mg/kg/day)  will be summarized  and compared  between  the two 
drugs  using  linear  GEE models  with the same factors  as described  above,  including  of the other  
potential  factors  identified  from the analysis  of the primary  outcome.  Additionally,  time to first 
opioid  use within  the first 24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  post procedure  will be estimated  using  the 
Kaplan-Meier method and compared between the two drugs using the clustered logrank test. 
This is appropriate  as patients  may never  require  any opioids  and will hence  be censored  at 24- 
hours.  The proportion  of patients  requiring  non-opioid  analgesia  within  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)  of 
procedure  will be compared  between  the two drugs  using  GEE (for binary  data)  as described  for 
the primary  outcome.  
 
Post-operative  pain reported  on the Wong -Baker  FACES®  Pain Rating  Scale  (converted  
to scale  of 0-10) will be measured  at 3 time points:  in the PRR,  at 6 hours  (+/- 1 hour)  and 24 
hours  (+/- 4 hours)  after the procedure.  If more  than one pain score  is recorded  during  the PRR,  
Page  15 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
then the maximum  pain score  during  the PRR  will be included  in analyses.  Pain scores  will be 
compared  between  the two drugs  using  a linear  GEE model  with drug indicator,  procedure  order  
and the exchangeable  correlation  structure  for the 3 time points.  The GEE models  appropriately  
account  for correlation  among  within -individual  repeated  measures,  sequence  of drugs,  and 
allow  for missingness  (i.e., if the respondent  does  not provide  complete  follow -up data).  Short - 
term QOL and activity  level will be reported  based  on the (NIH PROMIS®  Parent  Proxy  Item 
Bank  v1.0 – Pain Interference)  as individual  items.  QOL  measures  will only be recorded  once  at 
24-hours  post-procedure.  We will use a linear  GEE model  to analyze  the differences  in QOL  
item-measures  between  the two drugs.  Drug  indicator  and procedure  order  will be included  as 
covariates.  Overall  rate of any complications  or major  adverse  events  and the rates  of specific  
adverse  outcomes  related  to the addition  of local ropivacaine  will also be compared  between  
drugs  using  GEE (for binary  data)  These  analyses  are exploratory  because  they are of 
secondary  interest  and we do not have  prior data to estimate  statistical  power.  
 
15.1 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND RANDOMIZATION  
PROCEDURES  
15.2 Research  Participant  Registration  
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
 
Obtain  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  Consent  
Procedures.  
 
During  the registration  process  registering  individuals  will be required  to complete  a protocol  
specific  Eligibility  Checklist.  
 
All participants  must  be registered  through  the Protocol  Participant  Registration  (PPR)  Office  at 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center.  PPR is available  Monday  through  Friday  from 8:30am  
– 5:30pm  at 646-735-8000.  Registrations  must  be submitted  via the PPR Electronic  Registration  
System  (http://ppr/ ). The completed  signature  page  of the written  consent/RA  or verbal  
script/RA,  a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  and other  relevant  documents  must  be uploaded  via 
the PPR Electronic  Registration  System.  
 
The study  arm will be assigned  by randomization  at the time of study  registration.  
Page  16 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
16.0   DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
 
Data to be collected:  
Age 
Diagnosis  
Gender  
Opiates  used  during  procedure  
Any analgesia  used  through  24 hours  (+/- 4 hours)post  procedure  
Pain scores  
Quality  of life scores  
 
Data will be collected  via chart  review  post procedure,  and personal  phone  calls to 
families/patients  on the day after the procedure.  
 
Data will be collected on a secured  database  and stored  on an MSKCC  server.  Data will not be 
stored  on personal  devices  or removed  from MSKCC.  
 
We expect  to achieve  the following  accrual  rate 
Month  1: 15 patients  
Months  2, 3: 10 patients/month  
Months  4, 5, 6: 5 patients/month  
We will need  approximately  6 months  to achieve  our enrollment  goal based  on power  analysis.  
 
Given  that each  patient  will complete  two bone  marrow  procedures  and there  can be up to four 
months  between  procedures,  we expect  a study  duration  of approximately  10 months  for all 
enrolled  patients  to complete  both interventions.  
 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  
 
Quality  assurance  is the responsibility  of PI and Study  team  it will be achieved  by frequent  
review  of the data.  
 
The data will be obtained  from medical  records  and personal  phone  calls.  The clinic  team  will 
educate  the procedure  room/recovery  room  on validated  pain scales  to ensure  accurate  capture  
of patients  pain.  The clinic  team  will also provide  families  with written  validated  pain scales  to 
reference  at home  as well as a written  form of questions  to be asked  on phone  call. 
 
Eligibility  will be verified  for all enrolled  patients  by secondary  review  of the eligibility  checklist.  
This will be completed  by the data team.  
Registration  reports  will be generated  by the RSA to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  
of registration  data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data and 
inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates   and extext   and accuracy  of evaluations   and  follow -up will be 
Page  17 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
monitored  periodically  throughout  the study  period  and potential  problems  will be brought  to the 
attention  of the study  team  for discussion  and action  
 
Random -sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the study  
team  on an ongoing  basis.  
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM) Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  were  
approved  by the  National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.  The plans   address   the new 
policies set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled  “Policy of the National  Cancer  Institute  for 
Data and Safety  Monitoring  of  Clinical   Trials”  which  can be found  at:  
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/index.html .  The  DSM  Plans   at  MSKCC   were  
established  and are monitored  by the Office  of Clinical  Research.  The MSKCC  Data and Safety  
Monitoring  Plans   can be  found  on the  MSKCC   Intranet  at:  
https://one.mskcc.org/sites/pub/clinresearch/ Pages/protocol -review -committees/data -and-  safety -
monitoring -committee.aspx . 
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials are monitored  for data,  safety  
and quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protocol  
monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff education  
on clinical  research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control,  plus there  are two 
institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our clinical  trials 
programs.  The committees:  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  for Phase  I and II 
clinical  trials,  and the Data and Safety  Monitoring  Board  (DSMB)  for Phase  III clinical  trials,  
report  to the Center ‟s Research  Council  and Institutional  Review  Board.  
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each  protocol  will be assessed  for its level 
of risk and degree  of monitoring  required.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g.,  NIH sponsored,  in-house  
sponsored,  industrial  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be addressed  and the 
monitoring  procedures  will be established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
Institutional  monitoring  plan for phase  I and phase  II trials:  Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  
Center  (MSKCC)  has established  standard  procedures  for data safety  monitoring  of clinical  
research.  For Phase  II trials,  these  procedures  include  consideration  of accrual  rates,  toxicity,  
adherence  to dose -escalation  schedules,  adverse  event  notification  and data recording.  
Therapeutic  responses  are logged  on a central  database  and approximately  50% are reviewed  
by an independent  committee.  An annual  report  of the trial‟s progress  is sent to the IRB. All of 
the procedures  for Phase  II studies  outlined  in MSKCC ‟s policy  are applicable  to the current  trial 
and will be followed  by the investigators.  The analysis  of safety  will include  all patients  who 
receive  at least one dose  of study  medication.  Adverse  events,  including  all toxic effects  of 
treatment,  will be tabulated  individually,  and summarized  by body system,  according  to study  
medication,  and according  to severity  or toxicity  grade.  Laboratory  data will be tabulated  and 
summarized  by descriptive  statistics,  as well as on the basis  of MSKCC  specified  normal  range.  
Page  18 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
17.0   PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Patient  participation  in this protocol  is completely  voluntary.  Patients  will be provided  with 
documentation  explaining  the protocol  rationale  and objectives,  as well as its potential  risks,  
benefits,  toxicities/side  effects,  inconveniences  and financial  costs/burdens.  Alternative  options  
for therapy  will also be discussed.  Patients  who choose  to participate  will sign an informed  
consent  conforming  to the MSKCC  IRB guidelines.  The protocol  will protect  the rights  and 
privacy  of all participants.  Children,  adolescents  and young  adults  are eligible  for this study.  
Patients  of both sexes  and all ethnic/racial  backgrounds   are eligible  for this study.  Alternative  
treatments  are available  and will be discussed  with the patients  and/or  legal guardian.  
 
It is not known  whether  this treatment  will improve  the overall  survival   of  the  patient.   The 
potential  risks of this therapy  are described  in Section  11 of this protocol  and may outweigh  the 
potential  benefits  in an individual  patient.  Reporting  of serious  adverse   events   is  found   in 
section  17.2.  
 
Costs:  Patients  are responsible  for the costs  of physician  visits  and usual  laboratory  tests,  
hospitalizations,  radiographic  studies,  drug administration  and outpatient  care.  If there  is an 
injury  as a result  of the research  study,  emergency  care,  hospitalization,  and outpatient  care will 
be made  available  by Memorial  Hospital  and billed  to the patient  as part of the  medical  
expenses.  No money  will be provided  by Memorial  Hospital  as compensation  for research - 
related  injury.   Patients  will not be paid for taking  part in this study.  
17.1 Privacy  
 
It is the responsibility  of the Research  Staff to ensure  that protocol  subjects   received   the 
Cente r‟s Notice  of Privacy  Practices.  If the subject  has not received  one, MSK personnel  must  
provide  a Notice  of Privacy  Practices  and obtain  acknowledgment  before  the subject  
participates  in the study.  
 
MSK‟s Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclosure  of protected  health  information  pursuant  
to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of protected  
health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  Authorization  form.  
A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed  by the Principal  Investigator  and approved  
by the IRB and Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  
 
17.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting 
 
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An adverse  event  that results  in inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  
hospitalization  
Page  19 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct  
normal  life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Important  Medical  Events  (IME)  that may not result  in death,  be life threatening,  or 
require  hospitalization  may be considered  serious  when,  based  upon  medical  
judgment,  they may jeopardize  the patient  or subject  and may require  medical  or 
surgical  intervention  to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition  
 
Note: Hospital  admission  for a planned  procedure/disease  treatment  is  not considered  
an SAE.  
 
SAE reporting  is required  as soon  as the participant  signs  consent.  SAE reporting  is 
required  for 30-days after the participant ‟s last investigational  treatment  or intervention.  
Any events  that occur  after the 30-day period  and that are at least possibly  related  to 
protocol  treatment  must  be reported.  
 
If an SAE requires  submission  to the IRB office  per IRB SOP  RR-408 „Reporting  of 
Serious  Adverse  Events ‟, the SAE report  must  be sent to the IRB within  5 calendar  days 
of the event.  The IRB requires  a Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB)  SAE report  be 
submitted  electronically  to the SAE Office  as follows:  
 
Reports  that include  a Grade  5 SAE should  be sent to saegrade5@mskcc.org . All other  
reports should be sent to sae@mskcc.org. 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
Fields  populated  from CRDB:  
• Subject ‟s initials  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
Data needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
Page  20 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
o A explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject ‟s condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
 
The PI‟s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
 
 
18.1 INFORMED CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain  full 
details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  prior to 
their inclusion  in the study.  Participants  will also be informed  that they are free to withdraw  from 
the study  at any time.  All participants  must  sign an IRB/PB -approved  consent  form indicating  
their consent  to participate.  This consent  form meets  the requirements  of the Code  of Federal  
Regulations  and the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  The consent  form 
will include  the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of 
supportive  care for therapeutic  studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  
and to withdraw  from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will fully 
explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.  In addition  to 
signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  agree  to the Research  Authorization  
component  of the informed  consent  form.  
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must  
receive  a copy of the signed  informed  consent  form.  
Page  21 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
19.1 REFERENCES  
 
1. Vanhelleputte  P, Nijs K, Delforge   M,  Evers   G,  Vanderschueren   S.  Pain  during  
bone  marrow  aspiration:  prevalence  and prevention.  J Pain Symptom  Manage.  2003  
Sep;26(3):860 -6. 
2. Shokrani   O,  Saghaei   M,  Ashrafi   F,  Sadeghi   A.   Electrical   stimulation    of 
acupuncture  points  for analgesia  during  bone  marrow  aspiration  and biopsy:  A 
randomized  double -blind placebo -controlled  trial. Adv  Biomed   Res.  2014   May 
28;3:125.  
3. Lidén  Y, Landgren  O, Arnér  S, Sjölund  KF, Johansson  E.  Procedure -related   pain 
among  adult patients  with hematologic  malignancies.  Acta Anaesthesiol  Scand.  2009  
Mar;53(3):354 -63. 
4. Po' C,  Benini    F,  Sainati    L,  Frigo   AC,  Cesaro   S,  Farina    MI,  Agosto    C.  The 
opinion  of clinical  staff regarding  painfulness  of procedures  in pediatric  hematology -
oncology:  an Italian  survey.  Ital J Pediatr.  2011  Jun 10;37(1):27.  
5. Hedström  M, Haglund  K, Skolin   I,  von  Essen  L.  Distressing   events   for  children  
and  adolescents   with  cancer:   child,   parent,   and  nurse    perceptions.    J   Pediatr  
Oncol  Nurs.  2003  May-Jun;20(3):120 -32. 
6. Chen  E, Zeltzer  LK, Craske  MG, Katz ER. Children's  memories  for painful  cancer  
treatment  procedures:  implications  for distress.  Child  Dev. 2000  Jul-Aug;71(4):933 -47. 
7. Hjortholm   N,  Jaddi ni  E,  Hałaburda   K,  Snarski   E.  Strategies    of   pain   reduction  
during  the bone  marrow  biopsy.  Ann Hematol.  2013  Jan;92(2):145 -9. 
8. Zeltzer  LK, Altman  A, Cohen  D, LeBaron  S, Munuksela  EL, Schechter  NL. American  
Academy  of Pediatrics  Report  of the Subcommittee  on the Management  of Pain 
Associated  with Procedures  in Children  with Cancer.  Pediatrics.  1990  Nov;86(5  Pt 
2):826 -31. 
9. Whitlow  PG, Saboda  K, Roe DJ,  Bazzell   S,  Wilson  C.  Topical   analgesia   treats  
pain and decreases  propofol  use during  lumbar  punctures  in a randomized  pediatric  
leukemia  trial. Pediatr  Blood  Cancer.  2015  Jan;62(1):85 -90. 
10. De Negri  P, Ivani G, Tirri T, Del Piano  AC. New local anesthetics  for pediatric  
anesthesia.  Curr Opin Anaesthesiol.  2005  Jun;18(3):289 -92. 
11. Ropivacaine.  Lexicomp  Online,  Pediatric  & Neonatal  Lexi-Drugs,  Hudson,  Ohio:  Lexi- 
Comp,  Inc; Accessed  January  30, 2016.  
12. Kossowsky  J, Donado  C, Berde  CB. Immediate  rescue  designs  in pediatric  analgesic  
trials:  a systematic  review  and meta -analysis.  Anesthesiology.  2015  Jan;122(1):150 -71. 
13. Berde  CB, Walco  GA, Krane  EJ, Anand  KJ, Aranda  JV, Craig  KD, Dampier  CD, Finkel  
JC, Grabois  M, Johnston  C, Lantos  J, Lebel  A, Maxwell  LG, McGrath  P, Oberlander  TF, 
Schanberg  LE, Stevens  B, Taddio  A, von Baeyer  CL, Yaster  M, Zempsky  WT. Pediatric  
analgesic  clinical  trial designs,  measures,  and extrapolation:  report  of an FDA scientific  
workshop.  Pediatrics.  2012  Feb;129(2):354 -64. 
14. Wong -Baker  FACES  Foundation  (2015).  Wong -Baker  FACES® Pain Rating  Scale.  
Retrieved  [December  21, 2015]  with permission  from http://www.W  ongBakerFACES.org . 
Page  22 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
15. Stinson  JN, Kavanagh  T, Yamada  J, Gill N, Stevens  B. Systematic  review  of the 
psychometric  properties,  interpretability  and feasibility  of self-report  pain intensity  
measures  for use in clinical  trials in children  and adolescents.  Pain.  2006  Nov;125(1 - 
2):143 -57. 
16. Tomlinson  D, von Baeyer  CL, Stinson  JN, Sung  L. A systematic  review  of Faces  scales  
for the self-report  of pain intensity  in children.  Pediatrics.  2010  Nov;126(5):e1168 -98. 
17. Bandieri  E, Romero  M, Ripamonti  CI, Artioli  F, Sichetti  D, Fanizza  C,  Santini   D, 
Cavanna  L, Melotti  B, Conte  PF, Roila  F, Cascinu  S, Bruera  E, Tognoni  G, Luppi  M. 
Randomized  Trial of Low-Dose  Morphine  Versus  Weak  Opioids  in Moderate  Cancer  
Pain.  J Clin Oncol.  2015  Dec 7. 
18. McGrath  PJ, Walco  GA, Turk DC, Dworkin  RH, Brown  MT, Davidson  K, Eccleston  C, 
Finley  GA, Goldschneider  K, Haverkos  L, Hertz  SH, Ljungman  G, Palermo  T, Rappaport  
BA, Rhodes  T, Schechter  N, Scott  J, Sethna  N, Svensson  OK, Stinson  J, von Baeyer  
CL, Walker  L, Weisman  S, White  RE, Zajicek  A, Zeltzer  L; PedIMMPACT.  Core  outcome  
domains  and measures  for pediatric  acute  and chronic/recurrent  pain clinical  trials:  
PedIMMPACT  recommendations.  J Pain.  2008  Sep;9(9):771 -83. 
19. Varni  JW, Thissen  D, Stucky  BD, Liu Y, Gorder  H, Irwin DE, DeWitt  EM, Lai  JS, 
Amtmann  D, DeWalt  DA. PROMIS®  Parent  Proxy  Report  Scales:  an item response  
theory  analysis  of the parent  proxy  report  item banks.  Qual Life Res. 2012  
Sep;21(7):1223 -40. 
20. Varni  JW, Thissen  D, Stucky  BD, Liu Y, Magnus  B, Quinn  H, Irwin DE, DeWitt  EM, Lai 
JS, Amtmann  D, Gross  HE, DeWalt  DA. PROMIS®  Parent  Proxy  Report  Scales  for 
children  ages 5-7 years:  an item response  theory  analysis  of differential  item functioning  
across  age groups.  Qual Life Res. 2014  Feb;23(1):349 -61. 
21. Propofol.  Lexicomp  Online,  Pediatric  & Neonatal  Lexi-Drugs,  Hudson,  Ohio:  Lexi-Comp,  
Inc; Accessed  January  30, 2016.  
22. Monclair  T, et al. The International  Neuroblastoma  Risk Group  (INRG)  Staging  System:  
An INRG Task  Force  Report  J Clin Oncol.  2009  Jan 10; 27(2):  298 –303. 
23. Liang   and  Zeger,   1986.   Longitudinal   data  analysis   using   generalized   linear   models.  
Biometrika . 73 (1), 13-22. 
24. Varni  JW, Burwinkle  TM, Katz ER. The PedsQL  in pediatric  cancer  pain: a prospective  
longitudinal  analysis  of pain and emotional  distress.  J Dev Behav.  Pediatr.  2004  
Aug;25(4):239 -46. 
25. Ross,  Allison  K., and Robert  B. Bryskin.  Smith's  Anesthesia  for Infants  and Children.  
Edited  by Peter  J. Davis.  By Franklyn  P. Cladis  and Etsuro  K. Motoyama.  8th ed. St. 
Louis,  MO: Mosby,  2011.  
26. Kuthiala  G, Chaudhary  G. Ropivacaine:  A review  of its pharmacology  and clinical  use. 
Indian  J Anaesth.  2011  Mar;55(2):104 -10. 
 
27. Locatelli  B, Ingelmo  P, Sonzogni  V, Zanella  A, Gatti V, Spotti  A, Di Marco  S, Fumagalli  
R.  Randomized,   double -blind,   phase   III,  controlled   trial  comparing   levobupivacaine  
Page  23 of 23 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 16 -1417 A(3)  
Approval date: 30 -Jan-2018   
  
 
0.25%,  ropivacaine  0.25%  and bupivacaine  0.25%  by the caudal  route  in children.  Br J 
Anaesth.  2005  Mar;94(3):366 -71. 
28. Bosenberg  A, Thomas   J, Lopez   T, Lybeck  A, Huizar  K, Larsson  LE. The efficacy  of 
caudal  ropivacaine  1, 2 and 3 mg x l(-1) for postoperative  analgesia  in children.  Paediatr  
Anaesth.  2002  Jan;12(1):53 -8. 
 
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
 
Appendix  1: Wong -Baker  FACES®  Pain Rating  Scale  
Appendix  2: Post-procedure  pain management  algorithm  
Appendix  2.1: For Procedure  Recovery  Room  RNs 
Appendix  2.2: For parent/legal  guardian  
Appendix  3: Post-procedural  quality  of life (QOL)  questionnaire  