1   
Inhibiting the Systemic Autophagic Syndrome - A Phase II Study of Hydroxychloroquine 
and Aldesleukin in Renal Cell Carcinoma Patients (RCC).  
A Cytokine Working Group (CWG) Study 
Prometheus protocol #: IIT11PLK01  
Principal  Investigator:  Leonard J Appleman, MD, PhD  
UPMC Cancer Pavilion  
5150 Centre Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15232  
Phone:  412-648-6538  
 
Co-Investigators  Location  
Joseph  Clark,  MD Loyola  University  
Brendan  Curti,  M.D.  Earle A. Chiles Research Institute 
Marc S.  Ernstoff,  M.D.  Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical  Center 
John Kirkwood, MD  University of  Pittsburgh  
Theodore  Logan,  M.D.  Indiana  University  
Michael Lotze,  MD University of Pittsburgh (Local Co -Investigator) 
Jodi Maranchie,  MD University of Pittsburgh (Local Co -Investigator) 
David  McDermott,  MD Beth Israel Deaconess Medical  Center  
Paul Monk,  MD The Ohio State  University  
Stergios  Moschos,  MD University of North  Carolina  
Andrea Facciabene, PhD  University of Pennsylvania  
 
Pathology  Core Director  
Rajiv  Dhir,  M.D.  UPMC Hillman Cancer Center   
 
Immunologic Monitoring and Cellular Products Laboratories (IMCPL) 
Theresa Whiteside , PhD  
 
Statistician  
Daniel P.  Normolle,  PhD UPMC Hillman Cancer Center  & 
Biostatistics Dept, University of  Pittsburgh  
 
2  Rheumatology  
Larry  Moreland, MD  University of  Pittsburgh  
 
Program Manager for GU Clinical Research  
Clare Grzejka,  RN, BSN  University of  Pittsburgh  
 
Consultant  
Kim Margolin,  MD University of Washington, CITN,  CWG  
 
Prometheus /Clinigen  Contact  
Nancy Gregory   
Phone : 832-326-3256  
 
Commercially Available Agent(s):  Hydroxychloroquine/Plaquenil® (Sanofi Aventis); 
Interleukin 2/Proleukin (Prometheus /Clinigen ) 
 
IND #: exempt  
 
Protocol Version: 27  
 
Protocol Version Date: March 5, 2019  
3  Table of Contents  
 
 
Summary  and Schema  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 4 
1.0 OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  6 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ .. 7 
3.0  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 25 
4.0 REGISTRATION  PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ..... 28 
5.0 PRE -STUDY  TESTING/STAGING  ................................ ................................ ... 30 
6.0 TREATMENT PLAN &  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................ .... 31 
7.0  CORRELATIVE  STUDIES  ................................ ................................ ................  38 
8.0.  DATA  MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ ......................  41 
9.0  EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF TOXICITY  
 (DOSE  MODIFICATION)  ................................ ................................ ..................  42 
10.0   DETAILED  RESPONSE  ASSESSMENT  ................................ ..........................  47 
11.0   PARTICIPANTS EVALUABLE FOR  RESPONSE  ................................ .........  51 
12.0 REPORTING OF  ADVERSE  REACTIONS  ................................ .....................  52 
13.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND STUDY  SIZE  ................................ ..............  55 
14.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 58 
APPENDIX  A ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  70 
APPENDIX B -Schedule  of Events  ................................ ................................ .................  71 
APPENDIX  C ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  73 
APPENDIX  D ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  74 
APPENDIX  E ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  75 
APPENDIX F. ....................................................................... ........................................... .76 
4  Summary and Schema  
 
Treatment Arm : One course of treatment (84 days)  will consist of high dose (600,000 IU/kg) 
bolus  IL-2 administered  intravenously  every  8 hours  beginning  on day 1 and day 15 (maximum  of 
14 doses per cycle of administration); and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) orally started two weeks 
prior to IL -2 infusions (+/- 1 day) [to allow for weekends/holidays etc] and continued while able 
to take oral medication throughout all courses. For patients with evidence of stable disease or 
response up to three courses can be administered as shown below. Patients will be admi nistered 
600mg/d of HCQ at all sites in a total group of  21. 
 
Course 1  
Drug  Days : 
-14 1 15 29 43 57 71 84 
 
Hydroxychloroquine  X -------------------------------- -------------  X 
IL-2 X X 
Biomarker  X X X 
 
 
Course 2  
Drug  Days : 
85 99 113   127   141   155   168  
 
Hydroxychloroquine  X -------------------------------- --------  X 
IL-2 X X 
Biomarker  X 
 
Course 3  
Drug  Days : 
169   183   197   211   225   239   252  
 
Hydroxychloroquine  X -------------------------------- --------  X 
IL-2 X X 
Biomarker  X 
5  Agents  
- Hydroxychloroquine  oral at 600 mg/d  throughout  the treatment.  Continuous  oral administration 
will be initiated prior to the first dose (day -14), given a minimum of 14 days (maximum of 21 
days) prior to initiation of the first dose of IL -2 and then daily or twice a day throughout all three 
treatment  courses.  
- Aldesleukin (IL-2) 600,000 IU/kg IV bolus q 8 hrs beginning on day 1 a nd day 15 (maximum 
14 doses per  cycle).  
 
Response Assessment  
- Patients  will undergo  CT scans  at week  8 (+/- 1 week)  and week  12 (+/- 1 week),  then after both 
subsequent courses (every 10 -12 weeks). After the final course (week 36), patients will undergo 
CT scan evaluation every 12 weeks (+/ - 2 weeks) for up to one year or until tumor progression 
(whichever comes first). If additional scans are performed for clinical reasons, the study schedule 
may be altered  to perform  the requisite  scans  at a more  acceptabl e time point.  The change  in timing 
of study  scans  must  be approved  by the local  PI and documented.  For patients  who have  not shown 
progression at the end of one year, response will be captured during follow -up for  survival, which 
will be done on all patients via telephone contact and medical record  review.  
 
- Hydroxychloroquine will continue daily until documented disease progression or 12 weeks 
following documented complete  response.  
 
- Patients with evidence of tumor shrinkage may receive up to 3 course s of IL -2 therapy. Course 2 
will start on or within 2 weeks following day 85 and follow the same schedule as in Course 1. 
Course 3 can start within 2 weeks of completion of course 2. Patients not receiving IL -2 during 
course 2 who have some evidence of tum or shrinkage by week 24 can receive a 2nd course of  IL- 
2 beginning within 2 weeks of week  25. 
 
- Patients with no evidence of progression by RECIST 1.1 criteria may receive continued 
treatment with hydroxychloroquine through one year of initiation of HCQ tr eatment (Day -14) or 
until disease  progression.  
 
- Patients with progressive disease by RECIST 1.1 criteria will be taken  off-study.  
 
-  Both responding and non -responding patients will be followed until death or final closure of 
the study (6.4.2). Attention  will be paid to the time of disease progression and time of 
initiation of alternate  therapies.  
6  1.0 OBJECTIVES  
We hypothesize that IL -2 administration enhances systemic autophagy, limiting the effectiveness 
of immune effectors and that coadministration of the autophagy inhibitor hydroxychloroquine 
will enhance response, diminish toxicity other than possibly GI toxicity, and increase the ability 
to administer IL -2. 
1.1 Primary:  
 
1. Estimate the proportion of patients with metastatic RCC treated with IL -2 combined with 
hydroxychloroquine at 600 mg/d who experience a clinical complete  response.  
 
1.2 Secondary:  
 
2. Compare the distribution of clinical responses, overall survival and progression -free 
survival of patients with metastatic RCC treated with IL -2 combined with 
hydroxychloroquine to the published  response  of patients treated with high dose IL -2 alone  
(Proclaim database and publication) . 
 
3. Characterize  the safety  and toxicity  of IL-2 combined  with hydroxychloroquine : 
a. Number of doses of IL -2 administered during the first course of  therapy  
b. Toxicity after the scheduled 9th dose of  IL-2 
c. Frequency of grade III and IV or unexpected or rare toxicities [Section  9.5] 
 
4. Determine the relationship between laboratory parameters (Sections 7.2 -7.5) evaluated at 
baseline and during treatment and toxicity, clinical response, and  survival.  
 
5. Evaluate  the utility  of known  prognostic  criteria  for RCC  patients  on clinical  outcome.  (1). 
Pretreatment features associated with a shorter survival are low Karnofs ky performance 
status;  (<80%),  high serum  lactate  dehydrogenase  (> 1.5 times  upper  limit  of normal),  low 
hemoglobin (< lower limit of normal), high "corrected" serum calcium (> 10 mg/dL), and 
absence of prior nephrectomy (see  13.2.4).  
7  2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
2.1 Treatment of RCC - Background  
In 2010, it is estimated that there will be 35,710 new cases of kidney cancer and approximately 
12,480 kidney cancer -specific deaths in the United States (2). One -third of patients have metastatic 
disease at the time of diagnosis. Two recent randomized studies in metastatic RCC patients have 
shown survival benefit of nephrectomy and cytokine therapy over cytokine therapy alone (3, 4). 
For this reason, and for symptom control, many patients with meta static disease at presentation 
undergo nephrectomy as a component of their standard care. The prognosis for recurrent or 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma is poor. Median survival was 10 -13 months prior to the 
development of agents targeting the VEGF and mTO R pathways, and is now approximately 2 
years in good - and intermediate -prognosis patients (5) and 5 -year survival is less than 5%. These 
figures underscore the need for effective systemic therapy in this disease.  
 
Medical treatment for RCC has primarily fo cused on biological therapies designed to mobilize 
immune effector cells that recognize and destroy cancer cells (3 -9). Several randomized studies 
have suggested that interferon produces modest antitumor benefit in patients with advanced renal 
cancer, whil e IL-2 has received FDA approval due to its ability to produce durable responses, 
albeit in only a minority of patients. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes are often NK cells, which, 
when present in high numbers, are associated with improved prognosis (see bel ow). 
 
2.2 High -dose IL -2 Therapy for Patients with  RCC  
Investigations of IL -2 (Aldesleukin, Chiron) in patients with RCC were initiated by our group 
[Surgery Branch] at the NCI in the mid -1980s,and continued there and within the Cytokine 
Working Group. Initial  studies evaluated high -dose bolus IL -2 therapy in combination with the 
infusion  of autologous  lymphocytes  activated  ex vivo in IL-2 (lymphokine -activated  killer  or LAK 
cells) (10, 11). While dramatic and durable responses were reported in some patients, s ubsequent 
studies  found  the efficacy  of high-dose bolus  IL-2 alone  to be equivalent  to that of the combination 
of IL -2 and LAK cells, prompting the abandonment of this more complex cellular therapy 
component.  
 
In 1992, high -dose bolus IL -2 was approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with 
metastatic  renal  cell cancer  based  on data presented  on 255 patients  entered  onto 7 phase  II clinical 
trials (8, 12). In these studies, 600,000 -720,000 IU/kg of recombinant human IL -2 was 
administered by 15 -minute  infusion every 8 hours x 14 doses, thereby constituting a course of 
therapy. Patients received a course of therapy, consisting of two 5 -day treatment cycles separated 
by 5-9 days of rest (maximum of 28 doses) (cycle 1A/1B). Courses were repeated every 8 -12 
weeks in stable or responding patients. Although 35% of patients received 720,000 IU/kg of IL -2 
per dose and the remainder received 600,000 IU/kg per dose, the median cumulative amount of 
IL-2 administered was the same in both groups, since patients rece iving 720,000 IU/kg per dose 
tolerated fewer IL -2 doses. Ninety -six percent of these patients had an ECOG performance  status  
of 0 or 1, 85% had undergone a nephrectomy prior to starting IL -2 therapy, none had received 
prior immunotherapy, and the median ti me from diagnosis to treatment was 8.5 months.  
 
  
8  Objective responses were seen in 37 of the 255 patients (RR 15%). There were 17 (7%) complete 
responses (CRs) and 20 (8%) partial responses (PRs). Fourteen of the responding patients (38%) 
began therapy wit h tumor burdens >50 cm2 on pretreatment scans and 60% of PRs had >90% 
regression of all measurable disease. The median duration of response was 54 months for all 
responders,  20 months  for PRs and has not yet been  reached  for CRs.  The median  survival  was 16 
months for all 255  patients.  
 
Follow -up data on these patients has now been accumulated through June 2010, with a median 
follow -up of over 10 years. Although some late relapses are still being observed, the response 
duration curve appears to have leveled off after the 30 month time point and 60% of complete 
responders remain in remission. In addition, 4 PRs who underwent surgical resection of residual 
disease while still in response remain alive and disease -free at a minimum of 65+ months. 
Therefore, many CRs remaining free from progression for more than thirty months and  those PRs 
resected to NED after a response to high -dose IL -2 are unlikely to progress and may actually be 
cured. Thus, although the response rate to high -dose bolus IL -2 is modest, it can produce 
meaningful benefit in a small proportion of patients. Means to enhance this response are clearly in  
order.  
 
The High Dose Aldesleukin "Select" trial was conducted to prospectively assess the ability of 
histologic, immunohistohemical and other patho logic tumor features to predict overall response 
rate and other outcomes (McDermott et al. 2011). This study enrolled 123 patients between 
November 2006 and July 2009, at many of the same Cytokine Working Group Institutions 
participating in the present stu dy. Patients received high dose aldesleukin at a standard dose and 
schedule, and with standard recommendations for treatment modification for toxicity 
(Schwartzentruber 2001).  The High Dose Aldesleukin ="Select" study therefore represents a 
contemporaneou s population of patients with similar baseline characteristics and aldesleukin 
treatment with which to compare to the current study with regard to outcomes and toxicity."  
 
In that trial, overall response rate was 25% by independent review  (95% CI 17.5-33.7) and 28% 
by investigator review (as to be performed in this study) (95% CI 20.5 -37.3%).  The distribution 
of MSKCC 2002 risk was 19/70/11% (Good/Int/Poor).  Median PFS was 4.3 months (95% CI 2.5 -
4.7 mo)  (comparable to prior studies where about h alf the patients progressed on the first scan). 
As seen previously, there was a "tail" of durable progression -free survival (PFS rate at 3 years was 
11%).  Median overall survival was 42.8 months (95% CI 35.6 -51.9 months). Median duration of 
response was 2 0.6 months (CI 6.9 -42.7 mo)  
  
2.3 Randomized Trials with  IL-2 
Other regimens involving lower doses of IL -2 with and without interferon (IFN) have been 
reported to produce similar response rates to those observed with high dose (HD) IL -2, but these 
results  have  not been  reproducible  and the quality  of responses  has been  less impressive  (9,13,14). 
Before  accepting  lower  dose regimens  as equivalent  to HD IL-2, it was imperative  to establish  that 
the quality of tumor responses with lower dose regimens was not inferior. Three large -scale 
randomized trials have now been completed that provide clinicians with useful insights into the 
relative merits of these various regimens and thus the optimal management of patients with 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma.  
 
  
9  Inves tigators in France conducted a large -scale, phase III randomized trial comparing 
intermediate -dose IL -2 administered by continuous intravenous infusion plus subcutaneous IFNα 
with either  IL-2 or IFNα  administered  alone  (9). Four  hundred  twenty -five patients  were  enrolled. 
The three treatment groups were well balanced for age and gender as well as known predictors of 
response and survival. The response rate and 1 -year event -free survival were significantly greater 
for the combined IL -2 and IFNα arm th an for either of the single -agent arms, although there was 
no significant difference in overall survival among the three groups. Of note, responses were  seen 
in only 6.5%  and 7.5%  of patients  receiving  IL-2 or IFN alone,  respectively,  with only 2.9%  and 
6.1% of these patients still responding at the week 25 evaluation. Although more anti -tumor 
activity was seen with the combination arm, this was largely due to the rather limited activity of 
the single -agent regimens. How an intermediate -dose combination of  IL-2 and IFNα would 
compare with high -dose IL -2 alone remained to be  established . 
 
The NCI Surgery Branch investigators performed a randomized trial comparing standard HD IL - 
2 and the intermediate dose (low dose – LD) intravenous bolus IL -2 regimen (LD I V IL -2) (15). 
After randomizing 117 patients, a third arm was added involving subcutaneous IL -2 administered 
in a fashion similar to that previously described by Sleijfer et al . Results were analyzed and 
reported according to groups that were concurrently randomized. Among the 306 patients 
concurrently assigned to either HD or LD IV IL -2, the response rate was significantly higher  with 
high-dose therapy (21 versus 13 percent), with a trend towards more durable responses.  Response 
durability and survival in complete responders was superior in patients who received the HD 
intravenous IL -2 compared to those who received the LD IV IL -2. There were no differences in 
overall survival. Although toxicities were also significantly greater in the high dose group 
(part icularly hypotension), there were no deaths attributable to IL -2 in either arm and patient 
assessments of quality of life were found to be roughly equivalent. Among the patients 
concurrently  assigned  to either  subcutaneous  IL-2 or HD intravenous  bolus  IL-2, a higher  response 
rate was seen with HD IL -2 (21 versus 10 percent) but the difference was of borderline statistical 
significance. Once again there were no differences in overall  survival.  
 
In an effort  to determine  the value  of outpatient  subcutaneo us IL-2 and IFNα  relative  to high dose 
IL-2, the Cytokine Working Group performed a phase III trial in which patients were randomized 
to receive either outpatient IL -2 (5 MIU/m2 subcutaneously every 8 hours x 3 doses on day 1  then 
daily 5 days/week for 4 w eeks) and IFN  (5 MIU/m2 subcutaneously thrice weekly for 4 weeks) 
every 6 weeks or standard high dose inpatient IL -2 (600,000 IU/kg/dose every 8 hours 
intravenously, days 1 -5 and 15 -19 [max 28 doses]) every 12 weeks (16). One hundred and  ninety 
three patients were enrolled and 192 were evaluable. Patients were stratified for bone or liver 
metastases, primary in place and performance status 0/1 and the treatment arms were evenly 
balanced for these characteristics as well as other factors. 45% of patient s had bone or liver 
metastases, 31% had primary in place and 60% were PS 0. Toxicities seen were typical for these 
regimens, including one treatment related death from progressive disease and ARDS on IL -2 and 
IFN arm and one death from capillary leak syndr ome on high dose  IL-2. 
 
The response  rate for high-dose IL-2 was 23% (22/95)  versus  10% (9/91)  for IL-2/IFN  (p=0.018). 
Eight patients achieved a complete response on high dose IL -2 versus only 3 on low dose IL - 
2/IFN. The median response durations were 24 months for high dose IL -2 and 15 months for IL - 
2/IFN (p=0.18). Median overall survivals were 17 and 13 months (p=0.21), favoring high dose IL -
2. Ten patients on high dose IL -2 were progression free at 3 years versus 3 on IL -2/IFN (p=0.08).  
Durable  CRs favored HD IL-2 (7 vs. 0). Median  progression  free survival  was 3 months for  each 
10  treatment  arm. Of note,  responses  to high dose IL-2 were  seen with equal  frequency  across the  
stratification  criteria,  while  low dose IL-2/IFN  appeared  to produce  fewer  responses  in patients with 
liver and/or bone metastases and in those who had not undergone prior nephrectomy to remove the 
primary tumor. For patients with bone or liver metastases (p=0.001) or primary in place (p=0.04) 
survival was superior with high dose  IL-2 compared to IL -2/IFN, while no significant survival 
differences between the two treatments were noted for patients who had undergone prior 
nephrectomy or were without bone or liver metastases. Moreover, patients who had undergone a 
recent nephrectomy  (debulking nephrectomy in the setting of stage IV disease) appeared to fare as 
well with IL -2/IFN as with HD  IL-2. 
 
Taken together these studies suggest that HD bolus IL -2 is superior in terms of response rate and 
response quality to regimens involving ei ther low dose IL -2 and IFN or intermediate or low dose 
IL-2 or subcutaneous IFN. Furthermore , the benefit of high dose IL -2 relative to the lower dose 
regimens  may be most  pronounced  in patients  with unresected  primary  tumors  or bone  and/or  liver 
metastases. This suggests that high dose IL -2 is required to produce responses in typically 
refractory sites and to eliminate the last tumor cell. This data suggests that high dose IL -2 should 
remain the preferred therapy for appropriately selected patient s with access to such therapy. 
However, given the toxicity and limited efficacy of high dose IL -2 therapy, additional efforts 
should be directed at better defining the patient population for whom this therapy is appropriate 
and finding means to ameliorate toxicity and increase  efficacy.  
 
2.4 Predictors of Clinical Benefit from Cytokine -Based  Therapy  
Many  groups  have  attempted  to determine  reliable  predictors  of response  and survival  for patients 
with metastatic renal cell carcinoma who were receiving immunother apy. Factors that have been 
variably associated with response include performance status, number of organs with metastases 
(one versus two or more), absence of bone metastases, prior nephrectomy, degree of treatment - 
related thrombocytopenia, absence of pr ior interferon therapy, thyroid dysfunction,  rebound 
lymphocytosis, erythropoietin production, and post -treatment elevations of blood TNF -α and IL - 
1 levels  (17-20). 
 
Motzer and colleagues have shown in patients receiving IFN that poor survival is associat ed with 
low Karnofsky performance status, high serum lactate dehydrogenase, low hemoglobin, high 
“corrected” serum calcium and time from initial renal cell carcinoma diagnosis to start of therapy of 
less than one year (20). In a cohort of 453 patients who received IFN as initial therapy, the median  
survival  for the favorable  (no risk factors),  intermediate  (one or two risk factors)  and poor (three or 
more risk factors) risk groups were 30, 14 and 5 months respectively. Negrier and associates also 
identified  independent predictors of rapid disease progression, defined as progression within 10 
weeks of initiation of therapy (19, 21). These included greater than one metastatic site, disease -free 
interval of less than 1 year, and presence of liver metastases or mediastinal nodes, as well as type of 
immunotherapy used. Patients with liver metastases, more than  one site of disease,  and disease -free 
interval  of less than 1 year  had a lower  response  rate and a median survival of only 6 months, even 
while receiving co mbination IL -2 and interferon α therapy.  Figlin  and colleagues  identified  prior  
nephrectomy  and time from  nephrectomy  to relapse as important predictors of survival in patients 
receiving IL -2-based therapy (10). In their series, patients who received systemic immunotherapy 
for metastatic disease more than 6 months after nephrectomy had the best median survival and had a 
3-year survival rate of 46%. A recent multivariate  analysis  by the same  group  of investigators  that 
was confined  to patients  who recei ved IL -2 after nephrectomy  revealed  survival  to be inversely  
11  associated  with lymph  node  involvement, constitutional  symptoms,  sarcomatoid  histology,  metastases  
involving  sites other  than bone  or lung or multiple sites, and a TSH level > 2.0 mIU/L (10). They 
proposed a scoring algorithm based on these features in which survival at one year was predicted to 
vary from 1 - 92%. Recent data from the Cytokine Working Group phase III trial, mentioned above, 
suggested that disease site factors such as primary in place or hepatic or bone metastases may be 
more predictive of a poor  response to low dose IL -2 and IFN regimens, than to high dose IL -2. 
Furthermore, this study suggested  the greatest  benefit  from  high dose IL-2 relative  to lower  dose 
regimens  might  be seen in patients  with primaries in place and/or liver and bone metastases. These 
data call into question some of the prior studies and suggests that additional predictors of response 
and survival in patients receiving cytokine -based immunotherapy are  necessar y. 
 
2.5 Influence of subtype on response to  IL-2 
Responses to immunotherapy are most frequently seen in patients with renal cell carcinoma of 
clear cell histology. This observation was recently detailed in a retrospective analysis by Upton  et 
al of pathology  specimens  obtained  from  231 patients  who had received  IL-2 therapy  on Cytokine 
Working Group clinical trials (22). For patients with tumor specimens available for review, the 
response rate to IL -2 was 21 percent (30 of 146) for patients with clear cell histology primary 
tumors, compared to 6 percent for patients with non -clear cell histology (1 responder in 17 
patients). Among the patients with clear cell cancer in their kidney specimen, response to IL -2 was  
also associated  with the presence  of > 50% alveolar  features,  no papillary  features  or granular 
features  in the pathologic  material.  The response  rate was 39 percent  (14 of 36) in patients  with all 
these  features.  In addition,  patients  with clear  cell tumors  with < 50% alveolar  or granular  features 
but no papillary  features  in the specimen  had a response  rate of 19 percent  (15 of 77) compared  to 
3 percent (1 of 33) in the other  patients.  
 
From this data, a model was developed that placed patients with clear cell cancers into good, 
intermediate and po or response categories based on the analysis of their primary tumors.  
 
When this model was then applied to the 68 patients with specimens from other metastatic sites, 
all 7 tumor responses were seen in the 42 patients with clear cell cancer and intermediate or good 
prognostic features, thus confirming the validity of the model developed from the primary kidney 
tumor  specimens.  In addition,  median  survivals  for all patients  with clear  cell tumors  by risk group 
were 2.87, 1.36 and 0.87 years, respe ctively (p <0.001), indicating that the model may have 
prognostic as well as predictive value.  
 
 
  
12  Table 1. Histologic Predictors of Response to IL -2 Therapy  
Category  Pathology Type  N Response  RR %  
Good  Clear Cell 
Alveolar > 50% 
No granular  
No papillary  36 14 39 
Intermediate  Clear Cell 
Alveolar <50%  
Granular <50% 
No papillary  77 15 19 
Poor  Others  33 1 3 
 
As a result of these data, it has been conjectured that patients with non -clear cell histology and 
those with clear cell histology but adverse pathologic features (papillary and/or no alveolar  
features, and/or >50 percent granular features) receive alternative non -immunotherapy -based 
treatments; however, this supposition requires confirmation using an independent data set. In 
addition, the encour aging results in the favorable pathology types require prospective 
confirmation to determine the true response rates in a selected population. The association of 
response with pathologic features suggests that more intensive evaluation of tumor tissue migh t 
yield more robust predictors of response. Given that even in the most favorable prognostic group 
only 39% of patients responded to IL -2 therapy, additional investigations into tumor -associated 
predictors of responsiveness to IL -2 are still warranted.  
 
2.6 Molecular Markers of Response to  IL-2 
Some investigators have begun to examine tumor tissue to identify molecular markers that might 
predict the outcome of patients with renal cell carcinoma. Recently, carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) 
has been identified as one potential marker (23). CAIX is thought to play a role in cell proliferation 
in response to hypoxic conditions. CAIX expression is mediated by the HIF -1 alpha transcriptional 
complex and induced in many tumors types, but is absent in most normal tissue with  the exception 
of epithelial cells of the gastric mucosa. Bui et al used a monoclonal antibody designed to detect 
CAIX expression to perform an immunohistochemical analysis of paraffin embedded  renal  cell 
carcinoma  specimens  (23).  They  showed  that > 90% of renal  cell carcinomas express  CAIX  and 
that its expression  decreases  with advancing  stage.  In their analysis,  high CAIX expression in 
primary tumors was seen in 79% of patients and was associated with improved survival and, 
possibly, response to IL -2-based therapy. In addition, all long -term responders to IL -2-based 
treatment had high CAIX expression. In this study, low CAIX expression was associated with a 
worse outcome for patients with locally advanced renal cell carcinoma and was an independent 
predict or of outcome in patients with metastatic  disease.  
 
Building on this work, Atkins et al performed a nested case -control study within the larger Upton 
pathology cohort (24). Paraffin -embedded tissue sections of RCC were obtained from patients who  
had previo usly been  included  in the pathology  review  and were  immunostained  with the same CAIX 
antibody used by Bui et al. CAIX expression levels were correlated with type of IL -2 treatment, 
response to IL -2, pathologic risk categorization and survival. As in the report by Bui  et al, the 
percentage of CAIX positive tumor cells was utilized to separate high (> 85%) and low ( < 85%) 
expressors. Tissue specimens were obtained from 66 patients. Twenty -seven of the  selected 
patients (41%) achieved a response (10CR/17PR) to high -dose IL -2 (32) or low -dose  IL-2-based  
13  (34) regimens with 20 (30%) remaining alive at a median follow -up of 2.6 years. Fifty -eight 
specimens were assessed as clear cell, with 56, 33 and 4 having alveolar, granular and papillary 
features, respectively. Twenty -four (36%), 31 (47%) and 11 (17%) we re classified into good, 
intermediate, or high -risk groups according to the pathology model created by Upton et al that is 
described above. Forty -one specimens (62%) had high CAIX expression. Twenty -one of 27 (78%)  
responding  patients  had high CAIX  express ion, compared  to 20/39  (51%)  of non-responders 
(OR=3.3, p=0.04). A similar survival benefit was observed (p=0.04). Median survival was 3 and 
1 years for high and low CAIX expressers , respectively. Survival greater than 5 years was only 
seen in the high CAIX expressing  group.  High  CAIX  staining  was associated  with better  pathology 
prognosis and, when stratified by group, the odds ratios of CAIX expression were unequal across 
groups. The strongest association was in the intermediate pathology group where 9/9 responders 
had high CAIX expression vs. 11/22 non -responders, suggesting a possible refinement  of the  
Upton pathology model. A resultant group with good pathology or intermediate pathology and 
high CAIX expression contained 26 of 27 (96%) responders compar ed to only 18/39 (46%) non - 
responders (OR = 30; p <0.01). Survival benefit was also seen (p< 0.01). The authors concluded 
that based on this data, patients with low CAIX staining and intermediate or poor risk pathology 
classification should be considered for non -IL-2 based treatments.  
 
Table 2. CAIX Staining and Response Rate  
Category  N Response Rate %  
Low CAIX staining  
Intermediate or poor path  22 <5%  
Other  44 59% 
 
While this model requires validation, it is possible that IL -2 therapy could ultimately be reserved 
for patients with favorable or intermediate pathology classification and high CAIX staining who 
appear to be more likely to benefit.  
 
Additional studies to explain these preliminary observations and correlate results with pathologic 
features,  sites of disease  and previously  described  clinical  features  are necessary.  In addition,  gene 
expression profiling of tumor specimens to identify new proteins or patterns of gene expression 
that might be associated with IL -2 responsiveness may eventually hel p narrow the application of 
IL-2 therapy to those who will benefit the most. The SELECT Cytokine Working Group has 
recently concluded that combined histologic subtype and CAIX predictors were unable to define 
a predictor of response (McDerrmott et al, 2017 ; 150 ). 
 
2.7 Application of models to high dose IL -2 population  
The pathology and combined CAIX plus pathology models were retrospectively applied to the 
population of patients treated with high dose IL -2 on the Phase III Cytokine Working Group  trial. 
Fifty -five patients who received high dose IL -2 and had their pathology reviewed as part of the IL -
2 pathology analysis were classified into either the good or intermediate prognostic category. In 
this group of patients , the overall response rate was 31% ( 17 of 55), the CR rate was 11% (6 of 
55), the 3 year progression free survival rate was 14.5% (8/55), and the median progression free 
survival was 4.7 months. In addition, thirty -two patients who received high dose IL -2 and were 
included in the CAIX staini ng project had either good pathology or intermediate pathology and 
high CAIX staining. These 32 patients had an overall response rate of 37.5% (12/32), a  complete 
response rate of 16% (5/32), a 3 -year progression free survival rate of 19% (6/32) and a medi an 
14  PFS of 6.4 months. Considering that the CAIX staining population was enriched for responding 
patients, these latter numbers probably overestimate the true efficacy of high dose IL -2 in this 
population. On the other hand, the pathology analysis contains patients with intermediate 
pathology  and low CAIX  staining  that may depress  the overall  clinical  efficacy.  Based  on this data 
one would predict that patients selected for IL -2 therapy according to the combined CAIX and 
pathology  model  would  exhibit  a respo nse rate of approximate  30-35%,  a CR rate of 10-15%,  a 3- 
year progression  free survival  rate of 12-18%,  and a median  PFS of 4.5-6 months.  As both analyses 
are heavily confounded with the data used to create the models, prospective confirmation is 
required.  Although  supported  by substantial  information,  the recent  studies  from  the Cytokine  
 Working Group [David McDermott, ASCO 2010] do not substantiate an improved outcome for 
patients  predicted  to have  better  response  based  on these  criteria  although  a 25% response  rate was 
confirmed. We have also suggested little value of the administration of antibodies to VEGF with 
IL-2 treatment (25 -28). 
2.8 Autophagy serves as a survival pathway for stressed tumor cells enhancing 
survival following cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  
Autophagy  is an important  highly  evolutionarily  conserved  catabolic  process  by which  cells shuttle 
effete  or damaged  organelles  and proteins  to the autophagosome  for sequestration  and destruction. 
In addition to its homeostatic role, the autophagic process also allows cells to survive periods of 
nutrient deprivation and stress. Autophagy is thought to maintain cellular metabolism through 
increased turnover of cell components during times of nutrient deprivation. A growing body of 
literatur e suggests that autophagy is in fact a form of programmed cell survival and is induced to 
prevent apoptosis or necrosis (29 -31). As is the case in normal cells, autophagy is induced in tumor 
cells during times of metabolic stress. In fact, several studies have demonstrated that markers of 
increased autophagic flux localize to metabolically stressed areas of tumor (32). In particular, a 
recent study by Fujii et al. examined 71 resected adenocarcinomas and demonstrated a high 
correlation between worse prognos is and increased levels of autophagy in the specimens (33). That 
autophagy can protect tumor cells during times of stress has led to increased interest in blocking 
this process as a means of anti -tumor therapy. Inhibition of autophagy as a single agent is unlikely 
to have much clinical impact since only a small fraction of the tumor cells are under metabolic 
stress at any given time. Therefore , most strategies have focused on the combination of autophagy 
inhibition in combination with agents that induce cel lular stress (34, 35). Most modern neoplastic 
therapies fall into this category inducing cellular stress either by genotoxic injury, metabolic insult 
or blockade of growth factor activity. As shown in Figure 1 , administration of chloroquine, an 
inhibitor o f autophagy at 50mg/kg/d limits the weight gain in mice observed with high dose IL -2 
administration [6x105 IU bid x 5D] concurrent with administration.  
15  Figure  1. Chloroquine  limits  IL-2 Induced  Vascular  Leak  and Weight  Gain.  Weight  gain 
obser ved with IL -2 administration was ameliorated with chloroquine coadministration.  
Shown in the ordinate/y  axis is the change  in weight  for each animal  over the days of treatment.  IL-
2+CQ  versus IL -2, Days 3 and 6; p=0.04  
 
 
2.9 Chloroquine and its derivatives inhibit autophagy and enhance immunotherapy 
and chemotherapy effects.  
Chloroquine (CQ) is a synthetic 4 -aminoquinoline that has been used for 60 years in humans 
initially for malaria prophylaxis and treatment, and with emergence of resistance, in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).  It 
is an inexpensive orally available drug with a large therapeutic index. Chloroquine derivatives 
such as HCQ are still used extensively in patients with rheu matoid arthritis and lupus 
erythematosus. Chloroquine blocks acidification of the lysosome, thus inhibiting the last step in 
autophagy. With this last step blocked, a cell reliant on autophagy will increase the generation of 
autophagosomes and will eventua lly undergo either apoptotic or non -apoptotic cell death. 
Evidence in mouse models and human cancer cell lines suggest CQ may have significant anti - 
tumor activity by inhibiting autophagy induced by cancer therapy (35). Hydroxychloroquine is 
generally  considered  the safest  disease -modifying  agent  currently  used to treat rheumatic  diseases. 
Up to 10% of patients will experience nausea, headache, or bizarre dreams, but these are 
infrequently dose -limiting. Retinal toxicity is a rare complication, estimated to  occur in <1% of 
patients  treated  for years  at doses  not exceeding  6.5 mg/kg/day  lean body  weight,  or approximately 
400 mg/day (36, 37). Given the prolonged half -life of this drug (t1/2=40=45 d), treatment with 
daily doses of up to 1200 mg daily for a maximum of one month would achieve plasma 
concentrations  approximating  steady  state with 400 mg daily  dosing,  and the risk of retinal  toxicity 
for this relatively short -term exposure is thus low. While data is sparse regarding precise risk at 
higher  daily  dosing,  Shearer  and Dubois  reported  only a single  patient  with retinopathy  in a survey 
of 94 patients treated with HCQ 800 mg daily for up to 54 months (38). Levy et al. identified 78 
patients  receiving  a daily  dosage  >7.8 mg/kg,  and of the 3 with possible  or definite  retinal  toxicity, 
HCQ was taken for at least 3.5 years (36). Because retinal toxicity may progress after drug 
cessation  (39),  HCQ  will be discontinued  in any patients  reporting  any visual  complaints.  A formal  

16  ophthalmic evaluatio n plus a 3 month follow -up examination will be obtained only with ocular 
symptoms.  
 
2.10 Murine Models of IL -2 and Chloroquine [Figure  2] 
 
We 
have 
tested 
IL-2 
in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination with chloroquine in mouse models of metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver using 
luciferase transfected tumor and imaging strategies. When applying high dose IL -2 [6x105IU bid 
x 5D] as opposed to low dose regimens [6x104IU bid x 5D] in the setting of these models, we 
were able to demonstrate substantial antitumor effects in  combination with chloroquine at 
50mg/kg/d. Lower doses and dosing frequency were less effective.  
 
2.11 Hydroxychloroquine is more feasible than  chloroquine.  
Hydroxychloroquine is commonly prescribed for rheumatoid arthritis and lupus at a dose of 400 
mg po qd. A pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic  study  of escalating  doses  of HCQ  at 400 mg/800 
mg/1200  mg po qd in patients  with rheumatoid  arthritis  followed  by maintenance  doses  of 400 mg 
po qd found that doses of up to 1200 mg po qd were well tolerated (40). Dose -limiting toxicities 
(nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain) were observed at 800 and 1200 mg po qd. This toxicity 
correlated with blood HCQ levels, but not to blood levels of the other active metabolites DHCQ, 
DCQ, or BDCQ. Improvement of symptoms in rh eumatoid arthritis correlates with blood  DHCQ 
levels, suggesting a dose -response relationship. Chloroquine derivatives are metabolized through 
the p450 enzyme system, and CQ may inhibit the metabolism of CYP2D6 - metabolized drugs.  A 
predictable cumulative toxicity associated with CQ is retinopathy, and this is another reason why 
dose escalation in chronic treatment with CQ could be limited. While a link between HCQ and 
retinopathy has also been made, it occurs infrequently and only after prolonged exposure.  In a 
study  using  multifocal  electroretinography  to detect  early  pre-clinical  retinal  changes  in long-term 
HCQ users, 10 out of the 11 patients that developed early pre -clinical changes had been taking 
HCQ at doses of >400 mg po qd for greater than 5 years  (41). No overt retinopathy was noted in 
the 19 patients followed. This suggests that at a cumulative dose of 730 g. the risk of  retinal  

17  changes increase , but techniques such as multifocal electroretinography can detect early  changes 
and prev ent overt visual  loss. 
 
 
2.12 Clinical trials examining hydroxychloroquine and chemotherapy for the 
treatment of human  cancers.  
The above  cited  literature,  demonstrating  the utility  of blocking  autophagy  alone  or in combination 
with cytotoxic chemotherapy in vitro , and preclinical models, has led to the initiation of human 
clinical trials. Currently, there are more than twelve clinical trials examining the combination of 
hydroxylchloroquine  and conventional  chemotherapeutic  agents.  These  are summarized  briefly  on 
the next page. In dose escalation trials performed at the University of Pennsylvania, doses of 
1200mg daily have been achieved with no significant toxicity attributed to the HCQ in various 
combination including dose intense temazolamide, Velcade, or te msiloimus. In a protocol using 
temazolamide  and radiation  therapy  in combination  with HCQ  for patients  with Glioblastoma,  800 
mg was associated with myelosuppression and the MTD defined as 600 mg/d [Personal 
Communication, Ravi Amaravadi,  MD].  
 
Table 3. On going Clinical Trials of Hydroxychloroquine in Oncology.  
 
Condition  Intervention  Phase  Sponsors 
Collaborators  ClinicalTrials.gov 
Identifier  Title  
Prostate cancer  Docetaxel hydroxy - 
chloroquine  II CINJ, NCI  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  A Phase  II Study  of Docetaxel  and 
Modulation of Autophagy with 
Hydroxychloroquine  for 
Metastatic Hormone  Refractory  
Prostate Cancer  
Prostate cancer  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine  II CINJ, NCI  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Autophagic Cell Death in  Patients 
with Hormone -Dependent 
Prostate -Specific  Antigen 
Progression after Local  Therapy  
for Prostate Cancer  
Multiple myeloma, 
plasma  cell 
neoplasm  Bortezomib hydroxy - 
chloroquine  I/II University of 
Pennsylvania, 
NCI [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  A Phase I/II Trial of 
Hydroxychloroquine Added to 
Bortezomib  for 
Relapsed/Refractory Myeloma  
Brain,  central  
nervous  system 
tumors  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine 
temozolomide  I/II University of 
Pennsylvania, 
NCI [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  A Phase I/II Trial of 
Hydroxychloroquine  in 
Conjunction with Radiation 
Therapy and Concurrent and 
Adjuvant Temozolomide  in 
Patients With  Newly Diagnosed 
Glioblastoma Multiforme  
Breast cancer  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine 
ixabepilone  I/II CINJ, NCI  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Phase I/II Study of Ixabepilone in 
Combination with the Autophagy 
Inhibitor Hydroxychloroquine for 
the Treatment of Patients with  
Metastatic  Breast Cancer  
Lung cancer  Bevacizumab 
carboplatin hydroxy - 
chloroquine 
paclitaxel  I/II CINJ, NCI  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Modulation of Autophagy with 
Hydroxychloroquine   in 
Combination with Carboplatin, 
Paclitaxel and Bevacizumab in 
Patients  with 
Advanced/Recurrent Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer -A Phase I/II 
Study  
18  Adult solid tumors  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine 
temozolomide  I University of 
Pennsylvania, 
NCI [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  A Phase I Study of 
Hydroxychloroquine  in 
Combination with  Temozolomide  
in Patients with Advanced Solid 
Tumors  
Non-small cell lung 
cancer  Gefitinib, hydroxy - 
chloroquine  I/II National 
University 
Hospital, 
Singapore, 
Massachusetts 
General  
Hospital  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  A Phase II with a Lead in Phase I 
Study to Examine the 
Tolerability, Safety Profile and 
Efficacy of Hydroxychloroquine 
and Gefitinib in Advanced Non - 
Small Cell Lung Cancer  
Advanced cancer  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine, 
sunitinib malate  I CINJ, NCI  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Anti-Angiogenic Therapy in 
Patients with Advanced 
Malignancies: A Phase I Trial of 
Sunitinib  and 
Hydroxychloroquine  
B-cell chronic 
lymphocytic 
leukemia  Hydroxy - 
chloroquine  II North  Shore  
Long Island 
Jewish Health 
System  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Autophagic Modulation with 
Phase II Study to Evaluate the 
Tolerability and Efficacy of 
Treatment of Previously 
Untreated B -Cell Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia (B -CLL) 
Patients  with 
Hydroxychloroquine  
Pancreas Cancer  Hydroxychloroquine, 
Gemcitabine  I University of 
Pittsburgh  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Phase I/II study of Preoperative 
Gemcitabine in Combination  with 
Oral Hydroxychloroquine in 
Subjects with Resectable Stage 
IIb Or III  Pancreatic  
Adenocarcinoma  
Renal Cancer  Hydroxychloroquine  IA University of 
Pittsburgh  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Neoadjuvant  Study   of 
Preoperative 
Hydroxychloroquine in Patients 
with Resectable   Renal  Cell 
Carcinoma  
NOTE: Study citations were obtained from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/NCI clinicaltrials.gov website  
Abbreviations: CINJ, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey; NCI, The National Cancer Institute.  
 
 
2.13 miRNAs as Biomarkers of  RCC.  
 
The modification of cell death pathways important in cancer progression were postulated by the 
DAMP  Laboratory  five years  ago (42) but the causes  of the shift,  and its regulation,  were  obscure. 
One possible explanation may be the regulation by micro -RNAs (miRN As). These are 18 -22 bps 
long single stranded non -coding RNA that regulate gene expression in both plant and animals by 
interacting with and degrading or silencing as many as 100 separate messenger RNAs (mRNAs) 
(43-45). We have shown that tumor expression of miRNAs can limit immune recognition (51), 
and have focused on the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) (52) as a  potential 
target for miRs (see  below).  
Role of miRNAs in Target Sensitivity to Lysis. miRNAs play an important role in cell 
differentiation, tumor progression, organogenesis and embrybogenesis. Many miRNA machinery 
genes including Dicer, AGO1, AGO3, AGO4 are down -regulated in tumors and play a role in 
inflammatory cells (45 -50). Various miRNAs have been identified to be involve d in regulation of 
the cell cycle including lin -4 and let -7 controlling cell differentiation and proliferation, miR -14 as 
an apoptosis suppressor, miR -1, miR -273, lys -6, miR -181, miR -375, miR -143, and miR -196 for 
organogenesis.  Further  application  of miRNA  as gene  therapies  to deliver  tumor  suppression  as 
19  miRNA, anti -miRNA oligonucleotides (AMOs), or cholesterol conjugated AMOs, so -called 
antagomirs, are also in progress. Since miRNA plays an important role in cell differentiation and 
proliferation  affecting  many  cell types  including  hematopoietic  cells,  it will be useful  to understand 
the impact of miRNAs in the immune response in human biology  (52-64). 
Inhibition of miRNA processing by Dicer disruption up -regulates intercellular cell 
adhesion molecule (ICAM) -1 and enhances the susceptibility of colorectal tumor cells to  antigen - 
specific lysis by cytotoxic T -lymphocytes (CTLs) whereas expression of other  immunoregulatory 
proteins  examined  is not affected.  Blockade  of ICAM -1 inhibits  the specific  lysis of CTLs  against 
Dicer -disrupted cells, indicating a pivotal role of ICAM -1 in the interaction between tumor cells 
and CTL.  Both  miR-222 and -339 are down -regulated  in Dicer -disrupted  cells and directly  interact 
with the 3' untranslated r egion (UTR) of ICAM -1 mRNA (50). Modulation of Dicer or these 
miRNAs inversely correlated with ICAM -1 protein expression and susceptibility of U87 glioma 
cells to CTL -mediated cytolysis while ICAM -1 mRNA levels remain stable. 
Immunohistochemical and in sit u hybridization analyses of 30 primary glioblastoma tissues 
demonstrated  that expression  of Dicer,  miR-222, or miR-339 was inversely  associated  with ICAM - 
1 expression. We will similarly assess expression of ICAM -1 in circulating macrophages (52 -59) 
activated by DAMPs in the context of this  study.  
Studies  of miRNA  in Renal  Cancer.  There  have  been  several  investigations  of miRNA  
in renal cancer. miRNAs regulate renal development, activity and disease. Many  kidney  specific 
miRNAs  and miRNAs  specific  to renal  tumor  vs normal  tissue  have  been  described  (65, 66). Up- 
regulation  of miR-28, miR-185, miR-27, and let-7f-2 has been  identified  in RCC  relative  to normal 
kidney  (68).   miR 141 and 200c  are downregulated  in RCC  (69).  Loss of  miRNAs  permits 
translation  of proteins  that promote  tumorigenesis  (67).  An additional  38 miRNAs  have  been 
identified as increased in tumor, and 48 decreased assessed by microarray and  PCR  based 
techniques (70). miR -155 and miR -21 and miR -210 are overexpressed in clear  cell carcinoma 
(71).  miR-192 and miR-377 are associated  with specific  processes  including  matrix  deposition 
whereas miR -200 and miR -205 regulate the epithelial -to-mesenchymal transition (65).  The four 
histologic  RCC  types  were  effectively  classified  through  assessment  of miR 424, 203 and s-has- 
miR 33 (72). Identification of miRNA targets is still a challenge. Although there are  methods to 
predict  targets,  few  have been  validated  in  mammals  (66).  New techniques available  in our 
proteomic core may help ad vance this effort (73). miRNA can be successfully  extracted  from 
paraffin  or frozen  tissue  (74).  We recently  completed  our own studies  of normal  kidney,  clear  cell, 
oncocytoma, chromophobe, and papillary renal cell carcinoma (Bastacky SI, et al  in preparation).  
miR34c  and miR214.  We have  identified  two candidate  miRNAs,  miR34c  and miR214  
which are upregulated by HMGB1+, or HMGB1+/ - tumor lysates respectively. HMGB1 is 
released from stressed or dying tumor cells in response to ischemia reperfusion in jury and most 
therapeutic cytotoxic agent (55 -59). HMGB1 (60 -64) translocated to the cytosol in the setting of 
autophagy can bind Beclin -1 with dissociation of Beclin -1/Bcl -2. Mitochondrial HMGB1 
regulates cellular bioenergetics and mitophagy by promoting phosphorylation and activation of 
ERK1/2 (pERK1/2). Reduced but not oxidized HMGB1 suppresses SOD and mTOR expression, 
and increases mitochondrial superoxide production, which in turn induces autophagy.  
We have also identified putative miRNAs involved in H MGB1 -induced signaling and/or 
differentiation including hsa -mir-155, hsa -miR-34c and hsa -mir-214 in three normal individuals 
(Table 4) . These are of particular interest to us due to their computationally calculated potential 
targets. Hsa -mir-155 is predict ed to target Spi -1 (or PU.1) and TLR4, as well as MAP4K5 (a 
Mitogen -activated protein kinase), whereas hsa -34c is predicted to target Nemo/IKKγ of NFκB.  
20  Both Spi -1 and IRF -8 are myeloid -specific transcription factors involved in monocyte acti vation 
and differentiation. The MAP Kinase may be involved in early HMGB1 signaling, which in turn 
may be regulated by miR -34c or miR214. With the peripheral blood obtained in this protocol,  our 
next step will be to validate expression levels of these miRN As by quantitative  RT-PCR.  
 
Table 4. Putative miRNAs involved in human myeloid cells stimulated with PAMPS/DAMPS  
 
RCC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PBMCS IL -2 miRs.  
We would also like to predict IL -2 responsiveness by miR profiling. Recent studies have shown 
(75, 76) that miRs (miR -146a, miR -182) are differentially expressed following treatment with  IL- 
2 or during T -cell activation in mouse models. Those miRs involved in regulating genes involved 
in the IL-2 production  pathway  (e.g. NFAT,  AP-1 and NF-κB) and controlling  FOXO1  expression 
and STAT5 signaling pathway are of particular interest. In our preliminary data, 9 miRNAs are 
differentially  expressed  during  IL-2 treatment  in a dose dependent  manner  in vivo. (5 miRs  down - 
regulated and 4 miRs are up -regulated). We propose  to perform miR profiling of clinical blood 
samples  from  RCC  patients  before  receiving  IL-2. After  a clinical  response  has been  documented, 
the miR profiles from responders and non -responders will be used to generate a training set to 
predict IL -2 responsi veness.  
 
2.14 Natural Killer (NK) Cells in Renal  Cancer.  
The role of NK cells in RCC has been considered possible since our earliest clinical trials of IL -2 
demonstrated  remarkable  expansion  of NK cells in the peripheral  blood  and tissues  during  therapy 
in mice  and humans. We now know that RCC can attract various effector cells of both the innate 
and adaptive  immune  system,  including  natural  killer  (NK)  cells,  neutrophils  (77),  γδ T cells,  NKT 
cells, dendritic cells (DC), and regulatory T cells (Tregs). These, h istology, and serum factors 
predict clinical response (78 -83). These individual cell types do not act in isolation but function 
within  complex  networks  (84).  Unlike  melanoma,  where  a clear  role for T-cells has been  identified, 
the case for T-cells in succe ssful  immunotherapy  of renal  cell cancer  is far less clear  (85).  Although 
RCC responds to immune modalities, T -cell therapies have shown a very limited success in 
contrast  with melanoma.  RCC  immunotherapy  with NK cell infusions  and agents  that enhance  cell 
lysis is an intriguing alternative strategy (86). Several defects in cell -mediated immune function 
are apparent in RCC patients at the time of diagnosis. These defects transiently worsen after 
nephrectomy  but return  to baseline  by post-resection  on day 8 (87).  High  dose Interleukin  2 (HDIL - 
2) is FDA -approved for therapy of patients with metastatic melanoma and renal cell carcinoma,  

21  based  on its ability  to induce  durable  responses  in 5-10% of patients  but associated  with substantial 
side effects  (88).  Efforts  to develop  more  potent  IL-2 analogues  that preferentially  target  activated 
T-cells but not NK cells have  been  made.  BAY  50-4798,  such an IL-2-specific  agonist,  was tested 
in patients with RCC (89) with only 1/20 responding, suggesting  with such limited response, that 
NK cells are possibly important in this  disease.  
There are many infiltrating cells within RCC (90). When examining resected RCC, two 
subgroups  are identified  with high (>20%  of the lymphocytes,  n = 14), or low (<20%,  n = 20), NK 
cell numbers. Although these cells are noncytolytic the majority of NK cells from tumors with 
high NK cells become cytotoxic following IL -2 exposure (113) whereas those from the low NK 
tumors do not. Significantly increased numbers of intratumoral CD56+ NK cells (p=0.008) and 
CD8+ T cells (p=0.019)  compared  with baseline  are found  after treatment  with IL-2 and histamine 
(91).  Low-dose IL-2, IFNα  and GM-CSF,  administered  perioperatively  (92) increased  intratumoral 
numbers of CD3+ T cells, S100+ DC, CD83+ DC and IL -2R+ cells (4 -fold, 2 -fold, 10 -fold and 20 - 
fold, respectively, compared to controls). It further increased TNFα+ CD8+ T cells and DC -SIGN 
(CD209)+, CD83+, CD80+, IL-12+ and DC -CK1 (CCL18)+ DC. NK cells comprise a significantly 
higher propor tion of in RCC TILs relative to peripheral blood colorectal or breast cancers, where 
these cells are found in small numbers. Notably, significantly fewer NK cells are observed in 
peripheral blood from patients with metastatic RCC (93). All the RCC lesions (n = 140) tested in 
one study by tissue microarray are cytosolic MHC class I -Related Chain A/B [MICA/B+] (94), 
important for recognition by NKG2D expressing NK cells. Substantial numbers of NK cells in 
RCC can be detected with an antibody to NKp46, exclusi vely expressed by all NK cells in mouse 
and man. Cytotoxicity is observed after overnight activation with low -dose IL -2, proportional to 
the number of NK cells. Infiltrating NK cells express a functional inhibitory receptor, 
CD94/NKG2A and are cytolytic fo llowing cytokine stimulation  (95).  
Human  TLR  triggered  monocytes  up-regulate  MICA  and in turn downregulate  NKG2D  on 
autologous NK cells (96) and enhance production of IFN -γ. Thus myeloid cells (monocytes) and 
NK cells communicate directly during an innate immune response in humans. Two distinct 
activating NK cell synapses can be identified, a lytic and nonlytic one. Triggering NK cell 
proliferation  and cytokine  secretion  is associated  with NK cell 2B4,  while  macrophages  are killed 
in NK cell NKG2D/DAP10 clu sters (97). Interestingly, IFN -γ in turn down -regulates NKG2D 
ligand  expression  and subsequent  cytolysis  of MHC  class  I-deficient  tumor  cells by NK cells (98). 
This may be dependent on inducing a protective autophagy in these cells as we have shown in 
muri ne models.  Expression  of other  MHC  molecules  on fresh  RCC  (99-101) such as HLA -G may 
be also be important for evasion from immune detection by NK cells. It is lost during cultivation 
of RCC cells and thus the tumor microenvironment and/or endothelium appear to be involved in 
its regulation,  likely  by IFNγ.  HLA -G expression  in the 27% of RCC  lesions  prevents  lysis of RCC 
cells by cytokine immune effector cells. Enhancement of NK cytolytic activity by fever -range 
thermal stress is also dependent on NKG2D function (102). Assessment of pSTAT5 in patient 
PBMC in response to therapeutic IL -2 administration reveals persistent activation of STAT5 
within circulating NK and T cells for prolonged periods (103). Although chloroquine is said to 
diminish  cytolytic  activity  of NK cells,  this has not been  tested  in patients  with cancer  or certainly 
those with renal cancer (104). We will examine the function of NK cells in the proposed blood 
samples obtained in this  study.  
22  2.15 Dendritic Cells (DCs) and Renal Cancer.  
 
Multiple strategies have been employed to use DCs transfected with ant igen or fused with tumor 
to generate an effective antitumor response. To date, they have been largely disappointing. 
Interestingly IL -2 treatment during DC -based immunotherapy of patients with metastatic renal 
cancer (105) leads to a transient and ‘massive ’ increase of circulating natural regulatory T -cells, 
perhaps explaining their limited effectiveness; we hope to evaluate their number in the setting of 
HCQ  administration.  Intranodal  autologous  tumor  lysate -DC vaccines  with IL- 2 and IFNα  therapy 
in RCC  patients  led to objective  clinical  responses  in 9/18 patients  with three  CRs.  Pre-IP-10 serum 
levels might have helped predict outcome (106). We [WJS] found decreased numbers of myeloid 
and plasmacytoid  DC in the peripheral  blood  of RCC  patients  and were  found  at large  numbers  in 
the tumor, where they displayed an immature phenotype (DC -LAMP) (107). In another study 27 
patients with RCC were vaccinated with DCs loaded with either a cocktail of survivin and 
telomerase peptides or tumor lysate depending on t heir HLA -A2 haplotype, with low -dose IL -2. 
None of the patients had an objective response (108). Although not subjected to clinical trial, 
apoptotic  RCC  appeared  to be better  inducers  of cross -presenting  activity  than necrotic  cells (109). 
Another tumor ly sate (TL) -pulsed DC study in patients with RCC, only 1/9 patients achieved a 
partial  response  (110).  Electrofused  allogeneic  DC/autologous  tumor -derived  cells in patients  with 
2/20 patients demonstrated only a single PR by RECIST criteria (111). As in other epithelial 
tumors,  resected  RCC  in 25 patients,  using  immunohistochemistry,  higher  CD83+  DC in the tumor 
predicted a better survival (p = 0.0339) (112). Patients with RCC vaccinated with Carbonic 
anhydrase -IXG250/MN (CA9) -peptide -pulsed mature DCs, showed no evidence for induction  of 
CA9 -peptide -specific immunity or any clinical responses (113). Allogeneic DCs with or without 
cyclophosphamide have also been tested in patients with RCC. Only 2/22 patients had mixed 
responses,  both in the cyclophospham ide group  (114).  Thus  we conclude  that little has been  gained 
in this disease by conventional DC therapies. Little is known about chloroquine effects on 
circulating or tumor DCs but it appears to enhance human CD8+ T cell responses against soluble 
antigens  in vivo (115). We are aware of the important role of autophagy as a source of antigen for 
cross -presentation  but consider  that in the setting  of established  cancer  that autophagy  in the tumor 
is the more critical process needing to be blocked to enable effector NK and T  cells.  
 
2.16 T-cells and Renal  Cancer.  
 
Human renal cell cancer (RCC) is clearly responsive to immunotherapy. Clinical responses may 
be mediated by  "non -specific" (e.g. NK cells) or "specific" MHC -class -I-restricted tumor -specific 
CD8+ T lymph ocytes. Typically RCC progresses, however, despite significant infiltration of 
various lymphoid cells. We (116) examined freshly isolated RCC tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes 
(TIL) derived from seven RCC patients for cytokine expression by the polymerase cha in reaction 
(PCR). Established RCC tumor cell lines derived from these RCC patients were negative for 
interleukin -2 (IL-2), IL-4, IL-10, and interferon  gamma  and found  to be positive  for tumor  necrosis 
factor  alpha  (TNF  α), IL-6, IL-1 β, granulocyte/macrop hage -colony -stimulating  factor  (GM -CSF), 
and transforming  growth  factor  beta 1 (TGFβ1)  message  as detected  by PCR.  An identical  pattern 
of cytokine mRNA expression was identified in other long -term RCC lines and in normal human 
kidney cells upon culture, but not in two Wilms tumor cell lines tested. Short -term-, and long - 
term-established RCC lines, but not Wilms tumor lines, secreted substantial levels of GM -CSF, 
TNFα,  IL-1 beta,  and IL-6 as detected  by enzyme -linked  immunosorbent  assay.  Both  RCC  lines  
23  and Wilms tumor lines secreted TGF β1. In comparison, normal kidney cells secreted IL -6 and 
GM-CSF, but not IL -1 β, or TFG β 1 under identical in vitro cell culture conditions. We applied 
PCR -based methods to characterize the cytokine mRNA e xpression pattern in immune cells 
infiltrating into renal cell cancer without the need for expansion of such effector cells in vitro . 
Examining freshly collected RCC TIL by PCR from patients with primary cell cancer, we could 
demonstrate that such cells, b ut not lympho -mononuclear cells harvested from normal human 
kidney tissue, typically exhibit IL -4 and IL -10 mRNA expression. Given that alterations in tumor 
autophagy would be predicted to affect the death rate of these cells and provision of Ag for 
crossp riming of specific T cells, we propose to evaluate the HLA -A2+ patient cohort for changes 
in polarized CD8+ T cell response to a range of RCC and tumor stromal -associated antigens 
(EphA2, EGFR, HEr2, MAGE -3/6, PDGFR, RGS5, VEGFR1/2, G250 (CA -IX), DLK1, TEM 1, 
and HBB) (117 -121) pre - vs. post -treatment with hydroxychloroquine in the peripheral blood. In 
particular, IFN -γ response would be prioritized, but we could also consider granzyme or TNF -α 
(Tc1)  vs. IL-4/-5 or IL-10. It would  be possible  to do this by intracellular  cytokine  stain  in concert 
with surface staining for CXCR3 and/or VLA -4, given the importance of these markers for the 
ability of Th1 cells to home to and infiltrate tumors (113,  122).  
Relapsed/refractory NBL patients receiving the hu14.18 -IL-2 IC (humanized anti -GD2 
monoclonal  antibody  linked  to human  IL-2) in a Children’s  Oncology  Group  (COG)  Phase  II trial 
were genotyped for KIR and HLA to determine if KIR receptor -ligand mismatch were associated 
with anti -tumor response. Thirty -eight of 39 patients enrolled had DNA available for analysis; 24 
were found to have autologous KIR/KIR -ligand mismatch; 14 were matched. Seven of 24 
mismatched patients experienced either complete response or improvement of their disease 
following IC therapy. There w as no response or comparable improvement of disease in patients 
who were matched. Thus KIR/KIR -ligand mismatch was associated with response/improvement 
to IC (p = 0.03). Thus response or improvement of relapsed/refractory neuroblastoma patients after 
IC tr eatment is associated with autologous KIR/KIR -ligand mismatch, consistent with a  role for 
NK cells in this clinical response (123,124). The NK content of TILS can be predicted by transcript 
levels of NKp46, perforin, CX3CL1, and CXCR1 with normalization us ing qRT -PCR and are 
prognostic indicators of survival  (125).  
 
2.17 Rationale for the current  trial 
 
The rationale for combining the high dose bolus aldesleukin with hydroxychloroquine includes 
potential positive interactions on the immune regulatory side, non-overlapping toxicities, and 
potential for prolongation and increased number of responses based on murine studies conducted 
at the University of Pittsburgh. This study is a multi -center phase II study designed to estimate the 
efficacy of combination the rapy of standard high dose bolus IL -2 and various doses of 
hydroxychloroquine therapy in metastatic RCC patients. The combination of high dose bolus IL - 
2 and hydroxychloroquine has not been used in prior clinical trials. Hydroxychloroquine has  been 
shown to be safe in other acute stressful situations such as operative procedures (127 -130). 
Combinations of IL -2 with chloroquine have recently been shown in Pittsburgh to be statistically 
more effective than IL -2 alone, tested in three murine models (131). Bas ed on this murine data, we 
could expect to double the complete response rate in patients. Use of the number of doses of IL -2 
as a composite  of maximum  tolerated  dose and dose limiting  toxicity  helps  us (132,  133) deal with  
assessing  the tolerability  of the addition  of a second  drug to IL-2 designed  to enhance  efficacy  
24  or decrease  toxicity.  Evaluating  toxicity  after 8 doses  allows  us to compare  comparable  amount  of 
drug across patients when all are expected to have received all eight of the  doses.  
 
The primary outcomes for this study will be overall survival, progression -free survival and 
response rate. A secondary analysis will compare outcomes between the trial patients and a 
historical control set matched according to the prognostic criter ia described by Motzer et al (20) 
[lactate dehydrogenase (> 1.5 upper limit of normal), hemoglobin (< lower limit of normal), 
corrected  calcium  (>10mg/dL),  Karnofsky  performance  status  (< 80%)  and time from  initial  RCC 
diagnosis to start of interferon -α therapy of less than one year were significant prognostic factors. 
Patient categories are no risk factors, 1 or 2 risk factors, or 3 or more]  (20).  
 
2.18 Early experience with the  regimen.  
 
The first five patients  were  treated  with 600mg  of Hydroxychloroquine  with one patient deemed  a 
complete  response.  Out of the 13 patients  treated  with combination  HCQ/IL -2 therapy  using  1200 
mg of Hydroxychloroquine, two patients experienced pronounced hypotension and tachycardia. 
Furthermore, one patient died from pulmonary  emboli, not attributed to therapy. The cardiac events 
are consistent with IL -2 toxicities, but were observed somewhat earlier in the course of treatment.  
For that reason  we are accruing  another  21 patients  to assess  response  in addition  to the first five 
patients at the lower 600mg/d  dose.  
 
  
25  
3.0 ELIGIBILITY  
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
3.1.i. Histologically confirmed metastatic renal cell carcinoma with predominantly  clear 
cell histology.  
 
3.1.ii.  Have measurable disease by RECIST 1.1 criteria. For example, this would include 
tumor  in the lung, liver, and retroperitoneum. Bone disease is difficult to follow 
and quantify and as a sole site would not be  acceptable.  
 
3.1.iii.  Patients must be at least 4 weeks from radiation or surgery and recovered from  all 
ill effects.  
 
3.1.iv.  Age ≥18  years.  
 
3.1.v.  Karnofs ky Performance Status  ≥80%.  
 
3.1.vi.  Adequate end organ  function:  
 
a. Hematologic: ANC ≥ 1000 cells/ L, platelets ≥ 100,000/ L, hemoglobin ≥ 
9g/dl (pre transfusion values used for prognostic factor, can be transfused or 
use recombinant erythropoietin growth factors but must not have active 
bleeding).  
 
b. Liver:  AST  ≤ 2 x ULN  (upper  limit  of normal),  serum  total bilirubin  ≤ 2 x ULN 
(except for patients with Gilbert’s  Syndrome).  
 
c. Renal: serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 mg/dL or estimated creatinine clearance ≥ 
60ml/min using Crockc roft-Gault estimation using the  formula  
 
This 
formula expects weight to be measured in kilograms and creatinine to be 
measured in mg/dL, as is standard in the USA.  
 
d. Pulmonary: FEV1 ≥ 2.0 liters or ≥  75% of predicted for height and age. 
(PFTs are required for patients over 50 or with significant pulmonary or 
smoking history defined as >20 pack years or history of  COPD/emphysema).  
 
e. Cardiac: No evidence of congestive heart failure, symptoms of coronary artery 
disease, myocardial infarction less than one year prior to entry, serious cardiac 
arrhythmias, or unstable angina. Patients who are over 40 or have had  previous 
cardiac disease will be required to have a negative or low probability cardiac 
stress te st for cardiac  ischemia.  
 
3.1.vii.  Women should not be lactating and, if of childbearing age, have a negative 
pregnancy test within two weeks of entry to the  study.  
 
26  3.1.viii.  Appropriate  contraception  in both genders  (i.e., use of contraceptive  strategies  that 
prevent pregnancy; this most effectively would involve abstinence during the 
period of treatment but could include contraceptives, contragestives, and barrier 
methods.)  
 
3.1.ix. The patient must be competent and have signed informed consent.  
 
3.1.x.  CNS: No histor y of cerebrovascular accident, transient ischemic attacks, central 
nervous system or brain metastases.  
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.2.i. Patients who have previously received IL -2 are not eligible. Patients on HCQ in 
neoadjuvant protocols or in the past for clinical indications ARE eligible, as are 
patients who have previously received CTLA -4 and/or PD -1/PD -L1 antibodies.  
 
3.2.ii.  Concomitant second malignancy except for non -melanoma skin cancer, and non – 
invasive cancer such as cervical CIS, superficial bladder cancer withou t local 
recurrence or breast  CIS. 
 
3.2.iii.  In patients with a prior history of invasive malignancy, less than five years in 
complete  remission.  
 
3.2.iv.  Positive serology for HIV, hepatitis B or hepatitis  C 
 
3.2.v.  Significant co -morbid illness such as uncontrolled diabetes or active infection that 
would preclude treatment on this regimen.  
 
3.2.vi.  Use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppresion (if patient had been taking 
steroids, at least 2 weeks must have passed since the last  dose).  
 
3.2.vii.  History of inflammatory bowel disease or other serious autoimmune disease. (Not 
including thyroiditis and rheumatoid arthritis). Patients already on 
hydroxychloroquine for such disorders are not  eligible.  
 
3.2.viii.  Patients with organ  allografts.  
 
3.2.ix.  Uncontrolled hypertension (BP >150/100  mmHg).  
 
3.2.x.  Proteinuria dipst ick > 3+ or ≥ 2gm/24  hours.  
 
3.2.xi.  Urine protein:creatinine ratio ≥ 1.0 at  screening.  
 
3.2.xii.  Major surgery, open biopsy, significant traumatic injury within 28 days of starting 
treatment or anticipation of need for major surgical procedure during the course  of 
the study.  
 
  
27  3.2.xiii.  Minor surgical procedures, fine needle aspirations or core biopsies within 7 days 
prior to starting treatment. Central venous catheter placements are  permitted.  
 
3.2.xiv.  History of abdominal fistula, gastrointestinal perforation, or intraabdominal 
abscess within 6 months prior to starting  treatment.  
 
3.2.xv.  Serious, non -healing wound, ulcer, or bone  fracture.  
 
3.2.xvi.  History of tumor -related or other serious hemorrhage, bleeding diathesis, or 
underlying  coagulopathy.  
 
3.2.xvii.  History of deep venous thrombosis, clinically  significant peripheral vascular 
disease, or other thrombotic  event.  
 
3.2.xviii.  Inability to comply with study and/or follow -up procedures.  
 
3.2.xix.  Individuals with known history of glucose 6 phosphate deficiency are excluded 
from the trial (possible issue with HCQ tolerance). No literature can be found to 
support hemolytic anemia having ever occurred in these patients and 
rheumatologists who frequently utilize this drug have not seen this as a side  effect. 
Given that this has been a concern that has been raised, we believe it is prudent  to 
exclude these patients with known G6PD deficiency from participation. These patients can 
receive IL -2 alone off trial.  
 
3.2.xx.  Patients  with previously  documented  macular  degeneration  or diabetic  retinopathy 
are excluded from the  trial. 
 
3.2.xxi.  Baseline  EKG  with QTc > 470 msec  (including  subjects  on medication).  Subjects 
with ventricular  pacemaker  for whom  QT interval  is not measurable  will be eligible 
on a case -by-case basis.  
 
3.3 Minority and Women  Inclusion  
The patients for this study will be drawn from the oncology patient population seen at  the 
Cytokine Working Group Institutions. No one will be excluded because of gender or 
race.  
 
  
28  4.0 REGISTRATION  PROCEDURES  
 
To register a patient, the investigator or their designee will contact the Clinical R esearch 
Coordinators of Clinical Research Services (CRS) at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer 
Institute:  
 
Deborah Hice, RN 
Phone: 412 -623-8962  
Email: hiceda@upmc.edu  
 
Kathy Mansfield, RN 
Phone: 412 -623-7048  
Email: manskd@upmc.edu  
 
If the coordinators are unavailable, contact Clare Grzejka, RN, BSN , at 412 -623-4891 or 
grzejkac@upmc.edu . Patients must be registered prior to the fir st dose of 
hydroxychloroquine (day -14). The following information will be requested:  
 
4.1 Investigator Identification  
 
4.1.1 Institution name and/or  affiliate  
 
4.1.2 Investigator's  name  
 
4.2 Patient's  Identification  
 
4.2.1 Patient's initials and study ID    
 
4.3 Eligibility  Verification  
 
 Patients must meet all of the eligibility requirements listed in Section 3.0. 
Documents verifying eligibility, including a completed eligibility checklist, must 
be sent via fax or email to the coordinating center. The coordinating center 
requires  24 hours  to review  eligibility  of potential  subjects  from  external  sites.  
 
4.4 Cancellation  Guidelines  
 
 No patient  will be cancelled.  Data  will be collected  on all patients,  even  if a patient 
does not receive protocol therapy. Reasons for a patient not initiating therapy should 
be submitted in writing as soon as possible. All patients receiving at least one  week  
of IL-2 treatment  and two weeks  of oral HCQ  will be included  in the final evaluation.  
 
4.5 Central Pathology  Core  
 
 All patients will be required to  have sent four representative unstained slides or 
paraffin blocks containing tumor. Consent for requesting pathology material will 
be required for enrollment in the study. This material will be batched and sent to 
the UPCI Pathology Tissue Bank  Core for c entral pathology review.  
29   
 All samples should be mailed by courier to:  
  
 UPCI Renal Cancer Tissue Bank 
c/o Rajiv Dhir, MD  
 Department of Pathology 
Shadyside Hospital  
 5230 Center Ave.  
 Pittsburgh PA 15232  
 
  
30  5.0 PRE -STUDY  TESTING/STAGING  
 
All patients considered for entry in the trial should have measurable or evaluable metastatic 
disease as described in the RECIST 1.1 criteria (see Section 11.0). Staging will include:  
 
5.1 History and physical examination within two weeks of the first day of treatment  (day 
-14). 
 
5.2 Within 4 weeks prior to treatment (day -14), the following procedures are  required:  
 
5.2.i CT scans of the  chest/abdomen/pelvis  
 
5.2.ii Brain MRI or enhanced brain  CT 
 
5.2.iii  Bone scan (if clinically  indicated)  
 
5.2.iv  Cardiac stress test: All patients over 40 years of age or with significant 
cardiac  history  
 
5.2.v Pulmonary function tests within 4 weeks of starting therapy for all 
patients over 50 years old or with significant pulmonary or smoking 
history  
 
5.2.vi  Cardiac ECHO or MUGA scan to assess  LVEF  
 
5.2.vii  12-lead EKG  
 
5.3 Within 2 weeks prio r to treatment (day -14) the following procedures are  required:  
 
5.3.i Urine protein:creatinine ratio (see appendix A)  
 
5.3.ii Urinalysis  
 
5.3.iii  Laboratory tests: HIV, hepatitis B and C serology, pregnancy test  when 
indicated, CBC with differential, comprehensive metabolic p anel 
(creatinine, BUN, albumin, total protein, glucose, electrolytes, liver 
function tests [total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, aspartate 
aminotransferase,  alanine  aminotransferase]),  direct  bilirubin,  LDH,  Ca, 
PO4, TSH, PT, PTT. A serum sample for dete rmination of serum 
VEGF/ANG1/ANG2 levels will be drawn on day -14, prior to the dose 
of hydroxychloroquine.  
 
5.4 Within 4 weeks after enrollment, tissue blocks or four unstained slides of renal tissue 
sent to central pathology  facility.  
 
  
31  6.0 TREATMENT PLAN &  SCHEMA  
 
6.1 Classification:  
 
Patients will be classified by the following criteria prior to entry and the historical cohort will be 
group -matched according to these criteria. (Each criterion is dichotomized as absent - 0 or  
present  -1): 
• lactate dehydrogenase > 1.5 upper limit  of normal  = 1 
• hemoglobin < lower limit  of normal  = 1 
• corrected calcium (>10mg/dL) (total calcium  – 0.707 *[albumin -3.4])  = 1 
• Karnofsky performance status  < 80% = 1 
• time from initial RCC diagnosis to start of protocol therapy < 1  year = 1 
Patients   # of Risk Factors  Median time to Death  
Good Prognosis  = no risk factors  30 months  
Intermediate prognosis  = 1 or 2 risk factors  14 months  
Poor prognosis  = 3 or more  5 months  
 
6.2 Protocol  Design  
 
Patients will receive high dose IL -2 + hydroxychloroquine  
 
Treatment : One course of treatment (84 days) will consist of high dose bolus IL -2 administered 
intravenously every 8 hours on days 1 -5 (or 6) and 15 -19 (or 20) (maximum 14 doses/5 days of 
administration) and hydroxychloroquine daily sta rting two weeks before IL -2 therapy and 
continued  through  up to three  courses.  Dependent  upon  when  Dose  1 is administered  on Day 1/Day 
15, Dose 14 could require hospitalization on Day 6/Day  20. 
 
6.3 Agents  
6.3.1 Hydroxychloroquine  
6.3.1.1  Administration.  
Patients will receive HCQ every day starting at 14d before the first dose of IL -2. HCQ can be taken 
at any time of the day prior to or after meals. Tablets of HCQ are available in 200 mg strengths. 
HCQ will be administered in divided doses (BID) for doses above 200 mg p o qd to minimize 
nausea. The lower dose (200) should be taken in the AM and the higher dose (400) at night due to 
the potential for GI distress. Patients should be told to swallow the whole capsule in rapid 
succession without chewing. Missed and vomited do ses of HCQ can be skipped during therapy if 
necessary. The two -week lead in and long half -life of HCQ allow for this. Two dose reductions 
(Levels -1 and -2 in Table 5) may be allowed in a patient if treatment -limiting toxicity (Section 
9.2) is observed. A pill diary will be provided and is required.  
 
Table 5. Hydroxychloroquine Dose Schema  
Dose Level  Dose hydroxychloroquine (mg/day)  
1 600 mg  
-1 400 mg  
-2 200 mg  
 
  
32  6.3.1.2  Description  
• Generic  name:  Hydroxychloroquine  sulfate  
• Commercial  name:  Plaquenil  
• Chemical  name:  7-Chloro -4-[4-[ethyl -(2-hydroxyethyl)amino] -1- 
methylbutylamino] quinolon  
• Supplied by: Commercially available;  Sanofi -Aventis  
 
6.3.1.3  Known Potential Toxicities of Hydroxychloroquine  
• Central nervous system: Irritability, nervousness, emotional changes,  nightmares, 
psychosis, headache, dizziness, vertigo, seizure, ataxia,  lassitude.  
• Dermatologic: Bleaching of hair, alopecia, pigmentation changes (skin and  mucosal; 
black -blue color), rash (urticarial, morbilliform, lichenoid, maculopapular, purpuric, 
eryth ema annulare centrifugum, Stevens -Johnson syndrome, acute generalized 
exanthematous pustulosis, and exfoliative  dermatitis).  
• Gastrointestinal: Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramping,  pancreatitis.  
• Hematologic: Aplastic anemia, agranulocyt osis, leukopenia,  thrombocytopenia, 
hemolysis (in patients with glucose -6-phosphate  deficiency).  
• Hepatic: Abnormal liver function/hepatic failure (isolated  cases).  
• Neuromuscular & skeletal: Myopathy leading to progressive weakness and atrophy  of 
proximal m uscle groups (may be associated with mild sensory changes, loss of deep 
tendon reflexes, and abnormal nerve  conduction).  
• Ocular: Disturbance in accommodation, keratopathy, corneal changes/deposits (visual 
disturbances, blurred vision, photophobia - reversi ble on discontinuation), macular 
edema, atrophy, abnormal pigmentation, retinopathy (early changes reversible - may 
progress despite discontinuation if advanced), optic disc pallor/atrophy, attenuation of 
retinal arterioles, pigmentary retinopathy, scotoma , decreased visual acuity,  nystagmus.  
6.3.2 Interleukin 2  
 
6.3.2.1  Administration  
IL-2- 600,000 IU/kg IV bolus q 8 hrs beginning on day 1 and on day 15, for a maximum of 14 
doses per cycle.  
 
6.3.2.2  Description  
Aldesleukin is recombinant formulation of interleukin -2 (IL -2). Aldesleukin is a nonglycosylated 
biosynthetic interleukin -2 (also known as T -cell growth factor), which differs only slightly in 
amino  acid sequence  from  the natural  compound  with a serine  for cysteine  substitution  at position 
125 to allow correct folding.  Aldesleukin is commercially available from  Prometheus.  
 
6.3.2.3  Mechanism of  Action  
Aldesleukin's effects are essentially identical to those of endogenous interleukin -2. Aldesleukin 
interacts with the high -affinity IL -2 receptor expressed on cells of the immune s ystem and 
stimulates a cytokine cascade involving various interferons, interleukins, and tumor necrosis 
factors. Aldesleukin along with other cytokines induce proliferation and differentiation of B and 
33  T-cells, monocytes, macrophages, and cytotoxic lymphoc ytes which include natural killer (NK) 
cells, cytotoxic T -cells, tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), and lymphokine -activated killer 
(LAK) cells. Aldesleukin's antitumor activity is believed to result from activation of cytotoxic 
lymphocytes, however, th e exact mechanism is unknown. Whether aldesleukin acts directly or 
through second messengers is also unclear, however, aldesleukin does elevate production of 
interleukin -1, tumor necrosis factors α and β, interferon γ, and interleukin -6. 
 
6.3.2.4  Pharmacokinetics  
Aldesleukin is administered parenterally. Following a short IV infusion, the drug is rapidly 
distributed to the extravascular and extracelluar space as well as to the liver, spleen, kidneys, and 
lungs. Approximately 30% of an administered dose is distribut ed within the plasma. The 
pharmacokinetics  of aldesleukin  may be affected  by sodium  dodecyl  sulfate,  the solubilizing  agent 
in the commercial formulation. In addition, subcutaneous administration with albumin produces 
slightly higher and more prolonged serum concentrations of aldesleukin. Following distribution, 
aldesleukin is cleared from the systemic circulation by the kidneys through both glomerular 
filtration and peritubular extraction. The drug is then metabolized to amino acids by renal cells 
lining the proximal convoluted tubules. Very little drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. 
Following a 5 minute IV infusion, the serum distribution and elimination half -life in cancer 
patients was 13 and 85 minutes,  respectively.  
 
6.3.2.5  Toxicities  
Abdominal pain, a lopecia, anemia, angina, anorexia, anuria, arthralgia, ascites, atrial fibrillation, 
azotemia, back pain, chills, cholestasis, conjunctivitis, constipation, diarrhea, drowsiness, 
dysgeusia,  dyspepsia,  dyspnea,  dysuria,  edema,  elevated  hepatic  enzymes,  eosinophilia,  erythema, 
exfoliative dermatitis, fatigue, fever, GI bleeding, GI perforation, glomerulonephritis, 
hallucinations, headache, hematuria, hepatomegaly, hyperbilirubinemia, hyperkalemia, 
hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia , hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, h yponatremia, 
hypophosphatemia, hypotension, hypovolemia, infection, injection site reaction, interstitial 
nephritis,  jaundice,  leukocytosis,  leukopenia,  lymphopenia,  malaise,  metabolic  acidosis,  metabolic  
alkalosis, myalgia, myocardial infarction, nausea/vomiting, oliguria, pancreatitis, paranoia, 
petechiae, pleural effusion, premature atrial contractions (PACs), premature ventricular 
contractions (PVCs), proteinuria, pruritus, pulmonary edema, purpura, sinus bradycardia, sinus 
tachycardia, splenome galy, stomatitis, supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), syncope, tachypnea, 
thrombocytopenia, thrombosis, urticaria, visual impairment, weakness, weight gain, weight loss, 
wheezing, xerosis.  
 
6.4 Response Assessment/ Duration of  Therapy  
 
Patients will undergo CT  scans at week 8 and week 12 (+/ - 1 week) following initiation of IL -2 
therapy and then after each course (every 10 -12 weeks). After the final course (week 36),  patients 
will undergo CT scan evaluation every 12 weeks (+/ - 2 weeks) for up to one year or until tumor 
progression (whichever comes first). If additional scans are performed for clinical reasons, the 
study schedule may be altered to perform the requisite scans at a more acceptable time point. The 
change in timing of study scans must be approved by the local PI and documented. For patients 
who have not shown progression at the end of one year, response will be captured during follow - 
up for survival (explained  below).  
 
  
34  Patients with evidence of tumor shrinkage with all lesions measurable and eva luable may receive 
up to 3 courses of IL -2 therapy. Course 2 will start on or within 2 weeks following day 85 and 
follow the same schedule as in Course 1. Course 3 can start within 2 weeks of completion of Course  
2. Patients  not receiving  IL-2 during  cours e 2 with tumor  shrinkage  by week  24 can receive a 2nd 
course of IL -2 beginning within 2 weeks of week  25. 
 
Patients with no evidence of progression by RECIST 1.1 criteria may  receive continued treatment 
with hydroxychloroquine through one year of initiatio n of HCQ treatment (Day -14) or until 
disease  progression.  
 
Tumor response will be assessed by the NCI’s Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 
(RECIST) 1.1 guidelines. Patients will undergo tumor evaluation with physical exam and CT scans  
at week  8 (+/- 1 week)  and week  12 (+/- 1 week),  then after each course  (every  10-12 weeks). After 
the final course (week 36), patients will undergo CT scan evaluation every 12 weeks (+/ - 2 weeks) 
for up to one year or until tumor progression (whichever occurs first). If additional scans are  
performed  for clinical  reasons,  the study  schedule  may be altered  to perform  the requisite  scans at  a 
more  acceptable  time point.  The change  in timing  of study  scans  must  be approved  by the local PI  
and documented.  For patients  who have  not shown  progression  at the end of one year,  response will 
be captured during follow -up for survival, which will be done on all patients via telephone contact 
and medical record review. Patients with progressive disease by RECIST 1.1 cri teria will be taken 
off study.  
Table 6. Tumor Assessment  
 
Prior to therapy  At week 8 (course 1),  
and at the end of courses 2 
and 3.  Every 3 mos. until 
1 yrs  At disease 
progression  
CT C/A/P, BS*,  
MRI**  CT C/A/P, BS*, MRI**  CT C/A/P, BS*,  
MRI**  CT C/A/P, BS*,  
MRI**  
PE PE PE PE 
 
CT C/A/P = Computerized Tomography of the chest/abdomen/pelvis, BS = Bone scan, MRI = 
Brain MRI or enhanced Brain CT, PE = Physical examination.  
Tumor evaluation will include CT of chest/abdomen/pelvis.  
*Bone scan should be performed if bone metastases documented prior to study enrollment or if 
clinically indicated.  
**Brain  MRI  or enhanced  Brain  CT is required  prior  to therapy  for evaluation  of brain  metastases. 
The Brain MRI or enhanced Brain CT will be repeated if clinicall y indicated.  
Response criteria are provided in section 10.0.  
6.4.1 Toxicity  Evaluation  
Patients  enrolled  in this study  will be evaluated  clinically  and with standard  laboratory  tests before 
and at regular intervals during their participation in this study. Safety evaluations will consist of 
medical interviews, recording of adverse events, physical examinations, blood pressure, and 
laboratory measurements. Patients will be evaluated for adverse events (all grades), serious adverse 
events (SAE), and adverse ev ents requiring study drug interruption or discontinuation at each  study  
35  visit for the duration  of their participation  in the study.  Specific  monitoring  procedures are as  
follows:  
• During IL -2 treatment, AEs will be assessed daily.  
• In patients with bleeding,  hemostasis evaluation should be performed as clinically indicated  
• All patients will be followed by either history, physical examination, laboratory tests or 
telephone interviews until resolution of AEs. The frequency of these contacts will depend 
on the t ype and severity of the SAE and will be determined by the  investigator.  
• Patients will have at least one telephone contact between cycles of IL -2 administration to 
assess toxicity. A CBC and complete metabolic survey will also be  obtained.  
All patients on trial will have a compilation of treatment (number of doses), toxicity scoring, 
laboratory results, and response assessment monthly (see Section 8) by the Clinical Trials Office 
and this information made available at the time of the monthly teleconferences , the Cytokine 
Working Group teleconferences, and to the local oversight DSMB. In addition, the trial will be 
monitored monthly by the UPCI Multi -Center Trial DSMC, which operates under the direct 
supervision  of the UPCI  DSMC.  Data  on accrual  and adverse  events  at all sites will be aggregated 
by UPCI Clinical Research Services so that the Multi -Center DSMC has the necessary data to 
perform its function in a timely  fashion.  
 
Patients discontinued from the treatment phase of the study for any reason will be e valuated ~30 
days (28 -42 days) after the decision to discontinue treatment.  
 
6.4.2 Clinical Assessment and Duration of Therapy  
 
All patients  will have  blood  tests and a thorough  physical  examination  prior  to each cycle  of IL-2. 
Further therapy will be withheld until laboratory values and performance status return to within 
the eligibility criteria. IL -2 may be re -initiated once serum creatinine reaches ≤ 1.8 mg/dL (at the 
discretion of the treating  physician).  
 
Both responding and non -responding patients will be  followed until death or final closure of the 
study.  After  the final course  of treatment,  follow -up procedures  will be performed  every  3 months 
(+/- 2 weeks) for up to one year or until disease progression (whichever occurs first). Follow -up 
procedures wil l include CT scan, routine laboratory tests, and physical examination. Subjects  will 
then be followed for survival by telephone contact and medical record review every 3 months for 
one year following the time of disease progression or after one year off of  treatment, then every 6 
months for the next two years, then annually until death. A window of +/ - 2 weeks is permitted. 
This will include  review  of any routine  procedures  performed  as part of the patient’s  standard  care 
(e.g., routine scans, physical exam inations, laboratory exams, etc.). Attention will be paid to the 
time of disease progression and time of initiation of alternate  therapies . 
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse events, treatment may continue for up to 3 
courses per protocol or  until one of the following criteria applies:  
 
• Disease progression (see section  10.0),  
• Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of  treatment,  
• Treatment -related toxicities (see section  9.5), 
36  • Subject decides to withdraw from the study, or is  non-adherent,  
• Subject becomes pregnant or begins  breast -feeding,  
• General or specific changes in the subject's condition rendering the subject unacceptable 
for further treatment in the judgment of the  investigator.  
 
Patients discontinued from the treatment  phase of the study for any reason will be evaluated ~30 
days (28 -42 days) after the decision to discontinue treatment.  
 
6.5 Ancillary  Treatment  
 
6.5.1 Venous Access  Catheters  
 
Institutional guidelines should be followed for venous access. However, it is 
recommended  that patients with adequate peripheral venous access be treated through 
2 large bore peripheral IVs or PICCs. Patients without adequate peripheral venous 
access should have a double lumen central venous catheter or PICC placed prior to 
initiating  each course of therapy.  Central  venous  catheters  will be placed  preferentially 
in the subclavian vein. Infusaports should be used for neither IL -2 administration  
nor continuous IV hydration as this may create an unacceptable infection risk. 
Catheters should be removed at the end of each hospital course. Patients requiring 
central venous catheters or PICC will receive antibiotic prophylaxis (e.g. cephaloxin 
250 mg PO QID for those  without  penicillin  allergies  or ciprofloxacin,  250 mg PO BID, 
days 1 -10 and 15 -24 o f each course). If catheter related bacteremia develops, the 
catheter should be removed and parenteral antibiotic treatment (vancomycin 1 gm IV 
q 12-24 hours depending on renal function) may be  required.  
 
6.5.2 Suggested Concurrent Therapy 
Corticosteroids will n ot be  permitted.  
Antihypertensive therapy should be discontinued at least 48 hours prior to initiating 
each cycle of IL -2 and for the duration of the cycle. Investigators may choose to taper 
beta blockers over a few days prior to each cycle.  
 
While  IL-2 is administered  (days  1-5 (or 6) and 15-19 (or 20)),  patients  may receive the  
following  to abrogate  toxicity  related  to IL-2 (start  before  IL-2 begins,  continue for 12 
hours after last IL -2 dose):  
 
Acetaminophen 650mg PO every 4 hours.  
 
Meperidine (25-50mg) IV or IM should be given in the case of severe 
rigors.  
 
Indomethacin 25mg PO every 6 hours, or Naprosyn 750mg PO every 12 
hours, or Motrin 600mg PO every 6 hours can be given for fever, 
chills and myalgias unresponsive to acetaminophen.  
 
Ranitidine (150 mg) or Axid (150 mg) or Pepcid (20 mg) PO q 12 hours 
37  for prophylaxis of gastrointestinal bleeding.  
 
Lomotil or Imodium supplemented with paregoric, 10 -14 ml PO q 4 -6 
hours PRN will be used for diarrhea.  
 
Benadryl  (25-50 mg PO),Atarax  (25 mg PO), or Gabapentin  (300-600mg 
PO TID)  may be used for generalized  erythematous  skin rash and/or 
pruritus.  
 
Furosemide (20-40 mg) IV/PO qd may be administered following 
completion of IL -2 infusion and until edema resolves and weight 
returns to baseline per local phys ician.  
 
Keflex 250mg PO QID for prophylaxis of catheter -related infections.  
38  7.0 LABORATORY  STUDIES  
 
The schedule for blood sampling is in Appendix C. Bloods will be sent directly by overnight 
courier to the UPCI for separation and cryopreservation.  
 
UPCI – IMCPL  
5117 Centre Avenue  
1.26 Hillman Cancer Center 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  
Attn:  Processor   
Phone : 412-624-0078  
 
7.1 Baseline tumor samples All patients will be required to have four representative unstained 
slides or paraffin blocks co ntaining tumor available to be sent within four weeks of enrollment in 
the study. This material will be batched and sent for analysis to:  
 
UPCI Renal Cancer IL -2/HQ Tissue Bank  
c/o Rajiv Dhir, MD; Department of Pathology; UPCI 
5117 Centre Ave.  
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  
 
7.2 Serum and  PBMC  
a. All serum and plasma samples will be aliquoted and stored  at 
-70 to -80ºC at the UPCI. Specimens will be sent overnight to the IMCPL/UPCI 
(see Appendix D):  
 
b. Blood samples will be used for:  
1) Western Blots and EM for measures of autophagy (LC3, p62, Caveolin  1, 
HMGB1, sRAGE) -Research Laboratory (DAMP  Laboratory)  
2) Serum angiogenic cytokine measurements including VEGF,  ANG1,  and ANG2; 
Fibronectin; Osteopontin (IMCPL)  
3) Immune Function: TCR zeta chain, serum arginase/arginine levels  (IMCPL)  
4) Phenotype:  KIRS,  T cells,  Treg,  MDSC,  NK cells,  Measures  of CD11b+IL4Rα+ myeloid 
derived suppressor cells, CD56bright and CD56dull NKp46+ NK cells, and Lineage-HLA - 
DR+ myeloid DCs, and CD123+Lineage- plasmacytoid DCs will be assessed. Measures 
of cell surface RAGE and cytosolic RAGE on permeabilized cells will also be carried 
out. (IMCPL)  
5) miRNA -Research Laboratory (DAMP  Laboratory)  
6) Bank DNA and/or RNA (i.e. RNA PAX tubes) for germline SNP, gene expression 
analysis etc.) See  7.5. 
 
Autophagy assays will be run on all specimens  
 
7.3 Correlate the level of autophagy in resected renal adenocarcinomas (where available) 
with measures of clinical outcome and response. We hypothesize that levels of autophagy in 
biopsies from patients on treatment will directly correlate with response to therapy. Fixed 
specimens in 10% formalin at room temperature, and the size and gross appearance of the tumors 
will be recorded.  Select  serial  sections  of the tumor  specimens  will be assessed  for 
39  clinicopathologic co rrelates, HMGB1, RAGE, LC3, Caveolin 1, and p62 staining as described 
below. The immunohistochemical staining results will then be analyzed statistically to examine 
the relationship  between  clinicopathological  factors  in the tumor,  disease -free survival  and overall 
survival.  
 
Clinicopathological  Correlates : 1) tumor  size (≥3 vs <3 cm); 2) predominant  differentiation  of the 
tumor (well,moderately, or poorly differentiated); 3) lowest degree of tumor differentiation 4) 
angiolymphatic invasion 5) neural invasion; 6) margin status; 7) International.Union Against 
Cancer (UICC) pathological T and N  stage.  
 
Immunohistochemical staining for autophagy. We will use a modification of the technique 
described by Fujii et al to evaluate LC3 staining in tumor tissues . Briefly formalin -fixed, paraffin 
embedded tissue sections containing the maximal cancer tissue area will be processed for 
immunohistochemical staining. Because nerve cells stain for both RAGE and LC3 they will be 
used as internal positive controls for ea ch section Tumor cells whose staining intensity is equal to 
or stronger than that of nerve cells will be judged to be strongly positive, whereas those whose 
staining weaker than that of the nerve cells will be scored as weakly positive. Tumor cells that do  
not stain positively for LC3 or RAGE immunohistochemically despite a positive internal control 
will be scored as negative. We will select sections from the center and the invasive border for 
independent review and scoring. The dominant intensity level of positive cells will be evaluated 
as follows: The level of intensity of staining in each area will be determined by the percentage of 
cells that stain negative, weakly positive, and strongly positive. When more than 50% of the 
positive cancer cells are stro ngly positive for LC3/RAGE in each area, the area will be scored as 
strongly positive, and when more than 50% of the LC3/RAGE positive cancer cells are weak 
positive the area will be designated weakly positive. When 30% of the cancer cells are weakly 
posit ive and 40% are strongly positive, the predominant intensity will be recorded as strongly 
positive. Specimens will then be classified into three groups according to the dominant overall 
intensity of the cancer tissue: negative, weakly positive, or strongly  positive. A similar procedure 
will be carried out to assess HMGB1 staining of the cytosol. Two independent pathologists, 
blinded to the clinical outcomes will evaluate all of the immunohistochemical slides and their 
results compared and reviewed for discr epancies by a third party.  
 
7.4 Correlate the levels of autophagic markers with measures of clinical outcome in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We hypothesize that there will be biomarkers in the 
peripheral blood that will be specifically associated with i nduction of autophagy in renal cancer 
patients.  We further  hypothesize  that these  markers  will correlate  with treatment  status,  stage,  and 
response to therapy, disease progression and overall survival. To test this hypothesis we will 
correlate the level of  autophagy in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells with these measures of 
clinical outcome. Blood samples will be collected according to the schedule outlined in Table 6. 
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells are then separated from whole blood via ficoll h ypaque 
separation  and frozen  in DMSO.  Cells  will be lysed  for western  blot analysis  for RAGE,  HMGB1, 
LC3, LC3 -2, pre -LC3, caveolin 1, and p62. Levels of autophagic proteins, and RAGE/HMGB1 
will then be compared  between  time points  and correlated  with tumor  clinicopathologic  correlates, 
response to therapy, time to progression, and overall  survival.  
 
7.5. Evaluation of KIR/KIR -ligand Genotype and Response to Therapy. KIR genotyping  will 
be performed on patient DNA samples by PCR sequence -specific primer technique (SSP Unitray 
assay, Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) in the UPCI Genomics Facility. KIR -ligand typing 
40  will be performed at low -resolution on the same samples for HLA -B & -C loci by reverse PCR - 
SSO methodology (LifeMatch assay, Gen -Probe, Inc, Stamford, CT) and for high -resolution HLA -
C alleles by direct sequencing (AlleleSEQR assay, Abbott Labs, Des Plaines, IL). The four 
inhibitory KIR genes (KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2, KIR2DL3,  KIR3DL1) evaluated in this study and 
their corresponding KIR -ligands (HLA -C1, HLA -C2, or HLA -Bw4). KIR/KIR -ligand mismatch 
will be defined  as absence  of one or more  HLA  alleles  known  to be ligands  for the inhibitory  KIR 
genes present, using previously published  criteria.  
  
41  8.0 DATA MANAGEMENT AND DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
The number of IL -2 doses administered, severe adverse events, including their relatedness to 
HCQ (definitely, probably, possibly or unlikely), clinical response (Section 10.3), date  of 
progression and date of death will be forwarded immediately to the Data Coordinating Center at 
UPCI for monthly presentation to the CWG and the UPCI Multi -Center DSMC. The UPCI 
IMCPL will report to the DCC on samples received on a monthly basis. Biomar ker and 
laboratory data that will be evaluated at the end of the trial need only be reported to the DCC 
when the trial is closed to accrual, but more timely reporting is advisable so that missing and 
questionable data can be resolved prior to final data an alysis. The DCC will use the UPCI 
Clinical Trials Management Application to store and manage all demographic, clinical, 
laboratory and biomarker data required to achieve the Specific Aims.  
 
  
42  9.0 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF TOXICITY (DOSE  MODIFICATION)  
 
9.1 Gener al 
Investigator/Sub -investigators, regulatory, CRS management, clinical research coordinators, 
clinical research associates, data managers, and clinic staff meet regularly in disease center Data 
Safety Monitoring Boards (DSMB) to review and discuss study d ata to include, but not limited 
to, the following:  
 
• serious adverse  events  
• subject safety  issues  
• recruitment  issues  
• accrual  
• protocol  deviations  
• unanticipated  problems  
• breaches of  confidentiality  
 
All toxicities encountered during the study will be evaluated on an ongoing basis according to  the 
NCI Common  Toxicity  Criteria  version  4.0 and recorded  prior  to each course  of the investigational 
therapy. Any modifications necessary to ensure subject safety and decisions to continue, or close 
the trial to accrual  are also discussed  during  these  meetings.  All study  data reviewed  and discussed 
during  these  meetings  will be kept confidential.  These  reviews  are summarized  by each respective 
disease center and submitted to the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute’s Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (UPCI DSMC) for their monthly review of all disease centers’ studies. The 
UPCI DSMC will provide oversight for this study. At the time of renewal a summary of all serious 
adverse events and modifications wil l also be reported to the UPCI  DSMC.  
 
Any modifications necessary to ensure patient safety will be submitted to the IRB prior to 
implementation. The IRB will be notified of any change in the risk/benefit ratio which would affect 
whether the study should co ntinue. All protocol deviations or breaches of confidentiality will  be 
reported  to the IRB according  to IRB guidelines.  If any literature  becomes  available  which suggests  
that conducting  this trial is no longer  ethical  the study  will be terminated  and the IRB will be notified 
of the new findings in the form of an Unanticipated Problem submission. All study treatment 
associated adverse events that are serious, at least possibly related and unexpected will be reported 
to the IRB. DSMC reports and approval wil l be submitted to the IRB at the time of renewal.  
 
All records related to this research study will be stored in a locked environment. Only the 
researchers  affiliated  with the research  study  and their staff will have  access  to the research  records.  
 
Safety data for each patient at the end of each cycle of IL -2 will be provided by all sites to the PI 
at UPCI.  
 
Patients with life -threatening or persistent, severe toxic reactions to IL -2 will receive no further 
treatment with this agent. Specific toxicities, wh ich require special consideration, are discussed  
below. Previously unknown or severe toxicities will be reported to the PI as Adverse Drug 
Reactions. They will also be reported to the FDA on FDA Form 3500A Medwatch report. A 
courtesy  copy  of these  reports  will also be forwarded  to Prometheus  Drug  Safety  Department.  See 
section  12.0.  
43   
9.2 Dose Modification for Toxicity: HD IL -2 and  Hydroxychloroquine  
Modification of the treatment protocol will occur by withholding doses of IL -2 rather than 
continuing therapy at a reduced dose. The only dose modification for patients of 
Hydroxychloroquine will be for those individuals deemed by the treating investigator as ‘likely’ 
due to hydroxychloroquine  or the combination  and not to IL-2 alone  based  on their experience  and 
dose reduction as shown in Table 5 . Missed doses of IL -2 will not be made up. Dose of IL -2 will 
be withheld  for: 
 
9.2.1 Hypotension refractory to fluids and pressors or requiring unacceptably high 
pressor doses (those associated with individual decrease in e xtremity perfusion). We will 
use vasopressors judicially where necessary to support patients with limiting  kidney/other 
organ perfusion. Requirement for vasopressors will be a relative indication for 
concluding a cycle (see 10.4.2.3  below).  
 
9.2.2 Anuria for>24 hours and unresponsive to fluid  replacement  
 
9.2.3 Respiratory distress requiring oxygen>4 liters to maintain O 2 saturation>95%.  
 
9.2.4 Confusion  (mental  status  changes  can progress  to paranoia  despite  discontinuation 
of IL -2; it is imperative that the IL -2 be stopped  at any sign of persistent confusion or 
disorientation).  
 
9.2.5 Sustained ventricular tachycardia or any sign or symptom of myocardial 
ischemia or myocarditis. Patients experiencing sustained ventricular tachycardia or 
myocardial ischemia should not receive furt her treatment with  IL-2 
 
9.2.6 Metabolic acidosis with HCO 3<18, despite attempts to correct with IV  HCO 3. 
 
9.2.7 Atrial fibrillation or  myocarditis.  
 
9.2.8 Documented systemic  infection.  
 
9.2.9 Management of Nausea and Vomiting. The frequency of nausea and vomiting 
with interleukin 2 administration falls within a broad category of moderate emetic risk 
(NCCN  Practice  Guidelines,  2010).  It may be enhanced  by HCQ.  Patients  with nausea  and 
vomiting  will be given  8 mg bid of ondansetron  (a 5-HT3 receptor  antagonist).  For nause a 
and vomiting  that is not controlled  with regimen  of ondansetron  a general  principle  (NCCN 
Practice Guidelines, 2010) is to add one agent from a different drug class to the current 
regimen  5-HT3 and NK1  receptor  antagonists  are very safe drugs  that are standards  of care 
in this area. Although not well studied, by carefully monitoring NV and using  appropriate  
treatments patients might have better nutrition and maintenance of body weight. Records 
of antiemetics given routinely or as part of symptom managem ent will be recorded.  
 
or Any other serious toxicity that is not controlled at time of next dose.  
 
9.3 Specific IL -2 Toxicity  Management  
44   
Several treatment -related toxicities have been uniquely associated with the administration of high - 
dose IL -2. Antihypertensive medication should be stopped prior to IL -2 therapy.  
 
Recommendations  for management  of the more  significant  toxicities  typically  seen with high-dose 
bolus IL -2 are as follows (the following are only optional guidelines for toxicity  managem ent): 
 
9.3.1 Fluid Replacement . Excessive fluid replacement will increase the patient’s 
likelihood of developing pulmonary edema. It is suggested that when intravenous access 
has been  established;  begin  administration  of normal  saline  at 75cc/hour  IV. Once  patients 
have gained greater than 15% of baseline weight, elective discontinuation of IL -2 is 
recommended. Diuretics should not be given unless severe symptomatic fluid retention 
develops and blood pressure is  adequate.  
 
9.3.2 Hypotension. Administration of high  dose IL -2 leads to decreased peripheral 
vascular resistance and consequent hypotension. In order to manage this toxicity, the 
physician may utilize the following  guidelines:  
1. Monitor patients in a setting capable of providing level  high 
intensity  care.  
 
2. Prior to starting IL -2 therapy determine a minimum tolerated blood 
pressure (MTBP). For patients under age 40 and with no prior history of 
ischemic or valvular heart disease, the MTBP can be a systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) of 80 mmHg, while the MTBP for all other patients should 
be a SBP of 85 -90 mmHg based on perceived risk of cardiac  toxicity.  
 
3. When a patients systolic BP falls below the MTBP, suggested therapy may 
involve (in the following  order):  
 
a. Begin fluid boluses (250cc normal saline IV over 15 min. m ay 
repeat x 2) until SBP is > MTBP.  
 
b. Should fluid boluses fail make the SBP>MTBP, vasopressor support 
such as phenylephrine  could  also be instituted  (.1-2 ug/kg/min)  to maintain 
SBP.  
 
c. If blood pressure cannot be maintained on phenylephrine alone, or if 
unacceptable tachycardia develops, treatment with dopamine (1 -6 
ug/kg/min) should be added to sustain blood  pressure.  
 
9.3.3 Management of Arrhythmias/Myocarditis. If significant arrhythmias occur at 
any stage in the patient's treatment (whether on pressor agent s or not), the possibility of 
myocardial ischemia/infarction must be excluded by both EKG and cardiac enzyme 
assessment. Patients who develop atrial fibrillation should have IL -2 doses held.  Therapy 
may resume when the patient converts to normal sinus rhyt hm and is hemodynamically 
stable. If a significant supraventricular arrhythmia occurs while a patient is on dopamine 
therapy; neosynepherine should also be substituted for dopamine as initial blood  pressure 
45  support. Patients experiencing sustained ventricu lar tachycardia or documented myocardial 
ischemic episodes during therapy should not receive further treatment with IL -2. Patients 
with myocarditis may resume treatment in subsequent courses if CPK returns to normal. A 
cardiac ECHO documenting normal cardi ac function should be performed prior to 
restarting  therapy.  
 
9.3.4 Management of Neurotoxicity. Doses are held rather than reduced for 
neurotoxicity. If Grade 4 neuro -cortical toxicity is encountered and is not reversible within 
48 hours, no further treatment s hould be given and the patient should be removed from the 
study. If Grade 4 toxicity is reversible to Grade 1 within 48 hours, future treatment may be 
considered (in subsequent courses) if the patients shows any evidence of tumor regression 
and as discusse d with the patient.  
 
9.3.5 Metabolic Acidosis. In the course of IL -2 therapy, when a patient’s HCO 3 falls to 
below 20, NaHCO 3 should be added to the maintenance IV infusion. Should the HCO 3 
level fall below 18, IL -2 therapy should be held, and bolus infusions of  NaHCO 3 should be 
instituted. IL -2 therapy may resume if repeat HCO 3 > 18. Sodium acetate may be 
substituted for NaHCO 3 per institutional  policy.  
 
9.3.6 Low Urine Ouput. Fluid boluses and ‘renal’ dose dopamine may be administered. 
Weight gains/edema may serve as  a basis for holding  doses.  
 
9.3.7 Other Toxicities. Increases in the serum creatinine to 2.0 -3.5 mg/dl and total 
bilirubin  to 3.0-10.0 mg/dl  are common  and reversible  upon  cessation  of treatment.  Doses 
of IL -2 have not generally been withheld for renal and hepatic dysfunction alone. Although 
toxicity may become severe, recovery usually occurs following cessation of IL -2 and 
vigorous supportive care is  warranted.  
 
9.4 Management of Grade 4 Toxicity  
Patients with Grade 4 (Life Threatening) toxicity (with the e xception of those Grade 4 
toxicities listed in Section 10.5) may be treated with dexamethasone 4 mg qid until side 
effects improve to an acceptable level as indicated. Two dose reductions of 
hydroxychloroquine (Levels -1 and -2 in Table 5 ) may be allowed i n a patient if treatment -
limiting toxicity considered ‘likely’  attributable to  the combination  (and not to IL-2 alone)  
by the treating  investigator  is observed.  A pill diary  will be provided and is  required.  
 
9.5 Toxicity Criteria for Discontinuing  Treatment  
 
Patients will not be considered for further therapy if the following toxicities are 
encountered:  
 
9.5.1 Pulmonary toxicity requiring endotracheal  intubation  
 
9.5.2 Renal dysfunction requiring  dialysis  
 
9.5.3 Grade 4 cardiac dysrhythmia or Grade 2 or 3 dysrhythmia not easily  
controlled with medical management.  
9.5.4 Myocardial  ischemia  (Grade  3 or 4) or infarction  or symptomatic  myocarditis  (note: 
46  asymptomatic CPK or CPK -MB band elevations without EKG changes are not a 
contraindication to further  treatment).  
 
9.5.5 Coma  
 
9.5.6 Life-threatening  sepsis  
 
9.5.7 Pericardial  tamponade  
 
9.5.8 Bowel ischemia or perforation  
 
9.5.9 Grade  4 hypertension  or reversible  posterior  leukoencephalopathy  syndrome  (RPLS)  
 
9.5.10  Grade > 2 pulmonary or CNS  hemorrhage  
 
9.5.11  Grade 4 hypertension or hemorrhage, symptomatic grade 4 venous 
thromboembolic event, nephrotic  syndrome  
 
9.5.12  Any grade arterial thromboembolic  event  
 
9.5.13  Grade 4 congestive heart  failure  
 
9.5.14  Wound dehiscence requiring medical or surgical  intervention  
 
9.5.15  Inability of subject to comply with study  requirements  
 
9.5.16  Any other severe or li fe-threatening toxicity which, in the opinion of the 
investigator,  would  preclude  further  treatment  with these  agents,  or has not resolved 
substantially to an acceptable level as determined by the local  PI. 
 
Patients  who have  an ongoing  Grade  4 or serious  adverse  event  at the time of discontinuation  from 
study treatment will continue to be followed until resolution of the event or until the event is 
considered irreversible (see Section  7.1.3).  
 
  
47  10.0 DETAILED RESPONSE ASSESSMENT (also see  6.4) 
 
Response will be  defined by NCI’s Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1.  
 
10.1 Disease  Evaluation  
Measurable disease - the presence of at least one measurable lesion. If the measurable disease is 
restricted to a solitary lesion, its neoplastic nature should  be confirmed by cytology/histology.  
 
Measurable  lesions  - lesions  that can be accurately  measured  in at least one dimension  with longest 
diameter (longest diameter to be recorded) as ≥20 mm using conventional techniques or ≥10 mm 
with CT scan or ≥10 mm wi th calipers by clinical  exam.  
Malignant lymph nodes - to be considered pathologically enlarged and measurable, a lymph node 
must be ≥ 15 mm in short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness recommended 
to be no greater than 5 mm). At baseline  and in follow -up, only the short axis will be measured 
and followed.  
 
Non-measurable lesions - all other lesions, including small lesions (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥ 10 to < 15 mm short axis), i.e., bone lesions, leptomenin geal 
disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusion, inflammatory breast disease, lymphangitis 
cutis/pulmonis, cystic lesions, and also abdominal masses that are not confirmed and followed by 
imaging techniques. Non -measurable also includes lesions that ar e < 20 mm by chest x -ray 
 
Clinical lesions will only be considered measurable when they are superficial (e.g., skin nodules 
and palpable lymph nodes).  
 
All measurements will be taken and recorded in metric notation, using a ruler or calipers. All 
baseline  evaluations  should  be performed  as closely  as possible  to the beginning  of treatment.  The 
same  method  of assessment  and the same  technique  should  be used to characterize  each identified 
and reported lesion at baseline and during  follow -up. 
 
10.2 Methods of Measurement  
Conventional CT and MRI should be performed with cuts of 5 mm or less in slice thickness 
contiguously. If CT scans have slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the minimum size for a 
measurable lesion should be twice the slice thickness. Spiral CT s hould be performed using a 5 -7 
mm contiguous  reconstruction  algorithm.  This applies  to tumors  of the chest,  abdomen  and pelvis.  
 
Baseline documentation of "Target" and "Non -Target" lesions:  
Target Lesions  
All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involved organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and 
measured at baseline. Target lesions should be selected on the basis of the ir size (lesions with 
the longest diameter), be representative of all involved organs, but in addition should be those 
that lend themselves to reproducible repeated measurements. It may be the case that, on 
occasion, the largest lesion does not lend itself  to reproducible measurement in which 
48  circumstance the next largest lesion which can be measured reproducibly should be selected.  
A sum of the diameters (longest for non -nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) for all target 
lesions will be calculated  and reported as the baseline sum diameters. If lymph nodes are to be 
included in the sum, then only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseline sum of the 
diameters will be used as reference to further characterize any objective tumor regression in  the 
measurable dimension of the disease.  
 
Non-target Lesions  
All other  lesions  (or sites of disease)  including  any measurable  lesions  over and above  the 5 target 
lesions should be identified as non -target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline. 
Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence or absence of unequivocal 
progression of each should be noted throughout follow -up. 
 
10.3 Response  Criteria  
Evaluation of target lesions  
* Complete Response  (CR):  
Disappearance of all target lesions.  Any pathological lymph nodes (whether target or  non- 
target) must have reduction in short axis to < 10 mm. For patients with > 90% Partial 
Response defined as at least a 90% decrease in the sum of the LD of target lesions, taking 
as reference the baseline  sum LD sustained for greater than one year will be scored as a CR 
(maximal patient benefit), given the difficulty of evaluating lesions in some  instances.  
* Partial Response  (PR):  
At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the LD of target lesions, taking as reference the 
baseline sum LD  
* Minimal Response  (MR):  
At least a 20% decrease  in the sum of the LD of target  lesions,  taking  as reference  the base 
line sum LD 
* Progressive Disease  (PD):  
At least a 20% increase in the sum of the LD of target lesions, taking a s reference the 
smallest sum LD recorded since the treatment started. In addition to the relative increase 
of 20%, the sum must also demonstrate an absolute increase of at least 5 mm.  
* Stable Disease  (SD):  
Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to qualify for  
PD, taking as reference the smallest sum LD since the treatment started. Note: a change of 
20% or more that does not increase the sum of the diameters by 5 mm or more is coded  as SD.  
 
Evaluation of non -target lesions  
 
* Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non -target lesions and normalization of tumor 
marker level. All lymph nodes must be non -pathological in size (<10 mm short  axis)  
* Stable Disease (SD): Persistence of one or more non -target lesion(s) or/and maintenance of 
tumor marker level above the normal  limits  
* Progressive Disease (PD): Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or unequivocal 
progression of existing non -target lesions. Although a clear progression of "non target" lesions 
only is exceptiona l, in such circumstances, the opinion of the treating physician should prevail 
and the progression status should be confirmed later on by the review panel (or study  chair).  
 
49  Evaluation of best overall response:  
The best overall response is the best respons e recorded from the date of first protocol treatment 
until disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for PD the smallest measurements 
recorded  since  the treatment  started).  In general,  the patient's  best response  assignment  will depend 
on the ach ievement of both measurement and confirmation  criteria.  
 
Table 7. Response Criteria  
 
Target lesions  Non-Target lesions  Overall response  
CR CR CR 
CR Incomplete response/SD  PR 
PR Non-PD PR 
MR Non-PD MR 
SD Non-PD SD 
PD Any PD 
Any PD PD 
Any Any PD 
 
Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of treatment  without 
objective  evidence  of disease  progression  at that time should  be classified  as having  "symptomatic 
deterioration". Every effort should be made to document the objective progression even after 
discontinuation of treatment. In some circumstances it may be difficult to distinguish residual 
disease from normal tissue. When the evaluation of complete response depends on this 
determination, it is recommended that the residual lesion be investigated (fine needle 
aspirate/biopsy) to confirm the complete response status.  
 
10.4 Confirmation  
The main goal of confirmation of objective response is to avoid overestimating the response rate 
observed.  To be assigned  a status  of PR or CR, changes  in tumor  measurements  must  be confirmed 
by repeat  assessments  that should  be performed  no less than 4 weeks  after the criteria  for response 
are first met. In the case of SD, follow -up measurements must have met the SD criteria at least 
once after study entry at a minimum interval (in general, not less than 6 -8 weeks) that is defined 
in the study  protocol.  
 
10.5 Duration of overall response  
The duration  of overall  response  is measured  from  the time measurement  criteria  are first met (i.e., 
not from time of confirmation of response) for CR or PR (whichever status is recorded first) until 
the first date that recurrence or PD is objectively documented, taking as reference for PD the 
smallest measurements recorded since the treatment  started.  
 
10.6 Durat ion of stable disease  
SD is measured from the date of first protocol treatment until the criteria for disease progression 
are met, taking as reference the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started.  
 
  
50  10.7 Time to  Progression  
The time to progression  (TTP)  is defined  as the time from  the date of first protocol  treatment  until 
the date disease progression criteria are met (in responding patients progression criteria uses the 
reference  of the smallest  measurements  recorded  since  the treatment  started)  or is censored  at date 
of last disease assessment for those who have not  progressed.  
 
10.8 Progression -free Survival  
Progression -free survival (PFS) is defined as the time from date of first protocol treatment until 
the date disease progression criter ia are met (in responding patients progression criteria uses the 
reference  of the smallest  measurements  recorded  since  the treatment  started)  or date of death  from 
any cause, or is censored at date of last disease assessment for those who have not  progress ed. 
 
10.9 Survival:  
Survival is calculated from the date of first protocol treatment to the date of death, or censored at 
date of last contact.  
 
  
51  11.0 PARTICIPANTS EVALUABLE FOR RESPONSE  
 
Reporting of results:  
 
Clinical  Results:  All patients  included  in the study  will be assessed  for response  to treatment,  even 
if there are major protocol treatment deviations or if they are ineligible. Each patient will be 
assigned one of the following  categories:  
 
1) complete  response  
2) >90% partial  response  
3) partial  response  
4) stable  disease  
5) progressive  disease  
6) early death from malignant disease (within 3 months of initiating  therapy)  
7) early death from  toxicity  
8) early death because of other  cause  
8) unknown (not assessable, insufficient data).  
 
All patients  who met the eligibility  criteria  and receive  at least one week  of IL-2 treatment  will be 
included in the main analysis of the response rate. Patients in response categories 5 -8 will be 
considered as failing to respond to treatment (disease progression). Thus, an incorrect treatment  
schedule  or drug administration  does not result  in exclusion  from  the analysis  of the response  rate. 
 
  
52  12.0 REPORTING OF ADVERSE REACTIONS 
ADVERSE EVENT DEFINITIONS  
Adverse event  means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of the drug in  
humans, whether or not considered drug related.  
 
Adverse reaction  means any adverse event caused by a drug.  
 
Suspected adverse reaction  means any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility 
(definitely  or probably)  that the drug caused  the adverse  event.  Suspected  adverse  reaction  implies 
a lesser degree of certainty about causality than “adverse  reaction”  
 
Serious Adverse Event:  Any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in 
humans, whether or not considered drug relat ed. Specifically, results in death, is life -threatening, 
requires inpatient hospitalization or causes prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in 
persistent or significant disability/incapacity, is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or is an 
impor tant medical event (defined as a medical event(s) that may not be immediately life - 
threatening or result in death or hospitalization but, based upon appropriate medical and  scientific 
judgment, may jeopardize the subject or may require intervention [e.g.,  medical, surgical] to 
prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed in the definition above.) Also, included: any 
subject death within 30 days of the last dose of study drug, regardless of the  causality.  
 
Scheduled protocol inpatient hospitalizations d o not meet the criteria above for recording and 
reporting  as an SAE.  Only  events  which  would  prolong  the scheduled  inpatient  stay to be resolved 
or unplanned  hospitalizations  due to events  occurring  between  scheduled  inpatient  stays  should  be 
recorded as  SAEs.  
 
Life-threatening, suspected adverse reaction . A suspected adverse reaction is considered “life - 
threatening” if, in the view of either the Investigator (i.e., the study site principal investigator), its 
occurrence places the patient or research subj ect at immediate risk of death. It does not include a 
suspected adverse reaction that had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
 
Unexpected,  suspected  adverse  reaction . A suspected  adverse  reaction  is considered  “unexpected” 
if it is not listed in the general investigational plan or clinical protocol; or is not listed at the 
specificity or severity that has been previously observed and/or  specified.  
All observed or volunteered adverse events (serious or non -serious) and abnormal test f indings, 
regardless of study group or suspected causal relationship to the study drug(s) will be recorded in 
the subjects’ case histories. For all adverse events, sufficient information will be pursued and/or 
obtained so as to permit 1) an adequate determi nation of the outcome of the event (i.e., whether 
the event should be classified as a serious adverse event ) and; 2) an assessment of the casual 
relationship between the adverse event and the study drug(s).  
 
Adverse events or abnormal test findings felt to  be associated with the study drug(s) will be 
followed until the event (or its sequelae) or the abnormal test finding resolves or stabilizes at a 
level acceptable to the Principal Investigator.  
 
In the event of an adverse event the first concern will be fo r the safety of the subject.  
53  REPORTING OF SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS  
 
In the event of any unexpected or serious suspected adverse reaction, the PI, the institutional review 
board (per institutional reporting requirements), and Prometheus Drug Safety Department will be 
notified using the FDA Form 3500 MedWatch report. We will report all secondary malignancies 
occurring or following treatment by this protocol.  
 
All events meeting the definition of a serious adverse event should be recorded on a MedWatch  
3500A Form:  
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Forms/UCM048334.pdf ) 
and submitted to the Clinical Research Coordinators and Prometheus  Laboratories’ Drug Safety 
Department:  
Deborah Hice, RN 
Phone: 412 -623-8962  
Email: hiceda@upmc.edu  
Fax: 412 -623-8974  
 
 
Kathy Mansfield, RN 
Phone: 412 -623-7048  
Email: manskd@upmc.edu  
Fax: 412 -623-8974  
 
Prometheus Laboratories’ Drug Safety Department 
Email: drugsafety@prometheuslabs.com  
Fax: 858 -754-3046.  
 
In addition to completing appropriate patient demographic and  suspect medication information, 
the report  should  include  the following  information  within  the Event  Description  (section  5) of the 
MedWatch 3500  form:  
 
Reporting of toxicity will include:  
 
1) Treatment regimen (dosing frequency, combination  therapy)  
2) Protocol description (and number, if assigned)  
3) Description of event, severity, treatment, and outcome, if  known  
4) Supportive laboratory results and  diagnostics  
5) CTCAE Version 4.0 Term and Grade of event  
6) Investigator’s assessment of the relationship (causality ) of the adverse event to  each 
investigational product and suspect  medication  
 
• the likelihood of the relationship between the toxicity and treatment (i.e.,  unrelated, 
unlikely, possibly, probably, or definitely related to  treatment)  
o list alternate causality if event is unrelated or unlikely related to treatment 
(e.g. attributed to underlying disease, history of COPD, etc.)  
• whether the side effect noted falls within the expected toxicity profile of the  agent 
employed  
54  Follow -up information:  
 
Additiona l information may be added to a previously submitted report by any of the following 
methods:  
 
• Adding to the original MedWatch 3500 report and submitting it as  follow -up 
• Adding supplemental summary information and submitting it as follow -up with the origina l 
MedWatch 3500 form  
• Summarizing  new information  and faxing  it with a cover  letter  including  subject  identifiers 
(i.e. D.O.B. initial, subject number), protocol description and number, if assigned, suspect 
drug,  brief  adverse  event  description,  and notation  that additional  or follow -up information 
is being submitted (The subject identifiers are important so that the new information is 
added to the correct initial  report)  
 
Occasionally Prometheus may contact the reporter for additional information, cl arification, or 
current status of the subject for whom and adverse event was reported.  
 
Assessing Causality:  
 
Investigators  are required  to assess  how likely  it is that hydroxychloroquine  caused  or contributed 
to an adverse event (definitely, probably, possibly, or unlikely). The following factors should be 
considered when assessing  relatedness.  
● The temporal  relationship  of the clinical  event  to hydroxychloroquine 
administration  
● The likelihood that IL -2 provides a sufficient explanation for the observed  event.  
 
● Other drugs, therapeutic interventions or underlying conditions that may provide  a 
sufficient explanation for the observed  event.  
  
55  13.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND STUDY SIZE  
 
13.1 Objectives and  Design  
The primary  objective  of this Phase  II trial is to estimate  the proportions  of patients  with metastatic 
RCC treated with high -dose IL -2 combined with hydroxychloroquine experiencing complete 
response, or any response. The secondary  objectives are to compare response, time to progression 
and survival to his torical data to determine the toxicity of the treatment regimen, to evaluate PD, 
and to examine correlative science endpoints. Disease endpoints are defined in Section  10. 
 
The accrual goal is 39 participants. All study participants will receive the same high-dose IL -2 
treatment, which is considered standard of care. The initial dose of HCQ will be 600 mg/day for 
all patients.  If no limitations  on additional  dosing  (treatment -limiting  toxicities  [TLTs],  as defined 
in Section 9.2), dosing will continue at 6 00mg/d, otherwise, HCQ will de -escalate to 400 mg/d. 
Toxicity and response will be monitored after every three patients (Section 13.4), and will be 
stopped if the probability that treatment with IL -2+HCQ is excessively toxic or ineffective. The 
study may b e opened more broadly to additional Cytokine Working Group sites  whenever  
sufficient evidence has accrued that treatment with IL -2+HCQ is no more toxic or less effective 
than treatment with IL -2 alone.  
 
13.2 Analysis  Plan  
 
The data will be analyzed for response, overall survival and other endpoints, as described in this 
section; data will only be analyzed as specified in Section 14.3.1 to ensure the toxicity of IL - 
2+HCQ is not unexpectedly high. All analyses will be performed using the most recent versi ons 
of SAS and/or R available.  
 
13.2.1.  Estimate the proportion of patients with metastatic RCC treated with IL -2 combined with 
hydroxychloroquine at 600mg/d who experience a clinical complete response. Response is 
defined in Section 10.3. The probability of each category of response will be estimated. 
Secondary analyses will employ cumulative logit regression for increasing levels of 
response,  with adjustment  for demographic  and clinical  covariates.  All point  estimates  will 
be accompanied by appropriate 95% confid ence intervals.  
 
13.2.2.  Compare  the response,  overall  survival  and time to progression  of patients  with metastatic 
RCC  treated  with IL-2 combined  with hydroxychloroquine  to the published  response  of 
patients treated with high dose IL -2 alone . Logistic and proportional hazards (Cox) 
regression will be used to compare clinical response, and OS and PFS, respectively, to 
examine the effect of HCQ on the efficacy of IL -2. Formal tests of non -inferiority are 
beyond the scope of this Phase II study, and these seco ndary analyses are not statistically  
powered.  
 
13.2.3.  Characterize the toxicity of IL -2 combined with hydroxychloroquine in patients with 
metastatic RCC: number of  doses of  IL-2 administered  during  the first course  of therapy;  
toxicity  after  the scheduled  9th dose of IL -2; frequency of grade III and IV or unexpected or 
rare toxicities . Number of doses, maximal toxicity grade and incidence of treatment -
limiting toxicities (TLTs, as defined in Section 10.5) will be tabulated.  
56  13.2.4  Evaluate the utility of known prognostic criteria for RCC patients on clinical outcome . 
Prognosis is evaluated by whether the patient has 0, 1, or 2, or 3 or more of the following 
risk factors:  
• lactate dehydrogenase (> 1.5 upper limit of  normal)  
• hemoglobin (< lower lim it of normal)  
• corrected calcium  (>10mg/dL)  
• Karnofsky performance status (<  80%)  
• time from  initial  RCC  diagnosis  to start of interferon -α therapy  of less than one 
year 
This prognostic classification will be added to the baseline models described in Sections  
13.2.1  to 13.2.3  to determine  if any of the factors  would  significantly  change  the prognostic 
evaluation, and to the dynamic and post -treatment factors to potentially increase the 
statistical  power.  
 
13.2.5  Correlate baseline laboratory parameters (miRNAs pre - and post -IL-2; KIR genotyping; 
NK enumeration in the peripheral blood; DC function, TCR - chain expression, arginase 
or arginine levels, proposed pathological/molecular prognosis classification described in 
Section  2.6) with toxicity,  response,  and surviva l. Stepwise  proportional  hazards  or logistic 
regression  will be used to add variables  to the models  resulting  from  the analyses  in Section 
13.2.4.  
 
13.2.6  Assess if changes in biomarkers measured in PBMC (Section 7.4) are associated with 
clinical response, overall survival or progression -free survival. Stepwise proportional 
hazards  or logistic  regression  will be used to determine  if changes  of any of the markers  in 
Section 7.4 are related to patient outcomes, after adjusting for the prognostic criteria in 
13.2.4.  
 
13.3    Monitoring for Toxicity and  Response  
 
13.3.1  21 additional patients will be enrolled at IL -2+HCQ 600 mg/day on this revised protocol. 
If one or  more TLTs are observed, treatment will be de -escalated to IL -2+HCQ 400 
mg/day.  
 
13.3.2  The number of overall partial and complete responses ( Table 8 ) will be compared to the 
stopping rule described in Table 10 by the UPCI Multi -Center DSMC after every three 
patients become evaluable for response. For each number of evaluable patients in the 
left-hand columns, if the number of complete responses is less than or equal to the 
number in the right -hand column, the trial will be halted for lack of efficacy. The trial  is 
derived from a Bayesian beta -binomial model with the prior determined by the number  of 
complete responses observed in the high -dose arm of the randomized trial described in 
Section 2.3 (8/95). The values correspond to P (partial and complete response rat e < 
0.10)  
> 0.8.  
57  # Patients  #Responses  
18 0 
21 1 
24 1 
27 1 
30 2 
33 2 
36 2 
 
Table 8. Monitoring rule for complete response. For the given number of patients in Column 1, if 
the number of partial or complete responses is less than or equal to the number in Column 2, the 
trial is halted for lack of efficacy.  
 
13.4 Justification of Design  
The primary objective of this study is to estimate the clinical response rate of patients with 
metastatic RCC treated with IL -2 combined with hydroxych loroquine at 600mg/d. Assuming 
no TLTs occur and the trial is not closed early for toxicity or inadequate response (Section 
13.3.2),  there  will be 39 patients  available  for this objective.  A 95% exact  binomial  confidence 
interval  on 5 responses  out of 39 patients  (expected  if the addition  of HCQ  to IL-2 doubles  the 
historic proportions of CR ~ 8%) would have width equal to 0.27 (0.07,0.34). For the secondary 
endpoints of OS and PFS, if patients are recruited over 15 months, observed for 15 additional 
months, and the true median survival is 16 months, then the expected width of the 95% 
confidence interval for median survival is 12.8  months.  
58  14.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Bacik J, Berg W, Amsterdam A, Ferrara J. Survival and prognostic 
stratification  of 670 patients  with advanced  renal  cell carcinoma.  J Clin Oncol  17(8):2530 -40, 1999.  
2. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2012. American Cancer Society, Atlanta, 
GA 2012.  
3. Flanigan  RC. Salmon  SE. Blumenstein  BA. Bearm an SI. Roy V. McGrath  PC. Caton  JR Jr. Munshi  
 N. Crawford ED. Nephrectomy followed by interferon alfa -2b compared with interferon alfa -2b 
alone for metastatic renal -cell cancer. N Engl J of Med. 345(23):1655 -9, 2001  
4. Mickisch  GH. Garin  A. van Poppel  H. de Prijck  L. Sylvester  R. European  Organisation  for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Genitourinary Group. Radical nephrectomy plus interferon - 
alfa-based immunotherapy compared with interferon alfa alone in metastatic renal -cell 
carcinoma: a  randomize d trial. Lancet.  358(9286):966 -70, 2001 . 
5. Motzer  RJ, Hutson  TE, Tomczak  P, Michaelson  MD, Bukowski  RM, Oudard  S, Negrier  S, 
Szczylik C,  Pili R, Bjarnason  GA, Garcia -del-Muro  X, Sosman  JA, Solska  E, Wilding  G, 
Thompson  JA, Kim ST, Chen I, Huang X, Figlin RA.  Overall survival and updated results for 
sunitinib compared with interferon alfa in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin 
Oncol. 2009 Aug 1;27(22):3584 -90. 
6. Ernstoff MS. Combination Cytokine Therapy in Cancer. (Goldfarb RH, Whiteside TL, eds.) In:  
Tumor Immunology and Cancer Therapy,  New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1994, pp.  273-279. 
7. Tretter C, Savage PD, Muss HB, Ernstoff MS. Interferon -a and –b Clinical Applications: Renal 
Cell Carcinoma.  (Rosenberg  SA ed) In: Principles  and Practice  of the Biologic  Therapy  of Cancer. 
Third Edition Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000, pp  252-265. 
8. Yang JCY. Interleukin -2: Clinical Applications: Renal Cell Carcinoma (Rosenberg SA ed) In: 
Principles and Practice of the Biologic Therapy of Cance r. Third Edition Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2000, pp  73-82. 
9. Negrier S. Escudier B. Lasset C. Douillard JY. Savary J. Chevreau C. Ravaud A. Mercatello A. 
Peny J. Mousseau M. Philip T. Tursz T. Recombinant human interleukin -2, recombinant h uman 
interferon alfa -2a, or both in metastatic renal -cell carcinoma. Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie. 
New England Journal of Medicine. 338(18):1272 -8, 1998  
10. Figlin RA, Gitlitz B, et al: Interleukin -2 based Immunotherapy for the Treatment of Metastatic 
Rena l Cell Carcinoma: An Analysis of 203 consecutively treated patients. Cancer J. Sci. Am. 3 
Suppl 1: S92 -7, 1997 . 
11. Abrams  JS. Rayner  AA. Wiernik  PH. Parkinson  DR. Eisenberger  M. Aronson  FR. Gucalp  R. Atkins 
MB. Hawkins MJ. High -dose recombinant interleukin -2 alone: a regimen with limited activity in 
the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 
82(14):1202 -6, 1990 . 
12. Atkins MB. Interleukin -2: clinical applications. Seminars in Oncology. 29(3 Suppl 7):12 -7, 2002.  
13. Atkins MB. Sparano J. Fisher RI. Weiss GR. Margolin KA. Fink KI. Rubinstein L. Louie A. Mier 
JW. Gucalp R. et al. Randomized phase II trial of high -dose interleukin -2 either alone or in 
combination  with interferon  alfa-2b in advanced  renal  cell carcinoma.  Journal  of Clinical  
Oncology. 11(4):661 -70, 1993  
14. Atzpodien J. Kirchner H. Jonas U. Bergmann L. Schott H. Heynemann H. Fornara P. Loening  
SA. Roigas J. Muller SC. Bodenstein H. Pomer S. Metzner B. Rebmann U. Oberneder R. Siebels 
M. Wandert T. Puchberger T. Reitz M. Prospectively Randomized Trial of the German 
Cooperative Renal Carcinoma Chemoimmunotherapy Group (DGCIN). Interleukin -2- and 
interferon alfa -2a- based immunochemotherapy in advanced renal cell carcinoma: a Prospectively 
Randomized Trial of the Ge rman Cooperative Renal Carcinoma Chemoimmunotherapy Group 
59  (DGCIN). Journal of Clinical Oncology. 22(7):1188 -94, 2004  
15. Yang  JC. Topalian  SL. Parkinson  D. Schwartzentruber  DJ. Weber  JS. Ettinghausen  SE. White  DE. 
Steinberg SM. Cole DJ. Kim HI. et al. Randomized comparison of high -dose and low -dose 
intravenous interleukin -2 for the therapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma: an interim report. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 12(8):1572 -6, 1994  
16. Atkins MB. Dutcher J. Weiss G. Margolin K. Clark J. Sosman J. Logan T. Aronson F. Mier J. 
Cytokine Working Group. Kidney cancer: the Cytokine Working Group experience (1986 -2001): 
part I. IL -2-based clinical trials. Medical Oncology. 18(3):197 -207, 2001  
17. van Herpen  CM. De Mulder  PH. Prognostic  and predictive  factors  of immunotherapy  in metastatic 
renal cell carcinoma. Critical Reviews in Oncology -Hematology. 41(3):327 -34, 2002  
18. Dosquet C. Coudert MC. Lepage E. Cabane J. Richard F. Are angiogenic factors, cytokines, and 
soluble adhesion molecules prognostic factors in pa tients with renal cell carcinoma? Clinical 
Cancer Research. 3(12 Pt 1):2451 -8, 1997.  
19. Negrier  S. Perol  D. Menetrier -Caux  C. Escudier  B. Pallardy  M. Ravaud  A. Douillard  JY. Chevreau  
C.   
Lasset C. Blay JY. Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie. Interleukin -6, interleukin -10, and 
vascular endothelial growth factor in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: prognostic value of 
interleukin -6--from the Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
22(12):2371 -8, 2004  
20. Motzer R, Bacik J, Murphy BA, et al: Interferon alfa as a comparative treatment for clinical trials 
of new therapies against renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 20:289 –296, 2002  
21. Negrier  S. Escudier  B. Gomez  F. Douillard  JY. Ravaud  A. Chevreau  C. Buclon  M. Perol  D. Lasset  
C. 
Prognostic factors of survival and rapid progression in 782 patients with metastatic renal 
carcinomas treated by cytokines: a report from the Groupe Francais d'Immunotherapie. Annals of 
Oncology. 13(9):1460 -8, 2002  
22. Upton MP, Parker RA et al. Histologic predictors of renal ce ll carcinoma (RCC) response to 
interleukin -2 based therapy. Proc ASCO  2004.  
23. Bui MH. Seligson  D. Han KR. Pantuck  AJ. Dorey  FJ. Huang  Y. Horvath  S. Leibovich  BC. Chopra  
 S. Liao SY. Stanbridge E. Lerman MI. Palotie A. Figlin RA. Belldegrun AS. Carbonic anhydrase 
IX is an independent predictor of survival in advanced renal clear cell carcinoma: implications 
for prognosis and therapy. Clinical Cancer Research. 9(2):802 -11, 2003  
24. Atkins MA, McDermott D et al. Carbonic anhydrase IX(CAIX) expression predicts f or renal 
cell cancer (RCC) patient response and survival to IL -2 therapy. Proc ASCO  2004.  
25. Ohm JE, Gabrilovich DI, Sempowski GD, Kisseleva E, Parman KS, Nadaf S, Carbone DP.  VEGF 
inhibits T -cell Development and May Contribute to Tumor -induced Immune Suppression.: Blood 
101:4878 -4886,  2003.  
26. Gnarra JR . Tory K. Weng Y. Schmidt L. Wei MH. Li H. Latif F. Liu S. Chen F. Duh FM, et al.: 
Mutations of the VHL tumour suppressor gene in renal carcinoma. Nat Genet 7:85,  1994.  
27. Gabrilovich DI, Ishida, T, Nadaf S, Ohm JE, Carbone D P. Antibodies to Vascular Endothelial 
Growth Factor Enhances the Efficacy of Cancer Immunotherapy by Improving Endogenous 
Dendritic Cell Function. Clinical Cancer Research: 5: 2963 -2970,  1999.  
28. George SL, Desu MM. Planning the size and duration of a clinica l trial studying the time to 
some critical event. J Chr Dis 1974;27:15 -24. 
29. Degenhardt K , Mathew R,  Beaudoin B,  Bray K, Anderson D,  Chen G,  Mukherjee C,  Shi 
Y, Gélinas C,  Fan Y, Nelson DA,  Jin S , White E , Autophagy promotes tumor cell survival 
and restricts necrosis, inflammation, and tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell., 2006. 10(1): p.  51-
64. 
60  30. Kroemer, G. and B. Levine, Autophagic cell death: the story of a misnomer.  Nat Rev Mol 
Cell Biol, 2008. 9(12): p.  1004 -10. 
31. Mathew R,  Karp CM, Beaudoin B,  Vuong N,  Chen G,  Chen HY,  Bray K, Reddy A, Bhanot 
G, Gelinas C,  Dipaola RS,  Karantza -Wadsworth V, White E ., Autophagy suppresses  
tumorigenesis through elimination of p62. Cell, 2009. 137(6): p.  1062 -75. 
32. Mathew, R., V. Karantza -Wadsworth, and E. White, Assessing metabolic stress and 
autophagy status in epithelial tumors. Methods Enzymol, 2009. 453: p. 53 -81. 
33. Fujii S , Mitsunaga S,  Yamazaki M , Hasebe T, Ishii G,  Kojima M , Kinoshita T,  Ueno T,  Esumi  
H, Ochia i A., Autophagy is activated in pancreatic cancer cells and correlates with poor patient 
outcome. Cancer Sci, 2008. 99(9): p.  1813 -9. 
34. Livesey KM, Tang D, Zeh HJ, Lotze MT, Autophagy inhibition in combination cancer  
treatment. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2009  Dec;10(12):1269 -1279.  
35. Ravi K. Amaravadi, Jennifer Lippincott -Schwartz, Xiao -Ming Yin, William A.  Weiss,  
 Naoko Takebe, William Timmer, Robert S. DiPaola, Michael Lotze, Eileen White. Principles 
and Current Strategies for Targeting Autophagy for Cancer Tre atment. Clinical Cancer 
Research, in press.  
36. Levy GD,  Munz SJ , Paschal J , Cohen HB,  Pince KJ , Peterson T ., Incidence of 
hydroxychloroquine retinopathy in 1,207 patients in a large multicenter outpatient  
practice. Arthritis Rheum, 1997. 40(8): p.  1482 -6. 
37. Mackenzie, A.H., Dose refinements in  long-term therapy of rheumatoid arthritis 
with antimalarials. Am J Med, 1983. 75(1A): p.  40-5. 
38. Shearer, R.V. and E.L. Dubois, Ocular changes induced by long -term 
hydroxychloroquine (plaquenil) therapy. Am J Ophthalmol, 1967. 64(2): p.  245-52. 
39. Easterbrook,  M., Long -term course of antimalarial maculopathy after cessation of treatment. 
Can J Ophthalmol, 1992. 27(5): p. 237 -9. 
40. Munster T,  Gibbs JP , Shen D,  Baethge BA, Botstein GR , Caldwell J , Dietz F , Ettlinger R,  
Golden  HE, Lindsley H,  McLaughlin GE,  Moreland LW, Roberts WN , Rooney TW , Rothschild 
B, Sack  M, Sebba AI,  Weisman M , Welch KE , Yocum D , Furst DE ., Hydroxychloroquine 
concentration - response relationships in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum, 
2002. 46(6):  p. 
 1460 -9. 
41. Lyons, J.S. and M.L. Severn s, Detection of early hydroxychloroquine retinal toxicity enhanced  
by ring ratio analysis of multifocal electroretinography. Am J Ophthalmol, 2007. 143(5): p.  801-
809. 
42. Zeh, H.J., Lotze, M.T. Addicted to Death: Invasive Cancer and the Immune Response to 
Unscheduled Cell Death. J Immunother 2005;28(1):1 -9. 
43. Bartel, D.P. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell 116, 281 -297 
(2004)  
44. Aurora  Esquela -Kerscher  and Frank  J. Slack.  Oncomirs -microRNAs  with a role in cancer.  Nat Rev 
Cancer. 6(4); 25 9-69 (2006)  
45. Lotze,  MT, Yu, Y. Cancer  genomics:  the unknown  unknowns.  Curr Opin  Invest.  Drugs  2006;7:497 - 
500. 
46. Ceppi M, Pereira PM, Dunand -Sauthier I, Barras E, Reith W, Santos MA, Pierre P. MicroRNA - 
155 modulates the interleukin -1 signaling pathway in activated human monocyte -derived  
dendritic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb  24;106(8):2735 -40. 
47. Tang Y, Luo X, Cui H, Ni X, Yuan M, Guo Y, Huang X, Zhou H, de Vries N, Tak PP, Chen S, 
Shen N. MicroRNA -146A contributes to abnormal activation of the type I interferon pathway in 
human lupus by targeting the key signaling proteins. Arthritis Rheum. 2009  Apr;60(4):1065 -75. 
61  48. Anglicheau D, Sharma VK, Ding R, Hummel A, Snopkowski C, Dadhania D, Seshan SV, 
Suthanthiran M. MicroRNA expression profiles predicti ve of human renal allograft status. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar  31;106(13):5330 -5. 
49. Schmidt WM, Spiel AO, Jilma B, Wolzt M, Müller M. In vivo profile of the human leukocyte 
microRNA response to endotoxemia. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 13;380 (3):437 - 
41. 
50. Faraoni I, Antonetti FR, Cardone J, Bonmassar E. miR -155 gene: A typical multifunctional 
microRNA. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jun;1792(6):497 -505. 
51. Ueda R, Kohanbash G, Sasaki K, Fujita M, Zhu X, Kastenhuber ER, McDonald HA, Potter DM, 
Hamilton  RL, Lotze  MT, Khan  SA, Sobol  RW, Okada  H. Dicer -regulated  microRNAs  222 and 339 
promote  resistance  of cancer  cells to cytotoxic  T-lymphocytes  by down -regulation  of ICAM -1. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.  2009;106(26):10746 -51. 
52. Sparvero LJ, Asafu -Adjei D, Kang R, Tang D, Amin N, Im J, Rutledge R, Lin B, Amoscato AA, 
Zeh HJ, Lotze MT. RAGE (Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts), RAGE Ligands, and 
their role in Cancer and Inflammation. J Translational Medicine. 2009 Mar  17;7-17. 
53. Lu LF, Thai TH, Calado DP, Chaudhry A, Kubo M, Tanaka K, Loeb GB, Lee H, Yoshimura A, 
Rajewsky K, Rudensky AY. Foxp3 -dependent microRNA155 confers competitive fitness to 
regulatory T cells by targeting SOCS1 protein. Immunity. 2009  Jan;30(1):80 -91. 
54. Mantonvani A, Sica A, Locati M. Macrophage polarization comes of age. Immunity. 2005 23(4): 
344-6. 
55. Lotze, M.T., Tracey, K.J. High -mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1): nuclear weapon in the 
immune arsenal. Nature Reviews Immunology  2005;5(4):331 -42. 
56. Rubartelli, A., Lotze, M.T. Inside, outside, upside down: Damage associated molecular pattern 
molecules (DAMPs) and redox. Trends in Immunology.  2007;28(10):429 -436. 
57. Livesey KM, Tang D, Zeh HJ, Lotze MT. Not just nuclear proteins: 'novel' autophagy cancer 
treatment  targets  - p53 and HMGB1.Current  Opinion  Investigational  Drugs.  2008  
Dec;9(12):1259 - 63. 
58. Jon Cardinal, Pinhua Pan, Rajeev Dhupar, Mark Ross, Atsunori Nakao, Michael Lotze, Timothy 
Billiar,  David  Geller,  Allan  Tsung.  Cisplatin  prevents  HMGB1  releas e and is protective  in a murine 
model of hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury. Hepatology. 2009  Aug;50(2):565 -74. 
59. Ellerman, J.E., Brown, C.K., de Vera, M., Zeh, H.J., Billiar, T., Rubartelli, A., Lotze, M.T. 
Masquerader: high mobility group box -1 and cancer. Clin Cancer Res  2007;13(10):2836 -48. 
60. Zeh, HJ, Winikoff, S, Landsittel, DP, Gorelik, E, Marrangoni, AM, Velikokhatnaya, L, Winans, 
MT, Lee, K, Moser, A, Bartlett, D, Lotze, MT. Multianalyte profiling of serum cytokines for 
detection of pancreatic cancer. Cancer Biomark  2005;1:259 -69. 
61. P Pan , J Cardinal , R Dhupar , M Rosengart , MTLotze , D Geller, T Billiar, A Tsung. Low dose 
cisplatin administration in murine cecal ligation and puncture prevents the systemic release of 
HMGB1 and attenuates lethal ity. J Leukoc Biol. 2009;  86(3):625 -32. 
62. Lotfi  R, Herzog  GI, DeMarco  RA, Beer -Stolz  D, Lee JJ, Rubartelli  A, Schrezenmeier  H, Lotze  MT. 
Eosinophils Oxidize DAMPs Derived From Stressed Cells. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5023 - 
31. 
63. Dong Xda, E., Ito, N., Lot ze, M.T., DeMarco, R.A., Popovic, P., Shand, S.H., Watkins, S., 
Winikoff, S., Brown, C.K., Bartlett, D.L., Zeh, H.J. 3rd. HMGB1 release from tumor cells after 
treatment: implications for development of targeted chemoimmunotherapy. Journal of 
Immunotherapy 2007;  30(6):596 -606. 
64. Lotze  MT. Zeh HJ. Rubartelli  A. Sparvero  LJ. Amoscato  AA. Washburn  NR. Devera  ME. Liang  
 X. Tor M. Billiar T. The grateful dead: damage -associated molecular pattern molecules and 
reduction/oxidation regulate immunity. Immunological Reviews. 220:60 -81, 2007.  
62   
65. Saal S, Harvey SJ. MicroRNAs and the kidney: coming of age. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 
2009  Jul;18(4):317 -23 
66. Liang M, Liu Y, Mladinov D, Cowley AW Jr, Trivedi H, Fang Y, Xu X, Ding X, Tian Z. 
MicroRNA: a new frontier in kidney and blood pressure research. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2009  Sep;297(3):F553 -8. 
67. Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez -Saavedra E, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet -Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak 
RH, Ferrando AA, Downing JR, Jacks T, Horvitz HR, Golub TR. MicroRNA expression prof iles 
classify human cancers. Nature 435: 834 –838, 2005 . 
68. Gottardo F, Liu CG, Ferracin M, Calin GA, Fassan M, Bassi P, Sevignani C, Byrne D, Negrini 
M, Pagano F, Gomella LG, Croce CM, Baffa R. Micro -RNA profiling in kidney and bladder 
cancers. Urol Oncol. 20 07 Sep-Oct;25(5):387 -92. 
69. Nakada, C; Matsuura, K; Tsukamoto, Y, et al. Genome -wide microRNA expression profiling in 
renal  cell carcinoma:  significant  down -regulation  of miR-141 and miR-200c.  Journal  of Pathology. 
2008;216(4):418 -27. 
70. Yi Z, Fu Y, Zhao S, Zhang X, Ma C. Differential expression of miRNA patterns in renal cell 
carcinoma and nontumorous tissues. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009 Nov  17. 
71. Juan D, Alexe G, Antes T, Liu H, Madabhushi A, Delisi C, Ganesan S, Bhanot G, Liou LS. 
Identification of a Micro RNA Panel for Clear -cell Kidney Cancer. Urology. 2009 Dec 24 [Epub 
ahead of  print] . 
72. Petillo D, Kort EJ, Anema J, Furge KA, Yang XJ, Teh BT. MicroRNA profiling of human  kidney 
cancer subtypes. Int J Oncol. 2009  Jul;35(1):109 -14. 
73. Tian Z, Greene AS, Pietrusz JL, Matus IR, Liang M. MicroRNA -target pairs in the rat kidney 
identified by microRNA microarray, proteomic, and bioinformatic analysis. Genome Res. 2008 
Mar;18(3):404 -11. Epub 2008 Jan 29.  
74. Szafranska AE, Davison TS, Shingara J, Doleshal M, Riggenbach JA, Morrison CD, Jewell S, 
Labourier E. Accurate molecular characterization of formalin -fixed, paraffin -embedded tissues 
by microRNA expression profiling. J Mol Diagn. 2008;10(5):415 -23. 
75. Stittrich, A.B., et al., The microRNA miR -182 is induced by IL -2 and prom otes clonal expansion 
of activated helper T lymphocytes. Nat Immunol. 11(11): p. 1057 -62. 
76. Curtale, G., et al., An emerging player in the adaptive immune response: microRNA -146a is a 
modulator of IL -2 expression and activation -induced cell death in T lympho cytes. Blood. 115(2): 
265-73. 
77. Jensen HK, Donskov F, Marcussen N, Nordsmark M, Lundbeck F, von der Maase H. Presence of 
intratumoral neutrophils is an independent prognostic factor in localized renal cell carcinoma. J 
Clin Oncol. 2009 Oct  1;27(28):4709 -17. 
78. Sconocchia G, Spagnoli GC, Del Principe D, Ferrone S, Anselmi M, Wongsena W, Cervelli V, 
Schultz -Thater E, Wyler S, Carafa V, Moch H, Terracciano L, Tornillo L. Defective infiltration 
of natural killer cells in MICA/B -positive renal cell carcinoma involves  beta(2) -integrin -mediated 
interaction. Neoplasia. 2009  Jul;11(7):662 -71. 
79. Clement JM, McDermott DF. The High -Dose Aldesleukin (IL -2) "Select" Trial: A Trial Designed 
to Prospectively Validate Predictive Models of Response to High -Dose IL -2 Treatment in Pat ients 
With Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2009  Aug;7(2):E7 -9. 
80. McGuire BB, Fitzpatrick JM. Biomarkers in renal cell carcinoma. Curr Opin Urol. 2009 
Sep;19(5):441 -6. Review.  
81. Zurita AJ, Jonasch E, Wu HK, Tran HT, Heymach JV. Circulating biomarkers for vascular 
endothelial growth factor inhibitors in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2009 May 15;115(10 
Suppl):2346 -54. Review.  
63  82. Sabatino M, Kim -Schulze S, Panelli MC, Stroncek D, Wang E, Taback B, Kim DW, Deraffele 
G, Pos Z, Marincola FM, Kaufman HL. Serum vascular endothelial growth factor and fibronectin 
predict  clinical  response  to high-dose interleukin -2 therapy.  J Clin Oncol.  2009  Jun 1;27(16):2645 -
52. Epub 2009 Apr 13.  
83. Klatte  T, Seligson  DB, LaRochelle  J, Shuch  B, Said JW, Riggs  SB, Zomorodian  N, Kabbinavar  
FF, Pantuck  AJ, Belldegrun  AS. Molecular  signatures  of localized  clear  cell renal  cell carcinoma  
to predict disease -free survival after nephrectomy. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 
Mar;18(3):894 -900. 
84. Geiger C, Nössner E,  Frankenberger B, Falk CS, Pohla H, Schendel DJ. Harnessing innate and 
adaptive immunity for adoptive cell therapy of renal cell carcinoma. J Mol Med. 2009 
Jun;87(6):595 -612. 
85. Shablak A, Hawkins RE, Rothwell DG, Elkord E. T cell -based immunotherapy of metas tatic renal 
cell carcinoma: modest success and future perspective. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov  1;15(21):6503 - 
10. 
86. Berg M, Lundqvist A, McCoy P Jr, Samsel L, Fan Y, Tawab A, Childs R. Clinical -grade ex vivo - 
expanded  human  natural  killer  cells up-regulate  activating  receptors  and death  receptor  ligands  and 
have enhanced cytolytic activity against tumor cells. Cytotherapy.  2009;11(3):341 -55. 
87. Porta C, Bonomi L, Lillaz B, Klersy C, Imarisio I, Paglino C, Rovati B, Danova M, Ferraris E, 
Mensi M, Rovereto B. Immunological stress in kidney cancer patients undergoing either open 
nephrectomy or nephron -sparing surgery: an immunophenotypic study of lymphocyte 
subpopulations and circulating dendritic cells. Oncol Rep. 2008  Dec;20(6):1511 -9. 
88. Moschos SJ, Mandic M, Kirkwood JM, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT. Focus on FOCIS: interleukin 2 
treatment associated autoimmunity. Clin Immunol. 2008 May;127(2):123 -9. Review.  
89. Margolin K, Atkins MB, Dutcher JP, Ernstoff MS, Smith JW 2nd, Clark JI, Baar J, Sosman J, 
Weber J, Lathia C, Br unetti J, Cihon F, Schwartz B. Phase I trial of BAY 50 -4798, an interleukin - 
2-specific agonist in advanced melanoma and renal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 
1;13(11):3312 -9. 
90. van der Vliet HJ, Koon HB, Yue SC, Uzunparmak B, Seery V, Gavin MA, Rudensky A Y, Atkins 
MB, Balk SP, Exley MA. Effects of the administration of high -dose interleukin -2 on 
immunoregulatory cell subsets in patients with advanced melanoma and renal cell cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;13(7):2100 -8. Erratum in: Clin Cancer Res. 2007  Jun 1;13(11):3433. van 
der Vliet, Hans J J [corrected to van der Vliet, Hans J].  
91. Schleypen JS, Baur N, Kammerer R, Nelson PJ, Rohrmann K, Gröne EF, Hohenfellner M, 
Haferkamp A, Pohla H, Schendel DJ, Falk CS, Noessner E. Cytotoxic markers and frequency 
predict functional capacity of natural killer cells infiltrating renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer  Res. 
2006 Feb 1;12(3 Pt  1):718 -25. 
92. Donskov F, Hokland M, Marcussen N, Torp Madsen HH, von der Maase H. Monocytes and 
neutrophils as 'bad guys' for the outcome o f interleukin -2 with and without histamine in metastatic 
renal  cell carcinoma --results  from  a randomised  phase  II trial. Br J Cancer.  2006  Jan 30;94(2):218 - 
26. 
93. Verra  N, de Jong  D, Bex A, Batchelor  D, Dellemijn  T, Sein J, Nooijen  W, Meinhardt  W, Horenblas 
S, de Gast G, Vyth -Dreese F. Infiltration of activated dendritic cells and T cells in renal cell 
carcinoma following combined cytokine immunotherapy. Eur Urol. 2005  Sep;48(3):527 -33. 
94. Cózar  JM, Canton  J, Tallada  M, Concha  A, Cabrera  T, Garrido  F, Ruiz -Cabel lo Osuna  F. Analysis 
of NK cells and chemokine receptors in tumor infiltrating CD4 T lymphocytes in human renal 
carcinomas. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2005  Sep;54(9):858 -66. 
95. Schleypen JS, Von Geldern M, Weiss EH, Kotzias N, Rohrmann K, Schendel DJ, Falk  CS, Pohla  
 H. Renal  cell carcinoma -infiltrating  natural  killer  cells express  differential  repertoires  of activating 
64  and inhibitory  receptors  and are inhibited  by specific  HLA  class  I allotypes.  Int J Cancer.  2003  
Oct 10;106(6):905 -12. 
96. Stanley AJ, Gough MJ,  Banks RE, Selby PJ, Patel PM. Renal carcinoma cell lines inhibit natural 
killer activity via the CD94 receptor molecule. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2001 Jul;50(5):260 - 
8. 
97. Kloss M, Decker P, Baltz KM, Baessler T, Jung G, Rammensee HG, Steinle A, Krusch M, Salih 
HR. Interaction of monocytes with NK cells upon Toll -like receptor -induced expression of the 
NKG2D ligand MICA. J Immunol. 2008 Nov  15;181(10):6711 -9. 
98. Nedvetzki S, Sowinski S, Eagle RA, Harris J, Vély F, Pende D, Trowsdale J, Vivier E, Gordon 
S, Davis DM. Reciprocal regulation of human natural killer cells and macrophages associated 
with distinct immune synapses. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3776 -85. Epub 2007 Jan  11. 
99. Schwinn N, Vokhminova D, Sucker A, Textor S, Striegel S, Moll I, Nausch N, Tuettenbe rg J, 
Steinle A, Cerwenka A, Schadendorf D, Paschen A. Interferon -gamma down -regulates NKG2D 
ligand expression and impairs the NKG2D -mediated cytolysi of MHC class I -deficient melanoma 
by natural killer cells. Int J Cancer. 2009  Apr1;124(7):1594 -604. 
100. Selig er B, Schlaf G. Structure, expression and function of HLA -G in renal cell carcinoma. Semin 
Cancer Biol. 2007 Dec;17(6):444 -50. Epub 2007 Jul 13.Review.  
101. Bukur J, Rebmann V, Grosse -Wilde H, Luboldt H, Ruebben H, Drexler I, Sutter G, Huber C, 
Seliger B. Functional role of human leukocyte antigen -G up -regulation in renal cell carcinoma. 
Cancer Res. 2003 Jul  15;63(14):4107 -11. 
102. Bukur  J, Malenica  B, Huber  C, Seliger  B. Altered  expression  of nonclassical  HLA  class  Ib antigens 
in human renal cell carcinoma and its association with impaired immune response. Hum  Immunol. 
2003  Nov;64(11):1081 -92. 
103. Ostberg JR, Dayanc BE, Yuan M, Oflazoglu E, Repasky EA. Enhancement of natural killer  (NK) 
cell cytotoxicity by fever -range thermal stress is dependent on NKG2D function a nd is associated 
with plasma membrane NKG2D clustering and increased expression of MICA on target cells. J 
Leukoc Biol. 2007 Nov;82(5):1322 -31. 
104. Varker KA, Kondadasula SV, Go MR, Lesinski GB, Ghosh -Berkebile R, Lehman A, Monk JP, 
Olencki T, Kendra K, Carson  WE 3rd. Multiparametric flow cytometric analysis of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 5 phosphorylation in immune cell subsets in vitro and 
following interleukin -2 immunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Oct  1;12(19):5850 -8. 
105. Austin Taylor M, B ennett M, Kumar V, Schatzle JD. Functional defects of NKcells treated with 
chloroquine mimic the lytic defects observed in perforin -deficient mice. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 
1;165(9):5048 -53. 
106. Lemoine FM, Cherai M, Giverne C, Dimitri D, Rosenzwajg M, Trebeden -Negre H, Chaput N, 
Barrou B, Thioun N, Gattegnio B, Selles F, Six A, Azar N, Lotz JP, Buzyn A, Sibony M,  Delcourt 
A, Boyer  O, Herson  S, Klatzmann  D, Lacave  R. Massive  expansion  of regulatory  T-cells following 
interleukin 2 treatment during a phase I -II dendritic cell -based immunotherapy of metastatic renal 
cancer. Int J Oncol. 2009  Sep;35(3):569 -81. 
107. Schwaab T, Schwarzer A, Wolf B, Crocenzi TS, Seigne JD, Crosby NA, Cole BF, Fisher JL, 
Uhlenhake JC, Mellinger D, Foster C, Szczepiorkowski ZM, Webber SM, Sc hned AR, Harris 
RD, Barth RJ Jr, Heaney JA, Noelle RJ, Ernstoff MS. Clinical and immunologic effects of 
intranodal autologous  tumor  lysate -dendritic  cell vaccine  with Aldesleukin  (Interleukin  2) and 
IFN-{alpha}2a therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Aug  
1;15(15):4986 -92. 
108. Gigante M, Blasi A, Loverre A, Mancini V, Battaglia M, Selvaggi FP, Maiorano E, Napoli A, 
Castellano G, Storkus WJ, Gesualdo L, Ranieri E. Dysfunctional DC subsets in RCC patients: ex 
vivo correction to  yield an effective anti -cancer vaccine. Mol Immunol. 2009  Feb;46(5):893 -901. 
65  109. Berntsen A, Trepiakas R, Wenandy L, Geertsen PF, thor Straten P, Andersen MH, Pedersen AE, 
Claesson MH, Lorentzen T, Johansen JS, Svane IM. Therapeutic dendritic cell vaccination of 
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a clinical phase 1/2 trial. J Immunother. 2008 
Oct;31(8):771 -80. 
110. D' Hooghe  E, Buttiglieri  S, Bisignano  G, Brusa  D, Camussi  G, Matera  L. Apoptic  renal  carcinoma 
cells are better inducers of cross -presenting activity than their primary necrotic counterpart. Int J 
Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2007  Oct-Dec;20(4):707 -17. 
111. Kim JH, Lee Y, Bae YS, Kim WS, Kim K, Im HY, Kang WK, Park K, Choi HY, Lee HM, Baek 
SY, Lee H, Doh H, Kim BM, Kim CY, Jeon C, Jung  CW. Phase  I/II study  of immunotherapy  using 
autologous  tumor  lysate -pulsed  dendritic  cells in patients  with metastatic  renal  cell carcinoma.  Clin 
Immunol. 2007  Dec;125(3):257 -67. 
112. Avigan DE, Vasir B, George DJ, Oh WK, Atkins MB, McDermott DF, Kantoff PW, Figlin RA, 
Vasconcelles MJ, Xu Y, Kufe D, Bukowski RM. Phase I/II study of vaccination with electrofused 
allogeneic dendritic cells/autologous tumor -derived cells in patients with stage IV renal cell 
carcinoma. J Immunother. 2007  Oct;30(7):749 -61. 
113. Kobayash i M, Suzuki K, Yashi M, Yuzawa M, Takayashiki N, Morita T. Tumor infiltrating 
dendritic  cells predict  treatment  response  to immmunotherapy  in patients  with metastatic  renal  
cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res. 2007 Mar -Apr;27(2):1137 -41. 
114. Bleumer I, Tiemessen DM, Oosterwijk -Wakka JC, Völler MC, De Weijer K, Mulders  PF, 
Oosterwijk E. Preliminary analysis of patients with progressive renal cell carcinoma vaccinated 
with CA9 -peptide -pulsed mature dendritic cells. J Immunother. 2007  Jan;30(1):116 -22. 
115. Höltl  L, Ramon er R, Zelle -Rieser  C, Gander  H, Putz T, Papesh  C, Nussbaumer  W, Falkensammer 
C, Bartsch G, Thurnher M. Allogeneic dendritic cell vaccination against metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma with or without cyclophosphamide. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2005 Jul;54(7) :663- 
70. 
116. Accapezzato D, Visco V, Francavilla V, Molette C, Donato T, Paroli M, Mondelli MU, Doria M, 
Torrisi MR, Barnaba V. Chloroquine enhances human CD8+ T cell responses against soluble 
antigens in vivo. J Exp Med. 2005 Sep  19;202(6):817 -28. 
117. Maeurer MJ , Martin DM, Castelli C, Elder E, Leder G, Storkus WJ, Lotze MT. Host immune 
response in renal cell cancer: interleukin -4 (IL -4) and IL -10 mRNA are frequently detected in 
freshly collected tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1995 
Aug;41(2):111 -21. 
118. Komita H, Zhao X, Taylor JL, Sparvero LJ, Amoscato AA, Alber S, Watkins SC, Pardee AD, 
Wesa AK, Storkus WJ. CD8+ T -cell responses against hemoglobin -beta prevent solid tumor 
growth. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct  1;68(19):8076 -84. 
119. Herrem CJ, Tatsumi T , Olson KS, Shirai K, Finke JH, Bukowski RM, Zhou M, Richmond AL, 
Derweesh  I, Kinch  MS, Storkus  WJ. Expression  of EphA2  is prognostic  of disease -free interval  
and overall survival in surgically treated patients with renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 
Jan 1;11(1):226 -31. 
120. Tatsumi T, Herrem CJ, Olson WC, Finke JH, Bukowski RM, Kinch MS, Ranieri E, Storkus WJ. 
Disease stage variation in CD4+ and CD8+ T -cell reactivity to the receptor tyrosine kinase  EphA2 
in patients with renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 1;  63:4481 -9. 
121. Tatsumi T, Kierstead LS, Ranieri E, Gesualdo L, Schena FP, Finke JH, Bukowski RM, Brusic V, 
Sidney J, Sette A, Logan TF, Kasamon YL, Slingluff CL Jr, Kirkwood JM, Storkus WJ. MAGE -
6 encodes HLA -DRbeta1*0401 -presented epitopes recognized by CD4+ T cells from patients 
with melanoma or renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2003  Mar;9(3):947 -54. 
122. Zhang B. Targeting the stroma by T cells to limit tumor growth. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 
1;68(23):9570 -3. 
66  123. Shusterman S, London WB, Gillies SD , Hank JA, Voss SD, Seeger RC, Reynolds CP, Kimball J, 
Albertini  MR, Wagner  B, Gan J, Eickhoff  J, Desantes  KB, Cohn  SL, Hecht  T, Gadbaw  B, Reisfeld 
RA, Maris JM, Sondel PM. Antitumor Activity of Hu14.18 -IL-2 in Patients With 
Relapsed/Refractory Neuroblastoma: A Children's Oncology Group (COG) Phase II Study. J Clin 
Oncol. 2010 Nov  20;28(33):4969 -4975.  
124. Yu AL, Gilman AL, Ozkaynak MF, London WB, Kreissman SG, Chen HX, Smith 
M, Anderson B, Villablanca JG, Matthay KK, Shimada H, Grupp SA, Seeger R,  
Reynolds CP, Buxton A, Reisfeld RA, Gillies SD, Cohn SL, Maris JM, Sondel PM; 
Children's Oncology Group. Anti -GD2 antibody with GM -CSF, interleukin -2, and 
isotretinoin for neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2010 Sep 30;363(14):1324 -34. 
125. Delgado DC, Hank JA, Kolesar  J, Lorentzen DF, Gan J, Seo S, Kim K,  Shusterman  
 S, Gillies SD, Reisfeld RA, Yang RK, Gadbaw B, Desantes KD, London W, Seeger RC, 
Maris J, Sondel PM. Genotypes of NK cell KIR receptors, their ligands, and  
 Fcγ Receptors in the response of neuroblastoma p atients to Hu14.18 -IL-2 
immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 2010 Oct 8. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 
20935224.  
126. Leung W, Iyengar R, Turner V, Lang P, Bader P, Conn P, et al. Determinants of antileukemia 
effects of allogeneic NK cells. J Immunol. 2004;172(1):644 -50. 
127. Escalante A, Beardmore TD. Risk factors for early wound complications after orthopedic surgery 
for rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol. 1995  Oct;22(10):1844 -51. 
128. den Broeder  AA, Creemers  MC, Fransen  J, de Jong  E, de Rooij  DJ, Wymenga  A, de Waal -Malefijt 
M, van den Hoogen  FH. Risk factors  for surgical  site infections  and other  complications  in elective 
surgery in patients with rheumatoid arthritis with special attention for anti -tumor necrosis factor: 
a large retrospective study. J Rheumatol. 2007 Apr;34(4):689 -95. 
129. Lacaille D, Guh DP, Abrahamowicz M, Anis AH, Esdaile JM. Use of nonbiologic disease - 
modifying antirheumatic drugs and risk of infection in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum. 2008 Aug  15;59(8):1074 -81. 
130. Liang X, De Vera ME, Buchser WJ, Romo de Vivar Chavez, Loughran P, Beer -Stolz D, Basse  P, 
Wang T, Van Houten B, Zeh HJ 3rd. Lotz MT. Inhibiting systemic autophagy during interleukin 
2 immunotherapy .promotes long -term tumor regression. Cancer Res. 2012  June1 :;2(11):2791 -
801. 
131. Schwartzentruber DJ, Lawson DH, Richards JM, Conry RM, Miller DM, Treisman J, Pockaj B, 
Kendra KL, White RL, Gonzalez R, Kuzel TM, Curti B, Leming PD, WEHitman ED, Balkissoon 
J, Reitngen  DS, Kaufman  H, Marincola  FM, Mreino  MJ, Roseberg  SA, Choyke  P, Vena  D, Hwu  
 P. gp100 peptide vaccine and Interleukin -2 in patients with advanced melanoma. 2011. N Engl J 
Med 364:2119 -27. 
132. Margolin K, Atkins MB, Dutcher JP, Ernstoff MS, Smith JW 2nd, Clark JI, Baar J, Sosman J, 
Weber J, Lathia C, Brunetti J, Cihon F, Schwartz B. Phase I trial of BAY 50 -4798, an interleukin - 
2-specific agonist in advanced melanoma and renal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 
1;13(11):3312 -9 
133. Sosman JA, Weiss GR, Margolin KA, Aronson FR, Sznol M, Atkins MB, O'Boyle K, Fisher RI , 
Boldt DH, Doroshow J, et al. Phase IB clinical trial of anti -CD3 followed by high -dose bolus 
interleukin -2 in patients  with metastatic  melanoma  and advanced  renal  cell carcinoma:  clinical  
and immunologic effects. J Clin Oncol. 1993 Aug;11(8):1496 -505.  
134. McDermott DF, et al. Randomized phase III trial of high -dose interleukin -2 versus  
subcutaneous interleukin -2 and interferon in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J 
Clin Oncol. 2005 Jan  1;23(1):133 -41. 
67   
135. McDermott DF, Carducci M. Progress in Kidney Cancer Outcomes Through  
 Collaboration, Innovation, and Discovery. J Clin Oncol. 2018 Oct 29:JCO1801198.  
 doi: 10.1200/JCO.18.01198. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID: 30372393; PubMed  
 Central PMCID: PMC6299339.  
136. Gao X, McDermott DF. Ipilimumab in combination with nivolumab for the  
 treatment of renal cell carcinoma. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2018 Sep;18(9):947 -957. 
 doi: 10.1080/14712598.2018.1513485. Epub 2018 Aug 30. PubMed PMID: 30124333;  
 PubMed Central PMCID: P MC6289271.  
137. Motzer RJ, Tannir NM, McDermott DF, Arén Frontera O, Melichar B, Choueiri TK,  
 Plimack ER, Barthélémy P, Porta C, George S, Powles T, Donskov F, Neiman V,  
Kollmannsberger CK, Salman P, Gurney H, Hawkins R, Ravaud A, Grimm MO, Bracarda  
S, Barrios CH, Tomita Y, Castellano D, Rini BI, Chen AC, Mekan S, McHenry MB,  
Wind -Rotolo M, Doan J, Sharma P, Hammers HJ, Escudier B; CheckMate 214  
Investigators. Nivolumab plus Ipilimumab versus Sunitinib in Advanced Renal -Cell  
Carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2018  Apr 5;378(14):1277 -1290. doi:  
10.1056/NEJMoa1712126. Epub 2018 Mar 21. PubMed PMID: 29562145; PubMed Central  
PMCID: PMC5972549.  
138. Atkins MB, Plimack ER, Puzanov I, Fishman MN, McDermott DF, Cho DC,  
Vaishampayan U, George S, Olencki TE, Tarazi JC, Rosbr ook B, Fernandez KC,  
Lechuga M, Choueiri TK. Axitinib in combination with pembrolizumab in patients  
with advanced renal cell cancer: a non -randomised, open -label, dose -finding, and  
dose-expansion phase 1b trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018 Mar;19(3):405 -415. doi:  
10.1016/S1470 -2045(18)30081 -0. Epub 2018 Feb 10. PubMed PMID: 29439857.  
139. Curti B, Daniels GA, McDermott DF, Clark JI, Kaufman HL, Logan TF, Singh J,  
Kaur M, Luna TL, Gregory N, Morse MA, Wong MKK, Dutcher JP. Improved survival and  
tumor control with Interleukin -2 is associated with the development of  
immune -related adverse events: data from the PROCLAIM(SM) registry. J Immunother  
Cancer. 2017 Dec 19;5(1):102. doi: 10.1186/s40425 -017-0307 -5. PubMed PMID:  
29254506; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5735508.  
140. Rini BI, McDermott DF, Hammers H, Bro W, Bukowski RM, Faba B, Faba J, Figlin  
RA, Hutson T, Jonasch E, Joseph RW, Leibovich BC, Olencki T, Pantuck AJ, Quinn  
DI, Seery V, Voss MH, Wood CG, Wood LS, Atkins MB. Society for Immunotherapy of  
Cancer consensus s tatement on immunotherapy for the treatment of renal cell  
carcinoma. J Immunother Cancer. 2016 Nov 15;4:81. eCollection 2016. PubMed PMID:  
27891227; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5109802.  
141. Choueiri TK, Fishman MN, Escudier B, McDermott DF, Drake CG, Kluger  H, Stadler  
WM, Perez -Gracia JL, McNeel DG, Curti B, Harrison MR, Plimack ER, Appleman L,  
Fong L, Albiges L, Cohen L, Young TC, Chasalow SD, Ross -Macdonald P, Srivastava  
S, Jure -Kunkel M, Kurland JF, Simon JS, Sznol M. Immunomodulatory Activity of  
Nivoluma b in Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Nov  
15;22(22):5461 -5471. doi: 10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -15-2839. Epub 2016 May 11. PubMed  
PMID: 27169994; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5106340.  
142. Erbe AK, Wang W, Goldberg J, Gallenberger M, Kim K, Carmichael L, Hess D,  
Mendonca EA, Song Y, Hank JA, Cheng SC, Signoretti S, Atkins M, Carlson A, Mier  
JW, Panka DJ, McDermott DF, Sondel PM. FCGR Polymorphisms Influence Response to  
IL2 in Metastatic Ren al Cell Carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 May  
1;23(9):2159 -2168. doi: 10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -16-1874. Epub 2016 Oct 14. PubMed  
68  PMID: 27742794; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5392177.  
143. Alva A, Daniels GA, Wong MK, Kaufman HL, Morse MA, McDermott DF, Clark JI,  
Agarwala SS, Miletello G, Logan TF, Hauke RJ, Curti B, Kirkwood JM, Gonzalez R,  
Amin A, Fishman M, Agarwal N, Lowder JN, Hua H, Aung S, Dutcher JP. Contemporary  
experience with high -dose interleukin -2 therapy and impact on survival in  
patients with metasta tic melanoma and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer  
Immunol Immunother. 2016 Dec;65(12):1533 -1544. Epub 2016 Oct 6. PubMed PMID:  
27714434; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5099373.  
144. Wang W, Erbe AK, Gallenberger M, Kim K, Carmichael L, Hess D, Mendonca EA , 
Song Y, Hank JA, Cheng SC, Signoretti S, Atkins M, Carlson A, Weiss JM, Mier J,  
Panka D, McDermott DF, Sondel PM. Killer immunoglobulin -like receptor (KIR) and  
KIR-ligand genotype do not correlate with clinical outcome of renal cell  
carcinoma patients re ceiving high -dose IL2. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016  
Dec;65(12):1523 -1532. Epub 2016 Sep 30. PubMed PMID: 27695964; PubMed Central  
PMCID: PMC5123674.  
145. Wallin JJ, Bendell JC, Funke R, Sznol M, Korski K, Jones S, Hernandez G, Mier  
J, He X, Hodi FS, Denker M, Leveque V, Cañamero M, Babitski G, Koeppen H, Ziai J,  
Sharma N, Gaire F, Chen DS, Waterkamp D, Hegde PS, McDermott DF. Atezolizumab in  
combination with bevacizumab enhances antigen -specific T -cell migration in  
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Na t Commun. 2016 Aug 30;7:12624. doi:  
10.1038/ncomms12624. PubMed PMID: 27571927; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5013615.  
146. Choueiri TK, Escudier B, Powles T, Tannir NM, Mainwaring PN, Rini BI, Hammers  
HJ, Donskov F, Roth BJ, Peltola K, Lee JL, Heng DYC, Schmid inger M, Agarwal N,  
Sternberg CN, McDermott DF, Aftab DT, Hessel C, Scheffold C, Schwab G, Hutson TE,  
Pal S, Motzer RJ; METEOR investigators. Cabozantinib versus everolimus in  
advanced renal cell carcinoma (METEOR): final results from a randomised,  
open -label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Jul;17(7):917 -927. doi:  
10.1016/S1470 -2045(16)30107 -3. Epub 2016 Jun 5. PubMed PMID: 27279544.  
147.  McDermott DF, Sosman JA, Sznol M, Massard C, Gordon MS, Hamid O, Powderly JD,  
Infante JR, Fassò M, Wang YV, Zou W, H egde PS, Fine GD, Powles T. Atezolizumab,  
an Anti -Programmed Death -Ligand 1 Antibody, in Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma:  
Long -Term Safety, Clinical Activity, and Immune Correlates From a Phase Ia Study.  
J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar 10;34(8):833 -42. doi: 10.1200 /JCO.2015.63.7421. Epub 2016  
Jan 11. PubMed PMID: 26755520.  
148. Motzer RJ, Escudier B, McDermott DF, George S, Hammers HJ, Srinivas S, Tykodi  
SS, Sosman JA, Procopio G, Plimack ER, Castellano D, Choueiri TK, Gurney H,  
Donskov F, Bono P, Wagstaff J, Gauler TC, Ueda T, Tomita Y, Schutz FA,  
Kollmannsberger C, Larkin J, Ravaud A, Simon JS, Xu LA, Waxman IM, Sharma P;  
CheckMate 025 Investigators. Nivolumab versus Everolimus in Advanced Renal -Cell 
Carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2015 Nov 5;373(19):1803 -13. doi: 1 0.1056/NEJMoa1510665.  
Epub 2015 Sep 25. PubMed PMID: 26406148; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5719487.  
149. Kaufman HL, Wong MK, Daniels GA, McDermott DF, Aung S, Lowder JN, Morse MA.  
The Use of Registries to Improve Cancer Treatment: A National Database for  
Patients Treated with Interleukin -2 (IL -2). J Pers Med. 2014 Mar 7;4(1):52 -64. 
doi: 10.3390/jpm4010052. PubMed PMID: 25562142; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4251407.  
150.  McDermott DF, Cheng SC, Signoretti S, Margolin KA, Clark JI, Sosman JA,  
Dutcher JP, Logan T F, Curti BD, Ernstoff MS, Appleman L, Wong MK, Khushalani NI,  
Oleksowicz L, Vaishampayan UN, Mier JW, Panka DJ, Bhatt RS, Bailey AS, Leibovich  
69  BC, Kwon ED, Kabbinavar FF, Belldegrun AS, Figlin RA, Pantuck AJ, Regan MM,  
Atkins MB. The high -dose aldesleuki n "select" trial: a trial to prospectively  
validate predictive models of response to treatment in patients with metastatic  
renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 1;21(3):561 -8. doi:  
10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -14-1520. Epub 2014 Nov 25. PubMed PMID: 25424850; PubMed  
Central PMCID: PMC4315731.  
151. Motzer RJ, Rini BI, McDermott DF, Redman BG, Kuzel TM, Harrison MR,  
Vaishampayan UN, Drabkin HA, George S, Logan TF, Margolin KA, Plimack ER, Lambert  
AM, Waxman IM, Hammers HJ. Nivolumab for Metastatic Renal  Cell Carcinoma: Results  
of a Randomized Phase II Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2015 May 1;33(13):1430 -7. doi:  
10.1200/JCO.2014.59.0703. Epub 2014 Dec 1. PubMed PMID: 25452452; PubMed Central  
PMCID: PMC4806782.  
 
70  APPENDIX A  
 
Procedure for Obtaining a Urine Protein:Creatinine Ratio (Or alternatively calculate from 
the serum creatinine based on gender and age)  
 
1) Obtain at least 4 ml of a random urine sample (does not have to be a 24 hour  urine).  
2) Determine protein concentration  (mg/dL).  
3) Determine creatinine concentration (mg/dL).  
4) Divide #2 by #3 above: urine protein / creatinine ratio = protein concentration (mg /dL) / 
creatinine concentration (mg  /dL).  
 
The UPC directly correlates with the amount of protein excreted in the urine p er 24 hrs (i.e. a 
UPC of 1 should be equivalent to 1g protein in a 24hr urine collection).  
 
Protein and creatinine concentrations should be available on standard reports of urinalyses, 
not dipsticks. If protein and creatinine concentrations are not routine ly reported at an 
institution, their measurements and reports may need to be requested  
71   
 
APPENDIX B  - Schedule of Events  
 
 
 
 
Study Visit  Screening  Study 
start  Each Course (1 -3)  
 
 
 
End of 
Study 
Visit q  
 
 
 
Follow 
Up r  
 
Days -41 to  
-14  
 
Days -27 to  
-14  
 
Day 
-14  
 
Day 1   
 
Days 
7-14  
 
Day 
15  
 
Day 
29  
 
Day 
43  
 
Day 
57  
 
Day 
71  
 
Day 
84 
History/Physical exam   X X X  X X  X   X X 
Concomitant medications  X X X X  X X  X   X X 
Adverse events  X X X -------------------------------- --------------------------------  X X X 
Radiologic exams  Xa        Xb  X  Xb 
Pulmonary Function Testing  Xc             
Cardiac Stress Test  Xd             
12-lead EKG  X             
ECHO or MUGA for LVEF  Xe          Xe   
Screening labs   Xf            
Urine protein:creatinine ratio   X            
Urinalysis g  X  X  X        
Patient Registration   X            
Treatment labs    Xh Xi Xj Xi Xh Xh Xh Xh   Xh, k 
IL-2 l    Xl  Xl        
Hydroxychloroquine m   X----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Xk 
Research blood draws n   X X  Xn        
Pathology submission       Xo        
Telephone contact for toxicity assessment      X         
Subject Drug Administration Diary for HCQ  
Tablets    X X   X  X   X Xk 
a. Within 4 weeks prior to day –14 patients will have  CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis and brain MRI. If clinically indicated a bone scan should be  done.  
b. After week 8 (+/ - 1 week) and week 12 (+/ - 1 week) of each course patients will have CT of chest/abdomen/pelvis. If clinically indicated repeat bone scan an d brain MRI.  After 
the final course (week 36), patients will have CT scan evaluation every 12 weeks for up to one year or until tumor progressio n (whichever occurs first). For patients who have 
not shown progression at the end of one year, response will be  captured during follow -up survival via telephone contact and medical record review. If additional scans are 
performed for clinical reasons, the study schedule may be altered to perform the requisite scans at a more acceptable time po int. The change in tim ing of study scans must be 
approved by the local PI and  documented.  
c. All patients over 50 years of age or those with significant pulmonary or smoking  history.  
72   
d. All patients over 40 years of age or with significant cardiac  history.  
e. ECHO or MUGA will be performed at baseline. ECHO will be performed prior to start of each new course only if clinically indic ated (section  10.3.3).  
f. Screening  labs to include  CBC  w/differential,  CMP (creatinine,  BUN,  albumin,  total protein,  glucose,  electrolytes  [Na, K, Cl, HCO3],  liver function  tests [total  bilirubin,  ALP, 
AST, ALT]), direct bilirubin, calcium, phosphorus, LDH, TSH, PT, PTT, HIV, Hep B and C, Pregnancy test for women of childbear ing potential.  
g. Proteinuria level must be checked prior to each cycle of  IL-2. 
h. Outpatient labs to include CBC w/differential, CMP (creatinine, BUN, albumin, total protein, glucose, liver function tests [t otal bilirubin, ALP, AST, ALT], electrolytes [Na, K, 
Cl, HCO3]), LDH , CPK, amylase, and  lipase.  
i. Inpatient labs to include CBC w/differential, CMP (creatinine, BUN, albumin, total protein, glucose, liver function tests [to tal bilirubin, ALP, AST, ALT], electrolytes [Na, K, 
Cl, HCO3]), direct bilirubin, calcium, magnesium, p hosphorus, LDH, CPK, amylase, and lipase.  
j. Outpatient labs to include CBC w/differential, CMP (creatinine, BUN, albumin, total protein, glucose, liver function tests [t otal bilirubin, ALP, AST, ALT], electrolytes [Na,  K, 
Cl, HCO3]), amylase, and lipase  
k. Patients  with no evidence  of progression  by RECIST 1.1 criteria  may receive  continued  treatment  with hydroxychloroquine  through  one year of initiation  of HCQ  treatment 
(Day -14) until disease  progression.  
l. IL-2 every  8 hours  on days 1-5 (or  6) and 15 -19 (or  20) (maximum  14 doses  per 5 day cycle).  Dependent  upon when Dose  1 is administered on Day  1/Day  15, Dose  14 could 
require hospitalization on Day 6/Day  20. 
m. HCQ daily dosing starting on Day -14 (minimum of 14 days, plus a window of + 7 days if  needed)  
n. See Table 6 for sampling schedule. Cycle 2 draws will only be done in Course  1. 
o. Blocks or slides will be sent within 4 weeks after  enrollment.  
p. Subjects will be evaluated with physical examination ~30 days (28 -42 days) after being removed from study for any  reason.  
q. After the final course of treatment, follow -up procedures will be performed every 3 months (+/ - 2 weeks) for up to one year or until disease progression (whichever occurs first). 
Follow -up procedures will include CT scan, routine laboratory tests, and physical examination. Subjects will then be followed for survival by telephone contact and medical 
record review every 3 months for one year following the time of disease progression or after one year off of treatment, then every 6 months for the next two years, then annually 
until death. A window of +/ - 2 weeks is  permitted.  
 
 
If a subject's treatment and/or testing days need to be rescheduled due to the subject’s inability to comply with the study c alendar (i.e., 
hospitalizations, business and vacatio n travel plans, illness, transportation issues, holidays, family emergencies, etc.), a window of +/ - 
one week is available for rescheduling of treatment and procedures per the discretion of the treating physician investigator,  and as 
discussed with the pri ncipal investigator.  
73  Appendix C  
  
 Blood Draw Instructions for Research Labs for Protocol IL -2HQ  
 
A Phase II Study of Hydroxychloroquine and Aldesleukin in Patients with Advanced RCC  
 
Comments  Treatment Day  Timepoint  Tube(s) to draw  Storage 
condition  
Hydroxychloroquine is 
oral Day -14 Pre-dose of  
Hydroxychloroquine  2 lge (10ml) Red top  1 on ice or in 
frig., 1 ambient  
10 tubes at 
ambient temp. 
on their side  
1 tube on ice or 
in frig     10 lge (10ml) sod. Hep. Green  
top 
   1 PAXgene RNA blood tube 
(2.5ml)  
 Course 1  
Cycle 1  
Day 1 and 2  Please draw blood before pre - 
treatment ancillary medication 
is given  
Pre-dose of IL -2 
(post -dose PO HCQ)  2 lge (10ml) Red top  
 
10 lge (10ml) sod. Hep. Green 
top 
 
1 PAXgene RNA blood tube 
(2.5ml)  1 on ice or in 
frig., 1 ambient  
10 tubes at 
ambient temp. 
on their side  
1 tube on ice or 
in frig  
 Just prior to Dose 4 of IL -2 
( + / - 1 dose)  1 lge (10ml) Red top  On ice or in 
frig. 
 Course 1  
Cycle 1  
Day 15 and 16  Pre-dose of 
Hydroxychloroquine  2 lge (10ml)  Green top  
 
1 lge (10ml) Red top  Ambient temp. 
on their side  
On ice or in 
frig. 
 just prior to Dose 4 of IL -2 
( + / - 1 dose)  1 lge (10ml) Red top  On ice or in  
frig. 
 Course 1 
Between 
Days 60 -80 During clinic visit  2 lge (10ml) Red top  
 
10 lge (10ml) sod. Hep. Green 
top 1 on ice or in 
frig., 1 ambient  
10 tubes at 
ambient temp. 
on their side  
1 tube on ice or  
in frig    1 PAXgene RNA blood tube 
(2.5ml)  
 Course 2  
Cycle 1  
Day 1  Pre-dose of IL -2 
(post -dose PO HCQ)  2 lge (10ml) Green top  
 
1 lge (10ml) Red  top Ambient temp. 
on their side 
On ice or in  
frig. 
 Course 3  
Cycle 1  
Day 1  Pre-dose of IL -2 
(post -dose PO HCQ)  2 lge (10ml) Green top  
 
1 lge (10ml) Red top  Ambient temp. 
on their side 
On ice or in  
frig. 
74  APPENDIX D  
Processing Specimens for RCC Study (hydroxychloroquine / Aldesleukin for RCC)  
 
1 Large Red Top Tube(s) for Serum (Kept on ice): Please carry out in laminar flow hood to keep serum sterile.  
 
• After blood is drawn, invert t ube several times to mix well. Send to UPCI IMCPL  overnight.  
• IMCPL Centrifuge for 10 minutes at 900g to 1000g to separate out  serum.  
• Aliquot  serum  into prelabeled  sterile  freeze  vials  at approximately  0.5 to 1.0 ml per vial (4 vials 
maximum).  
• Fill in vial labels with patient ID# and date. (Please be careful to use appropriate lettered  vials)  
• Fill in Inventory/Shipping Log for  W0454  
• Store vials at -70 to -80C until ready to  ship.  
 
1 Large Green Top Tube for Plasma (Kept on ice): UPCI/IMCPL will carry out in  laminar flow hood to keep 
plasma sterile.  
• After blood is drawn, invert tube several times to mix well.  
• Centrifuge for 10 minutes at 900g to 1000g to separate out  plasma.  
• Aliquot  plasma  into prelabeled  sterile  freeze  vials  at approximately  0.5 ro 1.0 ml per vial (4 vials 
maximum).  
• Fill in vial labels with patient ID# and date. (Please be careful to use appropriate lettered  vials)  
• Fill in Inventory/Shipping Log for  IL-2HQ  
• Store vials at -70 to -80C until ready to  ship.  
 
1 10cc Red Top Tube for Serum (kept  at ambient temp.) AND  
10 Large Sodium Heparin Green Top Tubes for PBMCs. (Kept at ambient temp.):  
 
Batch specimens from one patient and ship on dry ice along with a copy of the Inventory / Shipping Log, for next 
day morning delivery by FedEx on a Monday -Thursday to:  
 
Please call or e -mail to alert us of shipment arrival, including tracking number.  
 
UPCI – IMCPL  
5117 Centre Avenue  
1.27 Hillman Cancer Center 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213  
Attn: Specimen processor 
Phone 412 -623-1418  
75  APPENDIX E  
Inventory /  Shipping Log for IL -2HQ Research Blood Specimens  
 
IL-2HQ: A Phase II Study of hydroxychloroquine and Aldesleukin in Patients with Metastatic RCC  
 
  
Patient  
Study  ID#     
Institution  
    
Date sent  
 to UPCI  
Day -14  
"A" Pre-dose hydroxychloroquine   
Date  
Time   
am/pm   
10 green tops    
2 red tops     
1 PAXgene RNA blood     
Day 1 - 2      
Cycle 1  "B" Pre-dose IL -2 (Post -dose PO  HCQ)  Date Time  am/pm  
Course 1  10 green tops    
 2 red tops     
 1 PAXgene RNA blood     
  
"C" Prior to IL -2 Dose 4 (+/ - 1 Dose)   
Date  
Time   
am/pm   
 1 red top     
Day 15 -16      
Cycle 2  "D" Pre-dose  hydroxychloroquine  Date Time  am/pm  
Course 1  2 green tops     
 1 red top     
  
"E" Prior to IL -2 Dose 4 (+/ - 1 Dose)   
Date  
Time   
am/pm   
 1 red top     
Between       
Days 60 -80 “F” During clinic  visit Date Time  am/pm  
Course 1  10 green tops     
 2 red tops     
 1 PAXgene RNA blood     
Day 1       
Cycle 1  “G” Pre-dose IL -2 (Post -dose PO  HCQ)  Date Time  am/pm  
Course 2  2 green tops     
 1 red top     
Day 1       
Cycle 1  “H” Pre-dose IL -2 (Post -dose PO  HCQ)  Date Time  am/pm  
Course 3  2 green tops     
 1 red top     
Green top tube (8 -10 mL/tube), Red top tube (8 -10 mL/tube), PAXgene tube (2.5 mL/tube)  
76  APPENDIX F  
 
Subject Drug Administration Diary for Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) Tablets  
 
 
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE 
TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO  THE PATIENT:  
 
1. You will take a dose of  hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)   mg daily starting on day –14. 
You will take:   200 mg tablets in the  morning  and   200 mg tablets in the 
evening every day while you are participating in this  study.  
2. You will start taking HCQ on day –14. You will take HCQ daily as  directed.  
3. For every day you take HCQ, record the date, the number of capsules you took, and  the 
time of day you took each  capsule.  
4. You should take your HCQ tablets at about the same time each  day. 
5. Swallow the tablets whole. Do not chew the  tablets.  
6. Missed and vomited doses should not be made  up. 
7. If you have any comments or notice any side effects, please record them in  the 
“Comments”  column.  
8. Please bring this form with you when you return for your doctor’s  appointments.  
9. If you make a mistake on the form, please cross out your mistake with a single line  through 
it. Then use the next day’s space to correct the entry. Then cross out each of the 
subsequent numbers and write in the correct number.  
10. DO NOT SHARE TH IS MEDICATION WITH  ANYONE.  
77  SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #: N/A (Day –14 to Day –1) Course Start Date:  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
–14        
–13        
–12        
–11        
–10        
–9        
–8        
–7        
–6        
–5        
–4        
–3        
–2        
–1        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
78   
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #:  Course Start Date:  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg 
tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg 
tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
1        
2        
3        
4        
5        
6        
7        
8        
9        
10        
11        
12        
13        
14        
15        
16        
17        
18        
19        
20        
21        
22        
79  23        
24        
25        
26        
27        
28        
 
 
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #:  Course Start Date:  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
29        
30        
31        
32        
33        
34        
35        
36        
37        
38        
39        
40        
41        
42        
43        
44        
45        
46        
47        
48        
49        
80  50        
51        
52        
53        
54        
55        
56        
 
 
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #:  Course Start Date:  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
57        
58        
59        
60        
61        
62        
63        
64        
65        
66        
67        
68        
69        
70        
71        
72        
73        
74        
75        
76        
81  77        
78        
79        
80        
81        
82        
83        
84        
82  SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug:  Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #: N/A (Day 267 to Day 351)  Course Start Date: N/A  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
267        
268        
269        
270        
271        
272        
273        
274        
275        
276        
277        
278        
279        
280        
281        
282        
283        
284        
285        
286        
287        
288        
289        
290        
291        
292        
293        
83  294        
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #: N/A (Day 267 to Day 351)  Course Start Date: N/A  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
295        
296        
297        
298        
299        
300        
301        
302        
303        
304        
305        
306        
307        
308        
309        
310        
311        
312        
313        
314        
315        
316        
317        
318        
319        
320        
321        
84  322        
 
 
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #: N/A (Day 267 to Day 351)  Course Start Date: N/A  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
323        
324        
325        
326        
327        
328        
329        
330        
331        
332        
333        
334        
335        
336        
337        
338        
339        
340        
341        
342        
343        
344        
345        
346        
347        
85  348        
349        
350        
351        
 
 
 
SUBJECT DRUG ADMINISTRATION DIARY FOR HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE TABLETS  
Protocol ID: UPCI 11 -080 Study Drug: Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)  
Subject Identification #:  Study Drug Start Date:  
Course #: N/A  Course Start Date: N/A  
 
Study 
Day Date  AM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  PM DOSE  
  200 mg  tablet(s)  Comments  Missed 
Doses  
  # pills 
taken  Time taken  # pills 
taken  Time taken    
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
86          
        
        
        
        
        
 