CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
Observational Study of Individual or Group Template  
 
 
 
Feasibility, A cceptability, and Barri ers to Implementation of  
a Geriatrics Bundle in the ICU: a Pilot Study  
(ACE -ICU) 
 
 Protocol Number  
2000029410  
  
Protocol Version  4 
4/7/2021  
  
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier  
NCT 04652453  
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality Statement:  
This research is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. The researchers with this Certificate may not disclose or use information, 
documents, or biospecimens that may identify you in a ny federal, state, or local civil, 
criminal, administrative, legislative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as 
evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless you have consented for this use. 
Information, documents, or biospecime ns protected by this Certificate cannot be disclosed to 
anyone else who is not connected with the research except, if there is a federal, state, or 
local law that requires disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases 
but not for feder al, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other 
proceedings, see below); if you have consented to the disclosure, including for your medical 
treatment; or if it is used for other scientific research, as allowed by federal regulat ions 
protecting research subjects.  
 
  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
2 Synopsis  
Purpose  
Despite the known benefits of geriatric care models among hospitalized older adults 
outside the intensive care unit (ICU), few studies have addressed the needs of older 
adults in the ICU; for example, sensory impairment, functional decline, and deprescribing 
of potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs) are rarely addressed in routine ICU 
practice. We have developed a geriatrics bundle for the ICU that implements evidence -
based interventions from geri atric models of care (occupational therapy, assessment and 
treatment of hearing impairment, and deprescribing PIMs started in the ICU) and 
complements existing ICU best practices. This pilot study will evaluate the feasibility, 
acceptability, and barriers and facilitators to implementing these interventions in the ICU . 
This pilot work will provide invaluable preliminary data for a future hybrid effectiveness -
implementation study of the geriatrics bundle in the ICU, with a long -term goal of adding 
the geriat rics bundle as the “G” component of the ABCDEF bundle (the existing standard 
of care) to facilitate widespread implementation  across ICUs.  
Primary Objective  
The primary objective  of this proposal is to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability, and 
barriers to implementing a “geriatrics bundle” in the ICU as an addition  to the current 
bundle of ICU interventions (the “ABCDEF bundle”).  
Secondary Objective  
The secondary objective of this study is to describe (as preliminary data) the in -hospital 
outcomes (such as incidence of delirium, mobility level, muscle strength at discharge, 
hospital length of stay) among patients who have received the geriatric bundle . 
Study Design  
This is a prospective pilot study that will draw participants aged 65 and older from the 36 -
bed medical intensive care unit (MICU) of the main campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital 
(YNHH). This study will use a pre -/post -intervention design; fi rst, 30 control patients will 
be enrolled, and subsequently the geriatrics bundle will be implemented in 50 patients.  A 
patient (or proxy) interview and medical record review will be performed at the time of 
enrollment by a research nurse. For patients in  the intervention group, t he research nurse 
will then orient the patient, proxy, and ICU nurse to the components of the geriatrics 
bundle. All patients in the intervention group will receive all 3 bundle components: 
occupational therapy (in addition to phy sical therapy delivered via our established early 
mobilization program, which the PI directs) , a portable amplifying device to help with 
hearing,  and a deprescribing intervention by the ICU pharmacist (in conjunction with the 
medical team) upon ICU -to-floor transfer.  
Study Date Range and Duration  
3 years (1 year s for field activities, 2 years for data analysis and manuscript preparation)  
Number of Study Sites  
1 – the York Street campus MICU of YNHH  
Primary Outcome Variables  
The primary outcomes are all implementation outcomes; therefore, they will only be 
evaluated among participants and providers enrolled during the intervention phase  of the 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
3 study. To evaluate the feasibility of bundle delivery in the ICU ( SA1), we will assess the 
delivery of each bundl e component separately. For the occupational therapy intervention 
(Component 1 ), we will review the electronic medical record (EMR) for OT notes from 
study enrollment through hospital discharge. In addition to gathering data on numbers of 
patients receivin g OT, we will gather data about the frequency of and which OT 
interventions are performed. For the hearing impairment intervention ( Component 2 ), we 
will perform a daily audit of use of the hearing amplifier (by speaking with the nurse, 
patient, and checki ng the  bedside log). For the deprescribing intervention ( Component 3) , 
we will review the chart for the ICU pharmacist’s note. We will also gather data on the 
details of the deprescribing intervention (i.e. the number and type of medications that 
were chan ged or discontinued) as preliminary data for future studies.  
To evaluate the acceptability of the geriatrics bundle among providers who are 
responsible for delivering and using the individual components ( SA2), we will administer a 
survey with a 5-point Likert scale (range 1 -5, where 5 indicates that the bundle is 
completely acceptable for use in its current form) to the providers who are responsible for 
delivering the intervention: occupational therapists (OT; Component 1 ), nurses (primarily, 
but also other ICU providers such as physici ans and physical therapists; Component 2 ), 
and ICU pharmacists ( Component 3 ). 
To evaluate facilitators and barriers to implementation of the geriatrics bundle ( SA3), we 
will use qualitative methods to allow for a more comprehensive understanding of barrier s 
and facilitators encountered by the healthcare team (OT, nursing, and ICU pharmacy) 
during bundle delivery. We will approach all participating OT and Pharmacy providers and 
use purposive sampling for the nursing group (given the large number of ICU nurse s). 
Focus groups will be recorded and professionally transcribed. Transcripts will be reviewed 
by the investigators with coding occurring according to the methods of Strauss and Corbin 
and analysis conducted using the constant comparative method.  
Secondar y and Exploratory Outcome Variables  
From the intervention and control groups, w e will gather data on in -hospital outcomes of 
importance to older adults, including but not limited to delirium, mobility level, muscle 
strength at discharge, functional status  at discharge, and ICU/hospital lengths of stay.   We 
will also ask patients about perceived benefit of the hearing impairment intervention.  
Study Population  
This is a prospective pilot study that will draw participants aged 65 and older from the 36 -
bed me dical intensive care unit (MICU) of the main campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital 
(YNHH).  All patients aged >=65 who are admitted to the MICU will be screened for 
enrollment.   Nursing providers, occupational therapists, and ICU pharmacists delivering 
the bun dle components will also be enrolled as study participants (“provider participants”).  
Number of Participants  
We plan to enroll 80 patient participants  (30 in the control group, 50 in the intervention 
group) .  Of the providers, we plan to enroll 75 nurses and all of the occupational therapists 
and ICU pharmacists ( approximately 3 -5 in each group) who deliver the interventions . 
Study Schedule  
Each patient participant will have 2 study visits that include assessments by the research 
team . Intervention participants will also have a  brief daily audit asking about use of the 
portable amplifying device .  The first visit will occur in the ICU and the second will occur 
on the hospital ward, prior to hospital discharge.  Each interview /assessment will take 
approximately 45 minutes.   Approximately one month after  discharge, there will be one 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
4 follow -up phone call to ask about ongoing use of the portable amplifying device  (in the 
intervention group) and to ask questions about functional recovery and h ealth outcomes  
(in all participants) . 
The study schedule for provider participants will include a brief survey (5 -10 minutes), 
and, for the subset that are recruited for and agree to participate in focus groups, one 
additional  study visit for the focus group ( lasting approximately 1 hour on a separate 
date).  
 
  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
5 Protocol Revision History  
 
Version Date  Summary of Substantial Changes  
1  11/5/2020  N/A – initial submission  
2  11/25/2020  Addition of provider participants (nurses, occupational therapists, and ICU 
pharmacists delivering the bundle components) as study participants 
throughout the protocol.  
3   1/6/2021  Addition of a control group (30 participants) and revision of the size of the 
intervention group to 50 participants (from 75)  
4    4/7/2021  Clarification of triggers for proxy  consent , removal of witness requirement for 
proxy consents given minimal risk , and a ddition (to the screening process , 
which currently only includes the JDAT screening report ) of review of the 
MICU roster with an additional check to ensure that the partic ipant has not 
opted out of research.  
  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
6 Statement of Compliance  
This document is a protocol for a human research study. The purpose of this protocol is to 
ensure that this study is to be conducted according to the Common Rule at 45CFR46 
(human subjects) and other applicable government regulations and Institutional research 
policies and procedures.  
 
Abbreviations  
EMR: electronic medical record  
ICU: intensive care unit  
MoCA: Montreal Cognitive Assessment  
OT: occupational therapy  
PIM: potentially inappropriate medication  
PT: physical therapy  
SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment  
 
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
Observational Study of Individual or Group Template  
1 Background/Literature Review  and 2 Rationale/Study Significance  
1.1 Background /Rationale and 2.1 Study Significance  
Millions of older adults are admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) every year, and 
this numbe r is only expected to increase as the population ages.1 By 2050, the number 
of older adults in the U.S. is expected to exceed 90 million.  A dvances in critical care 
medicine have concurrently resulted in increasing numbers of patients surviving a critical 
illness .2-5 The majority of ICU survivors experience new impairments in long -term physical 
function, cognitive function, or  mental health.6-8  Indeed, a high -impact editorial noted that 
“survivorship will be the defining challenge of critical care in the 21st century.”9 
Older adults are more likely to present to the ICU with multifactorial health conditions 
that c onfer increased vulnerability to  adverse outcomes .  Older adults with p re-ICU 
vulnerability factors  (e.g. frailty, cognitive impairment) are at greater risk of poor outcomes 
when exposed to a high acuity insult such as a critical illness , compounded with insults from 
the ICU environment (e.g. immobility and  polypharmacy ). Our work  has demonstrated the 
importance of frailty, cognitive impairment, and their interaction on post -ICU disability among 
older adults,10-12 established  the strong association  of an older person's pre -ICU functional 
trajectory with post-ICU disability,13 and shown that hearing and vision impairment were the 
factors most strongly associated with (a lack of) functional recovery after an ICU 
hospitalization.14 Despite the importance of these multifactorial health conditions on the post -
ICU outcomes of older adults, these health conditions are not routinely assessed or 
addressed in the ICU.  
In the fast -paced ICU environment, the consistent delivery of high -quality care has 
been improved through the use of bundles and checklists.15 Over the past decade, the 
“ABCDEF bundle” ((A)ssess/manage pain, (B)oth spontaneous awakening and spontaneous 
breathing trials, (C)hoice of analgesia/sedation, (D)elirium assessment, prevention, and 
management, (E)arly Mobilization, (F)amily engagement) h as become a core part of ICU 
practice, with each bundle component supported by a strong evidence base.16-18 Likewise, 
checklist s are a cornerstone of ICU practice, and have had the capacity to transform ICU 
care.19 By running through a checklist at the end of rounds, providers ensure that quality 
care, including the ABCDEF bundle, is delivered to every ICU patient.20 
Despite the increasing number of older adults admitted to the ICU, there has been no 
effort to target any bundle or checklist components to the needs of older ICU patients.  
To address the needs of critically ill older adults, the PI has developed an evidence -based 
(G)eriatrics bundle , with a long -term goal of adding this bundle as the  “G” component of the 
ABCDEF  bundle . The bundle includes occupational therapy evaluation and treatment (in 
addition to physical therapy already being delivered through early mobi lization), the 
assessment and treatment of hearing impairment, and a deprescribing intervention of 
potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs) started in the ICU upon the ICU-to-floor 
transition .  
The evidence base for this bundle is strong. Early mobiliz ation, usually delivered by physical 
therapy, is already part of ICU practice through the ABCDEF bundle.  We will add 
occupational therapy, a skilled service that focuses on daily functional tasks, and one that 
has previously shown benefit in improving fun ctional outcomes among hospitalized older 
adults21 and in the ICU population,22 to existing early mobilization protocols. Prior work 
among older adults has demonstrated the importance of assessing and treating sensory 
impairment,23,24 and our own work has demonstrated the association of sensory impairment 
with post -ICU functional outcomes.14 Finally, the continuation of potentially inappropriate 
medications (PIMs) initiated in the ICU is common,25 with prior studies demonstrating that 
pharmacist intervention may be effective i n reducing PIM continuation.26 The proposed work 
will evaluate the feasibility of the healthcare team to deliver the geriatrics bundle to older 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
8 patients in the  ICU ( Specific Aim 1 ) and assess the bundle’s acceptability among provi ders 
who are responsible for delivering and using t he individual components (nurses, physicians, 
occupational therapists, and ICU pharmacists ; Specific Aim 2 ). We will also evaluate 
facilitators and barriers to implementation of the geriatrics bundle in th e ICU setting (Specific 
Aim 3 ).  The results of this pilot proposal will provide preliminary data for an R01 application 
evaluating the bundle’s effectiveness in improving in -hospital and post -ICU outcomes 
(primary aim) while also evaluating implementation  outcomes (secondary aim).   
 
Prior Experience (if applicable)  
Dr. Ferrante has extensive experience conducting patient -oriented outcomes research in the 
intensive care unit.  Other active protocols enrolling in the ICU include the PREDICT study 
(PI: Ferr ante, protocol #2000026657) and the VALIANT study (mPI: Cohen, Ferrante, 
Hajduk, protocol #2000028175).   
 
2.2 Purpose of Study/Potential Impact  
Despite the strong evidence base for several of the geriatrics bundle components in 
hospitalized older adults, most of these components  have never been studied or 
implemented in the ICU environment. This study leverages strategies (bundles and 
checklists) that have been known to work in the ICU to build on existing evidence -based 
interventions (the ABCDEF bundle) to improve outcomes for o lder ICU patients.  
This pilot study will generate invaluable preliminary data about feasibility, acceptability, 
facilitators, and barriers to implementation that will be used to support a hybrid effectiveness -
implementation R01 of the geriatrics bundle in the ICU setting. Long -term, the overarching 
goal is to leverage the existing ABCDEF bundle by adding the geriatrics bundle as the “G” 
component to facilitate its widespread implementation.  
 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits  
2.3.1 Potential Risks  
The risk a ssociated with this study is minimal , since our study leverages three interventions 
that already exist in ICU practice, but are underutilized.  Occupational therapy has been part 
of the STEPS -ICU program (a YNHH quality improvement program) since its incep tion in 
March of 2015 .  This study does not change anything about the OT or STEPS -ICU program 
itself; the study only ensures that all patients age 65 and older (in the intervention group) are 
prescribed OT  (since most physicians only remember to order PT, but forget about OT) . Of 
note, Dr. Ferrante has been the physician lead of  YNHH's early mobilization program in the 
MICU (the "STEPS -ICU" program) since its inception in 2015 , and has worked closely w ith 
partners in Rehab Services throughout the duration o f the program . In terms of the hearing 
impairment intervention, portable amplifying devices have been available in the hospital for 
years , so the minimal risk is that the patient may find the headphones bothersome.  We will 
provide a laminated instruction sheet at each patient’s bedside so that the nurse and patient 
have a resource for use of the device.  In terms of the deprescribing intervention, there is a 
small risk of a patient having a home medication discontinued, but this risk will be minimized 
by having ICU pharmacists deliver the deprescribing intervention, so that they ensure that 
only medications started in the MICU (that are now inappropriate) are discontinued.  As with 
any study, there is a small risk of breach of confidentiality, but we will m inimize this risk 
through our use of secure data practices.    
There are no risks to the provider participants in this study, other than the inconvenience 
associated with the 5 -10 minute survey and/or the 1 -hour focus group.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
9 2.3.2 Potential Benefits  
The patient participants in the intervention group  are likely to benefit from receipt of the 
geriatrics bundle.  First, ensuring the default receipt of occupational therapy (OT) is likely to 
identify impairments in activities of daily living (ADLs) and ins trumental activities of daily 
living (IADLs) that may not have been observed without an OT evaluation. Second, the 
receipt of a portable amplifying device for hearing -impaired patients is likely to benefit their 
ability to hear in the short -term (and poten tially the long -term, if they continue to use a 
portable amplifier after discharge).  Provision of the device may also benefit patients who do 
not report hearing impairment, as they may have objective hearing impairment (but not 
subjective hearing impairme nt) and may still benefit from use of the device and realize the 
benefit once they have tried it.  Third, the deprescribing component will actually prevent 
potential harm from reaching the patient, because it is discontinuing medications started in 
the MIC U that are no longer appropriate for the patient.  There are no benefits to the patient 
participants in the control group.  However, i f the bundle is (eventually) successfully 
implemented into clinical practice, there will be potential benefit to future pa tients.  
There is potential benefit to the nursing and occupational therapy provider participants, as 
provision of the portable amplifying device to the patient may help improve their ability to 
communicate with a hearing -impaired older patient.  There is no potential benefit to the ICU 
pharmacy providers, though the knowledge gained in this study may improve ICU 
pharmacy practice in the future.  
3  Study Purpose and Objectives  
3.1 Hypothesi s 
We hypothesize that the geriatrics bundle will be feasible to impl ement among older patients 
in the medical intensive care unit (MICU), and that the bundle will be acceptable to the 
providers responsible for its implementation.  We hypothesize that the qualitative aim will 
uncover additional barriers and facilitators to the bundle’s implementation that were not 
identified in the first two aims.  
3.2 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this proposal is to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability, and barriers 
to implementing a “geriatrics bundle” in the ICU as an add ition to the standard of care (the 
“ABCDEF” bundle).  
3.3 Secondary O bjective  (if applicable)  
The secondary objective of this study is to describe (as preliminary data) the in -hospital 
outcomes (such as delirium, mobility level, muscle strength at discharge , ICU/hospital length 
of stay) among patients who have received the geriatric bundle , as well as their 30 -day 
functional outcomes and health outcomes (i.e. readmissions) .  An additional secondary 
objective is to describe the ongoing use of the portable amp lifying device after hospital 
discharge  among the intervention group participants .  
 
4 Study Design  
4.1.1 General Design Description  
This is a prospective pilot study that will draw participants aged 65 and older from the 36 -bed 
medical intensive care unit (MICU) of the main campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital 
(YNHH). The study uses a pre -/post -intervention design.  First, 30 consecutive patients will 
be recruited for the control group (during the “control phase” of the study).  The geriatrics 
bundle will then be implemented, and then 50 intervention group participants will be enrolled 
(during the “intervention phase” of the study).  For a ll study participants, a  patient (or proxy) 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
10 interview and medical record review will be performed at the time of enrollment by a 
research nurse. All participants will undergo another interview and assessment prior to 
hospital discharge, and will receive a brief follow -up phone assessment at approximately 30 
days after discharge.  
For participants in the intervention group, the research nurse will orient the patient, proxy, 
and ICU nurse to the components of the geriatrics bundle  during the baseline interview  in 
the ICU . All intervention group  participants  will receive all 3 bundle components: 
occupational therapy (in addition to physical therapy delivered via our established early 
mobilization program, which the PI directs) , a portable amplifying device to he lp with hearing,  
and a deprescribing intervention by the ICU pharmacist (in conjunction with the medical 
team) upon ICU -to-floor transfer.   Providers who are delivering the bundle components 
(nurses, occupational therapists, and ICU pharmacists) will also be enrolled as study 
participants, hereafter referred to as “provider participants.”   Participants enrolled during the 
intervention phase will also undergo brief “check -in” assessments between enrollment and 
hospital discharge to gather feedback and accept ability data about the interventions.  
 
4.1.2 Study Date Range and Duration  
3 years (1 year for field activities, 2 years for data analysis and manuscript preparation)  
 
4.1.3 Number of Study Sites  
1 – the York Street campus MICU of YNHH  
 
4.2 Outcome Variables  
4.2.1 Primary Outcome Variables  
The primary outcomes are all implementation outcomes; therefore, they will only be 
evaluated among participants and providers enrolled during the intervention phase of the 
study. To evaluate the feasibility of bundle delivery in the ICU ( SA1), we will asse ss the 
delivery of each bundle component separately. For the occupational therapy intervention 
(Component 1 ), we will review the electronic medical record (EMR) for OT notes from study 
enrollment through hospital discharge. In addition to gathering data on  numbers of patients 
receiving OT, we will gather data about the frequency of and which OT interventions are 
performed. For the hearing impairment intervention ( Component 2 ), we will perform a daily 
audit of use of the portable amplifying device. The daily  audit will include asking the 
participant and nurse about use of the device, as well as checking a daily bedside log where 
use of the device is recorded.  For the deprescribing intervention ( Component 3) , we will 
review the chart for the ICU pharmacist’s n ote. We will also gather data on the details of the 
deprescribing intervention (i.e. the number and type of medications that were changed or 
discontinued) as preliminary data for future studies.  
To evaluate the acceptability of the geriatrics bundle among providers who are responsible 
for delivering and using the individual components ( SA2), we will administer a survey with a 
5-point Likert scale (range 1 -5, where 5 indicates that the bundle is completely acceptable 
for use in its current form) to the provi ders who are responsible for delivering the 
intervention: occupational therapists (OT; Component 1 ), nurses (primarily, but also other 
ICU providers such as physicians and physical therapists; Component 2 ), and ICU 
pharmacists ( Component 3 ). 
To evaluate fa cilitators and barriers to implementation of the geriatrics bundle ( SA3), we will 
use qualitative methods to allow for a more comprehensive understanding of barriers and 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
11 facilitators encountered by the healthcare team (OT, nursing, and ICU pharmacy) during  
bundle delivery. We will approach all participating OT and Pharmacy provider s and use 
purposive sampling for the nursing group (given the large number of ICU nurses). Focus 
groups will be recorded and professionally transcribed. Transcripts will be review ed by the 
investigators with coding occurring according to the methods of Strauss and Corbin and 
analysis conducted using the constant comparative method.  
4.2.2 Secondary and Exploratory Outcome Variables (if applicable)  
From the intervention and control g roups, w e will gather data on in -hospital outcomes of 
importance to older adults, including but not limited to delirium, mobility level, muscle 
strength at discharge, functional status at discharge, and ICU/hospital l engths of stay.   We 
aill also  submit a JDAT request for deidentified, aggregate historical data from the York 
Street MICU on the same in -hospital outcomes.   
From the intervention and control groups, a t approximately 30 days after hospital discharge, 
we will also gather data on functional outco mes, cognitive outcomes, and health outcomes 
(including, but not limited to, readmissions) . From the intervention group only, we will gather 
feedback and data about  ongoing use of the portable amplifying device since hospital 
discharge.  
 
4.3 Study Population  
This is a prospective pilot study that will draw participants aged 65 and older from the 36 -bed 
medical intensive care unit (MICU) of the main campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital 
(YNHH).  All patients aged >=65 who are admitted to the MICU will be  screened for 
enrollment.  
Nursing providers, occupational therapists, and ICU pharmacists delivering the bundle 
components will also be enrolled as study participants (“provider participants”).  
4.3.1 Number of Participants  
We plan to enroll 80 patient participants  (30 in the control group, and 50 in the intervention 
group) . Of the providers, we plan to enroll 75 nurses and all of the occupational therapists 
and ICU pharmacists ( approximately 3 -5 in each group) who deliver the interventions . 
4.3.2 Eligibilit y Criteria/Vulnerable Populations  
This is a prospective pilot study that will draw participants from the 36 -bed medical intensive 
care unit (MICU) of the main campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital (YNHH), where 
approximately half of the 2900 annual admissions are among patients age 65 and older.  All 
patients age 65 and older who are admitted to the YNHH MICU will be screened for 
enrollment.   Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the patient participants are outlined in the 
table below.    
For the provider partici pants, all nurses, occupational therapists, and ICU pharmacists 
delivering the bundle components will be eligible for inclusion.  The only exclusion criterion 
for the nurses is if the nurse encountered by the research team is not the patient’s primary 
nurse (such as if the nurse is covering for the primary nurse’s lunch break).  
Table 1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
1. Age  65 years  1.  Unable to provide informed consent and 
no proxy available  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
12 2.  Hospitalized in the Medical Intensive 
Care Unit (MICU) on the York Street 
campus of Yale -New Haven Hospital.  
3.  Has not opted out of research  2. Advance directive of "comfort measures 
only" (CMO) or change to CMO anticipated 
during this hospital admission  
3. Planned discharge to hospice  
4. Primary language other than English  
5. Tracheostomy with long -term ventilator 
dependence  
6. Patients with non -family conservators 
(e.g. a lawyer serving  as the conservator for 
the patient)  
7. Unable to participate in the OT and 
hearing impairment interventions due to 
cognitive status (e.g. a dvanced dementia , 
anoxic brain injury, vegetative state, etc) or 
the need for deep sedation (e.g. if treatment 
of the critical illness requires deep sedation 
and neuromuscular blockade, such as in 
severe ARDS [the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome])  
8. COVID -19 positive  
9. Already receiving OT in the ICU  
 
5 Study Methods/Procedures  
5.1 Study Procedures  
Screening and enrollment  of patients  
The Yale -New Haven Hospital (YNHH) Joint Data Analytics Team (JDAT) will provide a list 
of medical intensive care unit (MICU) patients age 65 and older who have not opted out of 
research.  Study personnel will review this list  on a daily basis to screen for eligible patients.  
For screened patients, basic demographic information will be captured in a REDCap 
screening form as this is a feasibility study and we will need to provide descriptive statistics 
for the patients s creened and enrolled.  Study personnel will apply the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria from Table 1 (above in section 4.3.2) and identify eligible patients.  
Once an eligible patient is identified, a  research nurse or research assistant will assess the 
patient for his/her ability to consent and participate in the study interventions by first 
assessing mental status via the Richmond Agitation -Sedation Scale (RASS) .  For p atients 
who are too deeply sedated (RASS -2 to -5) or agitated (+2 to +5) , as often occu rs in the 
ICU due to severity of illness or the need for mechanical ventilation, a proxy will be 
approached for consent.  Patients with an acceptable RASS score ( -1, 0, or +1) will undergo 
an assessment of delirium using the Confusion Assessment Method for ICU (CAM -ICU).  
For p atients who are delirious according to the CAM -ICU, as often occurs in the ICU due to 
severity of illness, a proxy will be approached for consent .  Patients who have acceptable 
RASS scores and a negative CAM -ICU will be approached for  enrollment.  If study 
personnel have any concerns about the patient’s capacity to consent once they begin 
speaking to the patient, they will administer the University of California San Diego Brief 
Assessment of Capacity to Consent (UBACC).  If the patient  is found to lack decisional 
capacity, a proxy will be approached for consent.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
13 Participants will be provided with a copy of the consent  form. Proxies who sign the consent 
form in person will also be provided with a copy of the consent form.  In light of hos pital 
visitation restrictions due to COVID -19, and considering that many proxies will not want to 
visit the hospital during the COVID -19 pandemic, we will allow for verbal consent by proxy. If 
verbal consent by proxy is obtained, we will log this in the RE DCap database and mail the 
proxy a  key information sheet .  The consent form will be signed by research personnel and 
scanned into REDCap.   The research nurse will be required to check the following 
attestation in REDCap: “I verbally explained the purpose, procedures, risks, benefits, 
confidentiality, and voluntary nature of the ACE -ICU study.  The proxy was given time to ask 
any questions and agreed to have the participant take part in the study.”  
Baseline interview and pr ovision of portable amplifying device  (45 minutes of participant 
contact)  
After consent is obtained, the research nurse will perform a baseline interview that includes 
an assessment of geriatric factors, demographics, and in -hospital factors that have been 
found to be importa nt in prior research.  This interview is expected to take approximately 45 
minutes.  Data will be collected about demographics, health conditions, pre -ICU functional 
status, healthcare utilization, frailty, falls, social support, living situation, depressi ve 
symptoms, cognitive function, hearing impairment, and vision impairment.  Hearing 
impairment will be assessed with the single -item hearing question in the National Health and 
Nutrition Assessment Survey (NHANES) , which asks the participant or proxy to b est 
describe the participant’s hearing without a hearing aid or other listening device.   
For participants enrolled during the intervention phase of the s tudy, research  personnel will 
then orient the participant and the nurse to the portable amplifying dev ice and help set up 
the amplifier for the patient. A bedside laminated sheet with instructions on how to use the 
device will be provided and left at the bedside so that the participant and nurse have a 
resource for reference.  Due to COVID -19 restrictions,  every study participant will be 
provided with their own portable amplifying device which will be theirs to take home. Study 
personnel will then notify the physician team and occupational therapist of the participant’s 
enrollment in the study , so that an O T order is placed in the EMR.  The ICU pharmacy team 
will also be notified of the participant’s enrollment.  
Daily in -hospital audit (5 minutes of participant contact/day)  
For participants enrolled during the intervention phase of the study, s tudy personnel  will 
perform a daily audit of use of the portable amplifying device.  Participants will be asked a 
short series of questions about their device use.  Study personnel will also ask the nurse 
about use of the device and will check the bedside log of device use. 
Occupational therapy  
For participants enrolled during the intervention phase of the study , the occupational 
therapist will assess the patient’s need for OT and develop a treatment plan as they normally 
would in clinical practice.  This study does not alter any aspect of the OT assessment or 
treatment plan; the study only ensures that OT is ordered as a default for all enrolled 
participants.  
Deprescribing of potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs)  started in the ICU  
When a participant in the interv ention arm  is ready for transfer to the floor (as indicated by 
the primary MICU team placing a transfer order or indicating that they will place a transfer 
order that day), the ICU pharmacy team will review the active medication list for PIMs that 
were sta rted in the ICU and are now potentially inappropriate.  Common examples include 
atypical antipsychotics (often inappropriately started for ICU delirium) and acid suppressants 
(which are indicated for stress ulcer prophylaxis during mechanical ventilation, but are no 
longer indicated after discharge unless they are a home medication).  The ICU pharmacist 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
14 will review the patient’s home medication list to ensure that PIMs flagged for discontinuation 
were started in the ICU. The ICU pharmacist will then write a  brief note in the EMR 
documenting which PIMs were discontinued and why.   
Hospital discharge interview (45 minutes of participant contact)  
Prior to hospital discharge, all participants will undergo an assessment of functional status, 
cognitive status ( with the Montreal Cognitive Assessment ), and 3 objective assessments: 
manual muscle testing according to the 6 -point Medical Research Council (MRC) system,27 
hand grip dynamometry, and a short walk test.   We will also ask participants in the 
intervention arm about perceived benefit of the portable amplifying device, their comfort with 
the device, and acceptability of the device.  
• Manual muscle testing via the 6 -point MRC system: Strength in each of 12 muscle 
groups is assessed via a 6 -point system,  in which a score of 0=no contraction, 
1=flicker of a contraction, 2=active movement with gravity eliminated, 3=active 
movement against gravity, 4=active movement against gravity and resistance, 5= 
normal power.  
30-day interview (15 minutes of participant contact)  
At approximately 30 days after hospital discharge, we will call all participant s (or their 
proxies) to ask about functional status, cognitive status, and health events  (such as, but not 
limited to,  readmissions) . We will also ask participants in the intervention arm about ongoing 
use of the portable amplifying device since  discharge.  
Medical record abstraction  
Study personnel will review the EMR s of all participants  to gather data about the patient’s 
demographics, health conditions, and clinical course in the hospital including, but not limited 
to, medications, ICU and hospital diagnoses, h ospital length of stay, deliriu m, physical 
therapy treatments , SOFA score (a measure of severity of illness) , as well as ICU tre atments 
and complications ( e.g.  mechanical ventilation, tethering devices (e.g. lines, tubes, and 
restraints) , and the need for dialysis).  After the follow -up phone interview (or, if the patient 
cannot be reached, after the window for that follow -up inter view has closed), stud y 
personnel will again review the EMR to capture data on health outcomes such as 
readmissions and mortality.  
Payment for study participation  
All participants will be given a $50 gift card at the conclusion of study activities to thank them 
for participation in the study.  In most cases, the gift card will be mailed to the participant 
after completion of the follow -up interview.  If there are any concerns about the participant’s 
ability to reliably receive the gift ca rd after discharge (such as if the participant is being 
discharged to a short -term rehab facility), we will provide the gift card prior to hospital 
discharge.  
Screening and enrollment of provider  participants  
Occupational therapy providers  
At least one occupational therapist (OT) is assigned to the Medical Intensive Care Unit 
(MICU) as part of the quarterly rotation for rehab personnel who staff the MICU’s STEPS -
ICU early mobilization program.  Research personnel will identify the occupation al 
therapist(s) rotating through the MICU during the study period and approach them for 
inclusion in the survey and focus groups.  The appropriate information sheet (survey only or 
survey and focus group) will be provided.  We estimate that up to 5 occupat ional therapists 
will be enrolled in this study.  
ICU pharmacist providers  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
15 There are three ICU pharmacists who are dedicated to the MICU. Research personnel will 
approach the three ICU pharmacists for inclusion in the survey and focus groups. The 
appropriat e information sheet will be provided.   
Nursing providers  
Research personnel will identify the patient’s primary nurse by reviewing the electronic 
medical record, including the patient’s primary team in Mobile Heartbeat.  Nurses in the ICU 
or who are carin g for the patient on the ward (after ICU transfer) may be approached for 
inclusion in the survey and focus groups.  The appropriate information sheet will be 
provided.  
Payment for study participation  
Focus group participants will be provided with a $50 gif t card at the conclusion of study 
activities to thank them for their participation.  Survey respondents will not be compensated . 
5.1.1 Data Collection  
Location of data storage  
The majority of the research data will be entered directly into a data management software 
program (REDCap), using either an on -site computer or an iPad on the Yale secure network.  
Paper collection materials (such as parts of the MoCA ) will be scanned int o REDCap and 
then stored in locked file cabinets. Data coordination, data management and database 
design will occur within the Yale School of Medicine’s Program on Aging (POA). All data will 
be collected and maintained electronically. Data management proce dures will ensure 
accurate and efficient data collection and analysis; confidentiality and real -time, on -demand 
study monitoring reports. Patient identifiers will be collected to facilitate gathering of 
complete data from the electronic medical record (EMR ), but all participants will be assigned 
a unique REDCap study ID for identification in the study.  Data will be maintained in 
accordance with HIPAA guidelines for participant confidentiality and privacy. All data will 
reside on secure, HIPAA -compliant data base and file -sharing resources managed by the 
Data Management and Informatics Core (DMIC) of the POA and by Yale ITS. Access to data 
resources will be strictly limited to research staff and investigators.  
Data collection and data elements  
The data element s and method of collection during the study visits and for the EMR 
abstraction are outlined above in Section 5.1 ; therefore, in  this section we will add these 
details for data elements related to the primary outcomes.  To evaluate the feasibility of 
bundle  delivery in the ICU ( SA1), we will assess the delivery of each bundle component 
separately. For the occupational therapy intervention ( Component 1 ), we will review the 
electronic medical record (EMR) for OT notes /flowsheet data  from study enrollment 
throu gh hospital discharge. In addition to gathering data on numbers of patients receiving 
OT, we will gather data about the frequency of and which OT interventions are performed. 
For the hearing impairment intervention ( Component 2 ), we will sum data from the daily 
audit . Of note, if the patient is deeply sedated or unconscious due to critical illness, that 
day would not count as an eligible day of hearing amplifier use. For the deprescribing 
intervention ( Component 3 ), we will review the chart for the ICU phar macist’s note. We 
will also gather data on the details of the deprescribing intervention (i.e. the number and 
type of medications that were changed or discontinued) as preliminary data for future 
studies.  
To evaluate the acceptability of the geriatrics bun dle among providers who are 
responsible for delivering and using the individual components (occupational 
therapists, nurses, physicians, and ICU pharmacists), we will administer a survey with 
a 5-point Likert scale (range 1 -5, where 5 indicates that the bu ndle is completely 
acceptable for use in its current form) to the providers who are responsible for 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
16 delivering the intervention: occupational therapists (OT; Component 1 ), nurses 
(primarily, but also other ICU providers such as physicians and physical ther apists; 
Component 2 ), and ICU pharmacists ( Component 3 ). The survey will include 
questions about whether the device improved workflow (e.g. For PT, did it help 
facilitate early mobilization?) and ask for feedback that may help adapt the intervention 
to imp rove its utility. For the deprescribing component, we will administer the survey to 
the ICU pharmacist after they have performed the intervention.   The acceptability 
survey will be developed during the study to allow the investigator team to observe 
implem entation of the geriatrics bundle and ensure that the survey is assessing all 
important workflow elements.  
To evaluate facilitators and barriers to implementation of the geriatrics bundle using a 
qualitative approach, we will use qualitative methods to allow for a more 
comprehensive understanding of barriers and facilitators encountered by the 
healthcare team ( OT, nursing, and ICU pharmacy) during bundle delivery. This aim of 
the study will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Cohen, a qualitative and mixed - 
methods expert. We will select participants for focus groups organized by discipline. 
Because the goal of qualitative research is to obtain a broad representation of 
experiences and perceptions, we will use purposive sampling to identify nursing 
participants with diverse viewpoints regarding the acceptability of the intervention, as 
indicated by the survey in Aim 2. (Purposive sampling will be needed for the nursing 
group because the YNHH MICU employs well over 100 nurses.) For the OT and ICU 
pharmacy focus groups, all providers who implemented the bundle will be included. 
During the first 3 month s of the st udy, we will develop and pilot test an interview guide 
that includes probes for elaboration. We will ask the participants in each focus group to 
first elaborate on their role caring for older adults in the MICU, and how 
implementation of the geriatrics bun dle changed (or did not change) their workflow. 
We will then ask more specific questions about bundle implementation, including: 
whether/how other care processes were affected, perceived effects on workload, 
perceived benefit to the patient, ease/difficult y of using any new technology (e.g. the 
portable amplifying devices), whether/how the bundle components interacted with 
each other, and suggestions for improvement. At the end of the study, Dr. Cohen will 
conduct the focus groups by discipline. As the OT a nd ICU pharmacy groups are fairly 
small, we anticipate that only 1 focus group will be needed for each of these 
disciplines. We anticipate that 3 -4 focus groups (of 4 -6 people) will be needed for 
nursing. Focus groups will be recorded and professionally tr anscribed. Transcripts will 
be reviewed by Drs. Ferrante, Cohen, and Pisani, with coding occurring according to 
the methods of Strauss and Corbin and analysis conducted using the constant 
comparative method .33 The investigato rs will meet again to discuss the themes and 
what facilitators and barriers have been identified. These themes will provide 
invaluable data to help us refine and improve the geriatrics bundle for a future hybrid 
effectiveness -implementation study.   
5.1.2 Adverse Events Definition and Reportin g 
a. Attribution of Adverse Events:  
Adverse events will be monitored for each subject participating in the study and attributed to 
the study procedures / design by the principal investigator ( Dr. Ferrante ) according to 
the following categories:  
a.) Definite: Adverse event is clearly related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
b.) Probable: Adverse event is likely related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
c.) Possible: Adverse event may be related to inves tigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
17 d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely not to be related to the investigational 
procedures(s)/agent(s).  
e.) Unrelated: Adverse event is clearly not related to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).  
 
b. Plan for Grading Adverse Events:  
The following scale will be used in grading the severity of adverse events:  
1. Mild adverse event  
2. Moderate adverse event  
3. Severe  
 
c. Plan for Determining Seriousness of Adverse Events:  
Serious Adverse Events:  
In addition to grading the adverse event, the PI will determine whether the adverse event 
meets the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event (SAE).  An adverse event is 
considered serious if it results in any of the following outcomes:  
1. Death;  
2. A life -threatening experience in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization;  
3. A persistent or significant disability or incapacity;  
4. A congenital anomaly or birth defect; OR  
5. Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize 
the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
other outcomes listed in this definition.  
An adverse event may be graded as s evere but still not meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse 
Event.  Similarly, an adverse event may be graded as moderate but still meet the criteria for an 
SAE.  It is important for the PI to consider the grade of the event as well as its “seriousness” 
when determining whether reporting to the IRB is necessary.  
d. Plan for reporting UPIRSOs (including Adverse Events) to the IRB  
The principal investigator will report the following types of events to the IRB:  
Any incident, experience or outcome that meets A LL 3 of the following criteria:  
Is unexpected (in terms of nature, specificity, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research 
procedures described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved 
protocol and informed consent document and (b) t he characteristics of the subject 
population being studied; AND  
Is related or possibly related to participation in the research ( possibly related  means there is 
a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been 
caused by the  procedures involved in the research); AND  
Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, legal, or social harm) than was previously known 
or recognized.  
Unanticipated Problems Inv olving Risks to Subjects or Others (UPIRSOs) may be medical or 
non-medical in nature, and include – but are not limited to – serious, unexpected, and 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
18 related adverse events and unanticipated adverse device effects .  Please note  that 
adverse events are repo rtable to the IRB as UPIRSOs only if they meet all 3 criteria 
listed above.  
5.2 Study Schedule  
All patient participant s will have two 45 -minute study visits that include assessments by the 
research team.  The first visit will occur in the ICU and the second will occur on the hospital 
ward, prior to hospital discharge.  All patient participants will also receive a brief follow -up 
phone call at appr oximately 30 days after hospital discharge.  For participants in the 
intervention arm, s tudy personnel will also perform a daily 5 -minute audit of hearing amplifier 
device use  and gather data about acceptability from the participant and nurse (when 
availab le). 
The study schedule for provider participants will include a brief survey (5 -10 minutes), and, 
for the subset that agree to participate in focus groups, one additional study visit for the 
focus group (lasting approximately 1 hour on a separate date).  
5.3 Informed Consent  
For patient participation in the study, we will obtain informed consent.  T he patient and/or 
their proxy will be approached in the ICU by study personnel.  All patient rooms in the ICU 
are private rooms.  The patient's ability to make a n informed decision will be assessed 
through multiple methods, including (1) speaking with the care team to ensure that there are 
no concerns about capacity, (2) assessing the potential participant’s mental status (for coma 
or agitation) via the Richmond A gitation Sedation Scale (RASS), and (3) performing a CAM -
ICU to ensure that the patient is not delirious.  If the patient is able to provide informed 
consent, study personnel will leave a copy of the signed consent form with the patient. If the 
patient is not able to make an informed decision the proxy will be approached for consent.  
As noted above, if  consent is obtained from the proxy via telephone, we will mail the proxy 
an information sheet which serves as a copy of the consent .   
Because this is a fea sibility study that is gathering preliminary data, we need to gather basic 
data on the patients who are screened for this study; therefore, we are requesting a waiver 
of HIPAA authorization for screening/recruitment purposes only .  A waiver of HIPAA 
author ization for recruitment/screening purposes will lessen burden on patients and families 
(since we only intend to enroll patients who meet basic inclusion criteria), and still allow us to 
accurately report the number and characteristics of screened patients.  
For provider participation in this study, we will provide the appropriate information sheet 
(survey only, or survey and focus group) as this part of the study meets criteria for a waiver 
of documentation of consent.  Research personnel will review the info rmation sheet with the 
potential participant and answer any questions about the study.  
5.3.1 Screening   
The Yale -New Haven Hospital (YNHH) Joint Data Analytics Team (JDAT) will provide a list 
of medical intensive care unit (MICU) patients at the York Stre et campus who are age 65 
and older and who have not opted out of research.  Study personnel will review this list  on a 
daily basis , as well as the MICU list with an extra check to ensure that the patient has not 
opted out of research,  to screen for eligibl e patients.   As noted in the prior section, because 
this is a feasibility study that is gathering preliminary data, we need to gather basic data on 
the patients who are screened for this study; therefore, we are requesting a waiver of HIPAA 
authorization f or screening/recruitment purposes only .  Study personnel will record basic 
demographic information and basic identifying information about the screened participants. 
The basic identifying information is necessary because we need to know if participants are  
screened more than once for this study, which is likely to happen since readmissions to the 
ICU are common.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
19 A waiver of HIPAA authorization for recruitment/screening purposes will lessen burden on 
patients and families (since we only intend to enroll pati ents who meet basic inclusion 
criteria), and still allow us to accurately report the number and characteristics of screened 
patients.  
5.3.2 Recruitment, Enrollment and Retention   
Study personnel will review the JDAT -provided screening report and MICU roste r (with an 
additional check to ensure that the patient has not opted out of research) each day and 
review the list for eligible patients by applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria detailed 
above in section 4.3.2. As outlined above in the Study Proced ures (section 5.1), once an 
eligible patient is identified, a  research nurse or research assistant will assess the patient for 
his/her ability to consent and participate in the study interventions by first assessing mental 
status via the Richmond Agitation -Sedation Scale (RASS) .  For patients who are too deeply 
sedated (RASS -2 to -5) or agitated (+2 to +5), as often occurs in the ICU due to severity of 
illness or the need for mechanical ventilation, a proxy will be approached for consent.  
Patients with an  acceptable RASS score ( -1, 0, or +1) will undergo an assessment of 
delirium using the Confusion Assessment Method for ICU  (CAM -ICU).  For patients who are 
delirious according to the CAM -ICU, as often occurs in the ICU due to severity of illness, a 
proxy w ill be approached for consent.   Patients who have acceptable RASS scores and a 
negative CAM -ICU will be approached for enrollment.  If study personnel have any concerns 
about the patient’s capacity to consent once they begin speaking to the patient, they w ill 
administer the University of California San Diego Brief Assessment of Capacity to Consent 
(UBACC).  If the patient is found to lack decisional capacity, a proxy will be approached for 
consent.   Because we are studying a critically ill population, it is  essential that we allow for 
consent by proxy because many of the participants may be too sick to consent themselves 
or participate in the baseline interview themselves.  
All participants and/or proxies will be provided with a copy of the consent.  In light of hospital 
visitation restrictions due to COVID -19, and considering that many proxies will not want to 
visit the hospital during the COVID -19 pandemic, we will allow for verbal consent by proxy. If 
verbal consent by proxy is obtained, we will lo g this in the REDCap database and mail the 
proxy an information sheet.  If in -person consent is obtained, a copy of the consent will be 
provided at that time.  
5.3.3 Study Visits   
The study visits have been described in detail in section 5.1; as such, in this section we are 
providing the bulleted list of visits only.  The estimated time for participant contact is listed 
next to each visit.  
Patient participant study visits  
• Baseline  interview  and provision of the portable amplifying device : 45 minutes  
• Daily audit: 5 minutes/day . 
• Hospital discharge interview : 45 minutes  
• Follow -up phone interview approximately 30 days after discharge: 15 minutes  
Provider participant study visits  
• One 5 -10 minute survey  
• If the provider is recruited for and agrees to participate i n a focus group, one 
additional study visit for the focus group: 1 hour on a separate date  
5.4 Statistical Method s 
5.4.1 Statistical Design , 5.4.2 Sample Size Considerations, and 5.4.3 Planned Analyses  
SA1 Statistical Analysis:  First, we will compile the data for each bundle component into an 
implementation report card.  We will report the proportion of eligible patients receiving each 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
20 component, as well as the number of “doses” (for OT) and usage (for the hearing 
component) as outlined above. As a secondary analysis, we will evaluate delivery of the 
overall bundle. A feasibility threshold of 70% will be used for the individual bundle 
components, as well as the combined bundle (all 3 components).  
The null hypothesis will be that  <70% of patients will have received the bundle, with the 
alternative hypothesis that >= 70% of the patients will have received the bundle. Analysis 
consists of a simple comparison of the post -delivery proportion of patients who have 
received the bundle. U sing PASS 15 statistical software for a one -sided exact test based on 
normal approximation per the method of Fleiss, Levin and Palk (2003) with a one -sided 
alpha of 5%, we will have 100% power to detect a minimal proportion of 70%. To show 
robustness, if w e lower power to 80%, with a sample of 65 we are powered to detect a 
proportion of 75% and with a sample of 55 we are powered to detect a minimal proportion of 
78%. This implies our sample of 75 is more than adequate to detect meaningful rates at or 
above 70%.  
SA2 Statistical Analysis:  For each bundle component, we will define acceptability as a 
minimum average score of 7/10 on the Likert Scale (i.e., the minimum average over all Likert 
measurements for that component). As described in the grant, the pharm acists will rate 
acceptability at one timepoint (since the deprescribing intervention occurs once), whereas 
the nurses and occupational therapists will rate acceptability at multiple timepoints. For the 
latter two groups, we will calculate the overall mean  count (i.e. the mean Likert score) over 
time, again using a minimum average of 7 as the smallest level of permissible acceptability.  
The null hypothesis will be a mean less than 7 and the one -sided alternative a mean greater 
than or equal to 7. Using PAS S 15 statistical software for a non -parametric test of a single 
mean, based on the methods of Machin, Campbell, Fayers and Pinol (1997) and Zar (1984), 
and assuming a one -sided alpha of 5% and a null mean of 7, with a sample of 75 we will 
have 90% power to  detect mean counts of 7.3 or greater. To show robustness, if we lower 
power to 80%, with a sample of 55 we are powered to detect a minimal mean of 7.4. This 
implies our sample of 75 is more than adequate to detect mean outcomes at or above 7.  
 
SA3, Statistical Analysis:  Focus groups will be recorded and professionally transcribed. 
Transcripts will be reviewed by Drs. Ferrante, Cohen, and Pisani, with coding occurring 
according to the methods of Strauss and Corbin and analysis conducted using the cons tant 
comparative method .28 The invest igators will meet again to discuss the themes and what 
facilitators and barriers have been identified.  These themes will provide invaluable data to 
help us refine and improve the geriatrics bundle for a future hybrid effectiveness -
implementation study.  
 
5.4.4 Analysis of Subject Characteristics (if applicable)  
Analyses for this prospective cohort study will follow best practices for analyzing and 
accounting for limitations of  observational data. Variables will be examined univariately using 
descriptive  techniques to analyze distributions and missingness. Standard bivariate and 
multi -variable adjusted methods will be used to investigate  hypotheses, including but not 
limited to t -tests/analyses of variance for continuous variables, Wilcoxon/Kruskal -Wallis tes ts 
for ordered/non -normally distributed variables, chi -squared tests for non -ordered categorical  
variables, and regression methods (e.g., linear, logistic) for multivariable -adjusted analyses.  
5.4.5 Interim Analysis – N/A 
5.4.6 Handling of Missing Data  
In cases of variables with >5% missing data, multiple  imputation will be employed.  
6 Trial Administration  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
21 6.1 Ethical Considerations: Informed Consent/Assent and HIPAA Authorization  
Consent forms will be Institutional Review Board (IRB) -approved and the p articipant  or 
legally authorized representative (LAR) will be asked to read and review the document. The 
study personnel  will explain the research study to the participant and answer any questions 
that may arise.  
 
Participants/LAR will have the opportunit y to carefully review the written consent form and 
ask questions prior to signing. The participants/LAR should have the opportunity to discuss 
the study with their family or surrogates, or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The 
participant wi ll sign the informed consent document prior to any procedures being done 
specifically for the study. Participants/LAR must be informed that participation is voluntary 
and that they may withdraw from the study at any time, without prejudice. A copy of the 
informed consent document will be given to the participants/LAR for their records . 
As part of the consent process, trained research staff will review all the required elements of 
informed consent and HIPAA authorization, including the purpose, study procedu res, risks, 
benefits, confidentiality of records, and voluntary nature of the study.  The principal 
investigator will be available to answer any questions.  
 
Specific plans for the decisionally impaired : We recognize that  among older hospitalized 
patients, there may be a proportion of eligible patients who are decisionally impaired (i.e., 
who have a compromised capacity to understand information and make a reasoned decision 
about participation in research) and therefore require additional  protections. We als o 
recognize that t he purpose of identifying eligible patients who may be decisionally impaired 
is not necessarily to exclude them from research, but to seek ways to enable their 
participation in an ethically appropriate manner that is also compliant with r egulatory 
requirements. Therefore, at the time of approaching any potential participant for consent, our 
plans are as follows:  
 
A) Use standardized criteria to determine if the potential participant is capable of 
providing consent.  Members of the study team who are responsible for participant 
recruitment and consent are all highly trained and experienced in obtaining informed 
consent. They will receive training in  the process for  determining capacity to consent in 
aging populations.  Ability to provide informed consent will be assessed using the 
University of California, San Diego Brief Assessment of Capacity to Consent (UBACC), a 
brief instrument designed to assess decision -making capacity  for research participation 
according to NIH standards. Factors to be considered include the ability to articulate a 
choice regarding study participation, its purpose, and understanding that participation 
does not constitute medical treatment.  
 
B) Follow up with identified proxies when decisional impairment is identified . Proxies 
will be approached for consent because the risks of this study are minimal and the 
potential benefits of developing generalizable knowledge that will benefit elderly 
hospitalized patients nationwide is significa nt. All potential participants deemed 
decisionally impaired will be notified of that determination before permission is sought 
from their legally authorized surrogate to enroll in the study. Because many proxies will 
not be available in person due to COVID -19 visitor restrictions, we will allow for verbal 
consent by proxy and will then mail a copy of the consent/information sheet . 
 
C) Seek assent for potential participants who are decisionally impaired . If permission 
is given  by the surrogate  to enroll in the study, the potential participant will be notified 
and their verbal assent will be obtained ( i.e., their active affirmation of a desire to 
participate).  In all cases in which assent is sought, the assent discussion will include the 
following: (1) a simplifi ed description of the purpose of the research, including risks and 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
22 benefits; (2) a description of the study procedures to which the participant will be 
exposed; ( 3) a statement explaining that participation in this study is voluntary; and ( 4) a 
question an d answer period in which the participant will be encoura ged to ask questions 
about his or her  participation in the study.  
 
6.2 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review  
This is a prospective study that is being conducted in a clinical setting (the intensive care 
unit) and includes interviews and standard assessments used in geriatrics research.  The 
protocol will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval. Approval of the protocol must 
be obtained before initiating any research activity. Any change to th e protocol or study team 
will require an approved IRB amendment before implementation. The IRB will determine 
whether informed consent and HIPAA authorization are required.  A study closure report will 
be submitted to the IRB after all research activities have been completed.  
6.3 Subject Confidentiality  
Participant confidentiality and privacy is strictly held in trust by the participating investigators, 
their staff, and the sponsor(s) and their interventions. Therefore, the study protocol, 
docume ntation, data, and all other information generated will be held in strict confidence. No  
data will be released to any unauthorized third party without prior written approval of the 
sponsor.  All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
The study monitor, representatives of the Institutional Review Board (IRB), or regulatory 
agencies may inspect all documents and records required to be maintained by the 
investigator, including but not limited to, medical records (office, clin ic, or hospital) for the 
participants in this study. The clinical study site will permit access to such records.  
The study participant's contact information will be securely stored at each clinical site for 
internal use during the study. At the end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a 
secure location for as long a period as dictated by the reviewing IRB, Institutional policies, or, 
if applicable, sponsor requirements.   
Data for this study will be collected, recorded and stored using REDCa p (Research 
Electronic Data Capture). REDCap is a secure, web application designed to support data 
capture for research studies. Data from any paper study forms will be entered into REDCap 
and then stored in locked file cabinets restricted to the study tea m. Data coordination, data 
management, and database design will occur within the Yale School of Medicine's Program 
on Aging (POA).  
Patient identifiers will be stored within REDCap for research purposes, but upon entry into the 
REDCap system, each study participant will be assigned a unique Study ID that does not 
include identifiers. REDCap includes features for HIPAA compliance includ ing real -time data 
entry validation (e.g. for data types and range checks), a full audit trail, user -based privileges, 
de-identified data export mechanism to statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata and R), and 
integration with the institutional Active Direc tory. Access to study data in REDCap will be 
restricted to the members of the study team with authentication through University NetID 
credentials. The  REDCap@Yale database and web server are housed on secure platforms 
that are backed up daily. REDCap@Yale meets the security standards for use with high risk 
data as set forth by the Yale Information Security Office.   All of these measures minimize risks 
to subjects and decrease the likelihood of potential breaches of confidentiality. At the end of 
the study, all study databases will be de -identified and archived in REDCap at the Yale 
Program on Aging.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
23 6.4 Deviations/Unanticipated Problems  
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the study protocol. The noncompliance may 
be either on the part of the parti cipant, the investigator, or the study site staff. As a result of 
deviations, corrective actions are to be developed by the site and implemented promptly.  
 
It is the responsibility of the site investigator to identify and report deviations within 14 
workin g days of identification of the protocol deviation. All deviations must be addressed in 
study source documents, reported to the study sponsor, and the reviewing Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) per their policies.  
 
Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others include, in general, any 
incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given (a) the research procedures 
that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) -approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the participant population being studied;  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research ( “possibly related” means 
there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have 
been caused by the procedures involved in the research); and  
• Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm 
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known 
or recognized.  
 
The investigator will report unanticipated problems (UPs) to the reviewing Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) and to the study sponsor. The UP report will i nclude the following 
information:  
• Protocol identifying information: protocol title and number, PI's name, and the IRB project 
number;  
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• An explanation of the basis for determining that t he event, incident, experience, or 
outcome represents an UP;  
• A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been 
taken or are proposed in response to the UP.  
 
To satisfy the requirement for prompt reporting, UPs will be reported using the following 
timeline:  
• UPs that are serious adverse events (SAEs) will be reported to the IRB and study 
sponsor, if applicable within 5 days of the investigator becoming aware of the event.  
• Any other UP will be reported to the IRB and study  sponsor within 14 days of the 
investigator becoming aware of the problem . 
 
6.5 Data Quality Assurance  
In addition to required training for research staff at Yale, all research personnel have 
undergone additional training at the Yale Program on Aging to en sure that data are collected 
in a standardized and reliable way.  This includes training in geriatric assessments.  The risk 
of harm from routine physical assessments performed will be minimized by using Program 
on Aging (POA) field staff who follow standa rdized procedures outlined in a manual of 
operations. For example, as part of the walk test, research nurses will monitor for stability, 
assess for contraindications, use assistive devices, and will not attempt to complete walk 
test if there is a risk of f all. It is routine practice for POA research nurses to be trained in safe 
mobilization techniques and fall prevention for older adults. Participants will be encouraged 
to walk at a comfortable pace during the test, using assistive devices as needed.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
24 Participants will have the right to refuse the physical assessments at any time.  In the 
unlikely circumstance of a fall or other event, the research coordinator will follow the protocol 
for adverse events outlined in Section 6.4. 
 
6.6 Study Record s 
Study records include  (1) case report forms , (2) electronic health records, (3) the log of 
portable amplifying device use, (4) consent forms, (5) surveys, and (6) all regulatory 
documents, including the protocol .   
 
6.7 Access to Source  Data  
Source data will be maintained per Medical Records policy in REDCap, a password 
protected, secure, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant, 
web-based electronic database with a built -in audit trail.  
Only Institutional Review B oard (IRB) approved research team members who have current 
HIPAA and Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) 
and human subjects protection training will be authorized to access records.  
 
6.8 Data or Specimen Stor age/Security  
All study staff will follow Yale’s guidelines for data protection, which include storing all 
programs, data and documents on Yale -managed central file shares. No files or documents 
will be permitted on unencrypted portable media or on local ha rd drives, or on file shares 
other than those maintained by ITS specifically for the study. Remote access to central file 
shares will be permitted only by remote desktop connection from computers that are 
encrypted and secured according to Yale policy for managed workstations 
(http://its.yale.edu/services/software -computers -mobile -devices/software -delivery -
configuration/ managed -workstation -program ). 
 
Study data  at Yale  will be managed according Yale University Information Technology 
Services  (ITS)  policies for “3 lock data” ( http://its.ya le.edu/secure -computing/security -
standards -and-guidance ). Primary research data across sites  will be managed using 
REDCap . REDCap is a secure, web application designed to support data capture for research 
studies. It includes features for HIPAA compliance including real -time data entry validation 
(e.g. for data types and range checks), a full audit trail, user -based privileges, de -identified 
data export mechanism to statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata and R), and integration with 
the institutional Active  Directory. Access to study data in REDCap will be restricted to the 
members of the study team with authentication through University NetID credentials.  
 
All study staff will be trained in HIPAA and Human Subject Protection and will follow local 
institutio nal guidelines  and policies  for data protection. No files or documents will be permitted 
on unencrypted portable media or on local hard drives, or on file shares other than those 
securely maintained by ITS specifically for the study. Any paper records will be mai ntained in 
locked file cabinets within locked offices.  
 
6.9 Retention of Records  
The NIH requires that records must be retained for a minimum of 3 years after completion of 
the research.  However, since we plan to use the data gen erated from this study as 
preliminary data for future studies, thereby inviting additional scrutiny, we will plan to store 
the data for 10 years (the more conservative time frame used by the FDA) after study 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
25 completion in the secure REDCap server.  At this  point in time, the master list linking the 
unique subject number to the research data will be destroyed.  
 
6.10 Study Monitoring  
This pilot study presents minimal risks to participants,  and adverse events are not 
anticipated. In the unlikely event that se rious adverse events do occur (for instance, breach 
of confidentiality of data), they will be reported within 7 days  by the Principal Investigator ( PI) 
to the IRB, all co -investigators, and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies . The 
investigator  team  will specify whether the serious adverse event is considered related to the 
study.  
The PI will be responsible for all scientific,  organizational, and implementation decisions, 
including assuring that study participants are not exposed to risks and tha t the study is 
conducted according to high scientific and ethical standards.  
 
6.11 Study Modification  
All study modifications will be submitted to the IRB as a protocol modification.  The change 
will be implemented into the study after IRB approval of the modification.  
 
6.12 Study Completion  
The NIH requires that records must be retained for a minimum of 3 years after completion of 
the research.  However, since we plan to use the data generated from this study as 
preliminary data for future studies, the reby inviting additional scrutiny, we will plan to store 
the data for 10 years (the more conservative time frame used by the FDA) after study 
completion.    
 
6.13 Funding Source  
This study is funded by the Pilot/Exploratory Studies Core of the Yale Claude D. Pepper 
Older Americans Independence Center (P30 AG021342).  
6.14 Conflict of Interest Policy  
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence, such as by the 
pharmaceutical industry, is critical. Therefore , any actual conflict of interest of persons who 
have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect of this trial will be 
disclosed and managed. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of interest will 
be required to have su ch conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation 
in the trial. The study leadership in conjunction with the appropriate conflict of interest review 
committee has established policies and procedures for all study group members to dis close 
all conflicts of interest and will establish a mechanism for the management of all reported 
dualities of interest.  
At the present time, no investigators or study personnel have any conflicts of interest with 
regard to this study. Dr. Ferrante, the pr incipal investigator, is an attending physician in the 
MICU.  It is possible that a subject enrolled in this study may have been a MICU patient of Dr. 
Ferrante's.  To avoid any perceived conflicts of interest, Dr. Ferrante will not be involved in the 
direc t recruitment of any potential subjects with whom she had a clinical relationship (i.e., she 
will ensure that she is not the study team member approaching the patient).  
 
6.15 Publication Plan  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
26 The data arising from this study will be published in peer -revie wed journals and submitted for 
presentation at national meetings, including (but not limited to) the American Thoracic 
Society (ATS) meeting and the American Geriatrics Society (AGS) meeting.  The PI holds 
primary responsibility for publishing the study re sults.  
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
27 References  
1. Wunsch H, Guerra C, Barnato AE, Angus DC, Li G, Linde -Zwirble WT. Three -Year 
Outcomes for Medicare Beneficiaries Who Survive Intensive Care. JAMA -J Am Med 
Assoc. 2010;303(9):849 -856. 
2. Needham DM, Feldman DR, Kho ME . The Functional Costs of ICU Survivorship 
Collaborating to Improve Post -ICU Disability. American Journal of Respiratory and 
Critical Care Medicine. 2011;183(8):962 -964. 
3. Kumar G, Kumar N, Taneja A, et al. Nationwide Trends of Severe Sepsis in the 21st 
Century (2000 -2007). Chest. 2011;140(5):1223 -1231.  
4. Iwashyna TJ, Cooke CR, Wunsch H, Kahn JM. Population Burden of Long -Term 
Survivorship After Severe Sepsis in Older Americans. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2012;60(6):1070 -1077.  
5. Spragg RG, Bernard GR, Checkley W,  et al. Beyond Mortality Future Clinical 
Research in Acute Lung Injury. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine. 2010;181(10):1121 -1127.  
6. Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, et al. Improving long -term outcomes after 
discharge from intensi ve care unit: Report from a stakeholders' conference. Crit Care 
Med. 2012;40(2):502 -509. 
7. Marra A, Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, et al. Co -Occurrence of Post -Intensive Care 
Syndrome Problems Among 406 Survivors of Critical Illness*. Crit Care Med. 
2018;46(9):1393 -1401.  
8. Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A, et al. Functional Disability 5 Years afte r Acute 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2011;364(14):1293 -1304.  
9. Iwashyna TJ. Survivorship Will Be the Defining Challenge of Critical Care in the 21st 
Century. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2010;153(3):204 -205. 
10. Ferrante  LE, Murphy TE, Gahbauer EA, Leo -Summers LS, Pisani MA, Gill TM. Pre -
Intensive Care Unit Cognitive Status, Subsequent Disability, and New Nursing Home 
Admission among Critically III Older Adults. Annals of the American Thoracic Society. 
2018;15(5):622 -629. 
11. Ferrante LE, Pisani MA, Murphy TE, Gahbauer EA, Leo -Summers LS, Gill TM. The 
Association of Frailty With Post -ICU Disability, Nursing Home Admission, and 
Mortality A Longitudinal Study. Chest. 2018;153(6):1378 -1386.  
12. Ferrante LE, Murphy TE, Leo -Summers LS, Gahbauer EA, Pisani MA, Gill TM. The 
Combined Effects of Frailty and Cognitive Impairment on Post -ICU Disability among 
Older ICU Survivors. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 
2019;200(1):107 -110. 
13. Ferrante LE, Pisani MA, Murphy TE, Gahbauer EA, Leo -Summers LS, Gill TM. 
Functional Trajectories Among Older Persons Before and After Critical Illness. Jama 
Internal Medicine. 2015;175(4):523 -529. 
14. Ferrante LE, Pisani MA, Murphy TE, Gahbauer EA , Leo -Summers LS, Gill TM. 
Factors Associated with Functional Recovery among Older Intensive Care Unit 
Survivors. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 
2016;194(3):299 -307. 
15. Weled BJ, Adzhigirey LA, Hodgman TM, et al. Critical Care  Delivery: The Importance 
of Process of Care and ICU Structure to Improved Outcomes: An Update From the 
Protocol Number 2000029410  
                                          4/7/2021   V4 
 
28 American College of Critical Care Medicine Task Force on Models of Critical Care. 
Crit Care Med. 2015;43(7):1520 -1525.  
16. Balas MC, Burke WJ, Gannon D,  et al. Implementing the Awakening and Breathing 
Coordination, Delirium Monitoring/Management, and Early Exercise/Mobility Bundle 
into Everyday Care: Opportunities, Challenges, and Lessons Learned for 
Implementing the ICU Pain, Agitation, and Delirium Guid elines. Crit Care Med. 
2013;41(9):S116 -S127.  
17. Hsieh SJ, Otusanya O, Gershengorn HB, et al. Staged Implementation of Awakening 
and Breathing, Coordination, Delirium Monitoring and Management, and Early 
Mobilization Bundle Improves Patient Outcomes and Re duces Hospital Costs*. Crit 
Care Med. 2019;47(7):885 -893. 
18. Balas MC, Vasilevskis EE, Olsen KM, et al. Effectiveness and Safety of the 
Awakening and Breathing Coordination, Delirium Monitoring/Management, and Early 
Exercise/Mobility Bundle. Crit Care Med . 2014;42(5):1024 -1036.  
19. Berenholtz SM, Pronovost PJ, Lipsett PA, et al. Eliminating catheter -related 
bloodstream infections in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(10):2014 -
2020.  
20. Centofanti JE, Duan EH, Hoad NC, et al. Use of a Daily Goa ls Checklist for Morning 
ICU Rounds: A Mixed -Methods Study. Crit Care Med. 2014;42(8):1797 -1803.  
21. Cuevas -Lara C, Izquierdo M, Gutierrez -Valencia M, et al. Effectiveness of 
occupational therapy interventions in acute geriatric wards: A systematic review.  
Maturitas. 2019;127:43 -50. 
22. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al. Early physical and occupational 
therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2009;373(9678):1874 -1882.  
23. Inouye SK, Boga rdus ST, Charpentier PA, et al. A multicomponent intervention to 
prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. New England Journal of Medicine. 
1999;340(9):669 -676. 
24. Whitson HE, Cousins SW, Burchett BM, Hybels CF, Pieper CF, Cohen HJ. The 
combined ef fect of visual impairment and cognitive impairment on disability in older 
people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55(6):885 -891. 
25. Morandi A, Vasilevskis EE, Pandharipande PP, et al. Inappropriate Medications in 
Elderly ICU Survivors: Where to Intervene? Archives  of internal medicine. 
2011;171(11):1032 -1034.  
26. Kram BL, Schultheis JM, Kram SJ, Cox CE. A Pharmacy -Based Electronic Handoff 
Tool to Reduce Discharge Prescribing of Atypical Antipsychotics Initiated in the 
Intensive Care Unit: A Quality Improvement Init iative. Journal of Pharmacy Practice. 
2019;32(4):434 -441. 
27. Compston A. Aids to the investigation of peripheral nerve injuries. Medical Research 
Council: Nerve Injuries Research Committee. His Majesty's Stationery Office: 1942; 
pp. 48 (iii) and 74 figure s and 7 diagrams; with aids to the examination of the 
peripheral nervous system. By Michael O'Brien for the Guarantors of Brain. Saunders 
Elsevier: 2010; pp. [8] 64 and 94 Figures. Brain. 2010;133(10):2838 -2844.  
28. Strauss ALC, J. Basics of Qualitative Re search. Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory. : Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 1998.  
 