1 
 Official Title of the Study : Examining the Effect of Informational Emails on  Cost -Sharing Reduction (CSR) 
Silver 94 Enrollment and Utilization Among Unemployment Insurance Recipients  
 
Date of the document  creation : October 18, 2022  
 
Date of the document update: May 23, 2023  
 
  
2 
 Design Document and Analysis Plan  
 
Project Name:  Examining the Effect of Informational Emails on  Cost -Sharing Reduction  (CSR)  Silver 94 
Enrollment  and Utilization  Among Unemployment Insurance Recipients  
Date  of creation : October 18, 2022  
 
Project Objective  
Using  informational email s to increase  CSR Silver  enrollment among unemployment recipients  
 
Evaluation Design  
Test Arms / Treatment Conditions:  
This is a randomized intervention  where households who reported receiving unemployment insurance 
(UI) in 2021, had an email address and were enrolled in non -silver tier plans as of June 2021 were 
assigned to one of two arms: (1) a control group  or (2) a n inform ational email treatment group . 
Households in the treatment arm  were assigned to receive  two emails  in June and July 2021  that 
encourage switch ing metal tiers (from Catastrophic, Bronze, Gold or Platinum to CSR Silver) . 
Total Number of Observations:   
N = 42,470  households  eligible for  Cost -Sharing Reduction ( CSR) Silver 94 plans but enrolled  in non -silve r 
tier plans  in late-June 2021. 
 
Randomization / Assignment:  
Randomization was done at the household level . 75% of households were randomly assigned to two 
informational emails in late June and mid -July, respectively, and the remaining 25% were randomly 
assigned to no outreach during the intervention period beyond an eligibility redetermination notice.  
 
Power:  
To arrive at an estimate for the minimum detectable effect (MDE)  for our primary outcome , we assume 
a baseline metal tier switch rate of 1 0 percent . The intervention was  powered at the 80% level to detect 
a 1 percentage point increase  in the CSR Silver enro llment rate.  
 
Meaningful Effect Size:  
In previous  RCTs designed to induce plan switching , we have  observe d intent -to-treat (ITT) effects 
between 0.7 to 3.9 percentage points. Given the low -cost nature of this nudge  (i.e. approximately $0. 02 
per household) , even a 1 percentage point increase in CSR Silver take -up would be meaningful.  
 
Likely Effect Size:  
Based on prior  choice error  nudge s carried out by Covered California , we would expect to observe an ITT 
effect between 1-4 percentage point s.   
 
Data and Data Structure  
Outcomes:  
The primary outcome of interest will be an indicator for whether a consumer is enrolled in a  CSR Silver 
plan by the end of July 2021.  Our s econdary outcome s will include (1) an indicator for whether someone 
had an office visit between July 2021 and December 2021  (2) an indicator for whether someone had an 
prescription drug fill between July 2021 and December 2021, (3) an indicator for whether someone had 
3 
 an emergency room visit between July 2021 and December 2021, (4) an indicator for whether someone 
had a hospital ad mission between July 2021 and December 2021 . 
 
Data:  
We will use Covered California administrative  data to  obtain  enrollment outcomes  and baseline 
demographics for our sample  and Healthcare Evidence Initiative data to obtain utilization outcomes.  
 
Quality  Control Checks:  
After carrying out the randomization, we checked for balance across several observable covariates  (e.g. 
language spoken , self-reported race and ethnicity , baseline metal tier  and income as a percent of the 
federal poverty level ), which ind icated there were no significant dissimilarities across treatment arms.   
 
Statistical Models & Hypothesis Tests  
This section describes the statistical models and hypothesis tests that will make up the analysis —including any follow -ups on effects 
in the ma in statistical model and any exploratory analyses that can be anticipated prior to analysis.  
 
Statistical Models:  
Intent -to-treat: to estimate treatment effects, our primary analysis will be an intent -to-treat (ITT) 
specification, examining the effect of treatment assignment.  We will estimate the effect of the 
treatment using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. That is, we will regress the outcome of interest 
(e.g. Silver enrollment) for household i on the  treatment  indicator:  
outcome i = ∝+ β1Email si + εi 
 
The coefficient β1 will be the estimate of the causal effect of the intent to treat of informational  email s.  
 
Complier average causal effect: we expect some noncompliance among those households assigned to 
receive  email s as they  may have opted out of email communications from Covered California or 
provided an invalid email address.  Thus, to augment our ITT analysis, we will also estimate treatment 
effects base d on treatment receipt , using two-stage least squares regression (2SLS) .  
 
Follow -Up Analyses  
We will examine treatment heterogeneity by self-reported race  and ethnicity, baseline metal tier, age 
bracket and income bracket. In addition, as part of our complier average causal effect analysis, we will 
examine the effects of CSR Silver  enrollment (among households induced to enroll in a CSR Silver plan as 
a result of random as signment) on our four utilization outcomes.  
 
Inference Criteria, Including Any Adjustments for Multiple Comparisons:  
We will not perform any corrections for multiple hypothesis testing , and we will use  two-tailed tests 
with  p-values <= 0.05  to denote stati stically significant effects.   
 
 