 919.659.5677919.659.5677  
 
  
Phase 2 Randomized Single Ascending Dose Study in Post -Bariatric 
Hypoglycemia Subjects to Determine the Effect of Mizagliflozin 
Formulations on Postprandial Glucose and Insulin Levels  
 
Protocol :  VGX -001-011 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
May 1, 2024  
  
 919.659.5677919.659.5677  
Protocol:  
Study Objective  
To evaluate the safety, tolerability, and pharmacodynamics of two formulations of mizagliflozin 
with respect to postprandial plasma glucose levels in participants with Post -Bariatric 
Hypoglycemia (PBH).  
Study Design  
This was a Phase 2 randomized, sequential crossover single ascending dose study in participants 
with PBH to determine the effect of two mizagliflozin formulations on safety, tolerability, and 
postprandial glucose and insulin levels. This study examined single doses of mizagliflozin (2.5, 
5.0, and 10.0 mg) in either a liquid (2.5 mg) or encapsulated (2.5, 5.0, and 10.0 mg) formulation. 
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment arms (A: 2.5 mg 
encapsulated/washout/5 mg encapsulated, or B: 2.5 mg solution/washout/10 mg encapsulated).  
Baseline: A Baseline mixed meal tolerance test ( MMTT) was  performed once all screening 
assessments had been performed. Pharmacodynamic samples for glucose and insulin were 
obtained.  
Treatment Period: Following the Baseline MMTT assessment, subjects were  randomized into 
Treatment Arm A or Treatment Arm B.  Subjects were administered the assigned dose/formulation 
followed by an MMTT. Pharmacodynamic samples for glucose and insulin were obtained.  
Participants 
Males and nonpregnant females, ages 18 to 75 years old, having had Roux- en-Y bariatric surgery 
more than 6 months prior to signing the ICF.  
History of reactive hypoglycemia with Whipple’s triad: the occurrence of hypoglycemic symptoms 
associated with blood glucose of ≤50 mg/dL, and resolution with glucose or carbohydrate 
administration. Symptoms associated with reactive hypoglycemia include ne uroglycopenic 
symptoms (e.g., behavioral changes, confusion or impaired cognitive function, seizure, loss of 
consciousness).  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Males and nonpregnant females, ages 18 to 75 years old, having had Roux- en-Y bariatric 
surgery more than 6 months prior to signing the ICF. 
2. History of reactive hypoglycemia with Whipple’s triad: the occurrence of hypoglycemic 
symptoms associated with blood glucose of ≤50 mg/dL, and resolution with glucose or 
carbohydrate administration. Symptoms associated with reactive hypoglycemia include neuroglycopenic symptoms (e.g., behavioral changes, confusion or impaired cognitive function, seizure, loss of consciousness). 
3. Willing and able to give informed consent and follow all study procedures and requirements  
4. Subjects (male and female) must agree to use an adequate method of contraception from signed consent through 2 weeks after last dose of investigational product (IP).  
 919.659.5677919.659.5677  
Adequate contraception is defined as a contraceptive method with a failure rate of 
less than 1% per year when used consistently and correctly and when applicable, in accordance with the product label, for example: abstinence from penile -vaginal 
intercourse ; oral contraceptives, either combined or progestogen alone; injectable 
progestogen; implants of etonogestrel or levonorgestrel; estrogenic vaginal ring; 
percutaneous contraceptive patches; intrauterine device or intrauterine system; male 
partner steriliza tion at least 6  months prior to the female subject’s screening visit, and 
this male is the sole partner for that subject (the information on the male partner’s 
sterility can come from the site personnel’s review of the subject’s medical records or intervie w with the subject on her medical history); male condom combined with a 
vaginal spermicide (foam, gel, film, cream, or suppository); male condom combined with a female diaphragm, either with or without a vaginal spermicide (foam, gel, film, cream, or suppository).  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. History of current medical conditions (other than PBH) which may result in hypoglycemia such as insulinoma , adrenal insufficiency, insulin autoimmune 
hypoglycemia, congenital hyperinsulinemia. 
2. Current use of insulin or insulin secretagogues . 
3. History of current dumping syndrome . 
4. History of current fasting hypoglycemia.  
5. Subject s in whom a structural disease of the large intestine (including occlusion, stenosis, 
cancer, and inflammatory bowel disease) was observed by colonoscopy or contrast enema performed within 3 years before consent or subject s suspected of having a structural 
disease of the large intestine 
6. Active infection or significant acute illness within 2 weeks prior to dosing  
7. Subjects with mental development disorder.  
8. Subject s who received the following drug therapies within 1 week before the start of the 
observation period (Week −2).  
a. Cathartics (bulk cathartic, osmotic laxative, stimulant laxative)  
b. Drugs that improve gastrointestinal function 
c. Herbal medicines indicated for constipation  
d. Drugs that inhibit intestinal motility  
e. Drugs for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome  
f. Drugs for the treatment of chronic constipation 
g. Macrolides  
h. Supplements intended for improvement of constipation 
9. Subject s with a medical history of severe drug hypersensitivity 
10. Chronic kidney disease stage 4 or 5  
 919.659.5677919.659.5677  
11. Hepatic disease, including serum alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase 
greater than or equal to 3 times the upper limit of normal; hepatic synthetic insufficiency as defined as serum albumin <3.0 g/dL; or serum total bilirubin >2.0 upper limit of normal at screening.  
12. Congestive heart failure, New York Heart Association class II, III or IV  
13. History of myocardial infarction, unstable angina or revascularization within the past 6 months  
14. History of a cerebrovascular accident within 6 months of screening.  
15. Active treatment with any diabetes medications , except metformin.  
16. Active malignancy, except basal cell or squamous cell skin cancers  
17. Major surgical operation within 30 days prior to screening  
18. Blood donation (1 pint of whole blood) within the past 2 months  
19. Active alcohol abuse or substance abuse  
20. Current administration of oral or parenteral corticosteroids  
21. Pregnancy and/ or Lactation: For women of childbearing potential: there is a requirement for a negative urine pregnancy test and for agreement to use contraception during the study and for at least 2 weeks  after participating in the study. 
22. Other subject s considered inappropriate by the Investigator   
Randomization and blinding  
After performing Baseline assessments and meeting randomization criteria, Subjects were randomized into one of two treatment arms in a 1:1 fashion.  The Treatment Arms are defined as follows:   
Treatment Arm   
A In Period 1, s ubjects will receive an encapsulated formulation of 2.5  mg 
mizagliflozin . Following at least a 7 day washout period, in Period 2, 
subjects will return to the clinic to receive an encapsulated formulation of 5.0 mg mizagliflozin.  
B In Period 1, subjects will receive a liquid dose formulation of 2.5  mg 
mizagliflozin.  I f after consultation with the medical monitor and PI  
that there are no concerns regarding any treatment -related A Es, subjects  
will return to the clinic for a 10 mg en capsul ated dose (Period  2) and 
MMTT after at least a 7 day washout period.  
 
As this is an open- label study, t he subject, Investigator , site personnel and sponsor were not  
blinded to study drug.   
 919.659.5677919.659.5677  
Procedures  
At in -clinic visits on visit days for MMTTs, patients reported to the clinic in the morning after a 
minimum 8 hour fast. A blood sample was obtained (Pre -MMTT). In addition, a clinical lab 
serum sample was collected. Shortly thereafter (within 30 min), subjects were administered a 
water dose (Baseline), or the assigned dose of mizagliflozin with water, and at 20 (±5) min, an 
MMTT was administered. The MMTT was started by consumption of a liquid meal (350 kcal 
distributed as 57%  carbohydrate, 15% protein, an d 28% fat). Pharmacodynamic blood samples to 
measure plasma glucose and insulin were collected at (hr:min) 0:05, 0:10, 0:20, 0:40, 1:00, 1:20, 1:40, 2:00, 2:30, 3:00, 4:00, and 6:00 after MMTT initiation.  
Outcome Measurements  
Primary Endpoint s 
• Safety endpoints were as follows:  
− Adverse Events  
− Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature)  
− Laboratory analyses (to include chemistries and hematology)  
− 12-lead ECGs  
• MMTT glucose nadir after mizagliflozin dosing [Time Frame: 0 -3 hours].  
Secondary Endpoints  
• MMTT  plasma glucose and insulin peak concentration after mizagliflozin dosing 
[Time Frame: 0 -3 hours] . 
• MMTT  plasma glucose 1, 2, and 3 hour area under the curve (AUC 0-1, AUC 0-2, and  
AUC 0-3) after mizagliflozin dosing  
• MMTT  insulin concentration 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 hour area under the curve (AUC 0-1, 
AUC 0-2, AUC 0-3, AUC 0-4, and AUC 0-6) after mizagliflozin dosing  
• MMTT  time to peak plasma glucose concentration after mizagliflozin dosing  [Time 
Frame: 0 -3 hours]  
• MMTT  time to peak insulin concentration after mizagliflozin dosing [Time Frame: 
0-3 hours]  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
No formal hypothesis testing was  planned. This study was sized for feasibility, study design optimization, 
and to investigate a difference in t he nadir  plasma glucose concentration  during an MMTT . As such for 
descriptive purposes, in an inequality test on data from a three -period, single -sequence cross- over design, a 
sample size of 6 achieves approximately 80% power at a 2 -sided 5.0% significance level when the absolute 
difference between the two treatment means is 15, the between -subject standard deviation is 14.6 and the 
correlation between any two measurements on the same subject is 0.6.  