Page 1 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016Protocol Title: Physical  Activity and Screen-Time Regulations in  Childcare Centers: 
Influence on Young Children’s Health Behaviors (Pause & Play) – Aim  3
Academic PI Name: Amanda E. Staiano, PhD, MPP
Co-Investigator’s Name: Corby K. Martin, PhD; Andrew  T. Allen,  BA
Sponsor: Gulf States Health Policy Center (NIMHD)
Protocol Version Date: 5/31/2016
IRB Review  History:  Initial Submission
Objectives
A. Specific Aims
Reducing  childhood obesity is identified as a top priority of the Mayor’s Health  
City Initiative  (MHCI) of Baton  Rouge, Louisiana, which is a non-profit organization that  
brings together key community stakeholders to promote healthy living and active 
lifestyles. Louisiana’s prevalence of obesity in preschoolers is 60% higher than the 
national average: 13.8% of preschoolers  in the state are obese1 compared to 8.4% 
nationally.2 Obesity prevalence is particularly high among non-Hispanic  black children.2 
Childhood obesity  contributes to a higher risk of adult obesity,  premature mortality, and 
comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease,  stroke, asthma, 
and polycystic ovary  syndrome.3 Physical  activity is a protective factor against  childhood 
obesity,4 whereas  sedentary behavior has emerged as a risk  factor for obesity.5 Yet the 
majority of preschoolers  do not meet  nationally recommended guidelines for physical 
activity or sedentary behavior. Less  than 10% of preschoolers  obtain the recommended 
1 hour/day of moderate-to-vigorous physical  activity.6,7 Despite  recommendations of no  
more than 2 hours/day  of screen-time,8 which  is the most common  sedentary activity 
among preschoolers,9 children view on average 4.1 hours  of screen-time each  day.10 
Childcare  centers represent  an opportunity to increase physical activity and  
reduce sedentary behavior  in preschool-aged children,  since over 80% of children 
spend some time in childcare settings by the age of 3 years.10 Indeed, almost 50% of 
the variation in preschool  children’s physical activity occurs in childcare centers.11 Yet 
the majority  of childcare  centers are conducive  to low levels of physical activity  and high 
levels of screen-time:  many centers schedule  little time and  do not create designated 
space for physical activity,12 and children spend  on average 1.3 hours/day watching  a 
screen in these centers.9 Non-Hispanic  black children and children with obesity are 
most likely  to have both low levels of physical activity and high  levels of screen  time,13 
indicating that this population is particularly important  to target  to improve health 
behaviors. 
Most  states do not have strong regulations  for physical activity  or screen-time in 
childcare settings.14 Louisiana’s Department  of Education (DOE) is implementing new 
regulations for children  in childcare settings in 2015 to comply with  national 
recommendations: 1) physical activity of at least  1 hour/day and 2) screen-time limited 
to 2 hours/day. The DOE is also providing extensive training and  programmatic support 
to the centers.  For the proposed project, the MHCI joins academic  researchers at 
Pennington Biomedical to evaluate the implementation of these regulations and to Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 2 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016examine effects on children’s health behaviors. During this project, we will answer three 
major questions: 1) are the regulations being implemented as intended; 2) do  the 
policies benefit  the intended audience; and 3) what do stakeholders identify as the most 
important strategies  to improve children’s health behaviors. The demographics of Baton 
Rouge provide an opportunity  to examine these questions in a high  risk population: 46% 
of city residents  are non-Hispanic black and 28% of children under the age of 5 years 
live in households below the federal poverty  level.15 
The aims of the project are:
Specific Aim 3: To establish community priorities for strategies  to improve 
young children’s health behaviors based  on focus groups of stakeholders in the 
greater Baton Rouge area.
Specific  Aim 3 will be achieved  through a series of  taskforce and  focus group 
meetings administered by the MHCI. Meetings  will include  monthly meetings of  the 
MHCI advisory  boards composed of community stakeholders  and focus groups of 
childcare center directors and parents.  Stakeholders will create dissemination and  
implementation plans to leverage the findings of the project.  
Through this academic-community  partnership, we are  taking advantage of a 
natural policy experiment to examine the childcare environment  and children’s 
behaviors before and after implementation of a policy change. We will also facilitate 
conversations among stakeholders  to create  additional strategies to increase young 
children’s physical activity and decrease  screen-time both in childcare centers  and in 
other settings. The overall goal is to increase  physical activity  and reduce screen-time 
among preschoolers enrolled  in childcare centers.  If successful,  we will disseminate 
findings throughout  the Gulf States  region  as a model of  how changing  policies  in 
childcare settings can improve  children’s health  behaviors and reduce  childhood 
obesity.
Background
The Problem to Address: Obesity  and Physical Inactivity in Preschool Children
The Gulf States  of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama each rank in the top ten 
for highest  prevalence  of childhood obesity, adult obesity,  physical inactivity,  type 2 
diabetes, and hypertension.16 In Louisiana, obesity affects  13.8% of children aged  3 to 5 
years1 and 29% of all children aged 2 to 17 years,17 which is substantially higher  than 
the national  prevalence.2 Obesity during childhood contributes to several  serious  
comorbidities including diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease,  stroke, asthma, 
and polycystic ovary  syndrome.3 Moreover, children with obesity are at higher risk for 
premature mortality.3 
Increased  physical activity  and decreased sedentary behavior are key 
recommendations to reduce the risk for obesity  and related  comorbidities.18 Low levels 
of physical activity  and high levels of sedentary activity contribute  to a variety of  mental 
and physical health consequences during  the preschool and  early childhood years,  
including obesity, high blood  pressure,  behavioral problems,  academic problems, 
irregular sleep, and feelings  of sadness  and boredom.9 Indeed, physical activity  and 
screen-time together  explain 65% of the variance in children’s body mass  index (BMI) 
from age 3 to 7 years.19 However,  children are not obtaining sufficient levels of physical  
activity and are spending too much time in sedentary pursuits. Nearly  half of preschool-Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 3 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016aged children do not meet the recommended 1 hour of  moderate-to-vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA)  each  day.7 Screens are highly  prevalent in children’s lives due  to 
increased device availability and marketing efforts,20 and preschool children are 
estimated to spend  between 1.5 and 7.0 hours  each day in screen-time21,22  despite 
recommendations for 2 or fewer hours of daily screen-time.
Reducing  childhood obesity is identified as a top priority of the Mayor’s Health  
City Initiative  (MHCI) of Baton  Rouge, which is a non-profit organization that  brings 
together key stakeholders in the community to promote  healthy living and  active 
lifestyles. Pennington Biomedical has joined  with the MHCI to lead  a number  of projects 
to establish the prevalence of obesity and health risk factors in the community,  to 
evaluate simulated effects  of policy changes  on childhood obesity prevalence, and to 
coordinate medical, academic, and non-profit organizations  to strategize ways to 
promote healthy behaviors  among children and families. This proposal  represents a 
step forward in the partnership between the MHCI and Pennington  Biomedical to 
empirically test the effects of a health  policy  aimed at improving  children’s health 
behaviors in childcare settings. Given the vast majority of preschool children  attend 
childcare centers,10 implementing policies that promote physical activity in  these centers  
may have direct, impactful health benefits for young children.
A Carrot and Stick  Approach to Improve  Community Policies
Over  the past year, the Louisiana Department of  Education (DOE) has been 
given authority of childcare center licensing  in the state of Louisiana.  A 2012 state  
legislative mandate seeks  to create a unified early childhood system under  the DOE. 
With this transition,  all licensing  requirements are being revised; early care and 
education programs are being  organized under local childcare  center networks; new 
standards are being implemented for all childcare center providers that accept  public 
funds; and a quality  rating system  is being  redeveloped. Specific to the proposed 
project, new licensing standards will affect children attending over 1,300 licensed  
childcare centers state-wide  and include: 1) physical  activity of at least 1 hour/day and 
2) screen-time  prohibited for children younger than 2 years and  limited to 2 hours/day  
for children over 2 years.  Childcare centers in East Baton  Rouge Parish  must begin 
implementing changes  by 2016 to renew  their annual license.  
In addition to the mandated regulations, the DOE is also offering new training 
and programmatic opportunities to help childcare centers achieve the regulations. The 
DOE has engaged directly with childcare centers around  the state  by supporting the 
implementation of the Nutrition and Physical Activity Self-Assessment  for Child  Care 
(NAP SACC) intervention, which is funded by the state's Maternal  and Child Health  Title 
V Block Grant and 1305 funding. NAP SACC is a national evidence-based intervention  
to prevent and reduce childhood obesity.23 It is implemented in childcare  centers and is  
designed to promote  healthy weight development in preschool children  by improving the 
nutritional quality of food served, amount and quality  of physical activity, staff-child 
interactions, nutrition and physical activity policies and practices,  and related  
environmental characteristics.  Over 200 centers  have participated in the program  and 
have integrated practices that support healthy weight behaviors  since NAP SACC 
began in Louisiana in 2010. The Louisiana DOE  will train childcare center personnel  in 
East Baton Rouge Parish on these new regulations  in 2015-16,  offering a natural  
opportunity to examine  childcare centers before  and after implementation of the new 
policy.Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 4 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016Preliminary Data
Baton Rouge, which  is part of the Lower  Mississippi Delta (LMD),  represents one 
of the most medically underserved,  at-risk populations living  in the U.S. The Louisiana 
LMD is characterized by high levels of poverty,  food insecurity, obesity, and  related 
diseases. Approximately 40% of the Louisiana LMD  population is African American, and 
28% of residents live in poverty, compared  to 12% at the national level.15 This grant  
proposal arose from an ongoing collaboration between MHCI Director  Mr. Allen and 
academic researcher  Dr. Staiano,  based  on a shared interest to improve the health  
behaviors of young children in the Baton Rouge area.  As part of a national effort 
organized by the U.S. Conference of Mayors, the MHCI was launched  in Baton Rouge  
in response to the growing obesity epidemic  and its relationship  to chronic diseases  
which may be prevented or lessened through regular exercise and healthy eating. 
Community PI Mr. Allen directs  the efforts  of MHCI, which is a 501(c)(3) non-profit  
organization and includes three Advisory Boards that  bring together community  
stakeholders on a monthly  basis. As an Assistant Professor  at Pennington  Biomedical, 
a world-renowned nutrition and obesity academic research  center, Dr. Staiano serves  
on the academic advisory board  of the MHCI. Additionally, a medical advisory board 
and a community advisory  board bring together  stakeholders from area hospitals, non-
profit organizations, and government agencies.
This partnership arose from several  years of collaboration  between Pennington 
Biomedical and local health organizations. From 2008-2012, Louisiana researchers and  
child health advocates, through the leadership of Pennington  Biomedical, released an  
annual report  card (Louisiana’s  Report  Card  on Physical Activity & Health for Children 
and Youth25) that provided grades  on indicators related to  children’s physical activity 
and health. The Report Card is an advocacy  tool targeting adult decision makers and is 
intended to increase  awareness  of the health concerns associated with physical 
inactivity, to highlight  the growing  problem  of physical inactivity and  obesity among  
children and youth in Louisiana, and to generate political will for policy and 
environmental reform. In the 2011 Report  Card,26 rather than assign grades, the Report 
Card research advisory  committee followed  the model  set by the Healthy  People 
initiative27 and established specific  targets to reach by the year 2020 for each of the 
report’s indicators. These targets  were  also released for  public comment. The target set 
for childhood obesity  was a 20% reduction  from baseline  levels to year  2020. In 2012, a 
committee composed of Pennington Biomedical  researchers including Dr. Staiano, as 
well as the lead policy analyst for chronic disease outcomes  within the Louisiana 
Department of Health  and Hospitals, and the Louisiana Director  for Advocacy and 
Government Relations for the American Heart  Association, convened to determine 
whether the 2020 childhood obesity target was achievable and  to make evidence-based  
recommendations about policy  approaches that would make  the biggest improvements 
for this indicator. Our team used  the Prevention Impact Simulation Model (PRISM),  a 
systems model capable  of projecting  changes  in obesity prevalence  overall and among 
children.28,29 Eight  of the policy and environmental interventions considered within 
PRISM are interventions advocated for childhood obesity, and one of these eight 
focuses on physical activity in childcare  centers.  The PRISM model  estimated that a 
childcare center policy to increase children’s  physical activity and reduce screen-time to 
meet recommendations would  reduce overall childhood obesity prevalence by 2% by 
the year 2020. Given the new 2015 DOE state  regulations  to require physical activity Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 5 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016and reduce screen-time  in childcare centers, the MHCI’s prioritization of childhood 
obesity prevention, and the prior work by Pennington Biomedical and the MHCI, this 
academic-community partnership is primed to evaluate  progress towards creating 
healthier childcare centers in the city of Baton Rouge. The proposed project  allocates 
resources to both the MHCI and Pennington  Biomedical, using a community-based  
participatory research  approach  to ensure  findings will directly impact  the local  
community.
Significance
We created a unique partnership  between  a community-based  non-profit 
organization (the MHCI)  and a world-renowned academic research  institute (Pennington 
Biomedical) to examine the effects of a health policy change  in childcare centers on 
children’s health behaviors. The timing is ideal  to establish  baseline  values of the 
physical activity environment and behaviors  of children, then to  evaluate these 
environments and behaviors one year after the childcare centers receive training,  
programmatic support,  and mandated regulations to achieve the new physical activity  
and screen-time regulations. Community stakeholders in the MHCI have identified 
childhood obesity  prevention as a top priority,  but the majority of parents fail to 
recognize obesity in preschool  children,24 and many mistakenly think  that obesity is not 
a health problem at this age. We seek  a shift in the climate  of the community to 
recognize that preschool is a critical opportunity to improve  health behaviors in order to 
put children on a trajectory  towards life-long healthy living.
Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria
Two to three focus groups of 8-10 parents  and childcare directors  will be  conducted  to 
elicit community  priorities for strategies  to improve young children’s health behaviors.
Inclusion Criteria : 
Either a director  of a licensed  childcare  center in East Baton  Rouge Parish  OR a 
legal guardian  and/or primary caretaker of a child aged 3 to 5 years who is  
enrolled in a licensed childcare center
Able to understand and speak  English
Willing to be audio-taped  during the focus group (for transcription purposes)
Exclusion Criteria : 
Being affiliated with 1 of the 10 childcare centers being assessed for Specific  
Aims 1 or 2, either  as a director/teacher or as a parent of a student
Cognitive impairments that interfere with participation in a group discussion  
Number of Subjects and Subject Timeline
We plan to conduct  2-3 focus  groups  of 8-10 parents and childcare directors, for 
a total of 16-30 participants. Participation in the focus group part of the study  will last 
approximately 1 day. We plan to conduct  all focus groups  between January  2016 and 
June 2017.Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 6 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016Study Timeline
This study  will last from July 1, 2016  until June 30, 2017.  A proposed timeline of  
all study procedures is listed below:
Jul 2016  Aug 
2016Sep-Oct 2016
Oct-Dec 2016
Jan-Mar 2017
Apr-Jun 2017
Recruitment for focus 
groups
Focus group 
meetings
Focus group 
transcription and analysis
Focus group 
manuscript preparation
Recruitment Methods
Parents  and childcare directors  at EBR Parish childcare centers  will receive 
information about the focus groups via email, mail, fax, phone, or in-person.  Individuals 
who express interest in the focus groups  will be further contacted  by study staff for 
scheduling. Out of the pool of 192 DOE licensed childcare centers  in EBR parish, we 
should not have  a problem recruiting 16-30  parents/childcare directors.  We aim to 
recruit all focus group participants between July 2016  and December  2016.
Procedures
Focus Groups. A group  informed  consent  will be obtained when participants 
arrive at the focus group location prior to the start of  the focus group  discussion. 
Participants will complete a brief demographic questionnaire. Focus groups will be 
moderated by 1-2 study staff members  and will be audio and video-taped to aid in later 
transcription. The moderator will lead the focus group discussion with a series of 
scripted, open-ended  questions designed to facilitate focused  discussion and  optimize 
consistency across focus groups.  Each focus  group should  last approximately  1.5 
hours. Participants will receive a $20 as compensation for  their time. 
Consent Process
A script explaining all aspects of the focus group that  are normally detailed in  a 
consent document will be read to the group  prior to the focus group discussion.  The 
researcher reading the consent script will stress that focus group participation  is 
voluntary and will be available to answer  questions during this time. Subjects who do 
not wish to participate in the focus  group  will be asked to leave the room prior to the 
start of the focus group discussion. By staying in the room  during the focus group,  this 
will be the participants’ way of telling the researchers that  he/she  agrees to participate.
Primary Endpoints and Data  Analysis Plan
Transcripts of the focus  group discussions will be imported into NVivo software  
(Version 10, QSR,  Victoria, Australia)  to allow for thematic  evaluation. The evaluation 
process will include the following: 1) generation of key words, phrases, and quotes 
coded as variable themes agreed upon by at least one other participant in  the group 
and repeated independently  in another  focus  group; 2) grouping of variables based  on Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 7 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016unifying concepts and themes; and 3) review of the variable groupings to ensure  
consistency and relevance  of proposed unifying  concepts. Primary endpoints of  the 
focus groups will be qualitative concepts, themes, and quotes  of the childcare center  
directors and parent  perspectives that may aid in developing new strategies to increase 
physical activity and reduce sedentary  behavior  in preschool  children.
Power Analysis
Power is achieved in qualitative  focus  groups when  data saturation occurs,  i.e. 
when themes are agreed upon by at least  two participants in the group and repeated  
independently in another focus group.  The completion of 2-3  focus groups with 8-10 
individuals each should allow for the perception of themes.
Data Management and Confidentiality
The Pediatric Obesity and Health Behavior Laboratory, supervised by Dr. 
Staiano, will have primary responsibility for data collection, data management,  manual 
data entry,  tests for inter-rater reliability, and data analysis.  All electronic data will be  
stored in the secure Pennington database, with access given  to only necessary, HIPAA-
certified staff. All hard copies of data will be stored in a secure, locked cabinet  at 
Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Data collected at the childcare centers  will be  
securely transported to PBRC by trained  staff. Access to data files can be  made only 
with permission of the Academic Principal  Investigator. Data will be stored for  5 years 
following study completion.
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  and Monitor the Data  to 
Ensure the Safety of Subjects
This study  does not involve  more  than minimal risk to  participants. Focus group  
questions do not contain  sensitive items to ensure participants are comfortable  
responding. Only first names will be used during the focus group  discussion and only 
focus group participants  and the 2 moderators will be present in the room  during the 
focus group discussion. Data  will be stored  in a secured area and  all study staff  must be 
HIPAA certified. Following transcription  of the focus group discussions,  all transcripts  
will be de-identified and original audio/video  tapes  that contain  names and images will 
be destroyed. Only pertinent study staff will have access to study  data.
Withdrawal of Subjects
Participation is voluntary,  so participants may withdraw from the study at any 
time. Data  that have  already been collected during the course of study participation  from 
a withdrawn participant  will be used, unless a specific request is otherwise received. 
Withdrawn participants will not be able to be removed from group data that  have already 
been collected, such as the focus  group discussions. Participants may be  withdrawn 
from the study for the following reasons:
 Unwillingness on behalf  of the participant  to participate  in the study or cooperate 
with study staff
Risks to Subjects
There are no foreseeable risks to participants in this study. The focus  group 
discussions will not include  any sensitive topics that could  make  participants 
uncomfortable.Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 8 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016Potential Benefits to  Subjects
We cannot promise any direct benefits to the participant  from participating  in the 
focus group discussion, although  policy changes and  directions identified in the focus 
group discussions may improve physical  activity  and screen-time  behaviors for 
children/students of focus  group  participants.
Vulnerable Populations
This study  does not involve  vulnerable populations. 
Sharing of Results with Subjects
Study  results will not be shared  with participants unless  requested. If requested, 
only group summary data will be available for the focus  groups.
Setting
Focus groups will be held at a convenient  community location or a meeting room 
inside Pennington Biomedical Research Center.
Resources Available
Amanda E. Staiano, Ph.D., M.P.P., Academic  Principal Investigator, is  Assistant 
Professor and Director of the Pediatric Obesity and Health  Behavior  Laboratory at 
Pennington Biomedical. Dr. Staiano is a developmental psychologist with expertise  in 
epidemiological surveys  of children’s screen-time  and public policy related  to children’s 
health.
Corby Martin, Ph.D., Academic Mentor , Associate Professor, is a licensed  
clinical psychologist  with extensive  experience conducting population-based  cluster 
randomized trials, including an ongoing clinical  trial to  test a home-based obesity  
intervention for preschool children. As a senior faculty member, Dr. Martin will provide 
ongoing mentorship to Dr. Staiano.
Andrew T. Allen, B.A., Community Investigator,  is the Director of the Mayor’s 
Healthy City Initiative and Community  Outreach  Coordinator  for the Office of the Mayor-
President in the City of Baton Rouge.
Additional staff members, including  a PBRC project coordinator, a PBRC 
research specialist, and policy  student worker located at the Mayor-President’s Office  
will oversee  data collection and conduct the focus groups.
Both principal investigators  have extensive networks to childcare  centers 
throughout the city. Staff members  will spend  at least 2 weeks  in each childcare center  
at baseline and 1 year later to establish  rapport  for recruitment and data collection.  
There are currently 192 licensed childcare  centers and 13  Head Start centers located in 
EBR Parish, so we do not envision  difficulties recruiting 16-30 parents/childcare  
directors for focus group participation. 
Prior Approvals
None.
Compensation for Research-Related Injury
No form of compensation  for medical  treatment or for other damages (i.e., lost 
wages, time lost from work, etc.) will be available for this research study. In the event  of Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 9 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016injury or medical illness resulting from the research procedures, participants will be 
referred to a treatment  facility.
Economic Burden to Subjects and Compensation
Focus group participants  will be responsible for bearing  the cost of transportation 
to and from the focus group location.  Focus  groups will be held at  a convenient 
community location to cut down  on these costs  and focus group  participants will receive  
$20 in compensation upon focus  group completion to  offset these costs.  
Drugs or Devices
N/APennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 10 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/2016References
1. Polhamus B, Dalenius  K, Borland  E, Mackintosh H, Smith B, Grummer-Strawn L. Pediatric 
nutrition surveillance  2007 report.  Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009.
2. Ogden CL, Carroll  MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence  of childhood and adult obesity  in the 
united states, 2011-2012.  JAMA. 2014;311(8):806-814.
3. Reilly JJ, Kelly  J. Long-term impact  of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence 
on morbidity and premature mortality in adulthood: systematic  review.  Int J Obes. 
2011;35(7):891-898.
4. Ekelund U, Luan J, Sherar LB, Esliger DW, Griew  P, Cooper A. Moderate to vigorous  
physical activity and sedentary  time and cardiometabolic risk factors in children and 
adolescents. JAMA 2012;307(7):704-712.
5. Tremblay M, LeBlanc A, Kho M, et al. Systematic review of sedentary  behaviour and health  
indicators in school-aged children and youth. Intn J Beh Nutr Physical  Activity.  2011;8(1):98.
6. National Association  for Sport  and Physical Education. Active  Start:  A Statement of Physical 
Activity Guidelines for children from Birth to Age 5, 2nd Edition: Physical Education, Recreation, 
and Dance; 2009.
7. Beets MW, Bornstein D, Dowda M, Pate RR. Compliance With National Guidelines for 
Physical Activity in U.S. Preschoolers:  Measurement and Interpretation. Pediatrics.  
011;127(4):658-664.
8. The American  Academy of Pediatrics Council  on Communications Media.  Policy  Statement -- 
Children, Adolescents, Obesity, and the Media.  Pediatrics. 2011;128(1):201-208.
9. Vanderloo LM. Screen-viewing among preschoolers in childcare: a systematic  review. BMC 
Pediatr. 2014;14:205.
10. Tandon PS, Zhou C, Lozano P, Christakis  DA. Preschoolers’ total daily screen time at home 
and by type of child care. J Pediatr. 2011;158(2):297-300.
11. Pate RR, Pfeiffer KA, Trost SG, Ziegler P, Dowda M. Physical activity among children 
attending preschools. Pediatrics. 2004;114(5):1258-1263.
12. Dowda M, Pate RR, Trost SG, Almeida  MJC, Sirard JR. Influences of preschool  policies  and 
practices on children's physical activity. J Commun Health. 2004;29(3):183-196.
13. Anderson  SE, Economos CD, Must A. Active play and screen time in US children  aged  4 to 
11 years  in relation  to sociodemographic and weight status characteristics:  a nationally 
representative crosssectional analysis. BMC Public  Health.  2008;8(1):366.
14. Larson N, Ward DS, Neelon SB, Story M. What Role Can Child-Care Settings Play in 
Obesity Prevention? A Review of the Evidence  and Call for Research Efforts. J Amer Diet Assn.
2011;111(9):1343-1362.
15. U.S. Census Bureau. American FactFinder,  2014. Available at: http://factfinder.census.gov  
2014.
16. Trust for America's Health and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The State of Obesity  
2014. Washington, D.C.2014.
17. Romero P LCoOPaM.  Overweight and obesity  data from the Department of Health and  
Hospitals Adolescent School Health Program - Louisiana School Based Health Centers.  2010.
18. U.S. Department  of Agriculture. Dietary Guidelines for Americans,  2010.
19. Jago R, Baranowski  T, Baranowski J, Thompson D, Greaves  K. BMI from 3-6 y of age is 
predicted by TV viewing and physical activity,  not diet. Int J Obes Relat  Metab  Disord.  
2005;29(6):557-564.
20. Strasburger VC, Hogan MJ, Mulligan DA, et al. Children, adolescents, and the media. 
Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):958-961.
21. Rideout VJ, Foehr UG, Roberts  DF. Generation  M2: Media in the lives of 8- to 18-year-olds. 
Menlo Park, California, 2010.Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016

Page 11 of 11                                                                                                                     V 2.0 5/31/201622. Heelan KA, Eisenmann JC. Physical  activity,  media time,  and body composition  in young 
children. J Physical  Activity & Health. 2006;3(2):200.
23. Benjamin SE, Ammerman AS, Ward DS, et al. Peer Reviewed: An Intervention to Promote 
Healthy Weight:  Nutrition  and Physical Activity Self-Assessment for Child  Care (NAP  SACC) 
Theory and Design. Prev Chronic Dis. 2007;4(3).
24. Lundahl A, Kidwell KM, Nelson TD. Parental  Underestimates of Child Weight:  A Meta-
analysis. Pediatrics. 2014;133(3):e689-e703.
25. Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Louisiana's Report Card on Physical Activity & 
Health for Children & Youth: Past Report  Cards. http://www.pbrc.edu/report_card/past/. 
Accessed January 15, 2015.
26. Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Charting the Course  for 2020: 2011 Louisiana's 
Report Card  on Physical Activity & Health for Children  and Youth.  
http://www.pbrc.edu/report_card/pdf/2011%20LA%20Report%20Card%20Long.pdf. Accessed 
January 15, 2015.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Healthy People.  
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people.htm. Accessed  January  15, 2015.
28. Homer J, Milstein  B, Wile K, Pratibhu P, Farris R, Orenstein DR. Modeling the local 
dynamics of cardiovascular health: risk factors, context, and capacity. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2008;5(2):A63.
29. Homer J, Milstein  B, Wile K, et al. Simulating and evaluating local interventions  to improve  
cardiovascular health. Prev Chronic Dis. 2010;7(1):A18.
30. Bower JK, Hales DP, Tate DF, Rubin DA, Benjamin  SE, Ward DS. The childcare 
environment and children’s physical activity. Amer J Prev Med. 2008;34(1):23-29.
31. U.S. Department  of Health and Human Services. The 2008 HHS  poverty  guidelines. 2010;
http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/08Poverty.shtml. Accessed February 20, 2015.
32. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  A SAS program for the CDC growth charts. 
2011; http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/growthcharts/resources/sas.htm.  Accessed February  
20, 2015.
33. Van Cauwenberghe E, Labarque V, Trost  SG, De Bourdeaudhuij  I, Cardon  G. Calibration 
and comparison of accelerometer cut points in preschool children. Int J of Pediatr Obes.
2011;6(2Part2):e582-e589.
34. Jago R, Thompson J, Sebire  S, et al. Cross-sectional  associations between  the screen-time 
of parents and young children: differences by parent and child gender and day of the week.  Int J 
Behav Nutr Physical Activity. 2014;11(1):54.
35. Anderson  D, Field D, Collins P, Lorch  E, Nathan  J. Estimates of young  children's time with 
television: a methodological comparison of parent  reports with time-lapse video home 
observation. Child Dev. 1985;56(5):1345 - 1357.
36. McKenzie,  T. L., Marshall,  S. J., Sallis, J. F., & Conway, T. L. (2000a). Leisure-time physical 
activity in school  environments: An observational study using SOPLAY. Preventive  Medicine,  
30, 70-77.Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218Approved 06/01/2016
