Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
  
   
 
  
Caregiver  Collaborative Integrated Therapy in Sub -Acute Stroke  
Protocol -Remote  
 
Protocol date: August 23, 2020  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
  
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
  
Caregiver  Collaborative Integrated Therapy in Sub- Acute Stroke  
Protocol -Remote  
 
 Research Design and Methods  
A leading cause of serious, long -term disability in the United States,1 stroke has a particularly pernicious 
impact  on individuals and families.   Approximately 4.8 million stroke survivors (SS) require assistance from 
family members who are often untr ained and ill prepared for the burdens associated with stroke 
rehabilitation.2, 3 Family care partners (CP) are key contributors to stroke recovery, but their efforts can lead to 
a high level of CP burden and depressive symptoms, reduced quality of life (QOL)  and increased stress in the 
context of high levels of family conflict surrounding the recovery process.4, 5 Rehabilitation therapy 
interventions have primarily targeted SS outcomes without specifically addressing the well -being of the CP.6 
Our group  has pioneered  creative approaches for engaging CPs in rehabilitation activities within the family 
which  have great potential to improve physical and psychosocial health for both the CP and SS.  
We have developed a theory -based , family -centered  intervention, Care partner and Collaborative 
Integrated Therapy ( CARE -CITE ),7 designed to engage CPs during SS upper extremity (UE) functional task 
practice in the home.  Residual UE impairments occur in up to 80% of SSs 8 and are a primary factor in loss of 
functional independence.    CARE- CITE guides the CP in collaborative goal setting and providing autonomy 
support  (characterized by empathy, choice and reducing use of controlling language) for the SS to promote  
motivation and creative problem solving in UE self -management.  
The goal of this study  is to implement CARE -CITE paired with usual and customary UE care  sooner 
after stroke  when SSs are in outpatient rehabilitation and in the sub -acute stroke ( 1-3 month ) recovery period .  
We will examine CARE -CITE during t his early  stroke recovery  phase  and gather evidence to ascertain the  
theorized  mechanisms  of effect . This new information  will inform future intervention development , testing , 
and translation to improve stroke outcomes sooner during the rehabilitation  process .  
The scientific  premise underpinning this research is that a theory -based, family -centered intervention 
focused on skill building , improved family context,  and problem -solving will improve SS physical function and 
quality of life while reducing CP negative outcomes  during outpati ent rehabilitation . The research design is a 
mixed methods, two -group (2:1) exploratory pilot study comparing intervention (CARE -CITE with usual 
customary care (n=24  dyads ) to an attention control  with usual customary care (n=12 dyads) . 
Aim 1:  To evaluate effects of web- based  CARE -CITE at home during subacute stroke 
recovery  on both CP and SS health outcomes and QOL .   Hypotheses: 1.1. CPs receiving CARE -CITE 
will have reduced depressive symptoms and improved QOL at 2 -month post intervention  compared to the 
control group.   1.2. SSs receiving CARE -CITE will have im proved upper extremity function  and QOL  at 2-
month post intervention  compared to the control group.  
Aim 2: To examine the effect of web- based  CARE- CITE on the family context and 
processes  related to stroke rehabilitation .  Hypotheses:   2.1. CPs receiving CARE -CITE will have less 
family conflict and provide greater autonomy support at 2-month post intervention  compared to the control 
group.   2.2.  SSs receiving CARE -CITE will have improved perceived autonomy support and UE self -efficacy  
at 2-month  post intervention compared to control group . 
Exploratory Aim.  Use  qualitative methods to c omplement the interpretation of  effects on 
processes and outcomes  from Aims 1 and 2.   At 3 months post intervention, w e will evaluate  CPs’  
perceptions of the benefits, challenges and experiences with the intervention  and explore change s in their  
perceived QOL, family conflict, and autonomy support . 
 
• General Overview  of Proposed Methods : We propose  a mixed methods , convergent  design9 with  
a two-group experimental approach  with separate quantitative and qualitative analyses followed by 
integration of the findings . We will block randomiz e (2:1) 36 dyads  to treatment or control. All SS will 
be 1-3 months  post stroke  and living at home  to capture family dyads who are still in sub -acute post 
stroke outpatient rehabilitation therapy.   The intervention will last 4 weeks.  Baseline and 3-month 
post -intervention  assessments will include questionnaires , measures of recovery , and s emi- structured 
interviews (Table  2).  Methodological Modification:  All study interactions with participants 
(including screening, evaluations and interventions) will occur remotely via phone call or HIPPA compliant Zoom platform currently being used by Emory Healthcare for telehealth clinic visits.   
Study Participants: All Emory Hospital stroke admissions will be screened based upon study 
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
 inclusion/exclusion criteria  and contacted by the  research coordinator , if eligible .  Participant eligibility  will be 
confirmed  via telephone and virtual screen, and initial  virtual  evaluation will follow . All self -report written CP 
and SS questionnaires will be delivered to participants’ homes for completion.  Completed questionnaires will 
be returned via self -addressed stamped envelope or stud y staff will arrange for pick -up from the participant’s 
home.  The evaluator will review questionnaires for completeness and conduct a virtual evaluation to complete 
SS upper extremity assessments and address any missing CP data. All potential dyads will read/sign Emory 
IRB approved consent/HIPAA forms . Evaluations and training sessions will be video -recorded for 
standardization procedures to ensure study rigor and reliability. Video or audio recording is optional and not 
required for participants to partic ipate in the study. Participants will have the option to consent to these 
recordings. A medical screen from participant’s  physician  will be obtained  prior to enrollment.   Patients will 
agree to allow researchers to review their medical records for data col lection.  
Inclusion/exclusion criteria:   All SSs will be 1-3 months post ischemic or hemorrhagic event10, discharged 
from inpatient neurologic rehabilitation to their home, have minimal to moderate UE  deficits ( actively  initiate 
20 degrees of wrist and 10 degrees of finger extension), no severe cognit ive deficits (Mini -mental test11 >24), no 
physician determined major medical problems that would limit participation in outpatient therapy , and a CP 
living in the home .10, 12  CPs must > 21 years  old, able to read and write English and have no significant cognitive 
deficits (Mini -mental test >24).  CP s will be defined as those individuals who are a spouse/partner or family 
member dwelling in the same household , the family member most involved in strok e recovery,  and self -identify  
as the primary caregiver of the SS.4, 13 CPs must be familiar with using a computer and accessing websites , or be 
familiar  with using a tablet  (available for loan if no computer available ). 
We plan to recruit 12 dyads into the usual  care attention control group  and 24 dyads into the CARE -CITE 
group. The larger intervention group will contribute precision to the pilot -based estimates of mean changes 
and variability for key outcomes, while also improving the lessons to be learned about feasibility to inform 
future implementation for a larger -scale trial. G iven the PI’s extensive and successful recruitment ex perience 
for other prior stroke s tudies, a recruitment rate of 2-3 dyads per month is a realistic estimate for the proposed 
time period.  An attrition rate of ~8 % is projected based on the literature ;14-16 thus , we will enroll 40 dyads  to 
achieve a complete sample of 36.   
Intervention group: CARE- CITE:  While the SS is receiving usual and customary  outpatient  UE 
rehabilitation, the CARE -CITE intervention  will occur over 4  weeks . The primary CARE -CITE components will 
be education via web platform . The research interventionist will conduct a  virtual  in-home visit  via Emory 
Zoom platform at orientation and during week 4, and telephone follow ups . The research interventionist will 
work in tandem with the outpatient rehabilitation treatment team  to coordinate care plans and patient goals.  
1) Visit 1:  Virtual Orientation (3 hours) .  The  research interventionist  will meet virtually with CP and SS to 
review collaborative goals setting, evaluate UE movement limitations, and identify functional activity 
preferences . Together, they  will begin development of a progressive therapeutic exercise plan for home -based 
functional task practice , determine activities for each goal and measurable milestones to accomplish during the 
treatment period , creating a framework to improve joint responsibilities for self -management skills.    
2) CP completes  6 online CARE- CITE  modules  (15-30-minute sessions  each ). During the week following Visit 1, 
the CP will access the website to complete 6 online modules . Modules include demonstration videos and 
instructive content covering following areas:  p rinciples of functional task practice  (i.e., activities of daily living 
such as eating, grooming, or leisure/vocational activities) , adaptation of tasks, and importance  of progression 
of challenging tasks to drive neuroplasticity  (i.e., increasing numbers of practice repetitions or weight of objects 
lifted) . Examples are provided to  address potential SS frustration and improv e adherence.  Underpinning the 
content is the concept of autonomy support, with examples of fostering empathy ( e.g., the CP using non-
dominant hand during activities), problem solving (guidance for adaptation of functional activities at home to increase success or chall enge), instruction in the use of non -controlling language with role playing situations 
and the importance of creating choice in activities. For example,  in one vignette  to demonstrate problem 
solving, a CP interact s with the SS  during a meal using non- cont rolling language to offer choice for task 
modifications for manipulating food with the weaker hand.  The SS becomes frustrated with the challenging 
task , and the CP demonstrates options for dialogue that foster collaborativ e problem solving.   
3) Weekly tel econference/ Zoom  check -in.  Each week d uring the 4- week  intervention , the research 
interventionist will complete a structured 10-minute  phone call with CP to answer questions and assist with 
problem solving.  
4) Visit 2:  Virtual Home visit  (3 hours) . At the end of week 4, the same research interventionist will conduct a 
virtual home visit to review progress with  milestones and  advancement of activity goals . 
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
 5) “CARE -CITE Booster” session  – 4 weeks after the intervention period , the research interventionist will make 
a brief 10 -minute telephone booster call to reinforce CARE -CITE content , ask the CPs to ident ify two 
challenging areas during SS practice activities, and CP opportunities to use principles of autonomy support.  
Attention Control group:   SS and CP will receive customary care  outpatient rehabilitation therapy  but no  
CARE- CITE intervention.   The CP will receive a CP support brochure with ge neral caregiving information 
including  website resources to mimic web interaction of intervention group  (e.g., stroke  caregiver resource 
site).  The research coordinator will handle all communication. The CP will receive the same number of 
structured weekly phone calls  and the “booster call” to answer any quest ions , assess helpfulness of the 
information  and ascertain if there was any use o f the web resources or social support groups.  
Procedures:  The research coordinator will make a virtual screening  appointment  at via HIPPA compliant 
Emory Zoom telehealth platform for interested participants. If screening criteria are  met, a n electronic  
informed consent (via RedCAP data management system) will be obtained from the CP and SS. Following 
baseline  data collection obtained via a virtual evaluatio n by the research evaluator (licensed physical therapist) , 
participants will be randomized to groups using a random number generator.  The research interventionist 
(licensed physical therapist) will schedule  dyads in the intervention group for the orientati on virtual home visit 
and the second virtual home visit  and complete weekly phone calls . The research coordinator will schedule all 
dyad data collection appointments and complete attention control group dyads phone calls. All dyads complete 
a virtual evalu ation  for the 3-month  post -test visit.   To increase rigor and minimize bias , data collectors  will be 
blinded to group assignment/study hypotheses and will be trained  in study procedures (e.g. Mini -mental test 
administration) by the PI [Blanton], with regular assessments of competence every 4 months.  The PI will train 
the research interventionist in delivering the intervention and provide supervision by reviewing all i n home 
visits.  To minimize  missing data, all participants will be sent email / text / mail  reminders for upcoming  
appointment dates. Using the web platform,  we will be able to track the frequency and time on each web 
module.  All dyads will receive $100 for study participation at the end of the 3 -month follow up.  
Instruments:   Variables and  measures have all been tested in th is population previously .  Each standard tool 
has evidence of established reliability and validity in this patient population  as referenced in Table 2.  
Table 2. R21 Measures collected at baseline  and 3 months p ost-intervention  
VARIABLE   MEASURE S Description  Reliability/Validity  
CP Depression  CES-D 20-item, Likert -type scale   Established validity, internal consistency , reliability 17 
CP Quality of life  SF-36 36-item  Likert -type scale , mental  health 
domain  Sensitive indicator  CP mental health18, 19  
SS Quality of Life  Stroke Impact Scale (SIS)  59-items,  8 domains function  Test-retest  reliability ICC = 0.70 to 0.92; Internal 
consistency  alpha coefficient of 0.83 -0.90  20 
SS Upper 
Extremity 
Function  Wolf Motor Function Test 
(WMFT)  (dropped from 
remote study)  
Motor Activity Log (MAL)  15 item speed measures;2 item strength; 
low score/faster speed  
30-item questionnaire , Likert -type scale ; 
high score/high quality UE use  Inter-rater reliability r=.97;  valid in the stroke 
population21 
 
CP/SS Autonomy 
Support 
Environment  Family Ca re Climate 
Questionnaire  
FCCQ -CP/FCCQ -SS 14-item, Likert -type scale . Higher 
scores/higher autonomy support  
perception  Internal  cons istency >. 70; Construct validity supported - 
higher FCCQ -SS scores related to  SS lower perception of 
criticism, higher family emotional involvement -higher 
satisfaction with family support (p ≤ .05)22 
CP Family Conflict  Family Caregiver Conflict 
Scal e (FCCS)  about Stroke 
Recovery  15-item, Likert -type scale ; Higher 
scores/higher conflict  Established content/construct validity in stroke CP; 
reliability Cronbach’s  alpha =.9323 
SS UE Self Efficacy  Confidence in Hand and 
Movement Scale (CAHM)  20-item (scale 0 -100)UE confidence  for 
functional tasks ; high  scores /high 
confidence   Reliable and valid with moderate relationship with 
WMFT 3 -9 months post stroke10 
 
Additional secondary outcome measures will be collected for CP -Family Assessment Device (FAD) Scale  
(baseline only), CP Caregiver Strain Index (CSI), CP Bakas Caregiving Outcomes Scale (BCOS) , SS Fugl -Meyer 
Assessment (FMA)  (baseline only), SS Neuro -QoL Short Form v1.1 -  Satisfaction with Social Roles and 
Activities, CP BRICS NINR Depression scale  (PROM IS Depression - Short Form 6a ), SS Neuro -QOL SF v1.0 - 
Upper Extremity Function (Fine Motor, ADL) .  
 
Additional clinical data about SS (such as medications, concurrent medical problems, pre -morbid handedness, 
side affected by stroke) and about the CP (co -morbidities and medications) will be collected to fully describe 
the sample and explore relationships using correlation analysis. The CP adherence to the intervention  will be 
assessed by monitoring CP review of the CARE -CITE modules through Google Analytics, and completion of 
module feedback questionnaires  including  specific examples of ways they used the educational information 
(e.g., “provide an example of how you used autonomy support with your loved one”) .  Participants will have the 
option to w ear bilateral, wrist- worn accelerometers (Actigraph) to assess upper extremity performance in the 
home environment for a period of 1 -3 days at time of the baseline and  3-month follow -up evaluations.  
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
 Data Management and Planned Analysis : All quantitative  data storage will  be maintained through the 
Emory HIPPA compliant REDCap database.  Standard data cleaning, identification of missing data, 
identification of outliers, and internal consistency reliability for standardized scales will be completed.   Initial 
data analysis will include descriptive statistics to describe the sample and summarize major study variables. 
For Aim 1 , we hypothesize  that for dyads receiving CARE- CITE , CPs will display  reduced (improved) CES -D 
depression  and improved SF -36 (QOL) scores and SS will have higher scores on the MAL (improved use of arm 
function) , SIS (QOL), and  reduced scores on the WMFT (faster UE speed of movement) consistent with 
moderate to large effect sizes at 3 -month s as compared to baseline and more favorable  changes in these scores 
after 3-month s as compared to the attention  control group.  For Aim 2 , we hypothesize  that for dyads 
receiving CARE -CITE , both members  will have higher autonomy support (FCCQ -CP; FCCQ -SS), CP will have 
reduced FCCS (family conflict)  and SS will display higher CAHM (UE self -efficacy) as compared to b aseline and 
to the control group . The first component of the primary analysis will involve the construction of 95% 
confidence intervals in order to s ummarize  changes from baseline to 3-month s within each group . We will also 
report the results of paired t tests or nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank tests to assess changes from baseline 
to two month s post intervention  within each group. Similarly, we will compare m ean or median changes of the 
outcomes targeted in  Aims 1 and 2 across the two groups using two -sample t tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests, 
respectively. Recognizing the pilot nature of the study, these inf erences will be viewed primarily as descriptive 
rather than as definitive hypothesis testing efforts.   To address the multidimensional nature of the data, we will 
examine inter -correlations among the study variables, including variables that may influence response to the 
intervention. As needed, we  will use linear regression models to augment the primary  analyses in order to 
assess the extent of association between  patient characteristics and mean changes and whether observed  
differences in mean change s across groups persist after controlling for such variables.  The biological 
variables  of CP age, sex, gender  and relationship of CP to SS  (e.g. spouse, adult child) and other participant 
characteristics such as SS other health problems will be examined and  potential relationships explored to gain 
insight into possible confounding factors. Potential limitations :  While CP of any sex/gender will be 
recruited, most CPs are female, which may limit interpretations of any sex/gender differences found.   
 
Explorat ory Aim Methods:  At the end of 3-month post- intervention evaluation we will invite the 24 CPs in 
the intervention group to participate in  focused individual interviews to better understand their perceptions of 
how CARE -CITE impacted health outcomes, QOL , and family conflict and autonomy support.  We will use a  
semi- structured interview guide  (developed by the study team and reviewed by content and qualitative experts  
– See Appendices ) that  addresses  both outcomes and process aspects of CARE -CITE . For example, questions 
will focus on : how  the dyad incorporated  autonomy supportive strategies;  benefits/  challenges of using 
autonomy supportive approaches ; conflicts  in CP and SS working together  and how CP perceive the 
intervention impacted SS function.   An open -ended question  will be included  for CP to share additional 
feedback about CARE -CITE.  Virtual i nterviews (~45-60 minute  each)  via HIPPA compliant Emory Zoom 
telehealth platform  will be conducted by the PI and a rese arch assistant (RA). Dr. Lutz ( qualitative  methods  
expert ) will provide  oversight  to the PI and RA for qualitative interviews  and analysis. Interviews will be audio -
recorded and transcribed verbatim by a professional transcriptionist for accuracy.   Data Analysis:   Data 
collection and analysis will occur simultaneously. Dr. Lutz, Dr. Blanton and the RA will analyze transcripts 
line-by-line, using thematic analysis, to identify salient themes .24 Transcripts will be reviewed for  themes:  
autonomy supportive interactions (e.g. empathy, offering choice, problem solving) or non -autonomy 
supportive interactions (guilt inducing, lack of empathy, co ntrolling language) ; types and  opportunities to  work 
together on recovery activities ; and perceived effects on outcomes (functional recovery, depression, and QOL). 
As themes are identified  in early interviews, they will be verified with new CPs to substantiate their relevance ; 
the interview guide will be adapting accordingly . Comparisons of themes will be made within and across 
interviews.24-26 CP responses will b e compared for similarities and differences in the challenges and benefits of 
the intervention . Data saturation is expected to occur between 15 -24 participants.27 QSR NVivo 11 qualitative 
data management software28 will aid in analyzing the data making comparisons within and across texts , and 
comparisons to the quantitative measures.  Using  guidelines by Fetters, et. al.,9 triangulating qualitative and 
quantitative data will occur at the study end by merging data, bas ed on methods described by Creswell, et al.,29 
including the use of side -by-side joint displays. Dyad and CP quantitative data (e.g. change in family conflict, 
autonomy support and caregiver depression scores will be compared for concordance or discordance with 
themes identified in the interviews to better understand mechanism of the intervention.   Approaches to ensure 
rigor  of the  data analysis and interpretation : 1) Team members will keep  memos to record  findings and track 
analytical interpretations  provid ing an audit trail with  supporting documentation from interviews an d data 
analysis.  2) The team will meet monthly to discuss the ongoing data analysis and data collection.   3) Provisional 
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
 findings from early interviews will be discussed with the entire team for feedback on the interpretations and to 
help develop additional interview questions.  
 
References Cited  
 
1. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd -Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, et al. Heart disease and 
stroke statistics --2012 update: A report from the american heart association. Circulation . 
2012;125:e2- e220  
2. Grant JS, Hunt CW, Steadman L. Common caregiver issues and nursing interventions after a stroke. 
Stroke . 2014;45:e151- 153  
3. Miller EL, Murray L, Richards L, Zorowitz RD, Bakas T, Clark P, et al. Comprehensive overview of 
nursing and interdisciplinary rehabilitation care of the stroke patient: A scientific s tatement from 
the american heart association. Stroke. 2010;41:2402- 2448 
4. Clark PC, Dunbar SB, Shields CG, Viswanathan B, Aycock DM, Wolf SL. Influence of stroke survivor characteristics and family conflict surrounding recovery on caregivers' mental and p hysical health. 
Nurs. Res.  2004;53:406 -413  
5. Haley WE, Allen JY, Grant JS, Clay OJ, Perkins M, Roth DL. Problems and benefits reported by stroke 
family caregivers: Results from a prospective epidemiological study. Stroke . 2009;40:2129- 2133 
6. Bakas T, McC arthy M, Miller ET. Update on the state of the evidence for stroke family caregiver 
and dyad interventions. Stroke . 2017;48:e122- e125  
7. Blanton, Clark, Dunbar SB. Feasibility of a carepartner integrated telehealth rehabilitation program for stroke: A case  series. American Physical Therapy Association Combined Sections 
Conference. 2017 
8. Faria- Fortini I, Michaelsen SM, Cassiano JG, Teixeira- Salmela LF. Upper extremity function in 
stroke subjects: Relationships between the international classification of fu nctioning, disability, 
and health domains. J. Hand Ther.  2011;24:257 -264; quiz 265  
9. Fetters MD, Curry LA, Creswell JW. Achieving integration in mixed methods designs -principles and 
practices. Health Serv. Res.  2013;48:2134 -2156  
10. Winstein CJ, Wolf SL, Dromerick AW, Lane CJ, Nelsen MA, Lewthwaite R, et al. Interdisciplinary 
comprehensive arm rehabilitation evaluation (icare): A randomized controlled trial protocol. BMC 
Neurol.  2013;13:5  
11. Agrell B, Dehlin O. Mini mental state examination in geriatric s troke patients. Validity, differences 
between subgroups of patients, and relationships to somatic and mental variables. Aging (Milan, Italy) . 2000;12:439- 444  
12. Winstein CJ, Miller JP, Blanton S, Taub E, Uswatte G, Morris D, et al. Methods for a multisite randomized trial to investigate the effect of constraint- induced movement therapy in improving 
upper extremity function among adults recovering from a cerebrovascular stroke. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair. 2003;17:137- 152  
13. Dunbar SB, Clark PC, Quinn C, G ary RA, Kaslow NJ. Family influences on heart failure self -care and 
outcomes. J. Cardiovasc. Nurs. 2008;23:258- 265  
14. Bakas T, Austin JK, Habermann B, Jessup NM, McLennon SM, Mitchell PH, et al. Telephone assessment and skill -building kit for stroke careg ivers: A randomized controlled clinical trial. 
Stroke . 2015;46:3478- 3487  
15. Wolf SL, Winstein CJ, Miller JP, Taub E, Uswatte G, Morris D, et al. Effect of constraint- induced 
movement therapy on upper extremity function 3 to 9 months after stroke: The excite randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2006;296:2095- 2104  
16. Blanton S, Morris DM, Prettyman MG, McCulloch K, Redmond S, Light KE, et al. Lessons learned in 
participant recruitment and retention: The excite trial. Phys. Ther.  2006;86:1520- 1533  
17. Andresen E M, Malmgren JA, Carter WB, Patrick DL. Screening for depression in well older adults: 
Evaluation of a short form of the ces -d (center for epidemiologic studies depression scale). Am. J. 
Prev. Med.  1994;10:77- 84 
Version 8.23.20 CARE -CITE R21  PI:  Sarah Blanton, PT, DPT  
 18. Ware JE, Kosinski M, Dewey JE, Gandek B. Sf -36 health survey: Manual and interpretation guide . 
Quality Metric Inc.; 2000.  
19. Jonsson AC, Lindgren I, Hallstrom B, Norrving B, Lindgren A. Determinants of quality of life in 
stroke survivors and their informal caregivers. Stroke . 2005;36:803- 808 
20. Duncan PW, Wallace D, Lai SM, Johnson D, Embretson S, Laster LJ. The stroke impact scale version 
2.0. Evaluation of reliability, validity, and sensitivity to change. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation . 1999;30:2131- 2140  
21. Wolf SL, Catlin PA, Elli s M, Archer AL, Morgan B, Piacentino A. Assessing wolf motor function test 
as outcome measure for research in patients after stroke. Stroke . 2001;32:1635- 1639  
22. Clark P, and Dunbar, SB. Preliminary reliability and validity of a family care climate questionnaire for heart failure. Families, Systems, & Health . 2003;21:281 -291  
23. Clark PC, Shields CG, Aycock D, Wolf SL. Preliminary reliability and validity of a family caregiver conflict scale for stroke. Prog. Cardiovasc. Nurs.  2003;18:77  
24. Ryan GW, Berna rd HR. Techniques to identify themes. Field Methods . 2003;15:85 -109  
25. Strauss AL. Qualitative analysis for social scientists . New York: Cambridge University Press; 1987.  
26. Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of qualitative research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.; 1998.  
27. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough? Field Methods . 2006;18:59- 82 
28. QSR International Pty. Ltd. Nvivo qualitative data analysis software, version 8. 2008  
29. Crewswell JW, Clark VL. Designing and cond ucting mixed methods research.  Los Angeles, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2018.  
 