 
 
Title: Tamsulosin a nd Time to Spont aneous Void F ollowing Hysterec tomy: A Rando mized Contr olled Trial 
 
 
Authors: Martina Gabra  MD, Christi ne Hall MD, Lelan McCann MD, Jeenal Shah  MD, Ismael  Miller MD, Aaron  Masjedi 
MD, Stepha nie Runke MD, A ndrea A guirre MD 
 
NCT numbe r: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
  Date of document : 7/19/2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  
The study  was a doubl e-blinded,  placebo- controlled random ized control  trial that took place at two tertiary 
care hospital camp uses in Tucson,  Arizo na, betw een June 2021 and January 2023  and involved  11 
attending s urgeons. Approval from the institutional r eview board and registrati on on Clin icalTrials. gov was 
obtain ed prior to enrollm ent. 
 
Wom en 18-80 undergoi ng minimally  invasive  hysterectomy  for benign  indications were scree ned for 
partic ipation.  In this study,  minimally  invasive  hyster ectomy  included the followi ng proced ures: total vaginal 
hyster ectomy (TVH),  total laparosc opic hyster ectomy (TLH),  laparoscop ic assisted  vaginal  hyster ectomy 
(LAV H), robotic assisted lap aroscopic hysterectomy (RA-TLH), Vaginal Natural Orifice Tra nsluminal 
Endosc opic Surg ery (vNOTES),  and supracervical  hysterecto my. Patients  were  excluded from analysis if 
they had a planned concurrent  inconti nence surgery (e.g.  colporr haphy,  vaginal vault suspe nsion or sling 
procedure), a history  of bladder cancer, or  a medical contrain dication to tamsul osin. Participants requiring 
Foley  catheterizati on due to complicati ons such as bladder injury were  excluded. Patients were screened 
and co nsented a week prior to their schedu led sur gery. The day of surgery, either  0.4mg tamsul osin or 
placebo  was admin istered  on average 1 hour  before surg ery. This timing  was chosen  because the peak 
plasma concentration  of tamsulosin occurs  at 4 hours, so taking into account the total operating room (OR) 
time (from  rolling to the OR to leaving  the OR suite) the medi cation  onset coincides with the patient  arrivi ng 
to the PACU. Ran domization was performed by the hospital  investigational  pharmacy,  who dispensed  the 
study  medication or placebo in a blinded fashion.  Both tamsu losin and placebo study  medication w ere 
enca psulat ed and w ere indistingu ishable from one a nother.  
 
Each  participant underw ent a void trial post-operative ly by backfilling their bladd er with 200cc  normal  saline 
at the conclusion of the case and removing the foley.  Demograph ics, medical  and surgical  history, surgical 
details,  PACU  discharge time, time to void,  and adv erse even ts were re corded. Adverse  events  included 
intrao perative compl icatio ns, rate of re admission, a nd emerge ncy dep artment visits.  
 
   Statistical Analysis Plan  
The study aimed to exam ine two primary objectives:  (1) the time to void in the tamsul osin intervention  group 
compared to the pl acebo group, and  (2) the time to disch arge from the PACU. A redu ction of at lea st thirty 
minutes  in time to void was considered a signif icant change  that could alter the stand ard of care.  Based  on 
Chao et al, the time to void following a backfill void trial is  181 m inutes. To det ermine if tamsulos in results 
in a 30 minute  decre ase in time  to post-operative  void, a total of 77 partic ipants per group were  needed, 
assumi ng a 5% signific ance level and 80% power. To acco unt for 10% drop out or exclusion, a total of 170 
patients (85 per  group allocati on) were  consented.  Wilcox on rank-sum test was used  for contin uous 
variabl es and Fish er's exact test was used for categorical  variables. A P value of  <0.05 w as considered 
statistically significant. 