Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 1 of 14 Title: Evaluation of pain alleviating strategies during allergy shots (Subcutaneous 
immunotherapy): A randomized controlled study ( Pain Perception with  Allergy  Shot Techniques:  
PPAST ) 
 
Principal Investigator   
• Jennifer Pfieffer MSN, APRN, PCNS -BC, CPEN  
 
Co-Investigators  
• Karen Gee BSN, RN, CPN  
• Kristine Wehmeier BSN, RN, AE -C 
• Emily Hoehn BSN, RN, CPN  
• Monarie Lacanilao BSN, RN  
• Tracy DeSanto BSN, RN, CPN  
• Tara Spruill MSN, RN, CPN  
• Jamie Thibodeaux BSN, RN, CPN  
• Amanda Davis BSN, RN  
Ejaz Yousef MD  
•  
Research Coordinators  
• Isabel Delgado, BSH  
• Elizabeth DeLuca, BSN, RN, CCRC  
• Mary Warde, BSN, RN, CCRC  
 
Project Consultant  / Data Analyst  
• Keith Fishlock MSN,ARNP,PCNS -BC, FNP -BC 
 
Rationale  and Purpose  
Subcutane ous Immunotherapy (allergy injections ) is a potentially disease -modifying therapy that 
is effective for the treatment of allergic rhinitis/conjunctivitis, allergic asthma and stinging insect 
hypersensitivity.  Pain, which results from the irritation of nearby nerves is a common concern of 
patients, particularly in children, during or after the injection s. This can be a stressful and 
negative experience for the children. There are various techniques available to  minimize pain  in 
general. However, there is a lack  of published research on how to use these techniques in 
children receiving allergy injection s. The purpose of this study is to evalu ate and compare the 
efficacy  of the standard of care method (Ethyl Chloride/Pain Ease Spray) and three  non-
pharmacological pain control devices (Buzzy Bee  I, Buzzy Bee II  and Shot Blocker)  in 
decreasing the perception of  pain during subcutaneous allergy injection  in a pediatric 
allergy/immunology clinic setting.  
   
Objective  
• Evaluate and compare  the effectiveness of utilizing  various techniques to reduce the 
perception of pain during subcutaneous allergy injection s in children  
 
Possible Risks and Benefits  
Risk Assessment  
• The risks associated with study  participation are consistent with standard of care risks. 
Potential risk for the study participants may be possible allergic reaction/skin irritation 
from the cold spray or ice pack or an increased level of anxiety.  
 
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 2 of 14  
Benefits Assessment  
• The potential ben efit associated with this research study includes a better understanding 
of study  participant’s response to their assigned distraction technique. This study may 
help identify  which technique is more beneficial to use in children receiving 
subcutaneous immu notherapy to decrease the perception of pain and reduce anxiety 
related to immunotherapy treatment.  
 
Study  Design  and Duration   
This is a randomized controlled study. Approximately 100 children, age 4 – 17 years, who are 
currently receiving subcutaneous immunotherapy , will randomly select a blinded envelope which 
assigns the distraction technique to be utilized during their study particip ation. There will be 25 
envelopes assigned to each study group for a total of 100 envelopes.  Each envelope will 
contain a paper with a colored sticker for the associated group assignment and number 
sequence.  
 
The distribution of group assignment by number  sequence  and color is as follows:  
➢ Interventional Groups  
1. Shot Blocker®  # 1-25 (RED)  
2. Buzzy I  (vibrating only)  # 26-50  (GREEN)  
3. Buzzy II (vibrating and ice wings)  # 51-75  (BLUE)  
➢ Control Group  
4. Ethyl Chloride/Pain Ease Spray # 76-100  (YELLOW)  
 
The three interventional groups are currently marketed distraction devices. The control group is 
the current clinical standard of care option for pre -allergy injection application.  
 
The study consists of two visits. Both visits will be conducted during th e participants routine 
clinic visit for allergy injections. At the first visit the investigator will assess  eligibility. An  
overview of the study requirements will be provided  to parent/child  and consent/assent will be 
obtained.   
 
During the second visit, the child will be randomized to a  distraction technique or standard of 
care group to be utilized with the allergy injection (s) administered  at this visit. Adherence with 
institutional  allergy injection  guidelines will be maintained. Prior to the app lication of the 
distraction method, the investigator will interview the parent to collect data related to 
demographic  information and their child’s current allergy health and treatment regime. The 
child’s p ain perception will be assessed before and after t he allergy injection . The parent’s 
perception of their child’s pain will be assessed after the allergy injection.  The investigator will 
provide information on the application of the randomized method and will provide instruction on 
the completion of the pain scales and questionnaires.  The investigator and study staff will  not 
indicate a method preference or guide the child or parent with their pain level responses . After 
completion of the second visit , the child’s study participation is  complete.  
  
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria   
• Children aged 4 -17 years on injection immunotherapy  
• A minimum of three  allergy injection  injections prior to enrollment at Visit 1  
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 3 of 14 • Child accompan ied by parent or legal guardian  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Children with a known pain or sensory disorders  
• Developmental delays lacking necessary cognitive ability  
• Administration of any form of pain analgesic  within eight  hours of randomization at Visit 2  
 
Study Procedures  
Visit 1:  
Children ag ed 4-17 years who present to  receive their injection (s) in the allergy clinic will be 
screened by the Principal Investigator or Co -Investigator for study inclusion and exclusion 
criteria.  During their routine post -allergy injection  30-minute wait time, th e investigator and the 
research coordinator  will provide the parent and child with an overview  of the study design, the 
risk and benefit s assessment and study requirements. The investigator will advise the 
parent/child of the pain analgesic administration exclusion for the randomization visit.  After 
obtaining parental permission and  child assent, the child will be considered enrolled in the 
study. A subject ID will be assign ed. A visible mark placed on the  child’s allergy injection  chart 
will indicate the child  is ready to be randomized at their next routine allergy injection  visit. 
 
Visit 2:  
At a future allergy injection  clinic visit  the parent and the child will be asked if the child took any 
pain-relieving medicines, like Tylenol or Advil, within eight hours before coming to the clinic.  If 
the participant  needed th is kind of medicine, the allergy shot appointment will be th e same as 
before the study.  
 
Study visit 2 will be completed at another routine allergy shot appointment.  Preferably  the next 
scheduled allergy injection  visit. 
 
If the participant did not take any pain relieving medicine withi n the previous eight hours,  visit 2 
will continue. T he participants study group assignment will be determined . The envelopes 
identifying the four group assignments will be  coded by number and color . The child will be 
presented with a basket containing all  the envelopes . The investigator will instruct the child  to 
select one envelope  from the basket .  The envelope selected at random by the child will 
determine the distraction method to be utilized prior to the allergy injection (s).  The possible 
group assig nments , one of  three  currently marketed  distraction devices or  the control group 
utilizing the current standard of care option , are listed below and are further detailed in 
Attachments I – III.   
 
The four study groups are:   
➢ Interventional Groups  
1. Shot Blocker ®  
2. Buzzy I  (with ice pack -wings)  
3. Buzzy II (without ice pack -wings)  
➢ Control Group  
4. Ethyl Chloride/Pain Ease Spray  
 
 
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 4 of 14 Before applying the assigned distraction method : 
- Prior to randomization, the investigator will interview the parent to obtain the information 
needed  to complete the Parent Demographic -Health -Treatment Questionnaire 
(Attachment V).  The investigator will review the responses for any indicator of study 
ineligibility, ie, analgesic medication window.   
- The investigator  or study staff  will review th e Wong -Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale 
with the child. The  child will be  given a Wong -Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale form and 
asked  to circle the face which most closely matches  their current level of pain awareness  
prior to any intervention. (Attachment IV -a) 
- The investigator  or study staff  will review the Numeric Pain Rating Scale  (Attachment IV -
b) with the parent . The parent will be instructed  to circle the number on the scale which 
most closely matches their perception of their child’s  pain level  immediately after 
receiving the allergy injection.  
Application of the distraction method  and administration of the allergy injection : 
- The investigat or will apply the assigned distraction method  per method specifications  to 
the injection site area ( subcutaneous region  of the back of the upper arm ).  
- The investigator will administer the subcutaneous allergy injection(s) within the time 
frame specified for the assigned distraction device utilized or per the standard of care 
guidelines for the Pain  Ease Spray , as appropriate .   If the child ’s treatment plan 
includes more than one injection , the assigned group technique will be utilized for all 
injection s at the visit.   
Post allergy injection procedures : 
- Immediately  following the allergy injection , the child will be provided with a second 
Wong -Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale form and be asked  to circle the face which most 
closely matches their post-injection  level of pain awareness . 
- Immediately following the allergy injection, t he parent will be reminded to circle the 
number on the  Numeric Pain Rating Scale which most closely matches their perception 
of the child’s post-injection pain level .   
- The participant and parent will then complete  the routine 30 minute wait time for post 
allergy injection s.  
 
Study participation is complete a t the end of Visit 2.  
 
Prohibited Medications  
Analgesic medications administered within eight hours of Visit 2 are prohibited.  
 
Adverse Event (AE)  
An AE is any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom temporally associated with the use of 
the study technique and does not imply judgment about causality.  
 
AE’s associated with the randomized intervention  will be collected at Visit 2. The AE’s 
relations hip to the distraction technique will be assessed using the following guidelines for 
causality and grading severity. AE’s related to the allergy injection will not be captured in this 
study.  
 
 
 
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 5 of 14  
 AE Relationship to Study Distraction Technique Guide  
Relationship to Study 
Distraction Technique  Comment  
Definitely  An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from 
administration of the study distraction technique; that follows 
a known or expected response pattern to the suspected 
study distraction technique; that is confirmed by stopping the 
use of the study distraction technique; and this is not 
explained by any other reasonable hypothesis.  
Probably  An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from 
administration of the study d istraction technique; that follows 
a known or expected response pattern to the suspected 
study technique; that is confirmed by stopping the use of the 
study distraction technique; and that is unlikely to be 
explained by the known characteristics of the sub ject’s 
clinical state or by other interventions.  
Possibly  An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from 
administration of the study distraction technique; that follows 
a known or expected response pattern to that suspected 
study distraction te chnique.; but that could readily have 
been produced by a number of other factors.  
Unrelated  An event that can be determined with certainty to have no 
relationship to the study distraction technique.  
 
AE Severity Grading  
Severity (Toxicity Grade)  Description  
Mild (1)  Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic 
observations only; intervention not indicated  
Moderate (2)  Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention 
indicated; limiting age -appropriate Instrumental activities of 
daily living (e.g., preparing meals, using the telephone, 
managing money)  
Severe (3)  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life 
threatening; hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization 
indicated; disabling; limiting self-care activities of daily living  
(e.g., bathing, dressing, feeding self, using toilet, taking  
medications)  
 
Discontinuation and Replacement of study participants  
A child has the right to withdraw from study participation prior to the completion of Visit 2.  Early 
withdrawal participants will be replaced one to one.   
 
Participant ID assignment  
The study participants will receive a Participant ID at Visit 1 which wi ll be used for all data 
collection. The Participant ID used will range from 001 to 100.  If a study participant withdraws 
before the completion of Visit 2, the Participant and associated group assignment will be 
replaced. Replacement Participant ID’s will be sequential beginning with the number 101.  
 
 
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 6 of 14 Data Collection  
Medication  admin istration  data collected will be limited to the participant ’s current 
immunotherapy vial and dosing , distraction method utilized, site of the application method  and, if 
applica ble, antihistamine use and pain medication use. Demographic data collected will be age, 
race and gender. Symptom and health data point collection will target allergy injection  reactions 
and the presence of allergic rhinitis, asthma and atopic dermatitis.  (Refer to Attachment V).   
Pain perception data will be collect ed from both the child and parent using facial and numeric 
pain scales (Refer to Attachment IV).   
All data collected will be entered into an EXCEL data collection tool and stored on password 
protected, secure computer s.  The data will accessible only to the investigators and research 
coordinators in the study.  
 
Data Analysis  
Quantitative component data collected and evaluated for this study will include the number of 
patient participants within the allergy department, randomized interventions used, diagnoses 
including allergic rhinitis, asthma and atopic dermatitis, immunotherapy medication and dose, 
antihistamine and pain medication utilizat ion, patient and parental pain scores, adverse 
reactions, age, race, and gender.  
Quantitative component data collected for this study will be extracted into Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheets and analyzed using Excel functions. Target population demographic 
characteristics will be analyzed using descriptive statistics by the principal invest igator with the 
level of significance set at <0.05.  
 All information collected as part of evaluating the impact of this study will be aggregated data 
from the project participants and will not include any potential patient identifiers.  Participant 
confid entiality will be assured by coding the participants using individual identification numbers 
for any analysis activities occurring outside of the electronic health record. This information will 
be stored in accordance with Nemours IRB policies and procedur es.  The Excel files containing 
codified data without protected health information (PHI) will be stored in password protected 
files at Nemours, on a password protected desktop computer in a locked office space 
accessible only by the principal investigator and study designees. The risk to patients 
participating in this project will be no different from the risks of patients receiving standard care.  
 
Informed Consent Process  
• Children who meet study criteria will be identified by Principal Investigator or Co -
Investigator in the allergy clinic.   
• Parents/guardians and child will be given an overview of the study, participation 
requirements, and complete information on being a voluntary participant in a 
research study.  They will be given an opportunity to  read the consent form , have  
questions answered and decide if they want  their child  to participate.   
• If both the parent and child are interested in participating in the study, one 
parent/legal guardian will be asked to sign a Parental Permis sion and Consent Form.  
• Children between the ages of 7 and 17 who verbalize understanding  and are 
agreeable to the Assent information and study expectations will be asked to sign a 
Child Assent or Adolescent Assent Form.  
• The Principal Investigator, Co -Investigator or Research Coordinator obtaining 
consent will witness the parent and child signatures, will sign both documents and 
provide copies of the signed consent/assent to the parent and child.  
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 7 of 14  
Participating Sites  
The study will be conducted at Nemours C hildren’s Specialty Care in the pediatric allergy clinics  
locations : 
• Jacksonville Downtown  
• Jacksonville South  
• Fleming Island  
 
Literature Cited  
Angela Li, Zorash Montaño, Vincent J Chen, and Jeffrey I Gold :Virtual reality and pain 
management: current trends and future Directions: ; Pain Manag. 2011 March ; 1(2): 147 –157 
Rasha  Srouji , Savithiri  Ratnapalan , and Suzan  Schneeweiss :Pain in Children: Assessment and 
Nonpharmacologi cal Management.. International Journal of Pediatrics; Volume  2010  
Psychological interventions for needle ‐related procedural pain and distress in children and 
adolescents:Cochrane Systematic Review - Intervention  Version published: 04 October 2018  
Ariane Ballard ,2 Christelle Khadra , Samara Adler , Evelyne Doyon -Trottier , and Sylvie Le 
May:Efficacy of the Buzzy® device for pain management of children during needle -related 
procedur es: a systematic review protocol: ;Syst Rev . 2018; 7: 78.  
Shomaker K, Dutton S, Mark M. Pain prevalence  and treatment  patterns  in a US children's  
hospita l. Hosp  Pediatr  2015; 5:363–7. 
Stevens BJ, Yamada J, Estabrooks CA, Stinson J, Campbell F, Scott SD, Cummings G; CIHR 
Team in Children's Pain. Pain in hospitalized  children:  effect  of a multidimensional  knowledge  
translation  strategy  on pain process  and clinical  outcomes . PAIN  2014; 155:60–8. 
 
Vessey JA, Carlson KL, McGill J. Use of distraction with children during an acute pain 
experience. Nursing Research . 1994;43(6):369 –372 
Cohen LL, Blount RL, Cohen RJ, Schaen ER, Zaff JF. Comparative study of distract ion versus 
topical anesthesia for pediatric pain management during immunizations. Health Psychology . 
1999;18(6):591 –598. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment s: 
Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 8 of 14 I – Shot Blocker
 

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 9 of 14  
 
 
 

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 10 of 14 II – Buzzy Bee I (with ice pack -wings ) and Buzzy Bee II  (without ice pack -wings ) 
    
 

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 11 of 14  
 
 

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 12 of 14 III – Ethyl chloride spray  
 
 

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 13 of 14 IV – Data Collection Instruments for pain rating scales – (a) facial ( b) numeric  
 
  

Protocol v 1.0- 2019J Feb.  
Page 14 of 14 V – Parent Questionnaire: Demographic – Health – Treatment Questionnaire  
 
