Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
1 
  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making:  
A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
 
Principal Investigator: Christine Dehlendorf, MD MAS  
Contact Person: Judith Fitzpatrick  
 
CHR Continuing Approval Reference Number: 14 -12865  
Expiration Date: 9/6/2017   
I. General Study Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  2 
A. Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  2 
B. Study Aims  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  3 
II. Study Design ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
III. Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
A. Pre-Intervention Phase Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 4 
1. Pre-intervention Audio Recordings  ................................ ................................ ...............................  4 
2. Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  5 
B. Intervention Phase Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  5 
1. Patient Follow -Up Survey  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  7 
2. Disenrollment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  8 
3. Blinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  8 
C. Post -Intervention Phase Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................  9 
1. Provider and Clinic Staff Interviews  ................................ ................................ ..............................  9 
IV. Eligibility  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  10 
A. Inclusion criteria for patients  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  10 
Exclusion criteria for pati ents  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  10 
B. Inclusion criteria for providers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  10 
C. Inclusion criteria for clinic staff members  ................................ ................................ ..........................  10 
V. Participant Recruitment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  11 
A. Planned Parenthood of Northern California on Valencia St.  ................................ ..........................  11 
B. San Francisco City Clinic, Department of Public Health  ................................ ................................ .. 11 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
2 
 C. City College of San Francisco S tudent Health Center  ................................ ................................ ..... 11 
D. The Women’s Clinic at San Francisco General Hospital (5M)  ................................ .........................  12 
E. Staff Recruitment (all clinics)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  12 
VI. Participant Payments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  12 
VII. Data Collection and Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  13 
A. Outcomes of Interest  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  13 
B. Sample Size:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 16 
C. Methods o f Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  17 
D. Data Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  20 
 
 
I. General Study Information  
 
A. Background  
 
Approximately 50% of pregnancies in the United States are unintended. One factor contributing to this 
statistic is the non -use of effective contraceptive methods, including the fact that many women 
discontinue their chosen method shortly after initiating i t. The family planning visit presents an 
opportunity to assist women to achieve their reproductive goals through providing adequate 
information and helping women to choose the best method for them. Decision support tools are ideally 
suited to this setting,  as they have been found to help patients make value -concordant decision in 
preference -sensitive decisions such as the choice of a contraceptive method.  
 
The study team has developed a tablet -computer -based  tool that is  designed to transform the process 
of contraceptive counseling between a patient and her family planning provider in multiple ways. As our 
goal is not to replace the process of counseling with the provider, but rather to facilitate it, we have 
designed our tool with the intent of having a be neficial impact on provider -patient communication 
through promoting shared decision making.   
 
Our tool , called “MyBirthControl,”  is a tablet -based tool that women will use immediately prior to their 
visit. Through facilitating  shared decision making betwee n the woman and her provider, this tool will 
facilitate women being able to  choose a contraceptive method that is the best fit for  her values and 
preferences .  and that therefore  she can use consistently and correctly, decreasing her risk for  an 
unplanned  pregnancy.   
 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
3 
 MyBirthControl  is interactive and will be available in English and Spanish. The design for the tool consists 
of 5 modules:  
1) An educational session reviewing the five areas determined to be most relevant to the choice of 
a contraceptive method  based on our formative work and consultation with stakeholders and a 
review of the literature: effectiveness, side effects, return to fertility, and mode and frequency 
of administration.  
2) An interactive component allowing women to indicate their preference s for the method 
characteristics described in #1 (the values clarification exercise)  
3) A checklist assessing women’s medical eligibility for different contraceptive methods  
4) An interactive “method chooser” screen that highlights specific methods most appropriate for 
each woman based on responses to items 2 and 3 above, and allows the woman to navigate 
through information about the different methods. On this screen, she can compare the methods 
that are appropriate for her based on her answers to differe nt questions, allowing her to weigh 
the relative importance of, for example, side effects of a method and its efficacy on her method 
choice.  
5) A screen that allows her to indicate what questions she has, with example questions provided.  
6) A final screen that a llows women to print out their method preferences (#2), relevant medical 
history (#3), questions they wish to ask their health care provider (#5), and the methods that 
they are most interested in. This print -out is designed to be shared with the medical pr ovider.  
B. Study Aims  
 
Our aims are as follows:   
 
Aim 1:  To determine the impact of the implementation of a contraceptive decision support tool 
on women’s contraceptive continuation and their experience of receiving contraceptive 
counseling, including decisional conflict, compared to women receiving usual care.   
Aim 2:  To qualitatively compare the contraceptive counseling provided to patients who have 
used the decision support tool prior to their visit and those who have not use the tool.  
Aim 3:  To assess the experience of providers and health care delivery sys tems with use of the 
intervention in the clinical setting.   
 
This study is funded by the Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute contract number CE -1304 -
6874. Study activities will follow Dr. Dehlendorf’s Standard Operating Procedures for all procedur es not 
detailed in this study protocol.  
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
4 
 II. Study Design  
 
This is a cluster randomized controlled trial to investigate the effect of our contraceptive decision 
support tool on women’s contraceptive continuation, as well as on their experience of contracept ive 
counseling, measured both quantitatively and qualitatively. In addition, we will collect quantitative and 
qualitative data to determine the impact of the implementation of this tool on the experience of 
providers and the clinics in which they work.   Data collection will occur in three stages: 1) pre -
intervention phase, 2) intervention phase, including follow -up of patients for seven  months, and 3) post -
intervention phase. For phase 1, immediately before implementing the contraceptive decision support 
tool, we will collect audio recordings of contraceptive counseling visits. For phase 2, we will randomize 
at the provider level to usual c are or use of the intervention. For phase 3, we will conduct audio 
recordings of contraceptive counseling visits with pr oviders in the intervention arm, as well as 
performing interviews of intervention providers and focus groups with clinic staff. We will use best 
practices for the conduct and reporting of this type of trial as detailed in the CONSORT guidelines.  
III. Study Proc edures  
 
As described, this study has three main phases, outlined below. All study procedures will be conducted 
by UCSF study staff or UCSF study volunteers.  
A. Pre-Intervention Phase Procedures  
 
In the pre -intervention visit recording phase , we will recrui t patients at the study clinics  prior to 
implementing the intervention.  Subsequently, providers will be randomized into the control or 
intervention arm of the study.  
 
1. Pre-Intervention Audio Recordings  
 
The procedure for provider participants  is as follows:  
 The study will be discussed at staff meetings or individually, as determined by each clinic.  
 Each potential participant will then be contacted individually to have their questions answered 
and determine if they are willing to consent to participate. Study  staff will obtain written 
consent for the pre -study visit recording phase and the study intervention phase at this time.  
 After enrolling in the study, each provider will conduct 2 -3 family planning visits in the usual 
fashion as are performed at the clini c with patients participating in this phase of the study.  
 During these visits, the conversation between patient and provider will be recorded on a secure 
voice recorder.  
 The recordings from these visits will be transcribed on a computer by a HIPAA -complian t 
transcription service.  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
5 
  After completing three visits, each provider will complete a survey about their demographic 
characteristics and the Maslach Burnout Inventory.  
 
The procedure for patient participants  is as follows:  
 After being screened and consented by study staff, each patient will complete a short 
demographic survey  (Note : This survey was not added to study procedures until 11/4/15, when 
a minor modification detailing it was approved ) and have a family planning vis it in the usual 
fashion as is performed at the clinic with providers participating in the study.  
As described above, the conversation between patient and provider will be recorded on a 
secure voice recorder  during these visits, and the visits will be trans cribed.  
2. Randomization  
 
After the pre -intervention phase and before the intervention phase , the provider participants will be 
randomized into intervention and control arms, stratified by clinic. Providers will be randomized using a 
random number table, clu stered by each clinic. Dr. Vittinghoff will create a random number table using 
Stata 13’s “ralloc” randomization module and blinded study IDs provided by study staff. The decision 
support tool intervention will then be introduced in a short orientation to the providers randomized to  
the intervention arm . 
 
B. Intervention Phase  Procedures  
 
Study staff role: UCSF Research Assistants will track all recruitment activity using the clinic -specific 
Recruitment Tracking Log daily. Weekly totals will be tallied  each Friday afternoon. At each recruitment 
shift in each clinic, there should be one UCSF Research Assistant (RA) who conducts eligibility and 
consent processes, and , if possible,  one volunteer or Patient Stakeholder Representative who assists the 
RA with  completing tracking logs, the time study, and managing iPads and other study equipment.  Time 
study data will be collected in this phase the same as in the pre -intervention phase: patient arrival time, 
tool start and end time (if applicable), visit start t ime with clinician,  and visit end time.  
 
The procedure for provider participants  is as follows:  
 Each provider will conduct up to 45  family planning visits  (not including visits during which the 
patient participant was given a pregnancy diagnosis, which is a post -randomization exclusion 
criterion ) in the clinic  with patients participating in this phase of the study.  
 Providers who complete 40 visits before the end of the study will be approached and further 
recruitment for them is feasible , we will approach them to be re -consented to complete a 
maximum total of 45 visits per provider , in accordance with our IRB approval .  
 After completing study  visits  for the intervention phase , all providers will complete another 
short survey via REDCap, con sisting of the Maslach Burnout Inventory.  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
6 
  After completing all visits  and the secon d survey , providers in the control arm have completed 
their participation in the study while providers in the intervention arm move to the post -
intervention phase.  
 
In the i ntervention phase , we will recruit patients at the study clinics. The procedure for patient 
participants  is as follows:  
 After being screened and consented by study staff, each patient will complete a pre -visit survey 
regarding their contrace ptive knowledge  and preferences and p rovide her preferred and back -
up contact information to the study staff and preferred method of contact for follow -up surveys.  
 Some patient participants may be randomized  to whether they see a control or intervention 
arm provider, if they are at a clinic that does not make appointments with specific providers and 
there are providers in both arms that are available to have an appointment with that provider. 
Both City Clinic  and Planned Parenthood Valencia do not assign patients to a specific provider in 
advance of the start of their visit. Therefore, at these clinics, sometimes it will not be clear 
whether or not a participant should use the tool or not before her visit. At these two clinics, the 
RA who is recruiting will first see if it is obvious which study arm the patient should be in based 
on which providers are currently available to see family planning patients. In some cases, only 
one study provider will be working at  a time, or all the study providers who are working will be 
in the same arm, so it will be clear which arm the patient should be in. At other times, multiple 
providers may be working but there may be only one who speaks the patient’s language or who 
is not  about to start a long procedure, so it is clear which arm the patient will be in. In the 
remainder of cases, in which there is at least one provider from each study arm (tool and 
control) available to see patients at the same time, the RA will use a progr am written in R, the 
statistical software program, to randomly assign the patient to see either a tool or control 
provider. The randomization module was written by Dr. Eric Vittinghoff, our study statistician, 
and is installed on the study laptop s and RA i Phones. An RA simply has to open R and type in the 
command “randomize” along with the ratio of tool to control arm providers who are currently 
available (i.e., “Randomize(1,1)) and the program will produce an assignment. The RA will then 
do her best to wor k with clinic flow to ensure that the patient sees a provider in the appropriate 
arm. As described in the analysis section, if the patient ultimately sees a provider in the non -
randomized arm, she will be analyzed in the assigned arm using intention to tre at principles.  
 Randomization will be considered the point of enrollment in the study.  For patient participants 
that are at a clinic that makes appointments with specific providers, this will be decided by the 
clinic schedule and arm assignment will be reco rded upon completion of the pre -visit survey. For 
patient participants that are at City Clinic and Planned Parenthood, the point of enrollment in 
the study will be when the randomization procedure described in the previous paragraph has 
been completed. Pri or to being randomized, if an eligible patient participant does not wish to 
continue with study procedures, they will be considered as a “decline to participate.” If they do 
not wish to continue with study procedures after the point of randomization, they will be 
considered “dis -enrolled.”  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
7 
  If the patient's family pl anning appointment/randomization assignment is with a provider in the 
intervention arm , she will interact with the MyBirthControl contraceptive decision support tool 
while in the waiting room. The RA or volunteer will note the unique tool ID number that is 
generated on the start screen of the tool and log this in the recruitment tracking log so that back 
end tool data can be analyzed at a later date.   
 In the intervention arm , the tool will genera te a printout for each patient that contains 
information about their preferences for contraception, their reproductive intentions, their 
medical history, and questions that they have  for their provider . This paper will then  be shared 
with the provider . The  printout will be destroyed by study staff immediately after the clinic 
encounter  or taken home if the patient requests it,  so that it does not become a part of  the 
patient's medical record (in order to limit the possibility of contamination between arms) .  
 Patients seeing a provider randomized to the control arm  will then have a family planning visit i n 
the usual fashion, as performed by that provider . 
 After the visit, each patient will complete a post -visit survey assessing their demographics, their 
contraceptive methods choice and their opinion of the counseling they received.  If the patient 
must leave the clinic without completing her post -visit survey due to time constraints (and not 
because she wishes to withdraw from the study),  study personnel w ill attempt to contact the 
patient using the contact information given at the time of the visit and have them complete the 
post -visit survey by phone or email. If the patient does not complete the post -visit survey within 
48 hours of their initial visit,  study personnel will continue to  attempt to have them complete 
the post 48 -hours version of the post -survey ( in which the time -sensitive questions  have been  
omitted) up to one month after the initial visit.  
 Study staff will provide each patient with a flyer summarizing the timing of follow -up and with 
contact information for study staff in case participant changes her contact information or  wishes 
to dis -enroll.  
1.  Patient Follow -Up Survey  
 
Each patient will be  contacted by whatever method they prefer (phone, mail, SMS, email) at four and 
seven months after the visit to complete a follow -up survey to assess whether they have continued their 
contraceptive method.  The survey can be completed either over the phone with an RA or on the 
patient’s own time online using REDCap . 
 Patient contact information and enrollment dates will be entered into REDCap , where follow -up 
contact due dates will be calculated. RAs and volunteers will conduct follow -up attempts via the 
patient’s preferred method, logging each attempt and its outcome in REDCap . 
 In order to accurately assess whether Depo users got their next s hot on time, 4 month follow up 
calls will begin at 112 days (16 weeks ) and 7 month f ollow up calls will begin at 217  days  (31 
weeks) .  
 The secure UCSF email address birthcontrolstudy@ucsf.edu  has been creat ed and added to each 
RA’s email account to facilitate participant follow -up by multiple people.  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
8 
  Google Voice  will be used for text and phone follow -up contact attempts. Contact information 
will be deleted from the program  monthly .  
 Contact attempts for th e 4- and 7 -month follow -up surveys will be declared u nsuccessful after 4 
weeks , but participants with unsuccessful contact at 4 months will still have contact attempts 
made at 7 months .  
 Gift cards for completed surveys will be mailed, or can be picked up at the research offices at 
San Francisco General Hospital  if the patient prefers.  For more detail on participant 
reimbursements, see Section V.  
2. Patient Disenrollment Procedure  
Patients who no longer wish to participate will be withdrawn by the following protocol.  
Paperwork  
1.       If a participant disenrolls at baseline : move any study participant consents and/or  HIPAA 
forms) to the folder labeled “withdrawn patients,” stratified by clinic. Shred any contact 
information  forms. Mark on any remaining paper work the step that the p articipant  was at when 
they disenrolled, e.g. Mark on consent that the participant  disenrolled before completing the 
HIPAA form.  If a participant disenrolls at any point after baseline  (e.g. at 4 month follow -up), 
their consent and HIPAA forms should remain in the folder with the rest of the remaining 
enrolled participants. Shred contact information forms. The following procedure for electronic 
records should be followed for all participants regardless of when they disenroll from the  study.  
  
Electronic records   
1.        Mark “Yes” for “Dis -enrolled?” and complete reason for disenrollment in tracking sheet.  
2.        Mark participant as “dis -enrolled” in backend survey of REDCap.  
3.        Remove follow up dates from the calendar in REDCap.  
4.     Delete contact info rmation  if it was already entered in REDCap , including participant’s first 
name .  
3. Blinding  
 
Blinding of participants and study personnel at baseline was not feasible due to the nature of the 
intervention. At follow -up, study personnel conducting surveys by phone were not informed of study 
arm.  Consent forms intentionally do not disclose the specific outcomes of interest (i.e., contraceptive 
continuation), so as not to influence participant behavior . Additionally, participants will not be aware of 
their arm assignment until after they have been consented. Study staff will be blinded during 
quantitative data analysis of provider and patient participant data and time study data. How ever, 
blinding will not be feasible during qualitative analysis of visits as the presence or absence of the 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
9 
 handouts that arise from the tool may be apparent during the discussion; we will note this limitation in 
interpretation of our results.  
 
C. Post -Inter vention Phase Procedures  
 
In the post -intervention phase , we will recruit patients scheduled to see providers participating in the 
intervention arm at the study clinics. The procedure for patient participants  is as follows:  
 After being screened and consented by study staff, each patient will complete a brief 
demographic survey  (Note : This survey was not added to study procedures until 11/4/15, when 
a minor modification detailing it was approved ) and interact with the contrace ptive decision 
support tool while in the waiting room.  
 Patients will then have a family planning visit  
 During these visits, the conversation between patient and provider will be recorded on a secure 
voice recorder.  
 The recordings from these visits will be  transcribed on a computer by a HIPAA -compliant 
transcription service.  
 
The procedure for provider participants  is as follows:  
 Providers in the intervention arm only will complete a new consent form for their participation 
in this phase of visit recordings  and interviews.  
 Immediately after completing the intervention phase , providers in the intervention arm will 
conduct 2 -3 family planning visits with patients participating in this phase of the study.  
 During these visits, the conversation between patient an d provider will be recorded on a secure 
voice recorder.  
 The recordings from these visits will be transcribed on a computer by a HIPAA -compliant 
transcription service.  
 
1. Provider and Clinic Staff Interviews  
 
Provider interviews will take place at the study c linics  in a private location, at a time of the participant’s 
choosing . Only providers participating in the intervention arm will be interview ed regarding their 
experiences. These semi -structured interviews will provide additional information about the 
implementation of the intervention, including providers’ perceptions of the influence of the tool on their 
counseling and how they felt it influenced patients’ experiences.  Clinic staff —including nurses, medical 
assistants and administrative staff —at each clinic will be consented to participate in focus groups and 
will then complete a brief demographic survey . In the focus group, the clinic staff  will provide 
information about the perception of the intervention on clinic operations and their experiences 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
10 
 interacting with patients and providers. Audio from these interviews will be recorded on a secure voice 
recorder and transcribed by a HIPAA -compliant transcription service.  
 
IV. Eligibility  
 
Eligibility checking procedures are described under “Recruitment .” Inclu sion and exclusion criteria are 
the same at all study sites.  
 
A. Inclusion criteria for patients  will be that they are women of reproductive age (ages 15 -45), wish 
to discuss starting or changing  a contraceptive method during their visit,  speak , read , and understand  
English or Spanish , and have a history of sexual activity with men .  
 
 Exclusion criteria for patients  will be that they previously enrolled in the  stud y, they previously 
used the decision support tool at the Women's Community Clinic in San Francisco , they are un able to 
get pregnant , their appointment reason is for insertion of  an IUD or contraceptive implant , they are 
currently pregnant, and they d esire pregnancy currently or in the next seven month s. The last criterion 
is designed to ensure  we will have limited numbers of women that will discontinue their contraceptive 
methods during the study due to planning a pregnancy.  Post -enrollment exclusion  criteria, to be 
determined by the first question  on the post -visit survey, include finding out you a re pregnant at the 
clinic visit  and having enrolled in the study more than once.  
 
B. Inclusion criteria for providers  will be providing family planning counseling in one of the 
participating clinics and plan ning  to remain in this job role for at least six months . This will include MDs, 
DOs, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and unlicensed  counselors.  Provider and clinic staff 
eligibility will be determined in staff meetings or individually with the PI an d study coordinator, as 
determined by each clinic.  
  
C. Inclusion criteria for clinic staff members  will be working at one of the clinics in a job that 
includes  patient contact, but does not solely consist of family planning counseling at the time of the 
implementation of the intervention.  
Note: As of the CHR  minor modification submitted on 10/15/15 and approved on 10/16/15 we changed 
the eligibility criterion from “working at one of the clinics in a job with patient contact, but not directly 
providing con traceptive counseling” to “working at one of the clinics in a job that includes patient 
contact, but does not solely consist of family planning counseling.” This was changed before our first 
focus group was conducted and was done because the clinic staff a t one of our study sites, Planned 
Parenthood of Northern California on Valencia St., who would be able to contribute to the focus group 
all have provide some degree of family planning counseling at that site.  
     
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
11 
 V. Participant Recruitment  
 
Recruitment procedures will be tailored to meet the needs of each individual study site’s clinic flow and 
procedures, after discussion with clinic managers and staff.  
A. Planned Parenthood of Northern California on Valencia  St. 
 
At the request of the clinic, front desk staff or study staff will provide opt -out handouts to potential 
participants that they decide are potentially eligible based on visit type . At the request of the clinic, we 
will not recruit patients whose visit reas on is abortion care or colposcopy. Study staff (the RA) will check 
the clinic daily schedule and approach potentially eligible patients to determine their interest in the 
study  and provide them with the eligibility checklist  or review the checklist with th em privately . Patients 
who complete the eligibility checklist independently and indicate that they are not interested in 
participating will not be screened further.  Interested patients who complete the eligibility checklist 
independently  will accompany an RA to a private area to confirm whether or not she is eligible based on 
the written checklist, and to discuss any questions she has about the study. If the patient is eligible and 
still wishes to participate, the RA will complete the informed consent proce ss and enroll her in the study. 
Note:  As 4/2/15, we transition ed from having patients complete eligibility checklist handouts to having 
the RA assess for eligibility in a private area as done at other sites with the permission of Planned 
Parenthood.  
B. San F rancisco City Clinic , Department of Public Health  
 
Study staff will call potentially eligible patients from the waiting room into a private area to determine if 
they are interested in hearing more about the study . Potentially eligible patients will be dete rmined by 
looking at the clinic daily schedule. Recruitment will take place primarily during clinic hours that offer 
family planning – not during HIV clinic , at clinic request .  If the patient is interested after hearing a short 
description of the study, study staff will assess her eligibility using either a written or verbal eligibility 
checklist. The RA will then bring the patient to a health education room to confirm her eligib ility based 
on either the written or verbal checklist , and to answer questions about the study. If the patient is 
eligible and still wishes to participate, the RA will complete the informed consent process and enroll her 
in the study.  
C. City College of San Francisco Student Health Center  
 
Potential patient participants will be identified by RAs by looking at the clinic's daily schedule.  If a 
patient's visit reason does not clearly show she is ineligible (i.e., because of age or existing pregnancy), 
our resea rch staff will approach the patient to discuss the study and assess eligibility. Staff will first 
determine if she is interested in hearing about a study about birth control. If the patient is interested 
after hearing a short description of the study, stud y staff will assess her eligibility using either a written 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
12 
 or verbal eligibility checklist. Study staff will review her responses to the eligibility checklist and 
determine eligibility for the study. If additional clarification is needed regarding eligibil ity, the RA will 
then take the patient to a private area of the clinic to assess eligibility verbally.  If the patient is eligible 
and still wishes to participate, the RA will complete the informed consent process and enroll her in the 
study.  
D. The Women’s C linic at San Francisco General Hospital (5M)  
 
Potential patient participants will be identified by RAs by looking at the clinic's daily schedule. If a 
patient's visit reason does not clearly show she is ineligible (i.e., because of age or existing pregnanc y), 
our research staff will approach the patient to discuss the study and assess eligibility. Staff will first 
determine if she is interested in hearing about a study about birth control. If the patient is interested 
after hearing a short description of th e study, study staff will assess her eligibility using either a written 
or verbal eligibility checklist. Study staff will review her responses to the eligibility checklist and 
determine eligibility for the study. If additional clarification is needed regar ding eligibility, the RA will 
then take the patient to a private area of the clinic to assess eligibility verbally.  If the patient is eligible 
and still wishes to participate, the RA will complete the informed consent process and enroll her in the 
study.  
E. Staff Recruitment (all clinics)  
 
Recruiting of  provider participants and  clinic staff will consist of group meetings  in which the 
intervention and study procedures are explained and questions are answered by study staff . Study staff 
will attend clinic staff  meetings as organized with each clinic’s manager. Following these informational 
sessions, we will meet individually with staff to answer any additional questions and to provide all 
information necessary for informed consent by interested participants. Wri tten informed consent will be 
obtained.   
 
VI. Participant Payments  
 
Patient participants in the intervention phase will receive a $25 gift card when they e nroll and complete 
the pre - and post -visit surveys. These participants will also be mailed a $25 gift card for each completed 
4- and 7 -month follow -up survey for a maximum total payment of $75.  
  
Patient participants in the pre - and post -intervention audio recording -only phases will rec eive a $25 gift 
card when they enroll and complete the audio -recorded family planning visit for a maximum total 
payment of $25.  
  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
13 
 Provider participants will be receive a  $125 Visa prepaid debit card  when they enroll in the study  and 
complete the baseline p rovider survey and baseline audiorecordings and $125 when they complete the 
intervention phase for a total of $250 . Providers randomized to the intervention arm will receive an 
additional $100 after completing the post -intervention interview  and audio  reco rdings  for a total 
payment of $350. Payment will be either provided directly to the providers on a prepaid debit card or 
paid to the clinic as determined in collaboration with each clinic and their guidelines.  
 
Note: provider participants that see a high v olume of family planning patients with be approached to be 
re-consented in order to exceed 40 visits with patient participants (up to 45 visits). If they re -consent they 
will receive an additional $125 to recognize the additional time spent by these provid ers conducting visits 
as part of our study. For control providers who are re -consented to exceed 40 visits, this would result in a 
maximum total payment of $375 ($125 when they enroll  + $125 when they re -consent to exceeding 40 
visits + $125 when they com plete the intervention phase). For intervention provider s who are re -
consented to exceed 40 visits, this would result in a maximum total payment of $475 ($125 when they 
enroll + $125 when they re -consent to exceeding 40 visits + $125 when they complete the  intervention 
phase + $100 when they complete the post -intervention procedures).  
  
Clinic staff participants will receive a $50 prepaid debit card when they enroll and complete the focus 
group discussion for a maximum total payment of $50. Clinic staff wi ll also receive refreshments during 
the focus group discussion.  
 
VII. Data Collection  and Analysis  
 
The outcomes of interest for this study have been divided into three specific aims, which dictate what 
type of data is collected and how it is analyzed.  
A. Outcome s of Interest  
 
Specific Aim 1: The primary outcome is a binary indicator of contraceptive continuation at 7 months and 
a secondary outcome is a binary indicator of contraceptive continuation at 4 months. For ambiguous 
cases for these outcomes, we used a bl inded adjudication process and applied a standardized list of 
rules and assigned outcomes throughout the process of data collection. Potential outcomes for 
individuals are as follows: continuous users of chosen method, non -continuous users of chosen method , 
and missing but included and imputed.  
For all variables, the analysis will use multiple imputation to deal validly with the missing values. Of 
note, specific variables were not collected from participants we collected data from more than 48 hours 
after  their  visit. Those variables will be analyzed in the same way as other missing outcomes.  
 Primary outcome:  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
14 
 o  Continuation of the chosen method seven  months after her visit , without a gap of four 
consecutive weeks or more .  
 Secondary outcomes:  
o Patient Contra ceptive Counseling Satisfaction at post -visit survey  
 Factor analysis -validated survey created by the PI to assess patients' satisfaction 
with the contraceptive counseling experience.  
o Patient Chosen Contraceptive Method Satisfaction at the post -visit survey, and 4 and 7 
months  
 5-point Likert scale question regarding patient satisfaction with contraceptive 
method chosen.  
o Experience with Shared Decision -Making (measured at post -visit survey)  
 Patient report of having engaged in shared decision making with  their provider 
and their experience with the decision making process, as well as qualitative 
coding of contraceptive counseling visits. The qualitative coding will focus on 
the presence or absence of shared patient -provider decision making and patient 
engagement in the decision making process, drawing on concepts from 
observational measures of shared decision making, as well as insights into the 
counseling process gained through our previous observational study.  
o Patien t Decisional Conflict in Contraceptive  Choice  at the post -visit survey  
 Validated survey to assess patients' decisional conflict in medical decision 
making.  
o Patient Current Contraceptive Method Satisfaction  at 4 and 7 months  
 5-point Likert scale question regarding patient satisfaction with the 
contraceptive method they are currently using.  
o Patient Attitudes and  Knowledge of Contraceptive Options and Features  (post -visit 
survey)  
 Patient report of perceived knowledge of their options and questions derived 
from National Survey of Reproductive Contr aceptive Knowledge and previous 
studies of contraceptive knowledge and attitudes.  
o London Measure of Unplanned Pregnancy  at 4 and 7 months  
 Incidence of unplanned pregnancy among study participants.  
o Use of Any Moderately or Highly Effective Method of Contrac eption at 4 and  7 Months 
Follow -up 
 Whether patient is using an effective contraceptive method at  4 or 7 month s 
follow -up survey.  
o Choice of a Highly Effective Method of Contraception at Baseline  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
15 
  Whether patient chooses a highly effective contraceptive metho d at baseline 
visit.  
o Use of a Highly Effective Method of Contraception at 4 and  7 Months Follow -up 
 Whether patient is using a highly effective contraceptive method at 7 month 
follow -up survey.  
o Continuation of the chosen method 4 months after her visit.  
 Continuation of the chosen method four  months after enrollment , without a 
gap of  four consecutive weeks or more . 
Specific Aim 2: Qualitative assessment of  patient engagement and the presence of shared decision 
making between counseling provided before and after implementation of the decision support tool  by 
providers randomized to the intervention group. As described above, t he qualitative  coding will focus on 
the presence or absence of shared patient -provider decision making and patient engagement  in the 
decision making process, drawing on concepts  from observational measures of shared decision making, 
as well as insights into the counseling process gained through our previous observational study.  
 
Specific Aim 3:  
 Qualitative assessment of providers’ and s taff members’ experiences us ing interviews and focus 
groups  
 Quantitative measures of consultation time and total clinic visit time  
o Total Clinic Visit Time  
 Total amount of time a patient spends in a clinic for a family planning visit, from 
check -in to chec k-out. 
o  Time Spent with Contraceptive Counseling Provider  
 Total amount of time spent with the provider that is providing contraceptive 
counseling.  
 Change in provider burnout, pre - and post -intervention,  using the Maslach Burnout scale, 
measured prior to implementation of the intervent ion and at the end of the trial  
o Maslach Burnout Inventory:  
 Given to provider participants to measure emotional exhaustion, 
depersonalization, and personal accomplishment sub scale scores.  
Timing of Measures  
Patient Outcomes  
 Baseline 
clinic visit  4 months  7 months  
Demographics  X    
Chosen method  X    
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
16 
 Continuation of chosen method   X X  
Use of non -barrier method   X X  
Decisional conflict  X    
Attitudes Knowledge of contraceptive 
options  X    
Satisfaction with contraceptive 
counseling  X X  X  
Incidence of unplanned pregnancy   X  X  
Total clinic visit time  X   
Time spent with contraceptive 
counseling provider  X   
Satisfaction with chosen method  X X X 
Satisfaction  with current method   X X 
 
Provider Outcomes  
 Pre-
intervention  Post -
intervention  Follow -up 
interview/recording 
(intervention arm only)  
Demographics  X    
Provider burnout  X X  
Provider/patient engagement in shared 
decision -making , measured 
qualitatively  X   X  
 
B. Sample Size :  
 
Specific Aim 1:  We based our sample size calculation on our primary outcome, contraceptive 
continuation. Based on our previous studies in this population, we estimate that 50% of women in our 
control group will continue with their contraceptive method at seven months. Using this same data, we 
have calculated the intra -cluster correlation (ICC) of this response by provider and by clinic at ~0  and 
0.021 respectively. Accounting for clustering and 20% loss to follow -up, as well as a inflation factor to 
account for differences in contraceptive initiation among those in clinics with IUDs and implants on -site 
as compared to those without these meth ods on site, a sample of 758 patients (approximately 32 
patients for each of 24 providers) would provide 80% power in 2 -sided tests with a type -I error rate of 
5% to detect a 12 percentage point increase in continuation, to 62%.This difference in contracep tive 
continuation would be clinically meaningful and is consistent with effects reported in the contraceptive 
literature.  Again using data from our previous study to estimate ICCs and baseline parameters, the 
sample will also provide 80% power to detect sm all-to-moderate but clinically significant differences in 
secondary outcomes as shown below.  
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
17 
   
Outcome  ICC Design  
effect  Baseline  
SD/%  SES/  
MDD  Clinic  Provider  
Continuous measures            
   Decision conflict scale  0.000  0.027  1.3 1.9 0.25  
   Satisfaction score  0.152  0.075  1.7 6.5 0.31  
Dichotomous measures            
   Choice of highly effective method  0.096  0.000  0.9 23%  10.9%  
   Shared decision making  0.006  0.024  1.3 46%  14.3%  
   Unintended pregnancy  0.005  0.001  1.0 5% -4.5%  
For continuous outcomes, the standard deviation (SD) and standardized effect size (SES) are reported; for 
binary outcomes, the baseline prevalence and absolute effect, both in percent.  
 
Specific Aim 2:  We have estimated that audio  recording 2 -3 patient encoun ters at each time point 
(before and after implementation of the intervention) for each of the providers randomized to the 
intervention will allow us to achieve saturation and to meaningfully compare the pre - and post -
intervention period.   
Specific Aim 3:  We will conduct focus groups at each of the four clinics involved in the study, and will 
conduct semi -structured interviews of each of the providers randomized to the intervention. For our 
quantitative measures, we estimate we will have the ability to dete ct a less than 0.5 SD difference in 
consultation time and total clinic visit time. For comparison of burnout among providers, our sample size 
will be 24, with 12 in each group, and therefore will have limited power. In order to optimize power, we 
will esti mate treatment effects on the final score controlling for the baseline value. Using this measure, 
we anticipate having 80% power to detect a 0.5 to 1.1SD differences on each of the sub -scales of the 
Maslach Burnout Inventory, depending on with within -provi der correlation of these responses.   
C. Methods of Analysis  
 
Patient and provider stakeholders will be involved in an iterative manner in all stages of planning of 
analyses and in data interpretation.  
 
[IR-1] Data required for primary analyses will be inspected, cleaned, and locked before primary analysis 
is begun.   Data checks will include examination of descriptive statistics for plausibility (e.g. plausible 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
18 
 participant age, scale values fall within sc ale options given), distribution, and missingness. Values with 
errors will be replaced as missing or, if a correction is verifiable through review of an individual’s record, 
replaced with the correct value in the dataset in Stata 14. For the primary analys es, individual record 
reviews will be performed for any participants with circumstances in which the primary outcome of 
contraceptive continuation may be complicated. These include all participants who selected DMPA (The 
Shot or “Depo”) as their main or br idge method choice; participants who stopped their method before 
their 4 -month survey and restarted it again before their 7 -month survey; participants who transitioned 
from use of their bridge method to use of their main method for birth control during the  course of the 
study; participants who became pregnant during the course of the study, after their day of enrollment; 
participants who were not reached to complete a 4 -month survey, but did complete a 7 -month survey; 
and participants with partially complet e survey records at 4 or 7 months [IR -4]. Participants who are 
negative for the primary outcome (i.e. discontinuous) at the time of their 4 -month survey will be 
considered negative for the primary outcome at 7 months, regardless of whether they completed a  7-
month survey or not. Baseline outcomes will also be examined for individuals who accidentally 
completed multiple surveys at baseline, with priority given to the first survey completed. Reliability of 
scales will be assessed using Cronbach’s alpha, as we ll checks for predictive and discriminant validity.  
[IR-4]. Reliability of scales will be assessed using Cronbach’s alpha, as well checks for predictive and 
discriminant validity.  
Specific Aim 1:   
 
We will assess  imbalance by treatment assignment using cross -tabulations and comparisons of within 
group means and medians. Inference for balance on provider covariates will use chi-squared , Fisher’s 
exact,  t, and Wilcoxon tests  as appropriate, while  differences in patient charact eristics will be assessed  
using mixed  effects models with fixed effects for clinic and random effects for provider . [IR-3] Primary 
analyses of treatment effects will be intention -to-treat, according to  treatment assignment , and without 
regard to use of the  tool or seeing an intervention provider. Treatment effects will be estimated using 
mixed effects  linear,  logistic , proportional odds, and multinomial models, with fixed effects for clinic and 
random effects for provider.  
 
Missing data.   [MD -1] Missing da ta will have been minimized by active follow -up of participants.  [MD -4] 
Missing data rates for primary and secondary outcomes as well as important covariates will be reported, 
in combination with summaries of the reasons for missingness, including dropout  and pregnancy. [MD -
2] All analyses will handle missing data using 20 -fold multiple imputation of missing outcomes, based on 
iterative chained equations.  [MD -3] Summary effect estimates, averaged over the 20 imputed datasets, 
as well as confidence interval s and p -values, will be calculated using standard methods that account for 
imputation error.   
 
Sensitivity analyses. [MD -5] Because  informative  missingness  would violate the covariate -dependent 
missing at random (CDMAR) assumption of the standard multiple  imputation procedure, we will conduct 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
19 
 sensitivity analyses in which we  multiply impute missing data under plausible informative missing data  
mechanisms  – in particular, lower contraceptive continuation rates among participants with missing 
values of this outcome, in one or both arms . [DR-3] In addition, we will conduct sensitivity analys es 
controlling for any imbalanced pre -randomization characteristics (e.g., a ge and parity) that predict 
outcomes, using 5% changes in the coefficient for the intervention a s the criterion for covariate 
inclusion in the adjusted model.  To characterize the influence of individual providers, we will estimate 
best linear unbiased predictions of the provider effects, and also fit model s with additional random 
provider -interventio n interactions, to capture heterogeneity in the effects of the intervention. In all 
analyses, we will transform continuous outcomes as necessary to meet the normality assumption, 
model departures from linearity in the influence of continuous covariates, check for influential points, 
and identify potentially important interactions.  
 
Heterogeneity of treatment effects. [HT-1] We will assess modification of the effect of assignment to the 
intervention by the following 5  pre-specified factors:  a ge, race/ethnicity, language, parental education, 
and clinic.  We will assess evidence for effect modification by adding the effect modifier and its 
interaction with the treatment assignment indicator to the primary analysis models specified above.  To 
limit inflation of the type -I error rate, we will only estimate within -stratum treatment effects if the 
interaction is statistically significant at a Bonferroni -corrected P = 0.01, and will cautiously interpret 
findings.  These analyses will use multiply impu ted data and corresponding inference methods.   
 
Specific Aim 2: For this aim, we will be assessing the effect of the intervention on counseling at the 
cluster (i.e., provider) level. We will use  Dedoo se software to analyze the audio recordings using 
modif ied grounded theory, with the coding performed by Dr. Dehlendorf , Reiley Reed,  and Dr. Kimport , 
with input from patient stakeholder representatives. This coding will focus on the presence or absence 
of shared decision making and patient engagement in the d ecision making process. In conducting this 
coding, we will use concepts drawn from observational measures of shared decision making, including 
the OPTION scale and the Four Habits Coding Scheme, as well as insight into the counseling process 
gained through  our previous observational study, to identify our initial thematic structure.  We will 
perform iterative coding, with  discussions  between coders, the PI, and patient stakeholders  to clarify 
concepts and resolve ambiguities. We will then, again in collabora tion with stakeholders, qualitatively 
explore the extent to which the providers altered their behaviors following imp lementation of the 
intervention using memo writing, and ultimately compiling these into results.  
 
Specific Aim 3:  In order to determine the  effect of the intervention on the experience of providing 
family planning care at the level of both the clinic and the provider, we will perform both qualitative and 
quantitative analyses. Quantitative analyses, including comparing consultation time  and t otal clinic visit 
time for patients in the intervention and control group, will use similar methods to those described in 
Aim 1. We will also compare scores on each sub -scale of the Maslach Burnout Inventory (emotional 
exhaustion, depersonalization, and pe rsonal accomplishment), controlling for baseline values, between 
providers randomized to the intervention and those randomized to the control group in both bivariate 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
20 
 and multivariate analyses, again controlling for clustering by clinic.  In addition, we wil l conduct a 
sensitivity analysis controlling for any imbalanced pre -randomization characteristics (e.g., age) that 
predict outcomes, using changes in the coefficient for the intervention as the criterion for covariate 
inclusion in the adjusted model.  Thema tic analysis of interview and focus group transcripts and 
recordings will again be performed using Dedoose  software, using an iterative and collaborative process 
of coding as described in Aim 2.  
 
Intention -to-treat analysis  
Participants who “cross over” f rom their assigned study arm (as determined by the provider they are 
likely to see) will be included in the final analyses in the arm in which they were initially assigned.  
 
Modified intent ion-to-treat  analysis: Post -randomization exclusion  
Some participa nts may be excluded from analysis after being randomized:  
 Participants who find out they are pregnant during their enrollment visit (and thus would have 
been ineligible had this been known prior to enrollment).  
 Participants who enrolled in the study more than once (their second enrollment will be 
excluded).  
Additional Analyses  
Intervention arm patient participants’ decision support tool data will be analyzed. Participant data input 
to the tool includes patient preferences around birth control characteristics, their recommended 
methods, and any questions for their provider.  
 
D. Data Management  
 
Only Key Study Personnel as approved on the UCSF CHR application will have access to study data. As 
much data as possible will be collected and stored electronically in order to minimize the number of 
pieces of paper containing PHI and the po ssibility for participant data to be lost or breached. Collecting 
data electronically also eliminates the possibility for study staff to make errors in data entry when 
transferring data from paper to electronic storage.  
 
Surveys  
 
All patient and provider s urveys will be administered via REDCap  using secure iPads. Survey data will 
then live in the secure UCSF REDCap  database. All user actions in REDCap  are tracked by user and time 
(for example, editing or downloading data). Participant names and contact info rmation will be marked 
as PHI and will not be downloadable. Only de -identified data will be able to be downloaded by study 
Study Protocol  
Patient Centered Support for Contraceptive Decision -Making: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of a 
Contraceptive Decision -Support Tool  
November 22, 2016  
 
21 
 staff. If downloaded to Excel or Stata for analysis, study datasets will remain on a secure UCSF server 
accessible only by study staf f. Patient follow -up will also be tracked in REDCap .  
 
Note:  Surveys for participants who chose vasectomy as their contraceptive method at baseline and 
started that method will be administered over the phone using paper -based templates rather than 
REDCap, due to the difficulty associated with programming a survey for this specific method. Upon 
completion, the survey data will be manually entered into REDCap within one month and the paper -
based survey will be shredded.  
 
Consent forms  
 
Paper consent forms an d HIPAA authorizations will be stored in locked file cabinets in a locked ward for 
three years  after study completion , according to UCSF IRB stipulations . They will not be linked to 
participant study IDs.  
 
Time study  
 
Time study data  will contain no PHI other than  the participant study ID . It will be tracked in an Excel 
spreadsheet on a secure server.  
 
Audiorecordings and interviews  
 
All audio  recordings of patient visits and provider and staff interviews will be managed in accordance 
with Dr. Dehlendorf ’s standard operating procedures. This includes promptly  transferring recordings off 
of the recording device and onto a secure UCSF server, having visits transcribed and de -identified in a 
HIPAA -compliant manner, and storing de -identified transcripts used in qualitative analysis on a secure 
UCSF server.  