Engaging Medically Complex Veterans in Tele-Rehabilitation Using a 
Biobehavioral Approach: A Pilot Study of Feasibility and Acceptability
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
July 14, 2022
Protocol Template  Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-0990  
Protocol #:   21-2773    
Project Title:   Engaging Medically Complex Veterans in Tele-Rehabilitation Using 
a Biobehavioral Approach: A Pilot Study of Feasibility and Acceptability   
Principal Investigator :  Jennifer Stevens -Lapsley MPT, PhD  
Version Date :  07.14.2022  
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :
This is a single -site, randomized pilot study using a two -group (GROUP1 and GROUP2) 
crossover  design. Fifty Veterans with med ical complexity and deficits in physical function 
will participate. Outcomes will  be assessed at baseline (pre-intervention), 6 weeks 
(intervention mid -point), 12 weeks (end of intervention),  and 24 weeks.  
AIM 1: To determine the feasibility and acceptability of a multicomponent telerehabilitation 
program.  
Hypothesis 1a:  75% of Veterans will achieve ≥ 80% adherence as measured by 
attendance.  
Hypothesis 1b : At least 75% of Veterans will perceive the program as acceptable 
(≥ 4/5 on Acceptability of Intervention Measure13) and feasible (≥ 4/5 on Feasibility 
of Intervention Measure). In addition, we will monitor adverse events and 
categorize severity (mild, moderate, severe) and relatedness (definitely, probably, 
possibly).  
AIM 2: To assess the preliminary response of a multicomponent telerehabilitation using a 
two-group randomized crossover design and determine variability estimates. Outcomes 
for this aim are accelerometer -based physical activity, physical function, quality of life , and 
loneliness.  
Hypothesis 2:  At program end  (GROUP1 12 weeks, GROUP2 24 weeks) , 
participants  will have a trend of improved outcomes (accelerometer 7 -day average 
step count  with ActiGraph physical activity monitors (ActiGraph Inc. Pensacola FL , 
primary) compared to program start (GROUP1 baseline, GROUP2 12 weeks) . In 
addition, using the pooled intervention sample, variability estimates (standard 
deviation), will be determined for change in physical activity, physical function (,30 
second sit to stand14) and self -report measures of physical function (Activity 
Measure for Post -Acute Care15), quality of life (PROMIS 29 Profile v2.016), and 
loneliness (3 -item loneliness scale17 Berkman Social Disengagement Scale1). This 
will allow for sample size estimates for the subsequent larger effectiveness trial.  
AIM 3 (exploratory): Explore patient perspectives of the multicomponent telerehabilitation 
program (physical therapy, biobehavioral interventions, technology, and social support 
interventions) and how they contribute to program engagement and participation as well 
as changes i n physical activity.  
Protocol Template  Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Objective 3a: Qualitatively identify factors Veterans associate with program 
engagement and participation as well as short -term changes in physical activity 
(immediately post 24 -week outcome assessment); these data will deepen our 
understanding of how and why Veterans e ngage with the program and its 
components and identify targets for future interventions.  
Objective 3b : Qualitatively identify factors Veterans associate with maintenance of 
physical activity up to 6 months after program completion, with an emphasis on 
social support, strategies learned from biobehavioral interventions, and 
technology. These data will help  identify key factors related to maintenance of 
physical activity, inform future iterations of this multicomponent program, and 
identify targets for future interventions.  
II. Background and Significance :  
A.1. Older Veterans with complex health conditions are often excluded from 
rehabilitation research  
Veterans with multiple comorbidities are one of the most vulnerable patient  populations 
as well as a large and growing proportion of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) 
beneficiaries.18 Older Veterans with complex health conditions are at high risk for 
isolation,19 disability,20 adverse health events (e.g., hospitalization and death), mental 
illness,21 and heavy healthcare utilization.20 Historically, musculoskeletal research has 
often excluded medically complex older adults, which has hindered developmen t and 
evaluation of practical and effective rehabilitation strategies for this population. The 
reason for this selection bias is multifaceted. The population is heterogeneous in age, 
cognitive status, medical status, psychological comorbidity, living envir onment, and social 
support.22 In addition, this at -risk population often experiences simultaneous acute and 
chronic conditions that contribute to variability in rehabilitation outcomes and high rates of 
loss to clinical  follow -up. Ethical considerations al so create additional barriers to research 
participation, as many older Veterans have cognitive impairments that impact the informed 
consent process.23 However, such selection bias limits the generalizability of study 
findings and the likelihood that existing or new interventions will adequately address the 
needs of this growing population.22 Therefore, rehabilitation research targeting medically 
complex older Veterans is needed to optimize their physical function and enhance their 
life participation.  
A.2. Physical function is a powerful biomarker of health and clinical outcomes for older 
adults  
Although disability risk factors are complex and multifactorial, there is evidence that 
physical function alone is a powerful biomarker of overall health following hospitalization, 
and a strong independent predictor of hospital re -admission.24-27 Poor physical function is 
also associated with reduced walking ability, lower extremity weakness, and increased 
risk of falls.24,28 -31 Older adults with lower levels of physical activity at home are 
approximately 6 times more likely to be readmitted within 30 days of acute hospitalization 
than those with higher levels of physical activity.24 Furthermore, objective lower extremity 
weakness is associated with increased likelihood of requiring assistance at home.32 This 
Protocol Template  Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 evidence highlights the need for intensive and multimodal interventions directly 
addressing factors that contribute to low physical function and physical activity in this 
population. Most importantly, physical function is a modifiable risk factor, even in 
medically complex older adults, which previous studies suggest can be effectively 
addressed with more intensive rehabilitation strategies.  
A.3. Social isolation of older Veterans is associated with poor physical function  
Social isolation is also associated with poor physical function,33 and is predictive of 
rehospitalization, premature death, and poor health outcomes34 in older Veterans. Active 
older adults perceive social support and connectivity as important motivators for 
exercise.11,12 In studies of healthier populations the social connection provided by group 
exercise also boosts adherence,35 increasing long -term sustainability of exercise benefits.  
However, older Veterans with poor health status have geographic (e.g., rural) and 
physical barriers to rehabilitation participation and often experience greater social 
isolation. The use of technology, such as telehealth platforms, provides an avenue to 
address the problem of Veteran social isolation. While online social activity is a detriment 
to perceived health for young adults, older adults report feeling more social support and 
less isolation when connected online.36 Increasing Veteran social connectiv ity may 
augment conventional rehabilitation to improve older Veterans’ physical activity, life 
participation, and sustained outcomes.  
A.4. Conventional Rehabilitation Strategies are Insufficient to Produce Meaningful 
Gains  
We have found rehabilitation exercise dosage in a variety of settings often does not 
provide a meaningful physical challenge for older adults.6 Across the U.S., the content 
and intensity of conventional rehabilitation for medically complex older adults is 
substantially under -dosed.37-39 In the rare cases where resistance training is used, the 
loads are often equivalent to 2 pounds or less. This is not sufficient to induce physiologic 
adaptations.40 In contrast, high -intensity resistance training tailored to  individual patient 
tolerance integrates principles of physiologic tissue overload and resistance training into 
functional rehabilitation interventions to achieve better outcomes. Despite this, clinicians 
apply conservative interventions to medically compl ex populations because they fear 
patient injury or expect patients to resist working at higher intensities.41,42 Yet, when 
employed correctly, there is no greater risk of injury or patient refusals.43,44 In older adults, 
high-resistance, low repetition str engthening fosters better functional outcomes than 
traditional strength training, including greater gains in strength45,46 and physical function.47 
Furthermore, data from our group suggests practice change from low -intensity to high -
intensity functional resistance interventions is influenced by patient and clinician self -
efficacy,48 which are modifiable through enhanced patient engagement and enriched 
training  for rehabilitation clinicians. Furthermore, improvements in physical function are 
sustained well b eyond a discrete episode of care,43 helping to protect against the decline 
that might occur with the next expected insult.  
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
Protocol Template  Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 B.1.1. Clinical Research Experience  
Dr. Stevens -Lapsley, PT, PhD (PI) has more than 20 years of clinical research experience 
in working with medically complex patients and interdisciplinary teams in implementing 
rehabilitation programs. Dr. Stevens - Lapsley also has prior experience with imp lementing 
a telerehabilitation platform for patients after total knee arthroplasty (NIA R44 AG055341). 
Dr. Lauren Abbate, MD, PhD (Co -Investigator) is the Associate Director - Clinical at the 
Eastern Colorado Health Care System (ECHCS) Geriatric Research, E ducation and 
Clinical Center (GRECC) and the Medical Director for the ECHCS Gerofit Program. She 
has recent experience through Gerofit with telehealth delivery of exercise interventions. 
Dr. Cory Christiansen, PT, PhD (Co -Investigator) has worked closely w ith Dr. Stevens -
Lapsley over the past decade and has participated in the design, implementation, and 
publication of multiple rehabilitation research studies involving a variety of older adult 
populations. Most relevant to the current proposal, the Co -I has  extensive experience 
implementing biobehavioral strategies to improve physical activity in patients following 
Total Knee Arthroplasty9 and dysvascular lower limb amputation.8 Dr. Katherine Nearing, 
PhD (Co -Investigator) is the Associate Director of Education and Evaluation for the VA 
ECHCS GRECC. She will serve as the lead evaluator for this study. Dr. Jeri Forster, PhD 
(Co-Investigator) is a biostatistician who is the Directo r of the VA Data and Statistical Core 
for the VISN 19 Mental Illness Research, Ed ucation and Clinical Center (MIRECC). She 
will provide expertise on issues related to study design, database management, quality 
control, data analysis, and the preparation of manuscripts. Dr. Hillary Lum, MD, PhD (Co -
Investigator) clinical expertise in ge riatrics within the VHA system, in addition to her 
experience with telehealth care delivery using VA Video Connect will facilitate smooth 
program implementation.  
B.1.2. Preliminary Studies  
This new line of research builds on the collective experience of the investigative team. 
The PI and Co - Investigators have worked together over the past 7 years to 1) develop 
progressive rehabilitation strategies for medically complex patients (VA RR&D I21  
RX002054, VA RR&D I01 RX001978), 2) develop and test biobehavioral strategies to 
improve physical activity for patients following dysvascular lower limb amputation8 and 
total knee arthroplasty,9 and 3) test and refine telerehabilitation delivery for patie nts 
following total knee arthroplasty (NIA R44 AG055341). This study will be the first to 
combine these lines of research into a coherent multicomponent program. Further, this is 
the first study to determine the safety and feasibility of telerehabilitation  approaches for a 
high-risk, medically complex population. The investigative team’s collective experience 
and ongoing work in these areas positions them uniquely to lead the proposed 
investigation.  
IV. Research Methods  
C.1 Outcome  Measur es:   
Aim 1: Feasibility outcomes provide information to help determine if a larger study should 
be performed. Feasibility includes adherence, acceptability, and safety, and satisfaction. 
Additional factors may influence feasibility, and the following surveys for will be assessed 
Protocol Template  Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 at program end for Veterans and therapists: Feasibility of Intervention Measure,13 
Acceptability of Intervention Measure,13 Intervention Appropriateness Measure.13 
Satisfaction is measured by V -signals which is a survey specific to the VA; it measures 
satisfaction associated with telerehabilitation services. Additionally, we will monitor 
recruitment rate (proportion of Veterans enrolled out of those screened) and re tention 
(proportion of Veterans who complete program out of all enrolled) to inform feasibili ty of a 
larger randomized controlled trial for effectiveness.  
Aim 2: Preliminary responses to the interventions will be determined via performance -
based and self -report measures. Physical activity behavior outcomes (hypothesis 2) will 
include average 7 -day step count (accelerometry; primary ), self -efficacy (Self -Efficacy for 
Exercise Scale2) and exercise readiness to change (Exercise Stages of Change).70 
Physical function outcomes will include 30 second sit to stand test,3 arm curl test,72 2-
minute step test,72 and self -report Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care (AM -PAC).15 
Social isolation and loneliness outcomes will include 3 -Item Loneliness Scale17 and the 
Berkman Social Disengagement Scale .1 The PROMIS -29 v2.016 will measure quality of life 
(summative score), social support (subscale), and mental health (subscale). In addition, 
descriptive measures will be collected at baseline including demographics, medications, 
cognition (T -MoCA69), depression (Patient Health Questionnaire -9 for depression73), 
anxiety (General Anxiety Disorder -774), Mobile Device Proficiency Questionnaire,75 and 
comorbidities (Charlson Comorbidity Index68). 
Aim 3:  Qualitative data will be collected primarily through semi -structured one -on-one key 
informant interviews, which will be recorded with the participant’s permission. All 
interviews will be conducted through the same virtual platform participants will have b een 
using throughout program participation. To validate data and findings, additional 
qualitative data will be collected from documentation in CPRS (restricted to study -related 
documentation) and voluntary feedback provided though the veteran satisfa ction survey 
(V signals —a validated survey instrument used routinely within the VA). Objective 3a : 
These interviews will be conducted within 3 weeks of program completion (12 -weeks for 
participants in Group1 and 24 weeks for participants in Group2). The interviews will last 
approximately 45 -60 minutes. We will purposively sample Veterans based on leve l of 
technology engagement [high engagers (respond to Annie ≥ 80%) versus low engagers 
(respond to Annie < 50%)] and group sessions attendance [high attendance (≥ 80%) 
versus low attendance (< 50%)]. We will continue to sample Veterans until thematic 
satur ation is reached for each group. Objective 3b : We will conduct follow -up interviews 
with the Veterans who completed initial interviews (from objective 3a); these interviews 
will last approximately 30 -45 minutes and will occur between 3 to 6 months following their 
initial interview.  
Description of Population to be Enrolled :   
In this study, the target population is older Veterans , including those  identified as “high -
need, high -risk" by the Geriatrics &  Extended Care Data & Analysis Center (GECDAC); 
this designation includes Veterans who have experienced a     significant  health  event  in the  
last 12 months  (e.g., hospitalization) and  have  a Frailty  Index  score  ≥6. Veterans will be 
recruited through the VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System. Potential Veterans will be  
identified by the GECDAC and/or by providers in the Geriatric Specialty Clinic, Home 
Protocol Template  Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Based Primary Care, and   inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation settings. Potential 
Veterans with whom we have a treatment relationship will be pre -screened through 
standardized  chart review followed by standardized phone screen. If eligible and 
interested in participating, Veterans will  provide informed consent and be enrolled in the 
study; once enrolled, they will be randomized to either a  waitlist control (GROUP2) or 
experimental (GROUP1) group. Participants  will complete  surveys  and direct observation  
(Aims  1 & 2). Veterans will also undergo performance -based assessments of physical 
activity and physical function and  complete self -reported measures for physical function, 
quality of life, loneliness, social support, and mental  health.  
Formal  Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
Inclusion  
• ≥ 60 years of  age 
• Multiple  chronic  conditions  (Functional  Comorbidity  Index68 ≥ 3) 
• Impaired  physical  function ( ≤ 10 on 30 second sit to stand)  
Exclusion  
• Life expectancy  < 12 months  
• Acute or  progressive  neurological  disorder  (e.g., Amyotrophic Lateral  Sclerosis,  
recent  stroke)  
• Moderate to severe dementia without caregiver assistance (< 18 on telephone 
Montreal Cognitive  Assessment  (T-MoCA)69) 
• Unstable  medical  condition  precluding  safe participation  in progressive  
rehabilitation  (e.g., unstable  angina)  as defined by ACSM guidelines  
We plan to randomize  50 Veterans (25 randomized to each group), with the goal of having 
40 Veterans complete  the study (20% attrition rate). Due to our enrollment process, we 
plan to have 70 Veterans sign the informed consent; this will allow for up to 20 Veterans to 
complete evaluation but be found ineligible based on identified exclusion criteria. The goal 
of the study is to obtain a representative sample of older Veterans at  risk for, or  presenting  
with, impaired  physical  function  contributing  to fall risk, physical  depende nce, and risk for 
hospitalization. Both sexes and all races are included in the study, however the Veteran 
population is  predominantly  male  and Caucasian,  which will be  reflected in  the enrollment.  
D. Study Design and Research Methods    
We propose a pilot, two -arm randomized trial using a waitlist control to determine the 
feasibility, acceptability, and safety (AIM 1) of a 12 -week multicomponent telerehabilitation 
program. We will also assess the preliminary response (AIM 2) to this 12 -week 
intervention. Participants (n=50) will be randomized to GROUP1 or GROUP2 using 
computer -generated random blocks of 2 and 4, stratified by sex. A waitlist control 
(GROUP2) will be used to simultaneously achieve the aims and ensure that all 
participants r eceive the intervention. Data will be collected at baseline (pre -intervention),  
Protocol Template  Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 6-weeks (intervention midpoint for GROUP1), 12 weeks (intervention end  for GROUP1 , 
primary endpoint), and 24 weeks.  
Setting & Recruitment:  
Following consent and p rior to baseline assessment  and randomization, each participant 
will complete  a physical therapy evaluation performed by a licensed physical therapist. 
The purpose of this evaluation is to ensure the Veteran is appropriate for the planned 
intervention  and is eligible for the study . The evaluation may inc lude standard evaluation 
tasks including but not limited to chart review, subjective history, and functional 
assessment.  
Initial evaluation, i ntervention , and testing will occur through telehealth via VA Video 
Connect using a site -to-home format. Dedicated telehealth rooms are available for the 
study team in the ECHC S GRECC. Veterans will have the option of using their personal 
device (e.g., tablet, computer) or a VHA -issued tablet.  
Veterans will be recruited from the Geriatric Specialty Clinic, Emergency Department, 
Home Based Primary Care, and Inpatient and Outpatient rehabilitation services through 
the VA ECHCS. Veterans also will  be recruited via f lyers provided to/posted on:  VA social 
media, VA GRECC (Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center) Website; UCD 
Website, to facilities and clinicians in the VISN -19, VA CLC colleagues, in VAMC patient 
rehab discharge folders, to Colorado Visiting N urses Association, and to non -VA clinicians 
throughout the VISN19 region.   Additionally, we are approved via DART to review VISN19 
medical records  for study eligibility.  We do not anticipate any difficulties with recruitment 
because of the large volume of candidates who are currently waiting for availability of 
rehabilitation services. However, if recruitment goals are not met after six months, 
additional recruitment of Veterans will occur through established relationships with 
regional Colorado hospitals. Potential participants will be pre -screened through 
stand ardized chart review followed by standardized phone screen.  
Intervention  
Waitlist Control : 25 Veterans will be randomly assigned to GROUP2 for the first 12 
weeks prior to initiating the telerehabilitation program intervention. To encourage 
retention, Veterans will participate in an hour -long educational session every 2 weeks for 
a total of 6 sessions. These online educational sessions will also include a facilitated 
question/answer session. Topics will include general health management such as 
nutrition, stress reduction, and sleep hygiene. At the completion of 12 weeks, Veterans in 
GROUP 2 will crossover into the multicomponent telerehabilitation intervention.  
Multicomponent Telerehabilitation Program : 25 Veterans will be randomly assigned to 
immediately receive the multicomponent telerehabilitation program intervention 
(GROUP1). The three components include 1) individual and group progressive, high 
intensity resistance training rehabilitation, 2) biob ehavioral interventions, and 3) social 
support. A physical therapist (PT) will deliver telerehabilitation, and Veterans will 
participate in 12 individual sessions and 24 group sessions over the course of 12 weeks . 
Protocol Template  Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Biobehavioral interventions will occur 1time per week for a total of 6 sessions during the 
early part of the program and 2 booster sessions during the latter part of the program. 
Social support group discussions will occur following specified group telereh abilitation 
session for a total of 12 sessions.  
Multicomponent Telerehabilitation Program Intervention and Rationale  
Progressive Rehabilitation : Progressive rehabilitation involves physiologically -tailored 
high-intensity resistance training during functional movements (e.g., sit to stand transfer, 
stair navigation), balance training, and gait retraining to appropriately challenge individuals 
to facilitate desired change.  
Physical therapists will deliver progressive telerehabilitation during both individual and 
group sessions. Individual sessions will allow for orientation, individualization, and 
familiarization of various progressive rehabilitative interventions. Virtual g roup sessions 
will occur with the group in a virtual environment; each Veteran will attend the group VA 
Video Connect visit from their preferred location (e.g. , home). Group sessions will help 
facilitate social support.  
Biobehavioral Interventions: Our research team has extensive experience implementing 
biobehavioral interventions8,9 which are theory - and evidence -based.7,10 There will be 8 
individual sessions over the course of the 12 -week program. During the early part of the 
program, the PT will deliver 6 sessions focused on behavior change techniques (Table 1). 
The PT will deliver these interventions at the end of individ ual progressive rehabilitation 
sessions. The first session will provide an overview of the biobehav ioral program and the 
different techniques that will be discussed (e.g., self -monitoring, problem solving, action 
planning, education, barrier/facilitator identification, tailored feedback, and 
encouragement). Each session will include education on the pri mary topic for the day, and 
then focus on developing skills and independence applying that technique.  
Veterans will receive two individual booster sessions during the latter portion of the 
intervention. A VA-approved App  (Annie App) will be used to augment the biobehavioral 
treatments. For example, daily step count can be tracked by responding to SMS text 
message prompts delivered by Annie. The Veteran is then able to view their progress 
(through mobile App or web portal) p roviding feedback on their performance.  
Table 1. Components of the Biobehavioral Intervention  
Intervention  
Technique  Progression  from Therapist  Coaching (left)  to Participant  Self-Management  (right)  
Education  Therapist delivers education topic* (e.g., Self -Monitoring,  
Problems  Solving,  Identifying  Barrier/Facilitators,  Action  Plans).  Participant  reports  most  important  information  
learned.  
Self-Monitoring  Therapist  guides  participant  in tracking  daily activity  minutes  & 
session  participation  since  last visit. Participant  tracks  weekly  activity  minutes  and 
session participation.  
Tailored  Feedback  Therapist leads collaborative review of activity and participation  
data for action plan goal  setting.  Participant leads review of activity and  
participation  data and other  physical  activity  
goals.  
Protocol Template  Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Barrier/Facilitator  
Identification  Therapist  guides  participant  to identify  barriers/facilitators  of goal 
attainment.  Participant self -identifies barriers and  facilitators  
for goal attainment.  
Promotion of  
Problem  Solving  Collaborative  generation  of solutions  to overcome  barriers  to goal 
attainment.  Participant  generates  solutions  to identified  
barriers to  goal attainment.  
Action  Planning  Collaborative activity goal generation. Therapist guides, using  5-
10% increase  from daily activity  minutes  from previous  week  
target.  Participant -led weekly goal generation.  
Therapist ensures independence in action  
planning.  
Encouragement  Therapist reviews plan for the next week, while encouraging  
participant on successes attained toward improved physical  health.  Participant  leads  the review  of the plan for 
upcoming  week.  
* Each  week  will have  a specific  “take -home”  message  linking  physical  activity  and 
movement  behavior  to health.  Messages  will be brief and based on research evidence.  
Social Support: Social support is a key component of our program to address social 
isolation and perceptions  of loneliness. We will foster a sense of community and family 
among Veterans enrolled in the program through  virtual  group telerehabilitation sessions 
and group discussions. During group telerehabilitation,  therapists will purposefully engage 
Veterans, providing encouragement on performance while also facilitating  peer support 
and encouragement. The group discussions, which occur at the end of group  
telerehabilitation sessions, will  have core components to reinforce biobehavioral strategies 
and allow Veterans  to share their experiences, successes, and struggles implementing 
our program. Group discussions will be  iterative  by encouraging  Veterans  to suggest  
topics  for discussion and  ideas for improvement.  
Outcomes : All outcomes will be evaluated by a blinded assessor. Aim 1: Feasibility 
outcomes provide  information to help determine if a larger study should be performed. 
Feasibility includes adherence,  acceptability, and safety, and satisfaction. Additional 
factors may influence feasibility, and the following surveys will be  assessed at program 
end: Feasibility of Intervention Measure,13 Acceptability of  Intervention Measure,13 
Intervention Appropriateness Measure.13 Satisfaction is measured by V -signals whi ch is a 
survey specific to the VA; it measures satisfaction associated with telerehabilitation 
services. Additionally, we will monitor recruitment rate (proportion of Veterans enrolled out 
of those screened) and retention (proportion of Veterans who complete program out of all 
enrolled) to inform feasibility of a larger randomized controlled trial for effectiveness.  
Aim 2: Preliminary responses to the interventions will be determined via performance -
based and self -report  measures. Physical activity behavior outcomes (hypothesis 2) will 
include average 7 -day step count  (accelerometry; primary ), self -efficacy (Self -Efficacy for 
Exercise Scale2) and exercise readiness to change (Exercise Stages of Change).70 
Physical function  outcomes will include 30 second sit to stand test,3 arm curl test,72 2-
minute step test,72 and self -report  Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care (AM -PAC).15 
Social isolation and loneliness outcomes will include 3 -Item Loneliness Scale17 and the 
Berkman Social Disengagement Scale.1 The PROMIS -29 v2.016 will measure  quality of life 
(summative score), social support (subscale), and mental health (subscale). In addition,  
descriptive measures will be collected at baseline including demographics, medications, 
cognition ( T-MoCA69), depression (Patient Health Questionnaire -9 for depression73), 
anxiety (General Anxiety Disorder -774), Mobile  Device  Proficiency  Questionnaire -16,75 and 
comorbidities ( Functional  Comorbidity  Index68). 
Protocol Template  Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 ActiGraph physical activity monitors (ActiGraph Inc. Pensacola FL) will be used to obtain 
an objective measure of physical activity (PA). ActiGraph activity monitors assess PA 
using accelerometry, which allows objective evaluation of the relative volume (s teps/day) 
and intensity (activity counts) of physical activity with high validity and reliability.76-78 Each 
participant will wear the ActiGraph for 10 days at the beginning and end of their 
intervention window (baseline and week 12 for GROUP1, week 12 and  week 24 for 
GROUP2). The ActiGraph monitor will be used only for outcome data (not intervention) 
and provides no feedback to participants.  
E.   Description, Risks and Justification of Proc edures and Data Collection Tools:  
Potential  Risks (Aim  1 and  Aim 2) 
Study  Intervention  and Assessments  
We anticipate no greater risk than the minimal risk associated with standard 
telerehabilitation for Veterans  participating in this study. All interventions and assessments 
are considered a part of physical therapy clinical  practice. Because a physical therapist is 
not physically present with the participant during sessions, there is an increased risk for 
falls compared to in -person rehabilitation. Exercise is associated with inherent risks 
including  muscle soreness, muscle strain, shortness of breath, and cardiac events. 
Precautions will be taken to minimize  risks as follows:  
1. Veterans will receive education on expected side effects of exercise (muscle 
soreness, shortness  of breath) and methods to reduce fall risk prior to initiation of 
interventions. Education will also include    signs of distress that should be 
communicated to the study team (dizziness, light headedness,  symptoms  of 
myocardial  infarction)  
2. Veterans  will verify  their physical  location  (address)  in the event  that Emergency  
Medical  Services  need to be alerted during  the session  
3. Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate) will be assessed pre - and post - intervention 
to monitor  physiologic response to exercise (more details below); additional and 
repeated measures may be taken  as indicated. Veterans will be provided with 
equipment (automated blood pressure cuff, pulse oximeter)  to monitor  their vital 
signs  and will be instructed  on proper  use 
4. A licensed physical therapist will provide supervision for all study -related 
intervention and assessment activities  remotely  through  telephone and/or  VA 
Video Connect , which  will afford  the ability  to monitor  for signs of  distress  
(dizziness,  shortness  of breath  greater  than expected)  
5. Interventions will be modified based on each Veteran’s physical function, fall risk 
assessment, and  safety concerns (exercises performed sitting versus standing; 
standing exercises performed in  close  proximity  to sturdy  surface  for hand support)  
6. In addition  to the physical  therapist,  support  personnel  will be present  during  group  
telerehabilitation  to monitor for signs  of distress  and assist  in the  event of  an 
emergency  
7. Telerehabilitation  sessions  will be conducted  when  another  adult  is present  as an 
additional  safety  measure  
8. Veterans  will be encouraged  to take rest breaks  as needed  to manage  exercise 
Protocol Template  Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 associated  fatigue , shortness  of breath,  and thirst.  
Additional safety measures may be used based on each Veteran’s individual need (self -
reported perceived    exertion, glucose  monitoring).  
Vital signs are an objective indicator of physiologic response to exercise. Physical 
therapists will be trained in  appropriate vital sign ranges for rest and exercise to assess 
appropriateness and safety for exercise. Prior to  any exercise, the Veteran will self -assess 
blood pressure and heart rate. If blood pressure is outside of normal  ranges (systolic < 
90mmHg or > 180mmHg; diastolic < 50mmHg or > 100mmHg), the Veteran will be 
instructed    to rest for 10 minutes  and reassess.  The Veteran  may assess up  to 3 times 
total.  If blood  pressure  continues  to be out of normal ranges and/or the Veteran is 
experiencing symptoms (dizziness, shortness of breath, etc.),  the PT will defer study 
related activities and consult with study physician. If signs or symptoms of distress  occur 
during the telerehabilitation session, the Veteran will be instructed to sit and rest and self -
assess vita l signs . The same procedure as above will be followed. In the event of an 
emergency, the PT will alert  Emergency  Medical  Services through VA Video Connect . 
For the purposes of safety monitoring, all adverse events occurring during and between 
study related activitie s will be recorded. The physical therapist will assess for adverse 
events at the beginning of each  telerehabilitation session. Falls will be defined as 
“inadvertently coming to rest on the ground, floor, or other  lower level, excluding 
intentional change in position,” (World Health Organization) and characterized as  
unrelated, possibly, probably, or definitely related to study procedures. Additional  fall 
information including  circumstances and associated injuries will be collected. Any reported 
falls occurring outside of individual/group  sessions will be discussed at the subsequent 
individual session or within 24 hours if medical care is required.  Fall occurrences (injurious 
and non -injurious) and other adverse events will be re viewed  on a monthly basis. Other 
exercise side -effects, such as muscle pain, fatigue, shortness of breath, and minor  strains 
during therapy will be documented and monitored by Dr. Stevens -Lapsley. Based on the 
existing  literature80 and our own clinic al experience with rehabilitation (VA RR&D 
I01RX002417), we anticipate the  frequency  of these side -effects  to be extremely  low. 
Surveys  
We will administer  surveys  to enrolled  patients  via telephone, VA Video Connect, or CCTSI 
REDCap , dependent on Veteran preference . All collected data will be stored in CCTSI 
REDCap.  Surveys  will be used  to assess  participan ts’ cognition, perceptions  of study -
related  activities,  and perceptions  of physical  and mental  health.  Participants may 
experience discomfort when answering questions about their health; patients will be 
reminded  that they can choose not to answer any question and that all study data will be 
coded with a participant ID to  maintain confidentiality. Research team members will 
compile data into a secure database for analysis and all  data will be de-identified.  The 
main  risks to this portion  of the trial are risks of breaching  confidentiality  of data.  
Interviews  
The questions outlined in the interview guides (provided with this application) explore 
Protocol Template  Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 perceptions of the program and how the different components of the program impacted 
participation and/or physical activity behavior change. Generally, participants will be asked 
to reflect on their experiences during the program. Questions do not delve int o personal 
issues, but rather require individuals to be circumspect and to talk in terms of generalities. 
For this reason, we do not anticipate that the nature of the questions/ topics explored will 
cause participants any emotional or psychological distres s. To the contrary, we will 
emphasize that aspects of their experience in relation to the telerehabilitation program that 
they choose to share can help the study team improve the program to optimize the benefit 
for Veterans. The opportunity to have their i nput potentially improve services and care for 
other Veteran tends to be viewed positively by Veteran peers. As is customary, members 
of the research team will communicate that participation in these interviews is voluntary, 
they can ask questions at any t ime, they can decline to respond to any question, they can 
stop or withdraw their participation at any time, and decisions to decline to participate or 
answer any question will not affect their healthcare.  
The time required to participate in the interview and any associated inconvenience this 
may cause is also a potential risk. We will explain that interviews are estimated to require 
an hour of the individual’s time, and we will schedule interviews on a day and at a time 
convenient for them. Participants who are being invited to take part in an interview will 
have completed a 12 -week telehealth program, during which they consistently (2 -3x/week) 
demonstrated the ability and willingness to take part in virtual  activities for an hour in 
duration. This commitment is similar to the requirement of participating in the interview. 
We will use the same virtual, secure platform (VA Video Connect) to conduct the 
interviews so the technology will be familiar to each pers on. Therefore, we do not 
anticipate this aspect of participating in the interview to cause any undue stress.   
General  Risks  
As with all clinical research studies, there is the general risk of breach of confidentiality or 
data security. To  minimize this risk, only the minimal necessary data will be collected, and 
we strive to maintain confidentiality.  Only the researchers team members involved in the 
study will have access to the data that is collected. Paper data  will be kept in locked filing 
cabinets in locked offices of the VA researchers. Electronic data will be stored  and 
managed  in a password protected  computerized  database  that is behind a  firewall  (i.e., 
REDCap).  
All assessments and  interventions  in this study  are considered  to be low risk. We believe 
we have  minimized  risks by applying usual safeguards for instructing participants in 
physical activity and for conducting  telerehabilitation. Side effects, such as muscle pain, 
fatigue, minor sprains or strains, or falls during testing  will be recorded by the physical 
therapist and monitored by Dr. Stevens -Lapsley. As indicated previously, we  anticipate 
the frequency of these side effects to be extremely low based upon existing literature and 
our own  clinical experience with  the intervention.  
We will maximize  the safety  of our  participants  with the following  procedures:  
1. Individuals  with absolute  contraindications  to testing  and training  will be excluded  
based  on the inclusion /exclusion  criteria.  
Protocol Template  Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 2. Prior to initiating any study -related activities during a telerehabilitation session, 
participants will be asked  to identify their physical location (address) if Emergency 
Medical Services need to be alerted for any  reason  during the  session.  
3. All study -related intervention and assessment activities will be supervised by a 
licensed physical  therapist. Physical therapists will conduct a falls risk assessment 
at the first telehealth sessions to  determine  the participants’  level of function  and 
potential  needs  for support  and safety  during  the session (e.g. , use of hand -held 
support on a countertop during exercise); this approach will reduce the risk for falls  
and injury. Additionally, interventions and assessments will not be conducted for 
patients who are unable  to perform  the tasks  (by patient  report  or clinicians’ 
judgment).  
4. Furthermore, when at all possible, sessions will be conducted when another adult 
is present as an  additional safety  measure.  
5. When completing surveys with potentially sensitive questions, participants will be 
reminded that they can  choose not to answer any question and that all data is only 
linked to a participant ID in order to maintain  confidentiality and  anonymity.  
   F.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
Mobile -Health technology : Durability and continued functionality of technology is a 
concern when using any technology. The mobile -health tablets used in this study have 
been implemented for standard -of-care use for a variety of purposes currently in the VA 
ECHCS. If a tablet beco mes dysfunctional, replacement units are available so that an 
immediate back -up unit can replace the dysfunctional unit. The VHA will provide mobile - 
health technical support for the duration of the study. Finally, the intervention is not 
dependent on type of tablet used, so changes in mobile -health tablets in the future will not 
necessitate a change in intervention.  
Lack of long -term follow -up: Creating a change in physical activity behavior for an older 
adult population is a major challenge. We will collect data out to 24 weeks (GROUP1) to 
determine maintenance of intervention effects. We expect that activity changes may be 
reduced at the 24 -week time period for GROUP1 compared to the 12 -week test point, but 
that the activity will continue to be higher than baseline, based on data from studies of 
patients with other chronic diseases.79 
Heterogeneity of medically complex older adults : Medically complex older adults are 
heterogenous in age, cognitive status, medical status, psychological comorbidity, living 
environment, and social support.22 Additionally, they experience acute exacerbations of 
chronic conditions impacting their response to treatment and contributing to high drop -out 
rates among this population. To accommodate for this from our experiences, we 
anticipated a higher attrition ra te (20%) and adjusted enrollment accordingly.  
G.   Data Analysis Plan:   
Analysis Plan. Analyses will be performed in SAS v 9.4 or above and hypothesis tests will 
be two -sided, assuming an alpha level of 0.05. Participant characteristics and outcome 
variables will be summarized using means, standard deviations (SD), medians, ranges, N 
and per cent, as appropriate.  
Protocol Template  Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Aim 1 . The percent of Veterans (1) achieving ≥ 80% adherence and (2) scoring ≥4/5 on 
the Acceptability of Intervention Measure will be calculated with associated 95% exact 
binomial confidence intervals. We will additionally calculate the proportion of adverse 
events that are found to be possibly, probably , or definitely related to the intervention.  
Aim 2 . Given the small samples, the median change from baseline to 12 weeks for those 
randomized to the intervention will be compared between the groups using a Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test for each outcome of interest (7 -day average step count as primary). 
Estimates  of variability (SD) in the change from pre to post -intervention for the pooled 
sample completing the intervention (N=40) will be calculated for each outcome and 
reported with 95% CIs. These estimates and the CIs will inform sample size calculations 
for a future effectiveness trial.  
Aim 3: Semi -structured interviews will be recorded with permission and professionally 
transcribed. The accuracy and completeness of transcripts will be validated by a member 
of the study team. Thematic analysis will be conducted by two researchers as described 
by Fereday and Muir -Cochrane52 using a hybrid deductive -inductive analysis approach. A 
codebook will guide systematic analysis. The initial codebook will be developed using key 
constructs from Social Cognitive Theory, Technology Acceptance Model,53 and emerging 
social isolation theory specific to older adults.54 Constructs will also be added to the 
codebook as new concepts emerge inductively throughout analysis. Multiple passes will 
be taken through the data to support iterative and reflexive processing of key insights 
salient to the research questions and hypoth eses outlined for the study. Coding from both 
researchers will be compared and any disagreements/discrepancies will be resolved 
through weekly processing discussion meetings. Results will be transferred to a matrix to 
organize the data by salient themes an d support further interpretation.    
Data Management:  
Interviews will be recorded with permission from the participant by a member of the study 
team. Sound files will be encrypted using the Olympus DS -9000 Digital Voice Recorder (a 
VA-approved device). The audio file will be transferred securely using box.com . The 
interviews will be transcribed by a contracted employee of Transcription Outsourcing LLC, 
a VA -approved vendor. Once transcripts are complete, these Word documents and the 
associated sound files will be downloaded and saved on a shared network drive 
accessible only by research personnel of the university; once files are downloaded and 
saved to the shared network drive, the associated sound file and transcript will be deleted 
from box.com. These data will be stored electronically on a secure network dr ive 
(maintained by the university) in subfolders with a complex directory path. Study staff will 
use password -protected computers maintained by and/or located at the university to 
process information collected for this study. Any hard copies of data collec ted during 
interviews (i.e., transcripts and hand -written notes) will be stored in a locked filing cabinet 
to which only designated members of the research study team will have access. The key 
to this filing cabinet will be kept in a separate, secure locat ion. The participant’s study ID 
will be used to label the electronic and hard copies of the data obtained for this study 
(e.g., sound files, associated transcripts, or interview notes).  
 
Protocol Template  Page 15 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 If parts of an interview are featured in a report (e.g., a quote is used to represent a given 
theme and/or a composite story is featured to illustrate a common scenario/experience), 
we will confirm that there is no identifying information included. Names w ill be masked. 
For example, when sharing findings resulting from this study, specific names would be 
replaced in text with a descriptor such as [physical therapist] or [spouse].  
H.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
The VA has established rehabilitation programs for inpatient, home, and outpatient 
settings, but these typically require in -person attendance, address one area of functional 
impairment, and under -dose the intensity of rehabilitation. Further, Veterans often face 
barriers to attending in -person appointments; for example, living in rural locations, lack of 
transportation, or limited social support. As a result, many Veterans con tinue to have 
residual physical function limitations that prevent them from participating in life roles, 
navigating their home and the community, and participating in continued rehabilitation 
exercises in the community setting. It is unclear how telehealth  strategies could be 
effectively and safely utilized to provide rehabilitation services to Veterans who lack 
access to these important services. Indeed, telehealth platforms offer a solution to 
overcome access barriers (rurality, transportation), but no cu rrent research applies 
telerehabilitation to medically complex older Veterans.  
The current study will assess the feasibility, acceptability, and safety of the multi -
component rehabilitation program for high risk, high need Veterans with multiple 
comorbidities and functional deficits. Additionally, response to the multicomponent 
telerehabilitation program will also be measured to determine preliminary effectiveness. 
Study findings will guide refinement of telerehabilitation methods, so they are effective, 
easily implemented, and safe. This study will provide critical insight for provid ers regarding 
telerehabilitation for medically complex older Veterans and its utilization to improve 
physical function and concurrently reduce the impact of social isolation.  
I. References:  
1. Department of Veteran Affairs Office of Rural Health. Rural Veterans. 
https://www.ruralhealth.va.gov/aboutus/ruralvets.asp. Published 2020. Accessed 
July 15, 2020.  
2. King DA, O'Riley AA, Thompson C, Conwell Y, He H, Kemp J. Age -related 
concerns of male veteran callers to a suicide crisis line. Arch Suicide Res. 
2014;18(4):445 -452. 
3. Littman AJ, Forsberg CW, Koepsell TD. Physical activity in a national sample of 
veterans. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(5):1006 -1013.  
4. Kuwert P, Knaevelsrud C, Pietrzak RH. Loneliness among older veterans in the 
United States: results from the National Health and Resilience in Veterans Study. 
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;22(6):564 - 569. 
5. Richard A, Rohrmann S, Vandeleur CL, Schmid M, Barth J, Eichholzer M. 
Loneliness is adversely associated with physical and mental health and lifestyle 
factors: Results from a Swiss national survey. PLoS One. 2017;12(7):e0181442.  
6. Gustavson AM, Malone DJ, Boxer RS, Forster JE, Stevens -Lapsley JE. 
Application of High -Intensity Functional Resistance Training in a Skilled Nursing 
Protocol Template  Page 16 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Facility: An Implementation Study. Phys Ther. 2020.  
7. Messer LH, Sousa K, Cook PF. Applying two minds theory to self -management of 
Type 1 diabetes. Res Nurs Health. 2019;42(6):500 -508. 
8. Christiansen CL, Miller MJ, Kline PW, et al. Biobehavioral intervention targeting 
physical activity behavior change for older Veterans after nontraumatic 
amputation: a randomized controlled trial. PM R. 2020.  
9. Kline PW, Melanson EL, Sullivan WJ, et al. Improving physical activity through 
adjunct telerehabilitation following total knee arthroplasty: randomized controlled 
trial protocol. Phys Ther. 2019;99(1):37 -45. 
10. Bandura A. Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health Educ Behav. 
2004;31(2):143 -164. 
11. Brady S, D'Ambrosio LA, Felts A, Rula EY, Kell KP, Coughlin JF. Reducing 
isolation and loneliness through membership in a fitness program for older adults: 
Implications for health. J Appl Gerontol. 2020;39(3):301 -310. 
12. Schrempft S, Jackowska M, Hamer M, Steptoe A. Associations between social 
isolation, loneliness, and objective physical activity in older men and women. BMC 
Public Health. 2019;19(1):74.  
13. Weiner BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly 
developed implementation outcome measures. Implement Sci. 2017;12(1):108.  
14. Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, et al. A short physical performance battery 
assessing lower extremity function: association with self -reported disability and 
prediction of mortality and nursing home admission. J Gerontol.  1994;49(2):M85 -
94. 
15. Haley SM, Coster WJ, Andres PL, et al. Activity outcome measurement for 
postacute care. Med Care.  2004;42(1 Suppl):I49 -61. 
16. Hays RD, Spritzer KL, Schalet BD, Cella  D. PROMIS® -29 v2.0 profile physical and 
mental health summary scores. Qual Life Res. 2018;27(7):1885 -1891.  
17. Hughes ME, Waite LJ, Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT. A short scale for measuring 
loneliness in large surveys: results from two population -based studies. Res Aging. 
2004;26(6):655 -672. 
18. Schubert CC, Myers LJ, Allen K, Counsell SR. Implementing geriatric resources 
for assessment and care of elders team care in a Veterans Affairs Medical Center: 
lessons learned and effects observed. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64(7):1503 -1509.  
19. Wilson G, Hill M, Kiernan MD. Loneliness and social isolation of military veterans: 
systematic narrative review. Occup Med (Lond). 2018;68(9):600 -609. 
20. Singh JA, Borowsky SJ, Nugent S, et al. Health -related quality of life, functional 
impairment, and healthcare utilization by veterans: veterans' quality of life study. J 
Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53(1):108 -113. 
21. Zeber JE, Copeland LA, Grazier KL. Serious mental illness, aging, and utilization 
patterns among veterans. Mil Med. 2006;171(7):619 -626. 
22. Zulman DM, Sussman JB, Chen X, Cigolle CT, Blaum CS, Hayward RA. 
Examining the evidence: a systematic review of the inclusion and analysis of older 
adults in randomized controlled trials. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(7):783 -790. 
23. Gustavson AM, Drake C, Lakin A, et al. Conducting Clinical Research in Post -
acute and Long -term Nursing Home Care Settings: Regulatory Challenges. J Am 
Med Dir Assoc. 2019;20(7):798 -803. 
24. Fisher SR, Kuo YF, Sharma G, et al. Mobility after hospital discharge as a marker 
for 30 -day readmission. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2013;68(7):805 -810. 
25. Hoyer EH, Needham DM, Atanelov L, Knox B, Friedman M, Brotman DJ. 
Protocol Template  Page 17 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 Association of impaired functional status at hospital discharge and subsequent 
rehospitalization. J Hosp Med. 2014;9(5):277 - 282. 
26. Nguyen HQ, Chu L, Amy Liu IL, et al. Associations between physical activity and 
30-day readmission risk in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Ann Am Thorac 
Soc. 2014;11(5):695 -705. 
27. Portegijs E, Buurman BM, Essink -Bot ML, Zwinderman AH, de Rooij SE. Failure to 
regain function at 3 months after acute hospital admission predicts 
institutionalization within 12 months in older patients. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 
2012;13(6):569.e561 -567. 
28. Brown M, Sinacore DR, Host HH. The relationship of strength to function in the 
older adult. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1995;50 Spec No:55 -59. 
29. Moreland JD, Richardson JA, Goldsmith CH, Clase CM. Muscle weakness and 
falls in older adults: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2004;52(7):1121 -1129.  
30. Rantanen T, Guralnik JM, Izmirlian G, et al. Association of muscle strength with 
maximum walking speed in disabled older women. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 
1998;77(4):299 -305. 
31. Skelton DA, Greig CA, Davies JM, Young A. Strength, power  and related 
functional ability of healthy people aged 65 -89 years. Age Ageing. 1994;23(5):371 -
377. 
32. Hasegawa R, Islam MM, Lee SC, Koizumi D, Rogers ME, Takeshima N. Threshold 
of lower body muscular strength necessary to perform ADL independently in 
community -dwelling older adults. Clin Rehabil. 2008;22(10 -11):902 -910. 
33. Telenius EW, Engedal K, Bergland A. Long -term effects of a 12 weeks high -
intensity functional exercise program on physical function and mental health in 
nursing home residents with dementia: a single blinded randomized controlled trial. 
BMC Geriatr. 2015;15:158.  
34. Mistry R, Rosansky J, McGuire J, McDermott C, Jarvik L. Social isolation predicts 
re-hospitalization in a group of older American veterans enrolled in the UPBEAT 
Program. Unified Psychogeriatric Biopsychosocial Evaluation and Treatment. Int J 
Geriatr Psychiatry. 2001;16(10):950 -959. 
35. Picorelli AM, Pereira LS, Pereira DS, Felício D, Sherrington C. Adherence to 
exercise programs for older people is influenced by program characteristics and 
personal factors: a systematic review. J Physiother. 2014;60(3):151 -156. 
36. Cotten SR, Ford G, Ford S, Hale TM. Internet use and depression among retired 
older adults in the United States: a longitudinal analysis. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci 
Soc Sci. 2014;69(5):763 -771. 
37. Grant PM, Granat MH, Thow MK, Maclaren WM. Analyzing free -living physical 
activity of older adults in different environments using body -worn activity monitors. 
J Aging Phys Act. 2010;18(2):171 -184. 
38. Peiris CL, Taylor NF, Shields N. Additional Saturday allied health services 
increase habitual physical activity among patients receiving inpatient rehabilitation 
for lower limb orthopedic conditions: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2012;93(8):1365 -1370.  
39. Peiris C, Taylor N, Shields N. Patients receiving inpatient rehabilitation for lower 
limb orthopaedic conditions do much less physical activity than recommended in 
guidelines for healthy older adults: An observational study. Journal of 
physiotherapy. 2013;59:39 -44. 
40. Thompson DP, Arena SR, Riebe SD, Pescatello SL. ACSM’s new preparticipation 
Protocol Template  Page 18 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 health screening recommendations from ACSM’s guidelines for wxercise testing 
and prescription, ninth edition. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2013;12(4):215 -217. 
41. Falvey JR, Mangione KK, Stevens -Lapsley JE. Rethinking Hospital -Associated 
Deconditioning: Proposed Paradigm Shift. Phys Ther. 2015;95(9):1307 -1315.  
42. Freiberger E, Kemmler W, Siegrist M, Sieber C. Frailty and exercise interventions : 
Evidence and barriers for exercise programs. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 2016;49(7):606 -
611. 
43. Stevens -Lapsley JE, Loyd BJ, Falvey JR, et al. Progressive multi -component 
home -based physical therapy for deconditioned older adults following acute 
hospitalization: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2016;30(8):776 -
785. 
44. Gustavson AM, Malone DJ, Boxer RS, Forster JE, Stevens -Lapsley JE. Better 
Outcomes in Less Time: Application of High -Intensity Rehabilitation in a Skilled 
Nursing Facility. The Journal of Physical Therapy. in review.  
45. Fiatarone MA, Marks EC, Ryan ND, Meredith CN, Lipsitz LA, Evans WJ. High -
intensity strength training in nonagenarians. Effects on skeletal muscle. Jama. 
1990;263(22):3029 -3034.  
46. Seynnes O, Fiatarone Singh MA, Hue O, Pras P, Legros P, Bernard PL. 
Physiological and functional responses to low -moderate versus high -intensity 
progressive resistance training in frail elders. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2004;59(5):503 -509. 
47. Mangione KK, Craik RL, Palombaro KM, Tomlinson SS, Hofmann MT. Home -
based leg -strengthening exercise improves function 1 year after hip fracture: a 
randomized controlled study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58(10):1911 -1917.  
48. Gustavson AM, Stutzbach J, LeDoux C, Seidler K, Stevens -Lapsley JE. Therapist 
perspectives on implementation and maintenance of high -intensity rehabilitation in 
a skilled nursing facility. In preparation 2019.  
49. Horsley S, Schock G, Grona SL, et al. Use of real -time videoconferencing to 
deliver physical therapy services: A scoping review of published and emerging 
evidence. J Telemed Telecare. 2019:1357633x19854647.  
50. Hale-Gallardo JL, Kreider CM, Jia H, et al. Telerehabilitation for Rural Veterans: A 
Qualitative Assessment of Barriers and Facilitators to Implementation. J Multidiscip 
Healthc. 2020;13:559 -570. 
51. McDermott MM, Liu K, Guralnik JM, et al. Home -based walking exercise 
intervention in peripheral artery disease: a randomized clinical trial. Jama. 
2013;310(1):57 -65. 
52. Zanaboni P, Hoaas H, Aarøen Lien L, Hjalmarsen A, Wootton R. Long -term 
exercise maintenance in COPD via telerehabilitation: a two -year pilot study. J 
Telemed Telecare. 2017;23(1):74 -82. 
53. Tabak M, Brusse -Keizer M, van der Valk P, Hermens H, Vollenbroek -Hutten M. A 
telehealth program for self -management of COPD exacerbations and promotion of 
an active lifestyle: a pilot randomized controlled trial. International journal of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 2014;9:935 -944. 
54. De Greef KP, Deforche BI, Ruige JB, et al. The effects of a pedometer -based 
behavioral modification program with telephone support on physical activity and 
sedentary behavior in type 2 diabetes patients. Patient Educ Couns. 
2011;84(2):275 -279. 
55. (VA) DoVA. About VHA. https://www.va.gov/health/aboutvha.asp. Published 2019. 
Accessed August 27, 2020.  
Protocol Template  Page 19 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 56. King AC, Ahn DK, Oliveira BM, Atienza AA, Castro CM, Gardner CD. Promoting 
physical activity through hand -held computer technology. American journal of 
preventive medicine. 2008;34(2):138 -142. 
57. Müller AM, Khoo S, Morris T. Text Messaging for Exercise Promotion in Older 
Adults From an Upper - Middle -Income Country: Randomized Controlled Trial. J 
Med Internet Res. 2016;18(1):e5.  
58. Kim BH, Glanz K. Text messaging to motivate walking in older African Americans: 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44(1):71 -75. 
59. Tabak M, op den Akker H, Hermens H. Motivational cues as real -time feedback for 
changing daily activity behavior of patients with COPD. Patient Educ Couns. 
2014;94(3):372 -378. 
60. Banbury A, Nancarrow S, Dart J, Gray L, Parkinson L. Telehealth Interventions 
Delivering Home -based Support Group Videoconferencing: Systematic Review. J 
Med Internet Res. 2018;20(2):e25.  
61. Robertson B, Harding KE. Outcomes with individual versus group physical therapy 
for treating urinary incontinence and low back pain: a systematic review and meta -
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
2014;95(11):2187 -2198.  
62. Allen KD, Bongiorni D, Bosworth HB, et al. Group Versus Individual Physical 
Therapy for Veterans With Knee Osteoarthritis: Randomized Clinical Trial. Phys 
Ther. 2016;96(5):597 -608. 
63. Dracup K, Moser DK, Marsden C, Taylor SE, Guzy PM. Effects of a 
multidimensional cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program on psychosocial function. 
Am J Cardiol. 1991;68(1):31 -34. 
64. Puhan MA, Gimeno -Santos E, Cates CJ, Troosters T. Pulmonary rehabilitation 
following exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2016;12(12):Cd005305.  
65. Marton K, Kanas N. Telehealth Modalities for Group Therapy: Comparisons to In -
Person Group Therapy. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy. 
2016;66(1):145 -150. 
66. Burkow T, Vognild L, Johnsen E, Bratvold A. Promoting exercise training and 
physical activity in daily life: a feasibility study of a virtual group intervention for 
behaviour change in COPD. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making. 
2018;18(1).  
67. Marziali E. E -Health Program for Patients with Chronic Disease. Telemedicine and 
e-Health.  2009;15(2):176 -181. 
68.  Groll DL, To T, Bombardier C, Wright JG. The development of a comorbidity index 
with physical function as the outcome.  J Clin Epidemiol.  2005; 58(6):595 –602. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.10.018.  
69. Pendlebury ST, Welch SJ, Cuthbertson FC, Mariz J, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. 
Telephone assessment of cognition after transient ischemic attack and stroke: 
modified telephone interview of cognitive status and telephone Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment versus face -to-face Montreal Cognitive Assessment and 
neuropsychological battery. Stroke. 2013;44(1):227 -229. 
70. Bulley C, Donaghy M, Payne A, Mutrie N. A critical review of the validity of 
measuring stages of change in relation to exercise and moderate physical activity. 
Critical Public Health. 2007;17(1):17 -30. 
71. Fritz S, Lusardi M. White paper: “Walking speed: the sixth vital sign”. J Geriatr 
Phys Ther. 2009;32(2):2 - 5. 
Protocol Template  Page 20 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 
 
 72. Rikli RE, Jones CJ. Development and validation of criterion -referenced clinically 
relevant fitness standards for maintaining physical independence in later years. 
Gerontologist. 2013;53(2):255 -267. 
73. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression 
severity measure. J Gen Intern Med. 2001;16(9):606 -613. 
74. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing 
generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1092 -
1097.  
75. Roque NA, Boot WR. A new tool for assessing mobile device proficiency in older 
adults: the mobile device proficiency questionnaire. J Appl Gerontol. 
2018;37(2):131 -156. 
76. Berlin JE, Storti KL, Brach JS. Using activity monitors to measure physical activity 
in free -living conditions. Phys Ther. 2006;86(8):1137 -1145.  
77. Yates T, Davies M, Gorely T, Bull F, Khunti  K. Effectiveness of a pragmatic 
education program designed to promote walking activity in individuals with 
impaired glucose tolerance: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. 
2009;32(8):1404 -1410.  
78. Geraedts H, Zijlstra A, Bulstra SK, Stevens M, Zijlstra W. Effects of remote 
feedback in home -based physical activity interventions for older adults: a 
systematic review. Patient Educ Couns. 2013;91(1):14 -24. 
79. Geraedts H, Zijlstra A, Bulstra SK, Stevens M, Zijlstra W. Effects of remote 
feedback in home -based physical activity interventions for older adults: a 
systematic review. Patient Educ Couns. 2013;91(1):14 - 24. 
80. Wenger NK, Froelicher ES, Smith LK, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation as secondary 
prevention. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research and National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute. Clin Pract Guidel Quick Ref Guide Clin. 1995(17):1 -23. 
81.  
References  
 
1. Bassuk SS, Glass TA, Berkman LF. Social disengagement and incident cognitive 
decline in community -dwelling elderly persons. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(3):165 -
173. 
2. Resnick B, Jenkins LS. Testing the reliability and validity of the Self -Efficacy for 
Exercise scale. Nurs Res. 2000;49(3):154 -159. 
3. Rikli RE, Jones CJ. Development and validation of criterion -referenced clinically 
relevant fitness standards for maintaining physical independence in later years. 
Gerontologist. 2013;53(2):255 -267. 
82.  