Exparel RCT TSA Protocol 24MAR2020   Page 1 of 3 
 Randomized Clinical Trial of Exparel vs Pain Pump for Post -operative Pain Control after Total Shoulder 
Arthroplasty  
 
INTRODUCTION  
Routine anesthetic care for patients undergoing a Total Shoulder Arthroplasty  (TSA)  at our institution 
includes the implantation of a pain pump.  A pain pump is used to allow pain control in the days after a 
TSA. Anec dotally patients complain of breakthrough pain the night after their surgery when the local 
anesthetic administered during  surgery starts wearing off  [Abdallah] .  
 
Exparel ( Bupivacain e liposom e injectable suspensi on), a sustained -release preparation of bupivaca ine 
that is FDA approved for administration at the surgical site , may provide a lower -cost alternative to a 
pain pump , as it has the potential for activity up to 72 hours after surgery [ Davidovitch, Golf, Haas ]. Two 
prior randomized clinical controlled trials have compared Ex parel to an intraoperative int erscalene bloc k 
and showed improved pain scores and less opioid con sumption at 24 hours after surgery.  There have 
been no studies comparing Exparel to a pain pump and evaluated the outcomes  beyond 24 hours after 
surgery.  
 
The primary objective of this study is to determine if Exparel leads to better pain scores at 24, 48  and 73 
hours after TSA compared to a pain pump.  Secondary objectives are (1)  to determine if patients on 
Exparel use less narcotics and (2) have earlier return of functional use of the involved arm after surgery 
compared to the pain pump .  
 
METHODS  
Sample size:  
Based on prior studies on anesthetics for TSA, the mean worst pain score in the 24 hours after surgery 
was 5.4, based on a 0 to 10 scale. To detect a change of 2 points, alpha of 0.05, beta of 0.80, a sample 
size of 51 subjects in each group will be required.  To account for drop -outs, a total of 60 subjects in 
each arm will be enrolled.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 Patients undergoing unilateral primary TS A or reverse TSA  
 Indication for surgery is osteoarthritis , rotator cuff arthropathy or massive ir reparable 
rotator cuff tears  
 Surgery performed by the Principal Investigator (Dr. Krupp)  
 Anesthesia administered by  Co-Principal Investigator (Dr. Perkins)  
 Willing and able to sign an Informed Consent  
Exclusion  criteria  
 Indication for surgery is fracture  
 Comorbid psychiatric diagnosis requiring therapy and/or medication  except anxiety or 
depression  
 Comorbid chronic pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic dystrophy, fibromyalgia ) 
 Has hepatic disease  
 On workers compensation/disability/litigation  
 Known adverse reaction to medications to be administere d 
Exparel RCT TSA Protocol 24MAR2020   Page 2 of 3 
   On long -acting narcotic pain medication  (including extended release narcotic pain 
medications and methadone)  
 Home Oxygen requirement whether PRN or scheduled.  
 Contralateral Phrenic Nerve paralysis / incompetence.  
 BMI ≥ 50  
  
Randomization will be a varied blocked randomization with blocks of 12, 15 and 18 using sealed 
envelopes  
 
Treatment arms:  
Control:  Pain catheter based pain control.   Subject will receive an interscalene block with Ropivicaine 
0.5% (20cc), and th en a pain pump attached in the PACU infusing at 4cc/hr.   The patient will go home 
with that device until it runs out.  
Interventional:  Single shot Exparel 10cc (133mg) mixed with 10cc of 0.5% Bupivicaine  
 
Both arms will receive the same multimodal analgesia  medications preoperatively.  Celebrex 400mg PO, 
Gabapentin 600mg PO, Tylenol 1 gram PO, unless contraindicated.  
 
Variables collected  
Pre-operative  
Age 
Sex 
Race/Ethnicity  
Educational Level  
Height  
Weight  
Side of Arthroplasty  
Current pain medication  
Pain (NRS, 10 to 10)  
ASES  
SANE  
Work status  
Annual income  
Days off work  
 
In Hospital  
ASA score  
Local anesthesia start time  
Local anesthesia end time  
Operative time  
Length of hospital stay  
Cumulative  MMEs consumed at  24, 48 and 72 hours  
Worst pain in past 24 hours at 24, 48 and 72 hours post -op 
Duration of sleep  
Exparel RCT TSA Protocol 24MAR2020   Page 3 of 3 
 Intraoperative complications  
Postoperative complications  
Pump failure (Yes/No) queried at 24, 48 and 72 hours  
Catheter migration (Yes/No) queried at 24, 48 and 72 hours  
Functionality of surgical arm  at 24, 48 and 72 hours  
Unable to use, Only light activity , Able to do some activities, Able to do most activit ies, Slight 
restrictions  only, Normal  
 
Six weeks post -operative  
Current pain  
ASES  
SANE  
Complications  
 
Three months post -operative  
Readmissions  
Visits to the Emergency Room  
Total costs for Index surgery and all readmissions and Emergency Room Visits  
Date returned to work  
 
 
Statistics : 
Baseline data will be compared  
ANCOVA or GEE  to examine differences in worst pain scores over 24 hours over time b etween the two 
groups (among the three groups)  