Title: Flipped Classroom for Weight Management 
NCT Number: n/a 
Date: 5/18/2022 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22  Page 2 of 8University of Kansas Medical Center   
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Version date: 5/18/22  
Principal Investigator: Joseph E. Donnelly  
Study Title: Flipped Classroom for Weight Management .  
Co- Investigator(s): Kameron Suire,  Mary Hastert , Steve Herrmann . 
I. Purpose, Background and Rationale
A.Aim and Hypotheses
The pedagogy of weight management education has received little investigation, despite health
education being considered an essential aspect of weight loss interventions. We propose a 24 -week
study in which adults will engage in weekly, group weight management classes via Zoom utilizing the
flipped classroom teaching methodology. All participants will receive a standard weight management
diet and exercise prescription. The aims of this study are to:
1.Determine the feasibility and effectiveness of a 24 -week, weight management intervention in
adults (ages 18 -75) for improving lifestyle habits and weight reduction
2.Measure c hanges in  weight, physical activity, and behavioral outcomes across a 24 -week
weight management intervention
B.Background and Significance
There is an overall lack of pedagogy (i.e., approaches to teaching and learning) behind weight
management programs. We have con ducted multiple searches in NIH RePORTER and PubMed
and have found no studies on pedagogy  for weight  management  education,  despite  educational
content  being  a staple in  weight  management  interventions  and programs  (Franz et al., 2007;
Maula et al., 2020) . Investigation  of pedagogy  in weight  management  education  is virtually
absent  in the literature  and it is warranted  to investigate given the rising obesity epidemic.
An educational  model  used  in academic  institutions,  deemed  the active  learning model, may
serve as a feasible educational model used in weight management interventions. In a
traditional education model, the educator reviews educational materials during class times, then
the students independently complete skills -based homework assignments outsi de of class
(Ayaz & Sekerci, Oct 2015; Mayasari et al., Mar 2018; Persky & McLaughlin, 2017) . In cont rast,
the active learning model requires students  to independently  review  educational  material  before
class,  and class  time with the educator is spent engaging in group and individual skills -based
activities and problem -solving assignments  (Ayaz & Sekerci, Oct 2015; Mayasari et al., Mar
2018; Persky & McLaughlin, 2017) . The the oretical basis for the development of active learning
is to elicit higher cognitive learning, according to the revised Bloom’s taxonomy  (Bloom et al.,
1956; Krathwohl, 2002)  and shift independent  student  time to passive  learning  (remembering
and understanding) and collaborative student and educator time to active learning (applying,
analyzing, evaluating, and creating)  (Krathwohl, 2002) . When utilized in academic institutions,
the active learning model has been shown to increase student test scores, learning,
engagement, and skill acquisition across a variety of health and science - related topics
(McLaughlin et al., 2014; Persky & McLaughlin, 2017; Simpson & Richards, 2015) .
Investigators believed mechanisms behind th e improvement in student learning were
ownership of learning and flexibility  (Simpson & Richards, 2015) , self -efficacy and preparation
(Alt, 2015; McLaughlin et al., 2014) , and self-awareness and problem -solving  (Freeman et al.,
2014) . Previous research shows enhanced weight loss with improved self -efficacy  (Nezami et
al., 2016)  and self -awareness via self -monitoring  (Painter et al., May 2017)  in adults du ring a
weight management intervention, supporting the inference that an educational model with
outcomes which enhance student learning in academic  institutions  may be an effective
pedagogy  for weight  management  education.
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 3 of 8
  
 
  
 
C. Rationale  
Establishing effective weight management education techniques may help improve intervention adherence 
and improve lifestyle habits that can assist with long -term weight reduction.   
 
II. Research Plan  and Design  
 
A. Study Objectives  
The purpose of this study is to examine the feasibility and initial efficacy of a pedagogy applied in a  weight 
management intervention for adults with overweight/obesity.  
 
B. Study T ype and Design  
This study is a 24 -week, single -arm trial investigating the f easibility of a flipped classroom behavioral 
intervention for weight management. We will recruit up to 30 adults ages 18+ with a body mass index 
greater than or equal to 25 kg/m2 to participate in weekly, 1 -hour group weight management education 
delivered remotely via Zoom with a trained health educator. Participants will receive a dietary prescription 
of 1200 -1500 calories/day (5 portion -controlled meals and 5+ servings of fruits and vegetables) and 
exercise prescription of 150 -300 minutes exercise/week. A dditionally, participants will be asked to self -
monitor diet and exercise adherence weekly. Feasibility outcomes will be collected at baseline, 12 -weeks, 
and 24 -weeks.  
 
C. Subject C riteria  
Inclusion:  1) Body Mass Index greater than or equal to 25 kg/m2. 2) Age: 18 -75 yrs. 3) Wireless internet 
connection in the home . 4) Ability to engage in moderate to vigorous exercise.  Exclusion : 1) Unable to 
commit to weekly group education. 2) Food allergy/intolerance that would hinder ability to adhere to dietary 
prescri ption.   
 
D. Specific methods and techniques used throughout the study   
 
1. Intervention:  
Virtual , group instruction:  Participants  will be complete  a total of 24, 1-hour group  education sessions 
with a trained health educator. The group size will be 15 -18 participants with continuous recruitment 
until reaching a total of 30 participants. Sessions will be delivered virtually (Zoom ®). Prior to each 
group meeting, participants will be provided hard copy and audio/visual versions (podcasts and 
YouTube®) of the lesson to be covered in the upcoming meeting. group session will follow a pre -
determined structure: group discussion, review of  adherence, 5 to 10 minutes of physical activity, and 
an active learning -based education. Thus, active learning -based education will include: case vignettes, 
group debates/discussions,  think -pair-share  activities,  gamification  of health -related  topics, cre ation of 
meal and physical activity, problem -solving barriers to a healthy diet and physical activity, and hands -
on worksheets.  
i. Diet Prescription.  Participants will receive a diet prescription of 1200 -1500 kilocalories 
(kcals), consisting of 5 portion -controlled meals [(PCMs); 3 shakes and 2 entrees], 5 
servings of fruits and vegetables, and zero -calorie beverages. All PCM shakes will be 
prescribed  from the company  Health  Management  Resources  (HMR),  consisting  of 100 
kcals  and 10g of protein/shake. PCM  entrees are available  either via  HMR or approved 
outside entrees for purchase at the grocery store as determined by the RD. Guidelines for  
the approved  outside  entrees  are <300  kcals,  <10g  sugar,  and <3g saturated  fat per PCM. 
Participants will be encouraged to consume at least 65 ounces of zero -calorie beverages 
per day. Adherence to the diet prescription will be monitored via weekly self -monitoring 
sheets submitted  to the RD by email  prior to the educational  session  for review  and 
feedback.  
ii. Exercise Prescription. Participants will be asked to engage in 45 minutes of moderate - to-
vigorous exercise 5 days per week or 50,000 steps per week. A pedometer will be available 
for purchase if desired, but participants may use personal step co unting devices (e.g., 
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 4 of 8
  
 
 phone apps, watches). Adherence to the prescribed MVPA and steps will be assessed using 
weekly self -monitoring sheets submitted to the RD via email prior to each session.  
b. Self-Monitoring of Health Behaviors:  Once a month (Baseline, Mo nth 1, Month 2, Month 3) the 
participant and their caregiver will meet with the health educator via the tablet computer using 
Zoom video conferencing for approximately 20 minutes to discuss individual healthy lifestyle 
goals related to nutrition and physic al activity  and review Fitbit data .  Health educators will 
discuss with participants any further adaptations/modifications needed to help participants 
reach their goals.  
 
2. Schedule of Evaluations  
 
 Screening Visit:  
(Day -30 to Day -1) Baseline  
(Day -30 to Day-
1): Weekly  End of Study 
(Week 24)  
Informed Consent  X    
Enrollment  X    
Anthropometrics  X  X  
Health History   X  X 
Quality of Life   X  X 
Self-Efficacy   X  X 
Diet Behaviors   X  X 
Session Attendance    X  
Diet Adherence    X  
Exercise Adherence    X  
 
3. Description of Evaluations  
 
a. Anthropometrics (Weight, Height, Waist Circumference ): Participants will be weighed at the 
KU Weight Management Clinic location in Kirmayer Fitness Center on the main KU Medical 
Center campus. Anthropometrics will be collected in a private room by a registered nurse prior 
to the participant seeing a clinic physician. Weight will be collected to the nearest 0.1 kg. 
Standing height will be measured using a stadiometer. Body Mass Index will be calc ulated as 
weight (kg) divided by height (cm) squared. Waist circumference will be measured at the 
midline level between the inferior margin of the ribs and the superior border of the iliac crest.   
 
b. Health History : A health history developed by the study te am will be completed online via the 
REDCap database. Questions include a comprehensive assessment of previous weight loss 
attemps, current and previous medical conditions, current medications, and previous medical 
procedures.  
  
c. Quality of Life : Quality of life will be assessed using the Short Form 36 Health Survey 
Questionnaire (SF -36). The SF -36 is a validated and commonly utilized survey (α > 0.85) that 
relies on self -report of 8 domains: limitations in physical activities because of health pro blems, 
limitations in social activities because of physical or emotional problems, limitations in usual 
role activities because of physical health problems, bodily pain, general mental health, 
limitations in usual role activities because of emotional probl ems, vitality, and general health 
perceptions  (Brazier et al., 1992) .   
 
d. Self-Efficacy : Self-efficacy will be assessed using two tools: the Health Eating and Weight 
Self-Efficacy (HEWSE) scale  and the Self -Efficacy for Exercise (SEE) scale. Both surveys will 
be completed at baseline and post -intervention via REDCap. The HEWSE is an 11 -item scale 
to measure heatlhy eating and weight -selficacy with good internal consistency (α > 0.80) and 
test-re-test reliability (r = 0.72)  (Wilson -Barlow et al., 2014) . The SEE is a 9 -item scale that 
measures confidence engaging in exercise 3 times per week for 20 minutes  (α = 0.9) (Resnick 
& Jenkins, 2000) .  
 
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 5 of 8
  
 
 e. Diet Behaviors : Diet behaviors will be assessed using the Eating Attitudes Test, 26 -item 
version (EAT -26) completed via REDCap survey. The EAT -26 is a self -report of general and 
risky eating behaviours as a screening measure for disordered eating behaviors  (Garner et al., 
1982)  that clinicians can use as a screening tool prior to engaging in a lifestyle intervention.   
  
f. Session Attendance : Attendance to the group education sessions will be measured weekly 
and evaluated by the health educator. Attendance records will be entered into the study 
REDCap database.  
 
g. Diet Adherence:  Adherence to the diet prescription will be measured weekly via participant 
self-report. Participants will report daily total number of shakes, number of entrees, servings of 
fruit and vegetables, and days o ff plan. The self -monitoring sheet will be submitted via email to 
the health educator prior to each group session. The health educator will provide individual 
feedback based on self -reported diet adherence.  
 
h. Exercise Adherence:  Adherence to the exercise prescription will be measured weekly via 
participant self -report. Participants will report daily minutes of moderate to vigorous physical 
activity and steps . The self -monitoring sheet will be submitted via email to the health educ ator 
prior to each group session  and individual feedback will be provided.  
 
F. Risk/ Benefit Assessment  
Risks to the participant from participation in this study are minimal. Participants will be cleared by a board -
certified obesity physician to participate i n moderate to vigorous exercise and follow the diet prescription. 
Participants will be asked to gradually increase their exercise by 15 -20 minutes per week . The benefits to 
the participants are the well -established benefits of weight reduction, including r educed risk of chronic 
disease and improved health outcomes . The information obtained from this study will increase our 
understanding regarding pedagogy for weight management and its impact on intervention components, 
such as adherence . The risks to participants in this study are minimal while the benefits are large .  
 
G. Location Where Study Will Be Performed  
Research activities will take place at the University of Kansas Medical Center weight management clinic  
located in Kirmayer Fitness  Center . All data will be saved on a KUMC redcap database, and all study 
related documents will be saved on a KUMC P -Drive.   
 
H. Assessment of Subject Safety and Development of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
1. Elements of the plan include:  
a. Persons/groups who will review the data (study team; independent safety monitor, data 
monitoring committee or formal DSMB): Study Team  
b. Data/events that will be reviewed: Subject accrual (adherence to protocol regarding 
demographics, inclusion/exclusion) an d Adverse Event Rates  
c. Frequency of review: Monthly  
d. Types of analyses to be performed: Means  
e. Safety -related triggers that would cause the PI to stop or alter the study: The most likely 
scenario indicating the need to stop the investigation would be a failu re to recruit or deliver the 
intervention as planned. Another issue relating to stopping rules for this trial would be new 
information. It is unlikely that any new information will become available during this trial that 
would necessitate stopping the tria l 
2. Data on adverse events will be reported monthly to the PI throughout this trial. We anticipate that most 
adverse events will be mild in nature and will allow a complete return to the same activities after a 
short period of time; that is, later that day o r a day or two later.   
3. We anticipate most adverse events (if not all) will allow a complete return to the same activities after a 
short period of time; that is, later that day or a day or two later. However, if a serious adverse event 
that prohibits parti cipation moving forward, the participant will be terminated from the intervention.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 6 of 8
  
 
 Measurement and Reporting of Subject Accrual, Adherence to Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Review of the rate of subject accrual and adherence to inclusion/exclusion crite ria will occur monthly to 
assure that participants meet eligibility criteria.  
 
Measurement and Reporting of Adverse Events  
Data on adverse events will be reported monthly to the PI throughout this trial. We anticipate that most 
adverse events will be mild  in nature and will allow a complete return to the same activities after a short 
period of time; that is, later that day or a day or two later.   
 
Measurement and Reporting of Participant Compliance to the Treatment Protocol  
Compliance to the program will be monitored by attendance to the group sessions.  Compliance to the 
intervention protocol will be reviewed monthly by the PI.  
 
Stopping Rules  
We believe this trial conveys minimal risk. It is unlikely that any new information will become avai lable 
during this trial that would necessitate stopping the trial.   
 
III. Subject Participation  
 
A. Recruitment  
We will recruit adults through the KU Weight Management clinic at KU Medical Center. Adults are primarily 
referred to the clinic via KU Health System physicians and contacted via phone or HIPAA -compliant 
messaging in their medical record to schedule an ini tial appointment with a clinic physician. The physician 
will conduct  a comprehensive evaluation of the patient health status , including pertitent medical history. A 
study coordinator will assist with explaining a basic overview of  intervention components in-person to 
evaluate initial interest. If interested, potential participants will participate in group Zoom® sessions with a 
study coordinator to obtain consent.  
 
B. Screening Interview/ Questionnaire :  
The pre -screening for ability to participate in moderate  to vigorous exercise and follow the diet prescription 
will be completed in the initial appointment with the clinic physician. Following the physician appointment, 
participants will be screened for other eligibility (e.g., commitment to study components, a ccess to wifi) by 
a study coordinator.  
 
C. Informed Consent Process And Timing Of Obtaining Of Consent  
Mary Hastert will obtain written informed consent.  Remote video chat sessions (Zoom) will be scheduled 
with participants who are deemed to be initially eligible to participate. This video chat session will provide 
an opportunity to describe the project in detail, answer questions, verify eligibility, and t o obtain consent 
and assent. Prior to the consenting session, the participant will be sent the consent form and cover letter 
through The University of Kansas Medical Center’s (KUMC) secure email system. The study team will use 
the “share screen” option on Zoom to walk through each section of the consent document while noting 
questions that arise and answering these questions fully. Participants who are willing to participate in the 
study will sign and date the consent and/or assent forms electronically via REDCap. 
Participants/caregivers will be given unlimited time to make the decision on whether to participate. The 
study team member who conducted the consent meeting will also sign and date after reviewing the signed 
consent forms and verifying completeness . Study staff will provide the participant with a fully signed 
consent form for their records.  
 
 
D. Alternatives to Participation  
Participants may join other weight management  programs . 
 
E. Costs to Subjects  
There will be no costs to the participant or their family for this study.  
 
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 7 of 8
  
 
 F. How New Information Will Be Conveyed To The Study Subject And How It Will Be Documented  
New information will be told to the participants before, during, or after their participation in the study by 
email that will be sent to all participants . 
 
G. Payment, Including a Prorated Plan for Payment  
Participants will not receive any payment for their participation in the study.  
 
H. Payment for a Research -Related Injury  
There will not be any payment for a research -related injury.  
 
IV. Data Co llection and Protection  
A. Data Management and Security : Data base creation and management will be performed by experienced 
research staff. Research staff that enters data will be supervised and will be blinded to condition. The PI 
and study coordinator will have access to study data. We have extensive experienc e in data entry, data 
checking, and quality control from previous and current projects.  The primary database will be maintained 
through KUMC’s Redcap. Additional data (Fitbit Data) will be maintained a KUMC P -Drive. Prior to transfer 
of data files to non -study personnel (i.e., for statistical analysis), the files will be de -identified. Data will be 
categorized and entered into separate tables within a database, all linked by participant number. All key 
personnel have current Human Subjects/HIPPA certificat es. Physical files will be stored in a locked filed 
cabinet, in a locked office, in our space in the KUMC endowment building suite 100.  
 
B. Procedures to Protect Subject Confidentiality  
Confidentiality for participants may be at risk during data collection, entry, and storage. However, we will 
use a secure, HIPAA compliant system (i.e., REDCap) to serve as the study database to store all the 
demographic information that may lead to subject identification. The output from the Fitbit will be stored in 
the KUMC protected drive and only identified by a unique participation identification number to maintain 
confidentiality. All paper records will be kept in a locked file cabinet and information will not be released 
without written permission of the participant, exc ept as necessary for monitoring by the KUMC IRB  
 
C. Quality Assurance / Monitoring : At logical time points, the data will be checked for outliers and 
normalcy. Questionable data (e.g., >3 standard deviations from the mean) will be re -checked for accuracy 
and re-entered if necessary.  
 
V.     Data Analysis and Reporting  
 
A. Statistical and Data Analysis  
The effectiveness of the intervention will be assessed by estimating a confidence interval for w eight  loss 
percent  at 3 months. If the 95% CI includes 5% and the observed weight loss exceeds 2.5%, we will 
consider that the clinical effectiveness of the intervention  is plausible and will seek to confirm this in a 
larger trial. We evaluated the operating characteristics  of this decision rule through simulation with n = 36 
and assuming 15% attrition. When the true weight loss percentage is at least 5% we will have a 97.5% 
probability of proceeding, while if the true weight loss was not clinically significant, e.g., weight  loss of 4% 
or 2.5% we would have a 57% and 1% chance of proceeding respectively. This will ensure that we do not 
proceed when the true effectiveness is much less than has been determined clinically relevant. We will 
compare our observed recruitment, atten dance, and adherence to observed values from our traditional 
weight management program  (88 ± 5% recruitment, 75 ±  8% attendance, 80 ± 3% adherence) and 
previous studies utilizing the same diet plan, we expect to see similar rates in this intervention and w ill 
evaluate any characteristics of this trial which led to lower than expected rates for potential modification for 
a follow -up trial. The recruitment goal is set at 3 0 participants to account for 10 -15% attrition and statistical 
analysis of a sample size  of at least 24 participants. All statistical analyses will be conducted using SAS 
software version 9.4 or higher with a significance level set at 0.05.  
B. Outcome  
We except to know the feasibility of the intervention  and determine if we should apply for external funding 
to complete an adequately powered trial.  
 
 
 
 
Flipped Classroom for Weight Management, 5 .27.22   Page 8 of 8
  
 
 C. Study results to participants  
Study results will not be sent to the participants.  
 
D. Publication Plan  
The research results will be presented at a conference an d published in a peer -reviewed journal upon 
completion of the pilot study.  
 
VI. References  
 
 
 
Alt, D. (2015). Assessing the contribution of a constructivist learning environment to academic self -efficacy in higher education. 
Learn Environ Res , 18(1), 47 -67. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10984 -015-9174 -5  
Ayaz, M., & Sekerci, H. (Oct 2015). The effects of the constructivisit learning approach on student's academic achievement: a  
meta -analysis study. Turkish Online J Educ Technol , 14(4), 143 -156.  
Bloom, B., Englehart, M., Furst, E., Hill, W., & Kra thwohl, D. (1956). Taxonomy of emotional objectives: the classification of 
education goals. Handbook I: cognitive domain.  Longmans, Green.  
Brazier, J., Harper, R., Jones, N., O'Cathain, A., Thomas, K., Usherwood, T., & Westlake, L. (1992). Validating the SF-36 health 
survey questionnaire: new outcome measure for primary care. BMJ , 305(6846), 160 -164.  
Franz, M. J., VanWormer, J. J., Crain, A. L., Boucher, J. L., Histon, T., Caplan, W., Bowman, J. D., & Pronk, N. P. (2007). 
Weight -loss outcomes: a systemati c review and meta -analysis of weight -loss clinical trials with a minimum 1 -year 
follow -up. J Am Diet Assoc , 107(10), 1755 -1767. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2007.07.017   
Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L.,  McDonough, M., Smith, M. K., Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H., & Wenderoth, M. P. (2014). Active learning 
increases student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 111(23), 8410 -8415. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319030111   
Garner, D. M., Olmsted, M. P., Bohr, Y., & Garfinkel, P. E. (1982). The eating attitudes test: psychometric features and clin ical 
correlates. Psychol Med , 12(4), 871 -878. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291700049163   
Krathwohl, D. (2002). A revision of bloom's taxonomy: an overview. Theory Pract , 41(4), 212 -218.  
Maula, A., Kai, J., Woolley, A. K., Weng, S., Dhalwani, N., Griffiths, F. E., Khunti, K., & Kendrick, D. (2020). Educational 
weight loss interventions in obese and overweight adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Diabet Med , 37(4), 623 -635. https://doi.org/10.1111/dme.14193   
Mayasari, T., Handhika, J., Huriawati, F., Sasono, M., Kurniadi, E., Purwandari, P., & Candra Yusro, A. (Mar 2018). A meta -
analysis of constructivist approach on students' achievement. J Edu Train Stud , 3(2).  
McLaughlin, J. E., Roth, M. T., Glatt, D. M., Gharkholonarehe, N., Davidson, C. A., Griffin, L. M., Esserman, D. A., & Mumper , 
R. J. (2014). The flipped classroom: a cour se redesign to foster learning and engagement in a health professions school. 
Acad Med , 89(2), 236 -243. https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000000086   
Nezami, B. T., Lang, W., Jakicic, J. M., Davi s, K. K., Polzien, K., Rickman, A. D., Hatley, K. E., & Tate, D. F. (2016). The effect 
of self -efficacy on behavior and weight in a behavioral weight -loss intervention. Health Psychol . 
https://doi.org/10.1 037/hea0000378   
Painter, S. L., Ahmed, R., Hill, J. O., Kushner, R. F., Lindquist, R., Brunning, S., & Margulies, A. (May 2017). What matters  in 
weight loss? An in -depth analysis of self -monitoring. J Med Internet Res , 19(5). https://doi.org/doi : 10.2196/jmir.7457  
Persky, A., & McLaughlin, J. (2017). The flipped classroom - from theory to practice in health professional education. Am J 
Pharm Educ , 81(6).  
Resnick, B., & Jenkins, L. (2000). Testing the reliability and val idity of the self -efficacy for exercise scale. Nurs Res , 49.  
Simpson, V., & Richards, E. (2015). Flipping the classroom to teach population health: increasing the relevance. Nurse Educ 
Pract , 15(3), 162 -167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nepr.2014.12.001   
Wilson -Barlow, L., Hollins, T., & Clopton, J. (2014). Construction and validation of the health eating and weight self -efficacy 
(HEWSE) scale. Eat Behav , 15(3), 490 -492.  
 