Signed copy on file at IRB                v. 11/15/13  New York State Psychiatric Institute  
Institutional Review Board  
 
May 6 , 2019  
 
 
To:  Dr. Michael Grunebaum  
From :  Dr. Edward Nunes, Co -Chair  
  Dr. Agnes Whitaker, Co -Chair  
      
Subject : Approval Notice : Continuation Expedited per 45CFR46.110(b)(1 )(f)Category 8(c)  
 
    
Your protocol # 6598  entitled:   KETAMINE VS MIDAZOLAM : TESTING RAPID  RELIEF OF SUICIDE RISK 
IN DEPRESSION   Protocol version date 05/06 /2019  has been approved by the New York State 
Psychiatric Institute - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board 
from June 4 , 2019 to June 3 , 2020 .  
 
Consent requirements:  
      √  Not applicable: Data Analysis  Only  
    45CFR46.11 6 (d) waiver  of consent for secondary data analysis  
       Signature by the person(s) obtaining consent is required to document the consent process  
      Documentation of an independent assessment of the participant’s capacity to consent is also 
required.  
Approved for recruitment of subjects who lack capacity to consent :  No  Yes     
 
Field Monitoring Requirements:   Routine  Special: ___________________  
 
 
  Only copies of consent documents that are currently approved by the IRB may be used to obtain 
consent for participation in this study.  
  A progress report and application for continuing review is required 2 months prior to the 
expiration date of IRB app roval.  
  Changes to this research may not be initiated without the review and approval of the IRB except 
when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to participants.  
  All serious and/or unanticipated problems or events involving risks to subjects or others must be 
reported immediately to the IRB.  Please refer to the PI -IRB website at http://irb.nyspi.org  for 
Adverse Event Reportin g Procedures and additional reporting requirements.    
 
Cc: RFMH Business Office (NIMH: 1 R01 MH096784 -01A1 ) 
 
 
 
 
EN/AW /kpz4alw 
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 1 of 26
Protocol Title:
Ketamine vs Midazolam: Testing Rapid  
Relief of Suicide Risk in  Depression
Protocol Number:
6598
First Approval:
06/22/2012
Expiration Date:
06/03/2020Version Date:
05/06/2019
Clinic:
MIND Clinic
Contact Principal Investigator:
Michael Grunebaum, MD
Email: mfg14@columbia.edu
Telephone: 646-774-7573Co-Investigator(s):
Steven Ellis,  PHD
J. John Mann, MD
Maria Oquendo, 
Barbara Stanley, PHD
Matthew Milak, MD
Research Chief:
J. John Mann, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI belong  to?
PsychiatryWithin the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
MIND
Unaffiliated Personnel
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 2 of 26
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Outside Investigators:  
None
 
Consultant:  
Vivek K. Moitra, MD
Associate Clinical Professor of Anesthesiology
Associate Medical Director, Surgical  ICU
Associate Program Director, Critical Care  Medicine Fellowship
Division of Critical Care, Columbia University College of Physicians and  Surgeons
 
 
 
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
Study only involves secondary data analysis or chart record  review  of data.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.The study was completed in 2017 and the  primary results paper was published in  2018. Currently only 
secondary data analysis for potential secondary publications is ongoing.
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator and other investigators made all required disclosures of financial  interest  in 
the study sponsor/product?Yes
Summary
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 3 of 26
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
NoHave there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
YesIs the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? No
Approved Sample and Progress
Approved sample size  
80Total number  of subjects studied since  first approval
80Have there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study completion estimates?
NoComments / additional information None
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Neuropsychological Evaluation
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Medication Trial
   Medication-Free  Period or Treatment  Washout
   Administration of Substance of Abuse
   Off-label  Use of Drug or Device
   Somatic Treatment  or Intervention
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 4 of 26
   Substance Users
   Inpatients
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract application is a pending review or a funding decisionSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNIMHGrant NameKetamine vs Midazolam: Testing Rapid  Relief  of Suicide Risk in Depression
Grant Number1 R01 MH096784-01A1
Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeRFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName institution(s)Columbia University
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
   Other Columbia University Medical  Center  Facilities
This protocol  describes research conducted  by the  PI at other facilities/locations
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 5 of 26
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
We propose a rigorous clinical trial in depressed patients with  moderate to  severe  suicidal  ideation  to test 
random assignment  to iv infusion  of ketamine  or midazolam control  followed by open continuation 
treatment with  antidepressant medication  plus supportive case management. The primary goal is to  test 
ketamine’s potential anti-suicidal effects versus a  similar  sedative  control  medication not known to reduce 
suicidal ideation. Exploratory aims  include  analysis of potential biological (salivary cortisol) and  neuro-
cognitive correlates as well as  systematic assessment of suicidal ideation and  behavior during continuation 
treatment. 
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and RationaleSuicide and suicide attempts cost an  estimated $33 billion annually in  the U.S. and  immeasurable  pain and
suffering. Most  suicidal  behavior is associated with a depressive disorder, yet medication guidelines for
suicidal patients are  virtually nonexistent. The evidence base is severely limited because suicidal patients
are excluded from  most antidepressant clinical trials. Several recent studies show rapid  improvement in
suicidal ideation, in as little as one hour,  in depressed patients after intravenous infusion of sub-anesthetic
ketamine, a glutamate  antagonist and commonly used anesthetic.  The improvement in  suicidal  ideation
appears to last several  days, however,  depression and suicidality are usually chronic, recurring conditions.
Establishing a  strong anti-suicidal signal for ketamine in  this high-risk population would support an
innovative intervention that could change  clinical  care for a patient  population  of public  health importance.
Exploratory assessment of suicidal ideation and behavior during continuation treatment could help  target
research on strategies  to sustain  the benefit of ketamine.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
To compare the  effect  of iv  ketamine vs. midazolam infusion on suicidal ideation in a double-blind RCT in
MDD during a  major  depressive episode (MDE) (N= 80) with moderate to severe  suicidal ideation (SSI
score =  4 or greater).  The study infusion will be given as add-on to  current  psychotropic  medication.
Patients will be  randomized to iv ketamine  (0.5 mg/kg) or midazolam (0.02 mg/kg) infusion. We
hypothesize that administration  of ketamine will produce greater improvement in suicidal ideation 
compared to  midazolam at  24 hours after  infusion.
An exploratory aim of the  study is to compare  cortisol awakening response  (CAR) between the two
treatment groups.  Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  (HPA) axis hyperactivity is associated with  cognitive
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 6 of 26
impairment and suicide risk. Glutamatergic and serotonergic systems are closely associated  with  HPA
activity. We will measure salivary  cortisol at baseline and Day 01 post-infusion  with 2 saliva samples
collected at each time point, the first immediately on waking and  the second 30 minutes  later. We
hypothesize CAR  magnitude will be lower on Day  01 after ketamine compared to  midazolam.
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Depressed adults with moderate to severe suicidal  ideation
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
80Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
115Age range of subject  population
18 - 65
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
We expect the following gender and  ethnic breakdown: Male  (40%);  Female (60%); White (67%); Black 
(24%); Hispanic (16%);  Asian (9%).
Description of subject populationThe goal is to recruit unipolar  depressed  patients  with  current Scale for Suicidal Ideation  (SSI) score  of 4 or 
greater, to result  in a sample with, overall, moderate to severe  suicidal ideation. Based on studies in our 
clinic, subjects  come from  the 5 boroughs of New York City and the nearby tri-state suburbs.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Patients are recruited through advertisements,  clinician referrals,  and the hospital inpatient and emergency 
services.How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
Subjects will be  approached/recruited by study research assistants  and psychiatrists.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Through local  media, internet, mailings to clinicians,  outreach  to the CPMC and  other local  emergency 
departments and clinical  facilities.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 7 of 26
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
YesDescribe concurrent research  involvement
MIND umbrella protocol, IRB #4815.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sampleKetamine/Midazolam MDDCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
INCLUSION METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT  
1. Unipolar,  major depressive episode  
(MDE), with 17-item HDRS score ≥ 16. 
Patients may be psychiatric medication- 
free, or if on psychiatric  medication,  not 
responding adequately given current MDE 
with suicidal ideation (See 2).DSM-IV criteria by SCID-I administered by 
trained assessors; Medication  history;  
Clinical evaluation; HDRS.
2. Moderate to severe suicidal ideation as 
indicated by a Beck Scale  for Suicidal 
Ideation (SSI) score of 4 or greater.Beck Scale for Suicidal  Ideation (SSI) and 
clinical assessment.  
3. 18-65 years old Interview  
Clinical interview, informed consent.
 4. Patients will only be enrolled  if they agree 
to voluntary admission to an inpatient 
research unit at NYSPI for up to 72 hours,  or 
longer if clinically necessary,  for the infusion. 
5. Female patients of child-bearing age 
must be willing to use an acceptable form of 
birth control during  study participation such 
as condoms,  diaphragm, oral contraceptive 
pills.Clinical assessment, informed consent.
6. Must be enrolled in IRB #4815 (PI: 
Oquendo)Informed consent process.
7. Able to provide informed consent Interview
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 8 of 26
8. Subjects 61-65 years old must score  25 
or higher on MMSE at screening.Mini Mental  State  Exam
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
EXCLUSION METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT
1. Unstable medical or neurological illness 
including baseline hypertension (BP>140/90) 
or significant history of cardiovascular illness .Baseline medical evaluation including blood 
pressure, heart rate, physical exam,  routine  
labs, and electrocardiogram (ECG).
2. Significant ECG abnormality (e.g., 
Ventricular tachycardia, evidence  of 
myocardial ischemia,  symptomatic 
bradycardia, unstable  tachycardia, second 
degree (or greater) AV block).Baseline ECG.
3. Pregnancy/lactation Baseline serum pregnancy test.
4. Diagnosis of bipolar  disorder or current 
psychotic symptoms.Clinical assessment and baseline SCID-I
5. Contraindication  to any study  treatment. Medical assessment and history.
6. Current or past ketamine abuse or 
dependence ever (lifetime);  any drug or 
alcohol dependence within past 6 months; 
suicidality only due to binge  substance use or 
withdrawal.Clinical assessment, SCID-!, urine drug 
screen.
7. Inadequate understanding  of English. Clinical assessment.
8. Prior ineffective trial of or adverse reaction 
to ketamine or midazolam.Clinical assessment.
9. Opiate use greater  than total daily dose of 
20mg Oxycodone or equivalent during the 3 
days pre-infusion.Clinical assessment and medical  records.
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent 
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 9 of 26
No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
YesIndicate NYSPI IRB # 4815Describe Study Consent Procedures
a.  Subject  is given  a detailed, verbal explanation of this study and  IRB #4815 and given  a signed 
copy of both consent forms. 
b. Subject  gives written informed consent  to participate in IRB #4815 and  this study,  IRB #6598. 
c. Subject receives  medical evaluation under this study. Genetics  blood sample is  under IRB 
#4815 (Biological and neuropsychological measures for genetic studies of psychiatric 
populations— PI: Oquendo).
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
   Information Sheet
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Grunebaum, Michael,  MD
Lan, Martin, MDMiller, Jeffrey, MDSublette, M, MDType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Independent Assessment of Capacity
You have indicated  that your study  involves  subjects who  MAY  LACK capacity to  consent.
Does this study require an  independent assessment of capacity?
No
Study Procedures
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 10 of 26
Describe the procedures required for this study1. Screeninga. We will recruit inpatients or outpatients with a  major  depressive  episode. Referrals
generally come from physicians, clinics,  the Presbyterian Emergency Department, and ads in
media including  the internet.
b. Subject completes phone screen, approved under IRB  #5880R. If subject  appears eligible
based on the phone screen, they will be  scheduled  for an  in-person screening visit under
Screening Protocol  (IRB #5880R) to determine whether inclusion/exclusion criteria (excluding
medical screening) are  met.
c. Subject is  given a detailed, verbal  explanation of this study and IRB  #4815 and given a
copy of both consent forms.d. Subject gives written  informed consent to participate in IRB  #4815 and this  study,  IRB
#6598.e. Subject receives medical evaluation  under  this study. Genetics blood sample is under  IRB
#4815 (Biological and  neuropsychological measures for genetic studies  of psychiatric
populations—PI: Oquendo).f. During  the period between enrollment and the infusion, the treating physician will
assess the patient  weekly  in person  or by phone, including a  Clinical Global Impression
(CGI) scale. If  concerns  are noted during  a telephone contact, subjects will be  brought  in
for an in-person visit. If  someone  has a CGI-I >5  then  a repeat CGI-I  will be done within 3-4
days and if it remains >5 then the subject will be withdrawn; or 2) their CGI Improvement score issix or seven on one  occasion and  the treating  psychiatrist assesses that they
cannot safely continue research participation. If  after enrollment a  subject refuses inpatient
admission that is deemed clinically  necessary by the research team  they will be  withdrawn from
research.2. Prior Psychiatric Medicationa. For insomnia or  anxiety, PRN  diphenhydramine,  hydroxyzine, zolpidem, or a
benzodiazepine will be permitted. The goal will be  a maximum daily dose of lorazepam
2mg during the  week pre-infusion. However, no zolpidem or benzodiazepine will be
permitted during the 24 hours pre-infusion.  Subjects  who at enrollment  are taking a
higher benzodiazepine dose will  be tapered  and converted to lorazepam during the
pre-infusion week. Subjects who show signs of benzodiazepine withdrawalor cannot  tolerate the 24-hours pre-infusion  without zolpidem or benzodiazepine will be
withdrawn from  the protocol.
b. Current psychiatric medications  other than benzodiazepines will be maintained at a
stable dose until post-infusion  treatment.  Minor dose adjustments may be made pre-infusion,
such as to reduce side  effects.
3. Actively Suicidal  Patients
a. Patients with  imminent  (next few days)  suicidal plan or intent will only  be enrolled as
inpatients. The independent treatment  team on the inpatient research  unit must agree that
study participation is clinically reasonable.b. For patients who require hospitalization  because  of destabilization or suicidal risk,
admission to a NYSPI unit will be available.  Hospitalized  patients will be  discharged from the
hospital when  stable  as judged by the inpatient staff and the treating psychiatrist as not being
in imminent  risk of  harm  to self/other.
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 11 of 26
c. A research psychiatrist  will be available  by cellphone 24 hours a day,  seven days a week.
Patients requiring urgent admission will be brought to the CUMC Emergency Dept. by thestudy physician with security assistance,  if needed.  Non-emergent admissions  will be  arranged
by the treating psychiatrist, if possible to the 4-Center  or 5-South. Patients  who are deemed to
require hospitalization, but who refuse,  will receive all necessary interventions such as
contacting the local crisis team, family, or  Emergency Medical Services.
4. Pre-Infusion Research Measuresa. Baseline clinical and  neuropsychological ratings (See Figure  2, attached).
b. Saliva Cortisol: We will measure  salivary cortisol using  Salivettes  (Sarstedt,  Germany)  at the
following time-points  for both  the initial infusion and the optional open  ketamine  infusion: Time-
Sensitive (within 72 hours pre-infusion) and 24 HR Post-Infusion Day (i.e., Day 1 Follow-Up).The samples will be collected fasting  and before the patient has taken any medication that  day.
At each time point (Time-Sensitive, 24 HR Post-Infusion Day), patients will be asked to providetwo samples, one  immediately on waking up in the  morning and  a second sample 30 minutes
later. Samples will be processed in the Nathan  Kline  Institute laboratory of Thomas Cooper,
M.A., who is  an expert in these methods.
5. Randomizationa. Patients will  be assigned randomly to one of  the two treatment  conditions: ketamine or
midazolam.b. Randomization will be stratified on two variables: 1) According to time-sensitive pre-infusionScale for Suicidal Ideation (SSI) score of below 8 vs. 8 or above; and 2) According to  whether
the subject is currently taking psychiatric medication or not.
c. The infusion  medication will be  prepared by the NYSPI research pharmacy.
d. Codes linking patient numbers to treatment assignment will be sealed and  kept under lockand-
key for all study patients.6. Blindinga. The patient, study psychiatrist, and  assessors will be  blind to infusion  allocation.
b. An un-blinded  pharmacist, who is not part of  the research team, will dispense the infusion
treatments.c. To test adequacy of the  blind, after  completion  of post-infusion research assessments, all
subjects and research personnel  will each complete a brief  questionnaire asking  them to  guess
subjects’ infusion group status.d. Infusion responders  will be informed  by the  pharmacy via a  letter which infusion  they
received at the end  of their 6-month participation in our clinic or when they stop treatment in
our clinic, whichever comes first.  Infusion non-responders will be informed which  infusion they
received after research  measures are complete on the post-infusion day. The DSMB  may
request unblinded  data as  needed.
7. Inpatient Infusion  Phase
a. To participate in the study, patients must agree  to inpatient hospitalization at NYSPI (4-
Center or  5-South units) for the infusion. Our goal will  be for the  admission to be as short as
possible, approximately 3-5  days,  or more if clinically indicated. Patients will be  evaluated by a
research physician and  the inpatient unit’s independent clinical team and will be discharged
when assessed, according to standard practice, as safe for outpatient treatment in  the
research clinic. Patients who need  to be kept involuntarily for safety reasons will be withdrawn
from research and treated  clinically.
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 12 of 26
b. We will attempt to schedule the study infusion as close as possible to the date  of enrollment,
given time for  screening lab results, inpatient  admission  and BSU scheduling.
c. All patients will be NPO after midnight prior to study infusion and will be  escorted by study
staff to and from the BSU  where  the infusion will occur.
d. No zolpidem or benzodiazepine  will be permitted in the 24 hours  pre-infusion.  We
will monitor patients  for signs of  withdrawal,  such as severe anxiety, diaphoresis,
tachycardia (HR greater than 100), or hypertension  (BP greater than 140/90) and  if
such signs are present then the  infusion will  be canceled and benzodiazepine
restarted.e. For subjects currently taking psychiatric medication, we will give advance notice ofinfusion scheduling  to anesthesiologist consultant, Dr. Moitra, to  confirm  his or a backup
anesthesiologist's availability for phone  consultation during  the infusion,  if needed.
f. Pre-infusion blood level of BDNF will be measured by drawing  a blood sample
through the iv  site. This will  be analyzed  in the NKI  lab of Tom  Cooper.
8. Blinded Ketamine/Midazolam Infusiona. Dose:i) Patients  randomized to ketamine will receive an intravenous infusion of saline solution with
ketamine hydrochloride  (0.5 mg/kg; Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL)  over the course of
approximately 40 minutes in the  BSU  of NYSPI with continuous  monitoring of the subject  by a
study physician.ORii) Patients  randomized to midazolam will receive an intravenous infusion  of saline solution
with midazolam  (0.02  mg/kg) over approximately  40 minutes  in the BSU of NYSPI with
continuous monitoring of  the subject by a study physician.
b. Vital Signs Monitoring:  During study infusion(s), blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory
rate, and oxygen saturation  will be monitored as follows:
i. -5 minutesii. 0 (start  of infusion)
iii. Post start of infusion: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 minutes (end of infusion)
iv. Post end of infusion: Blood pressure will continue to be obtained until there are twomeasurements at  least 15 minutes apart that are within 10 mmHg of the baseline diastolic
blood pressure or diastolic blood pressure  is below  85. Respiratory rate  and oxygen
saturation will continue to be obtained until there  are two measurements  at least  15
minutes apart that are within  normal limits (RR of 10 or greater; 02 saturation of 94%  or
greater).c. The physician and  Research Assistant who remain in  the patient’s room  during the infusion
record the vital  signs.  After the subject  is transferred back to their inpatient unit room,  the
blood pressure and heart rate will be obtained manually by the unit nursing staff.d. Intervention  for Hypertension: If the systolic blood pressure  increases to  ≥ 200 or diastolic
blood pressure increases to ≥115 mmHg during the ketamine infusion, the  infusion  will be
discontinued. The  blood pressure will be monitored  and if  there is no decrease after 15
minutes, then:1) One dose of sublingual  nitroglycerine, 0.3 mg, will be  administered.
2) If there is no response within 10 minutes, clonidine 0.1 mg  po will be administered
every 30  minutes  (total maximum dose 0.6 mg clonidine) until the  desired blood
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 13 of 26
pressure is reached. Desired blood pressure  is defined as within normal range or 10
mmHg of baseline diastolic reading.3) If high blood pressure is symptomatic,  i.e., blurred vision, headache,  chest pain, the
subject will be transferred  to the ER. If  they do not respond to the above treatment  (d.)
then they will be  transferred to the  ER.
e. Intervention for Decreased Oxygen Saturation  or Respiratory Rate:
1) If 02 saturation is <94%,  the patient  will be given oxygen via nasal canula; then if 02
saturation returns to ≥94%, the infusion will be continued. If 02 saturation remains<94% with nasal canula  oxygen, then the infusion will be  stopped, the anesthesiologist
called, the blind broken, and if the infusion drug was midazolam then the patient will begiven flumazenil unless the anesthesiologist recommends other  treatment.
2) If respiratory rate  is <10,  the infusion will be stopped, the anesthesiologist called, the
blind broken,  and if the infusion drug was midazolam then the patient will be given
flumazenil unless  the anesthesiologist recommends other treatment.
3) If the  patient does  not respond  to the above  treatment, they will be transferred to the
ER.9. Post-Infusion Lab Testsa. BDNF, ketamine  and norketamine levels  will be measured by drawing blood  samples with a
blood-draw separate from  the iv site. These will be analyzed in the  NKI lab of Tom Cooper.
b. Post-infusion saliva cortisol: Same  procedure as Pre-Infusion (4b above).
10. Post-Infusion Treatment  According to Medications at Enrollment and Responder  Status  on
Day 01 post-infusion  (Responder: 50% or greater reduction in SSI  score from pre-infusion
baseline and  score < 4):
1a) Responders already taking an  antidepressant will receive open clinical
treatment.1b) Responders not already taking an antidepressant will begin 6-week treatment with  open
label sertraline as follows: Open-label  sertraline  will be  titrated  to a daily  dose  of 100 mg or higher
as tolerated. Fluoxetine,  paroxetine ER, or escitalopram may be substituted  for sertraline if a
subject has had a failed adequate previous trial  of the preferred drug due to side effects or lack of
response. An adequate trial is defined as at least  2/3 maximum PDR dose for at least 6 weeks. If
none of these  SSRIs  is acceptable, due to previous  failed trials as defined, then other
medication may be used.  The dosing schedule  will be as follows, but  can be attenuated if
required due to side effects:Week 1: sertraline 50 mg daily (or fluoxetine 20 mg or  paroxetine  ER 25 mg  or escitalopram
10mg).Week 2: sertraline 100 mg daily (or fluoxetine 40 mg or paroxetine  ER 50 mg  or escitalopram
20mg).Week 3-6: Optional  increase to sertraline 150 mg (or  fluoxetine 60 mg  or paroxetine ER  75 mg  or
escitalopram 40mg) daily, or higher,  if indicated by clinical assessment.
Response: Patients not responding adequately to sertraline (CGI  Improvement score of 6 or
worse 2 weeks in a row)  or who develop intolerable side effects will be switched to  fluoxetine,
paroxetine ER,  escitalopram, or if none is acceptable, due to  previous failed trials as defined
above, then to  other medication. Patients who relapse will receive open treatment.
Concomitant medication: For insomnia or anxiety, diphenhydramine,  hydroxyzine,
zolpidem, or a benzodiazepine (lorazepam up to 4mg total daily dose or equivalent) will be
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 14 of 26
permitted. If addition of antipsychotic or mood stabilizing medication  is required due to agitation,
psychosis, or manic symptoms, then the  patient will be withdrawn  from research and treated
openly.2) Non-responders:  For patients who are non-responders at 24 Hrs Post-Infusion  (Day 01), the
blind will be broken  after Day 01 post-infusion research measures  are complete. Non-responders
who received  midazolam  will be offered an optional open-label ketamine infusion,  following the
same procedure as above. Neuropsychological testing will be  repeated  on Day 01 after the openlabel
ketamine infusion,  during  the inpatient  stay.
a) Responders to optional open-label ketamine infusion  not already taking  an
antidepressant will receive the SSRI  continuation  treatment as above (see 1b).
Responders who  later relapse will receive open treatment.
b) Non-responders  to first infusion who received ketamine (not  eligible for  second
infusion) or  who  received midazolam but opt not to have a  second infusion will receive
open treatment.c) Non-responders to optional open-label  ketamine  infusion and responders already
taking an antidepressant will receive  open  treatment.
d) Non-responders  at Day  01 after  ketamine  will have an additional Scale for
Suicidal Ideation (SSI)  rating at Day  03 to assess potential delayed response.
3) All patients receive supportive management  according to the NIMH  treatment manual  of
Fawcett et al.6 This condition is similar to what many patients receive in  the community when their
primary treatment is  pharmacotherapy  with a psychiatrist as the sole  clinician, but  is enriched  by
clinical and ethical  necessity with additional  monitoring and assessment. This  will ensure that
patients are being carefully managed. As  described  in the manual,6 clinical management will
emphasize a positive, collaborative doctor-patient  relationship through  supportive reassurance,
rationale for treatment, psycho-education, assessment of target symptoms,  side effects, and
appropriate dosing,  assessment of suicide risk and mental status,  and review of procedures to
follow if  patients become  acutely suicidal.
4) Exploratory  research  assessments of mood, suicidality, and  side effects (per Fig. 2) will
continue for a six-week continuation phase post-infusion, for all subjects. Non-responders whoopt for the open ketamine  infusion will start  the continuation phase  after it. Continuation phase
appointments will be  weekly for six weeks, then decreasing to  at least monthly, as  clinically
indicated, for the remainder of the six months.5) In all follow-up treatments,  psychiatrists  will be available to  patients between sessions for
consultations and  emergencies (a  research  psychiatrist is on-call at all times).  Thus, clinical
management will provide careful assessment  of the patient's clinical condition to determine clinical
changes, safety, and  the need for  withdrawal  from the protocol. Psychiatrists will evaluate mood,
suicidality, and treatment course  to help  determine if a  patient's condition warrants removal from
the study. Independent, masters or PhD level, raters will systematically  assess suicidal ideation
and/or behavior and  depression weekly  during the  6-week continuation phase for exploratory
analysis.6) Week 7-24: All patients will be offered  free,  open, clinical treatment, and then will be  referred
for ongoing care.11. Outcome Measures: See Figure 2, Schedule  of Research Procedures and
Assessments (attached).12. Safety Follow-up for Ketamine Abuse/Use:
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 15 of 26
a. At 3 and 6 months  post-ketamine/midazolam,  all subjects we can  contact will be  evaluated
to determine the absence of post-exposure  ketamine  use/abuse.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
13. Withdrawal  from  Study: Subjects will be  withdrawn from  the study if:
a. They  request it for any  reason.
b. The PI  judges that  it is medically unwise to continue in the study, for example if  the
subjects are unable to comply with the study procedures.c. They  are unable to tolerate the delay to treatment because of pronounced worsening of
symptoms such as marked  agitation  or psychotic  symptoms. Worsening of suicidal ideation
will not automatically require discontinuation  from research, since  this is the primary study aim,
as long as  the team judges that the  patient can  be managed safely  as an  outpatient (e.g. they
have no plan or intent), or  they agree to inpatient  treatment and the inpatient staff agrees  that
the patient may continue research participation.d. A rise in systolic blood pressure  ≥ 200 mm Hg or diastolic blood  pressure to  ≥ 115 mm
Hg during  the infusion.
e. During infusion, if 02 saturation remains  <94% with nasal  canula oxygen or respiratory
rate <10, then patient will be withdrawn from  research and treated clinically as described in
Section 8.e.f. Other criteria for discontinuation will be appearance of psychosis, mania, severeagitation, or other deterioration  where the treating  physician decides that research participation
is unacceptable.g. During the 6-week SSRI trial: 2 consecutive weekly CGI-I’s >5.
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
Sample Collection Timepoint Total Collected Per Patient
Blood Baseline
 
Pre and Post-infusion59 ml
 
32 ml total (64 ml if two 
infusions)
Saliva Pre-infusion day (2 samples);  
Post-infusion day (2 
samples)1ml per sample = Total 4 ml
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 16 of 26
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Domain Instrument Time
Informed consent IRB-Approved Form 30–45
min
Diagnosis SCID I, II 120min
Demographics Division Baseline Demographic  form (BDEMO) 30 min
Clinical State Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 24-Item (HDRS- 
24)10 min
 Beck Depression Inventory  (BDI) 10 min
 Profile of Mood States (POMS) 10 min
 Global Assessment Score  (GAS) 2 min
 Single Question  Anxiety Rating (SQAR) 5 min
 Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) 1 min
Suicidal Ideation and 
Behavior Columbia Suicide History (CSH)10min
 Lethality Rating  Scale (LRS) 5 min
 Beck Scale for Suicidal  Ideation (SSI) 10 min
 Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS) 5 min
 Beck Suicide  Intent  Scale (SIS) 10 min
 Brown Goodwin Aggression Inventory (BGAI) 10 min
Life Events St. Paul Ramsey Scale (SPR) 5 min
Medication Antidepressant Treatment History Form (ATHF) 20 min
 Systematic Assessment  for Treatment  
Emergent Events-General Inquiry  (SAFTEE-
GI)10 min
 Clinician-Administered Dissociative States 
Scale (CADSS)15 min
 Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) – 
Positive Symptoms  Subscale Only10 min
 Adequacy of blind questionnaire 1 min
Biomarkers Neuropsychological testing 45 min 
 Salivary cortisol 10 min 
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 17 of 26
Off label and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
   Drug
Select the number of drugs used in this study2
Drug #1
Name of  the drug 
KetamineManufacturer and other informationMultiple generic manufacturers.  
Approval StatusNo IND is requiredChoose one of the  following options
FDA conditions are met  (see 'Rules')
Explain
This is a clinical study involving two marketed drugs and the study meets all of the following 
conditions:
1. It is not intended to be reported to the FDA in support of a new indication for  use or to support 
any other  significant  change in the labeling; and
2. It is not intended to support a significant change in the advertising for  the product; and
3. It does  not involve a route of administration  or dosage level, use  in a subject population, or 
other factor  that significantly increases  the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the product;  and
4. It is conducted in compliance with the requirements for IRB review and informed  consent  [21 
CFR parts 50 and 56 respectively]; and
5. It is conducted in compliance with the requirements concerning  the promotion and sale of drugs 
[21 CFR 312.7].
Drug #2
Name of  the drug
MidazolamManufacturer and other informationMultiple generic manufacturers.  
Approval StatusNo IND is requiredChoose one of the  following options
FDA conditions are met  (see 'Rules')
Explain
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 18 of 26
This is a clinical study involving two marketed drugs and the study meets all of the following 
conditions:
1. It is not intended to be reported to the FDA in support of a new indication for  use or to support 
any other  significant  change in the labeling; and
2. It is not intended to support a significant change in the advertising for  the product; and
3. It does  not involve a route of administration  or dosage level, use  in a subject population, or 
other factor  that significantly increases  the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the product;  and
4. It is conducted in compliance with the requirements for IRB review and informed  consent  [21 
CFR parts 50 and 56 respectively]; and
5. It is conducted in compliance with the requirements concerning  the promotion and sale of drugs 
[21 CFR 312.7].
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?YesMaximum duration  of delay to any treatment  
Patients will continue their current psychiatric medication. The delay to inpatient admission will notexceed 2 weeks; if a  subject needs a longer  delay  between consent and beginning
treatment, it will be  determined by the study clinician on a case-by-case basis based on
need for delay,  clinical stability, and ability to comply with the plan  for monitoring. This
period allows the  time required for processing lab samples, completion of baseline  research
measures, and scheduling  inpatient admission for the infusion  procedure in the BSU. We  will
attempt to minimize this  delay period. During this time  period  the treating  physician will stay in
contact with the participant and  assess their clinical condition weekly, either in  person or via
phone, including the  Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) scale. If items  of concern  are noted during
a telephone contact, the participant will be  brought in for an in-person visit. If someone has a CGII
>5 then a repeat CGI-I  will be  done within 3-4 days and if it remains >5 then the subject will be
withdrawn from  research  and start clinical treatment. Additionally, if the team judges  that this
delay is  not clinically acceptable or the participant  does not  agree  to the delay, then the patient will
be withdrawn  from research.
Maximum duration  of delay to standard care or treatment of known  efficacy
As described  above, for subjects not already taking an antidepressant, treatment with standard
antidepressant medication plus supportive clinical management will begin on the day after theketamine/midazolam infusion, after 24-hour research assessments are completed.  This adds 1
day to the delay described above.  Non-responders  who received midazolam and who choose to
receive a clinical  ketamine infusion prior  to beginning  standard  clinical  treatment  will have an
additional delay of a  few days for BSU scheduling, which we will attempt  to minimize.
Treatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
Described in Procedures (Section 10) above.
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 19 of 26
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesThis is  a study of sub-anesthetic ketamine’s effect on suicidal ideation in suicidal depressed
patients, with  midazolam as an active control.  Many treatments for major depressive disorder
exist, such as numerous  approved antidepressant  medications, ECT, and  various
psychotherapies. Relatively little is known about best practices for more suicidal depressedpatients.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Potential Risks to  Subjects  and Procedures for Minimizing Risks:
Risks associated with participation in this  study are related to  1) side  effects of  the medications;  2)
other medication related  risks; 3) intravenous catheters; 4) blood  drawing; and 5) pregnancy. Dr.
Milak, a co-investigator  on this study,  has experience with  this ketamine dose in our institution and
will consult and  supervise  on this study’s  infusion procedures. Dr. Vivek Moitra, MD, Associate
Clinical Professor of Anesthesiology,  Associate  Medical Director Surgical Intensive Care Unit,
Associate Program Director, Critical Care  Medicine Fellowship, Division  of Critical Care, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, is experienced with  both  ketamine and
midazolam, has reviewed  this protocol, and  is a consultant on this study.
1. Side effects of medications:1.A. Side Effects  of Intravenous Ketamine.
i) Medical  Risks. Administration of sub-anesthetic doses  of ketamine i.v., such  as the 0.5 mg/kg
dose to be  used in this study, may induce a modest rise in  blood pressure.  We have administered
sub-anesthetic doses of ketamine i.v. (0.5mg/kg over  40 minutes) in  the setting  of a currently
approved MRI/MRS brain imaging  protocol at this institution (IRB #5786, PI: J. Mann). The
resulting effects on vital signs for the eleven patients scanned under protocol #5786 are presentedas a function  of time in Table 1 below for the duration of the ketamine injection.  These modest
increases all  peaked and largely resolved by 75 minutes, with  vitals returning  to near baseline.
 
Table 1. Effects of ketamine on systolic and diastolic blood  pressure in a group of patients
(n=11). The dose of  ketamine was 0.5 mg/kg given over 40 minutes.
 
Time (min)
Systolic Blood  
Pressure during  
Ketamine (mm Hg)Diastolic Blood  
Pressure during  
Ketamine (mm Hg)Pulse during Ketamine (min-1)
0 111 70 69
5 113 72 63
10 116 73 69
15 116 73 72
20 121 75 68
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 20 of 26
25 121 78 73
30 120 77 72
35 124 78 73
40 122 78 79
45 122 78 74
50 116 75 73
55 121 76 74
60 123 76 75
65 124 79 75
70 121 81 76
75 114 75 76
 
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
ii) Specific  measures and  precautions
Any medical risks from increased  blood pressure  will be minimized through the careful screening
of potential subjects. Subjects will be excluded for baseline hypertension or any  history  of
cardiovascular illness. A physician, Dr. Michael Grunebaum (ACLS certified 05/22/2012;  copy of
certification attached),  will be  present during the procedure. If physician coverage for Dr.
Grunebaum is needed (such as vacation),  then another ACLS-certified MIND  physician (Drs.
Matthew Milak or Martin Lan),  who has  been  trained in  the infusion procedure, will be present.
Procedures for hypertension  that occurs during the  infusion  are described above under Study
Procedures. Nausea and  vomiting  will be treated supportively and,  if severe, with  anti-emetic
agents; if necessary, administration  of ketamine will be discontinued. Subject  will be informed that
they should be  fasting  (12 hours  no food, 4 hours no liquids) prior to the ketamine  infusion. For
these reasons, the medical risks involved in participation in this study will be minimized.iii) Psychiatric or Behavioral Risks. Ketamine is an FDA-approved dissociative anesthetic.
Ketamine exposure  at the sub-anesthetic dose to be  used  in this study can be associated with  a
moderate dissociative state, which is well  tolerated in the  majority  of cases and is spontaneously
reversible (7).  There is extensive clinical experience with  ketamine  used at anesthetic doses,  and
no long-term detrimental effects of ketamine exposure have  been reported. It is  possible that
ketamine administration will increase the risk of psychosis, even  in normal subjects. Ketamine is a
street drug  of abuse.  As such, it poses the risk that  exposure during  this study may predispose
subjects to subsequent abuse of this drug. To minimize this risk, current drug or alcoholdependence or any history of ketamine abuse or  dependence will be excluded. We will follow
patients while they are receiving clinical treatment and review any evidence of abuse that  may
appear after the ketamine  infusion.  This dose of ketamine has been  safely administered in  similar
settings to depressed  patients with clinically significant suicidal ideation at least 23 times  without
Protocol Summary Form6598Grunebaum, MichaelPage 25 of 31any serious side effects (8, 9).iv) Specific  measures and  precautions
The experiment will be carried out in the  presence  of at least  one psychiatrist. In case  of severe
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 21 of 26
agitation, hyperarousal, or psychosis, the blind will be broken.  If the  patient  received  ketamine,
they will be treated with benzodiazepine (lorazepam) or neuroleptics, as indicated  (see below for
midazolam). The risks of exposing  subjects to a drug of abuse potential will be  minimized by
explaining this risk to prospective subjects, and  by excluding from the study any  subjects with
documented or suspected current substance  or alcohol dependence.
2.A.2. Side Effects  of Intravenous Midazolam
Midazolam is an  imidazobenzodiazepine derivative  in common use as a sedative and, like
ketamine, anesthetic induction agent, including for routine outpatient procedures such ascolonoscopy (10-12). It is the control medication at a  dose of 0.045 mg/kg in the ongoing  NIMHfunded
ketamine RCT, “Optimization of IV  Ketamine  for Treatment Resistant  Depression”
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; PI:  SJ Mathew). We  will use a  lower dose of 0.02
mg/kg, which was  found in a double-blind RCT of anesthesia pre-medication to  produce equal
anxiolysis, but fewer sedative and cardio-respiratory effects compared  to 0.06 mg/kg (13). The
lower dose was recommended by our anesthesiologist consultant, Dr. Moitra, as being less likelyto make subjects  sleepy, which would make it a less effective control medication.
i) Medical  Risks.
a. Midazolam is  an imidazobenzodiazepine  derivative in common  use as a sedative  and,  like
ketamine, anesthetic induction agent (10-12). It has anxiolytic, hypnotic, muscle  relaxant, and
antegrade amnestic effects (10-12).  Midazolam  is not known  to have direct effects  on glutamate  or
NMDA receptors (10,11).  To investigate the  potential relationship  of anxiety  or anxiolysis to
infusion effects on suicidal ideation,  we will systematically assess anxiety using a visual analog
scale (14).b. Midazolam may cause respiratory depression, decreased systolic and diastolic  blood pressure
and increased heart rate (10-12)  The sub-anesthetic  dose we plan to use  requires the presence of
a physician, but not an anesthesiologist  (personal communication from Eric Heyer,  MD, Chief  of
Neuro-Anesthesiology, Columbia  University  Medical Center).
c. Cardio-respiratory effects are usually absent at  intravenous sedative doses  (0.05-0.15  mg/kg)
and our planned dose is below the low end  of this range (10-12). Midazolam has an  onset of CNS
activity within minutes, a  half-life of 2-4 hours, and  psychomotor performance  returns to normal
approximately 2 hours after administration  (10-12)  It is relatively free of other side effects such as
nausea, vomiting,  or venous irritation.10-12  Midazolam  may cause confusion, but an RCT found it
to be safe even  in the  elderly (15).
ii) Specific  measures and  precautions
The risk of respiratory depression with the midazolam  dose in this  study  is expected  to be
“miniscule” (personal communication, Dr. Moitra, study consultant).  Adverse effects of midazolam
can be reversed with administration of the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil (10-12).  Specific
Protocol Summary Form6598Grunebaum, MichaelPage 26 of 31interventions for  respiratory depression  or low oxygen  saturation  are described under Study
Procedures.iii) Psychiatric or Behavioral Risks. Midazolam has anxiolytic, hypnotic, muscle  relaxant,  and
antegrade amnestic effects substantially mediated by its binding to CNS benzodiazepine
receptors and  increased GABA activity  (10-12).  It is not known  to have  direct effects on glutamate
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 22 of 26
or NMDA receptors (10-12). Midazolam  may cause  confusion, but an  RCT  found it to  be safe even
in the elderly (15) Paradoxical excitation has approximately a 10% incidence after midazolamdoses twice as high as  the dose we plan  to use, is more common among older patients, and is
reversible within 30 seconds with administration of flumazenil (16).iv) Specific  measures and  precautions
The experiment will be carried out in the  presence  of at least  one psychiatrist. In case  of severe
agitation or hyperarousal, the blind will be broken and if  the patient received midazolam, then they
will be treated with neuroleptics and  or flumazenil. The risks  of exposing  subjects to a drug of
abuse potential will be minimized by explaining this risk  to prospective subjects, and by excluding
from the study any  subjects with documented or suspected current substance  or alcohol
dependence.
 
2.A.3. Side Effects  of Other Medications
Sertraline (or Fluoxetine, Paroxetine,  Escitalopram): The potential  side effects of SSRIs  include
nausea, sexual function  change (orgasmic  delay), weight loss or  gain, headache and diarrhea,
drowsiness or stimulation, nervousness  and/or insomnia, and allergic reactions.
Zolpidem: The potential side effects  are diarrhea,  dizziness, drowsiness, a drugged feeling, and
dry mouth.Lorazepam: The potential side effects are dizziness,  drowsiness, a  drugged feeling, and some
potential for tolerance  and withdrawal  symptoms.
Diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine: The potential side effects are dizziness, drowsiness, a  drugged
feeling, and  dry mouth.
2.B. Other medication related risks:Delay to Infusion: We will schedule the infusion as soon as  possible.  Patients  on psychotropic
medications may continue them.  Patients may experience worsening of their depressive
symptoms during this  period and this will be discussed with all  subjects as  part of the consent
process.Non-response: There is  a chance  that the medications and/or dosages used in this study will not
be helpful or  that a participant  may feel  worse  during participation in the study. Participants will be
encouraged to  tell their  doctor  if they feel worse during the study.
Other Risks Associated with Antidepressant  Use:
The Food and  Drug Administration  (FDA) has issued a public  health advisory concerning a
possible link between worsening depression,  and, in rare cases, suicidal thoughts  or behavior  in
adults younger than  25 years of age treated with certain antidepressant medications (including
those in this study). This FDA advisory will be discussed with all subjects as part of the consentProtocol Summary Form6598Grunebaum, MichaelPage 27 of 31process.2.C. Risks from  Intravenous Catheters.  There is a small risk of infection and  bleeding
associated with  intravenous catheters, which are prevented by proper  techniques.  Placement of
IVs will be by  a physician, nurse, or technician  trained and  certified in aseptic technique for
catheter placement to minimize this risk.2.D. Blood  Drawing:  The risks  associated  with drawing blood  are slight discomfort  and
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 23 of 26
occasional bruising.  There  is no risk of  anemia  in a physically healthy person with the amounts of
blood drawn in this  study.
2.E. Interviews: Psychiatric  interviews  and neuropsychological testing  can sometimes be
stressful, but  some people find talking to a physician  or psychologist helpful. The interviewers will
all be experienced personnel. The research team may  request  permission to  record the interview
for teaching purposes with audiotape and/or videotape. In this  event,  a separate consent process
will occur for this.2.F. Saliva sampling: This procedure has no significant risks other than minor inconvenience.2.G. Pregnancy:  Pregnancy is one of  the study’s exclusion criteria  and will be ascertained  at
screening with a  pregnancy test. Patients must agree at the time of consent to  use an  effective
form of birth control and to inform the  treating  psychiatrist in  the event of pregnancy while  in the
study. A pregnancy test will  be repeated  on the pre-infusion day. If a  patient becomes pregnant
during the study, they  will be withdrawn from research and treated clinically.
2. H. ElectrocardiogramAn electrocardiogram has no serious risks. On rare occasions a  rash may  develop  where the
electrodes are placed which usually resolves  without treatment.
3. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan: The Principal  Investigator will be  responsible  for monitoring
the safety and sound clinical care of all study participants through a weekly team meeting and asneeded.3.a. Adverse events. Serious adverse  events will be reported per  regulatory  requirements. Other
adverse events will be monitored using the SAFTEE-GI (17) and a weekly meeting of the researchteam.3.b. Data and Safety  Monitoring Board
i) Membership: A Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB) will consist  of three members,  all
experienced psychiatric  researchers  in depressive  disorders. None will be affiliated with the
research team conducting this project.ii) Responsibilities: The initial  tasks include  review of the protocol and  study forms documenting
adverse effects,  laboratory  results,  and clinical research forms. If any  modifications  are indicated,
they will be instituted. Throughout the study, notification of any Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) asProtocol Summary Form6598Grunebaum, MichaelPage 28 of 31well as any investigator-initiated changes in the protocol will be submitted to the DSMB  when they
are submitted to the IRB. Based on its review of the protocol, the DSMB  will identify  the data
parameters and format of the information  to be regularly reported. The DSMB  may at any time
request additional information from  the Principal Investigator. The  DSMB may monitor study
charts or  delegate this task to the personnel of the New York  State Psychiatric Institute IRB.
Other than  SAEs, adverse  events will be tabulated and submitted to the IRB and  DSMB  annually.
SAEs are also reviewed by the Incident  Review  Committee of the New York State  Psychiatric
Institute. The DSMB will initially be given  data  blinded to  treatment status  but may request
unblinding if there is a safety  concern.
Based on review of safety data, the DSMB  will make recommendations concerning the conduct of
the study. These may include  amending safety monitoring procedures, modifying the  protocol  or
consent, terminating the study or continuing the  study as designed.
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 24 of 26
iii) Initially,  one DSMB member will review  the study books  of the first  two patients  to be enrolled
to make sure that all necessary  forms are  included and are being filled out  correctly. In addition,
the DSMB will  meet in person or  by conference call after three and six months of enrollment and
then on a semi-annual basis but can  determine that more frequent meetings are indicated.
Meetings:iv) Reports:  The discussions and  decisions of the DSMB will be summarized in  written reports
and provided to the NIMH Program Officer  in annual reports.
v) HIPAA Procedures: This grant will go through Columbia  University and  will be conducted at
the New York State Psychiatric Institute  and Columbia University Medical Center. All HIPAA
requirements will be  followed including forms for  patients  to sign and receive a  copy to  keep as
part of the informed  consent process.
 
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
Records will  be kept in locked  files  and access will be allowed  only  to members of the research  team or
institutional personnel as part of a routine  audit. Research records, like other medical and clinical records,
will be kept confidential to the extent  permitted by law. Once  a patient enrolls in  the project they are given a
code number for  all subsequent computer data and/or lab forms. The code  list and  patient names as well
as all  data  are kept in locked files in locked  offices with  access limited to  those  directly responsible for
maintenance of these  files  by the  research  team. The data capture system we will use in this study,
StudyTRAX, has been used as a data repository  for NIH sponsored  projects at NYSPI and is HIPAA
compliant. Data sets are de-identified as defined in HIPAA 45 C.F.R.  §164.514 (b)(2).
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
Subjects will receive  a complete medical,  neurological and psychiatric evaluation, results of which  will be
communicated to them.  Subjects are  not expected to benefit directly from  participation in this  study,
however, they will be offered  a total of six months of medication  based treatment for depression.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
Yes
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 25 of 26
Please describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
We will give participants a modest  inconvenience payment of $20 cash  for each outpatient visit at which  
research data are collected,  which we believe will not be coercive but will help recruitment and decrease 
attrition. Subjects  will not receive payment for research assessments or procedures  during the inpatient 
stay.
 
References
References
(1) Beck  AT, Kovacs  M, Weissman A. Assessment of suicidal intention: The scale for suicide
ideation. J  Consult Clin Psychol 1979;47(2):343-52.
(2) Holi MM, Pelkonen  M, Karlsson L et  al. Psychometric properties and  clinical utility of  the Scale
for Suicidal Ideation (SSI) in adolescents. BMC  Psychiatry 2005;Feb  3(5:8).
(3) Hamilton M. A rating  scale for  depression.  J Neurol Neurosurg  Psychiatry  1960;23:56-62.
(4) Grunebaum MF, Ellis SP, Duan N, Burke  AK, Oquendo MA, Mann JJ. Pilot randomized clinical
trial of an SSRI vs bupropion: effects  on suicidal behavior, ideation, and mood  in major
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 2012 February;37(3):697-706.
(5) Rosenbaum JF, Fava  M, Hoog SL, Ascroft RC,  Krebs WB. Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor discontinuation syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. Biol Psychiatry 1998 July
15;44(2):77-87.
(6) Fawcett J, Epstein P,  Fiester SJ,  Elkin  I, Autry JH. Fawcett, J., Epstein, P., Fiester, S.  J., Elkin,
I. & Autry, J.  H. Clinical  management-
Imipramine/placebo administration manual: NIMH treatment of depression
collaborative research  program. Psychopharm Bulletin. 1987;  23(2): 309-324. Psychopharm
Bulletin 1987;23(2):309-24.
(7) Krystal JH, Karper LP,  Seibyl JP  et al.  Subanesthetic effects of the noncompetitive NMDA
antagonist, ketamine, in humans. Psychotomimetic, perceptual, cognitive, and  neuroendocrine
responses. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1994;51(3):199-214.
(8) Price  RB, Nock  MK, Charney DS, Mathew SJ. Effects of intravenous ketamine on explicit and
implicit measures of suicidality in treatment-resistant depression.  Biol Psychiatry 2009;66(5):522-
6.
(9) DiazGranados N, Ibrahim LA,  Brutsche  NE et al.  Rapid resolution  of suicidal  ideation  after  a
single infusion of an  N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in patients  with  treatment-resistant major
depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2010;71(12):1605-11.
(10) Brunton LL, Lazo JS,  Parker KL. Goodman  & Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics. 11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
(11) Evers  AS, Maze M, Kharasch ED. Anesthetic Pharmacology: basic principles and clinical
Protocol Summary  Form
6598
Grunebaum,  Michael
Page 26 of 26
practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2011.
(12) Reves JG, Fragen RJ,  Vinik HR,  Greenblatt  DJ. Midazolam: Pharmacology and Uses.
Anesthesiology 1985;62:310-24.
(13) Sun GC, Hsu MC,  Chia YY, Chen PY, Shaw FZ. Effects of age  and gender  on intravenous
midazolam premedication: a  randomized double-blind study. Br J Anaesth 2008 November
1;101(5):632-9.
(14) Davey HM, Barratt  AL, Butow  PN, Deeks  JJ. A one-item  question  with  a Likert or Visual
Analog Scale adequately  measured current  anxiety.  J Clin Epidemiol 2007 April;60(4):356-60.
(15) Christe  C, Janssens  JP, Armenian B,  Herrmann  F, Vogt N. Midazolam sedation for upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy in older persons: a  randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2000;48(11):1398-403.
(16) Weinbroum AA, Szold O, Ogorek  D, Flaishon R.  The midazolam-induced paradox
phenomenon is reversible  by flumazenil. Epidemiology, patient  characteristics and review of the
literature. Eur  J Anaesthesiol 2001;18(12):789-97.
(17) Levine  J, Schooler  NR. SAFTEE: a technique for the systematic  assessment of side effects in
clinical trials. Psychopharmacol Bull  1986;22:343-81.
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
Upload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study