RESEARCH PROPOSAL  
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Immediate Effect Of  Standing Trunk Extension Postures On Spinal Height 
And Clinical Outcome Measures In Low Back Pain: A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
 
Investigators:  
Jean -Michel Brismée, PT, ScD - PI 
Jeremy Harrison, PT, DPT  
Phillip S. Sizer,  PT, PhD 
 
 
Clinical Musculoskeletal Research Laboratory, Center for Rehabilitation 
Research, School of Health Professions, TTUHSC, Lubbock, TX, USA  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 2 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
ABSTRACT ………………………………………………………………………………4  
LIST OF FIGURES ……………………………………………………………………...5  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS …………………………………………………………….6  
BACKGROUND …………………………………………………………………………7  
PURPOSE, AIMS, VALUES …………… …………………………………………….12  
RESEARCH QUESTIONS ……………………………………………………………13  
HYPOTHESES …………………………………………………………………………13  
COMPARISON VARIABLES …………………………………………………………14  
      Independent Variables ……………………………………………………… ……14  
      Dependent Variables ……………………………………………………………..15  
      Relationship Variables ……………………………………………………………15  
METHODS ……………………………………………………………………………..16  
      Research Design ………………………………………………………………….16  
      Pre-Study Approvals ………………………………………………………………16  
      Subjects…......................................................................................................16  
      Testing Sequence …………………………………………………………………17  
DATA ANALYSIS ……………………………………………… ………………………22  
RESEARCH PROJECT TIMELINE ………………………………………………….25  
REFERENCES …………………………………………………………………………26  
APPENDICES ………………………………………………………………………….41   
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 3 ABSTRACT  
Background: Standing trunk extension postures  have been used for many years 
as a mechanical approach to low back pain  (LBP), sometimes directed by 
therapeutic intervention, sometimes subconsciously  performed by patient s to 
relieve LBP. However, no study to date has investigated  the eff ect of standing 
trunk extension postures  on spinal height and clinical outcome measures .  
Objective: The purpose of this study will be  to evaluate in subjects with LBP  
following a period of trunk loading, how spinal height and/or pain, symptoms’ 
centralization, and function  outcome measures respond to:  (1) standing repetitive 
trunk extension  posture ; and (2) standing sustained trunk extension posture . 
Lumbar range of motion ( ROM ) achieved during these two trunk extension 
postures will be compared to spinal height and outcome measures . 
Methods:  A pre -test, post -test comparison group design (randomized clinical 
trial) will be used to determine how spinal height changes in response to 
sustained and repetitive standing trunk extension after a period of spinal loading. 
The study will use a 2 (between subjects – type of tr unk extensio n: sustained vs. 
repetitive) x 3 (within subjects - time: before vs. after  vs. 2 weeks after  
intervention ) mixed design to evaluate the effects of sustained and repetitive 
trunk extension in standing on spinal height, pain, symptoms’ centraliza tion and 
function . 
Statistical Analysis: A 2(Strategy) X 3(Time) mixed  ANOVA will be used to 
statistically identify significant interactions and main effects  for spinal heig ht, pain  
and function  outcome measures . Post -hoc pairwise comparisons will be used to 
locate significant differences between the different conditions  (Time) .  
Significance will be set at α = 0.05. Pearson product -moment correlations will be 
used to measure correlations b etween lumbar ROM  in relation to spinal height 
and outcome measures . The Kruskal -Wallis 1-factor ANOVA for d ifference 
scores will used to determine changes of intensity and location of symptoms 
following sustained versus repetitive standing trunk extension. Spearman Rank 
correlation will be  used to evaluate the relationship between spinal height 
changes and changes of pain and location of symptoms for each group . 
Word Count: 326  
Key Words : Standing  postures ; trunk extension ; spinal height change; 
stadiometer  
 
 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 4 Lay Summary  
 
Standing back extension postures have been used for many years to treat people 
with low back pain.  
 
No study to date has investigated the effect of standing back extension postures 
on trunk height, pain  and function.   
 
The purpose  of this study  will be to evaluate in subjects with low back pain  how 
trunk height,  pain and function respond to  standing repetitive versus 
sustained  trunk extension postures.  
 
Methods : A randomized clinical trial  will be used to determine how trunk height, 
low back pain a nd function  change  in response to sustained and repetitive 
standing trunk extension after a period of spinal loading.   
 
Statistical Analysis  will be used to measure the outcomes.  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 5 LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1:  Flowchart depicting testing sequence……………………………………3 1 
Figure 2:  Starting position for standing trunk extension (repetitive and  
sustained…………………………………………………………………….34  
Figure 3:  Sustained trunk extension position and end position of repetitive trunk  
extension…………………………………………………………………….35  
Figure 4:  Position of subject for spinal height measure in stadiometer unit……..36  
Figure 5:  Position of subject during spinal loading time in sitting………………. ..37 
Figure 6:  Home exercise program for repetitive trunk extension group……........38  
Figure 7:  Home exercise program for sustained trunk extension group…………39  
Figure 8:  Home instructions for each subject……………………………………….40  
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 6 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
Analysis of Variance………………………………………………….…………ANOVA  
Fear Avoidance Belief Question naire… ..……………… …………………….....FABQ  
Intervertebral Disc……………………………………………..……………………. IVD  
Institutional Review Board…………………………………………………………. IRB  
Low Back Pain……………………………………………………………………….LBP  
Numer ical Pain Rating Scale……………………………………………….……NPRS  
Range of Motion…………………………………………………………………… .ROM  
Standard Deviation……………………………………………………………………SD  
Research Question…………………………………………………………………...RQ  
Research Hypotheses………………………………………………………………..RH  
Independent Variable……………………………………………………………….....IV  
Dependent Variable…………………………………………………………………..DV  
Relationship Variable…………………………………………………………………RV  
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 7 BACKGROUND  
According to the United States Department of Labor, there were more 
than one million  injuries and illnesses requiring days away from work amongst 
private industry, state and local government employees. Among these injuries 
and illnesses, 16.6 % were lo w back related equating to 191, 479 low back 
injurie s requiring days away from work  (US Department of Labor, Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, 2016 ). An analysis funded by the National Institute of Health 
found that the cost of pain outweighed the cost of cancer and diabetes by thirty 
percent. The authors further  reported that the annual cost of pharmaceuticals for 
pain management was $16.4 billion, and the cost of lumbar s urgeries was $2.9 
billion.  Pain indirect costs estimates were $18.9 billion for disability 
compensation and $6.9 billion for productivity loss ( Gaskin 2011 , The Economic 
Costs of Pain in the United States ).  
A joint clinical practice guideline  developed  by the American College of 
Physicians  and the American Pain Society classified  low back pain  (LBP) into 
three categories: (1) nonspecific LBP; (2)  LBP potentially associated with 
radiculopathy or spinal stenosis;  and (3) LBP potentially associated with another 
specific spinal cause . Of those three,  lumbar intervertebral disc (IVD) herniation 
is one of the most common spinal degen erative  disorders leading to LBP 
asso ciated with radiculopathy (Chou 2007, Goupille 1998, McCall 2000).  In order 
to better understand the IVD ’s role in the development or persistence of LBP and 
spinal stenosis,  there have been many stadiometric studies primarily focused on 
lumbar spinal height changes associated with various positions and movements 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 8 (Kourtis 2004; Magnusson 1996; Lazzarini 2014 ; Simmerman 2011 ). These 
studies stem from IVD  height preservation in th e aging spine.  Natural IVD  height 
preservation is so important that the biomedical field has examined the use of 
growth factors for IVD biologic regeneration (Masuda 2004) in order to more 
naturally preserve IVD  biomechanical and physiological function as opposed to 
surgical  disruption. To further understand IVD  functional properties, researchers 
have studied the IVD  hydraulic permeability and the influence that age and/or 
degeneration have on fluid movement (Gu 1999).  The authors reported that with 
IVD deg eneration, the radial permeability of the anulus fibrosus decreased , 
mainly because  of reduced  water content. However , the axial and circumferential 
permeability coefficients increase d, mainly due to structural change, leading to 
greater IVD isotropic permeability behavior  (Gu 1999).   
Sixty one percent of  time in the work and home environment  is spent in 
the standing posture  (US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016 ). 
Although prolonged weight bearing postures , such as standing and walking , have 
been associated with decreased spine height (Tyrrell  1985, Puntumetakul et al 
2009 ), some studies reported  that seated weight bearing postures could result in 
spine height gain (Magnusson 199 6a). Sustained and repetitive lumbar extension 
postures frequently occur after periods of prolonged unloading such as sleep . 
These postures are  periodically repeated throughout the day  during activities 
such as standing and walking  (US Department of Labor Bureau of Labor 
Statistics  2016) .  
People presenting with directional preferences that include  lumbar 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 9 extension tend to respond well to exercises  geared toward trunk extension  
(Stankovic 1990 , Swinkels 2009, Oliveira 2012 ). Significant and rapid changes in 
central and distal pain intensity and location have resulted from standing end -
range trunk extension  in patients with low back and referred pain (Donelson 
1991) . Additional studies reported that standing back extension exer cises 
resulted in back pain episodes’ prevention and decreased back pain in care 
workers (Matsudaira 2015; Dunsford 2011 ). Standing exercises have the 
advantage to be functional and easily performed in work and home settings 
(Tonosu 2016).   
 A positive relationship has been found between lumbar extension range 
of motion (ROM) and the centralization  process in patients with LBP (Bybee et al 
2009 ). The centralization phenomenon is part of the clinical examination finding s 
used to identify specific treatment -based classification subgroups. Centralization 
is characterized by spinal pain and referred symptoms that are progressively 
abolished in a distal to proximal direction in response to therapeutic interventions 
including u nloading or specific movement strategies (Brennan et al 2006, Laslett 
et al 2005). The operational definition and measurement techniques for 
centralization have been laid out in several studies (Aina et al 2004, Werneke et 
al 2008) . A decrease d spinal  ROM  is commonly associated with low back 
complications, and functional ROM needs to  be restored to allow for the return to 
previous activity levels  (Battie 1987, Vaisy 2015 ). Several methods  have been 
used to increase spinal ROM including static, repeated, passive postures , and 
propriocepti ve neuromuscular facilitation.  Both standing and prone lumbar 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 10 extension postures  are effective for treating low back Dysfunction Syndrome 
(McKenzie 2003). However, which method is best suited for increasing spinal 
ROM  remains debated  (Sady 198 2; Nordez 2017 ). One author found static  prone  
postures  to increase ROM more effectively with 30 -60 second sustained  postures  
as compared to 15 -second postures , but no difference between the effectiveness 
of 30 -second and 60 -second postures  (Bandy 1994 ; Page 2012 ).  
Repe titive postures  are another method used to increase ROM by 
elongating shortened connective tissue. The McKenzie classification of 
Dysfunction Syndrome is defined as the condition in which adaptive shortening of 
soft tissues and resultant loss of mobility cause pain by stretc hing shortened 
tissues that block full end -range movement  (Hefford 2008 ). Poor p ostural habits, 
previous trauma  and inflammatory or degenerative processes can lead to this 
dysfunction. These patients can develop contraction, scarrin g, adherence and 
adaptive shortening or imperfect repair and pain is felt when the abnormal tissue 
is stretched.  
Treatment of the Dysfunction Syndrome consi sts of postural correction , 
along  with repeated end -range movements  to remodel contracted  structure s. 
This intermittent stress is reported to provide an adequate stretching effect  and is 
most effective in the tre atment of extension dysfunction  (McKenzie 2003) . One 
study found that patients with LBP  chose to perform their extension posture  for 
home exercise  in standing 80.8 % of the time and only 19.2 % of the time in the 
prone position , resulting in similar  clinical outcomes  where b oth groups showed 
equal improvements in lumbar extension ROM  (Bybee et al 2008) .  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 11 Previous studies investigated the effects of postures and movements in 
lying (unloaded ) or seated positions on spinal height (Owens 2009 , Gerke et al 
2010; Pape  2018 ). These studies  primarily focused on spinal height following 
static patient positioning  and showed that both the lying and supported seated 
positions resulted in mean spinal height gains of 2 to 5 mm . However, most 
rehabilitation programs focused on LBP prevention and management use both 
repetitive and/or sustained spinal extension exercises to improve patients’ 
outcomes ( Peterson 2015 , Surkitt 2012 ).  Such  exercises can be performed in  
lying or standing  position .  Although patients with acute and recurre nt low back 
and referred pain  tend to respond  well to directionally preferenced  postures 
(Machado 2006 ), subjects with chronic symptoms tend to display  greater signs of 
sensitization,  biopsychosocial issues ( Huysmans 2017 ), and tend to respond less 
favorably to directional preferences postures and exercises ( Garcia 2017 ). In 
order to assess the biopsychosocial effect on clinical outcomes during this study, 
every subject will complete  the Fear Avoidance Belief Questionnaire  (FABQ) 
(Cleland et al 2008) .  
No study to date has investigated the effects of standing extension 
postures on spinal height, pain, centralization  and function . Therefore , the 
purposes of this study will be to evaluate in a sample of LBP  patients  the effect of 
standing trunk  extens ion, both sustained and repetitive , following a period of 
spinal loading,  on (1) spinal height; (2) pain; (3) symptoms centralization  and (4 ) 
function al measures . 
 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 12 PURPOSE, AIMS, VALUES  
Purpose(s) :  
The purpose of this study is to a ssess the effect of commonly used 
standing trunk  extension postures  on spinal height as well as pain, symptoms’ 
centralization, and function in patients with LBP.  
Aim(s) :  
Our aim is to  better understand the effect of standing sustained and 
repetitive trunk extensions on spinal height and  LBP patients’ symptoms 
intensity, centralization and function . With many patients commonly falling into a 
directional preference group and responding p ositively to mechanical spinal 
input, it is our aim to investigate if such trunk extension postures  performed  in 
standing affect spinal height in regard to growth or shrinkage and if these 
changes are associated with symptoms intensity, centralization and functional 
alterations.  
Value(s) :  
No previous study has examined changes in spinal height following 
standing trunk extension postures  and little is known on  the effect of such 
standing postures on spinal height.  The results of this study could impact 
rehabilitation programs that include standing trunk extension as a means of 
therapeutic intervention. This is valuable especially in aging population with 
degenerated IVD’s, loss of IVD height and propensities toward spinal stenosis, 
as we do not know if thos e subjects with directional preferences toward spinal 
extension could use standing trunk extension postures at home or in the work 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 13 environment to grow and/or prevent spinal shrinkage.  
RESEARCH QUESTIONS, HYPOTHESES AND VARIABLES  
Research Question(s)  (RQs) -This project aims to answer the following research 
questions:  
1. RQ 1 : Does sustained and repetitive standing trunk extension following a 
period of spinal loading effect spinal height, pain, centralization  and 
function  testing outcomes immed iately and two weeks following the 
interventions in patients with LBP?  
2. RQ 2 : Following a period a spinal loading, is there a difference in spinal 
height, pain, centralization and function testing outcome changes 
immediately and two weeks following sustaine d and repetitive standing 
trunk extension postures in patients with LBP?  
3.  RQ 3 : Is there a correlation between the degree of trunk extension during 
standing lumbar extension posture and spinal height, pain, centralization 
and function  testing outcomes chan ges immediately and two weeks 
following the interventions in patients with LBP?  
 
Research Hypotheses - (RH) This student has devised the following research 
hypotheses:  
1. RH 1: It is expected that following a period of trunk loading, both 
sustained and repetitive trunk extension postures in standing will resu lt in 
increased spinal height, reduce d pain, enhance d centralization and 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 14 function  testing outcomes immediately and two weeks following the 
interventions in patients with LBP.  
2. RH 2: It is expected tha t following a period of trunk loading, sustained 
standing trunk extension posture in standing will result in greater spinal 
height gain as compared  to repetitive  standing trunk extension postures, 
while repetitive standing trunk extension postures will res ult in greater 
improvements in pain , centralization and function testing outcomes as 
compared to sustained standing trunk extension postures  immediately 
and two weeks following the interventions . 
3. RH 3: It is expected that following a period of trunk loadin g, there will be a 
positive correlation between the degree of trunk extension during 
standing trunk extension posture and spinal height, centralization, pain 
and function  testing outcomes changes immediately and two weeks 
following the interventions in pat ients with LBP.  
 
Comparison Variables  
Independent Variable(s) -The student plans to use the following Independent 
variable(s) (IV)  
1. IV1: Trunk extension  
a. IV1: sustained  
b. IV2: repetitive  
2. IV2: Time  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 15 a. IV1: before  
b. IV2: after  (immediately)  
c. IV3: after 2 weeks   
 
Dependent Variable(s) -The Student plans to measure the following dependent 
variable(s) (DV)  
1. DV1: Spinal height using stadiometer (ratio scale).  
2. DV2: Pain rating using numerical pain rating scale (NPRS) (ordinal 
scale).  
3. DV3: Centralization (ordinal)  using  body diagram.  
4. DV4: Modified Oswestry Pain Disability Questionnaire (ordinal scale)  
 
Relationship Variable (s)- (RV) (if applicable)  
1. RV1: Degree of spinal extension (ratio)  
2. RV2: Spinal height using stadiometer (ratio scale).  
3. RV3: Pain rating using numerical pain rating scale (NPRS) (ordinal 
scale).  
4. RV4: centralization (ordinal).  
5. RV5: Modified Oswestry Pain Disability Questionnaire (ordinal scale)  
 
 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 16 METHODS  
Research Design(s)  
A pre -test, post -test comparison group design (randomized clinical trial) 
will be used to determine how spinal height changes in response to sustained 
and repetitive standing trunk extension after a period of spinal loading. The study 
will use a 2 (between subjects – type of trunk extension: sustained vs. repetitive) 
x 3 (within subjects - time: before vs. after vs. 2 weeks after)  mixed design to 
evaluate the effects of sustained and repetitive trunk extension in standing on 
spinal height, pain, centralization and function  outcome measures.  
Pre-study Approvals  
 The study will be submitted to the Texas Tech University Health Sciences  
Center Institutional Review Board (IRB) for approval.  The trial will then be 
registered at https://clinicaltrials.gov  . 
Subjects / Specimens  
Systematic consecutive sampling of up to 100 subjects with LBP (40 
subjects completing both day s of data collection) attending “Sports medicine and 
Physical therapy clinic” in Fredericksburg (Texas) as patients or for the purpose 
of health and wellness will be recruited.  Flyers will also be posted  at physician 
offices  and the general Fredericksburg community and surrounding areas to 
inform subjects about the study  (Appendix A) . 
Inclusion Criteria : (1) Ability and willingness to come twice  to the clinic for 
approximately 60 minutes  each ; (2) Subjects with LBP and directional preference 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 17 in back extension; (3) Age 18-80 (Yarznbowicz et al 2018) ; (4) Ability to stand for 
5 minutes; (5) Ability to sit for 10 minutes; and (6 ) Low back pain on Numerical 
Pain Rating scale (NPRS) of at least 2/10 and less or equal to 9/10 (Ferreira -
Valente 2011).  
Exclusion Criteria : (1) Pregn ancy by subject report; (2)  history of back surgery or 
spinal fractures within the last six  months; (3) history of spinal fusion or 
physician’s diagnosis of spinal  instability ; (4) current history of acute systemic 
infection, active inflammatory disease, or malignancy; (5) subjects engaged in 
legal/compensation claims for their back symptoms ; and (6) subjects unable to 
understand or speak English.  
Testing Sequence  
Subjects will be asked to attend two physical therapy sessions over 
approximately a 60-minute period each  to complete the study.  
Session 1  
Participants will complete a pre -screening questionnaire  regarding 
inclusion (Appendix B ). Each subject will watch an audio -visual po wer point 
presentation  explain ing the study,  test procedures  and describing the 
interventions (standing repetitive trunk extension and standing sustained trunk 
extension) . Written informed consent will be obtained. To determine directional 
preference, the investigator (JH) will use the guidelines set forth in th e directional 
preference definition  (Werneke 2011 ) and based off of standards set forth in 
randomized clinical  trials (May et al 2008).  Directional preference has been 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 18 defined as either (1) a specific direction of trunk movement or posture noted 
during the physical examination or (2) a specific easing factor reported by the 
patient during the subjective history that alleviates or decreases the patient’s 
pain, with or without the pain having changed location and/or increased the 
patient’s lumbar range of moti on (Werneke 2011) . A questionnaire including 
pertinent medical history will be completed  (Appendix C ). Subjects will complete 
(1) a Numerical Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) to rate their current, minimum, 
maximum and average LBP over the last two days (Ferreira -Valente MA 2011)  
as well as paresthesia signs/symptoms intensity (Appendix D ); (2) Body Diagram 
for indicating location of symptoms (Appendix E ); (3) Modified Oswestry low back 
pain questionnaire (Fritz 2001 ) (Appendix F); (4) Fear Avoidance Belief 
Questionnaire (Cleland et al 2008)  (Appendix G ). A researcher will record 
subject’s height and weight . A Flow chart illustrates study sequence in details 
(Figure 1).  
 If the subject meets criteria for inclusion in the study, the subject will 
complete a familiarization procedure to determine the consistency to reposition 
themselves in the stadiometer. Subjects able to reposition themselves in the 
stadiometer with a SD of 1.3mm or less for five consecutive measurements 
(Stothart et al 2000; Gerk e et al 2011; Owens et al 2009) will be included in the 
study. The digital display will be covered to blind the researcher performing the 
measurements. The data will be automatically recorded by the stadiometer and 
manually downloaded to a laptop computer . 
At the beginning of data collection, a randomization plan generator 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 19 (http://www.randomization.com  ) will assign each subject to one of two 
interventions : (1) standing repetitive  trunk extension at a rate of 10 per 45 
seconds  (Figure 2 ), repeated five times with 15 -second rest breaks ; or (2)  
standing sustained  trunk extension for 5 x 45 seconds with 15 -second rest 
breaks (Figure 3 ). Each subject will complete one intervention. The intervention 
number assigned  will be recorded by the subject  next to their name to allow 
blinding of the investigator as to which in tervention the subject is assigned to . 
The subject will undergo the test sequence after a 10 -minute period of trunk 
unloading in a supine posture to ensure spinal height is normalized, head in 
neutral posture, knees supported over a small bolster pillow, h ands placed on the 
abdomen (Kourtis et al 2004; Magnusson et al 1996a; Gerke et al 2011; Owens 
et al 2009). The subject will reposition on the stadiometer and spinal height will 
be measured after a relaxed exhalation (Measurement 1)  (Figure 4 ). The subject  
then will undergo a five -minute period of loaded upright sitting with a 4.5kg bag 
secured on each shoulder and spinal height will be measured (Measurement 2)  
(Figure 5 ) (Kourtis et al 2004; Owens et al 2009; Gerke et al 2011). As continued 
spinal height r eduction has been demonstrated following loaded sitting, the 
subject will undergo an additional five minutes sitting without load and spinal 
height will be measured (Measurement 3) (Kourtis et al 2004; Owens et al 2009; 
Gerke et al 2011). Inclinometers wil l be used to take an initial measure of each 
subject trunk extension prior to intervention.  The subject will then undergo one 
intervention for 5 minutes as previously described, according to the 
randomization assignment. In order to determine how sustained and repetitive 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 20 interventions related in terms of change in spinal height, the time to perform the 
sustained lumbar posture matches  the time necessary to perform the repetitive 
lumbar extension postures.  
The subject will  reposition on the stadiometer and spinal height will be 
measured (Measurement 4). Trunk extension will be measured to determine the 
strength of correlations between the degree of trunk extension during standing 
trunk exte nsion posture and spinal height , pain and centralization  testing 
outcomes changes  (MacDermid et al 2015).  The subject  will score their low back 
and lower extremity symptoms using N PRS (Ferreira -Valente MA 2011), and 
map their pain  on a body pain diagram (Appendix E ) prior to intervention , 
immediately  after and 2 -week  following the intervention to determine pain rating 
and centralizatio n of symptoms (Simmerman et al  2011).  The principal 
investigator will apply a numeric overlay template to the patient’s body diagrams 
to document the most distal pain location scores between 1 and 6  (Appendix I ). 
Higher score will indicate a more distal symptoms’  location.  
Home instructions  
Subjects will be instructed to continue to use their medications, including 
medications aimed at decreasing their pain, as prescribed by their primary 
healthcare provider and not to change them during the follow -up two -week 
period.  A sheet including home exercise instructions will be provided to each 
patient. Instructions will in clude repetitive or sustained trunk extension based on 
random group assignment, performed approximately 5 times per day.  Each 
subject will complete a  sheet recording home exercise compliance upon arrival in 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 21 session 2  (Appendix I ). 
Session 2  
Subjects will c omplete: (1) a NPRS to rate their current, minimum, 
maximum and average LBP over the last two days as well as paresthesia 
signs/symptoms intensity (Appendix D ); (2) Body Diagram for indicating location 
of symptoms (Appendix E ) (3) Modified Oswestry low bac k pain questi onnaire 
(Fritz 2001) (Appendix F ); (4) Fear Avoidance Belief Questionnaire (Cleland et al 
2008) (Appendix G ). Each subject will then complete a familiarization procedure 
to determine the consistency to reposition themselves in the stadiometer as 
described in session 1.  The subject will undergo a 10 -minute period of trunk 
unloading in a supine posture to ensure spinal height is normalized as described 
in session 1. The subject will reposition on the stadiometer and spinal height will 
be measured after a relaxed exhalation (Measurement 1 ) (Figure 4). The subject 
then will undergo a five -minute period of loaded upright sitting with a 4.5kg bag 
secured on each shoulder and spinal height will be measured (Measurement 2) 
(Figure 5).  The subje ct will then undergo an additional five minu tes sitting 
without load and spinal height will be measured (Measurement 3). Inclinometers 
will be used to take an initial measure of each subject trunk extension prior to 
intervention. The subject will then unde rgo the same  intervention  as in session 1  
for 5 minutes as previously described (standing repetitive trunk extension or 
standing sustained trunk extension). The subject will reposition on the 
stadiometer and spinal height will be measured (Measurement 4). Trunk 
extension will be measured to determine the strength of correlations between the 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 22 degree of trunk extension during standing trunk extension posture and spinal 
height, pain and centralization  testing outcomes changes (MacDermid et al 
2015).  The subjects will then score their low back and lower extremity symptoms 
using NPRS (Ferreira -Valente MA 2011), and map their pain  on a body pain 
diagram (Appendix H ). 
Investigator Blinding  
One investigator will be involved with data collection. The  invest igator, 
Jeremy Harrison, PT, DPT will carry out inclinometer measurements of lumbar 
and sacral posture, supervised positioning in the stadiometer and stadiometric 
measurements. The investigator will be blinded to the intervention (each subject 
will receive  a hidden random number and will perform independently the 
intervention in a treatment room) and the stadiometric measurements during the 
experiment. He will also be responsible for assigning subjects to their initial 
groups, supervising the subjects’  positioning in the different standing postures 
and confirming that a stadiometer reading is recorded on an Excel spreadsheet.  
Subjects Compensation  
Subjects will receive a one -month free membership to Hill Country 
Memorial Wellness Center in Fred ericksburg, Texas if they consent to participate 
in the study.  
Subjects Charges  
There will be no charge for the two physical therapy sessions, including 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 23 examination and intervention. Following the two intervention sessions, s ubjects  
referred by primary care providers (physicians, chiropractors, nurse practitioners, 
physician assistants) to physical therapy for LBP will have the choice to receive 
standard care and be charged  for physical therapy intervention.  
Confidentiality and data protection  
Electronic Transmission of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and 
Protected Health Information (PHI) will be followed and computer device has 
been encrypted (password protected). Excel spreadsheet will be used to store 
the data.  No Personally Identifiable Information will be retained in the Excel 
spreadsheet where the data will be stored.  
Data Analysis  
Descriptive and inferential statistics will be used utilizing SPSS 23.0 for 
Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL).  
1. Descriptive analyses : Descriptive statistics including mean, median, 
mode, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values , frequency 
counts  will be collected for age, height, weight, body mass index, pain, 
centralization, function (Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Questionnaire) , 
Fear Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire , spinal height, and spinal height 
changes after repetitive and sustained standing trunk extension after a 
period of spinal loading.  
2. Inferential analyses:  Levene’s test and Shapiro -Wilk test of normality will 
used to  test for variance and distribution of measurements of spinal height, 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 24 changes in spinal height, degrees of spinal extension, pain, and function  
outcomes .  
For experimental hypothesis 1, a paired -t-test (or Wilcoxon sign -rank test if 
the data do not meet assumptions for parametric inferential statistics) will 
be used to assess differences i n spinal height, centralization and pain 
outcomes improvements following sustained and repetitive trunk extension 
postures.   
For experimental hypothesis 2 , 2 (between subjects - type of trunk 
extensio n: sustained vs. repetitive) x 3  (within subjects - time: before , 
immediately after and 2 -week after ) mixed ANOVA’s will examine 
differences in (1) spinal height; (2) pain; and (3) function  outcomes,  as a 
result of sustained and repetitive standing trunk extension after a period of 
spinal loading. Post hoc paired t -tests will explore further for significant 
differences in spinal height, pain and function  outcomes between the six 
conditions.  
Experimen tal hypothesis 3  will be tested with Pearson product -moment 
correlations to determine the strength of correlations between the degree 
of trunk extension during standing trunk extension posture and spinal 
height, pain and function , outcomes changes in patie nts with LBP. 
Spearman's Rank Order correlation will be used to determine the strength 
of the correlation between centralization and the degree of trunk extension 
posture in standing.  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 25 Alpha level will  be set at 0.05 for significance for all tests and Bonferroni 
corrections performed as needed.  
 
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 26 REFERENCES  
1. Aina A, May S, Clare H. The centralization phenomenon of spinal symptoms 
– a sys tematic review. Man Ther. 2004;9: 134-143. 
2. Alexander LA, Hancock E, Agouris I, Smith FW, MacSween A. The response 
of the nucleus pulposus of the lumbar intervertebral discs to functionally 
loaded positions. Spine. 2007;32: 1508 -1512.  
3. Battie MC, Bigos SJ, Sheehy A, Wortley MD. Spinal flexibility and individual 
factors that influe nce it. Phys Ther . 1987;67: 653-658.  
4. Brennan G, Fritz J, Hunter S, Thackeray A, Delitto A, Erhard R. Identifying 
subgroups of patients with acute/subacute “nonspecific” low back pain: results 
of randomized clinical trial. Spine . 2006;31:623 -631. 
 
5. Bybee RF, Mamantov J, Meekin s W, Witt J, Byars A, Greenwood M. 
Comparison of two stretching protocols on lumbar spine extension. J Back  
Muscul oskeletal Rehabil . 2008;21: 153-159. 
6. Bybee RF, Olsen DL, Cantu -Boncser G, Allen HC, Byars A. Centralization of 
symptoms and lumbar range of mot ion in patient s with low back pain. 
Physiother Theory Pract. 2009;25: 257-267. 
7. Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, Casey D, Cross JT Jr, Shekelle P, Owens DK; 
Clinical Efficacy Assessment Subcommittee of the American College of 
Physicians; American College of Physicians; American Pain Society Low 
Back Pain Guidelines Panel. Diagnosis and treat ment of low back pain: a joint 
clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the 
American Pain Society. Ann Int ern Med . 2007;147: 478-491. 
8. Cleland JA, Fritz JM, Brennan GP. Predictive validity of initial fear avoidance 
beliefs in p atients with low back pain receiving physical therapy: is the FABQ 
a useful screening tool for identifying patients at risk for a poor r ecovery? Eur 
Spine J. 2008;17: 70-79. 
9. Donelson R, Grant W, Kamps C, Medcalf R. Pain response to sagittal end -
range spinal  motion. A prospective, randomized multic entered trial. Spine. 
1991;16: 206-212.  
10. Dunsford A, Kumar S, Clarke S. Integrating evidence into practice: Use of 
McKenzie -based treatment for mechanical low back pain . J Multidiscip 
Healthc . 2011;4:393 -402. 
11. Ferreira -Valente MA, Pais -Ribeiro JL, Jensen MP. Validity of four pain 
inten sity rating scales. Pain. 2011;152: 2399 -2404.  
12. Fritz JM, Irrgang JJ. A comparison of a modified Oswestry Low Back Pain 
Disability Questionnaire and the Quebec Back Pain Disabil ity Scale. Phys 
Ther. 2001;81: 776-788. 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 27 13. Garcia AN, Costa LDCM, Hancock MJ et al. McKenzie Method of Mechanical 
Diagnosis and Therapy was slightly more effective than placebo for pain, but 
not for disability, in patients with chronic non -specific low back pain: a  
randomized placebo controlled trial with short and longer term follow -up. Br J 
Sports Med. 2017;52:594 -600. 
14. Gerke DA, Brismee JM, Sizer PS, Dedrick GS, James CR. Change in spine 
height measurements following sustained mid -range and end -range flexion of 
the lumbar spine. Appl Ergon. 2011;42: 331-336. 
15. Goupille P, Jayson MI, Valat JP and Freemont AJ. The role of inf lammation in 
disk herniation - associated radiculopathy. Semin A rthritis Rheum . 
1998;28: 60-71. 
16. Gu WY, Mao XG, Foster RJ, Weidenbaum M, Mow VC, Rawlins BA. The 
Anisotropic Hydraulic Permeability of Human Lumbar An ulus Fibrosus. Spine. 
1999;24: 2449 -2455.  
17. Hefford C. McKenzie classification of mechanical spinal pain: Profile of 
syndromes and directions of pr eference. Man Ther.  2008;13: 75-81. 
18. Huysmans E, Ickmans K, Van Dyck D et al. Association Between Symptoms 
of Central Sensitization and Cognitive Behavioral Factors in People With 
Chronic Nonspecific Low Back Pain: A Cross -sectional Study. J Manipulative 
Physiol Ther. 2017;17: 30151 -3.  
19. Johann aber K, Fathallah FA. Spinal disc hydration status during simulated 
stooped posture.  Work; 2012;41: 2384 -6. 
 
20. Kourtis D, Magnusson ML, Smith F, Hadjipavlou A, Pope MH. Spine height 
and disc height changes as the effect of hyperextension using stadiometry 
and MRI . Iowa Orthop J . 2004;24:65 -71. 
21. Laslett M, Oberg B, Aprill C, McDonald B, Centralization as a predictor of 
provocation discography results in chronic low back pain, and the influence of 
disability and distress on diagnostic power. Spine J . 2005;5:370 -380. 
 
22. Lazzarini M, Brismee JM, Owens SC, Dedrick GS, Sizer PS. Spinal height 
change in response to sustained and repetitive prone lumbar extension after 
a period of spinal unloading . J Manipulative Physiol Ther . 2014;37(8):586 -
592. 
23. Lewis SE, Fowler NE. Changes in intervertebral disc dimensions after a 
loading task and the relationship with stature change measuremen ts. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil . 2009; 90:1795 -9.  
24. Machado LA, de Souza Mv, Ferreira PH, Ferreira ML. The McKenzie method 
for low ba ck pain: a systematic review of the literature with a meta -analysis 
approach. Spine. 2006;31: 254-262. 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 28 25. MacDermid JC, Arumugam V, Vincent JI, Payne KL, So AK. Reliability of 
three landmarking methods for dual inclinometry measurements of lumbar 
flexion and e xtension.  BMC Musculosketal Disor. 2015;16: 121. 
26. Magnusson ML, Aleksiev AR, Spratt KF, Lakes RS, Pope MH. 
Hyperextension and sp ine height changes. Spine . 1996; 21:2670 -5.  
27. Magnusson M, Hult E, Lindstrom I, Lindell V, Pope M, Hansson T. 
Measurement of time -dependent height -loss during sitting. Clinical Biomech . 
1990;5: 137-142. 
28. Magnusson M, Pope M. Body height changes with hyperextension. Clin 
Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 1996;11( 4):236 -238. 
29. Masuda K, Oegema TR Jr, An HS. Growth factors and treatment of 
intervertebral disc  degeneration. Spine. 2004; 29:2757 -2769.  
30. Matsudaira K, Hiroe M, Kikkawa M, Sawada T, Suzuki M, Isomura T, Oka H, 
Hiroe K, Hiroe K. Can standing back extension exe rcise improve or prevent 
low back pain in Japanese care workers? J Man Manip Ther. 2015;23(4):205 -
9. 
31. May S, Donelson R. Evidence -informed management of chronic low back 
pain with the McKenzie metho d. Spine J. 2008; 8:134-141. 
32. McCaffrey L, LeFebvre R. Directional Preference Protocol: Centralizing Low 
Back and Leg Pain. WSCC Clinics.  2008: 1-12.  
 
33. McCall IW. Lumbar herniated di sks. Radiol Clin North Am 2000; 38:1293 -
1309.  
34. McKenzie RA , May S . The Lumbar Spine Mechanical Diagnosis an d Therapy, 
2nd ed. Spinal Publi cations Ltd. 2003; 647-667. 
35. Nordez A, Gross R, Andrade R et al. Non -Muscular Structures Can Limit the 
Maximal Joint Range of Motion during St retching. Sports Med. 2017;47: 1925 -
1929.  
36. Oliveira VC, Ferreira PH, Maher CG, Pinto RZ, Refshauge KM, Ferreira ML.  
Effectiveness of self -management of low back pain: Systematic review with 
meta -analy sis. Arthri Care Res. 2012; 64:1739 -1748.  
37. Owens SC, Brismee JM, Pennel PN, Dedrick GS, Sizer PS, James CR. 
Changes in spinal height foll owing sustained lumbar flexion and extension 
postures: a clinical measure of intervertebral disc hydration using stadiometry. 
J Manipulative Physiol Ther . 2009;32:358 -63.  
38. Page P. Current Concepts in Muscle Stretching for Exercise and 
Rehabilitation. I nt J Sports Phys Ther. 2012; 7:109-119.  
 
39. Pape JL, Brismee JM, Sizer PS. Increased  spinal  height  using propped 
slouched sitting postures: Innovative ways to rehydrate intervertebral discs. 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 29 Appl Ergon. 2018; 66:9-17. 
 
40. Peterson T, Christensen R, Juhl C. Predic ting a clinically important outcome 
in patients with low back pain following McKenzie therapy or spinal 
manipulation: a stratified analysis in a randomized controlled trial. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord. 2015; 74:1-7.  
41. Puntumetakul R, Trott P, Williams M, Fulto n I. Effect of time of day on the 
vertical spinal creep response.  Appl Ergon. 2009; 40:33-8. 
42. Rousseau MA, Bradford DS, Hadi TM, Pedersen KL, Lotz JC. The instant 
axis of rotation influences facet forces at L5/S1 during flexion/extension and 
lateral bending. Eur Spine J. 2006; 15:299-307. 
43. Sady P, Wortman M, Blanke D. Flexibility training: ballistic, static or 
proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation? Arc h Phys Med Rehabil . 
1982; 63:261-263. 
44. Simmerman SM, Sizer PS, Dedrick GS, Apte GG, Brismee JM. Immediate 
changes in spinal height and pain after aquatic vertical traction in patients 
with persistent low back symptoms: a crossover  clinical trial. PM R. 
2011; 3:447-457. 
45. Stankovic R, Johnell O. Conservative treatment of acute low -back pain. A 
prospective randomized trial: McKenzie method of treatment versus patient 
education in "mini  back school". Spine. 1990; 15:120-123.  
46. Stothart JP,  McGill SM. Stadiometry: on measurement technique to reduce 
variability in spine shrinkage measurement. Clin Biomech . 2000;15:546 -8. 
47. Surkitt LD, Ford JJ, Hahne  AJ, Pizzari T, McMeeken JM., Efficacy of 
directional preference management for low back pain: a systematic review. 
Phys Ther . 2012; 92:652 -665. 
48. Swinkels A, Cochrane K, Burt A, Johnson L, Lunn T, Rees AS. Exercise  
interventions for non -specific low back pai n: An overview of systematic 
reviews. Phys Ther Rev. 2009; 14:247 -259. 
49. Tonosu J, Matsudaira K, Oka H, Okazaki H, Oshio T, Hanaoka I et al. A 
population approach to analyze the effectiveness of a back extension 
exercise "One Stretch" in patients with low bac k pain: A replication  study. J 
Orthop Sci.  2016; 21: 414-418. 
50. Tyrrell AR, Troup JD. Circadian variation in stature and the effects of spinal 
loading.  Spine. 1985 ;10:161-164. 
51. US Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics: Standing or walking 
versus sitting on the job in 2016 (March 01, 2017);  
https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2017/standing -or-walking -versus -sitting -on-the-
job-in-2016.htm ; Accessed 12/08/2017 . 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 30 52. Vaisy M, Gizzi L, Petzke F, Consmuller T, Pfingsten M, Falla D. Measurement 
of Lumbar Spine Functional Movement in Low Back Pain. Clin J Pain . 
2015; 31:876 -885. 
53. Werneke MW, Hart DL, Cutrone G et al. Association Between Directional 
Preference and  Centralization in Patients With Low Back Pain. J Orthop  
Sports Phys Ther . 2011; 41:22 -31. 
54. Werneke MW, Hart DL, Resnik L, Stratford PW, Reyes A. Centralization: 
Prevalence and Effect on Treatment Outcomes Using a Standardized 
Operation Definition and Measu rement Method. J Orthop  Sports Phys Ther . 
2008; 38:116-125. 
55. Yarznbowicz R, Tao M, Owens A, Wlodarski M, Dolutan J. Pain pattern 
classification and directional preference are associated with clinical outcomes 
for patients with low back pa in. J Man Manip Ther. 2018;26 :18-24. 
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 31 Figure 1 : Flow chart of test positions and testing sequence  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medical Hx, NPRS (pain and paraesthesia), Body diagram, Mod Oswestry, FABQ, Ht/Wt  
If subject is randomized to 
sustained trunk extension group  
 If subject is randomized to 
repetitive trunk extension group  
 Evaluation – Directional Preference  Pre-Screening for Inclusion  
Audio/Visual Power Point  
Written Informed Consent Obtained  
 
Familiarization Procedure with Stadiometer  
Measurement 1  
 Measurement 1  
 
Measurement 3  
 Supine Lying 10 minutes  
Loaded Upright Sitting 5 minutes  Supine Lying 10 minutes  
Upright Sitting Without Load 5 minutes  Loaded Upright Sitting 5 minutes  
Measurement 2  
Upright Sitting Without Load 5 minutes  
Measurement 3  Randomization of Subjects  
Measurement 2  
45 sec sustained extension, 15 sec rest x 5  
 10 trunk extensions in 45 sec, 15 sec rest x 5  
 Trunk Ext Measure 1 Using Inclinometers  Trunk Ext Measure 1 Using Inclinometers  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 32  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Visit  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                    
                                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Two Weeks of HEP (see HEP form)  
 Measurement 4  
NPRS, Body Diagram  Measurement 4  
Trunk Ext Measure 2 Using Inclinometers  
NPRS (pain and para esthesia), Body 
diagram, Mod Oswestry  
 NPRS, Body Diagram  
NPRS (pain and paraesthesia), Body 
diagram, Mod Oswestry  Two Weeks of HEP (see HEP form)  Trunk Ext Measure 2 Using Inclinometers  
Supine Lying 10 minutes  Supine Lying 10 minutes  
Measurement 1  
 Measurement 1  
 
Loaded Upright Sitting 5 minutes  Loaded Upright Sitting 5 minutes  
Measurement 2  Measurement 2  
Upright Sitting Without Load 5 minutes  Upright Sitting Without Load 5 minutes  
Measurement 3  
 Measurement 3  
 
Trunk Ext Measure 1 Using Inclinometers  Trunk Ext Measure 1 Using Inclinometers  
10 trunk extensions in 45 sec, 15 sec rest x 5  
 10 trunk extensions in 45 sec, 15 sec rest x 5  
 Familiarization Procedure with Stadiometer  Familiarization Procedure with Stadiometer  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 33  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Measurement 4  Measurement 4  
Trunk Ext Measure 2 Using Inclinometers  Trunk Ext Measure 2 Using Inclinometers  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 34 Figure 2 : Starting position for trunk extensions.  
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 35 Figure 3 : Sustained trunk extension position and end position of repetitive trunk 
extensions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 36 Figure 4 :  Position of subject for spinal height measure in stadiometer unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 37 Figure 5 : Position of subject during spinal loading time in sitting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 38 Figure 6:  Home instructions for Repetitive  Trunk Extension  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING REPETITIVE EXTENSIONS  
 
-Start by standing with your feet shoulder width apart and 
place your hands on your hips. Lean back to arch your back 
then return to starting position. (Lean back as far as you can 
tolerate  with each repetition ) 
Sets : 1 
Repetitions : 10 (Performed in 45 seconds, rest 15 seconds)  
-Perform sets in succession  
Frequency : 5 times per day  
 
 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 39 Figure 7:  Home instructions for Sustained Trunk Extension  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING SUSTAINED  EXTENSIONS  
 
-Start by standing with your feet shoulder 
width apart and place your hands on your 
hips. Lean back to arch your back, HOLD for 
time listed below, then return to starting 
position. (Lean back as far as you can 
tolerate  with each repetition ) 
Sets : 1 
Repetitions : 1 (hold extension 45 seconds , 
rest 15 seconds)  
-Perform sets in succession  
Frequency : Five times per day  
 
 
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 40 Figure 8 : Home instructions  
Continue to use your medications, including medications aimed at 
decreasing your pain, as prescribed by your primary healthcare 
provider/physician.  Please avoid changing them during the follow -up two -week 
period.   
We will ask you to complete a sheet reco rding home exercise compliance 
when you come to the second treatment session in about two weeks.  
Thank you.  
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 41 APPENDIX A  
Volunteers Needed for a Research Study!  
Title of the study:   
“IMMEDIATE EFFECT OF STANDING TRUNK EXTENSION POSTURES ON SPINAL HEIGHT 
AND CLINICAL OUTCOME MEASURES IN LOW BACK PAIN: A RANDOMIZED CLINICAL 
TRIAL” 
The purpose of this research is to help Physical Therapists better treat 
patients with low back pain  by understanding the effects of motion on spine 
height.  
 
Volunteers be tween the ages of 18 -80 who currently have low back and/or 
leg pain are needed to participate in a Physical Therapy study conducted 
by the  
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center  
 
Other requirements for participation  in the study:  
• Ability to stand for 5 minutes  
• Ability to sit for a minimum of 10 minutes,  
• Currently have low back pain that rate in the range of 2 -9 on 10 -point pain rating 
scale  
• Subjects MUST NOT: be pregnant, have history of back surgery, spinal fractures, 
spinal fusion or spinal instability, current infection, inflammatory disease, cancer 
or be engaged in legal compensation claims for their back symptoms.  
 
Participation is FREE. You will be asked to attend two, 1 - hour sessions in 2 -week period.  
 
To compensate you for your time, you will receive free 1 -month membership to Hill 
Country Memorial Wellness Center in Fredericksburg, Texas.  
 
Contact Jeremy Harrison, PT, DPT, COMT  
(830)997 -2001 jeremy.harrison@ttuhsc.edu  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 42  
APPENDIX B 
PRE-SCREENING QUESTI ONNAIRE LUMBAR PAIN STUDY  
 
Please answer the following questions:  
1. Are you interested to participate in a research project related to low back 
pain and spinal growth in which you will be asked to come twice to our 
clinic and be evaluated and treated twice for a 2 -week period? You will be 
evaluated and treated f ree of charge for two sessions only.       Yes / No  
 
2. Are you between the ages of 18 and 80  years old?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
3. Are you able to stand for 5 minutes?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
4. Are you able to sit for 10 minutes?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
5. Do you experience low back and/or leg pain of at least 2/10 a nd less or 
equal to 9/10?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
________________________________________________________________  
 
6. Do you have any history of spinal surgery and/or fractures within the last 6 
months?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
7. Do you have a current history of acute systemic infection, activ e 
inflammatory disease, or malignancy?  
      a. Yes  
      b. No  
 
8. Do you have any history of spinal fusion or diagnosed by a physician with 
spinal instability?  
      a. Yes  
      b. No  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 43 9. Are you currently engaged in legal/compensation claims for your back 
symptoms?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
10. Is there a possibility that you could be pregnant?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
Which, if any of the following positions, helps to relieve your back pain?  
a. Sitting  
b. Sitting with support in your back  
c. Standing  
d. Standing backward bending of your back  
e. Other: _________________________  
f. No position seems to feel better than the other  
 
FRONT OFFICE USE ONLY  
Diagnosis of Lumbar Pain and/or Radiculopathy:         Yes        No  
Patient referral for Physical Therapy:                            Yes        No  
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you are interested to participate, contact  
Jeremy Harrison, PT, DPT - Investigator  
(830) 997 -2001  
jeremy.harrison@ttuhsc.edu  
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 44 Questionnaire Key  
The purpose of this questionnaire is to take the burden off of participating 
physicians who are assisting with patient recruitment for this study. Simply add 
this questionnaire with your normal intake forms for all patients who are seeing 
the physician for low back pain and leg pain.  
 
Patient can be included in the study if : 
Questions 1 -5 
• All answered “YES”  
Questions 6 -10 
• All answered “NO”  
 
 
Office Use Only section  
• Qualified for study inclusion  YES / NO  
• Study Number:____________  
 
 
 
Referral contact information:  
 
Jeremy Harrison , PT, DPT, COMT  
Texas Tech University HSC  
830-997-2001  
 
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 45 APPENDIX C 
 
Intake Questionnaire:  
 
To be filled out by the participant:  
 
Date: _______________________________ Time: _______ ________am  pm  
 
Last Name :                                                        First Name:   
  
Phone # :(day)______________(evening)_______ _____(cell)______________  
 
E-mail address: __________________ ________________________________  
 
Age:_____   Gender :    M / F .   
 
Do you currently have (within the past 24 hours) pain, numbness, tingling 
or burning in any of the of following areas (please circle yes for all that 
apply)  
 
Low back symptoms                                            Y / N  
 
Buttock symptoms                                            Y / N  
 
Thigh symptoms                                                                     Y / N  
 
Lower leg symptoms (below the knee)                             Y / N  
 
Foot symptoms                                                          Y / N  
 
Toe symptoms                                                          Y / N  
 
How long ago did your current episode of pain start? ____days ____months 
____years  
 
Do you take pain medications?  Ye s / No  
 
   If yes , 
i. Name the pain medications _____________________________ _ 
 
 
ii. How many hours ago did you take your last pain medication?  
 
     _________hours         
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 46  
Do you currently have any of the following: (please circle yes for all that 
apply)  
  
Yes/No     Inability to sit  for a minimum of 5  consecutive minutes   
Yes/No     Inability to stand upright for a minimum of 5  minutes  
Yes/No     Neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis, spinal cord    
injury, spinal tumors  
 
Yes/No     History of s pinal fusion /surgery  
Yes/No     Pain in shoulders or neck  
Yes/No     Vertebral fractures  
Yes/No      Current vertebral infection  
Yes/No  Any unhealed bone fracture  
Yes/No  Diagnosis of cauda equina syndrome  
Yes/No  Pain level reported above 9 /10 on Numerical Pain Scale.  
Yes/No  Pain level reported at 0/10 at time of testing (no pain)  
Yes/No  Non-English speaking  
 
 
 
For Office use only  
Height: __________inches     Weight: ____________lbs  
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 47 APPENDIX D  
 
 
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 
Please fill in the following Pain scales regarding the pain in your BACK  circling 
the number that correctly describes your pain  
What is the least  amount of pain you have experienced in the last 2 days in your back 
(circle the number on the line below )?  
 
        0         1         2         3         4        5         6         7         8         9        10  
 
 
What is the most  amount of pain you have experienced in the last 2 days in your back 
(circle the number on the line below )? 
No Pain            Moderate Pain            Unbearable Pain  
 
        0         1         2         3         4        5         6         7         8         9        10  
 
What is the average  amount of pain you have experienced in the last 2 days in your 
back (circle the number on the line below )? 
No Pain            Moderate Pain            Unbearable Pain  
 
        0         1         2         3         4        5         6         7         8         9        10  
 
 
What is the amount of pain you are experiencing in your back  right now ? 
No Pain            Moderate Pain            Unbearable Pain  
 
        0         1         2         3         4        5         6         7         8         9        10  
  
 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 48 APPENDIX E  
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 
 

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 49 APPENDIX F  
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 50  
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 51 APPENDIX G  
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 
 
  

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 52 APPENDIX H  
Body diagram with template for centralization  
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 

 
 
Harrison, Research Proposal  
 
 
 53 APPENDIX I  
Date:          /.       /20    Time: ____am  ___ pm  Study #: __________  
 
Please complete the following form regarding compliance with your exercises:  
Standing trunk extension exercises  
 
I did not do the     I did the exercise     I did the exercise     I did the exercise     I did the exercise   
   exercise      25% of the time       50% of the time       75% of the time       100% of the time  
 
 
Were the exercises of backward bending  
Very helpful   Helpful  Neutral  Not helpful       Not helpful at all  
 