 
1 
 RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
 
 
NOVEL STRATEGY FOR PERIOPERATIVE BETA-BLOCKER THERAPY 
PILOT STUDY 
 
    
Peter Nagele, MD 
Associate Professor 
Division of Clinical and Translational Research 
Department of Anesthesiology 
Washington University School of Medicine 
660 S. Euclid Ave 
Campus Box 8054 
Saint Louis, MO, 63110 
Tel: 314-286-1715 
Fax: 314 286-2948 
E-mail: nagelep@anest.wustl.edu  
               Version Date:  March 11, 2016 
 
2 
 1.  SYNOPSIS 
 
Study Title NOVEL STRATEGY FOR PERIOPERATIVE BETA-BLOCKER THERAPY – PILOT 
Objective Determine the efficacy and safety of post operative beta-blocker therapy to reduce 
myocardial injury in patients with high cardiovascular risk. 
Determine the clinical utility of pre-oper ative high-sensitivity cardiac troponin levels 
for identifying patients who will benefit from postoperative beta-blocker therapy. 
Hypothesis In patients with high cardiovascular risk undergoing major, non-cardiac surgery, 
postoperative therapy with the beta-blocker, metoprolol, will significantly reduce 
postoperative cardiac injury without causing clinically significant hypotension. 
Postoperative β-blocker therapy is more effec tive in patients with elevated 
preoperative hs-cTn (“high-risk”- patients). 
Study Period Planned enrollment duration: 6 months 
Planned study duration: up to 3 days per subject 
Number of Patients 30 consented patients, 20 evaluable subjects 
Study Treatment  Postsurgical: 5mg metoprolol, IV, prior to extubation, every 5 minutes to achieve target heart rate of 65/min, up to 15mg; then 25mg metoprolol, oral, every 8 hours for 
72 hours.  
Study Design Open-label 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria Inclusion: 
1. Age ≥ 50 years 
2. American Society of Anesth esiologists [ASA] physical status classification III-IV  
3. Beta-blocker naïve [30 days prior to surgery]  
4. Previously diagnosed coronary artery disease (CAD), OR  
‐ History of peripheral vascular disease(PVD), OR  
‐ Chronic kidney disease(CKD) [eGFR ≤60ml/min] OR  
‐ At high risk for CAD (mus t meet at least 2 criteria)  
a. Age ≥ 70 years 
b. Hypertension  
c. Diabetes requiring oral medication or insulin  
d. Current smoker or some days smoker within the past 2 years  
5. Major non-cardiac, elective surgery under general anesthesia  
Exclusion: 
1. History of stroke, or TIA 
2. Previously diagnosed carotid disease, OR  either 70% unilateral or 50% bilateral 
carotid occlusion. 
3. Heart rate ≤55bpm 
4. Systolic blood pressure ≤110 mmHg, or ≤120 mmHg for patients >79 yrs-old 
5. Congestive heart failure with New York  Heart Association(NYHA) Functional 
Classification of III-IV or left ventricular he art failure with ejection fraction ≤ 50% 
6. Moderate or severe valvular regurgitation 
7. Second or third degree AV block without pacemaker 
8. Active asthma or COPD with symptoms or resolving symptoms on day of surgery  
9. Anem ia [Hb≤9g/d
 L] 
10. Allergy to beta-blockade drugs 
11. Hemodynamic instability 
12. Uncontrolled hemorrhage 
13. Unwilling or unable to give consent for participation 
14. Planned spinal or epidural anesthesia 
15. Undergoing any carotid endarterectomy, endovascular, endoscopic, superficial, or 
ambulatory procedures 
Measurements 1. 12-lead ECG monitoring for up to 72 hours with possible spot 12-lead ECGs 
2. Mobile hemodynamic monitoring for up to 72 hours 
3. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin plasma levels [hs-cTn] at up to 7 time points: 
baseline, pre-operative, peri-operative, post-operative, 24 hrs, 48 hrs, and 72 hrs. 
 
3 
 4. Daily adverse event monitoring until discharge. 
5. Phone visit at 30 days 
 
4 
 2.  STUDY PROTOCOL  
 Background and Significance 
Perioperative adverse cardiac even ts are a significant public health  concern. Often referred to as 
“hidden epidemic”, perioperative adverse cardiac even ts kill twice as many Americans per year as all 
motor vehicle deaths combined (2011: 32,367 motor vehicle deaths compared to an estimated 63,000 
postoperative cardiac deaths after non-cardiac surgery).6 Despite the substantial incidence and associated 
mortality of perioperative adverse cardiac events, few recommended preventive therapies exist. In fact, 
there is currently no medical treatment that can be  recommended for the prevention of perioperative 
adverse cardiac events based on robust  scientific evidence. Preoperative β-blocker therapy has become 
highly controversial (the new 2014 AHA guidelines no longer recommend preoperative β -blockers for the 
majority of patients).8,9 Perioperative statin therapy has nearly exclusively been explored in retrospective 
studies,42-44 and the only randomized controlled trial in patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery was 
performed by the same group whose research has been questioned for potential misconduct.45 Two recent large clinical trials showed that neither clonidine (an α 2 adrenergic agonist; haza rd ratio [HR] 1.08, 95% 
CI 0.93 – 1.26) nor aspirin (HR 0.99, 95% CI 0.86-1.15) prevent perioperative a dverse cardiac events. 
Thus, there is currently no evidence-based treatme nt for prevention of perioperative adverse cardiac 
events and therefore the critical unm et need to identify such treatment that is both safe and effective. 
 This research is significant because it studies an important public health problem and offers a 
potential option to the vexing problem of perioperative β-blocker therapy. If successful, our novel 
approach would translate into approximately 1 in  4 postoperative MIs prevented and approximately 
15,000 lives saved each year without increasing the risk of stroke and death in the general U.S. surgical population (assuming a similar effectiveness as seen in  the POISE trial: absolute  risk reduction from 5.1% 
to 3.6%, relative risk reduction ~30%, number needed to treat = 66 to prevent one MI). 
 
Preliminary Data 
Clinical Trial Experience Since 2007, the PI’s research team has screened more than 7,800 patients and 
enrolled more than 1,150 patients into 5 randomized c ontrolled trials or pros pective cohort studies at 
Barnes- Jewish-Hospital (see Table 1 ). The VINO trial was an NIH-funded (K23 GM087534) single-
center randomized controlled trial wi th a very similar population, clini cal trial structure and outcomes 
assessment including collaboration w ith BJH Investigational Pharmacy. 
 
 
Study  Design  Patients  
ScreenedPatients  
enrolledPopulation  Outcomes
Mini-VINO54 RCT ~100 N=63 Healthy, ASA I-II  Biomarker 
(tHcy)
VISION5,55 Prospective cohort  ~350 N=97 CAD, elevated cardiac 
risk, ASA III-IV  cTn 
MACE  
VINO35 RCT 6,831 N=625  CAD, elevated cardiac 
risk, ASA III-IV  cTn, hs-cTn, 
MACE, death  
QTc (unpublished) Prospective cohort  ~420 N=300  General adult OR 
population  QTc, myocardial ischemia 
Stress Test (unpublished) Prospective cohort  ~100 N=67 Patients undergoing 
cardiac stress testing  hs-cTn  
Totals   7,800 N=1,152
 
Table 1 : RCT: randomized controlled trial; ASA – American Society of Anes thesiologists; tHcy – plasma total homocysteine; CAD – corona ry 
artery disease; cTn – cardiac troponin; MACE – major adverse cardiac events; hs-cTn – high sensitivity cardiac troponin; QTc – corrected QT- 
 
Detection of myocardial ischemia with Holter ECG  
 
5 
 In 2013 we enrolled 300 patients in a study to det ect QTc-prolongation and myocar dial ischemia using the 
identical 12- lead Holter ECG system and software  presented in this app lication (DR181 12Lead Holter 
Digital Heart Monitor Recorder (NorthEast Monitoring,  Maynard, MA). To the right is a strip from a 
patient in this study who developed a significant ST-depression in leads II, III, avF, V4-6. ( Figure 2 ). 
 
 
c) Detection of perioperative my ocardial injury using high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin  
In an ancillary study to our VINO trial, we were among the 
first to demonstrate the use of hs-cTn in the perioperative setting by measuring the diffe rence between baseline and 
postoperative peak hs-cTn ( Δhs-cTn), which quantifies the 
extent of perioperative myocardial injury. 99% of patients had a detectable hs-cTn at baseline and hs-cTn increased 
postoperatively in >80% of patients.41 [Figure 3]  
  
Cumulatively, we have shown that we have the necessary 
expertise in conducting clinical trials, the ability to meet recruitment goals, and the ability to use 12-lead Holter ECG as well as hs-cTn to detect and quantify perioperative myocardial ischemia and injury.  
Objective 
-Determine the efficacy and safety of postoperative be ta-blocker therapy to reduce myocardial injury in 
patients with high cardiovascular risk.  
- Determine if pre-operative hs-cTn level can predic t which patients will benef it from post-operative beta-
blocker therapy.  Aim 1: Determine if postoperative β -blocker therapy reduces myocardial ischemia and injury 
 Sub-Aim 1: Efficacy: To determine whether titrated, postoperative β-blocker therapy reduces 
postoperative hs-cTn elevation and/or  ST-segment depression/elevation. 
 Sub-Aim 2: Safety: To determine whether titrated, postoperative β-blocker can be safely 
administered without causing prolonged hypotension. 
 

 
6 
 Aim 2. To determine if preoperative hs-cTn can identify patients who benefit from postoperative β-
blocker therapy.  
 
Patient Selection  
Inclusion: 
1. Age ≥ 50 years 
2. American Society of Anesthesiologists [A SA] physical status classification III-IV 
3. Beta-blocker naïve [30 days prior to surgery] 
4. Previously diagnosed CAD, OR  
a. History of PVD, OR  
b. CKD [eGFR ≤60ml/min] OR 
c. At high risk for CAD (must meet at least 2 criteria) 
i. Age ≥ 70 years 
ii. Hypertension 
iii. Diabetes requiring oral  medication or insulin 
iv. Current smoker or some days smoker within the past 2 years 
5. Major non-cardiac, elective surg ery under general anesthesia 
 
Exclusion: 
1. History of stroke or TIA  
2. Heart rate ≤55bpm 
3. Congestive heart failure with NYHA Functional Classification of III-IV, OR  
a. left ventricular heart failure with ejection fraction ≤50% 
4. Baseline systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≤110 mmHg, or SBP ≤120 mmHg for patients greater than 
79 years-old  
5. Moderate or severe valvular regurgitation  
6. Second or third degree AV block without pacemaker  
7. Active asthma or COPD with symptoms or resolving symptoms on day of surgery   
8. Anem
ia [Hb≤9g/dL] 
9. Allergy to beta-blockade drugs  
10. Hemodynamic instability  
11. Uncontrolled hemorrhage  
12. Unwilling or unable to give consent for participation  
13. Planned spinal or epidural anesthesia  
14. Undergoing any carotid endarter ectomy, endovascular, endoscopic,  superficial, or ambulatory 
procedures 
Design and Procedures 
Study Design 
The goal of this open-label pilot trial is to fine-tune the practicality of the trial intervention before 
commencing a large clinical trial and improve the efficiency.   Study Procedures, Follow-Up and Assessment a) Protocol:  Within an hour before surgery, patients will be connected to the 12- lead Holter ECG and a 
mobile hemodynamic monitor in the holding area of th e operating room. We may al so have spot ECGs if 
needed for calibration of Holter leads,  if necessary. This monitor is a small cuff that fits on the patients’ 
 
7 
 finger with a securing strap at the wrist, and a ch est strap that can capture  continuous blood pressure 
measurements, heart rate, SpO2, respiratory rate, skin  temperature, and potentia lly cardiac output.  The 
patient will also have blood drawn for a baseline hs-cTn in holding before surgery. Perioperative care is at 
the discretion of the attending surgeon and anesthesiologist and will not be influenced by the protocol. 
These interventions and data collected are for research  only, and will not enter th e clinical record of the 
patients. The hemodynamic and troponin data collected wi ll be analyzed for corre lation with primary and 
secondary outcomes. 
 
b) Intervention: 
i) Drug: Metoprolol is a β 1-selective β-blocker. The estimated oral bioavailability of immediate-release 
metoprolol tartrate is about 50%.56 Median elimination half-life of or al immediate-release metoprolol is 
between 3-5 hours in normal metabolizers. Peak plasma  concentrations are reached after 2-3 min. for IV 
and 1-2 hours for oral metoprolol tartra te. In this trial, metoprolol tart rate will be administered first as 
intravenous injection (IV) followed by an immediate-release oral tablet. Metoprolol formulations for this 
trial will be prepared by BJ H Investigational Pharmacy. 
 
ii) Dosing regimen: 
1. IV metoprolol 15 minutes before planned extubation patients will r eceive metoprolol. A rapid injection of 5 mg IV 
metoprolol will be administered. After 5 minutes, if HR > 65/min and BP> 110 mmHg, a second 5 mg IV 
dose will be administered (otherwise the treatment will stop). After 5 additional minutes, if HR > 65/min 
and BP> 110/mmHg, a third dose of 5mg IV metoprolol wi ll be given. The total IV metoprolol dose is 15 
mg. Target HR is 65/min. If the patient is greater than 79 years-old, the systolic BP parameter will be 
>120mmHg.   2. Oral metoprolol 
Before leaving the PACU (post-anesthesia care unit), pa tients will receive 25 mg or al metoprolol if HR > 
65/min and BP> 110/min and no active or minimal bleedi ng (floor dosing should no t be within 4 hours of 
PACU dosing). This regimen will be repeated ever y 8 hours with 25 mg metoprolol until postoperative 
day 3. If patients cannot tolerate or al medication, IV metoprolol as desc ribed above will be administered. 
Target HR is 65/min. If the patien t is greater than  79 years-old, the systolic BP parameter will be 
>120mmHg.  
 3. Rescue If patients develop clinically si gnificant hypotension (defined as systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg) 
clinicians will be instructed to administer IV phenylephrine as first li ne therapy, and a crystalloid fluid 
bolus, if hypovolemia is suspected, to maintain a systolic blood pressure > 110 mmHg. If patients develop 
clinically significant bradycardia (defined as HR < 50/min), 0.1 mg IV glycopyrrolate will be 
administered and repeated until HR>60/min. Alte rnatively, if both brady cardia and hypotension are 
present, IV ephedrine may be administered.  Justification of Intervention : The rationale for the metoprolol regime n is the following: (1) IV metoprolol 
is the only AHA-recommended st andard of care parenteral β-blocker for acute MI in non-surgical 
settings4; (2) the IV dos ing regimen is identical to the MIAMI trial34 and COMMIT trial57; (3) although 
potentially superior, data for bis oprolol are sparse and an IV form ulation is not FDA-approved; (4) 
atenolol has lower effectiveness compared to me toprolol and is no longer considered a first-line β-
blocker; furthermore, atenolol de pends on renal excretion which may be  affected by perioperative acute 
kidney injury; (5) although a potentially attractive option, esmolol (u ltra-short acting IV β-blocker) must 
be administered via IV infusion wh ich excludes discharge of postoperativ e patients to a regular floor; 
thus, using esmolol would severely limit the eligible patient population to patients being admitted to an 
 
8 
 ICU or other monitored environment. (6) all peri operative MI studies have  shown that >90% of 
perioperative adverse cardiac events  occur between the day of surgery and postoperative day 3; therefore 
we decided on a short-term β-blocker intervention (3 days) that will cover this high-risk period compared 
to a 30-day course; (7) the daily oral  metoprolol dose in this trial is 25% lower than in the POISE trial 
(150 mg vs. 200 mg) which we expect to retain the effectiveness of β-blockade while lowering the risk of 
hypotension. 
 
Pre-Study Period  
Patients will be recruited from patie nts with planned, elective surgery to  be performed at Barnes-Jewish 
Hospital, St. Louis, MO. Screening and recruitment will occur in our preoperative anesthesia assessment 
clinic which sees between 90-115 patients/day or duri ng the preoperative stay in the hospital. For elective 
surgery, patients undergo a standardized assessment  including a physical exam , a thorough history which 
includes all current medications, labora tory tests and, if indicated per st andard of care, additional cardiac 
workup such as dobutamine stress echocardiography, nucle ar stress test or cardi ac catheterization. For 
urgent or emergent surgery, an abbreviated assessment that includes pe rtinent medical facts is typically 
obtained. Eligible patients will be approached by a st udy team member and written, informed consent will 
be obtained. 
 
 Study Period 
From the morning of surgery until 72 hours after surgery, all patients will be continuously monitored by 
the Holter ECG, the continuous hemodynamic monitor, and the serial cardiac biomarkers obtained to 
detect myocardial ischemia. Every aspect of periopera tive care (surgical proce dure, drug use, monitoring, 
etc.) will not be regulated by standard of car e, except the administ ration of metoprolol. 
 
Observations and Measurements 
Study Endpoints 
Primary efficacy endpoints:  a) Myocardial ischemia (ST-depression/elevatio n) b) Myocardial inju ry (hs-cTn elevation) 
 Primary safety endpoints:  a) Clinically relevant hypotension, b) daily follow up visits for duration of hospitalization.  Endpoint Definitions: Myocardial Ischemia is defined as ST depression or elevation of ≥0.2 mV in one 
lead or ≥0.1 mV in two contiguous leads lasting ≥10 min; Myocardi al Injury as Δhs-cTn = difference 
between baseline and peak postoperativ e hs-cTn; Clinically re levant hypotension is defined as cumulative 
hypotensive time (duration of syst. BP <90 mmHg); MACE are defined as  MI, cardiac death or coronary 
revascularization. Myocardial infarc tion will be assessed according to the Third Universal Definition of 
myocardial infarction (rising pattern of cTn with at least one elevati on > 99th percentile plus new ECG 
changes indicative of myocardial ischemia and/or  clinical symptoms).1 New Q-waves, ST-segment 
depression or T-wave inversion ≥ 0.1mV, or ST-elevation ≥ 0.2 mV in at least two contiguous leads are 
considered indicative of myocardial  ischemia. The diagnosis of MI will be made and adjudicated by an 
attending cardiologist. Deaths will be  reviewed by two independent inves tigators and classified as either 
cardiac or non-cardiac. Sudden unexplained deaths will be  classified as cardiac unless evidence to the 
contrary (e.g. autopsy). Stroke will be defined as focal or global cerebral, spinal , or retinal dysfunction of 
sudden onset that either (1) persists for > 24 hours and has no known corresponding hemorrhage on brain 
imaging, or (2) persists for < 24 hrs and is associat ed with infarction of centr al nervous system tissue 
documented on brain imaging. 
 
 
9 
 There will be a daily post-surgery follow-up visits by until the subject is discharged from the hospital.  
The study team will monitor the subject for adverse events until discharge. 
  
Thirty days after subject discharge, a member of the research team will conduct a phone visit to assess 
subject status and collect additional adverse event information, if any.   
 Statistical Methods 
For the pilot study, we will only use descriptive statis tics as the study is vastly underpowered to detect 
any meaningful effects. 
 
Sample Size  
50 potential participants will be consented in orde r to achieve at minimum of 20 evaluable subjects 
 
Management of Intercurrent Events  
Adverse Experiences 
The investigator will closely monitor subjects for evid ence of adverse events.  All adverse events will be 
reported and followed until satisfactory clinical resolu tion.  Adverse events are defined as an untoward 
medical event potentially related to the use of our study drug requiring cl inical or rescue interventions. 
The description of the adverse experience will incl ude the time of onset, durat ion, severity, etiology, 
relationship to the study drug (none, unlikely, possible, probable, highly probable), and any treatment 
required. 
 
Premature Discontinuation and Subject Stopping Rules  
If a subject is withdrawn from the study, the subjec t will be replaced in order to provide the required 
number of evaluable subjects. Subjects will be withdrawn if the investigator decides that discontinuation is in the best interest of the subject, or the subject requests withdrawal from the study. The PI will oversee 
implementation of the rescue protocol and make the final determination about the subject’s participation 
in the trial.   
 
Potential Risks 
Risks associated with metoprolol:  Metoprolol is one of the most commonly used β-blockers. 
 Likely:   Reduction in heart ra te and blood pressure, dizziness 
 Less likely: Bronchospasm, depression, heart fa ilure, clinically significant hypotension and 
bradycardia, nausea, diarrhea 
 Rare:   Stroke, death, cardiac arrhythmias, bl urred vision, hepatitis, psoriasis flare up, itching, 
rash 
 Risks associated with blood collection : The blood draw may cause bleedi ng, bruising, or pain. There is 
also a rare risk of infection from  venipuncture. Risk from blood collec tion from a catheter is primarily 
infection. Maximum blood collection is 80ml [sli ghtly more than 5 tablespoons] across 72 hours. 
 
Risks involving obtaining an ECG  and hemodynamic monitoring include mild skin irritation from the 
electrodes.   Risk of confidentiality breach  is also a possible risk. 
 Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks 
All patients will receive general anesthesia by a t eam led by Board-certified/eligible anesthesiology 
faculty that operates at the highest standards of current medical practi ce and has an extensive experience 
in perioperative care for major va scular and other non-cardiac surgery. Patients will be fully monitored 
 
10 
 according to and exceeding of the American Society of  Anesthesiology standards to quickly assess any 
adverse event or com-plication from the time in th e preoperative holding area through operating room and 
post-anesthesia care unit. 
 Subjects will be informed that participation in th e study is voluntary and that they might refuse to 
participate and may withdraw from th e study at any time without penalty. S ubjects will be told that in the 
event of a physical injury as the direct result of study procedures, they will be cared for by a member of 
the investigating team at no cost, within the limits  of the Washington University compensation plan. 
 Adverse events will be reported to the IRB without  delay according to current  FDA and IRB guidelines. 
Adequate clinical care in case of an adverse event is assured as surgery will be performed at Barnes-
Jewish-Hospital, a major tertiary care hospital with around-the-clock anesthes ia attending staffing and 
ICU availability.  The attending surgeon and the surger y staff caring for the subject will be informed about the subject’s 
participation and the details of study drug administration.    The research team will be in open and continuous discussion with patients and surgical staff to ensure that there is no disruption in the patient’s c linical care, comfor t, and recovery.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
Adverse Event Monitoring 
The Division of the candidate has developed standard operating procedur es (SOPs) for data and safety 
monitoring. In light of the small population and attendant risk, the PI  will provide data and safety 
monitoring for the pilot study.  
 
An expert colleague from anesthesiology, not involved in the study, will be designated to serve in a 
monitoring capacity [DSM]. This indi vidual will make decisions regard ing adverse events and reporting, 
as well as the overall safety of st udy for continuation purposes.  The DS M will review all adverse events 
after enrollment is met or every six months, wh ichever comes first.  The DSM will be notified 
immediately of any serious adverse events in order to adjudicate the study’s status  in light of the SAE.  
SAEs will be reported per the criteria establishe d by WUSTL IRB and Depart ment of Anesthesiology 
SOPs. 
 Protection of Human Subjects 
The study will be conducted under appropriate Washington Universi ty Institutional Review Board 
protocols and consent forms approvals.  The study will be conducted under the supervision of the PI, a 
board-certified Anesthesiologist with extensive cl inical and human research experience and a GCP-
certified pharmacist with seve ral years of experience in the conduct of human studies. 
 Sources of Materials 
The following “materials” will be obtained from all study patients for research purposes only: 
 Blood for lab tests (hs-cTn): approximately 7 ml at  up to 7 time points over a 3 day period = total 
of approximately 84 ml blood. 
 ECG: digital recording of continuous Holter ECG 
 Monitoring of vital signs: record s of continuous vital sign monito ring (for 72 hours after surgery) 
 Daily post op follow-up assessments 
 Information from the patient’s medical record including progress notes, la b results and diagnostic 
testing 
 
11 
  
Results from these tests will not available until seve ral weeks after the patient has completed the study 
(due to batched analysis of lab samp les) and will not enter the patient’s clinical record. All data will be for 
research purposes only. In the case that we detect a pathological finding that  could influence patient 
outcome, for example ECG changes consistent with  an acute myocardial infarction or hemodynamics 
consistent with hypotension, we will info rm the patient’s primary care team. 
 We will collect all pertinent perioperative data that  might influence the outcome of the patient, e.g. 
current medication, past medical history, physical characteristics, intraope rative variables (complications, 
blood loss, etc.) and post operative variables. 
 All data will be de-identified of protected health information that c ould link the data or blood samples to 
an individual patient. We will only use pre-assigned  patient study ids to mark blood samples, holter ECG, 
and hemodynamic information. The numbers correspond to de-identified patient  data from the study. 
Only the PI has access to the master list that links individual patients to the de-identified numbers. This 
list is stored in a locked space in the PI’s office.  
 
Information Security Policy 
We will collect hemodynamic information during the pa tients’ hospitalization using mobile monitors.  
These devices may receive, store and/or transmit poten tially Protected Health Information, and will be 
located in Approved Secure Data Center with Wa shington University Psyc hiatry & Anesthesiology 
Information Services approved encryption methods to secure the information stored on or transmitted 
outside the secure clinical  network. Servers that are not located in  an Approved Secure Data Center are 
required to have all information stores of protected information encrypted. The holter ECG and continuous hemodynamic monitors are programmable so  that we can use patient study ids to identify 
participants and avoid using PHI. The mobile monitors allow the tran sfer of patient hemodynamic data 
via the secured wireless network to a centralized encrypted server  for data storage. 
 Laptops and workstations th at contain Protected Inform ation are required to have 
Full Disk Encryption, meaning that the enti re drive is encrypted, not just a few 
files and folders. Any and all mobile devices e.g. smart phones and tablets that connect to the secure clinical network that  may contain or transmit Protected Information (e.g. emails) 
are required to accept Information Securi ty Standards to encrypt and protect 
the devices. External storage media (i.e. b ackup tapes, removable drives, etc.) will 
need to have the Protected Information encrypted. Files that contain protected information that are transmitted across the Internet (e.g. e-mail attachment s sent to non-WUSM or BJC addresses, or file 
transfers to other entities) w ill need to have the attachments encrypted or use a School of 
Medicine approved secure encrypted  method to deliver the files. 
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent 
We will identify patients through our Center for Pr eoperative Assessment and Planning (CPAP) based on 
the CPAP patient schedule. We will identify potential study subjects according to their cardiovascular risk 
profile (CAD). If patients meet incl usion criteria, they will be approached in the CPAP clinic to 
voluntarily participate in the study. If  they agree, we will obtain written informed consent.  During the 
discussion with the potential subjec t in CPAP, it will be emphasized that  their participation is voluntary, 
that they are under no pressure or obl igation to participate and that th ere will be no change in their care 
should they decide not to participate.   
 
 
12 
 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others 
The clinical trial has the potential to significantly reduce the risk for perioperative cardiac events for 
patients in the metoprolol group. 
 The results from postoperative β-blocker therapy will provide strong evidence for using and ultimately 
implementing this approach into clinical practice as well as serving as a foundation for a large multi-
center clinical trial. The anticipated benefit of this research for society is that its findings will serve as an 
evidence-based foundation to consider  the implementation of hs-cTn in to clinical practice to improve 
preoperative cardiac risk stratification.  
Inclusion of Women 
Studies actively encourage the participation of wome n in the research. As a matter of operational policy, 
our studies routinely and deliberately attempt to include equivalent numbers of women and men. 
 
Inclusion of Minorities 
All of our studies actively encourag e the participation of minorities in the research.  Our minority 
recruiting typically matches the de mographic composition of the Washi ngton University community from 
which subjects will be recruited (78%  white, 21% Black, <1 % Hispanic).  