IRB # 202602   1 
 
Version: 4 
Date Changed: 6/18 /2018  APPROVED BY  
UNIVERSITY OF TO LEDO IRB PATIENT PERCEPTIONS OF CARE: THE EFFECTS O F SOCIAL DETERMINANTS 
OF HEALTH  
Objective:  
The primary objective is to connect patients with community resources to improve social determinants 
of health. Secondary objectives are improving patient satisfaction within the trauma  and general surgery  
service , enhancement of physician -patient communication, betterment of surgery  department  HCAHPS 
scores, and increased understanding of correlations between patient satisfaction and social 
determinants of health.  
We hypothesize that (1) directed screening and intervention can have a positive effect for patients and 
hospitals , (2) directed patient advocacy will have an effect on patients’ perception of care, (2) social 
determinants of health will have an effect on patien ts’ perception of care, and (4 ) traumatic injury and 
acute surgery will have an effect o n patients’ perception of care.  
Background and Significance of Research:  
As more information is uncovered regarding the relation between social d eterminants of health and  
health outcomes, it is imperative that health professionals consider these factors when treating patients. Recently, ProMedica CEO, Randy Oostra, has made statements pointing to food insecurity as 
one of the factors most affecting patients in the Toled o area. To address this problem in the community, 
ProMedica has  created a social determinants screening process and the Ebeid Institute, which provides 
healthy food in a former food desert. This  Social Determinants of Health Screening Tool was modeled 
after ProMedica’s own version and their efforts in addressing the social determinants of health within 
our community.  
HCAHPS, previously known as Press -Ganey scores, are the single major measure of patient perception of 
care and satisfaction in the acute care setting. Nationwide, billions of centers for Medicare and Medicaid services funding is at stake for hospitals to gain and lose based on these scores. It is unknown at this time (1) what hospitals can do to increase their scores, (2) how social determinants  of health affect 
patients’ perception of care, and (3) whether acute injury/illness  affects a patient ’s perception of care.  
To test our hypothesis, we will implement three interventions: a socio -economic survey with referral to 
services that provide assistance for social determinants of health, creation of a trauma and general surgery -specific patient advocacy program to improve communication, and data collection using 
HCAHPS and SF -12 to measure changes.  
Methods:  
 Study Design: 
We will be conducting this study as a prospective, non -randomized  QI study that will look at 
patients 18 years of age and older who are admitted under the trauma and general surgery specialties.  Patients will be identified through admission to the trauma or general surgery 
serv ice or referred to surgery services.  
 
 UT IRB Approved
0000202602
IRB # 202602   2 
 
Version: 4 
Date Changed: 6/18 /2018  APPROVED BY  
UNIVERSITY OF TO LEDO IRB Methods : 
1. Eligible patients are identified during morning conference  or consultation . 
2. These eligible patients, or their representatives, will be approached by the study team . 
3. Eligibility will be determined, ICF will be  completed for those eligible.  
4. Patient or representative will be give n the Social Determinants of Health Screening Tool. 
5. Patient or representative will be given the HCAHPS Feedback Tool. 
6. Feedback on HCAHPS results will be given to relevant teams (nurses, d octors, etc.) 
immediately.  
7. Patient or representative will be given the SF -12 Questionnaire.  
8. Prior to discharge, patients will also be given referrals to designated community resources, 
depending on the results of the Social Determinants of Health Screening Tool.  
9. On day 15 (± 7 days) after discharge, included patients will receive a follow -up phone call 
where they will be asked if they have utilized the Social Determinants of Health Referrals. 
They will also be given a second HCAHPS Feedback Tool.  
10. On day 30 (± 7 days) after discharge, included patients will receive a follow -up phone call 
where they will be asked once more if they have utilized the Social Determinants of Health 
Referrals.  They will also be given a second SF -12 Questionnaire.  
11. Demographic criteria will be assessed to determine location/residence of patients that will 
be utilizing the community service.  
Inclusion Criteria: 
 To be eligible for this study, a patient must meet the following criteria:  
1. 18 years of age  or older  
2. Admitted to the trauma or general surgery services  
3. Patient or legally authorized representative  agrees to participate and is willing to sign 
informed consent  
Patients who decline inclusion in social determinants of health screening will be offered 
participation in the HCAHPS Feedback Tool and SF -12 Questionnaire alone, without referrals. 
 Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Anyone less than 18 years old  
2. Any patient or legally authorized representative  unwilling to sign informed consent  
3. Anyone who express es unwillingness to use referral services  
 N umber of subjects : 
 This study will enlist  300 patients . 
Study Setting: 
The study will take place at the University of Toledo Medical Center and by follow -up phone 
calls.  
 UT IRB Approved
0000202602
IRB # 202602   3 
 
Version: 4 
Date Changed: 6/18 /2018  APPROVED BY  
UNIVERSITY OF TO LEDO IRB  Primary and Secondary Outcome Measures  
1. Improve patient satisfaction 
2. Increase access  to needed community services bases on social determinants of health  
3. Improve communication between the patient and health care team  
4. Baseline HCAP data  
 Data Collected : 
The most important variables to consider are patient age, race, gender, insurance status, 
employment status, past medical and surgical history including diagnosis, comorbidities, and 
medications , and results to Social Determinants of Health, HCAHPS, and SF -36 surveys.  
Patient identifiers such as name and MRN will also be collected. D ata will be coded and the data 
will be stored for 6 years as required by local policy.   
 Procedures and Interventi ons: 
Patients will be given three separate surveys during the course of the study: Social Determinants 
of Health Screening Tool,  HCAHPS Feedback Tool, and SF -12 Questionnaire . (See attached 
surveys) 
Depending on the results of the Social Determinants of Health Screening Tool, patients will be 
given referral information for various community programs with the aim of addressing the Social 
Determinant s of Health that each individual patient faces.  
Results of the HCAHPS Feedback Tool will be relayed to the appropriate teams (nurses, physicians, etc.) so that corrections and improvements can be made.  
 Risks : 
There is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality. The risk will be minimized by storing data in password protected computers, located in locked offices located in Dowling Hall on UTMC campus.  
 Planned Data Analysis :  
Data will be collected on a paper data collection tool, and then transferred as soon as possible 
to a coded electronic file using patient de-identifiers that remove all 18 HIPAA identifiers. The 
paper information will be locked in a file cabinet and kept f or 6 years after the study has been 
completed. After that point, the paper data will be destroyed using secure methods. The data 
collected will be analyzed to determine change in HCAHPS scoring, effectiveness of Social Determinants of Health Scree ning, and  correlation with SF- 12 results. Data will be analyzed 
using the SPSS data analysis software or a similar form of statistical software.  
 UT IRB Approved
0000202602