Official Study Title:  Novel Lung Functional Imaging for Personalized Radiotherapy 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
Secondary ID:  CCRO030 
Protocol Version:  Version 19: October 22, 2020 
 
Novel Lung Functional Imaging for Personalized Radiotherapy  
 
Protocol #:      CCRO030  
 
Principal Investigator:                                    Tokihiro Yamamoto , Ph.D. 
 Assistant Professor  
Department of Radiation Oncology  
UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-Principal Investigator :                              Megan Daly , M.D.  
 Assistant Professor  
Department of Radiation Oncology  
UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center  
 
 
 
 
 
Co-Investigator s:                                           Stanley Benedict , Ph.D. 
 Professor  and Vice Chair of Clinical Physics  
Department of Radiation Oncology  
UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center  
Department of Radiation Oncology  
 
 
 
 
 
Ken Y. Yoneda, M.D.  
 Professor of Clinical Internal Medicine  
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care  
University of California Davis Medical Center  
 
 
 
Friedrich D. Knollmann, M.D., Ph.D.  
Professor of  Clinical Radiology  
Department of Radiology  
University of California Davis Medica l Center  
 
  
  
 
Biostatistics :                                                   Lihong Qi , Ph.D.  
 Associate Professor  
Department of Public Health Sciences  
University of California  Davis  
 
 

CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 2 of 26 
  
  
 
Protocol Version and Date :                           Version 19: October 22, 2020  
Version 18: March 11, 2019  
       
 

CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 3 of 26 
 Index  
Schema  
1. Introduction and Background Data  
2. Specific Objectives  and Hypotheses  
3. Patient Selection  
4. Imaging Procedures  
5. Radiation Therapy  
6. Pulmonary Function Test , 6-min Walk Test, and BODE Index  
7. Adverse Event Reporting  
8. Data Review and Management  
9. Statistical Considerations  
10. Stud y Timelines  
11. Patient Assessments  
12. Ethical and Regulatory Considerations  
13. Data Safety and Monitoring  
14. Data Sharing  
15. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
16. Economic Burden to Subjects  
17. Sharing of Results with Subjects  
18. Devices  
References  
Appendix I : Zubrod Performance Status  
Appendix II:   Eligibility Checklist  
Appendix II I:  Patient Assessments  
Appendix I V: Data Submission Schedule  
 
 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 4 of 26 
 SCHEMA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Simulation imaging  
1. Pre-treatment free-breathing CT  
2. Pre-treatment four-dimensional (4D) CT scan  
Personalized t reatment planning  
4D CT ventilation image -guided optimization to 
preferentially spare functional lung regions  
 
4D CT ventilation image -guided radiotherapy  delivery  
• Conventionally -fractionated radiotherapy (CFRT) or hypo -
fractionated stereotactic ablative radiothe rapy (SABR)  
• Two m id-treatment free-breathing CT  and 4D CT scan s as 
correlative studies to assess dosimetric significance of 4D CT 
ventilation image -guided adaptive radiotherapy (CFRT only)  Eligible Lung Cancer Patient  
↓ 
Follow -up 
 ↓ ↓ 
↓ 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 5 of 26 
 Introduction and Background Data  
1.1. Overall survival of lung cancer patients treated with radiotherapy remains 
disappointing with substantial toxicity  
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the US  and worldwide .  In 2011, 
approximately 221,130 new cases of lung o r bronchial cancer were expected to be diagnosed in 
the US, and 156,940 patients (71%) are estimated  to die of this disease  (Siegel  et al. , 2011 ).  
Approximately 64% of non-small -cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and 54% of small -cell lung 
cancer (SCLC) patients will require radiotherapy at least once  (Tyldesley  et al. , 2001 ).  
Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has provided excellent clinical outcomes  for early stage 
NSCLC, e.g., three -year local control, 98%; three -year survival, 56% in the Radiation Therapy 
Oncology Group (RTOG) 0236 trial (Timmerman  et al. , 2010 ).  For advanced stage NSCLC, 
however, Machtay et al. have recently reported a five -year survival rate of 15% for patients treated 
with chemoradiotherapy from seven RTOG t rials (Machtay  et al. , 2012 ).  The maximum tolerated 
dose is limited by the risk of toxicity, especially for advanced disease.  For example, an attempt 
to escalate the prescribed dose in the early Phase I portion of RTOG 0117 was unsuccessful 
because of severe toxicity, including Grade 3 and 5 radiation pneumonitis (Bradley  et al. , 2005b ).  
Radiation pneumonitis is a common, potentially fatal toxicity that occurs in 5 -30% of lung cancer 
patients treated with radiotherapy  (Marks  et al. , 2010 ; Palma  et al. , 2013 ). 
 
1.2. Personalized radiotherapy that avoids high -functional lung regions may reduce 
toxicity and facilitate safe investigations designed to improve tumor control  
To address the critical problem described above, we propose a novel paradigm, i.e., functional 
image -guided personalized radiotherapy that avoids high -functional lung regions.  It may reduce 
toxicity and facilitate safe investigations designed to improve t umor control.  This hypothesis is 
supported by several findings in the literature.  Abratt et al.  have found that patients whose 
irradiated lung regions had >35% of the total lung perfusion are significantly more likely to manifest 
post-treatment decreases  in diffusing  capacity and worsening of dyspnea score  (Abratt  et al., 1990 ).  
Seppenwoolde et al. (Seppenwoolde  et al., 2004 ) and Vinogradskiy et al. (Vinogradskiy  et al., 2013 ) 
have de monstrated better correlations between the function -weighted lung dose and pneumonitis 
than those between the physical lung dose and pneumonitis.  
 
1.3. Novel lung ventilation imaging based on 4D CT has high translational potential and 
advantages  
4D CT ventilati on imaging is a novel promising technique  (Guerrero  et al. , 2005 ) (Figure 1) that 
has high translational potential and advantages ( e.g., higher resolution, lower cost, and/or greater 
availability) over competing modalities.  Thus, there has been growing interest in using this 
technology for functional avoidance treatment planning  (Yaremko  et al. , 2007 ; Yamamoto  et al. , 
2011 ) and treatment/ toxicity assessment  (Ding et al. , 2010 ; Vinogradskiy  et al. , 2012 ).  Animal 
studies have demonstrated high accuracy, e.g., correlation with xenon (Xe) -CT ventilation as 
reference (Fuld et al. , 2008 ; Reinhardt  et al. , 2008 ; Ding et al. , 2012 ) as well as high reproducibility  
(Du et al. , 2012 ).  Human studies have reported relatively inconsistent results (Castillo  et al. , 
2010 ; Castillo  et al. , 2012 ; Du et al. , 2012 ; Mathew  et al. , 2012 ; Yamamoto  et al. , 2012 ; Yamamoto  
et al. , 2014 ), but reasonable correlations with PFT parameters (Yamamoto  et al. , 2014 ), SPECT 
ventilation (Yamamoto  et al. , 2014 ), hyperpolarized 3He MR ventilation (Mathew  et al. , 2012 ) and 
SPECT perfusion (Castillo  et al. , 2012 ) indicate the potential for 4D CT ventilation imaging to have 
physiological significance.  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 6 of 26 
  
Figure 1. Schematic diagram for 4D CT ventilation imaging through (1) acquisition of 4D CT scans, (2) spatial mapping 
of different respiratory phases of 4D CT images using DIR, deriving a displacement vector field, and (3) analysis of the 
resultant displacement vector field to quantify reg ional volume change, a surrogate for ventilation . 
 
1.4. We propose a novel paradigm, 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized 
radiotherapy to improve therapeutic gains  
Many investigators have demonstrated a dosimetric  benefit of functional image -guided 
radiotherapy that avoids high -functional lung regions using various modalities, including SPECT 
perfusion (Marks  et al. , 1995 ), hyperpolarized gas magnetic resonance (MR) ventilation (Ireland  
et al. , 2007 ) and 4D CT ventilation (Yaremko  et al. , 2007 ; Yamamoto  et al. , 2011 ).  We have 
demonstrated that 4D CT ventilation image -guided radiotherapy  planning  reduces the mean dose 
to high -functional lung regions by 2 Gy on average compared to anatomic im age-guided planning 
(Yamamoto  et al. , 2011 ), indicating that 4D CT ventilation image -guided radiotherapy is estimated 
to reduce pneumonitis by 4%, corresponding to over 5,000 patients/year in the US, based on the 
fact that about 60%  (Tyldesley  et al., 2001 ) of 221,130 new  lung cancer patients  (Siegel  et al., 2011 ) 
are treated with radiotherapy.  It is assumed that the probability of pneumonitis increases with the 
mean  dose to high -functional lung regions in a similar manner to the published data on the mean 
dose to the total lung  (Marks  et al. , 2010 ).  There have been no attempts to assess the 
safety /feasibility  or clinical significance of such treatment in human subjects .  In this clinical trial,  
we will assess the safety and feasibility of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized 
radiotherapy .  We will deliver personalized radiotherapy treatments for lung cancer patients, and 
follow up patients to assess the safety and feasibility.  The hypothesis to be tested  is: 4D CT 
ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy can be delivered safely for lu ng cancer . 
 
2. Specific Objectives  and Hypotheses  
2.1. Primary objective  and hypothesis  
Objective:  Assess the safety and feasibility of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized 
radiotherapy that selectively avoids irradiating highly -functional lung regions for lung cancer.  
Hypothesis:  4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy can be delivered safely 
for lung cancer.  
 
2.2. Secondary objectives  
1) Assess long-term toxicity from 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy as 
scored by the NCI-Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 . 
2) Estimate the clinical significance of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy 
by evaluating : (1) clinical and subclinical endpoints for pulmonary toxicity (including 
symptomatic radiation pneumonitis  and post -treatment changes in pulmonary function test s 
(PFTs) , 6-min walk test, and BODE index ); (2) correlation between those endpoint s and 
functional dose -volume parameters . 
3) Assess local tumor control  after 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy.  
4) Quantify the dosimetric  significance of 4D CT ventilation image -guided adaptive radiotherapy.  
4D CT scan
Displacement 
vector field
Deformable image 
registration (DIR)Quantitative 
analysisVentilation image
Phase
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 7 of 26 
 5) Investigate whether in vivo EPID dosimetry can detect clinically significant anatomic changes 
for patients treated with CFRT.  
 
3. Patient Selection  
3.1. Inclusion criteria  
1) Primary lung cancer or metastatic disease to the lungs to be treated with either conventionally -
fractionated  radiotherapy (CFRT) or  hypo -fractionat ed stereotactic ablative radiotherapy 
(SABR) . 
2) Age restriction and/or gender/ethnic restrictions: Patients must be ≥18 years of ag e.  There 
are no gender or ethnic restrictions.  
3) Concurrent chemotherapy is allowed, but not required.  
4) Life expectancy  with treatment should be ≥6 months in the estimation of the treating 
physicians . 
5) Zubrod performance status ≤2  
6) Adequate marrow and hepatic function defined as Hgb ≥8; platelets ≥100k; ANC≥1500; LFTs 
≤2x upper limit of normal  and creatinine ≤ 2.0 or creatinine clearance of ≥ 40 
7) Patient must be able to provide study specific informed consent prior to study entry . 
 
3.2. Exclusion criteria  
1) Prior radiotherapy for thoracic cancer  or other malignancy leading to any overlap of planned 
radiotherapy fields.  
2) For patients undergoing definitive CFRT , patients with distant metastatic disease are not 
eligible.  
3) For patients undergoing SABR, both early stage p rimary lung cancer patients and those with 
limited metastatic disease to the lungs are eligible; however, patients with oligometastatic 
disease should have a controlled primary and no more than one other involved organ system.  
4) Children ( <18 years of age), pregnant women, University of California employees and 
students, and prisoners will be excluded from this study.  
5) We will carefully consider the inclusion of patients  with severe artifacts in 4D CT images, 
which deteriorate the accuracy of  ventilation computation.  
 
4. Imaging Procedures  
4.1. Scans to be acquired  
Patients will be positioned in the supine position on a flat tabletop with immobilization  (a 
customized thermoplastic immobilization cast or a molded foam cradle for stabilization  for CFRT; 
a stereotactic body frame or Body FIX system  for SABR) .  Abdominal compression will be used 
for all SABR patients unless tumor motion <1 cm can be reliably demonstrated by fluoroscopy 
and confirmed by 4D  CT without compression.   The following scans will be obtained:  
Simulation imaging  
1) Free-breathing  CT extending from the angle of the mandible cranially to the inferior extent 
of the liver caudally at a slice thickness of ≤3 mm  for CFRT and ≤2  mm for SABR .  IV 
contrast to assist in del ineation of the mediastinal nodal regions is permitted but not 
required.  
2) Pre-treatment 4D CT scan to include lungs from apices to diaphragm and full disease 
extent.  
3) If abdominal compression is used, an additional 4D CT scan will be acquired without 
abdominal compression.  
During a course of treatment  (CFRT only)  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 8 of 26 
 1) Two mid-treatment free-breathing  CT scan s performed at 16 -20 Gy and 30 -34 Gy  to 
include lungs from apices to di aphragm and full disease extent based on the same method 
as simulation.  
2) Two mid-treatment 4D CT scan s performed with the mid -treatment free -breathing CT 
scans to include lungs from apices to diaphragm and full disease extent.  
 
4.2. 4D CT ventilation computation  
4D CT ventilation images at the peak -inhale phase will be created using a software  tool developed 
and provided by a collaborator, Dr. Kabus at Philips Research .  This software  has not received 
regulatory clearance.  This tool loads anonymized 4D CT images acquired at UC Davis as input, 
and provides ventilation images calculated based on a non-parametric/volumetric  DIR algorithm  
(Staring  et al. , 2010 ) and two classes of ventilation metric : Hounsfield unit (HU) -change  (Simon, 
2000 ; Fuld et al. , 2008 ) and Jacobian  (Reinhardt  et al. , 2008 ) as output.  
 
5. Radiation Therapy  
5.1. Dose specifications  
CFRT  
Patients undergoing CFRT will receive a total of 60 Gy in 30 fractions.  The plan will be normalized 
such that ≥95% of the PTV receives the prescription dose.  Minimum dose to the PTV (defined 
as the dose to the lowest 0.03 cc) must be ≥90% of the prescrip tion dose (≥85% will be scored 
as a minor deviation ) and maximum dose must be ≤115% of the prescription dose to ≤0.03 cc  
(≤120% will be scored as a minor deviation) . 
 
SABR  
Patients undergoing SABR will receive a total of 54 Gy in 3 fractions for peripheral tumors or 55 
Gy in 5 fractions for centrally located tumors (defined as within 2 cm of the proximal bronchial tree 
or PTV touching mediastinal structures or pleura ; tumors with significant chest wall overlap of 
PTV can also be treated over 5 fra ctions at treating physician discretion ). The prescription isodose 
surface will be chosen such that 95% of the target volume (PTV) is conformally covered by the 
prescription isodose surface and 99% of the target volume (PTV) receives a minimum of 90% of 
the prescription dose.  
5.2. Technical parameters  
Radiotherapy  will be delivered by intensity -modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) or volumetric 
modulated arc therapy (VMAT) with an Elekta linear accelerator at energies ≥ 6 MV.  The dose 
behind the patient, i.e., transmission dose images will be acquired with a linear accelerator -
mounted electronic portal imaging device (EPID).  The acquired data will be analyzed with a 
research version of the PerFRACTION software (Sun Nuclear, Me lbourne, FL) (not FDA -
approved/cleared).  
 
5.3. Immobilization and simulation  
See section  4. 
 
5.4. Treatment planning  
Treatment plans will be created using a research version and a clinical version of the Pinnacle 
treatment planning system (Philips Radiation  Oncology Systems, Fitchburg, WI) .  The research 
version has not received regulatory clearance, whereas the clinical version has a FDA 510(k) 
cleara nce and is routinely used for treatment planning in the Department of Radiation Oncology.  
First, t he research version will be used to create an initial 4D CT ventilation image -guided 
treatment plan.  The initial plan will then be transferred to t he clinic al version for final dose 
calculation and evaluation by a radiation oncologist to ensure that the plan quality is clinically 
appropriate, i.e., target coverage is adequate and critical structures are spared as necessary.  
 
5.4.1.  Target volumes  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 9 of 26 
 CFRT  
1) GTV: Will include visible tumor as identified by diagnostic and/or treatment planning CT 
or PET, including pathologically enlarged lymph nodes >1 cm in short axis, hypermetabolic 
by PET (SUV  >3), or pathologically confirmed to contain malignant cells.  Elective 
treatment of nodal areas is not permitted.  
2) CTV: A CTV margin of 5 -10 mm will be added at the discretion of the treating physician to 
account for potential microscopic spread.  This margin may be shaved off overlapping 
adjacent structures including  chest wall, heart, esophagus, great vessels, and vertebral 
bodies.  
3) ITV: Will include the full range of tumor motion of the primary tumor and nodal target as 
delineated by 4D  CT.  Depending upon tumor location, a maximum intensity projection or 
maximal inh ale/exhale scans may be used to identify the ITV.  
4) PTV:  An additional margin of 5 -10 mm will be add ed to account for setup error.  
 
SABR  
1) GTV: Will include visible tumor as identified by diagnostic and/or treatment planning CT 
or PET.  
2) CTV: No additional margi n for microscopic spread will be used.  For purposes of this 
protocol, ITV=CTV.  
3) ITV: Will include the full range of tumor motion of the primary tumor and nodal target as 
delineated by 4D  CT.  Depending upon tumor location, a maximum intensity projection or  
maximal inhale/exhale scans may be used to identify the ITV.  
4) PTV: An additional margin of 5 mm will be added to account for setup error . 
 
5.4.2.  Lung s 
We will create 4D CT  ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy plans that selectively 
avoid irradiating highly-functional lung regions .  The peak -inhale 4D CT ventilation image will be 
aligned with  the free-breathing  CT image (primary image set for treatment planning ) by rigid image 
registration.   The overlapped lungs between the free -breathing CT and peak -inhale 4D CT images 
will be contoured.  Note that t he final total lung volume for dose -volume  analysis will include 
combined right and left lungs, excluding the GTV, trachea, and main and lobar bronchi.  IMRT or 
VMAT optimization will be performed by setting higher weights to highly -functional lung regions 
than poorly -functional regions to meet the  dose -volume constraints  shown below . 
 
CFRT  
Tissue  Constraints  
Lung ( right and left 
minus CTV) V20 <37%  (<40% will be scored as a minor deviation)  
Mean lung dose (MLD) <20 Gy  (<21 Gy will be scored as a minor deviation)  
Functional V20 <30% (Vinogradskiy  et al. , 2013 ) (<33% will be scored as a minor 
deviation)  
Functional MLD <19 Gy  (Vinogradskiy  et al., 2013 ) (<20 Gy will be scored as a 
minor deviation)  
 
SABR  
Tissue  3 fraction  5 fraction  
Volume  Vol Max  Max to 
0.03 cc  Volume  Vol Max  Max to 
0.03 cc  
Lung (right and left 
minus CTV) <1500 cc  
<1000 cc  10.5 Gy * 
11.4 Gy *  
NA <1500 cc  
<1000 cc  12.5 Gy * 
13.5 Gy *  
NA 
Functional V20 <4% (Barriger  et al. , 2012 ) (<7% will be scored as a minor 
deviation)  
Functional MLD < 4 Gy (Barriger  et al. , 2012 ) (<5 Gy will be scored as a minor 
deviation)  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 10 of 26 
 *Constraints marked by asterisk are guidelines and will not be scored as a protocol deviation if not achieved.   
For SABR in patients with more than one target, the lung dose -function constraints (functional MLD and V20) 
are guidelines and will not be scored as a protocol deviation if not ach ieved.  Other constraints represent  
absolute limits  and treatment delivery that cannot meet these constraints  will constitute a major 
protocol violation . 
 
5.4.3.  Other critical structures  
The following other critical structures will be contoured on the free-breathing  CT image  for both 
CFRT and SABR patients . 
1) Spinal Cord:  The spinal cord should be contoured on every axial CT slice as the bony 
limits of the spinal canal, extending from at least 10 cm superior to the superior -most 
extent of the PTV, and cau dally 10 cm below the inferior -most extent of the PTV.  
2) Heart:  The heart, along with the pericardial sac, should be contoured from its base to apex, 
beginning superiorly at the level of the inferior aspect of the aortic arch (aorto -pulmonary 
window) and ext ending inferiorly to the apex of the heart.  
3) Esophagus: The entire circumference of the esophagus including the outermost fatty 
dventitia should be contoured based on mediastinal windowing, and should be contoured 
on every axial CT slice at least 10 cm cran ial and caudal to the PTV.  
4) Brachial Plexus: The right and left brachial plexi should be contoured separately.  The 
defined ipsilateral brachial plexus originates from the spinal nerves exiting the 
neuroforamina on the involved side from around C5 to T2.  H owever, for the purposes of 
this protocol, only the major trunks of the brachial plexus will be contoured using the 
subclavian and axillary vessels as a surrogate for identifying the location of the brachial 
plexus.  This neurovascular complex will be cont oured starting proximally at the bifurcation 
of the brachiocephalic trunk into the jugular/subclavian veins (or carotid/subclavian 
arteries) and following along the route of the subclavian vein to the axillary vein ending 
after the neurovascular structures  cross the second rib.  
5) Proximal bronchial tree:  Should extend from 2 cm above the carina and include the right 
and left main bronchi, extending distally to the first bifurcation of the named bronchi . 
6) Trachea:  Should include the tracheal and cartilage rings extending at least 10 cm superior 
to the superior extent of the PTV . 
7) Great Vessels:  Should include the aorta, right and left pulmonary arteries, and superior 
vena cava at least 10 cm superior and inferior to PTV.  
8) Skin: The skin will be defined as a rind encompassing the outer 0.3 cm of the body surface . 
 
CFRT  
Tissue  Max Dose to 
0.03 cc (Gy)  Other Constraints  
Spinal cord  47 Gy   
Esophagus  70 Gy  Mean < 34 Gy * 
Brachial Plexus  66 Gy *  
Heart/Pericardium  70 Gy  60 Gy to <33%; 45 Gy to < 66% 
Great Vessels  70 Gy *  
Trachea  70 Gy   
Central Airways  68 Gy   
 
SABR  
Tissue  3 fraction  5 fraction  
Volume  Vol Max  Max to 
0.03 cc  Volume  Vol Max  Max to 
0.03 cc  
Spinal cord  <0.35 cc  18 Gy  21.9 Gy  <0.35 cc  23 Gy  30 Gy  
Esophagus  <5 cc 17.7 Gy*  25.2 Gy  <5 cc 19.5 Gy  35 Gy  
Brachial Plexus  <3 cc 20.4 Gy*  24 Gy*  <3 cc 27 Gy*  30.5 Gy*  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 11 of 26 
 Heart/Pericardium  <15 cc  24 Gy*  30 Gy  <15 cc  32 Gy*  38 Gy  
Great Vessels  <10 cc  39 Gy*  45 Gy  <10 cc  47 Gy*  53 Gy  
Trachea  <4 cc 15 Gy*  30 Gy  <4 cc  16.5 Gy*  40 Gy  
Central Airways  <0.5 cc  18.9 Gy*  23.1 Gy  <0.5 cc  21 Gy*  33 Gy  
Skin <10 cc  30 Gy*  33 Gy*  <10 cc  36.5 Gy*  39.5 Gy*  
*Constraints marked by asterisk are guidelines and will not be scored as a pro tocol deviation if not achieved.   
Other constraints represent absolute limits and treatment delivery that cannot meet these 
constraints will constitute a major protocol violation . 
 
 
6. Pulmonary Function Test , 6-min Walk Test, and BODE Index  
We will perform PFTs (including spirometry, lung volumes and diffusing  capacity ) at pre -treatment 
and at 6 -month follow -up, 6-min walk test  (recommended but optional at pre -treatment and follow -
up), and calculate the BODE (body mass index, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, exercise capacity)  
index for those who complete the 6 -min walk tests.  
 
7. Adverse Event Reporting  
7.1. Adverse event monitoring  
Subjects will be carefully monitored for adverse events.  This monitoring includes clinical and 
laboratory tests.  This study will utilize the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0 for toxicity and Adverse Event 
Reporting.   A copy of the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0 can also be downloaded from 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html.   Adverse events will be assessed each cycle, and the 
highest grade according to NCI -CTCAE version 4.0 will be recorded.  Adverse events will be 
assessed in terms of seriousness, severity, and rela tionship to the study procedures . 
 
7.2. Adverse  Event Definitions  
Adverse Events (AEs)  
Any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or 
disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure regardless of 
whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or procedure (attribution of unrelated, 
unlikely, possible, probable, or definite).  
 
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  
Any adverse experience occurring during any part of the protocol treatment and 30 days after that 
results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Results in death.  
• Is life -threatening (refers to an AE in which the patient was at risk of death at the time of 
the event. It does not refer to an event which hypothetically m ight have caused death if it 
were more severe).  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization  
• Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity. (Disability is defined as a 
substantial disruption of a person’ s ability to conduct normal life functions).  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
• Is a medically important event.  This refers to an AE that may not result in death, be 
immediately life threatening, or require hospitalization, but may be considered seriou s 
when, based on appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the patient, require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above, or involves 
suspected transmission via a medicinal product of an infectious agent.  
 
Intensity ( Severity) of the Adverse Event  
The intensity or severity of AEs will be graded according to the NCI -CTCAE version 4.0 criteria.  
 
Adverse Event Documentation  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 12 of 26 
 All AEs occurring after the subject has received the first dose of investigational treatment will be 
fully recorded in the subject’s case record form.  Documentation will be supported by an entry in 
the subject’s file.  Each event will be described in detail alon g with start and stop dates, severity, 
relationship to study treatment, action taken and outcome.  
 
7.3. Study Procedure Adverse Events  
Treatment -related AEs will be categorized and graded based on the NCI -CTCAE version 4.0.   
Treatment  should be interrupted for Grade 4 in -field toxicity and resumed when that toxicity has 
decreased to Grade ≤2 as detailed below.  If treatment is interrupted for >2 weeks, the pa tient 
should be removed from study treatment.   Expected AEs include r eversible or permanent 
alopecia, bone marrow toxicity, skin pigmentation, esophagitis  and radiation pneumonitis .  
Radiation -induced myocarditis or transverse myelitis rarely occur s at dos es <50 Gy.   
Radiographic evidence of density  change and subsequent fibrosis of the lung will occur within 
lung volume receiving ≥20 Gy, usually within the first six months  after initiation of treatment.  
 
Esophagitis  
Esophageal complaints are common with thoracic radio therapy.  Esophagitis typically 
manifests as dysphagia, odynophagia, and reflux symptoms.  Acute esophagitis occurs 
during a course of treatment and often persists for several weeks after treatment (Werner -
Wasik et al. , 2010 ).  The symptoms of severe esophagitis (Grade ≥3) typically peak 4 -8 
weeks from the beginning of treatment.  Late esophageal damage, typically stricture and 
associated dysphagia, develops ~3 -8 months after treatment.  Esophagitis does no t 
constitute a reason to interrupt or delay radiotherapy provided oral intake is sufficient to 
maintain hydration.  If Grade 3 or 4 esophagitis occurs, and a treatment interruption is 
being considered, every effort should be made to limit it to 3 treatment  days or less.  
 
Acute esophageal toxicity should be pharmacologically managed with the following 
approach and should be initiated at the first signs or symptoms of esophageal toxicity.  
Recommended treatments are as follows:  
1) Patients should be advised to avoid alcoholic, acidic, or spicy foods or beverages.  
2) Ketoconazole 200 mg PO q day OR Fluconazole 100 mg PO q day until completion 
of radiation.  
3) Mixture of: 2% viscous lidocaine: 60 cc, Mylanta: 30 cc, sucralfate (1 gm/cc): 10 
cc; Take 15 -30 cc PO q3 -4 hrs prn (Contraindi cations: pts on Dilantin, Cipro, 
Digoxin) . 
4) Ranitidine 150 mg PO BID (or other H2 blocker or a proton pump inhibitor such as 
omeprazole) until the completion of radiation . 
5) Grade 4 esophagitis: hold radiotherapy  until Grade ≤2.  
6) Occasionally, narcotics may b e required.  
 
Radiation p neumonitis  
Radiation pneumonitis is a subacute (weeks to months from treatment) inflammation of 
the end bronchioles and alveoli.  Approximately 80% of radiation pneumonitis is clinically 
manifest within 10 months of treatment (Marks  et al. , 2010 ).  The clinical picture may be 
very similar to acute bacterial pneumonia, with fatigue, fever, shortness of breath, 
nonproductive cough, and a pulmonary infiltrate on chest x -ray.  The infiltrate on chest x -
ray should include the area treated to high dose, bu t may extend outside of these regions.  
The infiltrates may be characteristically “geometric” corresponding to the radiation portal, 
but may also be ill defined.  
 
Patients reporting symptoms as above will be promptly evaluated and treated.  Mild 
radiation pneumonitis may be treated with nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory agents or steroid 
inhalers.  More significant pneumonitis will be treated with systemic steroids, 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 13 of 26 
 bronchodilators, and pulmonary toilet.  Supra - and concurrent infections should be treated 
with antibiotics.  Consideration of prophylaxis of opportunistic infections should be 
considered in immunocompromised patients.  
 
It is unlikely that symptomatic pneumonitis will occur during the weeks radiation is actually 
delivered to the patients.   However, if a patient experiences pneumonitis before 
completing therapy, therapy will be put on hold until symptoms resolve.  At that point, a 
clinical decision whether to finish therapy will be made by the treating physicians.  
 
 
AEs may be spontaneously reported by the patient and/or in response to an open question from 
study personnel or revealed by observation, physical examination, or other diagnostic procedures 
must be reported to Co-PI, Dr. Daly  (or designee).  
 
Reporting Forms:  
• SAE Report Form  
• Reporting to the FDA: US FDA MedWatch 3500A  
(http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/DownloadForms/default.htm )  
 
Each serious AE will be followed up until resolution or stabilization, by submission of updated 
reports to the Co-PI, Dr. Daly.   Both serious and non -serious AEs will be reported in accordance 
with UCD Institutional Review Board ( IRB) Administration and UCD Cancer Cent er policies.  The 
UC Davis IRB can be reached at (916) 703 -9151.  
 
8. Data Review and Management  
8.1. Patient Registration  
Once signed, informed consent has been obtained and all pre -treatment evaluations have been 
performed, patients will be entered on study according to UCD Cancer Center  policy.  To register 
a patient, the research nurse or data manager will complete the Eligibility Checklist and the Patient 
Registration Form.  A pat ient accession number will then be assigned.  Study biopsy and 
administration of study drug may not be initiated until the patient is registered.   An original signed 
and dated participant Informed Consent document will reside in a secured location within t he UCD 
Department of Radiation Oncology.  Copies of the signed and dated Informed Consent document 
will be provided to the study participant and UCD Health System Information Management for 
inclusion in the participant’s UCD Health System Medical Record.  
 
8.2. Data Collection  
All data will be collected using the UCD Database System (eVELOS) forms.   
 
9. Statistical Considerations  
9.1. Study endpoints  
Primary endpoint s 
(1) Grade ≥3 radiation pneumonitis, (2) grade ≥3 esophagitis, (3) other grade ≥3 AEs that occur 
≤12 months after treatment  and drop-out defined as definitely, probably, or possibly related to the 
protocol treatment . 
 
 
Secondary endpoints  
1) Long -term t oxicity, as scored by the NCI-CTCAE version 4.0 . 
2) Clinical and subclinical endpoints for pulmonary toxicity (including radiation pneumonitis and 
post-treatment changes in PFTs, 6-min walk test, and BODE index) . 
3) Correlation between  the clinical /subclinical endpoints for pulmonary toxicity and functional 
dose -volume parameters . 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 14 of 26 
 4) Local tumor control.  
5) Lung functional dose -volume metrics, including the functional Vx (fVx) (% volume receiving ≥ x 
Gy) and functional mea n lung dose (fMLD).  
 
9.2. Patient accrual  
We aim to accrue 34 patients over 1.5 years.  Patient accrual will continue  until either the projected 
sample of 34 patients has been enrolled, or the number of patients developing Grade  ≥3 AEs or 
drop-out due to intolerance of treatment exceeds five.  Patient follow -up will continue until all 
patients have at least two years  of follow -up, to allow for assessment of longer -term AEs. 
 
9.3. Analysis plan  
Primary endpoint s: (1) Grade ≥3 radiation  pneumonitis, (2) grade ≥3 esophagitis, (3) other grade 
≥3 AEs  that occur ≤12 months after treatment  and drop-out defined as definitely, probably, or 
possibly  related to the protocol treatment.  
We will estimate the rates of AEs and tolerability with exact 95% confidence intervals.  4D CT 
ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy will be considered safe if AE rates are lower 
than the following acceptable rates ( determined based on the published toxicity data for locally 
advanced lung cancer patients ): (1) grade ≥3 radiation pneumonitis, 13% (Jiang  et al. , 2012 ), (2) 
grade ≥3 esophagitis , 21% (Wei et al. , 2006), and (3) other grade ≥3 AEs and drop -out, 20% 
(Bradley  et al. , 2015 ). 
 
Secondary  endpoints  
Analyses of secondary endpoints will be primarily descriptive rather than hypothesis testing.  
 
Toxicity will be summarized by frequency and exact 95% confidence intervals, overall and 
separately by grade and organ system.  
 
The clinical significance of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy will be 
estimated by evaluating: (1) clinical and subclinical endpoints for pulmonary toxicity (including 
radiation pneumonitis, PFTs, 6-min walk test, and BODE index); (2) correlation between those 
endpoints and functional dose -volume parameters .  Radiation pneumonitis will be assessed at 
follow -up every 3 months for a minimum of 2 years after treatment using the NCI -CTCAE version 
4.0.  Post -treatment changes in PFT s (including spirometry, lung volumes and diffusing  capacity ), 
6-min walk test, and the BODE index will be evaluated at the time of 6 -month follow -up.  Using 
composite treatment plans, the following lung functional dose -volume parameters will be 
calculated: functional mean lung dose (fMLD), functional V 20 (fV20) and functional effective dose 
(fD eff) (Vinogradskiy  et al. , 2013 ), which will be correlated with the endpoints for pulmonary toxicity.  
 
To quantify the dosimetric  significance of 4D CT ventilation image -guided adaptive radiotherapy , 
we will create: (1) 4D CT ventilation image -guided adaptive radiotherapy plan, (2) 4D CT 
ventilation image -guided non -adaptive radiotherapy  plan, and (3) anatomical image -guided non -
adaptive radiotherapy  plan.  We will evaluate the lung functional dose -volume parameters, 
including the functional Vx (fVx) (% volume receiving ≥ x Gy) and functional mean lung dose (fMLD) 
for each plan .  The lung functional d ose-volume parameters of the 4D  CT ventilation image -guided 
adaptive radiotherapy  plans will b e compared with those of the 4D  CT ventilation image -guided 
non-adaptive radiotherapy  plans and anatomical image -guided non -adaptive radiotherapy  plans 
using a paired t-test.  Furthermore, we wi ll also investigate sensitivity to the number (1 or 2) and 
time (16 -20 Gy and/or 30 -34 Gy) of plan adaptation to design an optimal adaptive radiotherapy  
strategy, e.g., when and how many time(s) to adapt the original plan.  
9.4. Sample size  
We will examine the safety of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy based 
on AEs during the first 12 months of follow -up and toxicity -related drop -out.  With a sample size 
of 34 patients, we will be able to see grade ≥3 radiation pneumonitis , grade ≥3 esophagitis and 
other grade ≥3 AEs  at least once with 94%, 99% and 99%  probabilit ies, respectively, assuming 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 15 of 26 
 true rates of 13%, 21% and 20%, respectively.  We can also estimate these AE rates with a 
standard error of 8%, 9% and 9%, respectively.  
 
Approximately 37% of patients are estimated to die over the first 12  months of follow -up according 
to the published survival data for patients with locally advanced NSCLC  (Machtay  et al. , 2012 ).  
Also 1% of patients are estimated to drop out for reasons unrelated to the protocol treatment.  To 
compensate for possible loss of patients for such reasons, a sample size of 34 (increased by 38% 
from 20) will be used.  
 
9.5. Interim analysis to monitor study progress  
Interim reports will be prepared twice yearly until the final analysis has been completed. In 
general, reports will describe accrual, projected completion date, pre -treatment characteristics of 
patients, and frequency and severity of adverse events.  
 
10. Stud y Timelines  
Task  Year 1  Year 2  
Enroll 34 patients and deliver 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized 
radiotherapy      
Assess the safety/feasibility of 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized 
radiotherapy      
Estimate the clinical significance of 4D CT ventilation image -guided 
personalized radiotherapy      
 
11. Patient Assessments  
11.1.  Pre-treatment assessments  
Staging workup will include PET/CT, MRI of the brain  (this is only required for locally advanced 
patients and for other patients, it is optional) , and CT of the chest and upper abdomen performed 
with contrast  (recommended , but not required ) within 8 weeks prior to registration, as well as 
histologic or cytologic documentation of lung cancer.  PFT to include routine spirometry, lung 
volumes, and diffusing  capacity  should be performed within 8 weeks  before treatment .  CBC with 
differential an d comprehensive metabolic panel will be obtained within 14 days of enrollment to 
ensure adequate marrow reserve and end organ function.   
 
11.2.  Evaluation during treatment  
In an effort to improve the capture and consistency of AE reporting, essential AEs commonly 
associated with lung cancer radiotherapy , including but not limited to esophagitis, pneumonitis, 
pericarditis, dermatitis, hematologic toxicit y, and chest wall pain  are to be assessed at baseline  
and weekly during treatment  using the NCI -CTCAE version 4.0 .  Additional AE terms and grading 
criteria can be accessed online at  http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc. html.  Guidelines for 
management of AEs are outlined in section 7.  History, physical examination , Zubrod performance 
status, and body weight will also be obtained weekly during treatment.  
 
 
 
11.3.  Discontinuation of protocol treatment   
Protocol treatment may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:  
• Progression of disease  
• Unacceptable adverse events [at the discretion of the treating physician(s)]  
• Patient refusal  
• If protocol treatment is discontinued, follow -up and data collection will co ntinue as 
specified.  
 
11.4.  Post -treatment evaluations  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 16 of 26 
 In an effort to improve the capture and consistency of AE reporting, essential AEs commonly 
associated with lung cancer radiotherapy , including esophagitis, pneumonitis, pericarditis, 
dermatitis, hematologic  toxicities, spinal cord injury, chest wall pain, and are to be assessed at 
follow -up every 3 months for a minimum of 2 years after treatment using the NCI -CTCAE version 
4.0.  Additional AE terms and grading criteria can be accessed online at  
http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html .  Post-treatment PFTs will be performed at 6 months 
post-treatment, to include routine spirometry, lung volumes, diffusing  capacity and diffusing  
capacity . 
 
Disease response and progression will be monitored by the use of contrast -enhanced CT of the 
chest every 3 months for the first 2 years post -treatment.  PET/CT will be obtained at the discretion 
of the treating physician or to follow up suspicious findings on CT.   Patient assessments are 
outlined in Appendix II I. 
 
11.5.  Discontinuation of follow -up assessments  
Follow -up assessments may be discontinued for either of the following reasons:  
• Patient refusal  
• Patient’s withdrawal of consent; Data for these patients will not be used for analysis.  
• Otherwise, patients will be followed at least every three  months  for two years following 
treatment . 
 
12. Ethical and Regulatory Considerations  
12.1.  Ethical conduct of the study  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP) according to (International Conference on Harmonization) ICH guidelines.  
Specifically, the study will be conducted under a protocol reviewed by the IRB; the study will be 
conducted by scientifically and medically qualified persons; the benefits of the study are in 
proportion to the risks; the rights and welfare of the subjects will be respected; the physicians 
conducting the study do not find the ha zards to outweigh the potential benefits; and each subject 
will give his or her written, informed consent before any protocol -driven tests or eva luations are 
performed.  
 
Essential clinical documents will be maintained to demonstrate the validity of the stu dy and the 
integrity of the data collected.  Master files will be established at the beginning of the study, 
maintained for the duration of the study and retained according to the appropriate regulations.  
 
12.2.  Informed consent procedures  
Informed consent will be obtained before conducting any study -specific procedures ( i.e., all of the 
procedures described in the protocol).  The process of obtaining informed consent will be 
documented in the patient source documents.  
 
All patients will have signed an informed c onsent for participation in research activities in 
accord ance  with all institutional, NCI and Federal regulations, and will have been given a copy of 
the Experimental Subject ’s Bill of Rights.  
 
12.3.  Protocol d eviations  
PI, Dr. Yamamoto and Co -PI, Dr. Daly will discuss  all protocol waivers and/or treatment deviations  
immediately , and will  submit an amendment to the protocol if the deviation is likely to occur again.  
All protocol deviations will be reported in accordance with UCD IRB Administration and UCD 
Cancer Center policies.  
 
13. Data Safety and Monitoring  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 17 of 26 
 In addition to the requirements for AE reporting as outlined in section 7, this protocol is also subject 
to the UC Davis Cancer Center’s (UCDCC) Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  The UCDCC is 
committed to pursuing high -quality patient -oriented clinical research and has established 
mechanisms to ensure both scientific rigor and patient safety in the conduct of clinical research 
studies.  The UCDCC relies on a multi -tiered committee system that reviews and monitors all 
cancer clinical trials and ensures the safety of its participants, in compliance with institutional and 
federal requirements on AE reporting, verification of data accuracy, and adherence to protocol 
eligibility requirem ents, treatment guidelines, and related matters.  The Scientific Review 
Committee (SRC) assumes overall oversight of cancer studies, with assistance and input from 
two independent, but interacting, committees: the Quality Assurance Committee and the Data 
Safety Monitoring Committee.   A multi -level review system strengthens the ability of the UCDCC 
to fulfill its mission in conducting high quality clinical cancer research.  
 
14. Data Sharing  
The anonymized pre - and mid -treatment CT image data acquired in this stu dy will be shared with 
external investigators  upon request for other research activities .  To date we have received a 
request from Dr. Rene Werner ( University Me dical Center Hamburg -Eppendorf, Germany ) who 
will develop a repeat 4D CT image database that wi ll be publicly accessible for various 
developments and investigations such as respiratory motion modeling.  Anonymized CT image 
data will be transferred through cloud -based secure file sharing, e.g., Box 
(https://ucdavis.app.box.com ). 
 
15. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Potential benefits from this study include a potentially lower risk to experience pulmonary toxicity 
by 4D CT ventilation image -guided personalized radiotherapy compared to standard anatomic 
image -guided radiotherapy.   However, there is no guarantee that the patient will benefit directly 
from participating in this study.  
 
16. Economic Burden to Subjects  
There will be no additional costs to subjects  because of participation in this study . 
 
17. Sharing of Results with Subjects  
The results of this study will not be shared with subjects or subjects ’ primary care physicians.  
 
18.      Devices  
In vivo EPID dosimetry with the PerFRACTION  software calculates the dose of the day 
reconstructed from EPID measurements in patient anatomy using the treatment plan CT image 
data.  The calculated dose of the day will be compared with the plan dose to estimate changes in 
patient anatomy.  The perfor mance of in vivo EPID dosimetry will be evaluated by comparing the 
PerFRACTION analysis results with the dose of the day calculated with the mid -treatment CT 
image data as reference.   This device poses no additional risk to subjects.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Abratt R P, Willcox P A and Smith J A 1990 Lung cancer in patients with borderline lung 
functions --zonal lung perfusion scans at presentation and lung function after high dose 
irradiation Radiother Oncol  19 317-22 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 18 of 26 
 Barriger R B, Forquer J A, Brabham J G, Andolino D L, Shapiro R H, Henderson M A, Johnstone 
P A and Fakiris A J 2012 A dose -volume analysis of radiation pneumonitis in non -small 
cell lung cancer patients treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy Int J Radiat Oncol 
Biol Phys  82 457-62 
Bradley J, Graham M V, Winter K, Purdy J A, Komaki R, Roa W H, Ryu J K, Bosch W and 
Emami B 2005a Toxicity and outcome results of RTOG 9311: a phase I -II dose -escalation 
study using three -dimensional conformal radiothera py in patients with inoperable non -
small -cell lung carcinoma Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  61 318-28 
Bradley J, Paulus R, Komaki R, Masters G A, Forster K, Schild S E, Bogart J, Garces Y I, Narayan 
S, Kavadi V, Nedzi L A, Michalski J M, Johnson D, MacRae R M, Curran W J, Choy H 
and RTOG 2013 A randomized phase III comparison of standard -dose (60 Gy) versu s high -
dose (74 Gy) conformal chemoradiotherapy with or without cetuximab for stage III non -
small cell lung cancer: Results on radiation dose in RTOG 0617 J Clin Oncol  31 7501 
(Abstract)  
Bradley J D, Graham M, Suzanne S, Byhardt R, Govindan R, Fowler J, Pu rdy J, Michalski J, Gore 
E and Choy H 2005b Phase I results of RTOG L -0117; a phase I/II dose intensification 
study using 3DCRT and concurrent chemotherapy for patients with Inoperable NSCLC J 
Clin Oncol  23 7063 (Abstract)  
Bradley J D, Paulus R, Komaki R, Masters G, Blumenschein G, Schild S, Bogart J, Hu C, Forster 
K, Magliocco A, Kavadi V, Garces Y I, Narayan S, Iyengar P, Robinson C, Wynn R B, 
Koprowski C, Meng J, Beitler J, Gaur R, Curran W, Jr. and Choy H 2015 Standard -dose 
versus high -dose conformal ra diotherapy with concurrent and consolidation carboplatin 
plus paclitaxel with or without cetuximab for patients with stage IIIA or IIIB non -small -
cell lung cancer (RTOG 0617): a randomised, two -by-two factorial phase 3 study Lancet 
Oncol  16 187-99 
Carey Sa mpson M, Katz A and Constine L S 2006 Stereotactic body radiation therapy for 
extracranial oligometastases: does the sword have a double edge? Semin Radiat Oncol  16 
67-76 
Castillo R, Castillo E, Martinez J and Guerrero T 2010 Ventilation from four -dimensio nal 
computed tomography: density versus Jacobian methods Phys Med Biol  55 4661 -85 
Castillo R, Castillo E, McCurdy M, Gomez D R, Block A M, Bergsma D, Joy S and Guerrero T 
2012 Spatial correspondence of 4D CT ventilation and SPECT pulmonary perfusion 
defect s in patients with malignant airway stenosis Phys Med Biol  57 1855 -71 
Ding K, Bayouth J E, Buatti J M, Christensen G E and Reinhardt J M 2010 4DCT -based 
measurement of changes in pulmonary function following a course of radiation therapy 
Med Phys  37 1261 -72 
Ding K, Cao K, Fuld M K, Du K, Christensen G E, Hoffman E A and Reinhardt J M 2012 
Comparison of image registration based measures of regional lung ventilation from 
dynamic spiral CT with Xe -CT Med Phys  39 5084 -98 
Du K, Bayouth J E, Cao K, Christensen G E, Ding K and Reinhardt J M 2012 Reproducibility of 
registration -based measures of lung tissue expansion Med Phys  39 1595 -608 
Fu X L, Huang H, Bentel G, Clough R, Jirtle R L, Kong F M, Marks L B and Anscher M S 2001 
Predicting the risk of symptomatic radia tion-induced lung injury using both the physical 
and biologic parameters V(30) and transforming growth factor beta Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys  50 899-908 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 19 of 26 
 Fuld M K, Easley R B, Saba O I, Chon D, Reinhardt J M, Hoffman E A and Simon B A 2008 CT -
measured reg ional specific volume change reflects regional ventilation in supine sheep J 
Appl Physiol  104 1177 -84 
Guerrero T, Sanders K, Noyola -Martinez J, Castillo E, Zhang Y, Tapia R, Guerra R, Borghero Y 
and Komaki R 2005 Quantification of regional ventilation from  treatment planning CT Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  62 630-4 
Hayman J A, Martel M K, Ten Haken R K, Normolle D P, Todd R F, 3rd, Littles J F, Sullivan M 
A, Possert P W, Turrisi A T and Lichter A S 2001 Dose escalation in non -small -cell lung 
cancer using th ree-dimensional conformal radiation therapy: update of a phase I trial J Clin 
Oncol  19 127-36 
Hope A J, Naqa E I, Bradley J D, Vivic M, Lindsay P E, Bosch W R, Purdy J A and Deasy J O 
2004 Radiation pneumonitis/fibrosis risk based on dosiemtric, clinical, and location -related 
factors Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  60 S204 (Abstract)  
Ireland R H, Bragg C M, McJury M, Woodhouse N, Fichele S, van Beek E J, Wild J M and Hatton 
M Q 2007 Feasibility of image registration and intensity -modulated radiotherapy plannin g 
with hyperpolarized helium -3 magnetic resonance imaging for non -small -cell lung cancer 
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  68 273-81 
Jenkins P, D'Amico K, Benstead K and Elyan S 2003 Radiation pneumonitis following treatment 
of non -small -cell lung cancer with c ontinuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy 
(CHART) Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  56 360-6 
Jiang Z Q, Yang K, Komaki R, Wei X, Tucker S L, Zhuang Y, Martel M K, Vedam S, Balter P, 
Zhu G, Gomez D, Lu C, Mohan R, Cox J D and Liao Z 2012 Long -term cli nical outcome 
of intensity -modulated radiotherapy for inoperable non -small cell lung cancer: the MD 
Anderson experience Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  83 332-9 
Komaki R, Lee J S, Milas L, Lee H K, Fossella F V, Herbst R S, Allen P K, Liao Z, Stevens C W, 
Lu C, Zinner R G, Papadimitrakopoulou V A, Kies M S, Blumenschein G R, Jr., Pisters K 
M, Glisson B S, Kurie J, Kaplan B, Garza V P, Mooring D, Tucker S L and Cox J D 2004 
Effects of amifostine on acute toxicity from concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy fo r 
inoperable non -small -cell lung cancer: report of a randomized comparative trial Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  58 1369 -77 
Machtay M, Bae K, Movsas B, Paulus R, Gore E M, Komaki R, Albain K, Sause W T and Curran 
W J 2012 Higher biologically effective dose o f radiotherapy is associated with improved 
outcomes for locally advanced non -small cell lung carcinoma treated with chemoradiation: 
an analysis of the radiation therapy oncology group Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  82 425-
34 
Maguire P D, Sibley G S, Zhou S M , Jamieson T A, Light K L, Antoine P A, Herndon J E, 2nd, 
Anscher M S and Marks L B 1999 Clinical and dosimetric predictors of radiation -induced 
esophageal toxicity Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  45 97-103 
Marks L B, Bentzen S M, Deasy J O, Kong F M, Bradley  J D, Vogelius I S, El Naqa I, Hubbs J L, 
Lebesque J V, Timmerman R D, Martel M K and Jackson A 2010 Radiation dose -volume 
effects in the lung Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  76 S70-6 
Marks L B, Spencer D P, Sherouse G W, Bentel G, Clough R, Vann K, Jaszczak R, Coleman R E 
and Prosnitz L R 1995 The role of three dimensional functional lung imaging in radiation 
treatment planning: the functional dose -volume histogram Int J Radiat Oncol B iol Phys  33 
65-75 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 20 of 26 
 Mathew L, Wheatley A, Castillo R, Castillo E, Rodrigues G, Guerrero T and Parraga G 2012 
Hyperpolarized (3)He magnetic resonance imaging: comparison with four -dimensional x -
ray computed tomography imaging in lung cancer Acad Radiol  19 1546-53 
Palma D A, Senan S, Tsujino K, Barriger R B, Rengan R, Moreno M, Bradley J D, Kim T H, 
Ramella S, Marks L B, De Petris L, Stitt L and Rodrigues G 2013 Predicting radiation 
pneumonitis after chemoradiation therapy for lung cancer: an international indi vidual 
patient data meta -analysis Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  85 444-50 
Reinhardt J M, Ding K, Cao K, Christensen G E, Hoffman E A and Bodas S V 2008 Registration -
based estimates of local lung tissue expansion compared to xenon CT measures of specific 
ventilation Med Image Anal  12 752-63 
Rosenman J G, Halle J S, Socinski M A, Deschesne K, Moore D T, Johnson H, Fraser R and 
Morris D E 2002 High -dose conformal radiotherapy for treatment of stage IIIA/IIIB non -
small -cell lung cancer: technical issues and resu lts of a phase I/II trial Int J Radiat Oncol 
Biol Phys  54 348-56 
Seppenwoolde Y, De Jaeger K, Boersma L J, Belderbos J S and Lebesque J V 2004 Regional 
differences in lung radiosensitivity after radiotherapy for non -small -cell lung cancer Int J 
Radiat Onco l Biol Phys  60 748-58 
Siegel R, Ward E, Brawley O and Jemal A 2011 Cancer statistics, 2011: the impact of eliminating 
socioeconomic and racial disparities on premature cancer deaths CA Cancer J Clin  61 212-
36 
Simon B A 2000 Non -invasive imaging of regional lung function using x -ray computed 
tomography J Clin Monit Comput  16 433-42 
Singh A K, Lockett M A and Bradley J D 2003 Predictors of radiation -induced esophageal toxicity 
in patients with non -small -cell lung  cancer treated with three -dimensional conformal 
radiotherapy Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  55 337-41 
Staring M, Klein S, Reiber J H C, Niessen W J and Stoel B C 2010 Pulmonary Image Registration 
with elastix using a Standard Intensity -Based Algorithm. In: Proc. of the Medical Image 
Analysis For The Clinic - A Grand Challenge, MICCAI,  
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W, Bradley J, Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic 
G, Johnstone D, Fowler J, Gore E and Choy H 2010 Stereotactic body radiation th erapy 
for inoperable early stage lung cancer JAMA  303 1070 -6 
Tyldesley S, Boyd C, Schulze K, Walker H and Mackillop W J 2001 Estimating the need for 
radiotherapy for lung cancer: an evidence -based, epidemiologic approach Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys  49 973-85 
Vinogradskiy Y, Castillo R, Castillo E, Tucker S L, Liao Z, Guerrero T and Martel M K 2013 Use 
of 4-dimensional computed tomography -based ventilation imaging to correlate lung dose 
and function with clinical outcomes Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  86 366-71 
Vinogradskiy Y Y, Castillo R, Castillo E, Chandler A, Martel M K and Guerrero T 2012 Use of 
weekly 4DCT -based ventilation maps to quantify changes in lung function for patients 
undergoing radiation therapy Med Phys  39 289-98 
Wei X, Liu H H, Tucker S L,  Liao Z, Hu C, Mohan R, Cox J D and Komaki R 2006 Risk factors 
for acute esophagitis in non -small -cell lung cancer patients treated with concurrent 
chemotherapy and three -dimensional conformal radiotherapy Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  
66 100-7 
Werner -Wasik  M, Pequignot E, Leeper D, Hauck W and Curran W 2000 Predictors of severe 
esophagitis include use of concurrent chemotherapy, but not the length of irradiated 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 21 of 26 
 esophagus: a multivariate analysis of patients with lung cancer treated with nonoperative 
therapy  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  48 689-96 
Werner -Wasik M, Yorke E, Deasy J, Nam J and Marks L B 2010 Radiation dose -volume effects 
in the esophagus Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  76 S86-93 
Yamamoto T, Kabus S, Lorenz C, Mittra E, Hong J C, Chung M, Eclov N, To  J, Diehn M, Loo B 
W and Keall P J 2014 Pulmonary ventilation imaging based on four -dimensional CT: 
Comparison with pulmonary function tests and SPECT ventilation images Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys  In press  
Yamamoto T, Kabus S, von Berg J, Lorenz C, Chung  M P, Hong J C, Loo B W, Jr. and Keall P J 
2012 Reproducibility of four -dimensional computed tomography -based lung ventilation 
imaging Acad Radiol  19 1554 -65 
Yamamoto T, Kabus S, von Berg J, Lorenz C and Keall P J 2011 Impact of four -dimensional 
computed t omography pulmonary ventilation imaging -based functional avoidance for lung 
cancer radiotherapy Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  79 279-88 
Yaremko B P, Guerrero T M, Noyola -Martinez J, Guerra R, Lege D G, Nguyen L T, Balter P A, 
Cox J D and Komaki R 2007 Reduc tion of normal lung irradiation in locally advanced non -
small -cell lung cancer patients, using ventilation images for functional avoidance Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  68 562-71 
Yorke E D, Jackson A, Rosenzweig K E, Braban L, Leibel S A and Ling C C 2005 Correlation of 
dosimetric factors and radiation pneumonitis for non -small -cell lung cancer patients in a 
recently completed dose escalation study Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  63 672-82 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 22 of 26 
 APPENDIX I : 
 
 
 
 
ZUBROD PERFORMANCE SCALE  
 
0  Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease activities without restriction  (Karnofsky 90 -
100).  
 
1  Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry  work of a light 
or sedentary nature. For example, light housework, office  work (Karnofsky 70 -80). 
 
2  Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours (Karnofsky 50 -60). 
 
3  Capable of only limite d self -care, confined to bed or chair 50% or more of  waking hours 
(Karnofsky 30 -40). 
 
4  Completely disabled. Cannot carry on self -care. Totally confined to bed or  (Karnofsky 10 -
20). 
 
5  Death (Karnofsky 0).  
 
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 23 of 26 
 APPENDIX I I: 
 
 
Eligibility Checklist  
 
____________ (Y)  1. Does the patient have histologically d ocumented primary lung 
cancer (NSCLC or SCLC)?  or histologically documentation of a solid 
tumor with clear radiographic evidence of spread to the lungs amenable 
to SBRT  (for SBRT patients only; if CT -guided lung biopsy is deemed 
unsafe by interventional radiology, documented multidisciplinary review 
confirming radiographic diagnosis of early stage lung cancer or lung 
metastasis may be used)  
____________ (Y)  2. Is definitiv e thoracic radiotherapy planned?  
• Conventionally -fractionated radiotherapy (CFRT) (with or without 
concurrent chemotherapy)   
• Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR)  
____________ (Y)  3. Is the patient ≥18 years of age?  
____________ (Y)  4. Is the life expectancy with treatment ≥6 months?  
____________ (Y)  5. Is the Zubrod performance status 0 -2? 
____________ (Y)  6. Does the patient have adequate marrow reserve defined as an ANC 
≥1500, plt ≥100,000, Hgb ≥8 g/d ? 
____________ (Y)  7. Does the patient have adequate end organ function defined as LFTs 
≤2x upper limit of normal and creatinine ≤ 2.0 or creatinine clearance 
≥40? 
____________ (Y)  8. Is the patient able to provide study specific informed consent?  
____________ (N)  9. Has the patient had prior radiotherapy or other malignancy leading to 
any overlap of planned radiotherapy fields ? 
____________ (Y /N) 10. Is concurrent chemotherapy planned?  
____________ (Y /N) 11. Was a CT with contrast of lung and upper abdomen performed within 
8 weeks of registration?  (Recommended)  
____________ (Y)  
 
____________ (Y)  12. Was an FDG -PET performed for staging within 8 weeks of 
registration?  
13. Does the patient have locally advanced disease?  
____________ (Y)  14. If yes on #13, w as an MRI or CT of the brain performed for staging 
within 8 weeks of registration ?  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 24 of 26 
 ____________ (N)  15. Does the patient have any evidence of malignant pleural or 
pericardial effusion?  
____________ (N)  16. Does the patient have radiographic evidence of distant metastases ? 
____________ (Y/NA)  17. Has the patient agreed to use an effective method of contraception?  
____________ (N)  18. If female, is the patient pregnant or lactating?  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 25 of 26 
 APPENDIX I II: 
 
Patient Assessments  
 
Assessments  Pre-study 
entry At time of 
simulation  Mid-RT 
(8-10 fx)  Mid-RT 
(15-17 fx)  Weekly 
during RT  Q3 months for 2 
years post -RT 
Evaluations        
History/Physical  ≤21 days     X X 
Zubrod, weight  ≤21 days     X X 
Histologic or 
cytologic tumor 
evaluation **** No Time 
Limit        
Protocol -specific 
AE evaluation  ≤21 days     X X 
Pulmonary 
function test ≤3 months      X* 
6-min walk test  ≤42 days      X† 
BODE index  ≤42 days      X‡ 
Imaging (staging)        
CT w/  contrast of 
lung/upper 
abdomen  ≤56 days  
†††     X 
MRI brain *** ≤56 days      As clinically 
indicated  
PET/CT  ≤56 days      As clinically 
indicated  
Imaging  (RT 
planning and 
study)        
Free-breathing CT   X X§ X**   
4D CT   X X†† X‡‡   
Labs        
CBC with 
differential  ≤14 days     X X 
Comprehensive 
metabolic panel 
including LFTs 
and creatinine  ≤14 days      X 
 
* At 6-month post -RT follow -up only .  
† At 6-month post -RT follow -up only . 
‡ At 6-month post -RT follow -up only . 
§ CFRT only.  
** CFRT only.  
†† CFRT only.  
‡‡ CFRT only.   
***Required for locally advanced patients only  
††† Recommended  
****Biopsy mandatory for CFRT only  
CT w/ contrast for SBRT Q3 months for 1 year, then as clinically indicated  
CCRO030  
Version Date: 10/22/2020  
 
Page 26 of 26 
  