  
TCZ in Myositis 1 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     INSTITUTION or COOPERATIVE GROUP NAME  
 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 
     
Study Title 
Tocilizumab in the Treatment of Refractory Polymyositis and Der matomyositis 
 
 Study  Drug 
Tocilizumab (ACTEMRA®) 
 
Support Provided By 
Genentech 
 
Sponsor Investigator 
Chester V. Oddis, MD (University of Pittsburgh) 
 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Rohit Aggarwal, MD (University of Pittsburgh) 
 
Sub-Investigators 
Siamak Moghadam-Kia, MD (University of Pittsburgh) 
Leslie Crofford, MD (Va nderbilt University) 
Mazen Dimachkie, MD and Richard  Barohn, MD (University of Kansa s Medical Center) 
Floranne Ernste, MD and Steve n Ytterberg, MD (Mayo Clinic) 
Swamy Venturupalli, MD (Cedars Sinai Medical Center) 
Mary Cronin, MD (Medical College of Wisconsin) 
Galina Marder, MD (North Shor e Long Island Jewish System) 
    
Study Number: ML28681 
NCT: 02043548    
Protocol Version Date:  Version 2.3   01/30/2015 
          
  
TCZ in Myositis 2 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Disease Background 
1.2 Tocilizumab Background 
1.3 Other Study Drug(s) Background 
1.4 Study Rationale  
2.0 OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Primary 
2.2 Secondary 
2.3 Exploratory 
 
3.0 STUDY DESIGN 
3.1 Description of the Study 
3.1.1 Study Schema 
3.2 Rationale for the Study Design 
3.3 Outcome Measures 
3.3.1 Primary Outcome Measures 
3.3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures 3.3.3 Safety Outcome Measures 
 
4.0 STUDY POPULATION 
 4.0.1 Overview 
4.1  Inclusion Criteria 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria 4.3 Immunization during Tocilizumab therapy 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
6.0 STUDY MEDICATION  
6.1 Tocilizumab 
6.1.1 Tocilizumab Dosage and Administration 
6.1.2 Tocilizumab Storage 6.1.3 Tocilizumab Overdosage 
 
6.2 Other Study Drug(s)  
7.0 DOSE MODIFICATION / TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 
7.1 Tocilizumab 
7.2 Other Drug(s) 
 
8.0 CRITERIA FOR SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION 
8.1 Tocilizumab Specific Criteria 
8.2 General Criteria 
  
TCZ in Myositis 3 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    9.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY DISCONTINUATION 
 10.0 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS  
10.1 Pre-Treatment Evaluations 
10.2 Evaluations During Treatment 10.3 Post-Treatment Evaluations 
 
11.0 REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS 
11.1 Adverse Event and Reporting Definitions 
11.2 Reporting of Serious Adverse E vents Associated With Tocili zumab  
11.3  Tocilizumab Adverse Events of Special Interest  
12.0 EVALUATION OF RESPONSE 
 13.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
13.1 Determination of Sample Size 
13.2 Planned Efficacy Evaluations 
13.2.1 Primary Efficacy Variables 
13.2.2 Secondary Efficacy Variables 
13.3 Methods of Analysis 
 
14.0 RETENTION OF RECORDS 
 REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY  APPENDICES           
Appendix A: Study Flowchart/Schema 
Appendix B: MMT-8 
Appendix C: FDA MedWatch 3500A Form                   
  
TCZ in Myositis 4 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 1.1 Disease
 Background    
 
The idiopathic inflammatory myopa thies (IIM) are rare diseases with an estimated 
incidence of 10 cases per milli on per year and are associated w ith substantial morbidity 
and mortality. The treatment of  IIM is unsatisfactory, and no a gents are currently FDA-
approved for this indication. The  rarity of IIM has led to a pa ucity of controlled 
prospective clinical trials. Oth er than the recently completed RIM (Rituximab in 
Myositis) Study [1], most reports  involve single referral cente rs reporting retrospectively 
on small numbers of patients follow ed for relatively brief peri ods of time. To compound 
matters, our ability to accuratel y assess the effects of therap eutic interventions has been 
limited by unreliable and insensitiv e outcome measures as well as the dilemma of 
determining the relative cont ributions of potentially reversibl e disease activity versus 
irreversible damage to muscle in patients with myositis.  Howev er, through the efforts of 
the International Myositis Asse ssment and Clinical Studies (IMA CS) Group, many of 
these deficiencies have been addr essed with a revised definitio n of improvement agreed 
upon by an international panel of myo sitis experts at an Intern ational Consensus 
Conference held in Paris, France in June 2014  based on validat ed core set measures 
(CSM) that were utilized in the  RIM Study [2]. The goal of this  proposal is to perform a 
collaborative multi-center trial among adult rheumatologists an d neurologists 
implementing published disease activity and damage measures in adult inflammatory 
myopathy to examine the efficacy of tocilizumab (anti-IL-6R) as  a potentially important 
new therapeutic advance for the se diseases. Through the study o f a novel biologic agent 
we will seek to elucidate the determinants of disease response and non-response in adult 
polymyositis and dermatomyositis.   
 
1.2 Tocilizumab Background and Rationale in IIM 
 
Although there are several studies supporting the efficacy of t ocilizumab in RA and 
systemic onset juvenile idiopath ic arthritis, it’s use in other  autoimmune disorders has 
also been proposed [3, 4].  A cons ensus statement on blocking t he effects of IL-6 in RA 
and other autoimmune conditions has been recently published [5] . IL-6 is involved in the 
growth and differentiation of ma ny inflammatory cells. In addit ion to its initial role in 
triggering B-cell stimulating f actor, it also induces T cell gr owth and differentiation and 
plays a critical role in both a daptive and innate immune respon ses. IL-6, produced by 
many cells including T cells, B  cells, monocytes and endothelia l cells, binds to its 
receptor (IL-6R) and subsequently triggers several intracellula r pathways leading to the 
release of inflammatory media tors and stimulation of the immune  system. Inhibition of 
IL-6 has been studied in phase II and III clinical trials of RA . It has led to a decrease in 
acute phase reactants an d other indicators of chronic inflammat ion [5]. IL-6 is also a 
potential therapeutic target i n systemic sclerosis [6], and sin ce IL-6 induces 
differentiation of B cells into a ntibody forming cells and cont ributes to T cells 
transforming into effector cells , its use in SLE has also been suggested [7].  
 The use of TCZ in myositis propose d in this protocol is support ed by the aforementioned 
rationale and its efficacy in other rheumatologic disorders. Pa tients with refractory 
polymyositis (PM) were treated with tocilizumab and responded f avorably [8]. In 
  
TCZ in Myositis 5 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    dermatomyositis, tissue infla mmation implicates soluble cytokin e networks contributing 
to disease pathogenesis.  Work on a mouse model of myositis not ed IL-6 as a mediator of 
muscle inflammation [9]. Other i nvestigators studying periphera l blood samples and 
clinical data on both adult and j uvenile dermatomyositis (DM) n oted that serum levels of 
IL-6 were significantly correla ted with disease activity [10]. In this same study, 
correlations between serum IL-6 l evels and both the type I inte rferon gene and 
chemokine signatures were also id entified in DM. These authors suggest that the 
coordinated dysregul ation of IL-6 production a nd Type I interfe ron signaling implicates 
these pathways as contributing t o disease pathogenesis in DM.  
 In a mouse model of PM, C protei n-induced myositis (CIM), the p athology reportedly 
mimics that seen in human PM [11] . Mice were treated with anti- IL-6 receptor 
monoclonal antibodies or control antibodies and muscle tissue w as histologically and 
immunohistochemically analyzed [12 ]. CIM was ameliorated in thi s mouse model 
implicating IL-6 in the development of myositis. These results not only identified this 
model as useful to understanding PM  but they suggest that IL-6 blockade be considered 
as a new therapeutic approach in the treatment of myositis [12] . 
 Thus, the collective findings de scribed above provide evidence for the involvement of IL-
6 in the pathogenesis of both adul t PM and DM as well as suppor ting its role from animal 
models and human studies. 
 
1.2.1 Tocilizumab 
 
Tocilizumab (TCZ), formerly known as myeloma receptor antibody (MRA) is a 
recombinant humanized antihum an monoclonal antibody of the immu noglobulin IgG1 
subclass directed against the  IL-6R and produced by recombinant  DNA technology. 
Clinical efficacy and safety studies of TCZ have been conducted  or are ongoing in 
various disease areas, including a dult-onset RA, systemic-onset  juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. 
 
The half-life of TCZ is appr oximately 7 days. The TCZ exposures  were stable over 2- 
years of treatment. The observe d mean (± SD) Ctrough at 8 mg/kg  IV was 15.9 ± 12.0 at 
week 24 and 19.9 ± 17.0 at week 104. The observed mean (± SD) C trough at 4 mg/kg 
was 1.02 ± 6.14 at week 24 and 1.09 ± 2.77 at week 104. 
 
The Roche clinical development  program in adult RA, comprised f ive pivotal Phase 3 
trials and two open-label, long-te rm treatment extension studie s.  
 Further information on TCZ ca n be found in the Investigator’s B rochure (IB). 
 
1.3 Other Study Drug(s) Background 
 Not applicable 
 
1.4 Study Rationale   
 
As summarized in section 1.2, there  is rationale for the use of  TCZ in patients with 
autoimmune disorders and specifically myositis. Although, there  has been a paucity of 
  
TCZ in Myositis 6 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    myositis patients who have receiv ed TCZ, the immunologic profil e of PM and DM and 
the therapeutic effects of IL-6 bl ockade in a mouse model of PM  suggest IL-6 as a 
potential therapeutic target.  
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES 
 2.1 Primary   
 
We propose a multi-center, double-bl ind, randomized placebo-con trolled proof of 
concept pilot study to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability o f TCZ in patients with 
refractory adult PM and DM.  
2.2 Secondary   
 
The secondary objectives of this study will include assessing t he rapidity of response to 
TCZ, the magnitude of the respons e to TCZ, the steroid-sparing effect of TCZ, the 
durability of response, the presen ce of adverse effects to TCZ and the determinants of 
treatment response and disease pa thogenesis in patients receivi ng IL-6 blockade. To 
assess the predictors and dete rminants of response to TCZ, bloo d and tissue samples will 
be analyzed along with clinical a nd demographic data to be coll ected in order to study 
those clinical, pathologic and imm unologic factors associated w ith a response or lack of 
response to IL-6 blockade (s ee Section 3.1.1, Future Tests).. 
  
3.0 STUDY DESIGN   
3.1 Description of the Study 
 
We propose a multi-center, double-bl ind, randomized placebo-con trolled proof of 
concept pilot study to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability o f tocilizumab in patients with 
refractory adult PM and DM. 
 
3.1.1   Study Schema  
We will enroll 40 adult patients with refractory PM (n= ~20) or  DM (n= ~20) using a 1:1 
randomization scheme for active drug:placebo, thus enrolling 20  subjects to receive 
active drug and 20 subjects to receive placebo. An effort will be made to equalize the 
number of enrolled PM and DM pa tients. The myositis subset, PM and DM, will be 
treated as a stratification variab le and a “balanced coin” appr oach will be employed to 
control treatment assignment with in enrollment sites. Refractor y patients are defined as 
having failed (or considered intol erant to) an adequate course of glucocorticoids or 
having failed glucocorticoids a nd at least one other immunosupp ressive (IS) or 
immunomodulatory agent (e.g. met hotrexate, azathioprine, cyclos porine, tacrolimus, 
mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, IVIg, anti-TNF agent, and rituximab). An 
adequate trial of glucocorticoid s in adult IIM ge nerally includ es prednisone (or an 
equivalent glucocorticoid) at a  dose of at least 60 mg/day for one month, while an 
adequate trial of an IS agent generally will be at least 3 mont hs at a dose known to be 
effective for other rheumatologi c conditions. In this trial, su bjects enrolled who have only 
  
TCZ in Myositis 7 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    been treated with glucocortico ids will have received an initial  adequate trial of 
glucocorticoids and then failed t o respond to this initial tria l or flared with features of 
active myositis as the steroids are being tapered.  Enrolled subjects will have activ e disease as defined by the fo llowing clinical core set 
measures (CSM) and subjects must  meet at least 3 of the followi ng 6 criteria of disease 
activity to be enrolled: 
 Muscle weakness as defined by an M MT-8 score that is no greater  than 136/150 (see 
Appendix B) 
 Patient global VAS with a minimum value of 2.0cm on a 10cm scal e 
 MD global VAS with a minimum value of 2.0cm on a 10cm scale 
 HAQ disability index with a minimum value of 0.25 
 Elevation of at least one of the muscle enzymes (CK, AST, ALT, aldolase, LDH) at a 
minimum level of 1.3x the ULN   
 Global extramuscular disease activity (a composite of constitut ional, cutaneous, 
skeletal, gastrointestinal, pul monary and cardiac activity) sco re with a minimum 
value of 1.0cm on a 10cm VAS scale on the Myositis Disease Acti vity Assessment 
Tool (MDAAT) 
 
All 6 CSM will be assessed at the screening visit and every 4 w eeks thereafter prior to 
administration of  TCZ which will be given at a dose of 8mg/kg (maximum dose 800mg) 
for 6 additional visits followe d by a final closing visit (at w hich time study drug will not 
be administered). Thus, there wil l be a screening visit (no dru g) followed by visits at 
weeks 0,4,8,12,16, and 20 with a week 24 c losing visit. The new ly determined definition 
of improvement  (DOI) for this trial is a com posite established by internation al consensus 
among various adult and pediatric myositis experts. The DOI nec essitates achieving ≥ 20 
points based on the mod el noted in Table 1.   
 
Table 1.  
1000Minds Model  (absolute % change)
Core Set Measure  Improvement score for each level 
of CSM  
 
MD Global Absolute % Change      
Up to <=5% 0   
>5% up to <=15% 7.5   
>15% up to <=25% 15   
>25% up to <=40% 17.5   
>40% 20   
Patient Global/Parent Global Absolute % Change     
Up to <=5% 0   
>5% up to <=15% 2.5   
>15% up to <=25% 5   
>25% up to <=40% 7.5   
>40% 10   
MMT/CMAS Absolute % Change     
Up to <=2% 0   
>2% up to <=10% 10   
  
TCZ in Myositis 8 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    >10% up to <=20% 20   
>20% up to <=30% 27.5   
>30% 32.5   
HAQ/CHAQ Absolute % Change     
Up to <=5% 0   
>5% up to <=15% 5   
>15% up to <=25% 7.5   
>25% up to <=40% 7.5   
>40% 10   
Muscle Enzyme/CHQ-PF50 Absolute % Change     
Up to <=5% 0   
>5% up to <=15% 2.5   
>15% up to <=25% 5   
>25% up to <=40% 7.5   
>40% 7.5   
Extra Muscular VAS/DAS Absolute % Change     
Up to <=5% 0   
>5% up to <=15% 7.5   
>15% up to <=25% 12.5   
>25% up to <=40% 15   
>40% 20   
Total Improvement Score is sum of score achieved in each CSM
Total improvement score ≥ cut points determines Minimal, Modera te and Major Improvement 
Profile  Improvement 
Category  Cut point on 
total 
improvement 
score  
 Adult  Minimal ≥20  
Moderate ≥40 
Major ≥60 
   
  
  
 
The primary endpoint will be the a verage of the Total Improveme nt Scores at each of the 
six follow-up points. Repeated m easures analysis will be used t o compare the two 
treatment groups and adjustments will be made for the baseline CSM values.  The total 
improvement score will be cal culated by adding the improvement scores of all six core 
set measures based on the new consensus driven improvement crit eria in myositis (as 
shown in table 1).   Additional secondary endpoints include: (1) comparison of the t ime to first DOI between 
the 2 arms, (2) comparison of the  individual CSM in subjects ov er time between the 2 
arms (repeated measures analysis), (3) comparison of the steroi d-sparing effect 
(calculated using prednisone dose equivalents) between the trea tment and placebo arms, 
(4) assessment of the magnitude  of the effect size between both  treatment arms by 
comparing the proportion of subject s having Total Improvement S cores ≥ 20 (minimal), 
40 (moderate) and 60 (major), (5) the difference in adverse eve nts between the control 
and treatment arms. The durability of the treatment response wi ll be assessed by (6) 
  
TCZ in Myositis 9 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    comparing the proportion of subject s meeting DOI in the treatme nt and placebo arms on 
2 consecutive visits , (7) determination of t he time to flare [meeting the definitio n of 
worsening (DOW)] in those who ear lier met the DOI.(8) comparing  the proportion of 
subjects meeting the DOI in the treatment and placebo arms usin g the previously 
published definition of improveme nt by IMACS for adult myositis  [2] utilizing the six 
CSM: 3 of 6 CSM improved by ≥ 20% , with no more than 2 CSM wors ening by ≥ 25% 
(a worsening measure cannot be the MMT). 
 There are preliminary criteria suggested for myositis disease w orsening [13] which 
include: (1) physician global worsening of ≥ 2 cm on the 10 cm VAS and/or worsening of 
the manual muscle testing by ≥ 20%, or (2) global extra muscula r organ disease activity 
worsening by ≥ 2 cm on a 10 cm VA S, or (3) any 3 of 6 CSM worse  by ≥ 30%. Subjects 
meeting these criteria will be c onsidered treatme nt failures if  they did not first meet 
criteria for DOI. Treatment failures will also be defined as th ose subjects not achieving 
the DOI during the 24-week treatment period.   
 Strategies for (1) allowing “escap e” therapies and (2) insuring  that the original 
randomization treatment scheme is not revealed are discussed in  Section 4.4.  
 A biospecimen repository will be developed with specimens (seru m, cells etc.) collected 
at each study visit for future studies. Baseline muscle biopsie s and a repeat muscle biopsy 
at or after the time that a subject meets DOI will be encourage d. The collected samples 
and muscle biopsies will be store d for future experimental stud ies. No specific studies or 
analysis of the muscle biopsie s are included in this proposal. We will consider 
submission of ancillary proposals to conduct experiments design ed to further elucidate 
biomarkers and basic physiologic and cellular mechanisms of dis ease resulting from 
tocilizumab therapy.   Future Tests: The Specimen Repository samples will be used for two types of r esearch:  
1) immunologic and 2) genetic.  1. Immunology Research      
Tests to be performed on the s tored blood and/or  muscle biopsy  samples include 
the following: T and B cell flow cytometry, RNA-Seq analysis, a utoantibody 
testing for the presence of myositis associated autoantibodies,  serum interferon 
(IFN)-inducible chemokines , Th1, Th2, Th17, innate, and regulat ory cytokines at 
baseline and later time points i n this clinical trial to identi fy a biomarker signature 
predicting responsiveness to I L-6 blockade.  These immunology t ests will be 
conducted in a research laborat ory, not a public certified labo ratory.  Therefore, 
subjects will not be infor med of these results.   
 2. Genetic Research    
Tests may include:  
a) Immunogenetic testing.  This incl udes testing for components of  the 
immune system that are inherited.   
  
TCZ in Myositis 10 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    b) Genetic analysis.  While the exa ct nature of the genetic resear ch studies is 
not fully known, they may involve i dentifying genes that can: 1 ) increase 
the risk of developing autoimmune illnesses such as myositis, 2 ) modify 
the severity of autoimmune disease, or 3) control components of  the 
immune system (immunogenetic studies). 
c) The development of cell lines.   Techniques have been developed  which 
allow evaluation of genes and  DNA.  DNA might be examined dire ctly.  
Some of the blood cells might be m ade into a “cell line” that c an be grown 
indefinitely in the l aboratory.  A cell line gives researchers an unlimited 
supply of DNA that can be used for  future research studies with out having 
to draw additional bl ood in the future.   
 
3.2 Rationale for the Study Design and Dose 
 
It is difficult to estimate the timing of response to anti-IL-6  therapy but given the general 
timing of response to biologic ther apy in rheumatic disease pat ients we anticipate that a 
24-week trial is adequate in a pilot study of myositis. In addi tion, we will employ the 
dose of TCZ that has been used i n most of the RA trials to date . For a pilot, proof of 
concept study we will not em ploy a dose escalation design. 
 
3.3 Outcome Measures 
 
The outcome measures used in thi s trial are those agreed upon b y IMACS and have been 
employed in the RIM Study and incl ude the following clinical co re set measures (CSM): 
 The MMT-8 (Appendix B)  
 Patient global VAS recorded on a 10cm scale 
 MD global VAS recorded on a 10cm scale 
 HAQ disability index 
 At least one of the muscle enzym es (CK, AST, ALT, aldolase, LDH )   
 Global extramuscular disease activity (a composite of constitut ional, cutaneous, 
skeletal, gastrointestinal, pul monary and cardiac activity) sco re recorded on a 10cm 
VAS scale on the Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDA AT) 
 
3.3.1  Primary Outcome Measures  
 
The primary outcome will be to com pare the average Total Improv ement Scores at visits 
2 through 7 during the 6-month tr eatment period between the tre atment and placebo arms.  
Repeated measures analysis will  be used to compare the two trea tment groups and 
adjustments will be made for the baseline CSM values.  The tota l improvement score will 
be calculated by adding the improve ment scores of all six core set measures based on the 
new consensus driven improvement  criteria in myositis (as shown  in table 1).  
 
 3.3.2  Secondary Outcome Measures 
 
Additional secondary endpoints include: (1) comparison of the t ime to first DOI between 
the 2 arms, (2) comparison of the  individual CSM in subjects ov er time between the 2 
  
TCZ in Myositis 11 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    arms (repeated measures analysis), (3) comparison of the steroi d-sparing effect 
(calculated using prednisone dose equivalents) between the trea tment and placebo arms, 
(4) assessment of the magnitude  of the effect size between both  treatment arms by 
comparing the proportion of subject s having Total Improvement S cores ≥ 20 (minimal), 
40 (moderate) and 60 (major), (5) the difference in adverse eve nts between the control 
and treatment arms. The durability of the treatment response wi ll be assessed by (6) 
comparing the proportion of subject s meeting DOI in the treatme nt and placebo arms on 
2 consecutive visits , (7) determination of t he time to flare [meeting the definitio n of 
worsening (DOW)] in those who ear lier met the DOI.(8) comparing  the proportion of 
subjects meeting the DOI in the treatment and placebo arms usin g the previously 
published definition of improveme nt by IMACS for adult myositis  [2] utilizing the six 
CSM: 3 of 6 CSM improved by ≥ 20% , with no more than 2 CSM wors ening by ≥ 25% 
(a worsening measure cannot be the MMT). 
 
3.3.3  Safety Outcome Measures 
 
Safety is being assessed in one  of the secondary endpoints list ed above in Section 3.3.2. 
We will statistically compare the  frequency of the following ad verse events between the 
treatment and placebo arms:  
 Infections including all opport unistic infections and non-serio us infections as 
defined by those treated with IV anti-infectives 
 Myocardial infarction/acute coronary syndrome 
 GI perforation and related events 
 Malignancies 
 Hypersensitivity reactions and anaphylaxis 
 Demyelinating disorders 
 Stroke 
 Bleeding events 
 Hepatic events 
Similarly, we will analyze the proportion of serious adverse ev ents between the treatment 
and placebo arms. In addition, the number and percent of patien ts with AEs during the 
treatment period will be summarized.  
3.4      End of Study  
 
As described above, the end of the s tudy (closing visit) is wee k 24 but 2 additional visits 
3 months and 6 months after t he closing visit at week 24 have b een added to assess 
durability of TCZ response and safety. These 2 additional study  points are not only 
critical to the study from th e standpoint of assessing safety a nd the durabilit y of treatment 
response, but also provide an oppor tunity to collect valuable s ubject specimens for 
assessing biomarkers and indicato rs of disease response and rel apse.  
4.0 STUDY POPULATION 
 
4.0.1   Overview: Target Population  
  
TCZ in Myositis 12 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     
This trial will generally tar get a refractory population of adu lt PM and DM patients. Most 
enrolled patients will have faile d a trial of glucocorticoids a nd at least one 
immunosuppressive or immunomodulato ry agent (similar entry crit eria as the RIM 
Study). However, we will also enro ll patients who have failed a n adequate trial of 
glucocorticoids or who are flari ng with active disease as stero ids are being tapered. 
Nevertheless, subjects only fa iling glucocorticoids will likely  be a minority of the 
patients who are enrolled in the trial.  In addition to active myositis de monstrated by objective muscle  weakness (low MMT-8 
score), we will also enroll DM patients with less severe muscle  weakness but a 
significant skin rash and/or othe r extramuscular features that qualify them for enrollment 
(see Section 3.1 above and Inclu sion Criteria below). Thus, thi s trial allows us to study an 
additional subset of patients not  enrolled in the RIM Study [1]  who have demonstrable 
myositis and/or extramuscular disease activity but who fail to meet the single MMT-8 
criterion [i.e. an MMT-8 score  that is ≥ 136/150 (see Appendix B)]. However, a 
secondary endpoint of this trial allows us to analyze the indiv idual CSM over time in 
subjects receiving drug and placebo so they can still be compar ed throughout the trial (i.e. 
using repeated measures analysis).  
 
4.1  Inclusion Criteria  
 
Patients will be included in t he trial based on the following c riteria: 
1. Definite or probable PM or DM  by the criteria of Bohan and Pete r (as modified by 
IMACS) in adults over the age of 18. We will also allow enrollm ent of JDM patients 
(considered to have DM) over the age of 18 who otherwise meet t he inclusion criteria 
stipulated below. 
 2. Subjects must either have the cla ssic rash(es) of DM (heliotrop e, Gottron sign or 
Gottron papules), possess one of the myositis-associated autoan tibodies (anti-
synthetase, anti-SRP, anti-Mi- 2, anti-PM-Scl, anti TIF1-γ and a nti-MDA5), or have 
the diagnosis of PM agree d upon by a 3-member Adjudication Comm ittee consisting 
of a rheumatologist, neurologist  and neuromuscular pathologist.  
 
3. Refractory myositis patients are defined (see Section 3.1.1) as  having failed (or 
considered intolerant to) an a dequate course of glucocorticoids  or having failed 
glucocorticoids and at least one  other immunosuppressive (IS) o r immunomodulatory 
agent (e.g. methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimu s, mycophenolate 
mofetil, cyclophosphamide, IVIg, a nti-TNF agents, and rituximab ). 
 
4. Subjects must have at least 3/6 of  the following abnormal CSM (
see below) including 
an MMT ≤ 136/150 or subjects with an MMT > 136/150 m ust have 3 of the following 
abnormal CSM plus a cutaneous VAS on the MDAAT of  ≥ 3 cm on a 10 cm scale.  
Criteria for core set m easures for study entry: 
a. Patient global VAS with a minimum value of 2.0cm on a 10cm scal e. 
b. MD global VAS with a minimum va lue of 2.0cm on a 10cm scale. 
c. HAQ disability index with a minimum value of 0.25 
  
TCZ in Myositis 13 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    d. Elevation of at least one of the muscle enzymes (CK, AST, ALT, aldolase, 
LDH) at a minimum level of 1.3x the ULN.   
e. Global extramuscular disease activity score with a minimum valu e of 1.0cm 
on a 10cm VAS scale on the Myositis Disease Activity Assessment  Tool 
(MDAAT). 
 
5. If on prednisone, the dose must be s table for 4 weeks prior to the screening visit. 
Tapering of the prednisone dose wi ll only be allow ed after the subject meets the DOI 
or if safety/toxicity issues supervene. 
a. Prednisone Tapering: Prednis one should be held constant without  tapering or 
escalation (unless there is a s erious adverse event or disease flare) until the 
subject has achieved the DOI. T hen, tapering of prednisone may commence 
using a schedule approximating a  20-25% taper of the existing d ose every 4 
weeks based on the clinical judgm ent of the clinical site inves tigator. 
Prednisone tapering using the afo rementioned guidelines can be commenced 
at any time if: (a) the patient achieves the DOI or (b) there a re complications 
or circumstances that, in the clinical site investigator’s opin ion, necessitate the 
tapering of corticosteroids.  
 
b. Prednisone at Entry: It is als o recommended that patients be on  less than 
1mg/kg/day of prednisone at study entry.  
 
c. Prednisone Dosing During Flare: If in the clinical site investi gator’s opinion 
there are complications or wors ening of disease that necessitat e an increase in 
the prednisone dose then the smallest reasonable increase shoul d be 
considered. 
 6. If an IS agent was discontinue d prior to the screening visit th ere may be a washout as 
stipulated below or individualize d according to the patients tr eating physician: 
a. 4 week washout for methotre xate and tofacitinib 
b. 8 week washout for any other IS a gent (e.g. azathioprine, cyclo sporine, 
tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil) 
c. 3 month washout for leflunomi de, IVIg or cyclophosphamide 
d. 6 month washout for rituximab 
e. 8 week washout for infliximab,a dalimumab, golimumab, certolizum ab 
f. 2 week washout for etanercept 
g. 1 week washout for anakinra 
 
7. If an IS agent is continued, the dose must remain stable for 4 weeks prior to the 
screening visit and at least until  the DOI is met or if safety/ toxicity issues supervene. 
Concomitant IS medications permitted include methotrexate, azat hioprine, 
cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus. IVIg will also be allowed as an 
immunomodulatory agent. Careful  patient safety monitoring along  with ACR 
guidelines for monitoring these medications will be employed if  those toxicity 
monitoring laboratory studies  are not already being assessed as  part of this trial. No 
concomitant biologic agents are a llowed (rituximab, anti-TNFs, abatacept) as well as 
cyclophosphamide or tofacitinib a s concomitant immunosuppressiv e agents. 
Investigators will be certain  to assess and classify adverse ev ents as being secondary 
  
TCZ in Myositis 14 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    to either study drug as well as  any concomitant immunosuppressi ve agent(s). That is, 
there should be attri bution of the AE to the  appropriate agent.  
 8. Normal organ function, except if a bnormal due to the disease un der investigation 
 
9. Men and women of reproductive pote ntial must agree to use an ac ceptable method of 
birth control during treatment a nd for three months after compl etion of treatment. 
 
10. Subject has provided writt en informed consent. 
 
4.2  Exclusion Criteria 
 
 A patient will be excluded if any of the following criteria ar e met: 
1. Subjects under the age of 18. 
 2. Severe muscle damage defined as a global muscle damage score >5  on a 10cm VAS 
scale on the Muscle Damage Index (MDI).  
3. Cancer-associated myositis, defined as the diagnosis of myositi s within 2 years of the 
diagnosis of cancer except basal  or squamous cell skin cancer o r carcinoma in situ of 
the cervix that has been excis ed and cured and at least 5 years  since excision.  Also, 
evidence of active malignant dis ease, malignancies diagnosed wi thin the previous 5 
years (including hematological ma lignancies and solid tumors) o r breast cancer 
diagnosed within the previous 10 years.  
4. Known active current or history of  recurrent bacterial, viral, fungal, mycobacterial or 
other infections (including but  not limited to tuberculosis and  atypical mycobacterial 
disease, Hepatitis B and C, a nd herpes zoster, but excluding fu ngal infections of nail 
beds). 
 
5. Any major episode of infection requiring hospitalization or tre atment with IV 
antibiotics within 4 weeks of scr eening or oral antibiotics wit hin 2 weeks prior to 
screening. 
 
6. Active TB requiring treatment w ithin the previous 3 years. Pati ents should be 
screened for latent TB and, if  positive, treated following loca l practice guidelines 
prior to initiating TCZ. Patient s treated for tuberculosis with  no recurrence in 3 years 
are permitted. 
a. Quantiferon Gold (QG) is required for patients positive PPD results, 
who have previously received bac illi Calmette Guerin vaccination, OR 
for patients, who in the investigator’s opinion, may be anergic.  
 
For all other patients the following procedures for screening will be followed:  
b. If the patient has had a negative PPD or QG test result within the past 
year, and has not traveled to endemic areas and has not been exposed 
to a known case within the prev ious 12 months, then no further 
  
TCZ in Myositis 15 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    screening will be required.  
 
c. If the patient has not been screene d for TB within the previous 12 
months, then the local site will orde r the appropriate test (PPD or QG 
acceptable), according to their clinical standard of care.  
 d. If QG is used and the results are indeterminate , the patient will be 
rescreened using PPD.  
 
7. Primary or secondary immunodeficien cy (history of or currently active) unless related 
to primary disease und er investigation. 
 
8. Pregnant women or nursing (br east feeding) mothers.  
 
9. Patients with reproductive poten tial not willing to use an effe ctive method of 
contraception.  
10. History of alcohol, drug or chemi cal abuse within 1 year prior to screening or any 
medical condition or physical or ps ychological state that the P I feels would not allow 
the subject to safely c omplete the study. 
 
11. Initiation of an exercise program  for muscle strengthening with in 4 weeks of the 
screening visit or ini tiation of a muscle strengthening exercis e program during the 
study. 
 12. Major surgery (including joint s urgery) within 8 weeks prior to  screening or planned 
major surgery within 6 months  following randomization. 
 
13. Treatment with any investigationa l agent within 4 weeks (or 5 h alf-lives of the 
investigational drug, whichev er is longer) of screening. 
 
14. Previous treatment with the follo wing cell-depleting therapies,  including 
investigational agents or approve d therapies: CAMPATH, anti-CD4 , anti-CD5, and 
anti¬CD3. 
 
15. Immunization with a live/attenuated vaccine within 4 weeks prio r to baseline. 
 
16. Previous treatment with TCZ. 
 
17. History of severe allergic or a naphylactic reactions to human, humanized or murine 
monoclonal antibodies. 
 
18. Evidence of serious uncontrolle d concomitant cardiovascular, ne rvous system, 
pulmonary (including obstructiv e pulmonary disease), renal, hep atic, endocrine 
(include uncontrolled diabetes mellitus) or gastrointestinal di sease (including 
complicated diverticulitis, ulcer ative colitis, or Crohn’s dise ase.) 
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 16 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    19. Patients with lack of peripheral venous access. 
 
20. Body weight of > 150 kg. 
 
21. Abnormal laboratory values noted below: 
a. Serum creatinine > 1.6 mg/dL i n female patients and > 1.9 mg/dL  in male 
patients. Patients with serum creatinine values exceeding limit s may be 
eligible for the study if their estimated glomerular filtration  rates (GFR) are 
>30. 
b. Platelet count < (100,000/mm3); hemoglobin < 8.5 g/dl  and WBC count < 
3000/mm3; Absolute Neutrophil Count < 2.0 x 109/L (2000/mm3); Absolute 
Lymphocyte Count < 0.5 x 109/L (500/mm3) 
 
22. Positive hepatitis BsAg or hepatitis C antibody  
 
4.3 Immunization during TCZ therapy 
 
Live/attenuated vaccines shoul d not be given within 4 weeks pri or to baseline and during 
the study as clinical safety ha s not been established. No data are available on the 
secondary transmission of infecti on from persons receiving live  vaccines to patients 
receiving tocilizumab. No data a re available on the effectivene ss of vaccination in 
patients receiving tocilizuma b. Because IL-6 inhibition may int erfere with the normal 
immune response to new antigens,  patients should be brought up to date on all 
recommended vaccinations, except for live vaccines, prior to in itiation of therapy with 
tocilizumab. 
 
4.4     Criteria for Premature Withdrawal 
 
Patients have the right to wit hdraw from the study at any time for any reason. Every 
attempt will be made to have all patients complete the remainin g study visits as detailed 
in the Schedule of Assessments.  If the patient decides to prema turely discontinue study treatme nt (“refuses treatment”), 
he/she should be asked if he/she  can still be con tacted for fur ther information. The 
outcome of that discussion should be documented in both the med ical records and in the 
CRF. A complete final evaluation a t the time of the patient’s w ithdrawal should be made 
with an explanation of why the pati ent is withdrawing from the study.  
 Before categorizing a patient as  lost to follow-up, the investi gator must attempt to contact 
the patient or a responsible relative by telephone followed by registered mail to determine 
if any new AEs occurred, follow-up of any ongoing AE and to est ablish as completely as 
possible the reason for the withdrawal.  When applicable, patients should be  informed of circumstances u nder which their 
participation may be terminate d by the investigator without the  patient’s consent. The 
investigator may withdraw patient s from the study in the event of intercurrent illness, 
adverse events, treatment failure, lack of compliance with the study and/or study 
procedures (e.g., dosing instru ctions, study visits), or any re ason where it is felt by the 
  
TCZ in Myositis 17 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    investigator that it is in the be st interest of the patient to be terminated from the study. 
The reason(s) for withdrawal must be documented and explained t o the patient. 
If the reason for removal of a  patient from the study is an adv erse event, the specific 
event will be recorded on the  CRF. There should be an attempt t o follow the patient until 
the event has reso lved or stabilized. 
 An excessive rate of withdraw als can render the study non-inter pretable; therefore, 
unnecessary withdrawal of patie nts should be avoided. Should a patient decide to 
withdraw, all efforts will be mad e to complete and report the o bservations prior to 
withdrawal as thoroughly as possible.  Specifically related to this trial, there are several scenarios  for subjects as they are 
followed through the 24 week trial:  
1. Subjects improve and will be fo llowed for the duration of the t rial. 
2. Subjects can withdraw f rom the study at any time. They are then  treated at the 
discretion of the PI but should c ontinue to be followed at the regular study time 
points for the duration of the t rial. No randomization scheme w ill be 
broken/revealed. 
3. If the criteria for the DOW are  formally met but the subject an d PI do not feel it is 
necessary to change therapies, then the subject will remain on protocol. 
4. If criteria for the DOW is for mally met and the subject and/or the PI feel that 
other “escape” therapy is necessary or if the subject and PI feel that worsening 
has occurred such that other es cape therapy is necessary withou t formally meeting 
DOW criteria, then the subject wi ll be treated at the discretio n of the PI and no 
randomization scheme will be broke n/revealed. Subjects will con tinue to be 
followed at the regular study time points for the duration of t he trial. 
 
**Note: Investigators will be encouraged to wait until at least Week 8 before 
designating subjects as treatment failures  eligible to receive “escape” therapies. 
 
The following is a summary o f what is described above: 
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 18 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Study Subject
Meets DOI
Stays in 
ProtocolDeclines 
ParticipationMeets DOW
Subject and PI don’t 
feel need to change 
therapy
Stays in 
ProtocolSubject and/or PI  later 
feel need to change 
therapy
(may not meet “DOW”)
No randomization 
scheme 
broken/revealedTx at PI 
discretion
Stays in 
ProtocolTx at PI 
discretion at this 
visit  or later visitMeets DOI 
and stays 
in Protocol
Scheme for Subject 
Retention in TrialNo randomization 
scheme 
broken/revealed
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN 
 
This is a Phase II, double-bli nd, randomized, placebo-controlle d proof of concept trial of 
refractory adult PM and DM. TCZ w ill be given at a dose of 8mg/ kg by IV infusion every 
4 weeks at 6 time points (0,4,8,12,16,20).   We will enroll 40 adult patients with refractory PM (n= ~20) or  DM (n= ~20) using a 1:1 
randomization scheme for active drug:placebo, thus enrolling 20  subjects to receive 
active drug and 20 subjects to receive placebo.
 We hope to enroll 40 subjects at an 
enrollment rate of ~2 subjects/m onth such that recruitment will  encompass a period of 20 
months. This research study prot ocol allows the subject to rece ive up to “6” infusions of 
tocilizumab.  Even if the treatment is shown to be of benefit, additional infusions of 
tocilizumab beyond that allowed in the protocol cannot be given  to the subject while 
she/he is participat ing in this study. 
   
6.0 STUDY MEDICATION  
 
6.1 Tocilizumab 
 
Tocilizumab (ACTEMRA®) is a reco mbinant humanized anti-human in terleukin 6 (IL-6) 
receptor monoclonal antibody of the immunoglobulin IgG1κ (gamma  1, kappa) subclass 
with a typical H2L2 pol ypeptide structure. Each light chain and  heavy chain consists of 
214 and 448 amino acids, respectively. The four polypeptide cha ins are linked intra- and 
inter-molecularly by disulfide bonds. Tocilizumab has a molecul ar weight of 
approximately 148 kDa.  
  
TCZ in Myositis 19 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Tocilizumab is supplied as a ste rile, preservati ve-free solutio n for intravenous (IV) 
infusion at a concentration of 20 mg/mL. Tocilizumab is a color less to pale yellow liquid, 
with a pH of about 6.5. Single-use vi als are available containi ng 80 mg/4 mL, 200 mg/10 
mL, or 400 mg/20 mL of Tocilizumab. I njectable solutions of Toc ilizumab are 
formulated in an aqueous solu tion containing disodium phosphate  dodecahydrate and 
sodium dihydrogen phosphate dehydrate (as a 15 mmol/L phosphate  buffer), polysorbate 
80 (0.5 mg/mL), and sucrose (50 mg/mL).   “Tocilizumab will be provided fr ee of charge by Genentech. The Sponsor or designee of 
the study will ensure maintenance  of complete and accurate reco rds of the receipt, 
dispensation, and disposal or r eturn of all study drug in accor dance with 21 Code of 
Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 312.57 and 312.62 and Genent ech requirements.” 
 
6.1.1 Tocilizumab Dosage and Administration  
The recommended dose of tocilizuma b for adult patients is 8 mg/ kg given once every 
four weeks as an IV infusion. Tocilizumab can be used alone or in combination with 
MTX and/or other DMARDs.  Tocilizumab should be diluted t o 100 mL by a healthcare profess ional with sterile 
0.9%w/v sodium chloride soluti on using aseptic technique Tocili zumab is recommended 
for IV infusion over 1 hour.  When the Investigational Drug Ser vice (IDS) at the University o f Pittsburgh is involved 
with the study protocol and prep ares an IV drug that is to be b linded the following steps 
are taken: 
 
1. The pharmacist will be the onl y unblinded study personnel and t hey will follow 
whatever the study prot ocol dictates. They can create and maint ain the 
randomization list for the study ba sed off of the randomization  schema outlined in 
the protocol. 
2. The label will read “Drug Name and Strength” or PLACEBO.  This is placed 
on every label regardless if is drug or placebo. 
3. If the drug preparation is slight ly colored or cloudy, they wil l wrap the IV bag in 
an amber bag so as to not allow the blinded personnel to deciph er the color of the 
solution. 
4. The placebo formulation will be the same total volume as the st udy medication 
preparation and will be normal saline (unless otherwise specifi ed). 
 
For individuals whose body w eight is more than 100 kg, doses ex ceeding 800 mg per will 
not be given.  One vial containing 400 mg TCZ  or two vials containing 200 mg T CZ will be required 
for each 50 kg body weight to achieve an 8 mg/kg dose.  The num ber of vials to be used 
depends on the patient’s body weight as follows:  1.         One 400-mg vial (or two 200- mg vials) is used for pa tients with a body weight 
≤50 kg. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 20 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     
2.         Two 400-mg vials (or four  200-mg vials) are used for  patients with a body weight 
>50 kg combination of the 400-mg a nd 200-mg vials may be used b ut the total dose 
should not exceed 800 mg  
6.1.2 Tocilizumab Storage 
 
Tocilizumab should not be used aft er the expiry date (EXP) show n on the pack. 
 For vials: Store between 2ºC – 8ºC, do not freeze. Keep the con tainer in the  outer carton 
in order to protect from light.  For prepared infusion solution:  The prepared infusion solution of tocilizumab is 
physically and chemically stable in 0.9% w/v sodium chloride so lution at 30ºC for 24 
hours.  From a microbiological point of vi ew, the prepared infusion sho uld be used 
immediately. If not used immedia tely, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use 
are the responsibility of the  user and would not be longer than  24 hours at 2ºC – 8ºC, 
unless dilution has taken place in controlled and validated ase ptic conditions. 
 
6.1.3  Tocilizumab Overdosage 
 
There are limited data available  on overdoses with tocilizumab.  One case of accidental 
overdose was reported in which a patient with multiple myeloma received a dose of 40 
mg/kg. No adverse drug reactions w ere observed. No serious adve rse drug reactions were 
observed in healthy volunteers who received single doses of up to 28 mg/kg, although all 
5 patients at the highest dose  of 28 mg/kg developed dose-limit ing neutropenia. 
In case of an overdose, it is r ecommended that the patient be m onitored for signs and 
symptoms of adverse reactions. P atients who develop adverse rea ctions should receive 
appropriate symptomatic treatment.   
6.2 Other Study Drug(s) 
 
Placebo will be prepared as  described above in Section 6.1.1. 
 
7.0  DOSE MODIFICATION/TO XICITY MANAGEMENT 
 
A number of measures will be taken to ensure the safety of pati ents participating in this 
study.  These measures will be addressed through exclusion crit eria (see S ection 4.2) and 
routine monitoring as follows.    Patients enrolled in this study will  be evaluated clinically an d with standard laboratory 
tests before and during their pa rticipation i n this study.  Saf ety evaluations will consist of 
medical interviews, recording of  adverse events, physical exami nations, blood pressure, 
and laboratory measurements.  Subj ects will be evaluated for ad verse events (all grades), 
  
TCZ in Myositis 21 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    serious adverse events, and adve rse events requiring study drug  interruption or 
discontinuation at each study visi t for the duration of their p articipation in the study.   
 
7.1 Tocilizumab (Note: The following are considered adverse eve nts of special 
interest and they should be reported in an expedited fashion sh ould they occur while 
using tocilizumab) 
Opportunistic Infections a nd Serious Infections  
Physicians should exercise caution when considering the use of TCZ in patients with a 
history of recurring infection or with underlying conditions (e .g., diverticulitis, diabetes) 
which may predispose patients to infections. Tocilizumab should  not be administered in 
patients with active infection. The effects of TCZ on CRP, neut rophils, and the signs and 
symptoms of infection should be c onsidered when evaluating a pa tient for a potential 
infection.  
Vigilance for timely detection of serious infection is recommen ded for patients receiving 
biologic agents as signs and symptoms of acute inflammation may  be lessened due to 
suppression of the acute phase re action. Patients must be instr ucted to contact their 
physician immediately when any sym ptoms suggesting infection ap pear, in order to 
assure rapid evaluation a nd appropriate treatment.  
 
If a patient develops a serious infection, administration of TC Z is to be interrupted until 
the infection is controlled. T CZ should not be given in the set ting of active infection. 
Gastrointestinal Perforations   
Timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment may reduce the poten tial for complications of 
diverticulitis and thus reduce the risk of GI perforations. The refore, patients should be 
made aware of the symptomatol ogy potentially indi cative of dive rticular disease, and 
they should be instructed to ale rt their healthcare provider as  soon as possible if these 
symptoms arise. Patients with a history of symptomatic divertic ulosis, diverticulitis or 
chronic ulcerative lower GI disea se such as Crohn’s disease, ul cerative colitis or other 
chronic lower GI conditions that might predispose to perforatio ns will be excluded.  
Discontinuation of TCZ is recomm ended for patients who develop GI perforations. 
Demyelinating Disorders  
The impact of treatment with TCZ on demyelinating disorders is not known; events were 
rarely reported.  Patients should be closely monitored for sign s and symptoms potentially 
indicative of central demyelinating disorders.  Physicians shou ld exercise caution in 
considering the use of TCZ in patients with pre-existing or rec ent onset demyelinating 
disorders. Treatment with tocilizumab should be interrupted dur ing assessment of a 
potential demyelination event and only resumed if the benefit o f continuing study drug is 
favorable .   
Hematologic Abnormalities and Bleeding Events 
Decreases in neutrophil and plat elet counts have been observed following treatment with 
TCZ in combination with MTX. In addition, there may be an incre ased risk of 
neutropenia in patients who have  previously been treated with a  TNF antagonist. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 22 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    The risk mitigation strategies for neutropenia and thrombocytop enia are summarized in 
Tables 1 and 2, respectively.  For patients with concomitant me dications associated with 
hematologic toxicity, the reductio n or interruption of the susp ected medication is 
recommended prior to modifying TCZ. 
Table 1 : Neutropenia Risk Mitigation  
ANC (cells/mm3) Action 
> 1000 Maintain dose. 
500 – 1000 Interrupt tocilizumab dosing. 
When ANC increases to > 1000, resume tocilizumab at 4 mg/kg and increase to 8 mg/kg a s clinically appropriate 
< 500 Discontinue tocilizumab. 
ANC = absolute neutrophil count 
Patients withdrawn from tocilizumab treatmen t due to a reduced neutrophil count should 
be monitored for signs of inf ection, with treatment as deemed appropriate by the sponsor 
or designee, and should have a repeat white bl ood cell count with di fferential performed 
weekly until the ANC is above 1000 cells/mm3 (1.0 x 109/L). If the ANC does not return to 
above 1000 cells/mm3 (1.0 x 109/L) within 2 months (or sooner if deemed necessary by 
the sponsor or designee), a hema tology referral is recommended. 
Table 2: Thrombocytopenia Risk Mitigation 
Platelet count (cells/mm3) Action 
> 100,000 Maintain dose. 
50,000 – 100,000 Interrupt tocilizumab dosing.  
When platelet count incr eases to > 100,000, resume 
tocilizumab at 4 mg/kg and increas e to 8 mg/kg as clinically 
appropriate 
< 50,000 Discontinue tocilizumab. 
Patients withdrawn from tocilizumab treatmen t due to a reduced platelet count should 
have a repeat platelet count performed weekly until the count is above 100,000 cells/mm3 
(100 x 109/L). If the platelets do not return to above 100,000 cells/mm3 (100 x 109/L) 
within 2 months (or sooner if deemed necessary by the sponsor or designee), a 
hematology referral is recommended. 
Elevated Liver Enzymes and Hepatic Events 
Elevations in ALT and AST have  been observed during treatment w ith TCZ, but patients 
with myositis may have elevated levels of transaminases due to active myositis. Thus, 
these levels will be closely fo llowed and compared to the eleva tion of other muscle 
enzymes in order to monitor hepatic toxicity and make appropria te adjustments in either 
concomitant therapy or TCZ.  
 
Patients withdrawn from tocilizumab treatment due to elevated liver function tests should 
have repeat tests performed, as c linically appropriate, until leve ls return to baseline.  If 
the patient’s liver function test s have not returned to  baseline within 6 months (or sooner, 
if deemed necessary by the sponsor or designee), an ultrasound and/or liver biopsy 
should be considered. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 23 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Cardiovascular Events and Elevated Lipids 
Patients with some connective tissue diseases have an increased  risk for cardiovascular 
disorders, therefore, risk factors for cardiovascular disease ( eg, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia) should be managed  as part of their standard of care.  See section on Drug 
Interactions.   
For patients with LDL cholesterol ≥160 mg/dL, it is strongly re commended that 
investigators advise therapeutic lifestyle changes that may inc lude initiation lipid-
lowering agents. Lipid-lowering agents should also be considere d for patients with lower 
LDL cholesterol levels as part of their therapeutic lifestyle c hanges depending on their 
overall risk as defined in NCEP  ATP III or other national guide lines. 
Malignancies 
The impact of immunosuppression on the development of malignanc ies is not known, 
however an increased rate of some malignancies, notably lymphom a, has been observed 
in some patients with autoi mmune disorders. Although no imbalan ce of malignancies was 
observed in controlled clinical t rials of TCZ, malignancies hav e been identified as a 
concern for other biologics.  It is recognized that identificat ion of such events in TCZ-
treated patients may require a longer period of surveillance.  TCZ should be discontinued 
in patients with malignancies (w ith the exception of local basa l or squamous cell 
carcinoma of the skin that is com pletely excised with free marg ins). 
Hypersensitivity or Anaphylaxis: 
An infusion/dose reaction is defined as an adverse event occurr ing during and within 24 
hours after the infusion or subc utaneous injection of tocilizum ab. This may include 
hypersensitivity reactions or anaphylactic reactions.  
 Signs of a possible hypersensitivity reaction include but are n ot limited to: 
 Fever, chills, pruritis , urticaria, angioedem a, and skin rash. 
Cardiopulmonary reactions, i ncluding chest pain, dyspnea, hypot ension, or hypertension 
Healthcare professionals administering TCZ infusions  should be  trained in the 
appropriate administrative procedures, be able to recognize the  symptoms associated with 
potential anaphylactic or hypersen sitivity reactions, and have the appropriate medication 
available for immediate use in case of anaphylaxis or hypersens itivity reaction during or 
after administration of TCZ.  Healthcare professionals should a lso instruct patients to 
seek medical attention if they experience symptoms of a hyperse nsitivity reaction outside 
of the clinic. 
If a patient has symptoms of ana phylaxis or serious hypersensit ivity, or requires an 
interruption of the study drug because of symptoms of anaphylax is or hypersensitivity, 
administration of TCZ must be discontinued permanently and the patient should be 
withdrawn from the study.  The patient should be treated accord ing to the standard of 
care for management of the hype rsensitivity reac tion.  A blood sample for the presence of 
anti-tocilizumab anti bodies should be obtained at time of event  and at least 6 weeks after 
the last dose. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 24 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     
Viral Reactivation 
Though rarely reported within t he TCZ program due to exclusion criteria at study entry, 
reactivation of viral and other serious infections (e.g. EBV or  TB) has been observed with 
biologic therapie s including TCZ. 
 
Drug Interaction 
The formation of CYP450 enzymes  may be suppressed by increased levels of cytokines 
(eg, IL-6) during chronic infla mmation. Therefore, it is expect ed that for molecules that 
antagonize cytokine activity, suc h as TCZ, the formation of CYP 450 enzymes could be 
normalized. When starting or st opping therapy with TCZ, patient s taking medications 
which are individually dose-adju sted and metabolized via CYP450 , 3A4, 1A2, or 2C9 
(e.g. atorvastatin, calcium channel blockers, theophylline, war farin, phenytoin, 
cyclosporine, or benzodiazepines) should be monitored as doses may need to be adjusted 
to maintain their therapeutic e ffect. Given its long eliminatio n half-life (t1/2), the effect 
of tocilizumab on CYP450 enzyme ac tivity may persist for severa l weeks after stopping 
therapy.  8.0 CRITERIA FOR SUBJEC T DISCONTINUATION 
8.1 Tocilizumab-Specific Criteria 
Subjects who meet the following c riteria should be discontinued  from the study: 
 anaphylaxis or hypersensitivity reaction or requires an interru ption of the 
study drug because of symptoms of anaphylaxis or hypersensitivi ty (TCZ 
should be permanently discontinued from these patients) 
 
 ALT or AST value > 5X ULN or p ersistent elevation > 3X ULN 
 Platelet count (cells/mm
3) < 50,000 
 ANC (cells/mm3) < 500 
8.2 General Criteria 
 Inability of subject to compl y with study requirements 
 Determination by the investigator  that it is no longer safe for  the subject to 
continue therapy 
Subjects who are carriers of hepatitis B at the time of discont inuation from study 
treatment will continue to be followed for clinical and laborat ory signs of active HBV 
infection and for s igns of hepatitis. 
 
 
9.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY DISCONTINUATION        
 
See Section 4.4.  
10.0 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS 
  
TCZ in Myositis 25 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Week 0‐14 
days 
before 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 3 mo 
Follow 
Up 6 mo
Follow 
Up 
Visit  Screen  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  9 
Study Drug Administration  x x x x x x     
Safety Laboratory Testing 
Urine Pregnancy (if applic able)  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
WBC  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Platelets  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Neutrophils/Monocytes/Eosinophils 
Basophils  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Hemoglobin  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Hematocrit  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
ALT  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
AST  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Aldolase  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
LDH  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
CK, total  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
BUN  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Creatinine  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Electrolytes  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
IgG quantitative  x     x     x     x          
IgM quantitative  x     x     x     x          
Serologies (varicella, HCV, HBV)  x                            
Lipid Panel  x  x  x 
Anti‐TCZ autoantib odies & PK/PD*  x 
Data Collection                       
Screening Demographics  x                            
Screening Evaluation  x                            
Screening Criteria  x                            
Randomization Form     x                         
Patient Global Assessment  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Health Assessment Questionnaire  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MMT‐8  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MDAAT  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MDI  x     x  x 
Physician Global Assessmen t  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Physician Assessment of Cha nge        x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
SF 36 QoL Questionnaire      X  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Brief Evaluation     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Muscle Biopsy     x              x          
Adverse Event Monitoring     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Biospecimen Repository Collection     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
  
TCZ in Myositis 26 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    * If a hypersensitivity event occu rs, these tests will be done at  the time of the event and 6 weeks later 
 
10.1 Pre-Treatment Evaluations  
 
Unless otherwise specified, the f ollowing evaluations must be p erformed within four 
weeks prior to the date of each pa tient's initial treatment wit h Tocilizumab: 
 
 Pregnancy test (serum or urine)  for women of childbearing poten tial. 
 
 Medical history and documentation of  the rationale for treatmen t of the patient's 
disease with Tocilizumab. 
 
 Physical examination, includi ng vital signs, blood pressure, pe rformance status and 
tumor assessment.  
 Hematology: complete blood count  (CBC) with differential and pl atelet count. 
 
 Serum Chemistries: Total bilirub in, SGOT(AST), and SGPT (ALT) 
 
 Lipid Panel 
 
10.2 Evaluations During Treatment 
 
See Section 10.0 
 
 Neutrophils should be monitored e very 4 to 8 weeks following in itiation of 
therapy, then at approxim ately 3 month intervals 
 Platelets should be monitore d ever 4 to 8 weeks following initi ation of therapy, 
then at approximately 3 month intervals 
 ALT and AST levels should be m onitored every 4 to 8 weeks follo wing initiation 
of therapy, then at approximately 3 month intervals 
 Assessment of lipid parameters  should be performed approximatel y 4 to 8 weeks 
following initiation of TCZ thera py, then at approximately 6 mo nth intervals 
 
Anti-TCZ antibodies, TCZ levels and sIL6-R are to be collected at baseline, at the time of 
any event of hypersensitivity or a naphylaxis that is potentiall y related to TCZ and 6 
weeks subsequent  to the event. 
 
Baseline samples for immunogeni city testing will be drawn and s tored for all patients but 
analyzed only for those patients meeting the criteria below. 
 
Post-baseline, for patients w ho meet any of below criteria, imm unogenicity samples will 
be additionally collected at the time of the event, and then ag ain at least 6 weeks post-
hypersensitivity for IV and 8 weeks post-hypersensitivity for S C. 
 
Event: 
anaphylaxis 
  
TCZ in Myositis 27 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    serious hypersensitivity 
study treatment (Actemra) disc ontinuation due to hypersensitivi ty (serious or non-
serious)                  
  
Immunogenicity assays: scr eening, confirmation and IgE 
 
PK-PD samples should be collected  at the same time points as im munogenicity samples 
All patients experiencing event s related to serious hypersensit ivity or 
anaphylactic reactions that cause  the patient to be withdrawn f rom TCZ treatment dose 
for anti-TCZ and PK/PD testing. 
Reports of the results of these analyses will be provided to th e investigator for patients 
testing positive for anti-TCZ an tibodies. Sample logistics and handling will be 
managed by Covance Laboratories. 10.3 Post-Treatment Evaluations       
 See Section 10.0 
 
11.0 REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS  11.1 Adverse Event and Reporting Definitions 
An adverse event  (AE)  is any untoward medical occurren ce in a subject participating in 
an investigational trial or protoc ol regardless of causality as sessment.  An adverse event 
can be an unfavorable and uninte nded sign (including an abnorma l laboratory finding), 
symptom, syndrome or disease tem porally associated with or occu rring during the use of 
an investigational product whethe r or not considered related to  the investigational 
product.  Additionally, an AE can be any of the following:  
 Any new disease or exacerbation of an existing disease (a worsening in the 
character, frequency, or severity of a known condition)  
 Recurrence of an intermittent medical condition (e.g., headache) not present at 
baseline. 
 Any deterioration in a laboratory va lue or other clinical test (e.g., 
electrocardiogram, x-ray) that is associated  with symptoms or leads to a change in 
tocilizumab or concomitant  treatment or disconti nuation from tocilizumab.  
 
In the event of an adverse even t, the first concern will be for  the safety of the subject.  
Investigators are required to re port to Genentech Drug Safety a ny serious adverse event , 
and non-serious adverse events of s pecial interest, whether expected  or unexpected , and 
whether or not considered r elated to the tocilizumab. 
 The sponsor or designee further ag rees to forward reports to Ge nentech of serious 
adverse events and non-serious adve rse events of special intere st, regardless of attribution 
to the Investigational medicinal product.  
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 28 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    All events meeting these criteria  will be reporte d for the time  period beginning with any 
amount of exposure to Tocilizuma b through the protocol-defined follow-up period.  
Serious criteria, definitions, a nd guidance for reporting follo w. 
 Serious adverse events  (SAE) (Immediately Reportable to the Sponsor) are adverse 
events occurring at any dose wh ich meet one or more of the foll owing serious criteria : 
 
 Results in death  (i.e. the AE caused or lead to death) 
 Is life-threatening  (i.e. the AE placed the subject a t immediate risk of death; it  does 
not apply to an AE which hypothetica lly might have caused the d eath if it were more 
severe) 
 
 Requires or prolongs inpatient hospitalization  (hospitalizations for elective 
medical/surgical procedures, sched uled treatments, or routine c heck-ups are not SAEs 
by this criterion) 
 
 Is disabling  (i.e. the AE resulted in a subs tantial disruption of the subje ct’s ability to 
carry out normal life functions) 
 
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  (i.e., an adverse outcome  in a child or fetus of a 
subject exposed to the trial  drug prior to conception or during  pregnancy) 
 
 It does not meet any of the a bove serious criteria but may jeopardize the subject  and 
may require medical or surgical intervention  to prevent one of the outcomes listed 
above 
 SAEs include any sign, symptom or medical condition that meets any of the above 
criteria and emerges during Tocil izumab treatment or during a p ost-treatment follow-up 
period that (1) was not present a t the start of treatment and i s not a chronic condition that 
is part of the patient’s medical  history, OR (2) was present at  the start of treatment or as 
part of the patient’s medical h istory but worse ned in severity and/or frequency during 
therapy. 
 
Expected  adverse events are those  adverse events that are listed  or characterized in the 
current Investigator Brochure.   
Assessment of Adverse Events 
All AEs and SAEs whether volun teered by the subject, discovered
 by study personnel 
during questioning, or detected t hrough physical examination, l aboratory test, or other 
means will be reported appropriately. Investigators will be cer tain to assess and classify 
adverse events as being seconda ry to either study drug as well as any concomitant 
immunosuppressive agent(s). That is, there shoul d be attributio n of the AE to the 
appropriate agent. Each reported AE or SAE will be  described by its  duration (i.e. , start and end dates), 
regulatory seriousness criteria i f applicable, suspected relati onship to the (see following 
guidance), and actions taken.  
  
TCZ in Myositis 29 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    To ensure consistency of AE a nd SAE causality assessments, inve stigators should apply 
the following general guideline: 
Yes 
There is a plausible temporal r elationship between the onset of  the AE and administration 
of the TCZ, and the AE cannot be  readily explained by the subje ct’s clinical state, 
intercurrent illness, or concomitant therapies; and/or the AE f ollows a known pattern of 
response to TCZ; and/or the A E abates or resolves upon disconti nuation of TCZ or dose 
reduction and, if applicable, r eappears upon re-challenge. 
 
No 
Evidence exists that the AE has an etiology other than TCZ (e.g ., preexisting medical 
condition, underlying disease, int ercurrent illness, or concomi tant medication); and/or the 
AE has no plausible temporal rela tionship to TCZ administration  (e.g., cancer diagnosed 
2 days after first  dose of study drug). 
 Unexpected  adverse events are those not listed  in the current Investigator Brochure or 
not identified.  This includes adve rse events for which the spe cificity or severity is not 
consistent with the description in the Investigator Brochure.  For example, under this 
definition, hepatic necrosis woul d be unexpected if the Investi gator Brochure only 
referred to elevated hepatic  enzymes or hepatitis. 
 
The terms “severe” and “serious” are not synonymous.  Severity refers to the intensity of 
an AE (rated as mild, moderate, or severe; see section on “Assessment of Severity of 
Adverse Events”); the event itself may be of  relatively minor medical significance (such 
as severe headache without any further findings). 
Severity and seriousness need to be independe ntly assessed for each AE recorded on the 
CRF. 
Eliciting Adverse Events 
A consistent methodology for elic iting AEs at all subject evalu ation time points should be 
adopted. Examples of non-dire ctive questions include:  
 “How have you felt since your  last clinical visit?” 
 “Have you had any new or changed h ealth problems since you were  last here?”  
 Specific Instructions for Recording Adverse Events 
Investigators should use correct  medical terminology/concepts w hen reporting AEs or 
SAEs. Avoid colloquialis ms and abbreviations. 
 
a. Diagnosis vs. Signs and Symptoms 
If known at the time of reporti ng, a diagnosis should be report ed rather than individual 
signs and symptoms (e.g., record on ly liver failure or hepatiti s rather than jaundice, 
asterixis, and elevated transam inases). However, if a constella tion of signs and/or 
symptoms cannot be medically cha racterized as a single diagnosi s or syndrome at the 
time of reporting, it is acceptabl e to report the information t hat is currently a vailable. If a 
diagnosis is subsequently estab lished, it should be reported as  follow-up information. 
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 30 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    b. Deaths 
All deaths that occur during the  protocol-specified AE reportin g period (see Section 
5.1.2), regardless of attributi on, will be reported to the appr opriate parties. When 
recording a death, the event or  condition that caused or contri buted to the fatal outcome 
should be reported as the single medical concept. If the cause of death is unknown and 
cannot be ascertained at the ti me of reporting, report “Unexpla ined Death”. This includes 
death attributed to progr ession of underlying disease. 
 Death should be considered an outco me and not a distinct event.   The event or condition 
that caused or contributed to t he fatal outcome should be recor ded as the single medical 
concept on the Adverse Event CRF.  Generally, only one such eve nt should be reported.  
The term “sudden death” should only be used for the occurrence of an abrupt and 
unexpected death due to presumed cardiac causes in a patient wi th or without preexisting 
heart disease, within 1 hour of t he onset of acute symptoms or,  in the case of an 
unwitnessed death, within 24 hours af ter the patient was last s een alive and stable.  If the 
cause of death is unknown and cannot  be ascertained at the time  of reporting, 
“unexplained death” should be r ecorded on the Adverse Event CRF .  If the cause of death 
later becomes available (e.g., a fter autopsy), “unexplained dea th” should be replaced by 
the established cause of death. I f the death is attributed to p rogression of underlying 
disease, progression should be  captured on the Adverse Event CR F.  
 
c. Preexisting Medical Conditions 
A preexisting medical condition is one that is present at the s tart of the study. Such 
conditions should be reported as medical and surgical history. A preexisting medical 
condition should be re-assessed throughout the trial and report ed as an AE or SAE only if 
the frequency, severity, or char acter of the condition worsens during the study. When 
reporting such events, it is im portant to convey the concept th at the preexisting condition 
has changed by including applicab le descriptors (e.g., “more fr equent headaches”). 
 
d. Hospitalizations for Medical or Surgical Procedures 
Any AE that results in hospita lization or prolonged hospitaliza tion should be documented 
and reported as an SAE. If a s ubject is hospitalized to undergo  a medical or surgical 
procedure as a result of an AE, t he event responsible for the p rocedure, not the procedure 
itself, should be reported as the SAE. For example, if a subjec t is hospitalized to undergo 
coronary bypass surgery, record  the heart condition that necess itated the bypass as the 
SAE.  Hospitalizations for the follo wing reasons do not require repor ting: 
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospi talization for diagnostic or elective surgical 
procedures for preexisting conditions 
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospi talization required to allow 
efficacy 
measurement for the study or 
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospita lization for scheduled ther apy of the target 
disease of the study. 
 
e. Pregnancy 
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 31 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    If a female subject becomes pre gnant while receiving investigat ional therapy or within 90 
days  after the last dose of  study drug, a report should be com pleted and expeditiously 
submitted to the Genentech, Inc. Follow-up to obtain the outcom e of the pregnancy 
should also occur. Abortion, whether accidental, therapeutic, o r spontaneous, should 
always be classified as serious , and expeditiously reported as an SAE. Similarly, any 
congenital anomaly/birth defect i n a child born to a female sub ject exposed to TCZ 
should be reported as an SAE.  A C linical Trial Pregnancy Repor ting Form should be 
completed by the sponsor within 24 hours after learning of the pregnancy should not be 
recorded on the Adverse Event CRF.  The sponsor should counsel the patient, discussing 
the risks of the pregnancy and t he possible effects on the fetu s.  Monitoring of the patient 
should continue until concl usion of the pregnancy. 
 Abortions Any spontaneous abortion should be c lassified as an SAE (as the  sponsor considers 
spontaneous abortions to be medi cally significant events), reco rded on the Adverse Event 
CRF, and reported to the sponsor  within 1 working day after lea rning of the event (see 
section on “Reporting Requirement s for Pregnancies”).   
 Congenital Anoma lies/Birth Defects 
Any congenital anomaly/birth def ect in a child born to a female  patient or female partner 
of a male patient exposed to s tudy drug should be classified as  an SAE, recorded on the 
Adverse Event CRF, and reported to the sponsor within 1 working  day after learning of 
the event (see section on “Reporti ng Requirements for Pregnanci es”). 
 
f. Post-Study Adverse Events 
The investigator should expedi tiously report any SAE or non ser ious AESI occurring 
after a subject has completed or  discontinued stu dy participati on if attributed to prior 
TCZ exposure regardless of how much time has elapsed since stud y participation. If the 
investigator should become aware  of the development of cancer o r a congenital anomaly 
in a subsequently conceived offspring of a female subject who p articipated in the study, 
this should be reported as an S AE. All unrelated SAEs must be r eported during the study 
and up to 3 months after the las t dose of study drug, even if t he study has been closed. 
 
g. Reconciliation 
The sponsor agrees to conduct re conciliation for the product. G enentech and the Sponsor 
will agree to the reconciliati on periodicity and format, but ag ree at minimum to exchange 
monthly line listings of cases  received by the ot her party. If discrepancies are identified, 
the Sponsor and Genentech will cooperate in resolving the discr epancies. The responsible 
individuals for each party shall handle the matter on a case-by -case basis until 
satisfactory resolution.  
11.2 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events Associated with Tocili zumab 
 Immediate Reporting Requirements The Investigator must report the following events to Genentech Drug Safety within 24 
hours after learning of the event, regardl ess of relationship to study drug: 
 
SAEs. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 32 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     Non-serious and serious AEs  of special interest. 
 Pregnancies. 
 
The Investigator must report new significant follow-up information for these events to 
Genentech Drug Safety within 1 working day a fter becoming aware of  the information.  
New significant information includes the following: 
 New signs or symptoms or a change in the diagnosis. 
 Significant new diagnostic test results. 
 Change in causality based  on new information. 
 Change in the event’s outcome, including recovery. 
 Additional narrative information on th e clinical course of the event. 
 
Investigators must also comply with local requirements for reporting SAEs to the local 
health authority and IRB/EC. 
 
All serious adverse events (SAEs ) for which there is a reasonab le possibility the 
experience may have been caused b y Tocilizumab (this applies to  both expected and 
unexpected events) should be r ecorded on a MedWatch 3500A Form and faxed to: 
 Genentech Drug Safety  Tel: (888) 835-2555 Fax: (650) 225-4682 or (650) 225-4683  This must be reported to Genentech within 24 hours.    (Please use the safety reporti ng fax cover sheet attached to th is document for your fax 
transmission.)  
AND: 
 
Chester V. Oddis, M.D. 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology South 705, Biomedical Science Tower 3500 Terrace Street Pittsburgh, PA 15261 Phone: 412-383-8861 Fax: 412-383-8864 email: cvo5@pitt.edu  
 
AND: 
 
  
TCZ in Myositis 33 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    University of Pittsburgh 
Institutional Review Board 3500 Fifth Avenue Hieber Building, Suite 106 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Main Phone: (412) 383-1480 Main Fax: (412) 383-1508 
 
MedWatch 3500A Reporting Guidelines: 
 
In addition to completing appropria te patient demographic and s uspect medication 
information, the report should i nclude the following informatio n within the Event 
Description (section 5) of the MedWatch 3500A form: 
 
 Treatment regimen (dosing fre quency, combination therapy) 
 Protocol description (an d number, if assigned) 
 Description of event, severit y, treatment, and outcome if known  
 Supportive laboratory results and diagnostics 
 Investigator’s assessment of the  relationship of the adverse ev ent to each 
investigational product and suspect medication 
 
Follow-up information:   
 
Additional information may be a dded to a previously submitted r eport by any of the 
following methods:  
 Adding to the original MedWatch 3500A report and submitting it as follow-up 
 Adding supplemental summary information and submitting it as fo llow-up with the 
original MedWatch 3500A form  
 Summarizing new information and f axing it with a cover letter i ncluding subject 
identifiers (i.e. D.O.B. initial , subject number), protocol des cription and number, if 
assigned, suspect drug, brief adve rse event description, and no tation that additional or 
follow-up information is being submitted  (The patient identifi ers are important so 
that the new information is added to the correct initial report ) 
 
Occasionally Genentech may contact the reporter for additional information, clarification, 
or current status of the subject  for whom and adverse event was  reported.  For questions 
regarding SAE reporting, you may c ontact the Genentech Drug Saf ety representative 
noted above. 
 
 11.4 Actemra Events of Special Interest  
  
TCZ in Myositis 34 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Adverse events of special interes t (non-serious and serious) ar e required to be reported by 
the Investigator to Genentec h Drug Safety within 24 hours after  learning of the event (see 
Section 11.2 for repor ting instructions ).  Non-serious and serious AEs  of special interest 
for this study include the following: 
 Infections including all opport unistic infections and non-serio us infections as 
defined by those treated with IV anti-infectives 
 Myocardial infarction/acute coronary syndrome 
 GI perforation and related events 
 Malignancies 
 Hypersensitivity reactions 
 Demyelinating disorders 
 Stroke 
 Bleeding events 
 Hepatic events 
 
Guided questionnaires have been pr epared for the AEs of special  interest.   
The notification of AEs of speci al interest (including non-seri ous events of special 
interest) will follow the establ ished procedures for AEs and SA Es in the study (i.e., 
documented and reported to Genen tech Drug Safety or its designe e within one working 
day).  Guided questionnaires have  been prepared for the AEs of special interest and will 
be sent to the investigator(s) to obtain more detailed informat ion, as necessary.  The 
documentation and reporting requirements for those AEs of speci al interest will be 
further described in a separate  document (Actemra Events of Spe cial Interest Guidance 
Document). 
Study Close-Out 
Any study report submitted to the FDA by the Sponsor or designe e should be copied to 
Genentech. This includes all I ND annual reports and the Clinica l Study Report (final 
study report). Additionally, any lite rature article s that are a  result of the study should be 
sent to Genentech. Copies of suc h reports should be mailed to t he assigned Clinical 
Operations contact  for the study: 
 
[Clinical Operations Contact Information Here] 
  
12.0 EVALUATION OF RESPONSE 
 
The outcome measures used in thi s trial are those agreed upon b y IMACS and include the 
following clinical core set measures (CSM): 
 The MMT-8 (Appendix B)  
 Patient global VAS recorded on a 10cm scale 
 
MD global VAS recorded on a 10cm scale 
 HAQ disability index 
  
TCZ in Myositis 35 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015     At least one of the muscle enzym es (CK, AST, ALT, aldolase, LDH )   
 Global extramuscular disease activity (a composite of constitut ional, cutaneous, 
skeletal, gastrointestinal, pul monary and cardiac activity) sco re recorded on a 10cm 
VAS scale on the Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDA AT) 
 All 6 CSM will be assessed at the screening visit and every 4 w eeks thereafter prior to 
administration of  TCZ for 6 addi tional visits followed by a fi nal closing visit. The newly 
determined primary outcome  for th is trial is a composite estab lished by international 
consensus among various adult a nd pediatric myositis experts. P atients who achieve a 
score ≥20 points based on the mode l in Table 1 are considered t o have minimal 
improvement. The proportion of patie nts having a score ≥20 at e ach of the time points in 
the two treatment groups will provide an indication of the clin ical relevance of the effect 
of treatment.    
 
13.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 13.1   Determination of Sample Size      
 
The sample size is justifie d based on this trial being a proof of concept  pilot study. We 
have proposed a study populati on of 40 subjects being recruited  among sites that were 
active enrollers in the RIM Study. This will allow us to determ ine an estimate of the 
effect size of the study dr ug and placebo and to assess feasibi lity and safety in a pilot 
trial. If the estimate of time t o improvement is consistent wit h a benefit of TCZ compared 
to placebo as measured by the pr imary endpoint and secondary en dpoints 1, 2 and 4, then 
a larger study including both adult and juvenile myositis will be proposed with the 
potential incorporation of sites  outside of the United States. 
 
13.2    Planned Efficacy Evaluations 
 13.2.1 Primary Efficacy Variables 
 
The primary endpoint will be to com pare the average Total Impro vement Scores at visits 
2 through 7 during the 6-month tr eatment period between the tre atment and placebo arms.  
Repeated measures analysis will  be used to compare the two trea tment groups and 
adjustments will be made for the baseline CSM values.  The tota l improvement score will 
be calculated by adding the improve ment scores of all six core set measures based on the 
new consensus driven improvement  criteria in myositis (as shown  in table 1).  
 
13.2.2 Secondary Efficacy Variables 
 
Additional secondary endpoints include: (1) comparison of the t ime to first DOI between 
the 2 arms, (2) comparison of the  individual CSM in subjects ov er time between the 2 
arms (repeated measures analysis), (3) comparison of the steroi d-sparing effect 
(calculated using prednisone dose equivalents) between the trea tment and placebo arms, 
(4) assessment of the magnitude  of the effect size between both  treatment arms by 
comparing the proportion of subject s having Total Improvement S cores ≥ 20 (minimal), 
40 (moderate) and 60 (major), (5) the difference in adverse eve nts between the control 
  
TCZ in Myositis 36 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    and treatment arms. The durability of the treatment response wi ll be assessed by (6) 
comparing the proportion of subject s meeting DOI in the treatme nt and placebo arms on 
2 consecutive visits , (7) determination of t he time to flare [meeting the definitio n of 
worsening (DOW)] in those who ear lier met the DOI.(8) comparing  the proportion of 
subjects meeting the DOI in the treatment and placebo arms usin g the previously 
published definition of improveme nt by IMACS for adult myositis  [2] utilizing the six 
CSM: 3 of 6 CSM improved by ≥ 20% , with no more than 2 CSM wors ening by ≥ 25% 
(a worsening measure cannot be the MMT) . 
 
13.3   Methods of Analysis  
  
The primary analysis will compare  the average Total Improvement  Score in the two 
treatment groups at visits 2 t hrough 7 during the 6 month treat ment period. We will use 
repeated measures analysis and a djust for baseline CSM values. Such an analysis uses all 
of the information provided by the T otal Improvement Score but does not incorporate 
information on whether there has been a clinically meaningful d ifference. Therefore, we 
have included as a secondary e ndpoint (secondary endpoint 4), a  comparison of the 
proportion of patients in the two gr oups that have minimal, mod erate or major 
improvement.  For analysis of the 8 secondary endpoints noted in Section 13.2.2, we will use the 
following methods: (1) Kaplan-Meier plots will summarize the time to improvement i n the two arms and to 
compare the time to improvement between the 2 groups the log ra nk test will be used.  
(2) The average monthly values of  the individual CSM between th e 2 treatment arms will 
be analyzed using a repeated meas ures analysis adjusted for bas eline values. 
(3) The two sample t-test (or wh en appropriate the Mann-Whitney  statistic) will be used 
to analyze and compare the avera ge steroid-sparing effect betwe en the treatment and 
placebo arms. (4) The effect size between treatment arms will be assessed by comparing at each time 
point the proportion of patients ha ving minimal, moderate and m ajor improvement. 
Binary repeated measures will be used to test equality of propo rtions between the two 
groups.  (5) The chi-square statistic will summarize the difference in p roportion of adverse events 
between the placebo and study drug arms. (6) Kaplan-Meier plots will summarize the time to improvement ( on 2 consecutive visits) 
in the two arms and to compare t his time to improvement between  the 2 groups the log 
rank test will be used. (7) Kaplan-Meier plots will similarly summarize the time to dis ease flare (DOW) in the 
two arms and to compare the tim e to flare/worsening between the  2 groups the log rank 
test will be used. (8) Kaplan-Meier plots and the  logrank test will be used to com pare the two treatment 
groups using the previously publis hed definition of improvement  proposed by IMACS.   
 
 
14.0 RETENTION OF RECORDS  
  
TCZ in Myositis 37 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    All documentation of adverse even ts, records of trial drug rece ipt and dispensation, and all IRB 
correspondence for at least 2 years after the inve stigation is completed will be retained. 
 
 REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1.  Oddis, C.V., et al., Rituximab  in the treatment  of refractory  adult and juvenile 
dermatomyositis  and adult polymyositis:  A randomized,  placebo‐phase trial. 
Arthritis  Rheum, 2013. 65(2): p. 314‐24. 
2.  Rider, L.G., et al., International  consensus  on preliminary  definitions  of 
improvement  in adult and juvenile
 myositis. Arthritis  Rheum, 2004. 50(7): p. 
2281‐90. 
3.  Kaly, L. and I. Rosner, Tocilizumab  ‐ a novel therapy for non‐organ‐specific 
autoimmune  diseases. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol,  2012. 26(1): p. 157‐65. 
4.  Schoels, M.M., et al., Blocking the effects of interleukin ‐6 in rheumatoid  
arthritis and other inflammatory  rheumatic  diseases: systematic  literature  review 
and meta‐analysis informing  a consensus  statement.  Ann Rheum Dis, 2012. 
5.  Smolen, J.S., et al., Consensus  statement  on blocking the effects of interleukin ‐6 
and in particular  by interleukin ‐6 receptor inhibition  in rheumatoid  arthritis and 
other inflammatory  conditions.  Ann Rheum Dis, 2012. 
6.  Muangchan,  C. and J.E. Pope, Interleukin  6 in systemic sclerosis and potential 
implications  for targeted therapy. J Rheumatol,  2012. 39(6): p. 1120‐4. 
7.  Shirota, Y., et al., Impact of anti‐interleukin ‐6 receptor blockade on circulating  T 
and B cell subsets in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.  Ann Rheum 
Dis, 2013. 72(1): p. 118‐28. 
8.  Narazaki,  M., et al., Therapeutic  effect of tocilizumab  on two patients with 
polymyositis.  Rheumatology  (Oxford),  2011. 50(7): p. 1344‐6. 
9.  Scuderi, F., et al., IL‐6‐deficient mice show impaired inflammatory  response in a 
model of myosin‐induced experimental  myositis. J Neuroimmunol,  2006. 176(1‐
2): p. 9‐15. 
10. Bilgic, H., et al., Interleukin ‐6 and type I interferon ‐regulated  genes and 
chemokines  mark disease activity in dermatomyositis.  Arthritis  Rheum, 2009. 
60(11): p. 3436‐46. 
11. Sugihara,  T., et al., A new murine model to define the critical pathologic  and 
therapeutic  mediators  of polymyositis.  Arthritis  Rheum, 2007. 56(4): p. 1304‐
14. 
12. Okiyama,  N., et al., Therapeutic  effects of interleukin ‐6 blockade in a murine 
model of polymyositis  that does not require interleukin ‐17A. Arthritis  Rheum, 
2009. 60(8): p. 2505‐12. 
13. Oddis, C.V., et al., International  consensus  guidelines  for trials of therapies in 
the idiopathic  inflammatory  myopathies.  Arthritis  Rheum, 2005. 52(9): p. 2607‐
15. 
  
TCZ in Myositis 38 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    14. Sampson,  H.A., et al., Second symposium  on the definition  and management  of 
anaphylaxis:  summary  report‐‐Second National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious  Disease/Food  Allergy and Anaphylaxis  Network symposium.  J Allergy 
Clin Immunol,  2006. 117(2): p. 391‐7. 
 
 
APPENDIX A:  STUDY FLOW CHART/SCHEMA 
Week 0‐14 
days 
before 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 3 mo 
Follow 
Up 6 mo
Follow 
Up 
Visit  Screen  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  9 
Study Drug Administration  x x x x x x     
Safety Laboratory Testing 
Urine Pregnancy (if applic able)  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
WBC  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Platelets  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Neutrophils/Monocytes/Eosinophils 
Basophils  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Hemoglobin  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Hematocrit  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
ALT  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
AST  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Aldolase  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
LDH  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
CK, total  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
BUN  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Creatinine  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Electrolytes  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
IgG quantitative  x     x     x     x          
IgM quantitative  x     x     x     x          
Serologies (varicella, HCV, HBV)  x                            
Lipid Panel  x  x  x 
Anti‐TCZ autoantib odies & PK/PD*  x 
Data Collection                       
Screening Demographics  x                            
Screening Evaluation  x                            
Screening Criteria  x                            
Randomization Form     x                         
Patient Global Assessment  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Health Assessment Questionnaire  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MMT‐8  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MDAAT  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
MDI  x     x  x 
  
TCZ in Myositis 39 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Physician Global Assessmen t  x     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Physician Assessment of Cha nge        x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
SF 36 QoL Questionnaire        x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Brief Evaluation     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Muscle Biopsy     x              x          
Adverse Event Monitoring     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
Biospecimen Repository Collection     x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
* If a hypersensitivity event occu rs, these tests will be done at  the time of the event and 6 weeks later 
 
 APPENDIX B:  MMT-8  
MMT- 8 is a set of 8 designated muscles t ested unilatera lly (potential  score 0-70 and 
usually tested on the right side un less contraindicated) or bil aterally (pote ntial score 0-
140) and if axial (neck flexor) te sting is included, potential score = 150. The scale of 150 
is proposed for this trial.  
 
Muscle Groups  Right (0 – 10)  Left (0 – 10) 
Axial Muscles (0 – 10)    
Neck Flexors  0‐10 
Proximal Muscles (0 – 50)   
Deltoid   0‐10  0‐10 
Biceps brachii  0‐10  0‐10 
Gluteus maximus  0‐10  0‐10 
Gluteus medius  0‐10  0‐10 
Quadriceps  0‐10  0‐10 
Distal Muscles (0 – 20)    
Wrist extensors  0‐10  0‐10 
Ankle dorsiflexors  0‐10  0‐10 
MMT‐ 8 score (0 – 150)  0‐70  0‐80 
 
 APPENDIX C: FDA MEDWATCH 3500A FORM  
 
SAFETY REPORTING FAX COVER SHEET 
Investigator Sponsored Trials 
 
SAE FAX No: (650) 225-4682 
Alternate Fax No: (650) 225-4683  
Study Number 
(Genentech study number)  

  
TCZ in Myositis 40 Version 2.3, January 30, 2015    Principal Investigator  
Site Name 
  
Reporter name  
Reporter Telephone #  
Reporter Fax #  
 
 
Initial Report Date 
(DD/MON/YYYY) ____ / _____ /_____ 
Follow-up Report Date 
(DD/MON/YYYY) ____ / _____ /_____ 
 
 
Subject Initials 
(Please enter a dash if the patient has no middle name) ____ - ____ -____ 
 
 
PLEASE PLACE MEDWATCH REPORT or IND SAFETY REPORT BEHIND THIS 
COVER SHEET 
 
 
Please contact Genentech Safet y for any questions regarding SAE  or IND Safety 
reporting at (888) 835-2555 
 
   
Page 1 of ___ 
 