 
  
 
 Statistical Analysis Plan  
For the  
Final Statistical Report  
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:   OPTIMIZE -IP-12 
 
  PROTOCOL TITLE:  The OPTIMIZE Multicenter,  Placebo -
Controlled, Double -Blind, Randomized 
Trial  
   
PRINCIPAL  
INVESTIGATORS :   Nicole Mayer- Hamblett, PhD  
OPTIMIZE DCC  
 
Bonnie Ramsey, MD  
     OPTIMIZE CCC  
 
 FUNDING AGENCIES:   National Institutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI)  
 
 PREPARED BY:    Margaret Kloster, MS  
     Shelly Ma, MS  
     Nicole Hamblett, PhD  
    RELEASE DATE:    April 22, 2015 
 
  

 
 PREFACE  
 
 
The Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) as outlined in this document will be finalized prior to 
the completion of the first comprehensive DSMB interim report.  Any modifications to the SAP after finalization will be documented .  The  SAP contains all modifications and 
updates to the planned analyses that were outlined in the original study protocol.  This plan details all a priori  specified analyses that will be performed upon study completion 
and database lock, with detailed specific ations for all tables, figures, and statistical 
models.   
 
 Signature Page  
 
 
 
 Analysis plan approved by:  
    ______________________________________________      ____________ Bonnie Ramsey , M.D.              Date  
Principal Investigator  
OPTIMIZE CCC  
  
 
______________________________________________      ____________ 
Nicole Mayer Hamblett, PhD       Date  
Principal Investigator  
OTPIMIZE DCC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 1.     Overview 
 
1.1 Study Rationale and Design  
 This is a  multicenter, double -blind, randomized, placebo -control led clinical trial in 274 
children with CF ages 6 mos - 18 years with early  Pa, defined as either a first lifetime 
documented Pa culture or a Pa  positive culture after at least two years of negative 
cultures.  The study will assess the clinical and microbio logic efficacy and safety of 
azithromycin given three times weekly in combination with  standardized  TIS therapy 
among children with early  Pa.  TIS therapy is defined as an initial eradication treatment 
with 1 -2 courses of 28 days TIS and subsequent 28 day treatments only at times a 
quarterly oropharyngeal culture is positive for Pa .
  Eligible participants will be 
randomized within one month of their Pa positive culture . Participants initiating TIS 
more than 14 days prior to the baseline visit for treatment of their Pa positive culture will 
be excluded.  Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to receive one of the 
following two treatment strategies for 18 months: (1) oral placebo in addition to 
standardized TIS therapy, or (2) oral azithromycin in a ddition to standardized TIS 
therapy.    
 Three times weekly administration of oral azithromycin or matching placebo will be continued throughout the 18 month trial.   All participants will receive a 28 -day course of 
TIS therapy during the first quarter of t he trial  and have a follow -up culture obtained to 
document Pa clearance. P articipants who remain Pa positive after the first 28 -day course 
of TIS will receive a second 28 -day course of TIS.  Subsequently , participants will 
receive TIS therapy (administered  as a single 28 -day course) only if their quarterly 
cultures are Pa  positive. Cultures will be obtained at the start of each quarter for the 
duration of the 18 month study  (see Figure 1) .   
 Clinical and microbiologic outcomes will be assessed throughout t he 18- month trial, 
including the occurrence of pulmonary exacerbations and Pa  recurrence.   
 
 
 
 
The total duration of the study is expected to be forty -nine (49) months: thirty -one (31) 
months for participant recruitment and eighteen (18) for final participant follow -up. 
1.2 Study Objectives and Endpoints  
 
The primary endpoint in the study is the difference between treatment groups in the t ime 
to a protocol -defined pulmonary exacerbation,  comparing  oral placebo with  inhaled 
tobramycin versus oral azithromycin wi th inhaled tobramycin .  Pulmonary exacerbations 
will be defined according to an a priori  sign and symptom -based definition (Appendix 
II).   
Secondary Endpoints  
1. Time to Pa  recurrence over the 18 -month study period 
2. Safety as measured by the incidence of adverse events and laboratory abnormalities over the 18- month study period  
3. Changes from baseline  in plasma  inflammatory markers  
Secondary Exploratory Endpoints  
4. Proportion of participants with initial Pa  eradication success, defined as a Pa 
negative respirato ry culture at week 13  
5. Proportion of all cultures obtained that are positive for Pa  during the 18 month study 
period 
6. Prevalence of treatment -emergent Staphylococcus aureus  (methicillin susceptible 
and resistant), Haemophilus influenzae , Burkholderia cepacia complex, 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Alcaligenes xylosoxidans  (from oropharyngeal 
 
 and sputum cultures) , and non- tuberculous mycobacteria (in sputum only) during the 
18-month period 
7. Proportion of participants hospitalized over the 18- month study  
8. Prop ortion of participants prescribed acute oral, inhaled, and IV acute antibiotics 
over the 18- month study  
9. Change from baseline  to the end of the 18- month study in pulmonary function ( FVC, 
FEV 1, FEF 25-75%) in those old enough to perform spirometry (≥4 years of age)  
10. Change from baseline to the end of the 18- month study in weight and height  
11. Change from baseline to the end of the 18- month study in the self -report and parent -
completed Cystic Fibrosis Respiratory Diary scores  
12. Changes from baseline in the  respiratory microbiome  
13. Association of baseline inflammatory marker values, microbial diversity measures 
and other baseline clinical and demographic characteristics with clinical and microbiologic outcomes over the 18- month study  
  1.3 Interim Data Monitoring Committee Reviews  
 The DSMB will review quarterly abbreviated safety reports  beginning 3 months after the 
first participant is randomized . Summaries of enrollment, drug discontinuations, and AEs 
and SAEs tabulated by treatment group will be included in the  report.  
 In addition to the quarterly safety reports, comprehensive interim reports will be generated and reviewed on a semi -annual basis beginning one year after the first 
participant enrolled. These rep ort will include summaries of enrollment, randomiz ation, 
demographic and baseline characteristics, safety (SAEs and AEs ( including abnormal 
changes in audiology and electrocardiograms), hospitalizations, laboratory abnormalities, drug discontinuations), and key efficacy data (pulmonary exacerbations, micr obiology, 
anthropometrics, spirometry, acute antibiotic usage) .  
 Formal stopping rules for efficacy, futility and safety and the timing of their evaluation are outlined in section 1.3. 
 
1.4 Statistical Monitoring Guidelines and Stopping Rules for Planned Effi cacy 
and Futility Analyses  
 The DSMB will be guided by a formal stopping rule based on the relative risk of the primary endpoint, time to pulmonary exacerbation. With the sample size of approximately 137 per group and assuming a two- sided type 1 error of 0.05 and that 50% 
of participants will experience an exacerbation in the culture- based TIS with placebo 
group, the study has approximately 90% power to detect a 47% or greater reduction in exacerbations in the group receiving culture -based TIS with azithrom ycin (hazard ratio of 
0.53 or lower) and approximately 80% power to detect a 42% or greater reduction (hazard ratio of 0.58 or lower). These estimates take into account six planned interim analyses , which will be included in the comprehensive interim repor t, and one final 
analysis , included in the final report for the study. The first formal interim analysis will 
 
 be described in the first comprehensive interim analysis generated one year after the first 
participant is randomized.  Among the 137 participants  enrolled in the culture -based TIS with placebo group, at a 
rate of 50%, we would expect approximately 69 primary endpoint events during the 18 month randomized trial. Assuming that the addition of azithromycin conservatively results in a 40% reduction in exacerbations (relative risk ≤ 0.6), we would expect approximately 41 events among the 137 subjects enrolled in the azithromycin group for a total of 110 events during the study. The timing of the 7 analyses does not need to be equally spaced with respect to the accrual of PE events. However, if equally spaced analyses are performed, these would occur after 16, 31, 47, 63, 79, 94, and 110 events. Assuming an O’Brien- Fleming boundary1, the two- sided stopping rule would suggest 
that the trial be stopped early  for safety if the observed hazard ratio were greater than or 
equal to 15.71, 3.96, 2.51, 1.88, 1.74, 1.58, and 1.48 at each analysis time (i.e. significantly greater number of events in the azithromycin group as compared to the placebo group) and the stopping rule for efficacy would suggest that the trial be stopped early if the observed hazard ratio were equal to or less than 0.06, 0.25, 0.39, 0.50, 0.58, 
0.63, and 0.68 at each analysis time (i.e. significantly less exacerbations in the 
azithromycin group as compared to placebo). With this example of equally spaced 
analyses, on the error spending function scale this corresponds to the following 
cumulative error spent: <0.00001, 0.023, 0.0333, 0.1384, 0.3396, 0.6323, and 1.0.  
The actual stopping boundaries  will be computed at each analysis and in conjunction with 
comprehensive semi -annual report to the DSMB. Thus, the actual stopping boundaries 
may differ than those provided above depending on the number of events that have 
occurred. Splus SeqTrial software  will be used to calculate the formal stopping boundary 
and adjust for this interim analysis in the final analysis.  
In addition to monitoring for the primary endpoint, the DSMB will also be guided by a 
safety threshold for which to monitor safety of the S AE defined as sensorineuronal 
hearing loss. Based on data from the EPIC clinical trial among children ages 1 – 12 years 
of age receiving TIS for newly acquired Pa , we expect approximately 8.6% of children to 
have an abnormal hearing test post -baseline (wit h a comparable definition to 
sensorineuronal hearing loss above) (17/197 children in EPIC, 95% CI 5.5%,13.4%).  
Based on this data, we recommend a stopping rule for the SAE sensorineuronal hearing 
loss as the following:  
 
(1) The proportion of patients with sensorineuronal hearing loss post -baseline is at 
least 8% greater in the azithromycin group as compared to placebo. This assumes, 
for example, at the end of the study that 12/137 participants (8.8%) of participants in the placebo group and 23/137 (16.8%) in the azithromycin group experience this SAE (an 8.0% difference, 95% CI: 0.06%, 16.1%)  
 AND  
 
(2) The proportion of participants in the azithromycin group with sensorineural hearing loss is at least 13% or greater.  
 
 
  
2. Report Generation  
 
2.1 Data Flow  
 An electronic data capture system, Medidata Rave ®, will be utilized for collection of 
study data. The Investigator will prepare and maintain adequate and accurate source documents designed to record all observations and other pertinent data for each participant who signs informed consent.  
 Study personnel at each site will enter data from source documents corresponding to a participant’s visit or assessment into the protocol -specific electronic Case Report Form 
(eCRF). Participants will not be identified by name  in the study database or on any study 
documents to be collected by the Sponsor (or designee), but will be identified by a site number, participant number and initials. If a correction is required for an eCRF, the time and date stamp will track the person entering or updating eCRF data and creates an electronic audit trail. The Investigator is responsible for all information collected on participants enrolled in this study. All data collected during the course of this study must be reviewed and verified for  completeness and accuracy by the Investigator. A copy of 
the CRF will remain at the Investigator’s site at the completion of the study.  
  2.2 Report Generation  
 The final  statistical report will describe and justify any deviations from the original 
statistica l plan described herein.  If necessary, such deviations will be treated as a 
protocol amendment.  
 The final  statistical report will be accompanied by a description of the data cleaning 
process and will provide summaries of key findings . All programs used t o produce the 
statistical reports will be documented, validated , and archived. Statistical analyses will be 
generated by the OPTIMIZE DCC .     
 The statistical reports will be prepared u sing current versions of SAS, R and/or S -PLUS 
statistical software.  A ll statistical tests are two -sided and will be evaluated at a 0.05 level 
of significance unless otherwise specified.  
 2.3 Definition of the Analysis Populations  
Intent -to-Treat Population 
The intent -to-treat population is defined as all randomized participants . Participants who 
are discontinued from study drug early are encouraged to complete all remaining study 
visits  and will remain in the analysi s population according to ITT.  
 
Per Protocol Population 
The per -protocol population is defined as all randomized participants who have 
completed ≥ 80% of expected doses of azithromycin or placebo, were not determined to 
 
 be ineligible , did not incur any protocol violations , or who at any point in the study 
received IV anti -pseudomonal therapy in the absence of accompan ying symptoms  (as 
discouraged in the protocol).   Additionally, the per -protocol population will be analyzed 
according to the treatment they received (not how they were randomized) .  
 
All analyses included in this report will be performed using the intent -to-treat (ITT) 
population unless otherwise specified. The primary efficacy analyses evaluating time to protocol -defined pulmonary exacerbation, and key secondary efficacy endpoint s 
evaluating time to Pa recurrence  and changes in inflammatory markers , will also be 
performed  using the per -protocol population (see sections 4, 5 and 6, respectively) .  
  
Missing Data   
Site training, automatic queries in the electronic data capture system, and thorough clinical site monitoring will be performed in order to minimi ze the occurrence of missing 
data. Participants who discontinue treatment will be encouraged to remain in the study while completing all study procedures. Details regarding the handling of missing data for 
analyses evaluating the primary efficacy endpoint , time to pulmonary exacerbation, and 
for analyses of the key secondary efficacy endpoint s evaluating time to Pa  recurrence and 
change in inflammatory markers will be provided in each of their respective section s of 
the statistical analysis plan  (Section 4, 5 and 6) .  Observed case analyses will be 
performed for all other secondary and exploratory endpoints.  2.4 Definitions  
 Baseline – Baseline refers to the first study visit at which randomization occurs.  
 Study drug – Study drug refers to the drug the partici pant was randomized to (either 
azithromycin or placebo)  
 
 1.  Summary of  Enrollment  
The c umulative enrollment of participants entering the study is graphically presented. 
The number of participants screened, eligible, randomized, treated, and withdrawn pos t-
Baseline are summarized by both treatment arm and site.  Reasons for screen failure 
are summarized. Screen failures are participants  that signed informed consent but did 
not meet eligibility criteria or chose not to participate in the study. The number o f 
participants who withdrew early from the study are tabulated by treatment arm and 
reason for withdrawal is summarized.  
2.  Summary of  Participant Demographics and Baseline Characteristics  
Participant demographics and clinical characteristics at baseline are descriptively 
summarized by treatment arm and overall.   Characteristics summarized are gender, age, race, genotype (homozygous, heterozygous, other), FEV
1, height, weight, and 
sweat chloride. P. aeruginosa (Pa) eligibility status (first lifetime Pa  culture or history of 
Pa) as well as Pa and Staphylococcus aureus (SA)  status at baseline are also 
summarized by treatment arm and overall. T he number and percent of participants using 
either a nebulizer or  a podhaler for administration of tobramycin at baseline is also 
summarized, in addition to season of enrollment (winter, spring, summer and fall). The 
number of participants using hypertonic  saline and pulmozyme within thirty days of 
baseline is also summarized. Fisher Exact tests are used to test at a two- sided 0.05 
level of significance for differences in categorical variables across treatment arms. A 
two-sided t -test assuming unequal variance is used to test the difference between 
treatment arms for all continuous variables at a two- sided 0.05 level of significance.  
3.  Summary of  Protocol Adherence and Per Protocol Population Definition  
The n umber and percentage of participants who completed each visit is summarized by 
treatment arm. A study visit is considered completed if a participant completed any study 
related procedures.  
Follow -up time is summarized as well as the average length of follow -up time for each 
participant. Follow -up time is defined as time between baseline and the last study visit 
(either end of study Visit 8 [Week 78] or withdrawal date).  
Study drug (azithromycin/placebo) could either be stopped permanently or temporarily at 
any time at the discretion of the subject, site investigator or the Sponsor. If a participant stopped study drug permanently, they were encouraged to remain in the study and 
complete all remaining study visits. If a participant experienced moderate to severe 
intolerance of study drug, dosage adjustments could be made at the discretion of the 
investigator. The number and proportion of participants temporarily or permanently 
stopping study drug at the discretion of the site investigator are summarized, as w ell as 
the reason for study drug stoppage. The number and proportion of participants modifying study drug dosage frequency, at the discretion of the site investigator, is also summarized as well as reasons. The total number and proportion of participants w ith 
 
 physician initiated dose modifications is summarized and the difference in proportions 
between treatment arms is reported. A corresponding 95% confidence interval is 
calculated using Newcombe- Wilson method and p- values are from a Fisher’s exact test.  
Study drug compliance is measured based on participant self -report. Participants were 
instructed to maintain a daily diary in which they recorded doses taken. The diaries were reviewed at each study visit by the site Research Coordinator (RC) and any deviat ion 
from the expected dose will be discussed with the participant and reason for deviation 
noted. To determine compliance, the total number of expected doses for each participant 
in the study is calculated. Per protocol, 3 doses of study drug are to be tak en each week 
until the end of the study. For participants who completed Visit 8, the number of expected doses is calculated as the number of full weeks between the first dose of study drug and Visit 8 multiplied by 3. For participants who withdrew from the study prior to 
Visit 8, the number of expected doses is based on the expected time on study per 
protocol (78 weeks); therefore the number of expected doses is 234. Study drug 
compliance is calculated as: (Number of doses reported taken / Number of expected 
doses) x 100. Compliance is not dependent on the number of bottles dispensed or 
returned. Study drug compliance is summarized by treatment arm and overall as well as the number and percentage of participants with ≥ 80% compliance.  
Adherence to the protocol as it pertains to inhaled tobramycin use throughout the trial is also summarized. All participants should have initiated at least a first course of inhaled 
tobramycin no more than  fourteen days prior to Baseline. Subsequently, if a culture 
resulted in a Pa positive result at Visit 2 (Week 3) or any of Visits 3- 8 (quarterly visits), 
an inhaled tobramycin course would be initiated. If the study visit culture resulted in a Pa 
negative result, no inhaled tobramycin would be initiated unless indicated clinically for 
symptoms . Additionally, at the discretion of the primary care clinician, treatment with TIS 
may be revised to a 28- day on/28- day off regimen if the Pa infection is persistent . A 
persistent Pa infection is defined as any two respiratory cultures collected at a study 
visits, positive for Pa from Visit 3 onward. Sites were encouraged to prescribe TIS, 
however, a participant could choose to use the TOBI podhaler (TIP) or other 
commercially available nebulized tobramycin formulations in place of TOBI. The total 
number and percent of participants initiating the first course of inhaled tobramycin and 
the time from Baseline to initiating of the first course is summarized. The total num ber of 
subsequent Pa positive quarters is summarized as well as the number of Pa positive 
quarters for which inhaled antibiotics were initiated and the type of inhaled antibiotic used (TIS, TIP, other inhaled tobramycin, other inhaled antibiotic). Finally,  the number of 
subsequent Pa negative quarters is summarized as well as the number of Pa negative 
quarters for which inhaled antibiotics were initiated. A quarter is considered Pa  positive 
when at least one Pa  culture was positive at or between quarterly v isits.  
A listing of all protocol violations is provided. The number of participants included in the 
per-protocol population is provided by treatment arm  as well as reasons for exclusion. 
The per -protocol population is defined as all randomized participant s who have 
completed ≥ 80% of expected doses of azithromycin or placebo, were not determined to 
be ineligible, did not incur any protocol violations, or who at any point in the study 
 
 received IV anti -pseudomonal therapy in the absence of accompanying symptoms (as 
discouraged in the protocol).  T he per -protocol population  will be analyzed according to 
the treatment they received (not how they were randomized).  
4.  Summary of  Pulmonary Exacerbations  
The primary endpoint is time to a protocol -defined pulmonary exacerbation.  In this study, 
we used an a priori  definition for exacerbation based on signs and symptoms 
characterized as major criteria or minor criteria (protocol Appendix II).  Implementation of 
this definition was consistent with its definition in the randomized, placebo controlled trial of azithromycin in pediatric patients w ith CF culture negative for Pa (1, 2). At the 
initiation of each new antibiotic, site investigators completed an electronic case report form and indicated the presence or absence of signs and symptoms comprising the PE  
definition that prompted antibiotic t reatment. However, the decision to utilize antibiotics 
was not dependent on whether or not the protocol definition for exacerbation was met.   
 
Time to exacerbation is presented using Kaplan- Meier survival estimation and is 
compared between treatment groups using a Cox proportional hazards model with effects for treatment group and randomization strata ( ≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 -6 years, 
≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 years), with a test of the treatment effect at a two -sided significance 
level of 0.05.  Participants who withdraw from the study early will be censored at the date of last contact. The results from the m odel, including the hazard ratio and its 95% 
confidence interval are presented  using both the ITT population and the per -protocol 
population.   
 
Several sensitivity analyses will also be performed to assess the robustness of study 
results as outlined in the  study protocol.  The first sensitivity analysis will utilize a 
composite endpoint of time to pulmonary exacerbation or repeated use of acute antibiotics (at least 2 acute antibiotic courses prescribed that do not meet the PE 
definition) (3) . Furthermore , the potential influence of acute respiratory events not 
meeting the primary endpoint definition will also be assessed by censoring participants 
with acute antibiotic usage prior to meeting the primary endpoint . To investigate the 
impact of missing data, results from a  model will be presented using only participants 
with complete follow up data. A model will also be presented assuming any censored 
participant experienced a pulmonary exacerbation at the time of withdrawal or loss to 
follow -up. Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals from each model adjusting for 
treatment group and randomization strata are presented.  
Exploratory subgroup analyses of the primary endpoint will also be perf ormed.  
Estimates of the hazard ratio and associated 95% confidence interval along with p-
values for the primary endpoint will be reported by subgroups defined by pre -specified 
demographic and disease specific baseline characteristics of interest.  No adjustments 
for multiple comparisons will be made. Additional exploratory analyses include summarizing the frequency of signs/symptoms presented during all pulmonary 
exacerbations events as well as comparing treatment groups with respect  to the average 
 
 number of PEs. The results from an Anderson -Gill Cox Model for the mean number  of 
exacerbations with effects for randomization strata and treatment group is also 
presented with corresponding hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval.  
Additional exploratory analyses will be performed utilizing alternative definitions of the 
PE endpoint incorporating additional dat a collection during the study.  In particular, 
additional signs and symptom data were collected at scheduled study visits independent 
of antibiotic use for exploratory purposes and will be used to investigate frequency of 
signs  and symptoms consistent with the PE definition regardless of antibiotic initiation 
(defined a “significant respiratory event”) as well as the frequency of physician defined 
(rather than protocol defined) exacerbation events .   
 
 
References  
 
1. Saiman L, Anst ead M, Mayer -Hamblett N, Lands LC, Kloster M, Hocevar -Trnka J, 
Goss CH, Rose LM, Burns JL, Marshall BC, Ratjen F; AZ0004 Azithromycin Study 
Group. Effect of azithromycin on pulmonary function in patients with cystic fibrosis 
uninfected with Pseudomonas aer uginosa: a randomized controlled trial.  JAMA.  
2010 May 5;303(17):1707- 15. 
2. Anstead M, Saiman L, Mayer -Hamblett N,  Lands LC, Kloster M, Goss CH, Rose LM, 
Burns JL, Marshall BC, Ratjen F. Pulmonary Exacerbations in CF Patients with Early 
Lung Disease. Journal  of Cystic Fibrosis. 2014 Jan;13(1):74 -9. Epub 2013 Sep 10.  
PMID: 24029220.  
3. Mayer -Hamblett N,  Saiman L, Lands LC, Rosenfeld M, Kloster M, Fisher L, Ratjen F.  
Impact of acute antibiotic therapy on the pulmonary exacerbation endpoint in cystic 
fibrosis clin ical trials. Contemporary Clinical Trials.   2013 Sep;36(1):99 -105. doi: 
10.1016/j.cct.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 Jun 14. PMID:23770109.  
5.  Summary of  Pseudomonas aeruginosa ( Pa) Endpoints  
Respiratory c ulture results are obtained at scheduled study visit s with additional cultures 
obtained between visits only if clinically necessary. A nalyses include only cultures 
obtained during scheduled study visits unless otherwise specified. R espiratory  cultures 
could be collected via oropharyngeal (OP) swab, sputum (expectorated or induced) or 
bronchoalveolar  lavage (BAL). In the event that more than one culture is obtained for the 
same visit from the same participant , a positive result for Pa  in any of the specimens 
designates the participant positive for Pa at that visit. The number and percent of 
cultures obtained and by which method is summarized by visit and treatment  arm. 
A key secondary efficacy endpoint is time to Pa  recurrence after initial treatment with 
anti-pseudomonal therapy received during the first quarter of the study. Time to Pa 
recurrence from weeks 13 through 78 is presented using Kaplan- Meier survival 
estimation and compared between treatment arms using a Cox proportional hazards 
model with effects for treatment and age group (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 
12 years, ≥12 years), with a test of the treatment effect at a two -sided significance level 
 
 of 0.05.  The results from the model, including hazard ratios and 95% confidence 
interval s, are presented. This main model will be performed for both the ITT population 
and the PP population (see Introduction).  In the event that there are missing culture 
results at a scheduled study visit for a participant, the following imputation method will be 
used. If the participant has culture results available from the quarter directly following the 
missing culture quarter, the result of that culture will be used fo r the preceding missing 
quarter. If there are two or more missing quarters, the participant will be assumed to be 
a microbiologic “failure” and assumed positive for Pa. Further, a sensitivity model of time 
to Pa recurrence will be performed  including culture results obtained both at acute study 
visits and scheduled study visits.   
Exploratory subgroup analyses of the time to Pa  recurrence endpoint will also be 
performed. Estimates of the hazard ratio and associated 95% confidence interval  along 
with p -values  for the primary endpoint will be reported by subgroups defined by pre-
specified demographic and disease specific baseline characteristics of interest.  No 
adjustments for multiple comparisons will be made.  
The proportion of Pa -positive respiratory cultures among all respiratory cultures taken  at 
scheduled study visits from weeks 13 through 78 is also modeled.  The response is 
binary (positive or negative culture)  at each visit . A generalized estimating equation 
(GEE) model using a logit link is used to model this data with robust variance estimation 
and an independence working correlation matrix, including effects for both treatment and age group  (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 years)  in addition to 
the number of available cultures at scheduled study visits over the 18 month study 
period.  The significance of the treatment arm variable is tested using a two- sided 0.05 
level o f significance.  The treatment associated odds ratio from this model and 
corresponding 95% confidence interval is the measure of treatment effect.  The 
estimated treatment effect is interpreted as the marginal odds ratio of Pa positive 
respiratory cultures during the 18 months. A sensitivity model will also be performed  
including culture results obtained both at acute study visits and scheduled study visits.   
The proportion of participants with Pa  positive cultures is summarized by visit and 
treatment. Differ ences and 95% confidence intervals are reported for each visit.  
The proportion of participants who achieved initial eradication at week 3 and after the 
first quarter of treatment at week 13 is summarized and compared between treatment 
groups, and additional summaries are provided for the proportion who were Pa  positive 
at week 3 but were negative by week 13. The proportion of patients with at least one Pa  
positive culture result after the first quarter of treatment  (on or after week 13)  is also 
summarized f or each treatment arm with  the difference between treatment arms tested 
using a 0.05 level of significance Chi -square test.  The number of participants with 
persistent Pa infection at some point during the trial is summarized. Persistence is 
defined in the protocol as any two respiratory cultures collected at study visits, positive for Pa from Week 13 onward. The difference between treatment arms is tested using a 
two-sided 0.05 level Chi -square test. Additionally, among those who turned persistent, 
 
 the inhaled tobramycin formulation used and frequency of treatment (i.e. 28 days on/28 
days off, quarterly) after persistent infection is summarized.  
Time to persistent Pa infection  is presented using Kaplan- Meier survival estimation and 
compared between treatment  arms using a Cox proportional hazards model with effects 
for treatment and age group (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 
years), with a test of the treatment effect at a two -sided significance level of 0.05.  The 
results from the model, including hazard ratios  and 95% confidence interval s, are 
presented.  
Exploratory analyses of the frequency of mucoid Pa cultures were also performed . Pa 
mucoid status at each visit and the change for each visit from baseline is summarized by treatmen t arm.  Pa resistance to aminoglycosides, quinolones and β -lactams were also 
tested when indicated clinically. The number and proportion of participants with at least 
one emergent drug- resistant Pa culture post -baseline is summarized by treatment arm 
for each drug class  among those participants with at least one result available for 
testing . Differences and 95% confidence intervals are presented.  
A multivariable logistic regression model using stepwise regression is developed to identify key baseline predictors associ ated with initial eradication failure, determined 
using Pa status at Week 13. Baseline demographic, clinical , microbiologic and 
inflammatory variables will be assessed for inclusion of the model. Cross -validation 
techniques are used to determine a model . The model coefficients and standard errors 
(SE) are presented as well as corresponding 95% confidence intervals and the p- values.  
The positive predictive value, negative predictive value, sensitivity and specificity of the 
model are presented.
Summary of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) Endpoints  
6.  Summary of  Inflammatory Markers  
Serum inflammatory markers (myeloperoxidase (MPO), C -reactive Protein (CRP) and 
calprotectin) are transformed using log 10 and summarized at each visit (Baseline, Week 
39 and Week 78) by treatment arm .  For values below the limit of detection, ½ the lower 
limit of detection is used. For values greater than the limit of detection, the upper limit of 
detection is used.  
Change from baseline to end of study in each inflammatory marker is a key secondary efficacy endpoint.  Linear regression will be used to estimate the difference between 
treatment groups in the 78 week change from baseline in each inflammatory marker, 
adjusted for randomization strata. These analyses will be performed on both the ITT and PP population. Additional sensitivity analyses will be performed to address missing data. 
Specifically, the least favorable treatment arm i mputation method will be used which 
imputes that missing value with the mean change from the treatment arm with the worst 
change in the observed case analysis.   
 
 Observed c hanges from baseline at Weeks 39 and 78 are also descriptively summarized 
by treatment arm . The change from baseline in inflammatory markers at Weeks 39 and 
78 are also graphed for each treatment arm  along with 95% confidence intervals.  
7.  Summary of  Adverse Events  
Treatment emergent advers e events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) will be 
comprehensively  summarized. Treatment emergent adverse events are those events 
that occurred on or after Baseline as reported by the participant.  The safety population is 
used in all summaries of SAE s and AEs. Note that a ll tables summarizing  AEs also 
include SAEs (which are a subset of the AEs) unless otherwise specified.  
Included in the summaries are tables displaying : 1) the proportion of partici pants with at 
least one (S)AE, 2) t he average number  of (S)AEs per patient, and 3) the rate of (S)AEs 
per participant -month of follow -up. Poisson regression is used to compare the rate of 
(S)AEs by treatment arm. Rate ratios and corresponding 95% confidence intervals and 
p-values are reported. The differenc e in the proportion of participants experiencing at 
least one (S)AE between treatment arms is also reported, with  corresponding 95% 
confidence intervals  calculated using the Newcombe- Wilson method and p- values 
derived  from a Fisher’s exact test.  
A hist ogram showing the number of (S)AEs  per participant  in each treatment arm is 
displayed. Detailed summary tables of individual (S)AEs grouped by SOC will be 
included to show the number and percent of participants experiencing each (S)AE by 
treatment arm. The  number and rate of events for each (S)AE is also reported by 
treatment arm.  Poisson regression is used to derive rate ratios and corresponding 95% 
confidence intervals comparing treatment arms for each SOC.  Treatment arms will be 
compared by plotting  rates of (S)AEs and the proportion of participants experiencing 
(S)AEs by System Organ Class (SOC)  as well as the rate ratio and difference in 
proportions with corresponding 95% confidence intervals to compare treatment arms . 
The most frequently occurring adverse events, defined as those events occurring in ≥ 
5% of participants, will be separately summarized by SOC and treatment arm.  
The severity of AEs  will be tabulated by SOC and treatment arm  according to whether 
the AE was mild, moderate, severe or life- threatening.  The number and proportion of 
participants experiencing at least one AE classified as severe or worse is summarized 
by treatment arm.  The difference in the proportion of participants experiencing at least 
one severe AE or worse between treatment arms is reported. Corresponding 95% 
confidence intervals calculated using Newcombe- Wilson method and p- values derived 
from a Fisher’s exact test. The proportion of participants experiencing AEs and rates of 
AEs will be summarized by the relation to study d rug (unrelated, possibly, probably, 
definitely)  by treatment arm .  Finally,  the rate of AEs will be plotted by site.   
Both sensorineural hearing loss and protocol -defined abnormal ECG results, defined a 
priori  as key safety endpoints, will be reported as S AEs and therefore will be included in 
 
 SAE and AE tables. All SAE narratives will also be included in a listing appended to this 
report.  
8.  Safety Laboratory Parameters  
Blood was drawn for serum chemistry and hematology at Baseline, Visit 5 (Week 39) Visit 8 (Week 78) and at an Early Withdrawal Visit (if participant withdrew early). In the case that a participant had labs drawn at an Early Withdrawal Visit, those labs are 
included in the summaries for the visit that should have occurred closest to and after 
their early termination visit.  
Average lab values at each time point and average changes from Baseline are summarized by treatment arm. The difference between treatment arms in the mean change from Baseline to each visit are displayed with corresponding 95% confidence 
interval. If a par ticipant did not have labs at a specified time point, they are excluded 
from that particular measure.  
The number and percent of participants with lab measures below  (low) , within  (normal)  
and above (high)  the normal range at each visit and for each lab ar e displayed by 
treatment arm. Each site used their own standard normal range, therefore,  normal 
ranges for each measure may vary by site. For each abnormal lab value (low or high), 
the site PI determined if the abnormal lab was  considered clinically signif icant or not. 
Thus, c linically significant lab values are a subset of the abnormal values.  The number 
and percent of lab values deemed to be clinically significant are summarized by visit and 
treatment arm. Changes in abnormal and clinically significant lab values from Baseline at 
Visits 5 and 8 are summarized as emergent high or low . For example, a  lab value is 
determined to be emergent low at a visit if the lab value was not low at Baseline but low 
at the visit . Emergent high values and emergent clinical ly significant low and high values 
are similarly categorized.  The difference in proportions between treatment arms of 
participants with emergent clinically significant lab measures at Visit 5 and Visit 8 are 
displayed with corresponding 95% confidence interval.  
9.  Summary of  Hospitalizations and Antibiotic Usage  
Descriptive statistics are used to summarize the percent of participants hospitalized (all 
cause) by treatment arm, including the difference between treatment groups with 
associated 95%  confidence interval calculated using the Newcombe Wilson method. 
Differences between treatment groups with respect to the proportion of participants 
hospitalized is assessed using a logistic regression model adjusting for treatment and age category (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 years). The Odds 
ratio and 95% confidence interval from the model are presented along with a p -value. 
The rate of hospitalizations per month is also descriptively summarized and compared using Poisson regression, including follow -up time as an offset, with an associated rate 
ratio and 95% confidence interval  
 
 
 Similarly, the percent of participants initiating oral, IV, and inhaled antibiotics after 
Baseline and over the follow up period and the number of  days of oral and IV antibiotic 
use are descriptively summarized by treatment arm. Differences in proportions and the 
number of days of usage are summarized with associated 95% confidence intervals. The 
proportion of participants initiating oral, IV and inhaled antibiotics are compared using 
logistic regression modes adjusting for treatment arm and age category (≥6 months – 3 
years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 years  ). The Odds ratios and 95% confidence 
intervals from the models are presented along wit h associated p -values.  
10.  Summary of  Non-Pseudomonal  Microbiologic Endpoints  
Respiratory c ulture results are obtained at each study visit with additional cultures 
obtained between study visits only if clinically necessary.  . A nalyses include only 
cultures obtained at  scheduled study visits. The respiratory  culture could be collected via 
oropharyngeal (OP) swab, sput um (expectorated or induced) or bronchoalveolar  lavage  
(BAL). In the event that more than one specimen is obtained for the same visit from the 
same participant , a positive result for an organism in any of the specimens designates 
the participant positive f or that organism at that visit.  The number and percent of 
cultures obtained and by which method is summarized by visit and treatment  arm. 
Non-pseudomonal  microbiologic organism culture results ( Staphylococcus aureus  
[methicillin susceptible and resistant ], Haemophilus influenzae, Burkholderia cepacia 
complex , Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Alcaligenes (Achromobacter) 
xylosoxidans)  are summarized for each visit and the change for each visit from baseline 
by treatment arm  Differences and 95% confidence i ntervals are presented. For each 
organism , the treatment emergent prevalence is summarized by treatment arm. 
Differences and 95% confidence intervals are presented as well as p- values from a Chi -
square test. NTM results are available only when sputum was produced at study visits in a quantity that allows for testing. The number and percent of participants who were able to produce sputum at any visit post -baseline is summarized as well as the number and 
percent of participants with an NTM positive result by treatment arm. The difference and 95% confidence interval is presented Note that a  positive NTM result triggered 
permanent study drug discontinuation for that particular participant although they were encouraged to stay in the study for full follow -up. 
11.  Spirometry Results  
Spirometry was to be performed at Baseline for all participants 4 years and older who 
could reproducibly perform spirometry. Baseline clinical and demographic characteristics are summarized among  the subset of participants with spirometry values availabl e at 
the Baseline visit. All spirometry tables, figures and models include those participants 
with a Baseline measurement. FEV
1 (liters and percent predicted), FVC and FEF 25%-75% 
are descriptively summarized for  each study visit and change (absolute and relative)  
from Baseline by treatment.  The difference between treatment arms in the change from 
Baseline at each visit is presented along with 95% confidence intervals.  FEV 1 percent 
 
 predicted is calculated using the Wang (1) equations (Female ≤ 16 years, Male ≤ 18 
years) or Hankinson (2)  equations (Female > 16 years, Male > 18 years)  at each visit.   
Participants crossing age thresholds for a particular equation (e.g. from Wang to 
Hankinson) during the study remained on the same reference equations determined at 
Baseline to maintain continuity.  Relative change is defined as : [(Visit Measure –  
Baseline Measure)  x100]/Baseline Measure. The mean absolute and relative change 
from Baseline are plotted by treatment for each spirometry measure with 95% confidence intervals at each time point.  
For each spirometry measure, a repeated measures linear regression model is  used to 
model change over time among the subset of participants with spirometry at Baseline. 
The model adjusts for  age group (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 
years),  time (days) and a time by treatment interaction. A generalized estimating 
equation framework with an independence working correlation matrix is  utilized to 
calculate robust variance estimates. The coefficients of the model, along with 
corresponding standard error (SE), 95% confidence intervals (CI) and p -values are 
displayed. These models are utilized to estimate the 18- month change from Baseline 
with corresponding 95% CIs and p- values for each measure.  
References:  
 
1. Wang X, Dockery DW, Wypij D, Fay ME, Ferris BG, Jr. Pulmonary function 
between 6 and 18 years of age. Pediatr Pulmonol 1993; 15(2): 75- 88. 
2. Hankinson JL, Odencrantz JR, Fedan KB. Spirometric reference values from a sample of the general U.S. population. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 159(1): 
179-87. 
12.  Anthropometr ic Results  
Height/length and weight were collected at each study visit.  Height/length, height/length 
percentile, weight and weight percentile are descriptively summarized for each study 
visit and change (absolute and relative) from Baseline by treatment arm. WHO reference 
tables (1) were used to determine percentiles for participants < 2 years old at Baseline. 
CDC reference tables  (2) were used to determine percentiles for participants ≥ 2 years 
old at Baseline.  Participants crossing age thresholds for a particular equation (e.g. from 
WHO to CDC) during the study remained on the same reference equations determined 
at Baseline to maintain continuity. The difference between treatment arms in the change 
from Baseline at each visit is presented along with 95% confidence intervals. The mean 
absolute change from Baseline is  plotted by treatment for each measure with 95% 
confidence intervals at each time point.  
For each anthropometric measure, a repeated measures linear regression is to model change over time among the subset of participants with spirometry at Baseline. The 
model adjusts for  the age randomization factor (age group: ≤3 years, >3-6 years, ≥6 -12 
years, >12 -18 years ), continuous time (in days) and a treatment by time interaction.  A 
generalized estimating equation framework with an independence working correlation 
 
 matrix is utilized to calculate robust variance estimates. The coefficients of the model, 
along with corresponding standard error (SE), 95% confidence intervals (CI) and p-
values are displayed. These models are utilized to estimate the 18- month change from 
Baseline with corresponding 95% CIs and p- values for each measure.  
 
References  
 
1. WHO, Apr 2006. Child Growth Standards based on length/ehight,weight and age. 
Acta Paedreatr Suppl  Apr 2006; 450:76- 85 
2. Kuczmarski, Robert J., Cynthia L. Ogden, Laurence M. Grummer -Strawn, Kat herine 
M. Flegal, Shumei S. Guo, Rong Wei, Zuguo Mei, Lester R. Curtin, Alex F. Roche, 
and Clifford L. Johnson. "CDC growth charts: United States." Advance data 314 
(2000): 1 -27. 
13.  Summary of  the Cystic Fibrosis Respiratory Symptoms Diary (CFRSD)  
The Cystic Fibrosis Respiratory Symptoms Diary (CFRSD) and the parent -completed 
CFRSD will be completed at each study visit for participants ≥12 y ears and <11 years, 
respectively .  
The CFRSD asks a participant  (or parent)  to state the extent of their 8 respiratory 
symptoms: difficulty breathing, felt feverish, felt tired, had chills or sweats, coughed, 
coughed up mucus, had tightness in the chest, or wheezed. If a symptom is present, 
they are asked to rate the severity of the symptom using a 4 point scale with possible 
answers  that include “a little”, “somewhat”, “a good deal”, “a great deal” or “slightly”, 
“moderately”, “very”, “extremely”.  Each re spiratory symp tom is assigned a score from 0 -
4 based on the response (0 in the absence of symptom). For each participant, a 
summed score is then calculated, ranging from 0 to 24. In turn, this score is converted to 
a 0 to 100 scale.  This composite score is referred to as the CFRSD -CRISS.   
The CFRSD- CRISS is summarized at each visit and changes from Baseline by 
treatment. The difference between treatment arms in the change from Baseline for the 
CFRSD- CRISS at each visit are presented along with 95% confidenc e intervals. 
Summaries at each visit include scores from  participants who responded to at least 7 of 
the respiratory questions.  
A repeated measures linear regression model was used to model changes in the 
CFRSD- CRISS over time. The model adjusts for  age group (≥6 months – 3 years, ≥3 – 
6 years, ≥6 – 12 years, ≥12 years),  continuous time and a time by treatment interaction . 
A generalized estimating equation framework with an independence working correlation 
matrix is utilized to calculate robust variance es timates. The coefficients of the model, 
along with corresponding standard error (SE), 95% confidence intervals (CI) and p-
values are displayed. These models are  utilized to estimate the 18- month change from 
Baseline with corresponding 95% CIs and p- values for the CFRSD -CRISS . 
 
 The severity of symptoms from the CFRSD at Baseline and Visit 8 (Week 72) are 
summarized by treatment as well as change in severity of symptoms from Baseline. The 
proportion of participants experiencing symptoms at Baseline and Visit 8 are 
summarized by treatment arm as well as differences between treatment arms with 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals.  The proportion of participants with a decrease 
and increase in symptom severity from Baseline to Visit 8 is summarized by treatment  
arm as well as differences between treatment arms with corresponding 95% confidence 
intervals.   
 