Page 1 of 21  
  
 
 
Study Title: An Open Label Trial to Assess the Safety and  Efficacy  of KRN2 3, 
an Investi gational Antibody to FGF23, in  a Single Pediatric 
Patient with Epi dermal Nevus Syndrome (ENS) and Associated 
Hypophosphatemic Rickets 
 
Protocol Number:  
 
Investigational Product: KRN23  
 
Indication: Epidermal Nevus Syndrome with  Associated   
Hypophosphatem ic Rickets  
IND Number:  
 
Sponsor: University of Alabama at Birmingham  
 
 
 
Principal  Investigator: Hussein Abdullatif , MD 
 
Sub-Investigator: Bhuvana Sunil, M.D  
 
 
  Protocol Version Date: Version - 1  December, 5th 
2018 
 
 
 
 Study  Site: Univ ersity of Alabama at 
Birmingham  Department of 
Pediatric Endocrinology  
Page 2 of 21  
  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
1.0 STUDY  OBJEC TIVES  
 1.1 Primary  Objectives  
 1.2 
1.3 Secondary  Obje ctives  
Explora tory Obje ctives  
 
2.0  
BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICA NCE 
 2.1 Disease  Backgrou nd 
 2.2 Supporting Previo us Studies 
 2.3 Proto col Rationale  
 
3.0  
STUDY  DESI GN 
 3.1 Study Population 
 3.2 Num ber of Subjects Planned 
 3.3 Study Timel ine 
 
4.0  
SELECTION  AND  ENROLLM ENT OF SUBJECT  
 4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 4.2 Exclusion Criteria 
 4.3 Conse nt Procedures 
 
5.0  
METHODS  
 5.1 Recruitment of Subject 
 5.2 Sources  of Rese arch Material 
 5.3 Duration of Treatment 
 5.4 Study Procedures 
 
6.0  
OBSERVA TIONS AND MEASUREMEN TS 
 6.1 Pharma codynamic  
 6.2 Radiogra phic 
 6.3 Functional 
 6.4 Patient Repo rted Outcome(PRO)  
 
7.0  
CRITERIA  FOR  EVALUATION 
 7.1 Safety 
 7.2 Efficacy 
Page 3 of 21  
  
 
 
8.0 CRITERIA  FOR REMOVAL  FROM  PROTO COL THERAPY AND OFF STUDY CRITERIA  
 
9.0  
POTENTIAL RISKS  & BENEFITS 
 
10.0   
DATA  COLLECTION AND  ADVER SE EXPERIENCE  REPORTING  
 10.1 Clinical D ata Colle ction 
 10.2 Data Managem ent 
 10.3 Data Storage  
 10.4 Quali ty Assu rance 
 10.5 Adverse  Event Reporting 
 
11.0   
STATISTICAL  CONSIDE RATIONS  
 11.1 Safety Analysis  
 11.2 Efficacy Analysis  
 
12.0   
HUMAN SUBJEC TIONS  
 12.1 Insti tutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed  Consent 
 12.2 Study Modifications/Discontinuation 
Page 4 of 21  
  
 
1.0 STUDY  OBJEC TIVES  
 
1.1 Primary Obje ctive 
 
The effect of KRN23 treatment on normalizing  age-adjusted fasting  serum phosphorous  levels in 
a single pediatric  patient with Epidermal Nevus Syndro me associated  hypopho sphat emic rickets  
 
1.2 Secondary  Obje ctives 
1. The PD profile of KRN 23 as assessed by changes from baseline over time  
1,25(OH )2D, iPTH, Serum Calcium, TRP and TmP/GFR (the ratio  of renal tubular  
maximum phosphate  reabsorption rate to glom erular filtration  rate)  
2. Chang es in underlying  skeletal disease/rickets  as assessed by standard  
radiographs  utilizing the Radiographic  Global Impr ession of Change (RGI-C) 
rating scales 
3. Effects of KRN23 on biochemical marke rs of bone turnover that reflect rickets 
severity, alkaline phosphatase  (ALP) 
4. Walk test to be done if safe.  
 
 
1.3 Exploratory  Obje ctive 
1. Dual -energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) 
 
1.4 Safety Obje ctive 
Assess the safety of KRN23  administration in a single patient with ENS-associated  
hypop hosphat emic ricket s, based on adverse events (AEs), laboratory  assessments, cardiac 
imaging and renal ultra sound.  
 
2.0 BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICA NCE 
 
 
2.1 Disease Backgr ound 
Epid ermal nevus syndrome (CSHS formerly known as ENS)  is a rare congenital  syndro me 
charact erized by the presence of epid ermal nevi in 
association  with one or more other developmental abnor malities of other organ  systems 
including the nervous, 
skeletal, cardiovascular,  and ocular  systems. The epidermal nevi are non-neoplastic 
overgrowth of various compon ents of skin cells (e.g., sebaceo us cells- linear  sebaceous nevus), 
which are usually distributed  linearly along  the lines of Blaschko, corresponding  to the 
movement of skin cells during embryo genesis. While 
these epidermal nevi may be limited to the skin,  the additional  systemic abnor malities almost 
exclusively occur  in 
the setting  of extensive skin surface area involvement (10%-60% of the body surface  area) 
consistent with early  embryonic  somatic mutation  in multipotent  prog enitor  cells. Specific 
genetic defects and timing of mutation  during  fetal development influence the varied 
phenotypes of ENS (Lim et al. 2014). 
Hypopho sphat emia may rarely be one of the skeletal manifestations  of ENS presenting in 
children primarily  as rickets and in adults  as osteomalacia.  In all ENS-associated  osteomal acia Commented [JM1]: 6MWT and PROs are included in the table 
of assessments. Since the patient is wheelchair dependent for all 
mobility, the 6MWT would not be safe. It may be that the patient 
can safely walk but requires a wheelchair for longer distances. We 
suggest the walk test should be listed under secondary endpoints if 
safe. Alternatively, the TUG test may be more appropriate. We 
suggest to include the PROs as secondary or exploratory objectives.  
Page 5 of 21  
 cases in which  serum FGF23 levels were assessed, they were found to be elevated. The sour ce 
of the excess FGF23 in ENS-associated osteom alacia  is unclear. While early  stud ies suggested it 
may  be from  the skin lesions themselves, more  recent studies suggest it may be skeletally  
derived. Compared with  TIO, complete resection  and surgical  cure leading to removal of the 
source  of excess FGF23 is less likely. Non etheless, published case reports of ENS-associated 
osteomalacia  indica te improvement with skin debridement surgery in some cases. In many 
cases, improvement, if any,  is modest and transient. In ENS-associated  osteomalacia  when 
surgery is not curative or feasible, medical treat ment comprises oral phosphate  and/or  vitamin 
D replacement. Efficacy of these treatments is often limited;  it does not treat  the underlying  
disease; and its benefits must be balanc ed with monitoring  for potential  risks such as 
nephrocalcino sis, hypercalciuria,  and hyperparathyroidi sm. 
There are no appro ved therapies for the treatment of ENS associated hypopho sphat emic ricket s. 
The current standard  therapy  involves oral replac ement of phosphate  and suppleme ntation  with  
vitamin D metaboli tes (e.g., 
Page 6 of 21  
 calcitriol),  which  can improve some aspects of the bone  disease, but is often associated with 
poor  complia nce. Oral  phosphate  therapy  provides limited benefit by increasing the intake  of 
phosphate  into the body,  but does not treat  the underlying  cause (Costa et al. 1981), 
(Carpenter 2012). The treatment regimen requires balancing  the benefits of treatment with 
complicated monitoring  and potential  risks such as nephrocalcin osis, hypercalciuria,  and 
hyperparathyroidi sm (Carpenter et al. 2011), (Ruppe 2012). Treatment with oral phosphate  
may  also enha nce FGF23 production  and cause worsening  symptoms of enthesopathy  and 
other probl ems (Carpenter  2012),  (Karaplis et al.2012). High  FGF23 levels may  also cause 
direct effects on bone and cartilage  which  are not treat ed by oral phosphate  (Kawai  et al. 
2013). By targeting inappropriat ely elevated FGF23 levels, the reabsorption of phosphate  could  
potentially  be impro ved by normal path ways, reducing  urinary  phosphate loss and naturally  
increasing 1,25(OH )2D production  in a feedbac k-regula ted manner, offering a potentially  more 
effective and safe treat ment option  for this pediatric  ENS patient. 
 
2.2 Supporti ng Previous Studi es 
 
Burosumab (previously referred to as KRN23) is a fully human monoclonal antibody (mAb) 
designed to bind, and thereby inhibit the excess biological activity of fibroblast growth factor 
23 (FGF23). Burosumab is being investigated for the treatment of X -linke d 
hypophosphatemia (XLH), and tumor -induced osteomalacia (TIO) (also known as oncogenic 
osteomalacia), and the osteomalacia resulting from epidermal nevus syndrome (ENS). These 
conditions are diseases of bone hypomineralization caused by urinary phosphate wasting due 
to elevated levels of FGF23.   
 
Burosumab (Crysvita®) was approved by the United States Food & Drug Administration (FDA) 
on 17 April 2018 for the treatment of XLH in adult and pediatric patients 1 year of age and 
older. The European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization for burosumab 
on 19 February 2018 for the treatment of XLH with radiographic evidence of bone disease in 
children 1 year of age and older and adolescents with growing skeletons. Conventional 
therapy for XLH, TIO,  or ENS -associated osteomalacia involves oral replacement of phosphate 
and supplementation with active vitamin D metabolites (eg, calcitriol), but does not treat the 
underlying pathophysiology of these conditions.  
 
Conventional therapy can improve some as pects of the bone disease, but is often associated 
with poor compliance and potential risks such as nephrocalcinosis, hypercalciuria, and 
hyperparathyroidism (Carpenter et al. 2011), (Ruppe 2012). Treatment with oral phosphate 
may also enhance FGF23 produc tion and cause worsening symptoms of enthesopathy and 
other problems, including direct effects on bone and cartilage which are not treated by oral 
phosphate (Kawai et al. 2013), (Karaplis et al. 2012).   
 
By inhibiting FGF23, burosumab restores renal phosphate reabsorption, and increases the 
production of 1,25(OH)2D in a feedback -regulated manner, which enhances intestinal 
absorption of phosphate. The resulting improved serum phosphorus levels improve bone 
mineralization, and reduce the bone and non -bone manifestations associated with 
hypophosphatemia in XLH patients; similar effects are expected to be seen in patients with Commented [VW2]: Per Monica Yost (UGNX Safety):  
 
Section is significantly lagging behind to reflect the current 
development program and approve. We suggest to reference our 
current version (13) of the Investigator Brochure.  
Page 7 of 21  
 TIO/ENS -associated osteomalacia.  
 
As of the last data cutoff date among the clinical  studies presented in this Investigator’s 
Brochure (13 April 2018), 4 early phase clinical studies of burosumab in adults with XLH have 
been completed, 5 Phase 2/Phase 3 clinical studies are ongoing in pediatric subjects with 
XLH, and 4 Phase 2/Phase 3 cli nical studies are ongoing in adult subjects with XLH. Two Phase 
2 studies are ongoing in adult subjects with TIO/ENS -induced osteomalacia (Table 2).   
 
Results from clinical studies to date, in both children and adults, demonstrate that 
burosumab improves phosphate homeostasis by restoring tubular reabsorption of phosphate 
(as indicated by increased serum phosphorus levels and increased TmP/GFR) and increasing 
serum 1,25(OH)2D. In children, burosumab treatment substantially improved rickets, growth, 
physica l function, and pain. In adults, burosumab treatment resulted in an improvement in 
skeletal health, including osteomalacia, and improved healing of fractures and 
pseudofractures, and physical function, and reduced subject -reported stiffness and pain.   
 
2.3 Protocol  Ratio nale 
 
KRN23  is a fully  human immunoglo bulin G1 (IgG1) monocl onal antibody (mAb) that binds to 
and inhibits the activity of fibrobla st growth factor 23 (FGF2 3), leading to an increase in serum 
phosphor us levels. There are multiple  disorders (each with  a unique  underlying  cause) that 
result in unusually  high circulating  levels of FGF23, which  in turn  result in renal phosphate  
wasting and reduced (or aberrantly  normal in relatio nship to elevated FGF23) levels of 1,25-
dihydroxy  vitamin D (1,25[OH]2D). Across these disorders the clinical symptoms are similar and 
often include osteomal acia (and,  in children, rickets), muscle weakness, fatigue, bone pain, 
and fractur es. KRN23  has been studi ed in one of these disorders, X-linked hypopho sphat emia 
(XLH).  In single- and repeat-dose clinical  studies in subjects with XLH,  subcutan eous (SC) 
administration of KRN23 consistently increased and sustained serum phosphor us levels and 
tubular  reabsorption of phosphate  (TRP) without a major impact  on urine
Page 8 of 21  
 calcium  levels or vitamin D metaboli sm. Positive results were also observed in a noncl inical  
pharmacology model of XLH.  It is hypot hesized that KRN23 may  provide clinical  benefit in this 
patient due to the common underlying  feature  in this patient and in patients with  XLH – 
abnormally elevated FGF23 in the cont ext of low age –adjusted serum phosphorous  levels.   
 
3.0 STUDY  DESI GN 
 
Open-label, 52-week study designed  to assess the efficacy,  safety and pharmacodynami cs (PD)  
of KRN23 in a single subje ct with ENS-associated hypopho sphat emic ricke ts. 
 
3.1 Number of Subjects Planned 
 
Study  will enroll  a single 13 year old male pediatric  ENS patient with associated  
hypop hosphat emic rickets . 
 
3.2. Study  Timeline 
 
Patient  will be seen at Screening visit, Baseline visit and every 2wks  from that point forward 
until the end of the 52 week period. (See Table 1 for list of tasks per visit). Subje cts who 
complete treatment through  Week 52 may have the option  to conti nue KRN23 treat ment. If 
this is warranted  based on preliminary  efficacy,  the current protocol  will be amended to allow  
for an exte nsion. 
 
4.0 Selection  and Enrollment of the Subject 
 
4.1 Inclus ion Criteria  
1. Patient  has confirmed ENS by physician diag nosis 
2. Patient  has confirmed FGF23 elevations in the context  of low serum phosphorous  < 4.1 
mg/dL  
3. Patient  able to tolerate KRN 23 treat ment 
4. Have a corrected  serum calcium level < 10.8mg/dL  
5. Have an eGFR >60 ml/min 
6. Must be willing in the opinion  of the investigator,  to comply  with study proc edures and 
schedule  
7. Provide written informed consent by a parent after  the study has been explai ned and 
prior to any 
research  related procedures begin 
 
4.2 Exclu sion Criteria 
1. Patient should not use CRYSVITA with Oral phosphate or active Vitamin D 
analogs.  
2. Patient and investigator should not initiate CRYSVITA if Phosphorus level is 
within or above normal.  
3. CRYSVITA is contraindica ted in patients with severe renal impairment or end 
stage renal disease because these conditions are associated with abnormal 
mineral metabolism.  
4. The use or enrollment in studies using other investigational  therapies inclu ding Commented [VW3]: Per Monica Yost (UGNX Safety):  
 
Suggest to includ e the contraindications in the Product Insert (PI). 
Language in the PI:  
“Do not use CRYSVITA with oral phosphate and active vitamin D 
analogs.  
 
Do not initiate CRYSVITA treatment if serum phosphorus is within 
or above the normal range for age.  
 
CRYSVITA is  contraindicated in patients with severe renal 
impairment or end stage renal disease  because these conditions are 
associated with abnormal mineral metabolism. ” 
Page 9 of 21  
 other monoclo nal antibodies 
5. Subje ct and their Parent not willing or not able to give written informed consent 
6. In the Investigato rs opinio n, the subje ct may not be able to meet all the 
requirements for study participation  
7. Subje ct has a history of hypersensitivity to KRN 23 excipi ents that in the opinion  of 
the investigator,  places the subje ct at an increased risk of adverse effects 
8. Subje ct has a condition  that in the opinion  of the investigator could present a concern 
for subje ct safety or data  interpr etation.  
 
4.3 Consent Proc edure  
 
Informed consent/assent will be obtain ed follo wing an informed consent /assent conference 
wherein the  princip al investigator/ sub PI or their IRB-approved designee will discuss with the 
subje ct and parent the purpose of the study,  procedures to be follo wed, the duration  of 
participatio n, altern ate mod es of treatment, and the risks and benefits of participatio n, as 
described in the consent form. 
Page 10 of 
21  
 Signed  consent / assent forms will be obtain ed from  the subje ct and parent. The signed 
original consent / assent docu ments will become a part of the permanent medical  record  and 
copies will be provided to the subje ct and their parent. 
 
 
This study will be conducted  in compliance with  all United States  Federal and local  
laws, regulatio ns, and guid elines  for the conduct  of research  in a vulnerable  populatio n. 
 
5.0 Methods 
 
5.1 Recruit ment of Subje ct 
 
Patient  is previously known to, and is under the routi ne care  of, the Sponsored Investigator  
 
5.2 Source  of Research  Material 
 
KRN23  is a fully  human IgG1monoclo nal antibody that binds to and inhibits the activity of 
FGF23, leading to an increase in serum phosphor us levels. Ultrag enyx is developing KRN23  as a 
potential  therapeutic candidate  for the treat ment of XLH,  Tumor-Induced Osteomalacia  (TIO), 
and the rickets/osteomalacia  resulting from  Epidermal Nevus Syndro me (ENS). All of these 
conditions  are diseases of bone hypomineralization,  caused by urinary  phosphate  wasting due 
to elevated levels of FGF23. 
 
5.2.1 Mechanism of Action  
 
Through  direct binding,  KRN23  neutralizes the functions  of FGF23, thereby preventing signal 
transduction  from  the FGF23/α-Klotho/FGFR complex. By blocking  FGF23 actions, KRN23 
restores normal phosphate  reabsorption in the proxi mal kidney tubul es and increases the 
production  of 1,25 (OH)2D that enha nces intestinal absorption of phosphate  (Razza que etal.  
2007); (Fuku moto 2008); (Yamazaki et al. 2008). KRN23  increases phosphate  reabsorption in the 
kidney and increases  serum phosphor us levels. The consequent improved serum phosphor us 
levels are expected  to impro ve bone mineralization,  heal rickets  & osteomalacia,  and reduce 
the diverse bone and non-bone  manifestations  associated  with  hypopho sphat emia. 
Noncl inical  studies demonstrated KRN23 possesses high binding  affinity  to the N-terminal 
domain of FGF23. KRN23 binds  to FGF23 from humans, monkeys  and rabbits, but not to other 
species tested. KRN 23 increases phosphate  reabsorption in the kidney and increases  serum 
phosphor us levels. KRN 23 also increases  serum 1,25(OH )2D levels. 
 
5.2.2 Dose  and Mode  of Administration 
 
KRN23  is suppli ed as a sterile, clear, colorl ess and preservative-free solution  in single-use 5 
mL vials containing  1 mL of KRN23 at a concentration of 30 mg/mL. KRN 23 should be securely 
stored at 2°C to 8°C and protect ed from light. It should  not be shaken  or frozen.  KRN23  is 
intend ed for administration by the subcutan eous (SC) route.  
 
The chosen starti ng dose of KRN23  will be 0.3 mg/kg given SQ Q2W.  Alternating  sites of 
administration (abdo men, upper arm, thigh)  may be utilized  to mini mize potential  injection  site Commented [LW4]: Need to be consistent with below starting 
dose in Sec. 5.2.3.  
Page 11 of 
21  
 reac tions. Subsequent KRN23  titrations  to achieve normal, age adjusted serum phosphorous  
levels will be allowed (see “Titration  of KRN23”).  Data  from an ongoi ng pediatric  Phase 2 study 
helped establi sh the dose regimen and provided information for the design of this trial for a 
single  pediatr ic ENS patient. Interim  data suggested KRN23, administered Q2W  at 
approxi mately 0.8 mg/kg  for 40 weeks, increased serum phosphor us by an average  of 0.7 
mg/dL; increases of > 0.5 mg/dL  were seen in 83.3%  of subje cts. Serum 1,25 (OH)2D 
conc entrations  and TmP/GFR levels also increased, demonstrating overall improved 
phosphor us homeostasis. The increases in serum phosphor us and 1,25 (OH)2D  were sufficient 
to provide substantial  healing of rickets. No previous subjects have experienced serum 
phosphor us levels above the upper limit of normal. Additionall y, the Q2W  dosing regimen was 
chosen because it appeared to produce  a more  stable  and consistent increase in serum 
phosphor us levels with  less fluctuation  over time than  a Q4W  dosing regimen 
Page 12 of 
21  
 which  was also previously evaluated. The Q2W  regimen had a safety profile that was not 
substantially  different from the Q4W  dosing regimen in the pediatric  populatio n. 
 
5.2.3 Titration  of KRN23  
The starti ng dose will be 0.3 mg/kg  to be given every 2 weeks . 
 
If required dose may be titrated  with increments of 0.1 mg/kg/dose every 4 weeks  up to a 
maximum of dose of 2.0mg/kg (not to exceed 90mg per dose) until  phosphor us level is WNL. 
 
Serum phosphorous  level will be obtain ed within  48 hours  prior to each  regularly  scheduled 
office visit following Baseline visit. 
 Any visit at which  the serum phosphorous  level is shown to be below LLN the dose 
given at that visit will be up titrated  to the next level as long as 4 weeks have passed 
since the last dose adjustments . Dose will be titrated upwards by increments of 0.2 
mg/ kg/dose.  
 
 Any visit at which  the serum phosphor us level is shown to be in WNL  dose given at 
that visit will remain the same as the previous dose. 
 
 Any visit at which  serum phosphor us level is shown to be above ULN that visit’s dose will 
be withh eld. 
 
 The visit following a visit with no dose given: 
 
 If the serum phosphor us level conti nues to be above ULN  no dose will be given 
at that visit and subje ct will have serum phosphorus re-checked  weekly until it 
decreases to  the normal range.    
 
 Once  serum phosphor us is shown to be WLN  or below LLN range, restart 
dosing at ½ the previous dose prior to the serum phosphor us exceeding  the 
normal range, per the Investigator’s  discretion.  
 
 The restarti ng dose will be repeated at the next visit (2 weeks later per protocol  
visit schedule), as long as the serum phosphorus remains WLN. If the serum 
Phosphorus falls below the LLN at the next visit, the Investigat or may  titrate  
the dose upward by 0.1 mg/kg.  
 
 Dose  titration  may  occur  in increments of 0.1 mg/kg not sooner than 4 weeks 
from the previous dose adjustment.  
 
 If the serum phosphor us becomes close to the ULN  or LLN during  the study  and 
the Investigator  feels that based on the change trends that the serum 
phosphor us will be out of range at the next follow  up appointm ent, the dose 
may  be titrated  at the discretion of the Investigator.  
 Commented [SK5]: Is dose being started at 0.2mg/kg due to 
safety concern? Are you aware of the 0.3mg/kg results?  
Page 13 of 
21  
  
 
Patient  will receive study drug via SC injection to the abdomen, upper arms, thighs, or 
buttocks;  the injection site will be rotated  with  each injection.  If the dose level exceeds 1.5 mL 
in volume, the dose should  be administered at two injection sites. 
 
5.3 Duration  of Treatment 
 
Duration  of treatment is 52 weeks. Subje cts that complete treatment through  week 52 may 
have the option  to continue KRN23 treatment. If this is warran ted based on preliminary  
efficacy, the current protocol  will be amended to allow  for an extension. 
Page 10 of 21  
 5.4 Study  Proc edure  
 
Two wee ks prior to Baseline visit (B), patient and parent will attend a screening  visit to discuss 
and sign informed consent / assent. Once  Informed consent / assent is obta ined subject will 
be instructed  to discontinue oral phosphate  and active Vitamin  D treat ment in preparation for 
first dose of study  drug at baseline visit. 
Baseline Assessments (B) will entail  Physical Exam, Radiogr aphs, labs, DXA scan,  Renal  
Ultrasound , ECHO,  ECG, Functional  & Quality  of Life assessments and first dose of KRN23.  These 
events may  occur over the course of several visits pending  scheduling and patient’s ability to 
complete. Administration of the first dose of KRN23  will be given as the final  part  of the baseline 
visit and will initiate  the timing for the next visit. 
There will be a total  of 28 visits to the clinic. A screening  visit not less than  two weeks prior to Baseline 
visit, and, every 2 weeks thereafter  over the 52-week study period. Commented [VW6]: If DXA is listed as an exploratory objective, 
please list DXA assessment here for consistency.  
 
We suggest including DXA as there was significant improvement in 
DXA seen in our ENS clinical trial patient  
 
Page 11 of 21 
                               
                      
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                                            
                              
                              
                              
 Table  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FGF23 levels   1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
 
 
Page 11 of 21 
  
 
 
  
Study Visit (wk)                               
S= screening visit                            
B= Baseline Visit S B 2 4 6 810 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52
(Appointment Window)                                                                                             All Appointments from week 2 - week 52 are =/-3 days                                                
Informed Consent/Assent X
Physicial Exam X X X X X
Vital Signs & Weight X X X X X
KRN23 Administration X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Chemistry Panel X X X X X X X X X X
Non-Standard labs (iPTH, 
1,25(OH) 2 D, Amylase, 
Blilirubin direct, GGT, LDH, 
Lipase, Uric Acid X X X X X X X X X X
Serum Phosphorus 3X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Hematology X X X X X X X X X X
Urinalysis X X X X X X X X X X
2 hr Urine Collection (Ca, 
Cr, PO 4 ) X X X X X X X X
TmP GFR X
Concominant Medications X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
FGF23 levels X
Whole body X-ray 1X
LFT
Functional (6MWT) & PRO 
(PROMIS & FPS-R) X X X
Renal Ultrasound 1X X X
Echo 1 & ECG 1   (safety) X XCommented [LW7]: Following assessments are not consistent 
with section 5.5 Assessment schedule. Please review for 
consistency.  
Whole body x -ray – week 52 missing?  
6MWT  – confirm assessment.  
Echo & ECG – Week 26 missing?  
24-hour Urine collection – missing.  
 
Commented [VW9]:  Commented [VW8]: Per Monica Yost (UGNX Safety):  
 
Suggest to add adverse event collection.  
Commented [KL10R9]: We suggest including DXA as there 
was significant improvement in DXA seen in our ENS cl inical trial 
patient  
 
LFTs are not marked on SOE.  Are LFTs part of the Chemistry panel 
that will be done?  
 
2 hour urine: If the 24 -hour urine is removed, will all tests normally 
done on the 24 hour urine be done on the 2 hours urine (Table 2)  
Page 12 of 21  
 Foot notes  
1. May  be completed within ± 5 days of the projected visit date  to accommodate  scheduling  
2. Non-standa rd labs: iPTH, 1,25(OH) 2D, Amylase, LDH,  Lipas e, Uric Acid, 25 (OH) D.  
3. In office titration of study  drug dose is based on lab value of Serum Phosphat e. Subject will have  this lab drawn up to 2 days prior to next 
appointment.  
 
 
 
5.5 Assessment Schedule  
 
5.5.1 Physical Assessment  & Vital  Signs 
Complete physical examinati ons will be performed at Baseline (B), Weeks 12, 26, 38 and 52. Physical examination  will 
inclu de assessments of general appearance; head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat;  the cardiovascular,  dermatologic,  lymphatic,  
respiratory,  gastrointestinal, , musculoskeletal, and neurologic  systems. 
 
5.5.2 Concomitant   Medication s/Therapies  
 
Concom itant medicatio ns and therapies will be reviewed and recorded in the subject’s CRF at each study  visit to the investigational  
site Medications  (investigati onal, prescription,  over-the-counter,  and herbal) and nutrit ional  suppl eme nts taken during  the 30 days 
prior  to baseline visit will be reviewed and recorded. Therapies (phy sical therapy,  occu pational therapy  as well as mobility and 
walking  devices, including ankl e-foot orthosis, braces, cane, crutch es, walker, wheelchair etc.) utilized  during  the 30 days prior to 
Baseline will also be reviewed and recorded. At each subsequent visit, change in medications and therapies since the previous visit 
will be recorded. 
 
5.5.3 Radiog raphs  
 
Standard  radiographs  will be obtain ed at Baseline and Week 52. 
Standard  radiographs  of the lateral  spine, AP chest, right  and left hand/wrist, right  and left humerus, right  and left radiu s/ulna,  right  
and left femur/p elvis, right  and left tibia/fibula,  and right  and left foot as well as any other location  where the patient is currently 
experiencing tenderness or pain that may  reflect underlying  patholog y, or where the subje ct has a history of recent (< 3months) 
fractur e(s), or in bones where the bone scan sugg ests the presence of pseudo-fractur e, non-vertebral fract ure, vertebral fract ure or 
other finding  likely  deemed related to rickets and/or  osteomalacia,  During follow up, if the patient develops new symptoms of hip 
pain, rib pain or leg/femur pain, targeted x-rays will be ordered to assess for the presence of new fractu res or pseudo-fractur es. 
Follo w-up standard  radiogra phs will be completed in the anato mical locat ion where a fracture  or pseudo-fracture  is identified   
every 12 weeks during  the 52-week study period. Radiographs  will be interp reted locally  for the identification  of new   
abnormalities. 
 
5.5.4 Labo ratory 
 
Blood  and urine samples will be collected throughout  the study beginning at the Baseline visit. All baseline visit labs will be drawn 
prior  to subject receiving initial dose of KRN23. 
Prior  to every office visit subject will have the required blood  work  done after no less than  an 8 hour  fast. (See Table 1, page 12 for 
specific lab requirements for each visit) 
Visits for week 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 will require a 2-hr urine  collection  in addition  to blood  labs. The following procedure  will be follo wed 
for these urine collection s: 
 Subje ct will fast overnight – minimum of 8 hour s. Upon rising subje ct will void bladder (do not collect this sample) 
 Subje ct will arrive to the labo ratory  approxi mately 1 hour  after  initial  discarded void. At this time blood  samples will be 
drawn. 
 Subject  will stay at laboratory  site an additional  hour  to complete 2-hr urine  collection.  
 
 
Page 13 of 21  
  
 
5.5.5 Renal  Ultrasound  
Renal ultra sounds  will be conducted  at the Baseline, wee k 26 and Week 52 visit. Baseline and post-treat ment renal 
ultra sounds  will be evaluated to detect changes in calcifications and all other renal abnormalities from baseline. 
Ultrasonogra phic findin gs of nephrocalcino sis will be grad ed on a 5-point  scale (Patri quin, H, and Robitail le, P. 1986. 
"Renal calci um deposition  in childr en: sonogra phic demonstration  of the Anderson-Carr  progr ession." 
AJR Am J Roentgenol  146 (6):1253 -6.”).  
 
5.5.6 Electrocardiog ram 
A standardized  12-lead ECG will measure PR, QRS,  QT, and QTc at Baseline, Week 26 and Week 52. 
The goal  is to evaluate both for LVH changes, as well as for changes in conducti vity and intervals. 
The ECG results will be assessed for any clinically  signif icant abnormality  or relevant changes from baseline.  
 
5.5.7 Fibroblast  Growth Factor 23 
FGF23 conc entrations  will be measured at Baseline 
 
5.5.8 Echocardiog ram 
ECHO  will be performed at Baseline, Week 26 and Week 52. The goal  is to assess for evidence of ectopic  
mineralization  in the heart and aorta. Additional  tests may  be performed if any abnor malities are 
detected or if medically  indicated. 
 
5.5.9 Walki ng Ability 
The Six Minute  Walk Test (6MWT) will be administered at the Baseline,  Week 26 and Week 52 if patient is able and willing 
to walk  
 
5.5.10  Patient Repo rted Outcomes 
PROMI S-The Patient-Report ed Outco mes Measurement Information  System (PROMIS)  Pain Inter ference,  
patient is capable of completing those surveys.  Physical Function  Mobil ity, and Fatigue  measurements 
will be administered at Baseline,  Week 26 and 52. FPS-R-The Faces Pain  Scale – Revised will be 
administered at Baseline,  Week 26 and Week 52. 
 
5.5.11  KRN23  Adminis tration 
KRN23  will be administered SQ in clinic,  every 2 weeks for the duration  of the 52-week study.  Initial  dose given 
at baseline will be 0.3mg/kg . Subsequent Q2W  doses may be titrated accor ding to the titration  schedule  
with the goal  of achieving a normal fasting  serum phosphorous  level for females 5 to 13 years old within the 
range  of 4.1-5.9 mg/dL  
 
 
6.0 Observ ations and Mea sureme nts 
 
6.1 Pharmacodynamic  
 
A comprehensive serum metabolic  panel (Chem-20), comp lete blood  count,  and urinalysis (Table 2) will be 
used to assess safety as well as for the primary efficacy  param eter of normalization  of serum phosphorou s. 
Additional  bioc hemical parameters of interest inclu de serum 1,25 (OH)2D, calcium, creat inine, and iPTH;  and 
urinary  phosphor us, calcium, and creatinin e. In the event of elevated amylase levels on Chem-20, reflexive 
isoenzyme testing will be conducted . 
 
Fasting for a minimum of 8 hours  (overnight)  is required prior to each  blood  draw. 
Twenty-four-hour  urine  collection is required to assess urinary phosphor us: creatinine  and calcium: 
creatinine  ratio s; urinary  phosphor us, a PD param eter will also be obtain ed from  24-hour  urine  samples. Commented [JM11]: Same comment as previous page:  
 
6MWT and PROs are included in the table of assessments. Since the 
patient is wheelchair dependent for all mobility, the 6MWT would 
not be safe. It may be that the patient ca n safely walk but requires 
a wheelchair for longer distances. We suggest the walk test should 
be listed under secondary endpoints if safe. Alternatively, the TUG 
test may be more appropriate. We suggest to include the PROs as 
secondary or exploratory objec tives.  
Commented [JM12]: Please confirm if the patient will 
complete the PRO themselves or if a proxy version is needed.  
Commented [LW13]: Please review of consistency with other 
starting dose references (Sec. 5.2.2 & 5.2.3)  
Commented [LW14]: 24 hour urine collection is not listed in 
the Table of assessments.  
 
Same comment as above:  
If the 24 -hour urine is removed, will all tests normally done on the 
24 hour urine be done on the 2 hours urine (Table 2)? Please 
provide detail here.  
Page 14 of 21  
  
Table 2.0 
 

Page 15 of 21  
  
 
6.2 Radiographic  
 
6.2.1  Radiog raph Global Impression of Change  (RGI-C) 
Pairs  of wrist, knee and standing long  leg images from the patient will be presented  to an independent radiologi st, 
with the Baseline image on the left and the later image (Week 52) on the right.  The rater will be asked to assess 
change in rickets severity in the wrists and knees and exte nt of bowing in the legs using a 7-point  ordinal RGI-C scale 
score  ranging  from -3 (very much worse, or severe worsening of rickets) to +3 (very much better, or compl ete or near 
compl ete healing of rickets). 
 
6.3 Functional  
 
6.3.1 Six Minute Walk  Test 
The 6MWT will be administered in accor dance with  general principles  set forth  in the American  Thoracic  Society 
guid elines  (ATS  2002). Subje cts will be instructed  to walk  the length  of a pre-measured course for six consecutive 
minute s. The total  distance  walked at the end of six minutes will be recorded in meters. The percent of predicted 
normal values will be calcula ted using published normative data  based on age, gender, and height (Geiger et al. 2007).  
This test will be done only if the patient is able and willing to do it.  Patient is wheel chair bound.  
 
6.4 Patient  Reported  Outco mes 
 
6.4.1 PROMIS 
The Patient-Reported  Outc omes Measur ement Information  System (PROM IS) was developed by the 
Natio nal Institutes of Health and uses domain-specific measures to assess patient well-being (Broderick et al. 2013), 
(NIH  2015).  The domain-specific approach  is based on the idea that health attribute s, such  as pain and physical 
function  are not unique  to a specific disease. The PROMIS contains  a bank of questions  from  which  relevant items 
can be extracted  and used to create  a custom form. To assess these health domains, items from  the Pediatric  Pain  
Inter ference, Physical Functi on Mobil ity, and Fatigue  item banks (Version 2.0) were extracted  to develop this 
self- report  form..  Patient is very capable of self reporting.  
 
6.4.2 FPS-R 
The Faces Pain  Scale – Revised (FPS-R) is a self-reported measure  of pain intensity developed for childr en (Hicks  et al. 2001). 
It was adapted from  the Faces Pain  Scale  (Bieri et al. 1990) to make  it possible to score the sensation  of 
pain  on the widely  accepted  0-to-10 metric. The FPS-R has been validated for use in children 5 to 16 years of age. The FPS-R 
graphically  depicts  pain intensity using faces with  scores chosen from 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 (0=no hurt; 10=hurts  worst). 
 
7.0 Criteria for Evaluation 
 
7.1 Safety 
 
Safety will be evaluated by the incidenc e, frequency and severity of AEs and serious adverse events (SAEs), inclu ding 
clinically  significant changes from baseline to scheduled time points  in vital signs, weight,  interval history and physical 
examinatio n, GFR, clinical  laboratory  evaluations (inclu ding additional  KRN23/XLH  biochemical parameters of interest), 
and concom itant medication s. 
 
Known KRN23 adverse drug reaction s, i.e., possibly related to study  drug, inclu de injection site reactio ns (erythema, swelling, 
rash).Oth er events that have been reported  reported in patients with X linked Hypophosphatemi a who received CRYSVITA , not 
necessarily causally related, include pain  in extre mity, Vitamin  D deficiency, arthralgia and myalgia.  Monitoring  of these and 
other potential  adverse events will occur  throughout  the duration  of the study.  Baseline and 52-wee k ECHO,  Renal ultra sound  
and ECG will monitor for ectopic  mineralizations during  KRN23  administration.   There are no adverse effects noticed with TIO/ 
ENs subjects and so the above  side effects are unexpected.Commented [LW15]: See comment above.  
Commented [JM16]: See my comments above as well  
Commented [JM17]: As above, please  confirm if subject is able 
to self -report  
Commented [VW18]: Per Monica: No ADRs are established for 
TIO/ENS. These are adverse reactions for XLH. We suggest to 
remove or to state that all events are unexpected.   
Page 16 of 21  
 7.2. Efficacy  
 
7.2.1 Pharmacodyn amically  
Achi eving a normal, age adjusted fasting  serum phosphor ous levels over time is the primary efficacy  parameter and 
will be ascertained through  fasting blood  and urine samples as described in the Table  1, Schedule  of Assessments. 
 
7.2.2 Radiog raphically  
Healing of rickets as measured by X-rays. 
Healing of rickets in the wrists and knees as measured  X-rays and the 7-point  RGI-C scale. 
 
7.2.3 Functionally  
Impro ved walking  ability as measured  by change in the distance walk ed on the 6MWT in meters and percent predicted 
normal values at Baseline compared to Week 26 and 52 if pati ent is capable and willing to walk.  
 
7.2.4 Patient Repo rted Outcomes 
PROMIS  and FPS-R scales will be scored at Baseline, Week 26 and 52 and compared to report  on any changes in pain, 
fatigue  and physical functioning  as result of KRN23  administration 
 
 
8.0 Criteria for Rem oval of Patient from  Therapy 
1. Occurr ence of an Adverse Event(A E), collection  of unassociated AEs, or a pattern  of AE which in the opinion  of the PI 
make further participation  in the trial an unacc eptable  risk of harm  to the patient 
2. An illness that in the opinion  of the PI/Sub  PI might place the patient at risk 
3. At the request of the patient/guardian  or PI/Sub  PI 
 
9.0 Potential Risks and Potential Benefits 
 
KRN23  is an investigatio nal fully human IgG monoclonal antibody to FGF23 that is currently being developed as a  
The risks of burosumab in the treatment of CSHS are unknown.  The risks of burosumab in the treatment of pediatric and adult 
patient with XLH are provided in the the Crysvita™ Package Insert (Revised 04/2018).  The burosumab i nvestigator’s brochure 
(dated 15Jun2018) provided by Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc. also provides detailed information regarding potential side 
effects or adverse drug reactions of burosumab.  
 
The most common adverse drug reactions reported in paediatric p atients treated with burosumab for XLH during clinical trials 
were injection site reactions (57%), headache (54%), pain in extremity (42%), vitamin D decreased (28%), rash (23%), 
toothache (18%), tooth abscess (14%), myalgia (14%), and dizziness (11%).  
 
The most common adverse drug reactions reported in adult patients treated with burosumab for XLH during clinical trials were 
back pain (15%), headache (13%), tooth infection (13%), restless legs syndrome (12%), vitamin D decrease (12%) and dizziness 
(10%).  
 
In addition to the common adverse drug reactions, t he following are potential risks to the participant  that may occur based on 
the mechanism of action of burosumab, the inherent risks with the subcutaneous administration of monoclonal antibodies, 
and data from nonclinical and clinical studies of burosumab to date :  hyperphosphatemia, ectopic mineralization . 
hypersensitivity, injection site reactions, and anti -drug antibodies.  
 
Hyperphosphatemia is a potential risk of burosumab due to its mechanism of action.  Based on the role that FGF23 plays in the  
maintenance of phosphate homeostasis, careful attention s hould be paid to serum levels of phosphorus and other related 
factors, such as serum calcium, creatinine, BUN, 1,25(OH)2D, and iPTH, as well as urinary calcium.    Ectopic mineralization r isks 
are mitigated by careful, detailed, and controlled monitoring of  serum phosphorus levels and other biochemically -related 
factors including serum calcium, 1,25(OH)2D, and iPTH as well as urinary calcium. In addition, surveillance and monitoring vi a 
imaging modalities (i.e., renal u ltrasound) are used to mitigate an y fur ther risks for the subject . 
 Commented [LW19]: See comment above.  
Commented [JM20]: Helpful to list the domains measures a s 
PROMIS is not specific enough to explain what is administered. 
PROMIS customized questionnaire assessing Mobility, Fatigue and 
Pain Interference domains.  
Page 17 of 21  
 Hypersensitivity events (rash, injection site rash, and urticaria ) and injection site reactions (erythema, rash, swelling, bruising, 
pain, pruritus, urticaria, and hematoma)  are also a potential risk and m onitoring for these will occur throughout the duration of 
the study.  
 
Page 18 of 21  
 10.0  Data Collection and Adverse Event Reporting  
 
10.1 Clinical  Data  Collection  
 
Data  to be collected  will include demogra phic, ENS medical history,  genetic  (PHEX),  laboratory  values, PD param eters, 
FGF23 levels, prior and current medication s, prior proc edures and intervention s. Data  for AE’s will also be collected. 
 
10.2 Case Report  Form 
 
The investigator  is required to initiate  and maintain an adequate  and accur ate case  history that records all observations 
and other data  related to the study for this subject. All information  recorded on CRFs for this study  must be consistent 
with the subject's sour ce documentation.  All data  enter ed in to the CRF must be verifiable; therefore, CRFs will be routinely 
checked  for accuracy,  completeness, and clarity  and will be cross-checked  for consistency with  source  documents, including  
laboratory  test reports  and other subje ct records. 
 
10.3 Data  Manage ment & Storage  
Site sha ll maintain complete and accurate records related to the Study in accordance with  Code of Federal 
Regulatio ns Title  21, section 312.62. 
 
10.4 Site Monitoring  
 
Site monitoring  will be completed by internal  The University of Alabama IRB office . The functions  of the internal  
monitoring  will include the review of timelines and provision of data, the collection  of internal  and updat ed regulatory  
docum ents and the frequency of identified and resolved issues as it pertains to this 52-week trial.  
 
10.5 Adverse Event Reporti ng 
 
All AEs (i.e. any new or worsening  in severity or frequency of a pre-existing condition)  will be recorded from the time the 
informed consent is signed  through  90 days follo wing the last dose of investigational  product.  In addition,  any AE that occurs  
after  this time period that is considered to have a reasonable possibility of being associated with  the investigational  product 
will be recorded. Details of the event to include severity, relatio nship to investigatio nal product,  duratio n, action  taken, and 
outco me. 
 
All AEs that are considered related to investigatio nal product  will be followed to resoluti on or stabil ization if improvement   
is not expected.  AEs which  completely resolve and then recur will be recorded as a new AE. AEs conti nuing  at 90 days 
following the last dose of the investigatio nal product  will have a comment that the event has recovered, recovered with 
sequelae, stabilized,  or is not expected  to impr ove. The severity of all AEs will be grad ed using the NCI CTCAE (version 5.0) . 
 
Page 19 of 21  
  Mild  (Grade 1): Awareness of signs or symptoms, but easily tolerated  and of a minor  irritant  type, causing no 
loss of time from normal activities. Symptoms do not require  therapy  or a medical  evaluation; signs and sympt oms 
are transient. 
 Mode rate (Grade 2): Events introduce  a low level of inconvenience or concern to the participa nt and may  
inter fere with daily activities, but are usually  impro ved by simple therapeutic measures; moderate experiences 
may cause some interference with  functioning.  
 Seve re (Grade 3): Events interrupt the participa nt’s normal daily  activities and generally  require  systemic 
drug therapy  or other treat ment; they are usually  incapacitating.  
 Life-threatening  (Grade 4): Events that place the participa nt at immediate  risk of death or are disabling.  
 Death  (Grade 5): Events that result in death. 
 
10.5.1  Medical  Safety Monit or 
All SAE’s  must be reported  within 24 hours  to the IRB 
 
10.5.2  Safety Repo rt 
Copy  of all reports  will be stored in the Study  File. All SAEs  will be reported to the IRB and Ultrag enyx. 
 
10.5.3  Protocol Deviations 
Protocol  deviatio ns are events that are inconsistent with the protocol to  the point that they may  impact  subject safety 
and /or to the extent  of impacting  the study  outco me. Protocol deviatio ns will be report ed to the IRB in accor dance with 
their reporti ng guid elines. 
 
11.0  Statistical Considerations 
 
11.1 Safety Anal ysis 
Safety data will be reviewed on a regular  basis by both PI and Sub PI. For the safety analysis, the numbers (frequency)  
and incidence  rates of AEs and SAEs will be summarized  during  expo sure to KRN23 throughout  the study.  The analyses 
of safety time frame will encompass  both the 52-week study period and subsequent safety exten sion period if  applicable. 
 
All AEs will be coded using the Medical  Dictionary  for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA ). The incidence  and frequency of AEs 
will be summarized by System Organ  Class (SOC), Preferred Term (PT), relatio nship to study drug, and severity. A complete 
listing of AEs and SAEs will be provided for the patient at the end of the study  
 
Clinical  laboratory  data will be sum marized by the type  of laboratory  test. The frequency of abnor mal clinical  laboratory  
results (i.e.,  outside of reference ranges) and/or  clinically  significant abnormalities after study drug administration will be 
presented for each clinical  laboratory  measurement. For each clinical  laboratory  measurement, descriptive stati stics will 
be provided for Baseline and all subsequent scheduled visits during  which  laboratory  measure ments were obtain ed. 
Chang es from Baseline to the treatment visits will also be provided. Descript ive statistics of vital signs and concom itant  
medications  will be provided in a similar manner. 
 
11.2 Efficacy  Anal ysis 
 
11.2.1  Pharmacodyn amic 
Serum phosphorous  levels taken throughout  the 52-week period will be compared to the baseline value. Serum 1,25(OH)2 
D levels taken throughout  the 52-week period will be compared to the baseline value. Phosphate  reabsorption defined as 
the ratio  of renal tubular  maximum reabsorption rate of phosphate  to glomerular filtrat ion rate (TmP/GFR) will be assessed 
throughout  the 52-week period and compared to the baseline value. 
Alkaline  Phosphatase(ALP)  levels taken throughout  the 52-week period will be compared to the baseline value Commented [VW21]: Investigator is obligated to follow the 
Serious Adverse Event reporting instructions per the IST contract.  
 
Please include a statement that states the safe ty reporting 
instructions and timing will be referred to Exhibit B: Serious Adverse 
Event Reporting of the IST Agreement.  
Page 20 of 21  
 11.2.2  Bone  Health  
Severity of rickets and epiphy seal (growth plate) abnormalities will be assessed at baseline and 52-weeks. 
Lower extremity deformity assessed by interco ndylar  distance and intermalleolar distanc e. Specific abnormalities related 
to lower extremity deformity and bowing observed on standing  long  leg films will also be evaluated using the qualitative  
RGI-C scoring system 
 
11.2.3  Functional 
Six Minute Walk Test (6MW T) total  distance  and percent of predicted normal distance walked  will be assessed and compared 
at baseline,  26 weeks and at 52-weeks if patient is able and willing to walk . 
 
11.2.4.  Patient Repo rted Outcomes  
The PROM IS and FPS-R tools will be administered and compared at baseline, 26 and 52-weeks. 
 
 
12.0  Hum an Subj ect 
 
12.1 Institutional  Review Board  Review and Informed Consent 
 
This protocol  and the informed consent docu ments and any subsequent modifications  will be reviewed and appro ved by 
the IRB. A signed consent form will be obtain ed from the parent for this subje ct. A signed informed assent will also be 
obtain ed from  the subject. 
 
12.2 Study  Modi fication/Di sconti nuation  
The study  may  be modified or discontinued at any time by the IRB, the spon sor, the FDA or other government agenc ies as 
part of their duties  to ensure research  subjects are protec ted 
 
 Commented [LW22]: See comments above.  
Commented [JM23]: T-scores are generated for the PROMIS 
domains through scoring software available at the HealthMeasures 
site and can be compared to baseline. Useful to specify PROMIS 
domain T -scores here.  
Page 20 of 21  
  
Refer ences 
 
 
1. Aono, Y, Yamaza ki, Y, Yasuta ke, J, Kawata, T, Hasegawa,  H, Urakawa, I, Fujita,  T, Wad a, M, Yama shita,  T, Fukumoto, S, and 
Shimada, T. 2009. "Therapeutic effects of anti- FGF23antibodies” 
 
2. Aono, Y, Hasegawa,  H, Yamaza ki, Y, Shimada, T, Fujita,  T, Yama shita,  T, and Fukumoto, S. 2011 . "Anti-FGF- 23 neutralizing 
antibodies ameliorate  muscle weakness and decreased spontan eous movement of Hyp mice." J Bone  Miner Res 26 (4):803-10. 
 
3. ATS. 2002. "American Thorac ic Society State ment: Guidelines for the six-minute  walk test." Am.J.Respir, Crit.Care Med  166 
(1):111-117.  
 
4. Bieri, D, Reeve, RA, Champio n, GD, Addicoa t, L, and Ziegler, JB. 1990. "The Faces Pain  Scale for the self- assessment of the 
severity of pain experienced by children: development, initial validation, and preliminary  investigation  for ratio  scale 
prop erties." Pain  41 (2):139-50. 
 
5. Broderick,  JE, DeWitt,  EM, Rothrock,  N, Cran e, PK, and Forr est, CB. 2013. "Advances in Patient-Reported  Outco mes: The NIH 
PROMIS ((R)) Measures." EGEMS (Wash DC) 1 (1):1015 
 
 
6. Carp enter,  TO, Imel, EA, Holm, IA, Jan de Beur, SM, and Insogna,  KL. 2011 . "A clinician's guide to X-linked  hypopho sphatemia." J 
Bone  Miner Res 26 (7):1381-8. 
 
7. Carp enter,  TO. 2012. "The expanding  family of hypopho sphat emic syndro mes." J Bone  Miner Metab 30 (1):1-9. 
 
8. Carp enter,  TO, Imel,  EA, Ruppe, MD,  Weber,  TJ, Klausner, MA,  Woodd ell, MM,  Kawakami,  T, Ito, T, Zhang, X, Humphrey, J, Insogna,  
KL, and Peacock,  M. 2014. "Randomized trial of the anti-FGF23 antibody KRN23 in X-linked hypophosphat emia." J Clin Invest 124 
(4):1587-97. 
 
9. Costa, T, Mar ie, PJ, Scriver, CR, Cole, DE, Reade, TM, Nogra dy, B, Glori eux, FH, and Delvin, EE. 1981. "X- linked hypopho sphat emia: 
effect of calcitri ol on renal handling  of phosphat e, serum phosphat e, and bone  mineralization." J Clin Endocrinol  Met ab 52(3):463- 
472.  
 
10. Fukumoto, S. 2008 . "Physiological regulation  and disorders of phosphate  metabol ism-- pivotal role of fibrobla st growth factor  
23." Intern Med  47 (5):337-43. 
 
11. Geiger, R, Strasak, A, Treml, B, Gasser, K, Kleinsasser, A, Fischer, V, Geiger, H, Loeckinger, A, and Stein, JI. 2007. "Six-minute walk  
test in children and adolescents." J Pediatr  150 (4):395-9, 399. 
 
12. Imel, EA, Zhang, X, Rupp e, MD,  Weber,  TJ, Klausner, MA,  Ito, T, Vergeire, M, Humphrey, JS, Glor ieux, FH, Port ale, AA, Insogna, K, 
Peacock,  M, and Carp enter,  TO. 2015. "Prolo nged Correction of Serum  Phosphor us in Adults With  X-Linked  Hypopho sphat emia 
Using Mont hly Doses of KRN23." J Clin Endo crinol Metab 100 (7):2565-73. 
 
13. Karapli s, AC, Bai, X, Falet, JP, and Maci ca, CM. 2012 . "Mineralizing  enthesopathy  is a common feature  of renal phosphat e-wasting 
disorders attributed  to FGF23 and is exacerb ated by standard  therapy  in Hyp mice." Endocrinology  153 (12):5906-17. 
Page 21 of 21  
 14. Kawai, M, Kino shita,  S, Kimoto, A, Hasegawa,  Y, Miyag awa, K, Yamazaki, M, Ohata,  Y, Ozono,  K, and Michiga mi, T. 2013. "FGF23 
suppr esses chondrocyte  proli feration  in the presence of soluble  alpha-Klotho both in vitro and in vivo." J Biol Chem 288 (4):2414- 
27. 
 
15. Lim, YH, Ovejero,  D, Sugarman, JS, Deklotz,  CM, Mar uri, A, Eichen field, LF, Kelley, PK, Juppner, H, Gott schalk, M,  Tifft, CJ, Gafni,  RI, 
Boyce, AM, Cowen, EW, Bhattacharyya,  N, Guthrie, LC, Gahl, WA,  Golas, G, Loring,  EC, Overton, JD, Mane, SM, Lifton, RP, Levy, ML, 
Collins, MT, and Choat e, KA. 2014. "Multili neage somatic activating  mutations  in HRAS and NRAS cause mosaic cutan eous and 
skeletal lesions, elevated FGF23 and hypopho sphat emia." Hum  Mol Genet  23 (2):397-407. 
 
16. Razz aque, MS, and Lanske, B. 2007 . "The emerging  role of the fibrobla st growth  factor-23- klotho axis in renal regulati on of 
phosphate  homeostasis." J Endocrinol 194(1):1-10. 
 
17. Rupp e, MD.  2012 . "X-Linked  Hypopho sphat emia." In Gene Reviews, edited  by R. A. Pago n, M. P. Adam,  T. 
D. Bird,  C. R. Dolan,  C. T. Fong  and K. Step hens. Seattle  (WA). 
 
18. Thacher, TD, Fischer, PR, Pettifor, JM, Lawson, JO, Manast er, BJ, and Reading, JC. 2000 . "Radiographic  scoring method for the 
assessment of the severity of nutritio nal rickets." J Trop Pediatr 46 (3):132-9. 
 
19. Yamaza ki, Y, Tamada, T, Kasai, N, Urakawa,  I, Aono,  Y, Hasegawa,  H, Fujita, T, Kuroki,  R, Yamashita,  T, Fukumoto, S, and Shimada, 
T. 2008. "Anti-FGF23 neutralizing antibodies show  the physiological  role and structural  featur es of FGF23." J Bone  Miner Res 23 
(9):1509-1518. 