Pa ge  1 of  9 3  
C N S  I R B  Pr ot o c ol  Te m plate  ( 1 2. 1 5. 1 5)   Pr ot oc ol Title:   T he eff ects of a n estr o ge n rece pt or ( E R) bet a a g o nist ( Lill y C o m p o u n d 
L Y 5 0 0 3 0 7) o n estra di ol -wit h dra wal -i n d uce d m o o d s y m pt o ms i n  w o me n  wit h 
past peri me n o pa usal d e pr essi o n. 
A b bre viate d  Title:  Estr o g e n  rece pt or  b eta  a n d  m o o d 
Pr ot oc ol N u m ber: 1 8- M- 0 1 4 4 
Date of T his S u b missi o n/ Versi o n: Dece m b er  1 5, 2 0 2 2 
 
Pri nci pal I n v esti gat or  
 
 
 
H u ma n  Researc h  Pr otecti o ns Pr o gra m  I n v esti gat or a n d  Staff  Trai ni n g:  
 
F or  t his  pr ot oc ol, t he f oll o wi n g “J ust  i n  ti me”  h u ma n s u bjects  pr otecti o n trai ni n g  c o urses  are 
re q uire d f or i n vesti gat ors a n d staff: N o n e  
 
T otal  re q ueste d accr ual : 
 8 0 W o me n re p orti n g a past de pressi o n d uri n g t he per i me n o pa use t o be scree ne d  
 
 
Pr oject  Uses  I o nizi n g Ra diati o n:   N o  
Me dicall y-i n dicate d  o nl y  
Resear c h -rel ate d  o nl y  
B ot h  Yes  (attac h  R S C/ R D S C  d oc u me nt ati o n)  
 
I N D/I D E  N o    Yes ( att ac h F D A d o c u m e nt ati o n) 
Dr u g/ De vice/ #  I N D  1 2 8 2 5 6  
S p o ns or: NI M H  ( Dr.  Mar yla n d Pa o  is  t he official  re pres e nti n g  t he I nstit ute.)  
 
 
 
D ura ble P o wer  of Att or ne y    N o  Yes  
 
M ulti -i nstit uti o nal  Pr oject   N o  
I nstit uti o n  F W A  #    Yes  Peter  J.  Sc h mi dt,  M. D.  NI M H/  Bl d g  3 0 1 -4 9 6 0 - E-mail  
 S B E  1 0 C R C  6 1 2 0  petersc h mi dt @ mail. ni h. g o v 
  R m 2 5 3 3 0    
 
Page  2 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Date of IRB approval  (attach IRB documentation)  
 
Data and Safety  Monitoring Board  No  Yes  
 
Technology Transfer Agreement  No  Yes  
Agreement  type and number _Clinical Trial  Agreement  2015-0279 
Expiration Date  None_ 
 
          Confidential Disclosure Agreement  No  Yes  
   
Samples  are being stored  No  Yes  
 
Flesch -Kincaid  reading  level  of consent form:  9.7 

Page  3 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Précis  
A. Objective  
During the perimenopause, the incidence of depression increases 1-5 and predicts increased 
all-cause and cardiovascular  mortality  6. A role of estradiol  withdrawal  in the onset of mood 
disorders in some perimenopausal women has been suggested indirectly by estradiol’s 
antidepressant efficacy and safety in perimenopausal depression 7;8. Moreover,  
observational studies report  the emergence  of depressive symptoms after the discontinuation 
of menopausal hormone therapy  (HT) in 5-10% of women  9-11. The  coincidence of declining 
ovarian function with the onset of depression led to the inference that “withdrawal” from physiologic estradiol levels underpinned depression during the perimenopause.  To test this 
inference, we undertook a study to examine the role of estradiol withdrawal in perimenopausal depression. We evaluated the effects of the acute withdrawal of estradiol therapy in postmenopausal women with and those without a past perimenopausal depression. Results  demonstrated  that estradiol  withdrawal  induces depressive symptoms in 
women with a past perimenopausal depression, but not in those without such a history 
12. 
This study was the first to provide direct evidence that estradiol withdrawal is the relevant physiologic trigger for depressive symptoms in women  with this condition. In women  with 
past perimenopausal depression, the recurrence of depressive symptoms during blinded hormone withdrawal  suggests that normal changes  in ovarian  estradiol  secretion  can trigger 
an abnormal behavioral state in these susceptible women. These data also suggest that the effects of estradiol withdrawal are processed differently in some women, presumably by altering  the brain  network composition or activity  that underlies affective state.  In this next 
protocol, we will examine a possible mechanism mediating the effects of estradiol- withdrawal on mood symptoms in asymptomatic postmenopausal women with a past 
Page  4 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   perimenopausal depression. We propose to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a selective 
estrogen receptor (ER) beta agonist (Lilly Compound LY500307) to prevent estradiol withdrawal -induced mood symptoms. The effects of estradiol primarily occur through 
activation of two receptor subtypes, often with opposing outcomes: estrogen receptor (ER) alpha,  and ER beta.  We focus on ER beta because the beta estrogen  receptor  is reported  to 
mediate the effects of estradiol on the serotonergic system and mediate the antidepressant- like effects of estradiol in the forced -swim test 
13-16. Moreover, selective agonists of 
estrogen receptor beta have been demonstrated to attenuate the behavioral and hypothalamic- pituitary - adrenal (HPA) axis response to stress 
17-19in animal studies.  We 
propose to employ the selective estrogen receptor agonist LY500307 under double-blind, placebo controlled conditions to examine the specific role of estrogen receptor beta in the effects of estrogen withdrawal in women with a past perimenopause-related depression. Depressive symptoms will be measured with standardized ratings scales (i.e., Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale (CES-D) and 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale of 
Depression  (HRSD)).  We will also generate patient -derived LCLs and IPSCs from the 
women participating in this protocol to investigate both i ntrinsic cellular differences 
between women with PMD and controls as well as examining the effects of estradiol withdrawal with and without invitro exposures to an ER beta agonist. Additionally, w e 
will perform whole exome (WES)  and whole transcriptome (WTS) sequencing (and 
possibly whole genome sequencing (WGS) under this protocol in the future ). Results  of 
this study will determine  the role of ER beta in estradiol withdrawal -induced mood 
symptoms and can provide preliminary data to support the efficacy and safety of this compound as a treatment for depression during the perimenopausal transition. 
B. Study  Population  
Page  5 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   We propose to employ the selective estrogen receptor agonist LY500307 under double- 
blind, placebo -controlled conditions to examine the specific role of estrogen receptor  beta in 
the effects of estrogen withdrawal in women with a past perimenopause-related depression. Depressive symptoms will be measured with standardized ratings scales (i.e., Center for  Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale (CES-D) and 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale of 
Depression  (HRSD)).  Results  of this study will determine  the role of ER beta in estradiol 
withdrawal -induced mood symptoms and can provide preliminary data to support the 
efficacy and safety of this compound as a treatment for depression during the perimenopausal  transition.  
C. Design  
We propose to employ the selective estrogen receptor agonist LY500307 under double- blind, placebo -controlled conditions to examine the specific role of estrogen receptor  beta in 
the effects of estrogen withdrawal in women with a past perimenopause-related depression. Depressive symptoms will be measured with standardized ratings scales (i.e., Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale (CES-D) and 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale of 
Depression (HRSD)).  Results of this study will determine the role of ER  beta in estradiol 
withdrawal -induced mood symptoms and can provide preliminary data to support the 
efficacy and safety of this compound as a treatment for depression during the perimenopausal  transition.  
Page  6 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Table of Contents  
 
 
Précis  3 
A. Objective  ............................................................................................................................... 3  
B. Study Population  ................................................................................................................... 4  
C. Design.  .................................................................................................................................. 5  
1. Introduction  ................................................................................................................ 7  
2. Study Objectives  ................................................................................................ 19 
3. Participants  ......................................................................................................... 20 
4. Study Design  and Methods ................................................................................. 22 
5. Management  of Data and Samples  ..................................................................... 33 
6. Additional considerations  ................................................................................... 35 
7. Risks and Discomforts  ....................................................................................... 36 
8. Subject  Safety  Monitoring  .................................................................................. 46 
9. Outcome Measures  ............................................................................................. 48 
10. Statistical Analysis  ............................................................................................. 48 
11. Human  Subjects  Protection  ................................................................................ 50 
12. Anticipated  Benefits  ........................................................................................... 54 
13. Consent Documentation and Process  ................................................................. 55 
14. Data and Safety  Monitoring ............................................................................... 56 
15. Quality  Assurance  .............................................................................................. 57 
16. R eporting of Unanticipated  problems, adverse events  and protocol deviations.57 
17. Alternatives  to Participation  ............................................................................... 59 
18. Privacy ................................................................................................................ 59 
19. Confidentiality  .................................................................................................... 59 
20. Conflict of Interest  ............................................................................................. 59 
21. Reimbursement  and Travel Compensation  ............................................................. 60 
22. References  .......................................................................................................... 62 
23. Appendix 1 ......................................................................................................... 76 
24. Consent Forms  ....................................................................................................... 88 
 
 
 
List of Abbreviations:  
ET – estradiol  therapy 
E2 – estradiol  
HT – menopausal hormone therapy 
ER – estrogen receptor 
CES-D – Center  for Epidemiologic  Studies Depression  scale 
HRSD – Hamilton Rating Scale of Depression  
Page  7 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   1. Introduction  
Background:  
 
Depression risk increases during the perimenopause, and depression is cited as a primary 
reason for resuming menopausal hormone therapy (HT) 20-22. Community-based epidemiologic 
studies document a 1.5-3 fold greater  risk of first onset  and recurrent  depressions in women  during 
the perimenopause compared with those who are premenopausal (or who are several years 
postmenopausal) 1-4;23. Observational studies report the emergence of depressive symptoms after 
the discontinuation of HT in 5-10% of women 9-11. 
The role of estradiol (E2) - either declining or low levels - in the precipitation of 
perimenopausal depression (PMD) is unknown, largely due to the associational and indirect nature of the evidence linking ovarian function and depression. Correlative studies with plasma FSH or response to hormonal therapy 
4;7;8;24;25  do provide indirect evidence of the relevance of changes in 
reproductive hormones to mood disturbances. However, even prospective epidemiological studies cannot test the estradiol withdrawal h ypothesis since perimenopausal changes in the secretion of 
several  hormonal and metabolic factors could confound the effects of estradiol withdrawal. In other 
studies of the role of ovarian steroids in affective disturbance, changes in ovarian steroids (in the context of otherwise normal levels) have been shown to directly trigger depression, but only in a subset of women with histories of mood disorders linked to reproductive function 
26;27. In 
subsequent work  (protocol 03-M-0175), we directly  examined  the hypothesis that declining ovarian 
function – estradiol “withdrawal” - underpins depression occurring during the perimenopause. In 
this recently completed study, asymptomatic, postmenopausal women who experienced a depression during the menopause transition  and asymptomatic  postmenopausal women  with no past 
depression received a standard dose of estradiol and then were withdrawn from estradiol under double-blind, placebo-controlled conditions. 
Page  8 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Results  demonstrated  that estradiol  withdrawal  induces  depressive symptoms in women  with a 
past perimenopausal depression (n = 26), but not in those without such a history (n = 30). In 
women with a past depression during the perimenopause, estradiol withdrawal was associated with 
a significant increase in depressive symptoms (as measured with standardized depression rating scales including the Hamilton Rating Scale of Depression (HRSD) and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression  scale (CES -D) (p < 0.05, p < 0.001, respectively)  compared  with 
those women who were maintained on estradiol therapy under double-blind conditions. Additionally, no significant depressive symptoms emerged in the women lacking a history of depression who were either withdrawn or maintained on estradiol therapy. The severity of vasomotor symptoms did not differ significantly  between  estradiol  and placebo  conditions in either 
group of women 
12. This study is the first to provide direct evidence that estradiol withdrawal is 
the relevant physiologic trigger for depressive symptoms in women with perimenopausal depression. These data also suggest that the effects of estradiol withdrawal are processed 
differently in some women, presumably by altering the brain network composition or activity that underlies regulation of affective state.  
Identification of the mechanisms underlying the affect-modulating effects of estradiol 
withdrawal will potentially uncover novel treatments with either superior therapeutic benefits or more acceptable long -term safety profiles than those of estradiol therapy. Of note, the effects of 
estradiol primarily occur through activation of two receptor subtypes, often with opposing outcomes: estrogen receptor (ER) alpha, and ER beta. In this current protocol, therefore, we will examine the ability of a selective ER b eta agonist (LY500307) to prevent estradiol withdrawal- 
induced mood symptoms in women with past perimenopausal depression. We focus on ER beta 
because the beta estrogen  receptor  is reported  to mediate  the effects  of estradiol on the serotonergic 
Page  9 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   system and mediate the antidepressant -like effects of estradiol in the forced -swim test 13-16. 
Moreover, selective agonists of estrogen receptor beta have been demonstrated to attenuate the 
behavioral and  HPA axis response to stress 17-19. Results  of this study will determine  the role of ER 
beta in estradiol  withdrawal -induced mood symptoms and, possibly, suggest the efficacy  and safety 
of this compound as a treatment for depression during the perimenopause. Given  the markedly  different  adverse effect  profiles  of ER alpha and beta agonism, the results  of 
this study may substantially impact current treatment recommendations for women with perimenopausal depression. Justification for study sample: The sample of women who will be recruited for this protocol c
onsists of women who have a history of a Structured Clinical Interview for DSM V (SCID) 
confirmed major or minor depression in the context of the perimenopause and who now are asymptomatic  and postmenopausal. Our prior findings and those of others 
7;8 have demonstrated  the 
short-term antidepressant effects of estradiol in this condition. Longitudinal studies also have demonstrated that the onset of depression in these women typically occurs during a stage of the perimenopause (stages of reproductive aging workshop [STRAW] stage - 1) characterized by 
estradiol withdrawal. The results of our most recent study now provide, for the first time, direct  
evidence  that estradiol  withdrawal  triggers  a recurrence of depressive symptoms in these women  
 
(but not in matched  controls). It is unclear  whether  the relevant  signal in perimenopausal depression 
is mediated through estrogen receptor alpha or estrogen receptor beta. Consequently, we want to use the same design described above in euthymic women with a past history of perimenopausal depression to investigate whether the physiologically-relevant signal is mediated by estrogen receptor beta. Drawing our sample from this population ensures the inclusion of women who have been shown to be differentially sensitive to declining estradiol levels and who will likely develop 
Page  10 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   mood symptoms in our withdrawal  paradigm, critical  for demonstrating the role  of ER beta in 
perimenopausal depression. 
Estradiol has many biological effects, some of them undesirable in peri and postmenopausal 
women as observed in the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) 28;29. Estradiol acts through at least 
three receptor systems 30, with very different physiologic profiles associated with each. In fact, in 
many  tissues,  ER alpha and ER beta have antagonistic actions  31. Evidence suggests that ER beta is 
involved in regulation of anxiety and mood 13-16. Thus, demonstration that ER beta mediated the 
beneficial effects on depression would greatly advance both our understanding of relevant 
mechanisms underlying affective state regulation, and offer therapeutic options that may have a greater safety profile, avoid undesirable side effects, and address the needs of women with depression who are reluctant to take psychotropic medication or who e xperience intolerable 
antidepressant -related side effects.  
Our study hypothesis is that in women with a history of perimenopausal depression, mood 
symptoms consequent to experimentally induced estrogen withdrawal will be prevented by the administration of an ER beta agonist but not by placebo. Failure to confirm this hypothesis could suggest that either ER alpha alone or both ER alpha and ER beta are involved in the recurrence of mood symptoms. However, if the hypothesis is confirmed, then ER beta agonists could serve as effective alternatives  for women  receiving  estrogen therapy  (ET)  for mood disturbances during the 
perimenopause since these compounds would be expected to have a more acceptable long- term 
safety profile than estradiol.  
The ER beta compound to be employed in this protocol demonstrates  a dose-dependent loss of 
ER beta selectivity and overlapping effects on ER alpha activity potentially could be observed at higher doses of LY500307. Thus, we plan to employ two doses of LY500307 (i.e., 25 mg and 75 
Page  11 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   mg), as this will, in effect, enable us to compare selective ER beta agonism with mixed (ER alpha 
and beta) agonism, since the higher 75 mg dose could mitigate the recurrence of depressive symptoms by acting through ER alpha. We also will monitor other possible targets of ER alpha 
activation in these postmenopausal women including plasma luteinizing hormone (LH) levels, plasma  prolactin  secretion,  and endometrial  thickness  (by vaginal  ultrasound). These  measures  were 
selected  for the following reasons:  First, plasma  LH levels  are increased  in postmenopausal women, 
and studies in mice demonstrate that ER alpha is responsible for ongoing negative feedback effects of estradiol on pituitary LH secretion 
32-34; consequently, LY500307- related decreases in plasma 
LH levels would suggest an ER alpha action. Second, prolactin secretion also has been identified in preclinical studies to be mediated by ER alpha 
35;36; consequently, an LY500307- related increase in 
plasma prolactin secretion would suggest ER alpha activity. Finally, increased endometrial tissue, as measured by vaginal ultrasound, also would suggest the presence of ER alpha activity. These additional outcomes will assist in our efforts to distinguish ER beta activity from ER alpha activity in this protocol. Medication  A
 dministered  in this Protocol  
 
Selective Estrogen Receptor beta agonist LY500307: LY500307 is an orally active, selective estrogen receptor beta (ER beta) agonist designed to maximize binding to the ER beta receptor and minimize binding to the estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha). LY500307 was initially developed for the treatment  of benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH).  However,  due to inadequate efficacy  in prostate 
volume reduction or improvement in International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), the benefit- to- 
risk balance failed to support further development of LY500307 for the BPH indication. LY500307 was selected for use in this protocol since it is the only ER beta selective agonist that both has been 
Page  12 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   approved by the FDA for use under an IND  (held  by Lilly)  in humans and has evidence to support 
its ability to penetrate the central nervous system.  
In competitive  binding assays,  LY500307 affinity  for ER alpha is 2.04 nM, while  its affinity 
for ER beta is 0.16 nM, representing an approximately 12- fold selectivity towards ER beta (data 
available from  Lilly  upon request).  There have been  no studies of LY500307 in women. In men,  the 
terminal half -life of LY500307 is approximately 15 hours. Single dose studies in men have been 
conducted involving oral doses between 0.5 and 500 mg. In addition to phase 1 and 2 treatment 
trials of LY500307 (at doses of 25-150 mg per day) in men for t he treatment of BPH, there is one 
ongoing trial of LY500307 in men with schizophrenia targeting negative symptoms which employs three doses of LY500307 of 25 mg, 75mg, and 150 mg per day (conducted by PI Alan Brier at the University of Indiana). As of 04-13-18, 95 men with schizophrenia have participated in this trial. The study remains blinded; however, all three doses have been well-tolerated, and only three serious adverse events considered by the investigators to be probably related to study drug have occurred, including two events (dyspepsia and facial flushing) that occurred within 48 hours of initially  starting  the trial, and one case of urticaria  resulting  in this patient  being  withdrawn  from  the 
study (Alan Brier, personal communications, 07- 27-15 and 05-21- 18). Few adverse effects have 
been reported in men at th e proposed dose to be administered in this study. 
The ability of LY500307 to inhibit the metabolism of marker catalytic activities for 
cytochromes P450 (CYP) CYP3A4,  CYP2D6,  CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, CYP2B6, and 
CYP1A2 was examined using isozyme- selective probes. CYP enzyme inhibition constants (Ki) 
ranged  from  Ki = 2.5 ± 0.3 μM for CYP2C8  to Ki = 16 ± 2 μM for CYP1A2. Following 14 daily 
100-mg doses of LY500307 in healthy volunteers, the highest clinical plasma concentration observed was 27.3 ng/mL. Using this plasma concentration and the Ki that was calculated for 
Page  13 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   CYP2C8, the I/Ki result is 0.04, or <0.1. Thus, LY500307 is unlikely to produce significant 
inhibition  in vivo. Additionally, preliminary  screens  suggested no mechanism -based  inactivation  of 
any of these CYPs by LY500307 (LY500307 Investigator’s Brochure). 
Tissue distribution studies in rodents demonstrate that radiolabeled [14C] LY500307 
penetrates  the central  nervous system  and crosses  the blood- brain  barrier  (LY500307 Investigator’s 
Brochure).  
According to data provided by Lilly (LY500307 Investigator’s Brochure) a 25 mg daily 
dose will provide optimal selectivity for estrogen receptor beta, as the impact on estrogen receptor alpha increases with increasing doses. Nonetheless, the optimal dose for ER beta selectivity and CNS penetrance has not been established in humans. We plan to employ two doses of LY500307 (i.e., 25 mg and 75 mg), as this will in effect enable us to compare selective ER beta agonism with mixed (ER alpha and beta) agonism, since the higher 75 mg dose could mitigate the recurrence of depressive symptoms by acting through ER alpha. The dose of 75 mg was selected for the following reasons:  (1) the higher dose should enhance the CNS  penetrance  of LY50 0307; (2) the 75 
mg dose remains within the safe range for toxicity based on animal studies (LY500307 Investigator’s Brochure); and (3) the 75 mg dose has been safely employed without the occurrence of any serious adverse events in over 15 men with schizophrenia in a randomized controlled trial of LY500307 of 8 weeks duration (conducted by PI Alan Brier at the University of Indiana; [personal communication, 07-27- 15]).  
Pre-Clinical Studies of LY500307:  
 
Summary  (see LY500307 Investigator Brochure) – The results  of nonclinical  safety,  pharmacology 
and toxicology studies demonstrate acceptable  safety  profile.  No CNS  respiratory  or cardiovascular 
risks were identified at doses as high as 30 mg per kilograms in rats and mice, and 1500 mg per 
Page  14 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   kilograms in monkeys. In rat and monkey, one, six and nine month toxicity studies, the no- 
observed- adverse- affect  level  (NOAEL) -defining toxicity  was consistent with the pharmacology of 
an estrogen agonist and it was considered to be nonlife threatening, monitorable, and generally reversible. Few sex -differences were observed in these studies and the majority related to sex - 
differences in gonadal function. 
Plasma pharmacokinetics of LY500307 have been examined in CD-1 mice, Sprague- 
Dawley rats, and Cynomolgus monkeys after administration of [
14C] LY500307 (both male and 
female). Peak plasma concentrations (C max) of parent compound and radioactivity were observed 
from 0.5 to 8 hours after oral dosing. Following the C max, plasma concentrations declined with an 
elimination half -life ranging between three and eight hours for the parent compound and between 
six and 22 hours for radioactivity after oral administration. Of the absorbed dose only 2.7%, 1.2%, and 0.3% circulated as parent compound in mice, rats and monkeys, respectively. The toxicokinetics of LY500307 were determined  after daily  oral administration  in Sprague- Dawley  rats 
for up to six months, and in Cynomolgus monkeys for up to nine months. In general exposure increased with increasing dose. Exposure was higher in female rats but there were no sex- related 
differences observed in monkeys. LY500307 is highly bound to pl asma proteins from mice, rats, 
and monkeys. The degree of plasma protein binding was independent of concentration over the ranges tested for all species. Tissue distribution studies indicated that after an oral 5 mg per kilogram dose of [
14C] labeled LY500307 to Sprague-Dawley and Long-Evans rats, distribution of 
radioactivity was extensive, and there was no apparent melanin -binding observed (a potential 
marker of ocular toxicity in humans but with unclear predictive power). Quantifiable levels of radioacti vity were observed in testes, cerebellum, cerebrum, medulla, olfactory lobe, and spinal 
Page  15 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   cord of Long- Evans  rats indicating  that [14C] labeled  LY500307- derived  radioactivity  crosses  the 
blood:testes and the blood:brain barriers. 
In multiple -dose pharmacokinetics studies, plasma toxicokinetics of LY500307 have been 
determined  in Sprague- Dawley  rats and Cynomolgus monkeys following daily  oral exposure for up 
to six months for rats and nine months for monkeys. In general, greater exposure was observed in 
female rats compared to male rats especially at doses of .1 and 1 mg per kilogram per day. In male rats, the increase in exposure was greater than proportional to the increasing dose, whereas in females,  the increase  in exposure was generally  proportional with dose. Following daily  nasogastric 
administration of LY500307 in Cynomolgus monkeys, no significant sex- differences in exposure 
were observed. There was some evidence of accumulation of LY500307 over the duration of the study in the mid -dose group in females (15 mg per kilogram per day) and at the highest dose group 
(375 mg per kilogram per day) in both sexes on day 270 of the study. 
Non-clinical safety pharmacology and toxicology: The toxicity profile of LY500307 has 
been characterized in rat, mouse, and monkey through a package of acute, repeat dose, immunotoxicity  and reproductive toxicity,  safety  pharmacology and  genetic toxicology studies. The 
primary  treatment -related findings in repeat dose toxicity studies up to six months in duration in the 
rat and nine months in duration in monkey were consistent with  the estrogenic effects of LY500307 
and included decreased feed consumption and growth, changes in the endocrine, reproductive, hematopoietic, immune, and hepatic systems. All of these findings were considered to be nonlife threatening  monitorable and reversible following cessation  of exposure. The principal concern  arose 
with continued exposure to high doses could which resulted in dose limiting toxicity due to body weight loss and poor physical condition. Other potentially non-estrogen related findings in organ systems were considered minor in nature secondary to stress or marked changes in body weight and  
Page  16 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   food consumption or limited to higher doses that met or exceeded the maximum tolerated dose. 
LY500307 has a low order of acute oral toxicity and is classified as a non- irritant. Results of the in 
vivo safety pharmacology studies indicate that the oral administration of LY500307 does not produce CNS or respiratory effects at doses up to 30 mg per kilogram in rats or mice. In addition, the nonclinical data has not revealed  any substantial risk of QT/corrected  QT (QTc) prolongation or 
hemodynamic changes at doses up to 1500 mg per kilogram in monkeys. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC
50) for human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) (the ion channel produced by 
this gene mediates the potentially fatal long QT syndrome ) inhibition was greater than 2.82 µg per 
ml, the highest concentration tested  which  was at least 100 times  higher than the highest maximum 
LY500307 clinical plasma concentration at a clinical dose of 25 mg. 
Repeat dose toxicity findings in female rats were consistent with exaggerated estrogen 
pharmacology with similar systems affected as described in males (i.e. growth, hepatic, hematopoietic, endocrine, reproductive systems) after six months of treatment. There was complete reversal of all adverse treatment -related changes with the exception of partial recovery in body 
weight and female mammary gland findings and limited to no recovery of male follicle- stimulating 
hormone (FSH) and Inhibin B levels. In one and six month repeat dose toxicity studies in rats, at daily doses greater than or equal to 3 mg per kilogram, clinical signs were consistent with prolonged estrogen exposure and included signs of thin appearance, decreased body weight, food consumption, FSH, cholesterol and testosterone, alterations in levels and inhibin B; increased prolactin, degeneration the seminiferous tubules of the testes,  atrophy of Leydig cells and secondary 
sex glands; oligospermia/aspermia of epididymis, mammary gland feminization; centrilobular hepatocellular hypertrophy, and bone marrow hypocellularity. Additional important findings in males given greater than 10 mg per kilogram dose of LY500307 included decreased erythrocyte 
Page  17 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   parameters (red blood cells), hematocrit, hemoglobin, reticulocytes, leukocyte count, spleen and 
thymus weights, increased  gamma  glutamyl transferase,  alkaline  phosphatase, total bilirubin  and 
incidence of hepatic eosinophilic cell foci.  
Treatment -related findings in monkeys given LY500307 for one, six, or nine months were 
generally consistent with  estrogen agonist pharmacology and paralleled the effects observed in rats. 
Findings in female monkeys specifically, were consistent with the organ systems affected as described in males with the additional observations of a decrease in white pulp lymphocyt es in the 
spleen, menstrual cycle prolongation, decreased corpus luteum and squamous metaplasia of the cervix  epithelium and greater  than 15 mg per kilogram. In  general  the findings recovered  by the end 
of the third month of non- treatment.  
In reproductive toxicity studies in female rats altered estrous cycles increased 
moribundity/mortality,  abortion, post- implantation  loss and fetal skeletal  variations  were  observed 
at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram. In a rat pre-and postnatal study, dystocia, decreased postnatal growth and survival, delayed postnatal sexual maturation, estrous cycle prolongation, decreased fertility and a decrease in startle response were obser ved at 3 mg per kilograms in the F1 
generation.  
In conclusion, the results of nonclinical safety, pharmacology and toxicology studies 
demonstrate acceptable safety  profile.  No CNS  respiratory  or cardiovascular  risks  were identified  at 
doses as high as 30 mg per kilograms in rats and mice, and 1500 mg per kilograms in monkeys. In rat and monkey, one, six and nine-month toxicity studies, the no-observed- adverse -affect level 
(NOAEL) -defining toxicity  was consistent with the pharmacology of an  estrogen  agonist and it was 
considered to be nonlife threatening, monitorable, and generally reversible. Few sex- differences 
were observed in these studies and the majority related to sex-differences in gonadal function. The 
Page  18 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   NOAEL  level  was determined  to be 1 mg per kilogram per day in the male rat and 1.5 mg per 
kilograms per day in the male monkey following nine months of daily dosing. 
 
 
Estradiol  
 
The administration of 17ß-estradiol via a transdermal system was chosen for this study 
because it has  several  relevant  advantages  over oral  preparations 37;38. First,  it delivers  the primary 
ovarian  estrogen, estradiol, into the circulation at a constant rate and results in sustained and easily 
measurable plasma levels of estradiol and in estrone/estradiol ratios less than one (as seen in the 
pre-climacteric  period  of life)  39. Second, it delivers sufficient  estradiol  into the circulation  to raise 
estradiol plasma concentrations to levels similar to those of women in the early follicular to mid - 
follicular phases of the menstrual cycle 37;40- 42, levels reported by some inve stigators as the 
minimum necessary for the relief of menopausal symptoms, particularly hot flushes 40, without 
increasing synthesis of renin substrate. An increase in renin substrate has been suggested to accentuate or initiate the development of high blood pressure in susceptible women with other predisposing factors 
43 and has been implicated as a factor in the association of hypertension with 
the administration of oral conjugated estrogen 44. In our experience with the transdermal estradiol 
patch  in over 100 women  in several  protocols, it has been  well  tolerated,  and, with the exception  of 
an occasional skin rash, we have observed no adverse effects. With the application of the estrogen patch every three days, patient compliance has been reported to be excellent, and only occasional local irritation has been observed 
40. 
Provera  
 
Provera and synthetic progestins are widely prescribed, with indications including 
dysfunctional uterine bleeding, endometriosis, mastodynia, galactorrhea,  and precocious  puberty 45. 
Page  19 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Provera  is widely  prescribed  to induce menses  and shedding of the endometrial  lining  in women 
receiving ET.  In our experience and that of others 46, a daily dose of 5 mg for seven days is 
sufficient to successfully induce menses in women receiving 3 -8 weeks of ET.  
2. St udy  Objectives  
a. Primary  objectives  
 
To determine whether the selective ER beta agonist LY500307 prevents mood symptoms (as 
measured by the CES-D and HRSD) from developing after the acute withdrawal of ET under double-blind, placebo-controlled conditions in asymptomatic postmenopausal women who have previously experienced  a carefully  confirmed  perimenopause- related  depression. Additionally, we 
will assess the safety of LY500307 in the context of this study. 
b. Secondary  objectives  
 
Secondary objectives will be to evaluate the effects of LY500307 on measures of estradiol- withdrawal -induced individual affective and behavioral symptoms (daily rating form [DRF] and 
VAS ratings), vasomotor symptoms, plasma hormone levels (estradiol, estrone), and menstrual bleeding. Exploratory objectives will include an examination of the effects of LY500307 on gene expression profiles in lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs)  or induced pluripotent cells (IPCs) from  study 
participants . We plan to generate patient -derived LCLs and IPCs from the women participating in 
this protocol to investigate both i ntrinsic cellular differences between women with PMD and 
controls as well as examining the effects of estradiol withdrawal with and without invitro exposures to an ER beta agonist. Potential differences  in gene expression profiles  between  women  with and 
those without past perimenopausal depression, and the corresponding effects of estradiol 
withdrawal on these same systems are currently  being examined  in collaboration  with the 
Laboratory of Neurogenetics,  NIAAA.  Analyses of gene expression changes in lymphoblastoid 
cells will be performed by RNAseq, employing gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), weighted 
Page  20 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   gene co -expression network analysis (WGCNA) and database for annotation, visualization, and 
integrative discovery (DAVID) analyses, quantitative PCR to confirm the changes identified in 
RNAseq, and subsequent confirmation of changes in protein expression corresponding to results of gene expression data.  Additionally, w e will perform whole exome and whole transcriptome 
sequencing (and possibly whole genome sequencing) at a later date. Finally,  we will monitor the 
effects  of LY500307 on presumed  estrogen  receptor alpha- related tissue effects including 
endometrial proliferation (by vaginal ultrasound), lipids, selected plasma proteins (e.g., sex hormone binding globulin [SHBG]), plasma LH, and plasma prolactin levels. 
3. P
articipants  
a. Description  of study populations:  
 
The screening for this protocol was initially conducted as part of protocol 88-M-0131; however, this protocol (18 -M-0144) was amended to include the screening phase. Due to  
attrition during screening (i.e., screen failures), we will need to screen approximately 80 women in this protocol to ensure that our target enrollment is met.  The study population will be f orty-five non- depressed  postmenopausal women  with well 
documented past perimenopausal depression (i.e., 15 women in each of three study arms). 
Dropouts will only be replaced if they withdraw before randomization. All randomized subjects will be included in analyses. 
b. Inclusion Criteria:  
 
1. Women with a past perimenopause-related depression (within 12 years). The diagnosis of 
perimenopause- related  depression will be based  on a history of a past  depressive episode (major 
or minor depression confirmed by Structured Clinical Interview for DSM- V (SCID)) at midlife 
in association with menstrual cycle irregularity (and possibly hot flushes and/or vaginal dryness) and in whom menopausal hormone therapy was reported  to improve their depression at 
Page  21 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   any time within the prior twelve years. All women participating in this protocol will be screened 
with psychiatric, medical, and  reproductive evaluations to confirm  they are in  good medical 
health.  
2. Age 45 to 65;  
 
Medication free (including no mood stabilizers, no sleep medication) except for the following: women  on menopausal  hormone therapy  who will discontinue these  medications  at the start of 
this study and have their hormone therapy replaced with estradiol 100mcg per day (as described below), women who are on stable doses of thyroid replacement for at least six months prior to study enrollment, or women who occasionally take non-s teroidal anti- inflammatory  drugs 
[NSAIDs]  or allergy  medications  (although we will ask women  to minimize the use of these 
medications during the study). 3. Subjects  must have consent capacity.  
 
c. Exclusion criteria:  
 
The following conditions will constitute  contraindications to  participate  in this protocol:  
 
1. Any current  Axis  1 psychiatric  illness  or any clinically  significant sleep  disorder;  
 
2. Women  with histories  of hormone replacement  therapy-induced dysphoria due to either  the 
estrogen or the progesterone components of their hormone replacement; 3. Past history of major  depression with suicidal  ideation;  
 
4. History  of ischemic  cardiac disease,  pulmonary embolism,  or thrombophlebitis;  
 
5. Renal  disease;  hepatic dysfunction; history of cholecystitis; hypertension;  
 
6. Women  with a  history of carcinoma of the  breast  or any undiagnosed breast nodule/mass;  
 
7. Women  with a history of uterine cancer,  ill-defined pelvic lesions, particularly  undiagnosed 
ovarian enlargement, undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; 8. Pregnant women; sexually  active women  will be required  to employ barrier  contraceptive 
Page  22 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   methods;  
9. Cerebrovascular  disease (stroke);  
 
10. Recurrent  migraine headaches;  
 
11. Women  who  have had  a hysterectomy before one year after  their  last menstrual period ; 
 
12. NIMH  employees/staff  and their immediate  family  members  will be excluded  from  the study 
per NIMH policy. 
4. St udy  Design  and Methods  
a. Study overview  
 
Participants will be screened over 3 -4 clinic visits  to ensure inclusion criteria is met. 
Following screening, the medication phase of this study is a seven-week randomized, double blind, 
placebo controlled study and there is a four week follow-up evaluation phase to monitor all women for the emergence of adverse effects post -medication exposure. Participants will have weekly 
outpatient visits, weekly blood draws and will also complete daily symptom rating scales. The 
study involves a three week  baseline phase in which  all women  receive open label  (OL) estradiol 
therapy (ET) at a dose of 100 micrograms per day by transdermal skin patch, after which all women receive three weeks of double blind (DB) medication (i.e., LY500307 [at a daily dose of either 25 mg or 75 mg] or placebo), and then in non-menstruating women (i.e., the absence of reported menstrual bleeding of greater than 1-2 days during the double blind phase of this study), one week of Provera to precipitate a progestin-induced menses. The week of Provera is not a research- related 
intervention but is clinically -indicated to induce endometrial shedding that will eliminate 
potentially abnormal endometrial tissue consequent to the three weeks of unopposed estradiol exposure. The duration of the OL and DB phases of this study were selected to match those employed in our previous protocol (03-M-0175) 
12 in which  we demonstrated  that three weeks of 
estradiol followed by a three week withdrawal of estradiol were sufficient for the majority of 
Page  23 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   women (who met identical selection criteria as in this study) randomized to estrogen withdrawal to 
develop a recurrence of their mood symptoms after a three week asymptomatic period while on OL estradiol.  
All participants will be instructed to ingest study medications on an empty stomach after an 
overnight fast, since in all clinical pharmacology studies, LY500307 was administered orally after overnight fast, followed by breakfast approximately 30 minutes after the dosing. The effect of food on LY500307 has not been formally assessed. All participants will receive three capsules of LY500307 or placebo each morning consisting of the following formulations: 1) women randomized to 75 mg LY500307 will receive three capsules each containing 25 mg LY500307; 2) women randomized to 25 mg LY500307 will receive one capsule containing 25 mg LY500307 and two capsules of placebo; and 3) women randomized to placebo will receive three capsules each containing placebo. There will be a 1 -1-1 distribution of women in each study arm (i.e., each arm 
will contain 15 women). A table of random numbers will be used for randomization in this trial. A 
set of numbers, equivalent  to the proposed “N” will be selected  and an appropriate bl ock size within 
that set will be chosen.  Within that block, the highest third of the numbers will be assigned to one 
treatment arm, the middle third will be assigned to the second treatment arm, and the lowest third will be assigned to a third treatment arm.
 The block size is not revealed to the investigator. 
Genetics Studies: Subjects will be invited to provide a 30ml blood sample for genetic 
characterization studies, including investigation of specific gene polymorphisms (e.g., estrogen, progesterone and androgen receptors) and establishment of lymphoblastoid cell lines  (LCLs) and 
induced pluripotent cell (IPCs) for epigenomic (WES) , and transcriptomic (WTS)  sequencing. We 
also plan to perform whole genomic sequencing (WGS) in this protocol in the future. The  potential 
relevance of genetic polymorphisms for women with menstrual  cycle -related  mood disorders is 
evidenced in our recent studies (Dubey et. al, 2017;Rudzinskas et. al, 2020), where we have 
Page  24 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   demonstrated that cell lines derived from these women show intrinsic differences in their gene 
expression, both prior to and after in vitro hormone manipulation, as well as in analogous studies, such as those demonstrating that decreasing CAG trinucleotide repeats in Exon 1 of the androgen receptor lead to greater the transcriptional efficiency of this receptor   resulting in the increased 
likelihood of  developing prostate cancer , and a greater likelihood that the cancer will be of high stage and grade (124).  Menstrual -related mood disorders may, like prostate cancer, be seen as a 
different phenotypic response to a gonadal steroid signal, where it is the response, and not the signal, that is aberrant.  Wherever possible, internal control samples  will also be acquired . 
b. Recruitment  
 
All subjects  for this protocol will be either  self-referred  in response to  newspaper  advertisements  or 
referred by their personal physician. Pre-screening  telephone interviews will be performed prior to 
scheduling any woman for a screening clinic visit. 
IRB approved recruitment material will be to initiate a first contact with women who may be 
interested in participating in research or know someone who is. When a woman calls the Branch 
for more information she is given an overview of the study, told the study is taking place on an outpatient basis  at the NIH Clinical Research  Center  in Bethesda,  Maryland.  She is informed  there 
is no cost to her if she participates  and informed  of time  commitments  and compensation. The 
following recruitment material has been uploaded into iRIS : 
1. Menopause and Mood Ad 2c x 5 
 
2. Menopause and Mood Flyer  with Tear offs 
 
3. Menopause and Mood Poster  
 
4. Perimenopausal  Depression  Postcard  
 
5. Menopause and Mood Direct  Mail  Card  (2 pages)  
 
6. Menopause and Mood Dear  Neighbor Letter  
Page  25 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)    
7. Menopause and Mood 2- sided  note card  5c x 3 (2  pages)  
 
8. Menopause and Mood Online Button ad (300 x 250, standard  sidebar)  
 
Ad link to Study- specific page on the NIMH -IRP Join A Study Website. URL (placeholder) 
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/labs -at-nimh/join -a-study/adults/adults -perimenopause -related - 
mood- disorders.shtml  
9. Menopause and Mood Mobile ad (300 x 50, mobile or 728 x 90 banner)  
 
Ad link to Study- specific page on the NIMH -IRP Join A Study Website. URL (placeholder) 
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/labs -at-nimh/join -a-study/adults/adults -perimenopause -related - 
mood- disorders.shtml  
10. Menopause and Mood text for NIMH  “Join  a study” website  
 
11. Menopause and Mood Long text 
 
12. Menopause and Mood Medium text 
 
13. Menopause and Mood Short text 
 
Menopause and Mood Twitter  text (2)The  material  will be distributed, as appropriate, by the 
following methods: 
2c x 5 advertisements may be used in local newspapers (e.g., The Washington Post, Express, 
Gazette, Washington Jewish Week, Military papers) and/or in local and national magazines with targeted local advertising (e.g., Bethesda Magazine, Washingtonian, More, Washington Parent, Washington Woman, Oprah, Women’s Health), on websites of radio stations, newspaper and magazines, in advocacy group newsletters of local women’s groups, churches, community based organizations, professional groups (APA, MHA). Flyers (with tear offs) and posters (without tear offs) may be posted on NIH bulletin boards, community bulletin boards (with permission and according to the guidelines of the facility), emailed as PDFs  to local providers or callers who 
Page  26 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   request a copy, at conferences at which NIMH has a table with permission to distribute material 
(e.g., Montgomery County Mental Health Association sponsored CEU events for social workers). The postcard  and the 4.5 inch  x 6 inch note card may be sent using commercially -available mailing 
lists via direct mail.  The postcard and the note card contain the IRB required disclaimer “Names 
and addresses of women ages 45-65 living in the greater Washington DC area were obtain from a consumer information database.” Th e Dear Neighbor Letter may be sent using commercially - 
available mailing lists via direct mail and contains the IRB required disclaimer “Names and addresses of women ages 45 -65 living in the greater Washington DC area were obtain from a 
consumer information database.” It will be mailed along with the 2 -sided notecard (5c x 3). 
The 2 -sided notecard and postcard may be posted on NIH bulletin boards, community bulletin 
boards (with permission and according to the guidelines of the facility), emailed as PDF s to local 
providers or callers  who request  a copy, distributed  at conferences  at which  NIMH  has a table with 
permission to distribute material (e.g., Montgomery County Mental Health Association sponsored CEU events for social workers), mailed to women in the greater Washington DC area and distributed, as appropriate,  to community  organization (e.g., Montgomery County Mental  Health 
Association sponsored CEU events for social workers). The online electronic ad and mobile ad may be placed on websites of community groups (e.g. Wednesday Morning group), advocacy groups (e.g. Consortium for Women’s Mental Health), e- newsletters,  local  newspapers (Gazette,  Express),  local  magazines  (Washington Woman),  women’s 
health or community blogs (Just up The Pike, Bethesda Actually), radio stations (WBIG 100, WASH FM), and  Facebook pages ( e.g. NIH and NIMH or of women who call that may request a 
link to share). Long Text ads may be used for Listservs,  Craig’s  List,  Advocacy  e-news,  or print news  postings 
with the permission of the moderator and the IRB- required statement on how the receiver was 
Page  27 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   identified. Examples of Listservs that may be contacted include professional groups, parenting/ 
family, women’s health and fitness. SBE will retain copies of all correspondence with the administrator of each Listserv.  
 
 
Medium Text ads may be used for e- news  or print news  postings with limited  space requirements 
such as Washington Parent or professional Newsletters. Short Text ads may be used for e- news  or print news  postings with limited  space requirements  such 
as Washington Parent or professional Newsletters such as the Greater Washington Society of Clinical Social Workers.  
Twitter text may  be used by the NIH  and NIMH  extramural Communications Office  as well as by 
community  or advocacy  groups such  as Consortium for Women’s  Mental  Health.  The Branch  will 
not post directly to Twitter.  
c. Screening  
 
 An initial pre -screening phone call is done prior to obtaining consent via a waiver of consent for 
screening activities. Initial pre -screening will be conducted by phone interviews to determine if the 
subject appears to meet inclusion criteria .
  
Pre-screening  activities performed prior to obtaining informed consent: 
Minimal risk activities that may be performed before the subject has signed a consent include the 
following: 
• Email, written, in person or telephone communications with prospective subjects  • Review of existing medical records to include H&P, laboratory studies, etc.   • Review of existing MRI, x-ray, or CT images • Review of existing pathology specimens/reports from a specimen obtained for diagnostic 
purposes 
Page  28 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Please see request for waiver of consent for pre- screening activities in Section 13 b: Consent Process 
Section.  
After the pre- screening phone call, all potential participants will come to the Clinical Center, 
consent will be obtained and further screening will commence. All women will be personally 
interviewed to confirm the inclusion criteria by a psychiatrist, psychiatric nurse, or social worker to obtain a description of the following (if any): 1) the nature of the relationships between mood disorders and the perimenopause, with emphasis on the relationship of symptom appearance to onset of perimenopause, vasomotor symptoms, and development and evolution of the disorder; 2) type, severity and duration of symptoms, including non-mood related menopausal symptoms; 3) premorbid psychiatric history; 4) medical and medication history, including medication taken for mood problems; 5) psychiatric history.  Consent is obtained before any study procedures, including screening procedures, are done. Women will be screened to have the presence or absence of menopausal   status  evaluated  and 
documented. Postmenopausal reproductive status  will be defined  by a history of at least twelve  
months of amenorrhea and biological evidence of ovarian dysfunction, specifically at least three of four plasma FSH values > 14 IU/L on consecutive occasions drawn at 10-14 day  intervals over a period of six to eight weeks. The following screening procedures will be done in this protocol during the screening phase: 
• A complete  medical history, physical exam  and EKG 
• Participants will have a psychiatric history taken which will include diagnostic 
interviews such as the Structured Clinical Interview for Axis I DSM- V Disorders 
(SCID)  
• Symptom ratings: Women may be asked to return for follow-up interviews on approximately 10-14 day 
Page  29 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   intervals for up to six weeks in this screening phase. During these interviews, 
phenomenological assessments may be performed by instruments including the following: Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), 17- item Hamilton Depression Scale 
(HRSD); Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale ( CESD ); and 
questionnaires focusing on early life traumatic events (i.e. Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) Questionnaire and Childhood Trauma Questionnaire [CTQ]).  
• Blood tests:  
 
 complete  blood count (CBC)  
 
 electrolytes;  
 
 glucose,  
 
 BUN and creatinine;  
 
 Liver  function tests;  
 
 thyroid function tests,  
 
 plasma  prolactin,  
 
 plasma  FSH levels  (to confirm  reproductive status)  
 
 lipid profile.  
 
 plasma  βHCG pregnancy  test (if indicated)  
 
o Urine  – 
 urinalysis; urine pregnancy test  
 
 
Any woman  with  significant physical, EKG,  or laboratory  abnormalities,  or who meets any of 
the exclusion criteria will not participate in this protocol.  Additionally, prior  to participation 
all subjects will be examine d for any contraindications to ET. 
All women will have had a normal PAP smear, negative HPV test results and normal gynecologic 
Page  30 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   exam within the 5 years prior to study enrollment as recommended for women between the ages of 
30 and 65 years by the USPSTF,  the American Society  for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology 
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, unless the woman has a previous positive test for HPV in which case the exam and testing will have occurred within 3 years of starting this study. The gynecologic exam done is a standard gynecological exam.  Exams  done by 
an outside provider will require the release of a copy of the report from the provider with 
permission of the subject. If the inclusion criteria is met, participants may move to the medication phase of the study. d. Study Procedures  
 
During the seven -week   medication phase the following will be conducted:  
 
• The effects  of LY500307 or placebo  on mood symptoms will be monitored with daily 
symptom rating scales.  
• During the 8 weekly  clinic  visits  all women  will also have blood pressure,  pulse,  and weight 
measured and will be assessed for any side effects to the prescribed medications. 
• Blood samples  will be drawn  via venipuncture at  each of the first 7 clinic  visits; 
approximately 50 ml of blood will be collected at each draw (total = 350 ml). 
• One time blood draw of 30ml for genetics which includes the establishment of 
LCLs and IPCs, and analysis including WES, WTS and possibly WGS. 
• Transvaginal ultrasound will be performed on two occasions: before randomization (i.e., 
during week  3 of open label  estradiol),  and then after 3 weeks  of treatment  with  LY500307 
or placebo.  
Baseline period (Open Label estradiol treatment [ET]):  
 
During a three- week baseline phase, all women will receive open label (OL) 
estradiol (100 micrograms/day) by skin patch and will complete mood and behavioral 
Page  31 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   symptom ratings to confirm  the absence  of clinically  significant mood symptoms prior to 
entry into the study. 
Double-blinded Randomization phase:  
 
After the three-week baseline period and the determination that ET does not 
precipitate symptoms, women will be randomized to one of three arms as follows: LY500307 at a dose of 25 mg per day, LY500307 at a dose of 75 mg per day, or matched placebo for thr ee weeks.  Once the three weeks of LY500307 or placebo treatment is 
completed, non-menstruating women will receive one week of Provera (5 mg/day) at the end of the trial to induce a progestin withdrawal  bleed.  The justification  for employing two 
separate doses of LY500307 is that the lower dose (i.e., 25 mg) may be insufficient to effectively produce agonist effects at ER beta. Prevention of the emergence of estradiol withdrawal -induced mood symptoms at the 75 mg dose (but not the 25 mg dose) would 
suggest either a dose-dependent agonism at ER beta or the requirement for activation of ER alpha.  The latter  possibility  will be examined  by monitoring ERα activity  at the levels  of the 
endometrium, the pituitary (plasma LH and prolactin), and possibly hypothalamus (plasma LH 
33), which will help us evaluate potential ER alpha actions accompanying the higher 
dose of LY500307. Of note, the 75 mg daily dose is within the safety margins established by Lilly. 
After the trial, those women who were taking ET prior to the study will be re- started 
on their previous HT regimen  unless they request  to continue the withdrawal  from  HT under 
medical supervision. Outcome measures will include standardized mood and behavioral rating scales.  The main comparisons in this study will be between LY500307 and placebo 
in women  with a past history of perimenopause- related  depression. Results  will be analyzed 
by analysis of variance for mixed effects and post-hoc Bonferroni testing. 
Page  32 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Weekly  visits and daily  mood ratings:  
 
During the seven-week study, the effects of LY500307 or placebo on mood 
symptoms will be monitored with daily symptom rating scales and weekly clinic visits. 
Outcome measures include the following: Primary outcome measures:  self ratings - the 
Center for Epidemiologic Studies- Depression Scale (CES -D) 47, observer ratings - the 17- 
item Hamilton Rating Scale of Depression (HRSD)48. Secondary outcome measures:  the 
daily symptom rating form (DRF)49 consisting of a 14 item six point likert- type scale 
measuring the severity of several mood and behavior symptoms including hot flushes (completed on a daily basis at home by each participant); the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)
50; a visual analogue scale (VAS)  measuring  the reported  severity  of 13 mood and 
behavioral symptoms (completed at each weekly clinic visit); and  whole genome expression/exome sequencing. 
During eight weekly  clinic  visits  all women  will also have blood pressure,  pulse,  and 
weight measured and will be assessed for any side effects to the prescribed medications (including specific evaluations of any complaints of calf pain or other symptoms and signs of blood clots in the legs). In addition, blood samples will be drawn via venipuncture at each of the first seven clinic visits; approximately 50 ml of blood will be collected at each draw (total = 350 ml). This blood will be analyzed for several measures such as the following: estradiol, estrone, FSH, LH, prolactin, testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, SHBG, electrolytes; glucose, CBC, renal, hepatic, thyroid and lipid functions. These measures will 
be employed to monitor safety parameters of LY500307 (i.e., CBC, renal, hepatic, thyroid and lipid functions), and the potential effects of LY500307 on measures of ER alpha function (see above). Blood samples for estradiol will be processed within 24 hours in the NIH Clinical Center Pathology Service and sent to a staff member not involved with patient 
Page  33 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   care in order to monitor compliance with estradiol therapy. 
Timing of clinic visits: It is anticipated that participants in this study will occasionally miss or fail to complete an assessment or procedure, such as a study visit, completion of a rating scale or a blood draw. Omissions such as these will be considered expected events and not protocol deviations provided they are infrequent and do not include data needed to assess safety or the primary study outcome. Cumulative proportions of these missed events in the study population will be presented to the IRB annually. In addition, the rate of omissions will be monitored by the Investigators. If an individual misses more than 15% of the required  assessments/procedures  or if more  than 15% of the participants  miss completion  of 
the same assessment or procedure, it will be considered a deviation and a deviation report will be sent to the IRB within 14 days. 
Transvaginal Ultrasound:  
 
To monitor potential effects  of LY500307 on the endometrium (ER alpha- mediated), 
we will perform transvaginal ultrasound on two occasions as follows: before randomization 
(i.e., during week 3 of open label estradiol), and then after 3 weeks of treatment with LY500307 or placebo. The transvaginal ultrasound will be performed either in the Department of Radiology, NIH, or in the ACRF-9 under the consultation of Lynnette Nieman, M.D or Alan DeCherney, M.D. Any abnormality identified by transvaginal ultrasound will be further investigated by the consultant gynecologist. If any woman experiences marked discomfort during the insertion of the ultrasound probe the procedure will be discontinued, and we will perform  instead  a trans -abdominal ultrasound. 
Otherwise, there are no additional associated risks or discomforts with the transvaginal ultrasound.  
All women will receive an information hand -out describing the transvaginal ultrasound 
Page  34 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   procedure and possible associated  discomforts that will be reviewed  with each woman  by 
the research team prior to the first scheduled procedure. 
e. End of Participation:  
 
After the completion of this trial, all participants will be evaluated for the presence 
of clinically significant mood symptoms.  Additionally, the results (including symptom 
ratings and plasma hormone levels) of the study will be reviewed with each participant. If 
negative mood symptoms or distressing  hot flushes are present,  we will discuss therapeutic 
options prior to referral of each participant back to her community health care provider. 
Additionally, all women  will be requested  to return  for a follow-up clinic  visit four weeks 
after completion of the seven week medication phase (i.e., three week open estradiol 
treatment,  three week  double blind placebo/  LY500307 treatment,  and one week  progestin 
treatment  in non- menstruating  women) to evaluate  possible adverse  effects  emerging  post- 
treatment – although no late- onset adverse effects are anticipated.  At the time of this 
follow-up visit an EKG will be performed on all subjects to assess QTc. The options for follow-up in those women who report persisting negative mood symptoms include no treatment with follow -up by community health care provider, initiation of standard 
antidepressant therapy such as selective serotonin uptake inhibitors with follow -up in 
community, or resumption of previous menopausal hormone therapy by her community health care provider. Our experience in protocol 03-M-0175, which employed a similar study design with a symptom-provocation paradigm, suggests that in the majority of women depressive symptoms that emerged during estradiol withdrawal were of mild to moderate severity and time-limited. In those women in whom depressive symptoms persisted and were accompanied by distress, either resuming their previous ET or commencing  standard  antidepressant  therapy  led to a remission  of symptoms.  However,  in 
Page  35 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   the fourteen women with past perimenopausal depression who participated in 03-M-0175 
and were randomized to estradiol withdrawal, only three women elected to resume ET or use antidepressant therapy because of distressing mood symptoms. 
5. Ma
nagement  of Data  and Samples  
a. Storage  
 
Samples  and data will be stored  using codes  that we assign. Data will be kept in password- 
protected computers. Data from structured diagnostic interviews and symptom ratings are kept in secure research files and electronically on the Branch server space or within the CTDB database. Access to these research files is only available to s tudy investigators. Symptom ratings, 
diagnostic interviews, and other questionnaires will be collected through an online system using a subject -specific log in and password to protect confidentiality (see Appendix 2). Samples will 
be kept in pass-card prot ected locked storage.  Only study investigators will have access to the 
samples and data.  DNA  and cell cultures  for lymphoblastoid cells and/or induced -pluripotent 
cells (IPCs)  will be coded and stored under locked conditions at Dr. David Goldman’s laboratory 
(NIAAA) at Fisher’s Lane, Rockville. Dr. Goldman and other associate investigators in his lab will have access to the code key for specimens and data. Any loss or destruction of samples will be reported to the IRB. b. Data (including genomic data)  and sample  sharing plan 
 
This study requires  submission of genomic data under the NIH GDS  policy. Genomic data 
will be submitted to the following NIH -designated repositories: dbGAP.  
Samples  and data including genomic data will be shared  with NIAAA for the purposes of 
collaborative research.  
Data and samples  may also be shared  with collaborating  laboratories  at NIH or outside of 
NIH and/or submitted to NIH-designated repositories and databases if consent for sharing was 
Page  36 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   obtained. Repositories receiving data and/or samples from this protocol may be open- access or 
restricted access.  
Samples and data will be stripped of identifiers and may be coded (“de-identified”) or 
unlinked from an identifying code (“anonymized”). When coded data is shared, the key to the code 
will not be provided to collaborators but will remain  at NIH.   
Required  approvals from  the collaborating institution  will be obtained and materials  will be 
shipped in accordance with NIH and federal regulations.  c. Future use 
 
Samples and data are stored with the intent of future use by the Principal Investigator and 
other investigators. Participants  can opt out of having their samples  and data used in future  studies 
by initialing the consent form. 
Access  by other researchers  to the study data is an important component of this study. Most 
commonly, researchers seek access to de -identified clinical data and biomaterials via the NIMH 
Center for Genetics (NCG), where data requests are handled by the Genomics Research Branch in the Office of the Director, NIMH, in accordance with a Distrib ution Agreement 
(https://www.nimhgenetics.org/documents/Distribution%20Agreement.pdf). 
Access  to clinical  data and biomaterials  not available through the NCG is  handled by the PI, 
who works with  the requestor  and the NIMH  Office  of Technology Transfer  to provide anonymized 
or coded data or biomaterials in accordance with an appropriate Material Transfer Agreement.  
Personally  identifiable  information  is never  shared  outside the NIMH  IRP. 
 
d. Disposition  
 
Samples  and data will be kept indefinitely.  
 
6. Additional  considerations  
a. Research  with  investigational drugs or devices:  
 
Page  37 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   LY500307 drug substance will be provided as active pharmaceutical  ingredient (API)  from  Eli Lilly 
and Company allowing reference to the existing regulatory information in IND 100,916. The drug 
product will be prepared  under a new IND  for LY500307 (ER beta agonist) with the NIMH  as the 
sponsor. Dr. Maryland Pao is the official representing the Institute.  
Role of a commercial company: Eli Lilly will provide suitable amounts of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) of LY500307 to the Contract Manufacturing  Organization  (CMO)  where quality 
assurance tests will be performed and appropriately dosed capsules will be formulated. In addition to drug substance, Eli Lilly and Company will provide the CMO with access to the information in the existing IND 100,916, including information on formulation development and drug product stability. The CMO we propose to employ is Pine Pharmaceuticals and is responsible for the manufacturing and release of the medications  to be employed in this protocol. The facility  at 
the Pine Pharmaceuticals, ( 100 Colvin Woods Pkwy, Tonawanda, NY 14150; website: 
www.PinePharmaceuticals.com , Ph 716.248.1025 ) is an FDA  certified  facility  for good 
 
manufacturing practice (c-GMP)  and will produce the appropriate capsules  containing LY500307 
and matched placebos. Similar contracts are established with Pine Pharmaceuticals and the 
University of Iowa for the manufacturing and release of medications currently employed within other NIH protocols including several within the NIAID. 
 
b. Gene therapy 
Not applicable.  
7. Ri
sks  and Discomforts  
Rating Scales and Interviews : The risks and discomforts of the evaluations are minimal.  Mood 
ratings and interviews  in the clinic  pose little risk. Daily  ratings require approximately  10 - 15 
minutes each evening to complete, which may be inconvenient and potentially tiring but the majority of our participants  are very dedicated  to collecting  this information  while  participating  in our studies. 
Page  38 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   No discomfort is expected to be associated with or the clinical interview other than potential stress of 
answering personal questions and completing a questionnaire about early life trauma .  All clinical 
assessors have extensive experience in clinical psychiatric assessment and will make every effort to implement protocol procedures in a sensitive and supportive manner.  Research interviews will be interrupted if subjects become distressed or object to answering questions.  Other measures to minimize risks include the careful assessment of each subject before the study, and close clinical scrutiny during all aspects of the study. History and Physical Exam and Laboratory Tests:  It is possible that during the evaluation a subject may be found to have a medical problem of which they were previously unaware.  In that event, the participant will be given the results and an appropriate referral made as indicated by the condition identified.  
Genetic T esting  and Return of Incidental Findings:   These risks are only relevant if testing is 
conducted in CLIA-certified labs so that incidental findings can be returned and the results are placed 
in the subjects' medical record.  Under some circumstances, it can be a risk for genetic information 
about an individual to be known.  Variation in some genes is known to be directly related to risk for certain illnesses.  Other genes may be shown at some point in the future to be related to illness.  Since the results of these genetic tests may allow prediction of risk of illness in some cases, it is possible this information could be used against a subject participating in the study.  Although there are no physical risks associated with participation in genetic studies, apart from those routinely associated with phlebotomy, the psychological and social/economic risks associated with genetic studies of the kind described here are difficult to define and remain the subject of heated controversy in the ethics community.  The major risk, to the degree that any exists, is that a breach of confidentiality regarding genetic studies that resulted in third parties finding out genetic information about a person could theoretically place a person at risk for loss of insurance, loss of employment, etc. because of 
Page  39 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   genotype-based discrimination.  To our knowledge, no person has ever suffered harm for the reasons 
just described as a result of participating in a genetics research study.  Regardless, our written informed consent process will go over these risks carefully.  The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) is a federal law that prohibits plans and health insurers from requesting genetic information or using genetic information. It also prohibits employment discrimination based on health information. However, GINA does not address discrimination by companies that sell life insurance, disability insurance, or long- term care insurance. GINA also does 
not protect against discrimination based on an already-diagnosed condition or disease that has a genetic co mponent.  
Learning about the changes in genes could mean something about the subject’s  family members and 
might cause them distress .
 In addition, subjects could  receive a result for an unexpected gene change 
that turns out not to cause that health condition. This could potentially cause unnecessary distress or lead to unnecessary medical testing risks and costs. Subjects will have the right to “withdraw” from the research and have their DNA sample destroyed , 
if not already used
.  Finally, all research records containing any subject- identifying information will 
be stored under lock and key, or in secured computing environments by the CTDB.  Personal identifiers are never associated directly with genotypes in the same data file - all  genotype 
information is indexed only to de-identified subject codes.  With these safeguards in place, we are confident the research is virtually without psycho- social -economic risks to subjects; however, 
subjects will be informed that risks of sharing genomic data may include possibility of reidentification.  
Plan for Return of Incidental Findings: Subjects will be contacted if a clinically actionable gene variant is discovered. Clinically actionable findings for the purpose of this study are defined as disorders appearing in the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics recommendations 
Page  40 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   for the return of incidental findings that is current at the time of primary analysis. Subjects will be 
contacted at this time with a request to provide a blood sample to be sent to a CLIA certified laboratory. If the research findings are verified in the CLIA certified lab, the subject will be offered the opportunity to come to NIH (at our expense) to have genetic education and counseling to explain this result. If the subject does not want to come to NIH, a referral to a local genetic healthcare provider will be provided (at their expense). This is the only time during the course of the study that incidental findings will be returned. No interrogations regarding clinically actionable findings will be made after the primary analysis.
 
Study medications: LY500307 has not previously been administered to women, and, therefore,  
existing  safety  data in humans is based  on experience with LY500307 in men only. This protocol will 
be the first to evaluate LY500307 in women.  
1. Selective Estrogen Receptor  beta agonist LY500307: LY500307 is a selective ER  beta agonist.  
 
At doses of 25 – 75 mg per day,  LY500307 has been found to be well  tolerated,  with  both low 
(i.e., 25mg) and high doses (75 mg) having only modest effects on circulating testosterone 
concentrations in healthy middle- aged men (an effect presumed to reflect the actions of ER alpha 
not ER beta on negative feedback regulation of testosterone in men). No changes in vital signs, blood counts, liver and renal  functions, and electrocardiograms  (ECGs) have been  observed in the 
Phase 1 studies. 
Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology studies suggested that at higher doses, 
LY500307 loses  its selectivity  towards ER beta;  as such, classic estrogenic effects  have been 
observed in toxicology and Phase 1 clinical trials. These effects include the following: 
Weight loss: Reduced food intake and weight loss was observed consistently in the toxicology studies in animals.  Clinically,  no statistically  significant weight loss was 
observed in phase 1 studies. 
Page  41 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Gynecomastia: Mammary gland hyperplasia (also considered a consequence of ER alpha activity) 
has been consistently observed in toxicology studies in animals receiving high doses of LY500307, therefore,  gynecomastia is a potential adverse effect  of LY500307 in clinical dosing. 
Gynecomastia has been observed in men receiving hormone therapy for prostate cancer, and also in men receiving 5- α-reductase inhibitors for BPH. 
There are several  estrogenic adverse effects  that cannot be reliably  predicted  with available 
toxicology studies. These include: the worsening of atherosclerosis and increased risk for strokes and thromboembolic events (e.g., DVT). 
These less  common, but potentially life-threatening, AEs have been reported in association with 
estradiol therapy but are unlikely to occur with the duration of time that LY500307 is administered 
in this study and in this relatively young age range of women who are otherwise  healthy. Estrogens 
have been  known to alter hepatic lipid metabolism and reduce low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in 
women (see below). In one study (study Lilly Study BPAD, Lilly Investigator Brochure), after two weeks of LY500307 administration, there was an increase in calculated LDL concentration without a change in the LDL particle number or size. However, in a longer study lasting 24 weeks (Lilly Study BPAE, Lilly Investigator Brochure) no changes in plasma lipid profiles were observed. In 
contrast to effects  seen with estrogens, no increase  in serum  triglyceride  was observed. Changes  in 
liver function tests and renal function have not been observed during short-term clinical dosing, but will be monitored in this study. No changes in complete blood count and lymphocyte subtype were observed in the Phase 1 studies. In all clinical  pharmacology studies, LY500307 was administered  orally  after overnight fast, 
followed by breakfast approximately 30 minutes after the dosing. The effect of food on LY500307 has not been formally assessed.  
Following a single 25-mg oral dose of LY500307 containing [14C]LY500307 (approximately 100 
Page  42 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   μCi or 3.7-MBq) to 6 healthy  male  subjects,  approximately  98% of the administered radioactivity 
was recovered over a duration of 216 hours post-dose. The principal routes of elimination of 
LY500307 are in the urine, and to a lesser extent in the feces (see Lilly Investigator Brochure). In plasma  and urine, direct sulfate  and glucuronide conjugates of LY500307 were identified as the 
predominant metabolites.  
Four clinical pharmacology studies have been conducted in healthy males. As of November 2010, a total of 109 males have received LY500307 in clinical pharmacology studies. Doses  of LY500307 
were generally  well tolerated.  No clinically  significant safety concerns have been encountered  after 
administration  of LY500307 in studies to  date. Few  serious adverse events (SAEs) and treatment 
emergent adverse events (TEAE) were observed  at any dose level  in these studies (see Lilly  
Investigator Brochure,  page 36, tables  6.3 and 6.4). The incidence rates of SAEs and TEAEs were 
similar between placebo and active treatment groups. All AEs reported  in these studies were  mild to 
moderate in severity, and all were self -limiting without discontinuation of LY500307 dosing. No 
clinically significant changes in vital signs or EKGs were observed during these clinical pharmacology studies. No clinically significant changes in complete blood count, lymphocyte subtype, serum electrolytes, glucose, blood lipids, and liver and renal function tests were observed in these studies. Sporadic statistically significant QTc prolon gation was noted in one study (Lilly 
BPAC study, see Lilly Investigator’s brochure); however, no dose/concentration -dependent 
prolongation of QTc interval was observed in the other clinical pharmacology studies. In men with BPH, a phase 2 dose-ranging trial of 24 weeks duration designed to test the safety and efficacy of LY500307 was completed (Lilly BPAE, see Lilly Investigator’s brochure  pp 36-39). At the end of 
this phase 2 study, approximately 177 men experienced at least 1 treatment emergent adverse event and 54 men were considered to experience events possibly related to study drug including the followin g (in order of frequency): gastrointestinal disorders (such as constipation, diarrhea, nausea, 
Page  43 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   dry mouth, and flatulence), cough, nasopharyngitis, back pain, headache, increased prostatic 
specific antigen, dizziness and fatigue.  
Of note, the incidence rates  of SAEs,  including AEs leading  to discontinuation were similar 
between active and placebo treatment groups. 
In this study, we will evaluate at each clinic  visit signs and symptoms of any potential adverse 
events including those associated with deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, stroke, or 
severe migraine headaches. Additionally, laboratory tests will monitor renal,  hepatic function as 
well as blood counts and blood lipid levels.  Finally, during the last clinic visit an EKG will be 
repeated to rule out emergent cardiac conduction abnormalities. 
2. Estradiol Replacement  
 
Nausea is the most common side effect of estrogen administration. At conventional 
replacement doses, higher than those employed in this protocol, this complaint seldom interferes with eating, and no weight loss has been reported. Breast engorgement, endometrial hyperplasia and bleeding are also common side effects of estrogen administration. Pre-existing fibroid tumors 
of the uterus may enlarge  under the effects  of estrogen;  however, at the dosage and for the duration 
of estrogen administration in this prot ocol this risk is small.  
The relationship  between  estrogen, both endogenous and exogenous, and the development 
of endometrial carcinoma has been suggested by several different lines of investigation 
51. 
Numerous retrospective case control studies published since 1975 have indicated that postmenopausal exposure to unopposed estrogens for more  than one year results  in a two to 12 fold 
increased relative risk for endometrial cancer.  A relationship between the dose and duration of 
estrogen  use and  the risk  for endometrial  cancer  has also  been  shown, the risk  being increased  after 
one to four years of estrogen use and rising also with the dosage employed. However, the addition of progesterone to estrogen therapy appears to decrease the risk of endometrial hyperplasia and 
Page  44 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   endometrial cancer to equal or below that of women receiving no hormonal treatment. Recent 
studies suggest that the optimal regimen to prevent hyperplasia and thus, inferentially, the risk of 
carcinoma, consists of 12 to 13 days of progestin treatment each month when estrogens are administered  
52. There is an increase in thromboembolism and stroke in women receiving estrogen  
therapy 53-59; however, this complication is unlikely at the dose and duration of estrogen therapy 
employed in this protocol and in the younger age of the women participating in this trial 60. One 
study 40 reported no effect of the estrogen patch on the four clotting indices previously shown to be 
altered by oral contraceptive use 52;61;62 . Additionally, case-control studies 63;64  observed that an 
increased risk of venous thromboembolism was associated with oral but not transdermal estrogen compared with nonusers (odds ratios = .42 [95% CI, 1.5 to 11.6] and 0.9 [95% CI, 0.4 to 2.1] respectively).  Blood pressure, on average, appears to be unaffected by estrogen replacement 
therapy, although both increases and decreases have been reported. Post-menopausal estrogen therapy has been observed to increase the relative risk of cardiovascular disease in some 
57;65;66 but 
not all studies 67-69. Indeed recent analyses of the Women’s Health Initiative demonstrate that the 
adverse effects of estrogen therapy on cardiovascular outcomes were largely confined to older women compared with younger perimenopausal women 
70-78. High doses of oral estrogens have 
been reported to elevate hepatocellular enzyme levels and, less commonly, cause cholestatic jaundice.  The risk for gall stones and hepatocellular  adenomas  has been  reported  to be increased  in 
association with oral contraceptive use, and although uncommon these complications may also occur with the use of replacement doses of estrogen 
79-81. Further, most studies have suggested an 
increased relative risk of breast cancer after four or five years of use70;82- 94, similar to the risk 
expected if the onset of menopause was delayed for a comparable length of time.  
Estrogens may precipitate migraine headaches, and depression has also been reported to 
occur  with the use of estrogens. In general,  considering the dose and duration of treatment  that we 
Page  45 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   propose to use in this protocol, the risk of developing such side effects is negligible. 
Due to the publicity surrounding the cancellation of the treatment arm of the Women’s Health 
Initiative  study 28;29  that involved the administration  of combined conjugated estrogens and 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (Prempro),  we will include the following statement  in the consent 
documents:  
Adverse Events Related  to Combined Hormone Replacement  and the Results  of the Women’s  
 
Health  Initiative  (WHI):  
 
The WHI study demonstrated that continuous administration of one form of estrogen (conjugated estrogens) in combination with one form of progesterone (medroxyprogesterone acetate) is associated with an increased risk of dementia, heart attacks, stroke, blood clots, and breast cancer. Estradiol, the form of estrogen that we use in the first three weeks of this study, is administered for a short time (three weeks) and as a sole agent (followed by one week’s administration of medroxyprogesterone acetate)  and, consequently, should not pose the increased  risks  observed with 
the chronic combination of the conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone administered in the WHI study. 
Estrogens may precipitate migraine headaches, and depression has also been reported to 
occur with the use of estrogens. In general, considering the dose and duration of treatment that we propose to use in this protocol, the risk of developing such side effects  is very small.  Also,  we have 
excluded any subjects with a history of mood worsening in association with ET. 
A skin rash at the site of patch placement is not uncommon and resolves usually with re- 
positioning of the skin patch.  Thus a skin rash from  the estradiol  patch  is an expected  adverse event 
that will be tracked and reported at the time of CR.  
Possible Risks related  to Estradiol withdrawal:  
 
Menstrual  bleeding, hot flushes, vaginal dryness, and changes  in mood may occur  after 
Page  46 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   estradiol withdrawal; otherwise there are no known medical risks associated with estradiol 
withdrawal.  
3. Progesterone and Synthetic Progestins (Provera)  
a. Side Effects  
 
Side effects reported in women taking progestins are uncommon but may include breakthrough bleeding, edema, change in weight (increase or decrease), cholestatic jaundice, rash (with  or 
without pruritus),  depression of mood, easy fatigue, lack of initiative,  and chloasma.  Since 
progestins are often used in women with antecedent menstrual irregularity, it is not clear whether the breakthrough bleeding represents an effect of the medication or refractoriness to treatment. In 
the large majority of patients, menstruation occurs predictably following withdrawal of progestins. Finally, one investigation observed no differences in reports of physical or emotional symptoms between  medroxyprogesterone acetate and placebo  when  they were  added  to ET under double  blind 
crossover conditions 
95. Similarly, in protocol #90 -M-0077 we did not observe significant mood 
changes  during the addition of Provera  to ET 7. Side effects observed in patients receiving 
combined oral contraceptives include nausea, breast soreness, vaginal discharge, fluid retention, hypertension, and clotting abnormalities, which have been associated with the estrogen component of the oral contraceptive. Thromboembolic disorders including thrombophlebitis, pulmonary embolism, and cerebral and coronary thrombosis appear to occur with greater frequency in women taking oral contraceptives. While the increased incidence of these disorders has been associated 
with the estrogen component of the oral contraceptives, it is now believed  that the progestin  
component may,  to a lesser  extent,  contribute to the increased risk. There are relatively few reports 
associating oral contraceptives with the development of carcinomas (vaginal, uterine, hepatic, and mammary) despite the vast use of these agents, although this may reflect the latent period needed for cellular transformatio n. Finally,  several  reports  suggest an association  between  intrauterine  
Page  47 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   exposure to female sex hormones and congenital anomalies. 
Summary  of potential adverse effects  of the medications  to be administered  in this study in 
order of severity and timeliness of reporting to clinic staff: 
• Cough with or without blood, sudden chest  pain,  shortness of breath 
consistent with a pulmonary embolism 
• Calf pain, consistent with  venous thromboembolism (e.g., DVT)  
 
• Increased  risk for stroke, worsening of atherosclerosis  
 
• Headache  
 
• Nausea,  weight loss, or vomiting  
 
• High  blood pressure  
 
• EKG abnormalities  including QTc prolongation  
 
• Breast  tenderness or Gynecomastia  
 
• Chloasma,  spotty darkening of the skin (mostly  of the face)  
 
• Fluid  retention  
 
• An increase in calculated  LDL  concentration  without a change in the LDL 
particle number or size  
• Gastrointestinal disorders (such  as constipation, diarrhea,  nausea,  dry mouth, 
and flatulence)  
• Depression  
 
• Nasopharyngitis  
 
• Vaginal  bleeding  
 
• Back  pain 
• Dizziness  
 
• Fatigue  
Page  48 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)    
b. Symptom Provocation  
 
Some women  may experience a recurrence of their previous depressive symptoms during 
the estradiol withdrawal phase.  These symptoms are likely to be similar in severity to those 
experienced  prior to study entry. However,  if symptoms are intolerable  we will discontinue their 
participation in the study and provide guidance for symptom remediation as described above. 
c. Blood Drawing  
 
Total research blood withdrawal during this seven-week study is 380 mls and falls within 
NIH guidelines (550 ml. per eight week  period).  Fifty  ml’s  of research  blood will be drawn  at each 
of seven clinic visits in this protocol (total = 350ml).  One potential discomfort of this study may 
result from the venipuncture and multiple blood sampling. A one-time blood draw of 30ml will be drawn for genetics.  
d. Rating scales  
 
e. Vaginal  Ultrasound  
 
Any abnormality identified by transvaginal ultrasound will be further investigated by the 
consultant gynecologist. If any woman experiences marked discomfort during the insertion of the ultrasound probe the procedure will be discontinued. Otherwise,  there are no additional associated 
risks or discomforts with the transvaginal ultrasound. f. Data Sharing  
 
Under some circumstances,  it can be a risk for information  about an individual to be known. 
However , all research records containing any subject- identifying information will be stored 
under lock and key, or in secured computing environments by the CTDB. With these safeguards 
in place, we are confident data sharing  is virtually without risk to subjects; however, subjects will 
be informed that risks of sharing data may include possibility of reidentification. 
Page  49 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)    
8. Subject  Safety  Monitoring  
Subjects are evaluated by one of the Associate Investigators or the PI.  Overall participant 
safety  will be monitored by the PI. During weekly clinic visits all women will have blood pressure, 
pulse, and weight measured and will be assessed for any side effects to the prescribed medications 
(including specific evaluations  of any complaints  of calf pain or other symptoms and signs of blood 
clots in the legs). After completing the study (including the one month follow-up evaluation in every woman), participants will either be discharged from this protocol with a referral to the community, or will be referred to other NIMH studies. 
Patients  will be instructed  not to become pregnant during the study and sexually  active 
women will be required to employ barrier contraceptive methods. 
The Investigators will consult with the Independent Medical  Monitor, the NIMH  Office  of 
the Clinical Director and the Human Subjects Protection Unit (HSPU) team throughout study participation around issues of participant safety. Participants will be assessed for adverse 
experiences by the investigator. The reasons for study withdrawal include: 
a. Clinically  significant abnormal  lab values  or adverse events  inconsistent with continuation 
in the protocol. 
b. Clinical judgment of the investigator, the multidisciplinary team, or Independent Medical 
Monitor. The multidisciplinary  team  will meet  throughout the week  to coordinate treatment  efforts, 
monitor the progress/safety of the patient  and determine  whether  further  participation  would put the 
patient’s safety at risk.  The multidisciplinary team will make regular (i.e., every 3 weeks) on the 
clinical status of the participant to the Independent Medical Monitor. If the participant 
demonstrates clinical worsening (whether through clinical observation or scores on the CGI), the Independent Medical Monitor may recommend that the participant be withdrawn from protocol. Other  members  of the multidisciplinary  team  also reserve the right to discontinue a participant  from 
Page  50 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   further participation for any reason. 
c. Withdrawal  of consent and/or patient decision  to terminate.  
 
d. Unable to tolerate  the study medication,  e.g., severe breast  pain, severe  headaches  or nausea, 
disabling mood symptoms. Any patient experiencing clinically significant side- effects such as 
severe breast pain, severe headaches, nausea, hypertension, vomiting, extreme fluid retention, disabling mood symptoms, thrombotic conditions or extensive chloasma will discontinue  taking the 
study drug. If the study drug is discontinued, patients continued involvement with our clinic will not be jeopardized; they can still receive care to ensure a safe discontinuation from the study. 
While it is not anticipated, any subject who becomes acutely suicidal or whose depression becomes  
incapacitating  (inability  to perform  previously managed  daily  vocational or home- related activities; 
self report of increased and overwhelming distress) during the course of this study will, after 
careful evaluation, have their customary schedule of hormone therapy resumed (if they were taking 
hormone therapy prior to the study), their participation in the protocol terminated, and if  necessary,  
their care transferred  to an appropriate outpatient or inpatient psychiatric  facility.  Any adverse 
events will be reported as per NIH policy (See Appendix A). NIH will not be able to pay for outside hospitalization.  
9. O
utcome Measures  
a. Primary  outcome measures  
 
Outcome measures will include standardized mood and behavioral rating scales.  The main 
comparisons in this study will be between the selective estrogen receptor beta agonist LY500307 and placebo  in women  with a past history of perimenopause- related  depression. Outcome measures 
will include the following: Primary outcome measures:  self ratings - the Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies- Depression Scale (CES -D) 
47; observer ratings - the 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale of 
Depression (HRSD) 48. 
Page  51 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   b. Secondary  outcome measures:  the daily  symptom rating  form  (DRF)  consisting of a 
14 item six point likert- type scale 49 measuring the severity of several mood and behavior 
symptoms including hot flushes; the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) 50; and a visual analogue 
scale (VAS)  measuring  the reported  severity  of 13 mood and behavioral symptoms during the week 
prior to completion. Additionally, the relative impacts of LY500307 on ER alpha versus ER beta 
activity will be assessed by plasma LH, FSH, prolactin, and lipid levels, and endometrial thickness as measured by vaginal ultrasound. Finally, w e plan to generate patient -derived LCLs and IPSCs 
from the women participating in this protocol to investigate both intrinsic cellular differences between women with PMD and controls as well as examining the effects of estradiol withdra wal 
with and without invitro exposures to an ER beta agonist. 
10. S
tatistical  Analysis  
a. Analysis of data/study outcomes  
 
The double blind will be broken and the randomization status  of each participant will be revealed 
only after the completion of this study in all 45 women. Interim blinded analyses will be performed episodically (for example prior to the PI’s Board of Scientific Counsellors) to inform ongoing scientific efforts and productivity of the Branch; however, these interim analyses will not serve as the basis  for decisions to change study procedures or to terminate  the study. Both 
study outcome measures and safety assessments will be reviewed by the DSMB. We will first test for significant differences in mood symptoms arising during the double blind (DB) conditions compared  with the open label  (OL) ET (baseline)  conditions in each of the three 
groups (i.e., women with past PMD randomized to DB LY500307 [25mg or 75mg] or placebo). Second, we will compare  symptom ratings during DB treatment  conditions across  randomization 
groups (i.e., women with past PMD who were randomized to either DB LY500307 or placebo). 
We will obtain six repeated measures on the same woman during two phases: baseline OL 
Page  52 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   ET (three weekly measures) and DB treatment (three weekly measures).  Analyses will be 
performed  with SAS Version  9.2 software  (SAS  Institute,  Inc, Cary,  NC),  using PROC  MIXED 
(for mixed models). For each symptom rating and blood hormone level, the predictor variables 
of interest, DB treatment (placebo or LY500307), will be modeled as fixed effects. The 
covariance pattern across time will be structured as first- order autoregressive.  We will use the 
Kenward -Roger method for computing the degrees of freedom for tests of fixed effects.  
For each of the symptom outcomes, we will perform analyses to explore the effect of DB 
medication in the two treatment groups. We will first examine if symptoms changed from 
baseline (i.e., OL ET [weeks  1-3 of the trial]) to DB treatment  phase (i.e., weeks  4-6 of the 
trial) in any of the three randomization groups (as described above). For the second analysis, 
if necessary, we will include the mean of the baseline (OL ET) symptom measure (for each symptom) as a covariate and compare differences in symptom ratings across each of the three randomization groups to test for effects of DB tre atment.  Plasma levels of estradiol, estrone, 
prolactin, LH and FSH during DB treatment  also will be analyzed  across  randomization 
groups. For all analyses the value of the estimator (“least square means” in SAS terminology) and associated standard  error of the estimator and  p values will  be reported. The p values will 
be adjusted  for multiple  comparisons (k=3 -6) by the Bonferroni method, and two-sided  P < 
0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
Clinical characteristics (tables 1 -3) in women with past PMD will be compared to ensure 
similarity across groups and include the following measures: age, BMI, menstrual bleeding, weekly  average hot- flush  severity  scores  > 2 (minimal severity),  CES-D scores  > 16 (consistent 
with clinically significant depressive symptoms of at least moderate severity 
1;96), and CES- D 
scores >8 and <16 (consistent with subsyndromal depression 97-99). We will employ Fisher’s 
exact test for categorical variables and Student’s t -tests for continuous variables. 
Page  53 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   b. Power  analysis  
 
Based on the results of protocol 03-M-0175 12 and with standardized differences of .6 to .7 (and 
consistent with  a prior meta -analysis  of estrogen’s effects  on depressed  mood 100), 10 -15 women 
will be required in each of the three treatment cells to achieve a power of 80% with an α = 0.05 
to detect a significant difference between LY500307 and placebo with analyses of variance with repeated measures and Bonferroni t -tests in the principal outcome measures of HRSD and CES- 
D scales 
101. We intend to recruit  up to 80 women for this trial through this protocol. Dropouts 
will be replaced. Since LY500307 has never been administered to women, there is no data available to estimate the sample size needed to evaluate safety measures. Safety measures (unblinded) including symptom inventories, clinical  evaluations, laboratory  results,  and results  of 
EKG of all women participating in this study will be reviewed by the DSMB. 
11. H
uman  Subjects  Protection  
Subject  selection:  
a. Subject selection will be equitable.  All subjects must meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
listed in Section 4.  We will select physically healthy adult female individuals.  The proportion of 
ethnic minorities (vs. Caucasians) in the total sample will be approximately consistent with the overall U.S. population proportions. The specified age range for participants in this study (i.e., ages 45 – 65 years) was selected to match the sample selection criteria we previously employed in 
protocol 03-M-0175. The lower  age limit was to avoid enrolling women  with early  menopause prior 
to age 45 and the upper age limit would restrict participants to those who had menopause by age 55 (and therefore not women who had menopause after age 55 years). Thus we wish to study women who experienced menopause within the more normal range between ages 45 and 55 years. b. Justification  for exclusion  of children:  
 
We will exclude children  or minors because the study population is women  with past 
Page  54 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   perimenopausal depression. 
c. Justification  for exclusion  of vulnerable subjects:  
 
Those without consent capacity  are excluded  because the research  question can  be answered  by 
enrolling only adults who can provide their own consent and there is no direct benefit for these participants.  Therefore, the risks outweigh the benefits for this population. 
Since this study is more  than minimal risk, and there  is no safety  data from  non-pregnant women, 
pregnant women will be excluded from this study. Men will also be excluded because the study population is women with past perimenopausal depression. 
Justification of sensitive procedures: Depressive symptoms will be provoked to see if the study 
drug is effective. Any subject who becomes acutely suicidal or whose depression becomes incapacitating (inability to perform previously managed daily vocational or home- related activities; 
self report  of increased  and overwhelming distress)  during the course of this study will, after careful  
evaluation, have their customary schedule of hormone therapy resumed (if they were taking hormone therapy  prior to the study), their participation  in the protocol terminated,  and if necessary, 
their care transferred to an appropriate outpatient or inpatient psychiatric facility.  Any adverse 
events will be reported as per NIH policy (See Appendix A). d. Safeguards  for vulnerable populations:  
 
Pregnancy  testing  will be required  prior to study entry  and in sexually  active women  barrier 
contraceptive use will be required during this study. The enrollment of NIH employees will be in accordance with NIH policy 404 titled “Research Involving NIH Staff as Subjects”. Employees wishing to participate will be given the “NIH Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for Staff Who are Considering Participation in NIH Research”. Every effort will be made to protect participant information but such information may be available in medical records and may be available to authorized users outside of the study team 
Page  55 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   in both an identifiable and unidentifiable manner.  
12. A nticipated  Benefits  
There are no direct  benefits  of participating  in this study. We hope that the results  of the study 
will help us better understand perimenopause-related depression, which may help others in the 
future.  
Overall  risk and benefit  consideration:  
 
The overall  risks  for this study are more  than minimal; the risks  are reasonable in relation  to 
anticipated benefit.  
13. C onsent  Documentation and Process  
a. Designation of those obtaining consent  
 
Study investigators designated as able to obtain consent will obtain informed consent. All study 
investigators obtaining informed  consent have completed  the NIMH HSPU ‘Elements of Successful 
Informed Consent’ training. 
b. Consent procedures  
 
 
The informed consent document will be provided as a physical or electronic document to the 
participant or consent designee as applicable for review prior to consenting. A designated study investigator will carefully explain the procedures and tests involved in this study, and the associated risks, discomfort, and benefits. To minimize potential coercion, as much time as is needed to review the document will be given, including an opportunity to discuss it with friends, family members and/or other advisors, and to ask questions of any designated study investigator. A signed informed consent document will be obtained prior to any research activities taking place. 
 The initial consent process as well as re -consent, when required, may take place in person or 
Page  56 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   remotely (e.g., via telephone or other NIH approved remote platforms used in compliance with 
policy, including HRPP Policy 303) per discretion of the designated study investigator and with the agreement of the participant/consent designee(s). Whether in person or remote, the privacy of the subject will be maintained. Consenting investigators (and participant/consent designee, when in person) will be located in a private area (e.g., clinic consult room). When consent is conducted remotely, the participant/co nsent designee will be informed of the private nature of the discussion 
and will be encouraged to relocate to a more private setting if needed. If the consent process is occurring remotely, participants and investigators will view individual copies of the approved consent document on either on paper or on screens at their respective locations; the same screen or paper document may be used when both the investigator and the participant are co-located but this is not required. When required, the witness signa ture will be obtained similarly as described for the 
investigator and participant below. 
 Consent will be documented with required signatures on the physical document (which 
includes the printout of an electronic document sent to the participant) or on the electronic document. The process for documenting signatures on an electronic document is described below. 
 When a hand signature on an electronic document is used for the documentation of consent, 
this study will use the iMedConsent platform (which is 21 CFR Part 11 compliant) or the Adobe Acrobat platform (which is not 21 CFR Part 11 compliant). 
 Both the investigator and the participant will physically sign the paper document, or sign the 
electronic document using a finger, stylus, or mouse. Electronic signatures (i.e., the “signature” and a timestamp are digitally generated) will not be used. A record  of the communication of this 
Page  57 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   information  and of the consent to participate in this study will be placed in the medical record. The 
right of the subjects to withdraw from the study or to refuse any procedure will be made clear.  Any 
patient whose symptoms become excessive during this study will be offered another medication 
without completing the seven- week trial.  Confidentiality of patients will be assured according to 
the laws of the federal Privacy Act . In case of published data resulting from the study, care will be 
taken to protect the anonymity of patients. 
c. Consent documents  
 
The Patient consent and the Genetics consent forms contain all required elements.  All women 
enrolled in this study will first sign the Patient consent. Additionally, blood samples for 
lymphoblastoid cell lines  and induced- pluripotent cell lines will be obtained with a separate Genetics 
consent form from  this protocol.   
d. Considerations for Consent of NIH staff or family members of study team members: 
Consent for NIH staff will be obtained as detailed above with following additional protections: 
Consent from staff members will be obtained by an individual independent of the staff member’s team whenever  possible. Otherwise, the consent procedure will be independently monitored by the 
CC Department of Bioethics Consultation Service in order to minimize the risk of undue 
pressure 
on the staff member . 
e. Request for Waiver of Consent for Pre -Screening Activities: 
Prior to the subject signing the consent for this study, pre -screening activities listed in the 
screening section may be performed. We request a waiver of consent for these activities as they involve only minimal risk to the subjects.  A waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects given that the activities are only intended to determine suitability for screening for participation in research protocols.  These activities could not practicably be carried out without the waiver as central recruiting services, utilized in the NIH Clinical Center, perform pre -screening 
Page  58 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   activities for multiple studies and obtaining consent for each one is beyond their resources.  The 
subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation as they will be informed whether or not they are eligible to sign a consent for additional screening
. 
 
14. Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
a. Data and safety  monitor:  
 
The protocol will be monitored by the NIMH -IRP Data and Safety  Monitoring Board  (DSMB).  The 
NIMH -IRP DSMB SOP and membership is on file with the IRB. 
 
b. Data and safety  monitoring plan:  
 
This study will be reviewed by the NIMH DSMB prior to implementation and at least twice annually. Additional reviews may be scheduled at the discretion of the DSMB. The DSMB will review  study accrual  and progress, adverse events  related  to the study and safety  and outcome data 
as well as other study specific data elements at their request.  The medically responsible 
investigator has the authority to break the blind in the event of an emergency. Breaking of the blind, life threatening injury or death all require immediate reporting to the DSMB and the NIMH Clinical Director. A written notification to the DSMB chair must follow within 7 days.  Results of 
the DSMB review are provided to the PI, the Clinical Director and the IRB.  
The PI is responsible for participants  in this protocol and will report  all serious adverse events  to 
the NIMH Clinical Director and the IRB within the guidelines set by the standards for clinical research within the NIH intramural research program.  
As part of the Clinical Operations Committee, the Principal Investigator (PI) and Associate  
Investigators will discuss subjects’  participation  during weekly  rounds and will review  all data and 
procedures. During weekly clinic visits all women will also have blood pressure, pulse, and weight measured and will be assessed for any side effects to the prescribed medications (including specific 
Page  59 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   evaluations of any complaints  of calf pain or other symptoms and signs  of blood clots in the legs). 
The PI will be ultimately responsible for monitoring the data and safety and will provide 
continuous, close monitoring of adverse events. A yearly summary of adverse event data will be 
reported to the NIH IRB and  the external Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). 
c. Criteria  for stopping the study or suspending enrollment or procedures:  
 
In the event  of unanticipated problems or serious side effects,  the PI will consider  whether  the study 
should continue. The DSMB will have the authority to require changes in the study design, or to stop all or part of any study based  on accumulating  safety  data.  Any changes  required  as conditions for resuming the 
research must be submitted as an amendment and IRB-approved before the changes can be implemented.  
15. Qu
ality Assurance  
a. Quality  assurance monitor  
 
Quality  assurance will be monitored by the PI, the research  team  and the NIMH  Office  of 
Regulatory Oversight (ORO). b. Quality  assurance  plan 
 
ORO monitors intramural research studies to ensure compliance with GCP, organizational 
policies  and regulations. Audit frequency  is determined  by the ORO SOP based  on the study level 
of risk.  Results of ORO audits are provided to the PI, The Clinical Director and the CIRB. As an 
IND study, this protocol will be subject to GCP audits at study initiation and after the first enrolled subject.  Timing  of subsequent review  will be established  by the ORO but no less frequent than 
every year.  
16. R
eporting  of Unanticipated problems,  adverse events  and protocol deviations  
Reportable events  for this  protocol will be tracked  and reported  in compliance with  Policy  
 
Page  60 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   801. 
 
a. For Drugs and Biologics  
 
The PI and the IND  Sponsor for this study, will report  SAEs  according  to the requirements of 21 
CFR 312.64(b). The PI and Sponsor will record nonserious AEs. 
17. A lternatives  to Participation  
Subjects  either  do not receive any treatment  in this study or forego  treatment  in order to 
participate in this study.  The alternative, therefore, is not to participate.  
18. P rivacy  
All research  activities  will be conducted in  as private a setting  as possible.  
 
19. Confidentiality  
a. For research  data and  investigator  medical records  
 
Data will be stored  using codes  that we assign. Data  will be kept in password- protected  computers. 
Only study investigators will have access to the data. 
No sensitive  information  is collected,  so employee information  will be treated  the same as all other 
participants.  
b. For stored  samples  
 
Samples  will be stored  using codes  that we assign. Samples  will be kept in locked  storage.  Only 
study investigators will have access to the samples.  
c. Special  precautions 
Not applicable.  
20. C onflict  of Interest  
a. Distribution  of NIH guidelines  
 
NIH guidelines on conflict of interest have been  distributed  to all investigators.  
 
There are no conflicts -of-interest  to report.  Non-NIH investigators will abide by the conflict -of- 
interest policies of their own Institutions.  
Page  61 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   b. Conflict of interest: There are no conflicts to report.  
 
c. Role of a commercial  company: Eli Lilly  will provide suitable  amounts of LY500307 to the NIH 
Pharmacy which will be provided to the contract manufacturing organization (CMO) (i.e., Pine 
Pharmaceuticals)  where  quality  assurance tests will be performed  and appropriately dosed capsules 
will be formulated. A contract for manufacturing and a quality agreement are being initiated between NIMH and the CMO.  
21.  T
echnology Transfer approval from Lilly  
 
In addition to drug substance, Eli Lilly and Company provided the NIH with access to the information in the existing IND (IND - 100,916 for LY500307 study I1A -MC-E001 (ER beta 
agonist) including information on formulation  development  and drug product stability.  The Clinical 
Trial Agreement number is 2015-0279. There is no expiration date. 
21. R
eimbursement  and Travel  Compensation  
Reimbursement  of travel  and subsistence will be offered  consistent with NIH guidelines. 
Each volunteer will be compensated according to the following schedule: 
 
Screening Procedures:  
Initial evaluation, physical exam (2 hours)  30.00 
Venipuncture $20 X 3 60.00 
Completion of symptom ratings $10 X 3 30.00 
ER beta trial:   
Venipuncture $20 X 8 160.00 
Genetics Bloods  60.00 
Clinic visits (weekly) $20 X 8  160.00 
Completion of symptom ratings $10 X 8 80.00 
Transvaginal ultrasound $100 X 2  200.00 
Page  62 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Investigational drugs:  
Estradiol Patch $ 30 X 2  60.00 
LY500307 (or placebo) 21 doses 150.00 
Provera  30.00   
Total $1020.00  
 
 
Compensation will be prorated  for parts  completed  if subjects  do not complete  the study. No escort 
fee will be provided.  
Employees and staff who participate during work hours must have permission from their supervisor. NIH employees must either  participate  outside of work  hours or take leave  in order to 
receive compensation.  
Page  63 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Flow  Sheet   
Protocol Schematic  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
+PMD  
  
 
   
 
Baseline W0 W3 W6 W7 
  
 
+PMD = Asymptomatic Postmenopausal  Women with 
past perimenopause -related 
depression  -Estradiol  100 μg/day  (skin patch)  
-Placebo (PO) 
-LY500307  25 mg or 75 mg daily (PO) 
-Provera  5 mg daily (PO) 

Page  64 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   22. References  
 
1. Freeman  EW, Sammel  MD, Liu L, et al. Hormones and menopausal status  as predictors  of 
depression in women in transition to menopause. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004;61: 62-70 
 
2. Cohen LS, Soares  CN, Vitonis  AF, et al. Risk for  new onset  of depression during the 
menopausal transition.  The Harvard  study of moods and cycles.  Arch  Gen  Psychiatry 
2006;63: 385-390 
 
3. Freeman  EW, Sammel  MD, Lin H, et al. Associations of hormones and menopausal status 
with depressed mood in women with no history of depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
2006;63: 375-382 
 
4. Freeman  EW, Sammel  MD, Boorman DW,  et al. The longitudinal pattern  of depressive 
symptoms around natural menopause. 2013: 
 
5. Bromberger JT, Kravitz HM, Chang Y-F, et al. Major depression during and after the menopausal transition: study of women's health  across  the nation (SWAN).  Psychol Med 
2011;41: 1879-1888 
 
6. Wassertheil -Smoller S, Shumaker S, Ockene J, et al. Depression and cardiovascular 
sequelae in postmenopausal women. The Women's  Health  Initiative  (WHI).  Arch  Intern 
Med 2004;164: 289-298 
 
7. Schmidt PJ, Nieman  L, Danaceau  MA, et al. Estrogen  replacement  in perimenopause- 
related depression: a preliminary report. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183: 414-420 
Page  65 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   8. Soares  CN, Almeida  OP, Joffe  H, et al. Efficacy  of estradiol  for the treatment of depressive 
disorders in perimenopausal women: a double-blind, randomized, placebo- controlled trial. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2001;58: 529-534 
 
9. Ockene  JK, Barad  DH, Cochrane BB, et al. Symptom experience after discontinuing use of 
estrogen plus progestin. J A M A 2005;294: 183-193 
 
10. Grady  D, Ettinger  B, Tosteson ANA,  et al. Predictors  of difficulty  when  discontinuing 
postmenopausal hormone therapy. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102: 1233-1239 
 
11. Ness  J, Aronow WS, Beck  G. Menopausal symptoms  after cessation  of hormone 
replacement therapy. Maturitas 2006;53: 356-361 
 
12. Schmidt PJ, Ben Dor R, Martinez PE, et al. Effects  of Estradiol Withdrawal  on Mood in 
Women With Past Perimenopausal Depression: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 
Psychiatry 2015;72: 714-726 
 
13. Rocha BA, Fleischer R, Schaeffer JM, et al. 17 β -estradiol -induced antidepressant -like 
effect  in the forced  swim  test is absent  in estrogen  receptor -β knockout (BERKO)  mice. 
Psychopharmacology 2005;179: 637-643 
 
14. Walf  AA, Rhodes ME, Frye CA. Antidepressant effects  of ERβ-selective estrogen receptor 
modulators in the forced swim test. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2004;78: 523-529 
 
15. Suzuki H, Barros RPA, Sugiyama N, et al. Involvement of estrogen receptor β  in 
maintenance  of serotonergic neurons of the dorsal raphe.  Mol Psychiatry  2013;18: 674-680 
Page  66 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   16. Benmansour S, Weaver  RS, Barton  AK, et al. Comparison of the effects  of estradiol  and 
progesterone on serotonergic function. Biol Psychiatry 2012;71: 633-641 
 
17. Lund TD, Rovis T, Chung WCJ,  et al. Novel actions  of estrogen  receptor -β on anxiety - 
related behaviors. Endocrinology 2005;146: 797-807 
 
18. Walf  AA, Frye CA. ERbeta- selective  estrogen  receptor modulators produce antianxiety 
behavior when administered systemically to ovariectomized rats. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 2005;30: 1598-1609 
 
19. Oyola MG, Portillo  W, Reyna A, et al. Anxiolytic effects  and neuroanatomical  targets  of 
estrogen receptor- β (ERβ) activation by a selective ER β agonist in female mice. 
Endocrinology 2012;153: 837-846 
 
20. McIntyre RS, Konarski JZ, Grigoriadis S, et al. Hormone replacement therapy and antidepressant  prescription  patterns:  a reciprocal  relationship. Can Med Assoc  J 2005;172: 
57-59 
 
21. Citarella  A, Andersen M, Sundstrom A, et al. Initiating  therapy  with antidepressants after 
discontinuation of hormone therapy. Menopause 2013;20: 146-151 
 
22. Joffe  H. Antidepressant use after discontinuation of hormone therapy: what  can one infer 
about post-hormone therapy depression? Editorial. Menopause 2013;20: 123-125 
 
23. Bromberger JT, Matthews KA, Schott LL, et al. Depressive symptoms during the menopausal transition: the study of women's health  across  the nation (SWAN).  J Affective 
Disord 2007;103: 267-272 
Page  67 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   24. Daly  RC, Danaceau  MA, Rubinow DR, et al. Concordant restoration  of ovarian  function 
and mood in perimenopausal depression. Am J Psychiatry 2003;160: 1842-1846 
 
25. Joffe  H, Petrillo  LF, Koukopoulos A, et al. Increased  estradiol  and improved sleep,  but not 
hot flashes, predict enhanced mood during the menopausal transition. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2011;96: E1044-E1954 
 
26. Schmidt PJ, Nieman  LK, Danaceau  MA, et al. Differential  behavioral  effects  of gonadal 
steroids in women with and in those without premenstrual syndrome. N Engl J Med 1998;338: 209-216 
 
27. Bloch  M, Schmidt PJ, Danaceau  M, et al. Effects  of gonadal steroids in women  with a 
history of postpartum depression. Am J Psychiatry 2000;157: 924-930 
 
28. Writing  Group for the Women's Health  Initiative  Investigators. Risks and benefits  of 
estrogen  plus progestin in  healthy  postmenopausal women: principal results  from  the 
Women's Health Initiative randomized controlled trial. J A M A 2002;288: 321-333 
 
29. Shumaker SA, Legault C, Rapp SR, et al. Estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of dementia  and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: the Women's  Health 
Initiative Memory Study: a randomized controlled trial. J A M A 2003;289: 2651-2662 
 
30. Arevalo  MA, Azcoitia  I, Garcia -Segura LM. The neuroprotective actions of oestradiol and 
oestrogen receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 2015;16: 17-29 
 
31. Rissman EF. Roles of oestrogen receptors alpha and beta in behavioural neuroendocrinology: beyond Yin/Yang. J Neuroendocrinol 2008;20: 873-879 
Page  68 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   32. Singh SP, Wolfe A, Ng Y, et al. Impaired  estrogen feedback  and infertility  in female mice 
with pituitary -specific deletion of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1). Biol Reprod 2009;81: 
488-496 
 
33. Yeo SH, Herbison AE. Estrogen- negative feedback and estrous cyclicity are critically 
dependent upon estrogen  receptor -alpha expression in the arcuate nucleus of adult female 
mice. Endocrinology 2014;155: 2986-2995 
 
34. Hamilton  KJ, Arao  Y, Korach  KS. Estrogen hormone physiology: reproductive findings 
from estrogen receptor mutant mice. Reprod Biol 2014;14: 3-8 
 
35. Avtanski D, Novaira HJ, Wu S, et al. Both estrogen  receptor  alpha and beta stimulate 
pituitary GH gene expression. Mol Endocrinol 2014;28: 40-52 
 
36. Kansra  S, Yamagata S, Sneade L, et al. Differential effects  of estrogen  receptor  antagonists 
on pituitary lactotroph proliferation and prolactin release. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2005;239: 
27-36 
 
37. Cedars  MI, Judd HL. Nonoral routes of estrogen  administration.  Obstet  Gynecol  Clin North 
Am 1987;14: 269-298 
 
38. Setnikar I, Rovati LC, Vens -Cappell B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of estradiol and of estrone 
during repeated  transdermal  or oral  administration  of estradiol.  Arzneim  -Forsch  Drug  Res 
1996;46: 766-773 
Page  69 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   39. Powers MS, Schenkel L, Darley PE, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
transdermal  doseage forms  of 17 B estradiol: comparison  with conventional oral estrogens 
used for hormone replacement. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;152: 1099-1106 
 
40. Chetkowski RJ, Meldrum  DR, Steingold KA, et al. Biological effects  of transdermal 
estradiol. N Engl J Med 1986;314: 1615-1620 
 
41. Laufer  LR, DeFazio  JL, Lu JKH,  et al. Estrogen replacement  therapy  by transdermal 
estradiol administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;145: 533-538 
 
42. Steingold KA, Laufer  L, Chetkowski RJ, et al. Treatment  of hot flashes  with transdermal 
estradiol administration. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1985;61: 627-632 
 
43. Laragh  JH, Sealey  JE, Ledingham JGG,  et al. Oral contraceptives.  Renin, aldosterone, and 
high blood pressure. J A M A 1967;201: 918-922 
 
44. Crane MG, Harris  JJ, Winsor W. Hypertension oral contraceptive agents  and conjugated 
estrogens. Ann Intern Med 1971;74: 13-21 
 
45. Casper  RF, Powell  A-M. Premenstrual  syndrome: documentation by a linear  analog  scale 
compared with two descriptive scales. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;155: 862-867 
 
46. Sulak PJ. Endometrial cancer and hormone replacement therapy: appropriate use of progestins to oppose endogenous and exogenous estrogen. Endocrinol Metab  Clin North 
Am 1997;26: 399-412 
 
47. Radloff LS. The CES-D scale:  a self-report  depression scale for research  in the general 
population. Appl Psychol Meas 1977;1: 385-401 
Page  70 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   48. Hamilton  M. A rating  scale for depression. J Neurol  Neurosurg Psychiatry  1960;23: 56- 62 
 
49. Endicott J, Nee J, Cohen J,  et al. Premenstrual  changes: patterns  and correlates  of daily 
ratings. J Affective Disord 1986;10: 127-135 
 
50. Beck  AT, Ward  CH, Mendelson M, et al. An inventory for measuring  depression. Arch  Gen 
Psychiatry 1961;4: 561-571 
 
51. Gambrell  RD. The role of  hormones in the etiology  and prevention of endometrial cancer.  
 
Clin Obstet  Gynecol 1986;13: 695- 723 
 
52. Nieman  LK, Loriaux DL. Estrogens and progestins. In: Reynard A, Smith  C, eds. Textbook 
of pharmacology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company; 1992:695-716 
 
53. Gutthann SP, Rodriguez LG, Castellsague J, et al. Hormone replacement  therapy  and risk of 
venous thromboembolism: population based case-control study. Br Med J 1997;314: 796- 
800 
 
54. Jick H, Derby LE, Myers MW, et al. Risk of hospital admission for idopathic venous thromboembolism among  users  of postmenopausal oestrogens. Lancet  1996;348: 981-983 
 
55. Daly  E, Vessey  MP, Hawkins MM,  et al. Risk of venous thromboembolism in users  of 
hormone replacement therapy. Lancet 1996;348: 977-980 
 
56. Grodstein F, Stampfer  MJ, Goldhaber SZ, et al. Prospective study of exogenous hormones 
and risk of pulmonary embolism in women. Lancet 1996;348: 983-987 
Page  71 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   57. Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, et al. Postmenopausal estrogen therapy and 
cardiovascular  disease:  ten-year follow-up from  the Nurses'  Health  Study. N Engl J Med 
1991;325: 756-762 
 
58. Vickers  MR, MacLennan  AH,  Lawton  B, et al. Main  morbidities  recorded  in the women's 
international study of long duration oestrogen  after menopause (WISDOM):  a randomised 
controlled trial of hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women. Br Med J 2007;335: 239-250 
 
59. Grodstein F, Manson JE, Stampfer  MJ, et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy and stroke: 
role of time since menopause and age at initiation of hormone therapy. Arch Intern Med 2008;168: 861-866 
 
60. Canonico M, Plu-Bureau G, Lowe GDO, et al. Hormone replacement therapy and risk of venous thromboembolism in postmenopausal women: systematic  review  and meta -analysis. 
Br Med J 2008;336: 1227-1231 
 
61. Mandel  FP, Geola  FL, Meldrum DR, et al. Biological effects  of various doses of vaginally 
administered conjugated equine estrogens in postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1983;57: 133-139 
 
62. Melis  GB, Fruzzetti  F, Paoletti AM, et al. Fibrinopeptide A plasma levels  during low 
estrogen oral contraceptive treatment. Contraception 1983;30: 575-583 
 
63. Canonico M, Oger  E, Plu-Bureau  G, et al. Hormone therapy  and venous thromboembolism 
among postmenopausal women: impact of the route of estrogen administration and progestogens: the ESTHER study. Circulation 2007;115: 840-845 
Page  72 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   64. Olie V, Canonico M, Scarabin  P-Y. Postmenopausal hormone therapy  and venous 
thromboembolism. Thromb Res 2011;127 Suppl 3: S26-S29 
 
65. Hulley  S, Grady  D. Postmenopausal hormone treatment: Commentary. J A M A 2009;301: 
2493- 2495  
 
66. Barrett -Connor E, Bush TL. Estrogen and coronary  heart  disease  in women. J A M A 
1991;265: 1861-1867 
 
67. Lobo RA. Evaluation of cardiovascular event rates with hormone therapy in healthy, early 
postmenopausal women: results  from  2 large clinical trials.  Arch  Intern  Med 2004;164: 482- 
484 
 
68. Bush TL. Preserving  cardiovascular  benefits  of hormone replacement  therapy.  J Reprod 
Med 2000;45: 259-272 
 
69. Fitzpatrick  LA, Litin  SC, Bell MR. The women's health  initiative: a heart -to-HRT 
conversation. Mayo Clin Proc 2000;75: 559-561 
 
70. North American Menopause Society. Estrogen and progestogen use in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement  of The North  American  Menopause Society.  Menopause 
2010;17: 242-255 
 
71. Grodstein F, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ. Hormone therapy and coronary heart disease: the role of time since menopause and age at  hormone initiation.  J Womens  Health  2006;15: 35- 
44 
Page  73 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   72. Hsia J, Langer  RD, Manson JE, et al. Conjugated equine estrogens and coronary  heart 
disease: the women's health initiative. Arch Intern Med 2006;166: 357-365 
 
73. Clarkson TB. Estrogen effects  on arteries  vary with stage of reproductive life and extent  of 
subclinical atherosclerosis progression. Menopause 2007;14: 373-384 
 
74. Hodis HN, Mack  WJ. Postmenopausal hormone therapy  in clinical  perspective.  Menopause 
2007;14: 944-957 
 
75. Rossouw JE, Prentice RL, Manson JE, et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy and risk of 
cardiovascular disease by age and years since menopause. J A M  A 2007;297: 1465-1477 
 
76. Manson JE, Bassuk SS. Invited commentary: hormone therapy and risk of coronary heart 
disease - why renew  the focus on the early  years  of menopause? Am J Epidemiol 2007;166: 
511-517 
 
77. Manson JE, Allison  MA, Rossouw JE, et al. Estrogen therapy  and coronary -artery 
calcification. N Engl J Med 2007;356: 2591-2602 
 
78. Taylor HS, Manson JE. Update in hormone therapy use in menopause. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2011;96: 255-264 
 
79. Petitti DB, Sidney S, Perlman  JA. Increased  risk of cholecystectomy  in users  of 
supplemental estrogen. Gastroenterology 1988;94: 91-95 
 
80. Uhler  ML, Marks  JW, Judd HL. Estrogen replacement  therapy  and gallbladder disease in 
postmenopausal women. Menopause 2000;7: 162-167 
Page  74 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   81. Liu B, Beral V, Balkwill A, et al. Gallbladder disease and use of transdermal versus oral 
hormone replacement  therapy in postmenopausal women: prospective cohort study. Br Med 
J [ 2008;337: a386. Available at: http://www.bmj.com/cgi/reprint/337/jul10_2/a386. 
Accessed  Sep 24, 2009  
 
82. Wingo PA, Layde PM, Lee NC, et al. The risk of breast  cancer  in postmenopausal women 
who have used estrogen replacement therapy. J A M A 1987;257: 209-215 
 
83. Grady  D, Ernster V. Does  postmenopausal hormone therapy  cause breast  cancer? Am J 
Epidemiol 1991;134: 1396-1400 
 
84. Colditz  GA, Hankinson SE, Hunter DJ, et al. The use of estrogens and progestins and the 
risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med 1995;332: 1589-1593 
 
85. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors  in Breast  Cancer.  Breast  cancer  and hormone 
replacement  therapy: collaborative reanalysis  of data from  51 epidemiological studies of 
52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast cancer. Lancet 1997;350: 1047-1059 
 
86. Bergkvist L, Adami  HQ, Persson  I, et al. The risk of breast  cancer  after estrogen  and 
estrogen -progestin replacement. N Engl J Med 1989;321: 293-297 
 
87. Schairer  C, Lubin J, Troisi  R, et al. Menopausal  estrogen  and estrogen -progestin 
replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. J A M A 2000;283: 485-491 
 
88. Chen  WY,  Manson JE, Hankinson SE, et al. Unopposed estrogen  therapy and the risk of 
invasive breast cancer. Arch Intern Med 2006;166: 1027-1032 
Page  75 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   89. Stefanick ML,  Anderson GL, Margolis KL, et al. Effects of conjugated equine estrogens on 
breast  cancer  and mammography screening  in postmenopausal women  with  hysterectomy. J 
A M A 2006;295: 1647-1657 
 
90. Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al. Influence of estrogen plus progestin on 
breast  cancer  and mammography in healthy  postmenopausal women: the women's health 
initiative randomized trial. J A M A 2003;289: 3243-3253 
 
91. Li CI, Malone KE, Porter PL, et al. Relationship between long durations and different regimens  of hormone therapy and risk of breast  cancer.  J A M A 2003;289: 3254-3263 
 
92. Fournier A, Boutron-Ruault M, Clavel -Chapelon F. Breast  cancer  and hormonal therapy  in 
postmenopausal women - letter to the Editor. N Engl J Med 2009;360: 2366-2367 
 
93. Chlebowski RT, Kuller  LH, Prentice RL, et al. Breast  cancer  after use of estrogen  plus 
progestin in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med 2009;360: 573-587 
 
94. Beral  V, Reeves  G, Bull D, et al. Breast  cancer  risk in relation  to the interval  between 
menopause and starting hormone therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 2011;103: 296-305 
 
95. Kirkham C, Hahn  PM, VanVugt DA, et al. A randomized,  double-blind, placebo -controlled, 
cross -over trial to assess the side effects of medroxyprogesterone acetate in hormone 
replacement therapy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78: 93-97 
 
96. Roberts RE, Vernon SW. The center  for epidemiologic studies depression scale:  its use in a 
community sample. Am J Psychiatry 1983;140: 41-46 
Page  76 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   97. Cohen CI, Goh KH, Gustave M. A prospective study of outcome and predictors of 
subclinical  and clinical  depression  in an older  biracial  sample  of psychiatric outpatients. J 
Affect Disord 2010;121: 204-211 
 
98. Cohen CI, Magai  C, Yaffee R, et al. Racial  differences  in syndromal and subsyndromal 
depression in an older urban population. Psychiatr Serv 2005;56: 1556-1563 
 
99. Vahia IV, Meeks  TW, Thompson WK,  et al. Subthreshold depression and successful  aging 
in older women. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2010;18: 212-220 
 
100. Zweifel  JE, O'Brien  WH.  A meta -analysis  of the effect  of hormone replacement  therapy 
upon depressed mood. Psychoneuroendocrinology 1997;22: 189-212 
 
101. Wittes  J. Sample  size calculations  for randomized  controlled trials.  Epidemiol Rev 2002;24: 
39-53 
Page  77 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   23.  Appendix  1 
Adverse Experiences/Concurrent  Illnesses  
 
Any event  of an adverse nature that is reported  or observed to occur  during the study after initiation 
of treatment, whether or not believed to be related to the use of the test article will be documented 
in the patient record and on the Adverse Event Case Report Form. Definition  of Terms  
 
An adverse event means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of an intervention in humans, whether or not considered intervention-related (21 CFR 312.32 (a)). Exacerbation of pre-existing  conditions means  any condition or disease state that was present 
prior to first treatment with test article that changes adversely in nature, severity, or frequency during the study. An adverse event (AE) or suspected adverse reaction is considered " serious " if, in the view of 
either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: death, a life-threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threateni ng, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon 
appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse. Life threatening means the subject is at immediate risk of death as a result of the event as it occurred.  It does not mean  that a reaction,  had it occurred  in a more  serious  form,  might have 
Page  78 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   caused death.  
Classification of an Adverse Event: 
Severity of Event  
For adverse events (AEs) not included in the protocol defined grading system, the following guidelines will be used to describe severity.  • Mild  – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s 
daily activities.  • Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic 
measures. Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
• Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic 
drug therapy or other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life-threatening or incapacitating.  Of note, the term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious”.  
Relationship to Study Intervention:  
All adverse events (AEs) must have their relationship to study intervention assessed by the investigator who examines and evaluates the participant based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. The degree of certainty about causality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical trial, the study product must always be suspect. • Definitely Related – There is clear evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and other 
possible contributing factors can be ruled out. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs in a plausible time relationship to study intervention administration and cannot be explained by concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the study intervention (dechallenge) should be clinically plausible. The event must be pharmacologically or phenomenologicall y definitive, with use of a satisfactory rechallenge 
procedure if necessary. 
Page  79 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   • Probably Related – There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and the influence of 
other factors is unlikely. The clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs within a reasonable time after administration of the study intervention, is unlikely to be attributed to concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals, and follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal (dechallenge). Rechallenge information is not required to fulfill this definition.  
• Potentially Related – There is some evidence to suggest a causal relationship (e.g., the 
event occurred within a reasonable time after administration of the trial medication). However, other factors may have contributed to the event (e.g., the participant’s clinical condition, other concomitant events). Although an AE may rate only as “possibly related” soon after discovery, it can be flagged as requiring more information and later be upgraded to “probably related” or “definitely related”, as appropriate.  
• Unlikely to be related – A clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, whose temporal relationship to study intervention administration makes a causal relationship improbable (e.g., the event did not occur within a reasonable time after administration of the study intervention) and in which other drugs or chemicals or underlying disease provides plausible explanations (e.g., the participant’s clinical condition, other concomitant treatments). • Not Related – The AE is completely independent of study intervention administration, 
and/or evidence exists that the event is definitely related to another etiology. There must be an alternative, definitive etiology documented by the clinician. Expectedness  
The PI  will be responsible for determining whether an adverse event (AE) is expected or 
unexpected.  An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study intervention.  
Page  80 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Eliciting  Reports  of Adverse Events  
In addition to documenting observed changes in a subject’s medical or physical condition, 
information regarding the occurrence of adverse events during the study will be solicited through non-directed  questioning of the subject  by the investigator at each clinic  visit.  Subjects  will also be 
asked if they have been hospitalized for any reason, had any accidents, used any new medications, or changed dose or regimen of any concomitant medication (prescription or over-the-counter), and the reasons for such. 
Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 
The occurrence of an adverse event (AE) or serious adverse event (SAE) may come to the attention 
of study personnel during study visits and interviews of a study participant presenting for medical care, or upon review by a study monitor. 
All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for SAEs will be captured 
on the appropriate case report form (CRF). Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, clinician’s assessment of severity, relation ship to study product (assessed only by 
those with the training and authority to make a diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution. 
Any medical condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered 
as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition deteriorates at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the 
event at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of onset and duration of each episode. 
Page  81 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   The PI  will record all reportable events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent 
is obtained until 7 (for non-serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study 
participation.  At each study visit, the investigator will inquire about the occurrence of AE/SAEs since the last visit.  Events will be followed for outcome information until resolution or stabilization.  
Adverse Event Reporting:  
Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
The study investigator will immediately report to the sponsor any serious adverse event, whether or not considered study intervention related, including those listed in the protocol or investigator brochure and must include an assessment of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the study intervention caused the event. Study endpoints that are serious adverse events (e.g., all- cause 
mortality) must be reported in accordance with the protocol unless there is evidence suggesting a causal relationship between the study intervention and the event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis). In that case, the investigator must immediately report the event to the sponsor. 
All serious adverse events (SAEs) will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site 
investigator deems the event to be chronic or the participant is stable. Other supporting documentation of the event may be requested by the Data Coordinating Center (DCC)/study sponsor and should be provided as soon as possible. 
The study sponsor will be responsible for notifying the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of 
any unexpected fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible, but in no case later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information.  In addition, the sponsor must notify FDA and all participating investigators in an Investigational New Drug (IND) safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor determines that the information 
Page  82 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   qualifies for reporting. 
In consultation with the PI, a trained member of the study team will be responsible for conducting 
an evaluation of all adverse events and shall report the results of such evaluation to the NIH Institutional Review Board (IRB) as per Policy 801. 
Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
Any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria: • Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given (a) the research procedures that 
are described in the protocol-related documents, such as the Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) t he characteristics of the 
participant population being studied; and 
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possibly related” means there 
is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research); and 
• Suggests that the research places participants or others (which many include research staff, 
family members or other individuals not directly participating in the research) at a greater risk of 
harm (including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or expected.  
Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
The investigator will report unanticipated problems (UPs) to the NIH Institutional Review Board (IRB) as per Policy 801. 
Page  83 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Appendix 2 
 
Clinical Trials  Database - Security  Overview  
 
There are multiple  aspects  to the security  framework  for the Clinical Trials  Database  (CTDB) 
and Clinical Trials Survey System.  The following features allow for the safe and secure collection 
of research variables:  
• Application Firewall- The NICHD has recently upgraded their application firewall 
which protects both the front end web server and back end database server for the CTDB. Strict 
policies are in place which control exactly who has pre-defined, limited access to the application. 
This firewall  is a state-of-the- art hardware  solution which  blocks access  to everyone but authorized 
users for the CTDB system. 
• Data Encryption and SSL Certificates - The CTDB system makes use of military grade 
encryption both for the session and the data storage. The CTSS collects de- identified self -reported 
data.  Both systems protect information from interception by encrypting the data flow using SSL 
with a 1024 bit signed certificate.  The entire  communication session  from  the time a client  requests 
a connection to the system to the time a user logs out is encrypted using a certificate from an industry recognized vendor. The result is a secure communications channel for our partners, providing data confidentiality and integrity. In further, the CTDB program encrypts data stored within the system, thereby providing an additional layer or security for the sensitive CTDB clinical 
data. 
• CTSS  HIPAA Requirements  - Below  is the list of identifiers  to be removed  for the de- 
identification of health information under HIPAA. This is found in 45 C.F.R. 164.514(a),(b)&(c) 
(A) Names;  
Page  84 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   (B) All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, county, 
precinct,  zip code,  and their equivalent geocodes,  except  for the initial three  digits  of a zip code if, 
according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of the Census: 
(1) The geographic unit formed  by combining all zip codes with the same three  initial digits 
contains more than 20,000 people; and 
(2) The initial three digits  of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or 
fewer people is changed to 000. 
(C) All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, including 
birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of 
dates  (including year)  indicative  of such age, except that such ages and elements  may be aggregated 
into a single category of age 90 or older; 
(D) Telephone numbers;  
 
(E) Fax numbers;  
 
(F) Electronic  mail addresses;  
 
(G) Social  security  numbers;  
 
(H) Medical  record  numbers;  
 
(I) Health  plan beneficiary  numbers;  
 
(J) Account numbers;  
 
(K) Certificate/license  numbers;  
 
(L) Vehicle identifiers  and serial  numbers, including license plate numbers;  
 
(M) Device  identifiers  and serial  numbers;  
 
(N) Web  Universal  Resource Locators  (URLs);  
 
(O) Internet Protocol (IP)  address  numbers;  
Page  85 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   (P) Biometric  identifiers, including finger and voice prints;  
 
(Q) Full face photographic images and  any comparable images;  and 
 
(R) Any other unique identifying number, characteristic,  or code,  except  as permitted  by 
paragraph (c) of this section 
• Logical Access Controls (Role/Privileges) – Logical access controls are in placed using 
role based  security  for database access  and application  account  access.  Security  controls are in place 
to detect unauthorized access attempts. The application is further protected by the NICHD firewall 
and NIH firewall. Inactive user accounts are monitored and removed when not needed, and users are disconnected after a specific period of inactivity. Encryption is used  (1024bit SSL key) and data 
is HIPPA compliant. Access is monitored a nd apparent security violations are investigated when 
identified. Insecure protocols are disabled on all application servers. Guest and anonymous accounts/access is disabled.  
• Audit Trails  – Activity  involving access  to and modification  of sensitive  or critical  files 
is logged and monitored for possible security violations. Access to these audit trails is strictly controlled and can be used to support after-the-fact investigations of how, when and why normal operations ceased should this occur. Off-line storage of audit logs is retained for a period of at least 1 year. Suspicious activity is investigated and appropriate action is taken when warranted. 
• Physical and Environmental Protection – The servers are physically located in a 
secured NIH data center with controlled limited access. All work products from the system including Data backup tapes  are rotated  to off-site storage with must be authorize and  are recorded. 
All visitors to sensitive areas are escorted with entry codes changed periodically. Fire prevention and suppression devices  are installed  and in working condition. All heating  and air-cooling systems 
are periodically checked to ensure proper working condition. 
Page  86 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   • Production Input and  Output Control – Audit trails  are in place to  record  data changes.  
 
Only  authorized  system  administrators  are allowed  access  to this data,  as well as any data backup 
tapes. Damaged media is sanitized or destroyed, and any hardcopy media is shredded when no 
longer needed. 
• Contingency Planning – All critical  data files,  database files and web server  files have 
been identified. A regularly scheduled data backup solution is in place with identified resources supporting critical operations. A comprehensive contingency plan has been developed and documented. This plan has been approved by key affected parties. The Contingency plan/Disaster recovery plan is regularly tested and adjusted as appropriate. 
• Hardware and Software System Maintenance – Access is limited to the hardware and 
software infrastructure. Restrictions are in place as to who performs maintenance activities. Procedures are in place to monitor the use of system resources. All new and revis ed hardware and 
software are tested and approved before implementation. All system and application components are tested, documented and approved prior to promotion to production environment. Detailed system  specification  as prepared  and reviewed  by management.  A version  control system  is in place 
for all  key application  and operating system  files.  The systems are actively  managed  to monitor and 
reduce vulnerabilities with unnecessary services eliminated.  
Strategic framework – The tactical security framework provides a mechanism whereby the 
Clinical Trials support personnel provide day- to-day operational support activities for the regular 
maintenance of the CTDB system.  These initiatives incorporate application and software security. 
The CTDB  application  was designed using the latest Java technology. This allows  the adaptation  of 
the application to ever-changing business rules within the application. An Oracle 10g relational 
database provides the repository for the clinical data. The use of a robust, industry standard 
Page  87 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   relational database provides a modular architecture design of CTDB which allows for the CTDB 
program to assign role based security to the participants in the system. This allows roles to be defined and implemented for different users - such  as investigators, study participants, report writes, 
etc- in order to secure database access and the application data stored within the system. This 
implies that the NICHD CTDB partners can implement custom roles and maintain their own  
clinical data with a high level of c onfidence that the data will not be compromised nor shared with 
non-participants.  As technology evolves, this attention to the strategic framework allows us to 
address individual software components and target them for enhancements or upgrades all while maintaining the integrity and confidentiality of the CTDB system.  Another example of this 
strategic framework is the reporting interface.  The modular design of CTDB allows provides the 
ability to upgrade to Cognos reporting with the result being more detailed comprehensive reporting abilities.  The net result  is a feature -enhanced  system  while  maintain  the strict  security  framework  of 
the system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page  88 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   Appendix 3: Participant  education  sheets  
 
(1) Transvaginal Ultrasound 
What  Is a Transvaginal  Ultrasound?  
An ultrasound test uses high- frequency sound waves to create images of your internal 
organs. The sound waves bounce off your organs, creating images of their structures. 
Imaging tests can identify abnormalities and help doctors diagnose conditions. A trans vaginal ultrasound is a type of pelvic ultrasound used by doctors to examine female 
reproductive organs.  This includes  the uterus,  fallopian tubes,  ovaries, cervix, and vagina.  
 
“Transvaginal” means “through the vagina.” This is an internal examination. Unlike a regular  pelvic  ultrasound,  where the ultrasound wand rests  on the outside of the pelvis, 
this procedure  involves  your doctor  or a technician inserting an ultrasound probe about 
two or three inches into your vaginal canal.  
 
When  Is a Transvaginal  Ultrasound Performed?  
There are many  reasons  a transvaginal  ultrasound might  be necessary,  including:  
•an abnormal  pelvic  or abdominal  exam  
•unexplained vaginal  bleeding  
•pelvic  pain 
•an ectopic  pregnancy  (which  occurs when  the fetus  implants  outside  of the uterus,  usually 
in the fallopian tubes)  
•infertility  
•checking for cysts or uterine  fibroids  
•checking for proper  placement  of an IUD 
 
 
How  Should I Prepare for a Transvaginal  Ultrasound?  
In most cases, a transvaginal ultrasound requires little preparation on your part. Once you’ve arrived  at your doctor’s  office  or the hospital  and you’re in the examination room, 
you will have to remove your clothes from the waist down and put on a gown.  
 
Depending on your doctor’s instructions and the reasons for the ultrasound, your bladder 
might  need to be empty  or partially  full. A full bladder  helps  lift the intestines  and allows  for 
a clearer picture of your pelvic organs. If your bladder needs to be full, you’ll have to drink 32 ounces of water or any other liquid about 30 minutes to one hour before the procedure begins.  
 
If you’re  on your menstrual  cycle or if you’re  spotting,  you’ll have  to remove any tampon 
you’re using before the ultrasound.  
 
 
What  Happens  During  a Transvaginal  Ultrasound?  
When it’s time to begin the procedure, you’ll lie down on an examination table and place 
both of your feet in stirrups. Your  doctor  will cover  the ultrasound  wand  with a condom  and 
lubricating gel, and then insert the wand into your vagina.  
Page  89 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   You might  feel some  pressure  as your doctor  inserts  the wand.  This feeling  is similar  to the 
pressure felt during a pap smear when your doctor inserts the speculum into your vagina. 
Once the wand is inside of you, sound waves bounce off your internal organs and transmit pictures of the inside of your pelvis onto a monitor. The technician or doctor will slowly move the wand around while it’s still inside of your body. This provides a comprehensive picture of your organs.  
 
What  Do the Results Show?  
You might  get your results  immediately  if your doctor  performs  the ultrasound.  If a 
technician  performs  the procedure,  the images  are saved and then analyzed  by a 
radiologist. The radiologist will send the results to your doctor.  
 
 
A transvaginal  ultrasound helps  diagnose multiple  conditions,  including:  
• cancer  of the reproductive organs  
• cysts  
• fibroids  
• pelvic  infection  
• the thickness  of the uterine lining  
 
Outlook  
There are virtually no risks associated with a transvaginal ultrasound, although you might experience some discomfort. The entire  test takes  about  30 to 60 minutes,  and the results 
are typically ready in about 24 hours. If your doctor is unable to get a clear picture, you might be called back to repeat the test.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Page  90 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   (2) Deep  Vein  Thrombosis  (DVT)  
What  Is Deep  Vein  Thrombosis?  
 
Deep vein thrombosis  (DVT) is a serious  condition that occurs when  a blood clot forms  in 
a vein located deep inside your body. A blood clot is a clump of blood that is in a 
gelatinous, solid state. Deep vein blood clots typically form in your thigh or lower leg, but they can also develop in other  areas  of your body.  Other  names  for this condition  include 
thromboembolism, post -thrombotic syndrome, and post -phlebitic syndrome.  
 
Who  Is at Risk  for Deep  Vein  Thrombosis? 
DVT occurs most commonly in people who are over 50 years in age. Certain conditions that alter how your blood moves  through your veins  can raise  your risk of developing clots. 
These include:  
•having an injury  that damages  your veins  
•being overweight,  which  puts more  pressure on the veins  in your legs and pelvis  
•having a family  history  of DVT 
•having  a catheter  placed in a vein 
•taking birth control  pills or undergoing hormone  therapy  
•smoking (especially  heavy  usage)  
•staying seated for a long time while  you’re  in a car or on a plane,  especially  if you already 
have at least one other risk factor  
 
Some diseases and disorders can increase your risk of having blood clots. These include hereditary blood clotting disorders, especially when you have at least one other risk factor. Cancer and inflammatory bowel disease can also increase the risk of developing a blood clot. Heart  failure,  a condition  that makes  it more  difficult  for your heart  to pump  blood,  also 
occurs with an increased risk of clots.  
 
What  Are the Symptoms of  Deep  Vein Thrombosis? 
According to the National  Heart,  Lung,  and Blood  Institute, symptoms  of DVT only occur in 
about half of the people who have this condition. Common symptoms include:  
•swelling  in y
 our foot, ankle,  or leg, usually  on one side 
•cramping pain in your affected leg that usually  begins  in your calf 
•severe, unexplained pain in your foot and ankle  
•an area of skin that feels  warmer  than the skin on the surrounding areas  
•skin over the affected  area turning pale or a reddish or bluish  color  
 
People may not find out that they have deep vein thrombosis  until they’ve gone  through 
emergency treatment for a pulmonary embolism. A pulmonary embolism is a life- threatening complication of DVT in which an artery in the lung becomes blocked.  
 
What  Are the Complications  Associated  with Deep  Vein  Thrombosis? 
A major complication of DVT is a pulmonary embolism. You can develop a pulmonary embolism  if a blood clot moves  to your lungs  and blocks a blood  vessel. This can cause 
serious damage to your lungs and other parts of your body. You should get immediate 
Page  91 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   medical help if you have signs of a pulmonary embolism. These signs include:  
•dizziness  
•sweating 
•chest pain that gets worse  with coughing or inhaling  deeply  
•rapid breathing  
•coughing up blood  
•rapid heart  rate 
•dry cough  
•low grade  fever  
 
How  Do I Prevent  Deep  Vein  Thrombosis? 
You can lower your risk of having DVT by making a few lifestyle changes. These include keeping your blood pressure under control, giving up smoking, and losing weight if you’re overweight. Moving your legs around when you’ve been sitting for a while also helps keep your blood  flowing.  Walking  around after  being on bed rest can prevent  clots from forming. 
Your risk of developing DVT during travel is low, but it becomes higher if you’re sitting for more  than four hours  at a time while  driving  or flying.  You can lower  risk by moving  around 
every  so often — get out of your car and move  around at intervals  during long drives. Walk 
in the aisles if you’re flying, taking a train, or riding a bus. Stretch your legs and feet while you’re sitting; this keeps your blood moving steadily in your calves. Don’t wear tight  
clothes that can restrict blood flow.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page  92 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)    
24. Consent  Forms  
ERbeta Consent Form  
Page  93 of 93 
CNS  IRB Protocol  Template  (12.15.15)   25. Attachments  
 
LY500307 Investigator’s Brochure  