Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  1 ss  
 
Comparison  of Bilateral  Transversus  Abdominis  
Plane Block with Exparel versus Continuous  
Epidural  Analgesia With Bupivacaine:  
A Randomized,  Controlled  Trial  
 
 
 
 
Alparslan  Turan,  MD and Colleagues  
 
 
 
 
 
Department of O UTCOMES RESEARCH  
Cleveland  Clinic  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  2 ss Table  of Contents  
 
Specific  Aims  
 
1 BACKGROUND  
 
A. Postoperative  pain 
 
B. Postoperative  pain management  and regional  analgesia  
 
C. Epidural  Analgesia  and side effects  
 
D. Transverses  Abdominis  Plane  (TAP)  Blocks  
 
E. Exparel  
 
F. Rationale  of the study  
 
2 STUDY  OBJECTIVES  
 
3 METHODS  and STUDY  DESIGN  
 
A. Study  Overview  
 
B. Setting  and Population  
Inclusion Criteria  
Exclusion  Criteria  
C. Withdrawal  Criteria  
 
D. Administration  of Acetaminophen  
 
E. Protocol  
 
F. Measurements  
 
G. Data  Analysis  
 
H. Sample  Size Considerations  
 
I. References  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  3 ss Specific  Aims  
Pain management after major abdominal surgery remains challenging. The best - 
accepted  analgesic  approach  is continuous  epidural  analgesia,  however,  epidural  
analgesia  can cause  hemodynamic  instability,  along  with motor  weakness  and 
consequent restriction of ambulation. Furthermore, epidural catheter placement can be  
time consuming  and challenging,  and is contraindicated  in anti-coagulated  patients.  
The Transversus  Abdominis  Plane  infiltration  is an alternative  approach  to 
providing postoperative analgesia to the anterior abdominal wall. TAP infiltration are  
relatively  easy  to perform,  generally  safe,  and can be performed  in patients  who are anti- 
coagulated. TAP infiltration can be performed as a single injection, or a catheter can be  
inserted  for continuous  local anesthetic  infusion.  Single -shot TAP infiltration  with 
conventional  local anesthetics  do not last sufficiently  long to provide  effective  
postoperative analgesia. However, recently developed liposomal bupivacaine provides  
much  longer -lasting analgesia  than plain  bupivacaine.  
Therefore we proposed to compare single -shot TAP infiltration with liposomal  
bupivacaine were as effective as continuous epidural analgesia. The proposed research  
will have the following specific aims, all of which will be assessed over 72 hours, or the  
duration  of hospitalization  if shorter:  
Primary  Aim: Bilateral  TAP blocks  with single‐shot liposomal  bupivacaine  are noninferior  
to continuous epidural analgesia with conventional bupivacaine for both pain control and  
opioid  consumption.  
Secondary Aim 1 : To compare the effect of TAP block with Exparel and epidural  
analgesia  on activity  after surgery.  
 
Secondary  Aim 2: To compare  TAP block  with Exparel  and epidural  analgesia  on opioid  
related  side effect.  
Secondary Aim 3 : To assess hemodynamic changes with TAP block with Exparel and  
epidural  analgesia.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  4 ss Secondary  Aim 4: To compare  quality  of recovery  after anesthesia  with TAP block  
Exparel  and epidural analgesia.  
Secondary  Aim 5. To compare  length  of stay in TAP block  with Exparel  and epidural  
analgesia  patients  after surgery.  
 
Secondary  Aim 6. To evaluate  cost-effectiveness  of TAP block  with Exparel.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  5 ss  
 
1. Background  
 
 
 
A. Postoperative  pain 
 
Pain is a psychological sensory experience that is provoked by surgical tissue  
injury. Postoperative pain results from a of combination of nociceptive and inflammatory  
components.1 The nociceptive component results from activation of peripheral sensory  
neurons  damaged  by surgical  incision  and fades  gradually  as tissues  heal.  The 
inflammatory component enhances pain sensitivity via release of mediators from the  
surgically injured tissue. Central neuronal sensitization also seems to contribute to  
postoperative pain and hyperalgesia.1,2 Both mechanisms contribute to resting pain is in  
and around  surgical  incisions.  Movement  of wounds  or touching  them,  breathing,  
coughing,  and gastrointestinal  motility  can all  evoke  pain.  
 
Unrelieved postoperative pain leads to multiple physiological and psychological  
consequences,  which  potentially  worsen  outcomes.  For example,  inadequate  
perioperative  analgesia  is associated  with myocardial  ischemia,  impaired  wound  healing,  
delayed  gastrointestinal  motility,  atelectasis,  and postoperative  pneumonia.3-5 
Furthermore, poorly controlled acute pain is strongly associated with development of  
persistent  incisional  pain,  which can  be devastating  for patients.6,7 
B. Postoperative  pain management  and Regional  Analgesia  
 
Postoperative pain management has improved, but remains problematic. Thirty  
percent  of patients  still report  severe  postoperative  pain,  and 47% report  moderate  pain.8 
Researchers  estimate  that only one in four surgical  patients  in the USA receive  adequate  
relief of acute pain. Consequently, postoperative pain remains the major preoperative  
concern  for patients having  surgery.9 
Pain involves multiple mechanisms and is thus ideally treated with a variety of  
analgesic  techniques  with additive,  or better,  synergistic  effects.1 In theory,  at least,  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  6 ss combining  techniques  improves  overall  analgesia  while  reducing  side effects.  Consistent  
with this theory,  studies  indicate  that multimodal  analgesia  shortens  hospitalization  times,  
improves  recovery  and function,  and decreases  health  care costs.1,10 
Multimodal  analgesia  can be achieved  by combining  various  classes  of drugs.1,10,11 
But the most  common  approaches  are a combination  of an opioid  and non-opioid,  with or 
without  regional  anesthesia -analgesia.11 While  opioids  remain  the mainstay  for treatment  
of postoperative  pain,  sole reliance  on opioids  is often  inadequate  and lead to substantial  
side effects including ileus, sedation, respiration depression, and hyperalgesia.12 There  
is also evidence  opioids  impair  cellular  and humoral  immune  function  in humans,  thereby  
potentially enhancing infection risk.13-16 An important clinical goal is thus to decrease  
opioid  use and, consequently, reduce  opioid -related  side effects.  
 
Regional anesthesia (RA) is a promising approach to reducing the need for high - 
dose opioids. Regional techniques can be categorized as neuraxial blocks (spinals,  
epidural) that involve local anesthetics injected around the spinal cord or as peripheral  
nerve blocks that involve local anesthetic administration near peripheral nerves. The  
basis  of regional  analgesia  is local anesthetics  or/and  opioids  which  locally  block  voltage - 
gated sodium channels, thus interrupting nerve conductions and rendering enervated  
regions insensitive to pain.17 Peripheral nerve blocks, especially, have become po pular  
in recent decades largely because improvements in ultrasound technology make blocks  
faster  and safer  — and because  blocks  speed  recovery  and improved  patient  
satisfaction.18 
Surgery is associated with hormonal and metabolic derangements, the "stress  
response," which results from activation of the hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal axis and  
the sympathetic system. It is characterized by systemic release of catecholamines,  
cortisol, and cytokines.19 The stress response is associated with increased catabolism,  
immunosuppression, poor postoperative outcomes, and prolonged recovery.20,21 RA 
surpasses general anesthesia in ability to minimize the stress response.19,22 RA blocks  
the afferent  neural  transmission  from reaching  the central  nervous  system  and activating  
the stress  response,  and by blocking  descending  efferent  activation  of the sympathetic  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  7 ss nervous system.22-24 In clinical practice, RA has been shown to be superior to systemic  
opioids  alone  in thoracic,  abdominal,  gynecological,  and orthopedic  surgeries.25-28 
Studies  have  consistently  shown  RA to reduce  postoperative  pulmonary,  gastrointestinal,  
and cardiac  morbidities.  Furthermore,  there  is evidence  that RA decreases  postoperative  
morbidity  and mortality,  and shortens  postoperative  hospitalization.29-32 
Regional approaches  including  epidural and TAP blocks  are considered  key 
elements  in “fast-track”  protocols  for patients  recovering  from colorectal  surgeries  
because  they facilitate  recovery  and shorten  hospitalization.33 Thoracic  epidural  
analgesia reduces sympathetic outflow from T6 -L12, speeds return of gastrointestinal  
motility by as much as 3 days.34,35 RA also reduces consumption of opioids, a major risk  
factor for postoperative nausea and vomiting, which delays resumption of oral diet.  
Improved  intestinal  blood  flow may also improve  anastomotic  healing.36,37 
Pulmonary  complications  are common  side effect  of thoracic  and major  abdominal  
surgery,  in fact occurring  more  often  than cardiac  complications.38 Important  
complications  include  atelectasis,  pneumonia,  and respiratory  failure  — and are 
associated  with morbidity,  prolonged  hospital  stay,  and increased  cost of care.39 
Inadequate analgesia also leads to ineffective breathing ("splinting"), characterized by  
rapid  and shallow  breathes  which  itself contribute  to atelectasis,  impaired  gas exchange,  
and inability to clear secretions. The use of RA reduces pulmonary complications in  
patients  recovering  from thoracic  and abdominal  surgeries  by providing  excellent  
analgesia,  preventing  “splinting,”  and thus improved  respiratory  mechanics.40-43 
The most  serious  opioid -induced  complication  is respiratory  depression.  
Respiratory depression is the main fatal hazard of opioid use and has been identified as  
a safety target by the Joint Commission on Hospital Accreditation.57 Supporting this  
concern, a study conducted in United Kingdom ranked opioids as the second most  
common cause of adverse events in hospitalized patients.58 The current national goal of  
better controlling postoperative pain by making it a quality indicator is likely to increase  
opioid  use — and almost  surely also  increase  associated  complications.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  8 ss Both hypdrophilic (i.e., morphine) and lipophilic (i.e., fentanyl) opioids promote  
respiratory  depression  by: 1) systemic  uptake  via epidural  venous  plexus;  and 
2) arachnoid  penetration  and cephalad  spread.  The result  is a dose -dependent  reduction  
in responsiveness of brainstem respiratory centers to carbon dioxide partial pressure  
(PCO 2) with opioids. This is clinically manifested as an increase in resting PCO 2 and a  
shift in the CO 2 response curve.59,60 We will also evaluate hypoxic events in this patients  
and compare the  effect of  opioid  sparing  on these  events.  
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is a common complication which  
causes considerable patient discomfort and lowers patient satisfaction.61 In patients  given 
epidural opioids, it is caused by upward migration of opioids in CSF which then  stimulate  
the chemoreceptor  trigger  zone  of the medulla.62 Consequently,  PONV  remains  common  
during  epidural  analgesia,  with a reported incidence  of up to 70%.  
Opioids also enhance sphincter tone and reduce peristaltic contraction. Delayed  
gastric emptying is caused by decreased motility, increased antral tone, and increased  
tone in the first part of the duodenum. Delay in passage of intestinal contents leads to  
greater absorption of water, increased viscosity, and desiccation of bowel contents — 
which  in turn causes  constipation  and contributes  to postoperative  ileus.  63 Postoperative  
ileus, with an incidence of 4.5%, prolongs hospital stay and increases hospital costs.64 
Opioids  also inhibit  urinary  bladder  function,  thus increasing  the risk of urinary  retention.  
 
 
C. Epidural  Analgesia  and side effects  
 
Epidural analgesia (EA) is an indispensible part of modern perioperative pain  
management  because  it provides  better  postoperative  analgesia  after abdominal  surgery  
than systemic opioids.26 Commonly, a small dose of local anesthetic -opioid combination  
is injected  through  a catheter  into the epidural  space,  then the mixture  diffuses  across  the 
dura,  reaching  spinal  nerve  roots,  dorsal  root ganglion,  or the spinal  cord to block  afferent  
pain signals to attenuate the surgical stress response and provide excellent analgesia.44 
Meta -analysis shows that epidural analgesia reduces mortality by a third compared with  
systemic  opioids;  it also decreases  cardiovascular  and pulmonary  morbidities  in high-risk 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  9 ss patients,  speeds  return  of bowel  function,  and decreases  the risk of venous  
thromboembolism.  EA also enhances  patient  satisfaction  compared  with parental  
opioids.45 
Despite its widespread use, EA is has several limitations. First, locating the  
epidural  space  (ES) by loss-of-resistance  is a blind  procedure  and is operator  
dependent.46 Anatomical  variations  from age-related  vertebral  changes,  spine  
pathologies (i.e. scoliosis), previous back surgeries, body habitus, and normal variations  
in skin -to-epidural space all contribute to difficult epidural catheter insertion. The ES is a  
potential  space  consisting  of a labyrinth  of epidural  fat, lymphatics,  venous  plexus,  spinal  
nerves, and compartments separated by tissue band which make loc ation of catheter tip  
hard to control;  a consequence  can be nonuniform  spread  of anesthetics  and subsequent  
unilateral  or failed  block.47,48 
A further problem is that epidural catheter migration is common, with incidence of  
36%, and is due to body movement and oscillations of CSF.49,50 The tip can migrate out  
of the epidural space via intervertebral foramen (resulting in epidural failure), laterally  
(result in unilateral block), into subarchnoid space (resulting high or total spinal), or into  
epidural vein (result in systemic anesthetic toxicity).49,51,52 All of these factors contribute  
to a high  failure  rate, reported  to be 23-30%50,53 
There  are also situations  in which  patients  are unable  to receive  epidural  
anesthesia,  or epidural  blocks  are especially  prone  to failure.  Anticoagulated  patients,  for 
example,  are not ideal  candidates  for neural  anesthesia  due to risk of epidural  hematoma.  
Patients with history of chronic back low back pain, spine pathologies (scoliosis, spina  
bifida), or history of back surgery are also at increased risk of failed epidural blocks. In  
patients with previous spine surgeries, epidural scarring or altered anatomy may make  
the ES nearly impossible to locate; and even when an epidural catheter can be inserted,  
scarring  of ligamentum flavum often reduces the size of the epidural space leading to  
patchy  blocks.51 
Serious  complications  from EA are fortunately  rare. Nonetheless,  epidural  
analgesia  can cause  side effects  either  from administered  medications  or from injury  from 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  10 ss epidural  vessels  and neurological  structures.  Epidural  analgesia  also causes  hypotension  
in about 3 -7% of patients54 consequent to blocking sympathetic outflow which promotes  
venous  and arterial  vasolidation  and a “functional”  hypovolemia.  Although  hypotension  is 
usually  transient,  strokes  have  been  reported  in patients  with low reserve.55 More  
commonly, hypotension prompts clinicians to at lease temporarily cease local anesthetic  
administration and to give fluids or vasopressors.56 Typically, opioids are substituted  
during  hypotensive  periods,  at least  transiently  exposing  patients  to opioid -related  
complications.  
Although rare, neurologic complication consequent to neuraxial blocks can be  
devastating. Examples include epidural hematoma, epidural abscess, and postdural  
puncture headache.65 With widespread use of anticoagulants, patients are at increased  
risk of developing  epidural  hematoma  from initial  needle  insertion  to catheter  
manipulation. If unrecognized, epidural hematoma can cause cord compression and  
permanent  paraplegia.  Postdural  puncture  headache,  although  rare (~1%),  cause  
significant morbidity, require additional treatments (i.e., bed rest, blood patch), prolong  
hospital  stays,  and may persist  for months.66 
Including  opioids  to epidural  local anesthetics  has become  the standard  for 
providing  epidural  analgesia.  Beneficial  therapeutic  effects  of epidural  opioids  as a result  
of improved analgesia include improvement in pulmonary function, modification of the  
endocrine -metabolic stress response, improvement in time to ambulation, decreased  
morbidity, and shorter hospital stay. The epidural administration of opioids is associated  
with potential side effects and complications, the most serious potential side effect being  
that of respiratory depression. This, as well as most of the other potential opioid -related  
side effects  is associated  with epidural  opioid  analgesia.  A consequence  of these  toxicities 
and side effects is that epidural sometimes needs to be stopped at least  temporarily,  thus 
reducing  the analgesic  benefits  of RA.  
In summary,  epidural  analgesia  provoke  numerous  limitations  and severe  
complications that cause substantial patient morbidity. Nonetheless, epidural analgesia  
provides  superior  pain control  and causes  fewer  side effects  than systemic  opioids.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  11 ss Epidural  analgesia  also delays  discharge  from hospital,  increases  the cost of care,  and 
reduces  patient satisfaction.  
 
 
D. Transverses  Abdominis  Block  
 
 
The Transversus Abdominis Plane (TAP) block, first described by Rafi in 2001, is  
an alternative approach to providing post -operative analgesia to the anterior abdominal  
wall (Figure  1).67 For a TAP block,  local anesthetic  is injected  into the plane  between  the 
transversus  abdominis  and internal  oblique  muscles  to interrupt  the innervation  of afferent  
nerves  (T6-L1) of the anterior  abdominal  wall including  the parietal  peritoneum,  muscles,  
and skin. 
 
 
Complications  related  to TAP blocks  are rare. Early  reports  of liver laceration  from 
the block were likely from a combination of landmark technique and improper use of  
ultrasound.68 The TAP block  is easier  to perform  than epidural  anesthesia  (especially  with 
ultrasound guidance), safer, relatively inexpensive, and can be used safely in patients  
who are anti -coagulated. Local anesthesia to the TAP can be given as a “single shot” or  
via continuous local anesthetic infusion. Widespread clinical TAP catheter use is limited  
because  of easy  dislodgment  of catheter  and close vicinity  to surgical  site. 

Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  12 ss TAP appear to be safe and effective as part of multimodal analgesia for various  
abdominal surgeries including open appendectomy, hysterectomy, caesarean delivery,  
abdominoplasty,  prostectomy,  renal  transplant,  and laparoscopic  surgeries.69-76 It is even  
possible  to use TAP as sole anesthetic  technique  in open  abdominal  procedures.77,78 TAP 
blocks in colorectal surgery requiring a midline incision reduce postoperative opioid  
consumption,  PONV, and  sedation.79 
TAP blocks only provide somatic pain relief whereas epidural anesthesia also  
provides visceral and somatic relief. TAP blocks nonetheless provide effective analgesia  
and reduce opioid requirements. Furthermore, retention of sensory and motor function  
lower  extremities  facilitates  early  ambulation  and presumably  reduces  the risk of falls. 
E. Exparel  
 
Use of local anesthetics in postsurgical pain is limited because the duration -of- 
action  of current  local anesthetics  is short.  Effective  postoperative  analgesia  thus usually  
requires  insertion  of a catheter  and continuous  or repeated  anesthetic  administration.  
Exparel  (Exparel®, bupivacaine  liposome  injectable  suspension,  Pacira  
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Parsippany, NJ, USA) is a sterile, non -pyrogenic white to off -white  
preservative -free aqueous suspension of multivesicular liposomes (DepoFoam® drug 
delivery system) containing bupivacaine. Exparel is a liposome injection of bupivacaine,  
an amide -type local anesthetic, indicated for administration into the surgical site to  
produce postsurgical analgesia and intended for single -dose administration. Depofoam  
technology is base d on multiple microscopic spherical particles with many aqueous  
chambers  separated  by lipid membranes.  When  refrigerated,  the particles  are stable;  but 
after injection of Exparel into soft tissue, bupivacaine is released from the multivesicular  
liposomes over a period of time. The components of Depofoam particles are non -toxic 
and clinical trials have demonstrated no adverse events. Furthermore this technology  
previously has been safely used in different settings and provided sustained release in  
other targ et areas.  
Various  doses  of Exparel  were  compared  with plain  bupivacaine  in patients  having  
inguinal hernia repairs. Evaluations revealed that Exparel administration produces dose - 
dependent  increases  in plasma  bupivacaine  concentrations,  and that the half-life of 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  13 ss Exparel  was almost  twice  that of plain  bupivacaine.  However,  maximum  plasma  
concentrations were similar with plain bupivacaine and Exparel. Studies in other surgical  
models demonstrated similar results, and analgesia lasting up to 72 hours. Bupivacaine  
is metabolized through hepatic pathways, hepatic insufficiency thus increases the risk of  
toxicity.  
The clinical efficacy of Exparel has been studied in number of clinical trials. In  
wound infiltration for hemorrhoidectomy, 189 patients were randomized to Exparel or  
placebo. Significant reductions in pain scores were seen at each measurement time  
points for 72 hours. Patients given Exparel required 45% less opioid, and the first opioid  
dose  was almost  12 hours  later in Exparel  group.  In a different  study  performed  in patients  
having bunionectomies, cumulative pain scores were lower, and the time to first opioid  
use was significantly  prolonged  by Exparel.  Furthermore,  Exparel  has also been  
investigated  and demonstrated  significant  analgesic  effect  in patients  having  knee  
arthroplasty,  breast  augmentation,  and hernia  repair.  Surgical  wound  infiltration  was also 
studied  in 10 clinical  trials,  which  showed  that cumulative  pain scores  were  improved  with 
Exparel  through  24-72 hours.  However,  TAP studies  with Exparel  in abdominal  surgeries  
are mainly retrospective, with limited number of patients. None of these studies directly  
compare  TAP and  epidural analgesia.  
F. Pharmaco -economics  
 
Exparel costs about $300 per vial, which is substantial, and some institutions  
consequently regulate its use. However, in retrospective study demonstrated significant  
cost effectiveness  with Exparel  when  compared  with epidural.  There  is potential  economic  
benefit of using EXPAREL in TAP blocks. Even after agreeing with the efficacy of  
EXPAREL, one reason for its slow adaptation into mainstream acute pain practice is the  
drug would drive up cost of heath care. In addition, it has been documented that  
EXPAREL -based multimodal analgesia was associated with lower cost and length of  
hospital stay ($8766, 2 days) versus opioid -based analgesia ($11850, 4.9 days) in  
patients  after open  colectomies.80 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  14 ss Due to the long history  on epidurals,  there  might  be a underestimation  of the overall  
cost associated  with epidurals.  Schuster  et al. conducted  a retrospective  cost analysis  on 
the cost drivers of total expense of managing a patient -controlled epidural in a variety of  
surgeries and discovered that 51% of the cost was staff related and 15% was related to  
PCA pumps  and pump  materials.81 In many  hospitals,  patients  with epidurals  are 
continuously monitored by both ward nurses and acute pain service residents for opioid  
and epidural  related  side effects.  These  costs  can potentially  be reduced  or eliminated  by 
the opioid -free Exparel. More time and resources can thus be freed to care for more  
patients  in need.  
F. Rationale  of the study  
 
The recent  enhancement  of conventional  bupivacaine  with encapsulated  
bupivacaine  much  prolongs  the duration -of-action  and resulting  pain control  with a single  
application. TAP blocks appear to be easier to perform than epidurals (especially with  
ultrasound guidance), safer, relatively inexpensive, and can be used safely in patients  
who are anti -coagulated.  
Only three studies have compared  the analgesic effects  of TAP blocks  and 
epidural catheters.82-84 Niraj et al. compared the analgesic effects of bilateral subcostal  
TAP catheters and epidural catheters and reported a success rate of 78% for epidural  
versus  63% for TAP,  although  the results  were  not statistically  significant.82 Another  study  
in 2013 did not show any significant difference in analgesic effects of bilateral TAP  
catheters  and epidural  catheters.83 And finally,  in a recent  study,  single -injection  TAP was 
compared with IV opioid and epidural analgesia. The authors found that single -injection  
subcostal TAP blocks were more effective than IV opioid analgesia, while continuous  
thoracic epidural analgesia was more effective than the single -injection subcostal TAP  
block.  Existing studies suffer from small sample size and inconsistent conclusions.  
Experts in regional anesthesia have emphasized the need for well -powered studies  
comparing  the different  methods.85-88 
In our institution we retrospectively investigated patients who received TAP with  
Exparel  for abdominal surgery  and compared  it with patients  who received epidural.  318 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  15 ss patients were propensity matched on 18 potential factors among three groups (106 per  
group): 1) TAP infiltration with bupivacaine liposome; 2) continuous Epidural analgesia  
with plain bupivacaine; and; 3) intravenous patient -controlled analgesia (IV PCA). TAP  
infiltration  were  non-inferior  to Epidural  on both primary  outcomes  (p<0.001).  TAP 
infiltration  were  non-inferior  to IV PCA on pain scores  (p=0.001)  but not superior  on opioid  
consumption  (p=0.37)  (Figure  1). TAP infiltration  with liposomal  bupivacaine  and 
continuous  epidural  analgesia  were  similar  in terms  of pain and opioid  consumption,  and 
not worse in pain compared with IV PCA. Which demonstrated that TAP infiltrations with  
exparel  are a reasonable  alternative  to epidural  analgesia  in abdominal  surgical  patients.  
 
 
Figure 1 Results for comparison TAP infiltration and Epidural patients on postoperative  
time-weighted  average  pain score  in the 0-10 VRS pain scale  and 
intravenous morphine equivalent dose of opioid within 72 hours of the  
surgery.  
 
 
Furthermore,  preferable  because  they are easier  to perform  and thought  to be 
safer.  

Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  16 ss  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  17 ss 2. Study  Objectives  
 
We will prospectively  compare  the analgesic  efficacy  of TAP blocks  with liposomal  
bupivacaine (Exparel) and continuous epidural blocks in patients who are scheduled for  
major  lower  abdominal  surgery.  Specifically,  we will test the primary  hypothesis  that TAP 
blocks with single ‐shot liposomal bupivacaine are noninferior to continuous epidural  
analgesia  for pain control  and opioid  consumption  in patients  recovering  from major  lower  
abdominal  surgery.  
The proposed research will have the following aims, all of which will be assessed  
over 72 hours  or the duration  of hospitalization  if shorter:  
Primary  Aim.  
 
To assess whether TAP block with Exparel is noninferior to continuous epidural  
analgesia on pain management, defined as noninferior for both pain control and total  
opioid  consumption  for 72 hours,  in patients  who had major  lower  abdominal  surgery.  We 
define  noninferiority  as no worse  than 25% greater  opioid  consumption  and no worse  than 
1 point higher in pain score.  We choose a 1 point delta for VRS pain score since that is  
approximately half as large as a delta we would use to assess superiority, and it is also  
about half of the expected standard deviation in the VRS pain score, both standard  
methods  for choosing  a noninferiority delta.  
Hypothesis . Bilateral TAP blocks with single ‐shot liposomal bupivacaine are noninferior  
to continuous  epidural  analgesia  for both pain control  and opioid  consumption  in patients  
recovering  from major lower  abdominal  surgery.  
Total opioid consumption, in morphine equivalents, will be the major measure of  
opioid use.  However,  we will also  record the  number  of times analgesic  given for  
breakthrough pain. Our major outcome for pain will be time-weighted pain scores from  
discharge from the PACU until 72 hours after the end of surgery. PACU pain scores will  
also be compared separately. Sedation will be determined and recorded at roughly 4 - 
hour by ward nurses per  clinical  routine.  
Secondary  Aims.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  18 ss Secondary  Aim 1: To assess  the effect  of TAP block  with Exparel  and epidural  analgesia  
on activity after  surgery.  
Hypothesis.  TAP block with Exparel will have increased amount of time spend sitting or  
lying with epidural  patients.  
ViSi mobile  (Sotera  Wireless)  patient  monitoring  system  a platform  for 
comprehensive  vital sign monitoring  will be used  to quantify  patient  activity  over the initial  
72 postoperative  hours.  This system  continuously  measures  position  (lying  versus  sitting)  
and activity.  
Secondary  Aim 2: To evaluate  TAP block  with Exparel  and epidural  analgesia  on opioid  
related  side effect.  
Hypothesis . Patients in TAP group have fewer opioid -related side effects than epidural  
group.  
We will use a validated composite outcome, Opioid –Related Symptom Distress  
Scale (ORSDS), to evaluate opioid -related side effect.89 ORSDS is 4 -point scale that  
evaluates  3 symptom  distress  dimensions  (frequency,  severity,  bothersome  4-point  scale  
that evaluates  3 symptom  distress  dimensions  (frequency,  severity,  bothersomeness)  for 
12 opioid related side effects. ORSDS questionnaire will be administered by a trained  
research fellow on first, second, and third postoperative mornings while patients remain  
hospitalized . 
Secondary Aim 3: To assess hemodynamic instability TAP block with Exparel and  
epidural  analgesia.  
Hypothesis . Patients  in TAP group  will have  higher  blood  pressure  and less hemodynamic  
instability  compared  to epidural  patients.  Hypotension  will be defined  as MAP  hypotension  
MAP  < 55 mmHg and  SBP hypotension  defined  as SBP <  80 mmHg.  
ViSi mobile  (Sotera  Wireless)  patient  monitoring  system  will be used  to obtain  vital 
signs  including  beat-to beat noninvasive  blood  pressure  of the patient  for 72 hours.  
Secondary  Aim 4: To assess  Quality  of recovery  after anesthesia  with TAP block  Exparel  
and epidural analgesia.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  19 ss Hypothesis . Patients  in TAP group  will have  higher  quality  of recovery  score  than epidural  
patients.  
Quality of recovery after anesthesia and surgery is an important measure of the  
early postoperative health status of patients, and the Quality of Recovery scale is highly  
validated.90 Patients  will be questioned  on morning  of POD  1 and 3.  
 
Secondary Aim 5. To assess length of stay in TAP block with Exparel and epidural  
analgesia  patients  after surgery.  
Hypothesis . Patients  in Epidural  group  will have  prolonged  length  of hospital  stay 
compared  to epidural patients.  
 
Secondary Aim 6. To assess the cost -effectiveness of TAP block with Exparel after  
surgery.  
Hypothesis  TAP block  with Exparel  reduces  the cost of care by decreasing  opioid -related  
side effects and better  maintaining hemodynamic  stability.  
 
 
Exploratory  
 
Exploratory Aim 1. To compare TAP block with Exparel and epidural analgesia on  
postoperative  opioid -related  hypoxic  events.  
Hypothesis.  TAP block  with Exparel  reduces  hypoxic  events  compared  to epidural  
analgesia  patients.  
Patients will have continuous pulse -oximeter monitoring and recording. Nurses  
and the study  personal  will be blinded  to data on the monitor  and standard  of care will be 
provided. Data from the monitor will be downloaded daily for 72 hours postoperatively,  
incidence  of hypoxia  and the time spend  hypoxic  will be determined.  We will be using  ViSi 
mobile (Sotera Wireless) patient monitoring system a platform for comprehensive vital  
sign monitoring.  This system  will measure  3 lead ECG,  SpO2  and number  of respirations  
continuously. The outcome will be area -under -the-curve for saturation over time with the  
threshold  set at 90%.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  20 ss Exploratory Aim 2. To compare TAP block with Exparel and epidural analgesia on  
persistent postoperative pain.  
Hypothesis.  TAP block  with Exparel  reduces  persistent  postoperative  pain (defined  by 
pain at incision  at three  month  follow  up) similar  to epidural  analgesia  patients.  
Patients  were  also contacted  by one of the investigators  at 3 and 6 months  after 
discharge to evaluate whether persistent surgical pain. Presence and VAS score for  
persistent surgical pain and effect on MBPI will be asked to rate. DN4 Test will be used  
to evaluate  postoperatively  at 3 months  for defining  the type of pain.91 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  21 ss 3. Method  and Study  Design  
 
 
A. Study  Overview  
 
We propose a randomized trial comparing TAP blocks with Exparel to continuous  
epidural blocks in patients having elective lower -abdominal surgery. The study will be  
performed  at multiple  sites including various  Cleveland  Clinic  hospitals.  
B. Setting  and Population  
Inclusion  criteria : 
(1) Written  informed  consent;  
 
(2) 18-85 years  old; 
 
(3) ASA Physical  Status  1-3; 
 
(4) Scheduled  for elective  open  or laparoscopic  abdominal  surgery,  including  
colorectal  and hysterectomy surgeries;  
 
(5) Anticipated  hospitalization  of three  nights;  
 
(6) Expected requirement for parenteral opioids for at least 72 hours for  
postoperative  pain;  
 
(7) Able to use IV PCA systems.  
 
 
Exclusion  criteria : 
(1) Hepatic  disease,  e.g. twice  the normal  levels  of liver enzymes;  
(2) Kidney  disease,  e.g. twice  the normal  level of serum  creatinine;  
(3) Bupivacaine  sensitivity  or known  allergy;  
(4) Women  who are pregnant  or breastfeeding;  
(5) Anticoagulants  considered  to be a contraindication  for epidural  or TAP blocks.  
(6) Surgeries  with high port sites will be excluded  
 
 
C. Withdrawal  Criteria  
Patients  will be free to withdraw  from study  at any time.  Patients  will also be 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  22 ss removed  from study  at any time for adverse  events,  or deemed  necessary  for patient  
safety.  
Protocol  
 
After eligibility is confirmed, patients will receive complete information about the  
study both verbally and in writing. Informed consent must be obtained from the patients  
prior to randomization and study -specific procedures. Research fellow will also apply an  
8-item STOP -BANG questionnaire. Randomization will be web -based and independent  
to investigators interference.  
Randomization (1:1) will be web -based and initiated at induction of anesthesia;  
allocation will thus be concealed from investigators. Randomization will be stratified  
based on chronic opioid use, defined by opioid use for more than 30 consecutive days  
within three preoperative months, at a daily dose of 15 mg or more of morphine or  
equivalent.  
All blocks  will be performed  preoperatively  by attending  anesthesiologists  or 
regional anesthesia fellows who are experienced in epidural blocks and TAP blocks.  
Premedication  will be administered  at the discretion  of the attending  anesthesiologist  and 
standard  monitors  will be used.  All the patients  will receive  1000  mg oral acetaminophen  
one hour before surgery and they will receive 500 mg every 6 hours for 72 hours after  
surgery  starting  with oral intake.  
Patients will be randomly assigned to: 1) Epidural catheter, 2) Bilateral TAP block  
with Exparel. Randomization will be stratified by open and laparoscopic procedures in  
addition  to chronic  opioid  use. An in-plane  ultrasound  will be used  in TAP block  procedure.  
Once  the target  area is positioned,  plain  bupivacaine  0.25 %, 20 ml will be given  to open  
the space and then single dose (10 ml) of EXPAREL mixed with (10 ml) saline will be  
injected in each side. Total dose of Exparel will be 20 ml. Epidural catheters will be  
inserted  preoperatively.  Once  an epidural  catheter  is successfully  positioned,  an infusion  
will be initiated intraoperatively. Bupivacaine standard solution without additives will be  
prepared  for each  patient  in epidural  group.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  23 ss Standard general anesthesia will be given using propofol or etomidate, fentanyl,  
rocuronium for induction and sevoflurane or isoflurane. Intraoperative analgesic use will  
be limited to short acting opioids. Postoperatively, patients will be given intravenous  
patient -controlled  analgesia.  Hydromorphone  will be the default  drug,  but fentanyl  will be 
substituted  if necessary.  Clinicians  will adjust  analgesic  management  as necessary  in an 
effort to keep verbal response pain scores (details below) <4. If patients would not use  
the PCA for more than 2 hours, PCA will be deceased and it will be changed to PRN  
hydromorphone or fentanyl.  Nurses will adjust analgesic management as necessary in  
an effort  to keep  verbal  response  pain scores  <4. Blinded  clinicians  to the study  will adjust  
epidural  infusion rates.  
Other anti -inflammatory drugs will not be used intraoperatively or for the initial 72  
postoperative hours. A single dose of dexamethasone (4 -8 mg) will be permitted for  
PONV  prophylaxis  for patients  with Apfel  risk score  of 2 or more,  and inhaled  steroids  will 
be permitted  as necessary  to treat reactive  airway  disease.  Other  opioid  sparing  
medications like gabapentin, pregabalin, ketamine or lidocaine patch will also not be  
permitted  through  the initial  72 postoperative  hours.  
Clinical evaluators for the outcomes will be blinded to study aim and Pharmacy  
personnel not involved in evaluations will prepare the study drugs. Patients will be  
continuously monitored and recorded with a wireless monitor starting after extubation in  
the operating room. Clinicians including nurses will be blinded to monitoring and will be  
required  to perform  their standard  of care management after  surgery.  
Patients  will be allowed  to receive  prophylactic  anti-emetic  (first choice  
ondansetron) intraoperatively based on the risk assessment for nausea and vomiting.  
Postoperative  anti-emetics  for symptomatic  treatment  will also be allowed;  again  
ondansetron  will be the first  choice.  
Measurements  
 
Demographic  and Background  Information:  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  24 ss Demographic data to be obtained includes height (cm), weight (kg), age (yr), 
gender, (ASA) physical status, self -declared ethnicity, and the specific type of procedure  
will be recorded. Patients will be questioned for social history (tobacco) and medical  
history (pulmonary disease, kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, neurological disease,  
chronic  pain conditions,  illegal  drug usage,  alcohol  abuse,  myocardial  infarction,  previous  
surgery or stent placement and medications usage). Available preoperative laboratory  
tests and medication list will be recorded. Individual risk for na usea and vomiting will be  
determined  using  the Apfel  score.  Patients  excluded  for any reason  including  technical  or 
contraindication  will be recorded  for both  groups.  
ViSi mobile  (Sotera  Wireless)  patient  monitoring  system  will be used  to 
continuously record noninvasive blood pressure, patient activity, posture, 3 -lead ECG,  
SpO2,  and respiratory  rate. Data  will be recorded  at one-minute  intervals  and downloaded  
daily to a laptop.  
Opioid  requirements  will be measured  as the total amount  of opioids  (converted  to 
morphine sulfate equivalents) used intraoperatively and during the first 72 postoperative  
hours. Use of PCA and discontinuation will be recorded.  Pain Scores after surgery with  
be measured using a Verbal Response Scale (VRS). VRS is a  scale from 0 to 10 where  
0 signifies  no pain and 10 signifies  worst  pain ever experienced.  The VRS will be recorded  
every  30 minutes  in the recovery  area for the first 2 hours,  then every  ≈4 hours  thereafter  
while  awake  for 72 hours.  Extra  boluses  of local anesthetics  or block  failure  will be notified  
to acute  pain service and  will be documented in  EPIC.  
Patient  satisfaction  with their pain treatment  will be questioned  after 72 
hours/discharges using 0 -100 scales and we will also use Myles QoR scale to formally  
evaluate quality of recovery. Myles QoR scale is a validated scoring system allows  
quantification of patient’s early postoperative health status, which is also a description of  
quality  of recovery. We  will record the  hospitalization period.  
 
Failure to meet four criteria was determined as the factors delaying discharge: (1)  
adequate  analgesia  (defined  as NRS  <4); (2) independence  from intravenous  opioids  for 
at least  12 h; (3) ability  to independently  stand  and sit down  (evaluated  with the Timed  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  25 ss Up and Go test); and (4) unassisted ambulation of at least 30 m (evaluated with the 6 - 
min walk test). Blinded investigator will evaluate patients for discharge readiness and  
patients  having  all four factors  will be  accepted  as discharge  ready.  
Data  obtained  from electronic  medical  records  will include:  operation  time,  surgery  
type, intraoperative opioid consumption, postoperative opioid consumption in PACU and  
in ward, breakthrough pain medication requirements, pain scores in PACU and ward,  
requirement  of oxygen  in PACU  and ward,  pruritus,  requirement  of antihistaminic  
medications,  requirement  of naloxone,  itching,  ambulation  time,  flatus,  ileus,  bowel  
movements  (first time,  all bowel  sounds  at all quadrants),  constipation,  length  of stay and 
any side effects or complications. Patient functionality will also be recorded including,  
bathing,  toileting,  walking  and moving.  
We will also record  any interruptions  with comments  in epidural  group  
administration  because  of hemodynamic  instability  and lower  extremity  weakness.  Blood  
pressure  will be continuously  monitored  with VISI monitor system.  
Brief Pain Inventory  and the Short  Form  12 health  survey  (SF 12) will be completed  
before surgery, and at the 90 -day follow up. Brief Pain Inventory is a practical method of  
evaluating pain severity and impact on patient function. BPI includes four rating pain  
intensity,  and seven  covering  the impact  of pain.  Intensity  is recorded  on an ordinal  scale  
from zero (no pain)  to ten (worst  imaginable  pain).  Impact  of the pain section  these  ratings  
are made on zero -to ten numeric scales running from no interference to complete  
interference. The Short Form 12 health survey is an abbreviated version of the SF -36 
health  survey,  a well-established  instrument  to assess  psychological  and physical  
aspects  of health  related  quality  of life.  
G. Data  Analysis  
 
Randomized groups will be compared for baseline balance using standard descriptive  
statistics and the standardized difference (difference in means or proportions divided by  
the pooled  standard deviation).  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  26 ss Primary Aim . TAP with Exparel will be considerable noninferior to continuous epidural  
analgesia  (and vice versa)  on pain management  if found  noninferior  on each  of total opioid  
consumption and mean pain score in the first 72 hours post -op. Noninferiority deltas are  
defined  a priori  as no worse  than 25% higher  in opioid  consumption  and no worse  than 1 
point  in pain score.  Overall  alpha  will be 0.05,  and thus 0.025  in each  direction  of testing.  
No correction  to the significance  criterion  will be made  for assessing  2 primary  outcomes  
since both are required to be noninferior in order to reject the null hypothesis and claim  
one intervention  noninferior  on pain management.  
We will assess noninferiority for opioid consumption by first estimating the treatment  
effect (TAP with Exparel minus continuous epidural analgesia, and vice versa) on log - 
transformed  opioid  consumption  in a linear  regression  model  and then conducting  1-tailed  
tests to assess whether the exponentiated difference, i.e., ratio of geometric mean,  is less 
than the noninferiority  delta of  1.25.  
We will assess noninferiority for mean pain score over time by first estimating the  
treatment  effect  (TAP  with Exparel  minus  continuous  epidural  analgesia,  and vice versa)  
on VRS pain score in a repeated measures linear model adjusting for within -subject  
correlation (R matrix autoregressive (1) structure) across the times. We will then use the  
estimated  treatment  effect  (collapsed  over time)  and its standard  error  to conduct  1-tailed  
tests  to assess  whether  the difference  in means  is less than the noninferiority  delta  of 1. 
Secondary  aims.  Standard  statistical  analyses  will be used.  
 
Interim analyses for efficacy and futility will be conducted at each 25% of the planned  
enrollment (N=160, 320, 480 and 640) using a group sequential design with a gamma  
spending  function  (gamma  = - 4 for efficacy  and -2 for futility).  The probability  of crossing  
a boundary at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and last analyses will be 8%, 29%, 38% and 25%,  
respectively,  if the alternative  hypothesis  is true. Thus,  there  is a 75% chance  of crossing  a 
boundary (efficacy or futility) by the third look (N=480).  We chose a design with 3  interim 
analyses and a final as opposed to fewer or more interim looks based on both  practical 
and statistical grounds (allowing the chance to stop early, middle or late if  warranted,  but 
not too many  looks  as not much  is gained  by a larger  number).  The study  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  27 ss has been designed with non -binding statistical boundaries, such that the monitoring  
committee is not required to stop the study after crossing an efficacy or futility boundary  
(i.e., it will not affect  the stated  type I or type II errors  to continue  the study  after a boundary  
has been  crossed).  
H. Sample  Size Considerations  
 
Sample  size is based  on being  able to detect  noninferiority  on both total opioid  
consumption and pain score in the first 72 hours with about 90% overall power (90% for  
opioid consumption and 99.5% for pain score; overall power = 0.90 x 0.995 assuming  
independence) at the overall 0.025 significance level.  In our retrospective data we  
observed a coefficient of variation (CV=SD/mean) of about 1.10 for opioid consumption  
in similar patients.  For a single -analysis study we would need a total of 588 patients to  
have 90% power to detect noninferiority for opioid consumption at the 0.025 significance  
level assuming  a CV of 1.0 and noninferiority  delta  of 1.25 in ratio of geometric  means.  A 
single -analysis  total of 588 patients  would  give over 99.5%  power  to detect  noninferiority  
in pain score  with a delta  of 1 point  assuming  (conservatively)  a standard  deviation  of 2.5 
(from prior studies we expect the SD to be closer to 2.0; a total of N= 296 patients would  
be required for 99% power assuming a SD of 2.0 for pain score).  We therefore plan the  
study  to be able to detect  noninferiority  on both primary  outcomes,  which  is largely  driven  
by opioid consumption.  
Planning for a maximum of 3 interim analyses and a final analysis would require a  
maximum  of 640 total patients.  
Economic  Analysis  
 
A cost -effectiveness analysis will be conducted to determine the optimal strategy for  
economic outcomes related to pain control and surgery. In a cost -effectiveness analysis,  
costs are measured in monetary terms and benefits are measured in a unit of effect. For  
this study, the costs will be considered from the perspective of the hospital. The benefits  
will be evaluated on the cost to decrease the pain scores by 1 point using the visual  
analogue scale.  For this cost -effectiveness analysis, the incremental d ifference in costs  
and effects  between  interventions  being  evaluated  will determine  the optimal  strategy  of 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  28 ss choice.  
 
To undertake  this form of analysis,  a decision  analytic  model  using  Treeage  Pro®  will be 
developed. A decision analytic model is a systematic, quantitative approach to decision  
making and can aid in health -care resource allocation. The decision analytic model will  
compare  two possible  intervention  arms:  A- Exparel,  andB -Epidural  analgesia.  All 
possible outcomes will be incorporated into the model. Successful epidural placement  
and all adverse  events,  including  PONV  and ileus,  will be incorporated  as arms  within  the 
models.  LOS,  labor  and 30 day adverse  events  will be incorporated  at the terminal  nodes.  
A simplified decision tree is presented in Figure 1. A hospital/payer perspective will be  
adopted  and include  all relevant  costs  and outcomes.  Only costs  and benefits  relevant  to 
the interventions  in question  will be included.  All outcome  probabilities  used  in the model  
will be determined  from the clinical  trial. 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  29 ss  
 
 
 
Figure  1 – Skeleton  Decision  Tree – Exparel  vs Epidural  Analgesia  
 
Costs  to be included  will be the costs  of the intervention  drugs,  cost of consumables,  the 
cost of adverse  events,  cost of any labor  including  nursing  and physician  time in the OR, 
PACU  and on the floor,  and the cost of any healthcare  resources  required  in the 30 days  
post-surgery. These resources may include ER visits, physician visits or hospitalizations  
attributable to the procedure. Drug costs will be valued using the average wholesale  
acquisition cost as reported from the Elselvier Rx Verify database.  Consumable costs  will 
be sourced from supply management and verified from the published literature. The  value 
of LOS will be valued based on Medicare/Medicaid reimbursement schedules.  Adverse 
event costs will be sourced from the clinical trial where available and verified  using  
published  literature.  Labor  prices  will be sourced  from the Bureau  of Labor  and 

Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  30 ss Statistics using US averages. All costs will be adjusted to the same base year using the  
Medical Component of the Consumer Price Index. As costs and effects are being  
calculated  for only a short  time frame,  no future  discounting  will be used.  
The determined costs and effects for each arm of the decision tree will be incorporated.  
The analysis of the model will use the costs, effects and probabilities of each arm of the  
decision tree.  The analysis outcome will be a cost -effectiveness ratio for each arm. The  
incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratio will be calculated  for the interventions.  Depending  on 
the results, one intervention may be dominated in terms of cost and effect or the optimal  
strategy  may be dependent  on willingness  to pay for additional  units  of effect.  
The initial analysis would use direct clinical trial data. One criticism of clinical trial data,  
especially  when  it is used  in an economic  evaluation  is that its outcomes  can’t  always  be 
generalized  to other  settings.  Through  the use of economic  modeling,  clinical  trial 
outcomes can be modeled to real world conditions. Models can also extrapolate data  
beyond  the clinical  trial, link intermediate  clinical  endpoints  to final outcomes,  and simulate 
head to head comparisons of interventions where a trial does not exist. For this  study, 
complex sensitivity analysis will be conducted to test the robustness of the results  to 
variability and uncertainty in the models values and its effect on the choice of optimal  
strategy. The model will be populated with not just point estimates, but with the range of  
data values  and their associated distributions.  
Variability and uncertainty in the model will be analyzed from 3 aspects; variability in the  
population,  uncertainty  in the structure  of the model,  and uncertainty  of the variables  used  
within  the model.  Variability  of the population  will be tested  using  a Monte  Carlo  
Microsimulation. This analysis involves running one patient at a time through the model  
with the events based on the underlying probabilities and a random number generator  
within the model. This analysis simulates differences in populations and the distribution  
of potential outcomes including optimal intervention choice can be plotted. Uncertainty  
within the model will be analyzed using one -way sensitivity analysis. This analysis  
involves  varying the value  of one variable  at a time within  the predetermined  range.  From  
this analysis  will be conducted  where  one value  will be varied  at a time.  From  this analysis,  
the variables  who are the biggest  drivers  of changes  in the model  will be identified  and 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  31 ss summarized with a tornado diagram. These drivers will be compared to the drivers  
identified from the retrospective analysis to ensure uncertainty surrounding the values of  
these  variables  is adequately addressed.  
To test the uncertainty  of the variables  used  in the model,  probabilistic  sensitivity  analysis  
will be conducted. This form of analysis allows the uncertainty of all the variables in the  
model to be assessed at the same time. The values of variables are sampled from the  
distributions  within  the model.  Using  these  results,  the incremental  cost benefit  ratios  will 
be determined  with confidence  intervals.  Incremental  net benefits  will also be determined  
by determining a cost -effectiveness acceptability curve. This curve summarizes what  
proportion of time the optimal strategy will indeed be the optimal strategy as it depends  
on willingness to pay.  To further validate the results and support the identification of the  
optimal  strategy,  a cost-effectiveness  acceptability  frontier  will be produced  along  with an 
expected  value  of perfect information analysis.  
From all the analyses presented above, a transparent, easy to follow cost -effectiveness  
summary  will be produced  to aid persons  in decision  making  positions.  The summary  will 
include the costs and effects of each intervention, the incremental costs and effects  
between the interventions, the cost -effectiveness ratio of the interventions, and the  
incremental cost -effectiveness ratio between the interventions. The uncertainty around  
the results  will also be summarized  to show  that the optimal  strategy  is the choice  strategy  
in ‘what’  percentage  of time and for ‘what’  variable  values  and the value  of any additional  
research.  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  32 ss  
References  
1. Buvanendran  A, Kroin  JS: Multimodal  analgesia  for controlling  acute  
postoperative  pain.  Curr Opin  Anaesthesiol  2009;  22: 588-93 
2. Brennan  TJ, Kehlet  H: Preventive  analgesia  to reduce  wound  hyperalgesia  
and persistent  postsurgical  pain:  not an easy  path.  Anesthesiology  2005;  103: 681-3 
3. Desborough JP: The stress response to trauma and surgery. Br J Anaesth  
2000;  85: 109-17 
4. Wilmore  DW: From  Cuthbertson  to fast-track  surgery:  70 years  of progress  
in reducing  stress in  surgical  patients. Ann  Surg  2002;  236: 643-8 
5. Holte  K, Kehlet  H: Postoperative  ileus:  a preventable  event.  Br J Surg  2000;  
87: 1480 -93 
6. Nikolajsen L, Minella CE: Acute postoperative pain as a risk factor for  
chronic  pain after surgery.  European  Journal  of Pain Supplements  2009;  3: 29-32 
7. Perkins FM, Kehlet H: Chronic pain as an outcome of surgery. A review of  
predictive  factors. Anesthesiology  2000;  93: 1123 -33 
8. Apfelbaum  JL, Chen  C, Mehta  SS, Gan TJ: Postoperative  pain experience:  
results  from a national  survey  suggest  postoperative  pain continues  to be undermanaged.  
Anesth  Analg  2003;  97: 534-40, table  of contents  
9. Phillips  DM: JCAHO  pain management  standards  are unveiled.  Joint  
Commission  on Accreditation  of Healthcare  Organizations.  Jama  2000;  284: 428-9 
10. Weinbroum  AA: Non-opioid  IV adjuvants  in the perioperative  period:  
pharmacological and clinical aspects of ketamine and gabapentinoids. Pharmacol Res  
2012;  65: 411-29 
11. White  PF, Kehlet  H, Neal JM, Schricker  T, Carr DB, Carli F: The role of the 
anesthesiologist  in fast-track  surgery:  from multimodal  analgesia  to perioperative  medical  
care.  Anesth  Analg  2007;  104: 1380 -96, table  of contents  
12. Benyamin R, Trescot AM, Datta S, Buenaventura R, Adlaka R, Sehgal N,  
Glaser SE, Vallejo R: Opioid complications and side effects. Pain Physician 2008; 11:  
S105 -20 
13. Sacerdote P, Bianchi M, Gaspani L, Manfredi B, Maucione A, Terno G,  
Ammatuna M, Panerai AE: The effects of tramadol and morphine on immune responses  
and pain after surgery  in cancer  patients.  Anesth  Analg 2000;  90: 1411 -4 
14. Beilin B, Shavit Y, Hart J, Mordashov B, Cohn S, Notti I, Bessler H: Effects  
of anesthesia  based  on large  versus  small  doses  of fentanyl  on natural  killer cell 
cytotoxicity  in the perioperative  period.  Anesth  Analg  1996;  82: 492-7 
15. Yeager  MP, Colacchio  TA, Yu CT, Hildebrandt  L, Howell  AL, Weiss  J, Guyre  
PM: Morphine inhibits spontaneous and cytokine -enhanced natural killer cell cytotoxicity  
in volunteers. Anesthesiology  1995;  83: 500-8 
16. Boland  JW, Foulds  GA, Ahmedzai  SH, Pockley  AG: A preliminary  
evaluation  of the effects  of opioids  on innate  and adaptive  human  in vitro immune  function.  
BMJ Support  Palliat Care 2014;  4: 357-67 
17. Lipkind GM, Fozzard HA: Molecular modeling of local anesthetic drug  
binding  by voltage -gated  sodium channels.  Mol Pharmacol  2005;  68: 1611 -22 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  33 ss 18. Elkassabany  N, Cai LF, Mehta  S, Ahn J, Pieczynski  L, Polomano  RC, Picon  
S, Hogg R, Liu J: Does Regional Anesthesia Improve the Quality of Postoperative Pain  
Management and the Quality of Recovery in Patients Undergoing Operative Repair of  
Tibia  and Ankle  Fractures?  J Orthop  Trauma  2015;  29: 404-9 
19. Pflug AE, Halter JB: Effect of spinal anesthesia on adrenergic tone and the  
neuroendocrine  responses  to surgical  stress  in humans.  Anesthesiology  1981;  55: 120-6 
20. Ledowski T, Bein B, Hanss R, Paris A, Fudickar W, Scholz J, Tonner PH:  
Neuroendocrine  stress  response  and heart  rate variability:  a comparison  of total 
intravenous  versus  balanced  anesthesia.  Anesth  Analg 2005;  101: 1700 -5 
21. Vallejo R, Hord ED, Barna SA, Santiago -Palma J, Ahmed S: Perioperative  
immunosuppression  in cancer  patients.  J Environ  Pathol  Toxicol  Oncol  2003;  22: 139-46 
22. O'Riain  SC, Buggy  DJ, Kerin  MJ, Watson  RW, Moriarty  DC: Inhibition  of the 
stress  response  to breast  cancer  surgery  by regional  anesthesia  and analgesia  does  not 
affect vascular endothelial growth factor and prostaglandin E2. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:  
244-9 
23. Kehlet H: The stress response to surgery, Neural blockade in anaesthesia  
and pain management. Edited by Cousins M, Brinderbough M. New York, Lippincott - 
Williams,  1998.  
24. Buggy DJ, Smith G: Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia: better outcome  
after major  surgery?.  Growing  evidence  suggests  so. Bmj 1999;  319: 530-1 
25. Tiippana  E, Nilsson  E, Kalso  E: Post-thoracotomy  pain after thoracic  
epidural analgesia: a prospective follow -up study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2003; 47:  
433-8 
26. Werawatganon T, Charuluxanun S: Patient controlled intravenous opioid  
analgesia versus continuous epidural analgesia for pain after intra -abdominal surgery.  
Cochrane Database  Syst Rev  2005:  Cd004088  
27. Xu J, Chen  XM, Ma CK, Wang  XR: Peripheral  nerve  blocks  for 
postoperative pain after major knee surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 12:  
Cd010937  
28. Rivard  C, Dickson  EL, Vogel  RI, Argenta  PA, Teoh  D: The effect  of 
anesthesia  choice  on post-operative  outcomes  in women  undergoing  exploratory  
laparotomy  for a suspected  gynecologic  malignancy.  Gynecol  Oncol  2014;  133: 278-82 
29. Rodgers A, Walker N, Schug S, McKee A, Kehlet H, van Zundert A, Sage  
D, Futter M, Saville G, Clark T, MacMahon S: Reduction of postoperative mortality and  
morbidity with epidural or spinal anaesthesia: results from overview of randomised trials.  
BMJ 2000;  321: 1493  
30. Neuman  MD, Silber  JH, Elkassabany  NM, Ludwig  JM, Fleisher  LA: 
Comparative  effectiveness  of regional  versus  general  anesthesia  for hip fracture  surgery  
in adults. Anesthesiology  2012; 117: 72 -92 
31. Guay J, Choi P, Suresh S, Albert N, Kopp S, Pace NL: Neuraxial blockade  
for the prevention  of postoperative  mortality  and major  morbidity:  an overview  of 
Cochrane  systematic  reviews.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev 2014;  1: Cd010108  
32. Neuman  MD, Rosenbaum PR, Ludwig JM,  Zubizarreta JR, Silber JH:  
Anesthesia  technique,  mortality,  and length  of stay after hip fracture  surgery.  Jama  2014;  
311: 2508 -17 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  34 ss 33. Kitching AJ, O'Neill SS: Fast -track surgery and anaesthesia. Continuing  
Education  in Anaesthesia,  Critical  Care  & Pain  2009; 9:  39-43 
34. Jorgensen  H, Wetterslev  J, Moiniche  S, Dahl JB: Epidural  local anaesthetics 
versus opioid -based analgesic regimens on postoperative gastrointestinal  paralysis, 
PONV and pain after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000:  Cd001893  
35. Moraca RJ, Sheldon DG, Thirlby RC: The role of epidural anesthesia and  
analgesia  in surgical  practice. Ann  Surg  2003; 238:  663-73 
36. Johansson  K, Ahn H, Lindhagen  J, Tryselius  U: Effect  of epidural  
anaesthesia  on intestinal  blood  flow. Br  J Surg  1988; 75:  73-6 
37. Koolwijk  J, Backx  JPJM,  Bremer  RC, Kleinveld  S, Noordergraaf  GJ: 
Epidural analgesia as part of a fast track recovery (ERAS) program for elective colonic  
surgery:  just long enough.  journal  of Anesthesiology  and Clinical  Science  2013;  2 
38. Lawrence VA, Hilsenbeck SG, Mulrow CD, Dhanda R, Sapp J, Page CP:  
Incidence and hospital stay for cardiac and pulmonary complications after abdominal  
surgery.  J Gen Intern  Med 1995; 10:  671-8 
39. Sachdev  G, Napolitano  LM: Postoperative  pulmonary  complications:  
pneumonia  and acute  respiratory  failure. Surg  Clin North  Am 2012;  92: 321-44, ix 
40. Liu SS, Block  BM, Wu CL: Effects  of perioperative  central  neuraxial  
analgesia  on outcome  after coronary  artery  bypass  surgery:  a meta -analysis.  
Anesthesiology  2004;  101: 153-61 
41. Nishimori M, Low JH, Zheng H, Ballantyne JC: Epidural pain relief versus  
systemic opioid -based pain relief for abdominal aortic surgery. Cochrane Database Syst  
Rev 2012;  7: Cd005059  
42. Hausman  MS, Jr., Jewell  ES, Engoren  M: Regional  versus  general  
anesthesia  in surgical  patients  with chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease:  does  avoiding  
general anesthesia reduce the risk of postoperative complications? Anesth Analg 2015;  
120: 1405 -12 
43. Amini N, Kim Y, Hyder O, Spolverato G, Wu CL, Page AJ, Pawlik TM: A  
nationwide analysis of the use and outcomes of perioperative epidural analgesia in  
patients  undergoing  hepatic  and pancreatic  surgery.  Am J Surg  2015;  210: 483-91 
44. Hadimioglu N, Ulugol H, Akbas H, Coskunfirat N, Ertug Z, Dinckan A:  
Combination of epidural anesthesia and general anesthesia attenuates stress response  
to renal  transplantation surgery.  Transplant  Proc 2012;  44: 2949 -54 
45. Mann C, Pouzeratte Y, Boccara G, Peccoux C, Vergne C, Brunat G,  
Domergue  J, Millat  B, Colson  P: Comparison  of intravenous  or epidural  patient -controlled  
analgesia  in the elderly  after major  abdominal  surgery.  Anesthesiology  2000;  92: 433-41 
46. Drake EJ, Coghill J, Sneyd JR: Defining competence in obstetric epidural  
anaesthesia  for inexperienced  trainees.  Br J Anaesth  2015;  114: 951-7 
47. Hogan  Q: Epidural  catheter  tip position  and distribution  of injectate  
evaluated  by computed  tomography.  Anesthesiology  1999;  90: 964-70 
48. Hogan  QH: Lumbar  epidural  anatomy.  A new look by cryomicrotome  
section.  Anesthesiology 1991;  75: 767 -75 
49. Bishton IM, Martin PH, Vernon JM, Liu WH: Factors influencing epidural  
catheter  migration.  Anaesthesia  1992; 47:  610-2 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  35 ss 50. Hermanides J, Hollmann MW, Stevens MF, Lirk P: Failed epidural: causes  
and management. Br J  Anaesth 2012; 109:  144-54 
51. Arendt  K, Segal  S: Why Epidurals  Do Not Always  Work.  Reviews  in 
Obstetrics  and Gynecology  2008; 1:  49-55 
52. Clarkson CW, Hondeghem LM: Mechanism for bupivacaine depression of  
cardiac conduction: fast block of sodium channels during the action potential with slow  
recovery  from block  during  diastole.  Anesthesiology  1985;  62: 396-405 
53. Thangamuthu  A, Russell  IF, Purva  M: Epidural  failure  rate using  a 
standardised  definition. Int  J Obstet Anesth  2013; 22:  310-5 
54. Liu SS, Allen HW, Olsson GL: Patient -controlled epidural analgesia with  
bupivacaine and fentanyl on hospital wards: prospective experience with 1,030 surgical  
patients.  Anesthesiology 1998; 88:  688-95 
55. Wu CL, Francisco DR, Benesch CG: Perioperative stroke associated with  
postoperative  epidural  analgesia. J  Clin Anesth  2000;  12: 61 -3 
56. Holte K, Foss NB, Svensen C, Lund C, Madsen JL, Kehlet H: Epidural  
anesthesia, hypotension, and changes in intravascular volume. Anesthesiology 2004;  
100: 281-6 
57. Fellows  I, Bennett  T, Macdonald  IA: Influence  of environmental  temperature  
on the thermoregulatory  responses  to ethanol,  Thermal  Physiology.  Edited  by Hales  JRS.  
New York, Raven  Press, 1984, pp  221-3 
58. Davies  EC, Green  CF, Taylor  S, Williamson  PR, Mottram  DR, Pirmohamed  
M: Adverse drug reactions in hospital in -patients: a prospective analysis of 3695 patient - 
episodes.  PLoS  One 2009; 4:  e4439  
59. Koo CY, Eikermann  M: Respiratory  effects  of opioids  in perioperative  
medicine.  Open  Anesthesiol  J 2011;  5: 23-34 
60. Dahan A,  Aarts  L, Smith  TW: Incidence,  Reversal,  and Prevention of  
Opioid -induced  Respiratory  Depression.  Anesthesiology  2010;  112: 226-38 
61. Gan T, Sloan F, Dear Gde L, El -Moalem HE, Lubarsky DA: How much are  
patients willing to pay to avoid postoperative nausea and vomiting? Anesth Analg 2001;  
92: 393-400 
62. Gupta YK, Bhandari P, Chugh A, Seth SD, Dixit KS, Bhargava KP: Role of  
endogenous opioids and histamine in morphine induced emesis. Indian J Exp Biol 1989;  
27: 52-4 
63. Panchal  SJ, Muller -Schwefe  P, Wurzelmann  JI: Opioid -induced  bowel  
dysfunction:  prevalence,  pathophysiology  and burden.  Int J Clin Pract  2007;  61: 1181 -7 
64. Asgeirsson  T, El-Badawi  KI, Mahmood  A, Barletta  J, Luchtefeld  M, 
Senagore AJ: Postoperative ileus: it costs more than you expect. J Am Coll Surg 2010;  
210: 228-31 
65. Moen V, Dahlgren N, Irestedt L: Severe neurological complications after  
central  neuraxial  blockades  in Sweden  1990 -1999.  Anesthesiology  2004;  101: 950-9 
66. Turnbull DK, Shepherd DB: Post -dural puncture headache: pathogenesis,  
prevention  and treatment.  Br J Anaesth  2003; 91:  718-29 
67. Rafi AN: Abdominal field block: a new approach via the lumbar triangle.  
Anaesthesia  2001;  56: 1024 -6 
68. Young  MJ, Gorlin  AW, Modest  VE, Quraishi  SA: Clinical  implications  of the 
transversus  abdominis  plane  block  in adults.  Anesthesiol  Res Pract  2012;  2012:  731645  
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  36 ss 69. Niraj G, Searle A, Mathews M, Misra V, Baban M, Kiani S, Wong M:  
Analgesic efficacy of ultrasound -guided transversus abdominis plane block in patients  
undergoing  open  appendicectomy. Br  J Anaesth 2009;  103: 601-5 
70. Carney  J, McDonnell  JG, Ochana  A, Bhinder  R, Laffey  JG: The transversus  
abdominis plane block provides effective postoperative analgesia in patients undergoing  
total abdominal  hysterectomy.  Anesth Analg  2008;  107: 2056 -60 
71. Belavy  D, Cowlishaw  PJ, Howes  M, Phillips  F: Ultrasound -guided  
transversus abdominis plane block for analgesia after Caesarean delivery. Br J Anaesth  
2009;  103: 726 -30 
72. Gravante G,  Castri F,  Araco F,  Araco A:  A comparative study of the  
transversus  abdominis  plane  (TAP)  block  efficacy  on post-bariatric  vs aesthetic  
abdominoplasty  with flank liposuction.  Obes  Surg 2011;  21: 278-82 
73. Skjelsager A, Ruhnau B, Kistorp TK, Kridina I, Hvarness H, Mathiesen O,  
Dahl JB: Transversus abdominis plane block or subcutaneous wound infiltration after  
open  radical  prostatectomy:  a randomized  study.  Acta Anaesthesiol  Scand  2013;  57: 502- 
8 
74. Soltani  Mohammadi  S, Dabir  A, Shoeibi  G: Efficacy  of transversus  
abdominis plane block for acute postoperative pain relief in kidney recipients: a double - 
blinded  clinical  trial. Pain Med 2014;  15: 460 -4 
75. Albrecht E, Kirkham KR, Endersby RV, Chan VW, Jackson T, Okrainec A,  
Penner  T, Jin R, Brull R: Ultrasound -guided  transversus  abdominis  plane  (TAP)  block  for 
laparoscopic  gastric -bypass  surgery:  a prospective  randomized  controlled  double -blinded  
trial. Obes  Surg 2013; 23:  1309 -14 
76. Sandeman  DJ, Bennett  M, Dilley  AV, Perczuk  A, Lim S, Kelly  KJ: 
Ultrasound -guided  transversus  abdominis  plane  blocks  for laparoscopic  appendicectomy  
in children:  a prospective  randomized  trial. Br J Anaesth  2011;  106: 882-6 
77. Mishra L, Pani N, Mishra D, Patel N: Bilateral transversus abdominis plane  
block as a sole anesthetic technique in emergency surgery for perforative peritonitis in a  
high risk patient.  J Anaesthesiol  Clin Pharmacol 2013; 29:  540-2 
78. Lee AR, Choe YS: Anesthesia Experience for Open Gastrostomy With  
Ultrasound -Guided Unilateral Subcostal Transversus Abdominis Plane Block in a High  
Risk Elderly  Patient:  A Case  Report.  Anesth  Pain Med 2015;  5: e24890  
79. McDonnell JG, O'Donnell B, Curley G, Heffernan A, Power C, Laffey JG:  
The analgesic efficacy of transversus abdominis plane block after abdominal surgery: a  
prospective  randomized  controlled  trial. Anesth  Analg  2007; 104:  193-7 
80. Cohen SM: Extended pain relief trial utilizing infiltration of Exparel((R)), a  
long-acting  multivesicular  liposome  formulation  of bupivacaine:  a Phase  IV health  
economic  trial in adult  patients  undergoing  open  colectomy.  J Pain Res 2012;  5: 567-72 
81. Schuster M, Gottschalk A, Freitag M, Standl T: Cost drivers in patient - 
controlled epidural analgesia for postoperative pain management after major surgery.  
Anesth  Analg  2004;  98: 708-13, table  of contents  
82. Niraj G, Kelkar  A, Jeyapalan  I, Graff -Baker  P, Williams  O, Darbar  A, 
Maheshwaran A, Powell R: Comparison of analgesic efficacy of subcostal transversus  
abdominis plane blocks with epidural analgesia following upper abdominal surgery.  
Anaesthesia  2011;  66: 465 -71 
Date Oct 31st, 2016      Comparison  of TAP with  Exparel  versus  Continuous  Epidural  Analgesia  37 ss 83. Rao Kadam  V, Van Wijk RM, Moran  JI, Miller  D: Epidural  versus  continuous  
transversus  abdominis  plane  catheter  technique  for postoperative  analgesia  after 
abdominal  surgery.  Anaesth  Intensive  Care  2013;  41: 476-81 
84. Wu Y, Liu F, Tang  H, Wang  Q, Chen  L, Wu H, Zhang  X, Miao  J, Zhu M, Hu 
C, Goldsworthy  M, You J, Xu X: The analgesic  efficacy  of subcostal  transversus  
abdominis  plane  block  compared  with thoracic  epidural  analgesia  and intravenous  opioid  
analgesia  after radical  gastrectomy.  Anesth Analg  2013;  117: 507-13 
85. Findlay JM, Ashraf SQ, Congahan P: Transversus abdominis plane (TAP)  
blocks -a review.  Surgeon  2012;  10: 361-7 
86. Finnerty O, McDonnell JG: Transversus abdominis plane block. Curr Opin  
Anaesthesiol  2012;  25: 610 -4 
87. Finnerty  O, Sharkey  A, Mc Donnell  JG: Transversus  abdominis  plane  block  
for abdominal  surgery. Minerva  Anestesiol  2013;  79: 1415 -22 
88. Austin PC: Balance diagnostics for comparing the distribution of baseline  
covariates between treatment groups in propensity -score matched samples. Stat Med  
2009;  28: 3083 -107 
89. Yadeau  JT, Liu SS, Rade  MC, Marcello  D, Liguori  GA: Performance  
characteristics  and validation  of the Opioid -Related  Symptom  Distress  Scale  for 
evaluation of analgesic side effects after orthopedic surgery. Anesth Analg 2011; 113:  
369-77 
90. Gornall BF, Myles PS, Smith CL, Burke JA, Leslie K, Pereira MJ, Bost JE,  
Kluivers  KB, Nilsson  UG, Tanaka  Y, Forbes  A: Measurement  of quality  of recovery  using  
the QoR-40: a quantitative  systematic  review.  Br J Anaesth  2013;  111: 161-9 
91. Spallone V, Morganti R, D'Amato C, Greco C, Cacciotti L, Marfia GA:  
Validation  of DN4 as a screening  tool for neuropathic  pain in painful  diabetic  
polyneuropathy.  Diabet Med  2012; 29:  578-85 