Study  Protocol  
 
Reducing  the Duration  of Untreated  Illness  Among  Youth  in the Juvenile  Justice  System  
With Psychosis -Spectrum Disorders   
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Unique  Protocol  ID: R34 MH 115457   
9-1-2018
Specific  Aims  
According  to the PAR-16-264 FOA,  “approximately  100,000  adolescents  and young  adults  in the United 
States experience a first episode of psychosis (FEP) every year.”  Among these individuals, a substantial 
proportion report having experienced clinically significant positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations or delusions) 
prior to the age of 18, suggesting that adolescence may be a critical period for employing early intervention 
efforts. In this planning grant application, we focus on adolescents in contact with the juvenile justice system 
(JJS) because the literature indicates that 50 -75% of youth in the JJS meet criteria  for mental health disorders 
and most are not engaged in mental health services1,2. Among adolescents in the JJS, an estimated 3% have  
a psychotic illness1, and it can be reaso nably assumed that many more experience subthreshold psychotic - 
spectrum symptoms that may be indicative of risk. Evidence suggests that as many as 25% of those with FEP 
have their first contact with care through criminal justice agencies3. Among FEP indiv iduals, duration of 
untreated psychosis  (DUP), a  negative prognostic  factor, has been  shown to be  longer among those within the 
criminal justice system3. This suggests that youth with psychotic symptoms who end up in the JJS may not 
receive appropriate men tal health care and may be more susceptible to the negative sequelae associated with 
prolonged DUP.  Considering the early phase of illness, literature suggesting an association between longer 
DUP and a host of poor outcomes has led to efforts to identify i ndividuals experiencing emerging psychosis - 
spectrum symptoms as early as possible4–6. Early identification facilitates initiation of empirically -supported 
intervention services such as those offered through Coordinated Specialty Care (CSC) programs. CSCs are 
becoming more widely available across the nation, yet access is often limited due to lack of awareness of  
these services in the mental health community as well as poor patient follow through with referrals to CSCs.  
The current study will be conducted i n the Rhode Island JJS in which all youth receive a mental health 
screen (Massachusetts Youth Screening Instrument – 2nd Ed; MAYSI -2). All youth will also be screened with 
the Prodromal Questionnaire – Brief Version (PQ -B7). If they screen in on either th e MAYSI -2 or the PQ -B, 
they will be given referral  information  for CSC services by  JJS staff.  They  will also be offered  the opportunity  to 
participate  in the research  assessment,  regardless  of whether  they pursue  the CSC  referral,  which  involves  the 
Structured Interview for Psychosis -risk Syndromes [SIPS] and other measures to thoroughly assess history of 
psychotic  symptoms,  comorbid  difficulties,  and mental  health  care engagement. A  comparison  sample  of youth 
who do not screen positive on both the MA YSI-2 Thought Disturbance subscale and PQ -B will also be 
assessed  with the SIPS  to determine  accuracy  of the MAYSI -2 and PQ-B in the identification  of psychosis -risk. 
During the  first part (12  months) of the study, JJS staff will follow standard procedures  in referring youth to the 
state CSC. In the second part of the study (also 12 months), JJS staff will be instructed in the enhanced 
referral/linkage  to care protocol, including a  “warm hand -off” where referrals will be put  in direct and  immediate 
contact with CSC staff CSC staff will also be trained in procedures to increase the likelihood of follow through 
with the referral to the CSC. The research team will conduct 3 month follow -up qualitative interviews and 
quantitative assessments regarding referral p athways, bottlenecks and gaps in care, youth psychiatric 
symptoms, and JJS contacts. The following specific aims, mapped to the four stated goals of PAR 16 - 264, 
will be examined:  
Aim 1A: Identify baseline rates of psychosis -spectrum disorders within the J JS by exploring the 
occurrence  of psychotic  disorders  and psychosis -risk syndromes  as identified  through  clinical  interview  with the 
SIPS . 1B: Examine Duration of Illness (DUI) for sub - and DUP for full - threshold psychosis, in the JJS 
population based on SIPS interview data. 1C: Examine the accuracy (i.e., sensitivity, specificity) of the 
MAYSI -2 and PQ-B in identifying youth with psychosis -spectrum disorders, as defined by the SIPS.  
Aim 2A: Examine  whether  an enhanced  referral  procedure  results  in higher  rates  of completed  referrals 
to the CSC  compared  to standard  referral  procedures by comparing  rates  of completed  referrals  in Phase  I, 
standard care, versus Phase II, when an enhanced referral/linkage to care procedure is instituted in JJS. 2B: 
Identify im plementation and service level factors that promote/hinder linkage to the CSC by assessing 
feasibility , as determined by  penetration  (i.e. number of JJS personnel trained, and consistency in using the 
enhanced referral protocol) and acceptability  (i.e., JJ S staff perceived roles in screening and referral). Barriers 
and facilitators to linkage to CSC services will be examined as will equity  of the linkage across gender, race, 
and ethnicity. Efficiency  will be rated by the number of text message and phone con tacts necessary to 
complete the referral to the CSC. These data will improve understanding of service level factors that influence 
implementation of these procedures, with implications for both a future trial and real world practice.  
Aim 3A: Investigate cl ient level factors, including attitudes about CSC referrals and the rates of treatment 
initiation/retention  in CSC  services.  This data,  collected  at the 3 month  follow -up, will  also allow  examination  of 
the effects of the intervention on DUP as well as treatment barriers and motivation for treatment.  3B: 
Investigate mental health indicators at follow -up including psychotic symptoms and other outcomes (i.e., 
symptoms,  social/role  functioning),  as well as juvenile  justice  contacts. Aim 3C. Investigate  the relationship 
between service mechanisms (treatment linkage/attendance) and psychotic symptoms/DUP.  
Research  Strategy  
A. Background.  Psychotic  disorders  are among  the most  costly  and emotionally  devastating  mental  health 
conditions. Psychosis typically emerges in late adolescence or young adulthood, a period of development 
when individuals are pursuing critical milestones in the formation of their identities and life goals8. The 
emergence of psychotic symptoms during adolescence can cause a gre at deal of distress and disruption, 
oftentimes leading to long -term illness and functional impairment, with poorer prognosis for those with earlier 
onset symptoms9. Those with psychosis -spectrum disorders have markedly increased rates of suicidal 
behaviors10, and although severe violence is uncommon in this population, individuals in their first episode of 
psychosis are at  high risk of committing violent acts and coming into contact with the legal system prior to 
receiving treatment11. Evidence supporting t he benefits of psychosocial intervention in the early stages of 
psychosis has inspired ongoing efforts to identify individuals experiencing subthreshold symptoms and initiate 
appropriate services for symptom monitoring and/or treatment prior to the onset o f full-threshold psychosis.  
Prodromal psychosis. Although psychotic symptoms may emerge acutely within a “first episode” of 
psychosis, colloquially termed a “psychotic break,” schizophrenia spectrum disorders are often insidious in 
nature, with positive sy mptoms initially emerging as low -level attenuated experiences that, over time, become 
increasingly distressing and impairing. This gradual onset of symptoms is not only associated with prolonged 
distress, but also poorer long -term outcomes. While the incub ation period for psychotic symptoms varies 
greatly between individuals, many report a period of months to years during which psychotic -like experiences 
increase in frequency, intensity, and associated interference before they receive appropriate care. Insi dious 
symptoms often go unrecognized for a host of reasons including confusion (among patients and individuals 
close  to them),  lack of insight,  embarrassment,  attempts  to minimize  the significance  of or hide symptoms,  and 
belief  that symptoms  will resolve  on their own.  Thus,  psychosis -spectrum  symptoms  often  progress,  untreated, 
until acute  level care is warranted, and onset characterized by  gradual progression of symptoms is  associated 
with longer duration of untreated psychosis (DUP12). Not surprisingly, longer DUP is associated with 
particularly poor clinical, functional, and cognitive outcomes, and the more broadly defined duration of 
untreated illness (DUI; which includes prodromal and full -threshold stages of illness) may be more strongly 
linked to psy chosocial outcomes13. Overall, the DUI/DUP evidence suggests a need to recognize and treat 
early psychosis -spectrum symptoms to maximize recovery and minimize the personal and financial sequelae 
of illness9. 
Clinical high -risk states. Advances in understan ding the prodromal stages of psychosis have led to the 
development of a relatively new diagnostic category, Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome (APS),  that is now 
included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM -5). Indiv iduals with 
APS are those determined to be at clinical high -risk (CHR) for psychosis based on their endorsement of 
subthreshold positive symptoms (i.e. delusions, paranoia, grandiosity, hallucinations, and disorganized 
communication/thoughts) that are dist ressing and interfering, yet lacking in intensity, frequency, or conviction 
necessary to meet a full -threshold psychosis diagnosis14,15. Individuals with APS have been shown to have a 
markedly high risk of developing future psychosis, as approximately 36% of those identified will transition to 
psychosis  within  three  years16. Fortunately,  treatment  initiated  among  those  determined  to be at CHR,  prior to 
psychosis onset, has the potential to alleviate severity, delay onset, and, in some cases, prevent the 
development of full -threshold symptoms17. Evidence showing positive outcomes associated with the initiation 
of treatment during the prodromal phase and proximal to the onset of psychosis calls for early identification 
initiatives aimed at recognizing potentia lly prodromal symptoms and related markers of early illness.  
Identifying individuals at risk for psychosis . Advances in understanding the prodromal stages of 
psychosis have led to the development of assessment tools aimed at identifying individuals at CHR for 
psychosis14,15. Interviews that focus on subthreshold positive symptoms that can be reliably rated and  
classified  have been shown to identify  individuals with a notably  heightened risk  for psychosis16. Unfortunately, 
these interview -based assessments are costly and require significant training and administration time. Given 
these hurdles, as well as the low base -rate of psychosis -risk, full interviews are not likely to be widely adopted 
for clinical  use outside  specialty  psychosis  clinics.  Therefore,  efficient and  low-cost first-line screening  methods 
may be more practical tools for identifying individuals who may benefit from thorough psychosis -risk 
assessment within community settings.  
The use of brief psychosis -risk screening tools has the potential to conveniently identify individuals who 
may benefit  from a thorough  interview -based  evaluation7,18. Several  screening  tools  have  been  developed  and 
validated among help -seeking clients in the context of psychosis -risk clinics19, however, given constraints  
related to implementation of new, specialized measures within community settings, it is likely that a more 
feasible and acceptable approach to screening would include the use of key items within a broad measure of 
mental health concerns. Key -item screenin g is defined  as the use of a  limited number of specific items across  
a wide range of clinical domains to, 1) assess risk, and 2) prompt further probing within specific areas of 
concern. If a client endorses a key item, the clinician follows up wi th additional questionnaires and/or clinical 
interviewing.  Many  non-specific  mental  health  questionnaires  have  been  developed  to screen  across  multiple 
diagnostic categories, and success in the prediction of certain concerns (e.g., anxiety) has been 
demonstrated20–24. The validity of key items to screen for psychosis risk, however, has never been 
systematically examined as a means to facilitate more widely adopted intervention for early psychosis.  
Youth in the Juvenile Justice System . One high risk gr oup that receives relatively little attention in the 
literature with respect to identification and referral to treatment for psychotic symptoms is youth involved in 
Juvenile Justice (JJ). This study will focus specifically on court -involved, but non -incarc erated (CINI) juveniles, 
who comprise approximately two -thirds of the JJ population seen in the Juvenile Justice System (JJS). In 
Rhode Island, these youth, typically ranging in age from 11 -18, have their first contact with the JJS in the 
Rhode Island Fami ly Court (RIFC) Juvenile Intake Department (JID), a diversion based program for first -time 
offending youth. Most first -time offending, CINI juvenile offenders are diverted through monitoring (typically 90 
days) by a juvenile intake coordinator who makes va rious referrals (e.g., substance abuse treatment, mental 
health  evaluation)  and closely  monitors  adherence  with the caveat  that intake  requirements  must  be completed 
to avoid further JJ involvement (see letter of support from Chief Judge Michael Forte).  
Linkage to treatment among JJ youth . In RI, the majority of youth (67%) who made their first contact 
with the  JJS fell into  the caution or  warning range  of at least  one mental  health subscale of  the Massachusetts 
Youth  Screening  Instrument - Second  Edition  (MAYSI -2) with 40% flagging  on at least  2 subscales25. For many 
youth, the JJS is the ﬁrst point of contact for mental health support26 and often their only access to these 
services27. CINI youth who endorse recent psychiatric symptoms on screening tools g enerally do not have 
immediate access to a medical or mental health provider for services28,29. For example, Burke and colleagues 
(2015) found that 74% of youth who made their first contact with the JJS had a psychiatric disorder, yet only 
20% reported rec eipt of mental health services at follow -up assessments30. In another study, youth in the JJS 
had the lowest rates of mental health treatment utilization in a large sample of adolescents who received 
services in at least one public sector of care, e.g., al cohol and drug services, child welfare, etc31. Lack of 
access to needed mental health services among JJ youth32, may increase risk for a range of future 
psychopathology, including psychotic symptoms. Connecting JJ youth to care is a priority of this applic ation.  
At the RIFC JID, evidenced -based screening measures, including the MAYSI -2, were implemented in 
2014  to screen  CINI youth  for mental  health  and substance  use issues.  To date,  11% of these  youth  flag in  the 
caution or warning range on the MAYSI -2 Thought Disturbance subscale33. Unless they are floridly psychotic 
and require emergency care, the overwhelming majority of these CINI youth return home with referral 
information  to a community  mental  health  clinic or, at best,  a future  mental  health appointment  with a poor  rate 
(48-62%) of treatment uptake in the RI community33. The National Center for Mental Health and Juvenile 
Justice (NCMHJJ) Blueprint for Change goals include access to mental health treatment for all youth who 
endorse mental healt h symptoms indicating risk for a possible crisis or self -harm34, a frequent concern of 
individuals with psychotic symptoms.  
What prevents use of mental health services in JJ youth? Nationally, a commonly cited barrier to JJ 
involved youth receiving mental health care includes poor identification of mental health problems and referral 
to care. Mental health screenings are underutilized within the JJS and psychiatric disorders are often not 
detected35. For example, Hoeve et al. (2014) found that only  60% of y outh with a psychiatric  disorder received 
a treatment  referral  following  probation  or detention  intake,  with the lowest  rates  of referrals  given  to those  with 
internalizing disorders35. In another study of substance using CINI youth, only 18% received refe rrals to JJ 
drug and alcohol services36. Of youth endorsing suicide ideation at the JID screening, 14% of youth were not 
referred to mental health services37. Minority and disadvantaged youth, who are overrepresented in the JJS, 
have particular problems wi th access to care38–41. In the Rhode Island JID, for example, white youth had 3.37 
greater odds of being referred compared to black youth (p < .01) who endorsed a lifetime history of trauma.  
In addition, when given referrals, CINI youth and their families often do not follow through with court 
recommendations  and referrals,  posing  significant  challenges  for JJ staff in monitoring  and enforcing  juveniles’ 
compliance  with court orders.  Factors  related  to nonadherence include  living  situation42, poor  family  and social 
functioning43, and social disadvantage44. Many adolescents and guardians may also exhibit low levels of 
motivation to change as a result of being court ordered to seek intervention45,46. In this application’s 
intervention protocol, we pay particul ar attention to educating caregivers about mental health treatment and 
improving access to care by linking families to appointments for specialized psychosis -spectrum care at the 
time of their positive screen at the JID.  
Early psychosis intervention throug h Coordinated Specialty Care. Given the rise in recognition of 
psychosis -risk syndromes and the promising benefits of early psychosocial care, specialized psychosis - 
spectrum intervention services are being established across the nation. Coordinated Specia lty Care (CSC) 
intervention programs offer tailored services to clients with psychosis -spectrum disorders to help individuals 
effectively manage early symptoms and comorbid concerns (e.g., difficulties related to mood, anxiety, 
attention, and  substance  abuse), preserve  functioning,  and reduce  the long-term impact of illness.  As stated  in 
the FOA, “CSC treatment involves integrated, team -based care and typically features use of single 
antipsychotic medications, prescribed in low doses; family psychoeducation; supported employment and/or 
education; cognitive -behavioral therapy oriented to recovery; coordination with primary care services; and 
continuity  of care  across  inpatient and  outpatient  treatment  settings”. Rhode Island  has two CSC clinics  funded 
by the 2014 SAMSHA set -aside in the Community Mental Health Block Grant Program grant to the state. In  
this research project, we will partner with the CSC based at the Kent Center, the mental health clinic based in 
Warwick, RI, which is the second largest city in the state and only a 15 -minute drive for families that live in 
Providence, RI, where the largest JID is located. The CSC based in Warwick, called the Healthy Transitions 
program, uses a team approach to provide case management, family psych oeducation, individual and group 
therapy, coordination  of mental  health  and primary  care by a nurse  clinician,  psychiatry  consultation,  substance 
abuse specialty care, employment and education counseling, and wraparound case management. The CSC 
accepts pat ients regardless of insurance status; schedules evaluations typically within 2 weeks; provides 
evening appointments and can be reached by public transportation. Families can be reimbursed for travel 
costs. (See letter of support  from Barbara Lamoureux, Pro gram Director).  
Model  for dissemination and  implementation . The manner in which best practice  is implemented in JJ 
settings is important given challenges specific to the JJS. More than 60 dissemination and implementation 
(D&I) research models were identified in a D&I literature review47. The Conceptual Model of Implementation  
Research  (CMIR)48, developed  from the mental  health  service  field,  is most consistent  with the current  study’s 
goals to utilize strategies to introduce evidence -based practice within a specific setting, juvenile justice48–50. 
CMIR  was chosen  because  of its focus  on implementation  research  with mental  health  interventions  across 
socio -ecological levels relevant to the court setting (e.g., system, organization, and individual leve ls). 
Successful  implementation  ensures  feasibility,  fidelity,  context/population  responsiveness,  and sustainability49. 
In this application, we will train front -line staff in the JID to implement an enhanced referral procedure to 
CSC when an adolescent has screened positive as potentially at risk for psychosis (based on their responses 
on the MAYSI -2 Thought  Disorder  subscale  or the Prodromal  Questionnaire – Brief Version; PQ -B7) in order  to 
develop a feasible, disseminable process of referral for appropriat e mental health services. We will also test 
whether this enhanced referral process results in better linkage to care and improved outcomes compared to 
the baseline control condition. We will examine CMIR -specific implementation strategies, separate from th e 
intervention strategies, with the  goal of evaluating outcomes at the: implementation -level, such as the number 
of personnel trained and using screening and referral procedures for adolescents with psychosis -spectrum 
symptoms in the JJS; service -level, e.g., quality of the referral performed by CSC staff and the percentage of 
time treatment linkage is completed; and  consumer (patient) -level, in particular, outpatient treatment 
attendance, and  psychosis -spectrum symptoms. While  the ultimate  goal of implementation efforts  is improving 
clinical outcomes, this model also provides an understanding of the mechanisms through which gains are 
conferred in order to improve both conceptual models of referral processes and the referral process itself.  
SIGNFICAN CE. The current  study  proposes  a scalable  intervention  designed  to increase  identification  and 
linkage to CSC for adolescents involved in the JJS who present with psychosis spectrum symptomatology . 
Juvenile courts, and the JJS broadly, are increasing the p roactive screening of youth for mental health 
symptoms. However, there is an inevitable lag between screening and an outpatient mental health  
appointment which, in turn, is followed by generally poor uptake of outpatient treatment. This application’s 
appro ach is consistent with FOA language, specifically the NIMH interest in “better signal detection of 
psychosis onset, or symptoms suggesting high clinical risk of psychosis, within …. criminal justice agencies,” 
as well as “methods to achieve expeditious ref erral of persons with first episode psychosis (FEP), or those at 
high clinical risk of psychosis, to an appropriate specialty care treatment program”.  As specified in the FOA, 
this planning grant application will also: “identify a baseline rate of DUP”, as  well as explore the occurrence of 
psychosis -spectrum  symptoms  among high  risk JJ  youth,  “identify  bottlenecks  and gaps  in the pathway  to CSC 
care”, and “develop and pilot test feasible strategies for substantially reducing DUP”. The scientific premise  of 
this research is supported by the need to develop more effective screening and linkage to service strategies 
during a youth’s contact  with the  JJS, the virtual absence of such  studies in the  literature,  and its enhancement 
by use of a conceptual model for implementation. Our study will provide data on screening delivered by JJS 
staff and improved linkage to follow -up mental health care as the clinical services mechanism hypothesized to 
reduce the DUI/DUP. As requested in the FOA, we will also “provide evidence of the association between 
those targets”, i.e. latency to treatment linkage and engagement in treatment, and “the outcomes of interest 
(e.g.,  DIU/DUP,  symptoms,  and functioning)”.  In exploratory  analyse s, we will  also assess  potential  moderators 
that may inform which youth most benefit from this screening/referral intervention, including adolescent sex, 
gender, race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status, as well as service level factors, i.e., fidelity of  JID and CSC 
staff to the referral process. This research also has the potential to directly inform clinical practices  in JJS 
settings and has significant implications for scalability and dissemination. Scientific rigor  is maintained by 
ensuring fidelity t o the brief screening/referral protocol, study retention procedures, blinding of research 
assessors, data analytic strategies including missing data procedures, which are described in detail in the 
approach section below. Additionally, relevant biological variables , specifically sex, are considered in the  
experimental  design.  If the number  of females  is sufficiently  large,  we will report  results  separately  by sex but 
do all primary hypothesis testing without sex stratification. We will also conduct analyses with boys alone 
because the sample will be largely boys.  
B. INNOVATION: The proposed study is innovative  in that it proposes a new approach to screening and 
referral with adolescents at high risk for or in the early stages of psychosis by: 1)  using a protocol that is 
designed from the start to be readily disseminable to other JJS settings; 2) measuring moderators and 
mechanisms  of action  underlying the  enhanced  referral  protocol;  3) examining  the MAYSI -2/PQ -B as screens 
for psychosis  risk; and  4) examining  gender  identity,  given  that those  who identify  as transgendered  have  high 
rates of psychotic symptoms 51 but this question has not been examined in the juvenile justice population.  
C. APPROACH  
Overview of study procedures. This study will be implemented as a roll -out trial, a commonly used 
approach in system -wide intervention designs52,53. During the JID intake process, all juveniles attend their 
appointment with a caregiver/legal guardian and complete the MAYSI -254 and PQ -B. Youth will be eli gible to 
participate in the study if they flag on either the caution (2 items endorsed) or warning (3 or more items 
endorsed)  cut-offs on the 5-item MAYSI -2 Thought Disturbance  subscale,  or the cut-off score  (> 6) on the PQ- 
B. Using  both measures  will allow us to examine  rates  of false  positives  on the MAYSI -2, which  is commonly 
used in juvenile justice settings, enhance  identification of females at  risk, which is a  relative  weakness of the 
MAYSI -2, but not  the PQ-B, and  collect  data on the PQ-B with this population, adding  to the database  of this 
commonly used measure in NIMH -funded studies (Personal communication, PO Susan Azrin).  
JID intake workers will contact the research team when a youth screens in. As a back -up system, the JID 
workers turn in their MAYSI -2/PQ-B forms to the RIFC Mental Health Clinic (MHC) each day so the mental 
health team can determine if any further mental health evaluation is necessary for endorsement of any 
symptom. Co -Is Thompson  and Kemp  will be involved  in this process  so that if a youth  who screened  in on the 
Thought Disturbance subscale was not referred by the JID intake worker, they will be contacted by research 
staff if they signed the consent to contact form. Co -I Thompson, the Research Coordinator, or an RA, both of 
whom will have an office in the RIFC MHC on the same hallway as the JID, will consent/assent families.  
Research  staff will be registered  as court  interns  which  will allow  access  to court  records  and the court 
calendar. Co -I Kemp, who also has  an office  in the M HC, will be the back -up for approaching  families.  
Because  there  are several  research  projects  being  conducted  in the RIFC  JID, Co-I Kemp  has established 
a procedure  whereby  all families  in the waiting  room  are approached  by an RA and asked  to sign a “consent  to 
contact” form. If a parent signs this form, and the teen subsequently screens positive and qualifies for a study 
being conducted in RIFC after the JID intake worker administers the MAYSI -2/PQ-B, research staff will then 
meet separately with par ent/caregiver and the juvenile to describe study procedures in detail and 1) obtain 
juvenile assent without parental presence (note: no juvenile will ever be sanctioned by the court for not 
agreeing or being unable to participate in the research study; see  Human  Subjects/RIFC  Chief Judge Letter of 
Support), and 2) obtain written informed consent from the parent/caregiver. If the research team is unable to 
meet with the family while they are at their intake appointment, the family will be contacted by phone/ text and 
an appointment, either at the RIFC or at the family home, to consent/assent the parent and teen, and conduct 
the baseline assessment. Consenting procedures will also include permission to access court records.  
Intervention condition overview . The intervention will have two phases: 1) a Standard Care (baseline 
control) condition, followed by, 2) an Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care  condition. Because this is a roll -out 
trial, the two conditions will be compared using a non -randomized open trial desi gn. Design Consideration : 
We decided against randomization due to the following reasons: a) use of front line workers, as opposed to 
research staff specifically employed for the purposes of the research study, could result in contamination 
across  the two study conditions; b)  randomization would  create  the potential  for therapist  characteristics  having 
a primary  effect  on referral  outcomes; and  c) JJS administrators  and staff,  at this site have  expressed  concerns 
that randomization is an unacceptable practice in the JJS because it  results in the denial of what is assumed 
to be a superior service, the Enhanced Referral condition, to 50% of the youth.  
Families approached in months 3 - 14 (n = 100; 12 months of recruitment) will be in the standard care , 
baseline control condition and receive standard court procedures, with one exception. If the youth screens 
positive on  the Thought  Disturbance  subscale  or PQ-B, the intake  worker  will be instructed  to refer the family  to 
the CSC, rather than their local mental health clinic.  
During months 6 – 17, follow -up assessments of the standard care group will be completed and in 
months  18 – 19, JID intake  workers  will be trained  in the Enhanced  Referral/Linkage  to Care  protocol as  will 
the CSC staff who receive the  referral from JID intake workers.  
Youth  consented  in months 20  –31 (n= 100; 12 months  of recruitment),  will receive the Enhanced  
Referral/Linkage to Care  protocol. Details regarding the content of this condition are described below.  
Design Consideration : We considered enrolling an older sample because we will likely identify a larger 
proportion of  prodromal  (CHR) rather  than syndromal  psychotic disorder  youth in juvenile justice. Nonetheless, 
this application’s  approach  is consistent  with FOA language,  specifically in  “better  signal  detection  of psychosis 
onset, or symptoms suggesting high clinical risk of psychosis, within …. criminal justice agencies,” as well as  
“methods to achieve expeditious referral of persons with first episode psychosis (FEP), or those at high 
clinical  risk of psychosis”.  As specified  in the FOA,  this planning  grant  application  will also:  “explore  the 
occurrence of psychosis -spectrum symptoms”.  
We also considered having staff from the RIFC MHC perform a full evaluation before referring to the 
CSC  but MHCs  are not consistently  associated  with JJS nationwide  so we opted  for a procedure  that would  be 
generalizable  to the JJS nationwide. Similarly, we considered  having CSC  staff meet  the family  at the JID but 
again felt this  would not be a typical service delivery approach and consequently would affect eventual 
dissemination of our protocol.  
Qualifications of research team. This application brings together clinical researchers with expertise in 
screening,  brief intervention, and referral  (PI Spirito,  Co-I Wolff ) and mental  health in  the JJS ( Co-I Kemp ). PI 
Spirito and Co -I Wolff have collaborated on 7 NIH treatment grants, primarily on adolescents with mood 
disorders and high levels of affect dysregulation. They are very exper ienced in conducting treatment trials with 
adolescents with major psychopathology55 39 , and just completed two studies (MH01783; AA020705). All of 
these studies have included an in -depth assessment of psychopathology. Co -I Wolff also works on the 
adolesce nt inpatient unit at Brown’s child psychiatric hospital, Bradley Hospital, and routinely supervises 
treatment teams making differential diagnostic decisions regarding adolescents with psychotic symptoms. PI 
Spirito is currently conducting a screening/brief  electronic intervention for substance misuse in juvenile justice 
with Co -I Kemp. Co-I Thompson brings experience in working with youth with psychosis -spectrum disorders. 
She has specific expertise in psychosis -risk assessment, having been trained by SIPS creators and worked as 
a graduate assistant for five years administering comprehensive diagnostic interviews including the SIPS to 
young people (aged 12 -25) as part of the Maryland Early Intervention Program (funded through the Maryland 
Department  of Healt h and Mental Hygiene, Behavioral  Health  Administration  through  the Center  for Excellence 
on Early Intervention for Serious Mental Illness OPASS# 14 -13717G/M00B4400241). Co -I Thompson also has 
experience in the development and administration of DUP intervie ws among young adults within an FEP clinic 
at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center . Co-I Yen brings expertise in assessment and brief interventions 
with high risk adolescents, and  has collaborated  with PI Spirito  on 6 NIMH  and 2 private  foundation  grants.  She 
is currently the PI on a brief intervention for psychosis and suicidality in adolescents/young adults with patients 
recruited  from an  inpatient psychiatric  unit (AFSP  grant SRG -0-158-14). She  is also  the Director  of the Training 
and Assessment Unit at the Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior at Brown University . Co-I Kemp 
collaborated on three prior NIH funded grants focused on youth involved in the JJS (HD080780; DA034538; 
DA035231). Currently, PI Spirito is the primary mentor on Co -I Kemp’s Mentored Career Award (MH111606), 
focusing on suicidality among JJS involved youth . Co-I Kemp has received extensive training in qualitative 
research methods and interviewing. She is the Director of the RIFC MHC, which conducts forensic mental 
health evaluations with youth throughout the JJS continuum, including screening of adolescents with psychotic 
symptoms. She is very experienced in conducting research and examining clinical need with JJS involved 
youth.  Co-I Kemp  has worked  extensively  with the Chief Judge  and Deputy  Court  Administrator,  Kevin  Richard, 
to implement research protocols within the court setting. She also oversees JID intake workers on screening 
youth for mental health and substance use issues with the MAYSI -2. 
The assembled  research  team  collectively  brings  expertise  in the assessment  of adolescents  with a broad 
range of psychopathology, including psychosis -spectrum disorders, experience in conducting community - 
based research, and experience in improving assessment and referral withi n the juvenile justice system.  
Participants. JJS offenders, ages 12 - 17, will be eligible for enrollment with the following criteria: 1) legal 
guardian available to consent for juvenile’s participation, and adolescent assents to participate; 2) juvenile is  
English speaking; parents may be Spanish -speaking because we will have Spanish -speaking research staff 
and interpreter  services  available;  and 3) juvenile  flags  positive  on the MAYSI -2 Thought Disturbance  subscale 
or the PQ -B. Exclusion criteria  include: 1) observable developmental delays that would interfere with obtaining 
assent and/or accurate assessment, and 2) juvenile meets hospital level of care for imminent risk due to 
severity of symptoms, in which case they will be transported to Emergency Depart ment per existing JID 
procedures. In addition, we will collect a comparison sample (n = 70) meeting these same inclusion/exclusion 
criteria with the exception that they will screen negative on the MAYSI - 2 Thought Disturbance subscale and 
PQ-B. This subgro up will be used in analyses exploring the sensitivity/specificity of the MAYSI -2 Thought 
Disturbance subscale and PQ -B.. The MAYSI -2 is a 52 -item self -report measure for ages 12 -17 that screens 
for current MH symptoms.  The Thought Disturbance Subscale cons ists of 5 items, 4 of which refer to altered 
perceptions of reality and the fifth to de -realization. The developers do not recommend use of the subscale 
with girls. The PQ -B, a 21 item  measure for both males and females, with an 8th grade reading level and  takes 
3-4 minutes to complete. In a sample of 141 adolescents and young adults referred for assessment to 
prodromal research centers, the instrument achieved specificity of 0.68 and sensitivity of 0.88 with regard to 
SIPS diagnoses using a cutoff distress  score threshold of six or greater on the weighted distress measure.  A 
recent review indicated sensitivity ranging from .70 -.97 across different samples19. 
Racial  and ethnic  minority  considerations . Consistent  with 2016  RIFC  statistics,  ethnic  representation 
will be approximately 18% Hispanic and racial representation will be about 22% African American or Black  
(and other) and 72% White. Consistent with US nationwide statistics, African American juveniles are 
disproportionately represented (22% of juvenile offenders, yet only 6% of the entire Rhode Island population). 
Approximately  9% of intake  cases  involve parents  who speak only  Spanish (see  Facilities & Enrollment Table). 
Females are increasingly represented in the system (29%  in 2016) and are disproportionately represented 
among status offenders  (account  for 46% of status offenses  relative  to 11% of violent offenses).  We expect our 
sample  to reflect  these  demographics,  but we will over-sample  girls if possible  to lower  the ratio of boys  to girls. 
Estimated sample size and retention rates. In 2016, the RIFC handled offenses for 2,634 juveniles of 
whom 764 (29%) were female and 2,581 (98%) who were in the 12 -17 year old age range. The JID, for 
example, typically screens more t han 900 juveniles per year and, of those youth who are screened, 
approximately 11% (N= 99) flag for thought disturbance. With a conservative enrollment rate of 70%, and 12 
months of enrollment in both the baseline control (n = approximately 100 positive sc reens) and experimental 
intervention condition (n = approximately 100 positive screens), we would be able to meet our projected 
enrollment goals for both baseline standard care (n = 70) and enhanced referral (n=70) conditions. Using a 
conservative follow -up rate of 80% of the 140 enrolled and retained participants, approximately 55 families in 
both the baseline control and experimental condition are expected to complete the 3 -month follow -up. In 
addition, we will recruit 70 youth in Phase I and Phase II who  do not screen positive on the MAYSI -2 or PQ-B 
in order to conduct the sensitivity/specificity analyses. These projections are feasible given our excellent 
working relationship with the Rhode Island JJS  including the RIFC  and prior experience recruiting fr om the JID 
(see RIFC Chief Judge Letter of Support). Co -I Kemp collaborated on a 24 -month longitudinal epidemiological 
study of first -time CINI offenders at the RIFC and she successfully recruited the entire sample of 400 first -time 
offending CINI youth  (DA034538). Co -I Kemp  is also currently  recruiting at the RIFC JID  for a baseline sample 
of suicidal CINI youth for her NIMH K23 Mentored Career Award. PI Spirito also successfully established a 
referral  system  from RIFC  to two completed  grants, NIAAA  (AA017659)  and NIDA  (DA0029871)  trials  for youth 
with substance use -related court involvement.  
Protection  against  attrition . To maximize  participant  retention,  we will employ  procedures  routinely  used 
in our studies to reinforce with JJS families the value  of the follow -up portion of the study and to use all 
available resources to locate participants. Contact information will include the names and phone numbers of 
two friends/family members who can be contacted if staff is unable to reach the teen.  We will also ask for the 
parent and teen cell phone numbers and emails. Contact information will also be updated periodically prior to 
the 3 -month follow -up assessment. Participants will also be given refrigerator magnets and pens with the 
program’s contact inform ation as well as a card with the date for the follow -up assessment. Reminder 
postcards, text messages, and emails will be sent to participants. Telephone calls will also be made to 
participants. Weekly case review meetings will be held with the PI and Co -Is to review no -shows and plans 
discussed to complete contact with the participant. We have used these procedures with success in prior 
projects. Participants will be contacted 1 week prior to their follow -up appointment. In PI Spirito’s NIAAA - 
funded study  with CINI youth, retention rates were 94% at 3 months and 84% at 6 months  
Compensation  for participation. Families  will be compensated  $100  for each  assessment  ($50 each,  for 
a parent and the teen, at baseline and 3 -month follow -up). 
Referral  Conditions  
Phase I, months 3 – 14: Standard Care (baseline control) condition . In the Standard Care condition, if 
a teen has a positive screen on the MAYSI -2/PQ-B screening battery , JJS staff members determine whether 
there is need for further evaluation or concern o f imminent risk. If there is concern for imminent risk, then the 
staff member contacts a clinician in the RIFC Mental Health Clinic for an emergency evaluation. If the teen is 
not at imminent risk, a referral to a community mental health clinic is arranged  by the JJ intake worker. In this 
application, we will follow the same procedures, but if there is no imminent risk,  the JID staff member will refer 
to the CSC rather than a community mental health clinic. The CSC will evaluate the teen and offer services at 
the CSC if psychotic symptoms are a primary concern. CHR youth with other primary issues (e.g., trauma, 
substance  use) are  typically seen by other services in the  mental health clinic which houses  the CSC. All CHR 
youth  who consent  to the study  will be seen  for follow -up assessments and  can be referred  back  to the CSC  or 
mental health clinic to resume/initiate treatment if symptoms worsen. In the data analysis, we will record the 
percentage  of youth  referred  to the CSC who  are CHR/psychosis risk, as  well as the services  they receive and 
clinical  outcome data  at the 3 month  follow -up assessment.  Data  collected  by Co-I Kemp  indicates  that 26% of 
the youth that present to  JID report that they are already receiving mental health treatment. In such  cases, the 
families will be referred back to their mental health provider with the recommendation to consult the CSC.  
Phase II, months 20 – 31: Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition . The Enhanced 
Referral/Linkage  to Care condition  follows the same steps  as desc ribed in  the Standard Care  described above 
if there  is imminent  risk. If there  is no imminent  risk, the JJ intake  worker  contacts  the CSC  program  directly  for 
a “warm hand -off”. The CSC intake worker will speak with the parent and arrange for an intake evaluation, 
either  at the CSC  clinic  or at the family’s  home. For  families  that are  already  receiving mental  health  treatment, 
the JID intake worker will arrange the referral to the CSC for a consultation, at the CSC or family home. After 
the appointment i s arranged, the JID intake worker reviews some psychoeducation material about the role of  
mental  health  care in emotional/behavioral  problems  (see below).  
In addition, the CSC clinician who takes the phone call will use a motivational interviewing style to 
encourage  families  to follow  up with their scheduled  appointment.  This portion  of the  protocol  is based  on a 
module from PI Spirito/Co -I Wolff’s protocol that was recently tested in two randomized controlled trials 
(MH01783; AA020705)  that are nearing completion (see below).  
Psychoeducation material. The JID intake worker will review a handout on common symptoms of 
emotional distress and how youth and parents benefit from seeking mental health services. More specifically, 
the document outlines how to recognize warning signs of emotional distress, and the importance of finding 
support for difficulties that interfere with functioning and quality of life.  We decided to use a generic description 
of emotional problems, including some psychos is-like experiences as well as other common concerns, rather 
than a description of specific psychosis -spectrum symptoms, because we believe it is more consistent with the 
level of training of JID workers and avoids the premature implication of a psychotic disorder diagnosis. In 
addition, to ensure these procedures can be easily disseminated in the future if they appear useful, we kept  
this aspect of the protocol very straightforward. The JID Intake worker will just be asked to read through the 
handout with  the parent  and not required  to learn  any interview  material  about mental  health  care or psychosis - 
spectrum symptoms. The review of the psychoeducation material will be presented with the goal of enhancing 
the chances that the family will follow through wi th the CSC appointment.  
Motivational interviewing prompts . Similar to the psychoeducation aspect of the protocol, the CSC 
clinician will not be required to learn any interview material but instead will have a sheet with the following 
prompts  adapted  from motivational  interviewing protocols  by Drs. Spirito  and Wolff.  The decision  to keep  this 
aspect of the protocol very structured was to ensure its eventual disseminability. Prompts include:  
Do you think  it is necessary  for your child to be seen  at the clinic? 
May I share a few concerns I have?  
Some  teens  who have  thoughts such  as [specify]  often  get worse  as they get older. For  many  teens, it’s  only 
temporary and they start to feel better after they start talking to someone.  
And for some  teens  there  are medicines  that can help with these  thoughts  quite  a bit. 
Getting  help for these  thoughts  early  is important  so we really  encourage  parents  to get it checked  out. 
How are you feeling about going to the clinic appointment?  
What  might  get in the way of  you being  able to do that (i.e.,  transportation,  insurance,  time of day)? 
Is there anything we can do to help make it easier for you to get to the appointment?  
We can call you the day before  or the morning  of the appointment  to remind  you -- would  you like that? 
Follow -up reminders to set up a CSC appointment. Three and seven days after  the referral to CSC, the 
JJ intake worker will text the teen’s parent/caregiver to see if the  family kept their appointment with the CSC. If 
not, the intake  worker will  text the  parent  the phone  number  for the CSC  and will also ask  permission  to contact 
the CSC to further assist the family in setting up another appointment. JID workers can also choose to contact 
families by phone. A record of contacts will be recorded in order to  examine feasibility, acceptability, and 
efficiency of these procedures.  
Training JID and CSC workers in Enhanced Referral protocol (months 18 -19). A one hour training in 
this protocol will be conducted to mimic the type of training that would occur in ty pical circumstances. For the 
JID intake workers, we will: 1) review  the MAYSI -2 Thought Disturbance subscale and PQ -B and discuss why 
these symptoms might be potentially significant for these youth; 2) review the handout about symptoms of 
mental health pro blems in youth as well as the importance of a follow -up evaluation; 3) review the concept of 
the CSC and why a referral to the CSC would be potentially helpful to the adolescent; 4) review the need to 
arrange  a referral  to the CSC  for a consult even  if the  youth  is already  receiving  mental  health  care elsewhere; 
and 5) role play the “warm hand -off” procedures used when referring families to the CSC.  
There will be no ongoing supervision of the JID intake worker because that would be the most likely 
situation  in a typical  JJS intake  department.  Instead, we  will: 1) as  part of  routine  staff meetings,  the JID intake 
workers will be reminded about screening for mental health problems with the MAYSI -2/PQ-B and the referral 
procedures for youth flagging in on any p roblem, i.e. substance use, suicidal ideation, or thought disturbance;  
2) have the JID intake workers complete procedural checklists at the end of the interview that prompt them to 
follow  referral  procedures (we have had success  with improving procedures w ith this  type of self -monitoring in 
two recently  completed  RCTs); 3)  as part of the  research  procedure,  in their daily review  of MAYSI -2 and PQ- 
B forms, research staff will identify anyone who screened positive on these measures and check with the JID 
intake workers about whether they completed the self -monitoring checklist, reviewed the handout with the 
parents and made a direct referral to the CSC. This procedure serves as a feedback mechanism to JID staff 
and as a reminder to complete the referral prot ocol with youth.  
Fidelity  to the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition.  We will have the CSC clinician, who will 
be employed  by the research project  but also work  at the CSC, audiotape  their conversation  with the family  in 
the enhanced referral phase of the study. The CSC clinician will use a hand -held audio recorder so that only 
the CSC clinician’s portion of the conversation will be recorded. Fidelity will also be rated by interviewing the 
parent/caregiver at the baseli ne research assessment, which will typically occur within a week of the JID  
appointment. Caregivers will be asked what the CSC intake worker said to them about scheduling a CSC 
appointment. The RA conducting the assessment will record verbatim th e parent’s responses. In both the 
clinician reported and parent reported data collection, fidelity will be rated by PI Spirito and Co -Is Wolff and 
Yen on a two-point  scale  (0= not satisfactory;  1= satisfactory).  If there  is disagreement,  a consensus  meetin g 
will be held to resolve discrepancies in ratings.  
Baseline and follow -up assessment. Families in both phases of the study will complete the same 
assessments at baseline and 3 -month follow -up to gather data on treatment history, psychosis -spectrum 
sympto ms, general psychiatric symptoms and functioning, as well as JJS contacts (see details below under 
Measures).  In addition,  at follow -up, we will  interview  families  about  barriers  to treatment  linkage  and treatment 
satisfaction. The RA and Co -I Thompson will be blind as to whether the families were seen for follow -up CSC 
or mental health care until after the interviews are completed.  
 
Implementation  
Outcomes  
• Measures  
• Acceptability  
• Qualitative 
inte rview  and 
Self-report 
measure  
• Feasability  
• Data  % receiving 
intervention  
• Penetration (i.e., 
how many staff 
trained and 
consistently  use)  
• Observation   
Service  Mechanisms  
• Fidelity  
• Ratings  of 
protocol  fidelity  
• Efficiency  - data  on 
follow -up contacts 
to complete 
referral  
• Equity  of services  
• Data  on linkage  by 
subgroups   
 
Client  Outcomes  
• Treatment 
attendance and 
collateral  treatment  
• Psychosis  symptoms  
• Other  psychiatric 
symptoms  
• Motivation  for 
treatment  
• Barriers  to treatment  
• Treatment 
satsifaction  
• Recidivism  
• Court  records  We will also interview 
JID intake workers and 
CSC staff to assess both 
services and 
implementation factors 
related  to referral  process 
and completion. The 
baseline and follow -up 
assessment battery were 
designed to min imize 
participant burden and to 
thoroughly assess 
psychosis -spectrum 
symptoms. The follow -up 
assessment will be 
scheduled 3 -months  
post-referral  to the CSC. 
The 3 -month follow -up 
period will allow us to 
assess  whether  high risk 
youth engage in 
treatment with the CSC 
or other mental  
healthcare.  Both baseline  and follow  up interviews  will be conducted  in-person  and last approximately  1.5- 2 
hours.  
Co-I Thompson will administer the Structured Interview for Psychosis -risk Synd romes (SIPS), described 
below. She has received formal training and certification by SIPS developers to conduct the interviews, and  
she was trained  to research  quality  reliability  (ICC>.8)  within  her prior  research  team. She  will administer  all the 
SIPS interviews in order to maintain consistency across the two phases of the study as well as across 
participants. At baseline, when we will assess youth with both positive and negative screens, Co -I Thompson 
will be “blind” to whether youth have screened posi tive or negative. At follow -up, she will know that all youth 
have screened positive on the MAYSI -2 and PQ-B, but the RA and Co -I Thompson will instruct families not to 
disclose whether they followed through with the referral to the CSC or whether they have  received any type of 
follow -up mental health care until after the assessment is completed.  
Training in assessment. Training in the assessment protocol will occur during the first 2 months by Co -I 
Wolff, following procedures we used in other RCTs. Under Co -I Kemp’s oversight, research staff conducting 
baseline assessments will also receive training on working in the JJS and on how to appropriately respond to 
logistical  questions  that participants’  may have  about  the JJS. Co -I Kemp  will oversee  the baseline  assessment 
and Co -I Wolff will oversee the follow -up assessment component of the protocol. If parents request it, the 
results of the evaluation will be shared with the CSC in both phases of the study.  
Procedures for mental health deterioration/safety conce rns. It is possible that some participants will 
report symptoms  during  their research  assessment  that may warrant  additional  mental  health  care.  If any  youth 
indicates serious psychotic symptoms or suicidal/homicidal thoughts, a safety plan will be establi shed by Co - 
Thompson. Either  Dr. Spirito,  Wolff, Kemp, or Yen  all licensed clinical  psychologists, will be notified  and review 
the safety plan. In all cases, if families are in treatment at the CSC, or a mental health clinic, a mutually 
agreeable plan will  be derived with the CSC clinical team. In the event of an acute crisis, patient will be 
transferred to the Rhode Island Hospital (RIH) psychiatric Emergency Department, where all the PI and Co - 
Investigators Wolff and Kemp have staff appointments and clin ical privileges (See Human Subjects ). 
Measures.  The selection  of measures  was designed  to be realistic  for the court  system  with an emphasis 
on eventual implementation in a larger effectiveness trial. All assessments will be administered via laptops  
using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), a secure web -based application.48 An advantage of 
computer -administered self -report assessments is that participants using this medium have been found to be 
more comfortable disclosing personall y sensitive information and to be less likely influenced by social 
desirability  in their responses49. Using  REDCap  instead  of traditional  pencil  and paper  measures  will also save 
time and labor that would otherwise be required for data entry, double entry,  and resolution of discrepancies. 
To ensure participant safety, all items will be reviewed by research staff before the end of the assessment in 
case there is a need to review responses with the youth or caregiver.  
1. Background  variables  (obtained  at baseline  only) . 
Standard demographic variables including age, sex, race, ethnicity, and education will be assessed, 
including gender identity. Gender identity will be assessed using items listed in “Current Measures of Sexual 
Orientation and Gender Identit y in Federal Surveys, August 2016”. Specifically, we will ask “Do you currently 
describe yourself as male, female, or transgender?” If transgender, we will ask “Just to confirm, you were 
assigned [M or F] at birth and now describe yourself as [M or F], is that correct?” Legal history, as  well item- 
level responses on the MAYSI -2 and PQ-B, will be obtained from JID records as part of the consent process. 
The collection of much of the data from legal records and existing JJ system procedures is an additional 
strength  of this service -based  application  as it improves  feasibility  and the potential  for scalability  in the future.  
2. CMIR  implementation  level  measures  
These  data will be collected  and measures  will be administered  to JID staff and administrators  at the 
conclusion of Phase II of the project.  
Feasibility will be defined as the percent of youth who screen positive on the MAYSI -2 Thought 
Disturbance subscale and/or PQ-B who receive the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care protocol in Phase II of 
the project.  Follow-up rates  of texting/phone  calls will also be examined  separately  with respect  to its feasibility.  
Penetration  will be measured  by the percent  of personnel  who are trained  to deliver  the Enhanced 
Referral/Linkage to Care condition brief intervention.  
Acceptability will be assessed using qualitative interviews with JJ staff related to their perceived roles in 
screening and  using  the Enhanced  Referral/Linkage  to Care  protocol.  In addition, the  Attitudes  Toward  Mental  
Health Screenin g, a 15 -item scale tha t assesses clinician’s attitudes towards and self –efficacy in relation to 
screening and intervention58, will be administered at baseline and follow -up. The measure has 4 subscales: 
positive attitudes, level of confidence, perceived barriers, and role congr uence towards mental health 
screening. Staff rate each item on a five -point scale from “not at all” to “a very great extent”.  
3. CMIR  service -level  measures  
Fidelity  will be assessed  using  the rating procedure  described  above. Fidelity  will also be considered  a 
marker  of the quality  of treatment  linkage  in conjunction  with the percent  of referrals  completed  to the CSC.  
Efficiency  will be rated  by the number  of text  message  and phone  contacts  necessary  to complete  the 
referral to the CSC.  
Equity will be measured by examining differences by sex/gender and racial/ethnic subgroups in the 
numbers  of at-risk youth  who receive  the Enhanced  Referral/Linkage  to Care  condition,  fidelity/quality  of the 
Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care protocol, and actual completi on of the referral to the CSC.  
4. CMIR  client  (patient)  level  mechanisms  
CSC  services.  These  data will be collected  from the CSC with  signed,  written  consent  of the  parent,  and 
assent for those adolescents under age 18.  
Other non -CSC services.  The Child and Adolescent Services Assessment  [CASA59] is a parent -report 
instrument designed to assess at follow -up the use of mental health services for youth across 31 settings 
including inpatient, outpatient, and informal services. The measure has acce ptable psychometric properties. 
Collateral60 information  on treatment  attendance  (attendance  at first treatment  appointment  and total number  of 
treatment sessions attended) will also be collected by contacting each juveniles’ treatment provider at the 3 - 
month follow -up. A release of information is requested at baseline, for both primary care physicians (PCP) and 
their mental health provider/agency, as part of the court intake process. The consent form will also contain 
language allowing the research team t o collect this information from the youth’s treatment providers.  
Treatment motivation (self-report and parent/caregiver report). The Motivation for Youth’s Treatment  
Scale61, an 8-item measure,  will be used  to assess  the youth’s  motivation  to engage  in treatment  at baseline 
and at follow -up. The total scale and two subscales (Problem Recognition and the Treatment Readiness) 
produce alpha coefficients of above .80.  
Barriers  to treatment.  The Barriers  to Treatment  Participation  Scale62, a 44-item measure,  will be 
completed at baseline and 3 -month  follow -up by caregivers to assess barriers that parents/caregivers 
experienced since intervention and the role those barriers may play in treatment engagement. Alpha 
coefficients range from 0.61 to 0.80.  
Treatment  satisfaction  information  will be gathered  as part of the follow -up qualitative  interview.  Youth 
and caregivers will be interviewed about their satisfaction with the Enhanced Referral process as well as 
treatment at the 3 -month follow -up. 
5. CMIR  client  (patient)  level  outcomes  
General  psychopathology.  The Brief Problem  Monitor  (BPM63) will be completed  at baseline  and 3 month 
follow -up by youth and caretakers to assess general psychopathology including items for rating Internalizing 
(INT), Atte ntion (ATT), and Externalizing (EXT) problems. The items are drawn from the Youth Self Report  
(YSR) and  the Child Behavior Checklist for Ages 6 -18 (CBCL63/6-18). The reliability and validity of these 
measures have been documented. Each item is rated 0 = no t true, 1 = somewhat true, or 2 = very true. The 
BPM was chosen because it assesses behavior over various time periods whereas the CBCL/YSR are 
designed to assess behavior over a 6 -month period.  
The Mini International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  for Children  and Adolescents  (MINI -KID64) is a structured 
diagnostic interview used to characterize adolescents’ past and current psychiatric diagnoses and can be 
completed in 20 -30 minutes. Parents of adolescent participants will complete a collateral assessm ent of their 
child’s past and current psychiatric diagnoses using the MINI -Kid-P collateral interview. Psychometric 
properties are acceptable and results in reliable and valid psychiatric diagnoses for children and adolescents.  
Psychotic symptoms . The Structured Interview for Psychosis -risk Syndromes  (SIPS14) is a semi - 
structured interview targeting interviewees’ experiences of attenuated symptoms and other indicators of 
psychosis risk. The SIPS takes approximately 45 -90 minutes to complete and assesses th e presence of 
positive, negative, disorganized, and general symptoms. Respondents are determined to meet criteria for 
psychosis -spectrum disorders/syndromes based on their endorsement and description of five positive 
symptoms including odd or delusional th oughts, paranoia/suspiciousness, grandiosity, perceptual 
abnormalities, and disorganized communication. Factors such as the frequency and intensity of positive 
symptoms,  along  with the level of conviction  (belief  that the experience  is real) and interferen ce (i.e. associated 
distress or impairment), are used to determine whether individuals meet criteria for full -threshold psychosis or 
any of three  risk syndromes.  The SIPS is  the most widely -used psychosis -risk assessment in North America; it 
has been used to identify individuals with significantly elevated risk for psychosis16. Additionally, the SIPS is 
designed to consider comorbid disorders that may better account for symptoms that could, in isolation, be 
conceptualized as psychosis -spectrum. The MINI wil l be completed prior to the SIPS so that comorbid 
diagnoses  will be available. Elevations on the  symptom  scales of  the BPM  will also be available and will inform 
specific SIPS prompts to help with differential diagnosis considerations. In addition, in orde r to ensure 
collection of reliable and valid data from the SIPS, Co -I Thompson will audiotape interviews, with participant 
permission,  and she will present  the case  to two of the  Investigators  on the study. Differential  diagnoses will  be 
discussed as well as whether symptoms might be better explained by other disorders.  
In addition to rating current symptomatology at the date of interview, the SIPS is designed to track the 
emergence and progression of symptoms over time. For all positive symptoms that meet either risk or 
psychosis threshold, a timeline is established to retrospectively track when symptoms first reached clinical 
significance  and the date when  respondents  would  have  first met risk or psychosis  criteria.  The SIPS  is also 
designed to track symptom progression across assessment time points. At each assessment, the rater 
determines  whether  individuals  meeting  psychosis/risk  criteria  are best characterized  as having  progressing 
(i.e. worsening), persisting (i.e. stable), or remitting (i.e. part ially or fully remitting) illness. This onset and 
trajectory information will be used to define the start of illness as well as to measure DUI and DUP.  
Duration of Untreated Illness (DUI ). DUI (including DUP) is defined as the time between the onset of 
symptoms and the initiation of adequate treatment. DUI will be measured using a combination of measures, 
specifically the SIPS to track positive symptom onset, the CASA to track adequate treatment, and  a summary 
measure to calculate both DUI and DUP. Given th at many DUP measures exist, no particular tools stand out 
as superior65, and  the specific  tool used  to measure  DUP  does  not seem  to have  a significant  impact on  mean 
or median DUP66, we will derive DUP in conjunction with established measures of symptoms a nd treatment.  
Using a validated measure of psychosis -spectrum symptoms, namely the SIPS, we will be able to create a 
thorough  timeline  of symptom  onset  and progression.  Given  the lack of  consensus  in the literature  surrounding 
what constitutes adequate or effective treatment across psychosis and risk populations67, two reasonable 
treatment variables will be included in the measurement of DUI and DUP: 1) date of first completed course of 
antipsychotics for one  month or more, or 2) date of initiation of consi stent psychosocial treatment (attending 4 
or more sessions within 6 weeks), including psychosis -specific symptom monitoring and/or intervention65–67. 
Both of these variables will be captured by follow -up questions on items contained on the CASA, and the 
earlier of the two dates will be considered the date of adequate treatment provision. We will synthesize SIPS 
and treatment  date in order  to calculate  DUP  and DUI. The DUI summary  form will be reviewed with  parents  to 
determine if the onset of psychosis symp toms aligns with their perspective of when symptoms emerged (to 
help account  for lack of insight  that may interfere  with accurate  reporting  from youth), and  clinical  judgment  will 
be used to navigate discrepancies and determine approximate DUI/DUP in the consensus meeting.  
Functioning . Global Functioning - Role and Social Sc ales (GF-R and GF -S68) are clinician rated scales 
measuring functioning across two domains: role fulfillment and social integration/engagement. This set of 
scales was developed for the N orth American Prodrome Longitudinal Study (NAPLS68–70), a large multisite 
study investigating psychosis -risk, as a way to obtain consistent ratings across study sites. The measure was 
designed  for individuals  in the age range  of highest  risk for psychosis  (i.e., ages  12-29), and  it includes  detailed  
rating anchors based on  developmentally appropriate activities and difficulties that  may emerge in early stages 
of psychosis. Each GF scale includes 10 categories of functioning rated 1 -10, with lower scores indicating  
more impairment. In addition to rating an individual’s current level of functioning, the  GF scales include ratings 
of the individual’s highest and lowest rating within the past year (rated on the same scale, 1 to 10) to track 
changes in f unctioning across time. The GF scales are rated using information gathered through clinical 
evaluation (e.g., SIPS and MINI). In a recent study comparing the GF scales to similar functioning scales 
among help -seeking young people, Wilson and colleagues (20 14) reported moderate to strong correlations 
between  the measures.  In addition  to establishing  adequate  concurrent  validity,  this study  looked  at depression 
in relation to the GF scales and results suggested that the GF scales may successfully separate functioning 
from psychiatric symptom severity. This possibility, in addition to the brief and easily scored format of the GF 
scales, made the GF -R and GF -S appealing options for the current study.  
Recidivism  (collateral  data from RIFC  database).  Juveniles’  recidivism  rates  (e.g.,  new arrests ), description  
of related  charges  (e.g.,  substance -related,  property)  and time detained/incarcerated  (all tracked  by the RIFC 
database) will be available.  
Data  Analysis  Plan 
Prior to conducting analyses for the project aims, a series of routine procedures will be conducted to ensure 
the data accuracy/adequacy.  All forms  will be checked  for missing  data.  Descriptive  statistics  will be examined 
for distributional  properties  of the  variables  (e.g.,  normality, internal  consistency).  The data will be transformed 
to achieve normality if needed. Attrition/missing data:  It is anticipated that less than 20% of subjects will not 
have follow -up. We will test for differential attrition across the standard care and experimental c ondition.  
Sex as a biological  variable.  Our study  does  include  specific  a priori  hypotheses  about  sex differences.  
However,  we will tabulate  our results  separately  by sex, although  all hypothesis  tests  will use a unified  sample.  
For the qualitative analyses  described below, stakeholder interviews will be audiotaped, transcribed, and 
entered into NVivo, a qualitative data management program. Co -I Kemp, who has received extensive training  
in qualitative methods, will develop coding process in collabora tion with PI Spirito and Co -Is Wolff and Yen for 
qualitative  information  related  to the systems -level factors  and implementation  process.  These  coding  schemes 
will be used as a guide and adapted based on emergent themes from the data collected for the eval uation of 
the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition. The coherence between qualitative coding schemes and 
established  quantitative  measure  subscales  such  as the Attitudes  toward  Mental  Health  Screening  will allow  for 
triangulation of the rich data captured by this process. As described below, we will examine interest in and 
acceptability of screening and referral in the JJS stakeholder’s perspective, and barriers and facilitators of 
screening and referral, from both JJS staff and families perspectiv es. 
Aim 1: Identify baseline prevalence of psychotic disorders and psychosis -risk syndromes within  
the JJ system. We will calculate the percentage of youth who screen positive on the MAYSI -2 Thought 
Disturbance subscale and/or PQ -B over the 2 -year period o f the study.  We will also calculate mean, median, 
and range of DUI/DUP in months, for both sub - and full - threshold psychosis. Correlations and regression 
techniques will be used to explore the relation between attenuated psychosis (both individual symptom s and 
syndromes) and co -occurring symptoms (BPM symptomatology; MINI symptoms and diagnoses). Prevalence 
estimates will make use of a weighted sample that takes into account the selection probability for SIPS 
evaluation  given  MAYSI -2 and PQ-B results,  so that our  results  are generalizable  back  to the population  of JJS 
youth. We will also examine the utility of the MAYSI -2 Thought Disturbance subscale and PQ-B as screeners 
for psychosis -spectrum syndromes and disorders by determining the criterion -related va lidity (e.g., sensitivity, 
specificity,  positive  and negative  predictive  value)  of number  of items  endorsed  for predicting  psychosis  risk, as 
confirmed by clinical interview with the SIPS, as well as compare the two screens . This an alysis will also use 
the weighted data from the MAYSI -2 and PQ- B and SIPS evaluation sample, and logistic regression 
procedures.  
Aim 2A: Examine  whether  an enhanced  referral  procedure  results  in higher  proportion  of completed 
referrals to the CSC compared  to standard referral procedures by calculating the proportion of completed 
referrals in Phase I, standard care, versus Phase II, when an enhanced referral/linkage to care procedure is 
instituted in JJS. An 80% linkage will be considered a success, and ref lects the expected linkage proportion in 
Phase II. The probability of linkage will be contrasted across phases using logistic regression procedures.  
Aim 2B: Identify implementation and service level factors that promote/hinder linkage to the CSC. 
Feasibili ty and Penetration , the number and percentage of JID personnel trained and consistency (% of time) 
using the enhanced referral protocol will be calculated with descriptive statistics. A rate of 80% will be the 
benchmark. Efficiency  will be rated  by the number of text  message  and phone contacts  necessary  to complete 
the referral to the CSC. A benchmark of two contacts will be considered an indicator of efficiency. Equity  of 
enhanced referral protocol fidelity and treatment linkage across gender, race, and et hnicity will be compared 
across  Phase  I (Standard  Care)  and Phase  II (Enhanced  Referral/Linkage  to Care  condition),  as well as cross - 
sectionally in the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition only, using cross -tabulation approaches.  
Acceptability . JJS  staff perceived roles in screening and referral will be reported in percentages based on 
qualitative  interviews  as well as by mean,  median, and  range  of scores  on the Attitudes  toward  Mental  Health  
Screening  measure.  A total of 80% of the JID personnel  scoring  within  one standard  deviation  of the mean on 
this measure based on the literature will be the benchmark.  
Aim 3A: Investigate client level factors at follow -up. Attitudes about CSC referrals . These analyses 
follow the qualitative interview  procedure described above. Rates of treatment initiation/retention in CSC  
services or other  mental  health care . Percentages of CSC participation will be calculated with 80% set as the 
benchmark  as will other  types  of mental  health  care as rated  on the CASA. For those  already  in mental  health 
care at the time of enrollment, percentages of consultation to the CSC will be calculated, as will the types of 
treatment received and frequency/intensity of the services. Treatment barriers and motivation . Scores on t he 
Motivation for Youth’s Treatment Scale61 and the Barriers to Treatment Participation Scale62 will be analyzed 
using a paired t -test to determine any changes in these measures from baseline to three month follow -up. 
Treatment  Satisfaction . These  analyses  follow  the qualitative  interview  procedure  described  above.  
Aim 3B: Investigate mental health indicators at follow -up. Psychosis -spectrum symptoms  will be 
assessed on the SIPS (which will also allow examination of the effects of the intervention on DUP, D UI, and  
functioning ) and other clinical outcomes  on the subscales of the BPM. The goal of this aim is to obtain a 
reasonably precise estimate of the standard deviation for the outcome variables, and pre -post correlations of 
outcome variables, which are ess ential statistics for powering a definitive trial. Following Leon and colleagues 
(2011)71 and Kraemer and  colleagues  (2006)72, our goal is not to obtain  a preliminary  estimate  of the treatment 
effect size, but as per Teare and colleagues (2014)73, the size  of the pilot we propose is sufficient to obtain 
sufficiently precise estimates of key variance and covariance parameters necessary to design a definitive trial. 
Our approach will be to conduct an analysis consistent with the testing of the hypothesis that  JJS youth 
enrolled in the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition will have fewer psychosis -spectrum symptoms 
and other clinical outcomes at 3 month follow -up relative to youth in the baseline control.  
The main outcomes are individual and total symptom scores (reflecting intensity, interference, and 
conviction) as well as diagnosis (i.e., low -risk, high -risk, or psychosis) and illness trajectory (i.e. progression, 
persistence, and partial or full remission) from the SIPS. We will also examine tre atment attendance,  
motivation  for treatment,  and treatment  barrier  reduction.  The analysis  framework will  be linear regression, with 
psychosis -spectrum symptoms as the outcome and Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition as the main 
predictor.  In a randomized  design, we  would  be certain  that randomization  introduced  control  for measured  and 
unmeasured factors. In the baseline control design, we cannot be sure that secular trends might not cause 
different kinds of adolescents to become referred to JJ and/or influence their responses to questions about 
psychotic -like symptoms. For this reason, we will control for a select set of a priori identified confounding 
variables (sex, gender, race, ethnicity, and age), past history of psychosis -spectrum symptoms , and ongoing 
mental health treatment at the time of enrollment. The sign and standard error of the enhanced referral/linkage 
to care condition describes the magnitude and significance of the treatment effect at the threshold level of the 
screen55. For the  purposes of this pilot, key outcome parameters are the standard deviation of the SIPS 
positive symptom scores, the pre -post correlation of the SIPS scores, and the overall R2 in follow -up SIPS 
scores given pre -specified covariates. These parameters would be necessary to estimate the sample size 
requirements for a definitive trial.  
Aim 3C. Relationship between service mechanisms (treatment linkage and attendance) and 
psychotic symptoms/DUP. Correlation and regression techniques will be used to examine how u se of 
services  over the 3-month  study  period  is related  to change  in psychosis -spectrum  symptoms  as assessed  by 
the SIPS as well as general symptomatology, as assessed by the BPM.  
Exploratory  analyses.  In exploratory  analyses,  we will  also assess  potential  moderators  of the Enhanced 
Referral protocol effect. We are particularly interested in whether or not the effect of the Enhanced Referral 
protocol varies by  sex, gender,  race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic  status,  as well as service level  factors, i.e., 
fidelity of JID and CSC staff to the referral process. These exploratory analyses will be accomplished by 
repeating our main analysis models, described above, but including main and interaction effects of selected 
potential moderators with study phase. Infer ence will be based on effect size statistics for interaction effects 
and used as hypothesis generating results for future studies.  
Power : As mentioned above, per simulation studies conducted by  Teare  and colleagues  (2014)73, a total 
sample size of 60 is  sufficient to  obtain reasonably  precise estimates  of key  design parameters necessary  to 
power  a definitive  trial with continuous  outcomes.  Therefore,  our total sample  of 140  at baseline  and 110 at 3 
month follow -up should be sufficient to conduct a simulation study and determine power for a definitive trial.  
Timeline : Months  1 - 2: Start -up; Months  3- 14: 12 months  of baseline  data collection on  Standard  Care 
condition (baseline control); Months 6 - 17: 3 month follow -up on Standard Care condition; Months 18 - 19: 
Training of JID intake workers  in Enhanced  Referral/Linkage  to Care  protocol; Months  20 - 31: 12 months  of 
data collection on the Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care condition; Months 23 – 34: 3 m onth follow -up on 
Enhanced Referral/Linkage to Care protocol; Months 35 - 36: Analyze data and prepare manuscript.  
Future research . As stated in the FOA, this R34 planning grant proposes “the developmental work to be 
performed that enhances the probability  of success in a larger study” and “develops and refines the research 
strategies  to be utilized  in the subsequent large -scale  study….as  well as close  gaps  in the pathway  to specialty  
FEP care”. If successful, this planning grant will set the stag e for a Type III Effectiveness -Implementation 
design  to test this implementation  strategy  while also  collecting  data on the Enhanced  Referral  protocol’s  effect 
on linkage to CSC level care, DUP, and psychosis -spectrum symptoms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Fazel S, Doll H, Långström N. Mental Disorders Among Adolescents in Juvenile Detention and 
Correctional  Facilities:  A Systematic  Review  and Metaregression  Analysis  of 25 Surveys. J Am Acad  
Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry . 2008;47(9):1010 -1019.  doi:10.1097/CHI.ObO13e31817eecf3.  
2. Underwood  LA, Washington  A. Mental  Illness  and Juvenile  Offenders. Int J Environ  Res Public  Health . 
2016;13(2):228. doi:10.3390/ijerph13020228.  
3. Bhui K, Ullrich  S, Coid JW. Which  pathways  to psychiatric  care lead to earlier  treatment and  a shorter 
duration of first -episode psychosis? BMC Psychiatry . 2014;14(1):72. doi:10.1186/1471 -244X -14-72. 
4. Drake  RJ, Haley  CJ, Akhtar  S, Lewis  SW. Causes  and consequences  of duration  of untreated  psychosis 
in schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry . 2000;177:511 -515. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11102325.  
Accessed February 23, 2017.  
5. Harrigan SM, McGorry PD, Krstev H. Does treatment delay i n first -episode psychosis really matter? 
Psychol  Med. 2003;33(1):97 -110. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12537041.  Accessed  February 
23, 2017.  
6. Marshall  M, Lewis  S, Lockwood  A, Drake  R, Jones  P, Croudace  T. Association  Between  Duration  of 
Untreated Psychosis and Outcome in Cohorts of First -Episode Patients. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 
2005;62(9):975. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.9.975.  
7. Loewy  RL, Pearson  R, Vinogradov  S, Bearden  CE, Cannon  TD. Psychosis  risk screening  with the 
Prodromal Questionnaire --brief version (PQ -B). Schizophr Res . 2011;129(1):42 -46. 
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2011.03.029.  
8. Schiffman  J, Dixon  L. Treatment  issues  and challenges  facing  young  adults  with chronic  mental  illness.  
Maryl  Psychol . 2011;56:19 -21. 
9. Díaz-Caneja CM, Pina -Camacho L, Rodríguez -Quiroga A, Fraguas D, Parellada M, Arango C. 
Predictors  of outcome  in early -onset  psychosis:  a systematic  review.  npj Schizophr . 2015;1(1):14005. 
doi:10.1038/npjschz.2014.5.  
10. Kelleher  I, Corcoran  P, Keeley  H, et al. Psychotic  Symptoms  and Population  Risk for Suicide  Attempt.  
JAMA  Psychiatry . 2013;70(9):940.  doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.140.  
11. Large  MM, Nielssen  O. Violence  in first-episode  psychosis:  A systematic  review  and meta -analysis.  
Schizophr  Res. 2011;125(2 -3):209 -220. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.11.026.  
12. Nishii H, Yamazawa R, Shimodera S, Suzuki M, Hasegawa T, Mizuno M. Clinical and social 
determinants  of a longer  duration  of untreated  psychosis  of schizophrenia  in a Japanese  population. 
Early I nterv Psychiatry . 2010;4(2):182 -188. doi:10.1111/j.1751 -7893.2010.00179.x.  
13. Crumlish  N, Whitty  P, Clarke  M, et  al. Beyond  the critical  period:  longitudinal  study  of 8-year outcome  in 
first-episode non -affective psychosis. Br J Psychiatry . 2009;194(1):18 -24. 
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.107.048942.  
14. Miller TJ, McGlashan TH, Rosen JL, et al. Prodromal assessment with the structured interview for 
prodromal  syndromes  and the scale  of prodromal  symptoms:  predictive  validity,  interrater  reliability,  and 
training to reliability. Schizophr Bull . 2003;29(4):703 -715. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14989408.  Accessed March 8, 2017.  
15. Yung  AR, Yung  AR, Pan Yuen  H, et al. Mapping  the onset  of psycho sis: the Comprehensive 
Assessment of At -Risk Mental States. Aust N Z J Psychiatry . 2005;39(11 -12):964 -971. 
doi:10.1080/j.1440 -1614.2005.01714.x.  
16. Fusar -Poli P, Bonoldi  I, Yung  AR, et al. Predicting  Psychosis. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2012;69(3):220. 
doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.1472.  
17. Fusar -Poli P, Borgwardt  S, Bechdolf  A, et al. The Psychosis  High-Risk State.  JAMA  Psychiatry . 
2013;70(1):107. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.269.  
18. Miller  TJ, Cicchetti  D, Markovich  PJ, McGlashan  TH, Woods  SW. The SIPS  screen: a  brief self -report 
screen to detect the schizophrenia prodrome. 2004;70:78.  
19. Kline  E, Wilson  C, Ereshefsky  S, et al. Psychosis  risk screening  in youth:  A validation  study  of three  self- 
report measures of attenuated psychosis symptoms. Schizop hr Res . 2012;141(1):72 -77. 
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2012.07.022.  
20. Kopta SM, Lowry JL. Psychometric Evaluation of the Behavioral Health Questionnaire -20: A Brief 
Instrument  for Assessing  Global  Mental  Health  and the Three  Phases  of Psychotherapy  Outcome. 
Psychot her Res . 2002;12(4):413 -426. doi:10.1093/ptr/12.4.413.  
21. Veijola  J, Jokelainen  J, Läksy  K, et al. The Hopkins  Symptom  Checklist -25 in screening  DSM -III-R axis-I 
disorders. Nord J Psychiatry . 2003;57(2):119 -123. doi:10.1080/08039480310000941.  
22. Kessler  RC, Green  JG, Gruber  MJ, et al. Screening  for serious  mental  illness  in the general  population 
with the K6 screening scale: results from the  WHO  World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative. Int J 
Methods Psychiatr Res . 2010;19(S1):4 -22. doi:10.1002/mpr.310.  
23. Rumpf HJ,  Meyer  C, Hapke  U, John  U. Screening  for mental  health:  validity  of the  MHI-5 using  DSM -IV 
Axis I psychiatric disorders as gold standard. Psychiatry Res . 2001;105(3):243 -253. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11814543.  Accessed March 8, 2017.  
24. Berwick  DM, Murphy  JM, Goldman  PA, Ware  JE, Barsky  AJ, Weinstein  MC. Performance  of a five-item 
mental health screening test. Med Care . 1991;29(2):169 -176. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1994148.  Accessed  March  8, 2017.  
25. Tolou -Shams  M, Kemp  K, Yurasek  A, Levine  A, Lopes  C, Richard  K. Implementing  the MAYSI -2 with 
First-Time Offending Diverted Youth.  
26. Chapman  JF, Desai  RA, Falzer  PR. Mental  Health  Service  Provision  in Juvenile  Justice  Facilities:  Pre- 
and Postrelease Psychiatric Care. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am . 2006;15(2):445 -458. 
doi:10.1016/j.chc.2005.11.002.  
27. Burns BJ, Costello EJ, Angold A, et al. Childr en’s mental health service use across service sectors. 
Health  Aff (Millwood) . 1995;14(3):147 -159. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7498888.  Accessed 
November 19, 2016.  
28. Need  to Know: A  Fact Sheet  Series  on Juvenile  Suicide  Juvenile  Court  Judges  and Staff. Washington, 
DC; 2013.  
29. Hayes  LM. Juvenile  Suicide  in Confinement  A National  Survey  Report .; 2009.  
30. Burke  JD, Mulvey  EP, Schubert  CA. Prevalence  of Mental  Health  Problems  and Service  Use Among 
First-Time Juvenile Offenders. J Child Fam Stud . 2015;24(12):3774 -3781. doi:10.1007/s10826 -015- 
0185 -8. 
31. Hazen  AL, Hough  RL, Landsverk  JA, Wood  PA. Use  of Mental  Health  Services  by Youths  in Public 
Sectors of Care. Ment Health Serv Res . 2004;6(4):213 -226. 
doi:10.1023/B:MHSR.0000044747.54525.36.  
32. Liebenberg  L, Ungar  M. A comparison  of service use  among  youth  involved  with juvenile  justice  and 
mental health. Child Youth Serv Rev . 2014;39:117 -122. doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2014.02.007.  
33. Kemp  K, Yruaske  A, Poindexter  B, Tolou -Shams  M. MAYSI -2 Suicide  Ideation  Scale  with court -involved 
non-incarcerated youth. Prep . 2016.  
34. Skowyra  KR, Cocozza  JJ. Blueprint  for Change:  A Comprehensive  Model  for the Identification  and 
Treatment of Youth with Mental Health Needs in Contact with the Juvenile Justice System .; 2007.  
35. Hoeve M, McReynolds  LS, Wasserman  GA. Service  Referral  for Juvenile  Justice  Youths:  Associations 
with Psychiatric  Disorder  and Recidivism. Adm Policy  Ment  Heal Ment  Heal Serv Res. 2014;41(3):379 - 
389. doi:10.1007/s10488 -013-0472 -x. 
36. Lennings  CJ, Kenny  DT, Nelson  P. Substance  use and treatment  seeking  in young  offenders  on 
community orders. J Subst Abuse Treat . 2006;31(4):425 -432. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2006.05.017.  
37. Tolou -Shams  M, Kemp  K, Yruaske  A, Levine  A, Lopes  C, Richard  K. Implementing  the MAYSI -2 with 
First-Time Offending Diverted Youth.  
38. Wolff  J, Frazier  EA, Weatherall  S, Thompson  A, Liu RT, Hunt  J. Effectiveness  and implementation  of an 
evidence informed treatment on an adolescent inpatient unit.  
39. Esposito -Smythers C, Spirito A, Kahler CW, Hunt J, Monti P. Treatment of co -occurring substance 
abuse and suicidality among adolescents: A randomized clinical trial. J Consult Clin Psychol . 
2011;79(6):728 -739. http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=psyh&AN=2011 -23878 - 
001&site=ehost -live. 
40. Spirito  A, Wolff  J, Seaboyer  L, et al. Concurrent  treatment  for adolescent  and parent  depressed  mood 
and suicidality: Feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary findings. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol . 
2014.  
41. Wolff  J, Frazier  EA, Weatherall  S, Thompson  A, Hunt J. Mind  the gap: A  model  for implementing 
empirically informed treatment in an inpatient psychiatric setting .  
42. Amodeo  M, Chassler  D, Oettinger  C, Labiosa  W, Lundgren  LM. Client  retention in  residential  drug 
treatment for Latinos. Eval Program Plann . 2008;31(1):102 -112. 
doi:10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2007.05.008.  
43. Sayre  SL, Schmitz  JM, Stotts  AL, Averill  PM, Rhoades  HM, Grabowski  JJ. Determining  predictors  of 
attrition in an outpatient substance abuse program. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse . 2002;28(1):55 -72. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed /11853135.  Accessed March 9, 2017.  
44. Patra  J, Gliksman  L, Fischer  B, et al. Factors  Associated  with Treatment  Compliance  and its Effects  on 
Retention among Participants in a Court -Mandated Treatment Program. Contemp Drug Probl . 
2010;37(2):289 -313. doi:10.1177/009145091003700206.  
45. Moore LE, Tambling RB, Anderson SR. The Intersection of Therapy Constructs: The Relationship 
Between Motivation  to Change,  Distress,  Referral  Source,  and Pressure  to Attend. Am J Fam Ther. 
2013;41(3):245 -258. doi:10.1080/019 26187.2012.685351.  
46. O’Hare  T. Court -Ordered  versus  Voluntary  Clients:  Problem  Differences  and Readiness  for Change.  
Soc Work . 1996;41(4):417 -422. doi:10.1093/sw/41.4.417.  
47. Tabak  RG, Khoong  EC, Chambers  DA, Brownson  RC. Bridging  research  and practice:  models  for 
dissemination and implementation research. Am J Prev Med . 2012;43(3):337 -350. 
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.05.024.  
48. Proctor EK, Landsverk J, Aarons G, Chambers D, Glisson C, Mittman B. Implementation research in 
mental  health  services:  an emerging  science  with conceptual,  methodological,  and training  challenges. 
Adm Policy Ment Heal . 2009;36(1):24 -34. doi:10.1007/s10488 -008-0197 -4. 
49. Glisson  C, Schoenwald  SK. The ARC  Organizational  and Community  Intervention  Strategy  for 
Implementing Evidence -Based Children’s Mental Health Treatments. Ment Health Serv Res . 
2005;7(4):243 -259. doi:10.1007/s11020 -005-7456 -1. 
50. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, et al. Outcomes for implementation research: conceptual 
distinctions,  measurement  challenges,  and research  agenda. Adm Policy  Ment  Health . 2011;38(2):65 - 
76. doi:10.1007/s10488 -010-0319 -7. 
51. Rajkumar RP, Philip R. Gender identity disorder and schizophrenia: neurodevelopmental disorders with 
common  causal  mechanisms?  Schizophr  Res Treatment . 2014;2014:463757.  doi:10.1155/2014/463757.  
52. Brown  CH, Ten  Have  TR, Jo  B, et al. Adaptive  designs  for randomized  trials  in public  health. Annu  Rev 
Public Health . 2009;30:1 -25. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.031308.100223.  
53. Brown  CH, Wyman  PA, Guo J, Peña  J. Dynamic  wait-listed  designs  for randomized  trials:  new designs 
for prevention of youth suicide. Clin Trials . 2006;3(3):259 -271. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16895043.  Accessed N ovember 21, 2016.  
54. Grisso T, Barnum R, Fletcher KE, Cauffman E, Peuschold D. Massachusetts Youth Screening 
Instrument  for Mental  Health  Needs  of Juvenile  Justice  Youths.  J Am Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psychiatry . 
2001;40(5):541 -548. doi:10.1097/00004583 -200105000 -00013.  
55. Brent  D, Emslie  G, Clarke  G, et al. Switching  to another  SSRI  or to venlafaxine  with or without  cognitive 
behavioral  therapy  for adolescents  with SSRI -resistant  depression:  The TORDIA  randomized  controlled 
trial. Jama . 2008;299(8):901 -913. 
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=psyh&AN=2008 -02702 -001&site=ehost -live. 
56. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke  R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap)  - A metadata -driven  methodology  and workflow  process  for providing  translational  research 
informatics support. J Biomed Inform . 2009;42(2):377 -381. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010.  
57. Turner CF, Ku L, Rogers SM, Lindberg LD, Pleck JH. Adolescent sexual behavior, drug use, and 
violence:  Increased  reporting  with computer  survey  technology. Science  (80- ). 1998;280(5365):867 - 
873. doi:10.1126/science.280.5365.867.  
58. Hides L, Carroll S, Catan ia L, et al. Outcomes of an integrated cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) 
treatment  program  for co-occurring  depression  and substance  misuse  in young  people.  J Affect  Disord . 
2010;121(1 -2):169 -174. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2009.06.002.  
59. Burns  Angold,  A., Magruder -Habib,  K., Costello,  E., & Patrick,  M B. Child  and Adolescent  Services 
Assessment (vs. 4.2) . Durham, NC: Duke University; 1997.  
60. Ascher  BH, Z. Farmer  EM, Burns  BJ, Angold  A. The Child  and Adolescent  Services  Assessment 
(CASA): Description and Psychometrics. J Emot Behav Disord . 1996;4(1):12 -20. 
doi:10.1177/106342669600400102.  
61. Breda CS, Riemer M. Motivation for youth’s treatment scale (MYTS): a new tool for measuring 
motivation  among  youths  and their caregivers . Adm Policy  Ment  Health . 2012;39(1 -2):118 -132. 
doi:10.1007/s10488 -012-0408 -x. 
62. Kazdin AE, Holland L, Crowley M, Breton S. Barriers to Treatment Participation Scale: evaluation and 
validation  in the context  of child  outpatient  treatment.  J Child  Psychol  Psychiatry . 1997;38(8):1051 -1062. 
doi:DOI: 10.1111/j.1469 -7610.1997.tb01621.  
63. Achenbach  TM, Mcconaughy  SH, Ivanova  MY, Rescorla  LA. Manual  for the ASEBA  Brief Problem 
MonitorTM (BRM) . Burlington, VT: University of Vermont; 2011. http://www.aseba.org/ASEBA  Brief 
Problem Monitor Manual.pdf. Accessed March 9, 2017.  
64. Sheehan D V., Sheehan KH, Shytle RD, et al. Reliability and Validity of the Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric  Interview  for Children  and Adolescents  (MINI -KID).  J Clin Psychiatry . 2010;71(3):313 - 
326. doi:10.4088/JCP.09m05305whi.  
65. Register -Brown  K, Hong  LE. Reliability  and validity  of methods  for measuring  the duration  of untreated 
psychosis: A quantitative review and meta -analysis. Schizophr Res . 2014;160(1 -3):20 -26. 
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.025.  
66. Large  M, Nielssen  O, Slade  T, Harris  A. Measurement  and reporting  of the duration  of untreated 
psychosis. Early Interv Psych iatry. 2008;2(4):201 -211. doi:10.1111/j.1751 -7893.2008.00080.x.  
67. Compton MT, Carter T, Bergner E, et al. Defining, operationalizing and measuring the duration of 
untreated  psychosis:  advances,  limitations  and future  directions.  Early  Interv  Psychiatry . 2007 ;1(3):236 - 
250. doi:10.1111/j.1751 -7893.2007.00036.x.  
68. Cornblatt  BA, Auther  AM, Niendam  T, et al. Preliminary  Findings  for Two New Measures  of Social  and 
Role Functioning in the Prodromal Phase of Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull . 2007;33(3):688 -702. 
doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm029.  
69. Addington J, Cadenhead KS, Cannon TD, et al. North American Prodrome Longitudinal Study: A 
Collaborative  Multisite  Approach  to Prodromal  Schizophrenia  Research.  Schizophr  Bull. 2007;33(3):665 - 
672. doi:10.1093/schbul/sb l075.  
70. Wilson  C, Kline  E, Thompson  E, et al. Comparison  of measures  of functioning  for use with treatment - 
seeking adolescents experiencing attenuated symptoms of psychosis. Early Interv Psychiatry . 
2016;10(1):81 -87. doi:10.1111/eip.12189.  
71. Leon  AC, Davis  LL, Kraemer  HC. The role and interpretation  of pilot studies  in clinical  research. J 
Psychiatr Res . 2011;45(5):626 -629. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.10.008.  
72. Kraemer  HC, Mintz  J, Noda  A, Tinklenberg  J, Yesavage  JA. Caution  regarding  the use of pilot  studie s to 
guide power calculations for study proposals. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2006;63(5):484 -489. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.484.  
73. Teare  M, Dimairo  M, Shephard  N, Hayman  A, Whitehead  A, Walters  SJ. Sample  size requirements  to 
estimate key design parameters from external pilot randomised controlled trials: a simulation study. 
Trials . 2014;15(1):264. doi:10.1186/1745 -6215 -15-264. 