STUDY PR OTOCOL AND ST ATISTICAL ANAL YSIS PL AN 
“Lifestyle  Intervention and Testosterone R eplacement i n 
Obese S eniors ( LITROS)” 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
June 11, 2020 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  1/19  
  
 
  
 
Institutional Review Board for Baylor College of Medicine and Affiliated 
Hospitals  
 
Protocol Number: H -35267 
Status:  Approved 
Initial Submit Date:  7/2/2014  
Approval Period:  11/27/2019 - 11/12/2020  
 
 
Section Aa: Title & PI  
A1. Main Title  
TESTOSTERONE REPLACEMENT TO AUGMENT LIFESTYLE THERAPY IN OBESE OLDER VETERANS 
A2. Principal Investigator  
 
Name:  DENNIS VILLAREAL  Phone:  713-798-3185  
Id: 184416  Fax: 713-798-4585  
Department:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email:  dennis.villareal@bcm.edu  
Center:   Mail Stn:  BCM185  
A3. Administrative Contact 
 
Name:  ALESHIA DUMAS -BURKHALTER  Phone:  713-798-3185  
Id: 200972  Fax:  
  Email:  dumasbur@bcm.tmc.edu  
  Mail Stn:  BCM185  
A3a. Financial Conflict of Interest  
Does any member of study personnel (Investigator (includin g investigator’s spouse and/or dependent children)) that are 
involved in the design, conduct, or reporting of the research have a Significant Financial Interest (SFI) that would reasonably 
appear to be affected by the research for which funding is sought a nd/or associated with an entity/business that would 
reasonabl y appear to be affected by the research?  
No 
 
 
Section Ab: General Information  
A4. Co-Investigators  
 
Name:  MARCO MARCELLI  Phone:  713-794-7945  
Id: 034711  Fax: 713-794-7714  
Department: 
Center:  MED ICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  marcelli@bcm.edu  
Name:  PETER RICHARDSON  Phone:  713-794-7615  
Id: 131391  Fax: 713-794-7103  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: HEALTH SRVCS RESEARCH  Email: 
Mail Stn:  peterr@bcm.tmc.edu  
BCM288  
Name:  MARY NEWSOME  Phone:  713-791-1414  
Id: 137102  Fax: 713-798-6898  
Department: 
Center:  PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION  Email: 
Mail Stn:  mnewsome@b cm.tmc.edu  
BCM637  
Name:  VIJAY NAMBI  Phone:  713-798-5800  
Id: 143495  Fax: 713-798-4121  

6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  2/19  
  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: CARDIOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  vnambi@bcm.edu  
BCM620  
Name:  MON BRYANT  Phone:  713-791-1414  
Id: 149494  Fax: 713-794-7623  
Department: 
Center:  PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHABILITATION  Email: 
Mail Stn:  msbryant@bcm.edu  
TIRR 
Name:  
Id: 
Department:  BRYAN JIANG 
177335  
MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Phone: Fax: 
Email:  713-798 -0190 
 
bjiang@bcm.tmc.edu  
Center:   Mail Stn:  BCM620  
Name:  
Id: 
Department:  BIJU JOHNSON 
178315  
OFFICE OF RESEARCH: BIOINFORMATICS RES CTR  Phone: 
Fax: 
Email:  713-794 -8850  
 
bijuj@bcm.tmc.edu  
Center:   Mail Stn:  BCM310  
Name:  REINA VILLAREAL  Phone:  713-798-3185  
Id: 184419  Fax: 713-798-4585  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  reina.villareal@bcm.edu  
BCM185  
Name:  YOANN BARNOUIN  Phone:  713-794-7156  
Id: 189479  Fax: 713-798-8764  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  yoann.barnouin@bcm.edu  
BCM185  
Name:  MARIA LIZA NAVA  Phone:  713-794-7156  
Id: 196882  Fax: 713-798-8764  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  MariaLiza.Nava@bcm.edu  
BCM185  
Name:  ARJUN PAUDYAL  Phone:  713-794-7156  
Id: 198343  Fax: 713-798-8764  
Depar tment: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  apaudyal@bcm.tmc.edu  
BCM620  
Name:  VIMLIN AUETUMRONGSAWAT  Phone:  713-578-4300  
Id: 205472  Fax: 713-798-8764  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  auetumro@bcm.tmc.edu  
BCM185  
Name:  GIULIA GREGORI  Phone:  713-578-4300  
Id: 206003  Fax: 713-798-8764  
Department: 
Center:  MEDICINE: ENDOCRINOLOGY  Email: 
Mail Stn:  gregori@bcm.edu  
BCM185  
Name: 
Id: 
Institution: Address:  CLIFFORD QUALLS  
Non-Baylor  
Biomedical Research Institute of New Mexico 1501 San Pedro Drive, Albuquerque, NM 87108  Phone: Fax: Email:  (505) 249-3991  
 
Clifford.Qualls@va.gov  
Name: 
Id: DALE HAMILTON  
Non-Baylor  Phone: 
Fax: (713) 441-4483  
Institution:  Center for Bioenergetics, Houston Methodist Research 
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical  College  
Addre ss: Fondren Building, 8th floor, 6565 Fannin St, Houston, TX 
77030  Email:  DJHamilton@houstonmethodist.org  
 
Name:  GUPTE ANISHA Phone:  (713) -441-8825  
Id: Non-Baylor  Fax: 
Institution:  Center for Bio energetics, Houston Methodist Research 
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical  College  
Address:  Fondren Building, 8th floor, 6565 Fannin St, Houston, TX 
77030  Email:  AAGUPTE@houstonmethodist.org  
 
Name:  AIJU N ZHANG  Phone:  (713) -441-8825  
Id: Non-Baylor  Fax: 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  3/19  
 Institution:  Center for Bioenergetics, Houston Methodist Research 
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical  College  
Address:  Fondren Building, 8th floor, 6565 Fannin St, Houston, TX 
77030  
A5.  Funding  Source:  
Organization: VA CENTRAL OFFICE, RR&D 
 
A6a. Institution(s) where work will be performed: 
BCM: Baylor College of Medicine  
Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center  
A6b. Research conducted outside of the United States:  
Country: 
Facility/Institution: Cont act/Investigator: 
Phone Number:  Email:  AZHANG@houstonmethodist.org  
 
If documentation of assurances has not been sent to the Office of Research, please explain:  
A7. Research Category:  
 
 
A8. Therapeutic  Intent 
Does this trial have therapeutic intent?  
Yes 
 
 
A9. ClinicalTrails.gov Registration  
Does this protocol/trial require registration on ClinicalTrials.gov due to it: meeting the definition of an Applicable Clinic al Trial, 
being required under the terms  and con ditions of an award, or being proposed to be published in ICMJE journals?  
Yes 
 
 
Who will be responsible for registering and maintaining the registration of this Applicable Clinical Trial?  
The BCM PI will register the trial because either:  
 
- the tria l is BCM  PI-initiated,  
 
- BCM is the lead site of this multicenter trial, or,  
 
- the industry sponsor has instructed the BCM PI to register the trial, or,  
 
- registration of this trail is required as a term and condition of the reward by the funding  agency.  
 
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
Section B: Exempt Request  
B. Exempt From IRB Review  
Not Applicable  
 
 
Section C: Background Information  
Obesity among American veterans is highly prevalent and even more so among veterans using VA medical facilitie s. As 
previously discussed, as much as 40% of obese veterans are over 65 years old and expected to increase.15 Decreased muscle mass with aging and the need to carry extra mass due to obesity make it particularly difficult for obese older adults  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  4/19  
 to functi on independently and results in frailty leading to increased nursing home admissions and increased morbidity and 
mortality. Failure to assist veterans in managing weight and sedentary lifestyle affects current treatment and future 
demand for VA health care  services. For instance, a study among veterans showed that advancing frailty is associated 
with higher hospitalization and post -hospitalization cost, as well as higher post -discharged institutionalization and 30- day 
readmission. Given the high prevalence of obesity among veterans, it is likely that obesity contributed in a major way to frailty in these subjects. However, there is little evidence-based data to guide treatment of obesity in older adults and appropriate management of obese older adults is controversial. The MOVE (Managing Overweight/ Obese Veterans) program does not have any guidelines for eligible veterans if they are 70 or older. As discussed above, weight loss can be beneficial in obese older adults by improving functi on and quality of life or harmful by causing a decrease in muscle mass 
and bone mass. Data from our group showed that exercise only attenuates but not totally prevent the weight loss -induced 
reduction of muscle mass and bone mass. These findings, superimpo sed on age-related dec lines in muscle mass and 
bone mass, suggest that loss of muscle mass and loss of bone with voluntary weight loss might be harmful by further decreasing the reserve capacity of these tissues. Preservation of muscle and bone during voluntary weight loss in older adults may be important in keeping them above the threshold for risk for disability and fracture. Considering the high prevalence of testosterone deficiency in our population of male obese older adults, we propose that the restor ation of 
anabolic horm one levels through testosterone replacement will preserve muscle mass and bone mass and reverse frailty 
in obese older adults undergoing lifestyle therapy. The novel data generated from this proposed RCT will potentially impact 
the fu ture recommendations f or the standard of care in this rapidly increasing segment of the aging male veteran 
population  
 
 
Section D: Purpose and Objectives  
Primary aims Aim 1. Determine the effect of lifestyle therapy (diet -induced weight loss and exercise training) + 
testosteron e replacement (LT+Test) compared to lifestyle therapy + testosterone placebo (LT+Pbo) on physical function 
Aim 2: Determine the effect of LT+Test compared to LT+Pbo on lean body mass and muscle quality. Aim 3: Determine the effect of LT+Test compared to LT +Pbo on bone mineral density (BMD) and bone quality.  
 
Secondary aims Determine the effect of LT+Test compared to LT+Pbo on local catabolic and anabolic factors in skeletal 
muscle. Other secondary aims include determining the effect of LT+Test compared to LT+Pbo on cardiodiovascular risk 
factors, cognition, mood, and quality of life.  
 
The data to be obtained will not be used for future research and will be used only for purposes outlined in this protocol.  
 
 
Section E: Protocol  Risks/Subjects  
E1. Risk Categor y 
Category 2: Research involving greater than minimal risk, but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to the individual subjects.  
E2. Subjects  
Gender:  
Male  
 
Age: 
Geriatric (65+ yrs)  
 
Ethnicity:  
All Ethnicities  
 
Primary Language:  
English  
 
Groups to be r ecruited will include:  
Patients  
 
Which if any of the following vulnerable populations will be recruited as subjects?  
 
 
Vulnerable populations require special protections. How will you obtain informed consent, protec t subject confidentiality, and 
prevent undue coercion?  
 
E3. Pregnant woman/fetus  
Will pregnant women and/or fetuses (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the research?  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  5/19  
 No 
E4. Neonates  
Will neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable neonates (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the research?  
No 
E5. Children  
Will children be enrolled in the research?  
No 
 
 
Section F:  Design/Procedure 
F1. Design  
Select one category that most adequately describes your research:  
z.r) Randomized, Efficacy Study -- Surgical Techniques/Int erventions  
 
Discuss the research design including but not limited to such issues as: probability of group assignment, potential for subje ct 
to be randomized to placebo group, use of cont rol subjects, etc.  
This will be a randomized, comparative efficacy, do uble-blind, placebo-controlled (for testosterone) trial of the effects of 
lifestyle therapy (10% diet -induced weight loss and exercise training) + testosterone replacement versus lifesty le therapy 
without testosterone replacement on physical function, lean body mass, BMD and bone quality, and local and systemic 
catabolic and anabolic factors that mediate these changes in obese older men  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
Subjects will be older (65 -85 yr.) 2). Obese men (BMI 30 kg/m2 or greater) with low testosterone (les s than 300 ng/dL) as 
defined by the Endocrine Society. To confirm biochemical hypogonadism, serum testosterone concentrations will be 
measured on two separate mornings and shown to be consistently less than 300 ng/dL. 3). All subjects will be mild to moder ately frail, based on screening tests described below. 4). All subjects must have stable weight (~not less than or 
more than 2 kg) during the last 6 months. 5). Sedentary (regular exercise less than 1 h/week or less than 2 x/week for the last 6 months). As  in our previous studies (e.g. Villareal et al, Obes Res 2004, New Engl J Med 2011), the screening for 
physical frailty will include assessments of physical function using the modified physical performance test (PPT), aerobic capacity (peak oxygen consumpt ion, VO
2peak) using the graded exercise test, and basic and activities of daily living using 
the functional status questionnaire.  
 
Assessment of physical frailty. To be eligible for the study, individuals have to meet criteria for mild to moderate frailty based on a modified Physical Performance Test (PPT) score of 18- 31 (score range 0- 36). Low peak aerobic power 
(VO2peak) of 11 to 18 ml/min per kg of body weight and/or 3) self -reported difficulty or need for assistance with 1 basic 
activity of daily living  or up to 2 instrumental activities of daily living will also provide support for frailty. Subjects will be 
excluded from this study if they are considered too physically frail ( e.g. have a score of less than 18 on the PPT and/or 
VO2peak below 10 ml/kg/min).  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Any major chronic diseases, or any condition that would interfere with exercise or dietary restriction, in which exercise or  
dietary restriction are contr aindicated, or that would interfere with interpretation of results. Examples i nclude, but are not 
limited to: a) cardiopulmonary disease (e.g., recent MI, unstable angina, stroke etc.) or unstable disease (e.g., CHF). b) severe orthopedic/musculoskeletal or neuromuscular impairments; c) visual or hearing impairments ; d) cognitive impairment (Mini -Mental State Exam Score less than 24); and e) current use of bone acting drugs (e.g. estrogen, 
androgen containing compounds, raloxifene, calcitonin, parathyroid hormone during the past six months or 
bisphosphonates during the last two year s) and f) uncontrolled diabetes (i.e. fasting blood glucose more than140 mg/dl 
and/or HbA1c greater than 9.5%). Any contraindications to testosterone supplementation: a) history of prostate cancer or 
breast cancer, b) history of testicular disease, c) untr eated sleep apnea, d) hematocrit of more than 50%, and e) prostate-
related findings of a palpable nodule on exam, a serum PSA of 4.0 ng/ml or greater, International Prostate Symptom Score more than >19. Osteoporosis or a BMD T - score of - 2.5 in the lumbar spine and total hip as well as those patients 
with a history of osteoporosis -related fracture (spine, hip or wrist). Personal or family history of venous thromboembolism.  
 
F2. Procedure  
A. Screening tests - to determine whether volunteers are eligible to parti cipate they will undergo a medical history, physical 
examination, blood tests, physical function tests, DXA (bone scan), electrocardiogram (EKG), and graded exercise test. In some volunteers, if there is a question if there is metal in their eye (e.g. welders) they will also undergo a skull x -ray as part 
of safety measure prior to proceeding with MRI.  
 
B. Baseline and follow -up tests - if they are eligible to participate and choose to do so, they will undergo a series of tests 
and procedures: a. Body Composition assessments Dual energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA). The amount of fat, muscle, 
and bone in your body will be measured by DXA and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Fat in the abdomen and thighs  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  6/19  
 will be measured by MRI. Also, brain images will be collecte d. Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) scan. This is 
another form of bone density testing which measures volumetric bone mineral density and cross sectional bone 
dimensions of the leg. High res olution quantitative computed tomography (HR -pQCT). This mac hine is able to assess the 
3-dimensional bone microarchitecture and volumetric bone mineral density of the leg and forearm. Coupled with computer - 
based finite element analysis (FEA) modeling, it will also provide a newfound approach to assess bone strengt h. Waist 
circumference will be measured with a tape measure. MRI, QCT and HR -pQCT scan will be done at baseline and 6 
months. DXA scan will be done at baseline, 3 months and 6 months. b. Blood tes ts: Blood will be drawn for routine 
chemistries (blood count  and electrolytes), blood sugar, cholesterol, hormones (including testosterone), prostate specific 
antigen, and markers of bone function and inflammation. These tests will be performed at baseline and after 3 and 6 
months. Additional blood test as needed e very two weeks will also be performed after any medication change. c. Physical 
function tests: The Physical Performance Test will evaluate ability to do activities such as walking, climbing steps,  and 
picking up small objects such as a coin. Flexibility te sting will be done by checking range of motion of your joints. Muscle 
strength will be tested by having them use their arms or legs to push and pull as hard as possible against a special machine, and stand up from a kneeling position and sit down from a st anding position. Balance will be determined by 
having a tester examine their ability to stand with your feet in different positions, and walk an obstacle course. Endurance will be measured by how quickly and how far they can walk within a specific amount of time. These tests will be done at 
baseline, after 3- months and at the end of the study. d. Questionnaires: The SF -36 will ask you how you feel about your 
quality of life. The Functional Status Q uestionnaire will ask about things that they all need to do as a part of our daily lives. 
The Impact of Weight on Quality of Life Questionnaire- Lite will evaluate the effect of excess weight on their quality of life. 
The psychometric tests and mood scale will assess cognition and mood. The physical activity questi onnaire will evaluate 
their level of physical activity. International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) questionnaire will assess sexual function.  
These will be completed at baseline and at the en d of the study. e. Measurement of aerobic capacity: They wil l be asked to 
walk on a treadmill while breathing through a mouthpiece, and the amount of oxygen they consume will be measured. This test evaluates the ability of their heart to provide your muscl es with oxygen. This test will be performed at baseline and at 
the end of the study. f. Diet evaluation: They will meet with a dietitian for about ½ hour. The dietitian will ask them to 
measure and write down everything that they eat and drink for 3 days. At the end of the 3 days, they will meet with the 
dietitian again to review your food diary. This will be done at baseline, 3 months, and at the end of the study.  
 
Muscle studies: These tests are optional and are not required in order to take part in the overall study. These tests will be 
done at baseline and after  6 months. We will obtain by biopsy samples of muscle tissue from your thigh. This involves 
numbing their skin with local anesthesia (by injecting 2% xylocaine), making a small (approx. the size of the dotted line ----- 
-; ½ cm) incision on the thigh for t he muscle biopsy, removing a small (approx. 1/15th of an ounce) piece of muscle tissue. 
The incision is then closed with a piece of sterile tape. They will be given instructions on how to take car e of the biopsy site 
to prevent any complications.  
 
C. Interventions  
 
After the medical screening and baseline assessments are complete, they will be randomly assigned to receive either: 1) Lifestyle therapy (weight loss and exercise) + testosterone 2) Lifest yle therapy (weight loss and exercise) + placebo  
 
All partic ipants will participate in lifestyle therapy (standard first step approach for treating obesity) consisting of a weight 
management program and exercise training program. They will receive, under t he care of a registered dietitian, a special 
diet and attend group behavior modification sessions lead by the dietitian. These sessions will include classes on topics 
such as keeping track of what they eat, using food diaries, stress management, problem -solving, social support, changing 
problem behaviors, and ident ifying reasons or cues for eating. These sessions will last 75- 90 min, which will be held 
weekly. They will be asked to lose at least 10% of their body weight during the intervention. In addition,  they will  participate 
in the exercise training sessions on 3 nonconsecutive days for approximately 60- 90 minutes at our exercise facility. Each 
session will be led by a physical therapist/exercise trainer and will include exercise to improve flexibility, strength, endurance, and balance. Due to unexpected changes in circumstances, interruption of regular exercise and/or participation in diet classes may occur. Such subjects may be reintegrated into the exercise program. The exercise physiologist will reass ess their maximal strength and aerobic capacity to establish a new exercise prescription.  
 
The testosterone or placebo will be given in the form of a gel to be applied once daily in the morning to clean, dry, intact skin of their shoulders and upper arms. They will be given detailed instructions regarding the proper administration of the 
study medication. This may require an adjustment in dose if necessary depending on the results of the blood tests that 
monitor safety or adequacy of therapy. To monit or safety or any necessary adjustment in dose, one of the study ph ysicians 
will know if they are on the drug or the placebo, but neither the participant nor the rest of the study team will know which medication they are taking as they will be identical in appearance. However, this information is available in case of an 
emergency. They will continue to take this medication for up to 6 months.  
 
The testosterone gel will be Androgel 1.62%, which is available in the MEDVAMC formulary for VA patients and approve d 
for replacement therapy in males with deficiency of endogenous t estosterone (hypogonadism). As per the package insert, 
starting dose of Androgel 1.62% will be 40.5 mg of testosterone (single 40.5 mg packet) once daily. To verify that serum 
testosterone l evels are in the target range, serum testosterone will be determined two weeks after starting application. If 
testosterone concentration is less than 350 mg/dL, the unblinded study physician will increase the testosterone dose to  
60.75 mg (one 40.5 mg pack et plus one 20.25 mg packet daily) daily. If testosterone concentr ation is greater than 750 
mg/dl, the unblinded study physician will decrease the dose by 20.25 mg (one 20.25 mg packet). Subsequent dosage 
adjustments will also be based on symptoms and the occurrence of side effects as performed by the same unblinded stud y 
physician who will not be involved in baseline or follow -up testing. To maintain blinding, the physician making the dosage 
adjustments will direct that a participant in the placebo group be treated similarly.  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  7/19  The health re
cords of subjects will be flagged.  
Muscle bi
opsy is needed to address secondary aim ¿Determine the effect of lifestyle therapy + testosterone (LT + Test) 
compared to lifestyle therapy + placebo (LT + Pbo) on local catabolic and anabolic factors in skeletal muscle¿. We 
hypothesize that  LT+Test will cause a greater reduction in intramuscular proinflammatory cytokines than LT+Pbo. This 
hypothesis will be tested by comparing changes in gene and protein expression of cytokines such as TNF -á, IL -6, IGF- 1 
and muscle specific isoform (mechano growth factor) in muscle tissue samples between the treatment groups.  
Express
ion of genes and proteins involved in inflammation, anabolism, and catabolism. Real time RT -PCR. Total RNA will 
be isolated from muscle tissue biopsies according to the manufacturer s protocol. Briefly, frozen muscle samples will be 
disrupted on ice using a tissue homogenizer. Chloroform will be added (1/10 original volume), the homogenate mixed, and samples centrifuged to separate the aqueous and organic phases, which will remove DNA and protein from the RNA - 
containing aqueous phase. RNA will then be precipitated from the aqueous phase by the addition of isopropanol and centrifugation. The resulting RNA pellet will be washed in 75% ethanol, dried, and resuspended in RNAse-free wat er. RNA 
quantity and purity will be determined spectrophotometrically and bioanalyzer. Gene expression will be quantified by using real-time RT -PCR. . Samples will be assayed i n triplicate. Triplicates wherein the variation is greater than 10% from the 
average of the three will be discarded and re-run. The expression of the following genes will include: (1) TNF -á, IL -6 (pro- 
inflammatory cytokines, catabolism), and (2), MGF and IGF -1 (anabolism,) as well as also other genes involved in 
inflammation, anabolism, and catabolism. Arbitrary units of target mRNA will be corrected to levels of housekeeping gene. The expression of CD68, a marker macrophage infiltration, will also be determined to evaluate the relative number of resident macrophages. . We may also us e micro -array or RNA-seq based RNA expression of relevant genes in tissue 
samples to help understand the mechanisms or mediators for the effects of our testosterone replacement  and lifestyle 
therapy in obese older veterans. Western blotting: Frozen muscle tissue will be homogenized in ice cold buffer containing: 50 mM Tris - (ph7.4), 1% NP -40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, protease inhibitor 
cockta il (Sigma Chemical Co.), and 2 mg/ml glycerophosphate. Samples will be incubated on ice for 30 minutes and then 
centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 X G. The supernatant will then be collected and the protein concentration will be determined using the Lowry method. Samples will be diluted to a common total protein concentration and prepared in Laemmli sample buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol, denatured at 100C for 5 minutes and subjected to SDS -PAGE. 
Protein will be transferred from the gel to nitrocellul ose membrane. Membranes will be blocked for 1-1.5 hours in TBS 
containing 0.1% tween 20 (TBS -T) and 5% non-fat milk. Blots will be probed using commercially available antibodies such 
as rabbit anti-human IL-6, rabbit anti -human TNF -á, rabbit anti -human IGF -1, anti -human actin, overnight at 4°C in TBS -T 
/1% milk. Blots will be washed i n TBS-T and then incubated with donkey anti -rabbit HRP -labeled IgG secondary antibody 
for 1 hr at room temperature. The muscle samples will also be used to measure changes in mitochondrial function in response to lifestyle interventions + testosterone/plac ebo. 
Section G: Sample Size/Data Analysis  
G1. Sample Size  
How many subjects (or specimens, or charts) will be used in this study?  
Local: 500  Worldwide:  500 
Please indicate why you chose the sample size proposed:  
Based on our power calculations below, 84 subjects randomized are needed to have strong power  to detect signific ant 
differences in our  primary ou tcomes. B ecause of t he extensive screeni ng process t hat ar e needed to determine eligibility, 
we anticipat e that up to 500 subjects w ill need t o be consented t o come up w ith 84 eligible subjects t o be randomized for 
the study. T he computations t hat follow are based on a target s ample size of 41 randomized subjects i n each of t he two 
study gr oups. A ll computations ar e based on two-s ided t ests at t he 0.05 level of significance. I t is assumed that 2 0% of 
subjects w ill drop out. P hysical per formance test s core (PPT): P ilot dat a from our pr evious and ongoing studies showed 
that the change in PPT in response to 6 months of LT (weight loss and exercise training) ranged from  2.6 ± 2.5 to 4.7 ± 
2.4 while the change in PPT in response to weight loss alone was 1.3 ± 2.0 and in response to exercise alone was 2.3 ± 
1.2. W e expect t hat LT+ Test will c ause a greater i mprovement i n PPT than LT +Pbo. A ccordingly, ba sed on the largest 
pooled SD from all these pilot data (i.e. 2.5), we will be able to detect differences in the means (changes in response to 
LT+Test vs. LT+Pbo) of 1.8 in PPT (e.g., 3.6 vs. 5.4) with a power  of 0.89, consistent with reversal of frailty (e.g. PPT > 
32). The power will be 0.99 if the difference is as large as 2.4 (e.g. 3.6 vs. 6.0). Previous studies s howed improvement in 
physical function ( e.g. an increase in PPT score of 1.8 ± 2.2 in frail elderly m en) in response to testosterone replacement 
alone. Fat f ree m ass ( FFM): M eta analytic r esults f rom t he literature indicate a projected weight l oss-induced loss of 3.0 + 
0.3 (standard error)  kg of F FM, w ith reported SDs in other r eports of ar ound 2.1. I ndeed, o ur ow n pilot dat a als o showed 
that weight loss alone was associated with a loss  of FFM of 3.5 ± 2.1, whereas lifestyle therapy  (weight loss + exercis e) 
was associated with a loss of FFM of 1.8 ± 1.5 kg. Assuming the larges t pooled SD among these data (i.e. 2.1), the 
power to compare pr eservation of FFM in response to LT+Test with FFM loss in response to LT+Pbo is  0.89 (e.g. 0.0 kg 
vs. -1. 8 kg). The power will be 0.98 if the addition of testosterone r eplacement to lifestyle ther apy (LT+Test) will m odestly 
increase FFM compar ed to a decrease in r esponse to LT+Pbo (e.g. 0.5 k g vs. -1.8 kg). Previous studies showed an 
increase in FFM of 1.6 - 3.7 kg in response to testosterone replacement therapy. Hip bone mineral density (BMD): 
Previous data indic ated that diet-in duced weight loss  interventions are as sociated with reductions in hip BMD of 2.6 ± 
2.1% (Ryan et al), 4 .2 ± 1.2%, (Ricci et al.) and 4.0% (Jens en et al.) where SD was not presented in the last paper. 
Indeed, our own pilot data (Villareal et al) showed that ex ercise was unable to pr event this 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  8/19  
 weight loss -induced reduction in hip BMD (2.4 ± 2.1%). Assuming the largest pooled SD (2.1), the power to compare 
preservation of hi p BMD in response to LT+Test with BMD loss in response to LT+Pbo is 0.94 (e.g. 0.0 vs. -2.4%).  
Assuming tha t LT+Test will attenuate the BMD loss induced by LT+Pbo, the power will still be 0.70 (e.g. -1.0 vs. - 2.4%). 
Previous studies showed an increase in B MD of 1.4 - 3.5 % in response to testosterone replacement therapy in 
hypogonadal men. Regarding the effect of LT+Test on muscle cytokines and growth factors, our preliminary data in obese 
older adults suggested a between group difference of .53 + .23 for I L-6 mRNA, 1.7 + .4 for TNF-á , and 3.8 + 1.8 for MGF 
mRNA. Thus, we will have ample power (0.99) to detect between group differences. Assuming that the addition of testosterone replacement to lifestyle therapy (LT+Test) will be half as effective (e.g. betw een group difference of 0.27, 0.9, 
and 1.9) and using the same SDs (i.e. 0.23, 0.4, and 2.2), calculations would still yield adequate power (0.99, >0.99, and  
0.98 respectively).  
G2.  Data  Analysis  
Provide a description of your plan for data analysis. State the types of comparisons you plan (e.g. comparison of means, 
comparison of proportions, regressions, analy sis of variance). Which is the PRIMARY comparison/analysis? How will the 
analyses proposed relate to the primary purposes of your study?  
Intention-to -treat analyses will be performed by analyzing data from all participants originally randomized. The longit udinal 
analysis of all outcomes will be performed using a random effects mixed model repeated measures analysis of covariance in which lifestyle therapy + testosterone replacement therapy (LT+Test) and lifestyle therapy + testosterone placebo 
(LT+Pbo) cons titute the primary factors to be evaluated and potential covariates may include baseline values, years of 
education (for cognitive measures), and other measures of clinical status as appropriate. Mixed model analyses use all the available data and deals easily with missing data due to missed visits and subject drop-out. The mixed model  approach 
(PROC MIXED in SAS) we will employ fits a l inear model including a group-time interaction effect (the change over visits is 
different in the two intervention groups)  as well as potential covariates, and allowing for correlation between repeat 
measurements on the same subject. Prior to performing the longitudinal analyses, more routine preliminary analyses will be performed. These include standard tests aimed at ensuri ng that both outcome measures and continuous covariates are 
similar across groups at baseline. Categorical data analyses with Fisher’s  exact test will provide information about 
between group balance with respect to dichotomous covariates. In all analyses, careful attention will be given to ensuring 
that the conditions that are required of a particular statistical method are satisfied. Th us, we will assess the normality of 
regression residuals and ensure the homogeneity of variances by examining residuals af ter analyses of variance and 
covariance models are fit. When required assumptions are not satisfied, data transformations will be expl ored and utilized 
as appropriate. If transformations that yield the required assumptions cannot be found, it may be necess ary to analyze 
some variables semi -parametrically using the ranks of the data. We will also perform multiple imputation analyses for 
missing fitness data. Our overarching hypothesis across aims (theoretical model) is that a multifactorial intervention by 
means of LT+Test will be the most effective approach for reversing sarcopenic obesity and frailty in obese older adults, as 
mediated by  their additive effects in suppressing chronic inflammation and stimulating anabolism. Therefore, to test this 
central hypothesis in an integrated manner, we will also use partial correlation analyses and stepwise multiple regression analyses to determine which of the body composition factors or the mechanistic skeletal muscle factors are the most important mediators for the observed changes in overall physical function (PPT score). We will use partial correlation and multiple regression to control for poss ible overlap among the independent variables, and, thus, sorting out the important 
contributions of the preservation of lean mass and of the different mechanistic skeletal muscle factors (e.g., changes in TNF-á, IL -6 mRNA and protein) on the magnitude of i mprovement in overall PPT score (primary functional outcome).  
 
 
Section H: Potential Risks/Discomforts  
H1. Potential Risks/Discomforts  
Describe and assess any potential risks/discomforts; (physical, psychological, social, legal, or other) and assess the li kelihood 
and seriousness of such risks:  
We anticipate no psychological, social or legal risks beyond those of participatio n in health- related research in general. 
The potential risks of this study are small. The program of weight loss treatment presents few risks to subjects. The potential risks of the study are primarily associated with the testing measures, exercise testing, and testosterone therapy as described in the next paragraphs:  
 
Risks of testing procedures The general data collection procedures in volve patient interviews and questionnaires that are 
time- consuming (60 -90 minutes) and may result in fatigue or aggravat ion. In addition, some questions may touch on 
emotionally sensitive issues that could cause anxiety or other forms of emotional stress . There is a small risk of a 
hematoma, and an extremely small risk of infection associated with insertion of needles for blood withdrawal. An experienced technician, using aseptic technique will minimize these risks. The muscle strength testing protocol in volves 
isometric and isokinetic exercise against resistance. These exercises are brief and simulate those performed in a s tandard 
neuromuscular exam. The risk of these evaluations is therefore minimal. However, an occasional patient might experience muscle  fatigue or soreness after testing. The gait and balance measures could result in a fall. The DXA, pQCT and HR - 
pQCT will involve exposure to radiation. The amount of radiation averaged over the entire human body is equivalent to 6.5 mrem (0.065 mSv). This  is equivalent <1% of the allowable annual dose to radiation workers (e.g. X -ray technicians) and < 
3% of the amount of na tural background radiation exposure of people in the Albuquerque, NM area receive annually. It is 
of little consequence when compared to other everyday exposure risks. With the MRI exam, some patients experience 
slight tingling or tapping sensations in the arms or legs. This occurs in 2- 4% of patients and does not cause any damage to 
tissue. The muscle biopsy may result in some mild disc omfort or infection. To minimize the discomfort a small amount (2- 3 
ml) of local anesthetic (2% lidocaine) is injected at the incision site just prior to the biopsy. Bleeding at the incision is 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  9/19  
 minimized by applying direct pressure to the inc ision. The muscle sample is removed from a superficial portion of the 
vastus lateralis muscle where the risk of cutting a large artery or nerve is minimal. Our group has obtained over 1050 
muscle biopsies in study participants ranging in age from 24 yr to 92 yr, the majority of whom have been elderly. The only 
complications have been one mild hematoma and some soreness in the thigh for several days following a biopsy. The risks of the muscle biopsy procedure include discomfort, bleeding or infection at the site of insertion. Exercise testing, 
using an appropriate protocol in carefully selected patients is associated with serious complicati ons in fewer than 1 in 
5,000 patients. In a review of complications of 170,000 exercise tests conducted in 73 medical cen ters in the USA, 
Rochmis and Blackburn (JAMA 271:1060, 1971) reported a mortality rate of one per 10,000 patients tests; these were patients who were known to have or suspected of having ischemic heart disease. Repeated exercise testing, when 
properly moni tored under the supervision of an experienced physician, does not appreciably increase the risk to the 
patient. During the 11 years of the Program Project "Physiological Adaptations to Exercise" and during our 5-year Claude Pepper Older Americans Independe nce Center (OAIC) project, repeated maximal exercise tests have been performed on 
more than 650 people age 60- 96 years enrolled in research projects without any significant problems. Complications can 
include severe angina, acute myocardial infarction, ser ious arrhythmias, and death. Less serious problems include fatigue, 
dyspnea, and lightheadedness.  
 
Risks of exercise training The potential risks of exercise training include development of ventricular arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, and death. Haskell (Circulation 57:220, 1978) has reviewed the experience of 30 cardiac 
rehabilitation programs in North America and repor ted information on 13,750 participants, who accumulated 1,629,634 
patient hours of supervised exercise. A total of 50 car diac arrests were observed during exercise, 42 of which were 
successfully resuscitated, while 8 were fatal. Available information from randomized trials of exercise training in the secondary prevention of ischemic heart disease suggest that the mortality r ate is lower in ISCHD patients who exercise 
than in comparable patients who remain sedentary (Ann Clin Res 4: Suppl 9, 1972; Acta Med S cand Suppl 599, 1976, Am 
J Cardiol 48:39, 1981) when mortality from these studies are combined, the average total percent  mortality for the 
exercising groups is 8.9%, versus 12.4% for the controls (p 0.05). The above information regarding complications of exercise testing and training in CAD patients is reviewed because no statistical information is available regarding the complication rates during exercise in healthy people without evidence of ISCHD. It seems reasonable to assume that 
people without eviden ce of clinical ISCHD will have a lower incidence of cardiovascular complication during medically 
supervised exercise test ing and training than patients with ISCHD. In our OAIC studies of exercise in frail older adults we 
have not encountered any significant problems with the exercise testing or training (n=150). The exercise training could cause problems due to injury of tendons, ligaments, joints, or muscles. There is also the risk of a fall during exercise training, with related injury. During our current  study we have not had any injuries related to the exercises, or any injurious 
falls. In a previous study of 115 frail el derly men and women who participated in a 9-  month exercise training program, only 
2 individuals had tendon injuries, and there were no  other exercise -related injuries.100,107 The exercise facility is 
equipped with a defibrillator and all appropriate emergency medications. Subjects with known or suspected serious heart disease will not be accepted into the study. Apart from non- participat ion there is no specific alternative to this study.  
Subjects may choose to participate in other  clinical research at our Center.  
 
Risks of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) There will be risk associated with testosterone therapy such as an increase in  hemoglobin/hematocrit above a certain level may be associated with hyperviscosity and bad outc omes 
especially in the elderly such as exacerbation of vascular disease in the peripheral circulation, the coronaries or the 
cerebrovascular circulation. The ass ociation between TRT and the increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events 
is still und er discussion. Although still controversial, the Food and Drug Administration has recently advised health care 
professionals to make patients aware of possible i ncreased risk of heart attack and stroke in patients on treatment with 
testosterone. These subj ects may also develop prostate enlargement and potential for increase in urinary problems 
including lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), urinary retention and potentially stimulating the development of prostate 
cancer, although a definite association with the latter has not been proven. Hepatotoxicity, benign or malignant hepatic 
tumors, cholestasis have been reported with the oral form of testosterone therapy but  do not appear to be associated with 
intramuscular or transdermal preparation.61 There is also the potential of developing gynecomastia, leg edema, acne and 
exacerbation of pre-existing sleep -apnea as well as very mild changes in lipid panel. Other risks are mostly associated 
with the injections such as pain, hematoma and the very small risk for inf ection at the site of injection or the site of fat 
biopsy. Other rare risksalso include priapism (erection more than 4 hours), and behavioral change such as  aggressiveness 
and irritability. In addition, other members of the household who get exposed could develop masculinizing signs and 
symptoms.  
 
To minimize thisrisks, patients will be carefully advised of the following instructions: - Read the Medication Guide b efore 
starting thetestosterone gel therapy and to reread it each time the prescription is renew ed. The testosterone gel should be 
applied and used appropriately to maximize the benefits and to minimize the risk of secondary exposure to household members, particularly females and children. Children and women would avoid contact with unwashed or unclo thed 
application sites of men using the testosterone gel. Patients using the gel should apply the product as directed and strictly  
adhere to the following: Wash hands with soap and water immediately after application. Cover the application site with 
clothi ng after the gel has dried. Wash the application site thoroughly with soap and water prior to any situation where skin-  
to-skin contact of the application site w ith another person is anticipated. In the event that unwashed or unclothed skin to 
which the testosterone gel has been applied comes in contact with the skin of another person, the general area of contact on the other person should be washed with soap and water as soon as possible.  
 
There are risks of stress, emotional distress, inconvenience and po ssible loss of privacy and confidentiality.  
H2. Data and safety monitoring plan  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  10/19  
 Do the study activities impart greater than minimal risk to subjects?  
Yes 
 
NOTE:  The answer to the questions in H2 requires the completion of the form: 'Section H – Data and Safety Monitoring 
Plan' as an attachment in Section S.  
H3. Coordination of information among sites for multi -site research  
Is the BCM Principal Investigator acting as the SPONSOR -INVESTIGATOR for this multi -site research?  
No or Not Ap plicable 
 
Is BCM the COORDINATING CENTER for this multi -site research? 
No or Not Applicable  
 
 
Section I: Potential Benefits  
Describe potential benefit(s) to be gained by the individual  subject as a result of participating in the planned work.  
All subjects will receive the benefits of exercise and weight loss therapy for obesity. In previous studies of frail elderly men 
and women, we have found that exercise training has numerous benefic ial effects. We have found improvements in many 
measures of health and function in response to exercise, including aerobic exercise capacity, cardiovascular function, muscle strength, body composi tion, bone mineral density, blood pressure, glucose toleranc e, and blood lipid profile.  
Moreover, weight loss may improve cardiovascular health risk factors, physical function, and quality of life in frail obese 
elderly subjects. There is also evidence that testosterone deficiency contributes to the age-related los ses of muscle 
mass/and strength and BMD and increase fracture risk. Therefore, testosterone replacement therapy may help preserve muscle mass and BMD when obese older adults undergo lifestyle ther apy with weight loss and exercise. In addition, 
subjects in the proposed research will receive several immediate benefits. The most important of these is repeated assessment and monitoring of several health factors including blood chemistries, body composi tion and bone density. The 
results of these assessments will  be made available to the participants and their health care providers  
 
Describe potential benefit(s) to society of the planned work.  
Obesity in older adults, including many aging veterans, is a m ajor public health problem. In fact, the public health succe ss 
that has occurred in recent years could be in danger if lifestyles of older adults are neglected. The novel health outcomes and mechanistic -based data generated from this proposed RCT will have important ramifications for the standard of care 
for this r apidly increasing segment of the aging veteran population. The results could be incorporated in the MOVE 
(Managing Overweight/Obese Veterans) program, which currently does not have any guidelines for eligible veterans if they 
are 70 years or older.  
 
Do ant icipated benefits outweigh potential risks? Discuss the risk -to-benefit ratio.  
The benefits to the subjects studied in this research protocol, and to society at large, far surpass the risks. As me ntioned 
above, it is well known that exercise and weightl lo ss (lifestyle therapy) has multiple beneficial effects on health outcomes 
in obese adults. However, in frail elderly women and men, we also hypothesize that a multifactorial intervention by means of lifestyle therapy plus testosterone replacement will be t he most effective approach for reversing sarcopenic obesity and 
frailty and thus further improving physical function, preserving muscle mass and quality, and bone density and quality.  
Among the si de effects of testostesterone, erythrocytosis is a well reco gnized side effects but so long as patients are 
properly monitored and followed up will not result in signficant complications. While the relationshiop between testosterone and the risk for prostate cancer remains controversial, there is no data that supports a causal relationshipo between myocardial infaction and stroke. In addition, acne which has been reported as a side effect of tstosterone is not serious or life-threatening. In any event, results from this study would help define the optimal therapy to the public healthproblem of 
sarcopenic obesity and frailty, which might require a combination of lifestyle therapy and the restoration of the deficient anabolic hormone (testosterone to normal levels) and thus potentially change the standard approach to o besity in older 
adults.  
 
 
Section J: Consent Procedures 
J1. Waiver of Consent  
Will any portion of this research require a waiver of consent and authorization?  
Yes 
 
Please describe the portion of the research for which a waiver is required. (Example: chart review to determine subject eligibility)  
Chart review to determine subject eligibility (for screening purposes only)  
 
Explain why the research and the use or disclosure of protected he alth information involves no more than minimal risk 
(including privacy r isks) to the individuals.  
This waiver is needed to identify patients that may be eligible.  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  11/19  
 We will review the patients charts in the electronic medical record system in t he VA known as Computerized Patient 
Record System (CPRS) in the same way as we review  records of our clinical patients, the access to which is password 
protected. All members of the research team will be issued an individual password. We will also access C DW data and 
vital status files through the Data Access Request Tracker (DART) to incl ude real SSNs in order to identify potential 
subjects for recruitment purposes.  
 
We plan to protect idenfiers from improper use or disclosure.  
 
For the CPRS records that are queried will be stored in folders on VA computer space to which access is restrict ed to 
personnel authorized by the VA Research and Development Committee (L drive), specifically the PI and study coordinator. 
Data will not be shared on hard drives of any workstation, or transmitted to any other facilty. All printing will be directed to a printer in a private office, not to common work areas. All data used will be kept until a schedule of destruction is approved . 
 
For the CDW data and vital status fi les accessed through DART, the data will be transferred electronically to the local 
server (behind the VA firewall). Data access will be stored in a secure folder on the secure folder on Drive: L of the local 
VA server (behind the VA firewall). Data access  will be restricted to the PI, programmer, and the project staff. Data will be 
used only to identify patients for study recruitment as outlined above. No data will be removed from this folder.  
 
Explain why the waiver will not adversely affect the privacy r ights and the welfare of the research subjects.  
Data will be used only to identify patients  for study recruitment. Any information that is collected as part of the research 
including PHI will not be used or disclosed to a third party except as required by law or permitted by a HIPAA authorization 
 
Explain why the research could not practicably b e conducted without the waiver and could not practicably be conducted 
without access to and use of the protected health information.  
There are a large number of pati ents in the database and it is not possible to identify whether they might meet basic 
eligibility criteria without first accessing PHI and we would not be able to obtain HIPAA authorization from all of these patients prior  
 
Describe how an adequate plan ex ists in order to protect identifiers from improper use and disclosure.  
Access to the CPRS a t the MEDVAMC is limited to individuals who are involved in patient care or human research and is 
password protected. Paper documents will be placed in double locked doors with only members of research team are 
allowed access. In addition, no names will be used in any communication or publication resulting from the study.  
 
As also noted above, access to the CDW data and vital status files through DART, will be restric ted to the PI, programmer, 
and the project staff. The data will be stored in a secure folde r on Drive: L of the local VA server (behind the VA firewall). 
No data will be removed from this folder.  
 
Describe how an adequate plan exists in order to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with conduct of the 
research, unless there is a health or research justification for retaining the identifiers or such retention is otherwise required by 
law. 
Any files that contain identifiers for the specific purpose of screening and determining eligibility (as part of this waiver of consent) wi ll be destroyed at the earliest opportunity (i.e. when no longer used to determine eligibility and recruit for the 
study) according to VA guidelines.  
 
Describe how adequate written assurances exist in order to ensure that the PHI will not be reused or disc losed to (shared 
with) any other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research 
for which the use or disclosure of the PHI would be permitted under the Privacy Rule.  
Names will not be used in any communication or published reports about this study. In the event that  samples had to be 
shared with other laboratories, coded samples will be transferred without identifiers.  
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to (shared with) any other pers on or entity, except as required by law, for 
authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of the PHI would be permitted under the Privacy Rule  
 
Information from health records such as diagnoses, progress  notes, medications, lab or radiology findings, etc.  
Yes 
 
Specific information  concerning alcohol abuse: 
No 
Specific information concerning drug abuse: 
No 
Specific information concerning sickle cell anemia: 
No 
Specific information concerning HIV: 
No 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  12/19  
  
Spec ific information concerning psychiatry notes: 
No 
Demographic information (name, D.O.B., age, gender, race, etc.): 
Yes 
Full Social Security #: 
Yes 
Partial Social Security # (Last four digits): 
Yes 
Billing or financial records:  
No 
 
Photographs, videotapes, and/or audiotapes of you: 
No 
Other:  
No 
 
Will additional pertinent information be provided to subjects after participation?  
No 
 
If No, explain why providing subjects additional pertinent information after participation is not appropriate.  
The information we review from the database to screen potential subjects are not new information (e.g. age, 
demographics) and/or are already part of their medical record system in the VA, for which they are getting ongoing medical care through their  VA primary care providers . We are only reviewing medical records to determine whether or not potential 
subjects meet eligibility criteria and are not obtaining new tests or results during the medical record reviews.  
 
 
J1a. Waiver of requirement for writte n documentation of Consent 
Will this research require a waiver of the requirement for written documentation of informed consent?  
No 
J2. Consent Procedures  
Who will recruit subjects for this study?  
PI 
PI's staff  
 
Describe how research population will be identified, recruitment proce dures, any waiting period between informing the 
prospective participant and obtaining consent, steps taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence and 
consent procedures in detail.  
In order to determine whether or not potential subjects meet eligibility criteria, a review of medical records will be done 
and, for this purpose, a waiver of consent for the identification of potential subjects is attached in Section S. There are 
large number of patients in the dat abase and it is not possible to identify whether they might meet basic eligibility criteria 
without first accessing PHI. We will access the Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) data and vital status files through the Data Access Request Tracker (DART) to include real SSNs in order to identi fy potential eligible subjects for recruitment 
purposes.  
 
The CDW data are part of VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI), which is an initiative to improve 
researcher's access to VA data and to facilitate data analyses while ensuring Veteran' s privacy and security. The data 
were collected for administrative/clinical reasons. Guidelines that allow data to be released as identified can be found in the DART user guide, which outlines an extensive review process of Project Documents and Approvals and Data Request 
Forms that undergo a privacy review and additional reviews by the Office of Research and Development and security review of information provided in the Research Request Memo. The patients will be recruited only  for this research  project.  
 
We will recruit male veterans attending the Clinics at the MEDVAMC. Advertisements through posters and flyers, and direct mailings of printed materials to potential subjects will be done. Subjects will be identified from direct  referral by the 
attending ph ysician or by list generated from the Health Outcomes Section of patients who have low testosterone levels  of 
<300 ng/dl and in the BMI and age range under the Inclusion Criteria. The records will be reviewed for exclusion crit eria. A 
letter will be sent t o the patient describing the study and introducing the investigators. Interested patients will be asked to 
return a postcard.  
 
Individuals who express an interest in participation will undergo a brief telephone interview. Indiv iduals who express an 
interes t and meet the inclusion criteria will be invited to discuss their participation in greater detail. Detailed information will  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  13/19  
 be provided regarding the aims of the study, and all of the tests that they will undergo if they participate. Verbal and written 
information about the potential benefits and risks of the study will be provided; their questions will be answered and any 
concerns will be addressed. If the individual is interested in participating, a screening e valuation will be scheduled. Prior to 
randomization, the volunteers will undergo a detailed medical history and physical examination, and a clinical laboratory. They will have the nature and purpose of the study explained to them again, discuss their reasons and motivation for participation to det ermine whether they are realistic and discuss any potential problems, that might interfere with 
participation and have their questions answered. Data which include HIPAA identifiers such as names, date of birth or age, dates of tests and medical record num bers (first letter of last name plus 4 digits of social security number) will be collected.  
 
The consent will be obtained before any screening procedures included in the consent form are carried out.  
 
Each subject will be informed that their participation in the study is completely voluntary and they may withdraw by telling 
the study team that they are no longer interested in participating in the study or they may send a withdrawal letter. They 
will also be informed that their choice will not at any time af fect the commitment of their health care providers to administer 
care and that there will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.  
 
Are foreign language consent forms required for this protocol? 
No 
J3. Privacy and Intrusiveness  
Will the research involve observation or intrusion in situations where the subjects would normally have an expectation of 
privacy?  
No 
J4. Children  
Will children be enrolled in the research?  
No 
J5. Neonat es 
Will non -viable neonates or neonates of uncerta in viability be involved in research?  
No 
J6. Consent Capacity -  Adults who lack capacity  
Will Adult subjects who lack the capacity to give informed consent be enrolled in the research?  
No 
J7. Prisoners  
Will Prisoners be enrolled in the research?  
No 
 
 
Secti on K: Research Related Health Information and Confidentiality  
Will research data include identifiable subject information?  
Yes 
 
Information from health records such as diagnoses, progress notes, medications, lab or radiology findings, etc.  
Yes 
 
Specific information concerning alcohol abuse: 
No 
Specific information concerning drug abuse: 
No 
Specific information concerning sickle cel l anemia: 
No 
Specific information concerning HIV: 
No 
Specific information concerning psychiatry notes: 
No 
Demographic information (name, D.O.B., age, gender, race, etc.):  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  14/19  
 Yes 
 
Full Social Security #: 
Yes 
Partial Social Security # (Last four digits): 
Yes 
Billing or financial records:  
No 
 
Photographs, videotapes, and/or audiotapes of you: 
No 
Other:  
No 
 
At what institution will the p hysical research data be kept?  
Paper records will be kept at Michael E DeBakey VA Medical Center, Building 110, Room 264 and Room 242.  
 
How will such physical research data be secured?  
Paper records will be kept at MEDVAMC Building 110, Room 236 and Room 242 in locked cabinets at all times and closely 
monitored by the research coordinator. Room 236 and Room 242 will also be locked every day and whenever the research 
coordinator steps out of the room. Therefore, the physical data will be secured by two locks . In addition, the entrance to 
Building 110 and entrance to our research laboratory (where Room 236 and Room 242 are located), is secured through 
PIV card access to approved research personnel only. 
 
At what institution will the electronic research data be kept?  
Data to include PHI will be stored at the Michael E DeBakey VA Medical Center located at S \Research\ Villareal,Dennis \H- 
35267. Folder will be establ ished by Rafael Garcia for PI.  
 
Coded data (Study ID number) and PHI (limited to date of birth and date of visit, which are needed for specialized 
computer software to analyze the data) will also be entered, analyzed, and stored in specialized testing equi pment 
(ParvoMed indirect calorimeter and Q -stress computer equipment in Room 254, Biodex dynamometer housed in Room 
220 and 262, dual energy x -ray absorptiometer (DXA) and Peripheral CT scan in Room 226, Microindentation in Room 
264, all located inthe PI's  secured research lab at the second floor in Building 110, MEDVAMC and HR -peripheral CT scan 
in Room 140 in Building 109. All data will be coded, password protected, room locked protected, and entry to research lab will be PIV card -access protected (i.e. e ntry access to the research lab are given only to co -investigators using their PIV 
cards). Coded HR -pQCT data will be kept in Building 109, Room 138 in a computer locked, password protected. In 
addition, the entrance to Building 109 is secured through PIV card access to approved research personnel only. Also, Room 138 will be locked every day and whenever  the research operator steps out of the room.  
 
There will be software to be used for the conduct of the study, namely, Nutritional Data System for Research (Minneapolis, 
Minn) for analyses of food diaries, SF -36 software and Impact of Weight on Quality of Life software for analyses of Quality 
of Life, accelerometer software for analyses of physical activity, Hologic DXA for body comp analyses, Parvo for calorimetry, Biodex for strength, QCT software for bone density, Finite element analysis (FEA) software f or bone strength 
assessment with HR -pQCT, Cardiac science for cardiac stress test, osteoprobe for microindentation, and 
Analyze/liceOmatic for MRI; nanodro p 200/200c (spectrophotometer for DNA, RNA quantification), SoftMax Pro 6.5.1 
(ELISA plate reader); t he PI has a licenses for these software's funded by his grant and SPSS and SAS statistical 
software; for statistical analyses; the PI and VA have licenses for SAS software. Web application will NOT be used.  
 
Coded data will also be stored in PI's Baylor computer network drive for analyses using specialized soft wares described above in PI's Baylor computer located in Building 110. Coded data are transferred to the PI's Baylor computer network drive using VA issued flash drive. Link to code are stored only i n VA computer S drive. CD or DVD will also be used to 
back up data from the above medical device equipment and used to transfer the data to S drive. The CD  or DVD are 
stored in locked cabinet and locked room (Room 226).  
 
 
Flash drive will be used issued by  the VA to the PI, which has VA FIPS 140 -2 approved encryption. Data stored on mobile 
storage devices do not contain the only copy of research information. VA research data stored on all mobile devices or 
outside VA protected environment will be backed up regularly and stored securely within VA's protected environment.  
 
Such electronic research data will be secured via BCM IT Services - provided s ecured network storage of electronic research 
data (Non-Portable devices only):  
Yes 
 
Such electronic research dat a will be secured via Other: 
Yes, (describe below):  
VA IT Services - provided secured network (Non-portable devices only)  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  15/19  
  
Will t here be anyone besides the PI, the study staff, the IRB and the sponsor, who will have access to identifiable research 
data?  
Yes, identify the classes of the persons:  
Federal agencies such as the Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Research Oversight,  Office of Inspector General, 
Office of Human Research Protection, and Government Accounting Office and Food and Drug Administ ration (FDA) and 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be permitted to access patient records. Names will not be used in any publi shed 
reports about the study. The research team may also share information with Hospital or University representatives, to 
complete Hospital or University responsiblities, primary care physician if a medical condition that needs uregent attention 
is discov ered, and the Reserach Subjects Advocate at the VA. People who ensure the quality from the institutions where 
the research is being done, federal and other regulatory agencies will have access to all of the research data.  
 
There is no plan to disclose or otherwise grant access to VINCI/CDW data to entities outside or within VHA other than described in this protocol. Only authoriz ed personnel will have access to the data and personnel who no longer need the 
information will have their access removed.  
 
Please describe the methods of transmission of any research data (including PHI, sensitive, and non -sensitive data) to 
sponsors and/ or collaborators.  
We will not transmit any PHI or sensitive data outside the MEDVAMC.  
 
We will only send non-sensitive de-id entified data to Dr. Clifford Qualls (Biostatistician who has a WOC VA appointment) 
via secure/encrypted VA email at the Biomedical Research Institute of New Mexico (the nonprofit organization associated 
with the New Mexico VA Health Care System) for stati stical analyses. The data will be reviewed and confirmed as de- 
identified by the privacy officer before the de-identified data are sent to Dr. Clifford Qualls via secure/encrypted VA email.  
 
 
Will you obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality for this study ? 
No 
 
Please further discuss any potential confidentiality issues related to this study.  
We will keep patient records according to approved Records Control Schedule for facility reserach data by the MEDVAMC.  
 
It is understood by the PI that data will not b e used or shared with others outside the scope of the reserach study as 
documented in the protocol approved by the IRB and MEDVAMC R  and D Committee.  
 
Removal of access to research study data will be accomplished for all study personnel when they are no lo nger part of the 
research team.  
 
An Accounting of Disclosure (AOD) will be created and maintained for any disclosure of individually  idnetifial ble 
information (III) outside the VA. The manual spreadsheet will include the data of the disclosure, nature or description of the 
III disclosed, purpose of each disclosure, and the ame and address of person or agency to which the disclosure was made.  
 
Research records, including identifiers will be destroyed 6 years after cutoff (at the end of the fiscal year) after completion of the research project, but may be retained longer if required by other federal regulations or sponsor archive require ment  
 
 
Section L:  Cost/Payment  
Delineate clinical procedures from research procedures. Will subject's insurance (or subject) be responsible for research 
related costs? If so state for which items subject's insurance (or subject) will be responsible (surger y, device, drugs, etc). If 
appropriate, discuss the availability of financial counseling.  
Subjects will nor be respo nsible for any costs related to participation in the research. Any research-related costs will be 
borne by the research grant.  
 
If subjects will be paid (money, gift certificates, coupons, etc.) to participate in this research project, please note the tota l 
dollar amount (or dollar value amount) and distribution plan (one payment, pro-rated payment, paid upon completion, etc) of 
the payment.  
 
Dollar Amount:  
250 
 
Distribution Plan:  
Participants will be compensated for their time and inconvenience: $50.00 aft er completing all the baseline testings and $  
50.00 after completing all the final testings  (at 6 months). In addition, if they agree to the optional muscle studies, they will 
be paid $75.00 after each of the two outpatient muscle studies. This will take approximately (3-4) weeks after each completed visit to process.  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  16/19  
 Section M:  Genetics  
How would you classify your genetic study?  
 
 
Discuss th e potential for psychological, social, and/or physical harm subsequent to participation in this research. Please 
discuss, considering the following areas: risks to privacy, confidentiality, insurability, employability, immigration status, 
paternity status, educational opportunities, or social stigma.  
 
 
Will subjects be offered any type of genetic education or counseling, and if so, who will provide the education or counseling 
and under what condi tions will it be provided? If there is the possibility that a family's pedigree will be presented or published, 
please describe how you will protect family member's confidentiality?  
 
 
 
Section N: Sample Collection  
S AMPLE:  Blood  
What is the purpose of the sample collection? 
Blood samples will be collected for 1) medi cal screening to determine eligility for the tests (see inclusion/exclusion criteria)  
2) to monitor blood levels of testosterone, blood sugar, lipids, hormones, and markers of bone function and inflammation, 
and 3) for overall safety monitoring while in the s tudy. 
 
For blood draws, specify the amount drawn, in teaspoons, at each visit and across the course of the subjects entire 
participation time.  
Up to a total of 4 tablespoons at baseline, and after 2 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months.  
Is there the possibility t hat cel l lines will be developed with this sample?No 
Sample will be obtained from:  
Clinical Labs, Research Labs  
 
Will the sample be stripped of identifiers?  
No 
 
If sample will be released outside the hospital:  
 
Will sample be released to anyone not listed as an i nvestigator on the protocol? Will the information be identifiable, coded or 
de-identified?  
Baylor C of Med, Wash U, U of Connect, U of Florida, U of Maryland, DE -IDENTIFIED for special tests  
 
Will sample material be sold or transferred to any third parties ? Will the information be de-identified?  
No 
 
If sample will be banked for future use:  
 
Where will the sample be banked and for how long?  
At the Michael DeBakey  VA Medical Center for ten years or until used up. Specimens will have coded numbers and dates 
of tests.  
 
Does the banking institution have an approved policy for the distribution of samples?  
Yes 
 
If the entire sample will NOT be used during the course of this research study:  
 
Will the remaining tissue be discarded? If not what will be done wit h the remaining sample after study completion and how 
long will the sample be kept?  
We will keep the samples for 10 years after study completion after which they will  be discarded. We will request approval 
from IRB if we decide to reopen the study and reus e the samples for a new research protocol with related scope of 
interest.  
 
Will samples be made available to the research subject (or his/her medical doctor) for othe r testing?  
No 
 
If a subject withdraws from the study:  
 
Will subject have the option to get  the remaining portion of their sample back?  
No 
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  17/19  
 Will samples be destroyed? If not, will they be kept anonymously? What will happen to the sample if the subject revokes 
authorization?  
If the patient withdraws from the study, samples will not be destroyed a nd will be stored coded, except for the de identified 
samples that are sent to outside hospital for special tests mentioned above. If the subject rev okes authorization, the 
samples will be destroyed or discarded, except for the de identified samples that are sent to outside hospital for special 
tests mentioned above.  
 
Will data obtained from their sample be deleted? What will happen to the sample if the subject revokes authorization? 
For those who withdraw from the study, we will use the data generated from  the samples. However, for subjects who 
revoked authorization, their data will be deleted and samples destroyed or discarded.  
Will study data or test  results be recorded in the subject's medical records?  
No 
 
Will results of specific tests and/or results of  the overall study be revealed to the research subject and or his/her doctor? 
Standard test results that are done at VA lab and have clincal use are reported to their doctor (i.e. in CPRS, which is 
accessible to the vets primary care provider).  
 
Any abnomal findings will be shared with the subject's primary care physician for further evalution and treatment through 
the CPRS which are shared with their VA primary care physicains. Depending on the urgency of the abnormal finidngs, the 
PI may directly contact the primary care physicain by phone to discuss the abnormal findings. The PHI that may be used or disclosed to the subjects primary care physician ma y include names, date of bith or age, and date of tests.  
 
Please identify all third parties, including the subject's physician, to receive the test results.  
Subject's treating physician  
 
 
S AMPLE:  Tissue  
What is the purpose of the sample collection? 
We will collect muscle samples to address secondary aim: "determine the effect of lifestyle therapy plus testoste rone 
compared to lifestyle therapy plus placebo on catabolic and anabolic factors in skeletal muscles". We will compare 
changes in cellular/molecular, gene, and protein expression of skeletal muscle factors invoved in inflammation, anabolism, 
and catabolis m. 
 
For blood draws, specify the amount drawn, in teaspoons, at each visit and across the course of the subjects entire participati on time.  
 
Is there the possibility that cell lines will be developed with this sample?No 
Sample will be obtained from:  
Clinic al Labs, Research Labs  
 
Will the sample be stripped of identifiers?  
No 
 
If sample will be released outside the hospital:  
 
Will samp le be released to anyone not listed as an investigator on the protocol? Will the information be identifiable, coded or 
de-ide ntified?  
Yes, to potential collaborators for specialized tests or equipment. Samples will be coded.  
 
Will sample material be sold or transferred to any third parties? Will the information be de-identified?  
No, 
 
If sample will be banked for future use:  
 
Where will the sample be banked and for how long?  
Michael De Bakey VA Medical Center for up to 10 years after study completion.  
 
Does the banking institution have an approved policy for the distribution of samples?  
Yes 
 
If the entire sample will NOT be used d uring the course of this research study:  
 
Will the remaining tissue be discarded? If not what will be done with the remaining sample after study completion and how 
long will the sample be kept?  
The remaining samples will be stored for up to 10 years after study completion.  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  18/19  
 Will samples be made available to the research subject (or his/her medical doctor) for other testing?  
No 
 
If a subject withdraws from the study:  
 
Will subject have the option to get the remaining portion of their sample back?  
No 
 
Will sa mples be destroyed? If not, will they be kept anonymously? What will happen to the sample if the subject revokes 
authorization?  
For patients who withdraw from the study, the samples will not be destroyed but will be stored anonymously. For those 
who revoke  authorization, samples will be destroyed or discarded.  
 
Will data obtained from their sample be deleted? What will happen to the sample if the subject revokes authorization? 
For those who withdraw from the study, we will use the data generated from  the sa mples. However, for patients who 
revoked authorization, their data will be deleted.  
Will study data or test results be recorded in the subject's medical records?  
Yes 
 
Will results of specific tests and/or results of the overall study be revealed to the res earch subject and or his/her doctor?  
No 
 
Please identify all third parties, including the subject's physician, to receive the test results.  
None  
 
 
Section O: Drug Studies 
Does the research involve the use of ANY drug* or biologic? (*A drug is defined as an y substance that is used to elicit a 
pharmacologic or physiologic response whether it is for treatment or diagnostic purposes)  
Yes 
 
Does the research involve the use of ANY gene transfer agent for human gene transfer research?  
No 
O1. Current D rugs  
Drug : testosterone  
 
 
Is this study placebo -controlled? 
Yes 
 
If yes, be sure that you justify the use of the placebo for this research in the space below.  
All participants are obese and all will get the benefits of weight loss and exercise therapy (li festyle thera py) to improve 
overall health and physical function. However, it is not known whether adding testosterone replacement to lifestyle therapy 
in obese older pateints will further improve overall health and physical function and importantly preser ve muscle and bone 
mass while undergoing weight loss. The use of the placebo is necessary in order to conduct a randomized, comparative- efficacy, double-blind, placebo controlled (for testosterone) trial of the effects of lifestyle therapy + testosterone 
replacement v ersus lifestyle therapy + placebo and provide high-level evidence to support the hypothesis that a 
multifactorial intervention by means of lifestyle therapy + testosterone replacement will be the most effective approach for 
reversing sarcopeni c obesity and frailty in obese older veterans, and, thus this high level of evidenced-based data could 
be used to change the standard treatment approach for obese older adults and incorporated into the MOVE (Managing 
Overweight/Obese Veterans) program.  
 
Will the resear ch involve a radioactive drug?  
No 
 
 
Section P: Device Studies  
Does this research study involve the use of ANY device?  
No 
 
 
Section Q. Consent Form(s)  
6/18/2020  Human Protocol Report  
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=412457  19/19  
 None  
 
 
Section R:  Advertisements  
Mode of Advertising: Bulletin Board  
Exact language of Advertisement:  
OLDER VETERAN VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  
 
To participate in a study looking into the effect of testosterone, weight loss, and exercise training on physical function, body 
fat, muscle and bone.  
 
Duration: Participation in the study will be ~ 8 months.  
 
Tests/Procedures  include medical examination, assessment of physical function, cardiovascular testing, blood tests, body 
composition testing, mood/cognition, and muscle biopsies  
 
Interventions: Supervised weight loss and exercise training program ± testosterone therapy 
Compensation: may receive up to $ 250.00  
Dr. Dennis Villareal Principal Investigator HRRC No. H35267 Please contact the study office at telephone no. (713) 578-  
4300 for more information  