A RANDOMIZED  TRIAL  OF THE SYNC  APP 
 
Protocol  Number:  UMCC  2020.157  
National  Clinical  Trial  (NCT)  Identifie r: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal  Investigator:    Sung  Won Choi,  MD, MS 
1500  E. Medical  Center  Dr, D4118  MPB  
Ann Arbor,  MI 48109 -5718  
Phone:  734-615-5707  
Fax: 734-615-0464  
Email:  sungchoi@med.umich.edu  
 
Co-Investigators:   Muneesh  Tewari  PhD,  N. Lynn  Henry  MD PhD,  Joshi  Alumkal   
MD, Daniel  Forger  PhD, John  Maciejewski  MD PhD  
 
Biostatistician:    Walter  Dempsey  PhD 
    Phone:  734-936-0039      
Email:  wdem@umich.edu  
 
Single  Center:    University  of Michigan  
Version :    April 4, 2022  
2 Table  of Contents  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  3 
STUDY  SCHEMA:  SCHEDULE  OF EVENTS  6 
TIME  AND  EVENTS  TABLE  7 
INTERVENTION  ARM  VS CONTROL  ARM  8 
1. BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  9 
2. STUDY  DESIGN  13 
3. STUDY  ENDPOINTS  17 
4. PATIENT  ENROLLMENT  AND  EVALUATION  18 
5. STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  20 
APPENDIX  A: DESCRIPTION  OF DEVICES  23 
Fitbit  Charge  3 30 
Apple  Watch  36 
APPEND IX B: SYNC  COMPONENTS  51 
APPENDIX  C: USER -REPORTED  OUTCOME  MEASURES  62 
APPENDIX  D: REFERENCES  60 
  
3 PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
 
A RANDOMIZED  TRIAL  OF THE SYNC  APP 
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  Sung  Won  Choi  
 
Study  Design:  This is a study  to assess  whether  individually  tailored  lighting  and 
behavioral  interventions  delivered  through  an app are able to reduce  
symptoms  of fatigue  and improve  quality  of life across  three  populations  of 
cancer  patients.  We will recruit  138 patients  (69 control,  69 interventional)  
across  three  cancer  populations:  breast  cancer  and prostate  cancer,  and 
patients  who have  undergone  hematopoietic  stem  cell transplant  (HSCT).  
Participants  will be randomized  1:1 to either  the interventional  SYNC  app 
or to a control  app.  
 
 
Primary  Objective:  The primary  objective  is to test the statistical  significance  or difference  
between  the intervention  arm and the control  arm in the measured  outcome  
of fatigue,  as quantified  by daily fatigue  surveys  and weekly  PROMIS  Short  
Form  v. 1.0 Fatigue  4a surveys.  
 
Secondary  Objective:  The seco ndary  objective  will be to assess  user sleep  disturbances,  
anxiety,  depression,  physical  function,  and global  health  via a suite  of 
PROMIS  questionnaires.    
 
Exploratory  Objectives:  Exploratory  objectives  will be to assess:  i) physical  activity  through  
physiological  data capture  using  the wearable  sensor;  ii) health  care 
utilization  (i.e., total count  of hospital  days,  ED visits,  readmissions,  and 
ambulatory  care clinic  visits),  and iii) sleep  aid usage,  as measured  by self-
report.   
 
Eligibility  Criteria:   All patients  will be outpatient,  though  most  will still be undergoing  long-term 
treatment:  breast  cancer  patients  often  receive  endocrine  therapy;  prostate  
cancer  patients  often  receive  androgen  deprivation  therapy;  and HSCT  
patients  will be recovering  their immune  system  from the high-dose  
chemotherapy  that was administered  in preparation  for their transplant.  We 
will exclude  patients  actively  receiving  chemotherapy  at the time of 
enrollment  to avoid  potential  confounding  factor s. However,  post-transplant  
maintenance  chemo therapy  will be allowed.  We will also exclude  night  shift 
workers,  where  night  shift work  is defined  as working  a significant  number  
of hours  (i.e. more  than half) between  the hours  of 11PM  and 6AM on a 
regular  basis.  Participants  will be required  to be able to read and write  
English,  be at least  18 years  old, and report  their baseline  fatigue  level as 
4 moderate  (4 or higher  on a 10-point  scale).  Patients  must  own an iPhone  
6s or later (with  iOS 14 or later,  or willing  to update  to iOS 14+) and be able 
to complete  surveys  on it, or they must  agree  to utilize  a loaner  iPhone  
provided  by the study  team  to use during  the study  and return  at the end of 
the study . 
 
Treatment  Description:  All participants  will be given  access  to an app into which  they enter  
their research  ID number.  The research  ID number  will determine  which  
version  of the app is loaded  on their phone.  Participants  will also be given  
a wearable  device  and a pair of glasses.  Interventional  group  participants  
will be given  a pair of blue light-blocking  glasses.  Participants  in the control  
group  will be given  a pair of glasses  that does  not block  visible  light.  All 
participants  will wear  the wearable  device  day and night  over the course  of 
the 12-week  trial. Partic ipants  in the interventional  group  will use a version  
of the app that gives  them  personalized  lighting  recommendations  (e.g. 
"Seek  bright  light")  and a time interval  over which  the recommendation  
applies  (e.g. "8:30  - 9:45 am").   
Control  arm:   Control  group participants  will use a version  of the app that makes  
recommendations  to use the glasses;  however,  the time intervals  
recommended  will be chosen  to occur  in the period  of time when  any 
change  in lighting  is expected  to have  no effect  on the circadian  clock (e.g. 
around  noon,  for many  people  already  entrained  to a diurnal  schedule).  
Participants  will be informed  that they should  only wear  the glasses  if it is 
reasonable  for them  to do so.  
Accrual  Objective:  We will enroll  138 cancer  patients,  with half in the intervention  arm and half 
in the control  arm. Our primary  endpoint  is the PROMIS  4-item Fatigue  
Short  Form.   The age- and sex-adjusted  norm  for the Fatigue  scale  is 50 
points,  with a standard  deviation  of 10 points.  These  statistics  have  been  
shown  to be largely  generalizable  to the cancer  patient  population  (mean:  
52, standard  deviation  7.6). Our study  will have  power  of 0.80,  assuming  a 
two-sided  Type  I error  rate of 0.05,  to detect  an effect  size of half the 
standard  deviation  between  the interventi on and control  arms  if 64 cancer  
patients  are enrolled  in each  of the control  and intervention  groups.  A mean  
difference  of one-half a standard  deviation  is clinically  meaningful  and is 
considered  a medium  effect  size for clinical  trials.  During  the primar y 
analysis,  we will adjust  for the fact that there  are three  cancer  populations  
in our data and will look for a well-defined  effect  that is marginal  within  each  
population.  We will accrue  a total of 69 patients  in each  arm to account  for 
attrition  of data,  assuming  a 7% dropout  rate from the trial.  
 
Accrual  Period:  The estimated  accrual  period  is 1.5 years  
 
5 Study  Duration:  Data  will be collected  from participants  for 12 weeks.  Passive  collection  of 
wearable  data through  the app will continue  for up to one year for each  
participant  who opts-in to continue  using  the app, and medical  records  may 
be accessed  for up to five years  after the conclusion  of the 12-week  
collection  period.  
 
  
6 STUDY  SCHEMA:  SCHEDULE  OF EVENTS  
 
  
Diagram  outlining  the survey  data collected  over the trial. Note:  “Control  actions”  here refers  
to following  “dummy”  lighting  recommendations  that are minimally  expected  to affect  the 
circadian  clock.  
7  
TIME  AND  EVENTS  TABLE  
 
 
Patient  Events  Timeline  
Every  day after starting  
the trial: Every  week,  starting  on 
the first day of the trial:  On the first day and last 
day of the trial:  At any point  in time:   
Single  question  daily 
fatigue  survey  PROMIS  Fatigue  survey,  
“How  is your experience  
with the app?”  
questionnaire,  sleep  aid 
usage  survey   PROM IS Sleep,  Anxiety,  
Depression,  Physical  
Function,  Global  Health  App experience  free 
response   
 
 
  

8 Intervention  Arm vs Control  Arm 
 
  
Intervention  Arm  
 
Wearable  sensor:   
Patient  is given  a wearable  
device  to wear  for 12 weeks.  
 
Blue -blocking  glasses:   
Patient  is given  blue-blocking  
glasses  to wear  at instructed  
times.  
 
Full SYNC  app:   
Patient  downloads  the SYNC  
app and is given  light 
interventions  designed  to 
have  a targeted,  personalized  
effect  on the circadian  clock.  
Control  Arm  
 
Wearable  sensor:   
Patient  is given  a wearable  
device  to wear  for 12 weeks.  
 
Clear  glasses:   
Patient  is given  glasses that 
block  no visible  light.   
 
“Dummy”  SYNC  app:   
Patient  downloads  the SYNC  
app and is given  light 
interventions  designed  to 
have  minimal  impact  on the 
circadian  clock.  
9  
1. BACKGROUND  AND  SIGNIFICANCE  
1.1. Circadian  rhythms  are chronically  disrupted  in cancer  patients,  leading  to worsened  
symptoms  and outcomes.  A growing  body  of evidence  links circadian  rhythms  to human  
health  and disease.  These  rhythms,  which  repeat  approximately  once  a day and are kept 
in sync with the local environment  by the timing  of light exposure,  face constant  disruption  
in the modern  era of artificial  lighting  and smartphones  (Wittmann  et al. 2006 ; Roenneberg  
et al. 2012 ; Parsons  et al. 2015 ). Sleep,  the behavior  most  famously  under  circadian  
control,  is not the only process  affected:  these  rhythms  feature prominently  in nearly  every  
major  function  in the body,  from immune  response  to metabolism  (Eckel -Mahan  and 
Sassone -Corsi  2013;  McClung  2013 ; Paganelli  et al. 2018 ). Yet despite  increased  
awareness  of their importance  for human  health,  circadian  rhythms  are rarely  targeted  in 
clinical  interventions.   
1.2. Light  as a treatment  for circadian  disruption.  Light  therapy,  in which  people  
intentionally  expose  themselves  to bright  light and/or  avoid  light at specific  times  of day, 
holds  promise  for reducing  circadian  rhythm  disruption  to improve  symptoms  such  as 
fatigue.  However,  all intervention  studies  carried  out so far have  been  one-size-fits-all, 
with a single  light intervention  of fixed  timing  and without  real-time personalization  to 
match  an individual  patient's  day-to-day variation  in circadian  rhythm . Even  with these  
limitations,  breast  cancer  patients  exposed  to 30 minutes  of bright  light in the morning  
experience  reduced  desynchrony  (Neikrug  et al. 2012) , mitigated  fatigue  (Ancoli -Israel  et 
al. 2012) , and protection  from a significan t decline  in quality  of life (QOL)  (Jeste  et al. 
2013) . Other  studies  have  found  blocking  evening  light led to improved  sleep  in healthy  
populations,  though  no comparable  studies  have  been  carried  out in cancer  patients  (van 
der Lely et al. 2015 , Burkhart  and Phelps  2009) . 
1.3. Tracking  circadian  rhythms  has historically  been  challenging  in real-world  
conditions.  There  is great  promise  for lighting  interventions  as therapy,  yet several  
hurdles  stand  in the way. The first is awareness.  Many  patients  are unaware  of the effects  
of light on their bodies  and how these  effects  change  over the course  of the day. In 
addition,  daily exposure  to morning  light requires  habit -formation,  which  can be 
burdensome.  Importantly,  the timing  of light interventions  in previous  work  has never  been  
tailored  to match  the individual’s  circadian  rhythm,  instead  opting  for catch -all instructions;  
e.g., “on awakening”  or “in the morning.”  This is despite  the fact that sleep  and circadian  
rhythms  are distinct  processes,  particularly  in people  experiencing  irregular  sleep  and light 
exposure.   
1.4. Mathematical  models  and wrist -worn  wearables  can be used  to predict  circadian  
time.  The gold standard  for estimating  circadian  time is the costly  and time-consuming  
dim light melatonin  onset  (DLMO)  test. This salivary  asse ssment,  which  takes  hours  to 
collect  and costs  hundreds  of dollars,  has made  personalizing  circadian  recommendations  
impractical  in the past.  Recent  work  by our group  and others  has suggested  that circadian  
rhythms  can be tracked  by coupling  mathematical  models  to wearable  devices  that 
measure  activity,  light and/or  heart  rate (Stone  et al. 2019;  Woelders  et al. 2017;  Huang  
et al., In revisions;  Bowman  et al., in preparation).  Building  on these  method s, it is now 
possible  to deliver  light interventions  tailored  to the individual  user,  making  them  both more  
habit -building  and more  effective.    
1.5. Prior  work:  Embedding  circadian  algorithms  in mobile  apps.  In our previous  work,  
our team  developed  a prototype  mobile  application,  SYNC,  which  tracked  the circadian  

10 clock  indirectly  using  wrist-worn  wearable  sensor  data (i.e., minute -by-minute  
activity/steps  and heart  rate) as input.  The SYNC  app makes  behavioral  recommendations  
to correct  circadian  misalignment  in patients.  The general  types  of recommendations  are: 
1) When  to seek  and avoid  light;  2) When  to seek  and avoid  caffeine;  3) Ideal  window  for 
sleep.  These  recommendations  are given  with associated  time periods  and tailored  to 
match  the user’s  ability  and desire  to control  their light exposure  (e.g. the ability  to wear  
blue-blocking  glasses,  or be exposed  to very bright  light)  and home  time zone.  For 
example,  the app will only recommend  that the user avoid  light by wearing  blue-blocking  
glasses  if they have  marked  that they are willing  to use blue-blockers  in the Settings  page,  
and will only recommend  caffeine  timing  if the person  is a caffeine  user.   
 
1.6. Preliminary  data suggests  strong  potential  for wearables.  To assess  the viability  of 
cancer  participants  using  a wrist-worn  wearable  and lighting  hardware,  participants  were  
given  a version  of the app that passively  collected  data from an Apple  Watch  devic e 
without  making  active  recommendations,  a smart -bulb that could  be controlled  by the app 
(to change  color  to dim red) and red-tinted,  blue-blocking  glasses,  but no specific  
instructions  on how to use these  beyond  a simple  educational  primer  on how light affects  
sleep.  Overall,  users  in our Phase  I usability  trial found  the wrist-worn  wearable  extremely  
easy  to set up (100%  found  it “Very  easy”  to Wear  and Charge,  and 75% found  it “Very  
Easy”  to sync with their phone,  with the remaining  25% rating  it as “Fairly Easy.”).  The 
most  difficult  hardware  challenge  was connecting  the lightbulb,  with one participant  
choosing  not to set it up and one person  marking  it as “Neutral ” difficulty.  In summary,  
most  participants  did not find the hardware  overly  burdensome  to set up. Clear  daily 
patterns  of activity  and heart  rate can be seen  over the course  of the collected  data.  While  
the feasibility  of deploying  wearables  in a patient  population  was unclear  before  the 
usability  trial, we found  patients  were  willing  and able to reliably  wear  the device.   

11 1.7. Study  Rationale.  The scientific  premise  of this protocol  stems  from the literature  
presented  in   the Background  and Significance  and the large  body  of prior work  by the 
study  PI and Co-Is who have  extensive  experience  examin ing the information  needs  of 
cancer  patients.  The SYNC  app has been  tested  in one-on-one user interviews  and for 
ease -of-use with lighting  and wearable  hardware;  the next stage  of its development  is to 
incorporate  greater  scientific  rigor.  The heterogeneit y of cancer  types  and experiences  
means  that an intervention  may be effective  for one population  and not for another.  The 
work  proposed  in this specific  aim is to test the SYNC  app, in three  separate  populations  
of cancer  patients.  Patients  will be randomi zed either  to use the SYNC  app, with its tailored  
recommendations  for use with blue-blocking  glasses,  or to a control  app without  tailored  
recommendations  and clear  glasses.  
1.8. SYNC  1.0 Development.  The app was developed  for iOS devices  by Arcascope  using  a 
Phase  I SBIR  grant.  A non-interventional  version  of the app was tested  for usability  in a 
prior study.  The app was designed  based  on five in-depth  interviews,  assessed  for 
usability  in four recorded  tests  with the first prototype,  and tested  again  by eight  
participants  in a long-term study,  along  with hardware,  including  blue-blocking  glasses  
and mobile -controlled  smart -bulbs.  The app was capable  of syncing  with smart -bulb 
devices,  as well as registering  when  these  devices  were  used.  These  features  of the app 
were  removed  in response  to user feedback  that they did not like interfacing  with the smart  
lightbulbs.   
1.9. Understanding  circadian  interventions.  To better  explain  the recommendations  by the 
app, consider  the case  where  a user on a habitual  11:00  pm to 7:00 am sleep  schedule  
has been  disrupted  by staying  up later than normal.  The model  will track  that user’s  
circadian  state  as disrupted,  which  is shown  by the x variable  from the limit cycle  oscillator  
model  in the figure  above  as a dashed  red line, out-of-sync with the solid black  line (again,  
x) of someone  entrained  to 16 hours  of light and 8 hours  of dark.  Periods  of light and dark 

12 are marked  as bands  of yellow  and black,  respectively.  Predicted  windows  of sleep  
(Phillips  and Robinson  2007)  are marked  by purple  bands.  All simulations  start at 11:00  
am local time.  
 
The app makes  different  recommendations  based  on the user’s  predicted  sleep  drive.  If 
the user followed  no intervention  (leftmost  plot),  they would end the 24-hour period  still out 
of sync with their target  rhythm.  If they had accrued  a relatively  low sleep  drive  in the days  
leading  up to the disruption,  the app would  recommend  they put on blue-blocking  glasses  
at 8:15 pm, with an anticipated  sleep  onset  at 10:50  pm. If they had a significantly  higher  
sleep  drive,  the app would  recommend  a maximum  nap opportunity  of 1.5 hours  between  
12:30  and 2:00 pm, and a bedtime  at 7:40 pm. For all these  sample  recommendations,  
times  have  been  rounded  to the nearest  five-minute  mark. While  only two interventions  
are shown  (for “low”  and “high”  sleep  drive),  there  are many  others  that would  be 
recommended  for different  sleep  drives  and different  disruptions.  
1.10.  Scientific  Premise . Fatigue  is a major  problem  for cancer  patients,  and one that can persist  
long after treatment  ends.  Recent  work  has demonstrated  that light therapy  may mitigate  
or reduce  fatigue  levels  in both cancer  patients  and cancer  survivors.  This protocol  seeks  
to assess  how lighting  interventions  distributed  through  a mobile  app affect  fatigue,  sleep,  
and quality  of life across  three  populations  of cancer  patients.  Our strong  preliminary  data,  
coupled  with the need  to deliver  an effective  intervention  in a population  with severe  
circadian  disruption  form the scientific  premise.  Our central  hypothesis  is that targeted,  
personalized  light interventions  will reduce  fatigue  in cancer  patients.  
  

13 1. STUDY  DESIGN  
1.1. Study  Overview . This study  will use a two-arm randomized  study  design.   Participants  will 
be recruited  across  three  cancer  types.  Each  of the participants  will be randomized  to an 
active  “intervention ” arm (using  the full SYNC  app) or to a control  arm (using  a “dummy”  
version  of the SYNC  app that gives  recommendations  for light at times  that should  not 
significantly  affect the circadian  clock).  The random  allocation  of participants  to the 
treatment  arm or control  arm establishes  the basis  for testing  the statistical  significance  or 
difference  between  the groups  in the measured  outcome  (patient  fatigue,  assessed  by a 
daily 1-question  fatigue  survey  and the PROMIS  4-item Fatigue).  Patient  age, gender,  and 
other  prognostic  baseline  characteristics  that could  potentially  confound  an observed  
association,  including  those  that are unknown  or unmeasured,  will be distributed  equal ly, 
except  through  chance  alone,  through  random  assignment.  Thus,  this design  is well-suited  
to our goal of assessing  the efficacy  of a mobile  health  intervention,  SYNC,  on participants.  
1.2. Primary  Hypothesis . The primary  hypothesis  is that a mobile -app delivered circadian  
intervention  (SYNC)  will reduce  patient  fatigue.   
1.3. Study  Objectives  
1.3.1.  Primary  Objective.   To test the difference  between  the “intervention ” (full SYNC  
app) arm and the control  (limited  SYNC  app) arm in the measured  outcome  of 
patient  fatigue,  assessed  by daily 1 question  surveys  and weekly  4-item PROMIS  
questionnaires  over the course  of 12 weeks.   
1.3.2.  Secondary  Objective.  To determine  the change  in sleep  disturbances,  anxiety,  
depression,  physical  functioning,  and global  health  through  PROMIS  
questi onnaires,  between  baseline  and the 12-week  assessment  in both the control  
and intervention  arms,  and to look for differences  in this change  between  the two 
arms.   
1.3.3.  Exploratory  Objectives  
1.3.3.1.  Change  in patient  physical  activity  through  physiological  data capture  
using  the wearable  sensors  in the control  versus  intervention  arm. 
1.3.3.2.  Change  in patient  health  care utilization  (e.g.,  total count  of hospital  days,  
readmissions,  and ambulatory  care clinic visits)  in the control  versus  
intervention  arm 
1.3.3.3.  Change  in patient  sleep  aid usage  in the control  versus  intervention  arm. 
1.4. Participant  Eligibility  
1.4.1.   Inclusion  Criteria  
1.4.1.1.  Able to provide  informed  consent  and willing  to sign an approved  consent  
form that conforms  to federal  and institutional  guidelines.  
1.4.1.2.  Comfortable  reading  and speaking  English.  
1.4.1.3.  Must  own an iPhone  6s or later (with  iOS 14 or later or willing  to update  to 
iOS 14+) and be willing  to complete  surveys  on it, per the protocol.  
Alternatively,  patients  without  iPhones  must  be willing  to use a loaner  
iPhone  provided  by the study  team  to use during  the study  and return  at 
the end of the study . 
1.4.1.4.  > 18 years  of age.  
14 1.4.1.5.  Sleep  aid usage  will be allowed  as long as the patient  has been  on a stable  
dose  for at least  4 weeks  prior to enrollment  and agrees  to continue  the 
same  dose  during  the study.   
1.4.1.6.  A response  of at least  4 on a 10-point  scale  (with  0 = not fatigued  at all 
and 10 = extremely  fatigued ) to the question  “How  fatigued  did you feel in 
the last four week s?” 
1.4.1.7.  Breast  cancer  population:  Diagnosed  with stage  1-3 breast  cancer  in the 
last 10 years,  without  metastatic  disease.  Chemotherapy  or radiation  
therapy,  if indica ted, must  have  been  completed  at least  3 months  prior to 
enrollment.  Concomitant  anti-HER2  therapy  and/or  anti-endocrine  therapy  
is permitted.  
1.4.1.8.  Prostate  cancer  population:  Undergoing  androgen  deprivation  therapy  
(ADT)  for at least  three  months  and are anticipated  to remain  on ADT for 
the duration  of the trial. Concomitant  additional  anti-androgen  therapy  (e.g.,  
enzalutamide)  is permitted.  
1.4.1.9.  HSCT  population:  Participants  must  be from the University  of Michigan  
Blood  and Marrow  Transplant  Program.  
1.4.2.  Exclusio n Criteria  
1.4.2.1.  The patient  cannot  be undergoing  chemotherapy  at the time of enrollmen t 
unless  it is post-transplant  maintenance  chemotherapy.  Patients  
undergoing  post-transplant  maintenance  chemotherapy  are permitted  to 
enroll.  
1.4.2.2.  The patient  must  have  no evide nce of disease  progression  or recurrence.  
Specifically,  for the prostate  cancer  population,  the patient  must  have  no 
evidence  of disease  progression  on their current  ADT regimen  at the time 
of enrollment.  
1.4.2.3.  The patient  must  not be a night  shift worker,  wher e night  shift is defined  
as working  a significant  number  of hours  (i.e. more  than half) between  the 
hours  of 11PM  and 6AM on a regular  basis.  
1.5.  Intervention  Plan 
1.5.1.  Participants  will be consented,  enrolled,  and randomized  remotely  with a Research  
Coordinator  prior to beginning  the trial. A review  of inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will 
be conducted  to determine  the patient’s  eligibility  for enrollment.  Study  procedures  
will be reviewed  with the patient,  and documentation  of informed  consent  will be 
obtained.  After  signing  the informed  consent  form (ICF)  either  in person  or 
electronically  using  SignNow  or other  process  approved  by the University  of 
Michigan  IRBMED,  patients  will be assigned  a unique  study  ID number  in 
sequential  order.  Those  who are found  to be ineligible  will be replaced.  
1.5.2.  After  providing  informed  consent,  the participant  will be provided,  in the clinic  or 
via mail,  a wearable  device  and a pair of glasses,  which  will be either  blue-blocking  
(intervention  group)  or clear  (control  group).  Both of these  are described  in detail  
in Appendix  A. When  both are in the participant’s  possession,  the study  
coordinator  will schedule  a second  meeting  with the participant  to onboard  them  
to the specifics  of the study.   
15 1.5.3.  The study  coordinator  will walk the participant  through  setting  up the app and 
entering  their Research  ID number.  They  will ensure  that the participant  is able to 
connect  to the wearable  device  via their phone  and will explain  to the subject  that 
they shou ld not wear  the blue-blocking  glasses  while  driving  or if their vision  will 
be impaired  by them  in a way that challenges  their mobility.   
1.5.4.  Participants  will be allowed  to use sleep  aids over the course  of the trial. There  will 
be no restriction  on their usage; however,  subjects  will be asked  to report  on a 
weekly  basis  what  sleep  aids they consumed,  as well as the number  of alcoholic  
drinks  they consumed.  This survey  will be carried  out in the app. 
1.5.5.  Once  the trial has begun,  study  coordinators  will track  comp letion  of surveys,  and 
in the event  of missing  data will follow -up with subjects  to assess  challenges  to 
encourage  survey  completion.  SYNC  software  will be maintained  in collaboration  
with Arcascope,  Inc. After  randomization,  subjects  will complete  baselin e 
assessments,  as outlined  in the metrics  Appendix.  They  will be asked  to wear  the 
wearable  device  day and night  for twelve  weeks.  During  this time,  the app will 
deliver  ecological  momentary  assessments  of fatigue  daily at random  times  of day 
and the validated 4-item PROMIS  Fatigue  questionnaire  weekly  to both the control  
and interventional  groups.  At the end of the twelve -week  period,  the subjects  will 
remotely  complete  end-of-trial assessments.  
1.5.6.  Intervention  arm (SYNC  app):  Participants  randomized  to the intervention  arm will 
be instructed  on how to download  the app on their mobile  phones  (iOS)  and how 
to operate  the wearable  device.  The app will record  when  the user opens  the app, 
as well as when  they check  off having  completed  an assigned  task;  e.g. “getting 
bright  light exposure”.  Please  see Appendix  A to view the components  of the 
wearable  device.  Please  see Appendix  B to view specifications  of the mobile  app. 
Any PHI information  will be stored  on University  of Michigan  servers  in a secure  
way. Only non-PHI information  will be stored  and collected  via the Sync  app. The 
SYNC  will be downloaded  onto patient  mobile  phones  and can be used  freely  
throughout  the intervention  period  because  it contains  no PHI data.   
1.5.7.  Control  arm: Participants  randomized  to the control arm will be instructed  on how 
to download  the SYNC  app and how to operate  the wearable  sensor.  Their  
research  ID will trigger  the “control ” recommendations  from SYNC,  which  are 
chosen  to minimize  circadian  effect.  Any PHI information  will be stored  on 
University  of Michigan  servers  in a secure  way. Only non-PHI information  will be 
stored  and collected  via the Sync  app. The SYNC  will be downloaded  onto patient  
mobile  phones  and can be used  freely  throughout  the intervention  period  because  
it contains  no PHI data.    
1.5.8.  Light -blocking  and “dummy”  glasses:  Participants  will be provided  either  blue-
blocking  glasses  (intervention  group)  or clear  glasses  that do not block  visible  light 
(control).  The blue-blocking  glasses  are meant  to reduce  the circadian  effect  of 
light at certain  times  for participants.  Both pairs  of glasses  will be capable  of being  
worn  over regular  glasses  for vision  impairment.  Participants  will be informed  not 
to wear  the glasses  while  driving,  or when  doing  motor  activity  that risks injury  with 
vision  impairment.  They  will also be informed  that they are not required  to wear  the 
glasses  if doing  so makes  them  feel uncomfortable;  e.g. if they are out in public.   
1.5.9.  Wearable  sensor  device:  Each  participant  will be given  a wearable  sensor  to wear  
throughout  the treatment  period,  except  while  in water  or when  charging.  The goal 
is to collect  objective,  continuous,  multi -parameter  physiological  data (e.g.,  total 
16 hours  of sleep,  sleep  quality,  total number  of steps)  on patients  throughout  the 
treatmen t period  to correlate  with their subjective,  snapshot  participant -reported  
outcomes  collected  over the course  of the trial. The de-identified  wearable  data 
will be stored  on servers  purchased  by the small  business  partner,  Arcascope.  For 
troubleshooting,  detailed  instructions  will be provided  for all participants,  and 
customer  support  will be available  8AM – 5PM CST.  Our team  is available  by pager  
after hours,  if needed.   
  
17 3. STUDY  ENDPOINTS  
3.1. Primary  Endpoint . The primary  endpoint  is fatigue,  as assessed  by a daily fatigue  
questionnaire  and a weekly  4-item PROMIS  fatigue  questionnaire.  
3.2. Secondary  Endpoint . The secondary  endpoints  are sleep  disturbance,  anxiety,  
depression,  physical  function  and global  health,  as measured  via the following  PROMIS  
validated  instruments:  
- PROMIS  Sleep  Disturbance  (8-item)  
- PROMIS  Anxiety  (7-item)   
- PROMIS  Depression  (8-item)  
- PROMIS  Physical  Function  (8-item)   
- PROMIS  Global  Health  (10-item)  
3.3. Exploratory  Endpoints . 
3.3.1.  Activity  data.  Patient  activity  (steps)  and sleep will be measured  
continuously  from the start to the end of the trial through  wearable  sensors.  
3.3.2.  Health  care utilization  data.  Patient  health  care utilization  data (e.g.,  total 
count  of hospital  days,  emergency  department  visits,  readmissions,  and 
ambula tory care clinic  visits)  will be captured  through  the electronic  health  record  
as well as self-report  (i.e., if the patient  is readmitted  at an outside  hospital  other  
than Michigan  Medicine).   
3.3.3.  Sleep  aid utilization  data will be collected  via self-report  in the app once  a 
week.   
  
18  
4. PATIENT  ENROLLMENT  AND  EVALUATION  
4.1. Study  participants  will be recruited  through  the following  means:  
(1) The University  of Michigan  Rogel  Cancer  Center  physicians,  advanced  practice  
providers,  and nurse  coordinators.   
(2) The University  of Michigan  health  system’s  electronic  health  record  (EHR)  is based  
on the Epic software  (MiChart),  which  allows  researchers,  with IRB approval,  to 
contact  (via email,  flyers , phone  calls,  or in-person)  individuals  who meet  specific  
criteria  and may be eligible  to participate  in the study.  For example,  with IRB-
approval,  Drs. Choi,  Alumkal,  and Henry  and their Research  Staff can access  the 
daily clinic  schedules,  which  will enable  them  to identify  potential  participants  and 
meet  them  in-person  during  a corresponding  patient  encounter.   
(3) With IRB-approval,  we will distribute  flyers  in the outpatient  clinics  for our three  
cancer  populations  to inform  potential  indivi duals  about  the study.  We will also 
distribute  emails  to potential  study  participants  via the University  of Michigan’s  
UMHealthResearch  (https://umhealthresearch.org ) service.   
(4) The Michigan  Institute  for Clinic al and Health  Research  (MICHR),  supported  by 
the NIH Clinical  and Translational  Science  Award  Program,  will assist  our team  
with developing  and reviewing  recruitment  materials,  and identifying  obstacles  that 
may affect  participant  recruitment  and retention . 
4.2. Randomization : Once  the patient  is deemed  eligible  and has provided  written  informed  
consent,  the Research  Coordinator  will confirm  eligibility.  The study  statistician,  Walter  
Dempsey,  will create  a randomization  list before  the study  begins  enrollment  using the 
statistical  package  R.  Dr. Dempsey  will then forward  the list to the Data  Manager,  who 
will be responsible  for enrolling  patients  and assigning  them  to the correct  study  arm.   
4.3. Pre-Intervention  Evaluation : PROMIS  Patient -Reported  Outcomes  (PROs)  – Well-being  
or HRQOL  assessments  will be obtained  at baseline,  pre-intervention.  The surveys  will be 
completed  directly  through  the SYNC  app on mobile  phones.  Based  on prior work,  our 
Study  Team  has experience  administering  PROMIS  PROs  on mobile  devices.  
4.4. Post-Intervention  Evaluation : PROMIS  Patient -Reported  Outcomes  (PROs)  – Well-being  
or HRQOL  assessments  will be completed  at 12 weeks,  post-intervention.  This survey  
must  be completed  within  two weeks  after the 12-week  intervention  period. The surveys  
will be obtained  directly  through  the SYNC  app on mobile  phones.  Based  on prior work,  
our Study  Team  has experience  administering  PROMIS  PROs  on mobile  devices.  
4.5. Participant  Withdrawal : At any time,  a participant  may request  that her or his data no 
longer  be collected.  The participant  may make  this request  to the Research  Coordinator  
or to any member  of the Study  Team.  A note will be made  in the patient  chart  documenting  
the reason  the patient  withdrew  from the study.  Participants  may also be removed  for the 
following  reasons:  development  of disease  recurrence  or progression,  in the event  that 
the IRB or sponsor  decides  to close  the study,  or if the treating  physician  thinks  it is no 
longer  in the best interest  of the patient.   
4.6. Study  Regulations : The trial will be performed  in accordance  with all applicable  regulatory  
requirements  and laws.   
4.7. Risks . 

19 4.7.1.  Wearable  Sensor  Device : Patient  Subjects  who agree  to wear  the device(s)  for 
data collection  may experience  mild skin irritation,  which  will be monitored  by the 
care team. The subject  can decline  to wear  the device(s)  or request  to try a 
different  device(s)  that may be more  comfortable.  Subjects  who decline  to wear  
the wearable  device  will be replaced  and not included  in the statistical  analysis.  All 
subjects  will be instructed  to remove  the device  before  any scans  or radiation  
therapy.  
4.7.2.  Confidentiality : There  is a possible  risk of loss of confidentiality.  However,  every  
effort  will be made  to keep  your medical  information  confidential.  We will code  data 
by assigning  a numb er to each  individual  patient  and then store  the data by that 
number.  No mention  of patient  subject  identities  is made  in analyses  of the data or 
in any publications,  which  result  from such  research.  
4.8. Adverse  Event  Reporting  Requirements.   
Adverse  events  related  to this intervention  are not expected,  as the focus  of this 
intervention  (if randomized  to the intervention  group)  is on lighting  and minimal -risk 
behavioral  interventions.  However,  any adverse  events  resulting  from research  
procedure s will be reported  to IRBMED  per institutional  guidelines.   In the event  an AE 
does  occur,  the PI will determine  the attribution/relatedness  of each  AE. Expected  side 
effects  from anti-hormonal  therapies,  anti-HER2  therapy,  GVHD  will not be reported  for 
this trial. 
4.9. Participant  Data  Security  and Compliance . All identifiable  information  about  the patient  will 
be stored  on a secure,  password -protected  core image  laptop  computer  in Dr. Sung  Won 
Choi’s  Laboratory  (MPB)  following  rules  for secure  data storage  (e.g., M+Box  or Dropbox).  
Research  devices  will not interface  with MiChart.  All study  personnel  will be HIPAA  and 
PEERRS  certified.  All study  information  will be stored  in password -protected  encrypted  
files and identified  by case  number.  The technologies  proposed  in this proposal  have  all 
been  carefully  reviewed,  and approved  by the governing  bodies  at Michigan  Medicine.  All 
regulatory  and security  requirements  have  been  met and have  been  fully documented  in 
accordance  with the policies  and best practices  that govern  the use of technology  for 
patient  care and research  at Michigan  Medicine.  The MiChart  web services  were  built and 
are supported  by HITS,  and their use for this project  has been  approved  by HITS.  All 
standard  procedures  and protocols  for security  and data integrity  that apply  to this project  
are being  followed.  All PHI will be stored  in the HITS  Oracle  Database.  
4.10.  Data  Safety  Monitoring  Plan. This study  will be monitored  in accordance  with the NCI 
approved  University  of Michigan  Rogel  Cancer  Center  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan.  
The study  team  will meet  every  six months  or more  frequently  depending  on the activity  
of the protocol.  The discussion  will include  matters  related  to the safety  of study  
participants  (SAE/UaP  reporting),  validity  and integrit y of the data,  enrollment  rate relative  
to expectations,  characteristics  of participants,  retention  of participants,  adherence  to the 
protocol  (potential  or real protocol  deviations)  and data completeness.  At these  regular  
meetings,  the protocol  specific  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Report  form will be completed  
and signed  by the Principal  Investigator  or by one of the co-investigators.  Data  and Safety  
Monitoring  Reports  will be submitted  to the University  of Michigan  Rogel  Cancer  Center  
Data  and Safety  Monit oring  Committee  (DSMC)  every  six months  for independent  review.  
 
20 5. STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
5.1. Study  Design . The clinical  trial is a two-arm randomized  controlled  trial. After  
completion  of the intervention,  data analysis  will be conducted  according  to the 
statistical  analysis  plan outlined  below.  Descriptive  statistics  will be performed  
prior to conducting  the statistical  analyses.  An intention -to-treat (ITT)  analysis  of 
the results  will be based  on the initial  assignment  of the randomized  participants.  
With the ITT approach,  participants  will be analyzed  according  to the treatment  
assignment,  even  if the participant  drops  out of the study.  The ITT approach  
minimizes  biased  comparisons  among  the treatment  arms.  Missing  data will be 
imputed  using  the last collected data from the subject  prior to dropout.   
5.2. Accrual . It is estimated  that 18-months  will be necessary  to enroll  the targeted      
sample  size. Accrual  will be reported  by race,  ethnicity,  gender,  and age.     
5.3. Study  Duration . Survey  results  and wearable  data will be actively  collected  from 
participants  over the course  of 12 weeks.  At the conclusion  of the 12 weeks,  
passive  collection  of wearable  data through  the app will continue  for up to one 
year for each  participant  who opts-in to continue  using  the app. Medical  records  
may be accessed  for up to five years  after the conclusion  of the 12-week  
collection  period.  
5.4. Randomization . Blocked  randomization  will be used  to limit bias and achieve  an 
equal  distribution  of participants  to the intervention  and control  arms  of the study  
(69 randomized,  69; with 23 from each  cancer  population  in each  arm).  This 
approach  will recruit  participa nts in small  blocks  to ensure  that half of the 
participants  within  each  block  will be allocated  to the treatment  and the other  half 
to the control.  The size of the blocks  will be permuted  to limit selection  bias,  and 
within  each  block,  the order  of patient s will be random.  The study  statistician  will 
create  a randomization  list before  the study  begins  enrollment  using  the 
statistical  package  R.  This list will be used  by the study  group  in assigning  
patients  to the correct  study  arm. 
5.5. Blinding . Study  arm assignments  cannot  be blinded  to the investigators  or the 
rest of the study  team  because  it will be known  whether  participants  have  SYNC  
on their mobile  device  or not (due to technical  purposes).   
5.6. Primary  Endpoint . The primary  objective  of the study  is to test the effects  of 
SYNC  in a randomized  controlled  clinical  trial design.  Patients  will be randomly  
assigned  to the treatment  arm or the control  arm. The primary  objective  is to 
quantify  the effects  of the light interventions  delivered  by SYNC  on patient  
fatigue.  
5.7. Sample  Size Considerations . We will enroll  138 cancer  patients,  with half in the 
intervention  arm and half in the control  arm. Our primary  endpoint  is the PROMIS  
4-item Fatigue  Short  Form.   The age- and sex-adjusted  norm  for the Fatigue  
scale  is 50 points,  with a standard  deviation  of 10 points.  These  statistics  have  
been  shown  to be largely  generalizable  to the cancer  patient  population  (mean:  
52, standard  deviation  7.6). Our study  will have  power  of 0.80,  assuming  a two-
sided  Type  I error  rate of 0.05, to detect  an effect  size of half the standard  
deviation  between  the intervention  and control  arms  if 64 cancer  patients  are 
enrolled  in each  of the control  and intervention  groups.  A mean  difference  of one-
half a standard  deviation  is clinically  meanin gful and is considered  a medium  
effect  size for clinical  trials.  During  the primary  analysis,  we will adjust  for the fact 
21 that there  are three  cancer  populations  in our data and will look for a well-defined  
effect  that is marginal  within  each  population.  We will accrue  a total of 69 patients  
in each  arm to account  for attrition  of data,  assuming  a 7% dropout  rate from the 
trial.  
5.8. PROMIS®  measures  use Item Response  Theory  (IRT),  a family  of statistical  
models  that link individual  questions  to a presumed  unde rlying  trait or concept  of 
global  health  represented  by all items  in the scale.  PROMIS®  instruments  are 
scored  using  item-level calibrations.  The most  accurate  way to score  a 
PROMIS®  instrument  is to use the Health  Measures  Scoring  Service,  which  our 
Study  Team  has experience  with. This method  of scoring  uses  “response  pattern  
scoring,”  which  uses  responses  to each  item for each  participant.  Response  
pattern  scoring  is especially  useful  when  there  is missing  data (i.e., a respondent  
skipped  an item),  or different  groups  of participants  responded  to different  items).  
 
There  are four key features  of the score  for PROMIS®  Fatigue:  
1. Reliability : The degree  to which  a measure  is free of error.  It can be estimated  
by the internal  consistency  of the responses  to the measure,  or by correlating  
total scores  on the measure  from two time points  when  there  has been  no true 
change  in what  is being  measured  (for z-scores,  reliability  = 1 – SE2). 
2. Precision : The consistency  of the estimated  score  (reciprocal  of error  
variance ). 
3. Information : The precision  of an item or multiple  items  at different  levels  of the 
underlying  continuum  (for z-scores,  information  = 1/SE2). 
4. Standard  Error  (SE): The possible  range  of the actual  final score  based  upon  
the scaled  T-score.  For example,  with a T-score  of 52 and a SE of 2, the 95% 
confidence  interval  around  the actual  final score  ranges  from 48.1 to 55.9 (T-
score  ± (1.96*SE)  = 52 ± (1.96*2)  = 48.1 to 55.9)  
 
The final score  is represented  by the T-score,  a standardized  score  with a mean  
of 50 and a standard  deviation  of 10 points.  
 
5.9. Interim  Analysis . There  will be no interim  analyses  for efficacy  or futility  for this 
trial. 
5.10.  Patient  Characteristics . Patient  characteristics  will be summarized  for all 
participants.  Patient  characteristics  to be examined  may include:  age, gender,  
race/ethnicity,  treatment  and pathology  information  (including  dates),  and clinical  
outcomes;  e.g. survival,  relapse,  and toxicities.  
5.11.  Analysis  Populations  and General  Analysis  Guidelines . 
5.11.1.  Primary  Analysis  Population . All participants  enrolled,  consented,  and 
completing  at least  the baseline  outcome  measures  will be included  in the 
primary  analysis  population.  Analyses  for the primary  and secondary  
endpoints  will use the primary  analysis  population:  The primary  analysis  
will occur  once  all patients  have  been  followed  for the duration  of the 12-
week  trial, data adjudication  completed,  and data are locked.  
5.11.2.  General  Analysis  Guideline s. Primary  analyses  for the primary,  
secondary,  and exploratory  endpoints  will use the primary  analysis  
population.  Analyses  of each  endpoint  in each  population  will follow  the 
22 analysis  plans,  as described  below.  We expect  minimal  missing  data 
(<5%)  for the primary  endpoint  and secondary  endpoints  based  on past 
experience  with mobile  app studies.  
5.12.  Analysis  of Primary  Endpoint . Analysis  will be an intent -to-treat analysis  that 
includes  all participants.  Mean  Global  Health  scores  at the end of the trial will be 
compared  using  a two-sample  t-test (or Wilcoxon  Rank  Sum test if non-normality  
is apparent)  with a significance  level of 0.05.  Linear  regression  models  will be 
performed  to complement  the results  of the t-test and adjust  for specific  baseline  
participant ’s characteristics  (e.g.,  demographic,  social,  environmental)  to 
increase  the precision  of our inference.  There  is a possibility  that patient  
characteristics  will be unbalanced  since  our randomization  scheme  will be 
applied  to participants.  Thus,  our model s also will assess  potential  moderating  or 
mediating  effects.  
5.13.  Analysis  of Secondary  Endpoint .  
Mean  PROMIS  scores  (PROMIS  sleep  disturbances,  anxiety,  depression,  
physical  function,  and global  health ) for each  arm at the end of the trial will be 
compared  using a two-sample  t-test (or Wilcoxon  Rank  Sum test if non-normality  
is apparent)  with a significance  level of 0.05.  Linear  regression  models  will be 
performed  to complement  the results  of the t-test and adjust  for specific  baseline  
participant’s  character istics  (e.g.,  demographic,  social,  environmental)  to 
increase  the precision  of our inference.  There  is a possibility  that patient  
characteristics  will be unbalanced  since  our randomization  scheme  will be 
applied  to participants.  Thus,  our models  also will assess  potential  moderating  or 
mediating  effects.  
5.14.  Analysis  of Exploratory  Endpoints . 
5.14.1.  Patient  activity . The accelerometer  data of each  subject  will be 
transformed  into a low-dimensional  representation  using  motif  discovery  
algorithms.79 Such  techniques  are completely  data-driven,  and search  for 
motifs  (i.e., patterns)  in the data that occur  more  often  than chance.  A 
signal  can then be represented  by the number  of times  a particular  motif  
occurs.  Others  have  successfully  used  such  techniques  for representing  a 
variety  of waveform  data,  including  accelerometer  and continuous  
glucose  data.80-82 The accelerometer  data will be processed  to derive  
estimates  of total sleep  duration  (i.e., hours  per night),  wake  after sleep  
onset,  and sleep  efficiency  (i.e., ratio of sleep  to wake).  The variables  will 
be compared  between  arms.  
5.14.2.  Patient  health  care utilization . The total count  of hospital  days,  ED visits,  
readmissions,  and ambulatory  care clinic  visits  during  the trial, with 
adjustment  for follow -up, will be compared  between  arms  using  a Poisson  
regression  model,  with adjustment  for potential  mediating  or moderating  
effects  of patient  characteristics,  if needed.  The data will be captured  at 
the time of PRO  assessments.  
5.14.3.  Patient  sleep  aid utilization . The total number  of sleep  aids being  used  by 
the patients,  as well as the types,  will be collected  via weekly  surveys  
over the course  of the trial.  
  
23  
APPENDIX  A: DESCRIPTION  OF DEVICES   
Participants  in both arms  will be given  a pair of glasses.  In the contro l group,  participants  will be 
given  a pair of clear  safety  glasses.  They  will be given  one of two types  of clear  glasses,  
depending  on whether  or not they wear  reading  glasses  and comfort  considerations.  
 
The first type of glasses  for the control  group  are those  meant  for participants  who do not wear  
reading  glasses.  To account  for changing  availability  of specific  glasses  models  on the Amazon  
website,  any pair of clear  safety  glasses  that is similar  to the model  below  may be used.   
 
Example  of control  glasses for participants  who do not wear  reading  glasses:  
 
Crews  BK310  BearKat  3 Polycarbonate  Clear  Lens  Safety  Glasses  with Non-Slip Hybrid  Black  
Temple  Sleeve  
 
 
 
 
Manufacturer  MCR  Safety  
Part Number  1 
Item Weight  0.32 ounces  
Package  Dimensions  9 x 2.6 x 1.6 inches  

24 Item model  number  BK310  
Color  Clear  Lens  
Style  Duramass  Coated  Lens  
Finish  Scratch -resistant  
Pattern  Safety  Glasses  
Item Package  Quantity  1 
Batteries  Required?  No 
 
The second  type of glasses  available  to participants  in the control  group  are larger  and meant  
for participants  who also wear  reading  glasses.  To account  for changing  availability  of specific  
glasses  models  on the Amazon  website,  any pair of clear  safety  glasses  that is similar  to the 
model  below  may be used.  
 
Example  of control  glasses  for participants  who do wear  reading  glasses:  
 
Safety  glasses  Industrial  Goggles  with Anti-fog Lens,  Clear  Safety  glasses  with Anti-Scratch  
Lens  Goggles  Inside  Eyeglasses  (Transparent)   
 
 
 

25  
Manufacturer  MEIGIX  
Part Number  MEIGIX -GOGGLES2  
Item Weight  2.82 ounces  
Package  Dimensions  9.09 x 4.53 x 2.8 inches  
Finish  Scratch -resistant,  Anti-fog, Uv-
protectio n 
Material  Plastic  
Batteries  Required?  No 
 
 
Participants  in the intervention  arm will be given  a pair of blue-blocking  glasses.  This will be one 
of two types  depending  on whether  they wear  reading  glasses  or not, as well as comfort  
considerations.  
Participants  in the intervention  arm with reading  glasses  will receive  blue-blocking  glasses  that 
fit over their other  glasses.  To account  for changing  availability  of specific  glasses  models  on 
the Amazon  website,  any pair of blue-blocking  glasses  that is similar  to the model  below  may be 
used.  
 
Example  of intervention  glasses  for participants  who do wear  reading  glasses:  
 
Uvex  ASTRO  Over -The-Glass  (OTG)  Blue Light  Blocking  Computer  Glasses  with SCT-Orange  
Lens.  
 
 
26  
 
 
Manufacturer  Honeywell  
Part Number  S2515  
Item Weight  2.32 ounces  
Package  Dimensions  6.81 x 2.83 x 2.6 inches  
Item model  number  S2515  
Style  ASTRO  OTG 
Item Package  Quantity  1 
Included  Components  1 safety  eyewear  

27 Batteries  Required?  No 
 
 
Participants  in the intervention  arm without  reading  glasses  will receive  smaller  blue-blocking  
glasses  that would  not fit over other  glasses.  To account  for changing  availability  of specific  
glasses  models  on the Amazon  website,  any pair of blue-blocking  glasses  that is similar  to the 
model  below  may be used.  
 
Example  of intervention  glasses  for participants  who do not wear  reading  glasses:  
 
Uvex  Skyper  Blue Light  Blocking  Computer  Glasses  with SCT-Orange  Lens.  
 
 
 
Manufacturer  Uvex  
Part Number  S1933X  
Item Weight  1.6 ounces  

28 Product  Dimensions  2.7 x 2.2 x 7 inches  
Item model  number  S1933X  
Is Discontinued  By Manufacturer  No 
Size 1-Pack  
Color  Sct-orange  Lens 
Style  Skyper  
Finish  Anti-fog 
Item Package  Quantity  1 
Included  Components  1 Pair of Glasses  
Batteries  Included?  No 
Batteries  Required?  No 
Warranty  Description  Lifetime  Frame  Guarantee  
 
 
 
Participants  in both arms  will be given  a wearable  device.  This device  will be either  a Fitbit  
Charge  3 or an Apple  Watch.   
 
29 In the event  that Fitbit  Charge  3s are the selected  wearable  device  for the study,  a description  of 
the device  follows  below.   
The Fitbit  Charge  3 is a smart  watch  capable  of measuring  heart  rate, exercise  amount,  and 
sleep  levels.  There  is a retail  version  available,  and that is the model  we will be using  for our 
study.  The data collected  by the Fitbit  Charge  3 is transferred  from the smart  watch  to the Fitbit  
application  installed  on the patient’s  phone  via Bluetooth  Low Energy  (BLE),  a form of Bluetooth  
specifically  designed  to lower  power  consumption  without  compromising  range.  The app then 
transmits  the data to Fitbit’s  informatio n management  system  securely  and without  identifiable  
information.  The smart  watch  can be worn  on either  wrist to give accurate  measurements.  The 
Charge  3 is made  of safe-to-use aluminum  and flexible,  non-elastic  elastomer  material  common  
in fitness  watche s. 
 
Participant  Fitbits  will be managed  through  Fitbit’s  proprietary  management  system.  The user will 
grant  the SYNC  app permission  to access  their heart  rate and steps  data during  the onboarding  
step.  The subject  will wear  the Charge  3 as often  as they like. This will begin  the collection  of the 
subject’s  data.  The smart  watch  will upload  the data to the patient’s  phone  every  15 minutes  via 
BLE.  The data is then sent to the Fitbit,  where  it is housed  in secure  Microsoft  Azure  servers,  
compliant  with ISO/IE C 27001:2006  industry  standards  of encryption.   
In the event  that the Apple  Watch  is the selected  wearable  device  for the study,  a description  of 
the device  follows  below.   
The Apple  Watch  is a smart  watch  capable  of measuring  heart  rate, steps,  and sleep  levels.  The 
retail  version  will be used  in the study.  The data from the Apple  Watch  is transferred  via 
Bluetooth  Low Energy  to the participant’s  phone  and stored  in the Apple Health  App. The smart  
watch  can be worn  on either  wrist.  The strap  is made  from liquid  silicone  rubber  or nylon  weave  
for wearing  comfort.   
Information  collected  by the watch  can be accessed  by the app after the user has granted  
permission  via the Apple  Health  app.  
The Apple  Watch  series  used  in this trial may range  from Series  3 to Series  6 and may include  
Series  SE. 
Detailed  descriptions  of both the Fitbit  Charge  3 and the Apple  Watch  use and care are below.   
30 Fitbit  Charge  3 
Place  Charge  3 around  your wrist.  If you need  to attach  a different  size band,  or if you 
purchased  another  band,  see the instructions  in "Change  the band"  on page  13. 
Placement  for all-day wear  vs. exercise  
When  you're  not exercising,  wear  Charge  3 a finger's  width  above  your wrist bone.  
For optimized  heart -rate tracking  while  exercising:  
During  a workout,  experiment  with wearing  your tracker  a bit higher  on your wrist for an 
improved  fit. Many  exercises,  such  as bike riding  or weight  lifting,  cause  you to bend  your wrist 
frequently , which  could  interfere  with the heart - rate signal  if the tracker  is lower  on your wrist.  
Wear  your tracker  on top of your wrist,  and make  sure the back  of the device  is in contact  with 
your skin. 
Consider  tightening  your band  before  a workout  and looseni ng it when  you’re  done.  The band  
should  be snug  but not constricting  (a tight band  restricts  blood  flow, potentially  affecting  the 
heart -rate signal).  
Handedness:  
For greater  accuracy,  you must  specify  whether  you wear  Charge  3 on your dominant  or non-
domi nant hand.  Your  dominant  hand  is the one you use for writing  and eating.  To start,  the 
Wrist  setting  is set to non-dominant.  If you wear  Charge  3 on your dominant  hand,  change  the 
Wrist  setting  in the Fitbit  app: 
From  the Today  tab in the Fitbit  app, tap your profile  picture  > Charge  3 tile > Wrist  > Dominant.  
Change  the band:  
Charge  3 comes  with a small  band  attached  and an additional  large,  bottom  band  in the box. 
Both the top and bottom  bands  can be swapped  with accessory  bands,  sold separately  on 
fitbit.com . For band  measurements,  see "Band  size"  on page  48. 
Remove  a band:  
1. Turn over Charge  3 and find the band  latches.  
2. To release  the latch,  press  down  on the flat button  on the band.  
3. Gently  pull the band  away  from the tracker  to release  it. 
4. Repeat  on the other  side.  
Attach  a new band:  
To attach  a new band,  press  it into the end of the tracker  until you feel it snap  into place.  
 
   
31 If you have  trouble  attaching  the band  or if it feels  loose,  gently  move  the band  back  and forth to 
make  sure it's attached  to the tracker.  
Notifications : Charge  3 can show  call, text, calendar,  and app notifications  from your phone  to 
keep  you informed.  Keep  your tracker  within  30 feet of your phone  to receive  notifications.  
Set up notifications  
Check  that Bluetooth  on your phone  is on and that your phone  can receive  notifications  (often  
under  Settings  > Notifications).  Then  set up notifications:  
1. From  the Today  tab in the Fitbit  app, tap your profile  picture  > Charge  3 
tile. 
2. Tap Notifications.  
3. Follow  the on-screen  instructions  to pair your tracker  if you haven't  already.  
Call, text, and calendar  notifications  are turned  on automatically.  
4. To turn on notifications  from apps  installed  on your phone,  including  Fitbit  and 
WhatsApp,  tap App Notifications  and turn on the notifications  you want  to see. 
Note  that if you have  an iPhone  or iPad,  Charg e 3 shows  notifications  from all calendars  synced  
to the Calendar  app. If you have  an Android  phone,  Charge  3 shows  calendar  notifications  from 
the calendar  app you choose  during  setup.  
 
See incoming  notifications:  A notification  causes  your tracker  to vibrate. If you don't  read the 
notification  when  it arrives,  you can check  it later by swiping  down  from the top of the screen.  
Manage  notifications:  Charge  3 stores  up to 10 notifications,  after which  the oldest  are replaced  
as you receive  new ones.  
To manage  notifications:  
Swipe  down  from the top of the screen  to see your notifications  and tap any notification  to 
expand  it. 
To delete  a notification,  tap to expand  it, then swipe  to the bottom  and tap Clear.  
To delete  all notifications  at once,  swipe  to the top of your notifications  and tap Clear  All. 
Turn off notifications:  Turn off certain  notifications  in the Fitbit  app, or turn off all notifications  in 
the quick  settings  on Charge  3. When  you turn off all notifications,  your tracker  won't  vibrate  and 
the screen  won't  turn on when  your phone  receives  a notification.  
To turn off certain  notifications:  
1. From  the Today  tab in the Fitbit  app on your phone,  tap your profile  
picture  > Charge  3 tile > Notifications.  
2. Turn off the notifications  you no longer  want  to receive  on your tracker.  
3. Sync  your tracker  to save  your changes.  
To turn off all notifications:  
32 1. Press  and hold the button  on your tracker  and swipe  left to reach  the quick  settings  
screen  (on Fitbit  Pay-enabled  trackers).  
2. Tap DND  to turn on do not disturb.  The DND  icon dims  to indicate  that all notifications,  
including  goal celebrations  and reminders  to move,  are turned  off. 
Note  that if you use the do not disturb  setting  on your phone,  you don't  receive  notifications  on 
your tracker  until you turn off this setting.  
Answer  or reject  phone  calls:  
If paired  to an iPhone  or Android  (8.0+)  phone,  Charge  3 lets you accept  or reject  incoming  
phone  calls.  If your phone  is running  an older  version  of the Android  OS, you can reject,  but not 
accept,  calls on your tracker.  
To accept  a call, tap the check  mark  on your tracker's  screen.  Note  that you can't speak  into the 
tracker —accepting  a phone  call answers  the call on your nearby  
phone.  To reject  a call, tap the icon on your tracker's  screen.  
Respond  to message s 
If paired  to an Android  (8.0+)  phone,  Charge  3 lets you respond  directly  to text messages  and 
notifications  from certain  apps  on your tracker  with preset  quick  replies.  
To respond  to a message:  
1. Tap the notification  on your tracker.  To see recent  messages , swipe  down  from the clock  
face.  
2. Tap Reply.  If you don’t  see an option  to reply  to the message,  replies  aren’t  available  for 
the app that sent the notification.  
3. Choose  a text reply  from the list of quick  replies  or tap the emoji  icon to choose  an emoji.  
For more  information,  including  how to customize  quick  replies,  see help.fitbit.com . 
Activity  and Sleep:  
Charge  3 continuously  tracks  a variety  of stats  whenever  you wear  it. Data  automatically  syncs  
when  in range  of the Fitbit  app throughout  the day. 
See your stats:  
Swipe  up from the clock  face on your tracker  to see your daily stats,  including:  
Core  stats  Steps  taken  today,  distance  covered,  floors  climbed,  calories  burned,  and 
active  minutes  
33 Hourly  
steps  Steps  taken  this hour,  and the number  of hours  you met your  hourly  
activity  goal 
Heart  rate Current  heart  rate and heart -rate zone,  and resting  heart  rate 
Exercise  Number  of days  you met your  exercise  goal this week  
Cycle  track  Information  on the current  stage  of your  menstrual  cycle,  if applicable  
Sleep  Duration  and quality  of your  sleep  
 
Find your complete  history  and other  information  detected  by your tracker,  such  as sleep  data,  
in the Fitbit  app. 
Track  a daily activity  goal:  Charge  3 tracks  your progress  toward  a daily activity  goal of your 
choice.  When  you reach  your goal,  your tracker  vibrates  and shows  a celebration.  
Choose  a goal:  Set a goal to help you get started  on your health  and fitness  journey.  To begin,  
your goal is to take 10,000  steps  per day. Choose  to change  the number  of steps,  or pick a 
different  activity  goal depending  on your device.  
 
Track  progress  toward  your goal on Charge  3. For more  information,  see "See  your stats"  on 
the previous  page . 
Track  your hourly  activity:   
Charge  3 helps  you stay active  throughout  the day by keeping  track  of when  you're  stationary  
and reminding  you to move.  
Reminders  nudge  you to walk at least  250 steps  each  hour.  You feel a vibration  and see a 
reminder  on your screen  at 10 minutes  before  the hour if you haven't walked  250 steps.  When  
you meet  the 250-step goal after receiving  the reminder,  you feel a second  vibration  and see a 
congratulatory  message.  
 
Track  your sleep:  Wear  Charge  3 to bed to automatically  track  basic  stats  about  your sleep,  
including  your time asleep,  sleep  stages  (time  spent  in REM,  light sleep,  and deep  sleep),  and 
34 sleep  score  (the quality  of your sleep).  Charge  3 also tracks  your estimated  oxygen  variation  
throughout  the night  to help you uncover  potential  breathing  disturbances.  To see your sleep  
stats,  sync your tracker  when  you wake  up and check  the Fitbit  app, or swipe  up from the clock  
face on your tracker  to check  the Sleep  tile in Fitbit  Today.  
  
Fitness  and Exercise  
Choose  to automatically  track  exercise,  or to track  activity  with the Exercise  app and see real-
time stats  and a post-workout  summary.  
Sync  Charge  3 with the Fitbit  app and share  your activity  with friends  and family,  see how your 
overall  fitness  level compares  to your peers,  and more.  
Track  your exercise  automatically  
Charge  3 automatically  recognizes  and records  many  high-movement  activities  which  are at 
least  15 minutes  long.  Sync  your device  to see basic  stats  about  your activity  in the Exercise  tile 
in the Fitbit  app. 
For more  information,  including  how to change  the minimum  duration  before  an activity  is 
tracked,  see help.fitbit.com . 
Track  and analyze  exercise  with the Exercise  app 
Track  specific  exercises  with the Exercise  app on Charge  3 to see real-time stats,  including  
heart -rate data,  calories  burned,  elapsed  time,  and a post-workout  
summary  on your wrist.  For complete  workout  stats,  and a workout  intensity  map if you used  
GPS,  tap the Exercise  tile in the Fitbit  app. 
Note:  Charge  3 uses  the GPS  sensors  on your nearby  phone  to capture  GPS  data.  
 Check  your heart  rate 
Heart -rate zones  help you target  the training  intensity  of your choice.  See your current  zone  and 
progress  toward  your maximum  heart  rate on your device  next to your heart -rate reading.  In the 
Fitbit  app, you can see your time spent  in zones  during  a particular  day or exercise.  Three  
zones  based  on American  Heart  Association  recommendations  are available,  or you can create  
a custom  zone  if you have  a specific  heart  rate you're  targeting.  
Default  heart -rate zones:  
Default  heart -rate zones  are calculated  using  your estimated  maximum  heart  rate. Fitbit  
calculates  your maximum  heart  rate with the common  formula  of 220 minus  your age. 
 
 
 
35  
Icon Zone  Calculation  Description  
 
Below  Zones  Below  50% 
of your  
maximum  
heart  rate Below  the fat burn  zone,  your  heart  
beats  at a slower  pace.  You’re  likely  at 
rest or doing  light  activities  such  as 
taking  a stroll.  
 
Fat Burn  Zone  Between  
50% and 
69% of your  
maximum  
heart  rate In the fat burn  zone,  you’re  likely  in a 
moderate  activity  such  as a brisk  walk.  
Your  heart  rate and breathing  might  be 
elevated,  but you can still carry  on a 
conversation.  
 
Cardio  Zone  Between  
70% and 
84% of your  
maximum  
heart  rate In the cardio  zone,  you’re  likely  doing  a 
vigorous  activity  such  as running  or 
spinning.  
 
Peak  Zone  Greater  
than  85% of 
your  
maximum  
heart  rate In the peak  zone,  you’re  likely  doing  a 
short,  intense  activity  that improves  
performance  and speed,  such  as 
sprinting  or high -intensity  interval  
training.  
 
Custom  heart -rate zones  
Instead  of using  these  3 heart -rate zones,  you can create  a custom  zone  to target  a specific  
heart -rate range  in the Fitbit  app. 
 
 
  
36 Apple  Watch  
 
To use your Apple  Watch  Series  3 or later with watchOS  7, you need  to pair your Apple  Watch  
with an iPhone  6s or later with iOS 14 or later.  Setup  assistants  on your iPhone  and Apple  
Watch  work  together  to help you pair and set up your Apple  Watch.  
 
WARNING:  To avoid  injury,  read Important  safety  information  for Apple  Watch  before  using  your 
Apple  Watch.  
 
Turn on, pair, and set up your Apple  Watch  
1. Put your Apple  Watch  on your wrist.  Adjust  the band  or choose  a band  size so your 
Apple  Watch  fits closely  but comfortably  on your wrist.  
For information  about  changing  the band  on your Apple  Watch,  see Remove,  
change,  and fasten  Apple  Watch  bands . 
2. To turn on your Apple  Watch,  press  and hold the side button  until you see the Apple  
logo.  
3. Bring  your iPhone  near your Apple  Watch,  wait for the Apple  Watch  pairing  screen  to 
appear  on your iPhone,  then tap Continue.  
Or open  the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone,  then tap Pair New Watch.  
 
4. When  prompted,  position  your iPhone  so that your Apple  Watch  appears  in the 
viewfinder  in the Apple  Watch  app. This pairs  the two devices.  
5. Tap Set Up Apple  Watch.  Follow  the instructions  on your iPhone  and Apple  Watch  to 
finish  setup.  
 
Tip: If you have  difficulty  seeing  your Apple  Watch  or iPhone,  VoiceOver  or Zoom  can help—
even  during  setup.  See Set up Apple  Watch  using  VoiceOver  or Use Zoom  on Apple  Watch . 
While  it’s pairing  with your iPhone,  your Apple  Watch  provides  tips on how to interact  with it. 
Tap Display,  Digital  Crown,  and Side Button  to learn  more.  
 
You can activate  cellular  service  on your Apple  Watch  during  setup.  If you don’t  wish to, you can 
activate  it later in the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone.  See Use Apple Watch  with a cellular  
network . 
 
Your  iPhone  and Apple  Watch  must  use the same  cellular  carrier.  However,  if you set up an 
Apple  Watch  for someone  in your Family  Sharing  group , you may use a cellular  carrier  different  
from the one used  on the iPhone  you manage  it with. 
Cellular  service  not available  in all regions.  

37  
Trouble  pairing?  
● If you see a watch  face when  you’re  trying  to pair: Your  Apple  Watch  is already  
paired  to an iPhone.  You need  to first erase  all Apple  Watch  content  and reset  
settings . 
● If the camera  doesn’t  start the pairing  process:  Tap Pair Apple  Watch  Manually  at the 
bottom  of the iPhone  screen,  and follow  the onscreen  instructions.  
● If Apple  Watch  isn’t pairing  with iPhone:  See the Apple  Support  article  If your Apple  
Watch  isn’t connected  or paired  with your iPhone . 
Unpair  Apple  Watch  
1. Open  the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone.  
2. Tap My Watch,  then tap All Watches  at the top of the screen.  
3. Tap  next to the Apple  Watch  you want  to unpair,  then tap Unpair  Apple  Watch.  
Pair more  than one Apple  Watch  
You can pair another  Apple  Watch  in the same  way you paired  your first one. Bring  your iPhone  
near your Apple  Watch,  wait for the Apple  Watch  pairing  screen  to appear  on your iPhone,  then 
tap Pair. Or follow  these  steps:  
1. Open  the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone.  
2. Tap My Watch,  then tap All Watches  at the top of the screen.  
3. Tap Pair New Watch,  then follow  the onscreen  instructions.  

38 See the Apple  Support  article  Use more  than one Apple  Watch  with your iPhone . 
To learn  how to set up a watch  for someone  in your Family  Sharing  group,  see Set up Apple  
Watch  for a family  member . 
Quickly  switch  to a different  Apple  Watch  
Your  iPhone  detects  the paired Apple  Watch  you’re  wearing  and automatically  connects  to it. 
Just put on a different  Apple  Watch  and raise  your wrist.  
You can also choose  an Apple  Watch  manually:  
1. Open  the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone.  
2. Tap My Watch,  then tap All Watches  at the top of the screen.  
3. Turn off Auto Switch.  
To see if your Apple  Watch  is connected  to your iPhone,  touch  and hold the bottom  of the watch  
screen,  swipe  up to open  Control  Center,  then look for the Connected  status  icon . 
 
Pair Apple  Watch  to a new iPhone  
If your Apple  Watch  is paired  to your old iPhone  and you now want  to pair it with your new 
iPhone,  follow  these  steps:  
1. Use iCloud  Backup  to back  up the iPhone  currently  paired  to your Apple  Watch  (see 
the iPhone  User  Guide  for more  information).  

39 2. Set up your new iPhone.  On the Apps  & Data  screen,  choose  to restore  from an 
iCloud  backup,  then select  the latest  backup.  
3. Continue  iPhone  setup  and, when  prompted,  choose  to use your Apple  Watch  with 
your new iPhone.  
When  iPhone  setup  completes,  your Apple  Watch  prompts  you to pair it to the new iPhone.  Tap 
OK on your Apple  Watch,  then enter  its passcode.  
For more  information,  see the Apple  Support  article  How to pair your Apple  Watch  with a new 
iPhone . 
Transfer  an existing  cellular  plan to a new Apple  Watch  
You can transfer  your existing  cellular  plan from your Apple Watch  with cellular  to another  Apple  
Watch  with cellular  by following  these  steps:  
1. While  wearing  your Apple  Watch,  open  the Apple  Watch  app on your iPhone.  
2. Tap My Watch,  tap Cellular,  then tap  next to your cellular  plan.  
3. Tap Remove  [name  of carrier ] Plan, then confirm  your choice.  
You may need  to contact  your carrier  to remove  this Apple  Watch  from your cellular  
plan.  
4. Remove  your old watch,  put on your other  Apple  Watch  with cellular,  tap My Watch,  
then tap Cellular.  
Follow  the instructions  to activate  your watch  for cellular.  
For more  information  about  setup  and pairing,  see the Apple  Support  article  Set up your Apple  
Watch . 
If you need  to charge  your Apple  Watch  before  setup,  see Charge  Apple  Watch . 

40  
Apple  Watch  SE 

41  
Apple  Watch  Series  4 and Apple  Watch  Series  5 

42  
Apple  Watch Series  3 

43  
Charge  Apple  Watch  
Set up the charger  
1. In a well-ventilated  area,  place  the included  Apple  Watch  Magnetic  Charging  Cable  
or Apple  Watch  Magnetic  Charging  Dock  on a flat surface.  
2. Plug it into the power  adapter  (sold  separately).  
3. Plug the adapter into a power  outlet.  
Begin  charging  Apple  Watch  
Place  the Apple  Watch  Magnetic  Charging  Cable  on the back  of your Apple  Watch.  The 
concave  end of the charging  cable  magnetically  snaps  to the back  of your Apple  Watch  and 
aligns  it properly.  

44 You hear a chime  when  charging  begins  (unless  your Apple  Watch  is in silent  mode)  and see a 
charging  symbol   on the watch  face.  The symbol  is red when  Apple  Watch  needs  power  and 
turns  green  when  Apple  Watch  is charging.  
You can charge  your Apple  Watch  in a flat position  with its band  open,  or on its side.  
● If you’re  using  the Apple  Watch  Magnetic  Charging  Dock:  Lay your Apple  Watch  on 
the dock.  
● If your battery  is very low: You may see an image  of the Apple  Watch  Magnetic  
Charging  Cable  and the low battery  symbol   on the screen.  For more  
information,  see the Apple  Support  article  If your Apple  Watch  won’t  charge  or it 
won’t  turn on. 
Apple  Watch  Series  6 
 
Apple  Watch  SE 
 
Apple  Watch  Series  4 and Apple  Watch  Series  5 

45  
Apple  Watch  Series  3 
 
WARNING:  For important  safety  information  about  the battery  and charging  Apple  Watch,  see 
Important  safety information  for Apple  Watch . 
Check  remaining  power  
To see remaining  power,  touch  and hold the bottom  of the screen,  then swipe  up to open  
Control  Center.  To more  quickly  check  the remaining  power,  add a battery  complication  to the 
watch  face.  See Customize  the watch  face. 

46  
Save  power  when  the battery  is low 
You can put your Apple  Watch  in Power  Reserve  mode  to stretch  the remaining  battery  power.  
Your  Apple  Watch  still displays  the time,  but you can’t  use apps.  
1. Touch  and hold the bottom  of the screen,  then swipe  up to open  Control  Center.  
2. Tap the battery  percentage,  then drag the Power  Reserve  slider  to the right.  
 
Tip: If you have  battery -powered  devices  such  as AirPods  connected  to your Apple  Watch  
through  Bluetooth,  their remaining  charge  appears  on this screen.  
When  battery  charge  drops  to 10 percent  or lower,  your Apple  Watch  alerts  you and gives  you 
the opportunity  to enter  Power  Reserve  mode . 

47  
When  your Apple  Watch  is almost  out of power,  it enters  Power  Reserve  mode  automatically.  
Tip: For tips on maximizing  battery  life, see Maximizing  Battery  Life and Lifespan  at the Apple  
website.  
Return  to normal  power  mode  
Restart  your Apple  Watch —press  and hold the side button  until the Apple  logo appears.  
The battery  must  have  at least  10 percent  charge  for your Apple  Watch  to restart.  
Check  time since  the last charge  
1. Open  the Settings  app  on your Apple  Watch.  
2. Tap Battery.  
The Battery  screen  shows  the remaining  battery  percentage,  a graph  that details  the 
recent  history  of the battery  charge,  and information  about  when  the battery  was last 
charged.  
 
You can also check  the time since  last charge  on iPhone.  Open  the Apple  Watch  app on 
iPhone,  tap My Watch,  then go to General  > Usage.  
Check  battery  health  
You can find out the capacity  of your Apple  Watch  battery  relative  to when  it was new.  
1. Open  the Settings  app  on your Apple  Watch.  

48 2. Tap Battery,  then tap Battery  Health.  
To reduce  battery  aging,  Apple  Watch  learns  from your daily charging  routines  so it can wait to 
finish  charging  past 80 percent  until you need  to use it. 
Apple  Watch  alerts  you if battery  capacity  is significantly  reduced,  allowing  you to check  your 
service  options.  
Track  important  health  information  with Apple  Watch  
Your  Apple  Watch  can help you meet  your sleep  goals,  track  important  information  related  to 
your heart,  check  your blood  oxygen  levels,  and encourage  you to wash  your hands.  
 
Prioritize  your sleep  
Apple  Watch  can help you create  a sleep  schedule,  track  your sleep,  then report  your sleep  
trends  over time.  To get started,  open  the Health  app on iPhone  and create  a sleep  schedule.  
Then  wear  your watch  to bed and Apple  Watch  does  the rest. 
 
Get heart  health  notifications  
You can enable  notifications  from the Heart  Rate  app on your Apple  Watch  to alert you to high 
or low heart  rates.  The irregular  heart  rhythm  notification  on the Apple  Watch  can also alert you 
if an irregular  rhythm  suggestive  of Atrial  fibrillation  is identified.  Open  the Apple  Watch  app on 
your iPhone,  go to My Watch,  then tap Heart.  Turn on High Heart  Rate  or Low Heart  Rate,  then 
set a heart  rate threshold,  also turn on irregular  rhythm  notifications.  

49  
Check  your blood  oxygen  levels  (Apple  Watch  Series  6 only)  
Use the Blood  Oxygen  app  to measure  your blood  oxygen  levels  directly  from your wrist.  
See the most  recent  measurement  on your Apple  Watch  and a record  of all your readings  in the 
Health  app on iPhone.  
 
Wash  your hands  thoroughly  
Turn on Handwashing  in the Apple  Watch  app on iPhone,  and your Apple  Watch  encourages  
you to keep  going  for 20 seconds,  the time recommended  by global  health  organizations.  Your  
watch  can also notify  you if you haven’t  washed  your hands  within  a few minutes  of returning  
home.  

50  
Track  your menstrual  cycle  
Use the Cycle  Tracking  app  to log daily information  about  your menstrual  cycle.  The app 
uses  that information  to provide  period  and fertility  window  predictions.  
 
 
 
 
  

51 APPENDIX  B: SYNC  COMPONENTS  
 
Study  participants  randomized  to the Intervention  Arm will use a version  of SYNC  that makes  
behavioral  recommendations  to correct  circadian  misalignment.  Those  in the Control  Arm will use 
a “dummy”  version  of the app that makes  behavioral  recommendations  that should  minimally  
affect  the circadian  clock.   
 
The full version  of SYNC  has the following  features:   
- Light  exposure  recommendations;  e.g. times  to sit near a window  or go outside  
- Light  avoidance  recommendations;  e.g. times  to wear  blue-blocking  glasses  
- Caffeine  avoidance  recommendations   
- Ideal  times  to sleep  
- Ideal  times  to exercise  for peak  performance  
- Ideal  times  to exercise  to shift the circadian  clock  
- Surveys  embedded  for daily tracking  of fatigue  and other  metrics  
- Personalized  educational  information  about  the circadian  clock  
 
The dummy  version  of SYNC  has the following  features:  
- Light  exposure  recommendations,  timed  to avoid  shifting  circadian  rhythms  
- Surveys  embedded  for daily tracking  of fatigue  and other  metrics  
 
The abovementioned  recommendations  are calculated  using  mathematical  models  of the 
circadian  clock  which  read in data from the user’s  wearable  device.  The times  are expected  to 
shift every  day, as the user’s  circadian  clock  shifts.   
 
Sample  behavioral  recommendations  from the full app include:  
 
- “Sit near a window  or go outside  from 8:30 am - 9:45 am” 
- “Put on your blue-blocking  glasses  at 7:05 pm” 
- “To fall asleep  earlier  tonight,  do a workout  between  6:45 am and 9:30 am” 
- “Your  peak  window  of athletic  performance  is from 7:45 pm - 9:45 pm” 
- “Taking  a nap from 1:00 - 1:45 pm today  shouldn’t  keep  you from falling  asleep  tonight.”   
 
The dummy  version  of the app will make  the following  recommendations:   
- “Put on your study -provided  glasses  from 12:00  pm - 1:00 pm” 
- “Be in a room  with normal  lighting  from 1:00 pm - 1:30 pm” 
 
A screenshot  of the app, currently  in revision,  is provided  below  for context:  
52  
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 APPENDIX  C: USER -REPORTED  OUTCOME  MEASURES  
 
Baseline  Survey/Exit  Survey  
 
54 

55 
 
56 
 
57 
 
 
Morningness -Eveningness  Questionnaire:  
58 1. One hears about “morning” and “evening” types of people. Which one of these types do you 
consider yourself to be?  
a. Definitely a morning type  
b. More of a morning than evening type  
c. More of an evening than morning type  
d. Definitely an evening type  
2. Considering only your own “feeling best” rhythms, at what time would you get up if you were 
entirely free to plan your day?  
a. 5 am - 6:30 am  
b. 6:30 am - 7:45 am  
c. 7:45 am - 9:45 am  
d. 9:45 am - 11 am  
e. 11 am - 12 noon  
3. During the first half hour after awakening in the morning, how tired do you feel?  
a. Very tired  
b. Fairly tired  
c. Fairly refreshed  
d. Very refreshed  
4. At what time in the evening do you feel tired and in need of sleep?"  
a. 8 pm - 9 pm  
b. 9 pm - 10:15 pm  
c. 10:15 pm - 12:30 am  
d. 12:30 am - 1:45 am  
e. 1:45 am - 3 am  
5. At what time of the day do you think that you reach your “feeling best” peak?  
a. 10 pm - 5 am  
b. 5 am - 8 am 
c. 8 am - 10 am 
d. 10 am – 5 pm 
e. 5 pm – 10 pm 
 
 
  
59 Daily  Fatigue  Survey  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 Weekly  Survey  
PROMIS  Fatigue  Short  Form  4a 
 
 
“How  is your experience  with the app?”  questionnaire  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 Sleep  aid usage  survey  
 
 
 
Weekly  travel  questionnaire:  
 
1. Did you travel  across  time zones  this week?"  
 
  

62 APPENDIX  D: REFERENCES  
 
Ancoli -Israel,  Sonia,  Michelle  Rissling,  Ariel Neikrug,  Vera  Trofimenko,  Loki Natarajan,  Barbara  
A. Parker,  Susan  Lawton,  Paul Desan,  and Lianqi  Liu. 2012.  “Light  Treatment  Prevents  Fatigue  
in Women  Undergoing  Chemotherapy  for Breast  Cancer.”  Supportive  Care  in Cancer:  Official  
Journal  of the Multinational  Association  of Supportive  Care  in Cancer  20 (6): 1211 –19. 
 
Bowman,  Clark;  Huang,  Yitong;  Walch,  Olivia;  Fang,  Yu; Frank,  Elena;  Goldstein,  Cathy;  
Sen,Srijan;  and  
Daniel  B. Forger.  “Characterizing  the Human  Heart  Rate  Circadian  Pacemaker  through  Widely  
Available  Wearable  Devices.”  In preparation.   
 
Burkhart,  Kimberly,  and James  R. Phelps.  2009.  “Amber  Lenses  to Block  Blue Light  and 
Improve  Sleep:  A Randomized  Trial.”  Chronobiology  International  26 (8): 1602 –12. 
 
Eckel -Mahan,  Kristin,  and Paolo  Sassone -Corsi.  2013.  “Metabolism  and the Circadian  Clock  
Converge.”  Physiological  Reviews  93 (1): 107–35. 
 
Huang , Yitong;  Mayer,  Caleb;  Cheng,  Philip;  Siddula,  Alankrita  ; Burgess,  Helen;  Drake,  
Christopher;  Goldstein,  Cathy;  Walc h, Olivia;  Forger,  Daniel.  “Predicting  circadian  phase  across  
populations:  a comparison  of mathematical  models  and wearable  devices.”  In revision  at Sleep.  
 
Jeste,  Neelum,  Lianqi  Liu, Michelle  Rissling,  Vera Trofimenko,  Loki Natarajan,  Barbara  A. 
Parker,  and Sonia  Ancoli -Israel.  2013.  “Prevention  of Quality -of-Life Deterioration  with Light  
Therapy  Is Associated  with Changes  in Fatigue  in Women  with Breast  Cancer  Undergoing  
Chemotherapy.”  Quality  of Life Research:  An International  Journal  of Quality  of Life Aspects  of 
Treatment,  Care  and Rehabilitation  22 (6): 1239 –44. 
 
Lely,  Stéphanie  van der, Silvia  Frey,  Corrado  Garbazza,  Anna  Wirz-Justice,  Oskar  G. Jenni,  
Roland  Steiner,  Stefan  Wolf,  Christian  Cajochen,  Vivien  Bromundt,  and Christina  Schmidt.  
2015.  “Blue  Blocker  Glasses  as a Countermeasure  for Alerting  Effects of Evening  Light -Emitting  
Diode  Screen  Exposure  in Male  Teenagers.”  The Journal  of Adolescent  Health:  Official  
Publication  of the Society  for Adolescent  Medicine  56 (1): 113–19. 
 
McClung,  Colleen  A. 2013.  “How  Might  Circadian  Rhythms  Control  Mood?  Let Me Count  the 
Ways.”  Biological  Psychiatry  74 (4): 242–49. 
 
Neikrug,  Ariel B., Michelle  Rissling,  Vera  Trofimenko,  Lianqi  Liu, Loki Natarajan,  Susan  Lawton,  
Barbara  A. Parker,  and Sonia  Ancoli -Israel.  2012.  “Bright  Light  Therapy  Protects  Women  from 
Circadian  Rhythm  Desynchronization  during  Chemotherapy  for Breast  Cancer.”  Behavioral  
Sleep  Medicine  10 (3): 202–16. 
 

63 Paganelli,  Roberto,  Claudia  Petrarca,  and Mario  Di Gioacchino.  2018.  “Biological  Clocks:  Their  
Relevance  to Immune -Allergic  Diseases.”  Clinical  and Molecular  Allergy:  CMA  16 (January):  1. 
 
Parsons,  M. J., T. E. Moffitt,  A. M. Gregory,  S. Goldman -Mellor,  P. M. Nolan, R. Poulton,  and A. 
Caspi.  2015.  “Social  Jetlag,  Obesity  and Metabolic  Disorder:  Investigation  in a Cohort  Study.”  
International  Journal  of Obesity . https://doi.org/ 10.1038/ijo.2014.201 . 
 
Phillips,  A. J. K., and P. A. Robinson.  2007.  “A Quantitative  Model  of Sleep -Wake  Dynamics  
Based  on the Physiology  of the Brainstem  Ascending  Arousal  System.”  Journal  of Biological  
Rhythms  22 (2): 167–79. 
 
Stone,  Julia E., Xavier  L. Aubert,  Henning  Maass,  Andrew  J. K. Phillips,  Michelle  Magee,  Mark  
E. Howard,  Steven  W. Lockley,  Shantha  M. W. Rajaratnam,  and Tracey  L. Sletten.  2019.  
“Application  of a Limit -Cycle  Oscillator  Model  for Prediction  of Circadian  Phase  in Rotating  Night  
Shift Workers.”  Scientific  Reports  9 (1): 11032.  
 
Roenneberg,  Till, Karla  V. Allebrandt,  Martha  Merrow,  and Céline Vetter.  2012.  “Social  Jetlag  
and Obesity.”  Current  Biology:  CB 22 (10): 939–43. 
 
Wittmann,  Marc,  Jenny  Dinich,  Martha  Merrow,  and Till Roenneberg.  2006.  “Social  Jetlag:  
Misalignment  of Biological  and Social  Time.”  Chronobiology  International  23 (1-2): 497–509.  
 
Woelders,  Tom,  Domien  G. M. Beersma,  Marijke  C. M. Gordijn,  Roelof  A. Hut, and Emma  J. 
Wams.  2017.  “Daily  Light  Exposure  Patterns  Reveal  Phase  and Period  of the Human  Circadian  
Clock.”  Journal  of Biological  Rhythms  32 (3): 274–86. 
