 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 1 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc   
 
 
 Title:  Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters with Saline Only Flushes  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Date:  1/22/2020  
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 2 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc   
Research Protocol  
 
Date:    January 22, 2020  
 
Title:  Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters with Saline Only Flushes  
 
Principal Investigator:  Sarah Pelgen, BSN, RN, OCN1 
Sub-Investigators: Brian Singeltary,  DO2  
 
TriHealth Depa rtment Affili ation: 1Nursing ; 2 TriHealth Cancer Institute  
 
UCMC Barrett Infusion Center Principal Investigator:  Robbin Blau, BSN, RN, OCN  
 
UCMC Barrett Infusion Center Sub -Investigator:  Marsha Swango, BSN, RN, OCN, Dawn 
Grabill, RN, CRNI,  OCN  
 
Hatto n #: 12135 -12-079 
 
IRB Review Type:  □ Exempt  □ Expedited  X Full Board  
 
Purpose of Study:  At TriHealth and at UCHMC Barrett Infusion Center , the majority of cancer 
patients have implanted port catheters. Maintenance of implanted port catheters i s critical for the 
delivery of safe and effective care  for cancer patients who need dedicated venous access for 
purposes of blood draws, blood product infusions, intravenous medication s, intravenous fluids , 
and/or  antineoplastic therapy . One of the most co mmon compli cations of implan ted port 
catheters is occlusion. The primary cause of catheter occlusion is the formation of a thrombus 
within or surrounding the catheter  (McGee & Gould, 2003 ). The formation of a thrombus starts 
as a fibrin sleeve or sheath co nsisting of  platelets and fi brin. Routine flushing of implanted port 
catheters is conducted as a measure to prevent the formation of a fibrin sleeve.  
 
According to the TriHealth Nursing Policy and Procedure Intravenous Site Guidelines  and the 
UC Health Nu rsing Polic y for Central Ven ous Access Care and Maintenance , an implanted port 
catheter should be flushed with normal saline after IV medica tion, blood, or blood draws. 
Heparinized saline in the amount of 5 m L (concentration 100 units/m L) should be used as  a final 
flush when no IV fl uids are running and before de -accessing. However, routine use of 
heparinized saline flushes has been know n to result in heparin induced thrombocytopeni a (HIT), 
an immune reaction to heparin that can have serious consequences (Cooney, 2006 ). Additionally, 
heparin does not  have fibrinolytic activity; therefore, it will not lyse existing clots  (Heparin Lock 
Flush Solution ). It is recommend ed that the use of heparin be avoided or minimized whenever 
possible  (Cooney, 2006).   
 
While e vidence in the literature is  scant, there is no clear consensus on the need and efficacy of 
heparinized saline as the solution for maintaining patency in implanted port catheters  (Camp -
Sorrell, 2010 ). The investigators in this study examine d the community standard, w hich revealed 
that while some area hospitals  do use heparin in the final flush solution for implanted port 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 3 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  catheters, others adopted a saline only flush practice . This practice change does not appear to be 
based on evidence in the literature or the results  of their own res earch. However, they do report 
anecdotally that there has been no increas e in the use of alteplase ( Cath Flo: a thrombolytic ) since 
the practice change.  
 
The purpose of this study is to determine the safest  and most effective fl ushing solu tion(s) for 
maint aining patency in implanted port catheters. The researchers also hope to conclude that the 
complication rate in patients whose ports are flushed with saline only is no greater than those of 
patients whose ports are flushed with the combina tion of saline an d heparinized saline. These 
complications might include partial or complete obstruction, infection of the central line, and/or 
the onset of heparin induced thrombocytopenia.  
 
 Research Question(s):  
1. Does a saline only flush maint ain the pat ency  of implanted  port catheters at a rate 
comparable  to a heparinized saline solution?  
 
2. Is there any difference in the type and rate of complication s among  implanted port 
catheters flushed with saline versus heparinized saline?   
 
Null Hypothesi s: 
We are p roposing a non -inferiority trial. Thus, the null hypothesis is:  Implanted port catheters 
flushed with saline only will experience an occlusion rate of more than 10% over the occlusion 
rate experienced in implanted port catheters flushed with a h eparinized saline solution.  
 
The alternative hypothesis is: Implanted port catheters flushed with saline only will experience 
an occlusion rate less than 10% over the occlusion rate experienced in implanted port catheters 
flushed with heparinized saline s olution.  
 
Backg round Informa tion/Literature Review:  
 
Care of Implanted Port Catheters at TriHealth  
Currently at TriHealth, Inc. all implanted port catheters are flushed according to the TriHealth 
Nursing Policy and Procedure Intravenous Site Guidelines  (See Appendix A). An implanted port 
catheter is flushed with normal saline after IV medication, blood, or blood draws. Heparinized 
saline in the amount of 5 m L (concentration 100 units/m L) is used as a final flush when no IV 
fluids are running and before de -accessing.  This is intended t o maintain patency of the catheter 
until the next use. The same process is used at University of Cincinnati Medical Center Barrett 
Infusion Center, a new site added to the study in January 2018 . 
 
TriHealth wide, there is no accu rate data d escribing either the number of port catheters that are in 
use or the specifics of the complication rate. This data also is lacking UCMC wide. During the 
period of time between May 2, 2011 and April 30, 2012,  the Out -Patient Cancer Care (OPCC)  at 
TriHealth , utilized 134 doses of alteplase (Cath -Flo) to resolve occlusions. There is no easily 
accessible data describing whether these were partial (flushable but without a blood return) or 
complete (unable to flush) occlusions. There is no easily acces sible infor mation summarizin g the 
type of central line that had to be de -clotted; however,  the majority (>95%) of central lines 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 4 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  utilized by cancer patients in the OPCC are single lumen implanted port catheters.  During this 
time period, there were two patie nts receivi ng care in the OPCC whose catheters were  not 
flushed with a heparinized saline solution. One patient has documented HIT, and the other has a 
reported heparin allergy. Both patients have been able to maintain patent catheters with saline 
only flu shes. Hospi tal wide, informa tion related to the diagnosis of HIT , as it relates to  type of 
Heparin exposure ( e.g., subcutaneous  or IV Heparin or the use of heparinized saline ) is not 
available. There are no data available that demonstrates that patients wi th implante d port 
catheters who have developed a partial or complete occlusion developed bacteremia or central 
line infection due to the presence of fibrin on their catheter. Development of a fibrin sheath on 
the catheter is common after placement of an im planted por t catheter  (Galli eni, Pittiruti, & Biffi, 
2008 ). The fibrin sheath may then become seeded with microorganisms which may disseminate 
into the blood stream. Both catheter -related thrombus and bacteremia are potentially life -
threatening conditions.  
Heparin in duce d thrombocyto penia (HIT) is an immune reaction to heparin. Through a series of 
steps, antibodies are produced in response to an immune complex, which in turn activates 
platelets. As activated platelets are destroyed, thrombocytopenia  (low pl atelet coun t) occurs. This 
ultimately leads to a thrombotic state. Patients experiencing HIT can develop deep venous 
thrombosis, pulmonary emboli, stroke, or myocardial infarction. Patients developing HIT 
thrombotic syndrome may require limb amputation and  are at inc reased risk for d eath.  The 
actual incidence of HIT is 1 -5% of patients exposed to heparin  (Cooney, 2006).  Many clinicians 
think that HIT is under -recognized and under diagnosed. The first response to the diagnosis of 
HIT is the discontinuation of all form s of heparin, inc luding heparin flushes. The use of heparin 
should be avoided or minimized whenever possible. If saline only flushes were found to be as 
effective as heparinized saline flushes, it would significantly decrease the patient’s expos ure to 
hepa rin, and therefor e the potential to develop HIT.   
Frequency of flushing depends on the use of the implanted port catheter (ie. frequency of visits 
in the out -patient/in -patient units for blood draws or intravenous treatments).  At TriHealth, 
implanted p ort catheters that ar e not in use are flushed a minimum of every three months with 
the same solutions and volumes  as noted above (i.e., 20 mL normal saline plus 5 mL heparin 
(100 units/mL) ). The policy also recommends turbulent flushing  (see Appendi x A). The 
turbulent flushing  technique is accomplished by a push -pause rhythm every one m L for the entire 
flush volume. Turbulent flushing helps remove built -up residue, medication, and fibrin from the 
walls of the catheter. There is no policy stating freq uency of ma intenance port fl ushes at UCMC 
Barret Infusion Center. Additionally, TriHealth and UCMC have adopted the use of a neutral 
displacement  needle -free connector with a clear housing (the MicroCLAVE® Clear , ICU 
Medical, Inc., San Clemente, CA, USA ) that feature s a split septum with a straight internal fluid 
path design and minimal  dead space  to help minimize blood reflux into the tip of the catheter 
upon connection and disconnection of the luer loc, thus reducing the risk of occlusions due to 
blood ref lux.  This conn ector meets recommendations of the Infusion Nursing Society , Center 
for Disease Control, Federal Drug Administration and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology in 
America regarding the prevention of intravascular catheter -related bloodstream in fections an d 
enables clinici ans to view the fluid pathway to verify effective flushing and clamp  the IV line 
without requiring a specific clamping sequence.  
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 5 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  State of the Evidence: Heparin plus Saline versus Saline Only for Flushing Central Venous 
Access  Devices.  
The mo st common rea son for placing a long term central venous access device (CVAD) in the 
cancer patient is to deliver chemotherapy . For the cancer patient receiving vesicant drugs , a 
CVAD is very common for treatment.   
 
The benefits of the CVAD a re many and  include the abil ity to deliver large doses of medications 
and fluids, blood products, total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and to obtain blood specimens. Long 
term CVADS include peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs), implantable ports, a nd 
tunneled  catheters. Commo nalities among these devices are termination of the distal tips in the 
upper 1/3 of the superior vena cava, in the atrium, or in the upper portion of the inferior vena 
cava and the ability to be maintained for months to years  (Gallieni, Pi ttiruti, & Biffi,  2008). 
 
Maintaining patency of the CVAD in patients with cancer is of primary concern yet a review of 
the literature did not reveal consistent evidence -based  recommendations regarding the type of 
flushing solution.  At this time  most proce dures for mainten ance and care  of CVADs  are based on 
manufacturers’ recommendations and lack the evidence supported by randomized trials. 
Currently these devices are maintained with either normal saline or saline plus heparin flushes ; 
there is n o consensus  as to which meth od is most effective in preventing catheter occlusions  
(Camp -Sorrell, 2010). 
 
Complicating the issue of which solution to use is the fact that economics and safety are also 
prime considerations. Heparin flush solutions are not o nly more ex pensive but have the added 
risk of heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) even in very small concentrations such as those 
used for routine heparin flushes  (Golembliewski, 2008 ).  Safety of heparin use with regards to 
labeling, administration, an d medicatio n errors has been  documented in the literature (Otoya , 
2009 ) and i n the media in recent years adding  to the need for studies to substantiate the value of 
its use over saline alone.  
 
Studies favoring the use of heparin for flushing CVAD s includ e a prospecti ve, randomized tr ial 
by Cesaro  et al. (2009 ) which  compared flushing with saline plus heparin versus saline alone 
among 203 pediatric cancer patients with tunneled central venous catheters . A positive -pressure -
valve  connector was in place on the  catheters of all study part icipants. Conclusions indicated an 
increased complication rate with saline only flushing but they could not exclude the fact that the 
frequency of flushing and the use of the positive -pressure -valve connector were influential in  this 
outco me. Bowers  et al.  (2008) conducted a similar prospective, randomized study using  102 
subjects with PICC s and positive -pressure -valve  connectors . In this study , the normal saline  only 
group experienced a non-significant 6% higher com plication rat e. The stud y did evaluate th e 
monetary cost of this complication rate by considering the cost of the drug, the nursing time to 
restore patency, and replacement of the PICC line . They concluded that , even though the use of 
saline only flushes was a cost sav ings, the c ost of replacing a PICC due to occlusion was 
economically relevant. Jonker  et al. (2010 ) investigated  the use of saline alone versus heparin for 
flushing CVAD in a period of heparin shortage. This retrospective, cohort study queried a 
pharmacy d atabase for  alteplase usage from April 23, 2007 to December 31, 2008  and concluded 
that significant increases (P=.04) in alteplase usage were reported during the heparin shortage 
and significant increases in PICC line replacements were also noted (P<.05) f or this tim eframe. 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 6 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  The autho rs therefore concluded that the absence of the heparin  flush was the factor that led  to 
these increases in occlusion rates and PICC replacements.  
 
Studies that favored the use of saline alone for flushing CVAD included a study b y Rotello  et al. 
(2007).  Data on 500 triple lumen central venous catheter  line days  and 1500 port days flushed 
with 10 mL of normal saline every eight (8) hours while patients were in the ICU resulted in 
occlusions  rates of 4.8% and 2.9% respect ively. T hus, it was co ncluded that the use of normal 
saline flush es are effective in preventing line occlusions and prevent unnecessary exposure to  
heparin. In a prospective study of pediatric patients by Shilling  et al. (2006) it was discovered 
that using a positive  pressure v alve and saline p roved just as effective as using heparin in 
preventing occlusion of central venous catheters.  
 
Most compelling were the results of two systematic reviews regarding the management of 
CVADs.   Kannan  (2008 ) concluded that there is no evidence  to support the u se of hepariniz ed 
saline over normal saline and the use of heparin may cause exposure risks such as HIT or other 
adverse reactions. In another systematic review by Lee and Johnson (2005 ) it was concluded that 
there was a lack of  randomized  controlled trial  evidence on the benefit of heparin flushes as well 
as other management aspects of central venous catheters and sites. As previously mention ed, 
Camp -Sorrell  (2010) outlines a concise literature review or state of the science wit h regards t o 
oncology vascul ar access devices including recommendations of professional organizations with 
CVAD guidelines. The recommendations outlined by most organizations such as Centers for 
Disease Control (CDC), Oncology Nursing Society (ON S), Vascul ar Access S ociety (VAS), 
Infusion Nurses Society (INS), and Association for Professionals in Infection Control and 
Epidemiology (APIC) have either no guidelines for flushing or cite manufacturers 
recommendations which are based on trials used by US Food an d Drug Admi nistration (FDA) 
for device or product approval and not with randomized controlled studies  (Camp -Sorrell, 2010) .  
 
In conclusion, Level 1 evidence for the use heparin flushes versus saline flushes for the 
maintenance of CVAD is lacking in the cu rrent liter ature. The small numbers of randomized 
clinical studies that do exist are not in agreement and include other variables such as positive 
pressure val ves, inconsistent flush intervals, and varied patient populations.  Many of the 
previous studies did not incl ude patients with  implanted port catheters ; no study has been 
conducted exclusively among patients with implanted port catheters. For nursing to establish an 
evidence -based  practice guideline for flushin g of implanted port catheters, more resear ch is 
neede d to generate the  knowledge necessary to make recommendations that will change and 
standardize practice.  
 
Research Plan  
  
 Study Design:  Non-inferiority trial in which participants will be randomly assigned to 
one of two groups: the control gro up or the i ntervention group . 
 
 Setting for the Study:  TCI Infusion Centers,  specifically:  the TCI Good Samaritan 
(GS) Infusion Center at GSH; the TCI GS Infusion Center Butler County;  the the TCI GS 
Infusion  Center at the Thomas Center ;   the TCI G S Infusion Center, Cheviot; the TCI GS 
Infusion Center, Medicenter; the TCI GS Infusion Center, Anderson ; and the McCullough Hyde 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 7 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  Memorial Hospital infusion center . In January 2018 , University of Cincinnati Medical Center 
Barrett Infusion Center was added as a data c ollection site.  
  
 Participa nts: Patients receiving care in the identified settings who have an implanted 
port catheter  will be recruited to participate in this study . 
 
  Inclusion Criteria:  
• over the age of 18 years 
• able to read and understand  English   
• has an implanted p ort in place  less than one (1) year  
• evidence of a patent port catheter  prior to enrollment in the study  
• is receiving active treatment i.e., receiving a therapeutic drug through 
the implanted port   
• current treatment protocol pro jected to continue for a min imum of 
three (3) months  
• anticipates receiving care at the identified  centers for 6 months 
following  enrollment in the study  
• receives routine care of the implanted port catheter at any of the 
identified data collection sites  
 
  Exclusion C riteria:  
• has documented Hepa rin platelet  antibody (could not be randomized 
to either group ) or other allergy to Heparin  
• receiving therapeutic dose of an anticoagulant, i.e., warfarin, heparin, 
enoxaparin , etc.  
• has a heparin -coated  port (for example BioF lo port)  
• does not  meet one or  more of the inclusion criteria  
 
Recruitment  
Prospective study participants will be identified the da y prior to their appointment 
in the treatment center by a member of the research te am. Their chart will be 
revie wed for inclus ion criteria  and flagged as a  potential study participant . 
 
When the potential study participant arrives  in the  treatment center , a mem ber of the research 
team will escort the  patient into a treatment room and exp lain the study by reading a p repared 
script  (see Appendix B ).  If the pa tient expresses interest, the Informed Consent Statement and 
HIPAA Authorization form will be reviewed and signed .  After obtaining informed consent, a 
participant  will be randomly assigned to the heparinized sali ne flush (cont rol group)  or sal ine 
only flu sh study group  (intervention group) . A color -coded  sticker will be placed on the patient’s 
treatment folder indicating participation in the study and group assignment. The random 
assig nment process will be achieve d using sequen tially -numbered o paque sealed  envelopes 
(SNOSE)  containing the group assignment. A yellow  colored data collection  face sheet (see 
Appendix  C) will indicate control group ; a blue colored data collection face sheet will indicate 
the interventio n group.  
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 8 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  During FY 2012, 391 patients wit h implanted port catheters were treated in the OPCC. Seventy 
of these patients experienced an occlusion of their port that required the administration of 
alteplase (Cath Flo) (Kelly Dor nheggen, personal communicati on, October 12 , 2012 ). Thus, 70  of 
391 expe rienced an occlusion resulting in an occlusion rate of 1 8%. Some of these 70 patients 
experienced an occlusion more than once during that time. Additionally, during that time, a few 
patients had their implanted po rt catheters r emoved due to inf ection or ma lfunction. The exact 
number of patients who experienced multiple occlusions or had their implanted ports 
removed/replaced during FY2012 is unknown.  
 
We engaged the consultation of a biostatistician through the Ce nter for Clini cal and Translati onal 
Science  and Training (CCTST) to conduct a  power analysis to establish  the number of 
participants needed in each group  to determine the non -inferiority of the alternative therapy 
(saline only flush). Consultation was prov ided by Mekibi b Altaye, PhD , Associate Prof essor  
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center , University of Cincinnati . 
 
Based on the literature and our own experience  we estimated an approximate occlusion rate of  
20% with th e standard treatment (saline + heparinized saline flush  as described abo ve). The 
power analysis conducted by Dr. Altaye determined that, using a two-group  normal 
approximation test of proportions with a one -sided .05 significance level, a sample size of 19 8 
participants per group will  have 80% powe r to reject the n ull hypothes is that the proposed 
method  is not inferior  (i.e. the difference in proportions  between the  propose d method  and the 
standard  method  is greater  than 0.10) .  Thus , we will continue data colle ction until 198 have 
been completed in each group for a total of 396 study participants  who completed 6 months of 
data collection . To date (July 3, 2019), 69.7% of patients enrolled in the study are able to 
complete 6 months of data collection wit hout withdrawing for an exclusion cri terion  (ex: 
transferring to  hospice , being started on an anticoagulant, etc) . Therefore, we plan to consent 575 
patients to result in 396 who complete the study.  Once 396 patients have completed 6 months of 
data collect ion, data collection will stop and an y remainin g active particip ants will be  withdrawn 
from the study.     
 
 Data Collection:  
Independent Variables:  Method for flushing implanted port catheters:  
• 20 mL of saline followed by 5 mL of Heparinized saline in a 
conc entration of 100 units/mL      
     OR 
• 20 mL  of saline only  
  
  Depend ent Variables:  
   Primary  Outcomes  
• Occurrence of first complete (can neither withdraw blood nor flush the 
catheter) occlusion    
• Occurrence of first partial (able to flush but unable to withdraw blood) 
occlusion  
• Frequ ency with whi ch alteplase (Cat hFlo) has to  be utilized to resolve 
an occlusion  
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 9 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  Secondary  Outcomes  
• Number of subsequent occurrences of complete or partial occlusions 
after the first occurrence.   
• Amount of time in days that a port remains patent (flushes easi ly and 
able to obtain a blo od return).  
▪ Amount of time between entrance in study and first incidence 
of partial or complete occlusion  
▪ Amount of time between incidences of partial or complete 
occlusion.  
• Occurrence of oth er complications:  
▪ Central Line -Associ ated Blood  Stream Infection  (CLABSI)  – a 
laboratory -confirmed (recognized pathogen cultured from one 
or more blood cultures; organism cultured from blood is not 
related to an infection at another site) blood stream infe ction 
that is considered central line  associate d (CDC, 2012 ).  
▪ Develops comp lication related to Heparin  
• HIT (Heparin induced thrombocytopenia as measured 
by a positive HIT antibody test)  
• Other heparin allerg y 
 
Moderating variable s: other things that could also affect patency of the port  
• Numbe r of times  port flushed per  month  or frequency of flushing.  
• Use of prophylactic doses of anticoagulant drugs (e.g., enoxaparin , 
heparin, warfarin ) 
• Development of a hypercoaguable state, as diagnosed by primary 
hematolog ist/oncologist  
• Mechanical difficultie s related to port placement  e.g. “Pinch -off 
syndrome”  
• Length of time port has been in place prior to entrance in study  
  
Extraneous variables :  
• Type of cancer  
• Age of participant  
 
 Data collection tool  
The dat a collecti on tool (see Implanted Port Catheter Flushing D ata 
Collection Fo rm – Face Sh eet: Appendix C and Record of Flushes: 
Appendix D ) were developed by the principal and sub -investigator s 
specifically for the purpose of this study. The tool was reviewed by the 
OPCC n urses  for completeness and clarit y. In addi tion to basic 
demographic inf ormation (age, gender), the nurse will record the patient’s 
type of cancer, and the diagnosis or history of any hypercoaguable state or 
use of anticoagulant medication as documente d in the patient chart. The 
nurse wil l also doc ument the type of  implanted p ort catheter 
(single/double), the port location (right/left, subclavian vein (described in 
the operative note or chest x -ray), and the date the port was inserted so 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 10 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  that length of time the port has been in place  can b e calculat ed. Data will 
be recorded on the Face Sheet when the patient is enrolled in the study and 
as pertinent information/events become known, i.e., as complications 
occur .  
 
With each visit to the  identified treatme nt center , the nurse will document 
the date and  characteristics related to t he patency of the port catheter  on 
the Record of Flushes data collection tool . In the event the blood 
withdrawal is sluggish or absent, the patient will re ceive a dose of 
alteplase  (CathFlo) according to the  data coll ection  site’s policy as ord ered 
by the physician. Dosage and results of that intervention will also be 
recorded on the Record of Flushes data collection tool. In the event that 
any study participant (regardless of group  assignment) requires alteplase 
(Cath Flo) on th ree (3) consecuti ve visits to  the treatment center , the 
patient’s participation in the study will be terminated  and they will be 
excluded from further data collection. T he patient will be returned to a 
standar d ma intenance protocol for flushing o f the port  as prescribed by  the 
afore -mentioned site policy  or as prescribed by attending physician.  
 
Participants in the control group will have yellow  colored data collection 
Face Sheets  while participants in the int ervention group will have blue 
colore d data col lection Face Shee ts. The Reco rd of Flushes sheet will be 
white for patients in both groups. A blue or yellow  sticker will be placed 
on the cover of  the patient folder  housed in treatment center  noting  the 
patient’s involvement  in the study. The d ata collec tion Face Sheet a nd the 
curre nt Record of Flushes sheet will be kept in the individual patient 
folder as long as they remain a participant in the study. As the Record of 
Flushes data sheet becomes full, they w ill be collected by study staff and 
placed in l ocked drawer in a TriHealth or UCMC Barrett Infusion center 
office .     
 
In January 2018, UCMC Barrett Infusion Center was added as a new site. 
The study nurses at UCMC Barrett Infusion Center will use the sam e data 
collection forms and will stor e them alo ng with completed  informed 
consent forms at a locked office at UCMC Barrett Infusion Center. 
Periodically, the lead research coordinator will bring de -identified data 
collection forms back to TriHealth. Signed  informed consent forms will 
remain l ocked on U CMC Barrett Infus ion Center p roperty.  
 
 
  Experimental Aspect of the Study:  
 
Patients who agree to participate in this study will be randomized to either the 
control group or intervention group  as explained a bove .  
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 11 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  Participants in the control g roup will have their implan ted port cat heters flushed 
according to the established site’s policy.  Following the use of the port catheter 
with no continuous fluids running, or before de -accessing a port catheter 
(removin g the port needle), the port will be flushed wi th 20 ml of norma l saline 
and 5 ml of heparinized saline in the concentration of 100 units of heparin per ml.  
 
Participants in the intervention group will have their ports flushed with normal 
saline only. Tha t is, following the use of the port c atheter wi th no continuous 
fluids runni ng, or before de -accessing a port catheter (removing the port needle) , 
the port will be flushed with 20 ml of normal saline. Turbulent flushing technique 
(the solution is injected using a push/pause technique every 1 mL) will b e used in 
both gr oups and all  accessed port catheters will have a neutral displacement 
connector. The MicroCLAVE® Clear displacement connector  (ICU Medical, Inc., 
San Clemente, CA, USA)  is the current product in use. Participants in both groups 
will be see n in a TriHealth Cancer Insti tute Infusion Center  or the UCMC Barrett 
Infusion Center  at a frequency consistent with their individual treatment plan and 
as outlined in the site’s policy.  Participants will rema in in the study for 6 months 
or until  they expe rience one of the  potential r isks noted below . Participants will be 
considered as having completed the study if they participate for 6 months .  
 
Potential risks  for study participants  in either arm of th e study  include partial 
occlusion (can inst ill flush solution but not  withdraw blo od) and complete 
occlusion (can neither instill flush solution nor withdraw blood). Study 
participants could require removal of the port if an occlusion cannot be resolved, 
and possibl y require re -insertion of a new i mplanted p ort. I n the event  of any 
occlusion, alteplase  (CathFlo) in the policy established dose and frequency (see 
Appendix A) will be instilled to resolve the occlusion. Study participants  whose 
implanted ports are found occluded  on three (3) consecutive  visits to  the treatment 
center will be excluded from further data collection, i.e., their participation in the 
study will be t erminated . The standard flushing as prescribed by the site’s policy  
or as prescribed b y the atte nding physician will be used . Study partici pants  whose 
occlu sion cannot be resolved with alteplase and require removal of the port will 
also be terminated and excluded from further data collection. Patients who 
develop port infections necessitati ng port re moval will be terminated and 
excluded from further data coll ection. S tudy participants who develop HIT 
(heparin induced thrombocytopenia ) or other heparin allergy will be terminated 
and excluded from further data collection.  Likewise, patients w ho have 
thrombotic or embolic phenomenon re quiring th erapeutic anticoa gulation wil l be 
terminated and excluded from further data collection. If a participant in the 
intervention group receives clinical care and their port is flushed with heparin 
(following  standard hospital policy), the participant  will be w ithdrawn from the  
study. 
 
The study will be closed if there is evidence that study participants in the 
intervention arm experience implanted port occlusion at a disproportionate rate . 
The amount of altep lase (Cath Flo) use d in each group will be a ssessed ea ch 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 12 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  month for moni toring purpo ses. Additionally  interim data analysis will occur (1) 
once 1/3 of the participants have been enrolled in each group; (2) once 2/3 of the 
participants have been enrolled in e ach group (3) at the conclusion of the stud y. 
These i ntervals are based on the rec ommendation of our CCTST consultant Dr. 
Altaye. The variable of interest in the interim  data analysis at time (1) and (2) will 
be the occurrence of first partial occlusion pl us the occ urrence of the first 
complete occ lusion in each group. At fi nal analysis  the occurrence of first partial 
occlusion and first complete occlusion will be considered together as well as 
separately in each group. Dr. Altaye also advised that to contr ol for the  Type I 
error rate not to exceed the nomina l .05 level, the p-value shou ld be adjusted at 
each data interim analysis.  Dr. Altaye used the O’Brien Fleming alpha spending 
method to calculate the alpha levels for each interim analysis (O’Brien & 
Fleming, 1979 ). Thus, in order to reject the n ull hypoth esis that the pro posed 
proced ure will produce a failure rate greater than 10% over the occlusion rate 
experienced using the standard procedure, the p -value at the 1st, 2nd and final 
analysis should be co mpared wit h an alpha value of 0.0006, 0.015 1 and 0.04 71 
respectively. Thus if, usi ng the p -values noted, interim calculations at time (1) or 
time (2) note a significant increase in the occlusion rate among participants in the 
intervention group, the study will be pr ematurely closed.    
 
The underta king of th is research does require the participation of other personnel, 
facilities or departments other than those used in data collection. In the event the 
study participant is admitted to the hospital or  requir es some in tervention using 
their implanted port cathe ter (e.g., CT sca n with contr ast), the study participant 
will have an information card describing his /her participation in the study and the 
group to which he/she has been randomized, so that the assigne d flush so lution is 
used, and integrity of the study can be maintained .  The study  participant will 
receive the card with instructions at the time of his/her enrollment in the study  
(see Appendix E  Wallet Study Card ).  
      
Statistical Analysis: Descripti ve statist ics will be used to describe the 
participan ts. Differences b etween group s on the dependent variables will be 
calculated  using t -test, Chi -Square or Fisher’s exact test as appropriate for the 
level of data under analysis  (also see discussion regar ding inter im analysis) .  
Regression analysi s will be used to determine  the effect of the moderating 
variables on the occurrence of occlusion in the implanted ports.  Participants in the 
control group and intervention group will be further stratified based o n frequenc y 
of port flushing. Differences i n the rate  of occlusion bet ween stratif ied groups will 
also be calculated.     
 
Ethical Considerations: The purpose of this study is to determine the safest and most 
effective flushing solution(s) for maintaining patency in  implanted port catheters. In so 
doing,  study participants c ould be plac ed at potential risk for catheter occlusion. All 
catheter occlusion will be treated according to the site’s policy,  i.e., the instillation of 
alteplase  (Cath Flo) (see Append ix A) . Potential study participants will be  made awar e of 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 13 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  the risk whe n enrolled i n the study  (See Appendix  B (V.2, 2 -20-2015)  script for 
recruiting patients into the study  and Appendix F, the Informed Consent Statement ).  
 
• Informed Consent: Patients who  meet inclus ion criteria will be approached 
by a member  of the research team who  will explain the study , implications  of 
their participation and review the Informed Consent  Statement and HIPAA 
Authorization Form (s) (see Appendix F and G ). Participants will r eceive a 
copy of the signed Informed Consen t Statemen t and HIPAA Autho rization . 
The original signed Informed Consent Statement and HIPAA will be stored 
in a locked cabinet at a TriHealth office  or locked location at UCMC , or an 
off-site locked storage area , for six years after the study is closed a t which 
time the documents will be dest royed via mechanical shredder.  
 
• Privacy Information:  Once enrolled in the study, each p articipant will be 
assigned a study code and referred to by that code on all study re lated 
docu mentation.  A study enrollment lo g will be created to record  each 
partic ipant’s initials and medical record number, which will be correlated 
with the study code so that information may be retrieved to check or verify 
missing data. To maintain con fidentiali ty, the study enrollment log will  be 
kept i n a password prot ected file i n the Nursing Research Folder on the 
Udrive of the secure TriHealth server.  All completed data collect ion forms 
will stored in a locked location  in a TriHealth  or UCMC  office . Upon 
completion of the study, the data co llection s heets will be entered into a 
statistical database. Once all data have been entered and cleaned, the  study  
enrollment log will be destroyed via mechanical shredder. After all data have 
been entered , the data collec tion tools and spreadsheets will be returne d to 
lead researc h coordinato r and stored in a locked drawer in a TriHealth office 
for six years . The data file  will be stored in the Nursing Research Implanted 
Port Catheters  research subfolder on the U  drive on the TriHealth server for 
six year s. Only th e study PI and Su b-investigat ors will have access to th e 
Nursing Research Implanted Port Catheters  folder on the U drive.  
 
Once IRB approval for the study is granted, all nurses in the treatment center  
who deliv er care to patients with implante d ports wi ll receive traini ng from 
Sarah Pelgen, BSN, RN, OCN, Rachel Baker, PhD, RN,  Robbin Blau, RN, 
Marsha Swango, RN, Dawn Grabill, RN, Sharon Sanker , RN, OCN  (previous 
Principal Investigator, removed from study 9/2019 ), Sue Partusch  RN, MSN, 
AOCNS , (previous Principal  Inves tigator, remove d from study 6/ 2017) , Ruth 
Schwa rz RN (previous co -Investigator, removed from study 10/18/2017) , and 
Joy Dienger  PhD (previous co -Investigator, removed from study 6/2017) , RN  
regarding  study procedures. The nurses des ignated on the per sonnel ro ster 
who wil l be obtaining Informed Consent will also receive training specific to 
that process.    
 
Cost/Budget:  
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 14 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  There is no increase  in cost related to the maintenance of implanted port anticip ated 
among study participants. Patient will be bill ed for ca re received based on the current 
TriHealth  or UCMC Barrett Infusion Center  standards of care . 
  
Estimated Period of Time to Complete the Study:  
The study will begin as soon as IRB approval is gran ted. Estimated duration of  data c ollection is 
two y ears. There is no pre -data collection needed.  The re search team will meet bi-weekly to 
assess enrollment status and status of enrolled participants, particularly the incidence of 
occlusions and other comp lications during the previous wee k. Actual usage ra te of alt eplase 
(Cath Flo) in each study group will be  calculated monthly.  Data analysis will be conducted at the 
conclusion of the study. Study  results will be disseminated by TriHealth publication  and UC MC 
PPO Newsletter , changes to the  TriHealth  and the  UCMC  Nursing VAD pol icy as appropriate  as 
well as th rough presentation at profession nursing conferences (e.g, Oncology Nursing Society 
Infusion Nursing Society) and publication in peer reviewed nursing p ublications.   
 
Administrative Ap proval:  
A letter s eeking pe rmission to approach patients was sent to ph ysicians who currently treat most 
of the patients at the data collection sites.  All the physicians approached responded positively.  
The physicians approached at the beginning of the st udy were : Ranga Br ahmamdam,  MD, James 
Pavelka, MD, Jack Basil, MD, and Robert Albright , MD . Permission from other physicians 
whose patients are treated at any of the identified treatment centers and meet eligibility , will b e 
acquired prior to presenting the patient with any  informat ion about th e study.  
 
  Copies of permission /support of the study from nursing administration are detailed below and 
noted on Appendix I.  See attachment to this document for permission to include  additional TCI 
Infusion Center s ites.  
  
Facility/ Departmen t Name, Titl e and Signature of Appropriate 
Administrator  Date  
OPCC  Julie Van Curen, RN, BSN  10/10/2012  
ATC Bethesda 
North Hospital  Sue Weber, RN, MEd  7/2/2013  
Good Samaritan 
Infusion Center, 
Butler County  Julie Van Curren RN, BSN  10/21/2013  
Good Samari tan 
Hospital , Nursing    Paula Niederbaumer  9/24/2012  
Exec Director 
Cancer  Institute  Mark Witte  9/10/2012  
 
Sr. Nurse Manager, 
TriHealth Cancer 
Institute  Julie Van Curen, BSN, RN, OCN, CNN  11/6/2014  
 
References  
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 15 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  Bowers  L, Spe roni KG, Jones  L, et al. ( 2008). Compa rison of occlusion rates by flus hing 
solutions for peripherally inserted central catheters with positive pressure Luer activated 
devices. Journal of  Infus ion  Nurs ing, 3, pp. 22–27. 
 
Camp -Sorrell, D. (2 010) State of the science of onc ology vas cular access  devices. Seminars in 
Oncology N ursing . 26(2), p p.80-87. 
 
CDC (2012). C entral line -associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI) event. Device -associated  
Module: CLABSI, 4, pp. 1 -10. 
 
Cesaro S, Tridello  G, Cavaliere  M, et  al. (2009) . Prosp ective, r andomized tr ial of two different  
modalities of flushing central venous catheters in pediatric patients with cancer. Journal 
of  Clinical  Oncol ogy, 27, pp. 2059 –2065 . 
 
Cooney, M.F. (2006) . Heparin -Induced Thrombocytopenia , Critic al Care Nurse. 26, pp. 30-36. 
 
Gallieni , M., Pittiruti, M. & Biffi, R. (2008),  Vascular access in oncology patients. CA: A Cancer  
Journal for Clinicians .58, pp. 323-346.    
 
Golembliewski, J. (2008 ) Heparin – Focus on safet y. Journal of PeriAnesthesia Nurs ing. 23(4) , 
pp.276-278.  
 
Heparin Lock Flush Solution,  www. drugs.com/p ro/heparin -lock-flush -solution.html, accessed 
November 11, 2011.  
 
Jonker, MA, Osterby, BS, Vermeulen, LE, et al. (2010) . Does low -dose heparin maintain  central  
venous access device pat ency? A comparison  of hepar in versus sa line during a period of 
heparin shortage. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition ,  34(4), pp. 444-449. 
 
Kannan, A. (2008 ). Heparinised saline or normal saline? Journal of Perioper ative Practice , 
18(10), pp. 440 -441.     
 
Lee, O, & Johnston , L. (2005).  A systematic review for effecti ve management of central venous  
catheters and catheter sites in acute care paediatric patients. Worldviews on Evidence -
Based Nursing ,  2(1), pp. 4-13. 
 
McGee, D., & Gould, M. K.  (2003).  Preventing compli cations o f central ve nous catheterization.  
New Englan d Journal of Medicine, 348, pp. 1123 -1133.   
 
O’Brien, P. C. & Fleming, T. R. (1979). A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials.  
Biometrics ,  35( 3), pp. 549 -556. 
 
Otoya, M. (200 9). Heparin safety  in the n eonatal inte nsive care unit: Are we learning  from  
mistakes of others? Newborn & Infant Nursing Reviews ,  9(1), pp. 55-61.   
 
 Maintaining Patency in Implanted Port Catheters 16 
Pelgen 12135 -12-079 CC PROTOCOL V14 1 -22-2020.doc  Rotello, L .C., Albrant, D ., Purcell, T, et al. (2007).  Incidence of tri ple lumen catheter and port  
occlusion utilizing nor mal salin e flushes. Chest, 132(4 _MeetingAbstracts) , pp. 493a -493. 
 
Schilling, S, Doellman, D, Hutchinson, N, et al.  (2006).  The impact of needleless connector  
device on central venous catheter occlusion in  children: A prospective, control led trial. 
Journal  of Paren teral and En teral Nutrition ,  30(2) , pp. 85-90. 
 