Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
1 of 9 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower  
African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adherence  
 
Ebele M. Umeukeje MD, MPH  
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
1161 21st Avenue South S -3223 MCN  
Nashville, TN 37232 USA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
2 of 9 
 Table of Contents:  
 
                  Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
5.0 Study Procedures  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
8.0 Statistical Considerations  
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
10.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
 
 
 
  
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
3 of 9 
 1.0 Background  
 
End stage  kidney  disease  (ESKD)  is a public  health  concern.  High morbidity  from ESKD  accounts  for 
more than 30% of the  $30 billion  Medicare  ESKD  budget  and contributes  to excessive  ESKD -related  
hospitalizations.  Higher  hospitalization risk is observed in African Americans receiving hemodialysis, 
who have a four -fold higher prevalence of ESKD. Among ESKD patients, 35.4% are rehospitalized 
within 30 days compared to 15.3% of Medicare beneficiaries without kidney disease.  African  
Americans  constitute  the highest  proportion  (36.2%)  of this group.  Non-adherence  to dialysis  
treatment  is key to increased risk of these outcomes. Compared to Whites, African Americans have a 
four-fold higher odds of hospitalization  and higher  dialysis  treatment  non-adherence  rate. 
Psychosocial factors impact adherence behaviors in ESKD and associate with readmissions in patients 
receiving hemodialysis.  Yet, interventions  to reduce  readmissions  fail to focus on psychosocial  factors.  
Optimal  dialysis  adherence behavior  warrants  evaluation  of novel  motivation -related  psychosocial  
factors,  such as optimism,  apathy  and autonomy. Optimism  is a trait-like attitude  which  associates  with 
health  behaviors  and predicts  health  outcomes.  Apathy  is a lack of motivation, which leads to a 
negative impact on goal -directed behavior. Autonomy is an essential factor for achieving durable 
behavior  change.  
 
The hypothesis of this study is that culturally tailored motivational interviewing is feasible, 
acceptable, and will show preliminary  efficacy  in improving  autonomy,  apathy,  optimism,  and dialysis  
treatment  adherence.  This study  will provide additional  critical  and timely  information  to reduce  the 
excessive  re-hospitalizations  in end-stage  kidney  disease  (ESKD) by intervening upon dialysis 
treatment non -adherence. It will address the need to rigorously advance the science and 
understanding of the development, feasibility, acceptability and adoption of novel culturally -sensitive 
motivational strategies to i mprove dialysis treatment adherence among African Americans with 
ESKD. This study is significant because  it aligns  with research  priorities  in dialysis  care identified  by the 
World  Health  Organization,  the American  Society of  Nephrology,  the Center  for Medicare and Medicaid  
Services  and patients  with end-stage  kidney  disease.  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
This study  addresses  the need to rigorously  advance  the science  and understanding  of the 
development,  feasibility, acceptability  and adoption  of novel  culturally -sensitive  motivational  
strategies  to improve  dialysis  treatment  adherence among  African  Americans  with ESKD.  This 
study  specifically  aims to: 
 
1)  Gain advanced  skills in the development  and implementation  of novel culturally  sensitive  
motivational  strategies  
2)  Acquire  critical  preliminary  data for an R01-funded  phase  II efficacy  trial testing  the use of these  
motivational  strategies to improve dialysis treatment  adherence.  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
4 of 9 
 3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
• African American  
• Receiving hemodialysis treatments  
• Been on hemodialysis for more than 30 days  
• 18 years of age and older  
• Within a 3 -month look back at the time of screening, patients who have missed at least one 
dialysis session or shortened at least one dialysis session by 15 minutes.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Not self -identified as African American  
• Impaired mental status or severe illness  
• Non-English speaking  
• No documented evidence of dialysis treatment non -adherence  
• Missed or shortened treatments due to hospitalizations or excused travel  
• Terminal condition  
• Living in a nursing home/rehab  
• Planned transplant within the next 3 months  
• Planned conversion to peritoneal dialysis within the next 3 months  
 
 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
1. Obtain consent  by email  from attending physician s to approach  their hemodialysis  patient s (in 
person or over the phone) for study inclusion.  Provide the Attending Physicians with pertinent 
details of the study and encourage them to share this information with their patients.  
 
2. With the permission of the Attending Physicians, review the dialysis clinic schedules/census to 
identify patients  currently receiving hemodialysis therapy.  
 
a. Dialysis clinic locations  
i. Vanderbilt Dialysis Clinic :   
2906 Foster Creighton Drive Ste 200, Nashville, TN 37204  
ii. Vanderbilt Dialysis Clinic East:  
           20 Rachel Drive, Nashville TN 37214  
 
3. Approach patient in person in the dialysis clinics or via phone to discuss and invite participation  
(see subject participation script and phone recruitment script) . In addition to information which 
the patients may have received from their Attending Physicians, a nswer any questions that they 
may have  regarding the study , assess their interest in the study and do an initial screening.  
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
5 of 9 
 4. The randomization schedule will be generated and uploaded to Redcap by the biostatistician , 
and personnel will be masked until after enrollment. Personnel will be masked to patients' 
randomization status until after enrollment. After baseline enrollment  into the study, 
participants as well as study personnel will no longer be blinded to participants' treatment 
assignments. Patients will be randomized to the intervention group (Arm 1) or to usual care 
(Arm 2) using a block randomization scheme.  
5.0 Study Procedures  
 
1. See #4.0 above for enrollment procedures.  
 
2. Obtain signed informed consent in person, via phone or eConsent  (see attached eConsent) . 
a. Phone consent - If consent is taken over the phone a consent form will be mailed to the 
participant to obtain their signature with a request to mail it back in a self -addressed 
stamped envelope.  
b. eConsent - participant will be called, if they agree to participate and have capability, the 
REDCap link for eConsent will be emailed to the participant.  
 
3. Give copy of signed consent to patient in person or by mail and place copy of signed consent in 
dialysis medical record  
 
4. Administer surveys to all the subjects either orally, by phone, on paper, or electronically using 
mobile device depending upon the subject’s preference  
a. Patient Demographic s Survey * 
b. Brief Health Literacy Screening (BHLS) *  
c. Social Desirability Scale (SDS) * 
d. Chronic Hemodialysis Knowledge S cale (CHeKS) * 
e. Perceived Kidney Knowledge Survey (PiKS)*  
f. Autonomous Regulation (AR) Scale 
g. Healthcare Climate Questionnaire (HCCQ)  
h. Perceived Kidney Disease Self -Management Scale (PKDSMS)  
i. Apathy Evaluation Scale (AES)  
j. Perceived Expectancies Index (PEI) 
k. Life Orientation Test -Revised (LOT -R) 
l. Adherence to Refills and Medication Scale (ARMS)  
m. Cook-Medley Subscale Baseline Questionnaire  
n. Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES -D 10)  
o. Trust in Physician Scale (TPS)  
p. Readiness Ruler  
q. Time to Recover after Dialysis  
Surveys with an asterisk* are administered at Baseline ONLY.  
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
6 of 9 
 5. Administer surveys at three different time points: Baseline , week 8-9, and week 12/closeout . 
 
6. Abstract medical records at baseline , week 8, and week 12. 
 
7. Administer motivational interviewing session to subjects in the intervention arm of the study (as 
determined using a block randomization scheme)  
a. Motivational interviewing sessions will either be done face -to-face or virtually given 
challenges imposed by coronavirus disease -19 (COVID -19) pandemic. Face -to-face 
sessions will be audio recorded. Virtual motivational interviewing will be done using a 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  (HIPAA) -protected Zoom account. 
Initial session will take about 30 to 45 minutes. Follow up sessions will likely last less 
than 30 minutes.  
b. 10% of the motivational interviewing sessions will be coded by MI expert using the 
Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity Scale (MITI).  
c. The motivational interviewing script is attached separately.  
d. MI sessions will be conducted by certified health coaches. In preparation for the study, 
we will use standardized patients to assess the motivational interviewing skills of the 
health coaches.  
 
8. Provide subject wi th a $25 gift card as compensation for completing surveys at baseline, week 
8-9, and week 12/closeout ; $25 gift card as compensation for completion of each motivational 
interviewing session: weekly for the 1st 4 weeks, week 6, and week 8; and $ 25 gift card for 
completion of post-intervention exit interviews (applicable to subjects in the intervention arm ). 
 
9. Complete payment  form each time subjects are compensated for MI visits and/or completion of 
surveys, and complete payment  form for the post-intervention exit interviews.   
 
10. Summary of study activities and timeline:  
 
Procedure/Activity  Frequency  
Survey completion  3 time points  
Motivational interviewing (for intervention arm)  6 time points  
Exit interviews  (for patients  in intervention  arm) 1 time point  
Medical record abstraction  3 time points  
Dialysis adherence record abstraction  From 3 months prior to enrollment to end of study  
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
7 of 9 
 Variables  3M prior  W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 W6 W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12 
Autonomous regulation   
X       
X    
X 
Autonomy support   
X       
X    
X 
Perceived competence   
X       
X    
X 
Apathy   
X       
X    
X 
Optimism   
X       
X    
X 
Intervention               
MI  
X X X X  
X  
X     
Clinical Outcome/ EMR               
Dialysis adherence  X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Medical record abstraction   
X       
X    
X 
Logistical Outcomes               
Screening - enrollment ratio   
X            
Attendance to MI   
X X X X  
X  
X     
Drop -out rates   
X X X X  
X  
X     
Compensation               
MI visits   
X X X X  
X  
X     
Surveys   
X       
X    
X 
Exit Interviews          
X     
M – month, W – week, MI – motivational interviewing  
 
 
Brief exit semi -structured interviews with patients who receive MI  
The goal is to understand the perceptions, enablers  and nurturers of the adoption of the culturally 
tailored motivational interviewing protocol to improve hemodialysis adherence . 
 
a. Exclusion criteria:  
I. African American hemodialysis patients who are not currently enrolled in this study  
II. African American hemodialysis patients who are not in the intervention arm of this study  
b. Clinic locations  
i. Vanderbilt Dialysis Clinic  
ii. Vanderbilt dialysis East clinic  
 
1. The facilitator guide for the semi -structured interviews is a separate attachment.  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
8 of 9 
 6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
 
The PI and all the research personnel will adhere to the required IRB policies. All the subjects will be 
closely monitored for any and all AEs related to either the study survey administration or the 
motivational interviewing sessions. These will be report ed upon incident to the IRB within 7 calendar 
days as per IRB policy.  In addition, the  health coaches are to notify the PI and/or Research 
Coordinators if any concerning information comes up during the motivational interviewing session. The 
PI will be resp onsible for communicating any such information to the dialysis unit staff immediately.  
 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
If the study participant decide s to withdraw from the study, no additional information will be collected 
from them. This will have no impact on the care that they receive from their doctor. They are allowing 
us to use their information from this study for as long as we want. If they decide to withdraw 
permission, all they need to do is to let Dr. Umeukeje know. A decision to not participate in this 
research will not affect their treatment.  
 
8.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
This study is a pilot test of a culturally tailored motivational interviewing intervention. Thus, the main 
focus of the statistical analyses is simply to generate estimates of treatment effects and variation and  
to evaluate feasibility outcomes and acceptability of a culturally tailored motivational interviewing 
intervention  compared to usual hemodialysis care . 
 
Descriptive measures of autonomy, apathy, optimism, and dialysis treatment adherence will be 
calculated, including sample means, standard deviations, and  quantiles.  Estimated distributions of 
these variables will guide study design and power for a follow -up confirmatory clinical trial.  Graphical 
displays of univariate and bivariate data will be created to generate hypotheses for the follow -up 
study.  Data co llection process will be assessed for completeness and accuracy and operating 
procedures for data coll ection will be developed to minimize missing data in the confirmatory clinical 
trial. 
 
The Vanderbilt Qualitative Research Core will provide qualitative analyses of the brief exit interviews 
done in this study. All interviews will be recorded and transcribed verbatim and analyzed using 
HyperRESEARCH software (version 3.5.2; Research Ware Inc ., Randolph, MA).  Open coding will be 
performed, and themes and sub -themes will be assigned to each idea fragment. The unit of data 
analysis will be the codes. Any discrepancies will be reconciled among coders. Themes will be 
categorized into the three dom ains of the PEN -3 model: Cultural identity; Cultural empowerment; 
Relationships and Expectations.  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Ebele M. Umeukeje, MD MPH                   Version:  05/10/22 v.05 
Study Title:  MOVE:  MOtiVational Strategies to Empower African Americans to Improve Dialysis Adheren ce 
9 of 9 
 9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
All measures will be taken to ensure participant confidentiality during all phases of data collection, 
storage, and management. All patient data will be assigned a study ID number at the time of 
collection. Until the medical chart abstraction has been completed for all patients, a master key that 
contains patients name and date of birth or medical record number will be maintained on the secure 
VUMC server, in a password protected folder to which only the PI and mentors  and approved  study  
personnel  have access.  Once all data is collected  for each individual  participant,  the linking information  
and their entry on the master  key will be destroyed.  The PI will subsequently  maintain  all de-identified  
data that is collected in this study. Hard copies will be kept separately in a locked file cabinet in the 
PI's or research coordinator's office.  All materials  will have a study  ID number  and no identifying  
information  will be attached  to any data (i.e., no names, address,  phone  number,  medical  record,  
social  security  number,  or date of birth).  A database  will be created  with the de- identified data and 
maintained by the PI in a password -protected folder on the Vanderbilt Redcap database. All 
video/audio  recordings  will be stored  on the secure  VUMC  server.  Only the KSP included  in this IRB 
application  will have access to the research  information.  This project will utilize the  REDCap  platform 
for data collection and management.  This includes the ability for project team members listed as Key 
Study Personnel with existing electronic health record (EHR) system access rights to make use 
of REDCap  Clinical Data Interoperability Services (CDIS) tools. These tools are designed to enable 
transfer of relevant study -related data from the Vanderbilt  Research Derivative and/or directly from 
the EHR into  REDCap.  
 
10.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
Study duration is 2 years.  Once all data is collected for each individual participant, the linking 
information and their entry on the master key will be destroyed. The raw data will be stored for 10 
years after the close of the study.  