Title: Pilot RCT to Evaluate the Effects of a Trust -Building Depression Management Intervention 
on Moderate Depressive Symptoms in Low -Income Adolescents  
 
NCT: 03599141  
 
Date IRB approved: 10/13/2022  
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 1 of 23  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   Study comparing two depression management interventions for teens with 
depression  
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  
 Heather K. Hardin, PhD, RN  
 Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing  
 216.368.5129  
 hkh10@case.edu  
 
UH FACULTY ADVISOR:  N/A  
 
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY:  Department of Psychology  
 VERSION NUMBER:    1.16 
 
DATE:  09/28/2022   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 2 of 23  
Study Comparing Two Depression Management Interventions for Teens with Depression  
 
Objectives  
(1) Our purpose is to test the Trust-building depression S elf-Management Together ( TRUST ) 
intervention among adolescents with moderate depressive symptoms. Our premise is that trust 
can be learned, that  increasing trust will improve self -regulation,  and improv ed self -regulation 
will influence depression management behaviors, which will decrease depressive symptoms 
and increase quality of life (QOL). The study aims are:  
Aim 1. Compare the effects of the TRUST intervention with a depression management 
interventi on on depression management behaviors (sleep, stress management, medication 
adherence, appointment keeping) and health status (depressive symptoms, QOL) in adolescents wi th moderate depressive symptoms .  
Aim 2.  Assess whether the effects of the TRUST intervention on depression management 
behaviors (sleep, stress management, medication adherence, appointment keeping) and health 
status (depressive symptoms, QOL) are mediated by (respiratory sinus arrhythmia [RSA],  
behavioral interaction assessment, adolescent/parent trust self -reports, relationship quality, self -
regulation, family cohesion, social support, decision making, self -efficacy, rumination, 
decentering).  
Aim 3.  Assess the effects of potential moderators ( gender, race, perceived stress, parental 
monitoring, household income, parent level of education, parenting style, parent stress) on the 
relationship between the TRUST intervention and depression management behaviors and 
health status (depressive symptoms,  QOL).  
(2) Hypothesis:   We hypothesize that variations in adolescent/ parent trust -building will predict 
response to the TRUST intervention and depression management behaviors as evidenced by 
change in depressive symptoms and QOL.   
 
Background 
(1) Depress ive symptoms are a serious concern affecting the social, academic, and health  
outcomes of 36% of Cleveland adolescents.
2 Health disparities exist in depression 
management —with low- income and minority adolescents more likely to forego treatment for 
depression.3 Students enrolled in Cleveland Metropolitan School District  (CMSD)  schools are 
100% low -income and 84% ethnic minor ity.6 We are collaborating with CMSD to address health 
disparities in depression management among low income and minority adolescents. Our team 
has an 8 -year ongoing relationship with CMSD schools to improve the health of Cleveland’s 
children and their fam ilies.  
Depression among adolescents is affected by health behaviors such as sleep, stress 
management, medication adherence, and appointment keeping, as well as  quality of 
relationship with parents. Family focused interventions are well established for reducing 
emotional and behavior al problems in adolescents, and function in part, by fostering positive 
adolescent -parent relationships.7 Rotenberg describes adolescents’ trust of their parent as 
made up of: (a) honesty, which is telling the truth and engaging in benign and genuine 
behaviors; (b) reliability, which is perceived compatibility between one’s words and actions; and 
(c) emotional connection, which is the dependence on others to be receptive to disclosures and 
maintain confidentiality of disclosures.8 We are applying this theory as a basis for the TRUST 
intervention used in this study that builds trust between adolescents and their parents, alongside depression management behaviors.  
(2) Preliminary data. In this pilot RCT, we are evaluating the effects of the novel TRUST 
intervention to improve depression management behaviors in adolescents with depressive 
symptoms. PI Hardin has shown that low interpersonal trust is associated with risky health 
behaviors
5 and high depressive symptoms in low income adolescents.4 Recent studies indicate 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 3 of 23  
that self -regulation is a core aspect of positive relationships,9 trust,10 and healthy behaviors.11 
RSA is an indicator of heart rate variability in response to respiration,12 which is a marker of self -
regulation.11,13 We will assess RSA during a behavioral assessment of the quality of adolescent -
parent interaction using microsocial coding approaches.14,15 Co-I Connell has shown that RSA is 
associated with mutual positive affect16 and emotion regulation15 in adolescent -parent behavioral 
interactions.  
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
(1) Screening . Using an existing collaboration with the CMSD school system, participant s will 
be recruited via advertisements in parent meetings at CMSD schools and social media. Candidates whose parents indicate interest by phone call, email, message, or completing an 
online prescreening tool will be contacted using an IRB approved script t o recruit, screen, and 
enroll participant s. Adolescents will complete the PHQ -8 measure of depressive symptoms over 
the phone or by REDCap link on a tablet computer. A PHQ8 score >8 and <20 will be 
considered for study inclusion. Screening the adolescent with the PHQ8 confirms that the adolescent currently has moderate depressive symptoms and will occur during the screening process, prior to consent/assent. We have requested a waiver of consent on page 7 for 
screening purposes.  
 
 (2) Inclusion (adolescent)  
1. A Cleveland Metropolitan School District student  
2. Ages 14 -17 years old  
3. Repo rts diagnosis of depression  
4.  Reports mod erate depressive symptoms (PHQ -8 score >8  and <20)  
5. Able to read, speak, and understand the English language  
 Inclusion (parent/guardian)  
1. Female parent/guardian  
2. Able to read, speak, and understand the English language  
 
 (3) Exclusion (adolescent)  
1. Current suicide risk  
2. Diagnosis with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or a personality disorder  
3. Sever behavioral problems that preclude group participation (as reported by 
parent)  
4. Family plans to move from the region within one year  
 Exclusion (parent)  
1. Family plans to move from the region within one year  
 
Number of Research Participants  
(1) N = 30 adolescent/parent dyads   
(2) Single site study, N/A  
 Vulnerable Populations  
(1) Vulnerable populations included are:   
 ☐ Adults unable to consent  
 ☒ Minors (infants, children, teenagers)   
  ☐ Wards of the state  
  ☐ Foster Children  
 ☐ Pregnant Women   
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 4 of 23  
 ☐ Neonates  
 ☐ Employees of CWRU or UHHS  
 ☐ Prisoners  
 ☐ Illiterate Individuals  
 ☐ Non-English Speaking  
 ☐ University Students  
 
(2) Minors will be recruited with permission of the parent/guardian during the process of 
informed consent with assent designated for acceptance by the minor. Minors are the participant  of interest, since this is a pediatric study targeting adolescent particip ants with 
depression. The consent/assent document was designed with adolescents in mind, including 
simple and clear lay language to promote respect for (minor) persons with shared 
consent/assent decision- making between parent and adolescent. Drs. Hardin and Connell have 
conducted previous research protocols that involve adolescent -parent dyads and have 
experienced research assistants and established protocols for quality assurance, crisis 
intervention and referral, as well as initial and ongoing staff training. The research assistants hired for this project will have prior experience working with adolescent -parent dyads.  
Risks associated with study procedures (surveys, behavioral interaction, RSA) are not 
greater than encountered in daily life and will be m inimized with careful attention to adolescent 
participant  needs.  There is the potential for stigmatization due to depression diagnosis; 
however, measurements are taken in private and all results are reported privately in a sensitive and culturally appropriate manner.  If questionnaires indicate symptoms suggestive of severe 
depression or suicidal ideation, the results will be reviewed with Dr. Arin Connell, Ph.D. (co -
investigator, licensed clinical psychologist, #6732) who will consult with the adolescent and/or 
parent/guardian to determine whether the adolescent or parent/guardian is in need of a referral 
for further evaluation and treatment. The nature of this study includes adolescents with a 
diagnosis of depression. If the adolescent becomes upset during study procedures, a study 
research assistant and the participant ’s parent will be available to support and comfort the 
adolescent participant  if needed. The adolescent/parent dyad will be given an information sheet 
with the number of United Way First Call (211) to access on call mental health professional services in their local area or Cuyahoga County 24- Hour Mental Health Crisis Information and 
Referral Hotline (216 -623-6888). If the participant  is unable to be comforted by the research 
assistant or the parent and further assistance is required, the Mobile Crisis Team from the Cuyahoga County 24- Hour Mental Health Crisis, Information, and Referral Hotline will be 
contacted immediately. In addition, our Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will include an individual with expertise and experience conducting research studies with minor 
participants.  
(3) P
regnant women are not targeted for inclusion in this study, but will not be excluded in this 
study. Non-English speaking individuals will be excluded in this study. At this time, our study 
does not have the means to accommodate non- English speaking participants . This is a small 
(N=30), proof of concept, pilot study conducted by an early stage investigator. Once our team  
has evidence that trust -building interventions are effective, we will expand our reach with larger 
studies, which will include non- English speaking families.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
(1) The target population are CMSD school students 14 -17 years old diagnosed with depression 
and a parent. CMSD has 41 high schools enrolling approximately 10,000 students 14- 17 years 
old. According to a recent screening, approximately 36% of CMSD high school students 
reported depressive symptoms, which is approximately 3,600 students ages 14- 17 years old.  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 5 of 23  
(2) Using an existing collaboration with the CMSD school system, participant s will be recruited 
via mailed invitation letters, advertisements in parent meetings at CMSD schools, community 
events /locations, on the public bus system,  and social media. Due to COVID -19  safety  
restrictions, in person recruitment will follow all guidance made by local government (wearing 
masks, washing hands, or stay at home when appropriate ). Parents of participants in our 
previous studies that have consented to notifications of  future research will be mailed or emailed 
study information letters and study flyers.   
(3) Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing investigators have used this recruitment approach 
in a depression management study in which 52 adolescents were recruited in one year. Our study aims to enroll 30 adolescent/parent dyads. Candidates whose parents return a phone call, 
message, or online prescreener indicating interest will be contacted using an IRB approved script to recruit, screen, and enroll participant s.  
(4) Study flyers will be provided to school nurses, school administrators, and school guidance 
counselors for distribution to parents either electronically or, once restrictions associated with 
the COVID -19 pandemic are lifted, in- person. Similarly, once restrictions associated with the 
COVID -19 pandemic are lifted, w e will also use traditional methods of recruiting and flyer drops, 
targeting community venues including branches of the local public library, commercial retail outlets, and community parks, recreational facilities, and places of congregation (e.g. , churches, 
temples). Public bus advertisements will include paid advertising on the interior of the bus, aimed at bus riders.  These materials will be used to recruit participants during visits with school 
staff, during visits to community venues, and while riding the public bus system.  
 (5) Advertisements on public buses and Facebook will include a brief description of the study 
eligibility and study contact information, while flyers and brochures will include greater details 
about the study, eligibility, and contact information. The stud y recruitment materials are attached 
with this application.  
Facebook advertisements  will be used to advertise the study and evaluate potential eligibility for 
the study (See Facebook Level Up study advertisement attached). This Facebook 
advertisement will  be targeted to parents of adolescents 14- 17 years old attending a Cleveland 
Metropolitan School District school. The Facebook advertisement will be linked to a 
prescreening tool in REDCap to evaluate potential eligibility for the study. Facebook 
advertise ments will take four  forms :  1) study advertisements, 2) fun posts , 3) page shares, and 
4) targeted advertising. Examples of  Facebook advertisements and the prescreening form are 
attached with the study application.  
A. Study advertisements. We plan to periodically post the following Level Up study 
advertisements on our study Facebook page to assist in recruitment and keep the page active:  
a. “Greetings from the Level  Up team  at Case Western Reserve University Frances 
Payne Bolton School of Nursing! We are actively recruiting for our program helping parents and teens feel better. If you have a 14- 17 year -old teen enrolled 
at a Cleveland Metropolitan School District school and would like more information about our program, please give us a call. Our office  phone is 216-
368-5129, and our email address is levelup@case.edu.   We look forward to 
hearing from you! ” 
b. “Are you the parent or guardian of a teen ages  14-17 years attending a 
Cleveland Metropolitan School District school? Would you and your teen like to join a program to learn how to live healthier and feel better? Simply click the blue 
“Sign Up Now” button, fill out the form, and one of our study team members will 
be in contact with you soon.  Participants will be compensated for their time. ” 
c. “We are look ing for parents and guardians of teens ages 14 -17 years living in the 
Cleveland Metropolitan School District who are interested in joining our healthy 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 6 of 23  
living program. If you are interested, please feel free to contact us or click on the 
“Sign Up Now” button. Participants will be compensated for their time.” 
B. Fun posts. We will make fun Facebook posts to maintain presence and activity of our Facebook page. For example, we may make posts about secular holidays such as, “Wishing Cleveland families a Happy New Y ear!”  
C. We will ask other pages to share our page or recruitment posts with their followers. These other pages include Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, the Cleveland 
Metropolitan School District, local parent groups, local community groups, local 
churches, and national parenting groups.   
D. We will also use paid, targeted advertising on Facebook. These ads will target parents of high school age children in Cleveland.  
With the online prescreener form, parents will be contacted for further screening if t he 
following conditions are met:  1) parent indicates interest in the study, 2) parent indicates 
concern about their teen’s stress/ mood, and 3) parent provides their contact information. 
 Setting  
(1) Due to restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic, this study will be delivered in a 
remote format. Enrolled families will complete surveys via an electronic device connected to the 
internet, and intervention sessions will similarly be offered in a virtual  (phone or video 
conferencing)  format . When restrictions associated with the COVID- 10 pandemic are eased, the 
survey, behavioral, RSA, and intervention components of this  study will be conducted in 
research laboratories at the Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing and the Department of 
Psychology at Case Western Reserve University. The intervention session component of this 
study will be conducted at private community locations (e.g., library meeting rooms) that are 
convenient for enrolled study participants  once covid -19 restrictions are eased. (2) Using an 
existing collaboration with the Cleveland Metro School District, participants will be recruited from 
parent meetings, the community at large,  public bus system, and Facebook advertisements.  
(3) D ue to the COVID -19 pandemic, assent/consent will be obtained online using a REDCap 
survey facilitated by a phone call with a research assistant  to verify understanding of the study . 
When restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic are eased, assent/consent will be 
obtained in-p erson using the following process . First, c onsent/ assent will be obtained at either 
PI Hardin’s research space at the School of Nursing or Dr. Arin Connell’s research space at the 
Department of Psychology. Next, participants will complete surveys on tablet  computers  either 
PI Hardin’s research space at the School of Nursing or Dr. Arin Connell’s research space at the 
Department of Psychology. Parent/teen dyads will then be taken to Co- I Connell’s lab at the 
Department of Psychology where they will be seated  in comfortable chairs in separate, quiet 
research rooms. Research assistants will then provide an overview of the physiological 
equipment, including the manner of attaching all recording sensors.   
 
Consent Process  
Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent: 
☒ Yes  ☐ No 
 
We will recruit participant s using an  IRB-approved protocol. All participant s will be required 
to give informed written assent/consent to participate in the project. Assent will be obtained from 
adolescent participant s and consent will be obtained from the parents. No waiting period will be 
required between screening and consent. Trained research personnel will read, review, and discuss assent/consent forms with all potential participants prior to asking them to sign. It is 
anticipated that it will take approximately 30 minutes to complete the consent/assent process, but participant s may take as long as they need to make a decision. Participant s that seem 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 7 of 23  
unsure about consent/assent will be encouraged to discuss it at home and contact us once a 
decision is made. If the candidate appears confused or indicates a lack of understanding,  the 
interviewer will attempt to identify the misunderstanding and to explain the form again. Any candidate who still does not comprehend the form will be excluded from the study. We will ask 
questions to confirm understanding of the material covered in the assent/consent procedure 
(e.g., “Could you tell me what’s going to happen if you take part in the study?”). Trained 
research personnel will witness and date the signed forms. Assent/consent procedures will take 
place in a private room or office. PI Hardi n will keep assent/consent forms in a secured file 
cabinet within a locked room. At each study visit, study personnel will ask participant s about 
their experience in the study (i.e. “How are things going for you in the study?”) and ask if they 
understand w hat is happening in the study (i.e. “ Do you know why you’re here today?” or Do 
you have any questions about the study?”).  
 
As consent is an ongoing process, s ubjects in the study may need to be re- consented/re -
assented to inform them of new study information and reaffirm their willingness to continue 
participating in the research. National and local guidance recommend s the use of the least 
burdensome approach for re -consenting/ re-assenting a subject.
42,43 The Office of Human 
Research Protections (O HRP) guidance for re -consent/ re-assent will be followed ,44 which 
includes re- consenting/ re-assenting  active participants and verbal communication with 
documentation in the study record  for participants who have already completed all study 
activities .  
The following is a list of how data will be handled  following attempts to re- consent/re- assent. In 
the event that an active particip ant does not  complete re -consent/re- assent , their partic ipation in 
the study  will be ended and their data will not be used for analysis . For subjec ts who have 
completed  all study activities and select not to  re-consent/ re-assent , their data will not be used 
for any new analyses. With a  subject who has completed all study activities and cannot be 
contacted for re-consent/re- assent , only the survey data  included in previous IRB approvals 
(depressive symptoms, covid- 19 anxiety)  will be  used for  data analyse s. Finally, a ll subjects 
who are re-consented /re-assent ed and reaffirm their willingness to continue participating in the 
research  will have all data included in data analyses.   
 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process or Documentation  
☒ I will obtain consent, but request a waiver for pre- screening purposes.  
(1) The online prescreener and screening phone call cannot be practicably conducted w ithout a 
waiver of consent/assent  for a number of reasons. The information collected for the prescreen 
does not involve any actual intervention or experimentation. Families will only have a 
prescreening done if they are volunteering to learn more about participating in the study. The 
purpose of the pre -screening is to clarify the dyad’s eligibility for the study prior to arranging a 
baseline visit to the lab space at Case Western Reserve University. This is necessary to avoid 
scheduling dyads for baseline visits only to find that they are not eligible, a situation that, if 
avoidable, would anger and disappoint families. Our community advisory board recommended that the process of prescreening be efficient and non- burdensome for families, and the 
proposed approach is designed to be consistent wi th their recommendations. It also avoids 
inappropriate use of CWRU resources. Further, no data will be collected except those pertaining 
to eligibility . To require full consent/assent  would create temporal and perceptual impediments 
for families who would otherwise be interested in participating and would likely reduce community engagement in the project substantially. Furthermore, the waiver applies only to the 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 8 of 23  
prescreening by phone, online, or in person visit. All those eligible and wanting to take part i n 
the project will  compete a full consent/assent  prior to beginning the study.  
 
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults  
Non English Speakers :  Not applicable. With this small (N=30), proof of concept, exploratory 
pilot study, we are including only those who can speak, read, and understand the English language. Once effectiveness of the intervention has been established, we will include non-
English speakers.  We intend to develop a Spanish version of this intervention for use in future 
replication studies, once effectiveness of the intervention has been established.   
Adults Unable to Consent:
   Not applicable. The interventions under evaluation in this study are 
social/behavioral in nature and require the ability to read, speak, and unde rstand language , in 
addition to interacting one- on-one and in a group setting.  
 
Research Participants Who Are Not  Yet Adults ( teenagers)  
Parental permission be obtained from:  
☒ One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably 
available, and shares legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child.  
(1) With the non-invasive, low-risk nature of this study  with potential for participant benefit , we 
will require parental /guardian permission and involvement of only one pare nt/guardian. The 
screening form will  ask both the parent/guardian  and adolescent  for confirmation that the parent 
providing consent is a  legal parent/guardian of the child. Parental consent will be recorded with 
the either the selection of the “yes” checkbox in the electronic consent process during the 
COVID -19 pandemic or with the parent ’s signature on the assent/consent form once restrictions 
associated with the COVID -19 pandemic are ea sed. 
(2) All minor adolescents (ages 14- 17) will require consent of a parent or legal guardian.  All 
minor adolescents (ages 14- 17) will require assent.  
(3) Assent will be recorded with the either the selection of the “yes” checkbox in the electronic 
consent process during the COVID -19 pandemic or with the adolescent’s signature on the 
assent/consent form once restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic are eased . 
Assent will be recorded with the adolescent’s signature on the consent/assent form. The 
consent/assent form has been designed with simple language appropriate for both adults and 
teens. A single consent/assent form treats participants  ages 14 -17 as autonomous individuals 
able to make decisions for their participation, while reducing burden on families with multiple 
documents.  
(4) Re -consent/assent addendum.  
 
Sharing of Results with Research Participants  
We will not be providing individual results to participants’, however, general group results will be 
shared with participant s at the end of the study, or as needed if the results may influence their 
decision to remain in the study.    
Study Design, Procedures, and Timeline  
(1) Study Design. We will use an e xploratory 2- group pilot RCT to investigate the hypothesized 
effects of the TRUST intervention on depressive symptoms, QOL, sleep, stress management, medication adherence, and appointment keeping at 3 months and 6 months in comparison to 
the effects of a D epression Management Intervention.  
(2 & 3) Research Procedures will include:  
a. Recruitment and Informed Assent/Consent : We will recruit participant s using an  IRB-
approved protocol. All participant s will be required to give informed written 
assent/consent to participate in the project. During the COVID- 19 pandemic, we will be 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 9 of 23  
obtaining assent/consent online via REDCap . Research assistants will read, review, and 
discuss assent/consent forms with all potential participants prior to asking them to sign. 
If the candidate appears confused or indicates a lack of understanding, the interviewer 
will attempt to identify the misunderstanding and to explain the form again. Any candidate who still does not comprehend the form will be excluded from the study. We 
will ask questions to confirm understanding of the material covered in the assent/consent 
procedure (e.g., “Could you tell me what’s going to happen if you enroll in the study?”). 
Interviewers will witness  and date the signed forms. Assent/consent procedures will take 
place in a private room or office. PI Hardin will keep assent/consent forms in a secured 
file cabinet within a locked room. Participant s will be enrolled in blocks of 10  dyads, 
using a block r andomization scheme to assign each of the 10 dyads to either study 
group. Once a group of 5 is filled, weekly intervention sessions will begin. 
b. Questionnaires: Survey data will be collected using REDCap on a tablet computer . 
Measures used in the study are listed in the Table below.  Due to restrictions associated 
with the COVID -19 pandemic, parents and adolescents will be asked to answer 
questions privately and at approximately the same time point on an electronic device 
connected to the internet in their homes. If, for example, only one electronic device is 
able to connect to the internet, the adolescent can complete the survey and then pass 
the device to the parent for survey completion. We are assessing families for internet 
access and device availability in the screening form. For families that do not have a 
device, we will mail them a tablet that they will mail back to us at the end of the study.  
 
Study Variables, Measures, and Data Collection Points  
ADOLESCENT SURVEY  
 
Variable  Instrument  Title on Survey  B 3M 
 6M 
 
Depressive 
symptoms  Patient Health Questionnaire -819 Depression Questions  X X X 
Quality of life  Youth Quality of Life -Short Form21 Quality of Life Questions  X X X 
Sleep  PROMIS sleep d isturbance -425 
Children’s Report of Sleep 
Patterns22 Sleep Questions  
More Sleep Questions  X 
X X 
X X 
X 
Stress management  Adolescent Lifestyle 
Questionnaire—stress 
management subscale23 How do you handle your 
stress?  X X X 
Medication 
adherence  Extent of Medication Adherence24 Medication Questions  X X X 
Appointment keeping  Hill-Bone Compliance Scale25 Appointment Questions  X X X 
Biologic Trust  
 Respiratory sinus arrhythmia13 Not applicable — 
assessment in lab  X X  
Behavioral Trust  Behavioral interaction 
assessment14 Not applicable — 
assessment in lab  X X  
Cognitive Trust  Children’s General Trust Scale26  
 Children’s Trust 
Questions  X X X 
Cognitive Trust  Parent Trust of Child Scale —
Adolescent  perceived27 Parental Trust Questions  X X X 
Relationship quality  Inclusion of Other in Self28 How close are you with 
your parent?  X X X 
Self-regulation  Positive and Negative Affect 
Schedule29 Emotion Questions  X X X 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 10 of 23  
Note . B = baseline, 3M = 3 months, 6M = 6 months  
 
We are also providing families with information about free or reduced cost internet 
access and free internet hot spots in the community (attached). Once restrictions 
associated with the COVID -19 pandemic are eased, in- person data collection will 
resume. Parent and adolescent will simultaneously answer questions on separate 
computers in a private room. This is intended to allow both to answer questions  privately 
and to prevent parents from interfering with adolescent responses.  During social 
distancing due to novel coronavirus -19, we will email a link to the questionnaire to 
participants.  All materials will be assigned a unique number that will be used to link data 
over time. A master list linking the ID number to the participant’s name will be kept in a 
password- protected computer file, in a locked office, at the local site. This list will be kept 
entirely separate from the data so that responses cannot be linked to the individual 
participant.  
 
c. The risks associated with gathering information from participant s by properly trained and 
supervised research assistants are low. Participant s may experience discomfort by Family cohesion  Brief Family Relationship Scale30 Family Relationship 
Questions  X X X 
Rumination  Children’s Response Style 
Questionnaire32 How do you handle 
sadness?  X X X 
Self-efficacy  PROMIS Self -efficacy - Youth31 Getting stuff done 
questions  X X X 
Decentering  Experiences Questionnaire33 Self-awareness 
Questions  X X X 
Demographics  Demographics questionnaire  Who are you?  X   
Perceived stress  Perceived Stress Scale -Peds34 Stress Questions  X X X 
COVID anxiety  COVID anxiety -5 COVID anxiety  X X X 
Anxiety symptoms  PROMIS -25 Pediatric19 Health Questions  X X X 
Executive function  Pediatric Cognitive Function Short 
Form35 Thinking Questions  X X X 
Parenting monitoring  Parental Monitoring Scale36 How much do your 
parents keep an eye on 
you?  X X X 
PARENT  SURVEY 
Biologic Trust  
 Respiratory sinus arrhythmia13 Not applicable — 
assessment in lab  X X  
Behavioral Trust  Behavioral interaction 
assessment14 Not applicable — 
assessment in lab  X X  
Cognitive Trust  Pare nt Trust of Child Scale —
Parent27 Parent’s Trust of Child 
Questions  X X X 
Relationship quality  Inclusion of Other in Self28 How close are you with 
your teen?  X X X 
Relationship quality                                  Parent -Child Coercion Scale37 Parent -Child 
Communication 
Questions  X 
 X 
 X 
 
Demographics  Demographic questionnaire  Who are you?  X   
Parenting style  Alabama  Parenting Questionnaire -
Shor )38 Parenting Style 
Questions  X X X 
Parent stress  PROMIS Perceived Stress Scale34 Stress Questions  X X X 
General health  PROMIS -2519 General Health 
Questions  X X X 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 11 of 23  
some questions assessing stress and depression. In prior research, we have used these 
measures or similar measures with this adolescent -parent dyad population and found 
that adolescent -parent dyads were comfortable with the interviews. However, all 
participant s will be instructed that they can stop the interview at any time or can choose 
to skip any question that they wish. Our investigators and staff are experienced 
interviewers in research involving adolescent -parent dyads, and we have rarely 
encountered participant  reactions more adverse than transient awkwardness, 
embarrassment, or mild discomfort. If questionnaires indicate symptoms suggestive of 
severe depression or suicidal ideation, the results will be reviewed with Dr. Arin Connell, Ph.D. (co -investigator, licensed clinical psychologist, #6732) who will consult with the 
adolescent and/or parent/guardian to determine whether the adolescent or parent/guardian is in need of a referral for further evaluation and treatment. The nature 
of this study includes adolescents with a diagnosis of depression. If the adolescent 
becomes upset during study procedures, a study research assistant and the participant ’s 
parent will be available to support and comfort the adolescent participant  if needed. The 
adolescent/parent dyad will be given an information sheet with the number of United Way First Call (211) to access on call mental health professional services in their local 
area or Cuyahoga County 24- Hour Mental Health Crisis Information and Referral Hotline 
(216- 623-6888). If the participant  is unable to be comforted by the research assistant or 
the parent and further assistance is required, the Mobile Crisis Team from the Cuyahoga 
County 24 -Hour Mental Health Crisis, Information, and Referral Hotline will be contacted 
immediately.  
d. Cheek swab DNA test :  The cheek swab DNA test is canceled due to COVID -19. The 
cheek swab DNA test includes swabbing the parent and adolescents’ cheek with separate sterile cotton swabs. Participants can remain in the study, but opt out of the 
DNA test, if they choose. Participants will be assured that we will not use the data for 
paternity testing. The sensation of a cotton swab in the mouth may feel uncomfortable 
for some. We will allow participants to swab their own cheek under guidance of study 
staff, if they prefer.  
e. Saliva sample collection: The saliva sample portion of the study  is canceled due to  
COVID -19. Saliva will be collected in a tube to measure salivary oxytocin. Fifteen 
minutes pre/post the dyadic behavioral interaction, measures of salivary oxytocin levels 
of both adolescents and parents will be collected using Salivattes and stored at - 80 
degrees centigrade until processed and analyzed. Study staff will provide guidance to 
participants on how to provide the saliva sample. Spitting into  a tube may be 
uncomfortable  for some participants. Participants can remain in the study, but opt out of 
the salivary sample collection, if they choose. 
f. Behavioral interaction assessment :  The behavioral interaction is currently on pause 
and will only occur following the easing of restrictions associated with the COVID -19 
pandemic . During the behavioral interaction assessment lab visit, adolescents and 
parents are seated facing each other and will first complete a five- minute paced 
breathing task, which serves as a baseline period for  physiological indices, and four 5 
minute discussions tasks on family -related matters. The tasks include discussion of 
family problems, and planning a positive family activity, and have been used in prior trials and shown to relate to emotion self -regulati on capacity and adaptive coping by 
members of our study team.
28,31 Interaction tasks will be digitally recorded using a 
Noldus video capture system. The behavioral interaction assessment may seem 
awkward and uncomfortable to some participants. The paced breathing task and a 
practice discussion question are intended to help participants acclimate to the behavioral 
interaction  assessment. Participants may opt out of the use of audio/video capture of the 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 12 of 23  
interaction. If participants refuse the use of the audio/video recording, study staff will 
make notes of the interaction instead.  
g. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: The RSA is on pause and will only occur following the 
easing of restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic.  Heart rate and 
respiration will be collected simultaneously during the paced breathing and discussion 
tasks, from parent and adolescent, using a Biopac MP150 system and Acqknowledge 
Software.72 To collect heart rate and respiratory rate, we will apply cardiac leads t o the 
bare chest of both parent and adolescent. This may be uncomfortable for some 
participants. To reduce discomfort and maintain privacy, the cardiac leads will be placed 
on the participants in a private room and by a same gendered study staff member, if 
requested.  
h. Intervention group protocol : Due to restrictions associated with the COVID- 19 
pandemic, we will deliver both types of interventions in remote format wherein parents 
and adolescents will review video recordings of the materials, engage in exercises, and 
complete pre - and post -test to ensure engagement. Following the easing of restrictions 
associated with the COVID -19 pandemic, we will resume offering in- person sessions 
with parent -adolescents in groups of approximately five dyads . Each of eight 90 -minute 
weekly sessions of the TRUST intervention will include both a trust -building topic and a 
depression management topic. Trust -building topics include honesty, reliability, and 
emotional connection.8 The honesty portion will include discussion and practice of 
disclosing personal truths and receptivity of others’ disclosures. The reliability portion will 
include discussion and practice of making and keeping promises. The emotional connection portion will include discussion of adolescent -parent similarities and bonding 
activities like hugging and eye contact. The depression management portion will focus on sleep, stress management, medication adherence, and appointment keeping skills. 
The intervention will build depression management knowledge, set  personal and dyad 
goals, and practice self -monitoring. Goal -setting and self -monitoring of progress are also 
forms of making and keeping promises, thus connecting and reinforcing the concepts of trust and depression management techniques. The Depression M anagement  group 
will receive 8 sixty -minute weekly sessions that include the only the depression 
management training (sleep, stress management, medication adherence, appointment 
keeping) described above. Both intervention groups will be led by interventionists with 
health behavior change training.  
The interventionist will have a teaching plan with guidelines on time use for TRUST 
topics. Each session will include a trust -building topic and a depression  management 
topic, a discussion portion and a practice portion.  With the trust building portion, we will 
focus on honesty, reliability, and emotional connection. For example, the Honesty portion will teach adolescent and parent to share personal details about themselves 
without judging one another. Parents often get upset when their adolescent shares personal details with them and then jump to conclusions, judgment, and reprimands, 
which breaks down trust. The intervention will discuss this, then have adolescent -parent 
dyads practice sharing small truths and bei ng receptive to those disclosures. With the 
Reliability portion, we'll discuss that reliability means following through on your word. 
Dyads will make small promises to one another, then try to follow through on keeping the promises in the week between sessions. Emotional Connection is built when each 
person is receptive to disclosures and keeps promises.  
  With the depression self-management portion, we will focus on stress 
management, sleep, medication adherence, and appointment keeping only . We will 
discuss why these topics are important to health and identify ways to improve them. 
Each adolescent -parent dyad will set goals to improve in each of these areas, then 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 13 of 23  
identify a way to do that. For example, with stress management it could be taking a walk 
to de- stress, with sleep it might be giving up screen time one hour before bed. Making 
goals and keeping them is also a form of making promises and keeping them --thus 
connecting and reinforcing the concepts of trust and a healthy lifestyle.  
  We will conduct fidelity monitoring of the intervention groups. Each session of the 
TRUST intervention will be audio- recorded. Half of the sessions will be randomly 
selected for review using an investigator -developed fidelity checklist composed of the 
key elements of the i ntervention 26. Fidelity will be assessed by checking that each of the 
assigned topics from the teaching plan are discussed during the appropriate meetings.  
 
This is a social/behavioral research study. No drugs or devices will be tested as interventions  
with the research participant s. No source records, such as  medical or educational records, will 
be used to collect data about participant s. 
 (4) Study Procedures and Time Requirement:   
  
ClinicalTrials.gov Information  
Has this study been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov?  
☒  Yes.  Provide the following:  
i. The ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:  00220503  
ii. Investigator/sponsor responsible for registering: Heather K. Hardin 
☐  No.  Explain if there are plans to register or why registration is not required. 
 
List of Data to be Colle cted 
1. Indicate what identifiers you will collect  
☒ Name  
☒ Address  
☒ Dates related to an individual (birthdate)  
☒ Telephone number  
☐ Fax number  
☒ Email address    Estimated time requirement  
Study Procedures  Group 1  Group 2  
Prescreening  5 minutes  5 minutes  
Screening  30 minutes  30 minutes  
Study Visit 1 (Baseline)  30 minutes  30 minutes  
Intervention week 1  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 2  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 3  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 4  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 5  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 6  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 7  45 minutes  1 hours  
Intervention week 8  45 minutes  1 hours  
Study Visit 2 (3 months)  30 minutes  30 minutes  
Study Visit 3 (6 months)  30 minutes  30 minutes  
Total  8 hours 5 minutes  10 hours 35 minutes  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 14 of 23  
☐ Social security number  
☐ Medical record number  
☐ Health plan beneficiary number  
☐ Account number  
☐ Certificate/license number  
☐ Any vehicle or other device serial  
☐ Device identifiers or serial numbers  
☐ Web URL  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address  
☒ Finger or voice prints  
☒ Photographic (video) images  
☐ Other: Any characteristic that would uniquely identify the individual  
   
 
Data Analysis Plan  
(1) Statistical Analyses. Each participant  will be assigned a unique identifier for tracking 
purposes and all raw data will be uploaded to the secure database in REDCap. We will explore all variables using descriptive statistics. To address the Aims 1- 2, we will use a linear mixed 
effects model. To address Aim 3, we will apply usual mediation techniques.  
 
Confidentiality of Specimens and Banking  
Salivary specimens and cheek swabs are canceled due to Covid- 19. Specimens collected prior 
to Covid -19 were handled as follows.  Salivary specimens and cheek swabs will be collected and 
banked until full processing can occur. The specimens will be stored in the Frances Payne 
Bolton School of Nursing biomarker laboratory. Specimen testing is funded with internal monies; 
therefore, specimens will not be transferred to other researchers at this time.  
Saliva specimens  will be obtained from each adolescent at baseline and 3- month  data 
collections. The saliva samples will be collected by study personnel and labeled with the 
participant ’s alpha -numeric study identification code. Fifteen minutes pre/post the dyadic 
behavioral interaction assessment, measures of salivary oxytocin  levels of adolescents will be 
collected using SalivaBio passive drool salivary collection kits (Salimetrics LLC, State College, 
PA). Salivary s amples will immediately be placed on ice, trans ported to the laboratory by study 
personnel, and transferred to a locked  -80°C freezer  until processed and analyzed. Time from 
collection to freezing will be less than 1 hour. S alivary specimens will be processed per 
standard operating protocols to minimize non- biological technical bias . Salivary specimens will 
be stored for approximately 1 year, until enough samples have been collected to fill a single assay plate. Only study pers onnel will have access to the specimens. The remainder of the 
specimens will be destroyed after analysis. The salivary oxytocin testing is funded with internal 
funding and will not be transferred to other researchers.  
Cheek swabs obtained by a Registered Nurse research assistant will be collected only a 
single time during the study and will be used for OXTR genotyping. The Registered Nurse 
research assistant will obtain the cheek  swabs, label them with the participant’s alpha- numeric 
study identification code,  transport them to the lab at the Case Western Reserve University 
Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, and preserve them in lysis buffer until DNA extraction. OXTR rs53576 will be genotyped using the TaqMan genotyping platform. The TaqMan 
Genotyping Assay and TaqMan Genotyping Master Mix will be ordered from Thermo Fisher 
Scientific (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, https://www.fishersci.com). Genotyping will 
be performed in a 20 -µl system containing 10 µl of TaqMan Genotyping M aster Mix, 1 µl of 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 15 of 23  
TaqMan Genotyping Assay, and 1 µl genomic DNA using the StepOne Plus real -time PCR 
system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Allele determination will be performed using 
StepOne Plus software v2.3 (Applied Biosystems).  Cheek swab s pecimens will be stored for up 
to 10 years  and may be used for other genetic analyses . The remainder of the specimens will 
be destroyed after 10 years or when they are no longer viable. Only study personnel will have access to the specimens. The OXTR genotyping is funded with internal funding and will not be 
transferred to other researchers. Cheek swabs will be labeled only with study id and date; no 
master list will be made of identities and no attempt will be made to re -identify the specimens.  
 
Are you storing the specimen for future use for other research projects?  
☒ Yes 
☐ No 
  
Confidentiality of Data  
(1) To maintain the confidentiality of the data, I will use a unique study identifier (not derived 
from the participants’ personal identifiers) to code individuals’ data and I will store this ID log separate from study data.   
 (2) How are you storing your electronic data?  
☐ UH Redcap  
☒ CWRU Redcap  
☐ Secure Research Environment (SRE)  
☒ CWRU Box  
☐ OnCore  
☐ UH Secure Network  Drive (S:)  
☐ CWRU Secure Network Drive  
☐ Other :  List storage m ethod and provide justification 
 
 (3) ☒ I acknowledge that paper research data and documents will be stored in a double- 
            locked secure environment in the following location:  
            Location: Locked file cabinet in PI Hardin’s locked research office located in the School  
of Nursing 
 
(4) Data Sharing:  N/A  
 HIPAA Authorization  
If you are going to be accessing PHI (Protected Health Information), indicate how HIPAA 
authorization will be obtained (check all that apply):  
☐ HIPAA authorization is in the consent form  
☐ Requesting a full or partial waiver of HIPAA for prescreening  
☐ Requesting a full or partial waiver of HIPAA  
 (1) We are not collecting data from a covered entity; therefore, HIPAA authorization is not 
necessary.  
(2) Research records will be kept in a locked file and access will be limited to the researchers . In 
addition, research guidelines require that we provide access to regulatory bodies such as the 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 16 of 23  
University IRB, regulatory agencies, and the Center for Reducing on Health Disparities at 
MetroHealth to evaluate the safety of this project . 
(3) Personal identifiers will be kept for 6 years after giving study consent , which is approximately 
5 years after the study ends and data analysis begins.  
 
Risks to Research Participants  
 (1) The level of risk from the proposed trial is no more than encountered in daily life and is 
minimal relative to other clinical trials that test  drugs, devices,  or medical procedures.  Of note, 
we will not be completing  the behavioral interaction, RSA, salivary samples, or cheek swabs  
portions of the study while restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic are in- place . We 
will resume this part of our study when public health recommendations allow for this in- person 
data collection.  There is a small risk of loss of confidentiality by participating in this study. Our 
team takes participant confidentiality serious and implements several safeguards against loss of 
confidentiality. However, it is possible that being seen on campus with members of our team will 
identify participants’ role in the Level Up Study to passersby.   
The risks associated with gathering information from participant s by properly trained and 
supervised research assistants are low.  Participant s may experience discomfort by some 
questions assessing stress and depression. In prior research, we have used these measures or 
similar measures with this adolescent -parent dyad population and found that adolescent -parent 
dyads were comfortable with the interviews. However, all participant s will be instructed that they 
can stop the interview at any time or can choose to skip any question that they wish. Our investigators and staff are experienced interviewers in research involving adolescent -parent 
dyads, and we have rarely encountered participant  reactions more adverse than transient 
awkwardness, embarrassment, or mild discomfort. We are prepared to deal with such events 
and have a protocol that instructs the data collector how to obtain assistance for psy chological 
issues should they arise.  
There is the potential for stigmatization due to depression diagnosis; however, 
measurements are taken in private and all results are reported privately in a sensitive and 
culturally appropriate manner.  The nature of this study includes adolescents with a diagnosis of 
depression. If the adolescent becomes upset during study procedures, a study research assistant and the participant ’s parent will be available to support and comfort the adolescent 
participant  if needed. If questionnaires indicate symptoms suggestive of severe depression or 
suicidal ideation, the results will be reviewed with Dr. Arin Connell, Ph.D. (co- investigator, 
licensed clinical psychologist, #6732) who will consult with the participant to determine w hether 
the participant  is in need of a referral for further evaluation and treatment.  
(2) Although this study is deemed as having minimal risk, we recogniz e there are some 
unanticipated risks . An example on an unanticipated risk is that participants may be 
disappointed with the intervention group to which they are assigned.  
(3) As a social/behavioral intervention study, n o procedure in this study is a risk to an embryo or 
fetus should the research participant may or may become pregnant.   
(4) There are  no known  risks to others who are not research participants.  
(5) Drs. Hardin and Connell  have conducted previous research protocols that involve 
adolescent -parent dyads and have experienced research assistants and established protocols 
for quality assurance, crisis intervention and referral, as well as initial and ongoing staff training. 
The research assistants hired for this project will have prior experience working with adolescent -
parent dyads. If questionnaires indicate symptoms suggestive of severe depression or suicidal ideation, the results will be reviewed with Dr. Arin Connell, Ph.D. (co- investigator, licensed 
clinical psychologist, #6732) who will consult with the youth and/or parent/guardian to determine 
whether the youth or parent/guardian is in need of a referral for further evaluation and treatment.  
 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 17 of 23  
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Research Participants  
To protect participants’ privacy, several measures will be taken. During COVID- 19 data 
collection, adolescents and parents will be encouraged to complete the surveys in private 
spaces. Following the easing of restrictions associated with the COVID -19 pandemic, in- person 
data collection will resume and the following precautions will be taken , All study procedures will 
be carried out in private rooms. As participants are completing questionnaires, study staff will 
remain available for questions, but avoid moving around the room in any way that would allow 
the staff to see the participants’ questionnaire responses. Both parents and adol escents will 
receive separate tablet computers to complete the questionnaires simultaneously, so that 
participants are each engaged with their own questionnaires and promote privacy of the other 
participant. If participants are uncomfortable with the tablet computer, we will make 
arrangements to complete the questionnaires by participant’s choice of interview by study staff 
or by paper and pencil. During the cheek swab, participants will be allowed to swab their own 
mouths with direction from study staff, if the participants’ desire. When placing the heart rate 
monitoring leads on participants’ chests for the respiratory sinus arrhythmia testing, this will be 
done in a private room and by same gendered study staff, if desired by participants. During the behavioral interaction assessment, study staff will remain nearby but step out of the room, in 
order to help adolescent and parent participants’ feel comfortable during the discussion.   
Paper and pencil questionnaire completion will be a rare event. In the event of 
participant’s choice or internet connectivity problems, survey data will be collected through 
paper and pencil surveys. Research staff will be responsible for entering survey data directly into REDCap once internet connectivity has become a non- issue. Paper and pencil surveys will 
be stored in a locked, filing cabinet in PI Hardin’s locked research office. Only key research staff will have access to this office and access to the key to the filing cabinet.  
  Potential Benefit to Research Participants  
Participant s participating in this research may learn new skills for better managing their stress 
and sleep quality; medication adherence and appointment keeping skills may improve their 
health; and trust -building exercises may improve the quality of the adolescent -parent 
relationship.  These improvements may be short -term or long- term changes. We anticipate that 
our findings will demonstrate the linkages between a trust -building behavior change strategy 
and health behavior change that will help adolescents and parents improve their health.  
 Withdrawal of Research Participants  
Research participants will be withdrawn from the intervention without their consent under these 
circumstances:  
1. participant s display disruptive behavior during the group intervention sessions , 
2. evidence of  abuse between parent and adolescent dyad , or 
3. indication that a participant may be a harm to themselves or others .  
 
In the event that participants are removed from the intervention, PI Hardin will notify participants  
of their removal. Participant  dyads will receive a closeout packet, which will contain a list of 
community resources for further depression symptom management treatment. Participants  will 
also receive study personnel contact information to follow up on study outcomes. At this t ime, 
we will also update participant s’ contact information and ask if they are willing to be contacted 
for fu rther study vis its, if appropriate.  
 
Alternatives to Participation  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 18 of 23  
(1) No one will be required to participate in our study. Other available clinical trea ts are 
individual, family, or group therapy . Community self -management treatments available include 
stress management classes, such as yoga .  
(2) Standard of care therapy, including depression medication and counseling, should be 
continued regardless of participation. Self -management treatments are considered adjuvant to 
clinical treatment. We anticipate and encourage our participants to continue standard of care 
therapy.  
(3) Since self -management training is adjuvant to standard of care treatment, another  option is 
to not participate.  
 
Costs to Research Participants  
(1) There are no costs to participation in this study. Our study compensates participants for their 
time and travel costs.  
(2) Participants’ health i nsurance will not be charged for any servi ces provided in this study.  
(3) This study will pay for the costs of transportation to study visits ; cost of group intervention 
sessions  including healthy snacks and small gifts ; time to complete study visits; costs of 
surveys; and costs of respiratory sinus arrhythmia/behavioral interaction  testing.  
 
Research Participant Compensation  
Participation in the study requires time and effort. Because of this, c ompensation for time spent 
completing the study surveys, respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), and behavioral interaction 
assessment will be provided. Each adolescent and parent participant  will receive a $25 gift card 
for completing each structured interview and each behavioral interaction assessment with RSA . 
Thus, adolescent -parent dyad participant s who complete all interviews ($150 total) and undergo 
two behavioral interactions with RSA ($100 total) may receive a total up to $250. This amount is 
consistent with our prev ious work and is not perceived to be coercive by members of the 
community advisory board.  
 During the intervention groups, participants may receive small gifts (each valued at less 
than $15) intended to assist them in meeting intervention goals. Participants may receive small 
gifts such as an eye mask to promote sleep, a 7 -day medication box to promote medication 
adherence, a book about parent/teen communication, and a yoga mat. Healthy snacks will be made available to participants during the group sessions. A schedule of compensation is listed 
below.  
 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 19 of 23  
 
Compensation for Research Related Injury  
Describe who will pay for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in the event of a 
research related injury:  
☐ Funding agency is providing some/all payment for injury  
☒ Funding agency is providing no payment for injury  
☐ Not applicable 
Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure t he Safety of Research Participants  
(1) The data and safety monitoring plan for this study includes an official committee. The 
committee members who are outside the study team will review data on the study as provided 
by Drs. Hardin and Connell  and conduct random auditing of the research records to assess 
study safety and regulatory compliance.  Twice annually throughout the project, this committee 
will review data on this study regarding 1) study safety, including auditing selected cases for 
compliance with IRB requirements, conformance with informed consent requirements, 
verification of source documents, and investigator compliance; 2) minimizing research-associated risk; and 3) protecting the confidentiality of participant data. In addition, it  will review 
all causes of mortality and issues with participation. The rate of recruitment refusal (percent and reasons) and participant  attrition (percent and reasons) will be tracked and reported at these 
reviews. Differential attrition from the intervention arms also will be monitored. If concerns or problems are identified by the  Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) , they will be 
reported to the IRB and the sponsor  via email by Dr. Hardin and Dr.  Douglas , respectively, 
within 3 business days aft er they are identified. If there are recommendations made by the 
DSMC, the action plan for response or notice of any actions taken by the IRB regarding the 
research and any responses to those actions will be provided to sponsor  officials within 2 
weeks.  
 
At the onset and across the duration of the study, all staff and Investigators will have 
instructional review of the nature and types of unanticipated and adverse events as described  Compensation  
Study Procedures  Adolescent  Parent  
Study Vi sit 1 (Baseline)  
  Questionnaires  
  RSA/behavioral interaction  Transportation  (pause d)  
$25 gift card  
$25 gift card  (paused)  Transportation  (paused)  
$25 gift card  
$25 gift card  (paused)  
Intervention week 1  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 2  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 3  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 4  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 5  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 6  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 7  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Intervention week 8  Small gifts  Small gifts  
Study Visit 2 (3 months)  
  Questionnaires  
  RSA/behavioral interaction  Transportation  (paused)  
$25 gift card  
$25 gift card  (paused)  Transportation  (paused)  
$25 gift card  
$25 gift card  (paused)  
Study Visit 3 (6 months)  
  Questionnaires  Transportation  (paused)  
$25 gift card  Transportation  (paused)  
$25 gift card  
Total  $75 gift cards +  small gifts; 
transportation + snacks  
(paused)  $75 gift cards +  small gifts; 
transportation + snacks 
(paused)  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 20 of 23  
by the sponsor  and the CWRU IRB. As they occur, all unanticipated events and adverse events 
will immediately be reported to the PI who will report them to the IRB according to  the IRB 
protocol reporting procedures for both serious and non- serious adverse event and unanticipated 
problem reporting. These will be summarized in the twice annual reports to the DSMC. Annual 
progress reports to the IRB and the sponsor will include a summary of the DSMC’s activities 
and findings as well as any adverse events regarding human participant s. Program Officials of 
the sponsor will be informed in a timely manner (3 business days) of unanticipated problems 
(e.g., a data breach) or unexpected serious adverse events that may be related to the study 
protocol or IRB -approved revisions to the study protocol that indicate a change in risk for 
participants.  
 (2) A Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will be established for this study. This 
DSMC will independent of the study sponsor and will meet every 6 months of the study. Dr. Daly will chair the committee and be responsible to submit reports to the study  sponsor and IRB 
within 2 weeks of the meeting.   DSMC members include:   
Dr. Sara Douglas, an experienced family researcher  (sld4 @case.edu ) 
Dr. Val Toly, an NIH -funded researcher with parent/child dyads ( vab@case.edu) 
Dr. Chris Burant , a statistician not involved with the project ( cxb43@case.edu) 
Dr. Michael Decker, n euroscience of health behavior researcher ( mjd6@case.edu) 
Dr. Heather Hardin, PI (hkh10@case.edu)  
Dr. Arin Connell, Co -I (arin.connell@case.edu) 
 
Community- Based Participatory Research:  N/A  
Non-Local Recruitment Methods for Multi -Site Studies:  N/A 
Multi -Site Research Communication Plan:  N/A  
Drugs or Devices: N/A  
 
1. Mojtabai R, Olfson M, Han B. National Trends in the Prevalence and Treatment 
of Depression in Adolescents and Young Adults. Pediatrics. 2016.  
2. Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, et al. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance - United 
States, 2015. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2016;65(6):1- 174. 
3. Avenevoli S, Swendsen J, He J, Burstein M, Merikangas K. M ajor depression in 
the National Comorbidity Survey -Adolescent Supplement: Prevalence, 
Correlates, and Treatment. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 54(1):37- 44.e32.  
4. Hardin HK, Lee D, Moore SM. Trust of healthcare provider varies by level of depressive symptoms in adolescents. Society of Adolescent Health & Medicine; March 14, 2018, 2018; Seatle, WA.  
5. Hardin HK, McCarthy VL, Speck BJ, Crawford TN. Diminished trust of healthcare providers, risky lifestyle behaviors, and low use of health services: A descriptive study of rural adolescents. The Journal of school nursing : the official publication 
of the National Association of School Nurses. 2017:1059840517725787.  
6. Cleveland Metropolitan School District. Cleveland Metropolitan School District Facts. 2017; http://www.clevelandmetroschools.org/domain/24. 
7. Sandler I, Ingram A, Wolchik S, Tein J, Winslow E. Long- term effects of 
parenting- focused preventive interventions to promote resilience of children and 
adolescents. Child Development Perspectives. 2015;9(3):164- 171. 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 21 of 23  
8. Rotenberg K. Interpersonal Trust Dur ing Childhood and Adolescence.  
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press; 2010.  
9. Fosco GM, Caruthers AS, Dishion TJ. A six -year predictive test of adolescent 
family relationship quality and effortful control pathways to emerging adult social 
and em otional health. Journal of family psychology : JFP : journal of the Division 
of Family Psychology of the American Psychological Association. 2012;26(4):565- 575. 
10. Riedl R, Javor A. The biology of trust:  Integrating evidence from genetics, endocrinology,  and functional brain imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 
Psycholgy, and Economics. 2012;5(2):63- 91. 
11. Thayer JF, Ahs F, Fredrikson M, Sollers JJ, 3rd, Wager TD. A meta- analysis of 
heart rate variability and neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate variability as a marker of stress and health. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012;36(2):747- 756. 
12. Porges S W. The polyvagal perspective. Biol Psychol. 2007;74(2):116- 143. 
13. Connell AM, McKillop H, Patton E, Klostermann S, Hughes -Scalise A. Actor –
partner model of physiology, negative affect, and depressive symptoms in mother –child dyadic interactions. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 
2015;32(8):1012- 1033.  
14. Jabson J, Venkaraman S, Dishion TJ. The Simple Affect Coding System. Eugene, OR: Child & Family Center; 2003.  
15. Connell AM, Patton E, Klostermann S, Hughes -Scalise A. Attention bias in youth : 
associations with youth and mother's depressive symptoms moderated by emotion regulation and affective dynamics during family interactions. Cogn Emot. 
2013;27(8):1522- 1534.  
16. Connell AM, Hughes -Scalise A, Klostermann S, Azem T. Maternal depression 
and the heart of parenting: respiratory sinus arrhythmia and affective dynamics 
during parent -adolescent interactions. Journal of family psychology : JFP : 
journal of the Division of Family Psychology of the American Psychological Association (Division 43). 20 11;25(5):653- 662. 
17. McCraty R, Zayas MA. Cardiac coherence, self -regulation, autonomic stability, 
and psychosocial well -being. Front Psychol. 2014;5:1090.  
18. Hertzog MA. Considerations in determining sample size for pilot studies. 
Research in nursing & health. 2008;31(2):180 -191. 
19. Irwin DE, Stucky B, Langer MM, et al. An item response analysis of the pediatric 
PROMIS anxiety and depressive symptoms scales. Qual Life Res. 2010;19(4):595- 607. 
20. Faulstich ME, Carey MP, Ruggiero L, Enyart P, Gresham F. Assessment of depression in childhood and adolescence: an evaluation of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (CES -DC). Am J 
Psychiatry. 1986;143(8):1024- 1027.  
21. Patrick DL, Edwards TC, Topolski TD. Adolescent quality of life, Part II: initial validation of a new instrument. Journal of Adolescence. 2002;25(3):287- 300. 
22. Meltzer LJ, Brimeyer C, Russell K, et al. The Children's Report of Sleep Patterns: validity an d reliability of the Sleep Hygiene Index and Sleep Disturbance Scale in 
adolescents. Sleep medicine. 2014;15(12):1500- 1507.  
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 22 of 23  
23. Gillis AJ. The Adolescent Lifestyle Questionnaire: Development and 
psychometric testing. The Canadian journal of nursing researc h = Revue 
canadienne de recherche en sciences infirmieres. 1997;29(1):29- 46. 
24. Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent and predictive validity of a self -
reported measure of medication adherence. Med Care. 1986;24(1):67- 74. 
25. Kim MT, Hill MN, Bone L R, Levine DM. Development and testing of the Hill -Bone 
Compliance to High Blood Pressure Therapy Scale. Progress in cardiovascular nursing. 2000;15(3):90 -96. 
26. Rotenberg KJ, Fox D, Green S, et al. Construction and validation of a children's interpersonal  trust beliefs scale. British Journal of Developmental Psychology. 
2005;23(2):271- 293. 
27. Kerr M, Stattin H, Trost K. To know you is to trust you: Parents' trust is rooted in child disclosure of information. Journal of Adolescence. 1999;22(6):737- 752. 
28. Aron A, Aron EN, Smollan D. Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 1992;63(4):596- 612. 
29. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measur es 
of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 1988;54(6):1063- 1070.  
30. Fok CCT, Allen J, Henry D, People Awakening T. The Brief Family Relationship Scale: A Brief Measure of the Relationship Dimension in Family Functioning. Assessment. 2014;21(1):67- 72. 
31. Weintraub S, Bauer PJ, Zelazo PD, et al. NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery: Introduction and pediatric data. Monographs of the Society of Research in Child Development. 2013;78(4):1- 15. 
32. Abela JRZ, Br ozina K, Haigh EP. An Examination of the Response Styles Theory 
of Depression in Third-  and Seventh- Grade Children: A Short -Term Longitudinal 
Study. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology. 2002;30(5):515- 527. 
33. Fresco DM, Moore MT, van Dulmen MH, et al. Initial psychometric properties of the experiences questionnaire: validation of a self -report measure of decentering. 
Behav Ther. 2007;38(3):234- 246. 
34. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of health and social be havior. 1983;24(4):385- 396. 
35. Lai J, Nowinski C, Victorson D, et al. Quality -of-life measures in children with 
neurological conditions: Pediatric Neuro- QOL. Neurorehabilitation and Neural 
Repair. 2012;26(1):36- 47. 
36. Li X, Stanton B, Feigelman S. Impact  of perceived parental monitoring on 
adolescent risk behavior over 4 years. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2000;27(1):49- 56. 
37. Repetti RL, Taylor SE, Seeman TE. Risky families: family social environments and the mental and physical health of offspring. Ps ychological bulletin. 
2002;128(2):330- 366. 
38. Elgar FJ, Waschbusch DA, Dadds MR, Sigvaldason N. Development and Validation of a Short Form of the Alabama Parenting Questionnaire. Journal of 
child and family studies. 2007;16(2):243- 259. 
 HRP -503BIO  Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  1/23/2018  Prior Version:   
 
  Page 23 of 23  
39. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fi delity in health 
behavior change studies: best practices and recommendations from the NIH 
Behavior Change Consortium. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association. 2004;23(5):443- 451. 
40. Biopac Systems. Acqknowledge Software. 2016.  
41. Preacher KJ, Kelley K. Effect size measures for mediation models: quantitative strategies for communicating indirect effects. Psychol Methods. 2011;16(2):93-
115.  
42.  U.S. Health & Human Services Office for  Human Research Protections. (2020 a). 
New Information Provided to Previously Enrolled Research Subjects.  
https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/sachrp- committee/recommendations/april -7-2020-
attachment -a/index.html   
43.  CWRU IRB Guidance. (11/2020). Informed consent: Re- obtaining consent of 
subjects. https://case.edu/research/faculty -staff/compliance/institutional -review -
board- cwru -irb/cwru -guidance  
44.  U.S. Health & Human Services Office for Human Research Protections. (2020 b). 
Re-consent Appendix 2:  Additional information scenarios and suggested 
options. https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/sachrp -committee/recommendations/april -7-
2020- attachment -a2-reconsent -appendix -2/index.html   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 