Protocol Page
Molecular targeting  of 15-LOX-1 for apoptosis induction in human colorectal  tumors
DM02-592
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title Molecular targeting of 15-LOX-1 for apoptosis induction in 
human colorectal cancers
Study Chair: Imad Shureiqi
Additional Contact:Diane M. Weber
Jennifer L. Guerra
Valerie Sepeda
Additional Memo Recipients: Recipients List
OPR Recipients (for OPR use only)
None
Study Staff Recipients
None
Department:Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology
Phone:713-745-4929
Unit:CLINICAL CANCER PREVENTION
Study Co-Chair(s):Robert S. Bresalier
Patrick Lynch
Study Manager: Jennifer L. Guerra
Full Title:  Molecular targeting of 15-LOX-1 for apoptosis induction in 
human colorectal tumors
Public Description: This study test the mechanisms by which celecoxib could 
prevent colon  cancer
Protocol Type:Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: Activated -- Closed to new patient entry as of 09/08/2019
Version: 28
Document Status:Saved as "Final"
Submitted by: Jennifer L. Guerra--8/28/2019  10:54:20  AM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Elaine  Kramer -- 8/29/2019 6:21:55 PM
Which Committee  will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research  Committee - (CRC)
Protocol Body
1.0 Objectives
To determine whether celecoxib  downregulates  GATA-6 expression to  upregulate (15-lipoxygenase-1) 15-lox-1 expression, 
downregulate PPAR-delta (PPAR-d), and induce apoptosis in human  rectal cancers.  The current clinical  study  will measure 
GATA-6, PPAR-d, 15-LOX-1 expression, 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic (13-S-HODE) levels, and apoptosis rates  in paired 
normal and colorectal polyp epithelial tissues  before and after  6 months  of celecoxib treatment of patients with familial  
adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
2.0 Background
2.1.0 Colorectal Cancer as a Chemoprevention Target  
Colorectal  cancer is the second  leading cause of cancer deaths in the United  States  (1).  New strategies  to prevent  and treat 
colorectal cancers are therefore needed.  Chemoprevention is one promising  approach because it focuses on treating  cancers 
at earlier stages to prevent them from becoming incurable.  Colorectal cancer is a primary  candidate  as a target for developing 
chemopreventive agents because this disease  is common and develops through  a protracted, multistep  process that allows 
targeting earlier stages  for successful preventive interventions.  Indeed,  preclinical and early clinical studies suggest that this 
approach is quite feasible  (2).  NSAIDs are a very promising class of  chemopreventive agents in colorectal cancers, as shown  in 
epidemiologic, preclinical, and clinical studies (3).  Nevertheless,  the current  estimate of the possible efficacy rate  of NSAIDs as 
chemopreventive agents in the general population is 50% or less (2,3),  so further improvement  is needed.   In addition, the 
molecular mechanisms  through which NSAIDs exert their chemopreventive  effects have  yet to be fully defined (3).  Identification 
of crucial  molecular mechanisms for colonic tumorigenesis is  important  not only to better understand the mechanisms that  
underlie the chemopreventive activity of currently known agents,  but more so to develop better molecularly  targeted 
interventions.
2.2.0 Colorectal Chemoprevention by NSAIDs
NSAIDs act as chemopreventive agents against colorectal cancers in various  experimental  models (3).  Furthermore,  in 
clinical trials, sulindac and, more  recently,  celecoxib have suppressed the formation of adenomas in patients with familial 
Adenomatous polyposis syndrome (4,5).  NSAIDs initially were considered to act by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis; however, 
the role of prostaglandin synthesis inhibition as a basic  mechanism for the chemopreventive effects of NSAIDs has been 
questioned (3).  Apoptosis is diminished  in human cancers; and reestablishment of apoptosis is being targeted as a mechanism 
for treating tumorigenesis (6).  NSAIDs  induce  apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells independently  of COX inhibition (7,8).  Thus,  
COX-independent mechanisms for the chemopreventive effects  of NSAIDs  are being  explored.  One of these possible  
mechanisms is the NSAIDs’ ability  to modulate lipoxygenases (LOXs),  a class of enzymes involved in polyunsaturated fatty acid 
metabolism.  Like COXs, LOXs metabolize  polyunsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonic  acid to various biologically  active 
metabolites (e.g., hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids:  5-, 8-, 12-, and 15-S-HETE) (9).  LOX metabolism and products  are 
predominant in colonic epithelia compared with products of COX metabolism (10).  This further suggests the importance of 
LOXs in colonic tumorigenesis.   Indeed, several LOX  metabolites of arachidonic acid, such as 12-HETE and LTB4, promote 
tumorigenesis (11,12).  Like arachidonic  acid,  linoleic acid is another  n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid that forms biologically active  
products through oxidative  metabolism.   Furthermore,  in human  diets, the main form of n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake is 
linoleic acid (13).  Linoleic acid metabolism  in relation  to colonic carcinogenesis and chemoprevention has not received attention 
until recently (14).
2.3.0 Linoleic Acid,  13-S-HODE, and Colonic Carcinogenesis
Whereas  arachidonic  acid has multiple  oxidative metabolic pathways  in humans,  linoleic acid is mainly limited to the 15-
LOX-1 pathway, which produces 13-S-HODE (15,16).  Several lines  of evidence indicate  that 13-S-HODE  suppresses cellular 
proliferation and induces apoptosis  (14).  (a) We have found that 13-S-HODE  levels and 15-LOX-1 expression were  reduced in 
human colorectal cancers,  and 13-S-HODE induced  apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in  transformed colonic cells (17).  (b) 
Similarly, 15-LOX-1 is downregulated in human  esophageal cancers (18).  (c) Human osteosarcoma cells transfected with  
human 15-LOX-1 grow  more than 50% slower  with enzymatically  active expression of 15-LOX-1  (19).  Cell growth rates 
approach that observed in nonexpressing  clones when 15-LOX-1 expression is lost. (d)  The immediate and transient  precursor  
of 13-S -HODE, 13-hydroxyperoxyoctadecadienoic acid, induces  apoptosis  in human  T cells (20).  (e) Induction of differentiation 
in transformed  Caco-2  colonic cells and human tracheobronchial epithelial cells causes the expression of 15-LOX-1  in these 
cells, which is associated with the conversion of linoleic acid to 13- S-HODE  (21,22).   (f) Various  histone deacetylase  inhibitors,  
a class of putative  antitumorigenic agents that is currently under  extensive investigation  (23), including  trichostatin  A and HC 
toxin, induce 15-LOX-1 expression in human  colon cancer cell lines  (24).  (g) More recently,  studies of skin tumorigenesis in a 
transgenic mouse model of epidermis-type 12-S-LOX indicated that 13-S-HODE production is  associated with antitumorigenic 
effects (25).  Thus, 13-S-HODE has antitumorigenic  effects,  and linoleic acid might  promote colonic carcinogenesis through its 
conversion to arachidonic acid to from protumorigenic products (14).  This concept is further  supported by the finding that 
linoleic acid inhibits rather  than promotes carcinogenesis in a mouse-skin tumorigenesis model (26) wherein linoleic  acid is not 
converted into arachidonic acid but is converted into  13-S-HODE (27).
2.4.0. NSAID,  upregulation  of 15-LOX-1,  and apoptosis
NSAIDs’ ability  to induce  apoptosis  in colorectal cancer cells plays an essential role in  NSAID chemoprotective  effects  (7-
8).  Based  on our earlier findings that 15-LOX-1  downregulation in colorectal cancer cells is linked to apoptosis loss  in cancer  
cells, we evaluated whether NSAIDs restore  15-LOX-1 expression  in colorectal cancer cell to induce apoptosis.  We have found 
that in colorectal cancer cells, NSAIDs upregulated 15-LOX-1 expression  and increased  13-S-HODE production during 
apoptosis induction and that these  events were critical  to the NSAIDs’ ability to induce  apoptosis (18,28,29).   These findings  
were also confirmed  in vivo study  using xenograft models (Preliminary  Data, Fig. 2 Appendix K).  NSAIDs’  induction  of 
apoptosis through restoring 15-LOX-1  expression is not limited  to colorectal carcinomas.  Similar to what  we had observed in 
colorectal cancers, NSAIDs restore 15-LOX-1  expression to  induce apoptosis in human esophageal carcinomas (18).  Next, we 
found that NSAIDs restored 15-LOX-1  expression and  induced apoptosis  independently of  COX-2 inhibition (29).  We therefore 
examined whether NSAIDs upregulate 15-LOX-1 expression by directly modulating 15-LOX-1 expression regulation rather than 
through a substrate shift by inhibiting COX-2.  Indeed, we found that  NSAIDs upregulate 15-LOX-1 by modulating the 
transcriptional regulation of this enzyme (30).  We next searched  for candidate transcriptional  factors that are involved in 
transcriptional regulation of 15-LOX-1.
2.5.0 GATA-6 and Regulation of 15-LOX-1 Expression in Colorectal Cancers
The GATAs  are a family  of six transcriptional  regulation proteins.  GATA-4, -5, and -6 are expressed  in overlapping patterns 
during the development of endoderm-derived  organs such as the intestine (31).  In the intestinal  crypt, GATA-6 expression is 
higher in the proliferating region than in the tips of the intestinal  villi, where cells undergo differentiation and apoptosis 
(32).  GATA-6 is also highly expressed in gastric, colonic,  pancreatic, and  prostatic cancer cell lines (33).  Furthermore, induced  
terminal differentiation downregulates GATA-6 expression  (32,34).  We examined the effects of NSAIDs on the transcriptional 
regulation by GATA-6  of 15-LOX-1 expression  after we had found that NSAIDs  alter 15-LOX-1  expression at the transcriptional 
level (30).  NSAIDs downregulated GATA-6 in a time-dependent  manner  in colorectal cancer cells,  which preceded the 
upregulation of 15-LOX-1 that occurred at 24 hours  (30).  Ectopic GATA-6  overexpression blocked both  15-LOX-1 upregulation 
and apoptosis induction by NSAIDs (30), findings that indicate that GATA-6 plays  an important role in regulating apoptosis 
through suppression  of 15-LOX-1 transcription.   Furthermore,  we have recently  found that GATA-6 is overexpressed  in 
colorectal cancer epithelial tissues  compared  to paired normal  epithelial tissues  (preliminary data, Appendix K, Fig  3).  All this 
evidence indicates  that in colorectal  cancer  cells, GATA-6 has  negative  regulatory effects on differentiation and apoptosis  by 
suppressing 15-LOX-1 expression and that NSAID downregulation  of GATA-6  allows  for 15-LOX-1  expression and restoration 
of apoptosis.  The contribution of these events (i.e., NSAID downregulation of GATA-6 and subsequent upregulation  of 15-LOX-
1 expression) to the NSAIDs’ induction of apoptosis in patients with colorectal cancers  remains to be defined.  Thus,  our current  
proposed protocol aims to  answer these  questions by testing the following  hypothesis in a clinical  study:  NSAIDs downregulate  
GATA-6 expression to restore 15-LOX-1 expression, which  increases 13-S-HODE  production, thereby inducing apoptosis in 
human colorectal tumors.
2.6.0  PPAR-, Colorectal  Tumorigenesis, and NSAIDs’ Chemopreventive Effects
 PPARs act as nuclear  receptors for polyunsaturated fatty acids (arachidonic and linoleic acids)  and their metabolites 
(1).  PPAR- appears to contribute to colonic tumorigenesis and the chemopreventive response to NSAIDs,  although the role of 
PPAR-d is currently considered controversial, on the basis of preclinical  data.  PPAR-d is overexpressed in human  colorectal 
cancers (2), PPAR-d knock-out profoundly suppresses tumorigenesis in xenografts of HCT-116 colon cancer cells  in vivo (3), 
NSAIDs suppress  PPAR-d activity  in colorectal cancer cells to induce apoptosis  in vitro (4), and PPAR- knock-out  in mice 
attenuates sulindac’s  chemopreventive effects  (5).  The role of PPAR-d in colon  tumorigenesis  was questioned when  PPAR-d 
knock- out in the Min mouse failed  to show effects on intestinal tumorigenesis  (6) and when high concentrations of sulindac 
sulfide ( 80 M) inhibited  growth of PPAR-–null HCT-116 cells in vitro (3).  We examined this relationship between NSAIDs’ 
chemopreventive effects and PPAR-d further after finding  that 13-S-HODE’s binding to PPAR-d  suppresses PPAR-d activity 
and expression (7).  NSAIDs’ induced expression of 15-LOX-1 downregulated PPAR-d in vitro and in  vivo, and apoptosis 
induction and growth  inhibition by celecoxib  were significantly decreased in PPAR-null cells, thus indicating that  PPAR- is an 
important signaling receptor involved  with NSAID-induced apoptosis  (7).  A more recent study demonstrated that a PPAR- 
agonist promoted intestinal tumorigenesis  in Min mice (8), whereas  another study in those mice showed that PPAR- knock-out 
promoted polyp  formation (9).  Thus, the preclinical  data are conflicting in terms of the role played by PPAR-, especially in the 
setting of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene  mutation.  Previous data have shown  that PPAR- is upregulated in 
human colorectal cancers,  but the role of PPAR- in human colorectal tumorigenesis remains unknown, especially in FAP 
patients with the APC mutation, which  is simulated by the Min mouse  model.  Because animal models have limitations in 
simulating human  tumorigenesis  (10), clinical  studies are needed to define  the role of  PPAR- in human colorectal 
tumorigenesis.  We therefore  propose, in this application, to examine whether  the expression of  PPAR- differs between polyp 
and normal tissues  in patients with FAP and whether celecoxib modulates  PPAR- expression in humans.
2.7.0 Rationale of the experimental  design
The current proposal will explore the mechanistic role of GATA-6 and  15-LOX-1 in the apoptotic response to  NSAIDs in  the 
clinic.  NSAIDs are a very promising class of chemopreventive agents,  but the mechanisms of their chemopreventive effects  
remain unclearly defined.  Defining  these chemopreventive  mechanisms is  important not only to  understand how  NSAID works, 
but more  so to identify  molecular targets that can be used to develop better  antitumorigenic agents against colorectal 
cancer.  Loss of apoptosis is an important mechanistic event  for human  tumorigenesis development, and NSAIDs,  like other 
antitumorigenic agents, exert their antitumorigenic effect through  reestablishment  of apoptosis.   Our preclinical data have 
indicated that NSAIDs  induce apoptosis through downregulation of GATA-6 to transcriptionally upregulate 15-LOX-1 
expression.  Validation of 15-LOX-1 as a molecular target for therapeutic  induction of apoptosis in clinical  studies is needed  
because of the differences between preclinical and clinical models and  to establish its clinical importance as a molecular target  
for further  drug development.   We have selected celecoxib  for testing  in the current clinical  study because celecoxib  is a 
promising chemopreventive, as shown in preclinical models and in a clinical study of patients with FAP (5) and because we 
found in preliminary  laboratory studies that celecoxib restored 15-LOX-1 expression  to induce  apoptosis at a markedly  lower  
concentration than did other NSAIDs and that in a xenograft  model, celecoxib’s  growth-inhibitory  effects were dependent  on 15-
LOX-1 expression (preliminary  data, appendix K, Figs. 1 and 2).  The dosage  selected for  this study has been shown in a prior 
clinical study to have  chemopreventive effects (5).  Duration of the treatment was selected based on prior clinical study of FAP 
patients (5).  The study will be limited to patients with FAP.  FAP patients were selected  because: a) Celecoxib in the dose 
selected for the study has been previously shown in a randomized  trial to reduce polyp formation in FAP patients; and b) FAP 
patients have large numbers of polyps  that require repeated  surveillance colonoscopies during which biopsies  can be obtained. 
  15-LOX-1 and GATA-6 will be measured  using both Western blotting and immunohistochemical 
methods.  Immunohistochemistry  will help localize the expression  to the epithelial tissue  levels.  The study will also  provide data  
on the role played by PPAR-d in colonic tumorigenesis.  This role has been difficult to understand because of conflicting 
preclinical data (section  2.6.0).   13-S -HODE is the primary  product of 15-LOX-1, and the measurement of 13-S-HODE 
intracellular levels assesses 15-LOX-1 enzymatic activity.  In contrast to the semiquantitative  measurements of 15-LOX-1, 
PPAR-d and GATA-6 expression  (Western blotting and immunohistochemistry), 13-S-HODE intracellular levels can be 
measured in human  colonic epithelial tissues  using  a quantitative and reliable assay (17).  We have therefore selected 13-S -
HODE as the primary outcome variable.  GATA-6 and 15-LOX-1 expression levels  and apoptosis rates (TUNEL and activated 
caspase-3 assays) will be the co-primary outcome measures.   COX-2  expression  (western blotting  assay) and PGE2  levels 
[enzyme immunoassay (EIA) method] will be the secondary outcome variables to further examine relationship  to 15-LOX-1 
signaling pathway  in-vivo.
3.0 SUMMARY OF STUDY PLAN
Design: Phase  II study of 15-lox-1  molecular targeting by celecoxib  in patients  who have  FAP.
Study Cohort: Patients with FAP that can be accessed endoscopically for tissue biopsies.
Study Drug: Celecoxib  400 mg po bid X 6 months.
Primary endpoints: 13-S-HODE, 15-LOX-1, GATA-6, PPAR-d, and apoptosis  levels
Secondary endpoints: PGE2 and COX-2 expression levels  
Duration of treatment: 6 months
Follow-up: Patients will be contacted by phone 72 hours after  the first  dose  and every 2 weeks  (+/- three days) for 6 months 
thereafter for toxicity assessment.   
Sample size: 40 patients
Duration of the study: It is expected that accrual will be completed within 40  months from the date of the protocol modification 
and samples analyses will be finished  by 48 months from that date.
4.0 STUDY SCHEMA
Pretreatment history and physical 
Registration:  Subjects will complete medication  (Appendix G), demographic (Appendix E), and dietary food  questionnaire 
(Appendix II) forms.
Colonoscopy -   A total of 23 specimens will be obtained during each  endoscopic procedure.   One  or two forceps  biopsy 
specimens will be obtained from 10–20 separate polyps (the total number  of colonic polyps  sampled will be 20).  The  polyps 
with be sampled in a fashion that is representative of  the size  of the polyp population.  Three additional specimens  will be 
obtained from normal-appearing  colonic  mucosa.   Small  area with high density of colon or rectal polyps will be marked with 
India-ink tattoo.    Colonoscopies will be videotaped.      
Celecoxib 400 mg po bid x 6 months
History and physical for toxicity  assessment
Repeat colonscopy  and biopsies (20 biopsies from polyps, 3 from normal  mucosa)
Videotape colonscopy with picture of previously  tattooed area to assess the response  to treatment.  
Celecoxib serum  levels before celecoxib treatment begins and again at  the end of months 2,  4, and 6 (+/-  seven days) of  
celecoxib treatment
5.0 ELIGIBILITY AND EXCLUSION  CRITERIA
5.1.0 Eligibility
5.1.1 Diagnosis of familial adenomatous  polyposis (patients should have colorectal remnant that can be 
biopsied.  Patients who had total colorectal surgical resection are not eligible).
5.1.2 Adequate bone marrow function  (ANC > 1500 ml, platelet count > 100,000/ml). Serum creatinine, total bilirubin, 
and ALT < 1.5 upper limit normal.
5.1.3 Age of 16 or older.
5.1.4 Patient is able to give an informed  consent.
5.1.5 Women of childbearing  potential (women are considered  to be of childbearing potential unless  they are at 2 or 
more years  post-menopausal/or surgically sterile), must:
a.Not be pregnant or lactating   
b.Use adequate contraceptive measures  (e.g. abstinence,  IUD, birth  control pills, Depo-Provera or diaphragm or 
condom with spermicidal gel) starting  with last menses and throughout the study duration.
c.Have a negative serum pregnancy test within 14  days of starting celecoxib.   
5.2.0 Exclusion criteria
5.2.1 Inflammatory bowel disease.
5.2.2 Intake  of anti-inflammatory medications (e.g. non-steroidal, aspirin, and  sulfasalazine) that can not be discontinued 
starting 3 days prior to the enrollment.
5.2.3 Chemotherapy or radiation therapy  in less than three month  from the time of the enrollment.
5.2.4 Individual  who are taking Coumadin that can not be discontinued starting 7 days prior to the enrollment.
5.2.5 Individuals  who have  received an investigational chemopreventive  agent during the month prior  to the biopsies.
5.2.6 History of bleeding diathesis
5.2.7    History of sulfonamides (sulfa) allergies
5.2.8    History of cardiovascular  diseases that might include the following:  myocardial infraction, angina, coronary angioplasty,  
congestive heart failure, stroke,  or coronary bypass surgery.   
5.2.9    Uncontrolled hypertension (>135/>85  mm Hg) on  three repeated measurements during the 6 weeks  prior to enrollment 
on the study
5.2.10   Diagnosis of Diabetes 
5.2.11    Cigarette smoking  within the six months prior to the date of enrollment.
5.2.12   Uncontrolled  hypercholesteremia (low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) > 130).   Hypercholesteremia needs to be 
controlled following the updated National Cholesterol Education  Program Adult Treatment  Panel III Guidelines (appendix  OO) 
for at least 3 months prior to enrollment  on the study.  Hypercholesteremia treatment needs  to be continued during the 
enrollment on the protocol
5.2.13    Family  history of premature  coronary disease (i.e. onset <55 years  of age)
5.2.14    Metabolic syndrome diagnosis in patients who are 30 years  or older.  (The diagnosis  of metabolic syndrome is made 
when three or more of these risk factors  are present):
a. Waist circumference: Men >102  cm (>40 in); Women >88 cm (>35 in).
b. Triglycerides =150 mg/dl  (=1.69 mmol/L)
c. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C): Men  <40 mg/dl  (<1.03 mmol/L),  Women  <50 mg/dl (<1.29 mmol/L)
                  d.   Blood  pressure =130/=85 mm Hg
                  e.   Fasting  glucose =110 mg/dl (=6.1 mmol/L)
  5.2.15   History of deep  venous  thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, systemic lupus erythematous, family history of protein  S or 
C deficiencies  or prior heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
6.0 DRUG INFORMATION
6.1.0  Name and dose of study drug: celecoxib 400 mg po bid X 6 months.
6.2.0 Formulation:  Celecoxib is a diarly  substituted pyrazole  and chemically designated as 4-[5-(4-methylphenyl)-
3(trifluoromethyl)-1H-pyraxol-1yl] benzene sulfonamide.   Celecoxib molecular  Formula is C17H14F3N3O2S. Celecoxib is 
supplied in hard, opaque, gelatin  capsule(s) in either 200mg  or 400 mg dose.   
6.3.0 Administration: the drug will be taken orally at a dose of 400 mg (either two 200mg or one 400 mg  capsule) with meals 
twice a day (morning and evening).  
6.4.0 Source of the drug: Celecoxib  is available  by prescription from the Investigational Pharmacy at  MDACC.
6.5.0 Packaging: The drug will be provided by prescription usually with one month supply with 6 refills.  
6.6.0 Storage: The study drug will be stored at room temperature in a locked  cabinet with  restricted access.  The  medication 
supply will be protected from environmental extreme exposure.  
6.7.0 Adherence monitoring: Adherence will be assessed by pill diary  (Appendix L) and  celecoxib serum level (measured before  
the treatment and at the end of months  2, 4, and 6 (+/- seven days)  of celecoxib treatment).  Celecoxib serum  level will be 
measured as a send-out test through MD Anderson laboratory to  Quest Diagnostics.
7.0 CLINICAL  STUDY PLAN
7.1.0 Subject  Recruitment  
The study subjects  will be selected from patients with a confirmed diagnosis of FAP who are will be undergoing  celecoxib 
treatment and followed at MD Anderson Cancer  Center.
7.2. 0 Pretreatment Evaluation
7.2.1 Pretreatment history (including medication history especially  NSAID use) and physical  examination will be 
performed.  Physical examination should include  heart, lung, and extremity  examination.  Study subjects are specifically 
asked regarding cardiovascular  events (myocardial infarction, angina, stroke,  arrhythmia or congestive heart failure)  and 
cardiac symptoms (chest  pain,  palpitation, dyspnea, or edema).
7.2.2 Laboratory evaluation: fasting blood glucose and lipid profile (cholesterol, LDL, HDL      and triglyceride).  CBC, 
creatinine, bilirubin, and ALT.   
7.2.3 Serum pregnancy  test for women of childbearing age. 
7.2.4 Pretreatment history, physical, and laboratory data are acceptable within 35 days prior to start of protocol 
therapy (celecoxib).
7.3.0 Enrollment on the study
The informed consent will be reviewed  and discussed with subjects who are approached  for enrollment on the study.  A 
potential study  candidate who is interested in enrollment can be provided with a copy of the informed consent to review at 
home.  If after returning home,  a potential study candidate  expresses interest  in enrolling in the study but is unable  to be 
physically present at MD Anderson at the time of signing  the informed  consent due to physical distance,  he or she may fax the 
signed consent form to a clinical study  investigator and mail the original at the same time.  The subject will be enrolled  on the 
study once a clinical study investigator has signed the informed consent.   In adddition, before the patient starts his  or her colonic 
procedure the patient will then be re-consented by the clinical study  investigator.  After  signing an informed consent,  each 
subject will complete  a demographic data forms including  the following  information: Age, Sex, diagnosis, registration number, 
telephone number and address.  Subjects will also complete questionnaires  regarding medications, vitamins, dietary food 
questionnaire, and  nutritional supplements (Appendix H). The original copy of the consent form will be filed in the patient’s 
medical records.  A copy of the consent will be kept in the patient’s study file, and a second  copy will be given  to the patient.   In 
the event  that the patient has an opportunity to qualify for other research studies,  the patient may sign up two different  
consents.  Once the patient  is determined non-evaluable during the initial colonic procedure (having less than 20 polyps),  the 
patient will be enrolled on an alternative  research  study that  require the patient to have less than 20 polyps on their initial 
colonoscopy.
7.4.0 Celecoxib  administration
  Following  the initial colonoscopy procedure, subject will start celecoxib at a dose of 400 mg po bid with meals.   Celecoxib 
treatment will be continued for 6 months.  
7.5.0 Sampling procedure during  colonoscopies
A study  investigator with clinical  privileges to perform  gastrointestinal  endoscopic procedures will obtain a total of 23 
specimens during  each endoscopic procedure before celecoxib therapy  starts and after 6 months of treatment.   One or two 
forceps biopsy specimens will be obtained from 10–20 separate polyps (the total number  of colonic polyps sampled will be 
20).  The polyps  with be sampled  in a fashion  that is representative of the size of the polyp population.  Three additional 
specimens will be obtained from normal-appearing colonic mucosa.  If colorectal mucosa is carpeted with polyps, indigo 
carmine will be used to distinguish normal  from adenomatous mucosa.  
7.6.0 Sample  handling, size of biopsy samples, assay  needs,  allocation and  prioritization 
Each specimen obtained via the biopsy forceps  tissue collection  procedure will weigh  approximately 5 mg and contain at 
least 400 µg of protein.   When  the tissue  is homogenized, a single biopsy  specimen  has been sufficient for performing 
three immunoassays in triplicate or for three or more Western  blot analyses.  We will use Tissue-Tek®  OTC compound 
(Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA) for embedding tissue samples  for freezing.  In our prior studies,  we successfully used 
such frozen colonic tissues  for various  assays, including 13-S-HODE immunoassays and 15-LOX-1 Western blotting 
(11).  Polyp tissue biopsy samples will be handled in the following order:   10 specimens  for each assay will be frozen in 
OTC and processed for immunohistochemistry and 13-S-HODE  enzyme immunoassay  (EIA); 10  specimens for each 
assay will be frozen  in liquid nitrogen  and processed for 15-LOX-1, GATA-6,  and PPAR-  Western blotting.  For normal 
tissues, one specimen for each  assay will be frozen in OTC  and processed for immunohistochemistry  and 13-S-HODE 
EIA, and one specimen  for each  assay will be frozen in liquid  nitrogen  and processed for 15-LOX-1, GATA-6, and PPAR- 
Western blotting.  Biopsy samples from the normal and polyp sites will placed  in RNAlater (Ambion, Austin,  TX) and then  
frozen for 15-LOX-1,  PPAR-d, GATA-6, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene-1 (NAG-1) mRNA  
expression studies by quantitative real time PCR  analyses.  Tissues to  be frozen will be placed immediately (within  15 
seconds) in OTC or liquid nitrogen and stored at –80C until use, when  they will be transferred on  dry ice to the Clinical 
Cancer Prevention laboratories.
7.7.0.  Sample  Tracking, Storage, and Analyses:   
All tissue samples  will be logged into a computer tracking system as described in the Data Management section.  Samples 
will be transferred to the Clinical  Cancer  Prevention laboratories in the Naomi building (NA01.041) where  they will be stored 
at    -80C until the time of analyses.  Dr Shureiqi  and his research  assistance will analyze the samples according to the methods  
that are detailed in the attached laboratory method section (appendix  I).  The principle investigator will enter  sample analysis 
results into the study database.
7.8.0 Follow-up  procedure 
Patients will be contacted by phone 72 hours after the first celecoxib  doses and  every 2 weeks (+/- three days) thereafter  for 
toxicity assessment  for the entire period of the study (6 months).  Subjects will be asked to  maintain a treatment diary (Appendix 
L) of celecoxib intake.  Study subjects are specifically asked regarding cardiovascular events (myocardial infarction,  angina, 
stroke, arrhythmia or congestive heart failure)  and cardiac symptoms  (chest  pain, palpitation, dyspnea, or  edema). Serum 
celecoxib levels will be done at the end of months 2, 4, and 6 (+/- seven days)  of celecoxib  treatment.
7.9.0 Evaluation at the end of celecoxib treatment ( 6 month) 
1.Focused history to evaluate for adverse events  and medication  use.
2.Focused physical exam.  Physical examination includes  heart, lung, and extremity examination.  Study  subjects are 
specifically asked regarding cardiovascular events  (myocardial infarction, angina,  stroke,  arrhythmia or  congestive heart failure) 
and cardiac  symptoms (chest  pain, palpitation, dyspnea, or edema) .
3.Repeated colorectal  biopsies (20 from each  of polyps and 3 from normal mucosa). Colonscopies will be videotaped  to 
assess response to celecoxib.  
4.Adherence evaluation (treatment diary) and blood drawing for celecoxib serum  level.  
7.10.0 Blood  Collection  and sample processing for celecoxib  serum level 
A blood  specimen (5 ml each sample) for celecoxib serum level will be collected in heparinized tubes (red top tubes) on the 
day before celecoxib treatment begins  and at the end of  months 2, 4, and 6 (+/- seven days) of celecoxib treatment.  Blood  
sample specimen will be sent to the chemistry laboratory at  MD Anderson for processing and shipment to Quest diagnostic for 
analyses.
7.11.0 Definition  of an evaluable  course
Completion of 6 months of celecoxib treatment (90% of celecoxib doses) and colorectal biopsies pre-celecoxib  and after 6 
months of celecoxib therapy as specified by the protocol.  
7.12.0 Drop-out
New subjects will replace subjects who do not complete the study.
7.13.0  Financial Assistance for Travel Expenses for Financially Disadvantaged  Patients:
 Patients that might have financial  difficulties with covering travel  expenses to MD Anderson Cancer Center for  the initial and 
follow up visit, a special fund has established by the Division of Cancer  Prevention  to assist  these patients by covering  travel 
expenses.  Expenses covered are: air or ground  transportation, lodging and meals.  The subjects will be provided with the 
information regarding  the program through  the collaborating social  worker (Camille Blundell, MSW).   Information to contact  
Camille Blundell, MSW  is included  in the informed consent.   The eligibility for the assistance will be determined by the social 
worker based on the following  criteria:
Housing Transportation
 Age 16-25 (and/or  accompanied  
by       parents)
 Student
 Unemployed
 Income  below  DHHS poverty  guidelines
 Lack of health insurance
 College students
 Living outside Houston (100 mi)
 # of rooms/family members
 Age 16-25 (and/or  accompanied  by 
parents)
 Student
 Unemployed
 Income  below  DHHS poverty  guidelines
 Lack of health insurance
 Lack of transportation
Expenses covered:
1.  Transportation:  Under  300 miles, subjects will be provided with bus tickets or paid  49 cents/mile if they drive  to MD 
Anderson Cancer  Center
Over 300 miles,  subjects will be provided  with airfare  and shuttle  expenses between MD Anderson  and a 
Houston airport
2.  Housing: Hotel room at the Rotary House for  1-2 nights
8.0 STUDY CALENDAR
Month PreRx 1 2 3 4 5 6
MD Evaluationa
X X
Laboratory Evaluatione
X
Toxicity Evaluationb
X X X X X X
Pregnancy testc
X
colonoscopy and colorectal 
biopsies X X
Celecoxib Administration
X X X X X X
Plasma for 
drug assaydX X X X
aMD will perform history  and physical examination.   Study  subjects are specifically  asked 
  regarding CV events.
b Toxicity  evaluation  will be in person  at the end of the study and by telephone  72 hours after initial intake then  every 2 weeks  for 
6 months.
CSerum pregnancy test is performed in women who have childbearing potential.
DPlasma assay will be performed  as in section 7.10.0.
eLaboratory evaluation are : fasting blood  glucose, lipid profile, CBC,  creatinine, bilirubin,
   and ALT
9.0 MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE  REACTIONS (ADRS)
9.1.0. Definition  of Adverse Event  
An adverse event is any condition  that appears, worsens, or increases in frequency  after starting the study 
drug.   Investigators  will attempt to define  drug related versus non-drug related  adverse events; however, all adverse events, 
whether thought to be drug related  or not, will be noted in the records and reported to the IRB according to the guidelines for 
filing reports of adverse  experiences at M. D. Anderson (Appendix B).  Severe adverse events will  be reported using the 
MDACC severe  adverse event reporting form (Appendix J).
9.2.0 Adverse Event Severity grading
Adverse event  toxicity will be graded according to the defined  NCI Toxicity  scales (Appendix  C) and appropriate action 
taken.  Adverse events not included  in the defined NCI toxicity criteria will be graded  according to their effects  on the daily 
activity of the study subjects:
Grade 1: No limitation of daily activity
Grade 2: Some limitation of daily activity
Grade 3: Sever limitation of daily activity
9.4.0 Potential Expected Adverse events
The biopsies required for the study  are not expect to appreciably increase the small risk  of serious adverse  events that  
might otherwise happen during or after rectal endoscopic procedures.   These potential  risks  can include bleeding and 
bowel perforation.  The risk of perforation is expected to  be lower in the rectal  region than to what  expected with  higher 
colonic biopsies.   
Possible side-effects with celecoxib  can include: diarrhea,  indigestion, headache; nasal congestion, sore throat,  
rhinorrhea and/or upper respiratory tract infection; abdominal pain, stomach pain, peptic ulcer  disease, gastrointestinal 
bleeding, gas, nausea,  back pain; extremity  edema,  dizziness, insomnia, tinnitus,  liver function test abnormalities,  
hepatitis, jaundice,  and/or rash.   Celecoxib  at a dose of 800 mg daily was  found to increase  risk of major  fatal and non-
fatal cardiovascular  events by 3.4-fold compared to  subjects who were taking placebo in the Adenoma Prevention with 
Celecoxib (APC) trial (http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/celebrex/celebrex-hcp.htm).   One incident of rhambdomyolosis has 
been reported in a patient taking celecoxib.  The possibility  of celecoxib  being the cause of this incident cannot be 
excluded.
9.5.0 Measures  to monitor side effects and manage adverse events   
Subjects will be observed for at least  60 minutes after biopsy procedures.  Contact telephone numbers will be  provided to 
ensure that medical staff may be easily reached. Subjects are asked to call in case  of excessive bleeding or abdominal 
pain after of the procedure.   If excessive bleeding is  evident after the procedure, the lesions will be cauterized.   Surgical 
backup is available  at all times. 
Study subjects will be contacted by phone  72 hr after the first  celecoxib doses and every 2 weeks thereafter  for the rest  
of the celecoxib treatment duration  for toxicity assessment.   In addition,  subjects will undergo a history and physical to 
assess for toxicity  during a clinical visit at the end of the treatment.  All adverse events  will be followed according to good  
medical practices.   “Unacceptable  toxicity for a chemoprevention agent  is defined  as any  Grade 3 or higher toxicity (NIC 
Common Toxicity Scale) for any of the listed categories or Grade 2 or higher allergic  reaction or cardiac toxicity.”   If a 
study investigator determines  that an unacceptable toxicity [Grade 3 or higher toxicity  for any  of the NIC Common 
Toxicity Scale categories  or Grade  2 or higher allergic reaction or cardiac toxicity) is possibly related  to celecoxib, then 
celecoxib will be stopped and the study  Chair  be informed. The PI will meet with Drs.Lynch (study co-investigators) and 
Morris (study biostatistician) to perform a cumulative review of all adverse  events  and premature  terminations every 6 
months after study initiation or after completion  of 15% of subject enrollment  (enrollment  of 6 patients).  If any 
cardiovascular adverse event is identified for a follow-up period, Dr. Durand,  the study collaborating cardiologist, will 
participate in the review of the cumulative toxicity.  The patient  will be followed up according to good  medical practices. 
As a part of the follow-up in case of unacceptable toxicity development, a telephone  contact will be made at 30 + 7 days 
after celecoxib discontinuation to assess the resolution of the adverse event(s).  
 
9.5.1  Clinical Research Compliance’s Monitoring of the Conduct of  the Study  and the Safety  of Participants
This monitoring  schedule will occur  once every 6 months  or for every 15% of newly registered patients, whichever occurs 
first.  The monitoring team will consist  of one or more  staff members  from the Clinical  Research Compliance, depending on  the 
rate of accrual  of patients.  In addition,  two or three faculty members with clinical research experience  and expertise in the 
disease site of the protocol serve as the medical reviewers on the monitoring team.  These  medical reviewers, like the other 
members of the team,  are independent  and objective.  They  cannot be collaborators  on the study  or members of  the same 
academic department as the PI, and they cannot have any  other  involvement with  the study.   (The members of the  Clinical  
Research Compliance have no such  conflicts  because they are independent of all academic departments  in the institution.)
The monitoring teams review the following elements for each study they monitor:   informed consent forms, eligibility, 
pretherapy requirements, treatment  administration,  evaluations during the study and at follow-up, all toxic effects,  
response to therapy, and general data quality.  In addition, the monitoring teams use  the PDMS  to generate a report  so 
they can review all adverse events—serious, not serious, expected, and unexpected—reported by each study participant, 
not just those reported in the charts  of participants selected for in-depth  review.  The information in this PDMS-generated 
report includes the date of onset  of the event,  its severity  grade, its suspected causal relationship with the treatment, the 
date the event resolved,  and whether the event required treatment.
A pre-activation meetings  will be held with the PIs, their research teams,  and representatives of the Clinical Research 
Compliance to discuss the data and safety  monitoring plan  for the trials.  The monitoring plan  is discussed, and templates 
for data collection are distributed.  These templates are prepared by the Clinical  Research Compliance case by case 
after their review of the study protocol.   After the templates are completed  by the research team, they become a 
permanent part of the study participants’ medical records.
A report is prepared by the monitoring team after each  monitoring visit.  The completed report  is given to the research 
team, which has 1 week to review the report  and provide any  data identified as missing by the monitoring team.   A final 
monitoring report is then prepared.  If the report  does not indicate the occurrence of unexpected adverse events  or issues  
of noncompliance  with Current  Good Clinical Practice, federal regulations, or institutional policies, it is reviewed by the 
Clinical Research Compliance  Oversight Committee.  If a monitoring report  indicate such occurrence or issues,  it is 
forwarded to the IRB for review and action.
9.6.0. Serious Adverse Events 
Serious Adverse Experience -Any adverse drug experience that results  in any of  the following  outcomes: 
· Death
· A life-threatening adverse drug experience - any adverse experience  that places  the patient,  in the view  of the initial reporter, 
at immediate risk of death from the adverse experience as it occurred. It does not include an  adverse experience  that, had it 
occurred in a more  severe form, might  have caused death.
· Inpatient  hospitalization or prolongation  of existing hospitalization
· A persistent or significant disability/incapacity - a substantial disruption  of a person's ability  to conduct normal life functions.
· A congenital anomaly/birth defect. 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening,  or require hospitalization may  be considered  a serious  
adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical  judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may  
require medical  or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in  this definition.  Examples of such medical  events 
include allergic bronchospasm requiring  intensive treatment in an emergency room  or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions 
that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development  of drug dependency or drug abuse.
9.7.0 Reporting Serious  Adverse Events
All serious  adverse events, whether they appear to be related to the study medication or not, will be reported to the study chair 
and the MD Anderson  IRB  (via OPR) within 24 hours of knowledge of the event.  
9.7.1 Reporting procedure for cardiovascular toxicity  
 If an adverse cardiovascular event is identified, the research nurse  will notify the PI within 24 hours.  The  PI will report all  grade 
2 or more  adverse cardiovascular events related to the study  to the IRB within 1 working day of his notification about the 
event.  All serious cardiac adverse events will be reported to the FDA through the FDA Medical products Reporting Program 
(Med Watch) using the on line reporting mechanism  within 3 working days.   
9.8.0 Early stopping role for cardiovascular  toxicity
The proportion of subjects who developed  serious cardiovascular adverse events while taking placebo was reported as 1.8 %  in 
a large international study  for the prevention of sporadic polyps, the Prevention  of Spontaneous Adenomatous Polyps  
Trial.   Based on this information, we have statistically estimated  the numbers  of cardiovascular events  that will predict that 
celecoxib will have  excessive cardiovascular toxicity (10.3.7).   According  to these calculations, we will suspend  the study for 
excessive cardiovascular  toxicity if 2 or more  of the first 10 patients  enrolled  on the trial experience a grade  2 or greater 
cardiovascular toxicity, or if 3 or more of the first 31  patients experience a grade 2 or greater  cardiovascular toxicity, or if at any 
time during the study a 4th patient experiences a grade  2 or greater cardiovascular toxicity.  The study will be suspended by 
stopping enrollment  of new subjects and celecoxib treatment for all enrolled patients.  If the study  is suspended,  the IRB  and 
NCI will be notified within 3 working days.   The following study clinical investigators  will review safety data:   Drs. Shureiqi  and 
Lynch in consultation with Dr. Morris, study  biostatistician and  Dr. Durand,  collaborating  cardiologist.  A report of this safety  
review will be sent to MD Anderson  IRB and the NCI.  The study will be permanently stopped unless the MD Anderson IRB, NCI 
and study investigators  all agree that the study can be safely resumed.
10.0 DATA  ANALYSES
10.1.0. Data base management
10.1.1 Master Data Base
All clinical data for the protocol will be entered into The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Protocol Data 
Management System  (PDMS).  All laboratory data will be organized  into a secure master database in Microsoft access.  This  
data set will reside on the Intel machine in the department of  Clinical Cancer  Prevention. 
Some of the data sets will collected at the subject level  and some at  the specimen  level, so the  appropriate index  keys are 
used in each data set comprising the base to allow for efficient merging of the data.  Following quality review, data  will be 
merged into the master data set as it is entered (as described below).  
10.1.2 Derived  Data  Sets
For each  analysis, a data  set will be built by merging  appropriate  sets from the master  base (more than one analysis will use 
a given set).  This data set will have records  at the appropriate level of observation (e.g.,  subject), and will contain all of the 
transformations of original variables  as specified above and as may be required. Provisions will be made to allow  the production 
of derived  data sets for graphics and reports  that can be  passed to  a variety of programs on  any of the major  end-user platforms 
(DOS/Windows, Macintosh or UNIX). 
10.1.3 Revisions  and Corrections
All corrections to primary study documents will be  initialed and dated.  If computer-readable data is corrected by replacement  
of a data set, the replaced version of the data set will be retained in an archive.  Corrections to electronic  data will be stored  in a 
tabular form; that is, for each data set within the master  database, an  auxiliary data set is retained that records each addition,  
deletion or correction  to records in that data set.  The collection  of these  auxiliary data sets represents  an audit trail of 
corrections to the database.  A single program uses the audit records to update the database as required.
10.1.4 Archives
In addition, to the standard system backup for PDMS for the clinical data of the protocol, the master database  itself will 
be archived  weekly to zip discs, which will be kept in a secure place.   In addition,  paper reports  will be produced of  all 
changes made to the data set.  A paper  listing of the data set will be produced  periodically and kept off-site.
10.1.5 Security
Prior to registration, a registration checklist on-study form must be  completed.  It is added, along with  the signed  consent, to 
the individual subject’s protocol  research file.  Each subject is  assigned a unique study identification  number, which will be used 
on all study forms and specimens.  The study subjects’ protocol research files and a coded list  of subjects on the study will be 
kept in a key-locked filing cabinet  in the department  of Clinical  Cancer Prevention. Confidentiality of the patients will be 
maintained and information kept on each patient will be  made available only to identified investigators.  Fields which could  
identify subjects, such as name, address, or social security number will not be  stored  electronically and will be stored as paper 
reports under lock and key at all times.  All computer systems  will be password-protected.  Non-commercial software will not be 
loaded onto the Intel-based  computer dedicated to the data management. The redundant backups described above allow for 
quick restoration of data in the unlikely  event  that a security breach (or  the more  likely event  of hardware failure) occurs.
10.2.0 Data Entry
10.2.1 Clinical Data Entry
Data will be entered  into the PDMS database in case report forms after responses to all queries have been received.  In 
case of missing data,  a brief explanation  is to be recorded as a comment.  
10.2.2 Laboratory Data Entry
Laboratory data are recorded on forms and later entered into  the Microsoft  -access electronic  database.  The sample 
identification number should allow  only individuals  who have access to the clinical data to trace the sample to a specific 
patient.  The sample identification  number is however coordinated to ensure that  sample  identifiers internal to the laboratory can 
be unambiguously traced to a specific patient  by the principle investigator.  All questions of sample identity will be resolved 
before laboratory data are merged  into the master database.
10.3.0  Data analyses
10.3.1 Hypotheses to be tested: 
NSAIDs downregulate GATA-6 expression  to restore 15-lox-1 expression  that increases 13-S-HODE production,  reduces 
PPAR-d expression, and thereby  induce apoptosis in human colorectal  tumors.
10.3.2 Predictor variables
 a. Tissue disease status defined  into one of two categories: normal-appearing mucosa,  or polyp (tumor). 
 b. Treatment  status: pre- versus  post- celecoxib treatment.
10.3.3 Outcome variables 
A. Primary outcome  variable:  13-S-HODE, 15-LOX-1 primary  product, levels (measured  by ELISA  assay).
B. Co-primary outcome  variables: 15-LOX-1, PPAR-d,  and GATA-6  levels (measured by western blotting and 
immunohistochemistry) and apoptosis (measured by TUNEL and casapse-3 immunohistochemistry).  
C. Secondary endpoint: PGE2 levels (measured by EIA) and  COX-2 expression by immunohistochemistry and western 
blotting
10.3.4 Confounding variables
Information regarding  age, calcium, and folate  supplement intake will be  collected at the subject level and the effect of 
these variables will be assessed  as potential confounders.  
10.3.5 Statistical analysis:
(a) Primary end point analyses:   The patients in the study will be dichotomized  into responders and non-
responders.  Responders will be defined as patients with  at least a 25% reduction in their  number of colorectal polyps.  The  
primary analysis will be to compare  the mean change in 13  S HODE values from baseline  to post-treatment between the 
responders and responders.   To account for the correlation of  multiple tumors within a single patient, mixed  models  (PROC  
MIXED in SAS)  will be used to perform  this test. 
(b) Analysis  for primary and secondary  endpoint: 13 S HODE  levels will be  correlated with the ratio of normal to cancer tissue 
levels of 15 LOX 1, GATA 6, and TUNEL and caspase  3 using  Pearson and Spearman Correlation, as well as mixed 
models.  Additionally,  multivariate analyses  will be applied  to investigate the relationship between these measurements and 
confounding variables.
10.3.6   Sample size justification
 In this study, we will measure 13-S-HODE levels in triplicate  in 10 polyps  taken at baseline  and in  10 polyps taken after 6 
months of treatment  with celecoxib  from each of 40 patients.   As previously mentioned, these polyps will be selected 
independent of size so that there  is no systematic bias induced by selecting larger  polyps, for example.  This sample  size will 
allow us to have  at least 80% power to detect a 25% increase in mean 13-S-HODE levels from baseline to 6 months (from  0.63 
to 0.79 ng/g protein, for a mean  difference of  = 0.16) using a paired t test with a two-sided  significance level of 0.05,  assuming 
that the standard deviation for the paired  differences is  = 0.355.  These estimates are  based on  preliminary data from our 
laboratory on the 13-S-HODE levels  of polyps, and the details of how we arrived at these values are given  below.  These  
calculations make  the conservative assumption that there  will be no  correlation between  the baseline and 6-month values.  See 
the table  below for details on the power calculations based  on different  values for the effect  size, , and correlation  between 
baseline and 6-month  means from the same patient, .  If the correlation  is  = 0.40, our power  to detect a 25% increase in 13-S-
HODE level from baseline to 6 months is 95%.   With 40 patients and 10 polyps per patient, we have >  99.9%  power  to detect  a 
change in 13-S-HODE level of at least 50% (from 0.63 to 0.94 ng/g protein, irrespective of the value of .
 Table 1:  Power for paired  t test with two-sided  significance level of 0.05 to detect  significant change in mean 13-S-HODE level 
from baseline to 6 months as a function  of effect  size, , and standard deviation,  , which depends on the correlation  between 
baseline and 6-month  measurements, .
Mean 
change in 
13-S-
HODEMean 
change 
from  
baseline to 
6 mo  ()0 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50
0.355 0.337 0.318 0.297 0.275 0.251
25% 0.160 0.80 0.83 0.87 0.91 0.95 0.98
50% 0.310 > 0.999 > 0.999 > 0.999 > 0.999 > 0.999 > 0.999
Here we describe in detail the assumptions  we made to arrive  at our choice  of effect size and standard  deviation for the 
power calculations.   First, we assume  that a subset of patients with FAP will respond to celecoxib  and that others  will not 
respond.  We define  patients as responders if they experience  a  25% reduction in polyp  count from  baseline to 6 
months.  Second, we assume that nonresponders will experience  no change in their mean 13-S-HODE levels  from 
baseline to 6 months.  Our preliminary data showed that  the mean 13-S-HODE  level in patients’ polyps before celecoxib  
treatment is 0.63 ng/g, so we assume  that this will be the mean value  at both baseline and 6 months for  the 
nonresponders.  Third, we compute  the power  under two assumptions  for the responders:  that they will experience a 
50% increase or a 100% increase (i.e., a doubling) of 13- S-HODE  level from baseline to 6 months.  Assuming a baseline 
mean 13-S -HODE value of 0.63 ng/g means that the mean 6-month value for responders would be 0.94 or 1.26 ng/g,  
respectively.  In our preliminary data, the mean  13-S-HODE level for normal tissue was 3.35 ng/g, and the mean  ratio of 
13-S-HODE between  normal tissue and polyps  was 5.27.  Fourth, we assume that roughly half  of the patients will be 
responders.  In the study by Steinbach et al (12), 53% of the patients  had a > 25% reduction in polyp counts  and would 
have been considered  responders by our definition.  In Specific Aim 2, we compare the 13-S-HODE levels in responders 
and nonresponders, but in this Specific Aim, our analysis focuses on testing whether  the mean 13-S -HODE level in 
polyps changes from baseline to 6 months for all patients,  irrespective of response to treatment.  Thus,  we compute the 
power for an overall 25% or 50% increase  in 13-S-HODE  (from 0.63 ng/g to 0.79 or 0.94 ng/g),  which corresponds  to no 
change in the half of patients that are nonresponders and a 50% or 100% increase, respectively, in the half that are 
responders.  Fifth, we assume that the variance  in the mean 13-S-HODE level  for a given patient (averaging values for 
10 polyps, with 13-S-HODE measured  in triplicate) at  both baseline  and 6 months is s2 = 0.063,  which is estimated using 
a variance  component  analysis on the preliminary data.  In this variance component  analysis,  we estimated  the patient-
to-patient variation to be s21 = 0.0563, the polyp-to-polyp  variation to be  s22 = 0.0520 and the replicate-to-replicate  
variation to be s23 = 0.0629.  Routine statistical calculations show that the variance of  the mean 13-S -HODE level  for a 
patient (averaging  values for 10 polyps, with triplicate  measurements per polyp) is  s21 + s22/10 + s23/30 = 0.063.   Sixth, 
we assume that the mean baseline and 6-month 13-S-HODE levels for a given  patient will likely  be correlated with  each 
other.  Routine statistical calculations, letting  represent this correlation,  show that  the standard deviation of the difference 
between the mean 13-S-HODE  levels at baseline  and 6 months is given by 
 .  Since we do not have 
pretreatment and posttreatment preliminary  data, we do not know  what  should be, so we compute the power for values 
of  from 0 to 0.50 in increments of 0.10.  Our best guess is that  should be close to the intraclass correlation  between 
polyps within  the same patient, which is given by s21/(s21 +  s22 + s23/3) =  0.43.  A value of  = 0 is very  conservative 
because we expect  that there should  be some positive correlation between the baseline and 6-month values
10.3.7  Estimation of celecoxib excessive  cardiovascular toxicity
We will use the design of Thall and Simon (1994) to  continuously monitor grade 2 cardiovascular toxicities,  with the trial 
suspended if the rate is deemed too high, the data reviewed,  and only opened again after review by the NCI and IRB.
Let P represent  the proportion of patients in the trial who experience at least one  cardiovascular toxicity of grade 2 or  higher 
during the 6 months on study drug.  We will continuously monitor this quantity in the trial using the method  of Thall and Simon  
(1994).  We assume a diffuse prior distribution on P, specifically a Beta (0.02, 0.98), which has  mean  0.02 and 95% credible 
interval (0,0.28).  We will suspend accrual in the trial if, at any time during the trial, Pr (P>0.018)>0.90.  That is, we will stop the 
trial early if, based on the data in the trial, there  is strong evidence (probability  > 0.90) that the grade 2 cardiovascular toxicity 
rate is greater  than 0.018.   Based  on this criterion, the trial will be terminated early  for excessive  toxicity if 2 or more of the first 
10 patients enrolled on the trial experience a grade 2 or greater cardiovascular toxicity, or if 3 or more of the first 31 patients 
experience a grade 2 or greater cardiovascular toxicity, or if at any  time during the study a 4th patient experiences a grade 2 or 
greater cardiovascular toxicity.  With these  stopping rules, the study will suspend  accrual  of new patients and celecoxib  
treatment of enrolled patient with probability 0.85 if, in fact, P=0.10, and with probability 0.46 if, in fact, P=0.05.  If the true 
proportion is P=0.01,  then the trial will stop with probability 0.04.(see  reference 35).
11.0 ETHICAL & REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS
11.1  Institutional Review
This study  must  be approved  by an appropriate institutional review committee as defined  by Federal Regulatory Guidelines 
(Ref. Federal Register Vol. 46, No. 17, January 27, 1981, part 56).  The protocol  and informed consent form for this study must 
be approved in writing by the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB).   The IRB must be from an institution  which has a 
valid Multiple Project Assurance, Single  Project  Assurance or Cooperative Oncology Group Assurance on file  with the Office for 
Protection from Research Risks, National  Institutes of  Health.  The institution must be  in compliance  with regulations  of the 
Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Health and Human  Services.
Significant changes to the protocol, as well as a change  of principal investigator,  must also be approved by the Board 
and documentation  of this approval  provided to the study monitor.  Records of the Institutional Review Board review and 
approval of all documents pertaining to this study must  be kept on file by the investigator and are subject to FDA 
inspection at any time during the study.  Periodic status reports  must be submitted to the Institutional Review Board at 
least yearly, as well as notification of completion  of the study and  a final report within  3 months  of study completion or 
termination.  The investigator must maintain an accurate and complete record of all submissions made to the Institutional 
Review Board, including  a list of all reports and documents submitted.
12.0 References
1.Jemal, A., Thomas A., Murray T. and Thun  M. (2002)  Cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin, 52, 23-47.
2.Janne, P.A. and Mayer R.J. (2000)  Chemoprevention of  colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med , 342, 1960-8.
3.Thun, M.J., Henley  S.J. and Patrono C. (2002) Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs as Anticancer Agents:  
Mechanistic, Pharmacologic,  and Clinical  Issues. J Natl Cancer Inst, 94, 252-66.
4.Giardiello,  F.M., Hamilton  S.R., Krush A.J., Piantadosi  S., Hylind L.M., Celano P., Booker S.V., Robinson C.R. and 
Offerhaus G.J. (1993)  Treatment of colonic and rectal adenomas with sulindac  in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl 
J Med, 328, 1313-6.
5.Steinbach, G., Lynch P.M., Phillips  R.K., Wallace M.H., Hawk  E., Gordon G.B., Wakabayashi N., Saunders B., Shen 
Y., Fujimura T., Su L.K. and Levin  B. (2000)  The effect of celecoxib,  a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in familial 
adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med, 342, 1946-52.
6.Evan, G.I. and Vousden K.H. (2001) Proliferation, cell cycle  and apoptosis in cancer.  Nature,  411, 342-8.
7.Piazza, G., Rahm A., Finn T., Fryer B., Li H., Stoumen A., Pamukcu  R. and Ahnen D. (1997)  Apoptosis primarily 
accounts for the growth-inhibitory properties of sulindac metabolites  and involves a mechanism that is independent of 
cyclooxygenase inhibition, cell cycle  arrest, and p53 induction.  Cancer Research, 57, 2452-2459.
8.Hanif, R., Pittas A., Feng Y., Koutsos  M.I., Qiao L., Staiano-Coico L., Shiff S.I. and Rigas  B. (1996) Effects of  
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory  drugs  on proliferation and on  induction of apoptosis  in colon cancer cells by a 
prostaglandin-independent pathway.  Biochem Pharmacol, 52, 237-45.
9.Ara, G. and Teicher B.A. (1996)  Cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitors  in cancer therapy. Prostaglandins 
Leukot Essent  Fatty  Acids, 54, 3-16.
10.Craven, P.A. and DeRubertis F.R. (1986)  Profiles of  eicosanoid production by superficial and  proliferative colonic 
epithelial cells and sub-epithelial colonic tissue. Prostaglandins,  32, 387-99.
11.Steele, V.E., Holmes C.A., Hawk  E.T., Kopelovich L., Lubet R.A., Crowell J.A., Sigman C.C. and Kelloff  G.J. (1999) 
Lipoxygenase inhibitors as potential cancer chemopreventives. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev,  8, 467-83.
12.Bortuzzo,  C., Hanif R., Kashfi K., Staiano-Coico L., Shiff S.J. and  Rigas B. (1996) The effect of leukotrienes B and 
selected HETES on the proliferation of colon cancer cells. Biochimica  et Biophysica Acta, 1300, 240-246.
13.Brenner, R.R. (1981) Nutritional  and hormonal factors influencing desaturation  of essential fatty acids. Prog Lipid Res, 
20, 41-7.
14.Shureiqi, I. and Lippman  S.M. (2001)  Lipoxygenase modulation to reverse  carcinogenesis. Cancer Res, 61, 6307-12.
15.Baer, A.N., Costello  P.B. and Green F.A. (1991) In  vivo activation  of an omega-6  oxygenase in human skin. Biochem  
Biophys Res Commun, 180, 98-104.
16.Brash, A.R., Boeglin W.E. and Chang M.S. (1997)  Discovery of a second  15S-lipoxygenase in humans. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, 94, 6148-52.
17.Shureiqi, I., Wojno K.J., Poore  J.A., Reddy R.G.,  Moussalli M.J., Spindler  S.A., Greenson J.K., Normolle D., Hasan 
A.A., Lawrence T.S. and Brenner D.E. (1999) Decreased 13-S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid levels and  15-lipoxygenase-
1 expression in human colon cancers. Carcinogenesis, 20, 1985-95.
18.Shureiqi, I., Xu X., Chen D., Lotan R., Morris J.S.,  Fischer S.M. and Lippman S.M. (2001) Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs  induce apoptosis in esophageal cancer cells by restoring  15-lipoxygenase-1 expression. Cancer  Res, 
61, 4879-84.
19.Sigal,  E., Grunberger D., Highland  E., Gross C., Dixon  R.A. and Craik  C.S. (1990) Expression of cloned  human 
reticulocyte 15-lipoxygenase and immunological evidence  that 15-lipoxygenases of different  cell types are related.  J Biol 
Chem,  265, 5113-20.
20.Sandstrom, P.A., Pardi D., Tebbey P.W., Dudek R.W., Terrian  D.M., Folks T.M.  and Buttke T.M. (1995)  Lipid 
hydroperoxide-induced apoptosis: lack of inhibition  by Bcl-2 over- expression.  FEBS Lett , 365, 66-70.
21.Kamitani,  H., Geller  M. and Eling T. (1998) Expression of15-Lipoxygenase  by human colorectal  carcinoma Caco-2  
cell lines during apoptosis and cell differentiation.  J Bio Chem , 273, 21569-21577.
22.Hill, E.M., Eling T. and Nettesheim  P. (1998) Changes in Expression of 15-Lipoxygenase and Prostaglandin-H 
Synthase during Differentiation of Human Tracheobronchial Epithelial Cells. Am. J.  Respir. Cell Mol. Biol., 18, 662-669.
23.Jung, M. (2001) Inhibitors  of histone  deacetylase as new anticancer agents. Curr Med Chem, 8, 1505-11.
24.Kamitani,  H., Taniura S., Ikawa  H., Watanabe T.,  Kelavkar  U.P. and Eling T.E. (2001) Expression of 15-lipoxygenase-
1 is regulated by histone acetylation in human colorectal carcinoma.  Carcinogenesis, 22 , 187-91.
25.Muller, K., Siebert  M., Heidt  M., Marks F., Krieg P. and Furstenberger  G. (2002) Modulation  of Epidermal Tumor  
Development Caused by Targeted Overexpression of Epidermis-type  12S-Lipoxygenase. Cancer Res, 62, 4610-6.
26.Fischer, S.M., Hagerman R.A., Li-Stiles  E., Lo H.H., Maldve  R.E., Belury  M.A. and  Locniskar M.F. (1996)  
Arachidonate has protumor-promoting action that is inhibited by linoleate in mouse skin carcinogenesis.  J Nutr , 126, 
1099S-1104S.
27.Leyton, J., Lee M.L., Locniskar  M., Belury M.A., Slaga  T.J., Bechtel D. and  Fischer S.M. (1991) Effects of  type of 
dietary fat on phorbol ester-elicited  tumor promotion and other  events in  mouse skin. Cancer Res, 51, 907-15.
28.Shureiqi, I., Chen  D., Lee J.J., Yang P., Newman  R.A., Brenner  D.E., Lotan  R., Fischer S.M. and Lippman S.M. 
(2000) 15-LOX-1: a novel molecular target of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory  drug-induced apoptosis in colorectal cancer 
cells. J Natl Cancer Inst, 92, 1136-42.
29.Shureiqi, I., Chen  D., Lotan R., Yang P., Newman R.A., Fischer S.M. and Lippman  S.M. (2000) 15-Lipoxygenase-1 
mediates nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced apoptosis  independently of cyclooxygenase-2 in colon  cancer 
cells. Cancer Res, 60, 6846-50.
30.Shureiqi, I., Jiang  W., Fischer S.M.,  Xu X., Chen D., Lee J.J., Lotan R. and Lippman  S.M. (2002)  GATA-6 
transcriptional regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 during NSAID-induced apoptosis  in colorectal cancer cells. Cancer Res, 
62, 1178-83.
31.Laverriere,  A.C.,  MacNeill C., Mueller  C., Poelmann R.E., Burch  J.B. and Evans  T. (1994) GATA-4/5/6, a subfamily of 
three transcription factors transcribed  in developing heart and gut.  J Biol Chem,  269, 23177-84.
32.Gao, X., Sedgwick T., Shi Y.B. and Evans T. (1998)  Distinct functions are implicated for the GATA-4, -5, and -6 
transcription factors in the regulation of intestine epithelial cell differentiation. Mol Cell  Biol,  18, 2901-11.
33.Al-azzeh,  E.D.,  Fegert P., Blin N. and Gott P. (2000)  Transcription factor GATA-6  activates  expression of 
gastroprotective trefoil genes TFF1 and TFF2. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1490, 324-32.
34.Kamitani,  H., Kameda H., Kelavkar U.P. and Eling T.E. (2000)  A GATA binding site is involved in  the regulation of 15-
lipoxygenase-1 expression in human  colorectal carcinoma cell line, caco-2.  FEBS Lett , 467, 341-7.
35.Cusack, J.C., Jr., Liu R. and Baldwin  A.S., Jr. (2000) Inducible chemoresistance  to 7-ethyl-10-[4-(1-piperidino)-1-
piperidino]- carbonyloxycamptothe cin (CPT-11) in colorectal cancer  cells and a xenograft model is overcome by 
inhibition of nuclear  factor-kappaB  activation.  Cancer Res, 60, 2323-30.
36. Thall PF and Simon R. (1994).  Practical Bayesian Guidelines  for Phase IIB Clinical Trials.  Biometrics.  57(1):  
309-312.