 1  MC1651  
 
 
  
 
Mayo Clinic Radiation Oncology  
 
MC1651: Prospective evaluation  of Hypofractionation Proton beam therapy  with Concurrent Treatment 
of the Prostate and Pelvic Nodes for Clinically Localized, Intermediate or High Risk Prostate 
Cancer  
 
 
 Study Chair :   
   
   
 
   
  
 
 
 Study Co -Chair:  
  
 Investigators:   
   
   
   
   
 
 Statistician:    
    
 
*Study contributor(s) not responsible for patient care.  
 
 
Document History  (Effective Date)  
Activation  6/20/16  
 
Version 2  12/16/2016  
 
Version 3  2/14/2019  
 
  Version 4            10/24/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2  MC1651  
 
 
  
Protocol Resources  
Questions:  Contact Name:  
Patient eligibility *, test schedule,  
treatment delays/interruptions/adjustments,  
dose modifications, adverse events,  
protocol document, consent form, 
regulatory issues,   
forms completion and su bmission  Rad Onc , Study Coordinator  
 
 3  MC1651  
 
 
  
Index  
Schema  
  1.0 Background   
  2.0 Goals  
  3.0 Patient Eligibility  
  4.0 Test Schedule  
  5.0  Stratification Factors  
  6.0 Registration  Procedures  
  7.0 Protocol Treatment  
  8.0 Radiotherapy Dos e Modification s Based on Adverse Events  
  9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Supportive Care  
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
11.0 Treatment Evaluation  
12.0 Descriptive Factors  
13.0 Treatment/Follow -up Decision at Evaluation of Patient  
14.0 Body Fluid Biospecimens  
15.0 Drug Information  
16.0 Statistical Considerations and Methodology  
17.0 Pathology Considerations/Tissue Biospecimens  
18.0 Records and Data Collection Procedures  
19.0 Study Finances  
20.0 Publication Plan  
21.0 References  
Appendix I - ECOG Performance Stat us 
 
Appendix II - International Index of Erectile Function - Erectile Function Domain  
 
Appendix III - American Urological Association Symptom Index  
 
 4  MC1651  
 
 
  
 
List of Abbreviations  
 
AE Adverse Event/Adverse Experience  
BED  Biologic equivalent dose  
CFR  Code of Feder al Regulations  
CRF  Case Report Form  
DSMB  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GI Gastrointestinal  
GU Genitourinary   
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IMRT  Intensity Mo dulated Radiation Therapy  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
PHI Protected Health Information  
PI Principal Investigator  
PSA Prostate Specific Antigen  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event/Serious Adverse Experience  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
RT Radiation Ther apy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5  MC1651  
 
 
 Schema  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Registration  
Treatment:  
Hypofractionation proton beam therapy  with concurrent irradiation of the 
prostate and pelvic nodes for clinically localized, intermediate or high risk, 
prostate cancer  (25 fractions), in conju nction with androgen deprivation therapy  
Active Monitoring Phase : 
Late, radiotherapy -related, g rade ≥ 3 gastrointestinal and/or genitourinary 
adverse events  during 24 months post -protocol beam therapy  
 
Visits: 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months post -RT 
Event Monitoring  Phase :  
Up to 5 years  post-protocol therapy  
 
Evaluations : 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, and  60 
months post -RT 
 6  MC1651  
 
 
 
 1.0 Background   
 
1.1 Current status of radiotherapy ( RT) when elective pelvic nodal irradiation is considered 
for clinically localized, intermediate and high risk, prostate cancer  
 
Clinically localized prostate cance r is classified as ‘high’ risk, when there is a clinical 
stage T3 -4, Gleason score 8 -10, or Prostate Specific A ntigen (PSA) > 20 ng/mL , and as 
‘intermediate’ risk disease, when there is a clinical stage T2b -2c, Gleason score 7, or 
PSA 10 -20 ng/mL .  When su ch high or intermediate risk prostate carcinoma is treated 
with RT, elective pelvic nodal irradiation is often considered  (along with definitive RT to 
the prostate and seminal vesicles) , since there is concern that regional pelvic nodes may 
harbor occult m etastasis.  
 
When regional pelvic nodes are to be irradiated along with RT to the primary tumor in 
the prostate +/ - seminal vesicles, RT is usually delivered in two phases in the current 
clinical practice. The first phase is to irradiate  both regional pelv ic nodes and the primary 
tumor in the prostate +/ - seminal vesicles with a dose of 45 Gy in 25 fr actions. The 
second phase involves reducing  the clinical target  volume to the prost ate +/ - seminal 
vesicles and deliver ing an additional dose of 34.2 Gy in 19 fractions. This entails 
delivering daily 1.8 Gy per fraction to a total dose of 79.2 Gy over 8.8 weeks.  
   
Adding androgen deprivation  therapy to RT is a standard of care for high risk prostate 
cancer and to a lesser extent for intermediate risk prostate c ancer, based on a number of 
phase III studies demonstrating its overall or disease -free survival benefit. T he duration 
of androgen deprivation  therapy is usually 2 -3 years for high risk, and 4 -6 months for 
intermediate risk prostate cancer.  
 
1.2 Hypofract ionation as dose escalation  
 
Dose escalation in RT can be achieved either adding more fractions (with the 
conventional dose fraction size of 1.8 to 2 Gy per fraction daily) or altered fractionation 
schedule (with hypo - or hyper -fractionation). Hypofraction ation refers to an altered dose 
fractionation scheme in which the daily radiation dose is increased beyond the 
conventional 1.8 to 2 Gy per fraction.  Although a total radiation dose is usually lower 
with hypofractionation, a higher doe per fraction  is a m ethod of biologically intensifying 
the radiation dose over a shorter period of time.  
 
Clinical and laboratory studies have suggested that prostate cancer has a relatively slow 
rate of proliferation, characterized by a low α/β value (1.5 to 3 Gy) in a linear quadratic 
model for cell survival after irradiation [1-4].  This implies that a larger radiation dose per 
fraction (i.e. hypofract ionation) is more effective in cell killing for prostate cancer than 
simply adding more fractions. Another major advantage of hypofractionation is its 
convenience and lower treatment cost , as it allows a shorter treatment duration with a 
reduced number of RT fractions.  
 
 1.3 Proton beam therapy  
 
Proton beam therapy delivers a radiation dose with positively charged atomic particles 
(protons), while conventional e xternal beam RT does with photons. Unlike photons, 
protons have a physical property to deposit m ost of their energy only when they reach 
their target. This allows protons to  deliver a radiation dose to a target more preferentially, 
 7  MC1651  
 
 
 
 while minimizing a dose to nearby normal organs. Thus, a delicate balance of delivering 
a high radiation dose to eradica te prostate cancer while largely sparing the nearby no rmal 
organs (such as rectum , bladder , and small bowel ) can be achieved much better with 
proton beam therapy tha n with conventional RT. A study of dose -volume histogram has 
shown in the treatment of pros tate cancer that proton beam therapy delivers less radiation 
dose to the dose -limiting no rmal organs , in comparison to conventional, photon -based, 
intensity modulated RT (IMRT) [5]. 
    
Several studies have reported that p roton  beam  therapy can provide a therapeutic gain by 
offering at least equivalent (or superior) tumor control while reducing the risk of 
radiation toxicity, in comparison with conventional photon -based external beam RT , for 
clinically localized prostate cance r[6-9]. In these studies, proton beam therapy achieved  
at least equivalent or b etter biochemic al relaps e-free rate s, while yielding  lower 
incidences of acute and late radiation toxicity,  in comparison with conventi onal RT. In a 
study compari ng patient -reported quality of life between the two prospectiv ely collected 
databases , Hoppe  suggest ed approximatel y 50% reduction in  significant bowel urgency 
and frequency in patients treated with proton  beam  therapy compared with IMRT [10].   
 
In the  current proton beam therapy of prostate cancer, the target volume  has been mostly 
limited to the prostate and the adjacent seminal vesicles. There has been no prospective 
study of proton beam therapy to treat both the primary tumor in the prostate and the 
regional pelvic nodes simult aneously using a hypofractionation regimen.    
 
1.4 Study proposal  
 
In the proposed study, the prostate +/ - seminal vesicles will be treated with a 
hypofractionation regimen using daily 2.7 Gy fractions to 67.5 Gy, while the regional 
pelvic lymph nodes wil l be simultaneously treated with daily 1.8 Gy fractions to 45 Gy, 
using proton beam therapy .  Assuming a α/β value of prostate carcinoma between 1.5 and 
3 Gy, 67.5 Gy in 2.7 Gy fractions is equivalent to 80.2 Gy to 85.9 Gy in 1.8 Gy fractions. 
The overall treatment time is 5 weeks, which is about 3.8 weeks shorter than the standard 
conventional dose fractiona tion schedule (44 fractions over 8.8 weeks). A high precision 
RT technique using pencil beam proton therapy and daily on -line targeting of the prostate 
gland is employed to minimize  the dose to adjacent normal organs (bladder, rectum, and 
small bowel), whi ch will, in turn, reduce the risk of radiation toxicity.  
 
1.5   Biologic equivalent dose (BED) calculation for the proposed hypofractionation RT  
 
Using the linear quadratic model for cell survival after irradiation, a numeric value called 
biologic equival ent dose (BED) can be calculated.  BED is often used when different 
fractionation regimens are compared with respect to their radiobiologic effects on acute 
and late responding tissues [11]. A higher BED equates to better  tumoricidal effect and, at 
the same time, higher risk of normal tissue toxicity.    
 
  BED  = total dose x relative effectiveness  
   BED = (nd) x [1+ d / (α/β)]  
   n: number of fractions (treatments)  
   d: dose per fraction  
   α/β: numeric value reflecting  acute or late responding tissue  
 
 8  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Table 1 shows BEDs for prostate cancer with the proposed hypofractionation regimen 
(67.5 Gy at 2.7 Gy per fraction) versus with the conventional dose fractionation scheme 
(79.2 Gy at 1.8 Gy per fraction), when α/β ratio of  prostate cancer = 1.5 or 3. Prostate 
cancer is considered to have a low rate of proliferation similar to  late responding tissues 
with a  α/β ratio ranging from 1.5 to 3 in the linear quadrantic model [1-4].  This means 
that prostate cancer is more sensitive to a fractionation size (dose per treatment) , with a 
higher dose per treatment resulting in more effective tumor control. As depicted in the 
Table 1, the hypofracti onation regimen provides a higher BED, which means greater 
tumoricidal effect.    
 
Table 1: BEDs for Prostate Cancer    
α/β values  79.2 Gy  
at 1.8 Gy/fraction  67.5 Gy  
at 2.7 Gy/fraction*  
1.5 174.2  189.0  
3 126.7  128.3  
*Protocol dose  
 
To properly address a potential therapeutic gain of the proposed hypofractionation 
regimen, its impact on acute and late responding normal tissues needs to be also 
addressed . Table 2 compares BEDs between the hypofractionation regimen and the 
conventional dose fractionation scheme with respect to both acute and late responding 
normal tissues. The α/β value of acute responding normal tissues ( i.e. cells with high 
turnover) is estimated in the range of 10 (e.g. mucosal tissues), while late responding 
normal tissues (i.e. cells with low turnover) is considered to have a low α/β value in the 
range of 3 (e.g. parenchymal cells) [11].   
 
For acute responding normal tissues, BED of the hypofractionation regimen is slightly 
lower than that of the conventional dose fractionation scheme. This suggests that the 
likelihood of observing a higher incidence of acute radiatio n toxicity with the 
hypofractionation regimen is unlikely. In contrast, for late responding normal tissues , 
BED of  the hypofractionation regimen is slightly higher than that of the conventional 
dose fractionation scheme. This means that the hypofractionati on regimen has potentially 
a slightly higher probability of late radiation injury (such as radiation proctopathy or 
cystourethritis) , when  no other strategy to reduce the risk of radiation toxicity is 
integrated to the regimen. In order to counterbalance t his negative effect on the late 
responding normal tissues, the proposed study has incorporated high precision RT 
techniques (pencil beam proton therapy, and daily on -line targeting of the prostate using 
intraprostati c fiducial markers and  computed tomograp hy imaging ) that reduce the 
volume of normal tissues exposed to a high radiation dose. This reduction in the 
irradiated volume of normal tissues would, in turn, minimize the risk of late radiation 
toxicity.      
 
Table 2: BEDs for Acute and Late Normal Tis sue Toxicity  
α/β values  79.2 Gy  
at 1.8 Gy/fraction  67.5 Gy  
at 2.7 Gy/fraction*  
10 (Acute Responding Tissues)  93.5 85.7 
3 (Late Responding Tissues)  126.7  128.3  
*Protocol regimen  
 
 9  MC1651  
 
 
 
 1.6  Other studies evaluating hypofractionation regimens in photon radio therapy setting  
 
The efficacy of the proposed hypofractionation regimen in a photon RT setting  has been 
recently reported by Cheung et al  [12, 13]. In this prospective study of 97 patients, a 
hypofractionation regimen of 67.5 Gy in 25 fractions was delivered to the prostate +/ - 
seminal vesicles, along with a simultaneous irradiation of regional pelvic nodes with 45  
Gy in 25 fractions, over 5 weeks. The prostate and seminal vesicles were irradiated with 
intensity -modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) technique, while the regional pelvic nodes 
were treated with either three -dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D -CRT; 67 patie nts) 
or IMRT (30  patients). The study targeted patients with high risk prostate carcinoma 
(clinical stage T3, Gleason score 8 -10, or PSA ≥ 20). Median age of the cohort was 71 
years. The patients received adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy for median duration 
of 29.8 months  
 
Table 3 shows the incidence of the maximal acute gastrointestinal (GI) and genitourinary 
(GU) toxicity in the stud y, using the National Cancer Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 3.0.  
 
 
Table 4 shows the incidence of  maximal late GI and GU  toxicity, using the Radiation 
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) late morbidity criteria, with median follow -up of 39 
months.  
 
Table 4: Incidence of maximal late GI and GU toxicity (%)  
 Grade 0 Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  
GI toxicity  53.8 39.8 6.5 0 0 
GU toxicity  82 8 5 3 1 
  
With median follow -up of 62 months, PSA relapse -free rate and survival was 83.7% and 
92.2%, respectively, at 5 years.  Of the 33 patients who underwent a 5 -year pro state 
biopsy, only 4 (12.1%) had a positivity  showing viable malignant cells.  
 
Pollack et al. reported a phase III study comparing 76 Gy in 38 fractions (2 Gy per 
fraction; conventional fractionation regimen) with 70.2 Gy in 26 fractions (2.7 Gy per 
fracti on; hypofractionation regimen) for low - to high -risk prostate cancer [14]. Clinical 
target volume of radiotherapy was limited to the prostate and seminal vesicles  for low - 
and intermediate -risk prostate cancer, while regional pelvic nodes were included, along 
with the prostate and seminal vesicles, for high -risk prostate cancer. Patients were treated 
with IMRT technique. Adjuvant androgen therapy was variable, depe nding on the risk 
category. There were a total of 307 patients randomized between the two fractionation 
regimens. With median follow -up of 68.4 months, there was no difference in the rate of 
PSA relapse and/or clinical disease recurrence at 5 years: 21.4% for the conventional 
fractionation arm vs. 23.3% for the hypofractionation arm. There were no statistically 
significant differences in acute and late toxicity between the two arms. Table 5 shows late   Table 3: Incidence of maximal acute GI and GU toxicity (%)  
 Grade 0  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  
GI toxicity  4.3 59.1 36.6 0 0 
GU toxicity  7.5 49.5 38.7 4.3 0 
 10  MC1651  
 
 
 
 GI and GU toxicity, using modified LENT (Late Effects of  Normal Tissues)/RTOG 
criteria.   
 
Table 5: Late GI and GU toxicity: Crude incidences (%)  
 76 Gy in 38 fractions  70.2 Gy in 26 fractions  
 Grade 0  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 0  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  
GI 
toxicity  18.5 58.9 20.5 2 28.2 53.7 16.1 2 
GU 
toxicity  2 50.3 44.4 3.3 3.4 51.7 40.9 4 
 
Another phase III study compared 80 Gy in 40 fractions (2 Gy per fraction over 8 weeks) 
with 62 Gy in 20 fractions (3.1 Gy per fraction over 5 weeks) for high -risk prostate 
cancer [15, 16]. Clinical target volume of radiotherapy was limited to the prostate and 
seminal vesicles. Patients were treated with 3D -CRT techn ique, and received 9 -month 
adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy. A total of 168 patients were randomized between 
the two fractionation regimens. With median follow -up of 70 months, there was no 
statistical difference in the rate of PSA relapse (15% for 62  Gy/20 fractions vs. 26% for 
80 Gy/40 fractions, p = 0.065), local recurrence, and distant metastasis at 5 years. Table 6 
shows acute GI and GU toxicity, using the RTOG/EORTC scale. Table 7 shows late GI 
and GU toxicity, using a modified LENT –SOMA scale.    
 
Table 6: Acute GI and GU toxicity: Crude incidences (%)  
 80 Gy in 40 fractions  62 Gy in 20 fractions  
 Grade ≥ 2  Grade 3  Grade ≥ 2  Grade 3  
GI toxicity  21 0 35 0 
GU toxicity  40 1.2 47 1.2 
 
Table 7: Late GI and GU toxicity: Crude incidences (%)  
 80 Gy in 40 fractions  62 Gy in 20 fractions  
 Grade ≥ 2  Grade 3  Grade ≥ 2  Grade 3  
GI toxicity  12 0 14 1.2 
GU toxicity  6 2.4 8 0 
 
1.7 High precision RT techniques in the proposed study  
 
Mayo Clinic conducted a prospective study to examine the motion of the prostate and the 
stability of intraprostatic gold fiducial markers, using  an electronic portal imaging 
devic e[17]. The study found that gold fiducial markers were stable within the prostate 
and that there was a significant prostate motion between radiation fractio ns (i.e. inter -
fraction motion). It demonstrated that fiducial markers in the prostate gland allowed a 
significant margin reduction for planning target volume (PTV) when used for on -line 
localization of the prostate. Margins of 5 -7.3 mm around the prostate  for inter -fraction 
prostate motion could be reduced to 3 mm by daily on -line localization of the prostate 
using intraprostatic gold fiducial markers. As a result of this study, the implant of fiducial 
markers in the prostate gland, the application of a re duced margin for PTV, and the use of 
IMRT (to achieve better conformity around the prostate) have been a standard of care for  
photon RT  of prostate cancer at Mayo Clinic.  
 
 11  MC1651  
 
 
 
 When RT is delivered using daily setup based on prostate position, uncert ainty aris es 
about  the dose coverage of pelvic nodes  in the setting of simultaneous irradiation of the 
prostate and pelvic nodes, because  the motion of pelvic nodes can be independent of 
prostate motion .  The Stanford group reported that in the absence of a signific ant 
systemic offset, there were negligible changes in dose coverage of the pelvic nodes or 
normal tissue sparing when prostate fiducial markers were used for daily localization in 
the IMRT setting [18]. In another study, Adamczyk retrospectively evaluated the impact 
of correcting inter -fraction prostate motion upon th e dose delivered to pelvic  nodes in 28 
patients, based on 253 cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) take n during the 
radiotherapy [19]. In this study, the target (prostate) was matched based on CBCT 
imaging, and there were no fiducial markers in the prostate. Shift ing treatment fields on 
CBCT prostate matching influenced minimum, maximum, and mean dose of pelvic nodes 
in the range of 0.17% - 2.63%. At our own center, there are currently two prostate cancer 
patients receiving pencil beam proton beam therapy to the pelvic nodes  as well as to  the 
prostate. In these patients, proton beam therapy was delivered after a treatment set -up 
was established by matching prostate carbon markers using kV orthogonal imaging. 
During the course of proton beam therapy, they had verific ation CT scans in order to  
assess  whether clinical target volumes  including the pelvic nodes  were adequately 
covered. O ne patient  had three verification CT scans and the other had one. All of the 
verification scans showed that > 95% of the clinical target volume encompassing the 
pelvic nodes receiv ed the prescription dose (45 Gy), and that the standard deviation  in the 
volume covered by 45 Gy was 1.5%. These findings as well as the aforementioned 
studies indicate that setting up the RT field  using the fiduc ial markers in the prostate or 
CBCT matching of the prostate does not significantly jeopardize a dosimetric coverage of 
the pelvic nodes , and can be utilized for the simultaneous irradiation of the prostate and 
pelvic nodes.   
 
In the proposed study, high p recision RT techniques using pencil beam proton therapy  
and daily on -line targeting of the prostate and pelvic nodal region  are employed to ensure 
the accurate delivery of radiation to the intended targets, while minimizing the dose to the 
adjacent normal organs (such as bladder, rectum, and small bowel). The goal of these 
precision RT techniques is to minimize the risk of radiation toxicity as much as possible. 
Proton beam therapy  provides a dosimetric advantage, in comparison with photon RT, 
since it depo sits the bulk of its e nergy to the target  while delivering minimal dose to 
healthy tissues around the  target. The delivery of proton beam therapy  is further refined 
by pencil beam scanning technology in which proton is more precisely delivered in 
accordanc e to the depth and contour of the tumor, thus further reducing unnecessary 
radiation to the surrounding healthy tissues. Daily on -line targeting of the intended 
targets is achieved with two independent methods: 1. Carbon fiducial markers implanted 
into the  prostate, which can be visualized on an onboard imaging. Using the carbon 
markers as a surrogate for prostate position, the treatment field is adjusted daily to be 
aligned with the  position of the carbon markers in order  to ensure that the prostate is in 
the proper treatment coord inates. 2. L imited computed tomography  imaging  to confirm 
that the prostate and pelvic nodal chains are within the planning target volume s. 
Computed tomography  imaging  allows a volumetric conformation that the prostate and 
pelvic nodes are within the planning target volume s.  
 
1.8  Significance of the proposed study  
 
If the proposed RT regimen proves to be safe and effective, it will have a major impact in 
the current radiotherapy of prostate cancer. It may demonstrate not only its  therapeutic 
 12  MC1651  
 
 
 
 efficacy, but also its cost effectiveness and convenience as it allows a shorter treatment 
duration with a reduced number of RT fractions. This can be particularly appealing to 
prostate cancer patients who otherwise face 8.8 weeks of daily tre atment in the 
conventional dose fractionation schedule. A shorter treatment course with a reduced 
number of RT fractions also means substantial cost savings to the health care system. 
Additionally, the outcome of this study can be a basis for a large phase  III clinical trial 
comparing the hypofractionation regimen to a standard conventional dose fractionation 
schedule.  
 
2.0 Goals  
 
2.1 Primary  
 
2.1.1 To assess  late > grade3 GI and/or GU  toxicity of interest with the  
hypofract ionation proton beam therapy  regimen  
 
2.2 Secondary  
 
2.2.1.  Late g rade > 2 GI and /or GU toxicities of interest  within 24 months after the 
protocol RT , using the CTCAE v4.0.  
 
2.2.2.  Acute g rade >3 GI and /or GU toxicities of interest  during and within 3 months 
after the protocol RT , using the CTCAE v4.0.  
 
  2.2.3 .  Disease -free survival including freedom from PSA relapse at 5 years  
   
  2.2.4.  Disease -specific survival at 5 years  
   
  2.2.5.  Overall survival at 5 years  
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility    
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria   
 
3.1.1. Male; Age ≥ 18 years.  
 
3.1.2. Histological confirmation of  adenocarcinoma of the prostate within 6 months of 
study enrollment.  
 
3.1.3. Clinical stage T1 -2 N0 M0, Gleason Score  7, PSA 20 -100 ng/mL , or 
Clinical stage Any T N0 M0, Gleason Score 8 -10, PSA  100 ng/m L, or  
Clinical stage T3 -4 N0 M0, any Gleason Score, PSA  100 ng/mL , or 
Clinical sta ge T1 -2 N0 M0, Gleason Score 4 + 3 , PSA 10 -20 ng/mL  
 
3.1.4. Zubrod performance score  (PS) ≤ 1(Appendix 1). 
 
3.1.5. Total bilirubin, AST,  ALP , and serum creatinine: < 2 x upper normal limit  
 
3.1.6. Signed informed consent . 
 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria   
 
 13  MC1651  
 
 
 
 3.2.1. Any known  nodal ( N1) or distant metastasis ( M1) 
 
3.2.2. Previ ous androgen deprivation  therapy lasting more than 6 months  
  
3.2.3. History of inflammatory bowel disease  
 
  3.2.4. Presence of a hip prosthesis  
 
3.2.5. Prior pelvic radiotherapy or prostatectomy  
 
3.2.6. Prior or concurrent antineoplastic agents (chemotherapy)  
 
3.2.7. Previous or concurrent malignancy other than non -melanoma skin cancer within 
5 years of diagn osis of prostate cancer.  
 
3.2.8. Inability to start the protocol treatment within 1 month after study enrollment.  
 
3.2.9.  Medical or psychiatric conditions that preclude informed decision -making or 
compliance with the protocol treatment or follow -up 
 
4.0 Test Schedule  
 
 Active Monitoring Phase  Event Monitoring 
Phase  
Tests and procedures  ≤ 120 days 
prior to  
registration  Within 2 
weeks p rior 
to RT During  
RT 
(weekly)  End of 
RT 
(+/- 5 
days)  Post-RT 
month3: 3, 
6, 12, 18, 
and 24  Post-RT month3: 30, 
36, 42, 48, 54, and 60  
History, Physical exam, 
ECOG  X    X X7 
PSA X    X X 
Serum total testost erone  X    X2 X2 
CBC, AST, ALP, Total 
Bilirubin, Creatinine  X    X4 X4 
Path review1 X      
CT scan of abdomen and 
pelvis, or MRI of pelvis X    X4 X4 
Bone scan  X    X4 X4 
GI and GU toxicity  
assessment  (CTCAE v4.0)   X X X X X 
Questionnaires5 X6   X X X 
 
1. Optional; For outside prostate biopsy  only 
2. Serum total testosterone: to be performed post-RT month 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60  
3. Month: targeted month  +/- 1 month   
4. Only when relapse occurs  
5. Questionnaire s [including Patient -Reported Ou tcomes version o f the CTCAE, EPIC -26, American 
Urologic  Association Symptom Index score  (paper) , and International Index of Erectile Function – 
Erectile Function Domain  (paper) ], which are currently parts of a routine clinical practice , will be 
administered electronically  to patient in  conjunction with the Registry  and IRB# 15-000136.  
 14  MC1651  
 
 
 
 6. Baseline questionnaires should be completed prior to patient starting hormone therapy if possible.  
7. Only at 36, 48, and 60 months   
 
5.0 Stratific ation Factors   
  None  
 
6.0  Registration  Procedures  
Regist ration to the study will take place when a patient has met eligibility criteria, signed an 
informed consent, and has  been logged into Research Participant Tracking (Ptrax).  
 
7.0        Protocol Treatment  
Protocol treatment consists of proton beam therapy , in combination with  28 months of androgen 
deprivation therapy (or 4-6 months of androgen deprivation therapy for intermediate risk prostate 
cancer) . 
 
7.1. Proton beam therapy  
 
 7.1.1  Treatment planning  
 
  7.1.1.1.  Preparation prior to sim ulation  
A minimum of 1 day prior to a scheduled CT simulation, a total of four carbon 
markers are implanted into the prostate gland (two in the left and two i n the right 
lobe of the prostate gland) , via transperineal approach , under a transrectal 
ultrasoun d guidance  by a radiologist . These implanted carbon markers are used 
for daily image -guided proton beam therapy . 
 
Bladder preparation: A patient is to void one hour before simulation or treatment . 
Right after voiding, he  drinks 250 or 500 mL ( 8.5 or 16.9 o z) of water ov er the 
following 15 minutes. Then he does not void until he completes a CT simulation 
or treatment. This systemic approach is to minimize day -to-day variation of 
bladder volume as much as possible.  
 
  7.1.1.2.  Simulation  
A planni ng CT scan  will be  performed with a  patient in supin e position. A 
custom vacuum loc k bag is to be used for immobilization during simulation and 
treatment.  It should be built up around the patient’s feet to reduce the variation in 
foot rotation. An indexed knee cushion  may be added to the setup, if desired.   
 
An inflated endorectal balloon is  optional, and can be  used for prostate 
immobilization. An endorectal balloon is  to be  inflated with 100 mL of diluted 
contrast (consisting of 5 mL Gastroview mixed with 95 mL norma l saline). At 
the time of CT simulation, the insertion depth of endorectal balloon will be  
recorded at the level of anal verge. The same insertion depth will be  applied 
when an endorectal balloon is inserted during the course of proton beam therapy .  
 
Blad der contrast may or may not be used at the time of CT simulation at the 
discretion of attending physician. When bladder contrast is to be used, the 
 15  MC1651  
 
 
 
 following steps are to be taken: (1) Insert a Foley catheter into the bladder, (2) 
Drain 40 -50 mL of urine, (3) Replace the drained amount of urine with the same 
volume of diluted contrast (made of 5 mL of Omnipaque mixed with 55 mL of 
sterile water) into the bladder via a Foley catheter, (4) Remove the Foley catheter 
thereafter .   
 
A bla dder scanner will be  used to measure  a bladder volume at the time of CT 
simulation.  The target bladder volume  to be achieved  at the time of MR 
simulation  and during the course of proton beam  therapy will be  the measured 
volume  at the time of CT simulation +/ - 25%.  
 
CT simulation scanning will be  performed from immediately above the iliac 
crests through at least th e ischial tuberosities with 1  - 2.5 mm slice thickness.  
Shortly after CT simulation is completed, MRI  of the pelvis  (MR simulation) will 
be obtained with the same set -up described above. No contrast  should  be used for 
bladder or an  endorectal balloon. When an endorectal balloon is used, it should 
be inflated with n ormal saline  (100 mL) . MR imaging will be  fused with the 
planning CT imaging, using the implanted carbon marker s as references.   
  
  7.1.1.3.  Target volumes  
 
  7.1.1.3.1  Clinical target volume  (CTV)  
 
 There are two clinical target volumes : CTV1 and CTV2.  
 
 CTV1 is the prostate plus  a portion of or entire seminal vesicles. The 
 extent of seminal vesicles to be incl uded in CTV1 is at the judgement of 
 the attending physician and based on clinical and pathologic features of a 
 given malignancy.  
 
CTV2 is the regional pelvic nodes.  CTV2 includes the obturator,  external 
iliac, proximal internal iliac and common iliac n odes,  up to a level 
corresponding to the sacral promontory so that most of the common iliac 
nodes are included . Please refer to the pelvic nodal atlas  at the RTOG 
Web site (Pelvic Lymph  Node Volumes for Prostate Cancer Atlas;  
 The presacral nodes from the sacral promontory  to S3 may be 
included, depending on whether the  dose constraints to t he rectum are 
achievable . The inferior extent of the  external iliac lymph nodes is 
generally at the top of the femoral heads. The inferior extent of the  
obturator lymph nodes is generally at the top of t he symphysis pubis. 
CTV2  will include a  7 mm margin i n 3-dimensions to the  iliac vessels , 
and a 10 mm margin anteriorly fr om the anterior sacral bone for 
prescaral  nodes . Adjacent normal org ans (such as small bowel, large 
bowel, bladder, and rectum), pelvi c mu sculature, and bones are carved 
out from CTV 2. 
 
 7.1.1.3.2.  Internal target volume (ITV)  

 16  MC1651  
 
 
 
  ITV is an additional margin around  CTV to ensure  proper dose coverage 
 of CTV, given changes in the dose distribution caused by target motion.  
  
 ITV1 : CTV 1 + 4-5 mm expan sion for superior, inferior, anterior , and 
 posterior  directions,  and 5-6 mm expansion i n the lateral direction.  
 
 ITV2: CTV2 + 5 mm expansion in all directions  
 
7.1.1.3.3  Optimization target volume (O TV): A volume constructed by a    
  dosimetrist under the guidance of a physicist.  The OTV is a vo lume used 
  by the treatment -planning -dose-optimization algorithm to ensure that the  
  ITVs and CTV s are trea ted with a planned radiation  dose.  It includes  
  set-up and range uncertainties of 3 mm and 3 %, respectively. The OTV  
  is to provide a robust  coverage of CTV and ITV. The evaluation of a  
  proton plan is based on a robust coverage of CTV and ITV.  The OTV  
  should not be considered when evaluating the treatment plan.  
  7.1.1.4    Normal Critical Structures  
 
Normal critical structures to be de fined on the treatment planning CT scan 
include the  bladder, rectum,  large bowel, small bowel,  bilateral femora (to the 
level of ischial tuberosity), penile bulb, and skin. The structures  will be 
contoured and considered as solid organs. The bladder should  be contoured from 
its base to the dome, and the rectum from the anus (at the level of the ischia l 
tuberosity ) to the  rectosigmoid flexure. Any small bowel within the primary 
beam aperture should be def ined. Please refer to  the RTOG web site  
 view  the normal pelvis atlas for examples of target and normal tissue 
contours.  
 
 7.1.1.5   Treatment planning for critical structures  
 
Plan quality and accepta bility will be assessed in ac cordance to  dose-volume 
histogram (DVH) parameters of target volumes and organs at risk (OAR)  using 
the constraints shown in the following Table . 
 
Target DV H Objectives  Priority  
 
CTV Max[Gy]   Report  
Max[%]   Report  
Min[Gy]   Report  
Min[%]   Report  
Mean[Gy]   Report  
D2%[%]   Report  
D5%[%]   Report  
D95%[%]   Report  
D98%[%]  100% (via 
normalization)  Report  

 17  MC1651  
 
 
 
 V110%[cc]   Report  
V98%[%]   Report  
V99%[%]   Report  
V100%[%]  98% (via 
normalization)  1 
V107%[%]   Report  
Volume[cc]   Report  
CV98%[% ]   Report  
CV98%[cc]   Report  
 
ITV Max[Gy]   Report  
Max[%]  < 105%  1 
Min[Gy]   Report  
Min[%]  >90%  3 
Mean[Gy]   Report  
D2%[%]  <= 104 %  3 
D5%[%]   Report  
D95%[%]  >= 95 %  3 
D98%[%]   Report  
V110%[cc]  0 cc 1 
V98%[%]  >= 98 %  1 
V99%[%]  >= 98 %  2 
V100%[%]  >= 95 % (or 95%)  2 (or 1 , normalization)  
V107%[%]  <= 2 %  1 
Volume[ cc]   Report  
CV98%[%]  <= 2 %  1 
CV98%[cc]   Report  
 
 
Normal Tissue DVH Objectiv es Priority  
 
Bladder  D2cc[Gy]  < 72.91 Gy 1 
 < 72.14 Gy 2 
V36Gy[cc ]  Report  
V57Gy[cc ]  Report  
V61Gy[cc ]  Report  
V66Gy[cc ]  Report  
V36Gy[%]   33% 1 
 17% 2 
V57Gy[%]  15% 1 
 9% 2 
V61Gy[%]  11% 1 
 8% 2 
V66Gy[%]  8% 1 
 5% 2 
Volume[cc]   Report  
 
Right femoral head  Max[Gy]  < 34.96 Gy  1 
 < 32.69 G y 2 
Mean[Gy]  <= 23.95 Gy  1 
 <= 18.28 Gy  2 
V32Gy[%]  <= 5%  1 
 <= 2%  2 
 18  MC1651  
 
 
 
 V14Gy[%]  <= 91%  1 
 <= 66%  2 
 
Left femoral head  Max[Gy]  < 34.96 Gy  1 
 < 32.69 Gy  2 
Mean[Gy]  <= 23.95 Gy  1 
 <= 18.28 Gy  2 
V32Gy[%]  <= 5%  1 
 <= 2%  2 
V14Gy[%]  <= 91%  1 
 <= 66% 2 
 
Rectum  D2cc[Gy]  < 71.54  Gy 1 
 < 71.19  Gy 2 
V44Gy[cc ]  Report  
V53Gy[cc ]  Report  
V57Gy[cc ]  Report  
V61Gy[cc ]  Report  
V66Gy[cc ]  Report  
V44Gy[%]  24% 1 
 18% 2 
V53Gy[%]  17% 1 
 14% 2 
V57Gy[%]  15% 1 
 11% 2 
V61Gy[% ]   12% 1 
 9% 2 
V66Gy[%]  9%  1 
 6% 2 
 
Penile bulb Mean[Gy]   Report  
D50%[Gy]  <= 47 Gy  2 
D70%[Gy]  <= 36 Gy  3 
 
Large bowel  D2cc[Gy]   Report  
V44Gy[cc ]   
V53Gy[cc ]   
V57Gy[cc ]   
V61Gy[cc ]   
V44Gy[%]  24% 1 
 18% 2 
V53Gy[%]  17% 1 
 14% 2 
V57Gy[%]  15% 1 
 11% 2 
V61Gy[%]  12% 1 
 9% 2 
V66Gy[%]  9%  1 
 6% 2 
 
Small bowel  Max[Gy]  < 52 Gy  3 
D2cc[Gy]   Report  
V30Gy[cc]  < 300 cc  3 
V45Gy[cc]  < 150 cc  2 
V50Gy[cc]  < 2 cc  3 
 
 19  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Body - OTV V50%[cc]   Report  
V100%[cc]   Report  
V105%[cc]  0 cc 1 
 
 
For purposes of compliance, up to a 5% absolute increase in the volume of 
critical structure receiving a specified dose (or higher) will be considered 
acceptable and called “ minor deviation”. When there is a ≥ 5%  absolute increase 
in the volume of critical s tructure receiving a  specified dose  (or higher), it  will be 
consid ered unacceptable and called a “ major deviation”.  [Example: rectum 
V66Gy < 14% , but > 9%:  minor deviation; rectum V66Gy ≥ 14% major 
deviatio n]  
 
Of note, the penile bulb constraint is to be regarded as a guideline, and adherence 
to this should not, in any way, result in a reduction of the prescription dose or a 
compromised dose coverage of  the target volume.  
 
The deviations in dose constraints  described above are considered planning 
deviations only and will not constitute protocol deviations. Treatment plans that 
include minor planning deviations may be delivered as part of this protocol. 
Treatment plans that include major planning deviations m ay be delivered on this 
protocol with the  review and approval of  the attending physician  prior to 
treatment . All relevant DVH data regarding doses to critical structures  will be 
maintained in the study database for analysis.  
 
7.1.2  Target Dose  
 
 A prescrib ed dose of 67.5 Gy in 25 fractions (2.7 Gy per fraction per day, 5 days a week) 
 is delivered to ITV1, while ITV2 is concurrently treated to a dose of 45 Gy in 25 
 fractions (1.8 Gy per fraction).  
   
7.1.3   Treatment Administration  
 
  An optimal , pencil be am, proton therapy  plan is pr epared  to achieve proper dose   
  coverage of I TVs. Plan quality and acceptability is assessed, based on dose -volume  
  histogram parameters of target volumes and organs at risk.  
 
7.1.4 Treatment localization and verification   
 
 7.1.4.1   Patient set -up for daily proton beam therapy  is identical to the CT 
 simulation set -up, including bladder preparation and the application of 
 endorectal balloon , if used . An endorectal balloon is inflated  with 100 
 mL of normal saline  (or, if necessa ry, diluted contrast consisting of 10 
 mL Gastroview mixed with 90 mL normal saline).  
 
   7.1.4.2  On-line target localizati on and image -guided proton beam therapy : 
 7.1.4.2.1 Use of implanted carbon fiducial markers  
 Daily kV orthogonal imaging of the impl anted, intra -prostatic,   
 carbon  markers (from an on -board imager) should be used to   
 20  MC1651  
 
 
 
  confirm the treatment set -up and to account for inter -fraction   
 motion. A patient’s position should be adjusted, using the   
 fiducial markers as references.  
   
   7.1.4.1.2 Use of volumetric imaging  with CT on a rail  
The use of volumetric imaging with CT on a rail is strongly encouraged , if 
available , but not mandatory. Volumetric  imaging is taken with a CT scan on a 
rail, after a treatment set -up is established usi ng kV orthogonal imaging of the 
fiducial m arkers. This is to verify that I TV is proper ly covered volumetrically.  
Volumetric imaging  is taken daily  for the f irst 5 treatments and then t wice  
weekly (every Monday  and Thursday) thereafter.   
 
7.2   Concurrent androgen deprivation therapy  
 
As part of the standard of care, adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy is added to proton 
beam therapy  for 2 -3 years for high risk prostate cancer, and 4 -6 months  for intermediate 
risk pr ostate cancer. Androgen deprivation th erapy  usually starts  2 mo nths prior to the 
beginning of proton beam therapy . It consists of  bicalutamide 50 mg PO once daily for 2 -
16 weeks (given a t the start of androgen deprivation  therapy) and a LHRH agonist 
(gosereline or leuprolide). The first inje ction of a LHRH a gonist is usually given within 7  
days after the initiation of bicalutamide.  
 
8.0  Radiotherapy Dose  Modification s Based on Adverse Events   
With judicious use of ancillary treatment (see Section 9.0) and/or treatment interruption, it is 
anticipated that a dose reduction  should rarely be necessary. This study has no pre -specified dose 
reduction  due to adverse events.  However , if adverse event s are severe enough that 
administration of full dose is considered co ntraindicated by the attending  Radiation Oncologist, 
the study chair should be notified . 
Treatment interruption(s) are permitted only when radiation -related adverse event s are not 
reduced to an acceptable level with the use of ancillary treatment (see Section 9.0),  or when acute 
grade ≥3 AEs occur. The reason(s) for the interruption must be documented. The duration of 
treatment interrupti on should be minimized, but proton beam therapy  should not resume until AEs 
are grade <3.  
 
9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Supportive Care  
 
Suppo rtive measures s uch as antiemetic or antidiarrheal medications, steroid -containing topical 
preparations, topical bladder analgesic (e.g., phenazopyridine HCl) or anti -spasmodic (e.g., α -
adrenergic blockers) agents may be administered in accordance with man ufacturer 
recommendations as deemed necessary.  
 
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
10.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event - An untoward or undesirable experience associated with the use of a 
medical product (i.e. drug, device, biologic) in a patient or research subject.  
Serious Adverse Event  - Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  
Serious problems/events can be well defined and include;  

 21  MC1651  
 
 
 
 • death  
• life threatening adverse experience  
• hospitalization  secondary to radiation treatment, RT s ide effects or 
problem due to prostate carcinoma  
• inpatient, new, or prolonged; disability/incapacity  
• persistent or significant birth defect/anomaly  
 
and/or per protocol may be problems/events tha t in the opinion of the investigator 
may have adversely affec ted the rights, safety, or welfare of the subjects or others, 
or substantially compromised the research data.  
 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious, should be 
regarded as non-serious adverse events.   
 
Unanticipated Problems I nvolving Risks to Subjects or Others (UPIRTSO)  - Any 
unanticipated problem or adverse event that meets the following three criteria:  
• Serious : Serious  problems or events that result  in significant harm, 
(which may be physical, psychological, financial, soc ial, economic, or 
legal) or increased risk for the subject or others (including individuals 
who are not research subjects). These include: (1) death; (2) life 
threatening adverse experience; (3) hospitalization - inpatient, new, or 
prolonged; (4) disabilit y/incapacity - persistent or significant; (5) birth 
defect/anomaly; (6) breach of confidentiality and (7) other problems, 
events, or new information (i.e. publications, DSMB reports, interim 
findings, product labeling change) that in the opinion of the loc al 
investigator may adversely affect the rights, safety, or welfare of the 
subjects or others, or substantially compromise the research data, AND  
• Unanticipated : (i.e. unexpected) problems or events are those that are not 
already described as potential risk s in the protocol, consent document,  or 
not part of an underlying disease. A problem or event is "unanticipated" 
when it was unforeseeable at the time of its occurrence. A problem or 
event is "unanticipated" when it occurs at an increased frequency or at a n 
increased severity than expected, AND  
• Related : A problem or event is "related" if it is possibly related to the 
research procedures.  
 
Preexisting Condition - A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of 
the study.  A preexisting conditio n should be recorded as an adverse event if the 
frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition worsens during the study 
period. At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as 
a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically significant 
findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be 
recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
 
 22  MC1651  
 
 
 
  10.2 Recording Adverse Events  
 
  CTCAE term (AE description) and grade:  The descriptions and grading scales  
found in the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
(CTCAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for AE reporting. All appropriate treatment  
areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 4.0. A copy of the  
CTCAE ver sion 4.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP web site:  
 
 
10.2.1 Adverse event monitoring and reporting is a routine part of every clinical  
trial. First, identify and grade the severity of the event using the CTCAE  
version 4.0. Next, determine whether the event is expected or unexpected  
and if the adverse event is related to the medical treatment o r procedure. 
With this information, determine whether the event must be reported as an 
expedited report (see Section 10.3 ). 
 
  10.2.2 Assessment of Attribution  
When assessing whether an adverse event is related to a medical treatment 
or procedure, the foll owing attribution categories are utilized:  
Definite - The adverse event is clearly related to the agent(s).  
Probable - The adverse event is likely related to the agent(s).  
Possible - The adverse event may be related to the agent(s).  
Unlikely - The adverse event is doubtfully related to the agent(s).  
Unrelated - The adverse event is clearly NOT related to the agent(s).  
  
10.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems  
 
When an adverse event has been identified, the study team will take ap propriated 
action necessary to protect the study participant and then complete the Study 
Adverse Event Worksheet and log.  The sponsor -investigator will evaluate the 
event and determine the necessary follow -up and reporting required.  
 
Serious Adverse Event s will be reported as part of regular adverse event reporting 
mechanisms via the data capture system and lo gged for review reporting.  
 
10.3.1 Investigator Reporting: Notifying the Mayo IRB:  
 
The IRB requirements reflect the guidance documents released by t he 
Office of Human Research Protections (OHRP), and the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) in early 2007 and are respectively entitled 
“Guidance on Reviewing and Reporting Unanticipated Problems 
Involving Risks to Subjects or Others and Adverse Events” and  “Guidance 
for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and IRBs: Adverse Event Reporting – 
Improving Human Subject Protection.”  
 
10.3. 1.1 According to Mayo IRB Policy any serious adverse event 
(SAE) which the Principal Investigator has determined to 

 23  MC1651  
 
 
 
 be a UPIRTSO  must be reported to the Mayo IRB as soon 
as possible but no later than 5 working days after the 
investigator first learns of the problem/event.  
10.3.1 .2 Non-UPIRTSO – the investigator reports problems or 
events that do NOT meet criteria of an UPIRTSO in 
summary format at the time of the next continuing review. 
The investigator monitors the severity and frequency of 
subsequent non -UPIRTSOs.  
 
Consider the following information to collect when developing any forms 
for documentation of adverse events.  
Example  
Information collected on the adverse event worksheet (and entered in the 
research database):  
• Subject’s name:  
• Medical record number:  
• Disease/histology (if applicable):  
• The date the adverse event occurred:  
• Description of the adverse event:  
• Relationship  of the adverse event to the research (drug, procedure, 
or intervention):  
• If the adverse event was expected:  
• The severity of the adverse event: (use a table to define severity 
scale 1 -5) 
• If any intervention was necessary:  
• Resolution: (was the incident r esolved spontaneously, or after 
discontinuing treatment ?) 
• Date of Resolution:  
 
The investigator will review all adverse event reports to determine if 
specific reports need to be made to the IRB and FDA.  The investigator 
will sign and date the adverse eve nt report when it is reviewed.  For this 
protocol, only directly related SAEs/UPIRTSOs will be reported to the 
IRB.  
 
10.4 CTCAE v4.0 is used for the following AE s to be graded at each evaluation and 
pretreatment symptoms/conditions to be evalu ated at basel ine: 
 
System Organic Class  Adverse events/Symptoms  
Gastrointestinal  Diarrhea  
Fecal incontinence  
Proctitis  
Rectal hemorrhage  
Rectal ulcer  
Small intestinal obstruction  
 24  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Stricture/Stenosis:  Rectum  
Renal/Genitourinary  Bladder spasm  
Hematuria  
Urinary frequency  
Urinary incontinence  
Urinary tract obstruction  
Urinary tract pain  
Urinary urgency  
Cystitis noninfect ive 
Urinary retention  
Sexual/Reproductive function  Erectile dysfunction  
 
Acute AEs are defined as those that occur from day 1 , or commencement of 
radiation therapy, through 3 months after the completion of protocol treatment .  
 
All AEs seen after 3 months after the completion of protocol treatment  are 
considered late effects.  
   
10.4.1  Submit via appropriate reporting mechanisms  (i.e., paper or electronic) the 
following AEs experienced by a patient and not specified in Section 10.4:  
 
Grade 5 AEs (Death)  
  
10.4.1 .1.1 Any death within 30 days of the patient’s last study 
treatment or procedure regardless of attribution to radiation 
treatment  
 
10.4.1 .1.2 Any death more than 30 days after the patients last study 
treatment or procedure that is felt t o be at least possibly  
related to radiation treatment must also be submitted as a 
Grade 5 AE, with a CTCAE type and attribution assigned.  
 
10.5 Monitoring and Auditing  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by 
the IRB, the sponsor, and government regulatory agencies, of all study related 
documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data coll ection 
instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator will ensure the capability for 
inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic 
laboratory, etc.).  
 
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of po tential 
inspection by government regulatory authorities and applicable compliance 
offices  
 
10.5.1  Medical Monitoring  
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee th e safety of 
the study at his  site.  This safety monitoring will includ e careful 
 25  MC1651  
 
 
 
 assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events as noted above, as 
well as the construction and implementation of a site data and safe ty-
monitoring plan .  Medical monitoring will include a regular assessment of 
the number and type of serio us adverse events.  Any serious adverse 
events will be followed up by the sentinel event reporting procedure . 
  
10.5.2 Internal Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
 
As an interventional study, this study will be reviewed in conjunction with 
the Mayo Clinic C ancer Center DSMB processes. The study  will also be 
reviewed by the Radiation Oncology Research Executive Board on a 
yearly basis to assess accrual, adverse events, and any endpoint problems. 
Any safety issues requiring protocol changes will be communicate d 
through protocol amendments.   
 
The trial will be reviewed by the Cancer Center Auditing area on a bi -
annual or yearly basis , dependent on random study selection . Accrual, 
adverse events, and any endpoint problems  will be assessed . Any safety 
issues requ iring protocol changes will be communicated through protocol 
amendments.   
 
 
11.0 Treatment Evaluation  
 
11.1 No evidence of disease : No clinical evidence of tumor recurrence including the 
freedom from biochemical (PSA) failure  (Section 11.2.2.1)  
 
11.2.  Recurr ence of disease:  The site of recurrence will be collected , and classified as 
biochemical failure , local  recurrence, regional  recurrence and/or distant 
recurrence.   
 
11.2.1  Biochemical (PS A) failure: PSA nadir is  defined as the lowest PSA value reached 
after completion of treatment . Biochemical failure is defined as a PSA value that 
is ≥ PSA nadir + 2.0 ng/mL with the date of biochemical failure set at the date of 
the PSA value that meets this criterion.  
 
11.2.2  Local recurrence: Local recurrence is define d when  one or more  of the 
following s occur:  (1) ureteric obstruction at the level of the ureterovesical 
junction; urethral obstruction that r equires prostatic resection (with resected 
tissue demonstrating  prostatic adenocarcinoma) or urinary diversion; or  
hematuria due to prostate cancer progress ion, (2 ) positiv e prostate biopsy at ≥ 24 
months  from the completion of protocol treatment  (3) ≥ 20% increase in   the 
longest diameter of a target lesion in the prostate gla nd (for patients with a 
measurable  target lesion at baseline), or a new lesion measuring ≥ 1 cm sh ort axis 
during follow -up (for patients with non -measurable  lesion at baseline) in the 
setting of biochemical failure  
 
 26  MC1651  
 
 
 
 11.2.3  Regional recurrence: Development of  nodal metastasis in the pelvis which 
is defined as a new regional pelvic node that was normal  at baseline (< 1.0 
cm short axis) and increased to ≥ 1.0 cm short axis during follow -up. 
Confirmation by biopsy is encouraged.   
 
11.2.4  Distant recurrence: D evelopment of nodal metastasis  outside  the pelvis,  
 or a hematogenous (e.g., osseous, hepatic, etc.) lesion. Confirmat ion by  
biopsy is encouraged .  
 
11.2.5  Disease -free survival : Disease -free survival duration will be measured 
 from the date of registration to the date of biochemical, local , regional, or 
 distant recurrence  or the date of death from any cause.  
 
11.2.6  Disease -specific survival:  Disease-specific survival duration will be 
 measured from the date of registration to the date of death due to prostate 
 cancer. Death due to prostate cancer will be defined as:  
 
11.2.6 .1 Death attributed to carcinoma of the p rostate by the investigator, or  
11.2.6 .2 Death due to complications of treatment  
11.2.7  Overall survival: Survival duration will be measured from the date of 
 registration to th e date of death from any cause.  
 
12.0 Descriptive Factors  
 
12.1. Clinical tumor (T)  classification: ≤ T2 vs. ≥ T3   
12.2. Histologic  grade: Gleason score ≤  7 vs. ≥ 8  
12.3. Pre -treatment  serum PSA value: ≤  20 ng/mL vs. >20 ng/mL  
This is the PSA value obtained most immediately before the start of neoadjuvant 
androgen deprivation therapy  (see Section 7.2) .  
12.4. Patient  age: ≤70 years vs. >70 years.  
 
13.0 Treatment/Follow –up Decision at Evaluation of Patient    
 
 Follow -up data  will be collected and entered in accordance to S ection 4.0. No follow -up data is 
required beyond 5 years from the date of study enrolment . 
 
13.1 If a patient fails to complete the entire course of treatment for reasons other than 
toxicity or prostate cancer progression , he will be regarded as inevaluable  and 
will be replaced. Baseline characteristics will be collected in the database.  
However, no furth er data collection will be collected.     
 
13.2      A patient is deemed ineligible  if after registration, it is determined that at the t ime 
of registration, he  did not satisfy each and every eligibility criteria for study entry.  
 27  MC1651  
 
 
 
 The patient may continue treatment off -protocol at the discretion of the physician 
as long as there are no safety concerns, and the patient was properly registered.  
 
If the patient received treatment, all data up until the point of confirmation of 
ineligibility must be submitted,  and collection of follow -up data will continue  in 
accordance to Section 4.0. Event monitoring will be required per Section 18.0 of 
the protocol.  
 
13.3 A patient is deemed a cancel  if he is removed from the study for any reason 
before any study treatment is given.  On -study material and the End of Active 
Treatment/Cancel Notification Form must be submitted.  No further data 
submission is necessary.  
 
13.4 A patient is deemed a major violation , if protocol re quirements regarding 
treatment are severely violat ed such that evaluability for primary end point is 
questionable.  All data up until the point of confirmation of a major violation must 
be submitted.  The patient will continue the active monitoring phase and the 
event -monitoring phase of the study.  The p atient may continue treatment off -
protocol at the discretion of the physician as long as there are no safety concerns, 
and the patient was properly registered.   
 
13.5  When the patient develops a biochemical recurrence  only, he will continue on the 
protoc ol test schedule until  further medical management  is implemented  at the 
discretion  of his physician.  
 
13.6 When the patient develops a local, regional, or distant recurrence , he will go off 
study with no further scheduled follow -up tests. 
 
14.0 Body Fluid Biosp ecimens   
 Not applicable  
  
15.0 Drug Information  
 Not applicable  
 
16.0  Statistical Considerations and Methodology  
 
16.1    Overview:  This Phase II study will utilize a one -stage binomial design to assess 
the rate of late grade 3 or higher GI and GU tox icities associated with a 
hypofractionation proton beam therapy  regimen for prostate cancer.   
 
16.1.1  Endpoint:   The primary endpoint of this trial is the proportion of patients 
who experience a late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity.  Toxicity will 
be defined as an adverse event possibly, probably, or definitely related to 
proton beam therapy .   A late GI or GU toxicity will be defined as a GI or 
GU toxicity that occurs between 3 months  and 2 years  from the 
completion of proton beam therapy .   All pati ents meeting the eligibility 
criteria who have signed a consent form and have begun treatment will be 
evaluable for late toxicity, with the exception of patients determined to be 
a major violation.  
 28  MC1651  
 
 
 
  
16.2  Statistical Design:  
 
16.2.1 Decision Rule: It is hy pothesized that ≤ 5% of patients will encounter  a 
late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity  between 3 months and 2 years  
from the completion of proton beam therapy . The proposed treatment 
strategy would be considered ineffective in this population if ≥15% o f 
patients experiences a late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity.  
Subsequent studies with the proposed treatment strategy may be 
considered in this patient population if ≤5% of patients experiences a late 
grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity.  The followi ng one -stage binomial 
design uses 51 evaluable patients to test the null hypothesis that the rate of 
late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity is ≥15%.  
 
16.2.1.1  Final Decision Rule:  Enter 51 evaluable patients into the study. 
If 5 or more patients experi ence late grade 3 or higher GI or GU 
toxicity in the first 51 evaluable patients, we will consider this 
regimen ineffective in this patient population. If 4 or more fewer 
are patients in the first 51 evaluable patients experience late 
grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity, we may recommend further 
testing of this regimen in subsequent studies in this population.  
 
16.2.1.2  Over Accrual: If more than the target number of patients are 
accrued, the additional patients will not be used to evaluate the 
stopping ru le or used in any decision making process.  Analyses 
involving over accrued patients are discussed in Section 16.3 .4. 
 
16.2.2 Sample Size:  This study is expected to require a maximum of 51 
evaluable patients. We anticipate accruing 5 additional patients t o account 
for ineligibility, cancellation, major treatment violation, or other reasons. 
Therefore, this study is expected to accrue a maximum of 56 patients 
overall.  
 
16.2.3 Accrual Rate and Study Duration:  The anticipated accrual rate is 
approximately 3 -4 patients per month. Therefore, the accrual period for 
this phase II study is expected to be approximately 1.5 years. The final 
analysis can begin as soon as the last patient has been observed for 2 
years, or at approximately 3.5 years after the study ope ns to accrual.  
 
16.2.4 Assuming that the number of late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicities is 
binomially distributed, with a significance level of 10%, the probability of 
declaring that the regimen warrants further studies (i.e., statistical power) 
unde r various toxicity proportions can be tabulated as a function of the 
true toxicity proportion as shown in the table below.  
 
If the true late toxicity rate is…  0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 
 29  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Then the probability of declaring 
that the regimen is promising and 
warrants  further study is…   
0.02 0.10 0.41 0.89 
 
16.2.5 Other considerations:  Adverse events, quality/duration of response, and 
patterns of treatment failure observed in this study, as well as scientific 
discoveries or changes in standard care will be taken into  account in any 
decision to terminate the study  
 
16.3 Analysis Plan  
 
16.3.1 Primary Outcome Analyses:  
 
16.3.1.1 Definition:   The primary endpoint of this trial is the proportion of 
patients who experience a late grade 3 or higher GI or GU toxicity.  
Toxic ity will be defined as an adverse event possibly, probably, or 
definitely related to proton beam therapy. A late GI or GU toxicity 
will be defined as a GI or GU toxicity that occurs between 3 
months and 2 years from the completion of proton beam therapy .   
All patients meeting the eligibility criteria who have signed a 
consent form and have begun treatment will be evaluable for late 
toxicity, with the exception of patients determined to be a major 
violation.    
 
16.3.1.2 Estimation:   The proportion of grad e 3 or higher GI or GU 
toxicities will be estimated by the n umber of patients with a late 
grade 3 or higher GI or GU  toxicity divided by the total number of 
evaluable patients. Exact binomial 95% confidence intervals for 
the toxicity proportion will be cal culated.    
 
16.3.2 Secondary Outcome Analyses:    
 
16.3.2.1  Disease -free survival  is defined as the time from registration until 
the time of the first occurrence of bioch emical failure (Section 
11.2. 1), local recurrence, regional recurrence , distant meta stases , 
or death due to any cause .  The distributi on of disease -free 
survival  will be estimated using the method of Kaplan -Meier.  
The disease -free survival rate will be estimated  at 2 years and 5 
years . 
 
16.3.2.2 Disease -specific survival is defined as th e time from registration  
until the date of death due to prostate cancer  (Section 11.2. 6). The 
distributi on of disease -specific  survival  will be estimated usi ng 
the method of Kaplan -Meier. The disease -specific  survival rate 
will be estimated at 2 years and 5 years . 
 
 30  MC1651  
 
 
 
 16.3.2.3 Overall survival  is defined as the time from registration until the 
death due to any cause  (Section 11.2. 7).  The distributi on of 
overall  survival  will be estimated usi ng the method of Kaplan -
Meier. The overall  survival rate will be esti mated at 2 years and 5 
years . 
 
16.3.2.4 An acute adverse event is defined as an adverse event that occurs 
any time between registration and 3 months after the completion of 
proton beam therapy .  The rate of  ≥ grade 3 GI or GU acute 
adverse events will be estimated by the number of patients with a ≥ 
grade 3 GI or GU acute adverse event divided by the total number 
of evaluable patients.  Exact binomial 95% confidence intervals for 
the true rate of ≥ grade 3 GI or GU acute adverse events will be 
calculated.  
 
16.3.2.5  A late adverse event is defined as an  adverse event that occurs 
any time between 3 months and 2 years after completion of proton 
beam therapy .   The rate of  ≥ grade 2 GI or GU late adverse events 
will be estimated by the number of patients with a ≥ grade 2 GI or 
GU late adverse event divided by the total number of evaluable 
patients.  Exact binomial 95% confidence intervals for the true rate 
of ≥ grade 2 GI or GU late adverse events will be calculated.  
 
16.3.2.6 Adverse Events:  All eligible pati ents that have initiated treatment 
will be considered evaluable for assessing adverse event rate(s).  
The maximum grade for each type of adverse event will be 
recorded for each patient, and frequency tables will be reviewed to 
determine patterns.  Addition ally, the relationship of the adverse 
event(s) to the study treatment will be taken into consideration.  
Acute and late adverse events (as defined in sections 16.3 .2.2 and 
16.3.2.3) will be summarized separately.  
 
16.3.3  Correlative Analyses  
 
16.3.3.1 Patients will complete the Expanded Prostate Cancer Index 
Composite short form (EPIC -26) questionnaire at baseline and at 
the specified post-treatment  time points  as shown Section 4.0 .   
Subdomains for urinary, bowel, and sexual function will be 
evaluted at e ach time point and summarized descriptively.  
Changes across time will be evaluated to assess patient function 
and quality of life after study treatment.  
 
16.3.4 Over Accrual: If more than the target number of patients are accrued, the 
additional patients will not be used to evaluate the stopping rule or used in 
any decision making processes; however, they will be included in final 
endpoint estimates and confidence intervals.  
 31  MC1651  
 
 
 
  
16.4 Data & Safety Monitoring:  
 
16.4.1 The principle investigator(s) and the stud y statistician will review the 
study at least twice a year to identify accrual, adverse event, and any 
endpoint problems that might be developing. The Mayo Clinic Radiation 
Oncology Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is responsible for 
reviewing accrual a nd safety data for this trial at least once  a year, based 
on reports provided by the statistical office.  
 
16.4.2 Adverse Event Stopping Rules:   The stopping rules specified below are 
based on the knowledge available at study development.  We note that the  
Adverse Event Stopping Rule may be adjusted at any time during the 
conduct of the trial and in consideration of newly acquired information 
regarding the adverse event profile of the treatment(s) under investigation.  
The study team may choo se to suspend a ccrual if there are  unexpected 
adverse event profiles that have not crossed the specified rule below.  
 
Accrual will be temporari ly suspended,  if at any time we observe events 
considered at least possibly related to study treatment (i.e. an adverse 
event wi th attribute specified as  “possible,” “probable,” or “definite”) that 
satisfy one of the following:  
 
• If 4 or more patients in the first 20 treated patients experience a grade 
3 or higher GI or GU adverse event at least possibly related to 
treatment at any  time and after 3 months following completion of the 
protocol treatment  
 
• After the first 20 patients have been treated: if ≥ 20% of all patients 
experience a grade 3 or higher GI or GU adverse event at least 
possibly related to treatment at any time  after 3 months following the 
completion of protocol treatment.  
 
In addition,  we will review grade 4 and 5 adverse events deemed 
“unrelated” or “unlikely to be related”, to verify their attribution and to 
monitor the emergence of a previously unrecognized treatme nt-related 
adverse event.  
 
16.6   Results Reporting on ClinicalTrials.gov: At study activation, this study will be 
registered within the “ClincialTrails.gov” website. The Primary and Secondary 
Endpoints along with other required information for this study will be reported on 
ClinicalTrials.gov. For purposes of timing of the Results Reporting, the initial 
estimated completion date for the Primary Endpoint of this study is 3.5 years after 
the study opens to accrual. The definition of “Primary Endpoint Complet ion 
Date” (PECD) for this study is at the time the last patient registered has been 
followed for at least 2 years.  
 32  MC1651  
 
 
 
  
16.7 Inclusion of Minorities  
 
16.7.1 This study will be available to all eligible patients, regardless of raceor 
ethnic origin.  
 
16.7.2 Ther e is no information currently available regarding differential effects of 
this regimen in s ubsets defined by race, or ethnicity, and there is no reason 
to expect such differences to exist. Therefore, although the planned 
analysis will, as always, look for differences in treatment effect based on 
racial groupings, the sample size is not increased in order to provide 
additional power for subset analyses.  
 
16.7.3 The geographical region served by Mayo Clinic Cancer Center has a 
population which includes approx imately 3% minorities.  Based on 
prior Mayo Clinic Cancer Center studies involving similar disease 
sites, we expect about 3 -5% of patients will be classified  as 
minorities by race and  100% of patients will be men. Expected sizes 
of racial by gender subsets  are shown in the following table:  
 
Accrual Estimates by Gender/Ethnicity/Race  
 
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Unknown  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  0 2 0 2 
Not Hispanic or Latino  0 54 0 54 
Ethnic Category: Total of all subjects*  0 56 0 56 
Racial Category   
American Indian or Alaskan Native  0 0 0 0 
Asian  0 0 0 0 
Black or African American  0 2 0 2 
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 0 
White  0 54 0 54 
Racial Category: Total of all subjects*  0 56 0 56 
 
Ethnic 
Categories:  Hispanic o r Latino – a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rico, South or 
Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. The 
term “Spanish origin” can also be used in addition to “Hispanic or Latino.”  
Not Hispanic or Latino  
 33  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Racial 
Categories : American Indian or Alaskan Native – a person having origins in any of the 
original peoples of North, Central, or South America, and who maintains tribal 
affiliations or community attachment.  
Asian – a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, 
Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, 
China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, 
Thailand, and Vietnam. (Note: Individuals from the Philippine Islands have 
been recorded a s Pacific Islanders in previous data collection strategies.)  
Black or African American – a person having origins in any of the black racial 
groups of Africa.  Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro” can be used in addition 
to “Black or African American.”  
Nativ e Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander – a person having origins in any of 
the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.  
White – a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the 
Middle East, or North Africa.  
 
17.0  Pathology Considerations/Tissue Biospecimens   
 
 Not Applicable  
 
18.0 Records and Data Collection Procedures    
 
18.1 Submission Timetable  
 
Initial Material(s)  
CRF  Baseline  
(Compliance with Test Schedule Section 4.0)  
 
Demographics   
 
                          2 weeks after registration  
 
 
*6 months from accrual  Patient Eligibility  
On-Study  
Adverse Events -Baseline  
PSA and Testosterone Values  
Prostate Radiotherapy Questionnaires  
Androgen Deprivation Treatment  
 
 
 
Test Schedule Material(s )  
CRF   Active -Monitoring Phase2 
(Compliance with Test Schedule Section 4.0)  Event -Monitoring Phase3 
(Compliance with Test 
Schedule Section 4.0)  
 34  MC1651  
 
 
 
 On-Study  At each 
evaluation 
during 
treatment  At end of 
treatment  Post-RT: 3, 6, 12, 18, 
and 24 months  
(Active Monitor ing) Post-RT: 30, 36, 42, 48, 
and 60 months  
(Event Monitor)  
Adverse Event : Solicited  
Form  X X X X X 
Adverse Events Other  X X1 X1 X1 X1 
Radiation Treatment    X   
Androgen Deprivation 
Treatment  X X4 X4 X4 X4 
End of Active Treatment    X   
PSA and Test osterone 
Values   X  X5 X5 
Adverse Events: Post 
Radiation Treatment     X X 
Post Radiation Patient 
Status/Assessment     X X6 
Prostate Radiotherapy 
Questionnaires     X X 
Consent Withdrawal form   X1 X1 X1 X1 
Lost to Follow -up  X1 X1 X1 X1 
1. When applicab le 
2. Post RT (Active monitoring phase): 3 months (+/ - 1 months), 6 months (+/ - 1 months), 
12 months (+/ - 1 months), 18 months (+/ - 1 months), and 24 months (+/ - 1 months) post 
RT.  
3. Post RT (Event -monitoring phase): 30 months (+/ - 1 months), 36 months (+/ - 1 months), 
42 months (+/ - 1 months), 48 months (+/ - 1 months), 54 months (+/ - 1 months), and 60 
months (+/ - 1 months) post RT.  
4. Coordinator will look to see if patient received Androgen Deprivation Therapy since the 
previous reporting period.  If there was n o change, indicate on form.  
5. Testosterone is collected at post -RT month 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 months post RT.  
However, if one was completed it should be entered into the CRF.  Therefore, the form 
will populate at each visit, and if it wasn’t completed be cause it was not required, 
indicate “not completed” on form.  
6. History, physical exam, and ECOG are not required during Event Monitoring Phase.  
 
18.2 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
 
18.2. 1 Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept conf idential and managed 
according to the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed 
subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
• What protected health informat ion (PHI) will be collected from 
subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use 
of their PHI.  
 35  MC1651  
 
 
 
 In the event that a sub ject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the 
investigator, by regulation, retains the ability to use all information 
collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that 
have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, a ttempts should be made 
to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (long term survival 
status that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period.  
 
18.2. 2 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of clin ical findings, 
observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the 
reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in 
source documents.  Examples of these original documents, and data 
records include: hospital rec ords, clinical and office charts, laboratory 
notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or 
transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate and co mplete, 
microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, 
subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at 
medico -technical departments involved in the clinical trial. Source 
documents are kept in a secur e location that is locked and requires 
approved access.  
 
18.3. 3 Case Report Forms  
The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection 
instrument for the study.  All data requested on the CRF must be recorded.  
All missing data must be explain ed.  If a space on the CRF is left blank 
because the procedure was not done or the question was not asked, write 
“N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  
All entries should be printed legibly in black ink.  If any entry e rror has 
been made, to correct such an error, draw a single straight line through the 
incorrect entry and enter the correct data above it.  All such changes must 
be initialed and dated.  Do not erase or use “white -out” for errors.  For 
clarification of ill egible or uncertain entries, print the clarification above 
the item, then initial and date it.  If the reason for the correction is not 
clear or needs additional explanation, neatly include the details to justify 
the correction.   
 
  18.3.4  Records Retentio n 
The investigator will maintain records and essential documents related to 
the conduct of the study.  These will include subject case histories and 
regulatory documents.  
 
The investigator will retain the specified records and reports for;  
1. As outlined in t he Mayo Clinic Research Policy Manual –“Retention 
of and Access to Research Data Policy” 
  
19.0  Study Finances  

 36  MC1651  
 
 
 
   
19.1 Costs charged to patient:  routine clinical care  
 
19.2 Tests to be research funded: None. All tests  and treatments  performed in the study are 
part of routine clinical care.  
 
19.3 Other budget concerns: The Mayo Clinic Radiation Onc ology Unit will cove r costs 
related to administrating  the study  including a clinical research associate.  
 
20.0 Publication Plan  
The principal investigators hold primary responsibility for publication of the results of this study 
and approval from the principal investigators m ust be obtained before any information can be 
used or passed on to a third party.   
 
 
21.0 Reference s 
 
1. Wang, J.Z., M. Guerrero, and X.A. Li, How low is the alpha/beta ratio for prostate cancer?  
International journal of radiation onco logy, biology, physics, 2003. 55(1): p. 194 -203. 
2. Brenner, D.J., et al., Direct evidence that prostate tumors show high sensitivity to fractionation 
(low alpha/beta ratio), similar to late -responding normal tissue.  International journal of radiation 
onco logy, biology, physics, 2002. 52(1): p. 6 -13. 
3. King, C.R. and J.F. Fowler, A simple analytic derivation suggests that prostate cancer alpha/beta 
ratio is low.  International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 2001. 51(1): p. 213 -4. 
4. Fowler , J., R. Chappell, and M. Ritter, Is alpha/beta for prostate tumors really low?  International 
journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 2001. 50(4): p. 1021 -31. 
5. Vargas, C., et al., Dose -volume comparison of proton therapy and intensity -modulated 
radiotherapy for prostate cancer.  International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 
2008. 70(3): p. 744 -51. 
6. Nihei, K., et al., Multi -institutional Phase II study of proton beam therapy for organ -confined 
prostate cancer focusing on the inci dence of late rectal toxicities.  International journal of 
radiation oncology, biology, physics, 2011. 81(2): p. 390 -6. 
7. Slater, J.D., et al., Proton therapy for prostate cancer: the initial Loma Linda University 
experience.  International journal of radia tion oncology, biology, physics, 2004. 59(2): p. 348 -52. 
8. Mendenhall, N.P., et al., Five-year outcomes from 3 prospective trials of image -guided proton 
therapy for prostate cancer.  International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 2014. 
88(3): p. 596 -602. 
9. Zietman, A.L., et al., Randomized Trial Comparing Conventional -Dose With High -Dose 
Conformal Radiation Therapy in Early -Stage Adenocarcinoma of the Prostate: Long -Term 
Results From Proton Radiation Oncology Group/American College of Radio logy 95 -09. Journal 
of Clinical Oncology, 2010. 28(7): p. 1106 -1111.  
10. Hoppe, B.S., et al., Comparative effectiveness study of patient -reported outcomes after proton 
therapy or intensity -modulated radiotherapy for prostate cancer.  Cancer, 2014. 120(7): p . 1076 -
82. 
11. Hall, E. and G. A.J., Time, Dose, and Fractionated in Radiotherapy , in Radiobiology for the 
Radiologist 2006, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Philadelphia. p. 378 -397. 
12. Cheung, P.C., et al., Concomitant Hypofractionated IMRT Boost for High -Risk Prostate Cancer: 
5 Year Results.  International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 2013. 87(2): p. 
S106.  
 37  MC1651  
 
 
 
 13. Quon, H., et al., Hypofractionated concomitant intensity -modulated radiotherapy boost for high -
risk prostate cancer: late toxicit y. International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 
2012. 82(2): p. 898 -905. 
14. Pollack, A., et al., Randomized trial of hypofractionated external -beam radiotherapy for prostate 
cancer.  Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology, 2013. 31(31): p. 3860 -8. 
15. Arcangeli, S., et al., Updated results and patterns of failure in a randomized hypofractionation 
trial for high -risk prostate cancer.  International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics, 
2012. 84(5): p. 1172 -8. 
16. Arcangeli, G., et al., Acute and late toxicity in a randomized trial of conventional versus 
hypofractionated three -dimensional conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer.  International 
journal of radiation oncology, bio logy, physics, 2011. 79(4): p. 1013 -21. 
17. Schallenkamp, J.M., et al., Prostate position relative to pelvic bony anatomy based on 
intraprostatic gold markers and electronic portal imaging.  International journal of radiation 
oncology, biology, physics, 200 5. 63(3): p. 800 -11. 
18. Hsu, A., et al., A study of image -guided intensity -modulated radiotherapy with fiducials for 
localized prostate cancer including pelvic lymph nodes.  International journal of radiation 
oncology, biology, physics, 2007. 68(3): p. 898 -902. 
19. Adamczyk, M., et al., Dosimetric consequences of prostate -based couch shifts on the precision of 
dose delivery during simultaneous IMRT irradiation of the prostate, seminal vesicles and pelvic 
lymph nodes.  Physica medica : PM : an international j ournal devoted to the applications of 
physics to medicine and biology : official journal of the Italian Association of Biomedical 
Physics, 2014. 30(2): p. 228 -33. 
 
 
 
 38  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Appendix I  
 
Zubrod Performance Scale  
 
0 Asymptomatic and fully active  
 
1 Symptomatic; fully  ambulatory; restricted in physically strenuous activit y 
 
2 Symptomatic; ambulatory; capable of self -care; more than 50% o f waking hours are spent out of  
 bed 
 
3 Symptomatic; limited self -care; spends more than 50% of time in bed, but not bedridden  
 
4 Completel y disabled; no self -care; bedridden  
 
 39  MC1651  
 
 
 
 Appendix II  
 
International Index of Erectile Function Questionnaire (IIEF)  
 
Please circle the appropriate response option to indicate how you were feeling over the past month (4 weeks) . 
                                                   
 1:  During the past month or so, h ow often were you able to get an erection during sexual activity?  
            
0 = No sexual activity  
           1 = Almost never/never  
          2 = A few times (much less than half the time)  
  3 = Som etimes (about half the time)  
4 = Most times (much more than half the time)  
           5 = Almost always/always   
             
2:  During the past month or so, w hen you had erections with sexual stimulation, how often were your 
erections hard enough for pen etration?  
 
0 = No sexual activity  
1 = Almost never/never  
2 = A few times (much less than half the time)  
3 = Sometimes (about half the time)  
4 = Most times (much more than half the time)  
5 = Almost always/always  
 
3:  During the past month or so, w hen you at tempted sexual intercourse, how often were you able to penetrate 
(enter) your partner?  
                                                   
0 = Did not attempt intercourse  
1 = Almost never/never  
2 = A few times (much less than half the time)  
3 = Sometimes (a bout half the time)  
4 = Most times (much more than half the time)  
5 = Almost always/always  
 
4:  During the past month or so, d uring sexual intercourse, how often were you able to maintain your erection 
after you had penetrated (entered) your partner?  
 
  0 = Did not attempt intercourse  
1 = Almost never/never  
2 = A few times (much less than half the time)  
3 = Sometimes (about half the time)  
4 = Most times (much more than half the time)  
5 = Almost always/always  
 
5:  During the past month or so. d uring sexual i ntercourse, how difficult was it to maintain your erection to 
completion of intercourse?  
 
0 = Did not attempt intercourse  
1 = Extremely difficult  
2 = Very difficult  
   3 = Difficult  
4 = Slightly difficult  
5 = Not difficult  
 
 6:  During the past month or so , how many times have you attempted sexual intercourse?  
 40  MC1651  
 
 
 
  
0 = No attempts  
1 = One to two attempts  
2 = Three to four attempts  
3 = Five to six attempts  
4 = Seven to ten attempts  
5 = Eleven + attempts  
 
 
 41  MC1651  
 
 
 
  
Appendix III  
 
American Urological Association Symptom I ndex  
 
Please circle the appropriate response option to indicate how you were feeling over the past month (4 weeks) . 
 
1:  Over the past month or so, how often have you had a sensation of emptying your bladder completely after 
 you finished urinating?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
2:  Over the past month or so, how often have you had to urinate again, less than two hours a fter you finished 
 urinating?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
3:  Over the past month or so, how often have you found y ou stopped and stated again several times when you 
 urinated?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
4:  Over the past month o r so, how often do you find it difficult to postpone urination?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
5:  Over the past month  or so, how often have you had a weak urinary stream?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
6:  Over the past month or so, ho w often have you had to push or strain to begin urination?  
 42  MC1651  
 
 
 
   
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Less than one time in five  
 2 = Less than half the time  
3= About half the time  
           4 = More than half the time  
 5 = Almost always  
 
 
 
 
7:  Over the past month o r so, how often did you most typically get up at night to urinate?  
  
 0= Not at all  
          1 = Once every 8 hours  
 2 = Once every 4 hours  
3= Once every 3 hours  
           4 = Once every 2 hours  
 5 = At least once every hour  
 
 
   
 