ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm  NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
1 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
Human Laboratory Study of ASP8062 for Alcohol Use Disorder  
Spo
nsor:  National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Institutes of Health  
Division of Medications Development 
6700B Rockledge Dr. Bethesda, MD 20892-6902 
NIAAA Medications Development Team (Sponsor’s Representatives)  Raye Z. Litten, Ph.D. (Lead)  
Fax: 301-443-8774 E-mail: rlitten@mail.nih.gov
Daniel E. Falk, Ph.D.  
Tel: (301) 443-0788 Email: falkde@mail.nih.gov 
Jenica Tapocik Patterson, Ph.D.  
Tel (301) 827-6166 Jenica.patterson@nih.gov  
Joanne Fertig, Ph.D.  
Tel: (301) 443-0635 
Email: jfertig@mail.nih.gov  
Megan Ryan, M.B.A, CCRP  
NIAAA (address above) Tel: (301) 443-4225 Email: mryan1@mail.nih.gov 
Study Coordinating Center:  Fast-Track Drugs & Biologics, LLC 
20010 Fisher Avenue, Suite G 
Poolesville, MD, 20837 
Janet H. Ransom, Ph.D.  Project Director  
Tel: (301) 349-2059 Email: jransom@fasttrackresearch.com 
Charles Scott, Ph.D. 
Director, Biostatistics  
Medical Monitor:  Bryan Smith, M.D. 
Fast-Track Drugs & Biologics, LLC 
Tel: (301) 807-8548 
Email: bsmith@fasttrackresearch.com  
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  
NIAAA Confidential  
ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm              NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
 
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  2   
NIAAA Confidential  Backup Medical Monitor:  
 Lorenzo Leggio, M.D., Ph.D., M.Sc.  
Chief, Section on Clinical Psychoneuroendocrinol ogy and 
Neuropsychopharmacology  
Biomedical Research Center  
251 Bayview Boulevard  
Suite 200, Room 04A511  
Baltimore, MD 21224 Mobile: 240- 478-1503 
Email: lorenzo.leggio@nih.gov  
 
 
This document  is a confidential  communication of NIAAA.  Acceptance of this document  
constitutes agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein 
will be published or disclosed without NIAAA’s pri or written approval, except that this 
document may be disclosed to appropriate Institutional Review Boards under the condition that they are requested to keep it confidential. In addition, some information 
provided in this document is the property of AiCur e (“Platform Provider”), and should 
not be disclosed to others without written authorization from the Platform Provider, except to the extent necessary to ensure adequate conduct of the Study.  
         
  
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
 
The study will be carried out in accordance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as required by the 
following:  
• United States (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies  
(45 CRF Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56 and 21 CFR Part  312) 
• International  Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) E6 
All key personnel (all individuals responsible for the design and conduct of this study) have completed Human Subjects Protection Training.  
 
ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm              NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
 
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  3   
NIAAA Confidential  1. Protocol Synopsis  
Name of Sponsor: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Al coholism (NIAAA)  
Name of Investigational Product: ASP8062  
Name of Active Ingredient: ASP8062  
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
Study Title: Human Laboratory Study of ASP8062  for Alcohol Use Disorder  
Sponsor’s Representative : Raye Litten, Ph.D.  
Clinical Centers/PIs : Three clinical sites will participate in this study.  
Study Period: Approximately 1 year  Phase of Development: 2a 
Objectives:  
Primary: The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the effects of ASP8062, 25 mg once a day  and 
matched placebo, on alcohol cue- elicited alcohol craving during a human laboratory paradigm after 2 week s of 
daily dosing among subjects with moderate to severe alcohol use disorder (AUD) as confirmed by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders –  Fifth Edition (DSM -5™).  
Secondary: Secondary objectives include evaluation of ASP8062, 25  mg once  a day , and matched placebo  on 
reduction of alcohol consumption, alcohol craving, cigarette smoking (among smokers) and nicotine use (among 
nicotine users), mood, sleep, alcohol use negative consequences, study retention, and safety and tolerability 
throug hout the last 4  weeks of the treatment phase of the study.  
Methodology: This study is a 2- arm, double -blind, randomized, place bo-controlled, parallel group, 3- site study 
designed to assess the effects of ASP8062 as compared with placebo on responses to in  vivo alcohol cue exposure 
in the human laboratory setting. After signing informed consent, subjects will be screened for eligibility  and have 
other baseline assessments. Screening is permitted over a 14 -day period and most baseline assessments will be 
performed on the day of randomization. Assessments include alcohol breathalyzer test (before signing consent ), 
medical history, physical examination, weight, vital signs, electrocardiogram (ECG), drinking history by the 
timeline follow -back (TLFB) method, Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol- revised (CIWA -
AR), prior medication use, MINI neuropsychiatric interview, urine drug  test, smoking quantity frequency and 
nicotine use interview, clinical laboratory tests including chemistry, hematology, medical urinalysis, alcohol 
craving response s during a baseline cue reactivity  session , Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS) , 
drinking goal, Penn Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS), Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), PROMIS Alcohol  
Negati ve Consequences short form, Profile of Moods State  (POMS),  Hyperkatifeia Scale and confirmation that 
subjects are treatment seeking and desire a reduction or cessation of  drinking. Women of child- bearing potential 
will have a pregnancy test.  
If eligible for the study, 60  subjects will be randomized using a stratified permuted block randomization 
procedure with “clinical site” as the stratification variable in an approximate 1:1 ra tio (targeting 30 subjects per 
group) to receive either ASP8062  25 mg once daily  or matched placebo for 6  weeks.   
Subjects will be seen in the clinic at screening, at randomization and 5 other times during the study.  A final 
follow -up telephone interview w ill occur ~ 2 weeks after the end of study in -clinic visit.  Two cue reactivity 
sessions will be conducted. The first will be during screening (named pretreatment session) and the second will 
be after two week s of investigational produc t administration at Study Week 3. During these cue session s, subjects 
will be presented with water, followed by alcohol and will be asked to respond to 4 individual visual analog 
scales  (VAS) items assessing alcohol craving and 1 item assessing beverage liking.  Other assessments during the 
treatment period include TLFB, clinical laboratory tests , blood for serum levels of study drug for determin ing 
medication compliance, vital signs, ECG, concomitant medications, CIWA -AR, C-SSRS, pregnancy test , male 
and female birth control methods, adverse events (A Es), PACS, smoking quantity/frequency, PSQI, and POMS.  
The end of study visit will include the other assessments performed during the treatment phase and an Exit 
Interview, PROMIS q uestionnaire, and a treatment referr al. 
ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm              NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
 
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  4   
NIAAA Confidential  Number of Subjects (Planned):  60 
Main Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: Subjects will be male and female at least 21 years of age with 4 or more 
DSM -5™ symptoms of AUD (moderate to severe AUD). They must also be seeking treatment for AUD and if 
male, report drinking an average of at least 28  drinks per week or if female report drinking an average of at 
least 21 drinks per week prior to consent , and h ave a t least 1 heavy drinking day (4 or more drinks per day for 
women/5 or more drinks per day for men) during the 7 -day period prior to randomization.  
Investigational Product, Dosage and Mode of Administration:  
The target doses are 25 mg tablet  of ASP8062  by oral administration once daily  at bedtime  for 6  weeks.  
Reference Therapy, Dosage and Mode of Administration: Subjects in the placebo group will take an 
equivalent number of identically matched placebo tablets  (one per day) by oral administration once daily at 
bedtime for 6 weeks.  
Duration of Study: Each subject will participate in the study for up to 11 weeks, includi ng up to 2 weeks of 
screening, 6  weeks of treatment, one end- of-study visit during the week following the last treatment dose, 
and a final telephone contact ~2 weeks after completing treatment for a safety follow -up. 
Criteria for Evaluation:  
Primary: The primary efficacy endpoint is the  “strength” of alcohol craving Visual Analog Scale (VAS)  score  
(item 1 below)  upon presentation of the alcohol  during the  cue session at Week 3 –  after two  week s of 
investigational product treatment.  
Confirmatory secondary endpoints include  the VAS score s for the other 3 VAS scales (items 2 through 4 below) 
and the average score of the 4 VAS craving items;  and the difference score (alcohol cue VAS score minus water 
cue VAS score)  for all 4 of the individual VAS  craving items  and their average score . The beverage liking VAS 
item is also a confirmatory secondary endpoint . The 4 VAS craving items in order of appearance are:  
1. How strong is your craving to drink alcohol? -  note this is the primary efficacy endpoint  
2.      Having a drink would make things just perfect.   
3. If I could drink alcohol now, I would drink it.  
4. It would be hard to turn down a drink right now.  
The beverage liking item is: How much did you like the beverage just shown to you?  
Secondary: Secondary efficacy endpoints will be analyzed over the last 4  weeks of the treatment period.  
1. Percentage of subjects with no heavy drinking days. A “heavy drinking day” is 4 or more drinks 
per drinking day for women and 5 or more drinks per drinking day for  men.  
2. Percentage of subjects abstinent from  alcohol.  
3. Percentage of subjects with at least a World Health Organization (WHO) 2 -level decrease in 
alcohol consumption.  
4. Percentage of subjects with at least a WHO 1 -level decrease in alcohol  consumption.  
5. Percentage of days abstinent per  week.  
6. Percentage of heavy drinking days per  week.  
7. Percentage of very heavy  drinking days per week.  A “very  heavy  drinking  day”  is 8 or more  drinks  
per drinking day for women and 10 or more drinks per drinking day for  men.  
8. Weekly mean number of drinks per week.  
9. Weekly mean drinks per drinking day. 
10. Cigarettes smoked per week among  smokers . 
11. Percentage of subjects with no nicotine use among those reporting nicotine  use at baseline.  
12. Alcohol craving score  (PACS) . 
13. Sleep quality (PSQI)  score  (and subscale scores) . 
14. Profile of Mood States (POMS)  score (and subscale scores) . 
15. PROMIS Alcohol Negative C onsequences  score . 
Safety Endpoints: Safety endpoints will be analyzed over the entire treatment and follow -up period.  
1. Vital  signs  
ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm              NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
 
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  5   
NIAAA Confidential  2. Body weight  
3. Clinica l laboratory parameters  
4. BAC by  breathalyzer  
5. Urine drug  tests 
6. AEs  
7. ECG  results  
8. CIWA -AR scores  
9. Frequency of subjects with suicidal ideation at any time during the treatment period (C-SSRS)  
10. Concomitant medication use  
11. Alcohol Craving Questionnaire –  Short Form –  Revised ( ACQ -SF-SR) score  (pre- and post -cue 
response sessions)  
Compliance: Self report of compliance with study drug self -administration is confirmed by digital photography 
(AiCure software) with investigational products and  ASP8062  plasma levels.   
Statistical Methods  (Data Analysis):  
Analysis Populations:  
Modified intention- to-treat (mITT) Analysis Set: The mITT set is defined as subjects randomized to 
participate in the study that took at least one dose of investigational product and had a  non-missing VAS 
craving primary endpoint.  
Evaluable Analysis Set: The evaluable analysis set for the secondary endpoints is defined as those subjects 
randomized to the study who took at least 1  tablet per day for at least 80% of days in Weeks 1 -6. 
Safety Analysis Set:  The safety analysis set includes all subjects who took at least one dose of 
investigational product.  
Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint: Each subject will have an alcohol cue VAS score  for “strength” 
of alcohol craving score during the treatment alcohol cue session t hat is the primary endpoint . Analysis of 
covariance (ANCOVA) with the “strength” of alcohol craving value as the dependent variable and the 
pretreatment “strength’ of alcohol craving score as an independent fixed e ffect. Clinical site will also be 
included as an  independent factor. The ASP8062 group will be compared to the P lacebo  group. No imputation 
for missing endpoint data will be performed.   
Analysis of the Secondary Endpoints:  There are 3 additional questions asked during the cue session for each 
beverage cue. Each of these questions will be analyzed in the same manner as the primary endpoint. An overall 
mean  of the 4 questions will also be analyzed in the same manner.  The difference between  the first alcohol cue 
and water cue for each VAS item will be computed at both the pre and post treatment time points. The difference 
values for each VAS item and the average difference will be analyzed similarly to the primary endpoint.  
Continuous secondary endpoints (percent heavy drinking days, percent very heavy drinking days, percent days 
abstinent, drinks per week, drinks per drinking day, number of cigarettes smoked per week, PACS, POMS, and 
PSQI score) during the last 4 weeks of treatment period wi ll be analyzed using a mixed- effects model with site, 
assessment time, and baseline drinking as fixed factors. PROMIS will be analyzed with analysis of covariance 
model with baseline and treatment as factors.  Models will also include time by treatment grou p interaction term. 
Additional covariates may be included that are significantly correlated with outcome and/or if there are differences across the treatment groups.  
Analysis of the dichotomous secondary endpoints (percentage subjects with no heavy drinking days, percentage 
subjects abstinent from alcohol, percentage of subjects achieving at least a one and two -level shift in WHO 
alcohol consumption, and percentage of subjects with no nicotine use among subjects with any use during the week before randomization) during the last 4 weeks of treatment period will be conducted via logistic 
regression. Covariates may be included provided there are a sufficient number of events.   
No imputation for missing endpoint data will be performed for secondary endpoints .  
Safety Analyses:  AEs will be coded using the most recent version of the Medical Dictionary of Regulatory 
Activities (MedDRA) preferred terms and will be grouped by system, organ, and class (SOC) designation. The severity, frequency, and relationship of AEs to investigational product will be presented by preferred term by SOC grouping. Listings of each individual AE including start date, stop date, severity, relationship, outcome, 
and duration will be provided. Each AE (based on preferred terminology) will be  counted once only for a given 
ASP8062 – Human Laboratory Paradigm              NIAAA, NIH 
Protocol Number: HLAB -003 
 
Version  7: Date: 12Aug2022  6   
NIAAA Confidential  study subject. If the same AE occurred on multiple occasions, the highest severity and relationship to 
investigational product will be assumed. Thus, study participants are not counted multiple times in a given numerator in t he calculation of frequencies for a specific AE. Laboratory data, vital signs, ECG results, alcohol 
breathalyzer results, urine drug test results, and CIWA scores will be reported as summary statistics. The 
numbers and proportion of subjects who reported C IWA scores ≥ 10 at any time after the start of dosing will be 
presented. Change s in clinical laboratory tests and vital signs will also be presented as summary statistics of 
change from baseline. The number and percentage of subjects with a higher ACQ -SF-R score post cue session 
will be provided by treatment group.  
Compliance and Participation Outcomes: Medication compliance is defined as the amount of investigational 
products taken as a proportion of the total amount prescribed. Compliance will also be evaluated by 
determining the proportion of subjects who were prescribed ASP8062, reported taking ASP8062  (by AiCure 
assessment), and had a plasma sample with detectable ASP8062. The participation rate is the percentage of 
subjects with complete drinking data. Compliance and participation rates will be reported on a weekly basis and 
across the entire trial d uration.  Compliance by ASP8062  plasma levels will be reported as number and 
percentage of subjects with a level above the limit of detection at each time point  among subjects who were 
prescribed ASP8062 . Compliance with  tablet ingestion will be  confirmed by AiCure assessment  or subject’s 
self-report, if AiCure data is not available . Descriptive statistics will also be provided.  
Baseline Descriptive Statistics: Summaries of the characteristics of the subjects in each of the study groups at 
baseline will be p repared for the mITT , evaluable , and safety  analysis sets. Baseline characteristics will be 
compared between the ASP8062  group  and placebo group using appropriate statistical methods.  
 
 