MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              2 TABLE OF CONTENTS    
 
1.0 Study Synopsi s 
1.1 Overview  
1.1.1 Cell Dose Escalation within Amendment 6 after Meeting the Safety and Feasibility Criteria But Not Meeting the Initial Antitumor Criteria  
1.1.2 Cell Dose De- escalation and Change to Low Dose IL- 2 with Amendment 11 After 
Exceeding the Safety Criteria Under Amendments 6- 10 
1.2 Rationale and Hypothesis  
1.3 Study Objectives  
1.4 Study Population 
1.5 Number of Patients   
1.6 Study Duration  
1.7 Study Schematic  
1.8 Experimental Study Agents  
1.8.1 Retrovirus vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB  
1.8.2 MART -1
26-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
1.9 Timing of Events  
 
2.0 Schedule of Events 2.1 Schedule of Events for Repeated Dendritic Cell Vaccination 
 3.0 Table of Abbreviations  
 
4.0 Study Objectives 
4.1 Primary:  
4.1.1 Safety  4.1.2 Feasibility  
4.1.3 Clinical Response 
4.2 S econdary  
4.2.1 MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic T Cell Persistance  
4.2.2 In Vivo  Imaging  
 
5.0 Background 
5.1 Current management of surgically -incurable melanoma 
5.2 Rationale for immune- based therapies for metastatic melanoma.   
5.3 MART -1 melanoma antigen as target for melanoma immunotherapy  
5.4 Why Gene Therapy? 
5.5 TCR gene therapy  
5.6 Retroviral Vector -based Human Gene Medicine 
5.7 Safety and Regulatory Issues Regarding Retroviral- based Gene Transfer Approaches.  
5.8 Rationale for the Use of 2A Picornavirus Sequences. 5.9 PET -based Molecular Imaging  
5.10 MART -1 TCR- engineered T cell Experience at NCI Surgery Branch  
5.10.1 Use of Other TCRs in Humans  
5.10.2 Clinical Use of the MART -1 F5 TCRs in Humans  
 
6.0 Preliminary Data  
6.1 Origin and Functionality of the MART -1 F5 TCR.  
6.2 Preliminary Data Using the MART -1 F5 TCR Retroviral Vector (MSGV1- F5AfT2AB) in Human 
Subjects at the Surgery Branch/NCI  
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              3 7.0 Eligibility Criteria  
7.1 Inclusion Criteria 
7.2 Exclusion Criteria  
7.3. Definition of Study Enrollment Date  
 
8.0 Study Procedures  
8.1 Baseline Screening Assessments  
8.2 Initial Protocol Procedures  
8.3 Leukapheresis, Cell Cultures, and Admission to the Hospital  
8.4 Conditioning Chemotherapy Regimen with Cyclophosphamide and Fludarabine 8.5 MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC Infusion  
8.6 MART -1
26-35 peptide pulsed DC administration 
8.7 Low  Dose IL-2 
8.8 Hospital Discharge  
8.9 MART -1 F5 TCR Cell Tracking After Infusion  
8.10 Follow Up Study Visits  
8.11 Permissible Systemic Therapies During the Protocol On- study Period 
8.12 Days 75 to 90: Re- staging Exams and Procedures  
 8.13 Day 90: Office Visit for Re- staging Evaluation 
 8.14 Long- term Follow -up Plan 
8.15 Optional Delayed Dendritic Cell Vaccination  
    
9.0 Study Agents  
9.1 PBMC Expressing MART -1 F5 TCR  
9.1.1 Retrovirus vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB  
9.1.2 PBMC Tra nsgenic for MART -1 F5 TCR  
9.2 MART -126-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
9.2.1 MART -126-35 Peptide 
9.2.2 MART -126-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells (DC): 
9.3 Interleukin -2 (aldesleukin, Proleukin, recombinant human Interleukin 2)  
9.4 Fludarabine  
9.5 Cyclo phosphamide  
9.6 Laboratory Reagents  
9.6.1 OKT3   
9.6.2. Interleukin -2 
9.6.4 GM -CSF 
9.6.5 Interleukin-4 
9.6.6. Retronectin 
 
10.0 Generation of Experimental Cell Therapies:  MART -1-TCR Transduced CD8 Cells and 
MART -126-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
10.1 Generation of MART -1-TCR Transduced PBMC  
10.2 Generation of MART -126-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
10.3 Samples for Transgenic TCR Cell Persistence and Immune Monitoring 
 
11.0 Evaluation of Study Endpoints  
11.1 Primary Study Endpoints:  
11.1.1 Safety  
11.1.2 Feasibility  
11.1.3 Antitumor Activity  
11.2 Secondary Study Endpoints  
11.2.1 MART -1 TCR/sr39 Transgenic Cell Persistence 
11.2.2 In Vivo  Imaging  
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              4  
12.0 Adverse Event Reporting 
12.1 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
12.2 Definition of an Adverse Event (AE)  
12.3 Causality Assessment  
12.4 Withdrawal Due to Adverse Events  
 
13.0 Compliance with Good Clinical Practice, Ethical Considerations and Informed Consent  
13.1 Compliance with Good Clinical Practice and Ethical Considerations  
13.2. Regulatory Approvals  
13.3 Subject Recruitment  
13.4 Gender and Minorities  
13.5 Children  
13.6 Informed Consent Procedure  
13.7 Subject Enrollment  
 14.0 Qualifications of Personnel and Study Facilities  
14.1 Qualifications of Investigators  
14.2 Personnel Training 14.3 HGMP/JCCC Cell and Ge ne Therapy GMP Suite at UCLA 
14.4 Gene Therapy Viral Bank  
14.5 Clinical Facilities  
14.6 Compliance with Protocol Procedures and Rights and Welfare of Study Participants  
 
15.0 Data Safety Monitoring Board, Study Oversight, and Data Collection and Analysis  
15.1 Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
15.2 JCCC DSMB Internal Monitoring Plan 
15.3 Monitoring/Auditing Activities  
15.4 Detailed Reporting Mechanism for Adverse Events   
15.5 Data Recording and Retention of Study Data  
 
16.0 Statistical Methods  
16.1 Sample Size Deter mination 
16.2 Definition of Evaluable Patients  
16.3 Efficacy Analysis  
16.4 Study Stopping and Non- stopping Rules  
 17.0 References  
 
Appendix: Summary of Protocol Amendments  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              5 1. STUDY SYNOPSIS 
 
1.1 Overview  
 This is a two -stage phase II clinical trial with the combined primary endpoints to determine the safety, 
feasibility and antitumor activity of adoptive transfer of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) genetically engineered to express the alpha and beta chains of a high affinity T cell receptor (TCR) 
specif ic for the HLA -A*0201- restricted MART -1 melanoma tumor antigen to patients with locally 
advanced or metastatic melanoma. This gene transfer will be affected by a retroviral vector pseudotyped 
with a gibbon ape leukemia virus (GaLV) envelope. The two transgenes genes are linked by a 
picornavirus 2A sequence. Their expression is driven by the retroviral long terminal repeat (LTR).  
 Patients with MART -1-positive locally advanced or metastatic melanoma who are HLA -A*0201 -positive, 
and HIV, hepatitis B and C seronegative, will receive a non- myeloablative but lymphocyte depleting 
chemotherapy conditioning regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide and fludarabine, and then receive 
the adoptive transfer of autologous PBMC transduced with the MSGV1- F5AfT2AB retroviral vector, 
which expresses a high affinity TCR for the MART -1 melanoma antigen (MART -1 F5 TCR). The cell 
dose will be up to 10
9 autologous PBMC transduced with the MSGV1- F5AfT2AB retroviral vector. The 
transgenic T cells will be infused fresh on the day of harvest  as done in the last three patients within this 
protocol (since Amendment 8) , prior to which , thawed cryopreserved cells were infused. Following 
adoptive cell transfer, patients will receive MART -126-35 peptide- pulsed dendritic cell (DC) vaccines and 
low dose interlukin- 2 (IL-2) under Amendment 11 .  
 The MART -1 F5 TCR was provided by Dr. Stephen A. Rosenberg from the Surgery Branch, National 
Cancer Institute (NCI). The MART -1 F5 TCR is derived from the DMF5 tumor infiltrating lymphocyte 
(TIL) clone, and was selected from several MART -1-specific TCRs because of its high affinity and 
biological activity. This TCR delivered by the same retroviral vector is currently in clinical testing at the 
Surgery Branch/NCI. Both the NCI clinical trial and the trial at  UCLA are based on the same retrovirus 
expressing the MART -1 F5 TCR used to transduce whole PBMC and re -infused to patients after a non -
myeloablative but lymphodepleting chemotherapy conditioning regimen. Major differences between both 
clinical trials include the shorter ex vivo  expansion of TCR transduced PBMC, the use of MART -1
26-35 
peptide pulsed DC and the use of positron imaging tomography (PET) for non- invasive imaging of 
adoptively transferred TCR transgenic cells in the UCLA clinical trial.  
The primary endpoints will be safety, feasibility and objective tumor response. The phase II clinical trial 
design will have two treatment stages following a Simon optimal two- stage clinical phase II clinical trial 
design 
1. The clinical trial will have an initial stage w ith 8 patients followed by a second stage with up to 
22 patients.  
 
Safety will be determined in stage one, and if 3 out of 8 patients have MART -1 F5 TCR -induced dose 
limiting toxicities (DLT), then further accrual will not be warranted. Feasibility will be also determined in the first stage, and if 3 out of 8 patients cannot receive the intended cellular therapies, or if they result in 
suboptimal TCR transgenic cell in vivo  persistence, further accrual will not be warranted to the protocol 
as currently designed. Objective tumor responses will be determined by RECIST objective response 
criteria with a design to rule out a 10% response rate as the null hypothesis, and a 35% response rate as 
the alternative hypothesis. With this statistical design, if 2 or mor e of 8 patients in stage one have an 
objective response, the study will proceed to stage two and accrue a total of 22 patients. If 5 or more patients in the overall study have a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR), which combined result in the objective response rate, the study will be declared positive.  
 Secondary study endpoints are transgenic T cell persistence in humans and their ability to home to 
MART -1 positive melanoma metastasis. Analysis will be performed by sampling of peripheral blood and 
tumor deposits for T cell persistence and by non -invasive metabolic imaging using PET scans.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              6  
1.1.1. Cell Dose Escalation within Amendment 6 after Meeting the Safety and Feasibility Criteria 
But Not Meeting the Initial Antitumor Criteria  
 
Under the initial protocol 8 patients were accrued to stage 1 of this clinical trial. The criteria for safety 
and feasibility were met, with no dose limiting toxicities (DLTs) and feasibly delivering the intended cell 
therapies. However, the response rate was less  than required to meet the minimal antitumor activity of 
35% response rate, with less than 2 patients with an objective response at day 90 of the protocol among the first 8 patients. Therefore, the protocol as initially planned was halted and Amendment 6 w as 
generated administering a cell dose escalation up to 10
10 F5 TCR transgenic cells, or the maximum 
feasible for each patient, in a new start of this stage 2 clinical trial with an initial stage enrolling up to 8 patients following the same statistical design as the original protocol.  
 
1.1.2. Cell Dose De- escalation and Change to Low Dose IL -2 with Amendment 11 After Exceeding 
the Safety Criteria Under Amendments 6- 10 
 
The safety of increasing the F5 TCR transgenic cell dose to 10
10 within the basic F5 TCR  ACT protocol 
from UCLA was  assessed under  Amendment s 6 to 10. Dose escalation to up to 1010 cryopreserved cells 
was undertaken in 2 patients , and then the protocol was additionally modified to administer cells that had 
not undergone cryopreservation (Amendments 8 to 10) in three additional patients. However, two of 
these patients developed SAEs of respiratory distress requiring intubation. Thereafter, the total adoptively transferred cell dose was decreased back to a maximum of 10
9 cells and the regimen of  
administration of IL -2 was changed to LD IL -2 (Amendment 11).  
 1.2. Rationale and Hypothesis  
 
Rationale for TCR Transgenic Cell Adoptive Transfer Therapy. The adoptive transfer of large 
numbers of clonally -expanded antigen -specific T cells into patients with melanoma that have received a 
conditioning regimen to deplete endogenous lymphocytes (non -myeloablative but lymphodepleting), 
together with high doses of interleukin- 2 (IL-2), results in the highest rate of melanoma responses (50%) 
reported to date 
2,3. This approach provides a proof -of-principle for adoptive transfer immunotherapy for 
metastatic melanoma, but it is difficult to implement outside of pilot studies given its requirement for 
extensive ex vivo  manipulations. The ability to generate large numbers of tumor antigen -specific T cells 
by a single ex vivo manipulation consisting of the transduction of melanoma- specific TCR genes may 
result in a more broadly applicable approach for patients with melanoma. In this project we will test the 
hypothesis that the engineering of human PBMC to express a high affinity TCR specific for the human melanoma antigen MART- 1 is safe, feasible and can induce objective tumor responses in human 
subjects with advanced melanoma.  Rationale for the Clinical Trial Study Design and Primary Endpoints. This two -stage phase 2 clinical 
trial is designed to allow for the simultaneous testing of 3 primary endpoints. Safety and feasibility are 
being tested during stage one. The clinical trial will not proceed to stage two if one third or greater 
number s of patients develop DLTs. This is the standard level for DLT assessment as safety crit eria in 
phase 1 dose- escalation clinical trials. In addition, if the study drugs and procedures cannot be delivered 
as planned in over one third of patients, assessed by not meeting the study feasibility criteria (see below), then enrollment to stage two w ill not be warranted. The protocol would need to be amended to 
meet the feasibility criteria before further enrollment. Antitumor activity is assessed in the overall phase 2 clinical trial, but the study will only proceed to enroll in stage two if a minimal antitumor activity level is evident in stage one (see below).  
 
 
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              7 1.3 Study Objectives:  
 
Primary:  
 
• SAFETY. This TCR and retroviral vector at a cell dose up to 1011 have been already in clinical 
testing within a reported phase 2 clinical trial at the Surgery Branch/NCI. We started with a maximum of up to 10
9 MART -1 F5 TCR  transgenic cells for infusion. Since we did not meet 
the minimal hurdle of antitumor activity to proceed to stage 2 of this research after having entered the first 8 patients , we increas ed the dose to a maximum of up to 10
10 (Amendment 
6) which is still one log lower than the maximum cell dose within the NCI protocol. Therefore, 
there was  no need for a standard phase1 dose escalation clinical trial design. After enrolling 
two patients under this increased dose, we further changed to infusion of freshly harvested 
transgenic cells in place of cryopreserved cells, keeping the same increased dose of up to 
1010 (Amendment 8). Two out of three patients enrolled under this regimen required 
intubation for respiratory distress. Thereby, we propose to decrease the dose to 109 freshly 
harvested MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic cells and change to low dose IL2 in this amendment 
(Amendment 11). Safety continues to be a major concern and a clinical endpoint of t his 
clinical trial. Therefore, the study is designed with an early stopping rule based on development of DLTs in one third or higher among patients enrolled in the initial stage of this 
clinical trial. S afety will be determined in stage one, and if 3 out of 8 patients have MART -1 
F5 TCR -induced DLT, then further accrual will not be warranted.  
 
• FEASIBILITY. This clinical trial intends to deliver two patient -specific cell therapies, the TCR 
transgenic PBMC and MART -1
26-35 peptide pulsed DC, within a study design that requires 
other significant interventions, like a lymphodepletive conditioning regimen and post -infusion 
high dose IL-2 (up to Amendment 10), and then low dose IL- 2 (after Amendment 11) . This 
protocol has significant technical challenges, making feasibility a primary endpoint and 
requiring a clinical trial design with a feasibility early stopping rule. Therefore, feasibility will 
be determined in stage one, and if 3 out of 8 patients cannot receive the intended cellular 
therapies further accrual wi ll not be warranted.   
 
• CLINICAL RESPONSE. The overall phase 2 clinical trial statistical design has objective tumor response as the main criteria for determining the number of study subjects. Objective 
tumor responses will be determined by RECIST objective response criteria, which are defined 
as adding the rate of complete response (CR) and partial response (PR) at restaging exams 
on day 90 of the protocol. To account for the frequently observed delayed responses with 
immunotherapy, patients with disease stabilization at day 90 who do not receive further therapy but go onto meet RECIST criteria for CR or PR will also be considered as having 
objective response on study. The clinical trial statistical design is aimed at ruling out a 10% 
response rate as the null hypothesis, and has a 35% response rate as the alternative 
hypothesis. The minimum hurdle to proceed from stage one to stage two of this clinical trial 
will be observing at least 2 objective responses out of the 8 initial patients. The study will be considered a positive study ruling out the null hypothesis if 5 patients have an objective 
response among 22 evaluable patients enrolled in the two stages of this phase II clinical trial.  
 Secondary:  
 
• MART -1 F5 TCR TRANSGENIC CELL PERSISTENCE. To determine the persistence of 
MART -1 F5 TCR -engineered PBMC in serial peripheral blood samples and in biopsies of 
accessible metastatic melanoma lesions.  
 
• IN VIVO  MOLECULAR IMAGING. To explore the use of PET -based imaging using the PET 
tracer [
18F]FDG with the goal of determining  if the adoptively transferred MART -1 F5 TCR -
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  01/10/2018   
 
              8 engineered PBMC home and expand in secondary lymphoid organs and melanoma tumor 
deposits. Findings with non- invasive molecular imaging will be compared with results from 
immune monitoring assays in blood samples and tumor biopsies at different intervals after 
MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC adoptive transfer.   
 1.4 Study Population  
 
Subjects must be HLA- A*0201, have locally advanced (stage IIIc) or metastatic melanoma (stage IV) 
with no standard therapeutic options with a curative intent, that is MART -1-positive, age greater than or 
equal to 18, clinical performance status of ECOG 0 or 1, life expectancy greater than 3 months, and be seronegative for HIV, Hepatitis B and C (seropositive subjects would be more likely to have toxic effects 
from the conditioning chemotherapy or may not tolerate it). Study subjects should have accessible 
lesions amenable to outpatient tumor biopsies that still allow an adequate assessment of the primary 
endpoint of antitumor activity  and clinical response assessment.  
 
1.5 Number of Patients  
 
The phase 2 clinical trial design will have two treatment stages, an initial one with 8 patients, followed by 
a second stage with 14 additional patients (for a total of 22 patients). All patients will receive the same combined therapy of: 1) a lymphodepleting preparative regimen, 2) autologous PBMC retrovirally -
transduced with a MART -1 F5 TCR, followed by 3) IL- 2 and 4) MART -1
26-35 peptide–pulsed DC.   
 
1.6 Study Duration:  
 
Total duration of the st udy is estimated to be approximately 18- 24 months, if recruitment proceeds 
optimally with 2 patients screened each month, resulting in a mean of 1 to 2 patients entered in the trial 
every month.  
 The initial screening period will be 30 days, but patients will be allowed to enroll after the 30- day initial 
screening period, for up to approximately 60 days, using the same screening procedure test results to 
avoid unnecessary assay duplication. A pregnancy test must be completed within 14 days prior to 
dosing, if applicable.  
 
1.7 Study Schematic  
 Patients will undergo an initial leukapheresis to collect PBMC. The manufacture of both transgenic T 
cells and DC will be started on the day of leukapheresis. Immediately after processing the PBMC, 
1.5x10
9 PBMC will be  put in activation media containing OKT3 (anti -CD3 antibody) and IL -2 for two 
days, 12x108 PBMC will be set up for DC culture and the rest will be cryopreserved.  The next day after 
leukapheresis, patient will start receiving the non- myeloablative conditioning chemotherapy. Following 
activation, cells are transduced twice on two consecutive days with the MSGV1- F5AfT2AB retrovirus in 
retronectin- coated plates. Transduced cells will be expanded ex vivo  for 4 days after the first 
transduction and then put into an infusion bag to be infused i.v. fresh on the day of harvest as soon as 
the lot release is cleared. The following day, after a week of ex vivo  differentiation culture in GM -CSF 
and IL- 4, DC is harvested, peptide pulsed and administered i.d. Patient will also receive systemic low 
dose IL -2 for 7 days for up to 14 doses .  
 In the event the physician decides that the patient will not be clinically fit to receive the gene- modified 
MART -1 TCR CTL infusion within 24 hours of the scheduled day of cell harvest, t he cells will be 
cryopreserved on the harvest day for later use. 
 
  
 
   10 2.0 Schedule of Events 
 
 Screening  Day   
-6 Day 
–5 
and 
-4 Day 
–4 to 
-1 Day 
0 Day 
1 Day 
1 to 
7 Day 
14 Day 
20 
to 
40 Day 
30 Day 
45 Day 
60 Day 
75 Day 
75-
90 Day 
90 Q2-3 
mo up 
to 
Year 
2a Q6 o 
up to 
Year 
5f Q12 
mo up 
to 
Year 
15g 
Informed C onsent  X                  
Visit and Physical  X X        X X X X  X X X X 
HLA Typing  X                  
PCR or IHC for 
MART -1 X                  
CBCb X X X X X     X X X  X     
Metabolic  Panelb X X X X X     X X X  X     
LDH X           X X X  X     
CRP x             X     
Uric Acid  x x                 
Magnesium  x x                 
Phosphorous  x x                 
Lipase  x                  
Amylase  x                  
Coagulation Tests: 
PT/INR, PTT  x                  
Autoantibody Panel  X             X     
Thyroid Hormones  X             X     
Pregnancy Testc X              X     
Infectious disease 
serologies  X                  
CT or MRI Scan of 
the Brain  X             X     
Otologic Visit  X             X     
Ophthalmologic Visit  X             X     
Leukapheresis   X       X           
Plasmapheresis   X       X          
Blood for p lasma 
(cytokines)d          X X            
Blood for cell 
analyses  (immune 
monitoring)e  
X        X   X X X X  X X X X 
Biopsy  X        X          
ECHO or MUGA  X                  
ECG X                  
PFT X                  
MART -1 F5 TCR Protocol  8/1/2016                                              
 
11  Screening  Day   
-6 Day 
–5 
and 
-4 Day 
–4 to 
-1 Day 
0 Day 
1 Day 
1 to 
7 Day 
14 Day 
20 
to 
40 Day 
30 Day 
45 Day 
60 Day 
75 Day 
75-
90 Day 
90 Q2-3 
mo up 
to 
Year 
2a Q6 o 
up to 
Year 
5f Q12 
mo up 
to 
Year 
15g 
PET/CT Scans  X         X     X     
Inpatient admission   X                 
Cyclophosphamide    X                
Fludarabine     X                
MART -1 F5 TCR 
PBMC      X              
Low d ose IL -2       X            
MART -126-35/Dendritic  
Cell Vaccine       X   X  X         
aLong term follow up is described in section 8.15.   For the first 2 years, office visits  and blood collection will be at least every 3 months.  
bWhile patients are in the hospital, p hysical, CBC and metabolic panel will be per J -Medicine protocol.  
cFemales only.  
dAdditional blood for protein analyses in plasma or serum will only be collected  after day 30 if there is a suspicion of a cytokine storm or an acute event 
requiri ng additional analyses in blood. The plasma or serum may be collected as 5- 10 ml blood samples in anticoagulant or stored as the liquid phase of a 
Ficoll gradient when storing PBMCs.  
eBlood draws on these days should be performed if considered safe due to the pancytopenia and hemodynamic state of the patient. Can be done +/ - 6 days.  
fAfter 2 years, office visits or phone follow -up at least every 6 months.  Collection of blood for immune monitoring analysis and for RCR testing annually.  
gAfter 5 years, office visits or phone follow -up at least annually. Collection of blood for immune monitoring analysis and for RCR testing annually.   
In general, changes in the range of 7 days up or down from the scheduled event will not be considered significant deviations fr om the study timeline.  
 
  
   12 3.0 TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ACT: Adoptive cell transfer  
AE: Adverse event  
ATG: Anti-Thymocite Globulin  
CBC: Complete blood count  
CFR: Code of federal regulations  
CMV: Cytomegalovirus  
CR: Complete response  
CRF: Case report form  
CRP: C reactive protein  
CT: Computer tomography.  
CTLs: Cytotoxic T lymphocytes  
DC: Dendritic cells  
DLT: Dose limiting toxicity  
DSMB: Data Safety and Monitoring Board  
EBV: Epstein -Barr virus  
FDA: Food and Drug Administration 
[18F]FLT: [18F] fluoro-L- thymidin e 
[18F]FDG: [18F]fluorodeoxy -glucose  
GaLV: Gibbon ape leukemia virus  
GCP: Good Clinical Practices  
GCV: Ganciclovir  GM-CSF: Granulocyte- macrophage colony stimulating factor  
GMP: Good Manufacturing Practices  
GVHD: Graft -versus -host disease  
GVL: Graft -versu s-leukemia  
HBV: Hepatitis B virus  
HCV: Hepatitis C virus  
HCT: Hematopoietic cell transplantation  
H&E: Hematoxilin eosin staining 
HEPA: High -efficiency particulate air  
HGMP: Human Gene Medicine Program  
HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus  
HLA: Human leukocyte antigen  
IBC: Institutional Biosafety Committee  
ICF: Informed consent form  
ICS: Intracellular Cytokine Staining  
i.d.: Intradermal  
IHC: Immunohistochemistry  
IU VPF: Indiana University Virus Production Facility  i.v.: Intravenous  
IQAC: Internal Quality Assu rance Committee  
IRB: Institutional Review Board 
ISPRC: Internal Scientific Peer Review Committee IL: Interleukin  
JCCC: Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center  
LDH: Lactate dehydrogenase 
LTR: Long terminal repeat  
MHC: Major histocompatibility complex  
MLV: Molo nely Leukemia Virus  
MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging 
MSCV: Murine stem cell virus  
N.C.I.: National Cancer Institute  
NGVL: National Gene Vector Laboratory  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
13 N.I.H.: National Institutes of Health  
PBMC: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells  
PCR: Polymerase chain reaction  
PD: Progressive disease 
PET: Positron emitting tomography  
PR: Partial response  
RAC: Recombinant Advisory Committee  
RCR: Replication competent retrovirus  
RECIST: Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
SAE: Serious adverse event  
S.C.: Subcutaneous  
SD: Stable disease  
SUV: Standardized uptake value TSH: Thyroid stimulating hormone  
TCR: T cell receptor  
UCLA: University of California Los Angeles  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
14 4.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
4.1 Primary:  
 
4.1.1 Safety   The MART -1 F5 TCR and the retroviral vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB have already been tested in two 
clinical experiences, including a completed and reported phase 2 clinical trial by investigators at the 
Surgery Branch/NCI 
7, and the second experience being the 8 patients treated at UCLA under this 
same IND with the F5 TCR transgenic cell dose up to 109. Overall, the ACT of F5 TCR transgenic 
cells after a lymphodepletion protocol with high dose IL- 2 and DC vaccination was well tolerated with 
no dose limiting toxicities (DLTs) developed in the first 8 patients. The safety of increasing the F5 TCR 
transgenic cell dose to 1010 within the basic F5 TCR ACT protocol from UCLA was  assessed in stage 
1 of the protocol described in Amendment 6. Dose escalation to up to 1010 cells was undertaken in the 
following 2  patients , and after that the protocol was additionally modified to administer cells that had 
not undergone cryopreservation (Amendment 8) in three additional patients. However,  two of these 
patients had serious adverse events (SAE) of respiratory distress requiring intubation. Therefore, the total adoptively transferred cell dose was decreased back to a maximum of 10
9 cells and the regimen 
of administration of IL -2 was changed t o LD IL -2 (Amendment 11).  
 Safety evaluations will continue into the second stage of the study and the same early stopping rules 
for DLTs will apply to the second stage of this study. Safety remains the priority in all phases and 
stage of the investigational studies.  
 
4.1.2 Feasibility  
 
This protocol attempts to administer two cell -based therapies that require laboratory manipulation 
within the setting of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). Each cell therapy, the MART -1 F5 TCR 
engineered T cells and the MAR T-1
26-35 peptide pulsed DC, will require strict lot release criteria of the 
final product before administration. Feasibility will be determined in the first stage, and if 3 out of 8 
patients cannot receive the intended cellular therapies, or there is suboptimal TCR transgenic cell 
persistence in vivo , further accrual will not be warranted. The feasibility assessment will be based on:  
 i) Potential problems in the manufacturing of MART- 1 F5 TCR engineered PBMC or the MART -
1
26-35 peptide–pulsed DC vaccines.  
ii) Suboptimal number of MART -1 F5 TCR engineered T cells recovered from patients at pre -
specified time points.  
 
4.1.3. Clinical Response 
 Objective tumor responses will be determined by RECIST objective response criteria. The rate of CR 
plus PR will be used to assess the primary endpoint of antitumor activity with a clinical trial design to 
rule out a 10% response rate as the null hypothesis, and 35% response rate as the alternative 
hypothesis. Response assessment will be performed by comparing standard CT imag ing scans and 
photographs of target lesions from baseline with repeated imaging tests obtained at day +90 after the TCR transgenic PBMC adoptive transfer.  
 
4.2 Secondary  
 4.2.1 MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic T Cell Persistence.  
 
The persistence of MART -1 F5 TC R-engineered cells will be determined by analyzing serial 
peripheral blood samples for the presence of T cells with the MART -1 F5 TCR by tetramer or 
dextramer  analysis. In addition and when technically feasible, samples from metastatic melanoma 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
15 sites will be biopsied and assessed for the presence of the MART -1 F5 transgenic cells by IHC, PCR 
and/or immune monitoring assays in non- adherent TIL.  
 
4.2.2 In Vivo  Imaging.  
 
The adoptive transfer of MART -1 redirected TCR transgenic cells has the goal of targeting a tumor 
antigen expressed by melanoma cells. We plan to conduct serial PET molecular imaging using the tracer [
18F]FDG  to determine changes in the metabolic rate in secondary lymphoid organs and tumor 
metastasis. Accumulation of immune cells in secondary lymphoid organs and tumor lesions will result 
in an increase in glucose uptake and retention, which will result in an increase in the standardized 
uptake value (SUV) of [18F]FDG . The images obtained by whole- body PET will be matched with 
analysis of tumor biopsies to attempt to quantify the number of tumor- infiltrating MART -1 F5 TCR 
transgenic T cells.  
 
5.0 BACKGROUND 
 
5.1 Current Management of Surgically -incurable Melanoma  
 
Locally advanced and metastatic melanoma is notoriously resistant to standard forms  of therapy. Five 
agents are approved by the U. S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of stage IV 
melanoma . The chemotherapy drugs dacarbazine (DTIC) and hydroxiurea, and the administration of 
high doses of IL- 2 8,9 were approved based on single arm studies . . These  have response rates below 
15%, and neither form of therapy has been shown to increase survival in a randomized trial. Two new 
agents have been approved for the treatment of metastatic melanoma based on a demonstrated 
impact on overall survival, the anti -CTLA4 antibody ipilimumab (Yervoy) and the BRAF inhibitor 
vemurafenib (Zelboraf). I pilimumab induces low frequency of response rates (in the range of 10%) 
that tend to be durable and have translated in to improved overall survival in two randomized clinical 
trials  10,11. Vemurafenib gives a high response rate in BRAF V600 mutant metastatic melanoma, but 
median duration of response is 6- 7 months 12,13. In a randomized clinical trial it improved overall 
survival compared to dacarbazine 14. 
 5.2 Rationale for Immune- based Therapies for Metastatic Melanoma.   
 
Progress in our understanding of how the immune system recognizes and kills cancer cells has led to 
the notion that high levels of circulating, tumor -antigen -specific T cells may be required for effective 
antitumor responses. Active immunotherapy with several forms of cancer vaccines has shown that antigen -specific T cells can be activated and occasionally lead to antitumor responses 
15,16. However, 
the circulating levels of antigen- specific T cells and tumor response rates are much lower than 
desirable 17. 
 
Adoptive transfer of clonally -expanded, tumor antigen- specific lymphocytes to lymphopenic hosts after 
nonmyeloablative conditioning chemotherapy has resulted in cell proliferation and persistent clonal 
repopulation 2. This approach has resulted in an objective response rate over 50% in patients with 
metastatic melanoma, that holds up in larger groups of patients 3. The major limitation for the broad 
clinical applicability of this approach is the requirement for large -scale ex vivo  lymphocyte culture 
expansion (up to 1011 cells) 2, which restricts this approach to a highly select group of patients. 
 
5.3 MART -1 Melanoma Antigen as Target for Melanoma Immunotherapy  
 Multiple lines of evidence suggest that most tumor responses to immunotherapy involve the activation 
of tumor antigen- specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) 
18. These immune cells have a high 
affinity receptor, the TCR that specifically recognizes its ligand, a complex of MHC molecules with an 8 to 10 amino acid peptide that provides the antigen specificity. When the antigen specificity of T cell 
clones obtained from TIL was assessed, over 80% of them were restricted to the MART -1/Melan- A 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
16 melanoma an tigen 19,20. Over the past 10 years we have conducted prior experimental immunotherapy 
clinical trials att empting to induce melanoma regression by activating MART -1-specific T cells. These 
experiences demonstrated that a subset of patients have immune mediated tumor regressions to 
MART -1-based immunotherapy that are extremely long lived, lasting years without relapses 4,5.  
 
5.4. Why Gene Therapy? 
 
The adoptive transfer of large numbers of antigen- specific T cell s leads to the highest percentage of 
tumor regressions reported in patients with melanoma, but this approach is only feasible in a minority 
of patient where TIL can be cloned and expanded from melanoma metastasis 2,3. Genetic engineering 
of T cells with optimal TCRs would make this approach more broadly applicable. There is no other approach that would allow generating large numbers of T cells with uniform specificity for melanoma 
tumor antigens with a short (less than one week) ex vivo  cell manipulation. Therefore, gene transfer 
techniques are the only approach that would allow testing this concept in human subjects, as supported by preliminary data from a published clinical trial at the Surgery Branch/NCI  
21.  
 5.5 TCR Gene Therapy  
 
The transfer of TCR genes is necessary and sufficient to endow recipient T cells with the specificity of 
donor T cells 
22. Genetically modified T cells carrying foreign TCRs respond to target antigen 
recognition through the transgenic TCR both in vitro  and in vivo , leading to effective immune 
responses to viral and tumor challenges in murine adoptive transfer models 23. T cells redirected by 
TCR gene transfer are fully functional after transfer into mice, and have been shown to expand dramatically (over three logs) after encounter with their cognate antigen in vivo  
24. Preliminary data in 
humans provides evidence that the same is true in patients with metastatic melanoma 21. 
 
5.6 Retroviral Vector -based Human Gene Medicine  
 
Retroviral -mediated gene transfer is an efficient means for the expression of transgene into actively 
dividing primary cells. Up to 50- 60% of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and T lymphocytes can be 
transduc ed if cells are non- specifically activated, usually using a cytokine cocktail for HSC and either 
immobilized anti -CD3 and anti -CD28 or cytokines for T cells 25-27.  
 
5.7 Safety and Regulatory Issues Regarding Retroviral -based Gene Transfer Approaches.   
 
Ten infants with X -linked severe combined immune deficiency (SCID) resulting from a mutation in the 
γc gene (a surface cytokine receptor) were successfully treated with bone marrow transplantation of 
autologous HSC genetically modified to express the missing gene using retroviral vectors. Two of the infants developed a T cell leukemia approximately 3 years later. In both cases, the retrovirus carrying 
the γc gene had inserted near LMO2 , an oncogene that is activated in some forms of acute leukemias 
28,29. This event highlights the risks of insertional mutagenesis induced by DNA -integrating viral 
vectors. However, multiple lines of evidence suggest that this may be an isolated event linked to the possible oncogenic capacity of the γ c gene when under the control of a retroviral promoter, with a 
second hit being the activation of an endogenous oncogene like LMO2  
28-30.  
 
Retroviral vectors have a bias towards preferential integration in gene- rich regions, particularly near 
transcribed genes 31. The theoretical concern of insertional mutagenesis had been recognized early in 
the use of retrovirus as gene therapy vectors, since retrovirus cause tumors in mice, and their ability 
to transactivate normally silent genes has been a useful technique for the description of multiple 
oncogenes 32. However, retroviral vector oncogenesis from insertional mutagenesis has proven to be 
extremely rare in human subjects. Over 250 patients in over 40 clinical trials have received stem cells 
genetically modified with retroviral vectors  30, and the only cases of malignant transform ation are the 
two infants in the SCID study 28,29. Therefore, particularities of this study (the γc gene functioning as a 
first hit for leukemogenesis, a predilection for vector insertion near the LMO2 oncogene as second hit, 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
17 the baseline immune deficiency of the patients not being able to control transformed clones) seem to 
have played a major role in these two cases 33. 
 
5.8 Rationale for the Use of 2A Picornavirus Sequences 
 
Problems with expressing multiple genes in a single vector become apparent with the simultaneous use of multiple promoters and IRES sequences. The different encoded proteins are usually not expressed at  the same level. This is a critical issue for this protocol, since the correct surface 
expression of a functional transgenic MART -1 F5 TCR requires both proteins to pair, and in addition 
try to decrease the heterodimerization with other endogenous TCR chains. For example, a MART -1 
F5 TCR α chain, produced in excess of the MART -1 TCR β chain, may pair with an endogenous TCR 
β chain, resulting in the generation of TCR with specificity other than MART -1 
34. This problem has 
been circumvented by using picornavirus -derived “self -cleaving” 2A- like sequences. Using this 
approach, Szymczak et al . 35 have efficiently generated multicistronic retroviral vectors (with efficient 
translation of at least 4 genes) to restore TCR expression in CD3- deficient mice.  
 The original description of the 2A self -cleaving peptides was done by Martin Ryan and colleagues  at 
the University of St. Andrews, U.K., who were working on the Foot and Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV) and other picornavirus 
36. The FMDV encores some of its proteins in a long single open reading frame 
(ORF) that is cleaved post -translationally by viral proteinases. At one position of this polyprotein there 
is a rapid co- translational self -processing due to the presence of an 18 amino acid peptide (termed 
2A) that directed its own separation from the growing polyprotein 36-38. The use of 2A- based vectors to 
express the two MART -1 TCR genes would be predicted to allow for the coordinated expression of 
the 2 transgenes.  
 
5.9 PET -based Molecular Imaging  
 PET provides quantitative measurements of the 3D distribution of probes labeled with positron 
emitting radio -nuclides. PET scanners routinely measure radioactivity concentrations in the 10
-12 M 
range, making PET the most sensitive imaging technology applicable to both preclinical and clinical studies. MicroPET scanners approach a spatial resolution of ~1 mm
3 while clinical scanners have an 
intrinsic resolution of ~4 -5 mm3 39. Currently, PET imaging of metabolic activity is extensively used in 
cancer diagnosis, with more than 3 million PET scans administered in clinical centers worldwide in 
2006. A majority of these scans use the glucose analog 2-[18F]-fluoro -2-deoxy -d-glucose ([18F]FDG) to 
measure the rate of glycolysis, a metabolic process that is unregulated in the majority of cancers. 
[18F]FDG PET allows early detection and staging of cancer, as well as evaluation of therapeutic 
interventions. In addition to cancer, [18F]FDG also accumulates at sites of inflammation or active 
immune responses. Similar to malignant cells, T cells and other immune cells rapidly induce glycolysis 
following activation. Increased [18F]FDG retention has been reported in several immune and 
inflammatory processes including autoimmune hepatitis, viral infections, systemic lupus 
erythematosus  and rheumatoid arthritis.  
 The concept of PET measurements of metabolic processes exemplified by [
18F]FDG has been applied 
to the development of PET imaging probes sensitive to the rate of DNA synthesis and cell 
proliferation. The prototype for these probes is 3’ -18fluorothymidine ([18F]FLT), a nucleoside analog 
developed by Shields and colleagues 40. The accumulation of [18F]FLT in prolifer ating cells reflects the 
enzymatic activity of thymidine kinase 1, a cytosolic deoxynucleoside kinase which catalyzes the 
transfer of a γ -phosphate group from a nucleoside triphosphate to the 5’ -OH group of thymidine. TK1 
expression is regulated during cell cycle: it starts increasing in late G1 cells, reaches a maximum in 
the S phase coinciding with DNA synthesis, and markedly decreases during mitosis.  
  
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
18 5.10 MART -1 TCR-engineered T cell Experience at NCI Surgery Branch 
 
5.10.1 Use of Other TCRs in Humans.  The Surgery Branch/NCI has initiated two similar TCR gene 
transfer protocols using other TCRs, which as of the Fall of 2007 have enrolled a total of 54 patients:  
 
i) NCI trial 04 -C-0251 (OBA# 0308- 599, IBC# RD -03-XII-01) has treated 35 patients using a 
similar retroviral vector backbone and packaging cell line proposed in the current study. This 
clinical trial used a TCR that had much lower avidity for MART -1, which was termed F4  21. 
There were no adverse events associated with these patient treatments that were attributed to 
the gene transfer therapy. There have been four clinical responses (PR) observed during the 
trial, and two were long- term PRs (>12 months).  
 ii) NCI trial 07 -C-0175A (OBA# 0703- 840) has treated 20 patients using the same retroviral 
vector backbone and packaging cell line proposed in the current study. The protocol was feasible and overall safe, with major toxicities attributed to the F5 TCR transgenic cells being anterior uveitis in 55% of patients and hearing loss in 50% of patients  
7. Antitumor activity was 
demonstrated with 6 partial responses (PR) out of 20 patients (30%), with 3 of the responses being durable beyond 1 year  
7. 
 iii) NCI trial 07 -C-0003 (OBA#0602- 759, IBC # RD -06-II-10) has treated 7 patients using the 
same retroviral vector backbone and packaging cell line, the only difference being the TCR 
protein is specific for p53. There have been no adverse events associated with these patient 
treatments that were attributed to the gene transfer therapy. There has been no clinical 
response observed to date.  
 
5.10.2 Clinical Use of the MART -1 F5 TCRs in Humans.  NCI trial 07 -C-0175A (OBA# 0703 -840) 
uses the same MART -1 F5 TCR and retroviral vector construct proposed in the current protocol 
7,41. 
This clinical trial has initiated patient accrual and data is being generated currently. Below we list the 
major similarities and differences between both clinical trials: 
 
i) Major similarities:  
 
- TCR: Both clinical trials use the same MART -1 F5 TCR, derived from TIL clone DMF5, the 
highest affinity MART -1 TCR is a large screen at the Surgery Branch/NCI 7,41. 
- Retrovirus: Both clinical trials use the same retrovirus vector backbone, construct and 
master cell bank, and produced at the same facility, the Indiana University Vector 
Production Facility (IU VPF).  
- Target cells: Both experiences include the transduction of activated PBMC. Since a TCR can only be expressed and functional on the cell surface in cells that are CD3 positive, thi s 
allows the TCR engineering of both CD8+ CTL and CD4+ T helper cells. Therefore, CD4+ T cells acquire a TCR that redirects them to recognize antigen presented by MHC class I 
molecules.  
- Clinical trial design: Both are phase 2 clinical trials with primary e ndpoints of safety and 
antitumor activity.  
- Conditioning regimen: Both use the same non- myelodepleting but lymphodepleting 
chemotherapy conditioning regimen based on the administration of cyclophosphamide and fludarabine to allow homeostatic proliferation of the adoptively transferred TCR transgenic cells.  
 ii) Major differences:  
 
- Rapid Expansion Protocol (REP): The F5 clinical trial at the Surgery Branch/NCI 
7 includ ed 
a 2-week ex vivo  expansion after TCR engineering of lymphocytes following the REP 
protocol described by Riddell and colleagues 42. The clinical trial at UCLA will not include 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
19 this forced ex vivo  T cell expansion. The main reason is that several preclinical models 
suggest that extended ex vivo  expansion of lymphocytes before adoptive transfer results in 
terminally differentiated cells with limited in vivo  proliferation ability 43,44. Therefore, at 
UCLA the TCR transduced PBMC will only be kept for up to 96 hours in culture after the 
first transduction before re- infusing into patients.  
- Cell dose for adoptive transfer: Given that the UCLA study will not use REP, the target cell dose for adoptive transfer is one to two  log lower at UCLA than in the clinical trial 
conducted at the Surgery Branch/NCI  
7, where up to 1011 TCR transgenic cells were 
infused to patients.  
- Dendritic cell vaccination: Provision of antigen in the form of a vaccine is required in some 
animal models to support the antitumor activity of adoptively transferred T cells, most 
notably with the pmel -1 adoptive transfer model 45,46. This is because exposure to antigen 
while undergoing homeostatic proliferation stimulates further T cell expansion 47,48. We 
propose to use MART -126-35 peptide- loaded GM -CSF/IL-4 differentiated DC, a vaccine that 
has resulted 2 durable complete responders out of 18 patients with metastatic melanoma 
treated, currently ongoing beyond 5 and 6 years, respectively 4,5. 
- PET imaging: We include molecular imaging using the standard [18F]FDG PET probe, 
which allows non- invasive imaging of a key feature of activated lymphocytes, their hig h 
uptake of glucose due to aerobic glycolysis.  
- Low dose IL- 2: The UCLA clinical trial initially  used high dose IL- 2 post -adoptive transfer 
as means to provide helper cytokines to support the proliferation of adoptively transferred 
TCR transgenic cells.  After Amendment 11 this will change to low dose IL- 2. 
 
6.0 PRELIMINARY DATA  
 
6.1 Origin and Functionality of the MART -1 F5 TCR.  
 
The retroviral vector, MSGV1- F5AfT2AB, expressing the MART -1 F5 TCR, has been provided by Dr. 
Steven A. Rosenberg from the Surgery  Branch/NCI. This high affinity TCR specific for the MART -127-35 
epitope in the context of HLA -A*0201 has been selected based on its high affinity for its antigen and 
because it confers high functionality when genetically engineered into CD3 positive cells . 
 The low response rate in the prior MART -1 TCR gene transfer protocol at the Surgery Branch/NCI 
21 
led these investigators to attempt to identify MART -1 reacti ve TCR with higher avidity than the MART -
1 F4 TCR used in the prior gene therapy clinical trial. They generated multiple MART -1 reactive 
clones from a variety of MART -1 reactive tumor infiltrating lymphocyte cultures. Twenty four clones 
were isolated and tested for reactivity against the MART -1 peptide and against A2+ MART -1 
expressing melanoma lines as well as the 888 A2- melanoma line 41,49.  
 The TCR utilized in their prior clinical trial came from the DMF4 TIL clone. When compared to many 
other MART -1 reactive clones this clone had only medium avidity for recognition of MART -1 peptide 
as well as MART -1 expressing tumors. The highest avidity T cell clone identified in this analysis was 
the DMF5 clone. In an overnight co -culture assay measuring interferon -gamma release the DMF5 
clone had the highest recognition of T2 cells pulsed with the native MART -1
27-35 peptide. This clone 
secreted 17,161pgm/ml of interferon gamma in an overnight co- culture assay compared to 
1,987pgm/ml secreted by the DMF4 clone used in prior trials. In addition, the recognition of the 
mel526 and the mel624 A2+ MART -1+ cell lines was also higher utilizing the DMF5 clone than the 
DMF4 clone (5806 and 10,865 pgm/ml compared to 1780 and 2397 pgm/ml). Neither clone had 
significant recognition of the control A2- MART -1+ mel 888 line 41,49,50. 
 Investigators at the Surgery Branch/NCI next cloned the genes encoding the alpha and beta chains of 
the TCR from many of these cloned TIL populations. The genes encoding these alpha and beta 
chains were then electroporated into the same activated donor CD8
+ PBMC. The DMF5 
electroporated TCR was again the most reactive TCR when assessed against the MART -1 peptide 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
20 pulsed onto T2 cells as well as to A2+ MART -1+ melanoma cell lines. The reactivity of the TCRs 
recapitulated the reactivity seen in the original clones. They next checked lysis by these 
electroporated TCR in a 4- hour chromium release assay. Again the DMF5 TCR outperformed all of 
the other TCR and was approximately 10 times more avid compared to the DMF4 TCR used in their 
prior gene therapy clinical trial 41,51. 
 In summary, the anti -MART -1 F5 TCR appears to have excellent reactivity against both the MART -1 
peptide as well as melanoma cell lines. Investigators at the Surgery Branch/NCI have developed a 
GMP quality retroviral vector encoding the alpha and beta chains of the MART -1 F5 TCR for use in an 
ongoing phase 2 clinical trial 
51.  
 6.2 Data Using the MART -1 F5 TCR Retroviral Vector (MSGV1- F5AfT2AB) in Human Subjects at 
the Surgery Branch/NCI  
 Investigators at the Surgery Branch led by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg have reported on 20 patients treated with the ACT of lymphocytes expressing the F5 TCR  
7. The Surgery Branch protocol differs 
with the UCLA protocol in that up to 1011 TCR transgenic cells were administered, that these cells are 
generated and infused fresh (without cryopreservation as at UCLA), and that no DC vaccine is 
included. The protocol was feasible and overall safe, with major toxicities attributed to the F5 TCR 
transgenic cells being anterior uveitis in 55% of patients and hearing loss in 50% of patients 7. 
Antitumor activity was demonstrated with 6 partial responses (PR) out of 20 patients (30%), with 3 of 
the responses being durable beyond 1 year 7. 
 
7.0 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
 
7.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
a) Histologically confirmed melanoma that is considered surgically incurable with either:  
a. Stage IIIc melanoma including locally relapsed, satellite, in- transit lesions or bulky draining 
node metastasis.  
b. Stage IV melanoma (M1a, M1b or M1c).  
b) At least 1 lesion amenable for outpatient biopsies; this should be a cutaneous or palpable 
metastatic site or a deeper site accessible by image -guided biopsy that is deemed safe to access 
by the treating physicians and interventional radiologists. Patients without accessible lesions for biopsy but with prior tissue available from metastatic disease would be eligible at the investigator’s 
discretion.  
c) MART -1 positive melanoma by RT -PCR or IHC. 
d) HLA-A*0201 (HLA -A2.1) positivity by  molecular subtyping*.  
e) Age greater than or equal to 18 years old.  
f) Life expectancy greater than 3 months assessed by a study physician.  
g) A minimum of one measurable lesion defined as:  
a. Meeting the criteria for measurable disease according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST).  
b. Skin lesion(s) selected as non -completely biopsied target lesion(s) that can be accurately 
measured and recorded by color photography with a ruler to document the size of the target lesion(s).   
h) No restriction based on prior treatments.  
i) ECOG performance status (PS) 0 or 1.  
j) Adequate bone marrow and hepatic function determined within 30- 60 days prior to enrollment, 
defined as:  
a. Absolute neutrophil count ≥ 1.5 x 10
9 cells/L. 
b. Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L. 
c. Hemoglobin ≥ 10 g/dL. 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
21 d. Aspartate and alanine aminotransferases (AST, ALT) ≤ 2.5 x ULN ( ≤ 5 x ULN, if 
documented liver metastases are present).  
e. Total bilirubin ≤  2 x ULN (except patients with documented Gilbert’s syndrome). 
f. Creatinine < 2 mg/dl (or a glomerular filtration rate > 60).  
k) Must be willing and able to accept at least two leukapheresis procedures.  
l) Must be willing and able to accept at least two tumor biopsies . 
m) Must be willing and able to provide written informed consent.  
 
*Patients with HLA -A*0205 (HLA -A2.5) positivity by molecular subtyping may be eligible if there is 
demonstration that they can correctly present the MART -126-35 epitope as stimulators for IFN -gamma 
production by MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic cells.  
 
7.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
a) Previously known hypersensitivity to any of the agents used in this study.  
b) Received systemic treatment for cancer, including immunotherapy, within one month prior to initiation of dosing within this protocol. However, cell harvesting by leukapheresis may be 
performed before one month from prior therapy if the study investigators consider that it will not 
have a detrimental impact on the generate of the two cell therapies in this protocol.  
c) History of, or significant evidence of risk for, chronic inflammatory or autoimmune disease (eg, 
Addison’s disease, multiple sclerosis, Graves disease, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, inflammatory bowel 
disease, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, hypophysitis, pituitary 
disorders, etc.). Patients will be eligible if prior autoimmune disease is not deemed to be active 
(e.g. fibrotic damage of the thyroid after thyroiditis or its treatment, with stable thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy). Vitiligo will not be a basis for exclusion.  
d) History of inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or other chronic gastrointestinal conditions 
associated with diarrhea or bleeding, or current acute colitis of any origin.  
e) Potential requirement for systemic corticosteroids or concurrent immunosuppressive drugs based on prior history or received systemic steroids within the last 4 weeks prior to enrollment (inhaled or 
topical steroids at standard doses are allowed).  
f) HIV seropositivity or other congenital or acquired immune deficiency state, which would increase the risk of opportunistic infections and other complications during chemotherapy -induced 
lymphodepletion. If there is a positive result in the infectious disease testing that was not previously known, the patient will be referred to their primary physician and/or infectious disease specialist.  
g) Hepatiti s B or C seropositivity with evidence of ongoing liver damage, which would increase the 
likelihood of hepatic toxicities from the chemotherapy conditioning regimen and supportive 
treatments. If there is a positive result in the infectious disease testing that was not previously 
known, the patient will be referred to their primary physician and/or infectious disease specialist.  
h) Dementia or significantly altered mental status that would prohibit the understanding or rendering of informed consent and compliance with the requirements of this protocol.   
i) Clinically active brain metastases. Radiological documentation of absence of active brain 
metastases at screening is required for all patients. Prior evidence of brain metastasis 
successfully treated with surgery  or radiation therapy will not be exclusion for participation as long 
as they are deemed under control at the time of study enrollment.  
j) Pregnancy or breast -feeding. Female patients must be surgically sterile or be postmenopausal for 
two years, or must agree to use effective contraception during the period of treatment and 
6 months after. All female patients with reproductive potential must have a negative pregnancy 
test (serum/urine) within 14 days from starting the conditioning chemotherapy.  The definition of effective contraception will be based on the judgment of the study investigators.  
k) Since IL- 2 is administered following cell infusion:  
a. Patients will be excluded if they have a history of clinically significant E CG abnormalities, 
symptoms of cardiac ischemia or arrhythmias and have a left ventricular ejection fraction 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
22 (LVEF) < 45% on a cardiac stress test (stress thallium, stress MUGA, dobutamine 
echocardiogram, or other stress test)  
b. Similarly, patients who are 50 years old with a baseline LVEF < 45% will be excluded.  
c. Patients with ECG results of any conduction delays (PR interval >200ms, QTC > 480ms), sinus bradycardia (resting heart rate <50 beats per minute), sinus tachycardia (HR>120 
beats per minute) will be evaluated by a cardiologist prior to starting the trial. Patients with 
any arrhythmias, including atrial fibrillation/atrila flutter, excessive ectopy (defined as >20 
PVCs per minute), ventricular tachycardia, 3
rd degree heart block will be excluded from the 
study unless cleared by a cardiologist . 
d. Patients with pulmonary function test abnormalities as evidenced by a FEV 1/FVC< 70% of 
predicted for normality will be excluded.   
 
7.3. Definition of Study Enrollment Date  
 
Enrollment will be considered the time when the eligibility criteria is being entered into the study eligibility form after the screening tests have been completed to declare if the patient is able or not 
able to be considered for this research.  
 
8.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 This is a phase 2 study to determine the safety, feasibility and antitumor activity of retrovirus -
transduced T cell immunotherapy in patients with metastatic melanoma. The retrovirus vector encodes the MART -1 F5 alpha and beta TCR chains. The retrovirus vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB will be 
used to transduce autologous PBMC. Infusions of a target minimum cell dose of 10
8 TCR transgenic 
cells will be performed at day 0. Subjects will be followed for laboratory and clinical adverse events, for evidence of replication competent retrovirus (RCR), and for survival of transduced T cells . The 
most intensive monitoring of research volunteers will be made over 24 months, but subjects will be followed for life.  
 Given the pilot nature of this study, the multiple procedures involved and the use of two cell -based 
therapies manufactured from patients’ blood samples, the timeline of the study is aimed at defining 
their approximate administration to patients. In general, changes in the range of 7 days up or down 
from the scheduled event will not be considered deviations from the study timeline. If there is a clear trend of procedures that need to be performed at different times in study subjects, the protocol will be 
amended to attempt to adjust the study timeline to feasible procedures in the clinical study schedule.  
 
8.1 Baseline Screening Assessments  
 
Patients will be screened to determine whether they meet full eligibility criteria after the informed 
consent form (ICF) is signed. Standard of care medical history, pertinent laboratory data and 
significant medical problems of the patient will form the basis for proceeding to evaluate the candidate 
in more detail. Following signing of the ICF and enrollment into the study, the remainder of screening 
procedures and tests will be completed.  
 
An attempt will be made to complete all tests within 30 days of enrollment. However, given the 
multiple screening tests and the pre -study procedures to assess patient eligibility, tests older than 30 
days may be acceptable and will limit unnecessary test repetition. Key tests will be repeated at the discretion of the treating physicians if older than 30 days.  
 Screening tests : 
 
• Office visit, vital signs and physical exam.   The physical exam will include weight, height, and vital 
signs.  Weight measurement will only be obtained at subsequent physical exams if clinically 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
23 indicated.   Determination of HLA- A*0201 (HLA -A2.1) or HLA -A*0205 (HLA -A2.5) positivity by 
subtyping using at least intermediate resolution techniques (this testing may already be available 
from prior analysis).  
• There is data that patients who are HLA -A*0205 (HLA -A2.5) positive by molecular subtyping can 
correctly present the MART -126-35 epitope 52. To enroll patients who are HLA -A*0205 positive, 
patient -derived PBMC pulsed with MA RT-126-35 epitope will be used as stimulators for IFN -gamma 
production by MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic cells. If at least > 30,000 pg/ml/million cells of IFN -γ 
production upon MART -126-35 peptide stimulation using MART -126-35 peptide- pulsed HLA -A*0205 
PBMC.  
• Determination of MART -1 positivity in melanoma cells by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or PCR 
analysis of melanoma (this can be done in archived tissue, in a new tumor biopsy or may already be available from prior analysis).  A new biopsy may not be required if an acceptable biopsy was 
performed within 60 days of prior to screening.  
• Tumor Assessments (Imaging/Clinical): Documentation of baseline target and non -target lesions 
by imaging techniques or by measurement of clinical lesion(s) must be performed. Document ation 
of skin lesion(s) that can be clearly visualized must be established by color photography, including a ruler to document size.  
• Radiological Assessment of the Brain: All patients are required to have a baseline CT scan with i.v. contrast or MRI scan of the brain. Patients found to have active brain metastases are excluded 
from enrollment until the brain metastases are under control after neurosurgery or radiation 
therapy.  
• Collect blood for:  
 WBC with differential count and absolute neutrophil count (ANC), red blood cell (RBC) count, hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet count.  
 Blood Chemistries including: Calcium, chloride, total protein, potassium, random glucose, sodium, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, AST (SGOT), ALT (SGPT), alkaline 
phosphatas e (ALP), lactic acid dehydrogenase (LDH), total bilirubin, C -reactive protein, 
Magnesium, Phosphorous, Lipase, Amylase, Uric acid.  
 Coagulation tests: PT/INR, PTT.  
 Infectious disease serologies: HIV, CMV, EBV, HBV and HCV serotests (unless already tested 
within the past 1 year).  
 Thyroid Function: Thyroid stimulating hormone/TSH, T3, T4.  
 Autoantibody Panel: Anti -nuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
(ANCA), antimicrosomal, antithyroglobulin, anti liver -kidney microsomal (LKM), anti- islet cell, 
antibodies to Ro (SSA) and to La (SSB), and antiphospholipid antibodies.  
 A trial investigator or a clinical study staff member will complete an Eligibility Checklist based on these 
results. The checklist will be reviewed by the HGMP compliance officer. If eligible to proceed, the 
leukapheresis will be scheduled and the pertinent laboratory staff will be notified of the anticipated dates of cell processing.  
 
8.2. Initial Protocol Procedures 
 
• Ophthalmologic Exam. Patients will undergo a formal ophthalmologic exam by a qualified 
ophthalmologist. The minimally required procedures will be an ophthalmic history and a 
comprehensive ophthalmic examination.  
 
• Otological Exam. Patients will undergo a formal otological exam by a qualified 
otorhynolaryngologist. The minimally required procedures will be an otological history and a 
comprehensive otologic examination.  
 
• Tumor Biopsy.  A biopsy of a melanoma lesion accessible to outpatient sampling will be collected 
whenever feasible. A target minimum of 5 x 5 x 5 mm tumor tissue will be collected if feasible.   .  A 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
24 new biopsy may not be required if an acceptable biopsy  was performed within 60 days of prior to 
screening.  
 
• Baseline  [18F]FDG PET Scan. A baseline PET scan using [18F]FDG as tracer will be used to 
determine the background against which the assessment of MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic T cell 
accumulation will be compared to. An attempt will be made for the baseline PET to be performed 
in conjunction with the baseline tumor assessment by CT scan to minimize radiation exposure.  
 
• Cardiac Function Tests. An electrocardiogram (ECG) will record potential pre- existing 
conduction abnormalities for future comparison if needed. A MUGA  or echocardiogram will be 
performed to determine if the patient is fit to receive low dose IL- 2. A LVEF lower than 45% would 
preclude participation.  
 • Pregnancy Test.  All females of childbearing potential must have a negative serum or urine 
Pregnancy Test  within 14 days from the initial dose of conditioning chemotherapy in order to be 
eligible for participation. Females who have undergone surgical sterilization or who have been 
postmenopausal for at least 2 years are not considered to be of childbearing potential.  
 
• Central Venous Access Catheter.  A central venous access catheter (CVC) will be placed during 
the screening period or upon hospital admission. This should ideally be a double lumen central 
catheter, but it may be a single lumen catheter at the discretion of the treating physicians. 
Examples may include double lumen Groshong or PICC catheters.  
 
• Pulmonary Function Tests (PFT) : Tests to be performed in all patients , and if FEV
1/FVC< 70% 
of predicted patient will be excluded from participation. 
 
8.3. Leukapheresis, Cell Cultures, and Admission to the Hospital  
 
       a. Day -6 in the Morni ng. Leukapheresis and Cell Cultures. In the morning of the day a 
leukapheresis will be performed to collect blood to produce the MART -1 TCR transgenic cells and the 
dendritic cell vaccines.  
 
        b. Day - 6 in the Afternoon. Admission to the Hospital. Su bject will be admitted to the 
Hematology/Oncology unit at the Ronald Regan UCLA Medical Center.  
 
• Subject will be asked about illnesses, injuries, side effects, and any medications subject has taken 
or medical procedures that have been done to subject sinc e the prior visit.  
• Physical exam . 
• A catheter will be placed in a vein through which subject will receive liquids in preparation for the chemotherapy regimen.  
• Subject will have blood drawn to check health. Tests include complete blood counts; the ability o f 
blood to clot; blood chemistries. Most of these blood tests will be repeated daily or every other day during subject’s stay in the hospital.  
• Subject will start to receive one or two drugs to prevent complications with infections, the antibiotic Bactrim t o decrease the risk of Pneumocistis carinii pneumonia (or PCP), and the drug ganciclovir 
to decrease the risk of cytomegalovirus (or CMV). Gancyclovir will only be given to subjects who  
have evidence of prior exposure to the CMV virus. Both of these drugs  will be stopped before 
administering the gene- modified MART -1 TCR CTLs, since both drugs would interfere with their 
function in the body.  
 
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
25 8.4 Days – 5 to – 1: Conditioning Chemotherapy Regimen with Cyclophosphamide and 
Fludarabine  
 
The conditioning chemotherapy will be initiated the next day following leukapheresis.  
 
Supportive Therapy During Chemotherapy Administration:  
 
This therapy will be started on day – 5, counting as day 0 the day of engineered TCR transgenic cell 
infusion. The i.v. infusions, procedures and medications will be modified as indicated based on the 
Attending physician and clinical team taking care of patients. 
 
• Hydrate: Begin hydration with 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection containing 10 meq/L of potassium 
chloride at 150 ml/hr, starting approximately 12 hours pre -cyclophosphamide and continuing 
hydration until 24 hours after last cyclophosphamide infusion.  
• Daily CBC, and basic chemical panel as per standard procedures in the J -Medicine ward 
• Ondansetron (Zofran) 8- 16 mg i.v. on the days of  chemotherapy (or similar  antagonist of serotonin 
type 3 -5- HT3- receptors as per standard practices), lorazepam (Ativan) 1 mg i.v. q6h prn and 
prochlorperazine (Compazine) 10 mg. i.v. q6h prn on the days of chemotherapy conditioning, and 
po afterwards.  
• Trimethoprim -Sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim) 1 tablet po tid from days –6 to day –2, restarted once 
the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is above 1 x 103/µL until day +100.  
• Ganciclovir (Cytovene) 6 mg/kg on days –6 to day – 2 and then discontinued. Gancyclovir will  only 
be given to patients that are CMV seropositive at baseline or following standard practices.  
• Posaconazole 200 mg po tid (or similar prophylactic antifungal based on standard practice)  
starting on the day of reinfusion and continued until the ANC is above 3 x 103/µL for 3 consecutive 
days.  
• MESNA at equidoses with cyclophosphamide, administered by continuous intravenous infusion for 24 hours on the days of administration of cyclophosphamide.  
• Furosemide dosed as clinically indicated during the hydration period.  
 
Dexamethasone 10 mg may be added as an adjunct to other anti -nausea medications, but it should 
be discontinued before day –1 to avoid its immune suppressive effect against MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC 
adoptive transfer, MART -1
26-35/DC administration and low dose IL- 2. 
 
Chemotherapy Administration:  
 
Days –5 to – 4: 
 
• Cyclophosphamide 60 mg/kg/day x 2 days i.v. in 250 ml D5W with equidoses of mesna. Maximum 
dose calculated based on actual body weight should not exceed 140% of doses calculated based on ideal body weight.  
 Day -4 to Day - 1: 
 
• Fludarabine 25 mg/m
2/day i.v. daily over 30 minutes for 4 days. Maximum dose calculated based 
on actual body weight should not to exceed 140% of doses calculated based on ideal body 
weight.  
 
Prophylactic Supportive Care Throughout the Pancytopenic Period.   
 In order to closely monitor patient care and decrease study -related toxicities, patients will receive 
prophylactic therapy throughout the pancytopenic period. The intravenous infusions, procedures and medications will be modified as indicated based on the attending physician and clinical team taking care of patients.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
26  
• During the preparative and pancytopenic period, patients will have a complete blood count and  a 
comprehensive metabolic panel including a hepatic panel on a daily basis and periodic urine analysis (daily during cyclophosphamide administration days) following the standard J -Medicine 
protocol and the clinical judgment.  
• G- CSF (Neupogen) 300 or 480 µg will be used following the standard J -Medicine protocol and the 
clinical judgment.  
• Imipenem at 500 mg i.v. q6h. in case of fever > 38.2
oC (other antibiotic in case of history of allergy 
to penicillin and derivates; exact antibiotic combination should be decided by the treatment team).  
• Packed RBC transfusion to maintain a Hb > 8.0 g/dL, following the standard J -Medicine protocol 
and the clinical judgment.  
• Platelet transfusion to attempt to maintain a platelet count of > 10 x 103/µL, > 20 x 103/µL if there 
is concomitant fever, and > 50 x 103/µL if there is evidence of bleeding, following the standard J -
Medicine protocol and the clinical judgment.  
• Norethindrone (Norlutate) 10mg PO daily will be used for menstruating women to prophylaxis against menorrhagia.  
 
8.5 Day 0: MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC Infusion  
 Premedication  
 Side effects  following T cell infusions include transient fever, chills, and/or nausea. For this reason, 
patients will receive pre- medication with:  
 
• Approximately one hour prior to the infusion, an i.v. infusion of Dextrose 5% -Normal Saline, 250 
ml/hr will begin and continue for 3 hours.  
• Briefly (approximately 10 minutes) prior to the infusion, acetaminophen 650 mg po, 25 mg diphenhydramine and 12 g mannitol will be administered i.v. These medications may be repeated every six hours as needed.  
• A course of non- steroid al anti -inflammatory medication may be prescribed if the patient continues 
to have fever not relieved by acetaminophen.  
• It is recommended that patients not receive systemic corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone, prednisone, prednisolone, or dexamethasone, at any time, except in the case of a life- threatening 
emergency, since this may have an adverse effect on T cell survival. If corticosteroids are required for an acute infusion reaction, an initial dose of hydrocortisone 100 mg is recommended. Such subjects will not be removed from the study or replaced but will be followed to document the effects of such treatment.  
 
Transgenic MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC Cell Infusion 
 The TCR genetically engineered PBMC product  will be transported to the in- patient unit on ice in a 
rigid-walled container with a tight fitting lid (i.e. Tupperware; Nalgene container etc.) and labeled with 
a biohazard label. A target minimum of 10
8 and up to 109 transduced PBMC will be infused at a rate of 
~10 ml/min through standard IV tubing without a filter.   
Patient Monitoring After MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC Infusion  
 
• Patients will receive the TCR genetically modified PBMC in an individual use room equipped with a high -efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters that meets the precautions normally used for 
patients undergoing HSC transplantation.  
• Patients will be in a monitored bed during cell infusion, with vital signs recorded. 
• Sterile saline, acetaminophen and emergency drugs, including epinephrine [0.3 -0.5 mg (0.3- 0.5 ml 
of a 1:1000 solution), diphenhydramine (25- 50 mg i.v.), and methylprednisolone (30- 60 mg i.v.), 
should be readily available in the amount and formulation as per the standard treatment of a 
potential hypersensitivity/anaphylactic reaction 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
27 • If there is an adverse event (AE) characterized by life -threatening hypoxia or hypotension, or any 
other infusion reaction qualifying as a DLT as described in section 11.1.1. 1, then further infusion of 
the TCR transgenic cells will be canceled and no other immune stimulating approaches, such as 
IL-2, or DC vaccines, will be administered under this protocol.  
 
Febrile Reaction  
 
In the event that a subject develops sepsis or systemic bacteriemia following PBMC infusion, appropriate cultures and medical management will be initiated. If a contaminated PBMC  product is 
suspected, the product will be retested for sterility using archived samples that are stored in the UCLA HGMP/JCCC GMP Suite.  
 
8.6 Days 1, 14 and 30: MART -1
26-35 Peptide Pulsed DC Administration  
 
Patients will receive a target cell number of 107 MART -126-35 peptide pulsed DC administered 
intradermally (i.d.) close to a lymph node basin not known to be involved with melanoma.  
 
8.7 Days 1-7 : Low Dose IL -2 
 
Patients will receive IL- 2 (Prometheus) at 500,000 IU/m2 s.c. twice daily for 7 days. Doses  may be 
skipped depending on patient tolerance. Doses will be skipped if patients reach grade III or IV toxicity due to IL -2 except for the reversible grade III toxicities common to IL -2 such as diarrhea, nausea, 
vomiting, medically manageable hypotension,  skin changes, anorexia, mucositis, dysphagia, or 
constitutional symptoms and laboratory changes. Patients receiving IL -2 will have a CBC, electrolytes, 
BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, and serum chemistries evaluated at least  once during the week .  
IL-2 administration will be held per the parameters below:  
 
A) Hypotension <80 systolic or hypertension >160 systolic  
B) Sinus tachycardia > 120, sinus bradycardia <60, or any other arrythmias  
C) Syncope  
D) Chest pain  
E) Seizures  
F) Respirations of <10 or >30, or O2 Sat < 90% Room Air  
G) Urine output of less than 100ml q 4 hr  
H) Change in mental status  
I) Temperature more than 103° C, unresponsive to medication  
 
Fevers During IL- 2 Administration 
 
Fevers are a known side effect of IL- 2 administration. Since patients at the time of IL -2 dosing will also 
be recovering from the conditioning chemotherapy and will likely be pancytopenic, the supportive care during this period includes empiric treatment for infections and IL -2-based toxicities without resulting 
in a definition of DLT.  
 Supportive Care During Low Dose IL- 2 Administration  
 
Concomitant medications to control side effects of therapy will be given following the standard UCLA practices for IL -2-based therapy. Meperidine (25- 50 mg) will be given intravenously if severe 
chills/rigors develop. Other supportive therapy will be given as required and may include 
acetaminophen (650 mg q4h), indomethacin (50- 75 mg q6h) and ranitidine (150 mg q12h). 
Ondansetron 0.15 mg/kg/dose i.v. every 8 hours (or an equivalent antiemetic) may be administered for nausea or vomiting. Additional antiemetics may be administered as needed for nausea or vomiting. 
Antibiotic coverage for central venous catheters may be provided at the discretion of the treating physicians. These s ide effects are more commonly seen with high doses of IL- 2, not the low -doses 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
28 which is about 15 fold lower in total amount than the high dose IL -2 regimen, plus lasting over a 
longer period, that’s used in this study .  
 
Blood Collection for Immune Monitori ng Assays  
 
Collection of 100 ml of peripheral blood is scheduled on study days 0,  14, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90 and at 
each long term follow up visit as described in section 8.14 . Blood draws on these days should be 
performed if considered safe, and may be skipped or delayed because patients are likely to have chemotherapy -induced pancytopenia and may be hemodynamically unstable after IL -2. These blood 
draws can be done +/ - 7 days from the intended days.  
 Blood Collection for Plasma Cytokine Analyses 
 Although evidence indicates that it is not directly related to the F5 MART -1 TCR transgenic T cells, 
considering the two recent SAE cases requiring intubation, five to 10 ml of blood in anticoagulant will 
be collected daily for plasma during the first week after ACT routinely for cryopreservation/archiving 
and then as needed thereafter in case of an adverse event that warrants further collection of samples 
for cytokine/chemokine analyses.   
8.8 Hospital Discharge  
 
Patients will be discharged from the hospital when the  following criteria are met and following the 
clinical judgment of the treating physicians:  
 
• Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) > 500/ µL. 
• Platelet count > 20,000/ µL. 
• Hemodynamically stable.  
• Creatinine on downward trend after  L-2. 
• Liver function tests stable.  
• Not requiring daily blood product infusion.  
 
8.9 Days 20 to 40: MART -1 F5 TCR Cell Tracking After Infusion  
 
Between study days 20 and 40 (or when the treating physicians deem that the patient is stable 
enough to undergo these procedures), either as an inpatient or outpatient, the following will be 
repeated to attempt to detect the MART -1 F5 TCR transduced PBMC:  
 
• [
18F]FDG PET scan with an attenuated  restaging CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis.  
• Tumor biopsy whenever feasible.  
• Leukapheresis and plasmapheresis: This will be a partial (5 liter) leukapheresis for PBMC collection and 100 ml of plasma.  
 
8.10 Days 30, 45, 60 and 75: Follow Up Study Visits  
 
On study days 30, 45, 60 and 75 patients will be seen as outpatients in the oncology clinic for office 
visit, vital sign determination, safety blood tests and collection of blood for immune monitoring 
analysis.  
 
8.11 Permissible Systemic Therapies During the Protocol On- study Period  
 
The on -study period is defined as one year from the date of the TCR engineered  ACT infusion unless 
there is overt tumor progression or DLTs leading to patient discontinuation. Systemic immune suppressive therapies will be avoided during this time, but may be permissible in the following 
situations:  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
29  
• Systemic corticosteroids: Used in  case there is a suspicion or evidence of a DLT ( as described in 
section 11.1.1.1 ) that may be related to autoimmune or inflammatory reactions,  or cytokine storm . 
In this case, administration of  IL-2 and DC vaccines will not be continued.  
 
8.12 Days 75 to 90: Re -staging Exams and Procedures 
 
Patients will undergo restaging CT, PET and/or MRI scans of the brain, chest, abdomen and pelvis 
between study days 75 and 90. Restaging exams every 2- 3 months are standard of care in the 
management of patients with metastatic melanoma. In addition, a follow up ophthalmologic and 
otological tests will be scheduled. The results of this testing will be reviewed in a study visit on day 90, 
which will be the last visit during the most intensive part of the study protocol.  
 
8.13 Day 90: Office Visit for Re -staging Evaluation  
 
On study day 90 patients will be evaluated for antitumor activity after undergoing re -staging exams 
and laboratory tests. Patient with SD, PR or CR will be offered to continue on protocol after discussion 
of the study results. Patients with PD will be offered to terminate participation. However, given the 
phenomenon of delayed responses with tumor immunotherapy approaches, the final decision to 
continue or not on study will be at the discretion of the treating physician and the patient, regardless of 
the tumor response assessment.  
 
8.14 Long -term Follow -up Plan  
 
Regardless if followed on- study or off -study, patients will be asked to comply with the following long 
term plan:  
 
• For the first 2 years, office visits at least every 3 months.  
• After 2 years, office visits or phone follow -up at least every 6 months.  
• After 5 years, office visits or phone follow -up at least annually.  
• Collection of 60 -100 ml of blood for immune monitoring analysis and for RCR testing at 3 and 6 
months, and at one year post cell administration (as described in section 11.2.1.1). 
 
 
9.0 STUDY  AGENTS  
 
9.1 PBMC Expressing MART -1 F5 TCR  
 
Overview. A leukapheresis product obtained from study patients will be transferred to the 
HGMP/JCCC GMP Suite, on the 14th floor of the Factor Building. PBMC will be isolated by gradient 
centrifugation, and an aliquot of these cells will be cultured for 48 hours in the presence of anti -CD3 
(OKT3) and IL -2 in order to stimulate T -cell growth to prepare for viral vector transduction. PBMC will 
be transduced with a clinical grade retrovirus vector expressing MART -1 F5 TCR ( MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB) 
using retronectin- coated plates in two consecutive days and kept in culture for 96 hours from the time 
of the first retrovira l transduction. Transduced cells will be harvested and infused fresh as soon as the 
lot release criteria are cleared. On the infusion day, patients will have completed the non-
myeloablative but lymphocyte depleting preparative regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide and 
fludarabine.  
 
In the event the patient is not clinically fit to receive the gene- modified MART -1 TCR CTL infusion 
within 24 hours of the scheduled day of cell harvest, the cells will be cryopreserved on the harvest day for later use.  
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
30 9.1.1 Retrovirus Vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB  
 
Product Description. The retroviral vector, MSGV1- F5AfT2AB, was generated at the Surgery 
Branch/NCI, and consists of 4,196 bps including the 5' LTR from the murine stem cell virus 
(promoter), packaging signal including the  splicing donor and splicing acceptor sites, alpha chain and 
beta chain genes of the anti -MART -1 F5 TCR from TIL clone DMF5 7,41, and murine stem cell virus 
3'LTR. The alpha and beta TCR chains are linked by a T2A picornavirus peptide sequence.  
Classification: Immunotherapeutic.  
Active Ingredient. This retroviral vector has two active transgenes, the alpha and beta chains of a 
high affinity TCR that jointly recognizes the MART -127-35 epitope in the context of HLA -A*0201.  
• MART -1 F5 TCR: This high affinity TCR pair specific for the melanoma antigen peptide MART -127-
35 presented by HLA- A*0201 was cloned from a patient with metastatic melanoma. The TCR chain 
genes have not been modified to alter their amino acid sequence, and the affinity for the MART -
126-35 peptide presented by MHC tetramers is identical between the original cells obtained from 
this patient and the affinity of the MART -1 F5 TCR when expressed as a transgene in primary 
human T cells 7,41. 
Mode of Action: One functional complex will be generated by the active transgenes:  
• MART -1 F5 TCR: The MART -1 F5 TCR is expected to redirect the specificity of the TCR 
transgenic T cells to the MART -127-35 peptide presented by HLA -A2*0201 on the surface of 
melanoma cell s. 
Manufacturing Information for the Clinical Grade Vector: The clinical grade MSGV1- F5AfT2AB 
was generated at the Indiana University Vector Production Facility (IU VPF). The retroviral vector supernatant (PG13/F5af2aB C162D1) was prepared and preserved following cGMP conditions at IU 
VPF. The physical titer was determined by RNA dot blot according to the manufacturer’s certificate. The supernatant was stored upon the completion of production at least at – 70
o C at IU VPF. Upon 
shipment on dry ice, the supernatant is stored at –80o C at the HGMP/JCCC GMP suite. This facility is 
equipped with around- the-clock temperature monitoring. Supernatant is thawed and used for in vitro  
transduction of activated PBMC. There will be no re -use of the same unit of supernatant for different 
patients. The retroviral titer has been shown to be stable after immediate thawing and immediate administration (tissue culture wells previously coated with retronectin). Handling of the vector should 
follow the guidelines of Biosafety Lev el-2 (BSL -2).  
How Supplied:  The clinical grade vector is supplied by IU VPF following their Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP) for retroviral vector suspension, labeling and cryopreservation.  
Storage: Single use aliquots are stored in a viral bank establ ished in a dedicated –80
oC freezer with 
central, computerized monitoring system, with alarm and recording of all GMP storage systems located at the restricted access JCCC GMP Suite, 14
th floor of the Factor Building at UCLA.  
Stability:  Under the conditions  of continuous storage at – 80oC without freeze- thawing, it is expected 
that the retroviral vector is stable for at least 5 years. Aliquots of this vector will be recertified annually 
throughout the study period with selected assays for purity, identity and  potency.  
Dose and Schedule:  For ex vivo  use only.  
Route of Administration.  All use of this retrovirus vector is ex vivo , and no direct injection will be 
done in human subjects.  
Prior Human Experience. This same retrovirus vector expressing the MART -1 F5 TCR and similarly 
used to transduce human PBMC has already been administered to humans within a phase 2 clinical 
trial at the Surgery Branch/NCI 7. The prior human experience is as follows:  
• Retrovirus Vectors: Retroviral vectors have undergone extensive testing in humans . Their main 
safety caveat is the development of insertional mutagenesis, which seems to be a rare event and 
may be related to the expressed transgene and the immune competency of the host. Over 250 patients in over 40 clinical trials have received stem cells genetically modified with retroviral 
vectors, and the only cases of malignant transformation are the two infants in a clinical trial 
inserting the gammaC gene (a surface cytokine receptor) to HSC of infants with X -linked severe 
combined immune deficiency (SCID) 
28,29. 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
31 • MART -1 F5 TCR: The same MART -1 F5 TCR alpha and beta gene pair is being tested at the 
Surgery Branch/N.C.I. (Steven A. Rosenberg, P.I.) for its ability to redirect antigen specificity of 
human PBMC adoptively transferred to lymphopenic hosts in a protocol design similar to the one 
proposed herein  7. If we gain knowledge of the development of serious adverse events (SAE) 
related to the MART -1 TCR transgenic T cell administration, our protocol procedures and informed 
consent form will be modified accordingly.  
Reported Adverse Events and Potential Risks: The potential adverse events are related to the viral 
vector, transgenes and genetically modified cells, as discussed in the following section.  
 
9.1.2 PBMC Transgenic for MART -1 F5 TCR  
 
Product Description. PBMC obtained from leukapheresis and activated for 48 hours with OKT3 (anti -
CD3 antibody) and IL -2, infected by the clinical grade MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB retroviral vector supernatant 
in two consecutive days, maintained in culture for 4 days from the start of transduction in IL -2. 
Aliquots of these cells will be used to fulfill the lot release criteria.  
Classification: Immunotherapeutic.  
Active Ingredient. As described for the retrovirus vector MSGV1- F5AfT2AB.  
Mode of Action: The genetically modified PBMC expressing a transgenic surface MART -1 F5 TCR will 
be expected to be redirected to the MART- 1 antigen expressed by HLA -A2*0201 and MART- 1 positive 
melanoma cells. Recognition of the cognate antigen will result in the release of effector molecules from T cells, like the cytotoxic granules perforin and granzyme B, and activating cytokines like interferon-
gamma, IL -2 and TNF -alpha.  
Manufacturing Information: Genetically modified PBMC expressing transgenic MART- 1 F5 TCR will 
be manufactured by transduction of previously activated PBMC using the clinical grade retroviral vector MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB .  
Storage: PBMC transgenic for MART -1 F5 TCR will be harvested within 96 hours from the first 
transduction and infused fresh. If cryopreserved, they will be stored in a centrally -monitored liquid 
nitrogen freezer in the JCCC GMP suite located on the 14
th floor of Factor Building, UCLA.  
Stability:  These genetic ally modified PBMC will be infused fresh . When stored in liquid nitrogen, 
PBMC are viable for over 2 years with minimal viability loss if not subject to freeze- thawing. Cells will 
be used within 6 months of manufacture. 
Dose and Schedule:  Administered once on day 0 of this protocol, receiving a minimum target cell 
dose of 108 and up to 109 PBMC transgenic for MART -1 F5 TCR.  
Administration: Transgenic cells will be transported from the GMP suite to the hospital bed in an 
infusion bag with over -wrap, on ice i n a rigid- walled container with a tight fitting lid (i.e. Tupperware; 
Nalgene container etc.) labeled with a biohazard label. A detailed explanation for the change of PBMC 
protocol from Amendment 7 is provided at the end of the protocol in the Appendix: Amendment 8.  
Unused Transgenic Cells. Transgenic cells generated but not administered to patients will be 
cryopreserved and  banked for up to 5 years. Reinfusion of cells has to be done within 6 months of 
their cryopreservation. Cells may be used for additional in vitro  testing beyond this period of time. 
Disposal of transgenic cells remaining in the bag and i.v. tubing after administration to patients will be done in a biohazard container that will be autoclaved before disposal.  
Prior Human Experience: As des cribed above, PBMC transduced with the same retrovirus vector 
MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB, is currently in clinical testing 
7. 
Reported Adverse Events and Potential Risks: Potential risks are derived from the viral vector, the 
transgenes it will express and the infusion of genetically modified cells:  
• Retroviral Vectors: There are two potential serious anticipated risks associated with retroviral 
vectors. One is related to its ability to randomly and permanently integrate in the genome of target cells, which may lead to altered expression of genes in these cells potentially inducing oncogenic 
changes. The second one is related to the possibility of its recombination and generation of 
replication competent virus that could potentially lead to a HIV -like disease.  
o Risk of Insertional Mutagenesis with Retroviral Vectors. The risks of insertional 
oncogenesis with integrating gene delivery vectors is likely a complex function of several 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
32 factors, related to the type of vector used, the promoter and other transcriptional control 
elements of the vector, the transgene per se , as well as properties of the target cells. 
Moloney Leukemia Virus (MLV) -based gamma -retroviral vectors have been shown to have 
a high predilection for insertion into the 5’ region of actively transcribed genes, which may increase the risks for trans -activation of transcription from the cellular gene promoter 
55. 
Genes that modulate cell proliferation, such as the gammaC gene used to treat X -linked 
SCID may provide one component of a proliferative signal that plays a cooperative role in 
cellular transformation with cellular genes involved in cellular proliferation, such as LMO -2, 
when activated by insertional trans -activation 28. In contrast, effector proteins such as TCR 
would not, a priori , be expected to confer an unregulated proliferative stimulus, although 
they may play a role in clonal expansion upon encounter with the cognate antigen.  
o Risk of Replication Competent Retrovirus (RCR) with Retroviral Vectors.  Another risk 
is that genetic recombination within components of the vector system could lead to the 
generation of RCR. This event would have the potential of generating infective retrovirus 
that may lead to oncogenesis or immune deficiency. Our patients will be screened at baseline to be HIV seronegative. Since there will be no wild type HIV virus present, the 
possibility of providing the missing genes for the generation of infective retrovirus in vivo  
would be lower than when retroviral vectors are administered to HIV positive subjects.  
• MART -1 TCR: The main potential toxicities from the transgenic alpha and beta MART -1 TCR 
genes expressed in PBMC are derived from the MART -1 specificity of the TCR, or the mispairing 
with endogenous TCR genes leading to cells with autoimmune specificity.  
o Autoimmune Toxicity against MART -1 Positive Cells. Toxic events could be potentially 
derived from cytotoxic activity of the transgenic PBMC  against MART -1 positive cells  
7. 
This could result in disappearance of pigmented cells in the skin and development of 
vitiligo, pigmented cells in the uvea of the eye inducing uveitis, in the retina with the 
potential development of blindness, and in the inner ear resulting in vestibular problems. In 
particular, in the NCI Surgery Branch experience, anterior uveitis was noted in 55% of patients and hearing loss in 50% of patients receiving F5 TCR transgenic cells. These 
cases responded to local injection of corticosteroids  
7. These toxicities were not noted in 
the original UCLA experience with this F5 TCR with cell doses up to 109. With the F5 
infusion cell number going back down to 109, We will keep prospectively monitor ing 
ophthalmologic toxicity following standard eye exam evaluation for patients receiving tumor 
immunotherapy  56,57, and potential otological toxicities by serial otological exams.  
o Autoimmune Toxicity from Mispairing of TCR Chains. The alpha and beta chains of the 
MAR T-1 TCR could undergo heterologous pairing with endogenous alpha and beta chains 
of TCR expressed by the transduced T cells, leading to misdirected T cells with newly acquired TCR specificities. These would be unpredictable and not subjected to the thymic selection process, potentially resulting in T cells with autoreactivities. If evidence of 
autoimmunity developed, patients would receive immune suppressive therapy as clinically 
indicated based on the severity of symptoms , using medications like corticoste roids, 
cyclosporin- A, mycophenolate mofetil, anti -TNF-alpha antibodies or anti -thymocite globulin 
(ATG) . 
• MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic T Cells. The adoptive transfer of an ex vivo  modified autologous 
cellular product may lead to potential toxicities related to the cell manipulation.  
o Allergic Reaction and Cytokine Release Syndrome. The culture of cells ex vivo  in 
media products to maintain lymphocyte viability, the use of reagents to activate cells, the retroviral transduction process, and the expression of foreign genes may lead to alterations 
in the cell product resulting in immediate untoward effects. The most serious would be 
infusion reactions leading to severe allergic reactions, or the triggering of a cytokine 
release syndrome. Therefore, the genetically modified cells will be re -infused in an 
inpatient setting, with continuous monitoring of vital signs and by experienced personnel 
within the Hematology -Oncology HSC unit.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
33 o Contaminated Cell Product.  Ex vivo  culture and manipulation of cells may result in a cell 
product contaminated by bacteria, fungus, mycoplasma or virus. With the goal of detecting 
potential contaminants, the genetically modified cells will undergo intensive lot release testing prior to infusion.
 
o Autoimmune Toxicity from Mispairing of TCRs. The chains of the MART -1 TCR could 
pair with chains of TCR previously expressed by the T cells, leading to T cells that could 
then attack normal organs inducing a condition similar to autoimmune diseases. If 
evidence of autoimmunity developed, patients would receive immune suppressive therapy as clinically indicated based on the severity of symptoms, using medications like 
corticosteroids, cyclosporin- A, mycophenolate mofetil, anti -TNF-alpha antibodies or anti -
thymocite globulin (ATG).  
 
9.2 MART -1
26-35 Pepti de Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
 9.2.1 MART -1
26-35 Peptide 
 
Product Description:  MART -126-35 is an anchor -modified decamer derived from the immunodominant 
epitope derived from the well -characterized MART- 1 melanoma lineage antigen in the context of HLA -
A*0201 20,58-60. This HLA haplotype corresponds to greater than 30% of the general population in major 
ethnicities. This decamer anchor -modified peptide derived from the native MART -127-35 peptide with 
the amino- acid sequence ELAGIGILTV (MART -126-35) has more favorable HLA- A*0201 binding 
kinetics, with a longer off -rate resulting in greater ability to interact with T cells specific for MART -127-35 
58-60. This peptide has shown ability to activate MART -127-35-specific T cells in human subjects with a 
very good toxicity profile 6,61.  
Amino Acid Sequence: ELAGIGILTV (H -Glu-Leu-Ala-Gly-Ile-Gly-Ile-Leu-Thr-Val-OH).  
Other Names:  Melan- A. 
Classification: Antitumor vaccine.  
MART -126-35 Peptide Molecular Weight:  985.2.  
Chemical Formulation:  C45H80N10O14. 
Active Ingredient:  MART -126-35 Peptide: An immunodominant anchor -modified peptide in the HLA -
A*0201 haplotype derived from the melanoma tumor antigen MART -1. 
Mode of Action: MART -126-35 is recognized in vivo  by the immune system and induces tumor -specific 
CTL, by initiation of a MHC class I -restricted cytotoxic response against tumor cells bearing this antigen.  
MART -126-35 Clinical Gr ade Peptide Manufacture: Clinical grade peptides will be purchased from 
Biosynthesis, and provided with a Certificate of Analysis (COA).  
How Supplied:  MART -126-35 peptide is supplied as a lyophilized powder by Biosynthesis (Lewisville, 
TX) and provided with a COA.  
Storage: MART -126-35 peptide for injection 10 mg per vial:  Store intact vials refrigerated at -20o C. 
Working stocks of peptide solubilized in DMSO can be stored at – 80oC.  
Stability:   The peptide is stable at the recommended storage temperature for at least one year.  
Dose and Schedule:  For ex vivo  use only.  
Administration: The peptide will be used ex vivo  to pulse DC, will not be directly administered to 
human subjects.  
Prior Human Experience: Administration of DC pulsed with the anchor- modified MART -126-35 peptide 
has shown to be safe and able to activate T cells specific for the native MART -127-35 peptide in human 
subjects 6,61. 
Reported Adverse Events and Potential Risks:  Multiple clinical trials of tumor antigen -based peptide 
immunization have been conducted and published, either using biochemical adjuvants or pulsing DC 
62. Immunization with the native MART -127-35 peptide pulsed onto DC has proven to  be a generally safe 
approach able to stimulate antigen -specific T cells in human subjects 4,5. A recentl y completed phase I 
clinical trial at UCLA administered DC pulsed with this same modified MART -126-35 peptide together 
with the anti -CTLA4 antibody tremelimumab (CP- 675,206, Pfizer Inc.) to 16 patients with metastatic 
melanoma, with no untoward adverse events attributed to the modified MART -126-35 peptide. Four 
patients in this series have ongoing objective responses and are melanoma-free at 9+ to 42+ months.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
34  
9.2.2 MART -126-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells (DC):  
 
Product Description:  Dendritic cells will be differentiated from autologous adherent PBMC in cultures 
containing GM -CSF and IL- 4. After one week, loosely -adherent cells are harvested and pulsed with the 
anchor -modified MART-1 26-35 peptide, and then prepared for i.d. administration to patients as f resh cells.  
Active Ingredient: The biologically active ingredient is the MART -126-35 peptide, which is presented by 
HLA-A2*0201 complexes on the cell surface of DC together with costimulatory molecules and activating 
cytokines.  
Mode of Action: Dendritic cells are the central cells for initiating a cellular immune response. They 
are the most efficient cells for processing and presenting antigen in a MHC class I and II -restricted 
fashion. Antigenic epitopes are presented together with a high level of cell surface costimulatory 
(B7.1, B7.2, CD40) molecule expression.  
Tissue Source: Autologous adherent PBMC differentiated in vitro in GM -CSF ( Genzyme ) and IL -4 
(Cell Genix  or the current supplier of clinical grade IL -4) to generate DC.  
Manufacturing Information: Dendritic cells are generated from PBMC obtained from a single, 
unmobilized leukapheresis procedure by in vitro  culture for 7 days in media containing 5% autologous 
heat-inactivated plasma, supplemented with GM -CSF and IL- 4. The in vitro  generation of DC at  the 
JCCC GMP Facility for MART -1 peptide DC -based clinical trials is covered by INDs BB # 7122 and 
11579 4,5. The DC manufacture in the current study will be conducted following the same procedures.  
Storage: MART -126-35 peptide pulsed DC will not be stored; they will be administered fresh after lot 
release testing. During the time between peptide pulsing and injection to patients after lot release testing, the cells will be kept loaded in the syringe used for the injection in the final formulation, and 
kept at 4
oC or on ice in an ice bucket.  
Stability:   MART -126-35 peptide pulsed DC are stable and viable up to 24 hours from the time they are 
loaded onto a syringe for injection.  
Dose and Schedule:  A target cell number of 107 MART -126-35 peptide pulsed DC i.d. days 1, 14 and 
30. 
Route of Administration: Intradermal, close to a lymph node basin not known to be infiltrated by 
melanoma.  
Prior Human Experience:  Our completed phase I/II clinical trial (IND #7122) 4,5, where patients with 
melanoma were treated with DC pulsed with the native MART -127-35 immunodominant peptide, has 
allowed us to gain ample experience in this cell -based immunization strategy. This experience has 
been incorporated to an ongoing clinical trial administering the DC pulsed with the anchor -modified 
MART -126-35 anchor -modified peptide together with the anti -CTLA4 antibody tremelimumab (formerly 
CP-675,206) manufactured by Pfizer Inc. (Groton- New London, CT) (IND # 11579). We have 
optimized our laboratory technique to minimize the contamination risk and allow detection of any 
adventitious component in the vaccine before injection into patients. Pharmacokinetics of DC -based 
vaccines in humans have been conducted by others. When DC are injected i.d.,  as proposed in the 
current trial, the cells can be detected in the draining lymph nodes, supposedly at the site where they 
are able to stimulate the host immune system 63,64. The pharmacodynamic activity of i.d. -injected DC 
can be demonstrated by the generation of antigen -specific immune responses detected in PBMC 4,5.   
Reported Adverse Events and Potential Risks:  Several phase I/II clinical trials have been published 
where DC have been administered to human subjec ts 62,65. This has proven to be a generally safe 
treatment with significant activity in previously tr eated low grade lymphomas, metastatic melanomas, 
renal cell carcinoma, prostate cancer and colon cancer, among other malignancies. A potential 
adverse event induced by the administration of ex vivo  cultured DC is the administration of a product 
contaminated by pathogens. In an attempt to avoid this event, DC will undergo strict lot release criteria 
of the final product before administration to human subjects, and the administration route has been 
chosen to minimize the possibility of systemic toxicities . Otherwise, in our experience of 63 patients (25 
with MART -127-35/DC, 22 with AdVMART1/DC and 16 with MART -126-35/DC and concomitant anti-
CTLA4 antibodies), we have not observed SAE attributable to the MART -1-expressing DC.  
  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
35 9.3 Interleukin- 2 (aldesleukin, Proleukin, recombinant human Interleukin 2)  
 
Description: Please refer to package insert for complete product Information. Human recombinant 
interleukin -2 is a highly purified protein with a molecular weight of approximately 15,300 daltons. It is a 
lymphoki ne produced by recombinant DNA technology using a genetically engineered E. coli strain 
containing an analog of the human interleukin- 2 gene.  
Mode of Action: Immunotherapeutic agent which stimulates T and NK cell responses.  
How Supplied: Interleukin- 2 (IL-2) is manufactured by Prometheus .   
Formulation/Reconstitution: IL-2 is provided as single- use vials containing 22 million IU (~1.3 mg) 
IL-2 as a sterile, white to off -white lyophilized cake plus 50 mg mannitol and 0.18 mg sodium dodecyl 
sulfate, buffered with approximately 0.17 mg monobasic and 0.89 mg dibasic sodium phosphate to a 
pH of 7.5 (range 7.2 to 7.8). The vial is reconstituted with 1.2 mL of Sterile Water for Injection, USP, 
and the resultant concentration is 18 million IU/ml or 1.1 mg/mL. Diluent should be directed against 
the side of the vial to avoid excess foaming. Swirl contents gently until completely dissolved. Do not 
shake. Since vials contain no preservative, reconstituted solution should be used within  24 hours.  
Storage:  Intact vials are  stored in the refrigerator (2o – 8oC) protected from light. Each vial bears an 
expiration date.  
Dilution/Stability:  Reconstituted IL -2 should be further diluted with 50 mL of 5% Human Serum 
Albumin (HSA). The HSA should be added to the diluent prior to the addition of recombinant IL- 2. 
Dilutions of the reconstituted solution over a 1000- fold range (i.e., 1 mg/mL to 1 mcg/mL) are 
acceptable in either glass bottles or polyvinyl chloride bags. IL -2 is chemically stable for 48 hours at 
refrigerated and room te mperatures, 2o to 30oC. 
Dose and Schedule:  500,000 IU/m2 q12 hours for a maximum of 14 doses .  
Administration: The final dilution of IL- 2 will be given subcutaneously.  
Toxicities:  Expected toxicities of IL- 2 are listed in the product label. Grade III toxicities common to IL-
2 include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, skin changes, anorexia, mucositis, dysphagia, or 
constitutional symptoms and laboratory changes.   
 9.4 Fludarabine  
 
Description: Please refer to package insert for complete product Information. Fludarabine phosphate 
is a synthetic purine nucleoside that differs from physiologic nucleosides in that the sugar moiety is arabinose instead of ribose or deoxyribose. Fludarabine is a purine antagonist antimetabolite.  
Mode of Action: Chemotherapy agent.  
How Supplied:  Fludarabine is supplied by Bayer in a 50 mg vial as a fludarabine phosphate powder 
in the form of a white, lyophilized solid cake.  
Stability: Following reconstitution with 2 mL of sterile water for injection at a concentration of 25 
mg/ml, the solution has a pH of 7.7. The fludarabine powder is stable for at least 18 months at 2 -8
oC; 
when reconstituted, fludarabine is stable for at least 16 days at room temperature. Because no preservative is present, reconstituted fludarabine will typically be administered within 8 hours.  
Specialized references should be consulted for specific compatibility information. Fludarabine is 
dephosphorylated in serum, transported intracellularly and converted to the nucleotide fludarabine triphosphate; this 2 -fluoro -ara-ATP molecule is thought to be required for the drug’s cytotoxic effects. 
Fludarabine inhibits DNA polymerase, ribnucleotide reductase, DNA primase, and may interfere with chain elongation, and RNA and protein synthesis. Storage: Intact vials should be stored refrigerated (2 -8
oC). 
Dose and Schedule:  25 mg/m2/day for 4 days. The dose of fludarabine will be adjusted based on 
estimation of the creatinine clearance (CrCl). For CrCl 30- 70 the dose should be reduced by 20%, and 
for CrCl <30 – not g iven.  
Administration: Fludarabine is administered as an i.v. infusion in 100 ml 0.9% sodium chloride, USP 
over 15 to 30 minutes. To prevent undue toxicity the dose will be based on body surface area (BSA), but will not exceed a dose calculated on surface areas based on body weights greater than 140% of the maximum ideal body weight per height and weight.   
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
36 Toxicities: At doses of 25 mg/m2/day for 5 days, the primary side effect is myelosuppression; 
however, thrombocytopenia is responsible for most cases of severe and life- threatening hematologic 
toxicity. Serious opportunistic infections have occurred in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia 
(CLL) treated with fludarabine. Hemolytic anemia has been reported after one or more courses of 
fludarabine with or without a prior history of a positive Coomb’s test; fatal hemolytic anemia has been 
reported. In addition, bone marrow fibrosis has been observed after fludarabine therapy. Other 
common adverse effects include malaise, fever, chills, fatigue, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, and 
weakness. Irreversible and potentially fatal central nervous system toxicity in the form of progressive encephalopathy, blindness, and coma is only rarely observed at the currently administered doses of 
fludarabine. More common neurologic side effects at the current doses of fludarabine include 
weakness, pain, malaise, fatigue, paresthesia, visual or hearing disturbances, and sleep disorders. 
Adverse respiratory effects of fludarabine include cough, dyspnea, allergic or idiopathic i nterstitial 
pneumonitis. Tumor lysis syndrome has been rarely observed in fludarabine treatment of CLL. Treatment on previous adoptive cell therapy protocols in the Surgery Branch/NCI have caused 
persistently low (below 200) CD4 counts, and one patient developed polyneuropathy manifested by vision blindness, and motor and sensory defects 
3. 
 
9.5 Cyclophosphamide  
 Description: Please refer to package insert for complete product Information. Cyclophosphamide is a 
nitrogen mustard -derivative alkylating agent. Following conversion to active metabolites in the liver, 
cyclophosphamide functions as an alkyating agent; the drug also possesses potent 
immunosuppressive activity.  The serum half -life after i.v. administration ranges from 3 -12 hours; the 
drug and/or its metabolites can be detected in the serum for up to 72 hours after administration.   
Mode of Action:  Chemotherapy agent.  
How Supplied: Cyclophosphamide will be obtained from commercially available sources.  
Stability: Following reconstitution as directed with sterile water for injection, cyclophosphamide is 
stable for 24 hours at room temperature or 6 days when kept at 2 -8
0C.   
Dose and Schedule: 60 mg/kg/day x 2 days i.v.  
Administration:  It will be diluted in 250 ml D5W and infused i.v. over one hour. The dose will be 
based on the patient’s body weight, but to prevent undue toxicity, it will not exceed a dose greater 
than 140% of the maximum ideal body weight per height and weight.    
Toxicities: Hematologic toxicity occurring with cyclophosphamide usually includes leukopenia and 
thrombocytopenia. Anorexia, nausea and vomiting, rash and alopecia occur, especially after high -
dose cyclophosphamide; diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, infertility, and mucosal and oral ulceration have been reported. Sterile hemorrhagic cystitis occurs in about 20% of patients; severity can range 
from microscopic hematuria to extensive cystitis with bladder fibrosis. Although the incidence of  
hemorrhagic cystitis associated with cyclophosphamide appears to be lower than that associated with 
ifosfamide, mesna (sodium 2- mercaptoethanesulfonate) has been used prophylactically as a 
uroprotective agent in patients receiving cyclophosphamide. Prophylactic mesna is not effective in preventing hemorrhagic cystitis in all patients. Patients who receive high dose cyclophosphamide may 
develop interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, which can be fatal. Hyperuricemia due to rapid cellular destruction may occur, particularly in patients with hematologic malignancy. Hyperuricemia may be 
minimized by adequate hydration, alkalinization of the urine, and/or administration of allopurinol. If 
allopurinol is administered, patients should be watched closely for cyclophosphamide toxicity (due to 
allopurinal induction of hepatic microsomal enzymes). At high doses, cyclophosphamide can result in 
a syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion; hyponatremia with progressive weight gain without edema occurs. At  high doses, cyclophophamide can result in cardiotoxicity. 
Deaths have occurred from diffuse hemorrhagic myocardial necrosis and from a syndrome of acute myopericarditis; in such cases, congestive heart failure may occur within a few days of the first dose. 
Other consequences of cyclophosphamide cardiotoxicity include arrhythmias, potentially irreversible 
cardiomyopathy, and pericarditis. Other reported adverse effects of cyclophosphamide include headache, dizziness, and myxedema; faintness, facial flushing, and diaphoresis have occurred 
following IV administration. Mesna (sodium 2- mercaptoethanesulphonate; given by IV injection) is a 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
37 synthetic sulfhydryl compound that can chemically interact with urotoxic metabolites of 
cyclophosphamide (acrolein and 4- hydroxycyclophosphamide) to decrease the incidence and severity 
of hemorrhagic cystitis.  
 
9.6 Laboratory Reagents 
 
9.6.1 OKT3. OKT3 ( Miltenyi Biotec or other supplier of clinical grade OKT3), is an anti -CD3 antibody 
used to activate T cells in vitro  by engagi ng the CD3 complex. In the current clinical trial, OKT3 will be 
strictly used ex vivo  for the activation of PBMC for retroviral transduction. A clinical grade OKT3 
(Miltenyi ) is a  therapeutic monoclonal antibody approved by the FDA to treat rejection of tr ansplanted 
organs, including the heart, kidneys and liver. However, this antibody is currently not being produced 
by the clinical grade manufacture. When used in vivo , OKT3 antibodies eliminate CD3 positive 
lymphocytes which is beneficial to treat graft rejections. It can induce anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions, cytokine release syndrome and a variety of constitutional symptoms when administered 
systemically. The source of OKT3 antibody for the current studies is obtained with a certificate of analys is providing its manufacturing and product characterization. In addition, after aliquoting, the 
batches used within this study are further characterized by performing the following tests: Gram stain, fungal stain, bacterial culture, fungal culture, mycoplasma culture, endotoxin assay.  
 
9.6.2. Interleukin -2. The IL -2 used for in vitro  stimulation of PBMC will be the same as described for 
systemic IL -2 treatment in patients. All pertinent information is described in that section.  
 9.6.3 GM -CSF. Leukine
® (Genz yme)  is a recombinant granulocyte- macrophage colony -stimulating 
factor (rhu GM -CSF) approved by the FDA for use following induction chemotherapy to shorten time 
to neutrophil recovery. When used in vivo , it can induce constitutional symptoms and bone pain.  
When used in vitro , it can sustain the differentiation of monocytes to DC. In the current clinical trial, 
GM-CSF will be strictly used ex vivo  for the generation of DC.  
 
9.6.4 Interleukin -4. Clinical grade recombinant human IL- 4 is purchased from Miltenyi Biotec  or the 
current supplier of clinical grade IL-4 . This cytokine has been previously tested systemically in human 
subjects 66, but has not been licensed by the FDA for human use. When used in vitro , IL-4 increases the 
differentiation of monocytes to DC. This same cytokine source has been used in prior DC -based clinical 
trials at UCLA (IND # 11579 and 11053)  and was safe and biologically  active when used for DC 
generation  67. 
 9.6.5. Retronectin. RetroNectin® (CH- 296) is purchased from  Clontech Laborator ies or the current 
supplier of clinical grade RetroNectin ®. RetroNectin® is a chimeric peptide of recombinant human 
fibronectin fragments produced in E. coli, consisting of three functional domains: a central cell -binding 
domain (type III repeat, 8- 10), heparin -binding domain II (type III repeat, 12- 14), and a CS1 site within 
the alternatively -spliced IIICS region. It is a 574 amino acid protein with a molecular weight of 63 kDa. 
When coated on the surface of containers such as culture dishes, petri dishes, flasks or bags, 
retronectin significantly enhances retrovirus -mediated gene transduction into mammalian cells. This 
enhancement is hypothetically due to co -localization of retroviral particles and target cells on the 
molecules of retronectin. Virus particles bind retronectin via interaction with heparin- binding domain II, 
and target cells bind mainly through the interaction of the cell surface integrin receptor VLA -4 with the 
fibronectin CS1 site. Additionally, cells may also bind through the interaction o f another fibronectin 
ligand (RGDS in repeat 10) within the central cell -binding domain with a corresponding integrin 
receptor VLA -5 on the cell surface.  
 
 
 
  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
38 10.0 GENERATION OF EXPERIMENTAL CELL THERAPIES: MART -1-TCR TRANSDUCED CD8 
CELLS AND MART -126-35 PEPTIDE PULSED DENDRITIC CELLS  
 
Feasibility is one of the primary endpoints of this protocol. Repetitive deviations to the procedures 
described in this section will be recorded in the SOPs and the protocol modified accordingly and 
highlighted in the next submission to the IRB and FDA.  
 
10.1 Generation of MART -1 F5 TCR Transduced PBMC  
 
10.1.1 Leukapheresis Procedures  
 
Patients will undergo a 12 liter leukapheresis procedure to obtain PBMC for retroviral transduction and 
monocytes for DC generation. Any signs and symptoms of citrate toxicity due to apheresis (such as 
perioral paresthesia and muscle cramps) will be treated according to the UCLA Hemapheresis center 
standard procedures. The leukapheresis product will be transferred to the UCLA HGMP/JCCC GMP Suite for cell processing.  
 
10.1.2 PBMC Isolation  
 
Following leukapheresis, the product will be separated into mononuclear fraction for PBMC isolation using Ficoll and layering the leukapheresis product over this liquid and centrifuging at 500g for 30 
minutes.  
 
10.1.3 PBMC Activation 
 An aliquot of PBMC obtained from leukapheresis will be cultured in AIMV with 5% heat -inactivated AB 
serum at 10
6 cells/ml and activated for 48 hours in the presence of OKT3 (50 ng/ml, anti -human CD3 
antibody) and human IL -2 (300 IU/ml, aldesleukin) in order to stimulate T -cell growth to prepare for 
viral transduction.  
 
10.1.4 Clinical Grade Retrovirus MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB Lot Release Testing 
 
Prior to use, the clinical grade retroviral vector will require fulfilling the lot release criteria included in 
Table 1.  
 Table 1.  Clinical Grade MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB Retrovirus Lot Release Criteria:  
 Table 1a. Certificate of Analysis of the MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB  Master Cell Bank (MCB).  
 
Test Methods  Limits  Results  Date  
Contaminants  Aerobic and anaerobic 
culture for bacteria and 
fungus  No growth within 14 
days  No growth within 14 
days  Apr-10-2007  
 Mycoplasma culture 
and vero indicator cells  Negative for the 
presence of 
mycoplasma  Negative  Apr-04-2007  
 In-vitro viral assay 
utilizing 3T3, MRC -5 
and Vero cells  No CPE or 
hermadsorption  No CPE or 
hermadsorption  Apr-10-2007  
 Bovine viral assay*  Negative for cyto -pathic 
effect, hermadsorption 
and the presence of 7 specific bovine viruses 
using IFA  Negative for cyto -pathic 
effect, hermadsorption and the presence of  7 
specific bovine viruses 
using IFA  Dec-11-2006  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
39  Porcine viral assay*  Negative for cytopathic 
effect, hemadsorption 
and the Presence of porcine Viruses, BVDV 
Reovirus and rabies  Negative for cytopathic 
effect, hemadsorption and the Presence of porcine Vi ruses, BVDV 
Reovirus and rabies  Dec-06-2006  
 In-viro viral assay*  No evidence of 
contamination with adventitious viral 
agents  No evidence of 
contamination with adventitious viral 
agents  Dec-21-2006  
 MAP/LCM*  No evidence of viral 
contamination  No evidence  of viral 
contamination  Dec-21-2006  
 Transmission E.M.*  No Vital particles other 
than retro- virus like 
particles and no other identifiable microbial 
agents.  No Vital particles other 
than retro- virus like 
particles and no other identifiable microbial 
agent s  Nov-15-2006  
 SV40Tag (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-14-2006  
 E1a (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Jan-22-2007  
Human Vital  
Contaminants  HTLV -1/11 (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-16-2006  
 HIV-1/2 (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-16-2006  
 HEP B (PCR)*  Negative  Negativ e Nov-14-2006  
 HEP C (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-08-2006
  
 HHV 6 (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-15-2006  
 
 HHV 7 (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-14-2006  
 HHV 8 (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-15-2006  
 CMV (PCR)*  Negative  Negative  Nov-15-2006  
 EBV (PCR)*  Nega tive Negative  Nov-14-2006  
 Human parvovirus B19  Negative  Negative  Apr-14-2006  
Replication  
Competent  
Retrovirus:  
GAL-V  S+L- (PG-4/293) 
amplification) 5% of MCB supernatant  No Evidence of RCR  No Evidence of RCR  Apr-10-2007  
Replication  
Competent  
Retrovirus:  
GAL-V S+L- (PG-4/293 co -
culture) 1% of MBC  No Evidence of RCR  No Evidence of RCR  Apr-10-2007  
Replication  
Competent  
Retrovirus:  
ECO  Marker rescue   No Evidence of RCR  No Evidence of RCR  Apr-10-2007  
Identity   ADA Isoenzyme   Cells confirmed to be  
Of murin e origin   Cells confirmed to  
of murine origin   Apr-10-2007  
 Vector insert stability  Vector size/sequence 
consistent with 
expectant fragment 
size Vector size/sequence 
consistent with expectant fragment size  Apr-10-2007  
Vector 
Sequencing  Sequencing of the 
insert in the MCB  > 98% homology with 
the expected sequence  > 99.9% homology  Sep-26-2008  
 
Table 1b. Certificate of Analysis of the MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB  Final Product.  
 
Test Methods  Limits  Results  Date  
Contaminants  Aerobic and anaerobic 
culture for Bacteria and  No growth 14 days  No growth 14 days  March -18-
2008  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
40 Fungus   
 Mycoplasma culture 
and Vero indicator cells  Negative for the 
presence of 
Mycoplasma  Negative for the 
presence of 
Mycoplasma  Apr-04-2008  
 In-Vitro viral assay 
utilizing 3T3, MRC -5 
And Vero cells  No CPE or 
hermadsortion  No CPE or 
hermadsortion  Mar-18-2008  
Endotoxin  Limulus amebocyte 
lysate  Less than 0.33 EU/mL  Harvest 1 -7: less than 
0.06 EU/mL  Mar-18-2008  
Replication 
competent 
retrovirus: GAL -V S+L-(PG-4) 
(293 infection) 5% of  
vector supernatant  No Evidence of RCR  No Evidence of RCR  Mar-18-2008  
 S+L-(PG-4) (293 co -
cuture) 108 cells from 
production run  No Evidence of RCR  No Evidence of RCR  Mar-18-2008  
Transgene 
expression  MART -126-35 tetramer  
or dextramer staining 
in activated PBMC  > 10% MART -126-35 
tetramer  or dextramer  
positive cells among 
CD3+ T lymphocytes  > 75% MART -126-35 
tetramer positive cells among CD3+ T 
lymphocytes  Sept-02-2008  
Potency  MART -126-35 peptide 
and antigen- specific 
IFN-γ production by 
ELISA  > 30,000 pg/ml of IFN -γ 
production upon MART -
126-35 peptide 
stimulation using 
MART -126-35 peptide-
pulsed K562/A2.1 cells  > 100,000 pg/ml of IFN -
γ production upon 
MART -126-35 peptide 
stimulation using 
MART -126-35 peptide-
pulsed K562/A2.1 cells  Sept-05-2008  
 
10.1.5 Clinical Grade Retrovirus MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB Annual Recertification  
 Single -use aliquots of the clinical grade retrovirus vector will be subjected to annual recertification, 
and the results of this testing will be included in the annual progress report for the FDA (Table 2).  
 
Table 2a. MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB Retrovirus Annual Recertification:  
 
Test Item  Method  Limit of Detection  Acceptable Criteria  
Physical viral vector titer  qRT-PCR  5 x 103 copies/ µl Report value  
Infectious viral vector titer  
(Transgene expression)  MART -126-35 tetramer 
or dextramer  staining in 
activated PBMC  0.03% MART -126-35 
tetramer or dextramer  
positive cells among 
CD3+ T lymphocytes   > 10% MART -126-35 
tetramer or dextramer  
positive cells among CD3+ 
T lymphocytes  
Sterility  Aerobic and anaerobic 
culture for bacteria and 
fungus  No growth within 14 days  No growth within 14 days  
Mycoplasma  MycoAlert test   20 cfu/ml   Negative (<1 ratio)   
PCR/ELISA 
mycoplasma assay if 
the MycoAlert results 
are equivocal or 
positive  10 cfu.ml  Negative by PCR  
Endotoxin  Limulus amebocy te 
lysate or Endosafe - 
MCS System  0.1 EU/ml  <0.33 EU/ml for each 
sample  
Legend: EU: endotoxin units.  
 
 
  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
42 HSA, put into an infusion bag and kept in a 4 degrees refrigerator until lot release clearance and i.v. 
infus ion. Lot release tests are performed on aliquots of this final product. In the event patient is not 
able to receive the infusion within 24 hours of the scheduled harvest, cells will be re -suspended in 
cryopreservation medium and put into an infusion bag. Cryopreservation will be at < - 130oC in a 
monitored liquid nitrogen freezer at the JCCC GMP suite.  
 
10.1.8 Product Labeling 
 
The final MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic PBMC will be labeled using a  preprinted study label with the 
following information:  
 
• Patient UCL A ID. Number.  
• Patient’s initials. 
• Subject laboratory clinical trial code.  
• Date of cell preparation, with an expiration date of 24 hours if fresh and 6 months if 
cryopreserved.  
• Initials of person who prepared the vaccine.  
• Labeled with “For autologous use only”.  
• Labeled as “Not Tested for Biohazards” (due to no specific testing for HIV, HepC, HepB and other adventitious viruses in the final product).  
 10.1.9 In -process Testing and Final Product Lot Release Testing  
 In Process Testing.  We will conduct the following in -process testings (Table 3a and 3b).  
 
Table 3a.  Activated PBMC (Day 2) In- process Testing:  
 
Test Item  Acceptability Criteria  Results  
Gram Stain  Negative  Negative  
Fungal Stain  Negative  Negative  
Bacterial Culture  No growth  No growth x 14 days  
Fungal Culture  No growth  No growth x 14 days  
Mycoplasma Culture  No growth  No growth x 14 days  
 
Table 3b.  Transduced PBMC (Day 5) In -process Testing:  
 
Test Item  Acceptable Criteria  
MycoAlert test  Negative ;ratio<1 (readingB/readingA)  
PCR/ELISA mycoplasm a assay if the MycoAlert 
results are equivocal or positive  Negative by PCR   
TCR transgene expression  >10% of T cells by MART -126-35 tetramer or 
dextramer  staining  
TCR transgene functionality  > 30,000 pg/ml/million cells of MART -1 specific 
IFN-γ produ ction by ELISA  
Final Product Testing and Lot Release Criteria. In Table 4a the results that will be required before 
administering the cells to the patients are described, and in Table 4b the results that need to be in process at that time but results may not be available at the time of administration to patients are 
described.  
 
Table 4a.  MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic PBMC Lot Release Testing with Results Available Before 
Administration to Patients : 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
43  
Test Item  Acceptable Criteria  
Viability  > 70%  
Gram and fun gal stainsa Negative  
Endotoxin Assay b ≤ 5 EU/ kg body weight per dose  
MycoAlert testc Negative ;ratio<1 (readingB/readingA)  
PCR/ELISA mycoplasma assay if the 
MycoAlert results are equivocal or positive  Negative by PCR   
TCR transgene expression  >10% of T cells by MART -126-35 tetramer or 
dextramer  staining  
a. Performed on the final product by the UCLA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory. All sterility cultures  
and mycoplasma culture will be followed up to 14 days. If the cultures become positive after  the 
patient has received the cells, the patient will be started on empiric antibiotics.  
b. Performed on the final product using the Limulus amebocyte lysate read using the Quantitative 
Chromogenic Procedure  analyzed using an OCL-1000 (Bio Whittaker), or the Endosafe - PTS 
System (Charles River) assays.   
 c. If first line MycoAlert test becomes positive, it will be repeated with a second sample from the final    
product.  Moreover, we will perform PCR/ELISA mycoplasma assay if the MycoAlert results are 
equiv ocal or positive.  The release specifications for the mycoplasma test should be "negative by 
PCR".  
 
Table 4b.  MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic PBMC Lot Release Testing with Results Available After 
Administration to Patients : 
 
Test Item  Acceptable Criteria  
Bacterial and fungal culture  No growth x 14 days  
Mycoplasma culture  No growth x 14 days   
GalV S+  /L- RCR assay  Sample archived for later use if required. Not tested 
prospectively in all samples.  
 Plan in Case of Positive Results of Tests Not Available at the Time of TCR Transgenic Cell Administration to Patients.  The following will be our plan in case of results different from our 
proposed acceptable criteria:  - Bacterial or Fungal culture: An antibiogram will be obtained on the culture to typify the 
contaminan t. The patient will be contacted, two peripheral blood draws will be collected for culture, 
and the patient will be started on therapy, first with broad spectrum antibiotics or antifungals, and then adapted to the antibiogram of the cultures. 
- Mycoplasma culture: If the culture is positive after the rapid mycoplasma test had been negative 
and the cells were released for administration to patients, then the patient will be contacted, two 
peripheral blood draws will be collected for mycoplasma culture, and the  patient will be started on 
therapy with erythromycin, clarithromycin or azithromycin . 
- RCR: Since the TCR transgenic cell manufacture process will include ex vivo  culture for up to 4 
days from the first transduction, RCR will not be tested prospectively in the final product following 
the Guidance for Industry document by CBER, FDA from November 2006. If a sample from a patient tested at 3, 6 or 12 months or later is positive for RCR by PCR test, the stored sample of 
the final product will be tested. T he pat ient will be contacted, two peripheral blood draws will be 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
44 collected for confirmation, and the patient will be started on therapy  with combination 
antiretrovirals used to treat HIV infection.  
 
Notification of Regulatory Agencies for Positive Results of TCR  Transgenic Cell 
Administration to Patients.  If a preparation with bacterial, fungal, mycoplasma or RCR 
contamination has been administered to a patient, this event should be reported to the following 
agencies and committees within 48 hours of first knowledge: 
 - Human Gene Medicine Program compliance officer.  
- UCLA IRB. 
- UCLA ISPRC.  
- Study DSMB.  
- RAC.  
- FDA.  
 
Additional Optional Testing of TCR Transgenic Cells. The release tests will be used to determine 
whether the final cell product can be released for infusion (see Tables above). In addition, the cell 
product may undergo further characterization apart from the release testing. The vector -specific 
proviral copy number per cell may be determined.  We will perform additional testing for the number of 
vector copies and if higher than 5 we will propose a new dilution of the vector supernatant before using it for cell transduction.  The sites of integration may be defined as the structure of the integrated 
transgene. Detailed flow cytometry and TCR chain usage analysis may be performed. The product may be further characterized for measurable transgene products (Table 5).   
 
Table 5.  MART -1 F5 TCR Transgenic PBMC Optional Additional Testing:  
 
Characterization Assays  Comments  
Vector proviral copy per 
transduced cell  Quant ification of the copy number of provirus by qRT -PCR  
Final product phenotyping  CD3, CD4, CD8, CD27, CD28, CD45RA/RO, CD62L, CCR7, PD -1  
Transgene integration site 
analysis  Determination of integration site(s)  
Structure of integrated 
transgene  Stabil ity of integrated transgene  
Detailed flow cytometry  Phenotype of cells  
TCR transgene functionality  > 30,000 pg/ml/million cells of MART -1 specific IFN -γ production by 
ELISA  
Other characterizations  Telomere loss, telomerase expression, Th1 vs Th2 pa ttern, FoxP3 
expression in pre/post expansion T cells  
 
 10.2 Generation of MART -1
26-35 Peptide Pulsed Dendritic Cells  
 
10.2.1 MART -126-35 Peptide:  
 
MART -126-35 is an anchor -modified immunodominant epitope 58-60 derived from the well -characterized 
MART -1 melanoma lineage antigen in the context of HLA -A*0201 20. This HLA haplotype present in 
greater than 30% of the general population in major ethnicities.  
 
10.2.2 Peptide Manufacturing  
 
M A R T -1 F 5 T C R Pr ot o c ol  0 1 / 1 0 / 2 0 1 8                                               
 
4 6   
P ati e nt s will u n d er g o a l e u k a p h er e si s t o o bt ai n P B M C f or M A R T -1 F 5 T C R tr a n s d u c e d c ell s a n d D C 
m a n uf a ct ur e.  A ut ol o g o u s  pl a s m a  ( 1 0 0  ml)  will  b e  o bt ai n e d  b y  pl a s m a p h er e si s  o n  t h e  d a y  of  
l e u k a p h er e si s. A ut ol o g o u s pl a s m a i s h e at -i n a cti v at e d at 5 6 oC f or 1/ 2 h o ur a n d k e pt at -2 0 oC i n st eril e 
c o ni c al t u b e s l a b el e d wit h t h e p ati e nt' s a s si g n e d tri al i d e ntifi c ati o n. E a c h  b at c h of c o m pl et e m e di u m i s 
filt er e d ( 0. 2 0  µm) pri or t o u s e.  
 
1 0. 2. 7 L e u k a p h er e si s L ot R el e a s e Crit eri a:  
 
B ef or e  a d di n g  D M S O -c o nt ai ni n g  fr e e zi n g  m e di a  t o  t h e  P B M C  o bt ai n e d  fr o m  t h e  l e u k a p h er e si s  
pr o d u ct,  a n  ali q u ot  of  t h e s e  c ell s  i s  s e nt  f or  gr a m  st ai n,  st erilit y  c ult ur e s  f or  b a ct eri a,  f u n gi  a n d  
m y c o pl a s m a ( T a bl e 8). All c ult ur e s ar e k e pt f or at l e a st 1 4 d a y s, b ut t h e pr o d u ct c a n b e u s e d aft er 
n e g ati v e st ai n s ar e a s s e s s e d a n d b ef or e fi n al r e s ult s of t h e c ult ur e s.  
 
T a bl e 8. L e u k a p h er e si s L ot R el e a s e Crit eri a:  
 
T e st It e m  A c c e pt a bilit y Crit eri a  
Gr a m St ai n, F u n g al St ai n  N e g ati v e  
B a ct eri al C ult ur e   N o gr o wt h  
F u n g al C ult ur e   N o gr o wt h  
M y c o pl a s m a c ult ur e  N o gr o wt h  
 
 
1 0. 2. 8 Pl a s m a L ot R el e a s e Crit eri a:  
 
E a c h b at c h of a ut ol o g o u s pl a s m a will b e t e st e d f or gr a m st ai n, st erilit y c ult ur e s f or b a ct eri a, f u n gi a n d 
m y c o pl a s m a aft er h e at i n a cti v ati o n ( T a bl e 9). All c ult ur e s ar e k e pt f or at l e a st 1 4 d a y s, b ut t h e pr o d u ct 
c a n b e u s e d aft er n e g ati v e st ai n s ar e a s s e s s e d a n d b ef or e fi n al r e s ult s of t h e c ult ur e s.  
 
T a bl e 9.  Pl a s m a L ot R el e a s e Crit eri a:  
 
T e st It e m  A c c e pt a bilit y Crit eri a  
Gr a m St ai n, F u n g al St ai n  N e g ati v e  
B a ct eri al C ult ur e   N o gr o wt h  
F u n g al C ult ur e  N o gr o wt h  
M y c o pl a s m a C ult ur e  N o gr o wt h  
 
1 0. 2. 9 D e n driti c C ell M a n uf a ct ur e:  
 
D C ar e c ult ur e d at t h e U C L A C ell a n d G e n e T h er a p y C or e F a cilit y, 1 4 t h  fl o or F a ct or B uil di n g, a c ell 
c ult ur e  f a cilit y  m e eti n g  c G M P  st a n d ar d s,  s p e cifi c all y  d e si g n at e d  f or  t h e  c o n d u ct  of  cli ni c al  tri al s  
r e q uiri n g t h e pr o d u cti o n of bi ol o gi c al c ell -b a s e d pr o d u ct s. D C ar e pr e p ar e d fr o m a d h er e nt, a ut ol o g o u s 
p eri p h er al bl o o d m o n o n u cl e ar c ell s e x p o s e d f or 1 w e e k i n ti s s u e c ult ur e t o G M -C S F a n d I L -4.  
 
M o n o n u cl e ar c ell s ar e i s ol at e d fr o m a l e u k a p h er e si s pr o c e d ur e b y Fi c oll -H y p a q u e c e ntrif u g ati o n, a n d 
u s e d fr e s h or cr y p or e s er v e d i n at l e a st 2 0 % h u m a n  A B s er u m, a n d 1 0 % D M S O. D C V a c ci n e # 1 will 
b e  c ult ur e d  fr o m  fr e s h  P B M C  a n d  t h e  s u b s e q u e nt  D C  v a c ci n e s  will  b e  c ult ur e d  b y  t h a wi n g  
cr y o pr e s er v e d P B M C.  O n e w e e k b ef or e t h e pl a n n e d D C v a c ci n ati o n, c ell s ar e w a s h e d i n s ali n e a n d 
pl at e d at 2. 5 – 5 x 1 0 6 vi a bl e c ell s/ ml i n R P MI 1 6 4 0 + 1 -5 % h e at -i n a cti v at e d a ut ol o g o u s pl a s m a ( D C 
c ult ur e  m e di u m).  T h e  c ult ur e  c a n  al s o  b e  d o n e  i n  cli ni c al  gr a d e  h u m a n  A B  s er u m  i n st e a d  of  
a ut ol o g o u s pl a s m a, w hi c h m a y b e d o n e if t h e a m o u nt of a ut ol o g o u s pl a s m a  i s li miti n g, or if t h er e  i s 
f ail ur e t o g e n er at e g o o d D C pr e p ar ati o n s wit h t h e m a n d t h e pr o bl e m i s a s si g n e d t o t h e a ut ol o g o u s 
pr o d u ct. Aft er all o wi n g a d h er e n c e f or 2 hr at 3 7 oC, n o n -a d h er e nt c ell s ar e g e ntl y r e m o v e d b y w a s hi n g 
M A R T -1 F 5 T C R Pr ot o c ol  0 1 / 1 0 / 2 0 1 8                                               
 
4 7  wit h st eril e s ali n e s ol uti o n. A d h er e nt c ell s ar e c ult ur e d i n D C c ult ur e m e di u m f or 7 d a y s at 3 7 oC i n 5 % 
C 0 2 i n t h e pr e s e n c e of r h G M -C S F ( 7 6 8 I U/ ml) a n d r hI L -4 ( 4 8 0 I U/ ml).  
 
1 0. 2. 1 0 I n -Pr o c e s s T e sti n g  
 
I n -Pr o c e s s B a ct eri al a n d F u n g al T e sti n g. O n d a y 4 of D C c ult ur e, a n ali q u ot of 0. 5 ml of s p e nt 
c ult ur e m e di u m i s r e m o v e d fr o m e a c h ti s s u e c ult ur e fl a s k c o nt ai ni n g D C c ult ur e s, a n d i s s u bj e ct e d t o 
gr a m st ai n, f u n g al st ai n a n d st erilit y c ult ur e s f or b a ct eri a, f u n gi a n d m y c o pl a s m a. All c ult ur e s ar e k e pt 
f or at l e a st 1 4 d a y s.  
 
M y c o pl a s m a T e sti n g.  O n d a y 6 of D C c ult ur e, a s a m pl e i s t a k e n o ut fr o m e a c h fl a s k f or m y c o pl a s m a 
d et e cti o n u si n g a c o m m er ci al P C R -E LI S A kit fr o m R o c h e ( c at al o g N o. 1 6 6 3 9 2 5) or t h e M y c o Al ert 
M y c o pl a s m a D et e cti o n Kit ( L o n z a I n c, All e n d al e, N J), w hi c h i s b a s e d o n d et e cti n g s el e cti v e a cti vit y of 
m y c o pl a s m al e n z y m e s i n a bi o c h e mi c al t e st, wit h t h e r e a d o ut b y bi ol u mi n e s c e n c e ( or a n ot h er r a pi d 
a s s a y wit h si mil ar s e n siti vit y t o d et e ct M y c o pl a s m a c o nt a mi n ati o n). R e s ult s will b e r e p ort e d b ef or e 
v a c ci n e i nj e cti o n i nt o t h e p ati e nt. Crit eri a f or a c c e pt a n c e  of t h e D C pr e p ar ati o n a s m y c o pl a s m a -fr e e 
will b e < 1 r ati o a n d 0. 2 b a s e d o n t h e bi ol u mi n e s c e nt a s s a y a n d P C R -E LI S A a s s a y, r e s p e cti v el y.  
 
1 0. 2. 1 1 Pr e p ar ati o n of M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5  P e pti d e P ul s e d D C f or I m m u ni z ati o n:  
 
M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5  P e pti d e  P ul si n g.  O n  t h e  d a y  of  i m m u ni z ati o n,  D C  ar e  h ar v e st e d,  w a s h e d  i n  st eril e  
s ali n e a n d r e s u s p e n d e d at a c o n c e ntr ati o n of 1 0 7 i n 1 ml s er u m -fr e e R P MI 1 6 4 0 a n d 1 0 µg/ ml of 
M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 p e pti d e. Aft er 1 -2 h o ur of i n c u b ati o n at r o o m t e m p er at ur e, M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 / D C ar e pr e p ar e d 
f or i m m u ni z ati o n.  
 
Fi n al  M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 / D C  V a c ci n e  Pr e p ar ati o n.  Aft er  o n e  h o ur  of  i n c u b ati o n,  M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 / D C  ar e  
p ell et e d a n d w a s h e d t hr e e ti m e s i n st eril e s ali n e s ol uti o n. C ell s ar e c o u nt e d i n tr y p a n bl u e a n d u p t o 1 
x 1 0 7 D C ar e r e s u s p e n d e d i n st eril e s ali n e ( o pti o n all y s u p pl e m e nt e d wit h 1 -5 % of h e at -i n a cti v at e d 
a ut ol o g o u s  pl a s m a),  l o a d e d  o nt o  t h e  s yri n g e  a n d  k e pt  i n  a  s e al e d  b a g  o n  i c e  or  at  4 oC  i n  a  
r efri g er at or, w aiti n g fi n al t e sti n g f or l ot r el e a s e. U p t o 1 x 1 0 7 D C will b e a d mi ni st er e d, a s f e a si bl e 
b a s e d o n t h e n u m b er of D C i n e a c h pr e p ar ati o n. If a b at c h c o nt ai n s l e s s t h a n t h e m a xi m u m all o w e d 
c ell s, it will still b e a d mi ni st er e d t o p ati e nt s a n d t h e fi n al n u m b er of D C a d mi ni st er e d r e c or d e d i n t h e 
S O P a n d C R F s.  
 
1 0. 2. 1 2 Fi n al M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 / D C L ot R el e a s e T e sti n g:  
 
Fl o w C yt o m etr y.  Aft er t h e D C ar e p e pti d e -p ul s e d, a n ali q u ot of 0. 6 x 1 0 5 t o 1. 2 x 1 0 6 c ell s will b e 
u s e d  f or  p h e n ot y p e  c h e c k.  N o  si n gl e  m ar k er  c a n  s u c c e s sf ull y r e c o g ni z e  D C,  a n d  t h u s  a p a n el of  
m ar k er s will b e u s e d t o d et er mi n e t h e D C c o m p o siti o n. C ell s will b e  st ai n e d wit h a n a nti -M H C cl a s s II 
a nti b o d y  a n d  a nti -C D 8 6  c o sti m ul at or y  m ol e c ul e  a nti b o d y  a n d  a s s a y e d  b y  F A C S  a n al y si s  t o  
d e m o n str at e t h at  t h e  c ell s  ar e  e q ui p p e d  t o f u n cti o n  a s  a nti g e n pr e s e nti n g  c ell s.  C ell s  will  al s o  b e  
st ai n e d  wit h  a n  a nti -C D 1 4  a nti b o d y  t o  a s s e s s  t h e  D C  m at ur ati o n  l e v el.  Aft er  g ati n g  t h e l ar g e  a n d  
gr a n ul ar c ell s i n t h e p o p ul ati o n, t h e p er c e nt a g e of D C str o n gl y d o u bl e p o siti v e f or M H C cl a s s II a n d 
C D 8 6 a n d w e a kl y p o siti v e f or C D 1 4 i s d et er mi n e d. A c c e pt a bl e D C c o nt e nt d efi n e d a s c ell s d o u b l e 
p o siti v e f or M H C cl a s s II a n d C D 8 6 > 1 0 % fr o m t h e t ot al c ell p o p ul ati o n ( > 3 0 % of t h e g at e d l ar g e a n d 
gr a n ul ar c ell s).  
 
T e sti n g of t h e Fi n al Pr o d u ct.  Aft er t h e M A R T - 1 2 6 -3 5 / D C h a v e b e e n l o a d e d o nt o a s yri n g e a n d pl a c e d 
i n a s e al e d b a g o n i c e, a n ali q u ot  of t h e fi n al pr o d u ct c o nt ai ni n g a p pr o xi m at el y a mi ni m u m of 1 x 1 0 5 
D C f or e a c h st u d y i s s u bj e ct e d t o t h e f oll o wi n g t e sti n g:  
 
a.  Vi a bilit y d et er mi n ati o n b y tr y p a n bl u e e x cl u si o n. Li mit of a c c e pt a n c e: > 7 0 % vi a bilit y of t h e l ar g e 
gr a n ul ar c ell s b y tr y p a n bl u e e x cl u si o n.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
48  
b. Gram and fungal stains, with negative results to be confirmed before administration of the vaccine 
to the patient. The sensitivity of the Gram stain is 105 cells/ml. 
 
c. Repeated culture for sterility, mai ntained in culture for a total of 14 days.  Culture is done by 
inoculating the sample on Thioglycollate and Tryptic soy broths and Sheep Blood agar plates for each sample, and the cultures are examined for 14 days for evidence of growth. The 
Thioglycollate broth will detect aerobic, facultative anaerobic and anaerobic bacteria, and the Tryptic soy broth and Blood agar plates detect aerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria and 
fungi. If results of this or the in process cultures become positive at any time, the patient will be 
immedia tely contacted and started on empirical broad spectrum intravenous antibiotic treatment 
with Imipenem and Vancomycin, with adjustment of the antibiotic treatment according to the sensitivities obtained from the cultures. 
 d. Mycoplasma Culture. A sample from the DC final product is sent for mycoplasma culture. If the mycoplasma culture becomes positive after the patient has been injected with MART -1
26-35/DC, 
the patient will be contacted and started on Azithromycin.  
 
e. Evaluation of endotoxin contamination by Limulus Amebocyt e Lysate (LAL, Quantitative 
Chromogenic Procedure) or the Endosafe - PTS System (Charles River) . The assays have a 
sensitivity of 0.01 and 0.05 endotoxin units (EU)/ml. Acceptance Criteria for Test Article: <5.0 
EU/Kg weight of the study subject.  
 Additionally, a 0.05- 0.1 ml sample of the final MART -1
26-35/DC preparation from each vaccination time 
will be sterily cryopreserved and stored at < –130oC in a monitored liquid nitrogen tank for possible 
ancillary testing in the future. These samples will be stored a minimum of one year and a day after vaccine administration.  
 
10.2.13 MART -1
26-35/DC Lot Release Criteria:  
 The criteria for lot release with all results available at the time of injection to the patient is described in 
Table 10.  
 
Table 10.  MART -1
26-35/DC Lot Release Criteria: 
 
Culture Day  Testing  Lot Release Criteria  
Leukapheresis  Gram stain  
Sterility cultures  Negative  
Negative to date*  
Plasma  Gram stain  
Sterility cultures  Negative  
Negative to date*  
0 Fresh/ Thawed PBMC  > 70% Viability  
+4 Gram sta in 
Sterility cultures  Negative  
Negative to date  
+6 Mycoplasma Rapid Test  Negative (Ratio < 1)  
+7 DC Viability  
DC Phenotype Gram stain  
Fungal stain  
Sterility cultures  
Mycoplasma culture  
Endotoxin  
Label  > 70% Viability  
CD86 + MHC Class II > 30% LGC  
Negativ e 
Negative  
Negative to date*  
Negative to date*  
< 5 EU/Kg body weight/dose 
“Not Tested for Biohazards”  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
49  
*All sterility cultures and mycoplasma culture will be followed up to 14 days and the final results will 
not be available at the time of vaccination.  After injection of the MART -126-35/DC into the patient, if 
positive culture is reported at any time, the patient will be started on empiric antibiotics.  
 
10.2.14 Product Labeling.  
 
The final MART -126-35/DC vaccine will be labeled using a preprinted study label with the following 
information:  
 
• Patient UCLA ID. Number.  
• Patient’s initials. 
• Subject laboratory clinical trial code.  
• Date of cell preparation, with an expiration time of 24 hours (since it is administered fresh).  
• Initials of person who prepared the v accine.  
• Labeled with “For autologous use only”. 
• Labeled as “Not Tested for Biohazards” (due to no specific testing for HIV, HepC, HepB and 
other adventitious viruses in the final product).  
 
10.2.15 MART -126-35/DC Administration.  
 
Patients will receive up to 1 x 107 MART -126-35/DC that meet the lot release criteria injected 
intradermally (i.d.) in 0.1 -0.5 ml normal saline close to a lymph node basin not known to be involved 
with melanoma.  
 
10.3 Samples for Transgenic TCR Cell Persistence and Immune Monitoring  
 Samples of peripheral blood are collected for the secondary endpoints of MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic 
T cell persistence, RCR analysis, retrovirus insertion sites in dominant clones and immunological monitoring assays. These PBMC will be obtained from the following:  
 
• PBMC obtained from the baseline leukapheresis.  
• A second leukapheresis scheduled between study days + 20 -40 processing 5 liters of blood 
(partial leukapheresis).  
• Peripheral blood collections in EDTA (from which PBMC are separated through Ficoll gradient 
centrifugation.  
 11.0 EVALUATION OF STUDY ENDPOINTS   
 
11.1.1 Safety and Definitions of DLT.   
 
Criteria for safety evaluation.  Safety will be assessed by monitoring and recording potential adverse 
effects of the treatment using the Common Toxicity Criteria at each study visit. Subjects will be 
monitored by medical histories, physical examinations, ophthalmologic exams, and blood studies to 
detect potential toxicities from the treatment.  
 
11.1.1.1 Definition of Dose Limiting Toxicities (DLT).    
 
If 3 patients in the initial 8 patients experienc e DLTs, the study will not proceed to the next phase.  
 Adverse events are defined following NCI CTCAE v3.0. DLTs are defined as:  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
50 • Grade 2 or greater allergic reaction/hypersensitivity (except for fever or rash).  
• Grade 2 or greater autoimmune toxicity not associated with anti -tumor response or which 
threatens vital organ (heart, lung, kidney, bowel, bone marrow, musculoskeletal and central 
nervous system,) function with continued treatment.  
• Clinical evidence o f grade 3 or higher autoimmune reaction in the eye:  
 New subjective patient symptoms in comparison to the data obtained on day 1 of the study 
protocol:  
o Nyctalopia.  
o Loss of peripheral visual field.  
o Photopsias.  
o New floaters.  
o Color desaturation.  
o Blurry visio n.   
 New ophthalmologic findings in comparison to the data obtained on day 1 of the study protocol:  
o Loss of greater than the equivalent of 1 line of visual acuity.  
o Reproducible decreases in visual field of greater than 3 MD deviation.  
o New onset defined scotoma, depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium.  
o Appearance of subretinal fluid. 
o Onset of uveitis not controlled with corticosteroid eye drops. 
• Clinical evidence of grade 2 or higher autoimmune reaction in the ear:  
o New subjective patient symptoms in comparison to the data obtained on day 1 of the study protocol:  
 Deafness.  
 Oscilopia.  
o New otological findings in comparison to the data obtained on day 1 of the study protocol:  
 Loss of greater than the equivalent of 1 line of ear acuity. 
• Grade 3 non- hematologic toxicity due to cell infusion, not easily reversed by standard measures to 
less than a grade 2 within 48 hours.  
• Grade 3 skin toxicity at the DC injection site (pain or swelling with inflammation or phlebitis) will 
not be a reason for therapy withholding, as long as it has improved to grade 1 by the time of retreatment. However, grade 4 local skin toxicity (ulceration or necrosis) will be a reason for treatment withholding.  
• Any Grade of skin rashes related to Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis/ Steven Johnson’s Syndrome  
• Hypersensitivity reaction, Grade 3.  
• Hepatitis, Grade 3.  
• Unexpected Grade 3 or greater skin ulceration and skin rashes with desquamation.  
• Unexpected ≥ Grade 3 toxicity due to cytokines that does not decrease to ≤ Grade 2 in 96 hours.  
• Grade 4 non -laboratory toxicity due to cell infusion  
• Intubation due to respiratory distress after receiving the TCR transgenic ACT therapy.  
 The known toxiciti es and side effects of the chemotherapy preparative regimen, as listed in the 
protocol or package insert, or IL- 2 (Proleukin) or G -CSF (Neupogen) cytokine administration adverse 
event, as listed in the protocol or package insert, will not be considered for  the assessment of DLTs.  
 
11.1.1.2 Ocular Examinations.  
 
Since MART -1 positive pigmented cells are present in the uvea and retina, careful evaluation of the 
eye will be conducted throughout the study period.  
 
Qualifications of the Examiners: The ophthalmologic evaluation will be performed by a qualified 
ophthalmologist with a faculty appointment at UCLA. The primary ophthalmologists performing these 
examinations will be the study co -investigators Dr. Bradley R. Straatsma, M.D., J.D., Professor of 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
51 Ophthal mology and Director Emeritus of the Jules Stein Eye Institute, and Dr. Tara McCannel, M.D., 
Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Ophthalmology.  
 
Procedures: The following will be the procedures performed in the comprehensive ophthalmologic 
visits at screening and post treatment Day 75- 90: ophthalmic history, comprehensive ophthalmic 
examination, psychophysical visual function assessment and fundus photography. If any abnormality 
is detected, subjects will undergo an additional fluorescein angiography and electrophysiological 
visual function assessment. For other ophthalmologic visits, the minimally required procedures will be an ophthalmic history and a comprehensive ophthalmic examination.  
 
Ocular DLTs:  Ocular DLTs consist of new ophthalmologic findings or subjective patient symptoms in 
comparison to the data obtained during screening. The new symptoms of concern include nyctalopia, 
loss of peripheral visual field, photopsias, new floaters, color desaturation, or blurry vision. On 
examination, several findings would consist of an ocular DLT. These include loss of greater than the 
equivalent of 1 line of visual acuity, reproducible decreases in visual field of greater than 3 MD deviation or new onset defined scotoma, depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium, 
appearance of subretinal fluid, or onset of uveitis.  
 
Procedures to follow if an ocular DLT is determined: Subjects with findings of an ocular DLT as 
defined above will receive either topical or systemic prednisone (100 mg qday for 5 days) as recommended by the ophthalmologist, with repeated ophthalmologic assessment. If a favorable 
course is noted, then patients will be followed every week for one month, and monthly afterwards until 
complete resolution of the findings. If the patient does not have a favorable course after the initial 
prednisone treatment, then the patient will be admitted for intravenous corticosteroids therapy with the 
possibility of adding cyclosporin A, OKT3, micophenolate or other immune suppressant.  
 11.1.1.3 Otologic Examinations.  
 
Since MART -1 positive pigmented cells are present in the inner ear, careful evaluation of the ear 
function will be conducted throughout the study period.  
 
Qualifications of the Examiners: The otologic visit will be performed by a qualified 
otorhinolaryngologist with a faculty appointment at UCLA. The primary otorhinolaryngologist 
performing these visits will be the study co- investigator Dr. Akira Ishiyama.  
 
Procedures: The following will be the procedures performed in the comprehensive ophthalmologic 
visits on day 1 and 75- 90: otologic history, comprehensive otologic examination. If any abnormality is 
detected, subjects will undergo additional targeted examinations.  
 
Otologic DLTs:  Otologic DLTs consist of new ophthalmologic findings or subjective patient s ymptoms 
in comparison to the data obtained on day 1 of the study protocol.  
 Procedures to follow if an otologic DLT is determined: Subjects with findings of an otologic DLT 
as defined above will receive either topical or systemic prednisone (100 mg qday for 5 days) as 
recommended by the otorhynolaryngologist, with repeated otologic assessment. If a favorable course 
is noted, then patients will be followed every week for one month, and monthly afterwards until 
complete resolution of the findings. If the pat ient does not have a favorable course after the initial 
prednisone treatment, then the patient will be admitted for intravenous corticosteroids therapy with the 
possibility of adding cyclosporin A, OKT3, micophenolate or other immune suppressant.  
 
11.1.2 Feasibility  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
52 After entering 8 patients to the first stage of this study, followed up for a minimum of 3 months after 
the last subject has received the infusion of the MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic cells, an assessment of 
protocol feasibility will be done by the study investigators (Table 9). The feasibility assessment will be 
based on: i) the number of MART -1 F5 TCR engineered cells that can be recovered from patients at 
pre-specified time points, and ii) potential problems in the manufacturing of MART -1 F5 TCR  
engineered cells and/or the MART -126-35 peptide–pulsed DC vaccines (Table 11).  
 
Table 11.  Criteria to Declare the Study Unfeasible.  
 
Parameter  Criteria for Unfeasibility  
Feasibility of generating MART -1 transgenic 
cells that meet the lot release criteria . 3 or more preparations not meeting the lot release 
criteria in stage 1.  
Feasibility of generating MART -126-35/DC that 
meet the lot release criteria.  3 or more preparations not meeting the lot release 
criteria in stage 1.  
 
11.1.3 Antitumor Activity  
 11.1.3.1 Malignancy status 
 
Objective tumor responses are aimed at ruling out a 10% response rate as the null hypothesis, and 
35% response rate as the alternative hypothesis within a phase II two- stage clinical trial design. 
Therefore, if 2 out of 8 patients in the first stage have objective responses and the criteria for safety 
and feasibility are met, the study will proceed to a second stage entering 14 additional patients for a 
total of 22 patients in the clinical trial.  
 Potential objective responses to this combinatorial immunotherapy will be recorded following the 
RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) criteria 
68. Appropriate evaluations, including 
physical exam, pictures of visible lesions and imaging exams, will be evaluated at screening and then 
between study days 75 -90, or at discontinuation of study. The duration of patient evaluation may be 
extended if additional outpatient visits are required to assess duration of tumor response or time to progression.  
 All patients who have received an infusion of MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic T cells and have tumor 
assessments at baseline and during the study follow up will be considered evaluable for tumor 
response.   
 
11.1.3.2 Definition of Measurable and Non- measurable Lesions  
 
Measurements of all lesions should be recorded in metric units. All baseline evaluations must be 
performed as close as possible to the first day of study treatment. The same method of assessment 
and the same technique should be used to characterize each identified and reported lesion at 
baseline and during follow -up. 
a. Measurable Lesions:  
• Lesions that can be accurately measured in at least 1 dimension (longest diameter to be 
recorded) as ≥2.0 cm with conventional imaging techniques, ≥ 1.0 cm with spiral CT scan 
with slices of 5 mm thickness, or no less than double the slice thickness using modern CT 
scanners with thinner slices.   
• Skin nodules that can be clearly documented by color photography, including a ruler, to document the maximum diameter of the target lesion(s), regardless of their size.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
53 • If the measurable disease is restricted to a solitary lesion, its neoplastic nature should be 
confirmed by cytology/histology, or by positivity by [18F]FDG PET scan if the lesion is not 
easily accessible for tissue sampling.  
b. Non-measurable Lesions:  
• All other melanoma lesions: Previously irradiated lesions are non -measurable except in 
cases of documented progression of the lesion since the completion of radiation therapy.  
 
11.1.3.3 Definition of Target and Non- Target Lesi ons 
 
Patients must have at least one measurable lesion at baseline to be included in the analysis of this endpoint. Baseline documentation of tumor sites may include imaging assessment of disease in the 
chest, abdomen and pelvis. A baseline imaging study o f the brain is required.  
a. Target Lesions:  
• Up to 10 total lesions, a maximum of 5 lesions per organ, that are representative of all 
involved organs may be selected and recorded as target lesions at baseline. Target lesions 
should be selected on the basis of  their size (lesions with the longest diameter) and their 
suitability for accurate repetitive measurements (either by imaging techniques or clinically). The sum of the longest diameter for all target lesions will be calculated and reported as the 
baseline sum longest diameter. The baseline sum longest diameter will be used as 
reference to further characterize the objective tumor response of the disease.  
• Since at least 2 biopsies will be performed, at least one of the baseline target lesions should not be completely excised throughout the study period. 
b. Non-Target Lesions:  
• All other lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as non- target lesions and 
recorded as non- target lesions at baseline. Measurement of non- target lesions at baseline 
is not requi red and should be recorded as “present.” Each non- target lesion should be 
documented as either present, absent or new in each subsequent evaluation.  
 
11.1.3.4 Objective Response Classifications  
 
The following RECIST criteria will be the primary method utilized in this study for the assessment and reporting of tumor response data:  
• Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all evidence of melanoma in target and non-
target lesions. CR must be confirmed by repeat assessments performed no less than 4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met to qualify as CR. This definition includes a 
pathological CR when hyperpigmented lesions visible by exam are biopsied and demonstrate no viable measurable melanoma and pigment accumulated in phagocytic cells.  
• Partial  Response (PR): At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the longest diameter (LD) of 
target lesions taking as reference the baseline sum LD . Non -target lesions may persist provided 
there is no unequivocal progression in these lesions. PR must be confirmed by  repeat 
assessments performed no less than 4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met to qualify as PR;  
• Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum LD of the target lesions from the smallest sum LD recorded since the beginning of therapy or the appearance of one or 
more new lesions or unequivocal progression of existing non- target lesions; and  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
54 • Stable Disease (SD): Measurements demonstrating neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for 
PR nor sufficient increase to qualify as PD after the start of treatment taking as reference the smallest sum LD since the treatment started. During this time, non- target lesions may persist 
provided there is no unequivocal progression in these lesions.  
 
11.1.3.5 Frequency of Tumor Measurements  
 
Tumo r assessments for response will be performed starting at the end of 3 months (Day 90) and 
every 2 -3 months subsequently. Tumor assessment will also be performed at discontinuation from the 
study, unless these have been performed within the last 4 weeks pri or to discontinuation. CR and PR 
must be confirmed by repeat assessments performed no less than 4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met to qualify as such response. Additional tumor measurements may be 
completed as needed.  
11.1.3.6 Assessment  of Response for In- Transit Metastasis  
 
In patients with in- transit metastasis only, at least one in- transit metastatic lesion should not be 
excised. If there is only one measurable lesion, biopsies should not interfere with the measurement of the largest diameter of the lesion. Response will be assessed as above, taking the measurement from 
pictures with a built -in ruler.  
 
11.1.3.7 Duration of Response:  
 The duration of overall complete response will be measured from the time measurement criteria has 
been first met for CR until the first date that recurrent or progressive disease is objectively 
documented.  
 The duration of overall response will be measured from the time measurement criteria is met for 
CR/PR (whichever is first recorded) until the first date that recurrent or progressive disease is 
objectively documented (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started).  
 
11.1.3.8 Time to Disease Progression  
 
Defined as the length of time from the date of enrollment to the date of progressive disease first documented, death, or the start of secondary antitumor therapy, whichever occurs first.  Subjects lost 
to follow -up will be censored at their last available follow -up date.  
 
11.1.4 Definition of Study Failure Due to Failure of Meeting the Primary Study Endpoints.  
 Study failure according to safety and feasibility considerations is defined as follows:  
 
1) Unexpected SAEs that are related to the transduction process or research reagent and 
required that the study be stopped.  
2) 3 or more DLT in the first stage with 8 patients.  
3) Considered to be an unfeasible approach as defined above.  
4) 1 or less patients with CR or PR among 8 patients in stage 1.  
5) 4 or less patients with CR or PR among 22 patients in the completed study combining patients in stage 1 and 2.  
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
55 11.2 Secondary Study Endpoints:  
 
11.2.1 MART -1 TCR/sr39 Transgenic Cell Persistence  
 11.2.1.1 Transgenic Cell Persistence.  
 
TCR and vector presence will be quantitated in PBMC samples, obtained before adoptive transfer and 
at 7, 14, 30, 45, 60, 75 and 90 days after transgenic cell adoptive transfer. Thereafter, sampling will be every 3 months during the first 2 years, and then every 6 to 12 months. Analysis will be performed 
both using immune monitoring and molecular techniques. Detection of surface expression of the 
MART -1 TCR transgenic protein will be analyzed both by MHC tetramer or dextramer  analysis and 
staining for the specific region. Molecular analysis of the persistence of cells bearing the MART -1 F5 
TCR cDNA will be done by real time PCR techniques using primers specific for the transgenes and 
retroviral vector sequences. This testing will provide data to estimate the in vivo  survival of 
lymphocytes derived from the infused cells.  
 
11.2.1.2 Long  Term Monitoring for Replication Competent Retrovirus (RCR).  
 
Analysis for detection of RCR by PCR will be performed at the National Gene Vector Biorepository  
(NGVB) at the Indiana University Viral Production Facility (IU VPF) under the supervision of Dr.  
Kenneth G. Cornetta. Samples taken from cells prior to infusion will be archived and blood samples 
obtained from study patients at 3 and 6 months, and at one year post cell administration will be tested. 
Blood samples will be archived annually thereafter if all previous testing has been negative.  
 If a patient dies or develops a neoplasm (other than melanoma recurrence) during this clinical trial, efforts will be made to assay a biopsy sample for RCR. If any post -treatment samples are positive, 
then the baseline final product will be tested for RCR. Further analysis of the RCR and more extensive patient follow -up will be undertaken, in consultation with the UCLA IRB, RAC and FDA.   
 
11.2.1.3 Analysis of Retroviral Insertion Sites in Long Term Persisting MA RT-1 F5 TCR Clones 
 
It is possible that expansion of specific T -cell clones will be observed as tumor reactive T cells 
proliferate in response to tumor antigens. Therefore, care will be taken to track T cell persistence both immunologically and molecularly. Blood samples for persistence of TCR gene transduced cells will be 
obtained at 3, 6, 12 months, and then annually thereafter. If any patient shows a high level of 
persistence of TCR gene transduced cells at month 6 (by semi quantitative DNA -PCR using pri mers 
specific for vector sequences) the previously archived samples will be subjected to techniques that 
would allow the identification of clonality of persisting TCR gene transduced cells. Such techniques 
may include T cell cloning or LAM -PCR. Clonality a nalysis is available through NGVL 
69. 
 If a predominant or monoclonal T cell clone derived from TCR gene transduced cells is identified 
during the follow -up, the integration site and sequence will be identified and subsequently analyzed 
against the human genome database to determine whether the sequences are associated with any 
known human cancers. If a predominant integration site is observed, the T cell cloning or LAM -PCR 
test will be used at an interval of no more than three months after the first observation to see if the clone persists or is transient. In all instances where monoclonality is persistent and particularly in 
instances where there is expansion of the clone, regardless of whether or not the sequence is known to be associated with a known human cancer, the subject should be monitored closely for signs of 
malignancy.  
 
11.2.1.4 Immunological Monitoring.  
 Immunological monitoring will consist of quantifying T cells bearing surface MART -1 F5 TCR by 
MART -1
26-35 tetramer or dextramer analysis. The functionality of these cells will  be tested in ELISA 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
56 and/or multicytokine array assays , intracellular cytokine staining (ICS). Immunological assays will be 
compared between 1) pre- infusion PBMC, 2) an aliquot of the engineered PBL at the time of infusion, 
3) cells recovered from patients’ peripheral blood after adoptive transfer.  
 
Our published definitions for a positive or negative immunological response using standardized MHC 
tetramer assays will be used for these two assays  70. These definitions are based on the assay 
performance specifications by defining changes that are beyond the assay variability with a 95% confi dence level. For the other assays, differences of 1 fold will be considered indicative of true 
biologic differences.  
 Additional testing may be performed with other assays, for example intracellular phosphoprotein 
staining for signaling networks, multiplexed microfluidic and nanotechnology -based immune 
monitoring assays 
71,72.  
 
11.2.2 Evaluation of MART- 1 TCR Transgenic Cell Tumor Trafficking  
 
11.2.2.1 In Vivo Imaging  
 
The ability to non -invasively image T cell responses to cancer hinges upon the detection of metabolic 
changes related to TCR transgenic cell proliferation in vivo  detectable with PET probes.  
 
Patients will be injected with 200 MBq [18F]FDG at baseline and approximately 20- 40 days after ACT, 
with allowed variability of scheduling for 2 -4 weeks of the intended dates. One hour post injection, a 
PET/CT scan covering the area from the base of the skull to  the upper abdomen will be acquired. 
Scans of the extremities will be performed in patients with metastatic lesions in the arms or legs. The CT scan will be performed in a “low dose mode” (110 kVp, 30 mAs anode current) resulting in an effective dose of less than 1.3 mSv per scan 
73. These doses are comparable with typical diagnostic 
CT or PET scans and below the limits set by federal regulations for research studies involving radioactive imaging agents (http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_01/21cfr361_01.html).  
 Regional uptake of [
18F]FDG within metastatic tumor sites and secondary lymphoid organs will be 
quantified by standardized uptake values (SUV) normalized to the body weight of the patient. As an internal quality control, SUVs will also be determined for several normal organs, such as muscle, liver and lungs. These measurements will allow us to identify technical problems in the SUV calculations, such as partially paravenous tracer administration 
74. An attempt will be made to have all imaging 
studies will be performed on the same PET/CT system in order to eliminate confounding effects of differences in scanner sensitivity, spatial resolution or image processing. 
 
11.2.2.2 Tumor Biopsies 
 To correlate the [
18F]FDG signal with the numbers and functional phenotype o f MART -1 F5 TCR 
transgenic T cells accumulating at the tumor site, percutaneous or image -guided biopsies of tumor 
lesions between study days 20- 40, with allowed variability in this range, will be performed. The 
biopsies will be analyzed by H&E, IHC to quantify the numbers of T lymphocytes. If sufficient quantity 
of tissue is available, the study investigators will attempt to monitor the phenotype of the TIL obtained from tumor biopsy samples by MHC tetramer  or dextramer, multicolor flow cytometry (FACS), and 
other immune monitoring assays.  
 
12.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
 
12.1 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
 
A serious adverse event or serious adverse drug reaction is defined as any untoward medical 
occurrence at any dose that:  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
57  
• Results in death.  
• Is life -threatening (immediate risk of death).  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization.  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity.  
• Results in congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
Progression of the malignancy under trial should not be reported as an adverse event. However, if the malignancy has a fatal outcome during the trial or within the safety -reporting period, then disease 
progression must be recorded as a Grade 5 serious adverse event.  
Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in determining whether an event is an important 
medical event. An important medical event may not be immediately life threatening and/or result in death or hospitalization. However, if it is determined that the event  may jeopardize the patient and 
may require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above, the important medical event should be reported as serious.  
 
SAE Reporting Period  
 
Events that meet the SAE definition will be reported within the following timelines based on the time of 
first knowledge of the SAE by a study investigator:  
 
• SAE other than resulting in unexpected death: 
o P.I.: Within 24 hours.  
o IRB, ISPRC, DSMB, IBC, NIH/RAC: Within 7 days.  
o FDA: Within 15 days.  
• Unexpected death:  
o P.I.: Within 24 hours.  
o IRB, ISPRC, DSMB, IBC, NIH/RAC: Within 24 hours.  
o FDA: Within 7 days.  
 
In general, any SAE will be reported as soon as it is known by the study investigators and enough 
data is gathered for report filing. All SAE reports will  be managed through the UCLA SAE Compliance 
Officer, working under the JCCC Regulatory Affairs Office. Initial reports may be completed or 
amended with any new relevant additional information.  
 Copies of all reports will be maintained in the study regulatory file. Copies of any report sent to the 
FDA will also be sent to the study sponsor.  
 
12.2 Definition of an Adverse Event (AE)  
 
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical investigation patient administered a 
product or medical device; the event need not necessarily have a causal relationship with the 
treatment or usage.  
 Abnormal Test Findings 
 The criteria for determining whether an abnormal objective test finding should be reported as an 
adverse event are as follows:   
• Test result  is associated with accompanying symptoms, and/or  
• Test result requires additional diagnostic testing or medical/surgical intervention, and/or  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
58 • Test result leads to a change in trial schedule or discontinuation from the trial, significant 
additional concomitant drug treatment, or other therapy, and/or  
• Test result is considered to be an adverse event by the investigator or sponsor.  
 Merely repeating an abnormal test, in the absence of any of the above conditions, does not constitute 
an adverse event. Any abnormal test result that is determined to be an error does not require 
reporting as an adverse event.  
 12.3 Causality Assessment  
 
The investigator’s assessment of causality must be provided for all adverse events (serious and non-
serious). An investigator’s causality assessment is the determination of whether there exists a reasonable possibility that the investigational product caused or contributed to an adverse event. If the 
investigator’s final determination of causality is unknown and the investigator does  not know whether 
or not investigational product caused the event, then the event will be handled as “related to investigational product” for reporting purposes. If the investigator's causality assessment is "unknown 
but not related to investigational product", this should be clearly documented on the study records. In 
addition, if the investigator determines a serious adverse event is associated with trial procedures, the 
investigator must record this causal relationship in the source documents and CRF, as  appropriate, 
and report such an assessment in accordance with the serious adverse event reporting requirements, 
if applicable.  
 
12.4 Withdrawal Due to Adverse Events  
 Withdrawal due to adverse event should be distinguished from withdrawal due to insuffic ient 
response, according to the definition of adverse event noted earlier, and recorded on the appropriate adverse event CRF page. When a patient withdraws due to a serious adverse event, the serious 
adverse event must be reported in accordance with the reporting requirements defined below.  
 
13.0 COMPLIANCE WITH GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE, ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS, 
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
13.1 Compliance with Good Clinical Practice and Ethical Considerations 
 
This study must be conducted in compliance with all local and federal regulatory requirements, in 
particular those which afford greater protection to the safety of the trial participants. This study will be 
conducted according to the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki and with local and federal 
laws an d regulations relevant to the use of new therapeutic agents. The ICF must contain a language 
readily understood by the potential study subjects.  
 
13.2 Regulatory Approvals 
 The Protocol and ICF must be approved by the following committees before initiation of patient 
enrollment:  
 
Local Committees:  
 
o Institutional Review Board (IRB).  
o Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). 
o Institutional Scientific Peer Review Committee (ISPRC).  
  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
59 Federal Committees:  
 
o Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC).  
o Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
13.3 Subject Recruitment  
 
Study subjects will be invited to participate by the study investigators as part of the discussion of 
standard and experimental therapy for locally advanced or metastatic melanoma. Patients may access the s tudy investigators through:  
a) Subjects may be referred from UCLA or outside clinics. No patient will be approached without a referral or agreement from the patient’s physician in order to uphold patient confidentiality.  
b) Subjects may be identified by the study investigators from their own patient pools while discussing standard and experimental options for advanced or metastatic melanoma.  
c) Study flyers will be posted in public places, including the oncology clinic waiting room, for subject self-referral.  
d) Subjects may self -refer to this study when inquiring about clinical trial options at UCLA. 
e) This study will be listed at the NIH web site listing active clinical trials, which also assures trial registration at a public site.  
 13.4 Gender and Minorities  
 
There  will be no discrimination based upon sex or race. Subjects of any gender and ethnicity with 
melanoma have been and will be considered in the proposed clinical trials. There has been and will certainly be no discrimination due to gender or ethnicity, but the epidemiology of melanoma and HLA 
haplotypes may result in uneven minority population distribution. Since melanoma is slightly more prevalent in males (2/3), we expect that approximately 30- 35% of the study population will be females.  
 
Most subjects referred to the UCLA Melanoma Program come from the UCLA Oncology Network, with over 50 offices throughout the Los Angeles County and Western US, including areas where there is a majority of subjects of Asian, Hispanic and African American descent. Cutaneous m alignant 
melanoma occurs less frequently among non -white populations than among whites. Data from the 
California Cancer Registry reveal that, between 1988 and 1993, 95.5% of subjects with melanoma in California were non -Hispanic whites, 3.5% were Hispanic,  0.5% Asian, and 0.5% non -Hispanic blacks 
75. The patients treated in previous melanoma clinical trials conducted over the past 5 years at the 
UCLA Melan oma Program mirror the gender and race characteristics of the malignant melanoma 
patient population in the Southern California area. Table 12 reflects the gender and minority distribution of subjects accrued to clinical trials in the UCLA Melanoma Program over the past 5 years. 93% were white and 33% were female, which is in accordance with the incidence of melanoma in our population.  
 Table 12.  Gender and Minorities Accrued to Prior Melanoma Clinical Trials at the UCLA Melanoma 
Program (2002- 2007):  
 
 Ameri can 
Indian or  
Alaskan  
Native  Asian or  
Pacific  
Islander  Black, not  
of Hispanic  
Origin  Hispanic  White, not  
of Hispanic  
Origin  Other or  
Unknown Total  
Female  - 1 1 5 52 1 60 
Male  - 2 - 2 117 1 122 
Unknown  - - - - - - - 
Total  - 3 1 7 164 2 182 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
60 13.5 Childr en 
 
Metastatic melanoma is very rare in subjects younger than 18 years old. The use of the non-myeloablative regimen in this protocol is a major procedure that entails serious discomforts and hazards for the patient, such that fatal complications are possible. It is therefore only appropriate to carry out this experimental procedure in the context of life threatening metastatic cancer. Since the efficacy of this experimental procedure is unknown, it does not seem reasonable to expose children to this risk w ithout further evidence of benefit. Should results of this study indicate efficacy in treating 
metastatic melanoma, which is not responsive to other standard forms of therapy, future research will be conducted in the pediatric population to evaluate potential benefit in that patient population. However, patients with age less than 18 will be considered on a case -by-case basis, and a specific 
pediatric consent will be developed if necessary.  
 
13.6 Informed Consent Procedure  
 
13.6.1 Informed Consent Form (I CF). This study must be conducted in compliance with UCLA IRB, 
IBC, ISPRC, the RAC and the FDA, and relevant informed consent regulations. The ICF must contain 
a language readily understood by the potential study subjects. The original consent form, signed and 
dated by the patient and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion, will be included in the patient’s UCLA medical chart. A copy of the signed ICF will be provided to the patient.  
 
There will be one consent form describing all of the study procedures, including the administration of 
genetically modified cells and the procedures for gene transfer. The rationale for including gene transfer and non- gene transfer procedures in the same consent form is that their separation would 
result in  unnecessary duplication of text and non- linear explanation of the study procedures.  
 
13.6.2 Procedure of Consent. Subjects will be seen by one of the study investigators who will 
explain the study in detail including procedures, potential risks and side effects. Subjects will be encouraged to take additional time to consider the study and will be given the opportunity to take 
home the ICF for review and consideration. They will then be invited to meet with one of the 
investigators at another time. Subjects will be encouraged to have significant others or relatives with 
them at the time of the interviews. Questions from subjects, significant others and relatives will be encouraged. If the subject is non -English speaking, the study investigators will have the informed 
consent translated in the subject’s native language. Ample time will be allowed for discussions and clarification of the goals of the research project with the trial investigators. Potential subjects will be 
asked if they wish to participate and told that it is voluntary and refusal will not affect their relationship 
with their physician or the care given to them at UCLA. No coercion will be used.  
 
13.7 Subject Enrollm
ent  
 
Subjects will be enrolled at the time the ICF is signed. Fulfillment of the eligibility criteria for each new 
subject enrolled will be prospectively and independently monitored by the UCLA Human Gene 
Medicine Program (HGMP) Compliance Officer.  
 
14.0 QUALIFICATIONS OF PERSONNEL AND STUDY FACILITIES  
 
14.1 Qualifications of Investigators  
 
The UCLA Human Gene Medicine and Melanoma Programs: Antoni Ribas, James S. 
Economou, John A. Glaspy, William H. McBride, Bartosz Chmielowski, Arun Singh, Deborah Wong, Begonya Comin -Anduix, Richard C. Koya, Thinle Chodon, Donald Kohn. The first h uman 
gene transfer clinical trial conducted by Drs. Economou, Glaspy and McBride was initiated in 1992. This was a double retroviral vector gene marking of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL)
76. Two 
adenovirus vector gene transfer -based clinical trials were conducted by Drs. Economou, Glaspy, 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
61 McBride and Ribas at UCLA. These clinical trials involved the generation of genetically manipulated 
DC-based cellular vaccines using adenoviral vectors for melanoma and hepatocellular carcinoma 
(INDs 9908 and 11299).  
 
- Antoni Ribas, M.D. , Professor of Medicine and Surgery, Director of the Tumor Immunology 
Program Area at the JCCC,. Dr. Ribas is a translational medical oncolo gist and tumor 
immunologist, conducting experimental clinical trials in patients with melanoma.   
 
- James S. Economou, M.D. Ph.D. , Professor of Surgery and Microbiology, Immunology, and 
Molecular Genetics, Chief of the Division of Surgical Oncology, Deputy Director of the JCCC and 
the Director of the Human Gene Medicine Program (HGMP), and Vice Chancellor for Research  at 
UCLA. Dr. Economou is an accomplished translational tumor immunologist and pioneer in clinical trials with retrovirus -modified tumor infiltr ating lymphocytes (TIL).  
 
- John A. Glaspy, M.D., M.P.H., Professor of Medicine, Vice- Chair of the Division of Hematology -
Oncology, Director of the JCCC Clinical Research Unit Shared Resource, and the Associate 
Chief, UCLA 100 Medical Plaza Community Oncology Practice. Dr. Glaspy is a leading expert in 
clinical research, with a focus on melanoma and the development of cytokines and growth factors 
for human use.   
 
- William H. McBride, D.Sc . Professor and Vice Chair for Research, Director, Experimental 
Radiatio n Oncology. Dr. McBride is a recognized expert in animal models of tumor immunotherapy 
and radiation therapy.  
 - Bartosz Chmielowski, M.D., Ph.D. Assistant Professor of Medicine in the Division of 
Hematology -Oncology. An expert in thymic development 
77-79 and in the care of patients with 
malignant melanoma.  
 
- Arun Singh, M. D., Clinical Instructor in Medicine at the Division of Hematology -Oncology. Dr. 
Singh is a trained hematology -oncologist with expertise in high dose chemotherapy and IL- 2 
administration, and an expert in the use of molecular imaging to study immune responses to 
cancer.  
 
- Deborah Wong, M. D., Ph.D. Clinical Instructor, Division of Hematology and Oncology.   Dr. Wong 
is a translational medical oncologist whose research and clinical interest is in improving the 
understanding and the treatment of patients with melanoma.  
 
- Siwen Hu -Lieskovan, M.D, Ph.D.  Clinical Instructor,  Division of Hematology and Oncology at 
UCLA.  Dr. Hu -Lieskovan is a translational medical oncologist whose research and clinical 
expertise is in development of  immune and targeted therapy for melanoma, lung cancer and other 
solid malignancies . 
 
- Daniel Shin, M.D.  Fellow, Division of Hematology and Oncology at UCLA.  Dr. Shin is a 
translational medical oncologist. 
 
- Begoña Comin -Anduix, Ph.D.  Adjunct Ass ociate Professor, Division of Surgical Oncology. An 
expert in immune monitoring and culture of human lymphocytes  70. Will lead the laboratory 
analysis of patient -derived samples.  
 
- Beata Berent -Maoz, Ph.D.   Assistant Pro ject Scientist, Division of Hematology and Oncology at 
UCLA.  An expert in retroviral and lentiviral vector manufacture and transduction of target cells. 
Will be responsible for the GMP manufacture of TCR genetically modified cells and DC. 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
62 - Paula Kaplan -Lefko, Ph. D. Project Scientist , Division of Hematology -oncology at UCLA. 
Experienced in writing industry -sponsored and investigator -initiated regulatory documents. Will 
coordinate the regulatory activities during the conduct of this clinical trial.  
 
- Richard C. Koya, M.D., Ph.D . Ass ociate  Professor  of Oncology, Vector Development and 
Production Facility and Associate Director, Center for Immunotherapy at the Roswell Park Cancer 
Institute. ,. An experienced molecular biologist and expert in gene therapy vectors,  including 
retrovirus and lentiviral vectors .   
 
- Thinle Chodon, M.D., Ph.D.   Assistant Professor of Oncology, Center for Immunotherapy and 
Facility Director of CFI Translational Research Operations at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute, a n 
expert in retroviral and lentiviral vector manufacture and transduction of target cells. Will be responsible for the GMP manufacture of TCR genetically modified cells and peptide pulsed DC.  
 - Donald Kohn, M.D. , Professor of Pediatrics and Molecular Microbiology and Immunology at 
UCLA. Dr. Kohn is an international leader in clinical trials of HSC genetically modified using 
retroviral vectors.  
 
The UCLA AIDS Institute Gene Therapy Program: Jerome A. Zack and Zoran Galic.  Two clinical 
trials of HSC gene therapy in patients with HIV infection and AIDS, have been led by Dr. Zack (INDs 7328 and 10183). These trials involve introduction of an anti -HIV ribozyme into autologous CD34+ 
hematopoietic progenitor cells from HIV+ adults.  
 - Jerome A. Zack, Ph.D.  Professor of Medicine and Vice Chair of Microbiology, Immunology, and 
Molecular Genetics. Dr. Zack is a thymocyte development, embryonic stem cells and HIV immunity expert.  
 
- Zoran Galic, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor of Medicine. Dr. Galic is an embryonic stem cell and 
thymocyte development expert. 
 The Caltech/USC Engineering Immunology Program: David Baltimore, Pin Wang, Lili Yang.  
 
- David Baltimore Ph.D. , President of Caltech and Nobel Prize Laureate for the description of 
reverse transcriptase. Dr. Baltimore has a longstanding interest in the development of immunotherapy for cancer and infectious diseases, and has unique expertise in retroviral vectors 
for gene transfer.  
 
- Pin Wang, Ph.D.  Associate Professor in Chemical Engineering and Material Sciences at USC. Dr. 
Wang is an expert in the genetic engineering of retroviral and lentiviral vectors.  
 
- Lili Yang, Ph.D. , Project Leader at the Engineering Immunology Program at Caltech. Dr. Yang is 
an expert in TCR genetic cloning and the genetic engineering of HSC.  
 The University of Connecticut Immunotherapy Program: Bijay Mukherji.  
 
- Bijay Mukherji, M.D.  Professor of Medicine at the University of Connecticut. Dr. Mukherji is a 
pioneer in cloning human T cells specific for tumor antigens and in the study of their 
immunobiology. Dr. Mukherji conducted the first dendritic cell -based clinical trial in human 
subjects.  
    
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
63 The UCLA In Vivo  Cellular and Molecular Imaging Center: Caius Radu, Johannes Czernin, 
Michael Phelps.  
 
- Caius G. Radu, M.D. , Associate Professor of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology. Dr. Radu is 
an expert in molecular immunology and in vivo  imaging of immune responses in murine models.  
 
- Owen N. Witte, M.D. Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigator at UCLA, Professor of 
Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, President's Chair in Developmental 
Immunology, Professor of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, and Director of the Institute of 
Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at UCLA. Dr. Witte is a recognized molecular biologist who has 
pioneered an approach to non- invasivel y image antitumor T cell responses in alive animals.  
 
- Johannes Czernin, M.D. , Professor of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology . Dr. Czernin is a 
leading expert in the use of metabolic imaging for assessment of tumor response in patients .  
 - Michael E. Phelps, Ph.D. , Norton Simon Professor and Chairman of Molecular and Medical 
Pharmacology, Chief, Division of Nuclear Medicine . Dr. Phelps pioneered PET imaging to 
examine molecular and cellular functions in humans . 
 NanoSystems Biology Cancer Center (NSBCC): James R. Heath.  
 
- James R. Heath, Ph.D. , Elizabeth W. Gilloon Professor of Chemistry at Caltech and Director of 
the Caltech -UCLA -Institute for Systems Biology (ISB) NSB Cancer Center . Dr. Heath is a 
nanotechnology and microfluidics expert who has developed novel and highly multiplexed immune monitoring assays able to analyze limiting samples from tumor biopsies.  
 Biostatistics, Analytical Support & Evaluation (BASE) Unit   
 - David Gjertson, Ph.D.  Professor of Biomathematics at UCLA. Dr. Gjertson is an experienced 
biostatistician who will provide overall statistic al oversight.  
 
- Xiaoyan Wang, Ph. D. Assistant Professor of Medicine at UCLA. Dr. Wang is an experienced 
biostatistician who will work with Dr. Gjertson.  
 
The Jules Stein Eye Institute Ophthalmology Program: Bradley Straatsma, Tara 
McCannel . 
 
 
- Tara McCannel , M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Ophthalmology. Dr. McCannel  is an expert 
in ocular melanoma who has been involved in the monitoring of potential ocular toxicities of 
experimental immunotherapies test ed in clinical trials at UCLA.  
 
Otological Exams: Akira Ishiyama.  
 - Akira Ishiyama, M.D.  Professor of Head and Neck Surgery at UCLA. He is an expert in otological 
analysis, in particular in the study of autoimmune phenomena in the middle and inner ear.  
 
In conclusion, the study investigators are very familiar with the use of retroviral vectors to genetically 
modify primary lymphocytes, the requirements of GMP standards for ex vivo  cell culture and genetic 
manipulation, the requirements for GCP standards for conducting human experimental clinical trials, 
and have fully equipped clinical facilities that have been successfully reviewed by regulatory agencies 
for the conduct of cellular therapy and gene transfer studies.  
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
64 14.2 Personnel Training 
 
a. Clinical Per sonnel : The following will be required courses, training sessions or certificates 
required for clinical study personnel:  • UCLA IRB Human subjects certificate.  
• UCLA IRB HIPPA certificate. 
• Certificate in Good Clinical Practice.  
• UCLA Human Gene Medicine Program Educational Course.  
 b. Laboratory Personnel : The following courses, training sessions or certificates will be required for 
study laboratory personnel involved in TCR transgenic cell manufacturing:  
 • UCLA IRB Human subjects certificate.  
• UCLA IRB HIPPA ce rtificate.  
• UCLA JCCC current Good Manufacturing Practice training.  
• UCLA Human Gene Medicine Program Educational Course.  
• UCLA IBC training on Biosafety Level 2.  
• UCLA IBC certificate in the use of biosafety cabinets.  
• UCLA IBC shipping of Biological Material  
• UCLA IBC training in biological waste management.  
• UCLA IBC training on Bloodborne Pathogens.  
 
14.3 HGMP/JCCC Cell and Gene Therapy GMP Suite at UCLA  
 
UCLA has a dedicated, fully equipped and functional GMP suite specifically designed for cellular and 
gene transfer clinical trials. This facility is located on the 14
th floor of the JCCC Factor Building and is 
jointly managed by the JCCC and the HGMP. It consists of a 2395 square feet BioSafety level 2 (BSL2) suite with 7 HEPA -filtered rooms. This secured area  has centralized monitoring of air and 
equipment linked to the study investigators’ pagers. Access is restricted to investigators with certified 
training and is supervised by the JCCC Regulatory Affairs Office. The 4 positive pressure laboratories 
are desi gned for ex vivo  cell manipulation of cells, since it minimizes the possibility of outside 
pathogen contamination. The 3 negative pressure laboratories are designed for gene transfer procedures, since it ensures that the recombinant vectors will not contam inate the surrounding 
environment. There have been 18 investigator -initiated clinical trials in which the cell or gene therapy 
product has been manufactured by the investigator team in the JCCC GMP suite within RAC and FDA compliance.  
 
14.4. Gene Therapy Viral Bank  
 
The clinical grade MSGV1- F5AfT2AB will be stored in a dedicated – 80
oC freezer with central, 
computerized monitoring system, with alarm and recording of all GMP storage systems (refrigerators, 
freezers and incubators). This freezer is located at  the JCCC GMP Suite. This freezer is designed for 
exclusive use as a viral bank for ongoing gene therapy trials at UCLA, and is located in a secure area for containment to ensure proper storage. Access to the facility is guarded by two security doors with 
restricted access only to adequately trained and authorized individuals. Completion of a five- course 
training program is required to gain access to this GMP suite. This training program is provided by the 
JCCC Regulatory Affairs Office and the UCLA IBC.  
 
Under these conditions, retroviral vectors retain activity for a period exceeding 5 years if not subjected 
to freeze- thawing. Each aliquot of the final retroviral vector is calculated to be for a single use, 
therefore avoiding freeze- thawing cycles. All activities related to the GMP retroviral vector stored in 
the viral bank will be recorded in appropriate SOPs. This includes initial lot shipment, viral vector 
storage, viral vector dispensing, remaining samples after use to generate retrovirus gene- modified cell 
therapies, and yearly recertification.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
65  
14.5. Clinical Facilities  
 Chemotherapy conditioning and MART -1 F5 TCR cell adoptive transfer will be delivered in an 
isolation hospital bed in the Hematology/Oncology Hematopoietic Stem Cell (HSC) transplantati on 
ward. This is a fully staffed inpatient ward with experienced nurs es, house officers, clinical consultants 
and attending physicians. This ensures that, in the event of an adverse reaction or any other adverse event, treatment will be promptly available.  Patients will be placed in individual use rooms equipped 
with a high -efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters that meet the precautions normally used for 
patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. While receiving the TCR transgenic PBMC  adoptive transfer, patients will be continuously monitored.  
 This inpatient stay will be under the administrative responsibility of the UCLA General Clinical 
Research Center (Isidro B. Salusky, M.D., G -CRC Director, telephone: 310 -206-6987 ). This will 
provide an additional level of administrative and scientific oversight. The G -CRC staff provides expert 
care for research subjects and collaborates with investigators for the coordination and performance of clinical research. The G -CRC includes a Computer Ce nter under the supervision of the G -CRC 
Biostatistician Dr. Robert M. Elashoff, Ph.D. (telephone: 310 -825-9421 ) to assist in data analysis.  
 
The UCLA Melanoma Program medical oncology outpatient clinic is located at the UCLA 100 Medical Plaza, Suite 550. This facility is staffed with an office manager, 3 front desk assistants, 6 nurses, 2 phlebotomists, 2 insurance specialists and one nurse practitioner.  
 The UCLA Hemapheresis Unit is located at the 6
th floor of the 200 Medical Plaza building, Suite 660. This 
unit has 6 staff nurses  on a one- to-one basis, a supervisor, a coordinator, and a Hematology/Oncology 
fellow and attending doctors.  
 
14.6 Compliance with Protocol Procedures and Rights and Welfare of Study Participants  
 
Human Gene Medicine Program (HG MP) Compliance Officer. Kit Shaw (contact phone: 310 -267-
0584), Ph.D. Dr. Shaw worked on engineering and testing retroviral gene- transfer vectors in primary 
cells and small animal models.  She has been the study director for IND study of gene transfer to hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) for adenosine deaminase (ADA) -deficient severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID), where she had to ensure trial compliance with the regulatory bodies (FDA, DSMB, RAC, IRB) overseeing the trial.  She also has experience with IND submissions and cGMP for 
cell-based products.  She is familiar with clinical laboratory operations in addition to research 
laboratory operations.  Dr. Shaw will oversee activities involving gene transfer in the UCLA GMP suite 
and will prospectively review adherence to the protocol, RAC and FDA procedures.  Dr. Shaw also 
serves on the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC) DSMB.  For our investigator -initiated 
gene therapy trial, Dr. Shaw  will perform real time monitoring and auditing of the study.  
 
 JCCC Office of Regulatory Compliance. The manager of this office is Terra Hughes. Ms. Terra 
Hughes recently joined the JCCC from the UCLA IRB where she managed the Medical IRB committee 2. She has a bachelor’s degree from the University of Southern Califor nia (USC) in Biology 
and a Masters degree from CSULA in Criminalistics. Ms. Hughes will oversee the adequate conduct of this clinical trial.  
 
Clinical Research Compliance Officer. Sujna Raval- Fernandes, Ph.D. (contact phone 310 -794-
8693). Dr. Raval- Fernandes has a strong background in cancer research with more than 10 years of 
basic research experience. She has been in the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC)’s 
Office of regulatory Compliance for the past four and half years serving as the compliance officer and 
as a resource to investigators and clinical study staff in resolving quality assurance issues related to 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
66 research procedures and documentation. She is responsible for monitoring and auditing of studies to 
ensure regulatory compliance. She also serves on the JCCC Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB). Her responsibilities also include timely review of all serious adverse events submitted to the 
DSMB. She ensures that the investigators provide the JCCC DSMB with periodic summary reports 
that include accrual, safety and efficacy data. For our investigator -initiated gene medicine study, she 
will serve to ensure compliance to the JCCC DSMB.  
 
Office of Research Participant Advocacy (ORPA). The ORPA was established to assure the safety 
and well -being of all participants in clinical research studies conducted at the UCLA G - CRC while 
maximally facilitating the research process. Stanley Korenman, M.D. (telephone: 310- 794-1818), 
Associate Dean of Ethics and Professor of Endocrinology, serves as the Clinical Director of the office. 
Laurie Shaker -Irwin, Ph.D. (telephone: 310- 794-7504) serves as the Research Subject Advocate and 
manager of the office. ORPA fosters policies for the ethical conduct of clinical research, assuring autonomy and respect in the informed consent process, justice in the selection of participants, and 
beneficence in the initial and ongoing review and evaluation of risks and benefits. The office enhances patient safety by providing guidance and education to investigators and research personnel in the 
areas of ethics, research integrity, data and safety monitoring, adverse event reporting, and Good 
Clinical Practices (GCP).  
 15.0 DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD, STUDY OVERSIGHT, DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS  
 
15.1 Data Safety Monitoring Boa rd (DSMB)  
 
The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC) Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) was constituted in January 2001. The DSMB membership consists of representatives of the Cancer Center 
clinical research community. The Director of the Cancer Center appoints members to a term of 2 
years and each member is selected for their professional expertise in oncology practice and research.  
 The JCCC DSMB meets monthly to review all serious adverse event reports for JCCC institutional clinical trials at  UCLA and those encountered in the UCLA TORI network where the JCCC DSMB has 
oversight. All serious adverse event reports, which have been filed since the previous meeting, are presented to the committee for review.  
 For all JCCC and TORI studies, where the JCCC DSMB has primarily oversight for AE review, all AEs 
occurring within these studies shall be reported to the JCCC DSMB in a timely manner consistent with 
the UCLA IRB time requirements [ten days, two days for a death] regardless of relationship or seriousness.  The JCCC Office of Regulatory Compliance (ORC) will review all submissions and staff 
will enter the information into the JCCC Clinical Trials database.  Reports are generated for full JCCC DSMB review of those SAEs that have some component of relatedness to the study drug and may, at 
the discretion of the JCCC compliance officers, include SAE reports that may be incorrectly assessed 
by the PI. For institutional trials, where the JCCC DSMB has primary DSMB review responsibility, the office will r equest that the PI generate cumulative adverse event reports for biannual or annual review.  
 The DSMB reviews each Serious Adverse Event reported and determines whether or not protocol 
modifications are warranted to ensure patient safety. In this review, prior occurrences of similar 
toxicity with the therapy under study are taken into consideration, as well as the seriousness of the event and the likelihood that it was related to a study drug. The DSMB may recommend no changes 
to the study if the event is expected or related to other causes such as the patient’s underlying 
condition.  The DSMB may request an expert’s advice of other non- UCLA Principal Investigator with 
national experience to support their deliberations and decisions.   The JCCC DSMB has the  authority 
to recommend to the UCLA IRB the immediate halt to the study (i.e., discontinuation of any further treatment of enrolled patients and discontinuation of enrollment of new patients) should there be any 
serious unexpected toxicity that warrants further investigation. JCCC DSMB correspondences are 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
67 addressed to the Principal Investigator and copied to the UCLA IRB. Minutes of the DSMB meetings 
are recorded and processed into the computer file.  
 
15.2 JCCC DSMB Internal Monitoring Plan. The NIH and NCI  policy statements allow for variable 
monitoring and reporting plans, commensurate with the potential risks and with the size and 
complexity of the trial. The monitoring plan must be sufficiently rigorous and effective to ensure 
subject safet y and to ensure protocol compliance and data validity and integrity.  
 
15.2.1 Level of Risk of a Study. For trials overseen by the JCCC DSMB, the JCCC DSMB will 
determine the degree of risk of the study and will ensure that there are procedures in place to ensure 
the safety of the subjects that are enrolled in the trial.  The intensity level of the monitoring is 
determined by the risk category.  Some of the factors that must be considered when assigning the 
Level of Risk category include:  
 1. A biostatistical design and appropriate procedures for proper data management so that the information collected can be properly validated.  
2. Appropriate Serious Adverse Event reporting procedures must be in place.  
3. The study duration must be appropriate and must be based on a realistic rate of enrollment.  
4. Data collection and data management must be adequate to verify and ensure subject  safety.  
 15.2.2 Assignment of risk. Assigning risk ensures that the data and safety monitoring is based on 
the level of risk (low, medium, or high) to ensure that the data and safety monitoring activities are appropriate.  Below are some of the criteria used to make a decision regarding the assignment of risk: 
 
• Expected duration of the study based upon the estimated rate of one.  
• Type of study population (e.g. , children, geriatric)  
• The procedures used in the trial are commensurate with the degree of risk.  
• Adequate data management systems in place and appropriate case report forms  
• Proper serious adverse event reporting procedures in place  
• Proper biostatistical design and data analysis procedures in place.  
 
15.3 Monitoring/Auditing Activities.   
 The compliance officer of the JCCC Office of Regulatory Compliance [ORC] will monitor the clinical 
records for all human subjects enrolled onto JCCC institutional trials overseen by the JCCC DSMB.  
The JCCC compliance officer will perform real time review of informed consent form processes and 
the meeting of all inclusion and exclusion criteria at study entry.  Active monitoring will offer the JCCC study teams prospective information that can be used to enhance the quality of research being 
performed contemporaneously.  Auditing is a review of historic performance of the research effort and 
is performed on case report forms, regulatory files and source documents to measure the quality of 
the research effort in a retrospective manner.    
 
15.4 Detailed Reporting Mechanism for Adverse Events 
 
Each protocol is required to have a detailed description of the Adverse Event Reporting method.   The 
DSMB expects each protocol to abide by the reporting time line and definitions consistent with the 
NCI and FDA guidelines.   
 
An adverse event is any undesirable experience associated with the use of a medical product in a 
patient (any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom or disease temporally associated with the use 
of a medical treatment or procedure regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical 
treatment or procedure).  Any clinical adverse event must be recorded on the case report form during the course of the study.  The investigator must evaluate and document the adverse event for severity, 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
68 grade it according to the NCI Common Toxicity Guideline, causal relationship to the study drug under 
study, take appropriate action to care for the patient and to document the outcome.  All information 
recorded in the case report form must be verifiably documented in the source (i.e., medical record or physician office chart).  
 When an adverse event occurs, it is the responsibility of the investigator to evaluate and record into 
the source documents, the nature of the symptom, prescribe the appropriate remedy and to report the 
event.  The adverse event must be reported to the sponsor, the IRB, FDA and any other appropriate 
agency (e.g., IBC and NIH for gene medicine trials.)  The assessment and reporting must occur in 
writing within 10 days, 48 hours for death.    
 
If the event is Serious and Unexpected, the event should be reported immediately (in writing within 
10 days, 48 hours for death) by the Principal Investigator to the IND sponsor, UCLA IRB, JCCC DSMB and to any appropriate agency; the NIH and the UCLA IBC for gene medicine trial; directly to 
the FDA if it is an institutional IND trial; and to the NCI if it is an NCI sponsored trial.  For institutional trials and for gene medicine trials, the JCCC ORC and Gene Medicine Compliance Officers will assist 
the investigator to ensure that all serious adverse events are properly documented and reported in 
accordance to federal and institutional requirements. 
 
All adverse events that occur in a research study overseen by the JCCC DSMB must be submitted, regardless of relationship, expectedness, or seriousness.  
 
15.5 Data Recording and Retention of Study Data  
 
Data recording will be done in compliance with Good Clinical Practice. Medical  records and notes 
should be clearly marked and permit easy identification of participation by an individual in the 
specified clinical trial. Medical records and source data should be completed within a reasonable 
amount of time for purposes of timely data collection and entry.  
 The investigators are to record all data with respect to protocol procedures, drug administration, laboratory data, safety data and efficacy ratings on the case report forms (CRF). The CRF may be a 
printed, optical or electronic document. All corrections on a CRF and on source documents must be 
made in a way that does not obscure the original entry. The correct data must be inserted, dated and 
initialed/authorized by study site personnel. If the change is not obvious provide a reason. 
 16.0 STATISTICAL METHODS  
 This is a two -stage phase II clinical trial aimed at determining the safety, feasibility and antitumor 
activity of gene transfer using retrovirus MSGV1 -F5AfT2AB transduced PBMC. UCLA will be 
responsible for registering patients  and for maintaining a complete database of the study information 
excluding laboratory assay data. The clinical laboratory assay data will be obtained from source documents from the UCLA medical records (including both paper and electronic files and labora tory 
results) and transcribed into CRFs. A shadow chart may be kept with copies of the source documents 
in a locked room at the UCLA Clinical Research Unit or under direct control of the study P.I. Failure to 
complete the study due to the stopping rules being invoked will be the main basis for determining 
safety and feasibility of this study. This study is intended to provide data that might allow the 
investigators to conduct a preliminary assessment of safety and feasibility.  
 16.1 Sample Size Determination 
 The Simon optimal two- stage design
1 is used to determine the sample size, using the co -primary 
endpoint of response rate as the criterion for the clinical trial statistical design.  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
70 16.3 Efficacy Analysis 
 
The toxicities observed after each TCR transgenic cell infusion will be summarized in terms of type (organ affected or laboratory determination such as absolute neutrophil count), severity (by Toxicity 
Table) and nadir or maximum values for the laboratory measures, time of onset (i.e. course number), 
duration, and reversibility or outcome. Tables will be created to summarize these toxicities and side 
effects by dose and by course. Baseline information (e.g. the extent of prior therapy) and 
demographic information will be presented, as well, to describe the patients treated in this pilot study. All responses will be reported.  
 
16.4 Study Stopping and Non- stopping Rules.  
 
It is recognized that AEs can occur frequently in this population based on the underlying metastatic 
melanoma and these can be SAEs. The review of SAEs will form the basis for potential early stopping of the study. Only unexpected SAEs that are related to the transduction process/research reagent 
would define a stopping rule. The review of these adverse events, and any decision to prematurely 
stop subject enrollment, will be determined by the UCLA DSMB and reviewed by the IRB.  
 
Absolute stopping rules for this clinical trial will be:  
 1. Any death that is possibly related to the investigational agents namely MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC or 
MART -1
26-35 peptide pulsed DC.  
2. Two or more grade 4 events that are possibly related to MART -1 F5 TCR PBMC or MART -126-35 
peptide pulsed DC.  
3. Any event of hematological malignancy must be considered study stopping criteria until oncogenesis related to retroviral mutagenesis, EBV lymphoma and Post Transplant 
Lymphoproliferative Disorder (PTLD) can be excluded.  
 Premature termination of the clinical trial may occur because of a regulatory authority decision, change in opinion of the FDA, RAC, IRB, the DSMB, or determination that there are problems in the 
cell product generation or the safety of their administration as descried in the assessment of primary study endpoints . Additionally, recruitment may be stopped for reasons of particularly low recruitment, 
protocol violations, or inadequate data recording.  
17.0 REFERENCES  
 
 1. Simon R: Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 
10:1-10, 1989 
 2. Dudley ME, Wunderlich  JR, Robbins PF, et al: Cancer regression and autoimmunity in 
patients after clonal repopulation with antitumor lymphocytes. Science 298:850-4, 2002  3. Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Yang JC, et al: Adoptive cell transfer therapy following 
non-myeloablative bu t lymphodepleting chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with refractory 
metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 23:2346 -57, 2005 
 4. Butterfield LH, Ribas A, Dissette VB, et al: Determinant Spreading Associated with 
Clinical Response in Dendritic Cell- based  Immunotherapy for Malignant Melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 
9:998-1008, 2003  5. Ribas A, Glaspy JA, Lee Y, et al: Role of dendritic cell phenotype, determinant 
spreading, and negative costimulatory blockade in dendritic cell -based melanoma immunotherapy. J 
Imm unother 27:354- 67, 2004 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
71  6. Ayyoub M, Zippelius A, Pittet MJ, et al: Activation of human melanoma reactive CD8+ 
T cells by vaccination with an immunogenic peptide analog derived from Melan- A/melanoma antigen 
recognized by T cells -1. Clin Cancer Res 9:669-77, 2003 
 7. Johnson LA, Morgan RA, Dudley ME, et al: Gene therapy with human and mouse T -
cell receptors mediates cancer regression and targets normal tissues expressing cognate antigen. Blood 
114:535-46, 2009  8. Tsao H, Atkins MB, Sober AJ: Management of cutaneous melanoma. N Engl J Med 
351:998-1012, 2004  9. Cochran A, Glaspy JA, Ribas A, et al: Malignat Melanoma of the Skin. Cancer 
Treatment, Fifth Edition Charles M. Haskell Editor. W. B. Saunders:179-198, 2000  10. Hodi FS, O'Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al: Improved Survival with Ipilimumab in 
Patients with Metastatic Melanoma. N Engl J Med, 2010  
 11. Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, et al: Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously 
untreated metastatic melanoma. The New England journal of medicine 364:2517-26, 2011  12. Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, et al: Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in 
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 363:809-19, 2010  13. Ribas A, Kim K, Schuchter L, et al: BRIM- 2: An Open- label, multicenter Phase II study 
of RG7204 (PLX4032) in previously treated patients with BRAF V600E mutation- positive metastatic 
melanoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology 29:Abstr 8509, 2011  14. Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al: Improved survival with vemurafenib in 
melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. The New England journal of medicine 364:2507-16, 2011  15. Ribas A, Timmerman JM, Butterfield LH, et al: Determinant spreading and tumor 
responses after peptide-based cancer immunotherapy. Trends Immunol 24:58-61, 2003  16. Ribas A: Update on immunotherapy for melanoma. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 4:687-94, 
2006  17. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Restifo NP: Cancer immunotherapy: moving beyond current 
vaccines. Nat Med 10:909-15, 2004  18. Blattman JN, Greenberg PD: Cancer immunotherapy: a treatment for the masses. 
Science 305:200-5, 2004 
 19. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Delgado CH, et al: Cloning of the gene coding for a shared 
human melanoma antigen recognized by autologous T cells infiltrating into tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91:3515-9, 1994  20. Kawakami Y, Eliyahu S, Sakaguchi K, et al: Identification of the immunodominant 
peptides of the MART -1 human melanoma antigen recognized by the majority of HLA -A2-restricted 
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. J Exp Med 180:347-52, 1994  21. Morgan RA, Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, e t al: Cancer regression in patients after 
transfer of genetically engineered lymphocytes. Science 314:126-9, 2006  22. Dembic Z, Haas W, Zamoyska R, et al: Transfection of the CD8 gene enhances T -cell 
recognition. Nature 326:510-1, 1987  23. Schumacher TN:  T-cell-receptor gene therapy. Nat Rev Immunol 2:512- 9, 2002 
 24. Kessels HW, Wolkers MC, Schumacher TN: Adoptive transfer of T -cell immunity. 
Trends Immunol 23:264-9, 2002  25. Kasahara N, Dozy AM, Kan YW: Tissue -specific targeting of retroviral vectors through 
ligand -receptor interactions. Science 266:1373- 6, 1994 
 26. Weber E, Anderson WF, Kasahara N: Recent advances in retrovirus vector -mediated 
gene therapy: teaching an old vector new tricks. Curr Opin Mol Ther 3:439-53, 2001  27. Lois C, Refaeli Y, Qi n XF, et al: Retroviruses as tools to study the immune system. 
Curr Opin Immunol 13:496-504, 2001 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
72  28. Hacein -Bey-Abina S, Von Kalle C, Schmidt M, et al: LMO2 -associated clonal T cell 
proliferation in two patients after gene therapy for SCID -X1. Science 30 2:415-9, 2003 
 29. McCormack MP, Rabbitts TH: Activation of the T -cell oncogene LMO2 after gene 
therapy for X -linked severe combined immunodeficiency. N Engl J Med 350:913-22, 2004 
 30. Kohn DB, Sadelain M, Glorioso JC: Occurrence of leukaemia following ge ne therapy 
of X-linked SCID. Nat Rev Cancer 3:477-88, 2003 
 31. Rohdewohld H, Weiher H, Reik W, et al: Retrovirus integration and chromatin 
structure: Moloney murine leukemia proviral integration sites map near DNase I -hypersensitive sites. J 
Virol 61:336-43, 1987 
 32. Suzuki T, Shen H, Akagi K, et al: New genes involved in cancer identified by retroviral 
tagging. Nat Genet 32:166-74, 2002  33. Berns A: Good news for gene therapy. N Engl J Med 350:1679-80, 2004  34. Clay TM, Custer MC, Spiess PJ, et al: Potential use of T cell receptor genes to modify 
hematopoietic stem cells for the gene therapy of cancer. Pathol Oncol Res 5:3 -15, 1999 
 35. Szymczak AL, Workman CJ, Wang Y, et al: Correction of multi -gene deficiency in 
vivo using a single 'self-cleaving' 2A peptide-based retroviral vector. Nat Biotechnol 22:589-94, 2004  36. Ryan MD, Belsham GJ, King AM: Specificity of enzyme- substrate interactions in foot -
and-mouth disease virus polyprotein processing. Virology 173:35-45, 1989 
 37. de Felipe P, Martin V, Cor tes ML, et al: Use of the 2A sequence from foot -and-mouth 
disease virus in the generation of retroviral vectors for gene therapy. Gene Ther 6:198-208, 1999  38. Donnelly ML, Luke G, Mehrotra A, et al: Analysis of the aphthovirus 2A/2B 
polyprotein 'cleavage ' mechanism indicates not a proteolytic reaction, but a novel translational effect: a 
putative ribosomal 'skip'. J Gen Virol 82:1013-25, 2001  39. Phelps ME: PET : molecular imaging and its biological applications. New York, 
Springer, 2004   40. Shields AF, Grierson JR, Dohmen BM, et al: Imaging proliferation in vivo with [F -
18]FLT and positron emission tomography. Nat Med 4:1334-6, 1998  41. Johnson LA, Heemskerk B, Powell DJ, Jr., et al: Gene transfer of tumor -reactive TCR 
confers both high avidity and tumor reactivity to nonreactive peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. J Immunol 177:6548-59, 2006  42. Riddell SR, Greenberg PD: The use of anti -CD3 and anti -CD28 monoclonal antibodies 
to clone and expand human antigen- specif ic T cells. J Immunol Methods 128:189-201, 1990 
 43. Klebanoff CA, Gattinoni L, Torabi -Parizi P, et al: Central memory self/tumor -reactive 
CD8+ T cells confer superior antitumor immunity compared with effector memory T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:9571-6, 2005  44. Klebanoff CA, Gattinoni L, Restifo NP: CD8+ T -cell memory in tumor immunology 
and immunotherapy. Immunol Rev 211:214-24, 2006  45. Overwijk WW, Theoret MR, Finkelstein SE, et al: Tumor regression and autoimmunity 
after reversal of a functi onally tolerant state of self -reactive CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med 198:569-80, 
2003  46. Lou Y, Wang G, Lizee G, et al: Dendritic cells strongly boost the antitumor activity of 
adoptively transferred T cells in vivo. Cancer Res 64:6783-90, 2004  47. Borrello I , Sotomayor EM, Rattis FM, et al: Sustaining the graft -versus- tumor effect 
through posttransplant immunization with granulocyte -macrophage colony -stimulating factor (GM -
CSF) -producing tumor vaccines. Blood 95:3011-9, 2000 
 48. Cui Y, Kelleher E, Straley E,  et al: Immunotherapy of established tumors using bone 
marrow transplantation with antigen gene --modified hematopoietic stem cells. Nat Med 9:952 -8, 2003 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
73  49. Hughes MS, Yu YY, Dudley ME, et al: Transfer of a TCR gene derived from a patient 
with a marked antitumor response conveys highly active T -cell effector functions. Hum Gene Ther 
16:457-72, 2005 
 50. Rosenberg SA: Phase II Study of Metastatic Melanoma Using Lymphodepleting 
Conditioning Followed by Infusion of Anti -MART -1 F5 TCR -Gene Engineered Lymphocy te. 
OBA/RAC # 0703- 840, 2007 
 51. Rosenberg SA: Current immunotherapies based on lymphodepletion and adoptive cell 
transfer. Keystone Symposia: The Potent New Anti-tumor Immunotherapies:Abstract 003, 2007  52. Fleischhauer K, Tanzarella S, Wallny HJ, et al : Multiple HLA -A alleles can present an 
immunodominant peptide of the human melanoma antigen Melan- A/MART -1 to a peptide -specific 
HLA -A*0201+ cytotoxic T cell line. J Immunol 157:787-97, 1996 
 53. Yee C, Thompson JA, Byrd D, et al: Adoptive T cell therapy using antigen- specific 
CD8+ T cell clones for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma: in vivo persistence, migration, and antitumor effect of transferred T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:16168-73, 2002  54. Mackensen A, Meidenbauer N, Vogl S, et al: Phase I study of adoptive T -cell therapy 
using antigen -specific CD8+ T cells for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin 
Oncol 24:5060-9, 2006  55. Wu X, Li Y, Crise B, et al: Transcription start regions in the human genome are  favored 
targets for MLV integration. Science 300:1749-51, 2003  56. Gordon LK, Ribas A, Nusinowitz S, et al: Surveillance of the eye and vision in a 
clinical trial of MART1 -transformed dendritic cells for metastatic melanoma. Control Clin Trials 
25:400-7, 2004  57. Straatsma BR, Nusinowitz S, Young TA, et al: Surveillance of the eye and vision in 
clinical trials of CP -675,206 for metastatic melanoma. Am J Ophthalmol 143:958-969, 2007 
 58. Jaeger E, Bernhard H, Romero P, et al: Generation of cytotoxic T -cell responses with 
synthetic melanoma -associated peptides in vivo: implications for tumor vaccines with melanoma -
associated antigens. Int J Cancer 66:162-9, 1996  59. Men Y, Miconnet I, Valmori D, et al: Assessment of immunogenicity of human Melan-
A peptide analogues in HLA -A*0201/Kb transgenic mice. Journal of Immunology 162:3566-73, 1999 
 60. Valmori D, Dutoit V, Schnuriger V, et al: Vaccination with a Melan -A peptide selects 
an oligoclonal T cell population with increased functional avidity and tumor reactivity. J Immunol 168:4231-40., 2002  61. Schuler -Thurner B, Schultz ES, Berger TG, et al: Rapid Induction of Tumor -specific 
Type 1 T Helper Cells in Metastatic Melanoma Patients by Vaccination with Mature, Cryopreserved, Peptide-loaded Monocyte- derived Den dritic Cells. J Exp Med 195:1279-88., 2002 
 62. Timmerman JM, Levy R: Dendritic cell vaccines for cancer immunotherapy. Annu Rev 
Med 50:507-29, 1999  63. Morse MA, Coleman RE, Akabani G, et al: Migration of human dendritic cells after 
injection in patients  with metastatic malignancies. Cancer Res 59:56 -8, 1999 
 64. Fong L, Brockstedt D, Benike C, et al: Dendritic cells injected via different routes 
induce immunity in cancer patients. J Immunol 166:4254-9, 2001  65. Rosenberg SA: Progress in human tumour immunology and immunotherapy. Nature 
411:380-4, 2001  66. Roth MD, Gitlitz BJ, Kiertscher SM, et al: Granulocyte macrophage colony -stimulating 
factor and interleukin 4 enhance the number and antigen -presenting activity of circulating CD14+ and 
CD83+ cells in cancer patients. Cancer Research 60:1934 -41, 2000 
 67. Bertinetti C, Zirlik K, Heining -Mikesch K, et al: Phase I trial of a novel intradermal 
idiotype vaccine in patients with advanced B -cell lymphoma: specific immune responses despite 
profound immunosuppression. Cancer Res 66:4496-502, 2006 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
74  68. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al: New guidelines to evaluate the response 
to treatment in solid tumors [see comments]. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:205-16, 2000 
 69. Patterson AP: Minutes of the Recombinant DNA  Advisory Committee - 9/21/05. 
http://www4.od.nih.gov/oba/rac/minutes/RAC_minutes_09-05.pdf , 2005 
 70. Comin -Anduix B, Gualberto A, Glaspy JA, et al: Definition of an immunologic  
response using the major histocompatibility complex tetramer and enzyme -linked immunospot assays. 
Clin Cancer Res 12:107-16, 2006  71. Kwong GA, Radu CG, Hwang K, et al: Modular nucleic acid assembled p/MHC 
microarrays for multiplexed sorting of antigen -specific T cells. J Am Chem Soc 131:9695-703, 2009 
 72. Ma C, Fan R, Ahmad H, et al: A clinical microchip for evaluation of single immune 
cells reveals high functional heterogeneity in phenotypically similar T cells. Nature medicine 17:738 -
43, 2011  73. Yaghoubi S, Barrio JR, Dahlbom M, et al: Human pharmacokinetic and dosimetry 
studies of [(18)F]FHBG: a reporter probe for imaging herpes simplex virus type -1 thymidine kinase 
reporter gene expression. J Nucl Med 42:1225-34, 2001  74. Weber WA: Use of PET for monitoring cancer therapy and for predicting outcome. J 
Nucl Med 46:983-95, 2005  75. Cress RD, Holly EA: Incidence of cutaneous melanoma among non -Hispanic whites, 
Hispanics, Asians, and blacks: an analysis of california cancer registry data, 1988- 93. Cancer Causes 
Control 8:246-52., 1997  76. Economou JS, Belldegrun AS, Glaspy J, et al: In vivo trafficking of adoptively 
transferred interleukin- 2 expanded tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes and peripheral blood lymphocytes. 
Results of a double gene marking trial. J Clin Invest 97:515-21, 1996  77. Chmielowski B, Muranski P, Ignatowicz L: In the normal repertoire of CD4+ T cells, a 
single class II MHC/peptide complex positively selects TCRs with various antigen specificities. J Immunol 162:95-105, 1999  78. Chmie lowski B, Muranski P, Kisielow P, et al: On the role of high- and low -abundance 
class II MHC -peptide complexes in the thymic positive selection of CD4(+) T cells. Int Immunol 
12:67-72, 2000  79. Chmielowski B, Pacholczyk R, Kraj P, et al: Presentation of antagonist peptides to 
naive CD4+ T cells abrogates spatial reorganization of class II MHC peptide complexes on the surface of dendritic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:15012-7, 2002 
 
Appendix: Summary of Protocol Amendments  
 Amendment 1  
 
Date: March 16, 2009  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
While generating the forms to fill in the product lot release criteria we noted that the approved version of the study protocol did not specify which final product lot release tests should be 
received before administration of the cells to patients. The lot release criteria were detailed in 
Table 4 of the protocol, but both tests with immediate results and with delayed results were listed 
together. The key issues were the low likelihood of obtaining results of the copy number of viral insertions in the target cells, and the testing for replication competent retrovirus (RCR), which Dr. 
Reiser, the FDA product reviewer for this IND, had asked to be done at the Indiana University Viral 
Production Facility (IU VPF) under the direction of Dr. Ken Cornetta.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
75  
Dr. Reiser at phone number 301- 827-3420 who agreed that final results of the copy number and 
RCR were not required to be in hand before administering the TCR transgenic cells to patients. 
Dr. Reiser  said that a plan should be in place in case the results were positive, including the 
contacting and treatment of study subjects and the reporting of the event to the FDA.  
 
With this clarification, we discussed that we would amend the protocol to clearly state which 
results would be in hand before TCR transgenic cell administration to patients, and which results would be available at a later time point. We also discussed that this protocol amendment would 
include a plan for patient and FDA notification.  
 The lot release criteria have been broken down into two tables in the amended version of the 
protocol dated 03/16/09. Table 4a (page 37) details the results that need to be in hand before the release of the TCR transgenic cells for patient administration. Table 4b (page 37 -38) details the 
results that may be available afterwards. After this table there is a specification of the plans to 
contact and treat the patients and how the local and federal regulatory agencies should be 
notified.  
 
b) Consent Form:  
 
No changes.  
 
c) HS -1 Form:  
 
No changes.  
 Amendment 2  
 
Date: April 13, 2009  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- After discussion with the FDA reviewers in a series of teleconferences and email exchanges 
on April 7 and 8 (see attached minutes of these information exchanges), we deleted the 
requirement for quantitation of the number of copy inserts of retroviral vector in the final product. The FDA reviewers agreed with us that the quantitation of surface TCR expression in 
transduced cells was  a good quantitative assessment of transduction efficiency. In fact, the 
previously IRB approved protocol had this test listed twice, as lot release criteria and as optional additional testing in the TCR transduced cells.  
- We clarified the intent of the schedule of events as the intent to perform the protocol 
procedures on those days. However, since this is a pilot study and needs to account for 
variation on patient outcome and scheduling issues, we clarify in this second amendment that 
the dates are approxi mate.  
- The use of antiementics and prophylactic antifungals was updated to match the standard practice in the stem cell transplantation ward at UCLA.  
- The administration of MESNA was corrected to continuous intravenous infusion for 24 hours.  
 b) Consent Form : 
 
- We received the NIH Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC). Therefore, we added back the CoC language to the consent form.  
- We corrected a typographical error in page 7.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
76  
c) HS -1 Form:  
 
No changes.  
 
Amendment 3  
 Date: May 26, 2009  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- After new discussion with the FDA reviewers on April 27 (see attached minutes), we slightly 
modified our ex vivo culture plan after transduction to limit it to 4 days, which following the 
Guidance for Industry for Replication Competent Retrovirus (RCR) testing (November 2006) 
allows us to bank but not prospectively test for RCR in the final product. The FDA reviewers 
agreed with us that a reasonable plan would be to test samples from peripheral blood obtained 
at 3, 6 and 12 months after TCR transgenic adoptive transfer and only test the final product 
sample if one of the patient -derived samples is positive for RCR. The proposed S+/L - assay is 
a one- month assay with high costs that would not be able to provide results in time for patient 
safety. Therefore, we discussed with the FDA and went onto amend our protocol following the Guidance for Industry plan for studies where gene- modified cell therapies are cultured for less 
than 4 days. This was included in Table 4b and Sections 10.1.9 and 11.2.1.2. 
- The timing of sampling of blood of patients for RCR was modified to follow the Guidance for 
Industry document to samples at 3, 6 and 12 months, and stored samples annually thereafter (Section 11.2.1.2) . 
- The reporting of the results of t he mycoplasma PCR -based rapid test was changed, and we 
changed it in the protocol accordingly (Tables 4a and 10, and Section 10.2.10).  
- We deleted a 100 ml blood draw for immune monitoring analysis that was planned on day +1 since in the first two patients this blood draw provided very few lymphocytes since the blood draw happens at a time when the patient is pancytopenic. Analysis of these lymphocytes by 
immune monitoring assays did not provide much information.  
- We added a note in the schedule of events (Section 2) and in the protocol description in Section 8.6 text to note that 100 ml blood draws for immune monitoring analysis being planned 
for days 7 and 14 after TCR transgenic adoptive transfer can be done with a wider window since in our first 2 patients we have noted the recovering pancytopenia and hemodynamic 
state after high dose IL- 2 may not make it clinically wise to obtain these blood draws on these 
particular days.  
- We added statements to the supportive care plan for patients to follow the clinical  judgment 
and the standard practices in J -Medicine (Section 8.3).  
- Minor typographical errors were corrected throughout and marked in tracking mode in one of 
the protocol copies.  
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- Upon review of the ICF we noted that there was no good explanation of the amount and timing 
of blood draws for immune monitoring analysis. Therefore, we added a paragraph in Section 4 of the Study Procedures to explain to patients that repeated blood draws are planned to obtain 
cells for immune monitoring analysis.  
- After a correspondence with the IRB, an additional change was made to the consent form to take out the explanation and checkbox for the request for autopsy.  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
77 c) HS -1 Form:  
 
- A new grant from our collaborator Dr. Bijay Mukherji from the University  of Connecticut, with a 
UCLA subcontract, was added as funding source for this research project. 
- The timing of immune monitoring assays was added to the experimental procedures.  
- The tables of cell therapy lot release criteria were updated to match the tables included in the 
protocol after amendments 1, 2 and 3.  
 
Amendment 4  
 Date: July 16, 2009  
 Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- A new section (8.12.) was added to allow the administration of booster MART -1 peptide pulsed 
DC vaccinations  when the levels of MART -1-specific T cells would fall lower than 5% of total T 
lymphocytes. The schedule of events was included in the new section 2.1.  
- The requirement for paired tumor biopsies as inclusion criteria was changed to performing 
biopsies when felt feasible by the study investigators.  
- An appendix at the end of the protocol detailing the sequential protocol amendments was 
added.  
- Minor typographical errors were corrected throughout and marked in tracking mode in one of the protocol copies.  
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- The ICF was updated to include the administration of 3 delayed DC booster vaccinations.  
- The details on how the study was funded were updated in the ICF.  
- The change in the requirement for tumor biopsies was added, where patients without easily accessible lesions for surgical biopsy would still be eligible for this protocol either with no 
biopsy, or with an image -guided biopsy.  
- The contact information for study investigators was updated. 
 
c) HS -1 Form:  
 
- A new grant from our collaborator Dr. David Baltimore from the California Institute of Technology, with a UCLA subcontract, was added as funding source for this research project.  
- The changes in the eligibility not strictly requiring paired tumor biopsies were included.  
- The addition of booster DC vaccinations was included.  
 
Amendment 5  
 Date: October 13, 2009  
 Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- Correction of the schedule of events to reflect the follow up of patients who are in response or without progression after 3 months.  
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
78 - Added subjects who are HLA -A*0205 (HLA- A2.5) positive as potential participants in this 
research, provided that we demonstrate that MART -1 F5 TCR transgenic cells produce > 
30,000 pg/ml/million cells of IFN -γ production upon MART -126-35 peptide stimulation using 
MART -126-35 peptide- pulsed PBMC from the potential HLA -A*0205 (HLA -A2.5) subject 
candidate.  
- Added the Endosafe - MCS System as an alternative method for testing for endotoxin levels in 
TCR transgenic cells and dendritic cells.  
- Added to the pre- study procedures the placement of  a double lumen central venous access 
catheter.  
- Added the possibility of using clinical grade human AB serum for the DC manufacture.  
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- The dendritic cell vaccine booster part of the dendritic cell addendum consent was corrected to  
monthly vaccines.  
- The table at the end of the main consent form was updated to add the follow up visits, blood work and scans every 3 months for at least 2 years in patients who have no progression after 
the first 90 days of study participation.  
 c) HS -1 Form:  
 
- The changes in eligibility and procedures included in the protocol were made in the HS -1 form.  
 
Amendment 6  
 Date: April 6, 2010  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- The major modification in Amendment 6 was the increasing of the  F5 TCR transgenic cell 
dose to 10
10 and restarting the stage 1 of this protocol since with the prior version 
administering a cell dose up to 109 we did not meet the minimal hurdle of antitumor activity to 
proceed to stage 2 of this research after having entered the first 8 patients.  
- The description and references to the NCI Surgery Branch F5 TCR adoptive cell transfer 
protocol have been updated based on the published data included in the manuscript by 
Johnson et al. in Blood 2009.  
- C reactive protein (CRP)  testing was added to the baseline exams since there is emerging 
evidence that it may provide information about the immune permissively of the tumor 
microenviroment.  
- The timing of procedures related to prior therapy was clarified.  
- The eligibility/exclusion  for patients with prior brain metastasis was clarified.  
- The sources of clinical grade IL- 2 and GM -CSF were updated since they have recently 
changed due to pharmaceutical company agreements and cross -licensing. 
- We added a description of Retronectin to the detailed explanation of reagents used in this 
study.  
- We added the possibility of samples being tested with novel immune monitoring assays that 
have become available in the past several months. 
- We added Dr. James Heath from Caltech as a non- clinical investigator.  
- Several typographic errors and inconsistencies with the laboratory procedures were corrected 
and updated.  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
79 b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- No modifications were made to the ICF.  
 
c) HS -1 Form:  
 
- The changes in eligibility and procedures included in the protocol were made in the HS- 1 form.  
 
Amendment 7  
 Date: October 5, 2010  
 Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- Deletion of Dr. Erika von Euw from the protocol roster since she is no longer involved in this 
research project.  
- Clarification of  the enrollment of patients with a prior diagnosis of brain metastasis.  
- Updated information on the source of OKT3 for this protocol.  
- Updated details on the procedure of retroviral transduction of activated lymphocytes..  
- The inclusion of the testing for C reactive protein (CRP) in the Schedule of Events. 
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- Several typographical errors have been corrected in the ICF, and wording has been slightly modified to improve it.  
 c) HS -1 Form:  
 
- The relevant changes in the main study protocol were made in the HS -1 form.  
 
 
Amendment 8  
 
Date: December 17, 2010 
 
Main protocol and consent modifications  
 
a) Protocol: The following is a description of the major changes in Amendment 8 and the reasoning 
behind them:  
 1. Four days of Fludarabine at 25 mg/m
2/day instead of 5 days:  
 
The available information based on the course, correlative studies and outcome of the SAE on patient F5- 10 strongly suggest that it was due to direct marrow toxicity from the conditioning 
regimen as the most likely cause (see full description of the SAE). The most likely cause of a delayed marrow aplasia is fludarabine. Therefore, we have decreased the number of fludarabine doses at 25 mg/m
2/day i.v. daily from 5 days to 4 days.  
 2. Capping of the administration of high dose IL -2 to up to 9 doses instead of 14 doses:  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
80 A potential adverse contributor to the marrow aplasia in patient F5 -10 is the 14 doses of IL- 2 that 
this patient received, which is higher than other patients treated in this protocol. The prior versions 
of the protocol included dosing IL -2 at 600,000 IU/kg every 8 hours for up to 14 doses based on 
tolerance. This patient tolerated all doses within the expected parameters and received all of 
them. In conversations with our colleagues at the NCI Surgery Branch, who have administered the 
same conditioning regimen followed by high dose IL- 2 to over 200 patients, they feel that the 
dosing of IL- 2 may be an adverse contributor. In addition, review of the literature shows that higher 
doses of IL- 2 up to 15 (720,000 IU/kg, 8 hourly  for 5 days) lead to grade 3/4 toxicities whereas 
decreasing it to a maximum of 9 (720,000 IU/kg, 8 hourly for 3 days) results in fewer toxicities and 
still have the anti -tumor activities in conjunction with the adoptive cell transfer (ACT) 7,21. In fact, 
there was a trend wherein less doses of IL- 2 correlated with higher clinical responses. Therefore, 
we plan to cap the number of IL- 2 doses to a maximum of 9 doses.  
 3. Using freshly harvested F5 MART -1 TCR transgenic T cells:  
 
The major problem for patients treated within this protocol has been relapse of melanoma after an initial tumor response. Our ongoing experiments analyzing the functionality of the TCR transgenic 
cells recovered from patients demonstrate a progressive loss of ability to secrete multiple 
cytokines upon MART -1 antigen exposure. This is reminiscent of preclinical studies of T cell 
exhaustion and lack of secondary response to antigen. Therefore, improving the in vivo  
functionality of the TCR transgenic cells continues to be a major goal of our research plans.  
 
A recent experiment in a murine model of ACT performed by our collaborators Drs. Lili Yang and 
David Baltimore from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) indicated that 
cryopreservation has a profound detrimental effect on the in vivo  long- term survival of the 
adoptively transferred T cells and their ability to have a secondary response to antigen exposure. 
We noted a similar effect within our clinical trial, since in patient F5 -3 received a round of three 
delayed MART -1 peptide pulsed dendritic cell vaccines and had no secondary expansion of 
MART -1-specific T cells.  
 
These results have prompted us to modify our protocol to avoid cryopreservation of the TCR 
transgenic cells administered to patients, which is included in Amendment 8.  
 b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- The use of freshly harvested F5 MART -1 TCR transgenic T cells for infusion in place of 
cryopreserved cells as depicted in Amendment 8  
 
- The use of high dose IL -2 every 8 hours following transgenic T cell infusion for a maximum 9 
doses over 3 days has been adopted to replace the previous regimen of maximum 14 doses in Amendment 8  
 
c) HS -1 Form  
 
- As IRB submission at UCLA was  converted to webIRB which is entirely done online, HS -1 
form was no longer required.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
81 Amendment 9  
 
Date: April 20, 2011  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol:  
 
- Addition of  a PCR/ELISA  mycoplasma assay if the MycoAlert results are equivocal or positive  
both during in- process testing and before cells are administered to the patient . 
- Lowering of the lot release criteria to 10% of tetramer positive cells for MART -1(26-35) as long 
as all th e other lot release criteria are met.  
- Indication of performing additional testing for the number of vector copies. If higher than 5 we 
will propose a new dilution of the vector supernatant before using it for cell transduction.  
- Cardiac stress test on Day 75- 90 has been removed.  
- Addition of potential risks associated with autoimmune toxicity from mispaired TCRs  
- The use of Trimethoprim -Sulfamethoxazole and Ganciclovir will start from Day -6 
- Replacement of William Quan by Kit Shaw as the Human Gene Medicine P rogram (HGMP) 
Compliance Officer  
      -     More detailed description of Day - 6 events  
-     Minor formatting and wording modification  
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- Addition of potential risks associated with autoimmune toxicitiy from mispairing TCRs   
- Cardi ac stress test on Day 75- 90 has been removed  
- Addition of Day - 6 events to the schedule table in the end of the consent  
- Addition of risk to include life- threatening infection and/or respiratory failure requiring     
mechanical ventilation 
 
Amendment 10  
 
Date: August 22, 2011  
 Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol  
 
- Addition of Sujna Raval -Fernandes  as the compliance officer for the DSMB.  
- Addition of Arun Singh as a study investigator with patient contact.  
- Addition of Phyllis Wu as study coordinator and regulatory coordinator. 
- Change of manufacturer of OKT3 to Miltenyi: As per FDA recommendation on July 28, 2011, 
we replaced eBioscience OKT3 with Miltenyi OKT3.  
- Change of GM -CSF manufacturer to Berlex and IL -2 manufacturer to Prometheus only  in 
accordance to FDA product reviewer recommendation on July 22, 2011. The sources of 
clinical grade IL -2 and  GM-CSF were changed due to pharmaceutical company agreements 
and cross -licensing.  
- Added dextramer as an alternative option for tetramer for the purpose of quantification of F5 
TCR transgenic cells. We had tested by staining the same sample side-by -side at least three 
times and obtained comparable results repeatedly. Test results attached.  
- C orrected  “Blood for Plasma /serum ” procedure in the schedule of events to “Plasmapheresis” . 
Plasmapheresis is carried out at the time of leukapheresis for every patient on Day 0 and Day 30.  
- Correction of minor typographic errors . 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
82 b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- Addition of Arun Singh as a study investigator.  
- Description  of a day 20- 40 ECHO/MUGA w as deleted.  
 
Amendment 11  
 
Date: November 7 , 2011  
 
Main protocol and consent modifications;  
 a) Protocol  
 - Decrease the maximum cell dose for ACT to 10
9 total cells. 
- Changing the IL- 2 administration from high dose (HD) intravenously to low dose (LD) 
subcutaneously for up to 14 days.  
- Require having pulmonary function tests in all patients and change the patient exclusion 
criteria to exclude patients with a FEV 1/FCV < 70% of predicted  for normality.  
- Electrocardiogram (ECG) is added as a heart test for patients.  
- List pancytopenia caused by bone marrow infiltration by melanoma cells as a risk factor.  
- Added to exclusion criteria the following:  
o History of, or significant evidence of risk for, chronic inflammatory or autoimmune 
diseas e (eg, Addison’s disease, multiple sclerosis, Graves disease, Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, hypophysitis, pituitary disorders, etc.). Patients will be eligible if prior autoimmune disease is not deemed to be active (e.x. fibrotic damage of the thyroid 
after thyroiditis or its treatment, with stable thyroid hormone replacement therapy). Vitiligo will not be a basis for exclusion.  
o History of inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or other chronic gastrointestinal conditions associated with diarrhea or bleeding, or current acute colitis of any origin.  
- Added “Must be willing to perform two biopsies at least” to inclusion criteria.  
- Revised screening blood test details, reflected in the schedule table and section 8.1  
- In section 8.4, added “Norethindrone (Norlutate) 10mg PO daily will be used for menstruating 
women for prophylaxis against menorrhagia” under “ Prophylactic Supportive Care Throughout 
the Pancytopenic Period” . 
- A dded 8.11 Permissible Systemic Therapies During the Protocol On- study Period  
- Change GM -CSF source to Genzyme 
- Revisions in response to FDA inquires regarding cross -referenced IND 14760.  
- Correction of minor typographic errors . 
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- Description of the LD IL -2 administration  
- Description of the SAE of intubation in a second patient . 
- Description of pancytopenia caused by bone marrow infiltration by melanoma cells as a risk 
factor.  
- Requirement of having pulmonary function tests in all patients and change the patient 
exclusion criteria to exclude patients with a FEV
1/FCV < 70% of predicted  for normality.  
- Electrocardiogram (ECG) is added as a heart test for patients.  
- Added MART -1 testing in the screening procedures.  
 
  
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
83 Amendment 12  
 
Date:  July 25, 2013  
 
Main Protocol and Consent Modifications:  
 
a)  Protocol  
 
- No changes were made to the protocol  
 
b)  Informed Consent Form  
 
- Description of an SAE in which the patient died due to melanoma progression with massive 
intraabdominal bleeding. 
 
Amendm ent 13  
 
Date:  September 9, 2014 
 Main Protocol and Consent Modifications:  
 
a)  Protocol  
 
- Changed contact information for several  co-investigators on page 1  
- Added Paula Kaplan- Lefko, Beata Berent -Maoz, Daniel Shin, Siwen Hu- Lieskovan and 
Xiaoyan Wang  
- Remo ved Bradley Straatsma and Phyllis Wu  
- Blood tests (Mg, Phos and uric acid) in table in Section 2.0 w ere changed from Day -5 through 
Day 0 to only on Day - 6. 
- Modified days of blood collection and physical exams in table in Section 2.0 and 8.0 . 
- Added to section 8.0 and section 2.0 that changes in the range of 7 days up or down from the 
scheduled event will not be considered deviations from the study timeline.  Removed the word 
“significant” referring to deviations.  
- On page 25, ECOG has been deleted from the list of tests to be performed in the hospital.  
- On page 26, “mineral panel” has been deleted from the blood tests to be monitored.  
- Clarification that physical exam  at baseline will include weight, height, and vital signs  and that 
weight measurement will only be obtained at subsequent physical exams if clinically indicated 
(Section 8.1)  
- Deleted that physical exam would include weight, height and vital signs on Day - 6 (Section 
8.3) since weight measurement is not standard inpatient practice.  
- In section 8.1 and 8.2, added that a new biopsy may not be required if an acceptable biopsy  
was performed within 60 days of prior to screening per coverage analysis for other trials.  
- In section 8.2, modified cardiac function test details.  
- Reduced IL -2 administration from twi ce daily for 14 days to twice daily for 7 days per IRB due 
to SAEs  in IRB #12 -000153 and 13 -001624.  
- In section 8.4, changed dose of Ativan from 2 mg to 1 mg 
- Added holding parameters for IL -2 and fevers due to IL -2 to section 8.7  
- Changed section 8.9 to indicate that CT will be attenuated.  
- In section 8.15, removed optional repeated dendritic cell vaccines.  
- In sections 9.6.4 and 9.6.5, updated information regarding IL -4 and retronectin.  
- In section 10.1.5, Table 2b Annual Recertification was updated. 
 
 
 
MART -1 F5 TCR Prot ocol 01/10/2018                                             
 
84 b)  In formed Consent Form  
 
- Reduced IL -2 administration from twice daily for 14 days to twice daily for 7 days.  
- Removed optional repeated dendritic cell vaccines  
 
Amendment 14  
 
Date:  August 1, 2016  
 
a)  Protocol  
 
- Modified annual recertification tests required (Section 10.1.5)  
 
b) Informed Consent Form  
 
- No changes  
 
Amendment 15  
 
a) Protocol  
-  In section 10.1.5, Table 2b Annual Recertification was updated  
- In section 10.2.5 MART -126-35, Table 7 Peptide Annual Recertification was updated, and  
      modified annual r ecertification tests required . 