 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Myocardial Infarction, COmbined -device, Recovery Enhancement Study  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
April 22 , 2020  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 10 
 Date: 04/22/2020  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Seth S. Martin, MD , MHS  (Cardiology)  
Application Number: IRB00099938  
 
Myocardial Infa rction, COmbined device, Recovery Enhancement (MICORE) Study  
 
JHM IRB  - eForm A  – Protocol  
 
• Use the section headings to write the  JHM  IRB eForm A , inserting the appropriate material in each. If 
a section is  not applicable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised) , enter the date submitted to the field at the top 
of JHM  IRB eForm A . 
 
****************************************************************************** *********** *****  
 
1. Abstract  (Provide no more than a one pag e research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importance of the research. ) 
 
Our mobile application is reinventing the cardiology discharge process to assist the heart attack patient 
in navigating from the hospital to hom e. These patients may have  had a stent placed or bypass surgery 
to help open blocked vessels in the heart, and they will have had critical medications prescribed to help 
prevent further blockage.  At present, the discharge process for cardiology patients is  antiquated, 
involving last minute paper -based instructions often delivered by the least experienced health care 
providers. In this context, non -adherence to evidence -based therapies and readmission  rates remain 
unacceptably high, and our app is designed t o ultimately change this. There are now emerging scientific 
and clinical data strongly indicating that post -discharge -related complications including medication 
adherence and readmissions can be significantly reduced through interventions initiated prior t o 
discharge, and our app  will maximize inpatient time, engaging patients from hospital day 1.  This study 
has shown feasibility and usability of  our mobile application for hospital discharge  and now primarily 
aims to assess 30-day readmissions . We are also collect ing prospective data on ED visits, medication 
adherence, p atient satisfaction scores, app usability, and patient activation/engagement . Our research 
team  collaborate s with inpatient care teams to assist patients with downloading the app which provid es 
functionality allowing patients  to develop medication self -management skills, coordinate follow -up 
appointments, learn about heart health, and connect with health resources .  
 
2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
Primary objective: To assess time to first readmission  within 30 days post -discharge from the hospital  
in patients recovering from acute myocardial infarction who use the mobile application  as compared to 
a historical standard of care comparison group .   
Secondary objectives : To assess  medication adherence, patient satisfaction scores, app usability, 
patient activation , user engagement , user knowledge, and cost -effectiveness  in patients recovering from 
acute myocardial infarction who use the mobile application . To assess recu rrent myocardial infarction , 
ED visits, observation visits,  and mortality in both groups.  
 
3. Background  (briefly describe  pre-clinical and clinical data, current experience with procedures, drug or 
device, and any other relevant information to justify the research ) 
 
Nearly 20 percent of the 39 million patients discharged from the hospital in the US yearly are 
subsequently readmitted within 30 days  with cardiac patients among the leading subset of patients with 
early readmissions . Current evidence  raises major  patient safety concerns  with the discharge process 
and rate of avoidable morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, the cost to healthcare system is $17.4 
billion  annually and  accounted for 17 percent of total hospital payments from Medicare. Improving 
hospita l discharge will likely reduce  the rate of early hospital readmission which has been identified as 
a high priority for the US healthcare system  to improve patient safety  and reduce avoidable healthcare 
expenditures .   
 
Dr. Seth S. Martin, MD, MHS, PI, has an extensive  clinical research  experience and experience in  
clinically testing mobile health technology , including a blinded, randomized mHealth Activity Trial 
(mActive) , and evaluation of the Instant Blood Pressure mobile application. Dr. Martin  leads the  
Cardiology mHealth Interest Group at Johns Hopkins  which brings together multiple disciplines from 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 10 
 through the University .  Francoise Marvel, MD also completed  a HEXCITE Fellowship with Johns 
Hopkins Medicine and Technology Innovation Center focused on  develop ing skills in designing, 
testing, and implementing mobile health projects with patients.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
 
Study design  A 1-month  observational study , with a historical comparison group, involving 
Johns Hopkins Hospital and Johns Hopkins Bayview , as well as Massachusetts 
General Hospital , Reading Hospital, Franklin Square Hospital, and Union 
Memorial Hospital  
Study duration  Each participant in the Corrie Digital Health group will join the study for the 
entirety of their hospitalization following  enrollment and the study duration of 
participation is up to a year. The historical comparison group consists of English -
speaking AMI patients admitted from October 1, 2015 to October 1, 2016, prior 
to the availability of Corrie.   
Routine care  Participants  in the Corrie Digital Health group  will receive all routine care . 
Participants in the historical comparison group would also have received the 
standard of care at the time of admission  and during follow up . We are not 
assuming clinical responsibility with th e App as this is an informative health 
coaching and coordination of care app. Although we will instruct participants  not 
to direct their clinical questions to our study team, our study team is configured to 
respond to queries within 24 hours  during working  hours  and help participants  
connect with their care team. An email and phone number will be provided and it 
will be made clear that this is for technical questions related to App use.  For 
medical questions, we will instruct patients to reach out to their primary care 
provider or cardiologist.  The participant  will be able to reach their care providers 
by clicking the call feature in the app. If they feel they have an emergency after 
hours, then they will be instructed to call 911.  
 
Treatment failure 
or par ticipant 
removal criteria  None  
Participants 
receiving therapy 
when study ends or 
if a participant’s 
participation in the 
study ends 
prematurely  Participants  in the Corrie group will co ntinue to have access to the App  on their 
personal smartphone  after dis continuation of the study or if their participation in 
the study ends prematurely , but will need to return the Apple Watch  after the 
study period . If an iPhone is loaned to a participant , then he or she will need to 
return it after the study period.  
 
 
 
 
 
Procedural steps  Procedural steps for the Corrie Digital Health group:  
 
a.     Patients presenting with  acute  myocardial infarction as the primary diagnosis 
for admission to a  participating site , and meeting other eligibility criteria,  will be 
recruited  
b.     Participants  must be approved to participate in this research study by his/her  
primary care team   
- As resources allow, to make participation possible for participants who are not 
iPhone owners, we will offer a n “iShare” d evice share program  wherein w e loan 
an iPhone along with the Apple Watch during the study period  
- We will also introduce a family and friends program wherein we offer the app 
(but not Apple Watch) to family and friends who have an iPhone and would like 
to use the app for the purpose of supporting the participant  (participant must agree 
and designate the family/friend, including email and phone number, in the app)  
c.    If the participant  passes screening questions for study inclusion (i.e., owns a 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 4 of 10 
 smartphone and not limited from norma l smartphone usage due to conditions such 
as visual, motor, auditory impairment), the participant  will proceed to e -Consent   
d.      e -Consent will be done through ResearchKit  on a study iPad  
e.      The study team member will  be present to guide the parti cipant and  give the 
participant  an opportunity to ask questions before having the participant  sign the 
consent form.  If consent is provided, a Corrie sign will be placed on the door or in 
the room to indicate study participation to clinical staff or an Epi c research flag 
will be placed.  
f.     Next, the study team member  will guide the participant through  download of 
the app, and setup of the app including input ting medications  and profile 
information . Participants will also be given a StartKit (See Supplem ental Study 
Documents) which will include information on how to use the app to reference 
following discharge.   
g.     Consenting participants will be given an Apple Watch , Silicone Healthband , 
and iHealth blood pressure monitor (FDA approved),  and will be  instructed to  
wear the Apple Watch /Silicone Healthband  on their non -dominant wrist . The 
Apple Watch  and iHealth blood pressure monitor  will be paired with the iPhone.  
h.     To promote privacy of health information a login will be required for access 
to app (created upon e -consent)  and the iPhone will be set to password protected 
mode / touch ID activated   
i.     At the time of enrollment, app permissions will be given . In order for an 
application to access any information on an iOS/Android smartphone, the  
application must ask the user for permission and only if that permission is 
granted, can the application access that information. This is inherently enforced 
on all applications by the operating system. In our case we only will ask for 
permissions to acce ss: 
- relevant digital -health data from HealthKit, in particular physical activity and 
heart rate  
- photos to store an insurance card or other card like a stent card; even if the 
access -permission is granted, it is limited to the images specified by the us er 
- display notifications, such as an alert to take medications  
- a send email function to allow users to send a PDF of their consent form or a 
PDF of relevant health info (e.g., medication list) to care providers; no application 
is allowed to read any da ta from the mail app  
 
j.    Participants will be advised that they will need to return the Apple Watch (and 
iPhone, if loaned)  after 30 days.  They will be  advised that the app can be used 
freely after the study’s conclusion.  
k.     Participants will recei ve $10 (cash, check, or gift card) after successful 
completion of all follow -up surveys (see below).   
l.       At enrollment participants will fill out the mHealth literacy scale  and 
knowledge survey . Participants will also be asked whether they own a home  
weight scale and blood pressure cuff and their perceived value of Corrie.  
m.     All participant s will be emailed a usability -feasibility survey, satisfaction 
survey, and patient activation measure 3 days after the hospital discharge.  The 
standard email greeting is included as a Supplemental Study Document.  Survey 
responses will be recorded electronically via REDCap.  
n.      Participants will be given the option to take a photo in which they are 
identifiable using the app and can specify authorization for  internal or external 
use on the standard media consent form.  
o.     The study team will also assess the level of adherence based on data 
collected on usage and self -reported medication and therapeutic adherence 
collected through the app functionality  as well as through The Adherence to 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 10 
 Refills and Medication Adherence sub scale (ARMS). The ARMS will be emailed 
to participants 30 days following discharge. User engagement , patient activation , 
and knowledge will also be assessed 30 days following discharge th rough the 
User Engagement Scale , the Patient Activation Measure  and knowledge survey . 
Usability and satisfaction scales will be sent at 30 days also.  A question will also 
be asked to assess whether patients have been readmitted to the hospital or had an 
ED visit within the past 30 days. If a patient is readmitted to a Hopkins affiliated 
hospital their record will be search for confirmation and cause of readmission. If 
the person is readmitted to an outside hospital we will emai l them an 
Authorization for R elease of Health Information form  asking for permission to 
obtain their records of readmission.  
p.     At 6 months following discharge, a knowledge survey will be sent to the 
participants again to assess their retention of knowledge.  
q.    A survey quest ion will be asked to assess whether patients have been 
readmitted to the hospital or had an ED visit within the past year. If a patient is 
readmitted to a Hopkins affiliated hospital their record will be search for 
confirmation and cause of readmission. If  the person is readmitted to an outside 
hospital we will email them an Authorization for Release of Health Information 
form  asking for permission to obtain their records of readmission.  
r.  The inpatient phase of study participation will last  approximatel y 1-5 days 
depending on length of inpatient admission  and time of enrollment . The objective 
of the study team is to enroll the participant as early as possible in their 
hospitalization.  
s.    All participants  will continue receiving routine care.  
t.     W hen the study ends or a participant’s participation ends prematurely, those 
participants may keep their app  (in which case their use will continue to be 
tracked) , Healthband, and iHealth blood pressure monitor,  but will be asked to 
return the Apple Watch.  
u.     After study completion, participants will be sent the previously mentioned 
surveys (see Supplemental Study Documents) 3 and 30 days following discharge. 
If at both of these time points, participants don’t respond to the online surveys 
within 7 days  a member of the study team will attempt to obtain their responses to 
the surveys via a phone interview.  
v.     After study completion , participants will participate in a phone interview, if 
they agree, to gather more information about their experience, u sing a 
standardized set of questions (see Supplemental Study Documents).  
w.     Participants may be given the option to participate in future research studies.  
 
Data collection for the Corrie Digital Health group and the historical standard of 
care compar ison group to assess the primary outcome:  
a. Following study completion , we will submit requests to Johns Hopkins 
Hospital and Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital Partners group, and Reading Hospital administrative  data manage rs 
to obtain the following data on both groups: age, sex, race, language, body 
mass index, marital status, smoking status, diagnosis of STEMI versus 
NSTEMI, insurance status (payor index), admission date, discharge date, type 
of intervention received in ho spital (PCI or CABG), a discrete count of 
AHRQ identified Elixhauser comorbidities based on ICD -9-CM and ICD -10 
diagnosis codes, discharge disposition, readmission , days to readmission, 
reason for readmission , ED visits, observation visits,  and mortality .  
b. These variables will be obtained for both groups via the administrative  
databases to ensure standardization  of variables and collection.  
c. For the historical control group we will query data for patients admitted to 
each hospital from October 1, 2015 to Oc tober 1, 2016  for a STEMI or 
NSTEMI. To obtain data for the Corrie Digital Health group, 30 days after the 
last enrolled participant is discharged from the hospital, we will send a list of 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 6 of 10 
 participant identifiers to the hospital data managers.  
d. In an ancil lary study restricted to both groups of Hopkins participants, we will 
perform an Epic data extraction focused on measures of 2018 AHA/ACC 
guideline -directed cholesterol management such as  serum lipid values upon 
admission through 12 months of hospital disc harge, whether patients were on 
lipid lowering therapy at the time of admission, prescription of lipid lowering 
therapies at the time of discharge including statins and non -statins, whether 
the statin was a high intensity statin regimen at the time of hosp ital discharge,  
if patients were not on statin therapy due to a history of side effects, very high 
risk vs not very high risk status,  and whether additional lipid lowering 
therapies were prescribed within 12 months of hospital discharge.   
 
Data collection  for patients who were deemed ineligible/declined to participate in 
the Corrie Digital Health group to assess selection bias:  
a. Following study completion, we will submit requests to Johns Hopkins 
Hospital and Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center  administrat ive data 
managers to obtain the following data on the 541 patient who were deemed 
ineligible/declined to participate in the Corrie intervention group : age, sex, 
race, marital status, smoking status, diagnosis of STEMI versus NSTEMI, 
insurance status (payor  index), readmission, days to readmission, and reason 
for readmission .  
b. These variables will be obtained via the administrative databases to ensure 
standardization of variables and collection to those who were enrolled in the 
Corrie intervention group.  
 
 
 
MiCORE Reading Hospital cohort:  
Reading Hospital is participating in this study through a grant from the Reading Hospital Foundation. The 
participation of patients recruited from Reading will be limited to the 30 -day (approximate) initial 
enrollment perio d. The data collected from this cohort will be used to support the study’s primary outcome: 
30-day readmission rate.  
Study procedures for Reading Hospital  
Study design  Same as for primary cohort   
Study duration  Each participant will join the study for th e entirety of their hospitalization 
following enrollment. This inpatient phase will last approximately 1 to 5 days, 
depending on the length of stay and the enrollment date, with the goal being to 
enroll the patient participant as early as possible in his/h er hospitalization. Then 
enrollment will continue for 30 days following discharge for an approximate 
study duration of 30 to 40 days.   
Routine care  Same as for primary cohort  
Treatment failure 
or participant 
removal criteria  None (same as for primary co hort)  
Participants 
receiving therapy 
when study ends or 
if a participant’s 
participation in the 
study ends 
prematurely  Same as for primary cohort  
Procedural steps  Same as for the Corrie Digital Health group  in the primary cohort , paragraphs a 
through n, and r through w.  
The Reading cohort will not participate in the procedural steps for the 6 and 12 -
month follow -ups, as described in paragraphs p and q.  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 10 
 Data collection for the Corrie Digital Health group and the historical standard of 
care comparison grou p to assess the primary outcome will be the same.  
 
 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria   
a) The Corrie Digital Health group  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
-Patient admitted for acute m yocardial infarction ; MI 
present at the time of admission and Type I NS TEMI 
or STEMI  
-18 years or older  
- smartphone ownership  
 
 -Non-English speaking  
-Visua l, hearing, or motor  impairment  which 
preclude s use of the intervention  
-Persons not able to participate on due to 
severity of illness (e .g., intubated  and on 
sedation in  the setting of cardiogenic shock ) 
 
 
b) The Historical Comparison group  
 
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
-Patient admitted for  acute m yocardial infarction ; MI 
present at the time of admission and NSTEMI or 
STEMI  
-18 years or older  
 
 -Non-English speak ing 
 
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA approved 
indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant  populations are changed.  
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be administered.  
 
Device s: Smartphone + Apple Watch + Silicone HealthBand  + iHealth BP monitor +/ - Apple TV  
-Corrie is available for iPhone and will be available for Android .  
-The Apple Watch is only available for iPhone users.  
-The Silicone HealthBand is an optional component of the program available to all participants.  
-The iHealth BP monitor is available to all par ticipants through a layered app.  
-As the Corrie app includes Hopkins -approved Emmi educational videos for AMI patients, and there may 
be an enhanced experience by participants (possibly along with friends and family) watching these videos 
on the television  monitor in their hospital room, we will pilot install ation of  Apple TV s to allow the 
participant to AirPlay the video to the television monitor.   
-In discussion with an FDA -consultant , because the functionality of the application  is as an 
organizational a nd navigational tool for patients,  it does not require pre -approval from FDA before use 
with patients. It falls within the category of mobile applications for which the FDA is exercising 
enforcement discretion.  
- Patients meeting the eligibility  criteria  with an iPhone will rece ive the App , and the Apple 
Watch/Silicone Healthband.  Those without an iPhone may be enrolled in the Device Share Program  or 
the Android program when available . 
- The study team will deploy a light -weight silicone HealthBand with the  team’s Corrie logo. It  is a one -
size fits all band with no native technology functionality at this time.  Participants  will be asked if they 
have a silicone allergy prior to offering th e HealthBand. The band is optional.  The purpose of the 
Healthband  is to serve as an inpatient reminder to nurses and the treatment team that individual  is part of 
study and as a “pledge” by the participant  to improve health and engage with the app.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 8 of 10 
 Date: 01/02/2020  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Seth S. Martin, MD , MHS  (Cardi ology)  
Application Number: IRB00099938  
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable . 
b. Secondary outcome variables . 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and inte rim data analysis.  
d. Early stopping rules.  
 
Study Statistics   
Primary outcome :  Time  to first readmission within 30 days post discharge  
Secondary outcome : ED visits, observation visits, recurrent AMI, mortality, medication 
adherence, p atient satisfaction scores, app usability, patient activation, 
user engagement, 12-month readmission,  and cost-effectiveness   
Statistical plan including 
sample size justification and 
interim data analysis.  Allowing for 10% of drop -outs during 30 -day follow -up, the aim was 
to recruit N=200 in the intervention group and N=1 ,000 patients in the 
comparison gro up to provide around 90% power at the 2 -sided 5% 
level of significance to detect a hazard ratio of 0.5 (ie, 50% reduction 
in a hazard of the intervention group), assuming 85% of patients in the 
comparison group survive or are not readmitted by the end of s tudy 
(Stata stpower). The incident readmission rate of patients in our 
historical comparison group admitted to JHH and JHBMC was 16 
cases per 100 person -months. We aim to detect a 50% risk reduction in 
readmission rates because our solution is comprehensiv e in nature and 
it is estimated that 76% of 30 -day readmissions are potentially 
preventable using proven standards of care.  
 
Our statistics will be primarily descriptive.  We will examine 
characteristics of participants who join the study including 
demograp hics (e.g., age, sex, race/ethnicity, level of education, 
mHealth literacy, body mass index, marital status, occupation, annual 
income , insurance coverage ) and clinical characteristics (e.g., severity 
of MI by TIMI/GRACE score, Killip Class, severity of ca rdiovascular 
disease by ejection fraction, medications, cardiac risk factor profile 
including dyslipidemia  and lipid management characteristics as 
above ), hypertension, diabetes , smoking, prior history of MI, and other 
comorbidities such as COPD , anxiety, and depression . We will 
examine primary and secondary outcomes as frequencies (percentage) 
for categorical variables and mean (SD) for continuous variables 
according to site of enrollment (JHH or JHBV) and type of mobile 
device (iPhone or Android). We will  compare baseline characteristics 
of study participants using χ2 and t-tests for categorical and continuous 
variables, as appropriate.  
 
In assessing readmissions and cost -effectiveness, c oncurrent and 
historical controls will be matched to enrolled patien ts based on 
sociodemographic/clinical variables, and risk stratification using APR 
DRG  / severity of illness scores (which are show n in the literature to 
be predictive for readmissions). We will conduct a Cox survival 
analysis to compare time to first read mission between the Corrie 
digital health group and the historical comparison group. We will build 
a Markov model of cost -effectiveness with the perspective of a 
hospital adopting Corrie technology, taking into account the lifelong 
outcome and cost of the Corrie discharge process versus the standard 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 9 of 10 
 Johns Hopkins cardiology discharge process . 
Early Stopping Rules  N/A 
 
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
c. Plan fo r reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality.  
e. Financial risks to the participant s. 
 
Intervention Feature  Risks  Steps to Minimize risk  
HIPAA Compliance  
 -Parti cipant medical 
information is on  their 
personal phone   -We are using a  high level of personal 
security password protection and 
encryption to  meet privacy standards  
Unanticipated problems or 
study deviations, legal risk  -Breach of confidentiality  -Study t eam will disclose to participant and 
IRB if a breach of confidentiality occurs  
Financial Risks  -None  -None  
 
 
9. Benefits (Description of the probable benefits  for the participant and for society .) 
 
Overall, t he participants will be given access to a mobile application that can  help them  manage medications 
as well as follow -up appointments with their primary care provider, cardiologists, and cardiac rehab. In 
addition, they may benefit  from greater knowledge about their health from information in the app. 
Moreover, t he data that they contribute as a research participant could help others in the future.   
 
Probable benefits, as they relate to intervention features, are as follows:  
 
Intervention Feature  Benefit  
Medication Management  
 -Organize and track medicat ions 
-Increase medication engagement, understanding, and adherence  
-Stay u p-to-date with refills, so as not to run out of medications  
Follow -up & Cardiac Rehab  -Schedule appointments before they leave the hospital – Primary Care 
Provider , Cardiologist, Ca rdiac Rehab  
E-Learning Modules for 
Lifestyle Modification  -Improve lifestyle modification through education and access to 
resources – Tobacco Cessation, Heart Healthy Diet, Exercise  
Timing with Hospital Day 1 
Deployment  -Able to use time inpatient to imp rove self -management skills and ask 
questions  
Apple Watch  / Silicone 
Healthband  -Apple Watch is expected to engage participants  more effectively by: 
i) sending notifications to the Watch regarding the medi cation and 
follow -up reminders, and i i) engaging a nd monitoring participants ' 
exercise activities and goals . 
-Silicone Healthband will serve as a reminder.  
Companion App  -Connect participants with family so they understand the therapeutic 
and medication plan as well as what the participant has experience d.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  (Detail compensation for participant s including possible total compensation, 
proposed bonus, and any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing the protocol ) 
 
- The Corrie A pp, iPhone,  iHealth blood pressure monitor,  and the Watch /Healthband  will be provided at 
no cost to the participant . 
- Participants will receive $10 (cash, check, or gift card) after successful completion of follow -up surveys  
delivered 3 and 30 days following discharge . 
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 10 of 10 
 11. Costs  (Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participant s and identify who will pay 
for them. ) 
 
- Development costs associated with application development have been be paid through the Louis B. 
Thalheimer Fund  ($44,000)  and Wallace H.  Coulter Translational  Research  Partnership  ($25,000) . 
Developers are Johns Hopkins students paid through student human resources based on standard rates.  
 