Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  1 of 38  
  
 
 
Randomized  Controlled  Trial of Epidural -General  Anesthesia  versus  General  Anesthesia 
for Open  Pancreaticoduodenectomy:  Influence  on Complications  and Overall Two Year 
Survival  
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR 
MSK  THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Florence  Grant,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
Co-Principal 
Investigator(s)/Department : Kirsten  Meister,  CRNA 
William Jarnagin,  MD 
David  O’Connor,  PhD,  CRNA  Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
Surgery/HPB 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Mary  Fischer, MD 
Vinay Puttanniah, MD 
Patrick  McCormick,  MD 
Vinod  Balachandron,  MD 
Michael D’Angelica, MD  
T. Peter  Kingham,  MD 
Jeffrey Drebin, MD 
Alice Wei, MD  
Kevin  Soares,  MD 
Kay See Tan, MD 
Grant Chen, MD 
Amitabh Gulati, MD 
Jennifer  Cepak,  CRNA 
Tim Donoghue,  CRNA 
Adeel Haque, CRNA  
Michael Koszalka,  CRNA  
Lee Hingula, MD 
Aron Legler, MD 
Vivek  Malhotra,  MD 
Megan Abate, NP  
Jennifer  Aviado -Langer,  NP 
Laura James, NP  
Gina  Prior,  NP 
Laura  Conti -Harrigan,  NP 
Dilnoza Portnoy, NP 
Danielle Escaleira, NP 
Meghan Decker, NP 
Omotara Adewale,  NP 
Maria  Cantos, NP  
Alison Costalos, NP 
Stacey Cuomo, NP 
Leslie  Eadon  Blades,  NP 
Glenda  Espinosa,  NP Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Surgery/HPB  
Surgery/HPB  
Surgery/HPB  
Surgery/HPB  
Surgery/HPB  
Surgery/HPB 
Epidemiology/Biostatistics  
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Anesthesiology/Critical  Care 
Nursing  
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing  
Nursing  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  2 of 38  
  
 Chakia  Faniel,  NP Nursing  
Christine  Ferrari,  NP Nursing  
Evlyn  Hinds,  NP Nursing  
Stacey  Kaufman,  NP Nursing  
Kenny  Lacossiere,  NP Nursing  
John  Lezoli,  NP Nursing  
Marie  Helene  Lofland,  NP Nursing  
Christine  McGrade,  NP Nursing  
Margaret  McSweeney,  NP Nursing  
Rosemary  Ortiz,  NP Nursing  
Celeste  Springer,  NP Nursing  
So Kim,  NP Nursing  
Sera  Senturk,  NP Nursing  
Oksana  Ditwell,  NP Nursing  
Victoria  Tague,  NP Nursing  
Theresa  Hall, NP Nursing  
Ewa Chauvin,  NP Nursing  
Lauren  Picarde,  NP Nursing  
Patricia  Spellman,  RN Nursing  
Christine  Gillins -White,  RN Nursing  
Consenting  Professional(s)/Department:  Florence  Grant,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 William  Jarnagin,  MD Surgery/HPB  
 Mary  Fischer,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Vinay  Puttanniah,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Patrick  McCormick,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Lee Hingula,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Aron  Legler,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Vivek  Malhotra,  MD Anesthesiology/Critical  Care  
 Vinod  Balachandron,  MD Surgery/HPB  
 Michael  D’Angelica,  MD Surgery/HPB  
 T. Peter  Kingham,  MD Surgery/HPB  
 Jeffery  Drebin,  MD Surgery/HPB  
 Alice  Wei, MD Surgery/HPB  
 Kevin  Soares  Surgery/HPB  
 Megan  Abate,  NP Nursing  
 Jennifer  Aviado -Langer,  NP Nursing  
 Laura  James,  NP Nursing  
 Gina  Prior,  NP Nursing  
 Laura  Conti -Harrigan,  NP Nursing  
 Dilnoza  Portnoy,  NP Nursing  
 Danielle  Escaleira,  NP Nursing  
 Meghan  Decker,  NP Nursing  
 Omotara  Adewale,  NP Nursing  
 Maria  Cantos,  NP Nursing  
 Alison  Costalos,  NP Nursing  
 Stacey  Cuomo,  NP Nursing  
 Leslie  Eadon  Blades,  NP Nursing  
 Glenda  Espinosa,  NP Nursing  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  3 of 38  
  
 Chakia Faniel, NP 
Christine Ferrari, NP 
Evlyn Hinds, NP 
Stacey Kaufman, NP 
Kenny  Lacossiere,  NP 
John Lezoli, NP  
Marie Helene  Lofland, NP 
Christine McGrade, NP 
Margaret  McSweeney,  NP 
Rosemary  Ortiz, NP 
Celeste Springer, NP  
So Kim,  NP 
Sera Senturk, NP 
Oksana  Ditwell,  NP 
Victoria Tague, NP 
Theresa Hall, NP 
Ewa Chauvin, NP  
Lauren  Picarde,  NP Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing 
Nursing  
Nursing 
Nursing  
 
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory Human 
Subjects Education and Certification Program . 
 
OneMSK  Sites  
Manhattan  
Basking  Ridge  (consent  only)  
Commack  (consent  only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
1275 York Avenue  
New York,  New 
York 10065  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  4 of 38  
 Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  ................................ ................................ .........  5 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ..................  7 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ........................  8 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ..............................  14 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  14 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  16 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS ................................ ................................ ..............  18 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..............  18 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 18 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 18 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  19 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  ................................ ................................ ........................  20 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ..................  20 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ .......................  22 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................  22 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  ..........................  23 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................ ..........  24 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  24 
15.0 RESEARCH  PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION  PROCEDURES  ... 25 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ ......................  25 
15.2 Randomization ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  26 
16.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT  ISSUES  ................................ ................................ ...........................  26 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  28 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ...............................  28 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ...............  29 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  29 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  ................................ ................................ ............  29 
17.2.1   31 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ...............  31 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  31 
20.0 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  37 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  5 of 38  
 1.0 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR SCHEMA  
Study  Title:  Randomized  Controlled Trial of  Epidural -General Anesthesia versus  General Anesthesia 
for Patients Undergoing Pancreaticoduodenectomy:  Effects  on Complications and Overall Two  Year 
Survival  
Objectives:  To determine if an intraoperative  Epidural -General  Anesthesia Technique plus post - 
operative  epidural analgesia  (EG)  compared  with an intraoperative General  Anesthesia  Technique 
with post -operative epidural  analgesia (GA):  
1) results in fewer Grade 3 or greater post -operative complications as described at 
https://one.mskcc.org/sites/pub/surgery/Pages/Secondary -Events.aspx  and based  on the 
Dindo, Clavien  grading system. 1-4 
2) results  in prolonged  survival  at 2 years  in patients with  adenocarcinoma,  
3) decreases  patient  length  of stay (LOS),  
4) decreases  post operative  delirium.  
Patient Population:  Adult  patients ≥  18 years  old who are scheduled  for pancreaticoduodenectomy 
at MSKCC.  
Design:  Prospective  randomized  controlled  single  institution  trial. 
Treatment Plan:  Patients  will be consented to the study  in the surgical or pre -anesthesia clinics  and 
then randomized  in the Pre -Surgical Center after successful  epidural placement  to receive either  an 
intraoperative Epidural -General Anesthetic Technique  plus post-operative  epidural analgesia  (EG)  or 
a General Anesthetic Technique with  post-operative epidural analgesia (GA).  
Time  to Completion:  Estimated  time to completion  is 3 to 4 years.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  6 of 38  
  
 
 

Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  7 of 38  
  
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
Primary:  
 
• To determine if intraoperative  Epidural -General  anesthesia plus post -operative 
epidural analgesia (EG)  decreases  the incidence of  Grade 3  or greater complications 
(See  Appendix 1 and  described  above) in  adult patients undergoing  
Clinic  
Recruitment  
Consent  
Biostatistics  
Randomization  
to Epidural  
General  
A ia 
 nesthes  
Randomization 
to General 
Anesthesia  
Pre Surgical  
Center  
Successful 
Epidural 
Placement  
Successful 
Epidural 
Placement  
Intraoperative  
Epidural  
General  
A ia 
 nesthes  
General 
Anesthesia  
PACU  
Patient 
Controlled 
Epidural 
Analgesia  
Patient 
Controlled 
Epidural 
Analgesia  
Floor  
Patient 
Controlled 
Epidural 
Analgesia  
Patient 
Controlled 
Epidural 
Analgesia  
After  removal  
of epidural  
Oral Pain 
Medication  
Oral Pain 
Medication  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  8 of 38  
 pancreaticoduodenectomy  (PD),  as compared  to General Anesthesia with  epidural for 
post op analgesia (GA).  
Secondary:  
• To determine if  EG improves 2 -year survival in adult patients undergoing 
pancreaticoduodenectomy  (PD) for adenocarcinoma  as compared  to GA. 
• To determine if  EG results in  decreased  LOS in patients undergoing 
pancreaticoduodenectomy as compared to GA.  
Exploratory:  
• To determine if  EG decreases  the incidence of  post operative delirium  as 
compared to GA.  
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND  RATIONALE  
Pancreatic  cancer is  one of the deadliest cancers.  In 2016, it moved from the fourth to the 
third leading cause  of cancer -related  death in the  U.S., surpassing  breast  cancer.  Pancreatic 
cancer  is the 11th most  commonly  diagnosed cancer  in men and the ninth in women. While 
overall cancer  incidence  and death rates are  declining, the  incidence  and death rates for 
pancreatic cancer  are increasing. The vast majority of pancreatic cancer  cases are 
diagnosed after they have spread.  
Over  70% of patients will die  within the  first year of  diagnosis. While  surgery  offers the  best 
chance  for survival, fewer than 20 percent of pancreatic cancer  cases  are diagnosed early 
enough for surgical  intervention.  For all stages  of pancreatic cancer,  patients have a  one 
year survival  of 20%  and a  five year survival  of 7%, depending  on a balance between  the 
histology and metastatic  potential of the tumor, the stage when it  is diagnosed, the 
completeness  of the resection  and the  competency  of the  immune  system  of the host in the 
defense against metastases.5 Even with surgery, the eventual  prognosis is poor with a 
median  survival of roughly 18  months.  The overall five -year survival rate  is about 10%, 
although this can  rise as high as 20%  to 35% if  the tumor  is removed  completely  and when 
cancer  has not  spread  to lymph  nodes. In a  recent  prospective  analysis  we found a  survival 
rate of 88% at one year and 80% at 2 years after successful  surgical  resection.6 
Complications  after  surgery  affect  survival  
The surgery  itself carries  a high morbidity  with a  major  complication  rate upwards  of 30% in 
most  institutions. We  have recently reported a  rate of Grade 3 (see  Appendix  1) or greater 
complications of 27% in 218 pancreaticoduodenectomies performed in a high volume 
center.6 In addition,  we reviewed both  our published  data of  1030 cases  from 2004 – 20097 
as well  as the  resection  database  at our institution for the  past 5  years and found in  1028 
pancreaticoduodenectomies Grade 3 complication  rates of 35 and 33% overall. (MSK 
internal communication).  Major  post-operative complications,  particularly infectious  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  9 of 38  
 complications, are associated with impaired long -term survival.8-15 The most  common 
complications  after pancreatectomy  are intraabdominal  fluid collections/abscesses  and 
pancreatic leaks/fistulae, making up approximately 25% of all complication. 6,7 
Epidurals may  decrease  post -operative  complications  
Benefits  of epidural use  peri-operatively  have previously  been demonstrated  in reviews  of the 
literature, including lower complication rates, earlier return to bowel function, reduced blood 
loss and decreased  LOS.16,17  The hypothesis is  that epidural anesthesia  and analgesia (EAA) 
can improve surgical outcome  by reducing postoperative morbidity and hastening recovery.  
Likely  benefits include decreased  incidence of cardiac  complications  in high -risk patients; 
lower incidence of pulmonary complications,  lower incidence of DVT and pulmonary 
embolus; suppression  of the neuroendocrine stress response;  and earlier return of 
gastrointestinal function.  16 There  is a positive association  between epidural as the  primary 
anesthetic and decreased  post-operative complications  in various operative procedures.17 
A large literature review of retrospective, prospective, and meta -analysis studies has 
demonstrated an improvement in surgical  outcome through beneficial  effects on 
perioperative  pulmonary function, blunting  the surgical stress response  and improved 
analgesia. In particular, significant reduction in perioperative cardiac  morbidity 
(approximately 30%), pulmonary infections (approximately 40%), pulmonary embolism 
(approximately  50%), ileus  (approximately  2 days),  acute  renal  failure (approximately 30%), 
and blood loss  (approximately 30%) were  noted in one  groups review of the  literature.17 
In the MASTER Trial,18 adverse outcomes  in high -risk patients managed for major surgery 
with epidural block or  alternative  analgesic regimens  with general anesthesia  were  compared 
in a multicenter randomized  trial. In this trial, 915 patients undergoing major  abdominal 
surgery  with high -risk status  were randomly  assigned intraoperative  epidural anesthesia and 
postoperative epidural analgesia for 72 h with general anesthesia or control. The primary 
endpoint  was death at  30 days  or major postsurgical  morbidity.  They  found  that most 
adverse morbid outcomes were not reduced by use of combined epidural and general 
anesthesia  and postoperative epidural analgesia. However, the improvement  in analgesia, 
reduction  in respiratory  failure, and the  low risk  of serious  adverse  consequences  suggested 
that many high -risk patients undergoing major intraabdominal surgery would receive 
substantial benefit from combined  general  and epidural anesthesia intraoperatively  with 
continuing postoperative epidural analgesia.19 
A review by Fotiadis found that epidural analgesia is associated  with a shorter duration of 
postoperative ileus, attenuation of the stress response,  fewer pulmonary complications,  and 
improved  postoperative  pain control and  recovery. It does not reduce  anastomotic  leakage, 
intraoperative  blood loss,  transfusion requirement, risk  of thromboembolism or cardiac 
morbidity, or hospital stay  compared with that after conventional analgesia in unselected 
patients  undergoing gastrointestinal  surgery.  They  concluded  that thoracic  epidural  analgesia 
reduces hospital costs and stay in patients  at high risk of cardiac or pulmonary 
complications.20 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  10 of 38  
 A review  by Holte found no  statistically  significant evidence from  randomized  trials to  indicate 
epidural analgesia with local anesthetic to be associated with an increased risk of 
anastomotic  breakdown in colorectal  surgery. However, relatively few  patients have been 
included in randomized trials.21 
In a randomized  trial of patients aged 70  or greater undergoing major abdominal surgery, 
where  one group  received EG  and the  other GA  with post operative intravenous analgesia, 
the EG group  had better pain  relief and improved  mental  status on  POD  4 and 5, but no 
difference in delirium.22 
There  have been mixed  results when  epidurals are utilized  in patient undergoing 
pancreaticoduodenectomy . Epidurals for post op analgesia after 
pancreaticoduodenectomy have been associated  with lower pain scores,  but may also 
increase  complications  including pancreatic  fistulae, post -operative ileus,  LOS,  increased  
transfusion  requirements,  aggressive  fluid resuscitation  and higher rates  of gastrointestinal 
and respiratory complications.  
Pratt’s group evaluated  data for 233 consecutive patients, who underwent 
pancreaticoduodenectomy,  were  prospectively acquired  and retrospectively  reviewed. One 
hundred eighty -five patients received epidural analgesia , and 48  received intravenous  
analgesia. Patients administered epidural analgesia had lower pain scores  but significantly 
higher rates of major complications.  Pancreatic fistulae and postoperative ileus occurred 
more frequently, and patients with epidural  analgesia more often required discharge  to 
rehabilitation facilities. Thirty  one percent of epidural infusions were  aborted before 
anticipated (fourth postoperative day) because of hemodynamic compromise  and/or 
inadequate  analgesia. These select  patients required more transfusions,  aggressive fluid 
resuscitation,  and subsequently suffered  even higher rates  of gastrointestinal  and respiratory 
complications,  all attributing to higher costs. 23 
However, in some  more  recent studies, epidural analgesia is associated with lower post - 
operative complications following pancreaticoduodenectomy.24 A large review of 
pancreatectomies  utilizing the Nationwide  Inpatient  Sample showed those patients who 
received epidurals had decreased  LOS,  hospital  charges,  respiratory  failure/pneumonia  and 
inpatient  mortality.25 Another retrospective review found fewer incidences of sepsis,  post- 
operative  hemorrhage, liver failure, post -operative  pneumonia  and respiratory  failure  as well 
as lower in -hospital mortality.26 
To date there are rare randomized controlled trials in patients undergoing  pancreatic 
resection  utilizing epidurals at anesthetic levels, and all except one  study mentioned  are 
retrospective. Control for epidural local  anesthetic concentrations, infusion rates and timing 
of administration were  not made in  the retrospective  reviews. Based  on methods  published, 
determination of intraoperative  epidural anesthesia versus  postoperative utilization of 
epidural analgesia is lacking. Two  studies addressed timing of epidural administration and 
standardization of local anesthetic concentrations and rates.23,27  The study which 
prospectively accrued  was not randomized  and created an imbalance between the epidural 
(n=185)  versus  no epidural (n=48)  group.17,23  While  the authors addressed  timing  of epidural  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  11 of 38  
 administration  and utilized standardized  local anesthetic concentrations and  rates,  they had  a 
high epidural failure rate (31%)  and intraoperative IV opioids were  used.  The other study  with 
standardized infusion rates did not start  the epidural until the start of skin closure.27Lack  of 
consistency  in local anesthetic concentrations and time  to initiate epidural infusions provide 
conflicting  data for anesthetic management in  patients  undergoing  pancreatic resection, and 
it remains unclear  if epidural analgesia  provides  additional benefits to this patient population.  
A very recent randomized  trial comparing thoracic epidural analgesia with epi general 
anesthesia  to intravenous patient -controlled  analgesia for  pain control  over the  first 48 hours 
after hepatopancreatobiliary  surgery (4 pancreas resections)  found no increased  length of 
stay or complications.28 We propose  to ascertain  whether intraoperative  epidural anesthesia 
has any effect on postoperative complications.  
Surgery  and Anesthesia  affect  immunity,  which  affects  survival  
It is long known  that peri -operative  immune  suppression  can be caused  by surgical  stress 
and anesthesia.29 Natural killer  (NK) cells,  a subpopulation of  lymphocytes,  are the body’s 
primary  defense.30 They  recognize  and destroy  virally infected and tumor  cells during  the 
metastatic process.31 There is evidence that stress -induced  decrease  in NK cells can 
enhance  tumor development.32 This decrease  can last for up  to 30 days after surgery.33-35 
Surgical resection , the mainstay of treatment for  early stage  pancreatic cancer,  suppresses 
cellular immunity  for several  days, peaking  at day 35,36 and displays a  direct toxic effect on 
NK cells.37,38  Studies in humans  have shown  that surgery  itself can promote  the development 
of metastases by inhibiting  (NK) cell activity, 32 which  has been associated  with increased 
mortality and cancer recurrence.39-42 
Activation  of the neuroendocrine  system  in response  to surgery  causes  increased production 
of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from  the pituitary gland and release of 
glucocorticoids from the adrenals, also causing suppression  of cell-mediated immunity.43,44  
Cortisol decreases proliferation of T lymphocytes.45 The lymphocyte population  decrease 
perioperatively  is proportional  to the magnitude of the surgery.29,33 -35,46 -48 The release of 
catecholamines from activation  of the sympathetic nervous system also has 
immunosuppressive  effects.49 
General anesthesia.  NK cell  activity increases  following anesthetic pre -medication  and during 
induction,  followed  by a decrease  post-operatively,33-35 50 51 as well as impairing  other 
immune  function.52 Ketamine and thiopental,  but not propofol or diazepam, increase  viable 
tumor  cells in the  lungs of  rats and decrease  NK cell activity.52 Propofol has  also been shown 
to have less  of a negative effect on circulating lymphocytes than other anesthetic agents.53 
Isoflurane inhibits Interferon (IFN)  stimulation  of NK cells  in mice,54 where  sevoflurane alters 
the release of cytokines in vitro by NK cells.55 
Opioids  have been shown to suppress both cell -mediated and humoral immunity,56-63 
including post -operative NK cell  cytotoxicity,64,65  which  may enhance metastasis  and tumor 
recurrence.66 The effect may be dose dependent.64 They may also  increase angiogenesis  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  12 of 38  
 and promote  tumor  neovascularization.57 However, they also  relieve surgical  stress  which 
may enhance immunity.67,68  Morphine  used in analgesic doses may reduce the tumor 
promoting effects of surgery.69 
 
 
Some  anesthetic  techniques  may enhance  immunity  
Local anesthetics  may have an antitumor effect.70 General  anesthesia combined  with local 
anesthesia may  be able to reduce metastasis  and recurrence  after surgery.71 39-42,72 Patients 
who received an epidural -general  technique intraoperatively  showed dominance in T -helper 
cells and a decline of immunosuppressive  T cells  after surgery  in patients  with liver cancer73 
and in  patients  undergoing thoracotomy.74 In patients undergoing  radical  resection  for 
cervical and ovarian  cancers,  those  who received an EG technique had less suppression  of 
NK cell activity, higher levels of  the antitumorigenic cytokines  and lower levels of  the 
protumorigenic cytokines post -operatively.  This immune  suppression  may last up to two 
weeks post -operatively.29 In a study  of patients undergoing major intraabdominal surgery, 
those  who received an  intra-operative  EG technique showed  lower levels of  epinephrine  and 
cortisol intra -operatively.  Lymphocytes and  T-helper cells  were  also higher in the  epidural 
group on POD1.75 In colon cancer  surgery, studies have shown  that the epi -general  group 
had significantly  greater numbers  of lymphocytes  and Th1  cells and  lower  Th2 and  regulatory 
T cells post surgery76, as well as decreased levels of CRP  77. This study also showed a 
decreased time  to return of bowel  function and  full diet.77 In surgery for gastric cancer,  EA 
has also been shown to lower the stress reaction  and decrease  the impact  on immune 
function.78,79  Regional  anesthesia may have  an effect on cancer recurrence  by attenuating 
the immunosuppressive  effects  of surgery and decreasing the stress  response  80 81 Regional 
anesthesia may  be associated  with improved overall survival after oncologic surgery  but the 
data does not support reduced cancer recurrence.18,19,82 -86 
In a small  study  in patients who underwent optimal surgical debulking  for ovarian cancer, 
intraoperative use of epidural anesthesia was associated with an increased time to tumor 
recurrence  after surgery.  The intraoperative  use epidural group had  a mean  (95% confidence 
interval) time to recurrence of 73 (56 -91) months,  which was  longer than either the epidural 
postoperative group 33  (21-45) months  (P = 0.002) or the  no-epidural  group 38  (30-47) 
months  (P = 0.001). The postoperative -only and  no-epidural  groups were  not different (P = 
0.92). Intraoperative epidural significantly reduced  (hazard  ratio, 0.37 [95% confidence 
interval, 0.19 -0.73])  tumor  recurrence  risk.72 Another trial investigating  immune  function in 
women  with epithelial  ovarian cancer  undergoing radical resection  with either general 
anesthesia alone or in combination with epidural anesthesia found that combined 
general/epidural anesthesia appeared to promote antitumorigenic responses.87 
In a retrospective  review  of patients with  invasive prostatic carcinoma  who underwent open 
radical prostatectomy and had either general anesthesia -epidural  analgesia or general 
anesthesia -opioid analgesia, after adjusting  for several  tumor  variables, the epidural plus 
general anesthesia  group had  an estimated  57% (95%  confidence  interval,  17-78%) lower 
risk of recurrence  compared with the general anesthesia plus opioids  group, with a  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  13 of 38  
 corresponding  hazard  ratio of  0.43 (95%  confidence  interval, 0.22 -0.83;  P = 0.012). They 
concluded  that open  prostatectomy  surgery  with general anesthesia,  substituting  epidural 
analgesia for postoperative opioids, was associated  with substantially less risk  of 
biochemical cancer recurrence.30 
In a retrospective  review  of patients undergoing colorectal  cancer  surgery,  the authors found 
that the  use of epidural analgesia for perioperative  pain control  was not associated  with a 
decreased cancer  recurrence,  in contrast  to other studies;  however, a potential  benefit was 
observed in older patients. The benefit of regional anesthesia on cancer  recurrence  may 
depend on the specific tumor type.88 
A retrospective study in patients with pancreatic cancer  aimed to assess associations 
between perioperative management  and survival in  patients undergoing resection.  Survival 
data and anesthetic records for 144 patients who had surgical resection of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma were  obtained  and associations were sought between survival and 19 
predefined variables. The authors found increased survival in patients who received 
perioperative  epidural analgesia. An association  between  use of epidural  anesthesia  during 
primary pancreatic cancer  surgery and prolonged  survival was also observed.89 
Non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs)  inhibit  prostaglandin  synthesis  by inhibiting 
the cyclooxygenase enzyme.  Tumor cells  secrete prostaglandins which may  allow them to 
potentially be targeted by the use  of NSAIDs which  may be effective in restoring immune 
competence,65 preventing cell  proliferation, apoptosis and/or angiogenesis.90 NSAIDs also 
reduce prostaglandin E2 induced immunosuppression.91 
Post-operative  pain has also been  shown  to facilitate  cancer  metastases.57,69  
Since the complication rate after PD  is so high and survival is  so low, anything  we as 
anesthesia  providers can  do to  mitigate  either  would be  valuable  to this patient population. 
By decreasing  postoperative complications  and providing an immunosupportive  perioperative 
course  (mitigating the immunosuppressive  effects of  anesthesia and surgery), we may be 
able to affect survival as  well as  length of stay  in hospital.  We can achieve this by using 
techniques which decrease  complications as well as minimize  the neuroendocrine and 
cellular stress responses associated  with surgery and maintain adequate pain control. We 
believe that  adding an intra -operative epidural anesthetic technique while  minimizing  the use 
of agents associated with immunosuppression  and potentially  decreasing post -operative 
surgical complications may  affect the outcome  of patients undergoing  surgical  resection for 
pancreaticoduodenectomy.  
. 
Finally we  will compare  the incidence  of delirium postoperatively in patients in  each  arm due 
to the high incidence  of delirium found in cancer  patients in hospital, increasing  healthcare 
costs,  length  of stay, long term  cognitive decline and  mortality. 92-94 At MSK in  patients 
undergoing  major  surgery, patients with  delirium had a  longer length of stay  and a  greater 
likelihood of discharge  to a rehabilitation facility.95,96  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  14 of 38  
  
 
 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
4.1 Design  
This will be a prospective randomized assessor  (surgical  staff)  blinded controlled study. 
Since  the interventional  arm will be receiving a  continuous epidural infusion, it  would not  be 
possible  to blind the anesthesia  care provider  for the intervention.  Additionally,  once  surgical 
incision is made, the provider would be able to determine which patient’s epidural was 
injected with placebo as the patient response to incision would be much  greater than those 
patients receiving local anesthetic prior to incision.  
Postoperatively, the complication data points will be collected by nursing and surgical  staff. 
The treatment arm information is not  available  to those doing the assessments.  As all 
patients  will have epidurals postoperatively  and the  treatment  from then  on is  the same,  it will 
not be obvious which  treatment arm the patient is on.  
Eligible patients will  be consented  for the  trial in  the Hepatopancreaticobiliary  or Pre - 
Anesthesia clinic  before surgery.  Prior  to the  insertion of  epidural catheter  at the  Pre-Surgical 
Center which  occurs  on the day of  surgery,  patients will be  randomized  by the Research  staff 
to either an EG anesthesia technique plus post -operative epidural analgesia or a standard 
GA with post -operative  epidural analgesia the day before surgery using CRDB.  
 
Pre-operative:  preparation  and instruction  standard  for all patients:  
NPO  past midnight  except for  clear  liquids up to  2 hours before arrival to  the hospital, 
including medications.  
Baseline  weight and  vital signs  pre-operatively including mean  arterial pressure 
(MAP).  
An intravenous  catheter  (IV) will be placed  in the Pre -Surgical  Center.  
An epidural catheter will be  placed as  per usual clinical  practice  by a member  of the 
anesthesia  pain service  or the  attending anesthesiologist  as described  in section  9.0 
Intra -operative Management:  Standard  and common  to both arms.  Specifics  to Intervention 
Arm described in Section 4.2 below.  
• All patients will  be transported  to the OR  and secured  onto the operative table after 
appropriate identification.  
• Routine monitors  will be placed  per usual clinical  practice,  in addition to the  Bispectral 
Index (BIS) or other cerebral monitor, which will be maintained intraoperatively 
between 40 -60 per manufacturer’s guidelines.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  15 of 38  
 • After pre -oxygenation,  general anesthesia will  be induced in  a standard  fashion  with 
propofol, rocuronium  or vecuronium  and fentanyl. The  intervention group  will receive 
no more than 2mcg/kg  of fentanyl  IV for induction.  
• All patients  will receive acetaminophen  1G IV q 8 hours for  48 hours  unless 
contraindicated.  
• Patients will receive  ketorolac  q 6 hours for  48 hours,  at the  discretion  of the surgical 
team, and if not contraindicated.  
• Infusions  of dexmedetomidine or  ketamine will  not be used  in either  arm 
• All patients will  receive our  intra-operative  maintenance  fluid management  using  a 
balanced salt solution guided by static and functional hemodynamic parameters 
(stroke volume variation  or pulse pressure  variation).  
• The anesthesia  team will determine  a range of  appropriate mean  arterial pressures 
(MAPs) under anesthesia  for each  patient based  on all available information  and 
maintained with fluids and/or pressors per our usual anesthetic care.  
• Blood loss  will be replaced  with colloid per  our usual clinical  practice  until transfusion 
criteria are met (HB < 7mg/dl or evidence of hemodynamic instability).  
End of Case:  
The standard post -operative epidural medication, a combination of bupivacaine 0.05% and 
fentanyl 5mcg/ml  or similar  as clinically feasible, will  be started  at 6 mL/hour  following a  bolus 
of 6 mL  (for patients  on the non interventional  GA arm)  after fascial  closure  for all  patients.  
Patients  on the intervention  arm will have their  epidural  medication  changed  over at  that 
time.  
Patients will be  extubated in the  OR if possible  or in the Post  Anesthesia Care  Unit (PACU) 
and then transferred from the PACU to the floor at the discretion of the surgical  service.  
Since  patients on both  arms  will have the same  epidural medication  running at  the end  of the 
case  (bupivacaine 0.05% and fentanyl 5mcg/ml  or similar  as clinically feasible), any patient 
who awakes experiencing pain will  have their epidural redosed  with a 6ml  bolus  up to 2 
doses.  If pain relief does not occur,  participants will  be treated  with intravenous opioids.  
All patients will  receive the  usual  standard of  care for post -operative epidural management  at 
MSK as described in section 4.2.  
Prolonged low blood pressure  will be  supported  with a  low dose  vasopressor  infusion  in 
addition to judicious fluid management, if necessary.  
Post-operative pain will  be evaluated  by a member  of the Nursing  department first  and then 
by a member  of the Anesthesia Pain Service  if intervention  is necessary,  per usual  practice, 
and treated according to the institutional standard of care  for patients with epidurals. (See 
Section 9 Assessing  Epidural Function Post Operatively)  
Data will be collected as  described below and patients  will be analyzed secondarily by  the 
final pathology of  their tumor  for survivorship  evaluation. Although pre -operative  pathology is  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  16 of 38  
 often known,  there are  occasions  where  the pre -operative pathology  is incorrect  or foci of 
adenocarcinoma  are unexpectedly found. Analysis will, therefore, be done on  the final 
pathology.  
Patients who  are found to  have unresectable  disease  will be  removed  from the  study  as they 
will not undergo the pancreaticoduodenectomy. Patients with a malfuctioning epidural 
catheter intra -operatively  will be analyzed on an  intention  to treat and as treated manner.  
4.2 Intervention  
The goal of the study  intervention  arm is to provide  an anesthetic using  the epidural 
intraoperatively  which  decreases  post-operative complications  and supports  immune  function 
as described  above and minimizes  the stress  response  to anesthesia, surgery and pain. We 
plan to  limit narcotic use  to up  to 2 mcg/kg  of fentanyl  during induction on  the intervention  EG 
arm and provide adequate analgesia with  epidural  medication  as well as intravenous 
ketorolac and acetaminophen at the surgeons’ discretion. The epidural  will be continued  
post-operatively  with a standard  analgesic regimen  for all  patients  per usual  standard  of care 
at MSK (a combination of bupivacaine 0.05% and fentanyl  5mcg/ml  or similar  as clinically 
feasible), started  at 6 mL/hour  following a  bolus  of 6 mL after fascial  closure.  This differs from 
the standard arm which will receive our usual general anesthetic intraoperatively  with no 
restriction on  opioid dose  and using  the epidural  catheter for post op  analgesia only. Neither 
group will  be given  intraoperative  infusion  of ketamine  or dexmedetomidine.  
 
 
EG Arm:  Intraoperative  
Patients will have general anesthesia induced in a standard fashion with propofol, 
rocuronium  or vecuronium and  up to 2mcg/kg  of fentanyl IV.  No other intravenous,  intra- 
operative  opioids will  be given if  possible.  Acetaminophen and ketorolac will  be used  at the 
discretion of the surgical service.  
After induction and intubation  and before surgical incision, patients randomized  to the EG 
arm will receive  from 5  to 10 ml  of 0.125%  preservative -free (PF) bupivacaine  with fentanyl 
5mcg/ml  through the epidural catheter in divided doses if hemodynamically  tolerated.  
Anesthesia for  the intervention arm will  be maintained with sevoflurane  in oxygen and air to 
maintain a BIS reading in the range of 40 – 60 per the company’s  recommendation. A 
standard  epidural infusion of bupivacaine  0.125% with  fentanyl 5mcg/mL  will be started  at 6 
ml/hr. The rate will be  adjusted higher or lower, depending  on patient hemodynamic 
response. MAP will be maintained within a range of mean arterial pressures  (MAPs) which 
have been determined  to be appropriate by the  anesthesia  team for each  patient based on 
all available information  before randomization,  using  a combination  of intravenous fluids and 
pressors at the discretion of the anesthesia provider.  
After fascial  closure,  the epidural infusion will  be changed to  the standard  post-operative 
epidural Patient Controlled Epidural Analgesia (PCEA)  (typically a starting  basal  rate of 6 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  17 of 38  
 ml/hr  using  a combination  of bupivacaine 0.05% and  fentanyl  5mcg/ml  or similar  as clinically 
feasible). The patient will be transferred to the PACU.  
In PACU, acetaminophen 1gm  q 8 hours and/or ketorolac  15mg  IV q 6 hours will  be 
continued for  48 hours at  the discretion  of the surgical  service and  if not  contraindicated. The 
epidural will be  utilized and  assessed  and will be  discontinued  by the  anesthesia pain  service 
per pain service  protocol. The  quality  of the analgesia will be  evaluated  by a member  of the 
Anesthesia Pain Service and/or Nursing on the PCA documentation form.  
GA Arm:  Intraoperative  
Patients randomized to the GA arm will receive our standard anesthetic induction and 
maintenance  using  propofol, rocuronium or vecuronium,  fentanyl  and sevoflurane. There  will 
be no limit to  fentanyl  dosing  on this arm. Their epidurals  will be started with the  standard 
pain service  epidural  analgesia infusion (typically a starting basal rate of 6 ml/hr with a 6 ml 
bolus using  a combination  of bupivacaine 0.05% and fentanyl 5mcg/ml  or similar  as clinically 
feasible) when  the abdominal fascia  is closed.  The epidural will be  continued post -operatively 
as described  above. The quality of the  analgesia will  be evaluated  by a member  of the 
Anesthesia Pain  Service  and/or  Nursing as above. Acetaminophen and ketorolac will be 
used at the discretion of the surgical service.  
 
 
Common  to both  EG and GA Arms : 
Pre-operative  
For both arms  and prior to OR  arrival, the  anesthesia  team will determine  a range of  mean 
arterial pressures  (MAPs)  appropriate  by the anesthesia  team for  each  patient based  on all 
available preoperative information.  MAP  will be  maintained within this  range with 
vasopressors  and fluids  as guided by  functional  hemodynamic  parameters  intraoperatively.  
Post -operative  
The epidural  (standard pain service  epidural analgesia infusion described above) will be 
titrated as per  the usual  institutional  pain service  practice  with a goal of  minimizing  Numerical 
Rating  Scale  for Pain (NRS)  levels to a  value acceptable  to the patient. Upon initial  complaint 
of pain, the bedside  RN will encourage  the patient to  utilize the  PCEA. Epidural titration 
evaluations  will be  based  on daily assessments  by a member  of the  anesthesia  pain service. 
Titration will occur  according  to institutional practices and may include increasing or 
decreasing  the bupivacaine  concentration,  increasing  or decreasing  the opioid  concentration, 
changing opioid, or increasing/decreasing volumes administered, as  determined by  the pain 
service provider or nurse practitioner.  
Post-operatively  the pain service  will provide a  daily progress  note that includes a  report  of 
any epidural -related  side effects (nausea, vomiting, itching, mental status changes), 
tolerance  of oral  intake,  proper functioning of the epidural catheter and catheter  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  18 of 38  
 complications,  including infection, hematoma,  and abscess. Nursing will provide the RASS 
score  (for sedation), and  respiratory insufficiency  (the respiratory  rate).  Pain Scores  at rest 
and with  movement  will also  be documented  by Nursing  using  a Numeric  Pain Rating  Scale 
(NRS) on the Analgesic Infusion Form.  
Should pain control  remain  inadequate, the patient will  be converted  to an  intravenous 
patient -controlled  analgesia (IV  PCA) regimen  at the discretion  of the  pain service  provider. 
Failed epidurals (see  treatment/intervention  plan) will be documented as  a post -operative 
variable.  
In PACU, acetaminophen 1gm  q 8 hours will  be continued for  48 hours  with ketorolac 15 mg 
IV q 6 hours at the  discretion  of the surgeon for up  to 48  hours. The  epidural  will be utilized 
per our usual  MSK guidelines and  can be discontinued with  orders from  the anesthesia  pain 
service, and the patient switched  to oral pain medication.  
On the inpatient  floors, nurses  assess all  adult patients  for the  presence  of delirium  upon 
admission  to the floor and  every subsequent shift until discharge. Individual  notes are 
documented  in CIS and  there is also  (under  flow sheets)  the nursing  delirium  assessment 
capturing info for each day and the details  of the CAM (Confusion Assessment  Method) 
tool.93-96 
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
There  will be  no new therapeutic or diagnostic agents used  as part of this study. As all 
medications  are standard  and are not  experimental, all drugs and  materials will be obtained 
through the standard source  of supply  at MSKCC. All drugs shall be prepared in the usual 
fashion, according  to routine protocols and guidelines. Epidural catheters  will be obtained 
from The Department  of Anesthesiology and Critical  Care  Medicine  using  the supplier at  the 
time of the intervention.  
 
 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
▪ Adult  patients ≥  18 years  of age who can provide  informed  consent  
▪ Scheduled  for pancreaticoduodenectomy  
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
▪ Pregnancy  
▪ History  of documented  anaphylaxis or contraindication  to any  of the  study 
medications  
▪ Significant  cognitive impairment  or documented  psychologic  impairment  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  19 of 38  
 ▪ Contraindication to  epidural  per Pain Service  guidelines  Use of a sustained  release 
opioid  medication  such  as long -acting morphine , fentanyl  patches,  methadone, and 
buprenorphine  within the last 3 months  
▪ Post randomization exclusion  will occur  if the  patient is found to  have unresectable 
disease  at laparotomy and  therefore will  not have the  potential  for the same  post- 
operative complications.  
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
The eligibility  and exclusion criteria  do not discriminate  either explicitly or  implicitly against 
gender, race or ethnicity.  
Potential research  subjects  will be  identified  by a member  of the patient’s  treatment  team,  the 
protocol  investigator or the  research  team at MSKCC. If  the investigator is a  member  of the 
treatment team, s/he will screen  the patient’s medical records for suitable research  study 
participants and discuss the  study and their potential  for enrollment.  
The principal investigators  may also screen  the medical records  of patients with whom  they 
do not have a  treatment  relationship for  the limited  purpose  of identifying  patients who  would 
be eligible  to enroll in the  study and  to record  appropriate contact information in order to 
approach these patients  regarding the possibility of enrolling  in the study.  
All patients scheduled  to undergo pancreaticoduodenectomy  who meet  eligibility  criteria  will 
be approached for participation in the study during the surgical  or anesthetic pre -operative 
visit by a member  of the research  team.  Details pertinent to  the trial,  the expected outcomes 
and the associated  risks and potential  complications will be discussed  before enrollment.  
Informed consent  will be  obtained  by a consenting professional and  documented  in the 
patient’s  chart.  Study  subjects  will not receive  any compensation  for participation in  the 
study.  There will  not be  any additional  costs  for the patients derived from participation.  
During the initial conversation between the investigator/research staff and the patient, the 
patient may be asked to provide certain health information that is necessary  to the 
recruitment  and enrollment process.  The investigator/research  staff may also review portions 
of their medical  records  at MSKCC to further assess  eligibility. They will  use the information 
provided by the  patient  and/or medical  record  to confirm  that the  patient is eligible  and to 
contact  the patient regarding study  enrollment. If the patient turns  out to  be ineligible for the 
research  study, the research  staff will destroy all information collected on the patient during 
the initial  conversation and medical  records  review, except for any  information that must be 
maintained for the screening  log purposes.  
In most  cases,  the initial  contact  with the prospective subject  will be conducted either by  the 
treatment team, investigator or the research  staff working in consultation with the treatment 
team. The recruitment process outlined presents no more than minimal risk to the privacy of 
the patients  who are screened  and minimal  PHI will be  maintained as part  of a screening  log. 
For these reasons  we seek  a (partial) limited waiver of authorization for the purposes of:  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  20 of 38  
 1. Reviewing  medical  records  to identify potential  research  subjects  and obtain 
information relevant to the enrollment process  
2. Conversing  with patients  regarding  possible  enrollment  
3. Handling  of PHI contained  within  those  records  and provided  by the potential  subjects  
4. Maintaining  information  in a screening  log of patients  approached  (if applicable)  
 
 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
All patients  will be evaluated by an  attending  surgeon in  the Hepatopancreaticobiliary 
service. Extent of disease  and potential resectability will be determined using a variety of 
cross -sectional  imaging  and other studies that will vary depending on the underlying 
diagnosis.  Once  a patient is  determined to  be a candidate for pancreaticoduodenectomy  and 
is otherwise  eligible, the patient will  be approached  regarding participation in  the trial.  Prior to 
operation, the following will be performed, all standard before any pancreatic resection:  
1. The patient  will sign informed  consent  for the surgery  
2. The patient  will have  a complete  history  and physical  examination  
3. Patient  demographics  will be recorded  
4. Pre-operative testing  will be obtained  per usual  MSKCC  guidelines  
5. Formal  medical  evaluation  for pre-operative  clearance  will be obtained  if warranted  
6. Chest  radiography  or computed  tomography  scans  will be done  as per surgeon  
7. For women  between the ages of 11 and 50, a negative  serum  pregnancy  test within 
14 days prior to  surgery  or a negative urine pregnancy  test on the  morning  of surgery 
will be obtained  
9.0 TREATMENT/ INTERVENTION  PLAN  
 
The procedures utilized during  this trial incorporate routine anesthesia  and post-operative surgical 
practices  for patients undergoing  proximal pancreatic  resection at our institution.  None of the 
interventions are outside the scope of standard peri -operative  care.  
 
Epidural  Insertion  
 
The patient will be informed  of the intended procedure. The procedure  and the risks  involved  will be 
reviewed with the patient, and all questions will be answered before proceeding. Consent for the 
procedure will  have  been obtained as part of consent  for participation  in the study  as well as implied 
in the consent for surgery.  
 
After evaluation by the  pain service  and administration  of sedation,  the epidural catheter will be 
placed  per usual  pain service  protocol.  Epidurals are  typically placed in  the sitting  or lateral position 
using a loss -of resistance  technique to either air or saline. Epidurals  will be placed at dermatomes 
ranging from  T6 to L1 as is deemed technically  feasible by the Anesthesia Pain Service. During 
performance  of the  epidural  block,  should  a “wet tap” or  a “bloody tap” occur,  another  attempt  will be 
made  through either a higher or lower intervertebral space. All attempts at epidural insertion will  be 
noted, including those that are unsuccessful.  If unable to place the catheter successfully,  patients  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  21 of 38  
 will be provided with  an IV PCA  but recorded  as a PCEA  failure. Those  patients who  do not have an 
epidural catheter successfully  placed will be withdrawn from the study. Prior to the insertion of 
epidural catheter  at the  Pre-Surgical  Center,  randomization  will occur  using  CRDB  on the day  before 
surgery  by the  Research  staff.  Patients receiving EG  will be dosed  at the beginning of the  case  prior 
to surgical incision as described  in section  4.2. All patients  will have  a combination  of local 
anesthetic (bupivacaine) and an  opioid (fentanyl)  using  standard  concentrations  routinely used  by 
Anesthesia Pain Service post -operatively  as described in section  4.2 
 
Intra -Operative  Considerations  
 
According  to our current  practice,  induction  and intubation will  be carried  out in a standard  fashion  and 
as described in Section  4.2 Intervention.  The patient will be placed on positive pressure  ventilation. 
An additional  intravenous catheter may be placed per usual Anesthetic practice. Patients may  have 
an arterial line placed during surgery as clinically required for hemodynamic  monitoring.  
 
All patients will have continuous monitoring of heart rate, blood pressure,  electrocardiogram tracing, 
end-tidal carbon dioxide, oxygen saturation, temperature and BIS or other cerebral monitor. Blood 
loss and urine  output will be  recorded. All  care will be  per usual standard  of care  at MSK.  
 
The anesthetic technique will be according to treatment arm as described above in Section 4.2. 
Patients on the EG arm will be evaluated for epidural function intraoperatively by monitoring the 
patient’s  need  for additional  depth  of general  anesthesia.  This information  will be documented  and the 
epidural will be evaluated  post operatively as described below.  
 
Post-operatively, all patients will be transferred to the PACU and then to the surgical ward at the 
discretion of the treatment team. Epidural analgesia will be provided  as described in Section 4.2.  
 
Assessing  Epidural  Function  Post -operatively  
 
If there is concern  for epidural malfunction, defined as inadequate pain control in the PACU despite 
adequate  use of the epidural  and after 3 CABs,  lidocaine  1% will be administered  (5-10ml  as tolerated 
by hemodynamics) and then pain relief will be documented, when achieved. The pain service will 
assess epidural function post -operatively as per their protocol.  
 
Upon initial complaint  of pain, the  bedside RN  will encourage  the patient to  utilize the  PCEA. The  RN 
may also give additional boluses through the epidural. If the patient still complains of pain, the pain 
service  will be consulted.  Lidocaine  1%, 5 – 10 mls can be given  by the pain service  to assess  epidural 
function. Pain scores  will be documented before and after interventions. Ketorolac may be added at 
the discretion of the surgical service. If patient is still without relief, IV opioid may be utilized to 
supplement pain management.  
 
Epidural  Failure  
 
If epidural placement fails pre -operatively the patient will be withdrawn from the study. If epidural 
failure  is suspected  intra-operatively  because  of increasing  requirements for general anesthesia,  this 
will be noted in the intra -operative  record  and the epidural  will be assessed  as described above. If  it 
is felt that the epidural is not working adequately post -operatively, the catheter will be removed and 
the patient  will be analyzed on an intention  to treat basis.  
 
Epidural  Removal  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  22 of 38  
 Epidural catheters  are assessed  daily for function and will be discontinued per usual MSK 
guidelines. Low  molecular  weight  heparin (LMWH) medications  will not  be administered  to patients 
enrolled in the  trial. Should LMWH heparin have been  prescribed, an  interval of  at least 24  hours 
must  pass  prior to removal  of the epidural. Other anticoagulants  (if prescribed)  will be  handled  per 
usual protocol of the pain service as described here: 
http://vsmskpweb02:9068/painservice/guides/anticoags.htm ) Routine  subcutaneous  unfractionated 
heparin will  be used  as standard Deep  Vein Thrombosis  (DVT) prophylaxis and will  not be 
discontinued  for catheter  removal  as per  institutional standards. Epidural catheters  will be  removed 
per usual  pain service  protocol,  usually on  POD  3 or 4, or sooner  if not functioning.  Documentation 
and time  of removal will be documented by  the Anesthesia Pain Service in their routine notes.  
 
 
10.0 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
• Pre-operative  data will be recorded, including name, medical record number, case  number, 
date of birth, weight, height and laboratory values.  
• Pre-operative vital signs  will be recorded  including MAP.  
• Standard  intra-operative  monitoring  as described  above  will be  carried  out for all patients.  
• Assessment  and recording of all complications for the primary endpoint, intra -operative  and 
post-operative; the latter includes any complications occurring on, or after, POD0  (includes 
intraoperative  complications) until POD 90.  
• Estimated  operative  blood  loss and urine  output  will be recorded.  
• Cumulative  intra-operative  and post-operative  volume  of IV fluids  used  will be recorded  (colloid 
and crystalloid will be recorded separately).  
• Peri-operative blood product  transfusion  will be recorded.  
• Post-operatively the pain service along with nursing will provide a daily progress note that 
includes a report of any epidural -related side effects (nausea, vomiting, itching, sedation 
(RASS),  respiratory or mental status  changes), tolerance of oral intake, proper functioning of 
the epidural catheter  and catheter  complications,  including  infection,  hematoma,  and abscess.  
• Pain Scores  will be documented  by Nurses  using  a NRS  on the Analgesic  Infusion  Form.  
• A complete  blood  count  will be obtained  for three  days,  or until the day of  epidural  removal.  
• If applicable, daily nasogastric  tube (NGT) drainage volume and  duration of  NGT use  will be 
recorded.  
• Day of Foley catheter removal  (as per MSKCC  protocol)  and urinary retention will be 
recorded.  
• The day of tolerance  of oral intake  of fluids  more  than 400mL/24hrs  will be recorded.  
• The day of tolerance  of solid food will be recorded.  
• The day of passage  of flatus  and/or  feces  (return  of bowel  function)  will be recorded.  
• Assessment  of post operative  delirium by nursing  using  the CAM99 tool will be  performed 
once per 12 hour shift and documented  in the Nursing Delirium Assessment  Flowsheet. 
(Appendix 2.)  
• The day of  meeting discharge  criteria as  well as the  actual day  of discharge  will be 
documented.  
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
The use of an epidural catheter  has rarely been  associated  with severe  complications.  The 
incidence  of complications,  such  as nerve damage, epidural hematoma  and CNS infection  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  23 of 38  
 occurs is less than 1 in 10,000 patients.100 Suspicion  of an epidural hematoma or abscess, 
according  to the institutional  practices,  necessitates  imaging  (MRI of  the spine)  for diagnosis 
and subsequent evaluation from the neurosurgery service. The differences in anesthetic 
management are within accepted  peri-operative  standards and should not pose any 
additional morbidity to the patients enrolled.  
For data collection, all complications  of grade 3  or higher,  including those  felt to  be 
associated  with the epidural catheter, as defined by Martin et  al101 and based  on Clavien et 
al1,2,102  and Dindo,3 will be collected and reported to the IRB within 5 days as is standard 
practice. The Hepatopancreaticobiliary  (HPB) service runs a biweekly meeting in which all 
complications  are discussed  and prospectively recorded into the Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Surgical  Secondary  Events Program Database.  An anesthesia  research  study  assistant  will 
query the Memorial  Sloan Kettering Surgical Secondary  Events Program Database at 30 
days post -operatively to collect morbidity  data for patients enrolled in the study.  
 
 
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR  THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
The primary  objective  of this study  is: 
 
To determine whether EG  anesthesia, as opposed  to GA, affects  the incidence  of grade 3 or 
greater complications  in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy  and will  be assessed 
during the patients’ hospitalization, readmissions,  and follow -up reports from outside 
institutions sent to the  surgeon’s office. Complications  will be  graded in  severity according  to 
the MSKCC Graded Post  Operative Complications Criteria based on the modified Dindo, 
Clavien classification  of surgical  complications,  a grading system commonly  used  for this 
procedure.3,4 This classification  grades complications from 1 -5, with Grade 1 complications 
requiring bedside intervention.  Grade 2  requires moderate  interventions, such  as intravenous 
medications.  Grade 3 requires either a surgical,  endoscopic or interventional  radiology 
procedure  for treatment.  Grade 4 results  in chronic deficit  or disability.  Grade 5  complications 
result in death. The criteria can be found at on the MSK intranet at 
https://one.mskcc.org/sites/pub/surgery/Pages/Secondary -Events.aspx . Complication  data 
will be collected for 90 days  post operatively.  
 
The secondary  objectives  are: 
1) to determine whether EG  anesthesia  affects overall survival at 2  years, based  on the 
data showing  that the EG  technique as  outlined  has less of  a detrimental effect  on the 
patients’ immune  systems.  Patients who have a pathologic  diagnosis of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma  will be evaluated  for this endpoint  and the survival  data and date  of 
death obtained from the CRDB  status update report.  
2) to evaluate  the effect  of an  EG technique on  LOS. 
The exploratory objectives is:  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  24 of 38  
 To determine if  EG decreases  the incidence of  post operative delirium  as compared 
to GA.  This will be assessed  by nursing once per shift (twice daily) using the CAM 
tool and documented in the Nursing Delirium Assessment  flowsheet.  
 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL  FROM  STUDY  
A subject  may be removed  from the study  at any time  if the attending surgeon  or anesthesia 
provider deems  it necessary  for patient safety, or if the patient expresses desire to be 
removed.  If a patient is transferred  to the Intensive Care  Unit (ICU), s/he  will have that 
recorded as a Grade 3 complication for the primary  endpoint.  Management will continue in 
the patient’s  best interests and according to ICU guidelines.  
Any patient who  experiences any  complication intra -operatively  related  to the  epidural will 
have the  medication  stopped and  will continue  with GA. Any patient who experiences any 
complication post -operatively related to the epidural catheter will have that catheter 
evaluated  by the pain service  and removed  if necessary  and will  then continue  with IV PCA. 
Those patients will continue on study  and analyzed as intention to treat.  
 
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
This is  a randomized  comparison  of Epidural -General  Anesthesia (EG) versus the standard of care 
General  Anesthesia  (GA), both  with post-operative  epidural  analgesia, among  patients who  undergo 
Pancreaticoduodenectomy.  The primary  endpoint  is major  post-operative complications  (Grade 3  or 
higher). Results  from a previous  trial indicated a 33% major complication rate in the GA arm 
(proportion of patients with Grade 3 or higher post -operative complications).6,7 Hence, we  are 
interested in a decrease in complication rate to  20% in the EG arm.  
The evaluable  sample size  is 366 patients  (183 per arm). The randomization will be 1:1 into two 
arms,  stratified by neoadjuvant  chemotherapy  status  (yes/no). The proportion of patients who 
experience a major complication will be estimated separately for each arm.  We will use a Cochran - 
Mantel -Haenszel test after adjusting for neo adjuvant status to  determine  the association  between 
treatment arm  and the  proportion  of patients who  experience major complications.  Although  our 
primary  analysis is based  on a Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel  test, the power  calculation is  based  on an 
un-stratified Chi -square test,  which provides  a more  conservative estimate  of the required sample 
size. A sample  size of 366 provides 80% power for detecting a decrease  from 33% to 20% major 
complication rate with two sided type I error rate of 5% between the two arms.  This reduction was 
selected  as the point at which  the benefit  of EG  would  warrant a  change in  peri-operative  practice.  
This sample  size also allows for one interim analysis at halfway through enrollment, using Lan - 
DeMets  spending  function with  O’Brien -Fleming  boundaries  for both efficacy  and futility.  If p≤0.002 
at the interim analysis,  then enrollment  will stop  with the conclusion  that the EG  significantly reduces 
major complication  rate. If p≥0.0719 at the  interim analysis, enrollment will  stop for futility  with the 
conclusion  that there  is no evidence  that EG  significantly decrease  major  complication  rates. If 0.002  
<p<0.719,  the trial will continue  to completion,  and we will conclude  that EG significantly  reduces  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  25 of 38  
 major complication  rates if p≤0.049. The  boundaries above are  based  on the planned interim 
analysis with  50% of  the data collected.  The actual  timing  of the interim analysis will  correspond  to 
when the DSMB meets;  hence, the final stopping boundaries will be calculated based on the 
information fraction at the time  of the actual interim  analysis.  
Evaluable  patients are  randomized  patients who  completed  surgery  without pre -specified  violation  of 
intra-operative  criteria, specifically  if the patient was  found to be unresectable in the surgical  room.  
We anticipate the surgical unresectable rate to be 20%; hence, over -accrual may occur  in order to 
ensure  at least  366 evaluable  patients for  80% power.  The number  of patients who  are excluded due 
to unresectability will be summarized  by arm and compared  using the chi -square test. Based on an 
expected accrual  of ten patients per month,  we anticipate the time  to completion to be 3 to 4 years. 
Follow -up will continue for at least two years for each patient (to establish 2 year survival).We will 
utilize logistic regression  to estimate the association between the treatment arms and major post - 
operative complications,  after testing  for potential  peri-operative/post -operative  confounders such  as 
co-morbidities,  neoadjuvant  chemotherapy status,  and adjuvant  chemotherapy status.  
The secondary  endpoints  include  overall  survival  at two  years and  LOS, defined as duration 
between operation (POD  0) and discharge  from the hospital. Overall  survival of patients will  be 
summarized  by the Kaplan -Meier  approach in  each  arm. Median  survival  and 2 -year overall survival 
will be presented, along with  95% confidence  intervals  for the  entire cohort and the  subset  of 
adenocarcinoma patients. The comparison  of interest in terms of overall  survival will be performed 
among  patients with adenocarcinoma  (estimated  to be approximately 60%  of population)  and based 
on the final pathology.  Overall survival will be compared  between the two arms  using the log -rank 
test. Cox proportional  hazards models will be utilized to assess the  association between treatment 
arms  and the survival endpoint, including potential  adjustment  factors (co -morbidities,  neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy, and adjuvant chemotherapy).  
Analysis  of the secondary  endpoint  of LOS  will utilize  the two -sample  t-test to compare  the two  arms 
(with  appropriate transformation  of the  data based  on distribution of the endpoint)  in the  entire 
cohort. Linear  regression  will be utilized  to assess the relationship  between treatment arms and 
LOS, including potential adjustment factors (co -morbidities,  neoadjuvant  chemotherapy, and 
adjuvant chemotherapy).  
As exploratory  analyses,  we will compare  the two  treatment  arms  in terms  of one additional  outcome 
in the whole  cohort:  post-operative delirium status  (measured  daily until POD4).  Delirium status  will 
be analyzed with  logistic regression  including treatment arms  and other potential adjustment factors 
(co-morbidities,  neoadjuvant  chemotherapy, and adjuvant  chemotherapy).  
Analyses will  be performed  under the modified  intent to  treat (m -ITT) principle: all  evaluable  patients 
(as described above) will be analyzed in the randomized  arm. Additional  results from  as-treated 
analyses (based on actual treatment the patients received) will be reported.  
 
 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT  REGISTRATION  AND  RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES  
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  26 of 38  
 Confirm  eligibility  as defined in the section entitled Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria. Obtain 
informed consent, by following procedures defined in section  entitled  Informed Consent 
Procedures.  During the registration process registering individuals  will be required to 
complete  a protocol  specific  Eligibility  Checklist.  The individual  signing  the Eligibility  Checklist 
is confirming  whether or not the participant is  eligible  to enroll in the  study. Study staff are 
responsible  for ensuring that all institutional requirements necessary  to enroll a participant to 
the study have been completed. See related Clinical Research  Policy and Procedure #401 
(Protocol Participant Registration).  
15.2 Randomization  
The study will be conducted in a prospective randomized fashion. During the registration 
process,  registering individuals  will complete a protocol specific Eligibility  Checklist. After 
eligibility  is established and  consent  is obtained,  patients  will be  registered as described  in 
Section 15.1.  
Randomization will  occur  on the  day before surgery, prior to  the placement of epidural 
catheter  at the Pre -Surgical  Center.  Randomization  will be done using  randomly  sized 
permuted blocks. There will be a total of 366 patients recruited for this study  with 183  
patients in each  arm. Patients will be  approached and  consented  during a  pre-operative  clinic 
appointment. Randomization  will be done  in a 1:1 fashion  to either the EG  or GA intra - 
operative management using CRDB.  and stratified to neoadjuvant  chemotherapy status 
(yes/no). The use  of the post -operative epidural for analgesia will be common  to all patients.  
 
 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT  ISSUES  
A clinical research  coordinator  (CRC)  will be assigned to the study. The responsibilities  of 
the CRC  include project compliance,  patient  registration, data collection, abstraction and 
entry, data  reporting, regulatory monitoring, problem resolution  and prioritization and 
coordination of the activities of the protocol study  team. The CRC  will be integrated  into 
current weekly and monthly meetings where complications are recorded, procedures 
reviewed and  outcomes  documented.  The PI  will personally meet  with the  CRC  on a weekly 
basis to assist  with and review the collection and entry of data.  
All collected  data will  only be used  for the  purposes of the study. It will be  maintained in  a 
confidential clinical research database by research  study personnel only under the direct 
supervision of the principal investigator. The database will be kept in a password  protected 
computer  and will  not be  transferred  outside the  hospital network.  A minimum  dataset  will be 
kept in  CRDB.  The data will  be linked to the  patients by  means  of unique tracking  subject 
numbers,  the key to which will also be password  protected and only  to be accessed  by 
research  personal. Data will be reported to the IRB as required.  
DATA  TO BE COLLECTED  
• Name  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  27 of 38  
 • MRN  
• Date  of birth 
• Date  of operation  
• Sex 
• ASA status  
• Race  
• Height  
• Weight  
• BMI 
• Presence  of pre-operative  biliary  stent 
• Comorbidities  
• Medications  
• Neo adjuvant  chemo  
• Labs  
o CBC  (daily  x 3 days)  
• Volume  and types  of fluids  intraop,  including  blood  products  
• Estimated  blood  loss 
• Urine  output  and presence  of urinary  retention  
• Use of drain  
• NGT  drainage,  if used 
• Pancreatic  consistency  
• Pancreatic  duct size 
• Biliary  duct size 
• Reconstruction  and pancreatic  anastomosis  
• Surgery  start and end times  
• Pathology  including  grade  
• Stage  of disease  
• POD  NGT  is removed,  if used  
• POD  patient tolerates  liquids  400ml  or greater  
• POD  patient tolerates  solids  
• POD  Foley  catheter  is removed  
• POD  patient  passes  gas or feces  
• Presence  of delayed  gastric  emptying103 
• Post-operative  pain scores  twice  daily x 3 days 
• Function/failure  of epidural  catheter  
• POD  epidural  catheter  is removed  
• Grade 3  or greater complications  as described  according  to the MSKCC  Graded 
Post-operative Complications Criteria  
• CAM  tool delirium  assessment  twice  daily99 
• Overall  2 year survival  for patients  with adenoca  
• Date  of death  
• Cause  of death  (if known)  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  28 of 38  
 • POD  patient  is ready  for discharge  
• POD  of discharge  
• LOS 
• Administration  of adjuvant  chemo  
16.1 Quality  Assurance  
Weekly  registration reports will be generated  to monitor patient accruals  and completeness 
of registration data. Routine data quality reports will be generated to assess  missing  data 
and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates and  extent  and accuracy  of evaluations  and follow -up will 
be monitored periodically throughout the study  period and potential problems  will be  brought 
to the attention of the study team for discussion  and action.  
Random sample  data quality and protocol  compliance  audits will be  conducted  by the  study 
team at a minimum of two times per year, more frequently if indicated.  
The principal investigator will maintain  final responsibility for the maintenance, quality and 
integrity of all data  collection  during the study  and during the final analysis of  data. Breaches 
of protocol, problems  with eligibility,  informed  consent  or discrepancies  in data accuracy  will 
be reported to the IRB at MSKCC as required.  
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
The Data  and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plans  at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer  Center 
were  approved by  the National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001. The  plans address  the 
new policies set forth by the NCI in the Document  entitled  ”Policy  of the National  Cancer 
Institute for Data and Safety Monitoring  of Clinical Trials,” which can  be found at: 
http://cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/conducting/dsm -guidelines . The DSM  Plans  at MSKCC  were 
established and are monitored by the Office  of Clinical Research.  The MSKCC Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plans can  be found on  the MSKCC Intranet  at: 
http:/mskweb5.mskcc.org/intranet/assets/tables/content/359709/DSMPlans07.pdf . 
There  are several  different mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials are  monitored for  data,  safety 
and quality. There are institutional processes in place for quality  assurance  (e.g. protocol 
monitoring, compliance  and data verification audits, therapeutic response, and staff 
education on clinical research  QA) and departmental procedures  for quality control. In 
addition,  there are two institutional  committees that  are responsible for monitoring the 
activities of our clinical trials programs.  The committees:  Data  and Safety Monitoring 
Committee  (DSMC) for Phase I and II clinical trials, and the Data and Safety  Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for Phase  III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research  Council and 
Institutional Review Board.  
During the protocol development and review process,  each protocol will be assessed  for its 
level of risk  and degree of  monitoring required. Every  type of  protocol (e.g.  NIH sponsored,  in 
house sponsored, industrial sponsored,  NCI cooperative group, etc.) will be addressed  and 
the monitoring procedures will be established at the time  of protocol activation.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  29 of 38  
  
 
17.0 PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
▪ The responsible PI will ensure that this study  is conducted in agreement with the 
declaration  of Helsinki  (Tokyo, Venice, Hong King,  Somerset  West  and Edinburgh 
amendments).  The study  will seek  to protect  the rights of  human  subjects  in every 
way. 
▪ The potential  risks,  including adverse drug  reactions and  potential  benefits in terms  of 
post-operative recovery will be discussed  in detail with the patients.  
▪ Potential  side effects  will also be discussed  with the patients.  
▪ No patient will  be required to  participate in  the study  and participation, or  refusal  to do 
so, will not affect the patient’s  care or treatment.  
▪ The patient  will not incur  any financial  cost as a result  of participation  in the study.  
▪ Participation will  be purely voluntary, and subjects  will not be  reimbursed  for 
participation in the study.  
▪ Throughout  the study,  patient confidentiality  will be maintained. No  results  of the 
study  will be  presented  or discussed  in a fashion  that will allow  identification  of a 
particular patient  in the study.  
All adverse  events  will be fully disclosed  to the IRB in a timely  fashion  as required.  
17.1 Privacy  
MSK’s Privacy Office  may allow the use and disclosure  of protected health information 
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use  and disclosure  of 
protected health information will be limited to the individuals  described  in the Research 
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed by the Principal 
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board (IRB/PB).  
 
The consent  indicates  that individualized  de identified  information  collected  for the  purposes 
of this study may be shared with other qualified  researchers.  Only researchers who  have 
received approval from  MSK will be  allowed to  access  this information which  will not  include 
protected health information, such  as the participant’s name,  except for dates. It is also 
stated in the Research  Authorization  that their research  data may  be shared with other 
qualified researchers.  
 
 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE)  Reporting  
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An adverse  event that results  in inpatient hospitalization  or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  30 of 38  
 • A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial disruption of the  ability  to conduct 
normal life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Important Medical Events (IME)  that may not result  in death, be  life-threatening,  or 
require hospitalization may  be considered  serious  when,  based upon  medical  judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical  or surgical 
intervention  to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in this definition  
Note : Hospital admission  for a planned procedure/disease  treatment  is not  considered  an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting is required as soon  as the participant starts  investigational 
treatment/intervention.  SAE reporting is  required for 30 -days after the  participant’s last 
investigational treatment/  intervention.  Any event that  occur  after the  30-day period that  is 
unexpected and  at least possibly related to protocol treatment must  be reported.  
 
Please  note: Any  SAE that occurs  prior to the start  of investigational  treatment/intervention 
and is related  to a screening  test or procedure  (i.e., a screening  biopsy)  must  be reported.  
 
All SAEs must  be submitted in PIMS.  If an SAE requires submission  to the HRPP office per 
IRB SOP  RR-408 ‘Reporting of Serious  Adverse Events’, the SAE report must  be submitted 
within 5  calendar  days of event. All other SAEs  must  be submitted  within 30  calendar days of 
event.  
 
 
 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (s) 
• If the AE was expected  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o An explanation  of how the AE  was handled  
o A description  of the subject’s  condition  
o Indication  if the participant  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated Problem 
For IND/IDE  protocols:  
The SAE report  should be  completed  as per above instructions.  If appropriate,  the report  will 
be forwarded to the FDA  by the IND Office.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  31 of 38  
 17.2.1   
 
There  is no additional  SAE reporting  information  required  by the drug supplier.  
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
Before protocol -specified procedures are carried out,  consenting professionals will  explain 
full details of the  protocol  and study  procedures as  well as  the risks  involved  to participants 
prior to their inclusion in  the study. Participants  will also  be informed  that they are  free to 
withdraw from  the study  at any time. All participants must  sign an IRB/PB -approved consent 
form indicating their consent to participate. This consent  form meets  the requirements of the 
Code  of Federal Regulations and  the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center. 
The consent form will include the following:  
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study. (This will  include available  standard  and 
investigational therapies.  In addition,  patients will  be offered  an option  of supportive 
care for therapeutic studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of  the participant to  accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol  specific  procedures can  be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient privacy concerning research  specific  information. In 
addition to signing the IRB Informed Consent, all patients must  agree to the Research 
Authorization  component  of the informed consent form.  
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign  the consent  form.  The participant must 
receive a copy of the signed informed consent  form.  
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Clavien PA, Barkun  J, de  Oliveira ML,  et al. The Clavien -Dindo classification  of surgical 
complications:  five-year experience. Annals of surgery.  2009;250(2):187 -196. 
2. Clavien  PA, Strasberg  SM. Severity grading  of surgical  complications.  Annals of  surgery.  
2009;250(2):197 -198. 
3. Dindo  D, Demartines  N, Clavien PA. Classification  of surgical  complications:  a new proposal 
with evaluation  in a cohort of 6336 patients and results  of a survey. Annals of surgery. 
2004;240(2):205 -213. 
4. Grobmyer SR, Pieracci  FM, Allen PJ, Brennan MF, Jaques DP.  Defining morbidity after 
pancreaticoduodenectomy:  use of a prospective  complication  grading system.  Journal  of the 
American  College of Surgeons. 2007;204(3):356 -364. 
5. Shakhar  G, Ben-Eliyahu  S. Potential  prophylactic  measures  against  postoperative  
immunosuppression:  could  they reduce  recurrence  rates  in oncological  patients?  Annals of 
surgical oncology. 2003;10(8):972 -992. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  32 of 38  
 6. Grant  F, Brennan  MF, Allen PJ, et  al. Prospective  Randomized  Controlled Trial  of Liberal Vs 
Restricted  Perioperative  Fluid  Management in  Patients  Undergoing Pancreatectomy.  Annals 
of surgery. 2016;264(4):591 -598. 
7. Grant  FM, Protic  M, Gonen  M, Allen  P, Brennan  MF. Intraoperative  fluid management  and 
complications  following pancreatectomy.  J Surg  Oncol.  2013;107(5):529 -535. 
8. Aahlin  EK, Olsen  F, Uleberg  B, Jacobsen  BK, Lassen  K. Major  postoperative complications 
are associated with impaired long -term survival after gastro -esophageal and pancreatic 
cancer  surgery: a complete national  cohort  study.  BMC surgery.  2016;16(1):32.  
9. Kang CM, Kim DH, Choi GH, Kim KS, Choi JS, Lee WJ.  Detrimental effect of postoperative 
complications on oncologic efficacy of R0  pancreatectomy in ductal adenocarcinoma  of the 
pancreas.  Journal  of gastrointestinal surgery  : official journal of  the Society  for Surgery  of the 
Alimentary Tract. 2009;13(5):907 -914. 
10. Tokunaga  M, Tanizawa  Y, Bando  E, Kawamura  T, Terashima  M. Poor  survival rate  in 
patients  with postoperative  intra-abdominal  infectious  complications  following  curative 
gastrectomy  for gastric cancer. Annals of surgical oncology. 2013;20(5):1575 -1583.  
11. Khuri  SF, Henderson WG,  DePalma  RG, et al. Determinants  of long -term survival after  major 
surgery and the adverse effect of postoperative complications. Annals of surgery. 
2005;242(3):326 -341; discussion 341 -323. 
12. Artinyan  A, Orcutt  ST, Anaya  DA, Richardson  P, Chen  GJ, Berger  DH. Infectious  
postoperative complications decrease long -term survival in patients undergoing curative 
surgery  for colorectal  cancer:  a study  of 12,075 patients.  Annals of surgery.  2015;261(3):497 - 
505. 
13. Mavros MN,  de Jong  M, Dogeas  E, Hyder  O, Pawlik TM. Impact  of complications  on long - 
term survival after resection  of colorectal  liver metastases.  Br J Surg.  2013;100(5):711 -718. 
14. Cho JY, Han HS, Yoon YS, Hwang DW,  Jung  K, Kim YK. Postoperative complications 
influence prognosis and  recurrence  patterns in periampullary cancer.  World  journal of 
surgery.  2013;37(9):2234 -2241.  
15. Howard TJ,  Krug  JE, Yu J, et  al. A margin -negative R0  resection  accomplished  with minimal 
postoperative complications  is the  surgeon's contribution  to long -term survival in  pancreatic 
cancer.  Journal of gastrointestinal surgery  : official journal of the Society  for Surgery  of the 
Alimentary Tract. 2006;10(10):1338 -1345;  discussion  1345 -1336.  
16. Grass  JA. The role  of epidural  anesthesia  and analgesia  in postoperative  outcome.  
Anesthesiol  Clin North  America.  2000;18(2):407 -428, viii. 
17. Moraca RJ,  Sheldon DG,  Thirlby RC.  The role of  epidural anesthesia  and analgesia in 
surgical practice. Annals of surgery. 2003;238(5):663 -673. 
18. Rigg JR, Jamrozik  K, Myles  PS, et al.  Design  of the multicenter  Australian  study  of epidural 
anesthesia and analgesia in major surgery: the MASTER  trial. Control Clin Trials. 
2000;21(3):244 -256. 
19. Rigg JR, Jamrozik  K, Myles  PS, et al.  Epidural anaesthesia  and analgesia and  outcome  of 
major surgery: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359(9314):1276 -1282.  
20. Fotiadis  RJ, Badvie  S, Weston  MD, Allen -Mersh  TG. Epidural analgesia in  gastrointestinal  
surgery.  Br J Surg.  2004;91(7):828 -841. 
21. Holte K,  Kehlet H. Epidural analgesia and  risk of anastomotic  leakage.  Regional anesthesia 
and pain medicine. 2001;26(2):111 -117. 
22. Mann  C, Pouzeratte  Y, Boccara  G, et al. Comparison  of intravenous or  epidural  patient - 
controlled analgesia in the elderly after major abdominal surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2000;92(2):433 -441. 
23. Pratt  WB, Steinbrook RA, Maithel SK,  Vanounou T,  Callery MP, Vollmer CM, Jr.  Epidural 
analgesia for  pancreatoduodenectomy: a  critical  appraisal. Journal of  gastrointestinal surgery  
: official  journal  of the Society  for Surgery of  the Alimentary  Tract.  2008;12(7):1207 -1220.  
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  33 of 38  
 24. Amini  A, Patanwala  AE, Maegawa FB,  et al. Effect  of epidural analgesia  on postoperative 
complications following pancreaticoduodenectomy. Am J Surg. 2012;204(6):1000 -1004; 
discussion  1004 -1006.  
25. Sanford  DE, Hawkins  WG, Fields  RC. Improved  peri-operative  outcomes  with epidural  
analgesia  in patients undergoing a pancreatectomy:  a nationwide  analysis. HPB : the official 
journal of the International  Hepato Pancreato Biliary Association.  2015;17(6):551 -558. 
26. Amini N, Kim  Y, Hyder O, et al. A nationwide  analysis of the  use and outcomes  of 
perioperative epidural  analgesia  in patients  undergoing hepatic  and pancreatic  surgery. Am J 
Surg. 2015;210(3):483 -491. 
27. Axelrod TM,  Mendez BM, Abood  GJ, Sinacore  JM, Aranha  GV, Shoup  M. Peri-operative 
epidural may  not be  the preferred form  of analgesia in select patients undergoing 
pancreaticoduodenectomy. J Surg Oncol. 2015;111(3):306 -310. 
28. Aloia  TA, Kim  BJ, Segraves -Chun  YS, et  al. A Randomized  Controlled Trial of  Postoperative 
Thoracic  Epidural Analgesia Versus Intravenous Patient -controlled Analgesia After Major 
Hepatopancreatobiliary  Surgery. Annals of surgery.  2017;266(3):545 -554. 
29. Ogawa  K, Hirai M, Katsube  T, et al. Suppression  of cellular  immunity  by surgical  stress.  
Surgery.  2000;127(3):329 -336. 
30. Biki B, Mascha  E, Moriarty  DC, Fitzpatrick  JM, Sessler  DI, Buggy DJ.  Anesthetic technique 
for radical prostatectomy  surgery affects cancer recurrence:  a retrospective analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 2008;109(2):180 -187. 
31. Brittenden  J, Heys  SD, Ross  J, Eremin  O. Natural  killer cells and cancer.  Cancer.  
1996;77(7):1226 -1243.  
32. Ben-Eliyahu S, Page GG, Yirmiya R, Shakhar G. Evidence that stress  and surgical 
interventions promote  tumor  development by  suppressing  natural killer cell  activity.  Int J 
Cancer.  1999;80(6):880 -888. 
33. Cristaldi  M, Rovati  M, Elli  M, et al. Lymphocytic  subpopulation  changes  after open  and 
laparoscopic  cholecystectomy:  a prospective  and comparative  study  on 38  patients. Surg 
Laparosc Endosc. 1997;7(3):255 -261. 
34. Leaver HA, Craig SR,  Yap PL,  Walker  WS. Lymphocyte  responses  following open and 
minimally invasive thoracic surgery. Eur J Clin Invest.  2000;30(3):230 -238. 
35. Lennard TW,  Shenton BK,  Borzotta  A, et al. The  influence of  surgical  operations on 
components of the human immune  system. Br J Surg. 1985;72(10):771 -776. 
36. Coffey  JC, Wang  JH, Smith  MJ, Bouchier -Hayes  D, Cotter  TG, Redmond  HP. Excisional 
surgery for cancer  cure: therapy at a cost. Lancet Oncol.  2003;4(12):760 -768. 
37. Pollock RE, Lotzova E, Stanford  SD. Surgical  stress impairs natural killer  cell programming 
of tumor  for lysis in  patients  with sarcomas  and other solid  tumors.  Cancer.  1992;70(8):2192 - 
2202.  
38. Pollock  RE, Babcock  GF, Romsdahl  MM, Nishioka K.  Surgical  stress -mediated  suppression 
of murine natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Cancer Res.  1984;44(9):3888 -3891.  
39. Fujisawa  T, Yamaguchi Y. Autologous tumor  killing activity as a  prognostic factor  in primary 
resected  nonsmall cell carcinoma  of the lung.  Cancer.  1997;79(3):474 -481. 
40. Levy SM, Herberman RB,  Maluish  AM, Schlien  B, Lippman M. Prognostic  risk assessment  in 
primary breast cancer  by behavioral and immunological parameters. Health Psychol. 
1985;4(2):99 -113. 
41. Schantz  SP, Brown  BW, Lira E,  Taylor DL,  Beddingfield N. Evidence for  the role of  natural 
immunity in the control of metastatic spread of head and neck cancer.  Cancer  Immunol 
Immunother.  1987;25(2):141 -148. 
42. Tartter  PI, Steinberg  B, Barron  DM, Martinelli  G. The  prognostic  significance  of natural  killer 
cytotoxicity in patients  with colorectal cancer. Arch Surg. 1987;122(11):1264 -1268.  
43. Arya SK,  Wong -Staal  F, Gallo RC.  Dexamethasone -mediated  inhibition  of human  T cell 
growth  factor  and gamma -interferon  messenger  RNA.  J Immunol.  1984;133(1):273 -276. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  34 of 38  
 44. Larsson  EL. Cyclosporin  A and dexamethasone  suppress  T cell responses  by selectively 
acting at distinct  sites of the triggering  process. J Immunol.  1980;124(6):2828 -2833.  
45. Palacios R,  Sugawara  I. Hydrocortisone  abrogates proliferation  of T cells  in autologous 
mixed  lymphocyte reaction  by rendering the interleukin -2 Producer  T cells unresponsive  to 
interleukin -1 and unable to synthesize  the T -cell growth factor. Scand J Immunol. 
1982;15(1):25 -31. 
46. Vallina VL, Velasco  JM. The  influence  of laparoscopy  on lymphocyte  subpopulations  in the 
surgical patient. Surg Endosc. 1996;10(5):481 -484. 
47. Decker D,  Lindemann C, Springer W,  Low A, Hirner A, von Ruecker A. Endoscopic  vs 
conventional  hernia repair from  an immunologic  point of  view.  Surg  Endosc.  1999;13(4):335 - 
339. 
48. Ishikawa  M, Nishioka  M, Hanaki  N, et al. Perioperative  immune  responses  in cancer  patients  
undergoing  digestive  surgeries.  World  J Surg  Oncol.  2009;7:7.  
49. de Coupade C,  Gear  RW, Dazin  PF, Sroussi  HY, Green PG,  Levine  JD. Beta 2-adrenergic 
receptor regulation of human neutrophil function is sexually dimorphic. Br J Pharmacol. 
2004;143(8):1033 -1041.  
50. Tonnesen  E. Immunological aspects  of anaesthesia  and surgery --with special  reference  to 
NK cells. Dan Med Bull. 1989;36(3):263 -281. 
51. Brand  JM, Kirchner  H, Poppe  C, Schmucker  P. The effects  of general  anesthesia  on human  
peripheral  immune  cell distribution  and cytokine  production.  Clin Immunol  Immunopathol.  
1997;83(2):190 -194. 
52. Melamed R, Bar -Yosef S, Shakhar G, Shakhar K, Ben -Eliyahu  S. Suppression  of natural 
killer cell  activity  and promotion  of tumor  metastasis  by ketamine, thiopental, and halothane, 
but not by propofol: mediating mechanisms and  prophylactic  measures. Anesth  Analg. 
2003;97(5):1331 -1339.  
53. Kitamura  T, Ohno  N, Bougaki  M, Ogawa  M, Yamada  Y. [Comparison  of the effects  of 
sevoflurane  and propofol  on changes  in leukocyte -count  induced  by surgical  stress].  Masui.  
2008;57(8):968 -972. 
54. Markovic  SN, Knight  PR, Murasko  DM. Inhibition  of interferon  stimulation  of natural  killer cell 
activity in mice  anesthetized with halothane or isoflurane. Anesthesiology. 1993;78(4):700 - 
706. 
55. Mitsuhata  H, Shimizu  R, Yokoyama  MM. Suppressive  effects of volatile  anesthetics  on 
cytokine release  in human  peripheral blood mononuclear  cells.  Int J Immunopharmacol. 
1995;17(6):529 -534. 
56. Vallejo  R, de Leon -Casasola  O, Benyamin  R. Opioid  therapy and immunosuppression:  a 
review. Am J Ther. 2004;11(5):354 -365. 
57. Gupta K, Kshirsagar  S, Chang  L, et al. Morphine  stimulates  angiogenesis by  activating 
proangiogenic and survival -promoting signaling and  promotes breast  tumor  growth. Cancer 
Res. 2002;62(15):4491 -4498.  
58. Beilin B, Martin FC,  Shavit Y, Gale RP, Liebeskind JC. Suppression  of natural killer cell 
activity by  high-dose narcotic  anesthesia in  rats. Brain  Behav Immun.  1989;3(2):129 -137. 
59. Lewis JW,  Shavit Y, Terman  GW, Gale RP,  Liebeskind  JC. Stress and morphine affect 
survival of  rats challenged with  a mammary  ascites  tumor  (MAT  13762B). Natural immunity 
and cell growth regulation. 1983;3(1):43 -50. 
60. Shavit Y, Lewis  JW, Terman  GW, Gale RP,  Liebeskind  JC. Opioid peptides  mediate the 
suppressive  effect  of stress  on natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Science.  1984;223(4632):188 - 
190. 
61. Carr DJ,  DeCosta  BR, Kim CH,  et al. Opioid  receptors on  cells of the  immune  system: 
evidence for delta - and kappa -classes.  J Endocrinol. 1989;122(1):161 -168. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  35 of 38  
 62. Flores LR, Dretchen  KL, Bayer BM. Potential role of the autonomic  nervous system  in the 
immunosuppressive  effects  of acute  morphine  administration.  Eur J Pharmacol.  1996;318(2 - 
3):437 -446. 
63. Freier  DO, Fuchs  BA. A mechanism  of action  for morphine -induced  immunosuppression:  
corticosterone  mediates morphine -induced  suppression  of natural killer cell  activity. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1994;270(3):1127 -1133.  
64. Beilin B,  Shavit Y, Hart J,  et al. Effects  of anesthesia  based  on large  versus small  doses  of 
fentanyl on natural killer cell  cytotoxicity in  the perioperative period. Anesth  Analg. 
1996;82(3):492 -497. 
65. Colacchio  TA, Yeager  MP, Hildebrandt  LW. Perioperative  immunomodulation  in cancer 
surgery. Am J Surg. 1994;167(1):174 -179. 
66. Pollock  RE, Lotzova  E. Surgical -stress -related  suppression  of natural  killer cell activity:  a 
possible  role in tumor  metastasis.  Natural  immunity  and cell growth  regulation.  
1987;6(6):269 -278. 
67. Faith  RE, Murgo  AJ. Inhibition  of pulmonary  metastases  and enhancement  of natural  killer 
cell activity by methionine -enkephalin.  Brain Behav Immun.  1988;2(2):114 -122. 
68. Mathews PM, Froelich  CJ, Sibbitt WL,  Jr., Bankhurst  AD. Enhancement  of natural 
cytotoxicity by beta -endorphin.  J Immunol.  1983;130(4):1658 -1662.  
69. Page  GG, Blakely  WP, Ben-Eliyahu  S. Evidence  that postoperative  pain is a mediator  of the 
tumor -promoting  effects  of surgery  in rats. Pain.  2001;90(1 -2):191 -199. 
70. Sakaguchi  M, Kuroda  Y, Hirose  M. The  antiproliferative effect  of lidocaine  on human  tongue 
cancer  cells with  inhibition  of the activity  of epidermal  growth  factor  receptor. Anesth  Analg. 
2006;102(4):1103 -1107.  
71. Hogan  BV, Peter  MB, Shenoy  HG, Horgan K,  Hughes  TA. Surgery  induced 
immunosuppression. Surgeon. 2011;9(1):38 -43. 
72. de Oliveira  GS, Jr., Ahmad  S, Schink  JC, Singh  DK, Fitzgerald  PC, McCarthy  RJ. 
Intraoperative  neuraxial  anesthesia  but not postoperative neuraxial  analgesia  is associated 
with increased relapse -free survival in ovarian cancer  patients after primary cytoreductive 
surgery. Regional anesthesia and pain medicine. 2011;36(3):271 -277. 
73. Wang  XT, Lv M, Guo HY.  Effects  of epidural block  combined  with general anesthesia  on 
antitumor  characteristics  of T helper cells in  hepatocellular  carcinoma  patients. Journal  of 
biological regulators and homeostatic agents. 2016;30(1):67 -77. 
74. Yang C,  Chang  H, Zhang  T, Liang C,  Li E. Pre-emptive  epidural  analgesia improves  post- 
operative pain and immune  function in patients undergoing thoracotomy. ANZ journal of 
surgery.  2015;85(6):472 -477. 
75. Ahlers  O, Nachtigall I,  Lenze  J, et al. Intraoperative  thoracic  epidural  anaesthesia  attenuates 
stress -induced  immunosuppression  in patients  undergoing major abdominal surgery. British 
journal of anaesthesia. 2008;101(6):781 -787. 
76. Moselli  NM, Baricocchi  E, Ribero  D, Sottile  A, Suita  L, Debernardi  F. Intraoperative  epidural 
analgesia prevents the early proinflammatory response  to surgical  trauma. Results from a 
prospective randomized clinical trial of intraoperative  epidural versus general analgesia. 
Annals of surgical oncology. 2011;18(10):2722 -2731.  
77. Chen  WK, Ren L, Wei  Y, Zhu DX, Miao  CH, Xu JM. General  anesthesia  combined  with 
epidural anesthesia ameliorates the effect of fast -track  surgery by mitigating 
immunosuppression  and facilitating intestinal functional recovery in  colon  cancer  patients. 
International journal of colorectal disease. 2015;30(4):475 -481. 
78. Zhao  J, Mo H. The Impact  of Different Anesthesia  Methods  on Stress  Reaction  and Immune 
Function of the Patients with Gastric Cancer  during Peri -Operative Period. Journal of the  
Medical Association  of Thailand = Chotmaihet thangphaet.  2015;98(6):568 -573. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  36 of 38  
 79. Kun L, Tang  L, Wang  J, Yang  H, Ren J. Effect  of Combined  General/Epidural  Anesthesia on 
Postoperative NK Cell Activity and Cytokine Response  in Gastric Cancer  Patients 
Undergoing  Radical Resection.  Hepato -gastroenterology. 2014;61(132):1142 -1147.  
80. Moller  JF, Nikolajsen  L, Rodt  SA, Ronning H,  Carlsson  PS. Thoracic  paravertebral  block  for 
breast  cancer  surgery:  a randomized  double -blind  study.  Anesth  Analg. 2007;105(6):1848 - 
1851, table of contents.  
81. Buggy DJ,  Smith  G. Epidural anaesthesia  and analgesia: better  outcome  after major 
surgery?. Growing evidence suggests so. BMJ.  1999;319(7209):530 -531. 
82. Sun Y, Li T,  Gan TJ.  The Effects  of Perioperative Regional Anesthesia and  Analgesia on 
Cancer  Recurrence  and Survival After Oncology  Surgery: A  Systematic  Review  and Meta - 
Analysis. Regional anesthesia and pain medicine. 2015;40(5):589 -598. 
83. Chen  WK, Miao  CH. The effect  of anesthetic  technique  on survival  in human  cancers:  a 
meta -analysis  of retrospective  and prospective  studies.  PloS  one. 2013;8(2):e56540.  
84. Christopherson R,  James KE,  Tableman M, Marshall  P, Johnson FE. Long -term survival 
after colon cancer  surgery:  a variation  associated  with choice  of anesthesia. Anesth  Analg. 
2008;107(1):325 -332. 
85. Myles PS,  Peyton P,  Silbert  B, et al.  Perioperative epidural analgesia for  major  abdominal 
surgery for cancer  and recurrence -free survival: randomised trial.  BMJ.  2011;342:d1491.  
86. Peyton  PJ, Myles  PS, Silbert  BS, Rigg JA, Jamrozik  K, Parsons  R. Perioperative  epidural  
analgesia  and outcome  after major  abdominal  surgery  in high-risk patients.  Anesth  Analg.  
2003;96(2):548 -, table  of contents.  
87. Dong  H, Zhang Y, Xi H.  The effects  of epidural anaesthesia  and analgesia on natural killer 
cell cytotoxicity  and cytokine response  in patients with  epithelial  ovarian cancer  undergoing 
radical resection. The Journal of international  medical research.  2012;40(5):1822 -1829.  
88. Gottschalk  A, Ford JG,  Regelin CC,  et al. Association  between  epidural  analgesia  and 
cancer  recurrence  after colorectal  cancer  surgery. Anesthesiology.  2010;113(1):27 -34. 
89. Call TR, Pace  NL, Thorup  DB, et al. Factors  associated  with improved  survival after 
resection of pancreatic adenocarcinoma:  a multivariable model. Anesthesiology. 
2015;122(2):317 -324. 
90. Wang  D, Dubois  RN. Prostaglandins  and cancer.  Gut. 2006;55(1):115 -122. 
91. Mahdy  AM, Galley HF,  Abdel -Wahed  MA, el-Korny  KF, Sheta  SA, Webster  NR. Differential 
modulation of  interleukin -6 and interleukin -10 by  diclofenac in  patients undergoing major 
surgery. British journal of anaesthesia. 2002;88(6):797 -802. 
92. Breitbart  W, Alici Y. Evidence -based  treatment  of delirium  in patients  with cancer.  J Clin 
Oncol.  2012;30(11):1206 -1214.  
93. Inouye SK, van Dyck  CH, Alessi  CA, Balkin S, Siegal AP, Horwitz RI. Clarifying confusion: 
the confusion  assessment  method.  A new method  for detection of  delirium. Ann Intern  Med. 
1990;113(12):941 -948. 
94. Inouye  SK, Westendorp  RG, Saczynski  JS. Delirium in  elderly people.  Lancet.  
2014;383(9920):911 -922. 
95. Korc-Grodzicki  B, Root  JC, Alici Y. Prevention of  post-operative delirium in older patients 
with cancer  undergoing  surgery. J Geriatr Oncol. 2015;6(1):60 -69. 
96. Korc-Grodzicki  B, Sun SW,  Zhou  Q, et al. Geriatric  Assessment  as a Predictor  of Delirium 
and Other  Outcomes  in Elderly Patients With  Cancer. Annals of  surgery.  2015;261(6):1085 - 
1090.  
97. Sessler  CN, Gosnell  MS, Grap MJ,  et al. The  Richmond  Agitation -Sedation  Scale:  validity 
and reliability  in adult intensive care unit patients. Am J Respir  Crit Care Med. 
2002;166(10):1338 -1344.  
98. 99. Waszynski  CM. Confusion  assessment  method  (CAM).  Insight.  2002;27(2):43 -44. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  37 of 38  
 100. Auroy Y, Narchi P,  Messiah  A, Litt L,  Rouvier B,  Samii  K. Serious complications  related  to 
regional anesthesia: results of a prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology. 
1997;87(3):479 -486. 
101. Martin  RC, 2nd, Brennan  MF, Jaques  DP. Quality  of complication  reporting  in the surgical  
literature.  Annals  of surgery.  2002;235(6):803 -813. 
102. Clavien PA, Sanabria JR,  Strasberg  SM. Proposed  classification  of complications  of surgery 
with examples of utility  in cholecystectomy.  Surgery. 1992;111(5):518 -526. 
103. Wente  MN, Bassi  C, Dervenis C,  et al. Delayed gastric  emptying (DGE)  after pancreatic 
surgery:  a suggested  definition  by the  International  Study  Group of Pancreatic  Surgery 
(ISGPS). Surgery. 2007;142(5):761 -768. 
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES  
Appendix  1. 
Grade 3  is a standard  and validated  level of  complications  defined as “major.”  It refers  to the 
degree of intervention  required to  treat the  specific  event. Major  complications  are 
considered those Grade 3 and above.  
MSKCC  Graded  Post-operative  Complications  Criteria2-4,102  
0 No complication.  
1 Complications  requiring minor  intervention:  oral antibiotics,  bowel rest,  basic  monitoring, 
supportive care.  
2 Complications  requiring  moderate  intervention:  intravenous medications  (antibiotics, 
antiarrhythmics, etc.),  TPN, prolonged tube feeding, chest  tube insertion.  
3 Complications requiring hospital re -admission,  surgical intervention,  radiologic 
intervention,  ICU admission,  intubation/ventilatory  support,  bronchoscopy,  pacemaker 
placement.  
4 Complications  resulting  in chronic  disability,  organ  resection,  enteral diversion.  
5 Complications  resulting  in death.  
 
 
 
Appendix  2. 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center 
IRB Number: 18 -056 A(6)  
Approval date: 02 -Mar-2020  
Page  38 of 38  
  
 
