 
 
 
 
Title:  Improving functions in Veterans with Post -traumatic Peripheral Neuropathic Pain  
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  12/07/2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Aims  
Traumatic peripheral nerve injury is a common occurrence in the Veterans due to servic e or surgically 
related trauma. Over 30% of neuropathic pain conditions in Veterans are due to peripheral nerve injury 
(VASDHS internal survey). Peripheral nerve injury often results in the formation of neuroma/nerve entrapment, 
a per sistent neuropathic pa in state with ectopic neuronal activity at the site of injury and/or at the dorsal root 
ganglion (DRG) of the injured axons [1].  Invasive measures such a s surgical resection, venous transposition 
or local injection s of steroid and local anesthetics at the injury/neuroma site are often ineffective in alleviating 
the symptoms . On the other hand , the invasive n ature of these interventions frequently  further exacerbate s 
pain associated with the pre -existing hypersensitive neuropathic pain states [2]. Therefore, there is a need in 
the field of pain management in developing means of non -invasive therapy in treating post -traumatic peripheral 
neuropathic pain (PTP -NP) states. The pain service at the VA  San Diego Healthcare System (VA SDHS ) has 
recently adopted the use of transcutaneous magnetic stimulation (tMS) in treating PTP -NP and noticed 
encouraging pain relief benefit in patients with PTP -NP [3]. The PI also completed a mechanistic nerve 
conduction study and showed that this treatment met hod can potentially restore lost neuronal  functions 
associated with  pain modulation [4].  Our initial pilot data from a randomized controlled study support the 
feasibility of conducting a larger scale clinical trial  to adequately assess the effect of tMS in treating PTP -NP 
and improving patients' function . The proposed study will set the foun dation for future phase II/III multi -center 
studies . To validate  tMS as  a non-contact and non-invasive pain treatment  option  for reducing pain in Veterans 
with PTP -NP and improving their overall functions , the proposed study  consists of the following hypot heses  
and specific aims:  
 
Aim #1) Assess the effect of transcutaneous magnetic stimulation (tMS) in alleviating post -traumatic 
peripheral neuropathic pain (PTP -NP);  
Hypothesis #1: Active tMS  will significantly reduce symptoms of PTP -NP more than sham tMS as 
reflected by change of the spontaneous and evoked pain scores, and area of allodynia;  
 
Aim # 2) Assess the effect of tMS in improving quality of life and functions in Veterans with PTP -NP;  
Hypothesis #2: Active tMS will significantly provide more improvement in quality of life and functions 
for Veterans with PTP -NP than sham tMS  
 
  
Background : 
 Post-traumatic peripheral neuropathic pain (PTP -NP) is a common d ebilitating condition in Veterans 
after peripheral nerve injury due to either physical  or surgical trauma. In certain type of physical trauma or 
surgical procedures, the prevalence of PTP -NP can exceed 60%  [5-7].  Unfortunately, current available 
treatment options  such as surgical exploration, injections or medication s have not been adequately addressing  
this debilitating condition, which often casts a profound negative impact on the patients’ quality of life [8]. 
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that after peripheral nerve injury, large myelinated  pain modulatory  A-
beta afferent fiber firing diminished over time whereas smaller pain transmitting fibers including A -delta and C -
fibers had enhanced firing [9]. Clinically, a significant degree of pain with altered sensitivity at the area of the 
scar or within the distribu tion of the peripheral nerve has been the hallmark of PTP -NP. This  chronic pain state 
is frequ ently  accompanied by a condition known as allodynia in which noxious perception occurs with non -
noxious stimuli such as light stroking [10] and with morphological changes including the formation of neuroma 
[11, 12] .  In addition, spontaneous electrical  (ectopic)  activities  at the site can also enhance the sensitivity of 
the nociceptors and augmented conduction of the nociceptive impulses toward the central nervous system. 
Therefore modulating afferent sensory input at the site of injury without physically irritating or cont acting the 
area of neuronal injury provides an excellent alternative in managing PTP -NP with a potential long lasting  
analgesic effect.  
Non-invasive neuromodulation for PTP -NP 
 While non -invasive peripheral neuromodulation provides a great alternate treatm ent option for pain, not 
all peripheral neuromodulatory modalities are applicable to PTP -NP. For example, low frequency TENS (≤5 
Hz) appeared to undiscrimitively diminish both large and small afferent fibers input as it diminished mechani cal 
pain and tactile thresholds . On the other hand, high frequency TENS at 250 Hz appeared to predominantly 
activate pain transmitting A -delta afferent inputs  [13, 14] .  The analgesic  effect of low frequency (≤5 Hz) TENS 
is usually not sustained once the stimulation is stopped [15]. While TENS reduces hyperalgesia and pain, 
tolerance to the treatment effects may develop with prolonged stimulation and a high intensity of stimulation is 
required to counteract the tolerance effect and produce optimal analgesia [16]. In patients with PTP -NP, a 
direct high intensity electrical stimulation via the TENS electrodes over the site of injury is often not tolerated by 
patients with allodynia, thus making direct  skin contact  electrotherapy not an appealing therapeutic option  for 
this patient population.  
Innovative non-contact t reatment for PTP-NP 
Transcutaneous Magnetic Stimula tion (tMS) offers an innovative, non-invasive  and non -contact (skin)  
means of neuromodulation in managing PTP-NP via the use of dynamic magnetic flux, which  can affect 
neuronal functions by inducing localized neuronal depolarization [17].  This innovative technology derives from 
the use of transcranial  magnetic stimulation ( TMS ), which  uses electromagnetic principles to produce small 
electrical currents in neurons  without skin contact or anesthetics  [18-21]. This method of pain neuromodulation  
without skin contact  provides a major advantage in treating patients with tactile allodynia.   When a c urrent is 
passed around the coil , a dynamic magnetic flux will pass through the skin and into the first few centimeters of 
the skin without attenuation.  A figure -of-eight coil is commonly used because it gives a focused dynamic 
magnetic flux stimulation  from the center of the coil to the target site which can be marked with an extende d 
cross -hair for alignment  [3]. This dynamic magnetic flux induced  neuronal stimulation  is far more focused than 
other available direct current based electrotherapies.  Recently, TMS has  been shown to be beneficial in 
managing intractable central neuropathic states and headaches  [22, 23] . TMS is also known to facilitate nerve 
repair/regeneration  [24]. While high frequency TMS ( >1hz) results in neuronal excitation, low frequency TMS 
(≤1 Hz) results in neuronal inhibition  [25]. Therefore, knowing that PTP -NP is associated with enhanced A -
delta and C afferent fi bers firing, and ectopic activities , low frequency tMS can be applied as a  treatment option 
for managing the  state of neuronal hypersensi tivity known to ex ist in PTP -NP. 
Preliminary data  
1) Initial clinical observation reported in a case series  [3]  
In an earlier case series, the investigators  reported the effect of tMS on neuroma/nerve entrapment in five 
patients  with PTP -NP. Their pain conditions have failed both steroid injection and conventional pain 
medications  prior to tMS  (MagPro B65 ; MagVenture, Atlanta, GA) . 400 pulses of stimulation at .5Hz were 
delivered per treatment session. Each patient received 3 -4 sessions of treatment over a period of two months. 
Pre- and post -intervention spontaneous pain levels were assessed with a numerical pain rating  scale (N PRS). 
Average pre and post scor es (±SD) on the N PRS were 5.00  (±1.41) and 0.80  (±1.10) respectively with an 
average pain reduction of 84  (±21.91) % in the NRS after three to four treatments within two months. This 
analgesic effect appeared to be sustainable with repeated treatment deliv ered at a 6 - to 8-week duration. Pre -
treatment tactile allodynia found in three patients resolved after the initial 2 -month treatment sessions.  This 
published  case series provides the initial clinical evidence that  tMS offers a non -invasive treatment optio n for 
PTP-NP. The PI has since treated over 70 Veterans with PTP -NP with a similar  protocol and noticed 
comparable encouraging outcomes.   Additional r andomized controlled studies are warranted to  further validate 
the effi cacy of this treatment modality . 
2) Modulatory effect of tMS on peripheral sensory and motor transmission  [4]  
In a published mechanistic study, the  investigators assessed t he effect of tMS on peripheral sensory 
thresholds, nerve conduction properties and TENS induced fast afferent slowing effect as measured by motor 
and sensory conducti on studies at  the ulnar nerve. The investigators  found that  sham tMS with TENS 
(Sham+TENS) significantly (P=0.02 and 0.007 respectively) reduces sensory conduction velocity (CV) and 
increases sensory onset latency (OL), and motor peak latency (PL) whereas, real tMS  with TENS 
(Real+TENS) reverses the effects of TEN S on sensory CV and OL, and significantly (P=0.036) increases the 
sensory PL.  tMS  alone significantly (P<0.05) elevates sensory PL and onset -to-peak latency. The result of this 
mechanistic study suggest s that tMS can reverse the TENS induced slowing effec t on the fast conducting 
fibers and casts a selective peripheral modulatory effect on the slow er conducting pain afferent fibers.  Given 
that PTP-NP is often associated with aberrant neuronal activities with reduction of fast conducting pain 
modulatory fibe r firing and enhancement of small pain conduct ing fiber activities, tMS can play  a non-invasive 
neuromodulatory role in reversing this post -injury aberra nt neuronal behavior and restoring  normal peripheral 
neuronal  modulatory  function.  
3) Preliminary data a r andomized cont rol study   
Aside from the i nitial prospective  case series  observation, the investigators have conducted a pilot randomized 
sham -controlled study in which, 10  patients  (12 nerve sites)  with PTP -NP received three daily (>24 and <48 
hours apart) sessions of real tMS at .5hz (400 pulses per session ) at the side of nerve injury, and 10 
patients(10 nerve sites) with PTP -NP received the sham treatment  using the method as described in a 
previo usly published study [4]. % of reduction ( SD) in both spontaneous and evoked  pain, and allodynic area  
from the pre -treatm ent assessments  were evaluated . For the average spontaneous pain, t he real treatment 
group demonstrated reduction s on the mechanical visual analogue scale (M -VAS)  from 60.7 14.7 to 36.7 25.5 
and 44.6 32.9 at the post-treatment one- and four -week  assessments respectively, whereas the sham group 
reported 60.020.2, 47.3 16.5, and 47.7 27.2 spontaneous pain M -VAS at pre - and post  one and four -week 
assessments respectively. For the average evoked pain to punctate stimulation (5.18 von Frey Filament) the 
real treatment group demonstrated  40%% and 37% reduction s at post-treatment one - and four -week 
assessments respectively, whereas the sham group only reported  20% reduction s respectively  at both post -
treatment time points. In addition, the average evoked pain to stroking stimulation, the rea l treatment group 
demonstrated 44% % and 25% reduction s at post -treatment one - and four -week assessments respectively, 
whereas the sham group only repor ted 2% reduction  at post -treatment one week and 23% increase of pain at 
post-treatment 4 week assessment. These  initial observed trend s of efficacy with the real tMS treatment group 
in both pain and allodynia reductions  support  the feasibility of the propo sed randomized study.   
These preliminary  data support the feasibility of the current proposed study  with the following aims and  
corresponding  hypotheses:   
1) Assess the effect of transcutaneous magnetic stimulation (tMS) in alleviating post -traumatic 
peripheral neuropathic pain (PTP -NP); Hypothesis #1: Active tMS will significantly reduce symptoms of 
PTP-NP more than sham tMS as reflected by change of the spontaneous and evoked pai n scores, and 
area of allodynia.  
2) Assess the effect of tMS in improving  quality of life and  functions in Veterans with PTP -NP; 
Hypothesis #2: Active tMS will significantly provide more improvement in quality of life  and functions  
for Veterans  with PTP -NP than sham tMS  
Methods : 68 Veterans  with PTP -NP will be r andomized to receive either real  (Group T) or sham  (Group S) 
tMS tr eatments .  Post -treatment assessments  of pain and functions  will be conducted at one week, and four 
week  after the completion of the treatment . Each subject will receive 4 treatments at the injury site at >24 and 
<72 hours apart. Treatment intensity will b e based on the patients’ sensing  thresholds to the stimulation  
amplitude . Pre -treatment assessments will consist of spontaneous and evoked pain rating, peripheral 
quantitative neurosensory testing, mapping of allodynic area and ov erall functional and quality of life 
assessments.  At Visit 1, aside from careful chart review, a detailed history and physical exam will be 
conducted by one of the clinical investigators to identify the cause of injury and the specific peripheral nerve (s) 
involved.  This study will be carried out according to the following schedule:  
 VISIT 
1 B1 VISIT 
2 VISIT 
3 VISIT 
4 VISIT 
5 B2 VISIT 
6 B3 VISIT 
7 
Informed consent  x          
Medical History  x          
Physical Examination  x       x  x 
Daily Pain Log   x     x  x  
QST x       x  x 
Spontaneous Pain M -VAS x  x x x x  x  x 
Evoked Pain M -VAS x  x x x x  x  x 
Allodynic  Area  x       x  x 
tMS Treatment    x x x x  x   
Medication Assessment  x x     x x x x 
Side effect  Assessment     x x x x x x x 
BPI-sf x       x  x 
C-SSRS  x       x  x 
Hamilton Depression Scale  x       x  x 
PGIC  x       x  x 
WPAI -SHP x       x  x 
Daily Sleep Inter ference   x     x  x  
Phone assessment        x  x  
Blinding efficacy assessment         x   
Visit 2 occurs one week after Visit 1; Visits 2,3 ,4 & 5  occur consecutively at >24 and <48 hours apart; Visit 6 
and Visit 7  occur one week and four weeks respectively after Visit 5;  B1 is the study period between the Visit 1 
and Visit 2;  B2 is the study period between Visi t 5 and Visit 6;  B3 is the study period between Visit 6 and Visit 
7.  
Primary efficacy assessment:   
Spontaneous pain rating: Spontaneous pain level will be measured by using a sliding algometer, known as 
the Mechanical Visual Analog Scale (M -VAS).  The dev ice has been well validated, and is anchored at the left 
by “no pain sensation” and at the right by “the most intense pain sensation imaginable.”  The corresponding 
length of the red bar with a scale from 0 to 100, which can be read on the back by the test er, represents the 
subject’s intensity of pain  [26].  
Secondary Efficacy Assessment:  
Evoked Pain M -VAS rating: Stroking evoked pain will be assessed by gently moving a pain tbrush over the 
site of PTNP. Punctate evoked pain will be conducted by gently pressing a 5.18 von Frey monofilament against 
the site of PTNP. The patients will be asked if pain is felt. If so, the intensity of pain will be rated in the M -VAS 
[27]. Average Daily NPRS rating : The Daily Pain Diary consists of an 11 -point numeric pain rating scale 
(NPRS) ranging from 0 (“no pain”) to 10 (“worst possible pain”).  Subjects describe their pain during the past 24 
hours by choosing the appropriate number  between 0 and 10 . Quality of life and f unctional assessments  
will be conducted  with: 1) Daily Sleep Interference Scale (DSI S) [28]; 2) Brief Pain Inventory (BPI -sf) [29, 
30]; 3) Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC)  [31];  4) Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression  
(HRSD)  [32-35], 5) Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS)  [36], and Work Productivity and 
Activity Impairment Questionnaire  (WPAI -SHP version 2)  [37]. Other study associated assessments  
consist of : 1) Weekly Phone Assessment : After the post -treatment one-week  assessment, the study 
coordinator will conduct weekly phone contact with the sub jects for pain and side effect assessments until the 
completion of t he study. The study coordinator will also trouble shoot any potential issue s that may lead to 
unnecessary subject dropout with the assistance of the PI ; 2) Side Effect Assessment : During each study 
related visit  (after Visit 2)  and weekly phone assessment, side effect assessment will be conducted to monitor 
any study related complication. Patie nt will be asked to report any potential neurological side effect such as 
persistent numbness, tingling or increase of pain related to the treatment. Investigators will determine whether 
these side effects are study or non -study related and report to  the Institutional Human Subject Protection 
Committee,  VA Research and Development Committee  and Data Safety Monitoring Board according to th e 
protocol ; and 3)  Concomitant Medication:  Any medication that a subject uses during the study is considered 
concomitant medication. This includes prescription and non -prescription treatment such as contraceptives, 
vitamins, topical preparations, herbal pr eparations, and non -pharmacological therapies. Concomitant 
medication information  (please se e Human Subject for allowable and  prohibited concomitant medications 
during the study)  will be collected for all subjects during the screening, treatment, between visits ( recorded in 
the Daily Pain Log ) and subsequent post treatment visits. Information regarding subjects’ previous failed 
treatments will also be collected at the screening visit. Subjects will be instructed not to alter medication 
regimens dur ing the study without consultation with the investigators.  
For the blinding pro cess , a curtain will be placed in front of the patient so that the patient cannot s ee the 
treatment field. In addition, during the treatment the patients will be required to wear a soft eye shield. 
Simultaneous transcutaneous  electrical stimulation will be provided to enhance the blinding effect. Blinding 
efficac y assessment s will be con ducted according to the study schedule . 
tMS sensing  amplitude threshold  will be determined by placing the center of the TMS coil over the injury site  
at one cm away without touching the skin. The subjects will be instructed to click a computer mouse when he 
or she feels the stimulation, which  will be started at 10% of the maximum stimulation amplitude and increased 
at 5% increments. Each stimulation threshold will be deliver 10 times  with vario us between -stimulation  intervals 
(15 to 60  seconds)  prompted by a computer indicator . A computer program linked to the mouse will record a 
subject’s response . The lowest stimulation amplitude  at which  a subject responds  correctly at 6/10 tri als will 
be re corded as the tMS sensing amplitude threshold . This method of tMS sensing amplit ude threshold 
determination used in the preliminary data collection allows a  consistent way to establish the stimulation 
intensity  for each subject based on the sensing ability  of an individual injured peripheral nerve to the 
stimulation.  
Real t MS (T): The tre atment site will be marked  and additional  crosshair marking will be drawn  for coil 
alignment . The center of magnetic coil  (MagPro B65 ; MagVenture, Atlanta, GA) will be  placed one cm above  
the marked location  in reference of the crosshair markings without touching the skin [3]. A total of 400 pulses at 
0.5 Hz  and 150% of the tMS sensing  amplitude  threshold will be delivered  via the center of TMS coil. For 
blinding purpose, a pair of transcutaneous  electrodes will be placed at least 10 cm  away from the sensory or 
motor innervation territory of the injured  nerve  and greater  than two centimeters away from the border of the 
allodynic area. The electrodes will be linked to a pu lse generato r (ITO -160, Japan) and synchronized 
stimulation  at the same frequency of the t MS will be provided  during the study treatment  [4].  
Sham t MS (S): Sham treatment will be provided with the magnetic  coil treatment site turned 180 degrees and 
the non-treatment sit e (facing the injury location) covered with a magnetic shield made of Giron molded to the 
shape of the coil  [4, 23] . The m agnetic shield completely prevents any magnetic flux from reaching the skin.  
Similar synchronized electro -stimulation at the same frequency of the tMS will be provided  for the blinding 
purpose [4].  
Quantitative Neurosensory Testing  and Determinat ion of Allodynic Area : Tactile threshold in the affected 
area will be measured by von Frey and  non-noxious thermal sensations including cold, warm, and noxious 
thermal sensations such as c old and hot pain thresholds will be  measured by using a Thermal Sensory 
Analyzer (Medoc Advanced Medical Systems, Minneapolis). This method of peripheral sensory testing has 
been well established in literature a nd used extensively in previous pain-related studies  conducted by PI  [27, 
38]. The region of allodynia will be established with a 5.18 von Frey hair and a foam paint brush gently stroked 
on the skin. The stimuli will be initial ed away from the allodynic area and marched towards the center of the 
area from different angles at half of a centimeter interval. The periphery  of the allodynic area will be marked 
with a felt tip pen. At  least eight points, at about 45 degrees apart and in a range of 360 degrees, will be 
established to mark the border  of the allodynic area. The bord er will then be outlined onto a transparency. The 
area (cm 2) will be determined by using a compensating planimeter (Keuffel & Esser, Germany)  [27].  
General approach in  Data Analysis and Power Calculation  
  
Descriptive statistics will be obtained for all variables, test of normality of continuous and homogeneity of 
variance will be performed.   The statistical method such as log or square root transformations will be employed 
to correct for any abnormalities. The comparability of the groups  on demographic data at the pre -treatment  
level will be tested with analyses of variance or Chi -square analyses. If we identify any significant differences in 
these variables between the groups, we will modify our analyses by adding those covariates to the model. Dr. 
Shahrokh Golshan, the study statist ician, will perform statistical analysis . All analyses will be performed using 
the SPSS version 21.   Missing data values will be minimized by intensive training of the interviewers in 
techniques of clarifying answers and checking questionnaires while the p articipants are on -site. When missing 
values are identified, several approaches to acquire the necessary data will be employed: 1) if at all possible, 
participants will be rescheduled within 24 hours of completion of tests or interviews; 2) if a participan t cannot 
be rescheduled, an effort will be made to send a tester to the individual’s place of residence within the same 
period; 3) The pattern of missing data will be examined according to the procedure recommended by Little and 
Rubin [39] which includes comparing group differences in the primary outcomes of subjects with versus without 
missing data.  We will also test whether the dropouts  are random or systematic by comparing the dropouts  with 
the study completers on the baseline data. An absence of significant differences will support the random nature 
of dropouts . The following steps will minimize effect of dropouts :  First, selected data ana lysis method allows 
the inclusion of subjects who dropout  or are terminated early in the study, without relying on data imputation 
procedures.  Second, effect of any systematic differences between the dropouts  and completers will be 
explored by including t he variable of concern to the model as a covariate. Finally, we will use pattern -mixture 
models to assess if there is bias due to drop out or missing data.  
Hypothesis #1 : Active tMS will significantly reduce symptoms of PTP -NP more than sham tMS as 
reflect ed by change of the spontaneous and evoked pain scores, and area of allodynia ; Independent 
Variables:  Treatment Groups with two levels (Groups T&S), Visits up to 7 levels; Dependent Variables:  
Primary outcome: Spontaneous Pain Scores; Secondary outcome: Evoked Pain Scores; Area of Allodynia;  
Statistical Analysis : Data will be analyzed using mixed effects model [40-42]. The influence of missing data is 
reduced since this analytical approach  maximized number of subjects by allowing the inclusion of subjects with 
missing data, dropouts or early termination without relying on data imputation procedures. We will use p attern -
mixture models to assess  biases due to drop out or missing data. The mixed effects model method provides an 
estimate of the individual variability around the population trend, the variability of the individual intercepts 
(baseline values) and slopes (changes across time), and the correl ation between them. A fully saturated 
treatment by time model will be utilized for inference. Co-variance structure will be chosen  and random group 
level treatment effects will be evaluated  based on Akaikes Information Criterion . Analyses will be conducte d 
within and across nested levels of the study design; this will involve within -subject analyses (comparison of 
occasions of measurement nested within an individual), as well as between -subject analyses (comparison of 
two groups). In addition, any treatmen t group comparison can be adjusted for subject -specific characteristics 
and adjustments for changes in these characteristics over the course of the study can be incorporated into the 
single -subject analyses. Based on the pilot study , we expect a dropout ra te of <10% throughout the study.   All 
analyses will be two -tailed, where applicable, with α = .05.  Correction for family -wise Type I error rates will be 
made using the Westfall -Young randomization maxTprocedure, which adjusts p -values for significance wh ile 
taking into account the correlation of the outcomes [43]. In this way we can control for a n overall family -wise 
error rate of .05 while achieving more power than Bonferroni adjustments.  
Power Calculations :  Sample size estimation was done using the RMASS program provided by Hedeker et al. 
[44, 45] . Based on these calculations a sample size of 68 would provide 80% power to detect a large effect 
size. This effect size was selected based on the observation s reported in th e preliminary data #1 and #3. Large 
effect size is defined as a between -group difference increasing linearly from 0 at baseline to .8 SD units at the 
last time point. The minimum power estimation is based on sample size calculation for 10% attrition rate, 
correlations of 0.6 between the repeated measures, and for large effect size .   
Hypothesis #2: Active tMS will significantly provide more improvement in quality of life  and functions  
for Veterans with PTP -NP than sham tMS ; Independent  Variables:  Treatment Groups with two levels 
(Groups T&S), Visits up to 7 levels; Dependent Variables:  DSIS, BPI -sf, PGIC, HRSD; WPAI -SHP.   
Statistical Analysis : Similar to Hypothesis #1  
 
Human Subjects  
Characteristics  
  Approximately 68 Veterans with PTP -NP who meet the study inclusion and exclusion criteria will be 
enrolled into one of the two study groups: Group T will receive real tMS and Group S will receive sham tMS.  
The following eligibility criteria will be applie d to select subjects for whom protocol treatment is 
considered appropriate. All relevant medical and non -medical conditions will be taken into consideration when 
deciding whether this protocol is suitable for a particular subject.  
Inclusion Criteria  
Subjec t eligibility will be reviewed and documented by one of the clinical investigators in the study team 
before subjects are included in the study. Subjects must meet all of the following inclusion criteria and none of 
the exclusion criteria to be eligible for  enrollment into the study:  
1). Evidence of a personally signed and dated informed consent document indicating that the subject has been 
informed of all pertinent aspects of the study;  
2). Subject is willing and able to comply with scheduled visits, treatm ent plan, daily pain, sleep and all study 
related assessments and procedures;  
3). Subjects must be literate in the language used in the assessments and pain diary;  
4). Veterans (men or women) of any race or ethnicity who are at least 18 years of age;  
5). F emale subjects of childbearing potential must agree to use a highly effective method of contraception 
throughout the study and for at least 7 days after the last session of the  assigned treatment . A subject is of 
childbearing potential if, in the opinion  of the investigator, he/she is biologically capable of having children and 
is sexually active;  
6). Subject must have chronic peripheral neuropathic pain present for more than 4 months after a traumatic or 
surgical event per medical history (this may inclu de, for example, motor vehicle accident, fall, sports injury, 
knee or hip replacement, hernia repair, thoracotomy, mastectomy, focal/localized burns or crush injury);  
7). In addition, to be eligible for inclusion in the study, all subjects must:  
a. Have an  average daily Numerical Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) score >3 during B1; and  
b. Have a spontaneous pain intensity >30 on 0 -100 Mechanical Visual Analogue Scale (M -VAS) to be 
eligible for randomization;  
8). Must have their implicated peripheral nerve(s) identi fied; 
9). Must meet criteria for neuropathic pain assessment to meet eligibility for the study [46]. Pain distribution 
acros s a nerve territory and history indicates relevant lesion or disease plus criteria listed in a and/or b  
a. At least one negative or positive sensory sign or symptom confined to innervation territory of the 
lesioned nervous structure. Examples of negative o r positive signs or symptoms include:  
· Burning, stabbing or tingling sensation/pain;  
· Numbness/paresthesia;  
· Cold, heat or pressure;  
· Hyperalgesia or allodynia;  
· Hypoesthesia;  
· Increased or decreased sharp sensation (e.g., pinprick testing);  
· Decreased vibration/vibratory sensation;  
 
b. Prior diagnostic tests confirming lesion or disease explaining neuropathic pain (Nerve conduction 
studies, EMG, skin or nerve biopsy). Documentation of affected nerve(s) indicating that the subject’s 
pain is of neuropathic origin and is a result of injury/trauma to the affected/implicated nerve(s).  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects presenting with ANY of the following will NOT be included in the study:  
1). Subjects with neuropathic pain due to diabetic peripheral neur opathy, post herpetic neuralgia, Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus, chemo/anti -viral therapy, trigeminal neuralgia, or carpal tunnel syndrome; subjects 
whose post -traumatic neuropathic pain is categorized as central (e.g., spinal cord injury) rather than periph eral. 
2). Subjects with pain due to Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS, Type I or Type II);  
3) Phantom limb pain after amputation. However, subjects with stump pain and phantom sensation but no 
phantom pain will not be excluded;  
4). Subjects with skin co nditions in the affected dermatome that in the judgment of the investigator can 
interfere with evaluation of the neuropathic pain condition;  
5). Subjects with other pain such as lumbar or cervical radiculopathy that may confound assessment or self -
evaluati on of the peripheral neuropathic pain; subjects with significant somatic pain at the site of their trauma 
that may confound assessment or self -evaluation of their neuropathic pain;  
6). Any subject considered at risk of suicide or self -harm based on investi gator judgment and/or the details of a 
risk assessment;  
7). Use of prohibited medications in the absence of appropriate washout periods;  
8). Participation in any other clinical trial within the 30 days prior to screening and/or during participation in this  
study;  
9). Subjects with a history of a cardiac arrhythmia that has led to the placement of a cardiac pacer or 
defibrillator will be excluded from the study;  
10). Pregnant females and females of childbearing potential not using highly effective contracept ion or not 
agreeing to continue highly effective contraception during the study;  
11). Subjects with a current diagnosis of DSM -IV-TR Axis I disorder (including, for example, schizophrenia, 
bipolar disorder, other psychotic disorders such as schizoaffective disorder and delusion disorder, somatoform 
disorders or factitious disorders, or bipolar disorders, even if controlled or stable; or alcohol or substance 
related disorders in the past 2 years); however, diagnoses of Generalized Anxiety Diso rder (GAD) or major 
depression (MDD) that is clinically stable are allowed;  
12). Subjects with pending Worker’s Compensation, Worker’s Compensation, civil litigation or disability claims 
pertinent to the subject based upon trauma; current involvement in ou t-of-court settlements for claims pertinent 
to subject’s trauma; Subjects with fully resolved litigation and compensation claims can participate;  
13) Subjects who have previously received either transcranial or transcutaneous magnetic stimulation therapy 
in the past.  
Concomitant Medication(s)  
Medications allowed during the study will include stable (been used at least 30 days prior to the 
screening visit) regimens of :  
1) Non narcotic analgesics such as non -steroidal anti -inflammatory, acetaminophen ( 2g per day), 
tramadol ( 200mg per day), Aspirin ( 325mg per day), triptans used for non -neuropathic pain 
conditions such as migraine;  
2) Antidepressants such as Serotonin Specific Reuptake Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants used 
mainly for sleep only;  
3) Anxiolytics/benzodiazepine hypnotics such as Alprazolam, lorazepam, triazolam used at bedtime only;  
4) GABA -A  partial agonists/non benzodiazepine hypnotics such as Zolpidem, eszopiclone used for sleep 
only.  
 
Subjects receive any narcotic based analgesic, topic al analgesics over the affected site, steroid and 
local anesthetic injection, anticonvulsants, and antipsychotic medications less than 7 days prior to the pre -
treatment assessment will not be enrolled for the study. Non-pharmacologic treatments, including but not 
limited to, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation unit (TENS), acupuncture, acupressure, therapeutic 
massage, will be prohibited during the entire study. Subjects should not have elective surgery or elective 
interventional medical procedures for the duration of the study. Subjects are allowed to use additional 
acetaminophen (up to a maximum total of 3g per day) as the only rescue medication during the study. The use 
of the rescue and other concomitant medications will be documented in the dail y pain log  
Subject Recruitment Timeline and Retention Plan  
Over the past few years, the PI has established a close clinical and research collaborative relationship 
with the VASDHS Rehabilitation Medicine and Genera Surgery Clinic.  With the addition of the  proposed 
research personnel, we plan to conduct the study with the following timeline:  
 Research Activities in 6 -month Increments  
Time Increments  1 2 3 4 Total  
Training & Study Preparation  X     
Targeted # of Group T Subject Recruitment  8 11 11 4 34 
Targeted # of Group S Subject Recruitment  8 11 11 4 34 
Total # of Subjects  16 22 22 8 68 
Interim Data Analyses    x   
Final Data Analyses & Manuscript Preparation     x  
 
Currently the VASDHS Pain Clinic evaluate more than 100 new pain consults each month. In addition, 
the Rehabilitation Medicine also conducts approximately 20 new consults each month for Veterans with 
amputation. Initial screening of potential subjects will be conducted in both clinic locations. Approximately, 25% 
of the patients of p ain clinic new evaluation consists of patients with PTP -NP and approximately 20%  of the 
post-amputation subjects consists of stump pain with phantom limb pain. The Pain Service has an 
arrangement with the VASDHS General Surgery Service to evaluate post -surgical patients with pain at or near 
their surgical sites after reversible anatomical or surgical causes have been ruled out.   In addition to the 
clinical services, recruitment flyers will be placed in various clinical services including but not limited t o  general 
surgery, neurology and primary care clinics. Potential subjects will be provided with both verbal and written 
information about the study. Interested subjects will then be further assessed according to the study inclusion 
and exclusion criteria and enrolled for the study. With close to 30 PTP -NP being evaluated per month, the 
proposed recruitment plan is feasible.  
 Before subjects are entered into this study, the purpose and nature of the study as well as possible 
adverse effects will be explained to them in the presence of a witness.  The subject (or his/her 
guardian/representative if the patient is unable to sign p ersonally) must sign a statement, which complies with 
the requirements of the US Code of Federal Regulations (Title 21 CFR Part 50.25<a> &<b>).  Each signature 
is to be witnessed.  A signed original should be given to the subject.  All subjects will be sel ected based on the 
above criteria.  
 
Risk to Subjects  
  Risks associated with transcutaneous magnetic stimulation (tMS) are minimal. A potential discomfort 
associated with tMS  is a mild muscle stimulation at the treatment site. Typically, changing the orientation of the 
coil can minimize the degree of muscle stimulation. The thermal pain testing will induce some discomfort/pain. 
The temperature range of the thermal analyzer is internally set at 0 to 50 ºC, which is known not to cause any 
risk of skin injury. The use of oscillated thermal heat further minimizes the risk of skin damage. These and 
other risks of the intervention will be fully discussed with the subjects prior to th e study and side effect will be 
assessed during the study as well.  
Adequacy of Protection from Risk  
1) All procedures will be performed under the direct supervision of the PI or qualified co -investigators. The 
patient will be educated regarding returning to c linic or going to an emergency department if there is 
any significant change in their pain symptoms.  
2) Although there is no existing guideline for peripheral magnetic stimulation, the tMS setting used in the 
study is within the current safety guidelines for TMS and is the same as the protocol in previous case 
series, mechanistic and pilot studies. However, in the event that the subject feels any discomfort during 
the study treatments and wishes to stop the treatment, the study will be stopped immediately.  
3) Only the PI and the investigators will have access to the research records.  Research records will be 
kept confidential to the extent provided by law.  During the study, the patient’s name and identity will not 
be publicly disclosed without their written per mission.  The results of this study will likely be published in 
medical journals or presented at medical meetings.  However, the authors will only use the assigned 
patient number in the article or presentation.  All research records and data will be kept i n a locked 
cabinet in the PI's office at the VASDHS.  
4) Minor complications such as local skin irritation may occur due to the peripheral neurosensory testing, 
and will be managed conservatively with rest and /or oral non -narcotic analgesics. The PI and the co-
investigators are either board certified anesthesiologist or Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) 
certified.  
 
Potential Benefits  
 Patients with PTP -NP will benefit from the study with potential pain reduction, and  functional and 
quality of life improve ment. In addition, the information obtained can potentially explain the cause(s) of their 
symptoms and guide the development of treatments that can potentially correct the aberrant neuronal functions 
leading to their debilitating symptoms.  
Importance of K nowledge to be gained  
 The outcome of the study can help understanding the pathophysiology of PTP -NP and validating the 
treatment effect and mechanisms of a novel, non -invasive, low -risk and low cost treatment modality to the 
general VA patient population.  
Data from neurosensory testing and mapping of allodynic area will also provide objective evidence and 
facilitate other treatment development in rectifying these functional abnormalities.  
 
Risk and Benefit ratio  
 Given that PTP -NP can significantly impair a patient’s daily function and quality of life and conventional 
therapy with multiple pharmacological agents usually consist of many side effects, and the minimal risk 
associated with tMS treatment, the risk /benefit ratio in the current study is very low.   Therefore, the proposed 
study can potentially gain crucial knowledge about the utilization of a novel non -invasive therapy for Veterans 
with PTP -NP. 
Children and Women  
  No children will be recruited for this study. VA requires a waiver for a research on  children and currently 
VASDHS does not offer a pediatric service. Female subjects who meet the study inclusion and exclusion 
criteria will be recruited.  Female Subjects at childbearing age will be required to have a urine pregnancy test 
prior to the enro llment.  
Data and Safety Monitoring  
 This study assesses the effect of tMS  in alleviating PTP -NP.  For the objectives of the study, sensitive 
information (SI) collected in the study will include patients’ demographic information such as age and gender, 
patients’ location, severity and duration of pain and level of disability rel ated to the chronic pain conditions.  
Information regarding past medical history, co -existing diseases and current medication will also be collected 
and recorded in the VA computer under the PI or research coordinator's hard drive.  All SI data will be 
encrypted and stored in separate data management system. Information regarding the study will be stored in 
the PI’s office inside locked cabinetry.  Subjects will only be identified with initials and assigned subject 
numbers in the data sheets.  Data collecte d from the subjects will be encrypted and assigned a number 
matching the subjects. The matching list will be stored in secure locked cabinet in the PI's office.  
The SI will only be assessed by the PI, and other approved study personnel.  In the event of a  real or 
suspected breach of security, the VA police, the VA information Security Office, and the VA Privacy Officer will 
be notified as soon as possible.  SI will be accessed, stored, and destroyed according to a data security plan 
that will promote secur ity and privacy.  The raw data sheet will be stored in the PI’s research office at building 
23 in a locked cabinet and destroyed by either the PI or the study approved personnel not later than 2 years 
after the close -out of the study by cross -shredding or the then approved VA procedure. The analysis data file 
will include only de -identified data related to goals of this study and will access only by approved study 
personnel.  
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB):  
The DSMB will review all unanticipated problem s involving risk to study subjects, serious adverse 
events, and all subject deaths associated with the protocol, and provide an unbiased written report of the event 
within 10 calendar days. The DSMB will provide an independent evaluation of adverse events and 
unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects to the Human Subject Protection Committee. The DSMB will 
comment on the outcomes, adverse events, and relationship of the events to the protocol. The DSMB will 
indicate whether they concur with the deta ils of the report provided by the PI. The DSMB promptly reports 
discrepancies or problems to the Human Subject Protection Committee. They have the authority to stop a 
research study in progress, remove individual volunteers from a study, and take whatever steps will be 
necessary to protect the safety and well being of research subjects until the Human Subject Protection 
Committee can assess the report.  The members of the DSMB for this proposal will comprise of a pain 
specialist, a clinical psychologist and  a biostatistician who will be independent of the investigative team and 
possess sufficient educational and professional experience to serve as the subjects' advocate. The members 
of DSMB also have no apparent conflicts of interest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Sorkin, L.S. and T.L. Yaksh, Behavioral models of pain states evoked by ph ysical injury to the 
peripheral nerve.  Neurotherapeutics, 2009. 6(4): p. 609 -19. 
2. Wu, J. and D.T. Chiu, Painful neuromas: a review of treatment modalities.  Ann Plast Surg, 1999. 43(6): 
p. 661 -7. 
3. Leung, A., A. Fallah, and S. Shukla, Transcutaneous magn etic stimulation (TMS) in alleviating post -
traumatic peripheral neuropathic pain States: a case series.  Pain Med, 2014. 15(7): p. 1196 -9. 
4. Leung, A., et al., Effect of low frequency transcutaneous magnetic stimulation on sensory and motor 
transmission.  Bioelectromagnetics, 2015.  
5. Hsu, E. and S.P. Cohen, Postamputation pain: epidemiology, mechanisms, and treatment.  J Pain Res, 
2013. 6: p. 121 -36. 
6. Birch, R., et al., Nerve injuries sustained during warfare: part I--Epidemiology.  J Bone Joint Surg Br, 
2012. 94(4): p. 523 -8. 
7. Dobrogowski, J., A. Przeklasa -Muszynska, and J. Wordliczek, [Persistent post -operative pain].  Folia 
Med Cracov, 2008. 49(1-2): p. 27 -37. 
8. Jensen, M.P., M.J. Chodroff, and R.H. Dworkin, The impact of neuropathic pain on health -related 
quality of life: review and implications.  Neurology, 2007. 68(15): p. 1178 -82. 
9. Puig, S. and L.S. Sorkin, Formalin -evoked activity in identified primary afferent fibers: systemic 
lidocaine suppresses phase -2 activity.  Pain, 1996. 64(2): p. 345 -55. 
10. Koplovitch, P., A. Minert, and M. Devor, Spontaneous pain in partial nerve injury models of neuropathy 
and the role of nociceptive sensory cover.  Exp Neurol, 2012. 236(1): p. 103 -11. 
11. Zimmermann, M., Pathobiolo gy of neuropathic pain.  Eur J Pharmacol, 2001. 429(1-3): p. 23 -37. 
12. Rajput, K., S. Reddy, and H. Shankar, Painful neuromas.  Clin J Pain, 2012. 28(7): p. 639 -45. 
13. Walsh, D.M., et al., Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. Relevance of stimulati on parameters 
to neurophysiological and hypoalgesic effects.  Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 1995. 74(3): p. 199 -206. 
14. Koga, K., et al., Selective activation of primary afferent fibers evaluated by sine -wave electrical 
stimulation.  Mol Pain, 2005. 1: p. 13.  
15. Chesterton, L.S., et al., Sensory stimulation (TENS): effects of parameter manipulation on mechanical 
pain thresholds in healthy human subjects.  Pain, 2002. 99(1-2): p. 253 -62. 
16. Sato, K.L., et al., Increasing intensity of TENS prevents analgesic toleran ce in rats.  J Pain, 2012. 13(9): 
p. 884 -90. 
17. Griskova, I., et al., Transcranial magnetic stimulation: the method and application.  Medicina (Kaunas), 
2006. 42(10): p. 798 -804. 
18. Wassermann, E.M., Risk and safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stim ulation: report and 
suggested guidelines from the International Workshop on the Safety of Repetitive Transcranial 
Magnetic Stimulation, June 5 -7, 1996.  Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 1998. 108(1): p. 1 -16. 
19. Pridmore, S. and G. Oberoi, Transcranial magnetic stimulation applications and potential use in chronic 
pain: studies in waiting.  J Neurol Sci, 2000. 182(1): p. 1 -4. 
20. Pridmore, S. and R. Belmaker, Transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment of ps ychiatric 
disorders.  Psychiatry Clin Neurosci, 1999. 53(5): p. 541 -8. 
21. Pascual -Leone, A. and H. Pridmore, Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).  Aust N Z J Psychiatry, 
1995. 29(4): p. 698.  
22. Leung A, L.J., Rollnik J, Donohue M, Xu R, Lee R,André -Obadia N,Khedr E,Saitoh  Y, Wallace M,Chan 
R RTMS in neuropathic pain management -a meta -analysis The Journal of Pain, 2009. 10(4): p. S38.  
23. Leung, A., et al., Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in Managing Mild Traumatic Brain Injury -
Related Head aches.  Neuromodulation, 2015.  
24. Fujiki, M. and O. Steward, High frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation mimics the effects of ECS 
in upregulating astroglial gene expression in the murine CNS.  Brain Res Mol Brain Res, 1997. 44(2): p. 
301-8. 
25. Funke,  K. and A. Benali, Modulation of cortical inhibition by rTMS - findings obtained from animal 
models.  J Physiol, 2011. 589(Pt 18): p. 4423 -35. 
26. Price, D.D., et al., A comparison of pain measurement characteristics of mechanical visual analogue 
and simple  numerical rating scales.  Pain, 1994. 56(2): p. 217 -26. 
27. Leung, A., et al., Concentration -effect relationship of intravenous alfentanil and ketamine on peripheral 
neurosensory thresholds, allodynia and hyperalgesia of neuropathic pain.  Pain, 2001. 91(1-2): p. 177 -
87. 
28. Vernon, M.K., et al., Reliability, validity, and responsiveness of the daily sleep interference scale among 
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia patients.  J Pain Symptom Manage, 2008. 
36(1): p. 54 -68. 
29. Zelman, D.C ., et al., Validation of a modified version of the Brief Pain Inventory for painful diabetic 
peripheral neuropathy.  J Vasc Nurs, 2005. 23(3): p. 97 -104. 
30. Mendoza, T., et al., Reliability and validity of a modified Brief Pain Inventory short form in pati ents with 
osteoarthritis.  Eur J Pain, 2006. 10(4): p. 353 -61. 
31. Forkmann, T., et al., The Clinical Global Impression Scale and the influence of patient or staff 
perspective on outcome.  BMC Psychiatry, 2011. 11: p. 83.  
32. Ashman, T.A., et al., A randomiz ed controlled trial of sertraline for the treatment of depression in 
persons with traumatic brain injury.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2009. 90(5): p. 733 -40. 
33. Chan, F., et al., The serotonin transporter polymorphisms and major depression following traumatic 
brain injury.  Brain Inj, 2008. 22(6): p. 471 -9. 
34. Novack, T.A., et al., Impact of early administration of sertraline on depressive symptoms in the first year 
after traumatic brain injury.  J Neurotrauma, 2009. 26(11): p. 1921 -8. 
35. Rapoport, M.J., et al., An open -label study of citalopram for major depression following traumatic brain 
injury.  J Psychopharmacol, 2008. 22(8): p. 860 -4. 
36. Posner, K., et al., The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal con sistency 
findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults.  Am J Psychiatry, 2011. 168(12): p. 
1266 -77. 
37. Reilly, M.C., A.S. Zbrozek, and E.M. Dukes, The validity and reproducibility of a work productivity and 
activity impairment instrume nt. Pharmacoeconomics, 1993. 4(5): p. 353 -65. 
38. Leung, A.Y., et al., Qualitative and quantitative characterization of the thermal grill.  Pain, 2005. 116(1-
2): p. 26 -32. 
39. Little RJ, R.D., Statistical Analysis with Missing Data . 1987, New York: John Wil ey and Sons.  
40. Laird, N.M. and J.H. Ware, Random -effects models for longitudinal data.  Biometrics, 1982. 38(4): p. 
963-74. 
41. Hedeker, D., R.D. Gibbons, and J.M. Davis, Random regression models for multicenter clinical trials 
data.  Psychopharmacol Bull,  1991. 27(1): p. 73 -7. 
42. Diggle MP, L.K., Zeger S., Analysis of longitudinal data . 1994, New York: Oxford University Press.  
43. SS, W.P.a.Y., Resampling -based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for Multiple P -value 
Adjustment.  1993, New York: John Wi ley & Sons.  
44. Hedeker, D. and R.D. Gibbons, MIXREG: a computer program for mixed -effects regression analysis 
with autocorrelated errors.  Comput Methods Programs Biomed, 1996. 49(3): p. 229 -52. 
45. Hedeker, D. and R.D. Gibbons, MIXOR: a computer program f or mixed -effects ordinal regression 
analysis.  Comput Methods Programs Biomed, 1996. 49(2): p. 157 -76. 
46. Treede, R.D., et al., Neuropathic pain: redefinition and a grading system for clinical and research 
purposes.  Neurology, 2008. 70(18): p. 1630 -5. 
 