 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 1 of 20  
Protocol:    
Nifedipine for Acute Tocolysis of Preterm Labor  
 
Principal Investigator:    
Edward Wells , MD  
 
Co-Investigators:    
David Nelson , MD; Donald D. McIntire, PhD; Kenneth J. Leveno, MD  
  
Funding:    
Internally funded by Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology  
 
IND Number:  Not applicable  
 
Version 8.0, March 22, 2018  
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 2 of 20 The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas  
Institutional Review Board  
 
Protocol Template  (for Investigator Initiated Studies)  
 
 
Title:  Nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor  
 
1. Introduction and Purpose:  
 
1. Describe why this research project will be done.  Clearly state the overall objectives, specific 
aims, hypotheses and rationale for performing the study.  
 
Preterm birth, defined as birth at less than 37 weeks, affects 11 - 13% of all births in the United States 
and results in significant morbidity and mortality for the approximately 500,000 infants born preterm 
each year.  The leadi ng cause of preterm birth  is preterm labor, a nd obstetrical interventions  have 
included various tocolytic medications . Efficacy studies on these have yielded disappointing results. 
(Leveno et al, 1986;  Leveno et al 1990 ; Canadian Preterm Labor Investigator s Group, 1992; Leveno 
and Cunningham, 1992 , Mercer and Merlino , 2009 ). There has been  recent  interest in nifedipine as a 
tocolytic for preterm labor (Conde -Agudelo  et al, 2011 ).  In 2008, a survey of maternal -fetal medicine 
specialists reported that 32% we re using nifedipine as their tocolytic of choice (Fox et al, 2008), 
despite that there are no place bo-controlled , randomized  studies  of nifedipine for acute tocolysis 
preterm labor showing  a benefit . 
 
This is  a randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled trial of nifedipine for acute tocolysis of 
preterm labor. Our objective is to determine whether nifedipine decr eases the rate of preterm birth . 
Our null hypothesis is that nifedipine does not reduce the rate of preterm birth.   
 
2. Indicate the Primary and Secondary Study Endpoints. Also indicate the Primary Safety 
Endpoints (unless the study is a safety study).  
 
The primary outcome will be prolongation of pregnancy until at least 37 weeks . Secondary outcomes 
will include 1) number of patients who receive at least 2 doses of betamethasone, 2) delivery within 48 
hours of diagnosis of preterm labor and 3) delivery within 7 days . 
 
3. Explain why the study risks are reasonable in relation to the potential benefits to su bjects and 
society.   
 
Given the  prevalence  of this off -label use of nifedipine , it is unlikely that serious adverse events are  
commonly encountered. The main serious risk associated with nifedipine is pulmonary edema, but in 
the 17 reported cases, this ri sk was reported in the context of other specific risk factors , such as use 
with other tocolytic drugs , use of rapid -acting formulations , prolonged tocolysis, and use when there 
was evidence of preex isting maternal cardiac disease/ dysfunction . Importantly, in 26 published tr ials 
involving isolated use of nifedipine for acute tocolysis, there were no cases of pulmonary edema 
amon g patients receiving nifedipine  (References 8a-aa). 
 
We plan to restrict use to h ealthy, normotensive women with singleton pregnanci es not receiving 
additional tocolytic agents.  We will also not use prolonged or sublingual (rapid acting) administration 
of nifedipine .  Therefore, these reported adverse reactions are most unlikely . Milder s ide effects 
associated with nifedipine include  headache , flushing and low blood pressure, which resolve  with 
discontinuation of the medication. The balance of benefits and risks favors  performing this study to 
quantify benefits, if any, given the potential for nifedipine to stop preterm labor and its h igh use rate in 
the community.  
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 3 of 20  
2. Background:  
 
1. State the purpose of the research and describe the related theory/data supporting the intent of 
the study.   
 
The purpose of this research is to determine whether nifepidine is effective compared to placebo for 
delaying delivery sufficient to ensure delivery of corticosteroids and thus reducing preterm birth  
related morbidity . Nifedipine interferes in calcium transport across cell membranes  and is an effective 
smooth muscle relaxant . We believe that uterine relaxation (tocolysis) from nifedipine may reduce 
preterm birth.    
 
2. Describe what is considered standard care (approved and/or customary) for the medical 
condition being studied, if applicable.  
 
Although t ocolysis is not currently used  at Parkland Hospital, it is considered within the standard of 
care for physicians caring for women in preterm labor.   
  
3. Explain how the new treatment or procedure may improve standard care, if applicable. Clearly 
delineate what is considered research study items from the “standard care”.  
 
If nifedipine is identified as an effective tocolytic for reducing preterm birth, it would be included as 
part of the standard care for women  with preterm labor.  
 
4. Provide a short statement concerning the status of the drug, drug combination, delivery 
method, device, or other interventions/concepts to be studied.  
 
Nifedipine is FDA approved for treatment of angina and hypertension, but it is wid ely used off -label as 
a tocolytic for preterm labor.  
 
5. Indicate whether the research is confirming or an extension of previous work, or whether it is 
pioneering with little prior information.  Include an evaluation of existing knowledge and identify 
the in formation gaps that the project intends to address.   
 
No placebo controlled , randomized  trials of nifedipine as an intervention for acute tocolysis  of preterm 
labor (defined as cervical dilatation with contractions)  have been reported, therefore, this stu dy will be 
an important contribution  to the medical literature .  
 
6. Describe published research with animals and/or humans that supports the study hypothesis 
or objectives.  If applicable, include information regarding toxicity.  Include a bibliography of 
key references/citations as applicable.  
 
Ex Vivo Data  
 
In human myometrium collected at the time of cesarean section Nitrendipine, a dihyropyridine calcium 
channel blocker  similar to nifedpine , depressed myometrial contractions . (Maigaard, 1986).  
 
Randomized Trials of Nifedipine  
 
Vis et al (2014) recently reported an unusual study of “randomized women” and “nonrandomized 
eligible women” with nifedipine tocolysis versus placebo in women between 24 and 34 weeks’ 
gestation with intact membranes, a sho rt cervix by ultrasound, a negative fetal fibronectin (in theory, 
low risk of preterm birth) and “symptoms of preterm labor” (symptoms were not further defined). This 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 4 of 20 was a non -inferiority trial and the authors reported that placebo was not inferior to nif edipine tocolysis. 
The very small sample size and its very unusual design raise questions about its utility .   
 
No placebo -controlled , randomized  trials of nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor  (defined as 
cervical dilatation and contractions) have been reported . Published  studies of nifedipine as a 
treatment for preterm labor are comparisons  to other  tocolytic  agents (References 8a-aa). These 
other agents include magnesium sulfate, atosiban and beta -agonis t drugs such as ritodrine , none of 
which  have been demonstrated to improve birth outcomes.  
 
Meta -Analyses of Trials Involving Nifedipine  
 
Cochrane Review of Calcium Channel Blockers for Inhibiting Preterm Labor  
 
The authors included published and unpublished data from 12 trials (1029 women) comparing calcium 
channel blockers to other tocolytic agents. The relative risk for giving birth within 7 days was  
decreased (RR 0.76, 95% confidence interval, 0.60 -0.97)  with nifedipine, and t he relative risk for 
maternal side effects was less (RR 0.32 95% CI, 0.24 -0.41). There were fewer adverse neonatal 
outcomes among patients treated with nifedipine, with the relative  risks (95% CI ) for RD S, necrotizing 
enterocolitis &  intraventricular hemorrhage being 0.6 3 (0.46 -0.88), 0.21 (0.05 -0.96),  0.59 (0.36 -0.98).  
 
Other Meta -Analyses  
 
Tsatsaris et al (2001) analyzed 9 randomized trials involving 679 patients comparing nifedipine to 
beta-agonists. The relative risks (95% confidence intervals) for delaying delivery at least 48 hours, 
side effects, respiratory dis tress syndrome and neonatal intensive care unit admission compared to 
other beta -agonists were 1.52 (1.03 -2.24), 0.12 (0.05 -0.29), 1.51 (0.63 -3.65) and 0.65 (0.43 -0.97), 
respectively.  Conde -Agudelo et al (2011) reviewed 26 trials  with 2179 women . Compared to beta -
agonists, nifedipine significantly reduced risk of delivery within 7 days and before 34 weeks, RDS, 
necrotizing enterocolitis, IVH, neonatal jaundice and ICU admission. Compared to magnesium sulfate, 
nifedipine showed no significant differences. Maintenance tocolysis is ineffective.  
 
Safety  
 
Review s of Adverse Outcomes Involving Nifedipine :  In a review of the literature on adverse events 
following the use of calcium channel blockers  like nifedipine  for tocolysis, Oei (2006) concluded  that: 
1) calcium channel blockers should not be combined with intravenous beta -adrenergic agonists  (such 
as ritodrine hydrochloride or terbutaline) , 2) intravenous nicardipine or high oral doses of nifedipine 
should not be used in cases of multiple gestation or when th e mother is compromised 
cardiovascularly , and 3) b lood pressure should be monitored and cardiotocography should be 
recorded when immediate release tablets are used.  
 
Importantly , in the proposed  study, only healthy women  with singleton  pregnancies will  be consented 
for participation,  sub-lingua l (rapid -acting) administration  will not be use d and multiple tocolytics will 
not be employed.  Compared to the only FDA approved tocolytic (ritodrine), nifedipine has fewer side 
effects.   
 
Recently, Xiao et al (20 14) reported the effect of magnesium sulfate and nifedipine on the risk of 
developing pulmonary edema in preterm births: “nifedipine did not increase the odds of developing 
pulmonary edema [adjusted odds ratio (OR)=1.22 (confidence interval (CI) 0.50, 3.01 ), P=0.67]”  
 
Hemodynamic and Metabolic Effects  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 5 of 20 Papatsonis et al (2003) compared 95 patients randomized to oral nifedipine to 90 patients random ized 
to intravenous ritodrine. Compared to nifedipine, p atients who received ritodrine had significantly 
lower m ean diastolic blood pressures at 24 and 48 hours (65 +/ - 12 versus 70 +/ - 8, p=.001, and 65 
+/- 12 versus 71 +/ -8, p=.004, respectively), and significantly higher mean maternal pulses at 24 and 
48 hours (105 +/ - 17 versus 86 +/ - 13, p<.0001, and 100 +/ - 21 versus 85 +/ - 12, p<.0001).  Gucglu et 
al (2006) studied maternal hemodynamic parameters as well as Doppler waveforms of various fetal 
structures in 28 women who received nifedipine for preterm labor . The maternal and fetal h eart rates 
were unaffected desp ite that maternal mean systolic and diastolic bl ood pressures were  lower at 24 
hours. Changes in the umbilical artery Doppler measurements were “minimal and not sustained.” 
Additionally, De Heus et al (2009) reported the effects of the tocolytics atosiban and nifedipine on fetal 
movements, heart rate and blood flow and concluded: “tocolysis with either atosiban or nifedipine 
combined with betamethasone administration appears to have no direct fetal adverse effects.”  
 
Recently, Ulubasoglu (2014) reported th at there were no statistically significant differences between 
24-hour values for the umbilical artery  pulsatility index, resistance index (RI), systolic -diastolic (S:D) 
ratio, right uterine artery measures ( pulsatility index, RI, S:D ratio ) or left uterin e artery measures ( RI 
and S:D ratio ), and they concluded that “o ral nifedipine is a safe tocolytic agent with no long -term 
effect on fetomaternal circulation in pregnant women at risk of preterm delivery .” 
 
3. Concise Summary of Project:  
 
1. Provide a brief description of the study design.  If applicable, describe the treatment arms, use 
of placebo or comparison  drug/device and randomization.  
 
This will be a randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled trial of nifedipine for acute tocolysis (48 
hours  total duration ) of preterm labor in women with singleton gestations between 28 -0/7 weeks and 
33-6/7 weeks’ gestation. After initial monitoring on Labor & Delivery, a ll women will be  admitted to the 
antepartum ward until  approximately 34 weeks’ gestation  and com pletion of the full  course of 
corticosteroids , although the provider will determine when it is safe  for the patient to be discharged, as 
is our current routine without tocolysis.  Discharge can be affected by whether the patient is 
considered stable (is she  contracting again?), if her cervical exam has changed (if her cervix has 
increased dilatation, particularly to 4 cm or more, she may not be considered safe for discharge) and if 
she is receiving any other interventions . We will avoid creating an expectati on that by participating in 
this study, then an exact or particular discharge date is assured.   
 
2. Include specific details regarding the study drug(s) being used, including the generic/trade 
name of the study drug. Include details about drug preparation, pa ckaging, shipping, storage, 
dispensing, return and destruction. Include details of any dose reductions or dose escalations 
that may occur including the dose change and duration of transition from one dose to another.  
 
The generic name is nifedipine which i s marketed as Ad alat or Procardia as trade name s. Generic 
nifedipine in 20 mg doses will be obtained from a distributor in the United States. The Investigational 
Drug Service at Parkland Hospital has arranged for t he placebo and study d rug to  be encapsulated by 
Abrams -Royal Pharmacy , 8220 Abrams Road, Dallas, TX 752313550 Parkwood Blvd, Bldg F, Ste 
#630, Frisco TX 75034. This pharmacy has experience with drug encapsulation for randomized 
controlled trials . The Investigational Drug Service at P arkland Hospital is aware that Abrams -Royal 
Pharmacy will be encapsulating the placebo and study drug.  Unused or expired study drug will be 
returned to the investigational drug service (IDS) pharmacy.  
 
Women who consent to participate in the above study w ill be randomized by the IDS pharmacy to 
receive either placebo or a loading dose of nifedipine 20 mg oral capsule, which will then be repeated 
after 90 minutes  if there are persistent contractions . Four hours  after the first dose, the y will begin 
nifedipi ne 20 mg oral capsule every 4 hours for a total  duration  of 48 hours, up to a maximum of 160 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 6 of 20 mg the first 24 hour period (120 mg the second 24 hour period) , unless delivery occurs sooner . We 
anticipate that women will remain on Labor & Delivery for monitor ing for at least 24 hours prior to 
consideration of transfer to the high -risk antepartum unit.  
 
3. Include information regarding the study drug(s) classification and the mechanism of action, if 
known.   
 
Nifedipine is a dihydropyridine cl ass of calcium ch annel blocker, and are selective for smooth muscle. 
The dihydropyridines are thought to inhibit  uterine myometrial contractions by causing relaxation of 
the uterine smooth muscle.  
 
4. Include a brief description of outcome variables and study endpoints, as a ppropriate.   
 
The primary outcome will be delay of delivery until 37 weeks’ . Secondary outcomes will include 1) at 
least 2 doses of betamethasone , 2) delivery within  48 hours’  gestation  and 3) delivery  within 7 days . 
 
5. Indicate the maximum number of local subjects to be consented  on this protocol, including 
projected screen failures and early withdrawals.  Include subjects who will receive 
interventions as well as controls, if applicable.  For multi -center research, indi cate the total 
sample size for the entire project across all sites.  
 
Assuming a 50% consent rate, we will be approaching ap proximately 300 women for consent.   
Sample size calculations indicate we need 75 women per arm or 150 total women to demonstrate a 
33% reduction in preterm birth , based upon 2 prior Randomized Placebo Controlled Trials of tocolysis 
(magnesium sulfate and ritodrine) performed at Parkland Hospital (Leveno et al, 1986; Cox and 
Leveno, 1990) .   
 
6. If the study involves use of existing charts,  records, or specimens, specify the maximum 
number that will be reviewed to compile the data or the sample population necessary to 
address the research question.  
 
This is a prospective trial and existing records will not be reviewed.  
 
7. Provide the total num ber of subjects to be studied at this site and approximate ly how long the 
study will last.  
 
It is anticipated that the study will  take approximately 4-5 years  to consent and study a total of 150 
women  with preterm labor between 28 -0/7 weeks and 33 -6/7 weeks . 
 
8. Include conditions which would result in the subject exiting the study prior to the expected 
completion date, such as non -compliance, safety reasons, subject withdrawal of consent, 
disease progression, etc.  
 
This is a n intent to treat study.  Withdrawal of  consent would be the only indication for early exit.  
 
4. Study Procedures:  
 
1. Provide a chronological description of all study procedures.  If applicable, divide procedures 
into pilot, screening, and procedures performed at each regular visit.  Indicate how many total 
visits and approximately how long visits will last.  For studies that are providing medication(s), 
give the name(s), dosage, and route of administration.  For studies that have more than one 
arm/part, provide the above information for each.  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 7 of 20 Women presenting with symptoms of preterm labor will be assessed using electronic external fetal 
heart rate and uterine contraction monitoring. Women will receive a baseline and subsequent cervical 
exam s as necessary . If at any time  during her e valuation , the woman is dilated to at least 2 cm  and 
has uterine  contractions, she will be potentially eligible for study .  Women with a singleton gestation  
between 28 -0/7 weeks and 33 -6/7 will be approached for consent to participat e by Research Nurses 
employed by the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  or Dr. Wells if a Research Nurse is 
unavailable . They will be randomized by the IDS Pharmacy into treatment (study drug, nifedipine) or 
control (placebo) groups . 
 
Study women  will receive nifedipine 20 mg  or placebo  oral capsule followed by a second dose after 
90 minutes  if there are persistent contractions . Four hours after the initial dose, they will begin 
nifedipine 20 mg or placebo oral capsule every 4 hours for a total duration of 48 hours, up  to a 
maximum of 160 mg the first 24 hour period (120 mg the second 24 hour period), unless delivery 
occurs sooner . We anticipate that women will remain on Labor & Delivery for monitoring for at least 24 
hours prior to consideration of transfer to the high -risk an tepartum unit.  
 
There will be a “HOLD DOSE” parameter in which a dose will be held if an enrolled patient:  
 refuses medication  
 has heart rate greater than 1 20  
If a dose is held, the nurse will contact the 4th year resident who will ensure Dr. Wells is noti fied. 
 
There will be a “STOPPING RULE” for further individual participation in the study for any of the 
following criteria: withdrawal of consent, diffuse rash or anaphylaxis reaction to medication (requires 
confirmation by house officer), hypotension requ iring delivery or medication such as ephedrine, or 
development of any obstetrical outcomes that would normally preclude tocolysis (development of 
ruptured membranes, development of chorioamnionitis, development of preeclampsia/gestational 
hypertension, dev elopment of bleeding suspicious for abruption, cervical dilatation of 6 cm or more or 
fetal death) , or if a decision is made to either deliver the patient or to use regional anesthesia . 
 
Women without  further cervical change  after monitorin g on Labor and D elivery will be  admitted to the 
antepartum unit fo r surveillance  until approximately 34 weeks’ gestation  and completion of the full 
course  of corticosteroids , although the provider will determine when it is safe  for the patient to be 
discharged . This is our current practice in such women and is not a study procedure. Discharge can 
be affected by whether the patient is considered stable (is she contracting again?), if her cervical 
exam has changed (if her cervix has increased dilatation, particular ly to 4 cm or more, she may not be 
considered safe for discharge) and if she is receiving any other interventions . We will avoid creating 
an expectation that by participating in this study, then  an exact or  particular discharge date is assured . 
Some patien ts choose to leave earlier (usually due to family obligations) despite the recommendation 
to stay until 34 weeks’ gestation.  Women who are discharged from the antepartum unit  will be  
followed -up in the OB Complications Clinic of Parkland Hospital weekly u ntil delivery. This method of 
outpatient follow -up for patients after discharge from the antepartum unit  is also our routine and is not 
a study specific procedure.  
 
2. You may include tables, figures and/or flow diagrams if necessary to clarify highly complex  
studies.    
N/A 
 
3. Indicate the timing of all study procedures and the anticipated duration of the subject’s 
involvement.   
 
Study participants involvement in study related procedures will last 48 hours.  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 8 of 20 4. As applicable, include the amount and blood to be drawn, tissue samples to be collected, 
radiation exposure, questionnaires, or other interventions.  
 
No additional blood, tissue, imaging studies, questionnaires or other in terventions are planned . 
  
5. Note if the subject will be responsible for any research -related costs and estimate the amount 
of these costs, if applicable.  
 
This study will be locally  funded by the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and participants will 
not be responsible for any research -related costs .  Study drug is the only r esearch related cost.  All 
other procedures such as inpatient hospitalization are part of routine care for women with preterm 
labor and a cervix of 2 cm or more.   
 
6. If applicable, describe end -of-study procedures, including transition of the subject to alte rnative 
care.  
N/A 
 
5. Sub-Study Procedures:  
 
1. For any sub -studies that may be a part of the research, please provide a subsection title and 
include information about the procedures that will be performed and whether subjects have the 
option to participate o r not (e.g., pharmacokinetics, biomarkers).  
N/A 
 
2. For studies that collect blood and/or tissue for DNA analysis where the genetic portion is 
described in the Master Protocol provide a genetic subsection to include information about the 
procedures that will be performed and whether subjects have the option to participate in the 
sub-study.  
N/A 
 
6. Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects:  
 
1. Describe the characteristics of the subject population.  For example, list any characteristics 
required for eligibility, such as  diagnosis, prior therapy, age, or gender.  
 
Inclusion criteria include:  
 Mothers between 16 and 44 years of age  inclusive . 
 Singleton pregnancy   
 Intact membranes  
 Betwee n 28-0/7 weeks and 33 -6/7 weeks’ gestation  inclusive  
 Reported or documented uterine activity  
 Cervical dilation between 2 cm and 4 cm inclusive  
 
2. Explain the rationale for the use of special classes of subjects who are more likely to be 
vulnerable, such as pregnant women, children, cognitively impaired people  or prisoners.  
 
Pregnant women are included as this study is for an intervention for preterm labor.  
 
7. Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects:  
 
1. Describe the exclusion criteria. For example, list any characteristics that would preclude 
participation, such as prior therapy, concomitant treatments and co -morbid conditions.  If 
exclusion is based on age, gender, language barriers or social/ethnic grou p, describe the need 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 9 of 20 for the exclusion in terms of scientific validity.  Do not justify exclusion in terms of convenience 
or other non -scientific issues, such as lack of funding.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
Oppose inclusion criteria:  
 Multifetal gestation  
 Less than 28 weeks’ gestation  
 34 or more weeks’ gestation  
 Ruptured membranes   More than 4 cm dilated  
Corticosteroids contraindicated:  
 Previously received a course of 
corticosteroids for fetal lung 
maturation  
 
Tocolysis contraindicated:  
 Low amniotic fluid 
(oligohydramnios)  
 Fetal growth restriction  
 Chorioamnionitis  or temperature of 
at least 38.0 degrees Celsius  
 Fetal death  
 Preeclampsia  
 Suspected placental abruption or 
placenta previa  
 Lethal fetal malformation or 
amniotic fluid index at least  35 
 
 
  
      Nifedipine contraindicated:  
 Systolic BP < 90 mmHg or diastoli c 
BP < 50 mmHg  
 Baseline tachycardia (pulse >120 
after 2 consecutive measurements 
30 minutes apart)  
 Chronic hypertension treated with 
antihypertensives in pregnancy  
 Seizure disorder or HIV*  
 Women who have received 
progesterone therapy in the 2nd or 
3rd trimester  
 Maternal allergy to nifedipine  
 Known maternal cardiac disease  
* See July 2013 FDA warning regarding nifedipine and phenytoin, also several protease inhibitors 
are strong inhibitors of metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4  
 
2. Include situations or conditions, unknown at the time of enrollment that might cause a 
screening failure.  
 
No situations  known . 
 
8. Sources of Research Material:  
 
1. Identify the source(s) of materials/data to be used in the research, such as information or 
specimens  from medical records, databases, repositories or other sources.   If a combination 
of these sources are used, and/or new clinical data generated, describe how the research 
material is acquired.  
 
Data on  obstetrical and neonatal outcomes for all women delivered at Parkland Hospital are routinely 
entered into Dr. Leveno’s obstetrical operations database .  Outcomes recorded for study women and 
their offspring will be linked by Don McIntire, PhD, who is the only person who has access to this 
password protected and encrypted dataset.   
 
2. State whether the material or data will be obtained specifically for research purposes, or 
whether existing records, specimens or other data will be used. If existing records or 
specimens are being used, please indicate the dates from which data or samples will be 
extracted (start and stop dates).  
 
This will be a prospective, double -blind, placebo controlled trial and therefore existing records or 
specimens will not be used.  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 10 of 20 9. Recruitment Methods and Consenting  Process:  
 
1. Indicate if the potential subjects will be patients of the investigators.  
 
All investigators are fa culty members and oversee obstetrical care at Parkland Hospital.  
 
2. Describe and provide details of the recruitment process.  Include when, where, by whom and 
how potential subjects will be approached. Indicate if non -English speaking subjects are being 
consented and if so, indicate how informed consent process will be con ducted.  
 
Research nurses employed by the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, and who are on -call and 
monitoring Labor & Delivery, will identify, approach and provide informed consent to all potential 
participants  (these tasks will be performed by Dr. Wells if a research nurse is unavailable when a 
patient presents with preterm labor) . If potential participants are non -English speaking, a language -
appropriate translator will be obtained as per current Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology 
research protoc ols. 
 
3. Explain measures that will be taken to respect the privacy of the potential subjects.  
 
Patients will generally be consented in one of the private rooms on L abor & Delivery.  
 
4. Explain what precautions will be taken to minimize the potential for undue i nfluence or 
coercion.  
 
Professional research nurses already on staff with the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, and 
who do not have an interest in a  particular study outcome , will be providing the informed consent  
during weekdays and most weeknights. If a patient presents with active preterm labor when a 
research nurse is unavailable, Dr. Wells will obtain informed consent. Dr. Wells has observed several 
of these nurses obtain  informed consent in a dispassionate and thorough manner, which e mphasizes 
to the patient that the usual care that we provide will not be affected by her decision to participate or 
not. 
 
5. If you are requesting a waiver of informed consent, explain how the criteria for waiver are met.  
N/A 
 
6. If vulnerable populations will b e included, describe the additional protections that will be 
provided, such as methods to obtain surrogate consent (cognitively impaired subjects), and 
plans for obtaining assent and/or the permission of one or both parents (minors).  
N/A 
 
10. Potential Ris ks: 
 
1. Describe the known risks and/or potential discomforts associated with each intervention or 
research procedure.  Risks may be physical, psychological, social or economic.  
 
Mild side effects associated with nifedipine include headache, flushing and low blood pressure, which 
generally resolve with discontinuation of the medication and without further intervention. In a 
systematic review, Khan et al (2010) reported that the use  of calcium channel blockers for tocolysis or 
for hypertension in pregnancy was associated with a 3 -fold increased risk of tachycardia and an 8 to 
9-fold increased risk of hypotension when the dose exceeded 60 mg per day. However, this analysis 
included al l pregnant women receiving all different types of calcium channel blockers (including 
severely hypertensive women , particularly women with preeclampsia and severe gestational 
hypertension , a very different population that we propose to study ), and thus was  not limited to 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 11 of 20 women with preterm labor, the sub -population than we propose to study. Regarding the possibility of 
hypotension, Luewan et al (2010) studied blood pressure in normotensive pregnant women treated 
with nifedipine 10 mg every 15 minutes up to 40 mg, followed by 60 mg controlled release tablet in 4 
to 6 hours. The authors defined hypotension as a decrease in diastolic blood pressure of at least 15 
mmHg from baseline, and reported up to 17% of patients met these criteria. They concluded that 
“hypotension secondary to nifedipine was not associated with significant clinical symptoms, 
suggesting that nifedipine is relatively safe in terms of hypotensive effect.”  
 
Houtzager et al (2006) performed long -term follow -up of children exposed in utero to nif edipine or 
ritodrine for preterm labor and reported: “ The results do not support any differential postnatal effect of 
the tocolytic agents ritodrine or nifedipine on the child's long -term psychosocial and motor functioning. 
The slightly better outcome of c hildren randomised in the nifedipine group is most likely due to more 
favourable perinatal outcomes in this group. ” 
 
More serious side effects are rare when the widespread use of nifedipine in the community is 
considered.  In the English -language medical l iterature, t here are 22 reported cases of pulmonary 
edema , 1 stillbirth and 2 cases of myocardial infarction  associated with nifedipine tocolysis , but these 
risks were  reported in association with other particular risk factors such as use with other tocolytic 
drugs, use of rapid -acting formulations, prolonged tocolysis and use when  there was evidence of 
preexisting maternal cardiac disease/dysfunction  (Bal et al, 2004; Vaast et al, 2004; Abbas et al, 
2006; Van Geijn et al, 2005; Nassar et al, 2007; Ga tault et al, 2008; ; Kutuk et al, 2013; Serena et al, 
2014; Van Veen et al, 2005; Oei et al, 1999; Verhaert and Acker, 2004) . The single report of stillbirth 
was disputed and provoked a series of follow -up letters in response to the controversy (Johnson, 
2005; Kandysamy, 2005; Papatsonis et al, 2005). Importantly, in 26 published trials involving isolated 
use of nifedipine for acute tocolysis, there were no cases of pulmonary edema or more serious side 
effects among patients receiving nifedipine  (References  8a-aa). More recently, Kutuk (2013) reported 
a case of pulmonary edema with nifedipine use in a woman with ruptured membranes at 33 weeks. 
The authors note that the pulmonary edema occurred on the 4th day of her admission in association 
with prolonged toc olysis . In this case report of a single patient, there was prolonged use of nifedipine 
in a woman with ruptured membranes, which was arguably not acute tocolysis at all since the event 
occurred during a period typically associated with maintenance tocolysi s. Our study restricts use to 
acute tocolysis with only 48 hours’ duration, and in women with intact membranes. Four other cases 
of pulmonary edema were reported by Serena et al (2014), but these were all in women with 
prolonged intravenous use of nicardip ine, and intravenous tocolysis is a recognized risk factor for 
pulmonary edema (Oei, 2006). We are not using intravenous formulations nor will we be using 
nifedipine for prolonged periods (maximum 48 hours of acute tocolysis).  
 
Recently, Xiao et al (2014) reported the effect of magnesium sulfate and nifedipine on the risk of 
developing pulmonary edema in preterm births: “nifedipine did not increase the odds of developing 
pulmonary edema [adjusted odds ratio (OR)=1.22 (confidence interval (CI) 0.50, 2.01), P =0.67]”. Of 
note, Sciscione et al (2003) reviewed 62,917 consecutive pregnancies delivered between 1989 and 
1999 and reported that acute pulmonary edema due to tocolytics was exclusively in women who 
received multiple simultaneous tocolytic agents “the mos t common combination was intravenous 
magnesium sulfate and subcutaneous terbutaline.” In the current study, we are not using multiple 
tocolytics, and women in this study will not be receiving magnesium sulfate, so this risk is felt to be 
very low.  
 
A sing le case report of severe resistant maternal hypotension following tocolysis with nifedipine was 
published in December 2014 (Khoo and Mathur, 2014). There are several aspects of patient 
management within this case report that raise concern, and which are di stinct from protocols in our 
present study. First, the patient in the case report presented with hypotension (87/51 mmHg) and 
ruptured membranes. In our present study, we exclude women with low blood pressure (systolic value 
less than 90 mmHg and/or a dias tolic value less than 50 mmHg), as well as women with ruptured 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 12 of 20 membranes. Second, more aggressive dosing of nifedipine was used in the case report (nifedipine 10 
mg every 15 minutes for 4 doses). This more aggressive dosing amounted to 40 mg in the first h our, 
compared to the protocol in our present study, which calls for 20 mg, with an additional 20 mg after 90 
minutes if there are persistent contractions and hold -dosing parameters are not met. Third, the 
nifedipine was continued despite tachycardia (135 b eats per minute) and persistent hypotension 
(88/43 mmHg). In the case report, despite the patient feeling weak and having persistent hypotension 
and tachycardia (83/43 mmHg and 121 beats per minute) 5 hours after the first dose of medication, 
the medicatio n was continued. In our study, there is a hold dose parameter for heart rates of 120 
beats per minute or more. In the case report, the blood pressure dropped further to 76/42 with 
persistent tachycardia at 7 hours after the first dose of nifedipine, and th e blood pressure at delivery 
was 56/43.  The authors could not be sure of the hypotension being attributable to the nifedipine and 
the authors considered sepsis in the differential diagnosis, and her intravenous antibiotics were noted 
to be “oralised” on t he third postoperative day. Again, this single case report was notable for more 
aggressive nifedipine dosing in a woman with baseline hypotension and ruptured membranes at the 
outset, and the nifedipine was continued despite worsening clinical status and p ersistent tachycardia. 
We exclude women with ruptured membranes and baseline hypotension, and our hold -dose 
parameters offer further protection; therefore, the outcome reported in this single case report is most 
unlikely to occur given the protections set up in the present study.  
 
Two recent reviews of the literature recommend nifedipine as the first choice tocolytic for its possible 
beneficial effect and favorable side effect profile:  
1) Van Vliet et al (2014) wrote: “for the initial tocolysis, the use of ato siban or nifedipine for 48 h is 
recommended based on the largest effectiveness and most favorable side effect profile.”  
2) Haram et al (2014) wrote: “nifedipine may be a reasonable first choice because it is easy to 
administer and also of limited side effects  relative to Beta2 -mimetics.”  
We plan to restrict use to healthy, normotensive women with singleton pregnancies not receiving 
additional tocolytic agents.  We will also not use sublingual administration of nifedipine.  Therefore, 
these reported adverse rea ctions are most unlikely.  
 
2. Estimate the probability (chance or likelihood of occurrence) that a given harm may occur and 
its severity (mild, moderate or severe) and define risks by percentages, when available, or by 
categorizing with the terms rare, unlik ely, likely.  
 
Mild Events:  
Mild headache  or flushing : Likely ;  Moderate h eadache , Dizziness  or Nausea:  Unlikely  
A review (Chan et al, 2008) of nifedipine for first -line tocolysis of 212 episodes of preterm labor in 203 
women reported that moderate headache  was the most common side effect (9 of the 203 women, 
4.4%). Other side effects included flushing (9 of the 203 women, 4.4%), dizziness (4 of the 203 
women, 2%), nausea (3 of the 203 women, 1.5%), shortness of breath (1 of the 203 women, 0.5%). A 
study by Guclu (2006) found that u p to 71% of patients had flushing and 25% had  headache.  A review 
(Marin et al, 2007) of nifedipine tocolysis in 24 patients repo rted that 11 (45.8%) had  mild headache . 
 
Moderate Events:  
Hypotension or Tach ycardia : Unlikely  
A review  (Chan et al, 2008)  of 203 women for whom nifedipine was prescribed as the first -line 
tocolytic in 212 episodes of preterm labor reported that nifedipine was discontinued for hypotension 
less than 90/60 in 3 women (1.5%). One woman (0.5%) developed tachyca rdia of at least 140 BPM.  
 
Pulmonary Edema : Rare  
There are 8 case reports/case  series (Bal et al, 2004; Vaast et al, 2004; Abbas et al, 2006; Van Geijn 
et al, 2005; Nassar et al, 2007; Gatault et al, 2008 ; Kutuk et al, 2013; Serena et al, 2014 ) including a 
total of 22 patients with pulmonary edema  in the English -language medical literature . Risk factors 
appear to be multiple gestation, sublingual (rapid -acting) or intravenous dosing of nifedipine or 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 13 of 20 nicardipine , use of multiple tocolytics , prolon ged use of tocolysis and maternal cardiac disease or 
dysfunction. These risk factors will be avoided due to our very specific inclusion and exclusion criteria 
and the non-sub-lingual formulation of nifedipine used.  In an expert review of the literature, Oe i (2006) 
recommends that intravenous nicardipine or high doses of nifedipine should not be used in cases of 
multiple gestation or when the mother is compromised cardiovascularly.  Intravenous formulations will 
not be used in this study, and multiple gestat ions will be excluded.  Importantly , in 26 published trials  
involving nifedipine for acute tocolysis, there were no cases of pulmonary edema among patients 
receiving nifedipine . 
 
Severe Events:  
Stillbirth or myocardial infarction : Extremely r are 
Van Veen e t al (2005) reported the only identified case of stillbirth in the English language literature 
after use of nifedipine. Importantly, this patient received multiple tocolytics (atosiban, indomethacin, 
nifedipine) which will not be the case in our study. Only 2 case reports were found  of myocardial 
infarction associated with nifedipine tocolysis in the literature (Oei et al, 1999; Verhaert and Acker, 
2004). In both cases healthy babies were ultimately delivered and there were no abnormalities on 
maternal foll ow-up testing. Importantly, in these cases nifedipine was used with another tocolytic 
(ritodrine), and in one case there were ruptured membranes. W e will not be using nifedipine in 
conjunction with another tocolytic (in this case ritodrine), nor will we be  using nifedipine in patients 
with ruptured membranes (at higher risk for infection ). Of note, t here have been 3  placebo -controlled 
trials of nifedipine for maintenance tocolysis  over prolonged periods (Lyell et al, 2008; Parry et al, 
2012; Roos et al, 2013) . Importantly , none of these  reported  severe  adverse events  for nifedipine 
during the long periods that maintenance tocolysis was employed . 
 
3.  Compare the risks of the research to standard of care.  If placebo controls are used, justify their 
use ov er active or other kinds of controls.  
 
At Parkland Ho spital, patients  receive corticosteroids for fetal lung maturity, ampicillin as prophylaxis 
for Group B streptococcus, sedation and hydration. Tocolytic drugs are not used for preterm labor . 
However, use  of tocolytic agents is within the standard of care for women with preterm labor.  Given 
that it is uncertain whether nifedipine for acute tocolysis results in a benefit  by delaying preterm birth 
and its associated risks , or only carries risks of side effec ts without benefit s, it is ethical to compare 
nifedipine to placebo.  
 
11. Subject Safety and Data Monitoring:  
 
1. Describe what measures have been taken and/or will be taken to prevent and minimize any 
risks or discomforts.  
 
Only singleton pregnancies in wome n with preterm labor and unruptured membranes will receive 
either  placebo or  nifedipine .  Multiple t ocolytics will not be used. Additionally, i ntravenous or 
sublingual (rapid -acting) forms of nifedipine will not be used. Only women with preterm labor at 28-0/7 
weeks to 33 -6/7 weeks will be included, as women with preterm labor between 24 -0/7 weeks and 27 -
6/7 weeks receive magnesium sulfate for neu roprophylaxis and magnesium sulfate can synergize w ith 
nifedipine to block calcium movement through calcium ch annels. Women with hypotension, 
tachycardia or significant maternal cardiac disease  or hypertension treated with antihypertensives  will 
be excluded  at the outset . Women with potential indications for delivery will be excluded.   Hold dose 
parameters and sto pping rule for further participation are detailed in Section 4(1) above.  
 
2. If applicable, discuss provisions for insuring necessary medical or professional intervention in 
the event of adverse events.   
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 14 of 20 All study participants will undergo regular vital sign monitoring while on Labor & Delivery and on the 
antepartum unit. Patients on Labor and Delivery will have continuous electronic fetal monitoring and 
tocometer evaluation, and patients on the antepartum unit  will have daily fetal heart testing . If a 
maternal or fetal complication is identified, physicians will be immediately available to intervene on 
behalf of the mother and fetus.  
 
3. Describe the plan for monitoring study data collected to protect subject safety and data 
integrity. Please review Guidance on Data and Safety Monitoring Plans  for instructions on 
what information should be provided.  If desired, the DSMP Template  may be used and 
included in your applicati on packet.  
See DSMP  
 
4. Note: investigator -initiated studies involving administration of an experimental (i.e. not FDA 
approved for the indication/population under study) drug, device or intervention must  submit a 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan ( DSMP Template ) and may be required by the IRB to establish a 
Data Safety monitoring Board (DSMB).  
See DSMP  
Summary of Sections 66.0 and 67.0 of the Smart Form for the Data Safety Monitoring Plan and 
Committee  
Who comprises the Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)?  
The DSMC is composed of Dr. Don McIntire, PhD, Professor and Statistician within the 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, as well as two faculty physicians from the 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology not participating in the study (Dr. Scott Rober ts and 
Dr. Oscar Andujo).  
When will the DSMC meet:  
The DSMC will meet at least annually during the projected 4 year duration of the study. 
Additionally, after accrual of 75 patients (half of the planned 150 patients for recruitment), an 
interim analysis wi ll be performed.  
What will be analyzed by the DSMC?  
The DSMC will monitor study accrual rate, study attrition including participant 
withdrawals/dropouts, patterns of AEs and/or unanticipated events, patterns of protocol 
deviations and/or violations and ch anges in risk/benefit. Efficacy (positive and negative) as 
well as possible futility of further study will be examined at the interim analysis. Significance 
levels for the interim analysis will be altered by the method of Lan -DeMets. Safety will be 
evaluat ed at each meeting of the Data Safety and Monitoring Board.  
How will safety be evaluated and what study -specific stopping rules will be used by the DSMC?  
Safety will be evaluated by analyzing situations in which administration of the study drug is 
stopped  according to the “STOPPING RULE” below.  
The study would be stopped if nifedipine is found to significantly delay preterm birth, or if a 
significantly greater number of stillbirths or emergency deliveries due to nonreassuring fetal 
heart tracing attributa ble to study drug during the 48 hour period during which the study drug 
will be administered for acute tocolysis of preterm labor.  
What safety mechanisms are built into the Nifedipine study protocol?  
Apart from the strict inclusion and exclusion criteria and the plan to continue maternal and fetal 
monitoring for at least 24 hours after beginning the study, the following safety parameters are 
part of the study protocol:  
There will be a “HOLD DOSE” parameter in which a dose will be held if an enrolled patien t 
either refuses medication or has a heart rate greater than 120.  If a dose is held, the nurse will 
contact the 4th year resident who will ensure Dr. Wells is notified.  
There will be a “STOPPING RULE” for further individual participation in the study for any of the 
following criteria: withdrawal of consent, diffuse rash or anaphylaxis reaction to medication 
(requires confirmation by house officer), hypotension requiring delivery or medication such as 
ephedrine, or development of any obstetrical outcomes th at would normally preclude tocolysis 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 15 of 20 (development of ruptured membranes, development of chorioamnionitis, development of 
preeclampsia/gestational hypertension, development of bleeding suspicious for abruption, 
cervical dilatation of 6 cm or more or fetal d eath), or if a decision is made to either deliver the 
patient or to give regional anesthesia.  
 
12. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality:  
 
1. Describe how data/specimens will be collected and stored and the security methods in place.  
Note: the more sensitive the study data, the more sophisticated the methods should be to 
maintain confidentiality.  
 
Data on all obstetrical and neonatal outcomes are routinely entered into Dr. Leveno’s obstetrical 
operations database  (a secure, password -protected databas e at UT Southwestern ). 
 
2. If data/specimens will be disclosed to outside persons or entities, list the entities and the 
method used to code or de -identify the data/specimens.  
 
No data or specimens are anticipated to be disclosed to any outside persons or ent ities. 
 
3. State if you intend to apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality from the NIH.  
N/A 
 
13. Potential Benefits:  
 
1.  Describe the potential benefits of the research to the subjects, to others with similar problems, 
and to society.  If there is no prospect of direct benefit to the subjects, state how the knowledge 
to be gained will benefit society enough to justify any risks to subjects.  
 
Potential direct benefits to the  study participant are prolongation of pregnancy and avoidance of 
preterm birth.  Potentia l benefits to society include a  better understanding of whether nifedipine is an 
effective intervention for tocolysis of preterm labor . 
 
14. Biostatistics: (omit this section for peer -reviewed research such as cooperative group, or NIH - 
sponsored studies, and for industry -sponsored research which has been submitted to FDA)  
  
1.  Describe the statistical methods to be used to answer the study question(s).  Pilot studies also 
require a method of analysis, but the justification of the target sample size is not required.  
 
T-tests (two -sided) will be used for continuous variables and Chi -squared tests for categorical 
variables.  Power will be 80% and an alpha of 0.05 will be used.  
 
2. Explain how the target sample size was determined.   
 
Previous studies done o n preterm patients at Parkland Hospital include Leveno e t al (1986) , Cox and 
Leveno (1990)  and Chao et al (2011 ). In Chao et al (2011 ), there were 153 patients in 12 months. 
Over 4 years, we would anticipate four -times that (153 x 4 = 612).  In Chao et al (2011 , The Diagnosis 
and Natural History of False Preterm Labor, Obstet Gynecol ), 27% of the patients diagnosed with 
contractions and with cervical dilation of less than 2 cm delivered prior to  37 weeks’ gestation. 
However, this study by Chao et al was not a prospective study. Additionally, it focused on women with 
cervical dilatation less than 2 cm , whereas the current study includes women with cervical dilation of 2 
to 4 cm dilated . Importantly,  women with more cer vical dilation are more likely to deliver early , and it is 
appropriate to revise the target enrollment .  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 16 of 20 Fortunately, 2 prior Randomized, (placebo) Controlled Trials (RCT) of tocolysis (magnesium and 
ritodrine)  from Parkland Hospital have been published . For the RCT by Leveno et al of ritodrine 
versus placebo (“Single -Centre Randomised Trial of Ritodrine Hydrochloride for Preterm Labour ”, 
Lancet, 1986) in which women with singleton pregnancies and preterm labor with cervical dilation up 
to 4 cm, 39 of 52 ( 75%) patients randomized to the control group delivered b etween 27 and  35 
completed weeks. Similarly, for the RCT of magnesium sulfate versus placebo by Cox and Leveno  
(“Randomized investigation of magnesium sulfate for prevention of preterm birth” Am J Ob stet 
Gynecol 1990) in which women with singleton pregnancies and preterm labor with cervical dilation 
less  than 5 cm, 55 of 80 (6 8.8%) of patients randomized to the  control group delivered between 27 
and 35 completed  weeks’ gestation. These are important data derived from randomized, placebo -
controlled, prospective trials done here at Parkland Hospital and we feel that our sample size should 
incorporate this prospectively obtained data. An average of the above preterm birth rates for these 
two RCTs at Park land Hospital is 7 1.2% (39+55 / 52+80). In slight distinction to the above studies , for 
the current study, we are including women beginning at 28 weeks’ gestation, and we will be assessing 
preterm birth as delivery at less than 37 weeks. In theory, the pre term labor rate for delivery  at less 
than 37 weeks  (the primary outcome of the current trial ) would be higher than this average preterm 
birth rate for women prior to 3 5 completed  weeks’ gestation.  However, using these prospectively 
obtained numbers from pa st studies of preterm labor at Parkland hospital, we would need 
approximately 150 women (75 women in each of the 2 arms) in order to detect a 1/3 reduction  (from 
71.2% to 47.5%)  in the rate of preterm birth with 80% power and an alpha of 5%.  
 
Analysis of i nternal obstetrics operations data indicates that for the month of March 2015, there were 
10 women between 28 -0/7 weeks and 33 -6/7 weeks with preterm labor and a cervix of 2 to 4  cm 
dilation. Of these 10 women, 6 were ineligible for participation in the st udy (2 had diabetes in 
pregnancy, 1 women had a twin gestation, 1 women was only 15 years of age and 1 woman had 
bleeding concerning for abruption). Of the 4 eligible women in March of 2015, 2 elected to participate 
in the study, consistent with our ongoin g consent rate of approximately 50%.  
 
Effective September 17, 2015, there has been a protocol change at the level of the Division of 
Maternal -Fetal Medicine at Parkland Hospital. This protocol change will be to give corticosteroids for 
fetal lung maturity to women with diabetes and to all women with hypertension who are at risk of 
preterm birth. This MFM Division level protocol change will affect this study of women at risk of 
preterm birth . 
 
Given that 2 of the formerly ineligible women  (due to diabetes)  who presented in March  2015  would 
now be eligible  due to the above protocol change , we estimate that up to 24 additional women (2 x 12 
= 24) would be screene d per year, and up to 12 additional women  (50% of the 24 additional 
screened)  would participate. Gi ven that there were 29 women recruited over the intitial 13 months 
(which equates to approximately 27 over 12 months), under the new practice in which corticosteroids 
will be given more broadly (and women with diabetes and mild hypertension not treated with  
medications are eligible for participation), we estimate that up to 78 -90 women would now be 
screened,  and of these, we estimate that 39-40 women would participate per year.  
 
Therefore, over ~4 -5 years, we would expect 300 patients screened and 150 patien ts consented. In 
order to detect a 33% reduction in the rate of preterm birth less than 37 weeks’ gestation, assuming 
80% power and a 2 -sided alpha of 5%, a sample size of 75 patients per arm (two arms, study drug 
and placebo) , 150 patients total,  will nee d to be recruited. So far in the current study, we have had 
about a 50% consent rate. Assuming a 50% recruiting rate  (50% x 300 = 150), it is estimated th at this 
study will take 4 to 5 years to complete.  
  
References  
 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 17 of 20 1. Leveno KJ et al. Single -Centre Randomised Trial of Ritodrine Hydrochloride for Preterm 
Labour. Lancet. 1986; I:1293 -1295.  
2. Leveno KJ et al. The National Impact of Ritodrine Hydrochloride for Inhibition of Preterm 
Labor. OBGYN. 1990; 76:12 -5. 
3. Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group. Tr eatment of Preterm Labor with the Beta -
Adrenergic Agonist Ritodrine. NEJM. 1992; 327:308 -12. 
4. Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG. Beta -Adrenergic Agonists for Preterm Labor. NEJM. 1992; 
327:349 -51. 
5. Mercer BM and Merlino AA. Magnesium sulfate for preterm labor and pre term birth. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2009; 114:650 -668. 
6. Conde -Agudelo A, Romero R, Kusanovic JP. Nifedipine in the management of preterm 
labor: a systemic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 204:e1 -e20. 
7. Fox NS, Gelber SE, Kalish RB, Chasen ST. Contemporary practice patterns and beliefs 
regarding tocolysis among U.S. Maternal -Fetal Medicine specialists. Obstet Gynecol; 2008; 
112:42 -47. 
8. Prospective trials of nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor.  
a. Read MD, Wellby DE. The use of a calcium antagonist (nifedipine) to suppress preterm 
labour.  Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1986 Sep;93(9):933 -7. 
b. Meyer WR, Randall HW, Graves WL. Nifedipine Versus Ritodrine for Suppressing 
Preterm Labor. J Reprod Med. 1990; 35:649 -53. 
c. Ferguson JE, Dyson DC, Holbrook RH, Schutz T, Stevenson DK. A Comparison of 
Tocolysis with Nifedipine or Ritodrine: Analysis of Efficacy and Maternal, Fetal and 
Neonatal Outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1990;163:105 -111. 
d. Bracero LA, Leikin E, Kirshenbaum N, Tejani N. Comparison of Nifedipine an d Ritodrine 
for the Treatment of Preterm Labor. Am J Perinatol. 1991; 8:365 -9. 
e. Kupferminc M, Lessing JB, Yaron Y, Peyser MR. Nifedipine Versus Ritodrine for 
Suppression of Preterm Labour. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1993; 100:1090 -4. 
f. Papatsonis DNM, Van Geijn HP , Ader HJ, Lange FM, Bleker OP, Dekker GA. Nifedipine 
and Ritodrine in the Management of Preterm Labor: A Randomized Multicenter Trial. 
Obstet Gynecol. 1997; 90:230 -4. 
g. Papatsonis DNM, Kok JH, Van Geijn HP, Bleker OP, Ader HJ, Dekker GA. Neonatal 
effects of  nifedipine and ritodrine for preterm labor. Obstet Gynecol. 2000; 95:477 -481. 
h. Koks CAM, Brolman HAM, de Kleine MJK, Manger PA.  A Randomized Comparison of 
Nifedipine and Ritodrine for Suppression of Preterm Labor. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol. 1998; 7 7:171 -6. 
i. Garcia -Velasco JA and Gonzalez Gonzalez A. A Prospective Randomized Trial of 
Nifedipine Versus Ritodrine in Threatened Preterm Labor. Int J Obstet Gyncol. 1998; 
61:239 -44. 
j. Cararach V, Palacio M, Martínez S, Deulofeu P, Sánchez M, Cobo T, Coll O. N ifedipine 
versus ritodrine for suppression of preterm labor. Comparison of their efficacy and 
secondary effects. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2006 Aug;127(2):204 -8.  
k. Maitra N, Christian V, Kavishvar A. Tocolytic efficacy of nifedipine versus ritodrine  in 
preterm labor. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2007 May;97(2):147 -8.  
l. Van De Water M, Kessel ET, De Kleine MJ, Oei SG. Tocolytic effectiveness of nifedipine 
versus ritodrine and follow -up of newborns: a randomised controlled trial. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 20 08;87(3):340 -5. 
m. Jaju PB, Dhabadi VB. Nifedipine versus ritodrine for suppression of preterm labor and 
analysis of side effects. J Obstet Gynaecol India. 2011 Oct;61(5):534 -7.  
n. Smith CS and Woodland MB. Clinical Comparison of Oral Nifedipine and Subcutaneou s 
Terbutaline for Initial Tocolysis. Am J Perinatol. 1993; 10:280 -4. 
o. Weerakul W, Chittacharoen A, Suthutvoravut S. Nifedipine versus terbutaline in 
management of preterm labor. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2002 Mar;76(3):311 -3. 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 18 of 20 p. Laohapojanart N, Soorapan S, Wacha raprechanont T, Ratanajamit C. Safety and 
efficacy of oral nifedipine versus terbutaline injection in preterm labor. J Med Assoc Thai. 
2007 Nov; 90(11):2461 -9. 
q. Mawaldi L, Duminy P, Tamim H. Terbutaline versus nifedipine for prolongation of 
pregnancy in pat ients with preterm labor. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2008 Jan; 100(1):65 -8.  
r. Valdés E, Salinas H, Toledo V, Lattes K, Cuellar E, Perucca E, Diaz R, Montecinos F, 
Reyes A. Nifedipine versus fenoterol in the management of preterm labor: a randomized, 
multicenter  clinical study. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2012;74(2):109 -15.  
s. Raymajhi R, Pratap K. A comparative study between nifedipine and isoxsuprine in the 
suppression of preterm labour. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2003 Apr -Jun;1(2):85 -
90. 
t. Singh N, Singh U, Seth S. Comparative study of nifedipine and isoxpurine as tocolytics 
for preterm labor. J Obstet Gynaecol India. 2011 Oct;61(5):512 -5. 
u. Kashanian M, Akbarian AR, Soltanzadeh M. Atosiban and nifedipin for the treatment of 
preterm labor. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2005 O ct;91(1):10 -4. 
v. Al-Omari WR, Al -Shammaa HB, Al -Tikriti EM, Ahmed KW. Atosiban and nifedipine in 
acute tocolysis: a comparative study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2006 Sep -
Oct;128(1 -2):129 -34. 
w. Salim R, Garmi G, Nachum Z, Zafran N, Baram S, Shalev E. Ni fedipine compared with 
atosiban for treating preterm labor: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2012 
Dec;120(6):1323 -31 
x. Glock JL and Morales WJ. Efficacy and Safety of Nifedipine Versus Magnesium Sulfate 
in the Management of Preterm Labor: A Ran domized Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1993; 
169:960 -964. 
y. Haghighi L. Prevention of preterm delivery: nifedipine or magnesium sulfate. Int J 
Gynaecol Obstet. 1999 Sep;66(3):297 -8. 
z. Lyell DJ, Pullen K, Campbell L, Ching S, Druzin ML, Chitkara U, Burrs D, Caughe y AB, 
El-Sayed YY. Magnesium sulfate compared with nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm 
labor: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2007 Jul;110(1):61 -7. 
aa. Klauser CK, Briery CM, Keiser SD, Martin RW, Kosek MA, Morrison JC. Effect of 
antenatal  tocolysis on neonatal outcomes. J Matern Fet al Neonatal Med. 2012 ;25:2778 -
81. 
9. Maigaard S, Forman A, Brogaard -Hansen KP, Andersson KE.  Inhibitory Effects of 
Nitrendipine on Myometrial and Vascular Smooth Muscle in Human Pregnant Uterus and 
Placenta. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol. 1986; 59:1 -10. 
10. King JF, Flenady VJ, Papatsonis DNM, Dekker GA, Carbonne B. Calcium Channel Blockers 
for Inhibiting Preterm Labour (Review). Cochrane Library, Issue 4, pages 1 -51. 2006.  
11. Tsatsaris V, Papatsonis D, Goffinet F, Dekker G, Car bonne B. Tocolysis with Nifedipine or 
Beta-Adrenergic Agonists: A Meta -Analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2001; 97:840 -7. 
12. Oei SG. Calcium Channel Blocker for Tocolysis: A Review of their Role and Safety Following 
Reports of Serious Adverse Events. Eur J Obstet Gyne col Reprod Biol. 2006; 126:137 -45. 
13. Papatsonis DNM, Van Geijn HP, Bleker OP, Ader HJ, Dekker GA. Hemodynamic and 
Metabolic Effects After Nifedipine and Ritodrine Tocolysis. Int J Obstet Gynecol. 2003; 82:5  
14. Guclu S, Gol M, Saygili U, Demir N, Sezer O, Bascha t AA. Nifedipine Therapy for Preterm 
Labor: Effects on Placental, Fetal Cerebral and Atrioventricular Doppler Parameters in the 
First 48 Hours. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2006;  27:403 -8. 
15. Bal L, Thierry S, Brocas E, Adam M, Van de Louw A, Tenaillon A. Pulm onary Edema 
Induced by Calcium -Channel Blockage for Tocolysis. Anesth Analg. 2004; 99:910 -1. 
16. Vaast P, Dubreucq -Fossaert S, Houfflin -Debarge V, Provost -Helou N, Ducloy -Bouthors AS, 
Puech F, Subtil D. Acute Pulmonary Oedema During Nicardipine Therapy for Pre mature 
Labour, Report of Five Cases. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2004; 113:98 -9. 
17. Abbas OM, Nassar AH, Kanj NA, Usta IM. Acute Pulmonary Edema During Tocolytic 
Therapy with Nifedipine. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006; 195:e3 -e4. 
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 19 of 20 18. Van Geijn HP, Lenglet JE, Bo lte AC. Nifedipine Trials: Effectiveness and Safety Aspects. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005; 112:79 -83. 
19. Nassar AH, Ghazeeri G, Usta IM. Nefedipine -associated pulmonary complications in 
pregnancy.  Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2007 May;97(2):148 -9. 
20. Gatault P, Genee O , Legras A, Garot D, Mercier E, Fichet J. Calcium -channel blockers: an 
increasing cause of pulmonary edema during tocolytic therapy. Int J Cardiol. 2008; 
130:e123 -e124.  
21. Van Veen AJ, Pelinck MJ, Van Pampus MG, Erwich JJHM. Severe Hypotension and Fetal 
Death  Due to Tocolysis with Nifedipine. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005; 112:509 -510. 
22. Johnson KA, Mason GC. Severe hypotension and fetal death due to tocolysis with 
nifedipine. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005; 112:1583.  
23. Kandysamy V and Thomson AJ. Severe Hypotension and Fetal Death Due to Tocolysis with 
Nifedipine (Comment). Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 2005; 112:1583 -4. 
24. Papatsonis DNM, Carbonne B, Dekker GA, Flenady V, King JF. Severe Hypotension and 
Fetal Death Due to Tocolysis wi th Nifedipine (Comm ). Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 200 5; 
112:1582 -3. 
25. Oei SG, Oei SK, Brolmann HAM. Myocardial Infarction During Nifedipine Therapy for 
Preterm Labor. N Engl J Med.1999; 340:154.  
26. Verhaert D and Van Acker R. Acute Myocardial Infarction During Pregnancy. Acta Cardiol. 
2004; 59:331 -9. 
27. Khan K, Zamora J, Lamont RF, Van Geijn Hp H, Svare J, Santos -Jorge C, Jacquemyn Y, 
Husslein P, Helmer H H, Dudenhausen J, Di Renzo GC, Roura LC, Beattie B. Safety 
concerns for the use of calcium channel blockers in pregnancy for the treatment of 
spontaneous preter m labour and hypertension: a systematic review and meta -regression 
analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010 Sep;23(9):1030 -8. 
28. Luewan S, Mahathep R, Tongsong T. Hypotension in normotensive pregnant women treated 
with nifedipine as a tocolytic drug. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2011; 284:527 -520. 
29. Houtzager BA, Hogendoorn SM, Papatsonis DNM, Samsom JF, Van Geijn HP, Bleker OP, 
Van Wassenaer AG. Long -Term Follow -Up of Children Exposed In Utero to Nifedipine or 
Ritodrine for the Management of Preterm Labour. Br J Obs tet Gynaecol. 2006; 113:324 -331. 
30. Chan LW, Sahota DS, Yeung SY, Leung TY, Fung TY, Lau TK, Leung TN. Side -effect and 
vital sign profile of nifedipine as a tocolytic for preterm labor. Hong Kong Med J. 2008; 
14:267 -272. 
31. Marin TZ, Meier R, Kraehenmann F, Burk hardt T, Zimmerman R. Nifedipine serum levels in 
pregnant women undergoing tocolysis with nifedipine. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2007; 27:260 -263. 
32. Lyell DJ, Pullen KM, Mannan J, Chitkara U, Druzin ML, Caughey AB, El -Sayed YY. 
Maintenance nifedipine tocolysis compa red with  placebo. Obstet Gynecol. 2008; 112:1221 -6 
33. Parry E, Roos C, Stone P, Hayward L, Mol BW, McCowan L. The NIFTY study: a multi -
centre randomized double blind placebo controlled trial of nifedipine maintenance tocolysis 
in fetal fibronectin positive wom en in threatened preterm labour. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2012. 
S216  
34. Roos C et al. Effect of maintenance tocolysis with nifedipine in threatened preterm labor on 
perinatal outcomes. J Am Med Assoc. 2013; 309:41 -47. 
35. Chao TT, Bloom SL, Mitchell JS, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ. The diagnosis and natural history 
of false preterm labor. Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 118:1301 -1308.  
36. Vis JY et al. Randomized Comparison of Nifedipine and Placebo in Fibronectin -Negative 
Women with Symptoms of Preterm Labor and a Short Cervix (APOSTEL -I Trial) . Am J 
Perinatol. 2014, Dec 8. [Epub ahead of print]  
37. Cox S and Leveno KJ. Randomized investigation of magnesium sulfate for prevention of 
preterm birth.  Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1990; 163:767 -72. 
38. Sciscione AC, Ivester T, Largoza M, Manley J, Shlossma n P, Colmorgen GHC. Acute 
pulmonary edema in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2003; 101:511 -515. J Clin Ultrasound. 
2014 Dec 13. doi: 10.1002/jcu.22252. [Epub ahead of print]  
 
Version 5.1 September 18, 2015  
Page 20 of 20 39. De Heus R, Mulder EJH, Derks JB, Visser GHA. The effects of tocolytics atosiban and 
nifedipine on fetal movements, heart rate and blood flow. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 
2009; 22:485 -490. 
40. Xiao C, Gangal M, Abenhaim HA. Effect of magnesium sulfate and nifedipine on the risk of 
developing pulmonary edema in preterm births. J Perinat Med. 2014 ; 42:585 -589. 
41. Khoo F and Mathur M. Severe resistant maternal hypotension following tocolysis with 
nifedipine. BMJ Case Report. 2014, Dec 16 2014. Doi: 10.1136/bcr -2014 -208059  
42. Kutuk MS, Ozgun MT, Uludag S, Dolanbay M, Yildirim A. Acute pulmonary failure due  to 
pulmonary edema during tocolytic therapy with nifedipine. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013; 
288:953 -954. 
43. Serena C, Begot E, Cros J, Hodler C, Fedou AL, Nathan -Denizot N, Clavel M. Nicardipine -
induced acute pulmonary edema: a rare but severe complication of to colysis. Case Rep Crit 
Care. 2014.  
44. Van Vliet EO, Boormans EM, de Lange TS, Bol BW, Oudijk MA. Preterm labor:  current 
pharmacotherapy options for tocolysis. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014; 15:787 -797. 
45. Haram K, Mortensen JHS, Morrison JC. Tocolysis for acut e preterm labor: does anything 
work. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2014 Jul 3:1 -8. [Epub ahead of print]  
 