1 
  
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 
       SUMMARY  
 
 
COVER PAGE  
 
NCT #: 1064187-2  
 
TITLE OF PROJECT: Defining Adolescent Nausea through Brain-Gut Physiology and Non-Invasive  Neurostimulation Response  DOCUMENT DATE:  8-22-2018 
                     
 
                

2 
  
STUDY TITLE: Defining Adolescent Nausea through Brain-Gut Physiology and Non- Invasive  
       Neurostimulation Response   PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Katja Kovacic, M.D.  A. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
The main purpose of this study is to characterize adolescents w ith chronic nausea through non- invasive gastric 
motor function and autonomic tests, and subsequently evaluate brain connectivity changes induced by auricular neurostimulation in  functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs). Funct ional nausea is a poorly understood 
condition that is difficult to manage due to lack of diagnostic testing and targeted therapies. Symptoms often overlap with those of gastric motor disorders such as delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) and poor gastr ic 
compliance. We have recent ly demonstrated safety and efficacy of auricular neurostimulation for the treatment 
of FGIDs .  Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is an established technique for studying brain 
networks and their connections. fMRI -BOL D (blood oxygen level dependent) signals detect changes in blood 
flow as a measure of brain activity. Resting state functional c onnectivity (rsFC) analysis is based on studying 
the functional organization of large- scale brain networks  when a subject is not engaged in any mental task. 
Certain brain regions have greater coherence of neural activity as measured by the spontaneous fluctuations of the fMRI -BOLD signal.  Studies of adult patients with a variety of chronic pain conditions show altered resting 
state brain network activity .
1-4 There is convincing data that baseline or rsFC between brain networks is  
dysregulated in patients with FGIDs.5,6 Our group has recently  reported similar findings in children with 
irritable bowel syndrome.7 The amygdala is a limbic brain structure involved in emotions, fear, anxiety and 
processing of visceral sensations. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) interacts with the amygdala to mediate the behavioral responses to various stimuli.
8 We have recently demonstrated efficacy of non-invasive peripheral 
neurostimulation  of the external ear in adolescents with FGIDs (IRB ID# 689519-17) (unpublished data) . 
Preliminary animal studies from our group show significantly decreased neuronal signaling in the amygdala after auricular neurostimulation. The current  proposal will phenotype patients with chronic nausea into various 
subgroups and then investigate intrinsic  resting state  brain connectivity in the functional nausea subgroup 
compared to irritable bowel syndrome and health y controls before and after auricular neurostimulation therapy. 
 B. SPECIFIC AIMS / HYPOTHESIS  
  
Specific aim #1 : Define functional nausea (FN) as an entity subdivided by measures of arousal, anxiety and 
gastric motor function.  
 Hypothesis : Adolescents with chronic nausea form subgroups based on clinical, physiologic and psychological 
parameters: 1) FN: characterized by high anxiety and emotional arousal, autonomic imbalance/low vagal tone and absence of major foregut dysmotility, 2) gastroparesis, and 3) poor gastric compli ance. We will separate FN 
from other groups by clinical questionnaires, autonomic tests (heart rate variability) and gastric motility tests (gastric emptying, accommoda tion tests).  
 Specific aim #2: Demonstrate that resting state functional brain connect ivity is different in female adolescents 
with FN  compared to gender and age-matched healthy controls.  
 
Hypothesis : Adolescents with FN  will have alte red rsFC between bra in regions associated with emotional 
arousal neurocircuits (amygdala) and the top -down regulation of these by the prefrontal cortex. There will be 
decreased resting state functional connectivity  between the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and 
amygda la in adolescents with  FN compared to healthy controls.  
 
Specific aim #3 : Demonstrate that four weeks of auricular neurostimulation improves nausea while 
strengthening the vagal tone and the abnormal  resting state brain connectivity in female adolescents with FN  
compared to baseline and to more resemble that of healthy controls.  
3 
  
Hypothesis:  3a) Compared to baseline (pre- stimulation), there will be reduction in nausea and concurrent 
symptoms in the active compared to sham neurostimulation group after 4 weeks of therapy . 3b) Active 
neurostimulation therapy will increase  vagal tone compared to baseline and also increase the rsFC  between the 
vmPFC and amygdala in female adolescents with FN . 
 
C. BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE, AND RATIONALE  
Functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) affect a large percentage of children and negatively impact quality of life .
9 The childhood prevalence is rising and based on a European study, the annual cost per patient is 
approximately $2800.10,11 In adult patients with irritable bowel syndrome ( IBS), the annual direct cost is 
estimated at $1.35 billion .12 Our recently published study showed that over 50% of children with FGIDs suffer 
from  chronic nausea.13 Most of them have a diagnosis of IBS  or funct ional abdominal pain. The nausea is 
seldom recognized or targeted therapeutically. Nausea in children cause disability and frequent school absences.  In most cases, the nausea is deemed functional, without a known cause and without clear understanding of mechanisms. Pharmacotherapy is therefore empiric and the typical drugs used are centrally acting agents such 
as tricyclic antidepressants, suggesting the involvement of higher brain centers. In children, these drugs still have marginal  efficacy compared to placebo
14,15 and alternative strategies are generally as effective.16 A recent 
systematic review concluded t here is no evidence to support pharmacologic therapy in pediatric FGIDs.17  
 No prospective studies exist that characterize functional nausea (FN) clinically or mechanistically. FGIDs  are 
currently defined using symptom criteria (Rome criteria) rather than through a mechanistic understanding of their pathophysiology.
18 Symptoms of FN often overlap with foregut motility disorders such as delayed stomach 
emptying (gastroparesis) and reduced stomach compliance (a ‘stiff stomach’) and are difficult to distinguish clinically. Current testing for gastric motor disorders is  very limited in children, with lack of pediatric norms, 
using tests that expose children to radiation (nuclear gastric emptying scintigraphy).  Non-invasive tests such as the 
13 C gastric emptying breath test (a non-radioactive isotope) has recently been studied in children and 
correlates well with scintigraphy.19 Similarly, the nutrient drink test (NDT) is an easy and non-invasive method 
that has been used in children to test sensitivity to gastric distention and impaired accommodation.20,21   
 Excessive emotional arousal, fears, stress and symptom- related anxiety is perhaps the most common and 
striking co-morbidity in patients with FGIDs .
22,23 Functional disorders are thus often presumed  to stem from 
purely psychiatric disease. This may result in even further stress, astigmatism and mis trust in health care 
providers. We have shown that a majority of adolescents with functional nausea are adolescent females with  co-
morbid anxiety, sleep disturbances  and more debilitating symptoms compared to those without nausea.24,25 
Others have shown that anxiety reduces the threshold for nausea26 and that FGID patients with nausea have 
more severe GI and somatic symptoms, depression, low self- esteem, disability and family stress.27  
 
The sympathetic an d parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) connect with the 
enteric nervous system to modulate GI motor function and sensation.28 Nausea elicits robust ANS changes 
indicated by accompanying diaphoresis, pallor, lightheadedness, palpitations, salivation etc.29 Our studies show 
a strong association between FN and co-morbid symptoms of autonomi c imbalance (dizziness, anxiety, 
exhaustion, and postural tachycardia syndrome).24 Over 90% of adolescents seen in our Neurogastroenterology 
Clinic suffer from chronic nausea.30 Improvement in nausea following treatment of orthostatic symptoms is also 
documented.31 Others have found convincing associations between nausea, orthostatic disorders and anxiety.32-
34 Additionally, studies demonstrate low vagal (parasympathetic) tone in FGIDs, suggesting a possible 
pathophysiologic role.35-37 The brain stem nucleus tractus solitarius ( NTS) is a major relay center for afferent 
signals transmitted from the GI tract through the vagus (parasympathetic) nerve. The baroreflex is critical to maintain orthostatic control.
38  Baroreceptor signals travel directly along CN IX and X to the NTS.39 The NTS 
projects to higher limbic brain regions (amygdala, hypothalamus) involved in arousal, emotions and central autonomic control .
40-42  Autonomic imbalance in adolescents is closely linked to r educed vagal baroreflex 
response and heart rate variability (HRV).  43 HRV is a measure of the ability to modulate cardiac auton omic 
outflow via baroreceptors.44 A study of adolescents with chronic nausea showed decreased HRV, suggesting 
4 
 decreased parasympathetic vagal modulation of the heart.32 Cranial nerves IX and in particular X (vagus) may 
thus link ANS dysregulation with symptomatic nausea and indicate involvement of higher brain regions in FN. 
The emotional arousal neurocircuits are abnormally engaged in FGIDs, specifically during expectation  of a 
visceral stimulus.42,45  
 The vast majority of nausea sufferers are adolescent females who suffer from anxiety. For unclear reasons, many suffer from intense morning nausea. A strong female predominance is well documented in FGIDs.
46 
There are significant gender differences in the regions of the brain activated following pain.6,47 Studies 
specifically point to gender- related differences in the rsFC of the insula and limbic regions with males 
demonstrating greater activation in insula while females showing more activation in limbic regions such as the amygdala and closely  associated structures such as the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).
45,47- 49 Studies in adults 
suggest that females may have enhanced sensitivity in the brain regions that process cognitive/emotional aspects of GI sensation
45 and in response to somatic stimulation such as noxious heat.50 The gender differences are 
proposed to stem from a greater activation in females of the emotional arousal circuits, specifically during the expectation  of a visceral stimulus.
45,51 A concept thus emerges where female adolescent suffering from intense 
morning nausea may have an abnormal emotional arousal control with concurrent low vagal tone/ANS imbalance, that predisposes to symptoms upon morning arousal, sustained and exacerbated by fears and anticipatory anxiety of recurring symptoms. Aberrant connectivity in emotional arousal neurocircuits is increasingly recognized through functional magnetic resonance imagining studies (fMRI) in FGIDs.   
 
Aberrant Brain Network Connectivity  The emerging concept in neuroscience emphasizes functional connections between brain areas as part of large-scale networks. Of particular importance to visceral sensation and emotion regulation in FGIDs is the emotional arousal neurocircuits (emotional arousal network), stimulus detection and the central autonomic network. fMRI studies show alterations in connectivity amongst affective (amygdala, insula), sensory and attentional brain regions in female FGID subjects.
52,53 Resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) studies show abnormalities in 
limbic/affective brain areas such as  the amygdala and insula in adult FGID patients.6,45,51,54 The amygdala is a 
limbic brain structure involved in emotions, fear, anxiety and pain processing.8 The amygdala communicates 
directly with hypothalamus and brain stem nuclei that drive autonomic responses. There are also projections from the amygdala to all major neuromodulatory systems including dopaminergic, cholinergic, serotonergic and noradrenergi c systems.
8 There are also consistent reports of sex differences in amygdala responses during the 
anticipation of aversive emotional stimuli in both healthy and IBS patients.45,49,55,56 Further, there is solid data 
that amygdala interacts with the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), an area involved in higher cognitive processing to consolidate memories. RsFC analysis shows that the extent of amygdala coupling with the mPFC influences how a subject regulates their emotional response to a stimulus.
8 Brain areas such as the mPFC may 
attenuate sensory input such that it remains below the perception level.   The vmPFC regulates auto nomic responses in which lower vmPFC activity reflects vagal withdrawal.
57 
Numerous fMRI studies show increased vmPFC with concomitant decreased amygdala activity during successful emotional regulation, suggesting that the strength of vmPFC-amygdala coupling predicts healthier regulation of emotions and anxiety .
8,58-60 A developmental switch occurs during adolescence when there is a 
normal reduction in amygdala reactivity due to top-down mPFC control over amygdal a.61 Preliminary fMRI 
connectivity analysis by our group shows impaired vmPFC, amygdala and hippocampal connectivity with the hypothalamus in adolescents with FGIDs. The emotional arousal network with amygdala as a key node is activated by perceived or real perturbation of body homeostasis.
62 Abnormal emotional arousal with poor 
feedback inhibition of amygdala by the vmPFC and altered ANS output results in heightened anxiety, lower vagal tone and morning symptoms upon awakening. Nausea coupled with anxiety is thus likely a manifestation of dysregulated emotional arousal and resulting impaired corticolimbic modulation of gut sensations. We hypothesize that there is aberrant top -down control by the vmPFC on amygdala activity, characterized 
by decreased rsFC between these regions in adolescent females  with FN. Modulating brain signals that 
communicate discomfort such as nausea by means of peripheral neurostimulation may influence these specific brain regions and provide clues to underlying pathophysiology and physiology- based treatment.   
 
5 
 Neuromodulation such as gastric electrical stimulation is an emerging therapy for GI disorders.63-65 These 
effects are believed to be mediated by increased vagal afferent input to the NTS, influencing ANS and higher 
brain centers.66-68 Tracing studies confirm that the external ear contains branches of four cranial nerves (CN V, 
VII, IX, X) that project to the NTS.69,70 Animal and human data shows that transcutaneous stimulation of the 
auricular branch of the vagus nerve in  the ear transmits signals to brainstem medulla and NTS.71-73 The crucial 
role of the vagal neurocircuitry in the genesis of nausea and vomiting is widely accepted.74 Auricular 
neurostimulation may thus alter the sensation of nausea through NTS activation and signaling to limbic regions where ANS outflow and low vagal tone underpin nausea and anxiety.
75,76 Stimulation of the entire auricle may 
affect all four cranial nerves in the auricle that converge in the brainstem NTS.69 Peripheral nerve field 
stimulation of the auricle is thus a plausible means of modulating the vagal afferents and arousal neurocircuits. Our unpublished data on a percutaneous auricular neurostimulator , the Electro Auricular Device (EAD ), in 
adolescents with FGIDs show significant improvement in pain and global wellbeing (randomized, sham-controlled trial).  Animal data from our group also shows that EAD alter the response characteristics of 
amygdala neurons and improves visceral hyperalgesia. We hypothesize that ANS dysregulation and 
aberrant functional connectivity in emotional arousal circuits is the basis of an amplified perception of GI tract sensation, elevated anxiety, reduced vagal tone and negative emotional state observed in FN. We 
expect that peripheral stimulation of several cranial nerves will improve symptoms in adolescents with FN by 
strengthening vagal tone and the top-down regulation of vmPFC on amygdala. Improved phenotyping and correlation of symptoms with physiologic measures is key to establishing a mechanistic basis for effective therapies. We therefore propose to define FN through clinical features and physiologic testing and underlying brain pathways and evaluate the response to a novel, non-pharmacological and noninvasive neurostimulation device.  
   D. DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
Feasibility of comparing fMRI data across age groups One of the primary concerns in interpreting fMRI data obtained in children and in making comparisons across age groups involves the significant developmental changes in brain morphology that occur during childhood and adolescence.  Although the majority of brain growth occurs prior to the age of 5 years, it has been estimated that approximately 5- 8% of cerebral growth occurs between the age of 5 years and adolescence.
41-44 
Furthermore, brain maturation proceeds at different rates in different regions of the brain.  Concerns have been raised regarding the possible effects of these developmental changes on the process of spatial normalization, which involves transformation of images to a common stereotactic space based on an adult- derived template. 
The latter process is necessary in order to make direct voxel wise comparisons across subjects and subject groups.  Recent studies do support the feasibility of making such comparisons within a common stereotactic space, suggesting that anatomical differences between  the atlas transformed brain morphology of children (aged 
7 to 8 years) and adults are minimal, relative to the level of resolution possible with current functional imaging and that would not result in spurious functional differences.
45, 46 This study will  include only adolescents who 
are at least 12 years of age, further minimizing any potential developmental effects. 
 
Study Population  80-100 adolescents with chronic nausea and a subgroup of 15 patients with IBS as well as 15 healthy controls, between ages of 12-18 years, will be enrolled . All subjects will unde rgo gastric motor function and HRV testing 
at baseline followed by four weeks of auricular neurostimulation or sham therapy. By definition, all adolescents in this study will have no clear explanation for their symptoms after undergoing medical workup per standard of care.  
 Inclusion Criteria  (Nausea  and IBS Groups ):  
- Children aged 12 years to 18 years who provide written assent and whose parents provide writt en    
  permission for participation  
6 
 - English-speaking and able to verbalize their condition an d concerns about nausea, pain and other symptoms 
- Subjects will meet Rome IV  criteria for functional nausea as determined by  a pediatric gastroenterologist 
- Subjects included in the IBS group will meet Rome IV criteria for Irritable Bowel Syndrome  
- Patients must have an intact external ear that is free of infection or severe dermatological conditions, have  
  stable vital signs for their respective age, no history of seizures and no currently implanted electrical device  
- Subjects included in the FN group include those who meet Rome IV criteria for functional nausea and have:  
1) autonomic imbalance with low vagal tone defined as baseline resting supine RMSSD value 2 or more standard deviations below the mean on HRV measurements , and  
2) normal gastric motor function (absence of gastroparesis or  impair ed accommodation). The 
gastric motor function and HRV tests will be compared to normative values obtained through a 
separate, ongoing, IRB-approved protocol (# 1030543-2) 
 Exclusion Criteria  (Nause a and IBS  Groups ):    
-  Other pain -related diseases or somatization disorder  
-  Mental retardation or pervasive developmental disorder or epilepsy  -  Psychosis  -  Genetic or chromosomal disorders -  Pregnancy  -  Subjects who admit to substance abuse during screening  -  Patients with findings of peptic ulcer disease, H.pylori gastritis, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease,  
   allergic disorders, or any chronic condition or medication that may cause nausea or pain  
-  Patients wh o are treated with opioids or who had any changes in their medical regimen in the past four weeks  
   prior to study -  Patients with a history of allergy to adhesives -  Patients with a lactose intolerance  
  
Study Design Overview  
Subjects will undergo medical workup per standard of care.  Subjects refractory to current medical therapy may be enrolled without changes to their current medical treatment. No new pharmacological agents will be added during the 4-week study period and no changes in dosing or scheduling of current therapy will be allowed during the study period. Subjects will be screened weekly for any side effects by registered nurses who are part of the Pediatric Translational Research Unit (pTRU) .  All subjects will be asked to notify the PI or research 
team with any worsening in symptoms or side effects of therapy.  Any subject without improvement in symptoms during the study will be able to discontinue the study. If symptoms worsen or fail to improve during the study or if their clinical presentation changes in any way, subjects will have the option to drop out any time, receive standard medical therapy and appropriate referrals. If per standard of care, a subject requires a change in one or several of their regular medications during the study, they will be asked to notify the research team. To monitor this, the subjects will be inquired about their medication list and doses during their weekly visits. If the medication change is determined to potentially affect the stu dy results, the subject may be excluded from 
further study as determined by the PI.   
 
Protocol and Procedures  
 
Pre (Baseline):  
The primary investigator, a co-investigator or research coordinator will introduce the study to eligible patients seen in the CHW Gastroenterology Clinic during their regularly scheduled clinic visit. A member of the research team will explain the details and purpose of the study during an informed consent discussion. Once the patient and caregivers have had enough time to consider participation, understand all of the risks and benefits and would like to participate, they will complete the informed  consent, assent and HIPAA documents.  
 
7 
 Medical and psychological history will be obtained to verify eligibility and screen patients for alcohol, nicotine, 
and drug abuse following the completion of consent/assent documents.  All eligible subjects will complete the questionnaires related to demographic, medical, and psychological factors including nausea, abdominal pain, IBS symptoms (Rome IV), anxiety, disability and quality of life (Table 1). This will take about 30 minutes total to complete .  Subjects will then undergo baseline heart rate variability (HRV) measurements in clinic. Children  
will perform a self -assessm ent of the Tanner stage of pubertal development using a validated self- assessment 
form.    
Visit 1: Subjects will undergo the 13C gastric emptying breath test (GEBT)  (Table 1).  See section on 13C GEBT 
for details and attached protocol.  
 
Visit 2: Subjects will undergo Satiety Drink Test (see SDT section and attached protocol). 
 
Visits 3 -6: Subjects will complete questionnaires as per Table 1 followed by neurostimulator placement by 
study physician. These visits will be repeated weekly and take about 20- 40 minutes to complete. HRV will be 
measured before and after the EAD placement at Visit 3 and 6.   
 
Post- neurostimulation  #1: Subjects will not return but will complete questionnaires (Table 1) at the end of 4 
weeks of therapy which will be mailed back to the research team.  Participants in fMRI sub -study will undergo 
repeat fMRI scan (post -scan) at this visit and complete questionnaires per Table 1.  
  
Post- neurostimulation  #2: All subjects will retu rn to clinic for their regularly scheduled clinic follow-up visit 2 
months after end of therapy and will complete questionnaires as per Table 1.  
 **Subsequent to the initial 4 weeks of therapy, subjects will undergo another 4 weeks of active  
neurostimulation therapy (visits 7 -10) with the exact same protocol as during the first round of treatment. A 
post-neurostimulation #3 questionnaire assessment will be completed (just as with post-neurostimulation #1) although no repeat fMRI scans will be performed at this time. Similarly, a post- neurostimulation #4 clinic visit 
will be scheduled 2 months after the end of the second 4 week of therapy.    
Optional fMRI Sub- study  
Participants who are interested in learning more about the fMRI sub- study will indicate so on the main study 
consent form.  A member of the research team will explain the sub-study to the participant and guardian(s).  If the participant is willing to participate, the  sub- consent and assent forms will be completed.  Dr. Silverman will 
complete a psychological history for all participants who agree to participate in the fMRI sub-study. Female 
participants in the experimental group (Nausea group; n=15 and IBS group; n=15) who are found to be eligible to participate in the sub -study will be scheduled to complete the fMRI scans at Visit 3  (baseline scan) prior to 
EAD placement and Post #1 (post- scan; day 5 after the last neurostimulator placement within one hour of 
removing the device). The  post- scan will be compared to baseline and baselin e scans from 15 age-and gender-
matched healthy controls who will undergo one fMRI scan (no therapy). All ethnic categories will be included.  
Healthy control participants will be recruited via word of mouth. Researchers will mention the study to peers who will be instructed to contact the research team to learn more about the study. A member of the research team will introduce the study either in person or over the phone and will explain the inclusion and exclusion criteria.  If the participant is  eligible,  consent/assent documents will be completed. Participants will then be 
scheduled to visit the pTRU where they will meet with a study physician who will perform a brief medical 
examination to confirm participant eligibility.  Eligible participants will be e scorted to the MRI unit by a 
member of the research team where they will be introduced to the mock scanner.  Participants will have the option of lying in the mock scanner prior to their fMRI scan. A medical professional who is a member of the research team will be present during the scan.  Healthy controls will only have 1 fMRI visit which will be 
completed at their convenience.   
8 
  
fMRI S ub-study inclusion ( FN and IBS  Groups ): 
- meet general study inclusion criteria  fMRI Sub-study inclusion ( Healthy Control Groups ): 
-  Female children, aged 12 years to 18 years, who provide written assent and whose parents provide written     permission for participation  
-  English-speaking -  Subjects who have no previous disorders or history, symptoms or signs of gastrointestinal disorder,      fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, migraine, chronic dizziness while upright, PTSD, panic disorder,     functional gastrointestinal disorders, constipation or fecal incontinence, diagnosis of postural tachycardia     syndrome, diabetes, asthma, neuropathy -  Subjects who have not seen by a gastroenterologist within 2 years of enrollment at the discretion of the PI.  -  Subjects who have no chronic gastroenterology complaint  fMRI Sub-study exclusion ( All Groups ): 
-  Curren tly receiving any medication that will strongly affect fMRI results   
-  Patients with pacemakers, metal clips used in previous surgery or other device which are not compatible with     MRI scanning (for sub-study group only) -  Inability to lie still in the scanner (for sub -study group only) 
-  Claustrophobia or i nabil ity to lie still in the scanner  (for sub -study group only) 
-  Orthodontic braces or permanent retainers  (for sub -study group only) 
-  Patients who are unable to tolerate noise produced by the MRI  
Visit 3: Following completion of the questionnaires, subjects wh o wish to do a mock scanning, will be 
scheduled for a 30- minute test fMRI session  in the mock scanner.  If the subject tolerates this, they will 
complete the  fMRI scan . When fMRI scan is completed, subject s in the experimental group will have the 
neurostimulator placed (see section on placement details) by a study investigator who is a certified MD. 
 Post #1: Subjects in the fMRI sub -study (FN or IBS groups) will return to the scanner to complete their final 
fMRI scan  on day 5 of last week of therapy, after removal of the EAD device.  
 E. TOTAL NUMBER OF HUMAN RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS PROPOSED FOR  THIS 
 STUDY AT THIS SITE AND GLOBALLY.  WHAT ARE THESE NUMBERS BASED ON?  
We aim to enroll 80-100 adolescents with chronic nausea for phenotyping with tests and clinical questionnaires followed by randomization to neurostimulatio n or sham therapy. A subset of 15 adolescent females and 15 age-
matched females with IBS will enter a sub -study involving the same procedures as well as  pre and post 
treatment fMRI scans.  Baseline fMRI data will be compared to scans obtained in 15 healthy, age and gender 
matched healthy controls.  F. DRUGS OR PROCEDURES  
 
Table 1. 
 Pre Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4 -5 Visit 6  Post #1  Post #2  
Screening & Consent  x        
Tanner staging  x        
13C gastric emptying breath test   x       
Satiety Drink Test    x      
Heart Rate Variability  x   x1  x1   
Nausea Profile  x   x x x x x 
BARF scale  x   x x x x x 
SUDS scale  x   x x x x x 
9 
 API (pain and nausea)  x   x x x x x 
PROMIS anxiety  & global health  x   x x x x x 
FDI x   x x x x x 
Nausea Severity Scale  x   x x x x x 
CSI  x   x x x x x 
VSI x   x x x x x 
PAGI -SYM x   x x x x x 
ROME IV  x        
Symptom response scale      x x x x 
Neurostimulator  (active or sham)     x x x   
fMRI scan (subset)     x   x  
NP=Nausea Profile; API=Abdominal Pain Index;  PROMIS=  Patient Reported Out come Measurement Information System; 
FDI=Functional Disability Inventory; CSI=Children’s Somatization Inventory; VSI=Visceral Sensitivity Index; PAGI-
SYM=Patient Assessment of Upper Gastrointestinal Symptom Severity Index  
 x1 HRV will be completed prior to and after neurostimulator placement.  
  
All procedures will be performed in the Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin (CHW) Pediatric Translational 
Research Unit ( pTRU). Prepackaged kits (Cairn Diagnostics, Brentwood, TN, USA) for the gastric emptying 
breath test and nutrient drinks will be stored by research coordinators in locked offices within the Division of Gastroenterology and brought to the pTRU on the day of testing. The prepackaged kits for the gastric emptying test and neurostimulators will be shipped by manufacturer when requested by PI. A box labeled with subject ID and containing neurostimulators (four), a GEBT kit and a labeled folder with patient ID and relevant questionnaires will be premade and kept with each subject package. After the breath test is performed, research 
coordinators will ship the samples to Cairn Diagnostics within 2 days of collection.   
Measurements and Data Collection  
At the time of each neurostimulator placement, a member of the research team will inquire and document current medications and doses and if subjects experienced any side effects from the neurostimulator during the previous week. Subjects will also be asked if they wore the device for all five days and it will be documented if the device was returned to the research team.  
 Demographic Information Data will be collected as part of the clinic visit and at enrollment.  This includes child’s  date of birth, age,  sex, 
ethnicity, and caretaker marital status. The physician assessment will also include questions about prior medical 
diagnoses, co-morbid symptoms and the characteristics of pain and nausea such as timing and triggers.   Symptom Information  
Patients  will complete the questionnaires as outlined above before, weekly at the time of application of the 
neurostimulator and after the study completion.  These i nstruments have demonstrated reliability and validity 
and have been used for both clinical and research  purposes in pediatric populations. Up to one year after study 
completion, the investigators my conduct brief follow-up phone calls to subjects to assess long- term effects.  
   Medical Information  
Information recorded for patients is part of clinical care and includes weight, height, vital signs, medications, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, early life events, family history, surgeries and other medical co- morbidities.  
 Gastric Emptying Breath Test (GEBT)  
The 13C-GEBT is a validated, FDA approved and radiation free alternative in which the isotope 13C bound to 
Spirulina platensis  algae labels a test meal.77,78 The 13C-labeled solid is absorbed in the duodenum, metabolized 
and excreted as 13CO 2 in breath.79 Breath samples are collected at specific intervals as gastric emptying is the 
rate-limiting step for the exhaled 13CO 2. Baseline 13C-GEBT is performed on all subjects using a standardized 
10 
 meal as previously performed in children and adults.19,77,78 End-tidal breath samples are collected before and at 
regular in tervals after ingestion (15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210 and 240 min). Breath samples are 
analyzed for 13CO 2 content using isotope ratio mass spectrometry (Cairn Diagnostics, Brentwood, TN, USA) as 
previously described.77 The time at which half of the 13CO 2 is excreted in the breath is defined a s the gastric 
emptying half time (t 1/2). Subjects are classified as delayed (t 1/2>90th percentile) vs normal (10th< t1/2 ≤90th 
percentile) gastric emptying based on control data obtained through separate study.  
 
Regulatory status 
The 13C-Spirulina Gastric Emptying Breath Test (GEBT) is FDA approved (PMA #P110015) for use in adults 
(see attached forms and intended use statement below).  
 
Intended Use Statement  
The Gastric Emptying Breath Test (GEBT), to be used with the GEBT test meal, is intended fo r use in the 
measurement of the rate of gastric emptying of solids and as an aid in the diagnosis of delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) in adult humans who are symptomatic for gastroparesis. For these purposes, the test system utilizes a Gas Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (GIRMS) for the measurement of the ratio of 
13CO 2 to 12CO 2 in 
breath samples.  
 The GEBT procedure will be administered under supervision of a health care professional although no 
specialized facilities or specially licensed personnel are required.   
 
Description of the Gastric Emptying Breath Test (GEBT)  
The GEBT is a non -radioactive breath test that uses the stable isotope, carbon 13 (13C).80 13C stable isotope 
labeling is inherently  safe as 1.1% of all the carbon in nature, our bodies and in the food we eat is 13C, with the 
remaining 98.9% being 12C. The test consists of a breath collection kit with subsequent analysis of the breath 
samples by Gas Isotope Ratio Mass Spectroscopy (“GI RMS”).  The breath collection kit includes a standardized 
test meal that contains freeze-dried 13C labeled Spirulina. 
 After an overnight fast, the patient consumes the test meal consisting of: • a dried scrambled egg mix containing approximately 100 mg of 
13C-Spirulina.  The 13C- labeled 
Spirulina/scrambled egg mix  is rehydrated with potable water just before cooking in a microwave oven 
• Six (6) Nabisco PREMIUM Saltine crackers  
• Six (6) ounces of potable water  Breath samples, collected before and after the test meal, are sent to Cairn Diagnostic’s  CLIA certified  
laboratory for analysis by GIRMS to determine the ratio of 
13CO 2/12CO 2.  This ratio is used to calculate the 
13CO 2 excretion rate.  By measuring the change in excretion over time, the rate of gas tric emptying can be 
determined.  
 
Principle of the GEBT 
After providing two  pre-meal breath samples, the individual being tested consumes the standard GEBT meal 
consisting of 27 grams of re-hydrated, pasteurized scrambled egg mix containing a dose of 43 mg of 13C 
(provided by approximately 100 mg of 13C-Spirulina), 6 saltine crackers, and 6 ounces of potable water. The 
caloric value of the meal is approximately 230 kCal. As the egg meal containing the 13C-Spirulina  is triturated 
by the stomach to a particle size of 1 – 2 mm, it passes through the pylorus into the intestine. In the intestine, the labeled products of 
13C-Spirulina digestion (proteins, carbohydrates, and fats) are absorbed and metabolized 
giving rise to 13C-labeled carbon dioxide expired in the breath. Breath samples, collected periodically in capped 
glass tubes before and after test meal administration, are returned to a central laboratory for analysis by Gas Isoto pe Ratio Mass Spectrometry (GIRMS) to determine the ratio of 
13CO 2/12CO 2 in each sample. By measuring 
the change in this ratio over time as compared to the pre- meal value, the rate of 13CO 2 excretion can be 
calculated and the individual’s gastric emptying rate determined.  In addition, MLR equations78 can be used to 
11 
 calculate “breath test fraction emptied” values and a “breath test t ½” value that are comparable with 
scintigraphic fraction emptied and scintigraphic half emptying times.  
 
GEBT Configuration 
The G EBT procedure is conducted over a 4- hour period. Following an overnight (or ≥8 hour) fast, duplicate 
pre-meal breath samples are collected from the test subject. Two pre- meal samples are collected to ensure that 
in the event of breakage, leakage or a lost sample, there is a “back -up” available in order to establish a subject’s 
baseline 13CO 2 level. The first intact sample of the two pre -meal samples will be analyzed to establish the 
subject’s baseline 13CO 2 value. Following pre- meal sample collection, the subject is administered the test meal. 
Single post- meal breath samples are subsequently collected at 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210 and 240 
minutes from the end of test meal consumption.   
List of all materials provided with the GEBT kit: 
• 1 Pouch of Diagnostic Dosage (13C-Spirulina/Egg Mix in a foil pouch with oxygen absorber) 
• 6 Saltine crackers (3 packages, of two crackers each, repackaged in a foil pouch with oxygen absorber) 
• 1 large (~8 oz) microwaveable cooking cup 
• 1 filling cup (small (~ 3.5 fl oz) plastic cup with pour spout for transferring water) 
• 1 plastic cutlery kit (knife, fork and spoon) 
• 2 wrapped, plastic straws 
• 8 barcode labeled, glass, breath collection tubes with screw caps 
• 1 breath tube holder 
• 1 mailer  
• 1 GEBT requisition form 
• 1 package insert  
 
Shelf Life and Storage  
The 13C-GEBT Administration Kit will be stored at controlled room temperature*.  The kit has an expiry date; 
the GEBT Kit will not be used beyond the expiration date displayed on the kit box.   Collected breath samples should be stored at controlled room temperature*. Breath samples need to be shipped to Cairn Diagnostics, in a sample mailer, within three weeks of collection.  
 *Controlled room temperature: a temperature maintained thermostatically th at encompasses the usual and 
customary working environment of 20°C to 25°C (68°F to 77°F).   
Subject Preparation  
The GEBT should be administered after an overnight fast. No solid food should be consumed or vigorous activity undertaken within 8 hours prior to the test. The individual being tested may consume a small amount of water up to 1 hour before the test, but not more than 4 fluid ounces. Coffee may enhance gastric motility and should not be consumed within 8 hours prior to testing.  Subjects should not smoke/use tobacco products (e.g. chewing tobacco, nicotine gum) before or during administration of GEBT.  The research team will confirm that the individual being tested does not have a known hypersensitivity to Spirulina, egg, milk, or wheat allergens; is not severely lactose intolerant; and has not taken medications known to influence the rate of gastric emptying (e.g., erythromycin, metoclopramide, opiates and anticholinergics) within 3 days of testing.  The GEBT procedure will be performed in a comfor table environment within the 
CHW TRU after obtaining height and weight information on participants. The individual being tested will sit quietly and fast (with the exception of the test meal) for the duration of the test. Limited walking is allowed, when necessary, e.g., use of restroom.  
Satiety Drink Test (SDT) 
12 
 The SDT is a simple and non-invasive measure of sensation to gastric distention. It has good reproducibility and 
correlates fairly well with barostat studies of gastric accommodation.81,82 20 The maximum tolerated gastric 
volume and satiety is recorded after subjects ingest a nutrient formula at a predetermined rate until reaching maximal satiety  (see protocol below). The volume ingested when reaching a satiety score of 5 corresponds to 
the maximal ingested volume (i.e. drinking capacity). The SDT measurements will be compared to normative data from a separate study. A d rinking capacity (kcal) of <5
th percentile for age and gender will classify a 
patient as impaired gastric accommodation.    Studies will be carried out on a separated day from the above GEBT, also in the morning after an overnight fast. Height and weight of subjects will be recorded prior to testing. Subjects will ingest a room temperature liquid nutrient drink (Ensure Original Vanilla; Abbott Laboratories, IL, U.S.) containing 220kcal per 237ml, 18% protein, 11% carbohydrates and 9% lipids. One of two beakers will be filled with the drink by a research coordinator or nurse at a rate of 30 ml/min. The subject will be instructed to ingest the drink at the filling rate by alternating the beakers.  Every 5 min, they will be asked to score their satiety and symptoms of nausea, bloating, pain, burning sensation and vomiting on a scale 1-5: 1= no sensation; 2=first sensation; 3=mild sensation; 4=moderate sensation and 5= maximum sensation. The maximum tolerated gastric volume (kcal), i.e. drinking capacity, is recorded after subjects reach  maximal satiety  with a score of 5 at which point they will cease 
drinking.  At the same 5 min inte rvals, subjects will also be asked to circle their nausea on a validated pictorial 
nausea severity scale (BARF scale) 0 -10.
83 Twenty minutes after completing the test, the subjects will again 
score the above symptoms on scale 1-5. A research coordinator or nurse will assist the children with completing the scores and carefully explain symptoms such as satiety as their fullness and opposite of desire to eat.   Prior to any study procedures, subjects will be carefully screened for any allergies to Spirulina, egg, milk, or wheat allergens, lactose intolerance as well as use of medications . Subjects will be instructed that some 
discomfort may be expected during the nutrient drink test. They will also be notified that they may experience symptoms of nausea, fullness, bloating or pain. However, since the test is designed to cease when maximum satiety is reached, we do not expect significant symptoms to occur.   Heart Rate Variability  HRV reflects the variability of the R -R interval in the electrocardiogram and its frequency domains.
84 HRV is 
an indirect measure of central autonomic control and an indicator of overall psychological well-being.85 
Reductions in resting HRV reflect decreases in vagal output. The high frequency range of HRV is considered representative of vagal (parasympathetic) activity and studies show altered vagal tone as measured by HRV in subjects experiencing nausea.
86 All subjects will undergo a 9 min ute baseline HRV measurement (3 minutes 
sitting , 3 minutes standing and 3 minutes sitting ) after 10 min utes of rest. This will be repeated 20 minutes into 
neurostimulation and following the end of therapy. Data will be compared to the healthy controls from IRB protocol (#1030543-5 ). Recordings will be performed supine , sitting  and standing to assess baroreflex 
response. HRV indices such as Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia (RSA), low frequency domains, low/high frequency ratio and the time domain RMSSD as a surrogate of vagal tone
84 will be analyzed using 
CardioEdit/Batch software. The RSA values will be the primary HRV outcome and compared to baseline pre-neurostimulation  and previously collected normative data from age-matched, healthy controls.  
 Questionnaires:  
All patients will complete the questionnaires listed below.  Patients are allowed to skip any questions that they do not feel comfortable answering. A member of the research team will introduce each questionnaire and explain the instructions to each of them.    
1.  Nausea Profile (NP). The NP is a two page, 17 -item questionnaire validated in adolescents which measures  
     the subjective experience of nausea on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 9 (severely) across three dimensions: 1)       somatic distress; 2) GI distress and 3) emotional distress.
87  The subjects will be asked to rate their nausea  
     over the past week. Three subscale scores and a total score is generated which can be used to measure an  
     individual’s experience of nausea and how it changes over time.88  This instrument has demonstrated  
13 
      excellent internal reliability in adolescents (Cronbach’s  α=0.941).32 Subjects will also rate their usual level of  
     nausea on a scale fr om 0 to 10 (10 being the worst nausea imaginable).  
2.  Baxter Retching Faces (BARF): pictorial daily nausea severity rating scale (0 -10)83 
3.  Subjective Unit of Distress Scale (SUDS): during active  
     treatment (3x) and off days (1x) to measure amount of distress on a severity scale (0=peace to 10=nervous  
     breakdown)89 (weekly averages will be computed)  
4.  Abdominal Pain Index (API). The API is a short, one-page instrument validated in children with functional       
abdominal pain.90 A revised form of t his scale will be used to assess nausea  (=Nausea Severity Scale) .  
5. Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Systems (PROMIS) Pediatric Anxiety -Short Form scale:91 
Symptoms of anxiety will be assessed via the short , 8-item PROMIS anxiety short form.  A Research   
Psychologist (PhD) will assist with interpretation of the psychometric data. Scores  
     will be compared against healthy norms, and pediatric chronic pain patients.  6.  Patient Reported Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Global healthy: A newly developed and validated global health/quality of life outcome measure that provides an efficient (7- item) summary of a 
child’s physical, mental and social health (both self and parental reports will be assessed) .
92   
7.  Functional Disability Inventory (FDI): Symptoms of disability and reduced quality of life secondary to pain       nausea will be assessed with the FDI  child and parent report forms.
93  This is a one page, self- report measure 
of the degree that ch ildren experience difficulty in physical and psychosocial functioning due to impaired 
physical health. Patients and parents rate each of the 15 -items on a five -point Likert scale indicating how much 
difficulty they have doing common childhood activities be cause of their physical health.  
8.  Children’s Somatization Inventory (CSI): 24-item instrument assessing child and parent report of multisystem somatic complaints. The CSI has been validated in children with functional pain disorders.
94  
9.Visceral Sensit ivity Index (VSI): The VSI is a short, one- page validated instrument assessing gastrointestinal 
symptom- specific anxiety.95  
10. Subjects will also fill out a short validated overall symptom response scale.96 Subjects will rate their  
     symptoms as better, worse or no change based on a 15 point scale: -7 to -1= worse; 0 = no change; +1 to +7       = better). A score of +5 to +7 will be considered significant improvement.  11. Patient Assessment of upper Gastrointestinal Symptom Severity Index (PAGI- SYM):  
97 Upper 
gastrointestinal symptoms including symptoms of gastroparesis will be assessed via this 20- item instrument.  
12. Rome IV Diagnostic Questionnaire on Pediatric Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: clinical  
     classification into Rome IV criteria for functional GI disorders (baseline only)98  
 Neurostimulator   
Auricular Neurostimulation ( EAD) treatment protocol  
Subjects  will enter a 4 -week, prospective randomized, double blind sham controlled treatment trial with the 
FDA -approved and commercially available EAD manufactured by Key Electronics (Jeffersonville, IN, USA) 
and distributed by Innovative Health Solutions (Versailles, IN, USA). The device is cleared under the BWK 
classification,  with intended use in the practice of acupuncture by qualified practitioners of acupuncture as 
determined by the states.  EAD is an ambulatory, neurological device which consists of a battery powered, 
externally affixed generator with 4 wire leads attached to 3 electrode/ needle arrays and one single point needle. The arrays are designed to produce a field effect similar to surgically implanted peripheral neurostimulators. The electrodes will be placed percutaneously in the external ear with the help of a tr ansilluminator to visualize 
the neurovascular bundles. Three electrodes will be placed on the ventral and one on the dorsal aspect of the ear. The electrodes will be taped and secured behind the ear next to the generator itself which is secured to the skin with adhesive. The entire device may be covered by longer hair. The placement of the devices is within standard of care by properly trained medical doctors as already completed trial at CHW (IRB
# 689519- 17). 
Training of MDs has been performed by Dr. Chris Brown or Brian Carrico as representatives of Innovative Health Solutions. Training of other involved physicians may be performed if protocol approved. 40- 50 subj ects 
will receive the active EAD  device while 40-50 subjects will receive an inactive  device that is identical to the 
active device but lacking the battery.     
 
14 
 Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either treatment or sham group.  Randomization will be determined 
using a computer program based on random number generation in blocks of 10 subjects at a time. The manufacturer will provide the researchers with four devices per package (4 weeks per patient) and distribute 10 packages at a time to the investigators. Each package will have a serial number and only one research coordinator will have the key to which serial numbers represent active devices and which represent inactive ones.  This research coordinator will keep the data in a secure database and will not be involved in any of the patient recr uitment or study procedures.  All other research coordinators, investigators, statistician  and nurses 
involved will be blinded.  Research coordinators within the division of gastroenterology will store the devices as pre- packaged by manufacturer and label the devices with a serial number and patient ID number. A labeled 
folder for each patient with all questionnaires needed for the entire study will also be kept with each subject package. The devices and folders will be stored in a locked office in the gast roenterology division, only 
accessible by research coordinators.  Password protected i Pads will be used to collect questionnnaire 
information from participants. No PHI will be loaded on these iP ads.  
 A blinded research coordinator will bring each subject’s numbered package to the research area (Translational Research Unit) when patient arrives. The package for the subject will be stored locked in the TRU until the 
subject finishes the 4 week therapy. The coordinator will ask the subject to complete the pre- placement 
questionnaires (Table 1; visit #3) and hand the device (numbered with serial # and patient ID only) to one of the certified MDs for placement. The devices will be "made to order" when requested by the PI and will be shipped packaged as above.  
 Patients will be told that they may or may not feel a slight flushing or tingling sensation after device placement. The electrode/needle arrays are implanted according to the individual’s arterial and cranial nerve anatomy. The exact location of the implan tation may vary slightly from person to person but is determined by both knowledge 
of auricular neuro-anatomy and visualization of the neurovascular bundles by trans- illumination  (IHS, 
Versailles, IN, USA). The points will be targeted by four- point electrical stimulation using the EAD device after 
carefully disinfecting the ear. The small device will be positioned and secured behind the ear similar to a hearing aid, which may be covered by hair. Neurostimulation will be delivered below sensation threshold continuously for 5 consecutive days. The EAD device will be applied by a trained MD. Subjects will remove the device independently at home and discard them as they are non-functioning after 5 days (5 days battery life). If a device is lost or broken, the research team will attempt to schedule placement of a new EAD within 1 
day if you wish. The devices are easily removed by removing the tapes and adhesives. Before and during the treatment trial, subjects and parents will complete questionnaires as shown in Table 1. 
 The EAD Surgical kit consists of : 
- an alcohol swab  - prep and stay swab  - round fixation plasters - fixation plasters to fasten the generator  - Steri -strip adhesive vial  
- Sterile wire harness pack  - Generator  
- Tweezers  
- Surgical marker  
- Transilluminator  
 EAD  placement details:  
1. A research coordinator in the GI office will be asked to open the package and obtain either a true device or a control device as outlined in a randomization scheme provided by the statistic ian. This research 
coordinator will document the patient ID, name and the device serial number in the study database and whether assign ed to an active vs inactive device.  This lead research coordinator will be the only 
unblinded person and she will not be involved in any patient contact or other parts of the study.  
15 
 2. The neurostimulator placement will be performed as directed and per EAD training protocol 
instructions identically to prior CHW IRB approved trial. 
3. Before neurostimulator placement, the subject should be advised that some discomfort is normal at first 
but should report if the discomfort persists or gets worse after a few minutes. The patients should be advised that they may feel a slight pulsing sensation and perhaps a warming sensation in the ear to which the electrodes are affixed. The pulsing and warming sensation may disappear after approximately 5 minutes. If the discomfort level increases the offending electrode can be slightly repositioned until the patient’s discomfort level decreases to an acceptable level.  
4. Device placement will take approximately 5 minutes. The patient will remain at rest for the next 5 minutes.  
5. The subje ct will be advised not to immerse the device in water as the device is water resistant but not 
water proof. If showering or washing their hair, subjects will be instructed to place a dry wash cloth or plastic such as Press n’ seal over the area to help pro tect the device. Subjects will be given a contact 
person (primary investigator and research coordinator) to call if they are having any problems with the device or if it falls off.   
6. The patient will be instructed on removing the device after 5 days. If not comfortable doing so or unable to carry out the instructions, the patient may be seen that day for removal by one of the investigators.  
7. At the end of the study (post-neurostimulation #1), subjects will be asked to guess their group allocation  to test blinding. 
8. The patient will be asked to return the used device for proper disposal when they return for their follow-up appointment.  
9. The subject will be given a handout with information (attached) on device handling, exact date and time of device removal and  date and time to return.  
10. The subject will be advised to refrain from using any new or as needed anti- emetic or pain medications.  
11. The subject is dismissed.  
  
 Optional fMRI  sub-study  
Participants will be given the option to participate in the f MRI sub-study.  Post menarche patients must yield a 
negative urine pregnancy test on the day of each scan.  Participants will then be escorted to the f MRI scanner in 
the lower level of FH where t hey will complete the safety screening questionnaire.  The patient will be given the 
option of lying down in the mock scanner prior to their first fMRI scan.   
 The fMRI scans will be carried out using GE 3T short bore scanner.  This scanner is located at the Froedtert  
Hospital.  For each participant we will perform one baseline whole brain anatomical scan and one resting state  
fMRI  scan before and after therapy. Healthy controls will have only one baseline fMRI scan. The healthy 
controls will also undergo a visual task where they are simply shown images while in the fMRI scanner. These images will be related to toilet training and this data will be used for healthy comparison data from separate study by our group (IRB #774802- 6). We anticipate the whole ses sion to last about 40 minutes.  Echo  planner 
images resolved to 64x64 pixels/slice at TR of 2s and echo time of 25 ms will be obtained.  
Resting State Functional Connectivity MRI  
Resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) analysis measures the temporal correlation between a predetermined seed region of interest and functionally related brain regions. After subgrouping and additional consenting, 15 post- pubertal female subjects classified as FN will undergo a 10 min ute anatomical scan 
followed by a 6 min rsFC MRI scan at baseline prior to first EAD placement which is repeated after 4 weeks of therapy (after stimulator removed) (Table 1; post- neurostimulation  #1). 15 female subjects classified as irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS group) will undergo the same protocol. Resting state MRI scans will be performed per protocol below. The amygdala will be used as a seed region and the functional connectivity between the 
amygdala and PFC regions will be examined during rest at baseline. Data will be compared i n treatment 
16 
 responders (if possible) and non-responders in order to evaluate connectivity differences before and after 
therapy in these two groups.   
Multimodal Imaging protocols  
Research -dedicated GE MR750 3.0 Tesla whole -body scanners with 32- channel phase -array head coil will be 
employed and the scanner is located in the Froedtert Hospital (FH)/Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW). Our scanning protocol will focus on integrating the most recent advances in multimodal imaging technologies, including T1 SPGR, T2 FLAIR, R -fMRI, and ASL -CBF images.  The justifications of utilizing these imaging 
protocols are: 1) to noninvasively characterize the structural, functional, and metabolic changes in subjects; 2) these imaging protocols will provide robust quality control, repeatable and reliable imaging datasets for imaging post- processing and statistical analyses; 3) most of these imaging protocols and pulse sequences have been tested 
and released as products by major scanner vendors (GE, Siemens, and Philips), ther efore, they can be immediately 
translatable to the clinic setting.  Specifically, the integrated multimodal imaging protocols and justification are summarized below:  
 1)  SPGR high -resolution images.  Acquire T1 weighted spoiled gradient recalled echo (SPG R) images for 
high spatial resolution of anatomical images. The SPGR images can be employed for tissue segmentation and volumetric analysis using FreeSurfer, and image registration for functional neural network studies.  2)  FLAIR images .  Acquire T2 weighted fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images for general 
pathological detection such as for macroscopic white matter lesion quantification, and micro hemorrhage. In addition, the T1/T2 ratio can provide myelination information.  3)  R -fMRI images.  Acquire resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (R -fMRI) datasets to study 
intrinsic blood oxygenation level dependent (iBOLD) signal. These iBOLD signals will be employed to study changes in neural networks of the disease and control brains. It is hypothesized that a) alterations in functional 
cortical networks are apparent; b) Network wide analysis can identify and classify functional disease status together with their comorbidity.  We will utilize “seed” -based, module- based, and whole brain network- based 
analyses to characterize the changes in nausea/pain brains. For the image acquisition, we will employ our newly developed pulse sequence, named Spatially compensated Intra-shot Turbo keyhole (SCITH), based on multi-echo denoise approach for robust reliability and repeatability for functional connectivity analyses.    All these imaging protocols and data acquisition will be completed within one scanning sessions in 30 min for each subject.    Data Acquisition and Analysis   
Data acquisition: The cerebral cortical activity will be monitored in all subjects with a blood oxygenation level -
dependent (BOLD) fMRI technique. Gradient echo-planar imaging (EPI) data will be acquired on a Neuro-
optimized 3.0 T MR system (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA). A quadrature birdcage head coil will be used for radio frequency (RF) transmission and reception. One hundred and twenty T2*- weighted images depicting blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast (Ogawa et al., 1990) will be acquired over 6 min at each of 14 near -axial non- contiguous 4 mm thick planes parallel to the inter commissural (AC±PC) line: TE 
(echo time) = 25 ms; TR (repetition time) = 2 s; matrix size = 64 x 64; FOV (Field of view) = 240 mm; in -plane 
resolution = 3.75*3.75 mm
2; interslice gap = 0.7 mm.  
 
Scanning protocol : A 6  min resting state scan will be performed at baseline. The same protocol is repeated at 
end of therapy with another scan after device is removed (Table 1; post-neurostimulation #1) . This will allow us 
to examine functional connectivity changes induced by the stimulation. rsFC will be compared between baseline and end of treatment in both treatment responders and non-responders and compared to healthy controls and IBS patients . Brain  activation will be quantified for each voxel by measuring percent change of 
BOLD signal relative to the baseline. Spatial smoothing of the response magnitude across voxels will be 
17 
 conducted using a 6- mm full-width half- maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel ﬁlter  to compensate for 
intersubject variability. In the group analysis, activation maps for each stimulation state and group will be 
derived by applying voxelwise one- sample t -tests of fitting coefficient from regression analysis. The obtained 
statistical maps  were corrected for multiple comparisons using the probability and cluster thresholding 
technique (AlphaSim in AFNI).  
fMRI-guided connectivity analysis: We have developed a novel fMRI -guided connectivity analysis  in previous 
investigations by Dr. Li to determine the distribution of an arousal network by using a seed region in a specific brain area of interest. In this protocol, we will examine resting state functional connectivity with amygdala as the seed region of interest and its coupling with prefronta l cortex areas as well as insula and hypothalamus as 
key nodes of the emotional arousal neurocircuit and internal awareness. 
 Statistical Analysis  
 
Data Management  
The data gathered will be entered into REDCap  data system with each ID having a unique identifier for each 
participant. REDCap is a secure, web -based application for building and managing online databases. All data 
will be de -identified and samples will only have a unique identifier that will link th e unique identifier with the 
patient’s name.  
 The REDCap clinical database will be maintained by the Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, at the Children's Research Institute under the direction of Pippa Simpson, PhD.     
Missing Data Handling 
Missing Data:  Every effort will be made to avoid missing data. Using logistic regression, the pattern of missing 
data will be explored. Assuming the data are missing at random (MAR) multiple imputations for items will be used. Data analysis overview:  Summary statistics, such as mean, median, standard deviation, range and 
correlation will be used as a first step to examine data.  To satisfy parametric assumptions, we may perform transformations with justifications if possible and otherwise use non- param etric tests. We will use CART and 
biological and physiological information to identify interactions when formulating regression models. Statistical software employed for data analysis will be: Cytel StatXact, SAS version 9.4, Salford System CART for trees, SPSS Version 24. The power calculation was made using PASS 13.’  Power  
 
Aim 1.  We will summarize characteristics by the groupings.  
Aim 2.  See fMRI analysis section below  
Aim 3 . Hypothesis 3a): Four weeks of active neurostimulation will reduce nausea and concurrent symptoms from 
baseline compared to sham therapy as measured by weekly N ausea Severity Scale total score (primary outcome)  
after 4 weeks of therapy. Secondary outcomes include  daily nausea (BARF)  scores,  and weekly nausea profile 
scores, upper GI symptoms (PAGI -SYM), abdominal pain (API), anxiety ( SUDS, PROMIS and VSI) , quality of 
life (PROMIS), disability (FDI) and co-morbid symptoms (CSI) . Another secondary efficacy variable will be the 
change in Nausea Severity Scale score after the second 4 weeks of therapy in a subset of subjects. We will compare pre and post total nausea, GI symptoms, anxiety, disability , quality of life and co -morbid symptom scores using 
a two -sided paired t -test at a Bonferroni corrected alpha of 0.05. Power:  with ~ 40 in each group initially, allowing 
for 12% dropout  based on our prior study, we will have ~ 35 subjects and 80% power to detect a difference of at 
least XX standa rd deviations (SD). We will similarly compare the other variables. Further we will use regression 
and regression trees with final value as the outcome and demographics, baseline values and overall symptoms as covariates. Hypothesis 3b: Adolescents with FN will have reduced vagal tone as measured by HRV. Active 
neurostimulation therapy will elevate vagal tone compared to baseline  and sham therapy, resembling that of 
healthy controls . We will similarly analyze the change in vagal tone in nausea subjects . Furt her we will compare 
18 
 the final vagal tone to healthy using a two sample t -test of equivalence where equivalence will be defined as 
within 20%. See fMRI analysis section for details on resting state fMRI analyses.  
Longitudinal Continuous Variables 
The efficacy parameters of longitudinal continuous variables such as nausea and pain will be analyzed using a 
mixed effects covariance pattern model to utilize all the data collected over time with consideration of the variance- covariance matrix of the repeated measures. This method allows a general unstructured variance-
covariance matrix and allows patients to have incomplete data across scheduled time points. The method applied is also known as mixed- effects repeated measures analyses (MMRM).  
 The primary model wi ll include independent variables of the fixed, categorical effects of treatment, assessment 
visit, and treatment-by-assessment, interaction, along with the continuous effects of baseline and baseline-by-assessment interaction up to end of study. An unstructured variance- covariance structure will be used to model 
the within -patient  errors and different variance -covariance structures will be tried for goodness-of- fit 
exploration.  
Continuous/ Ordinal variables 
Summary statistics such as mean, median, standard deviation, range and correlation plots and tree analysis will be used to examine distributions and interrelationships. Where necessary, for parametric assumption, we will 
employ appropriate transformations with justifications. If data cannot be appropriately transformed we will 
compare variables between the two groups using a Mann- Whitney test.  
 Additional Analysis  
In addition to the above described primary analysis, the following analysis will be done. 1. The mean change from baseline in all efficacy variable scores will be summarized using descriptive statistics at all assessment time points.   2. To assess effects of dropouts, the dropout cohort analysis will be performed by summarizing the change of primary and secondary efficacy variables using different dropout cohorts. Dropout cohorts will be formed by patients that had their last primary efficacy measurement in the same assessment interval.  
 For all efficacy variables, nominal p -values will be presented without applying any adjustment for multiple 
comparisons.  GEBT Metrics  
The preferred and FDA approved GEBT metric is the Percent Dose (abbreviated PCD) excreted at time t after 
consumption of the test meal.  To provide a more convenient scale, we multiply PCD by 1000 to produce kPCD at any time, t.  
100010132∗

∗∗ ∗ ∗=doseR PRCO DOBkPCDs
t  
where:  
• DOB = The measured difference in the ratio [13CO 2/12CO 2] between a post -meal breath specimen at 
any time (t- minutes) and the baseline breath specimen.  
• CO 2PR = CO 2 Production Rate (mmol CO 2/min) calculated using the Schofield equations97 which 
incorporate the patient’s age, gender, height and weight. 
• Rs = The ratio [13CO 2/12CO 2] in the reference standard (Pee Dee belemnite) for these measurements.  
Rs = 0.0112372 
• 13 = the atomic weight of Carbon-13 
• 10 = A constant factor for converting units 
19 
 • dose = the weight (mg) of Carbon- 13 in the dose of 13C-Spirulina administered to the patient in the 
test meal.  Since 13C-Spirulina  contains approximately 43% Carbon- 13, a dose of 100mg 13C-Spirulina  
corresponds to approximately 43 mg of Carbon-13. 
The kPCD va lues will be used to estimate the fraction of meal emptied from stomach at the specific time points. 
We will then generate normative range values for kPCDs (13C-excretion rates) at the different time points and 
also determine the half -life of gastric emptying: Breath test t ½ (BT_t ½) 
 
BT_t ½ values comparable to scintigraphic half emptying times will be calculated.78 13CO 2 excretion rates 
(kPCD) are used to calculate “breath test fraction emptied” values using the multiple logistic regression equations published by Szarka et al which correct for age, gender, height and weight.
78  
 T
max, the time of maximum 13CO 2 excretion rate, is another metric that will  be used to interpret GEBT results : 
patients with delayed gastric emptying rates usually have a T max of 240 minutes.  
 NDT  
The endpoint of the nutrient drink test will be the volume and calories ingested at a satiety score of 5. Data will be expressed as median and interquartile ranges (IQ R). Correlations between the endpoint of the satiety drink 
test and parameters such as weight, height, BMI, age and gender will be analyzed using Pearson’s correlation. Differences will be compared using student’s t -test or Mann -Whitney U -test and consider ed significant at the 
5% level. The upper and lower limits of normal for the maximum tolerated volume/calories will be calculated as the 5
th and 95th percentile for each age group. 
 For all efficacy variables, nominal p -values will be presented without applying any adjustment for multiple 
comparisons. 
Safety Data  
All safety variables (e.g., adverse events will be summarized for each assessment time (including follow-up) 
using descriptive statistics. Incidence of adverse events will be summarized by treatment.  
 
fMRI analyses  
 
Strategies for imaging data analysis and data fusion with clinical observation .  The goal for analyzing results 
from integrated multimodal imaging protocols is provide structural, functional, and metabolic information for the insight into the mechanisms of pain/drug abuse brains in order to advance long- term prevention, diagnosis, 
prediction and treatment planning.  Our strategy for analyzing these large complexes imaging datasets will involve 
four steps: First step , preprocess imaging datasets for individual subjects and then convert voxelwise imaging 
parameters into standard imaging  matrices in MNI templates.  Second step , conduct group- level statistical 
analysis based on each of imaging modalities, e.g. functional (R -fMRI) or ASL -CBF images. There are three 
levels of neural network analyses: 1) Seed -based network analysis; 2) ROI -based large scale network analysis; 
and 3) whole brain Graph theory analysis (e.g., Small -world graphical analysis). From the second step, we will 
obtain imaging parameters as independent variables for each subject such as brain atrophy, CBF and functional connectivity index (FCI) at seed, regions, and whole brain networks levels. Third step , construct a database 
containing demographic information and a battery of neuropsychological and behavioral testing scores. Fourth step, conduct Data fusion processes from step 2 and step 3 with Multivariate analysis  and Multivariate Linear 
Regression for establishing the neural biomarker for diagnosing and measuring treatment responses/efficacy.  
 
Multivariate analysis will be employed in determining the sensitivity and specificity in discriminating normal, pain, or drug abuse subjects as described in specific Aims. The imaging parameters P  from step 2 (e.g. Functional 
connectivity index (FCI) and metabolic information (CBF) will be statistically combined to give a composite imaging Index, which will be employed in disease diagnoses. We propose to use a multivariate classification 
20 
 technique, such as Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Function. Assume that we have a training sample of n  normal 
subjects, and m dise ased subjects (nausea or pain ).  For each subject, we measure P  parameters.  Then, we can 
assemble this data into the matrices: X 1 = [x 11, x12,…, x 1,n] and X 2 = [x 21, x22,…, x 2,m], 
where x ij = vector of P  measurements for subject j from group i (i=1,2 (nor mal and diseased, respectively).   Let 
μ1, μ2 =  sample mean vectors, and S 1, S2 = sample covariance matrices, for the normal and diseased groups.  The 
sample covariance matrices can be combined into a single, pooled estimate:  S pooled   =  [(n-1)S1 + (m -1) S2] / 
(n+m -2). 
From these quantities, Fisher’s Sample Linear Discriminant Function is given by: 
y(xo) = ( μ1 – μ2) S-1pooled  xo, where x o represents a vector of observations for a new subject.  Define q as the 
midpoint between the transformed sample means: q  =  ½ [y( μ
1) + y( μ2)] = ½ (μ 1 – μ 2) S-1pooled (μ1 + μ 2) 
Then, using Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Function, we classify x o as belonging to the normal group if y( xo) > q, 
and classify x o as belonging to the diseased group if  y( xo) < q.    
Based on these values of y(x o), ROC curves can be constructed.  Note:   In order for the matrix inverse S-1pooled   to 
exist, it is necessary that n + m - 2 > P .  
 Multivariate Linear Regression will be employed in determining the neural correlates of clinical parameters. The imaging parameters P from step 2 will be the independent variables and clinical parameters M  from Step 3 
will be the dependent variables. Therefore, in order to deal with multiple dependent and multiple independent parameters, across multiple subjects, we propose to use multivariate multiple regression models.  Suppose that 
cognitive ability is measured as a vector of m components.  That is, for each subject j  in the study, we measure 
the vector m  of cognitive attributes at time t: 
Y
j (t) = [Y j1 (t)  Y j2 (t) …   Yjm (t)]. 
We will assemble these measurements for each of the n subjects into the n  x m matrix Y.  The design matrix X  is 
an n x p matrix, Xj (t) = [X j1 (t)  X j2 (t) …   X jp (t)]. In this case, the regression coefficients, which relate the 
independent to the dependent variables, are represented by the p x m matrix β.  Then, the multivariate linear 
regression model is given by:   Y = X
 , where ε  is the error matrix.   The error terms corresponding to the m  
cognitive observations for the j th subject may be correlated.  Likelihood ratio tests will be performed to assess 
the statistical significance of various components of the regression coefficient matrix β , in order to determine 
which subsets of the independent variables can be used to predict variations in cognitive ability across subjects.    MCW Research Team and imaging facility:  MCW is a national leader with a well-established model for basic and clinical translational research. Our MCW research group was the first to discover and devel op R-
fcMRI methodology in 1995 and has been at the forefront in developing R-fcMRI applications for nearly two decades.  Our group has previously used R- fcMRI to describe changes in neural networks in a variety of 
diseases and conditions, including cocaine/heroin abuse, mTBI, pain, Alzheimer’s disease, depression, and anesthesia, etc. Also, MCI imaging research center, has a team of imaging physicists and imaging processing scientists and the -state-of-the- art GE MR750 3T scanner to conduct the proposed studies.  
 Outcome measure and Impact :  The proposed study will provide biomarkers for the functional 
pathophysiology of functional GI disorders, as well as other comorbidities that can lead to improved diagnostic and treatment options for these debilitating conditions and ultimately improve the long- term health and welfare 
of functional GI disorders.  G. RISK CATEGORY:  
Nausea and IBS patients - 45 CFR 46.405: Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting 
the prospect of direct benefit to the individual child subjects Healthy controls in fMRI sub-study - 45 CFR 46.404: Research not involving greater than minimal risk to the children 
H. RISKS AND THE PRECAUTIONS WHICH WILL BE TAKEN TO MINIMIZE RISK 
 EXPOSURE  
21 
  
Gastric function tests:  
Involved risks are minimal.  Possible risks involve allergies to contents  of formula or premade meal for GEBT; 
although these will be carefully screened for prior to enrollment there is a possibility of unknown allergies.  Patients may experience some d iscomfort, nausea and possible vomiting with satiety drink test. However, 
patients are instructed to cease drinking at point of satiety so extreme symptoms should not be experienced. 
Questionnaires:  
Patient distress during questionnaire completion:  If children become distressed during completion of study 
questionnaires, they are instructed in the consent and assent forms to inform the researchers or nurse.  The researchers/nurse will then contact the primary investigator who will place a referral to a psychologist.as necessary and as dictated by law (e.g., suspected child abuse/neglect) to ensure patient and family safety and to address psychosocial needs. 
Patient/Parent report of clinically significant psychosocial or safety issues:  Any child endorsing  clinically 
significant psychological distress on questionnaire- reported screening measures will be referred to a 
psychologist. The PROMIS anxiety and global health scales will be scored by research coordinators within a week of completion. The raw score will be covered to a standardized T score where a T score of 50 represents the mean for a U.S. general pediatric population with a standard deviation of 10. Subjects scoring greater than 2 standard deviations below the mean will be reported to the PI. The PI wil l discuss the results with the family 
and provide them with a referral to a licensed clinical psychologist (Dr. Silverman) as necessary.       
 Heart Rate Variability: Participants will be asked in advance if they have a history of skin allergy to adhesives to avoid provoking any skin irritation or rash.  However, some redness from the adhesive on the ECG surface electrodes may temporarily appear.  
Neurostimulation: 
Overall risks/ discomforts involved are very minimal – Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
 Possible risks/discomforts may involve: 
a. Discomfort upon insertion of the electrodes for < 5 minutes - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
b. Discomfort at the lead placement site > 5 minutes – Rare (1 % - < 5%)  
c. Bleeding at the electrode site if the neurovascular bundle is penetrated - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
d. Localized discomfort if the electrodes should become dislodged during the wearing of the device  - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
e. Localized dermatitis - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
f. Drop in blood pressure - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
g. Syncope (fainting) - Rare (event rate 1% - < 5%)  
  Adverse effects to supporting personnel 
a.  Skin piercing with percutaneous needles - Rare (event rate 1 % - < 5%)  
 **In our recently completed randomized trial of auricular neurostimulation for functional abdominal pain (unpublished data), there were no significant or serious adverse events noted. Of 115 enrolled subjects, 10 reported side effects for following reasons, none of which were serious: ear discomfort n=6 (three active/three placebo device); adhesive allergy n=3 (one active/two placebo); syncope due to needle phobia n=1 (placebo).   
fMRI  sub-study  
1) Interviews and surveys : In this case that the subject becomes tired they will be permitted to rest.   
2) Magnetic Resonance (MRI) Studies:   MRI studies are associated with the following risks and discomforts:  
22 
 a) An MRI machine acts like a large magnet.  If the study subject has a pacemaker or any metal, such as an  
      aneurysm clip, ear implant, or nerve stimulator in their body, they will not be allowed to have an MRI scan.   
b) If a piece of metal (such as a tool, keys, or watch) is released into the scanner room, study subject may be  
      injured.  This chance is minimized by careful screening and by having only trained technicians or assistants  
      in the immediate area, which is otherwise restricted.  
c) Subjects will be required to wear ear protection to minimize noise injury in the scanner.  
d) If the child brings credit cards, other magnetic media, or fine electronics or devices (such as a watch) into  
      the MRI scanner room, they may be damaged by the strong magnetic field. The risk is minimized by proper  
      screening before entering the scanner room. 
3) Pregnanc y Related Risk:  Pregnant women will not take part in this research study.  The effects of a MRI 
scanner on an unborn baby are not known.  All female participants past puberty will take a urine pregnancy test prior to participating in the fMRI scan.  
4) Fatheri ng a child:  The effects of a MRI scanner on an unborn baby are not known.   Participants  should not 
father a baby while in this study.   
5) Claustrophobia:   If the subject experiences fear of being trapped in a narrow space the scan will be stopped.  
If the subject wishes to re-attempt the scan another appointment can be made. 
 There may be other risks and side effects that we cannot predict.  If these should occur the participant should 
discuss them with the researcher and /or their  regular doctor. 
 Safety Monitoring Plan  All procedures will be performed by trained professionals within the standard of care under continuous medical supervision in the hospital setting (research unit). Side effects will be inquired about and documented every week during the study and at the post-study follow-up visit. Daily nausea ratings will be filled out by patients so this will be carefully monitored.  If any  serious harm or discomfort is identified by the subjects or the study 
personnel, the treatment will be discontinued. Any patient with worsening or no improvement in symptoms during the study will be able to drop out at any time and receive standard of care medical therapy. The skin of the external ear will be carefully disinfected to avoid any infection risks.  Subjects will undergo vital sign screening before enrollment and vital sign assessment before neurostimulator placement.   Safety Analysis Plan   
There are no dangerous interventions related to this study, and the short study timeline allows for 
discontinuation of treatment when it is proven to be ineffective.   Completion of psychometric questionnaires may be associated with mild distress in some par ticipants. Because 
the questionnaires include assessment of patient psychosocial functioning, clinically significant symptoms that the patient or parent were unaware of may be brought to light.    
Patient distress during questionnaire completion:  If children become distressed during completion of study 
questionnaires, they are instructed in the consent and assent forms to inform the researchers or nurse.  The researchers/nurse will then contact the primary investigator who will place a  referral to a psychologist.as 
necessary and as dictated by law (e.g., suspected child abuse/neglect) to ensure patient and family safety and to address psychosocial needs. 
 
Patient/Parent report of clinically significant psychosocial or safety issues:  An y child endorsing  clinically 
significant psychological distress on questionnaire- reported screening measures will be  referred to a 
psychologist.  Regarding psychological screeners, rese arch assistants will score the PROMIS questionnaires 
within a week of completion.  Any scores 2 or more standard deviations above mean  will be reported to the PI. 
In turn, the PI will discuss the results with the family  and provide them with a referral to a licensed clinical 
psychologist as necessary.     
  
 
23 
 I. PROVISION FOR THE PROTECTION OF PRIVACY OF SUBJECTS AND TO MAINTAIN 
 THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA 
 
All research projects that collect electronic data must use appropriate security measures to ensure 
that data is protected from theft or loss in order to prevent breaches  of confidentiality.  You must 
indicate what encryption tools (or why they are not necessary) from the options below.  The IRB 
will not review this protocol unless you indicate the encryption tools being used to secure your 
research data.   If you do not have encryption in place on your systems, please contact your 
Information Systems support to arrange for one of the encryptions options listed below.  
 
            The following encryption products employ cryptographic modules that the National Institute of   Standards and Technology has certified as meeting FIPS 140- 2 requirements.   Children’s Hospital  
 and Health System endorsed the use of these products made to encrypt hard drives and removable  
media.   All electronic research data must be encrypted using one or more of these products.   
 
Please indicate which encryption tools you are using to secure your research data.  
            ___Credent Mobile Guardian (RS, PD)             ___GuardianEdge Hard Disk and GuardianEdge Removable Storage Encryption (HD, RS, PD)             ___IronKey encrypted flash drives (RS)             ___McAfee Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS) 
___Microsoft Bitlocker (HD, RS when used with Windows 7 and FIPS compliant algorithms are 
enabled)  
            ___PGP Whole Disk Encryption and PGP Portable (HD, RS)             ___SafeNet Protect Disk and SafeNet Protect File (HD, RS)  
            ___Seagate Secure Self -Encrypting Drives (HD when encryption option is enabled) 
            ___Symantec Endpoint Encryption (HD, RS, PD)             ___WinMagic SecureDoc encryption (HD) (for MCW owned computers)  ___Other ( add description) 
             Does not apply because:             ___  D ata is de- identified – no PHI collected  
            ___  Data is stored on paper only             ___  Data is stored on CHW secured shared drives. 
      _X_ Data is stored on MCW secured shared drives.  
 
Key 
            HD = Hard Drive  
            RS = Re movable Storage (USB flash drive, CD, etc.) 
            PD = Portable Device (iPod; iPhone; PDA, etc.)  
Each subject will be assigned a unique identifying number which will be the only identifier listed on the questionnaires, GEBT and neurostimulator kits  and all data collection forms.   Each subject’s identifying number 
and related electronic data will be kept on a secured, MCW password- protected database that provides access 
only to the PI and research staff. Only authorized research personnel will have access to the database. A separate secure database will have the subject identification number linked to the patient’s name and info.  The 
GEBT kits and neurostimulator devices will be shipped directly from the manufacturer (Key Electronics) to the GI office research coordinator who will label each package of 4 neurostimulator devices with a patient ID and serial number with a prepared sticker label. A subject folder will also be prepared an d labeled with the same ID 
and kept together wit h the device package. The devices will be stored in a locked room in the division of 
gastroenterology. The kits  will be transported by a research coordinator to the TRU on the day needed. The 
remaining kits will be stored  in a locked room  in the GI clinic , labeled with the patient’s ID. Only research 
coordinators within the division of gastroenterology will have access to the storage room. To track use and 
24 
 proper disposal of the devices, subjects will be asked to return the used device the following week (a t time of 
the next stimulator placement or follow -up clinic vis it if week 4) . The doctor or research coordinator will record 
that device was returned and dispose it properly. The research coordinator will log this data every week on each 
subject as devices  are returned.  
   J. PROVISIONS FOR MONITORING DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS; AND 
 ADDITIONAL SAFEGUARDS TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS AND WELFARE OF SUBJECTS 
 WHO ARE LIKELY TO BE VULNERABLE  
The PI will monitor the  health of all patients in the study per standard cl inical practice.  The PI  will monitor 
protocol adherence and supervise data collection, entry, and analysis.   K. ANTICIPATED BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROTOCOL TO HUMAN RESEARCH  PARTICIPANTS AND SOCI ETY  
 There are numerous, possible direct and long- term benefits to the subjects in this study.  Our recently completed 
study of EAD in children with various functional abdominal pain disorders demonstrate improved pain, global 
well- being and functioning after only 3 weeks of therapy with effects sustained at 2 months follow-up 
(manuscript under review). Since it is well documented that functional disability and quality of life is worse in adolescents with functional pain disorders with concurrent nausea th an in those without nausea,
13,9 and as many 
subjects in the above trial were noted to have improve ment  in concurrent nausea, we postulate that some of the 
improvement in well -being and functioning may be due to reduction in nausea (along with pain) . There  is now 
also mechanistic data through heart rate variability studies before and after therapy (unpublished data), suggesting the EAD acts through peripheral vagal nerve stimulation effects. Given the known vagal pathways involved in nausea and vomiting, we anticipate a reduction in nausea in subjects suffering from chronic functional nausea. Our prior studies on functional nausea show a high prevalence of anxiety and co-morbid GI symptoms including bloating, fullness and discomfort.
13,24   Based on our prior data, we therefore also anticipate 
that concurrent symptoms such as bloating, post-prandial fullness, and anxiety may improve. Of 104 subjects  
analyzed, there were no significant side effects reported other than mild ear discomfort (n=6; n=3 in active and n=3 in placebo arm), adhesive allergy (n=3), and one subject with syncope due to needle phobia (placebo arm). Adolescents suffering from functional GI disorders thus have the opportunity to benefit from a non-pharmacological and non-invasive therapy without the adverse effects of pharmacological agents. The results of this study may provide important insights to the medical field  regarding a poorly characterized group of patients 
and the underlying mechanisms.  
As an added incentive, all  participants who complete the study will receive a $75 check mailed to their address 
on file. Those who complete the fMRI portion will receive $125. Subjects who do not complete all parts of the study, will still receive a prorated stipend of $10 per each week of therapy they completed.   L. STOPPING POINTS THAT WOULD NOT ALLOW THE STUDY TO CONTINUE AS 
 PROPOSED  
Stopping points for the study include achieving adequate information on enough of the goal subjects, unanticipated adverse events , and inability  to obtain enough data or patients/caregivers electing to discontinue 
the study.    Reporting Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems  
Expected adverse events that  are not serious will be  reported on the Continuing Review Progress  Report.  
Continuing Review will be  performed on a 12-month cycle, starting at time of protocol’s  initial approval. More 
frequent progress reports will be submitted  at the request  of the IRB.  
 
Serious Adverse Events: The PI, within 24 hours , will report a ll ser ious adverse events occurring in any 
enrolled subjects to the IRB. Unexpected (but not serious) adverse events occurring in e nrolled subjects which, 
25 
 in the opinion of the PI, are possibly related to pa rticipation in the protocol will be reported by the PI within 5 
working days to the IRB. 
 Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be repo rted to the IRB within 24 hours. 
 M. IS THERE A DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD IN PLACE?  WHO ARE IT'S 
 MEMBERS?  HOW OFTEN DO THEY MEET?   
As this is a low risk protocol, no data safety monitoring board will be appointed unless requested.   N. DESCRIBE HOW THE CONSENT PROCESS WILL TAKE PLACE.  INCLUDE A LIST 
 OF APPROPRIATELY TRAINED PERSONNEL WHO WILL BE INVOLVED.  
Written informed consent for participation will be obtained from the parents and children for their child’s participation.  Written assent will be obtained from youth 12 and 13 years  of age using the CHW assent form.  
Patients ages 14 and above will sign the assent line on the consent form per CHW policy.  Consent will be obtained by a study investigator or member of the research team  at the patients ’ appointment in the GI Clinic . 
Volunteers’ consent will allow for accessing information collected for program evaluation/clinical purposes. Participating children and parents will have the option of having the consent/assent document read aloud to them to facilitate understanding.  Copies of signed consent/assent documents will be given to participants.  When consent is given for a minor child to participate in a research study by one or both parents, and the child reaches the age of majority (18 years) the child will be re-consented as an adult to continue participation in the study.  If age of majority is reached while the participant is active and continues to receive study interventions per the study protocol, he/she will be re-consented using the most current approved IRB informed consent document and HIPAA form. If age of majority is reached after all study interventions have been completed and the participant remains in the study for purposes of data collection for outcomes only a separate “Age of Majority” informed consent will b e obtained.  
 O. PROCEDURES TO BE EMPLOYED IN ANALYZING DATA AND THE ANTICIPATED SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PROPOSED STUDY 
Analyses will be conducted with SPSS and SAS software programs.  Probability levels of < .05 will be used as cut offs for statistical signif icance.  
  
The key significance of this study is the identification of a successful, non-invasive therapy for chronic nausea and to study the underlying brain connectivity that may be altered by this therapy. With this study, we hope to lay the foundation for the application of auricular neurostimulation for pediatric functional GI disorders by demonstrating effects on brain network.  This is an innovative and novel treatment, which will enhance our knowledge on the brain-gut neural connectivity underlying functional disorders and ultimately improve patient care.   
 
P. FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS  
The EAD devices will be supplied by the distributing company (IHS) at manufacturing rate. The gastric 
emptying breath test kits and analysis will be supplied by distributing company (Cairn Diagnostics) at a discounted rate. Internal funds from Department of Pedi atrics have been received to support this study and grant 
funds have been received from Children’s Reasearch Institute (CRI). A mentored K23 NIH grant is also pending.   Q. ADVERTISEMENTS / FLIERS  
 Not applicable.  
 R. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. Cauda F, D'Agata F, Sacco K, et al. Altered resting state attentional networks in diabetic 
neuropathic pain. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr . 2010;81(7):806–811. 
26 
 doi:10.1136/jnnp.2009.188631. 
2. Gay CW, Robinson ME, Lai S, et al. Abnormal Resting- State Functional Connectivity in Patients 
with C hronic Fatigue Syndrome: Results of Seed and Data-Driven Analyses. Brain Connect . 
2016;6(1):48–56. doi:10.1089/brain.2015.0366. 
3. Ichesco E, Puiu T, Hampson JP, et al. Altered fMRI resting- state connectivity in individuals with 
fibromyalgia on acute pain stimulation. Eur J Pain . January 2016. doi:10.1002/ejp.832. 
4. Flodin P, Martinsen S, Altawil R, et al. Intrinsic Brain Connectivity in Chronic Pain: A Resting -
State fMRI Study in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis. Front Hum Neurosci . 2016;10:107. 
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2016.00107. 
5. Letzen JE, Craggs JG, Perlstein WM, Price DD, Robinson ME. Functional connectivity of the 
default mode network and its association with pain networks in irritable bowel patients assessed via 
lidocaine treatment. J Pain . 2013;14(10):1077–1087. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2013.04.003. 
6. Hong J-Y, Kilpatrick LA, Labus JS, et al. Sex and disease- related alterations of anterior insula 
functional connectivity in chronic abdominal pain. J Neurosci . 2014;34(43):14252–14259. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1683-14.2014. 
7. Liu X, Silverman A, Kern M, et al. Excessive coupling of the salience network with intrinsic 
neurocognitive brain networks during rectal distension in adolescents with irritable bowel syndrome: a preliminary report. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . October 2015. 
doi:10.1111/nmo.12695. 
8. Kim MJ, Loucks RA, Palmer AL, et al. The structural and functional connectivity of the amygdala: 
From normal emotion to pathological anxiety. Behavioural Brain Research. 2011;223(2):403–410. doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2011.04.025. 
9. Youssef NN, Murphy TG, Langseder AL, Rosh JR. Quality of life for children with functional 
abdominal pain: a comparison study of patients“ and parents” perceptions. Pediatrics . 
2006;117(1):54–59. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-0114. 
10. Lewis ML , Palsson OS, Whitehead WE, van Tilburg MAL. Prevalence of Functional 
Gastrointestinal Disorders in Children  and Adolescents. The Journal of Pediatrics . May 2016. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.04.008. 
11. Hoekman DR, Rutten JMTM, Vlieger AM, Benninga MA, Dijkgraaf MGW. Annual Costs of Care 
for Pediatric Irritable Bowel Syndrome, Functional Abdominal Pain, and Functional Abdominal Pain Syndrome. The Journal of Pediatrics . 2015;167(5):1103–1108.e2. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.07.058. 
12. Inadomi JM, Fennerty MB, Bjorkman D. The economic impact of irritable bowel syndrome. 
Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics . 2003;18(7):671–682. doi:10.1046/j.1365-
2036.2003.t01-1-01736.x. 
13. Kovacic K, Williams S, Li BUK, Chelimsky G, Miranda A. High Prevalence of Nausea in Children 
With Pain -Associated Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: Are Rome Criteria Applicable? 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition. 2013;57(3):311–315. doi:10.1097/MPG.0b013e3182964203. 
14. Powers SW, Coffey CS, Chamberlin LA, et al. Trial of Amitriptyline, Topiramate, and Placebo for 
27 
 Pediatric Migraine. N Engl J Med . October 2016. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1610384. 
15. Saps M, Youssef N, Miranda A, et al. Multicenter, randomized, placebo- controlled trial of 
amitriptyline in children with functional ga strointestinal disorders. Gastroenterology . 
2009;137(4):1261–1269. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2009.06.060. 
16. Rutten JMTM, Korterink JJ, Venmans LMAJ, Benninga MA, Tabbers MM. Nonpharmacologic 
treatment of functional abdominal pain disorders: a systematic revie w. Pediatrics . 
2015;135(3):522–535. doi:10.1542/peds.2014-2123. 
17. Korterink JJ, Rutten JMTM, Venmans L, Benninga MA, Tabbers MM. Pharmacologic treatment in 
pediatric functional abdominal pain disorders: a systematic review. The Journal of Pediatrics . 
2015;166(2):424–31.e426. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.09.067. 
18. Rasquin A, Di Lorenzo C, Forbes D, et al. Childhood Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: 
Child/Adolescent. Gastroenterology . 2006;130(5):1527–1537. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2005.08.063. 
19. Hauser B,  Roelants M, De Schepper J, et al. Gastric emptying of solids in children: reference 
values for the (13) C- octanoic acid breath test. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . April 2016. 
doi:10.1111/nmo.12845. 
20. Hoffman I, Vos R, Tack J. Normal values for the satiety drinking test in healthy children between 5 
and 15 years. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . 2009;21(5):517. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2982.2007.01057.x. 
21. Hoffman I, Tack J. Assessment of gastric motor function in childhood functional dyspepsia and 
obesity. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . 2012;24(2):108–112, e81. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2982.2011.01813.x. 
22. Mayer EA, Craske M , Naliboff BD. Depression, Anxiety, and the Gastrointestinal System. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 2001; 62(suppl 8):28–36. 
23. Labus JS, Mayer EA, Chang L, Bolus R, Naliboff BD. The central role of gastrointestinal- specific 
anxiety in irritable bowel syndrome: further validation of the visceral sensitivity index. 
Psychosomatic Medicine . 2007;69(1):89–98. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e31802e2f24. 
24. Kovacic K, Miranda A, Chelimsky G, Williams S, Simpson P, Li BUK. Chronic Idiopathic Nausea 
of Childhood. The Journal of Pediatrics . March 2014. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.01.046. 
25. Kovacic K, Williams S, Li BUK, Chelimsky G, Miranda A. High Prevalence of Nausea in Children 
With Pain -Associated Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: Are Rome Criteria Applicable? 
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition. 2013;57(3). 
26. Haug TT, Mykletun A, Dahl AA. The prevalence of nausea in the community: psychological, 
social and somatic factors. Gen Hosp Psychiatry . 2002;24(2):81–86. 
27. Russell A, Sherman AL, Walker LS. 620 Nausea Complicating Recurrent Abdominal Pain in 
Childhood Predicts Functional GI Disorders, Disability, Depression and Anxiety in Young … . 
Gastroenterology; 2015. 
28. Cheng P, Shih W, Alberto M, et al. Autonomic response to a visceral stressor is dysregulated in 
irritable bowel syndrome and correlates with duration of disease. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . 2013;25(10):e650–e659. doi:10.1111/nmo.12177. 
28 
 29. Lacount LT, Barbieri R, Park K, et al. Static and dynamic autonomic response with increasing 
nausea perception. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2011;82(4):424–433. 
30. Chelimsky G, Kovacic K, Simpson P, et al. Benign Joint Hypermobility Minimally Impacts 
Autonomic Abnormalities in Pediatric Subjects with Chronic Functional Pain Disorders. The 
Journal of Pediatrics . August 2016. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.06.091. 
31. Fortunato JE, Shaltout HA, Larkin MM, Rowe PC, Diz DI, Koch KL. Fludrocortisone improves 
nausea in children with orthostatic intolerance (OI). Clin Auton Res . 2011;21(6):419–423. 
doi:10.1007/s10286-011-0130-x. 
32. Tarbell SE, Shal tout HA, Wagoner AL, Diz DI, Fortunato JE. Relationship among nausea, anxiety, 
and orthostatic symptoms in pediatric patients with chronic unexplained nausea. Exp Brain Res . 
May 2014. doi:10.1007/s00221-014-3981-2. 
33. Ojha A, Chelimsky TC, Chelimsky G. Comorbidities in Pediatric Patients with Postural Orthostatic 
Tachycardia Syndrome. The Journal of Pediatrics . 2011;158(1):20–23. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.07.005. 
34. Thieben MJ, Sandroni P, Sletten DM, et al. Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome: The Mayo 
Clinic Experience. Mayo Clinic Proceedings . 2007;82(3):308–313. doi:10.4065/82.3.308. 
35. Chelimsky G, Boyle JT, Tusing L, Chelimsky TC. Autonomic Abnormalities in Children With 
Functional Abdominal Pain: Coincidence or Etiology? Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition . 2001;33(1):47. 
36. Sullivan SD, Hanauer J, Rowe PC, Barron DF, Darbari A, Oliva- Hemker M. Gastrointestinal 
symptoms associated with orthostatic intolerance. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and 
Nutrition . 2005;40(4):425–428. 
37. Manabe N, Tanaka T, Hata J, Kusunoki H, Haruma K. Pathophysiology underlying irritable bowel 
syndrome --from the viewpoint of dysfunction of autonomic nervous system activity. J Smooth 
Muscle Res . 2009;45(1):15–23. 
38. Lohmeier TE, Iliescu R. The baroreflex as a long- term controller of arterial pressure. Physiology 
(Bethesda) . 2015;30(2):148–158. doi:10.1152/physiol.00035.2014. 
39. Palkovits M, Záborszky L. Neuroanatomy of Central Cardiovascular Control. Nucleus Tractus 
Solitarii: Afferent and Efferent Neuronal Connections in Relation to the Baroreceptor Reflex Arc. In: Progress in Brain Research. Vol 47. Progress in Brain Research. Elsevier; 1977:9–34. doi:10.1016/S0079-6123(08)62709-0. 
40. Jänig W. Neurobiology of visceral afferent neurons: neuroanatomy, functions, organ regulations 
and sensations. Biol Psychol . 1996;42(1-2):29–51. 
41. Mayer EA, Naliboff BD, Craig ADB. Neuroimaging of the brain-gut axis: from basic 
understanding to treatment of functional GI disorders. Gastroenterology . 2006;131(6):1925–1942. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2006.10.026. 
42. Simons LE, Moulton EA, Linnman C, Carpino E, Becerra L, Borsook D. The human amygdala and 
pain: Evidence from neuroimaging. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012;35(2):527–538. doi:10.1002/hbm.22199. 
43. Stewart JM. Autonomic Nervous System Dysfunction in Adolescents with Postural Orthostatic 
29 
 Tachycardia Syndrome and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Is Characterized by Attenuated Vagal 
Baroreflex and Potentiated Sympathetic Vasomotion. Pediatric Research . 2000;48(2):218–226. 
doi:10.1203/00006450-200008000-00016. 
44. Goldstein DS, Bentho O, Park M-Y, Sharabi Y. Low- frequency power of heart rate variability is 
not a measure of cardiac sympathetic tone but may be a measure of modulation of cardiac autonomic outflows by baroreflexes. Exp Physiol . 2011;96(12):1255–1261. 
doi:10.1113/expphysiol.2010.056259. 
45. Labus JS, Naliboff BN, Fallon J, et al. Sex differences in brain activity during aversive visceral 
stimulation and its expectation in patients with chronic  abdominal pain: a network analysis. 
Neuroimage . 2008;41(3):1032–1043. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.03.009. 
46. Mayer EA, Berman S, Chang L, Naliboff BD. Sex‐ based differences in gastrointestinal pain. Eur J 
Pain . 2004;8(5):451–463. doi:10.1016/j.ejpain.2004.01.006. 
47. Berman S, Munakata J, Naliboff BD, et al. Gender differences in regional brain response to visceral 
pressure in IBS patients. Eur J Pain . 2000;4(2):157–172. doi:10.1053/eujp.2000.0167. 
48. Berman SM. Sex differences in regional brain response to aversive pelvic visceral stimuli. AJP: 
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology . 2006;291(2):R268–R276. 
doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00065.2006. 
49. Naliboff BD, Berman S, Chang L, et al. Sex- related differences in IBS patients: central processing 
of visceral stimuli. Gastroenterology . 2003;124(7):1738–1747. 
50. Moulton EA. Sex differences in the cerebral BOLD signal response to painful heat stimuli. AJP: 
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology . 2006;291(2):R257–R267. 
doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00084.2006. 
51. Hong J-Y, Kilpatrick LA, Labus J, et al. Patients with chronic visceral pain show sex- related 
alterations in intrinsic oscillations of the resting brain. J Neurosci . 2013;33(29):11994–12002. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5733-12.2013. 
52. Lu CL, Wu YT, Yeh TC, et al. Neuronal correlates of gastric pain induced by fundus distension: a 
3T-fMRI study. Neurogastroenterol Motil . 2004;16(5):575–587. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2982.2004.00562.x. 
53. Nan J, Liu J, Li G, et al. Whole-brain functional connectivity identification of functional dyspepsia. 
PLoS ONE . 2013;8(6):e65870. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0065870. 
54. Hong J-Y, Naliboff B, Labus JS, et al. Altered brain responses in subjects with irritable bowel 
syndrome during cued and uncued pain expectation. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . November 
2015. doi:10.1111/nmo.12710. 
55. Kilpatrick LA, Zald DH, Pardo JV, Cahill LF. Sex-related differences in amygdala functional 
connectivity during resting conditions. Neuroimage . 2006. 
56. Berman SM, Naliboff BD, Suyenobu B, et al. Reduced brainstem inhibition during anticipated 
pelvic visceral pain correlates with enhanced brain response to the visceral stimulus in women with irritable bowel syndrome. J Neurosci . 2008;28(2):349–359. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2500-
07.2008. 
30 
 57. Hänsel A, Känel von R. The ventro-medial prefrontal cortex: a major link between the autonomic 
nervous system, regulation of emotion, and stress reactivity? … . 2008. 
58. Stein JL, Wiedholz LM, Bassett DS, et al. A val idated network of effective amygdala connectivity. 
Neuroimage . 2007;36(3):736–745. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.03.022. 
59. Kim MJ, Whalen PJ. The Structural Integrity of an Amygdala- Prefrontal Pathway Predicts Trait 
Anxiety. J Neurosci . 2009;29(37):11614–11618. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2335-09.2009. 
60. Hilbert K, Lueken U, Beesdo-Baum K. Neural structures, functioning and connectivity in 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder and interaction with neuroendocrine systems: a systematic review. J 
Affect Disord . 2014;158:114–126. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.01.022. 
61. Gee DG, Humphreys KL, Flannery J, et al. A developmental shift from positive to negative 
connectivity in human amygdala-prefrontal circuitry. J Neurosci . 2013;33(10):4584–4593. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3446-12.2013. 
62. Mayer EA, Labus JS, Tillisch K, Cole SW, Baldi P. Towards a systems view of IBS. Nature 
Publishing Group. 2015;12(10):592–605. doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2015.121. 
63. Abell TL, Chen J, Emmanuel A, Jolley C, Sarela AI, Törnblom H. Neurostimulation of the 
gastrointestinal tract: review of recent developments. Neuromodulation. 2015;18(3):221–227; 
discussion227. doi:10.1111/ner.12260. 
64. Teich S, Mousa HM, Punati J, Di Lorenzo C. Efficacy of permanent gastric electrical stimulation 
for the treatment of gastroparesis and functional dyspepsia in children and adolescents. J Pediatr 
Surg. 2013;48(1):178–183. doi:10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.10.038. 
65. Levinthal DJ, Bielefeldt K. Systematic review and meta -analysis: Gastric electrical stimulation for 
gastroparesis. Auto n Neurosci . April 2016. doi:10.1016/j.autneu.2016.03.004. 
66. McCallum RW, dusing RW, Sarosiek I, cocjin J, Forster J, Lin Z. Mechanisms of symptomatic 
improvement after gastric electrical stimulation in gastroparetic patients. Neurogastroenterology & Moti lity. 2010;22(2):161–e51. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2982.2009.01389.x. 
67. Soffer E, Abell T, Lin Z, et al. Review article: gastric electrical stimulation for gastroparesis – physiological foundations, technical aspects and clinical implications. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics . 2009;30(7):681–694. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2036.2009.04082.x. 
68. Liu J, Qiao X, Chen JDZ. Vagal afferent is involved in short- pulse gastric electrical stimulation in 
rats. Dig Dis Sci . 2004;49(5):729–737. 
69. Contreras RJ, Beckstead RM , Norgren R. The central projections of the trigeminal, facial, 
glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves: an autoradiographic study in the rat. Journal of the Autonomic Nervous System . 1982;6(3):303–322. 
70. Zhang LL, Ashwell K. The development of cranial nerve and visceral afferents to the nucleus of the 
solitary tract in the rat. Anatomy and embryology . 2001. 
71. Fallgatter AJ, Neuhauser B, Herrmann MJ, et al. Far field potentials from the brain stem after transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation. J Neural Transm . 2003;110(12):1437–1443. 
doi:10.1007/s00702-003-0087-6. 
72. Peuker ET, Filler TJ. The nerve supply of the human auricle. Clinical Anatomy . 2002. 
31 
 73. Nomura S, Mizuno N. Central distribution of primary afferent fibers in the Arnold's nerve (the 
auricular branch of the vagus nerve): A transganglionic HRP study in the cat. Brain Res . 
1984;292(2):199–205. doi:10.1016/0006-8993(84)90756- X. 
74. Babic T, Browning KN. The role of vagal neurocircuits in the regulation of nausea and vomiting. 
Eur J Pharmacol . 2014;722:38–47. doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.08.047. 
75. Horn CC. Why is the neurobiology of nausea and vomiting so important? Appetite . 2008;50(2–
3):430–434. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2007.09.015. 
76. Wang G -J, Tomasi D, Backus W, et al. Gastric distention activates satiety circuitry in the human 
brain. Neuroimage . 2008;39(4):1824–1831. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.11.008. 
77. Bharucha AE, Camilleri M, Veil E, Burton D, Zinsmeister AR. Comprehensive assessment of 
gastric emptying with a stable isotope breath test. Neurogastroenterology & Motility . 
2013;25(1):e60–e69. doi:10.1111/nmo.12054. 
78. Szarka LA, Camilleri M, Vella A, et al. A stable isotope breath test with a standard meal for 
abnormal gastric emptying of solids in the clinic and in research. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol . 
2008;6(6):635–643.e1. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2008.01.009. 
79. GHOOS YF, MAES BD, GEYPENS BJ, et al. Measurement of gastric emptying rate of solids by 
means of a carbon -labeled octanoic acid breath test. Gastroenterology . 1993;104(6):1640–1647. 
80. Lee JS, Camilleri M, Zinsmeister AR, Burton DD, Kost LJ, Klein PD. A v alid, accurate, office 
based non-radioactive test for gastric emptying of solids. Gut . 2000;46(6):768–773. 
81. Kim DY, Myung SJ, Camilleri M. Novel testing of human gastric motor and sensory functions: 
rationale, methods, and potential applications in clinical practice. Am J Gastroenterol . 
2000;95(12):3365–3373. doi:10.1111/j.1572-0241.2000.03346.x. 
82. Tack J. Assessment of meal induced gastric accommodation by a satiety drinking test in health and 
in severe functional dyspepsia. Gut . 2003;52(9):1271–1277. doi:10.1136/gut.52.9.1271. 
83. Baxter AL, Watcha MF, Baxter WV, Leong T, Wyatt MM. Development and validation of a 
pictorial nausea rating scale for children. Pediatrics . 2011;127(6):e1542–e1549. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2010-1410. 
84. Trimmel K, Sacha J, Huikuri HV. Heart Rate Variability: Clinical Applications and Interaction 
Between HRV and Heart Rate . 2015. 
85. Chalmers JA, Quintana DS, Abbott MJA, Kemp AH. Anxiety Disorders are Associated with 
Reduced Heart Rate Variability: A Meta-Analysis. Front Psychiatry . 2014;5. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00080. 
86. Lacount L, Napadow V, Kuo B, et al. Dynamic Cardiovagal Response to Motion Sickness: A 
Point- Process Heart Rate Variability Study. Comput Cardiol . 2009;36:49–52.  
87. Muth ER, Stern RM, Thayer JF, Koch KL. Assessment of the multiple dimensions of nausea: the 
Nausea Profile (NP). Journal of Psychosomatic Research. 1996;40(5):511–520. 
88. Stern RM, Koch KL, Andrews P. Nausea:Mechanisms and Management . Oxford University Pr ess, 
USA; 2011. 
32 
 89. McCabe RE. Subjective Units of Distress Scale. Phobias: The Psychology of Irrational Fear . 2015. 
90. Laird, K.T., Sherman, A.L., Smith, C.A., & Walker, L.S. (2015). Validation of the Abdominal Pain 
Index using a revised scoring method. Journal of Pediatric Psychology , 118.  
 
91. Pilkonis et al. Validation of the depression item bank from the Patient- Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System (PROMIS®) in a three-month observational study, 56, 112–119.  
 92. Forrest CB, Bevans KB, Pratiwadi R, et al. Development of the PROMIS ® pediatric global health 
(PGH -7) measure. Qual Life Res . 2014;23(4):1221–1231. doi:10.1007/s11136-013-0581-8. 
93. Walker LS, Greene JW. The Functional Disability Inventory: Measuring a Neglected Dimension of 
Child Health Status. J Pediatr Psychol . 1991;16(1):39–58. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/16.1.39. 
94. Walker L et al. Children’s Somatization Inventory. (1991). Children’s Somatization Inventory. J Abnorm Child Psychol 1991; 19:379-94.  
 95.  Labus et al. The Visecral Sensitivity Index: development and validation of a gastrointestinal 
symptom-specific anxiety scale. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004; 20: 89-97.  
96. Juniper E, Guyatt G, Willan A, Griffith L. Determining a minimal important change in a disease-
specific quality of life questionnaire. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology . 1994;47(1):81–87. 
doi:10.1016/0895-4356(94)90036-1. 
97. Rentz AM, Kahrilas P, Stanghellini V, et al. Development and psychometric evaluation of the 
patient assessment of up per gastrointestinal symptom severity index (PAGI- SYM) in patients with 
upper gastrointestinal disorders. Qual Life Res . 2004;13(10):1737-1749.  
98. Palsson OS, Whitehead WE, van Tilburg MAL, et al. Rome IV Diagnostic Questionnaires and 
Tables for Investig ators and Clinicians. Gastroenterology . February 2016. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2016.02.014. 
99. Klein PD. Clinical applications of 13CO2 measurements. Fed Proc . 1982;41(10):2698–2701. 
100. Bond JM, Kent GG, Binney VA, Saleh M. Psychological adjustment of chil dren awaiting limb 
reconstruction treatment. Child Care Health Dev . 1999;25(4):313–321. doi:10.1046/j.1365-
2214.1999.00117.x. 
101.  Russell A, Sherman AL, Walker LS. 620 Nausea Complicating Recurrent Abdominal Pain in 
Childhood Predicts Functional GI Disorders, Disability, Depression and Anxiety in Young Adulthood. Gastroenterology ; 2015;148(4):S122. 
 
 
 
CHW HRRB  
SUMMARY  
042409  
 