Protocol GTI1502 -Amendment 2 15 Mar2016 
Clinical Study Protocol 
Protocol Title: 
Investigational Products: 
Sponsor's Name and Address: 
Sponsor's Telephone Number: 
Study Number/Protocol Version 
Number/Date: 
IND Number: 
Development Phase: An open-label, multi-center study to evaluate the 
safety and phannacokinetics of IGSC 20% 
administered for 6 months in subjects with 
primary immunodeficiency 
IGSC20% 
Immune Globulin Subcutaneous (Human), 20% 
Caprylate/Chromatography Purified 
Grifols Therapeutics Inc. 
79 TW Alexander Drive 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 
 
 
GTl1502Nersion 3.0/15 Mar 2016 
Includes GTl1502Nersion 2.0/20 Aug 2015 and 
GTI1502Nersion 1.0/16 Jun 2015 
16528 
3 
The undersigned confirm that they agree to conduct the study under the conditions 
described in this protocol: 
Medical Monitor:  
Confidentiality 
Statement: 
COJ\l"FIDENTIAL o IC, 
The following confidential information is the property ofGrifols Therapeutics Inc. 
As long as the information contained in this protocol has not been published, it may 
only be used after permission has been obtained from Grifols Therapeutics Inc. It is 
not possible to make reproductions of all or sections of this protocol. Commercial 
use of the information is only possible with the permission of the proprietor and is 
subject to a license fee. 
Page 1 of94 

Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 2of 94Summar y of Changes for Amendment 2
Protocol Version Date of Approval
3.0
Amendment 1 + Integrated Protocol15 Mar 2016
2.0
Amendment 1 + Integrated Protocol20Aug 2015
1.0
Original16 Jun 2015
Protocol Amendment 2
The protocol for GTI1 502 (Versio n 2.0, dated 20 Aug 2015 ) has been amended and reissued 
as Protocol Amend ment 2, Version 3. 0, dated 15 Mar 2016.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 3of 94SUMM ARY OF CHANGES F OR A MENDMENT 2
SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
Global change Approximately 50 subjects w ill be enrolled in order to 
have approximately 30 adult subjects and 12 to 15
pediatric subjects (age 2 -16 years) completing treatment 
with subcutaneously administered IGSC 20%.  Approximately 50 subjects w ill be enrolled in order to 
have approximately 30 adult subjects and 12 to 18
pediatric subjects (age 2 -16 years) completing treatment 
with subcutaneously administered IGSC 20%.  For internal 
consistency .
Global change Screening Phase : 7to 28 days Screening Phase : upto 28 days To clarify that a
minimum 
Screening duration 
is not required.
Protocol 
Synopsis, 
Section s3.3.2.3,
3.5.4, 3.6.2.4 ,
and 4.3.1local infusion site reactions infusion site reactions To provide 
clarification .
Protocol 
Synopsis: 
Inclusion 
Criteria
Section 3.2.13.The subject has not had an SBI w ithin the last 3 
months prior to Screening.
4.Currently on IgG replacement therapy (via IV or SC 
infusion) for ≥3 consecutive months. Subjects 
receiving IVIG prior to study must receive a dosage 
of 300 to 800 mg/kg per infusion. 
5.Documented (at least once within previous 3 months) 
IgG trough level of ≥500 mg/dL on current IgG 
replacement therapy regimen.
6.Screening trough IgG levels must be ≥500 mg/dL.
Note: If Screening trough levels are not above this 
threshold, the subjects w ill be a Screen Failure, but 
may be re -screened following dose adjust ment of their 
original IgG replacement therapy regimen and 
maintaining stable dosing for a period of at least 3 
consecutive months prior to Screening a second time.3.The subject has not had an SBI w ithin the last 3 
months prior to or during Screening.
4.Currently on IgG replacement therapy (via IV or SC 
infusion) for ≥3 months. 
5.Note: This inclusion criterion is removed in protocol 
amendment 2.   
6.Screening trough IgG levels must be ≥500 mg/dL.
Note: If Screening trough levels are not above this 
threshold, the subjects w ill be a Screen Failure, but 
may be re -screened following dose adjustment of 
their original IgG replacement therapy regimen and 
maintaining stable dosing for a period of at least 3 
months prior to Screening a second time.(4) IVIG dose 
inclusion 
stipulation 
removed due to 
Run-inPhase
which adjusts to 
the required dose 
range . 
(5) Historical IgG 
trough criterion 
removed since not 
evaluated 
frequently in 
medical practice.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 4of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
Protocol 
Synopsis: 
Exclusion 
Criteria
Section 3.2.27.The subject has significant proteinuria (dipstick 
proteinuria ≥3+ or known urinary protein loss         
>1-2g/24 h or nephrotic syndrome) and/or has a 
history of acute renal failure and/or severe renal 
impairm ent (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] or creatinine 
more than 2.5 times the upper limit of normal [ULN]) 
and/or on dialysis
18.The subject has participated in another clinical trial 
within 30 days prior to Screening (observational 
studies without investigative treatments [non -
interventional] are permitted) or has received any 
investigational blood product within the previous 3 
months
20.Mentally challenged subjects who cannot give 
independent informed consent 7.The subject has significant proteinuria (dipstick 
proteinuria ≥3+ or known urinary protein loss
>1g/24 h or nephrotic syndrome) and/or has a history 
of acute renal failure and/or severe renal impairment 
(blood urea nitrogen [BUN] or creatinine more than 
2.5 times the upper limit of normal [ULN]) and/or on 
dialysis
18.The subject has participated in another clinical trial 
within 30 days prior to Screening (observational 
studies without investigative treatments [non -
interventional] are permitted) or has received any 
investigational blood product with the exception of 
other IgG products within the previous 3 months
20.Mentally challenged subjects who cannot give 
independent informed consent or assent(7, 20) To further 
clarify other 
exclusions 
(18) To allow 
patients on 
previous 
investigational IgG 
studies to 
participate w ithout 
a 3 month 
minimum time 
stipulation to avoid
potential treatment 
hiatus . 
Protocol 
Synopsis: 
Determination 
of Sample Size
Section 5.2…Also a sample size of 42 to 45with at least 24 
scheduled administrations of IGSC 20% w ould provide 
the clinical experience data on a total of more than 1008 
to 1080 IGSC 20% dosing administrations for safety 
assessment.
The planned enrollment of 42 subjects should be more 
than adequat e to establish that the AUC for total IgG for 
IGSC 20% is non -inferior to that achieved by IGIV- C 
10%.…Also a sample size of 42 to 48with at least 24 
scheduled administrations of IGSC 20% w ould provide 
the clinical experience data on a total of more than 1008 
to 1080 IGSC 20% dosing administrations for safety 
assessment.
The planned minimum enrollment of 42 completing
subjects should be more than adequate to establish that 
the AUC for total IgG for IGSC 20% is non -inferior to 
that achieved by IGIV -C 10%.To provide 
clarification for the 
requirements for 
number of subjects
Section 3.1.2 
Run-In PhaseGroup 2 -Three (3) -month Run -In Phase:
Those subjects who prior to screening are receiving IVIG 
therapy (at a dose betw een 300 and 800 mg/kg per 
infusion every  3 or 4 w eeks) but who are not receiving 
IGIV -C 10% specifically (ie, a different commercially 
available IVIG) will be required to receive IGIV -C 10% 
intravenously (at an equivalent dose and dosing interval 
as in their previous IVIG therapy) for a tot al duration of a 
3-month Run -In Phase.Group 2 -Three (3) -month Run -In Phase:
Those subjects who prior to screening are receiving IVIG 
therapy (at a dose betw een 300 a nd 800 mg/kg per 
infusion every 3 or 4 w eeks) but who are not receiving 
IGIV -C 10% specifically (ie, a different commercially 
available IVIG) will be required to receive IGIV -C 10% 
intravenously (at an equivalent dose and dosing interval 
as in their previo us IVIG therapy) for a total duration of a 
3-month Run -In Phase. Subjects receiving infusions To add  
clarification
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 5of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
Group 3 -Four (4) -month Run -In Phase:
Subjects meeting any of the criteria for Group s 2 and 3 
will be scheduled to begin receiving IGIV -C 10% 
intravenously at a dose of 300 to 800 mg/kg every 3 to 4 
weeks (dose and interval to be determined based on the 
investigator’s clinical judgment) for a period of up to 4 
months prior to the IV#1 visit. Thenumber of visits (up 
to 5) during the Run -In Phase will be determined based 
on each subject’s previous IgG treatment regimen.every 3 weeks will have 4 Run -In visits and subjects 
receiving infusions every 4 weeks will have 3 Run -In 
visits.
Group 3 -Four (4) -month Run -In Phase:
Subjects meeting any of the criteria for Group 3 w ill be 
scheduled to begin receiving IGIV- C 10% intravenously 
at a dose of 300 to 800 mg/kg every 3 to 4 w eeks (dose 
and interval to be determined based on the investigator’s 
clinical judgment) for a period of up to 4 months prior to 
the IV#1 visit. Subjects receiving infusions every 3 
weeks will have 5 Run -In visits and subjects receiving 
infusions every 4 weeks will have 4 Run -In visits. 
Section 3.3.1.4 IGSC 20% and IGIV- C 10% must b e stored at 
temperatures of 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) and protected 
from light. Do not freeze. Investigators, or designees, are 
responsible for maintaining storage temperature records 
and for immediately reporting deviations in temperature 
to the study mon itor.IGSC 20% and IGIV- C 10% must be stored at 
temperatures of 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F) and protected 
from light. Do not freeze or partially freeze . 
Investigators, or designees, are responsible for 
maintaining storage temperature records and for 
immediat ely reporting deviations in temperature to the 
study monitor.Wording to be 
consistent with the 
Pharm acy manual
Section 3.3.2.2 The IV and SC dose of study drug will be individualized 
based on each subject’s current IgG regimen which is 
assumed to be an effective dose. Subjects are required to 
have been clinically stable for at least 3 months onthis 
pre-determined dose (betw een 300 -800 mg/kg 
administered every 3 or 4 w eeks) ofan approved IgG 
product. The IV IGIV -C 10% dose w ill be the same as 
this estab lished dose and dosing interval.  For those 
subjects currently on SCIG, the initial IV IGIV -C 10% 
dose should be betw een 300 and 800 mg/kg in 
conjunction with investigator judgment. The IV and SC dose of study drug will be individualized 
based on each sub ject’s current IgG regimen which is 
assumed to be an effective dose. Subjects are required to 
have been clinically stable for at least 3 months on an 
IgG product. The IV IGIV -C 10% dose will be betw een 
300 and 800 mg/kg during the Run -in phase and IV#1 
andIV# 2 .  See Table 3 -1.For internal 
consistency and 
simplicity
Section 3.3.2.3 Details regarding infusion rate and infusion 
administration are located in the pharmacy/study manual. 
Subjects may use the same anatomical area or rotate Details regarding infusion rate and infusion 
administ ration are located in the pharmacy/study manual. 
Subjects may use the same anatomical area or rotate Corrects 
inconsistency since 
there is allowance 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 6of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
anatomical areas for SC infusions throughout the study. 
No m ore than 8 infusion sites per infusion will be used. 
The minimum distance between infusion sites is 
recommended to be no less than 2 inches. The maximum
target infusion rate will be no greater than 25 
mL/hour/site as tolerated by the subject and per the 
Investigator’s discretion; the Investigator w ill tailor the 
infusion configuration for each subject.anatomical areas for SC infusions throughout the study. 
No m ore than 8 infusion sites per infusion will be used. 
The minimum distance between infusion site s is 
recommended to be no less than 2 inches. The target 
infusion rate will be no greater than 25 mL/hour/site as 
tolerated by the subject and per the Investigator’s 
discretion; the Investigator will tailor the infusion 
configuration for each subject.to increase the 
infusion rate. 
Section 3.3.3.1 Within each study site, subjects in the study will receive 
a consecutive subject number at Screening Visit. Subject 
numbers are generated beginning with the study center 
number (3 digits, assigned by the Sponsor starting at 
100) follow ed consecutively with a unique number for 
each subject (4 digits , including leading zeros ). For 
example, if the Investigator’s center number is 301, 
subject numbers will be 3010001 , 3010002 , 3010003 , 
etc., in consecutive order. Subject numbers, once 
assigned, will not be reused at any center.Within each study site, subjects in the study will receive 
a consecutive subject number at Screening Visit. Subject 
numbers are generated beginnin g with the study center 
number (3 digits, assigned by the Sponsor starting at 
100) follow ed consecutively with a unique number for 
each subject (4 digits). For example, if the Investigator’s 
center number is 301, subject numbers will be 3012001 , 
3012002 , 3012003 , etc., in consecutive order. Subject 
numbers, once assigned, will not be reused at any center.To reflect the 
actual numbering 
convention used.
Section 3.3.4 All dose calculations will be done by the study clinic 
personnel and the dose preparation procedures will be 
provided to each subject for in -home SC administration.All dose calculations will be done by the Interactive Web 
Response (IWR) system and the dose preparation 
procedures w ill be provided to each subject for in -home 
SC administration.To reflect the 
actual system used.
Section 3.4 Concomitant medications must be recorded in the 
subject’s s ource documents and in the eCRF , including 
the trade or generic names of the medication, the dose, 
the route of administration, duration, and frequen cy.Concomitant medications must be recorded in the 
subject’s source documents and in the eCRF from time of 
consent , including the trade or generic names of the 
medication, the dose, the route of administration, 
duration, and frequency.To specify the 
starting time for 
concomitant 
medications
recording
Section 3.4.2 Use of the following during the study (from Screening to 
SC Week#25 Final Visit) is prohibited:
•Any IgG replacement therapy other than IGIV -C 10% 
or IGSC 20% provided in this study Use of the following during the study (from Screening to 
SC Week#25 Final Visit) is prohibited:
•Any IgG replacement therapy other than IGIV -C 10% 
or IGSC 20% provided in this study once the first dose 
of study treatment is administeredTo specify the 
starting p oint for 
the prohibition of 
any non -study  IgG 
replacement 
therapy
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 7of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
Section 3.4.3 The medications listed below  are not allow ed during the 
study as premedication to an infusion; however these 
medications are allow ed during the study for general use 
(eg, to treat an AE):The medications listed below  are not allow ed during the 
study as premedication to an SC infusion; however these 
medications are allow ed during the study for general use 
(eg, to treat an AE):To provide 
clarification
Section 3.6.2 The follow ing sections describe the 
procedures/assessments to take place at each study visit. 
See the Schedule of Study Procedures table in Appendix 1
for a summary of study visits and the procedures to be 
conducted at each visit. For allvisits, a ± 1 day win dow is 
allow ed, with the exception of the serial PK sampling 
visits, and t he SC#2 and SC#3 visits which must be 
performed with a +1 day visit window  (ie, these 2 visits 
cannot be performed 1 day early). Unscheduled visits may 
be conducted if deemed necessary for the purpose of 
subject safety.The follow ing sections describe the 
procedures/assessments to tak e place at each study visit. 
See the Schedule of Study Procedures table in Appendix 1
for a summary of study visits and the procedures to be 
conducted at each visit. For most clinic visits, a ± 1 day 
window  is allowed . Forthe serial PK sampling visits ,see 
specific PK windows in Section 3.6.2.3 and 3.6.2.4 .  If 
there are logistical issues requiring schedule adjustment 
for w eekly subcutaneous IGSC 20% administration, SC#1 
may be scheduled 6 to 9 days after IV#2.   The SC#2 and 
SC#3 visits must be performed w ith a +1 day visit 
window  (ie, these 2 visits cannot be performed 1 day 
early) . Unscheduled visits may be conducted if deemed 
necessary for the purpose of subject safety.To clarify the 
timing of visit 
windows.
Section 3.6.2.1 The subject’s medical records will be reviewed to 
confirm a documented diagnosis of PI. Subjects who are 
interested in participating will undergo the following 
tests and procedures:
•Written informed consent and assent if applicable will 
be obtained prior to initiation of any screening 
procedures
•Eligibility will be checked by careful assessment of the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria
•Dem ographics and medical history will be recorded 
including age, gender, age at diagnosis of PI, 
previous /current IgG treatments. The subject’s medical records will be reviewed to 
confirm a documented diagnosis of PI. Subjects who are 
interested in participating will undergo the following 
tests and procedures:
•Written informed consent and assent if applicable will 
be obtained prior to initiation of any screeni ng 
procedures
•Eligibility will be checked by careful assessment of the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria
•Dem ographics and medical history will be recorded 
including age, gender, age at diagnosis of PI, and past 
12 months of previous /current IgG treatme nts. Record 
relevant medical history defined as any history 
impactful on the subject’s condition in terms of current 
functioning, disability, treatment, or management.To clarify 
requirements for 
medical history 
documentation and 
chest X -ray 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 8of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
• Chest X- ray (if chest X -ray or CT have not been 
performed within past 6 months prior to screening)
•Total IgG trough level determination: participants will 
be required to have a documented total IgG level of 
≥500 mg/dL to enroll•Chest X -ray (if chest X -ray or CT have not been 
performed within past 6 months prior t o screening) 
Note: at least one radiographic view (anterior -posterior 
[AP] or posterior -anterior [PA] is required .)
•Total IgG trough level determination: participants will 
be required to have a screening total IgG level of ≥500 
mg/dL to enroll
Section 3.6.2.3
IV#1 VISIT & 
PK 
ASSESSMENT 
FOR IV 
DOSING•Predose urine pregnancy test •Predose urine pregnancy test (child -bearing  potential 
females only)To clarify the 
pregnancy test is 
for w omen of 
child -bearing 
potential
Section 3.6.2.4
SC Week #1 
Clinical Visit
Appendix 1 
footnote m•Predose virus safety retain samples
Note: For children at the discretion of the Investigator, 
virus safety retain samples may be draw n theday prior 
to SC Week#1 instead of combining with other blood 
draw s on a single day.•Predose virus safety retain samples
Note: For children at the di scretion of the Investigator, 
virus safe ty retain samples may be draw n 1 or 2 days
prior to SC Week#1 instead of combining with other 
blood draws on a single dayTo clarify the 
window  for virus 
safety retain 
samples
Section 3.6.2.4
Section 3.6.2.5b.  ……Or any single alarm symptom such as 
hemoptysis or cyanosis (36,37,38).c.Any single alarm symptom such as hemoptysis or 
cyanosis (36,37,38).Form at change
Section 3.6.2.5 If the results of the interim PK analysis do not indicate a 
need for a dose adjustment factor change, subjects will 
be brought into the clinic and end of study procedures 
will be performed.If the results of the interim PK analysis do not indicate a 
need for a dose adjustment factor change, subjects will 
be brought into the clinic (within one week following the 
confirmation of the initial dose adjustment factor) and 
end of study procedures will be performed.To specify a 
timeframe for 
bringing subjects 
back for end of 
study procedures
Section 3.6.3 
Table 3 -2Additional special 
testsaDAT, serum free 
hemoglobin, 
haptoglobinCentral 
(central DAT 
if feasible)Additional special 
testsaDAT, serum free 
hemoglobin, 
haptoglobinCentral To provide 
clarification that 
this testing will be 
performed at the 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 9of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
central laboratory
Section 3.6.2.3 Note: For pediatric subjects, at the discretion of the 
Investigator, virus safety retain samples may be drawn 
theday prior to SC Week#1 instead of combining with 
other blood draws on a single day.Note: For pediatric subjects, at the discretion of the 
Investigator, virus safety retain samples may be drawn 1 
or 2daysprior to SC Week#1 instead of combining with 
other blood draws on a single day.To clarify the 
window  for virus 
safety retain 
samples
Section 3.7 Subjects maywithdraw  or be withdrawn from the study 
for the following reasons:
Also, subjects maybe withdrawn from IP/study drug or 
the study for the following reasons:
•Subjects who develop an SBI during the IV Run -In 
Phase or IGIV -C 10% IV Phase prior to the first dose 
of IGSC 20%
If a subject discontinues study after receiving IGIV -C 
10% but prior to receiving the first dose of IGSC 20%, 
an additional subject may be recruited into the study to 
assure that 30 adults and 12 children receive at least one 
dose of IGSC 20%.Subjects willwithdraw  or be withdrawn from the study 
for the following reasons:
Also, subjects willbe withdrawn from IP/study drug or 
the study for the following reasons:
•Subjects who develop an SBI prior to the first dose of 
IGSC 20%
If a subject discontinues study after receiving IGIV -C 
10% but prior to receiving the first dose of IGSC 20%, 
an additional subject may be recruited into the study to 
assure that 30 adults and 12 children complete IGSC 
20% treatmen t.To provide 
clarification for  
subject 
discontinuation and 
subject completion 
target
Section 4.3.1 An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in 
a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a 
medicinal product or study treatment and which does not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with this 
administration . An AE can therefore b e any unfavorable 
and unintended sign (including any abnormal laboratory 
finding , for example ), symptom, or disease temporally 
associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether 
or not considered related to the medicinal product.An AE is defined as a ny untoward medical occurrence in 
a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a 
medicinal product or study treatment and thatdoes not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment . 
An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unint ended 
sign (including any abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use 
of a medicinal product, whether or not considered related 
to the medicinal product.To provide 
clarification
Section 4.4.1 Any SAE (see Section 4.3.6) that occurs after signing the 
study ICF through the Final Visit (ie, end of study) must 
be expeditiously reported whether or not considered 
attributable to the study drug. Each SAE must be fully Any SAE (see Section 4.3.6) that occurs after signing the 
study ICF through the Final Visit (ie, end of study) must 
be expeditiously reported whether or not considered 
attributable to the study drug. Each SAE must be fully To provide 
clarification for 
SAE reporting 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 10of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
recorded in the subject’s eCRF orSAE Report Form.
SAE s will be reported using the designated SAE Report 
Form . When the Investigator becomes aware of an SAE, 
she/he must submit electronically through the electronic 
data capture (EDC) system or when the EDC system is 
not available submit a com pleted, signed an d dated SAE 
Report Form (in English) within 24 hours to the Sponsor 
by email/fax.
Each SAE must be followed up until resolution or 
stabilization. After the initial report, all relevant 
information for SAE follow up, and for the outcome, 
must also be suppli ed to the Sponsor in a timely manner 
(within 3 days from its identification or w ithin 24 hours 
for relevant new information) by means of the SAE 
Report Form. In addition, the Sponsor or contract 
research organization (CRO) may request additional 
informatio n and/or reports.
All SAE Report Forms and Pregnancy Report Forms 
must be reported to Grifols electronically through the 
EDC system or when the EDC system is not available, 
reported to :recorded in the subject’s eCRF andSAE Report Form.
SAEs will be reported using the designated SAE Repo rt 
Form . When the Investigator becomes aware of an SAE, 
she/he must submit a completed, signed and dated SAE 
Report Form (in English) within 24 hours to the Sponsor 
by email/fax.
Each SAE must be followed up until resolution or 
stabilization. After the initial report, all relevant 
information for SAE follow up, and for the outcome, 
must also be supplied to the Sponsor in a timely manner 
(within 3 days from its identification or w ithin 24 hours 
for relevant new information) by means of the SAE 
Report Form . In addition, the Sponsor or contract 
research organization (CRO) may request additional 
information and/or reports.
All SAE Report Forms and Pregnancy Report Forms 
must be reported to :procedures
Section 4.4.2 (No previous text) 4.4.2 Reporting Pregnancy
Pregnancies occurring during the course of the study will 
not be considered an AE unless a relation to the study 
drug is suspected. In any case, a Pregnancy Report Form 
must be completed and sent as soon as pos sible to the 
Sponsor for any pregnancies that occur from time of 
consent through the Final Visit (ie, end of study). A copy 
of the form should be filed at the study site for follow -up 
until the end of the pregnancy. Any pregnancy must be 
followed by the In vestigator until delivery or to the end 
of pregnancy. Any anomalies, complications, abnormal 
outcomes, or birth defects observed in the child must be 
reported as an SAE (see email address or fax number in To provide 
procedures for 
reporting 
pregnancy
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 11of 94SectionsChange From :
(Strikethrough is added to highlight deleted text)Change To :
(Underline is added to highlight new text) Rationale:
Section 4.4.1) w ithin 24 hours of the Investigator or 
study personnel’s first knowledge.
Appendix 1 Pre-dose laboratory assessments (hematology, chemistry, 
special tests, urinalysis)i
Special tests only (DAT, serum free hemoglobin, 
haptoglobin)
Footnotes:
fOnly if chest X -ray or CT have not been performed in 
the past 6 months at Screening 
jPregnancy testing will be repeated at any time if 
pregnancy is suspected. 
nWeekly SC dosing may be 7 days ± 1 day.  except for
SC#2 and SC#3 which must be performed with a +1 
day window. ; the first 3 SC infusions of IGSC 20% 
will be performed in the clinic where site personnel 
will instruct on/observe proper SC dosing technique 
using the pump.  Subsequent monthly SC infusions 
will also occur and be observed in the clinic after labs 
and total IgG trough levels are obtained.  Other SC 
infusions will be performed at home for interim weeks 
starting after the SC Week #3 visit.Pre-dose laboratory assessments (hematology, chemistry, 
urinalysis)i
Special te sts (DAT, serum free hemoglobin, haptoglobin)
Special tests assessment added at Screening, IV#1 
Baseline, SC Week #1 , SC Week #9, SC Weeks #17, Final 
Visit (Week #25)/Early Termination, and Monthly 
Extension Visit
Footnotes:
fOnly if chest X -ray or CT hav e not been performed in 
the past 6 months at Screening (Note: at least one 
radiographic view (AP or PA) is required.)
jPregnancy testing will be repeated at any time if 
pregnancy is suspected. Pregnancy testing including 
serum and urine tests will be performed for child -
bearing potential females only.
nWeekly SC dosing may be 7 days ± 1 day. If there are 
logistical issues requiring schedule adjustment for 
weekly subcutaneous IGSC 20% administr ation, SC#1 
may be scheduled 6 to 9 days after IV#2.   SC#2 and 
SC#3 visits must be performed w ith a +1 day window . 
The first 3 SC infusions of IGSC 20% will be 
performed in the clinic where site personnel will 
instruct on/observe proper SC dosing technique using 
the pump.  Subsequent monthly SC infusions will also 
occur and be observed in the clinic after labs and total 
IgG trough levels are obtained.  Other SC infusions 
will be performed at home for interim weeks starting 
after the SC Week #3 visit.Change s made to 
be consistent with 
the changes in the 
protocol text body
(Note: Administrative changes including minor administrative corrections are not included in Protocol Summary of Changes.)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 12of 94Investigator Signature Page
The undersigned confirms that he/she agrees to conduct the study under the conditions 
described in this protocol and comply with International Conference on Harmonization 
Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and all applicable regulatory requirements:
___________________________________ ______________________
INVESTIGATOR NAME (Please Print) LOCAT ION
___________________________________ ______ ________________
INVESTIGATOR SI GNATURE DATE
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 13of 94Protocol S ynopsis
Title of Study:
An open -label, multi -center study  to evaluate the safet y and pharmacokinetics of IGSC 20% 
administered for 6 months in subjects with primary immunodeficiency
Study Number :
GTI1502
Phase:
3
Number of Subjects Planned:
Approximately  50 subjects
Study Centers Planned:
Approximately  30 study  centers
Study Objectives:
Primary Pharmacokinetic (PK) Objective
To determine a dose of weekl y subcutaneousl y administered Immune Globulin Subcutaneous 
(Human), 20% Capry late/Chromatograph y Purified (Grifols) (IGSC 20%) that produces 
steady -state AUC of total IgG that is non- inferior to that of the regularly  administered IV 
dose of Immune Globulin I njection (Human), 10% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified 
(Grifols) (IGIV -C 10%) in primary  immunodeficiency  (PI)subjects
Secondary  Objective
To determine if IGSC 20% replacement therap y maintains mean stead y-state trough total IgG 
levels that are comparable to the mean trough total IgG levels with the IGIV -C 10% 
replacement therap y in PI subjects
Safety  Objective
To assess the safet y and tolerability of IGSC 20% as an IgG replacement therap y in subjects 
with PI
Overall Study Description:
This is a prospective, multi -center, open -label, single -sequence, 6 -month, PK and safety  and 
tolerability  study  of IGSC 20% in subjects wit h PI. Approximately  50 subjects will be 
enrolled in order to have approximately  30 adult subjects and 12 to 18 pediatric subjects (age 
2-16years) completing treatment with subcutaneously  administered IGSC 20%.  Pediatric 
enrollment will be stratified by  age category  with a target of 4 to 6 children for each group: 
2to 5 years, >5 to 12 years, and >12 to 16 years of age . The PK profiles of total IgG 
following administration of both IV (IGIV- C 10%) administration and SC (IGSC 20%) 
administration under approximate steady -state conditions wi ll be determined and compared.
This study  will include 3 treatment phases: Run -In Phase , IV Phase ( IV administration of 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 14of 94IGIV -C 10% treatment), and SC Phase (SC administration of IGSC 20%). Before a subject is 
to be enr olled (entering either the Run -Inor IV P hase) into the study , the subject will be 
screened during the Screening Phase of upto 28 day s (following the first assessment of 
subject eligibility ).
Subjects, depending on their current IgG treatment regimen, may be required to enter the 
Run-In Phase to receive IV IGIV -C 10% treatment (Sponsor provided)  to achieve an 
approximately  stead y-state condition prior to entering the IV Phase . They  will then enter the 
IV Phase to determine the AUC profiles of IV infusions of IGIV-C 10%.
Subjects with a qualify ing IV IGIV -C 10% treatment regimen (on stable IGIV -C 10% doses
of 300 -800 mg/kg) can enter the IV Phase directl y where they will receive IGIV -C 10% 
(Sponsor provided). In the IV Phase , steady -state IV PK assessments i ncluding AUC will be 
performed.
After completing the IV Phase , subjects will enter the SC Phase to receive weekl y SC doses 
of IGSC 20% for at least 24 weeks. The IGSC 20% dose will be determined by using an 
initial I V to SC dose adjustment factor of 1.37. After reaching an approximately  stead y-state 
condition, the SC PK profiles including AUC at SC Week #13 will be determined.
Comparison of the IV PK profiles and IGSC 20% PK profiles in the first 6 adult/adolescent 
subjects will be performed through an interim PK anal ysis. If the dose adjustment factor is 
deemed acceptable (SC dose of IGSC 20% is non -inferior to the subject’s IV dose) 
(Section 3.1.5 ), all subjects will continue to complete treatment and assessments through 
Week#25 (no further monthly  extension visits). Otherwise, a new dose adjustment factor will 
be employ ed for all subjects following the procedures described in Section 3.1.5 , and 
subjects will receive 24 weeks of IGSC 20% tre atment at the new IGSC 20% dose . In this 
study , the PK profiles will be assessed in all subjects. Subjects aged 2 to 5 y ears old will be 
assessed using an abbreviated sampling schedule for PK profiles.
The interim serial PK samples (for both the IGIV -C 10% IV and the IGSC 20% SC dosing 
phases) may  be obtained at an alternate location.  If an outside agency  is utilized for sample 
collection, the samples will be drawn and processed per protocol and laboratory  manual 
instructions.
Target Population:
Eligible participants for this study  include male or female subjects who are 2 to 75 y ears of 
age and have a diagnosis of PI  requ iring IgG replacement treatment. Subjects who initially  
fail to meet eligibility  criteria may  be re -screened once upon consultation with the Sponsor. 
Subjects who fail to meet eligibility  criteria upon re -screen are Screen Failures and will not 
be eligible to participate in the study .
Diagnosis and Main Eligibility Criteria:
Inclusion Criteria:
A subject must meet all the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for participation in this 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 15of 94study .
1. Subjects between the ages of 2 and75 years (inclusive) at Screening.
2.Documented and confirmed pre -existing diagnosis of PI  with features of 
hypogammaglobulinemia requiring IgG replacement therapy  including but not limited to 
the following humoral -based immunodeficiency  syndromes (eg, X -linked 
agammaglobulinemia, common variable immunodeficiency ), and combined 
immunodeficiency  syndromes without ly mphocy topenia (eg, hy per immunoglobulin M 
[IgM] immunodeficiency sy ndrome). Please also refer to Exclusion Criteria.
3.The subject has not had a n SBI within the last 3 months prior to or during Screening.
4.Currently  on IgG replacement therapy  (via IV or SC infusion) for ≥3 months. 
5.Note: This inclusion criterion is removed in protocol amendment 2. 
6.Screening trough IgG levels must be ≥500 mg/dL.
Note: If Screening trough levels are not above this threshold, the subjects will be a Screen 
Failure, but may  be re -screened following dose adjustment of their original IgG 
replacement therap y regimen and maintaining stable dosing for a period of at least 3 
months prior to Screening a second time.
7. The medical records for all subjects should be available to document diagnosis, previous 
infections and treatment.
8.The subject has signed an informed consent.
Note: The subject must sign the informed consent form (IC F) if at least 18 y ears old; for 
children of younger age, the subject’s parent or legal guardian must sign the I CF and if 
appropriate/applicable, the subject must sign a Child Assent form approved by  the 
Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee (IRB/ EC) per their requirements
Exclusion Criteria:
A subject meeting an y of the following exclusion criteria is NOT eligible for participation in 
the study .
1.Clinical evidence of an y significant acute or chronic disease that, in the opinion of the 
Investigator, may  interfere with successful completion of the trial or place the subject at 
undue medical risk
2.The subject has had a known serious adverse reaction to immunoglobulin or an y severe 
anaph ylactic reaction to blood or any  blood -derived product
3.The subject has a history  of blistering skin disease, clinically  significant 
thrombocy topenia, bleeding disorder, diffuse rash, recurrent skin infections or other 
disorders where SC therapy  would be contraindicated during the study
4.The subject has isolated IgG subclass deficiency , isolated specific antibody  deficiency  
disorder, or transient hy pogammaglobulinemia of infancy
5.The subject has known selective immunoglobulin A (IgA) deficiency  (with or without 
antibodies to IgA)
6.Females of childbearing potential who are pregnant, have a positive pregnancy  test at 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 16of 94Screening (serum) or IV#1 Baseline (urine) (human chorionic gonadotropin [HCG] -based 
assay ), are breastfeeding, or unwilling to practice a highl y effective method of 
contraception (oral, injectable or imp lanted hormonal methods of contraception, 
placement of an intrauterine device [IUD] or intrauterine s ystem [I US], condom or 
occlusive cap with spermicidal foam/gel/film/cream/suppository , male sterilization, or 
true abstinence) throughout the study
Note: T rue abstinence: When this is in line with the preferred and usual lifesty le of the 
subject. (Periodic abstinence [eg , calendar, ovulation, sy mptothermal, post- ovulation 
methods], declaration of abstinence for the duration of a trial, and withdrawal are not
acceptable methods of contraception.)
7.The subject has significant proteinuria (dipstick proteinuria ≥3+ or known urinary  protein 
loss >1 g/24 h or nephrotic sy ndrome) and/or has a history  of acute renal failure and/or 
severe renal impairment (blood urea n itrogen [BUN] or creatinine more than 2.5 times 
the upper limit of normal [UL N]) and/or on dial ysis
8.The subject has Screening Visit values of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) levels exceeding more than 2.5 times the UL N for the expected 
normal range for the testing laboratory .
9.The subject has hemoglobin <9 g/dL at Screening.
10.The subject has a history  of or current diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis or 
thromboembolism (eg, deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction, cerebr ovascular 
accident or transient ischemic attack); history  refers to an incident in the y ear prior to 
Screening or 2 episodes over lifetime.
11.The subject is currently  receiving anti -coagulation therapy  which would make SC 
administration inadvisable (vitamin K antagonists, nonvitamin K antagonist oral 
anticoagulants [eg, dabigatran etexilate targeting Factor IIa, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, and 
apixaban targeting Factor Xa], parenteral antic oagulants [eg, fondaparinux]).
12.The subject currentl y has a known h ypervisco sity syndrome.
13.The subject has an acquired medical condition that is known to cause secondary  immune 
deficiency , such as chronic ly mphocy tic leukemia, ly mphoma, multiple myeloma, 
chronic or recurrent neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count less than 1000/µL [1.0 x 
109/L]), or human immunodeficiency  virus (HIV) infection/acquired imm une deficiency  
syndrome (AIDS).
14. The subject has a known previous infection with or clinical signs and s ymptoms 
consistent with current hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepa titis C virus (HCV) infection.
15.The subject (if <18 years of age) has non- controlled arterial hy pertension at a level of 
greater than or equal to the 90th percentile blood pressure (either s ystolic or diastolic) for 
their age and height (See Appendix 3) or the adult subject has non -controlled arterial 
hypertension (s ystolic blood pressure >160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure 
>100 mmHg)
16.The subject is receiving any  of the following medications: (a) immunosuppressants 
including chemotherapeutic agents; (b) immunomodulators; (c) long -term sy stemic 
corticosteroids defined as daily  dose >1 mg of prednisone equivalent/kg/day  for 
>30days.
Note: I ntermittent courses of corticoste roids of not more than 10 days would not exclude 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 17of 94a subject. Inhaled or topic al corticosteroids are allowed.
17.The subject has known substance or prescription drug abuse
18.The subject has participated in another clinical trial within 30 day s prior to Screening 
(observational studies without investigative treatments [non- interventional] are 
permitted) or has received any investigational blood product with the exception of other 
IgG products within the previous 3 months
19.The subject/caregiver is unwilling to comply with any  aspect of the protocol, including 
the home SC infusions, blood sampling, and completion of a SC infusion diary  for the 
duration of the study
20.Mentally  challenged subjects who cannot give independent informed consent or assent
21. In the opinion of the Investigator, the subject may  have compliance problems with the 
protocol and the procedures of the protocol
Investigational Product, Dose, and Mode of Administration:
Grifols I mmune Globulin Subcutaneous (Human), 20% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified 
(IGSC 20%)
IGSC 20% is a sterile liquid formulation of immunoglobulin that has been purified from 
human plasma via a multi -step process. IGSC 20% is manufactured using the same process 
as for IGIV -C 10% (Immune Globulin I ntravenous [Human], 10% 
Capry late/Chr omatography  Purified [IGIV -C]), with the addition of a nanofiltration step and 
is further concentrated by ultrafiltration to a higher IgG concentration (20%). IGSC 20% 
vials will be supplied in a 50 mL  vial size or smaller containing a 20% solution of 
immu noglobulin, ie, a concentration of 20 g/100 mL , with a nominal 10 grams 
immunoglobulin per vial.
In the current study , the initial IV to SC dose adjustment calculation formula used is:
Reference Therapy, Dose and Mode of Administration :
Grifols Immune Globulin I ntravenous [Human], 10% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified
(IGIV -C 10% )
IGIV -C 10% is a sterile liquid formulation of immunoglobulin that has been purified from 
human plasma. IGIV -C 10% is a licensed product. IGIV -C 10% vials may  be supplied in th e 
vial sizes of 10, 25, 50, 100, and 200 mL .  In this study , administration of IGIV- C 10% will 
be via the IV route onl y.
The IV IGIV -C 10% dose and dosing interval will be individualized based on the treatment 
each subject is receiving for their PI at scre ening .300 to 80 0 mg/kg (IV dose)
3 or 4 (regular IV dosing interval in week)× 1.37 (IV to SC dose adjustment factor)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 18of 94Duration of Treatment:
Total duration of study  participation:  up to 50 weeks
Screening Phase: up to 28 day s
Treatment duration:
Run-In Phase:  3 to 4 months
IV Phase:  4 to 5weeks
SC Phase:  24 weeks
If the initial dose adjustment factor is deemed insufficient at the time of the interim PK 
analysis (please see s ynopsis section below) , a new dose adjustment factor will be calculated 
and implemented. In this case, all subjects will complete 24 weeks of IGSC 20% treatment 
with a dose determined using the new dose adjustment factor.
Study Variables:
Primary  PK Variable
AUC in the IV Phase : Steady -state AUC of total IgG over a regular dosing interval (τ), 
either every  3 weeks or every  4 weeks (ie, AUC 0- τ,IVor AUC 0-21days,I Vor AUC 0-28 days,I V, 
respectivel y) in PI subjects
AUC in the SC Phase : Stead y-state AUC of total IgG over a weekl y SC dosing interval 
(τ) (ie, AUC 0-τ,SCor AUC 0-7days,SC ) in PI  subjects
Secondary  Variables
Mean stead y-state trough (pre -dose) concentration of total IgG following IV 
administration of IGIV -C 10% or SC administration of IGSC 20%
Exploratory  Variables
tmax(time to reach C max) and C maxin PI  subjects at steady  state
Trough levels of IgG subc lasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4)
Antibody  levels for S. pneumoniae , H.influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus)
Rate of serious bacterial infection (SBI)
All infections of an y kind (serious/nonserious including acute sinusitis, exacerbation of 
chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhe a, 
etc.) as determined b y the Investigator
Validated infections documented by  positive radiograph, fever (>38°C oral or >39°C 
rectal), culture, or diagnost ic testing for microorganisms eg, bacterial, viral, fungal, or 
protozoal pathogens (for instance, rap id streptococcal antigen detection test)
Number of day s on antibiotics (including oral, parenteral, oral plus parenteral, 
prophy lactic and therapeutic). Use of prophy lactic antibiotics will be distinguished from 
antibiotics fo r treatment of acute infection .
Number of hospitalizations due to infection
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 19of 94Number of day s of work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections and their 
treatment
Trough measles antibod y titers (functional assay) for informational purposes
Safety  Variables
Adverse events (AEs), suspected adverse drug reactions (suspected ADRs), adverse 
reactions (ARs), serious AEs (SAEs), and discontinuations due to AEs and SAEs
Note: All  infusion site reactions will be recorded in the eCRF. For local infusion site 
reactions where the signs/sy mptoms lead to infusion interruption or discontinuation, 
require concomitant medication, or have an impact on the general condition of the subject 
as judged b y the Investigator, they will be considered as AEs.
Vital signs during clinic visits (sy stolic blood pressure [SBP] and diastolic blood pressure 
[DBP], heart rate [HR], temperature [T], respiratory  rate [RR])
Physical a ssessments: phy sical exam ination s will be recorded as normal or abnormal, 
according to the ph ysician's judgment criteria, and findings will be recorded.
Laboratory  assessments including chemistry , hematology , and urinal ysis.
Total number of n on-serious infections and proportion of subjects who experience non -
serious infections of an y kind (including acute sinusitis, exacerbation of chroni c sinusitis, 
acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea, etc. )as determined 
by the Investigator .
Key Assessments and Procedures:
IgG trough levels will be measured for all subjects during the Screening Visit, Run -InPhase , 
IV Phase,and SC Phase as detailed in Appendix 1 .
The sampling for determining PK profiles for IV administered IGIV -C 10% will commence 
at the IV#1 (IV Phase ) visit for all enrolled subjects .
The sampling for determining PK profiles for the SC administration of IGSC 20% will 
commence at the SC Week #13 visit for all enrolled subjects.
Subjects between the ages of 2 and5 years of age will undergo serial PK sampling using an 
abbreviated sampling schedule .
SC infusion diary : An IGSC 20% infusion diary  will be provided to each subject prior to the 
first IGSC 20% infusion which may be used to record items including but not limited to: 
infusion site reactions, concomitant medications (including antibiotics [prophy lactic and 
therapeutic]), and details of study  drug administration (location and number of sites, 
date/clock time of start and end of infusion, dose/volume of each SC dose, duration and rates 
of infusion). The SC infusion diary  may  also be used to record day s of missed 
work/school/daily  activities due to i nfections and related treatment.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 20of 94Note:  All infusion site reactions will be recorded. For the subset of local infusion site
reactions where the signs/sy mptoms lead to infusion interruption or discontinuation, require 
concomitant medication, or have an imp act on the general condition of the subject as judged 
by the Investigator, these will be considered as AEs.
Statistical Methods:
Study  Populations:
Safety  Population
The safet y population will include all subjects who received an y amount of study drugs 
(IGIV -C 10% and/or IGSC 20%) and will be used for safety  anal ysis.
PK Population
The PK population will consist of all subjects who receive study  drugs and have sufficient 
and valid total IgG concentration vs. time data for either the IV or SC Phase to all ow 
calculation of AUC 0-τ,SCor AUC 0-τ,IV(the primary PK endpoint).
The validity  of total IgG concentrations  will be reviewed and determined before the database 
lock based on consideration of treatment compliance and blood sampling/testing issues (such 
ascollection problem). Any  invalid total IgG concentrations will be flagged with the reason 
for invalidity  in the listing.
IgG Population
The IgG population will consist of all subjects who receive study drugs and have an y total 
IgG concentration data. The summary  of total IgG concentration data will be based on IgG 
Population.
Demographic and Baseline Characteristics:
The demographic and baseline characteristics will be summarized. For quantitative variables, 
mean, SD, median, and minimum/maximum will be provided. For qualitative variables, the 
frequency  and percentage will be provided.
Study  Anal yses:
Primary  PK Analy ses
The Primary  PK endpoint is the steady -state AUC over a dosing interval defined as follows:
AUC 0-τ,SC, the AUC over a weekl y dosing in terval (τ) at an approximate stead y-state 
condition following weekly  SC infusion, ie, AUC 0-7 days.
AUC 0-τ,IV, the AUC over a regular dosing interval (τ) at an approximate steady -state 
condition following the regular IV infusion, either every  3 weeks or every  4 weeks, ie, 
AUC 0-21 days or AUC 0-28 days , respectively .
AUC 0-τ,SCis to be obtained after the 13th SC dose of IGSC 20% at the weekly  dose 
calculated using the final dose adjustment factor, and AUC 0-τ,IVis to be obtained following 
IV infusion of IGIV -C 10% at the IV#1 visit.  Since the dosing interval (τ) is 7 day s for the 
SC dose, AUC 0-τ,SCis determined as AUC 0-7 days.  For IV dosing, the dosing interval (τ) is 
21or 28 day s for the 3 -week or 4- week subjects, AUC 0-τ,IVis determined as AUC 0-21days or 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 21of 94AUC 0-28 days , respectively.
Prior to statistical comparison of AUC 0-τ’sbetween the IV IGIV -C 10% and SC I GSC 20% 
doses, the AUC 0-21days from the IV infusion in subjects on a 3- week IV dosing interval will 
be divided by  3 or the AUC 0-28days from IV dosing in subjects on a 4- week IV dosing 
interval divided by  4 for comparison with AUC 0-7days from the weekl y SC infusion.
The hy pothesis to be tested is that the weekl y SC dose of IGSC 20% will achieve an 
approximate steady -state AUC 0-τ,SCof total IgG that is non -inferior to that achieved b y a 
regular IV dose of IGIV -C 10% (AUC 0-τ,IVdivided by  3 or 4 depending on the IV dosing 
intervals).  Non -inferiority  of steady -state IgG AUC between SC dose of IGSC 20% and IV 
IGIV -C 10% administrat ion will be tested based on established regulatory guidelines for 
bioequivalence testing. The 90% confidence interval (CI) of the geometric LSM ratio of SC 
AUC to I V AUC will be calculated.  The SC dose is considered to be non- inferior to the IV 
dose if the low bound of the 90% CIfor the geometric L SM AUC ratio is above 0.80 based 
on loge -transformed data.
Secondary  and Exploratory  PK Anal ysis
Secondary and exploratory  PK endpoints include the steady -state mean trough concentration 
of total IgG and the C max, tmaxof total IgG. Descriptive statistics will be calculated for the 
steady -state mean trough concentration of total IgG and for Cmaxandtmaxof total IgG.  All 
pre-infusion total IgG concentrations obtained before and at the 13th SC dose of IGSC 20% 
will be evaluated to determine if an approximate steady- state condition has been achieved b y 
the 13th SC dose.  The stead y-state mean trough concentrations of total IgG following SC 
administrated IGSC 20% will be determined as the average value of C trough measurements 
obtained at Weeks#13, #14, #17, and #21. The mean stead y-state trough concentrations of 
total IgG following IV administrated I GIV-C 10% will be determined as the average value of 
Ctrough measurements obtained at the IV#1 visit and at 21 or 28 d ays after the IV#1 IGIV -C 
10% dose (depending on dosing interval), ie, immediatel y prior to the administration of IV 
dose at IV#2 visit.
Summaries will be provided for trough concentration of total IgG and each of its subclasses 
between IV infusion of IGIV -C 10% and SC administration of I GSC 20%.  Summaries of 
trough level concentration of antibody  titers against S. pneumonia, H.influenza, and C. tetani
will also be provided.
Depending on the number of subjects being dosed on IGIV -C 10% at 3 -or 4-week dosing 
interval, subgroup anal yses may  be performed to evaluate PK variables by  IV dosing 
interval. Subgroup anal yses willadditionally  include age, sex, race, ethnicity  and other 
factors as appropriate .
Additional exploratory  variables will be summarized descriptively. The number and 
proportion of subjects having SBI, infections, days on antibiotics, hospitalizations due to 
infection, and days of work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections will be calculated 
and summarized. Furthermore, the total number of events or day s and corresponding 
annualized rate per subject of SBIs, infections, day s on antibiotics, hospitalizations due t o 
infection, and day s of work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections will be calculated 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 22of 94and summarized.
Interim PK Anal ysis
An interim PK analysis will be performed as soon as practical after the first 6
adult/adolescent subjects (age ≥12-75 years) have completed the PK sampling schedule for 
both the IV and SC (after the 13th SC dose) phases of the trial.  PK data from these 
6adult/adolescent subjects will be analyzed using procedures as described above under 
primary  efficacy  anal ysis.  A decision on whether to modify  the dose adjustment factor for 
calculating the SC dose will be made base d on this interim PK analy sis.
Final PK and statistical analy sis will be based on the PK data obtained after the final (or 
adjusted, if an y) SC dose administered in all completed subjects.
Safety  Anal ysis
The safet y analyses are based on the safet y population.
All AEs ,suspected ADRs , AR, and SAEs, and discontinuations due to AEs and SAEs will be 
summarized by  presenting the number of AEs and the number and percentage of subjects 
with AEs. The summaries will be presented b y MedDRA sy stem organ class and preferred 
term. AE summaries b y severit y will also be provided. Local infusion site reactions and non-
serious infections will be similarly  summarized.
Subjects with deaths, SAEs, and AEs leading to premature discontinuation from the study  
will be listed and presented in a narrative form.
Adverse events temporally  associated with IV or SC administration of study  drug will be 
defined as those occurring during or within 72 hours of completion of an infusion. 
Additionally , local infusion site reactions will be tabulated and summarized for the total 
duration of the study  and by  IGSC 20% infusion week.
For all laboratory  tests and vital signs, the original value and the change from Baseline will 
be summarized for numeric results and frequency/percentage will be summarized for 
qualitative results. For laboratory  tests with normal ranges, out of normal range values will 
be flagged and shift tables will be provided.
Determinati on of Sample Size
The planned number of subjects (50 enrolled to provide 30 completing adult subjects and 
12to 18 completing pediatric subjects). This sample size is primarily  based on safet y 
assessment consideration. Also a sample size of 42 to 48 with at least 24 scheduled 
administrations of I GSC 20% would provide the clinical experience data on a total of more 
than 1008 to 1080 IGSC 20% dosing administrations for safety  assessment.
The planned minimum enrollment of 42 completing subjects should be more than adequate to 
establish that the AUC for total IgG for IGSC 20% is non -inferior to that achieved b y 
IGIV -C 10%.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 23of 94TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY OF CHANGES F OR AMENDMENT 2 ................................ .............................. 3
GLOSSARY AND ABBREVI ATIONS ................................ ................................ .................. 27
1 INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 30
1.1 Primary  Immunodeficiency ................................ ................................ ................... 30
1.2 Immunoglobulin Replacement Therap y ................................ ................................ 30
1.3 Study  Rationale ................................ ................................ ................................ ......31
1.3.1 Dose Rationale ................................ ................................ ............................. 32
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES ................................ ................................ ................................ ....33
2.1 Primary  Pharmacokinetic Objective ................................ ................................ ......33
2.2 Secondary  Objective ................................ ................................ .............................. 33
2.3 Exploratory  Objectives ................................ ................................ .......................... 33
2.4 Safety Objective ................................ ................................ ................................ .....34
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN ................................ ................................ .......................... 34
3.1 Study  Design and Plan ................................ ................................ ........................... 34
3.1.1 Screening Phase ................................ ................................ ........................... 35
3.1.2 Run-In Phase ................................ ................................ ................................ 36
3.1.3 IV Phase ................................ ................................ ................................ .......37
3.1.4 SC Phase ................................ ................................ ................................ ......37
3.1.5 Interim PK A nalysis................................ ................................ ..................... 39
3.2 Selection of Study  Population ................................ ................................ ................ 40
3.2.1 Inclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ......................... 40
3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ........................ 41
3.3 Treatments ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 42
3.3.1 Treatments to Be Administered ................................ ................................ ...42
3.3.1.1 IGSC 20% ................................ ................................ .......................... 43
3.3.1.2 IGIV -C 10% ................................ ................................ ....................... 43
3.3.1.3 Labeling of Investigational Products ................................ ................. 43
3.3.1.4 Storage of Investigational Products ................................ ................... 43
3.3.1.5 Preparation ................................ ................................ ......................... 43
3.3.1.6 Accountability  for Investigational Products ................................ ......44
3.3.2 Rationale for Selection of Doses/Timing of Investigational Products ......... 44
3.3.2.1 Selection of Doses and Timing of Dosing in the Study ..................... 44
3.3.2.2 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject ................................ 45
3.3.2.3 Subcutaneous Administration Procedures for IGSC 20% ................. 45
3.3.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups ................................ ...46
3.3.3.1 Subject Numbering ................................ ................................ ............ 46
3.3.3.2 Randomization ................................ ................................ ................... 46
3.3.3.3 Blinding ................................ ................................ .............................. 46
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 24of 943.3.4 Treatment Compliance ................................ ................................ ................. 46
3.4 Prior and Concomitant Therap y................................ ................................ ............. 47
3.4.1 Prohibited Medications Prior to Study  Participation ................................ ...47
3.4.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications during the Study ............................... 47
3.4.3 Restricted Concomitant Medications during the Study ............................... 47
3.4.4 Drug Interactions ................................ ................................ ......................... 48
3.5 Study Variables ................................ ................................ ................................ ......48
3.5.1 Primary  Pharmacokinetic Variables ................................ ............................ 48
3.5.2 Secondary  Pharmacokinetic Variables ................................ ........................ 48
3.5.3 Exploratory  Variables ................................ ................................ .................. 48
3.5.4 Safety  Variables ................................ ................................ ........................... 49
3.6 Assessments ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 49
3.6.1 Assessment Periods ................................ ................................ ...................... 49
3.6.2 Observations and Measurements ................................ ................................ .50
3.6.2.1 Screening Visit ................................ ................................ ................... 50
3.6.2.2 Run-In Phase (If Required) – IV Administration of IGIV -C 10% ....51
3.6.2.3 IV Phase – IV Administration of IGIV -C 10% ................................ .51
3.6.2.4 SC Phase – SC Administration of IG SC 20% ................................ ...54
3.6.2.5 Monthly  Extension Visits ................................ ................................ ..59
3.6.2.6 Final Visit (Week #25)/Early  Termination Clinic Visit ..................... 60
3.6.3 Description of Laboratory Tests and Procedures ................................ ......... 61
3.6.3.1 Assessment and Recording of Infections ................................ ........... 62
3.6.3.2 Virus Safet y Testing ................................ ................................ .......... 62
3.6.3.3 D- dimer and Wells Score ................................ ................................ ...63
3.7 Removal of Subjects ................................ ................................ .............................. 63
3.8 Follow -up of Subjects Withdrawn from Study ................................ ...................... 64
3.9 Premature Termination of Study /Closure of Center ................................ .............. 64
4 ADVERSE EVENTS ................................ ................................ ................................ .......64
4.1 Warnings/Precautions ................................ ................................ ............................ 64
4.2 Adverse Event Monitoring................................ ................................ ..................... 65
4.3 Adverse Event Definitions ................................ ................................ ..................... 65
4.3.1 Adverse Events ................................ ................................ ............................ 65
4.3.2 Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions/Adverse Reactions.............................. 65
4.3.3 Causality  of Adverse Event ................................ ................................ ......... 65
4.3.4 Severity  of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction............... 66
4.3.5 Expectedness of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction ......67
4.3.6 Seriousness of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction;  
Serious Adverse Event ................................ ................................ ................. 67
4.3.7 Adverse Event and Pregnancy Documentation ................................ ............ 68
4.3.8 Type and Duration of the Follow -Up of Subjects after Adverse Events ..... 69
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 25of 944.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events or Pregnancy ................................ .............. 69
4.4.1 Reporting Serious Adverse Event ................................ ................................ 69
4.4.2 Reporting Pregnancy ................................ ................................ .................... 70
5 STATI STICAL METHODS AND DETERMINATION OF SAMPL E  SIZE ............... 70
5.1 Statistical and Analy tical Plans ................................ ................................ .............. 70
5.1.1 Subject Populations for Analy sis................................ ................................ .70
5.1.2 Demographic and Baseline Characteristics ................................ ................. 71
5.1.3 Pharmacokinetic Analy sis................................ ................................ ............ 71
5.1.4 Interim PK Anal ysis................................ ................................ ..................... 72
5.1.5 Exploratory  Anal ysis................................ ................................ ................... 73
5.1.6 Safety  Anal ysis................................ ................................ ............................ 73
5.2 Determ ination of Sample Size ................................ ................................ ............... 74
6 ADMINISTRATIVE ................................ ................................ ................................ .......74
6.1 Investigator(s), Other Study Personnel and External Committees ........................ 74
6.2 Data Qualit y................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 74
6.3 Documentation ................................ ................................ ................................ .......74
6.3.1 Record Retention ................................ ................................ ......................... 75
6.3.2 Acce ss to Information for Monitoring ................................ ......................... 75
6.3.3 Access to Information for Audits or Inspections ................................ ......... 75
7 ETHI CAL  AND LEGAL AS PECTS ................................ ................................ ............... 76
7.1 Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee ................................ ...................... 76
7.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study ................................ ................................ ................. 76
7.3 Regulatory  Authority  Approvals/Authorizations ................................ ................... 76
7.4 Subject I nformation and Consent ................................ ................................ ........... 76
7.5 Insurance ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 77
7.6 Confidentiality ................................ ................................ ................................ .......77
8 USE OF DATA AND PUBL ICAT ION ................................ ................................ .......... 77
9 REFERENCES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 79
10 APPENDI CES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 83
LIST OF IN -TEXT TA BLES
Table 3- 1 Study  entry  of subjects ................................ ................................ ...................... 36
Table 3-2 Name, Description, and L ocation of Laboratory  Tests and Procedures............ 61
LIST OF IN -TEXT FIGURES
Figure 3-1 Overall study  design ................................ ................................ ......................... 35
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 26of 94Figure 3-2  IV dosing of IGIV -C 10% and SC dosing of IGSC 20% Clinic Visits and 
PK sampling schedules (Also see Sections 3.6.2.3 and 3.6.2.4) ................................ .38
LIST OF A PPENDICES
Appendix 1 Schedule of Study  Procedures ................................ ........................... 84
Appendix 2 Diagnostic Criteria for Serious Infection Ty pes................................ 88
Appendix 3 Blood Pressure Percentiles for Pediatric Patients .............................. 90
Appendix 4 Wells Score ................................ ................................ ........................ 94
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 27of 94GLOSSA RY A ND ABBREVI ATIONS
ADR Adverse drug reaction
AP Anterior -posterior 
AE Adverse event
AIDS Acquired immunodeficiency  syndrome
ALP Alkaline phosphatase
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
AR Adverse reaction
ARC Absolute reticulocy te count
AST Aspartate aminotransferase
AUC Area under the concentration vs. time curve
AUC 0-7days Area under the concentration- time curve from 0 to 7 day s
B19V Parvovirus B19
BUN Blood urea nitrogen
Cmax Maximum concentration
Ctrough Minimum concentration
CI Confidence interval
CRO Contract research organization
CSF Cerebrospinal fluid
CXR Chest X -ray
DAT Direct antiglobulin test
DBP Diastolic Blood Pressure
DNA Deox yribonucleic Acid
DVT Deep venous thrombosis 
eCRF Electronic case report form
EDC Elect ronic data capture
EMA European Medicines Agency
FDA Food and Drug Administration
HAV Hepatitis A virus
HBV Hepatitis B virus
HCG Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 28of 94HCV Hepatitis C virus
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HR Heart rate
IB Investigator’s B rochure
ICF Informed Consent Form
ICH GCP International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical Practice
IgA Immunoglobulin A
IgG Immunoglobulin G
IGIV -C 10% Immune Globulin I njection (Human), 10% Capry late/Chromatography  
Purified (Grifols)
IgM Imm unoglobulin M
IGSC 20% Immune Globulin Subcutaneous (Human), 20% 
Capry late/Chromatography  Purified (Grifols)
IM Intramuscular
IP Investigational product
IRB/EC Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee
IUD Intrauterine device
IUS Intrauterine s ystem
IV Intravenous
IVIG Intravenous Immune Globulin (generic terminology )
IWR Interactive Web Response
kg Kilogram
LDH Lactate dehy drogenase
MedDRA Medical Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities
mg Milligram
mL Milliliter
NAT Nucleic acid amplification technology
PA Posterior -anterior 
PE Pulmonary  embolus 
pH Potential of hy drogen; acidity /alkalinity  measure
PI Primary  immunodeficiency
PK Pharmacokinetics
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 29of 94RNA Ribonucleic acid
RR Respiratory  rate
SAE Serious adverse event
SBI Serious bacterial infection
SBP Systolic blood pressure
SC Subcuta neous
SCIG Subcutaneously  delivered immune globulin or subcutaneous 
immunoglobulin (generic terminology )
SD Standard deviation
SRC Safety  Review Committee
SSC Specific Signs/Sy mptoms Check
T Temperature
tmax Time to reach C max
TEAE Treatment -emerge nt adverse event
US United States
WBC White blood cell
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 30of 941INTRODUCTION
1.1 Primary  Immunodeficiency
Primary  Immunodeficiency  (PI) diseases are a family  of congenital disorders of the immune 
system that lead to an increase in frequency  of infections, notably , but not limited to, 
bacterial infections of the respiratory  tract ( 1). Results from a recent study  suggest that in the 
United States (US) alone 1 in 2,000 children and 1 in 1,200 persons (including adults and 
children) are diagnosed with PI , yielding a total US PI  patient population estimate of 
approximately  250,000 adults and children ( 2). Worldwide upper estimates suggest that six 
million people (638,000 in Europe) may  be living with a PI , although orders of magnitude 
fewer patients have been identified in registries ( 3). Patients with inherited deficiencies 
leading to impaired humoral immunity  are highl y susceptible to a wide range of infections, 
most commonly  bacterial infections. The efficacy  of immunoglobulin G (IgG) replacement in 
the treatment o f these disorders has been well established ( 4,5) since 1952 when the use of 
serum globulin fraction was reported to reduce the frequency  of infections in a patient with 
agammaglobulinemia. The therapeutic management of PI  has been carried out via 
intramuscular (IM), intravenous (IV), and subcutaneous (SC) injections of various IgG 
preparations ( 6,7).
1.2 Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy
Despite its widespread use, the infusion of IV immune globulin (IVIG) is problematic in 
some patients, especiall y those who have poor venous access or develop s ystemic adverse 
events (AEs), such as headaches, fever, chills, or my algias from this route of administration 
(8,9). In children, difficulty  in obtaining venous access can prevent or delay IVIG therap y 
(7,10,11).Over the last several years sub cutaneously  delivered immune globulin (SCI G) has 
been developed for administration in the home setting for treatment of PI and has become 
accepted in the clinical setting ( 10,11,12).
Theresults of several adult PI studies with SCI G products have shown good efficacy  of 
replacement therap y and control of bacterial infections ( 13,14,15). Additionally , the results 
of several pediatric studies also showed that SC in fusion of IgG in children (ages 1 -15 years) 
at home was feasible and safe and also resulted in maintenance of the IgG levels above 
500mg/dL ( 12,16,17), a level that is considered as suf ficient to protect against serious 
bacterial infections (SBI s) in adults and pediatric PI  patients. It is now generall y accepted 
that repeated SC infusions of IgG cause few, if any, adverse s ystemic reactions and for some 
patients, including children, the SC route has become a preferred route of administration 
(8,18-29).
Advantages of home -based SCI G infusions in adults and children with PI  include treatment 
satisfaction and qualit y-of-life improvement, specifically , greater independence, better 
control of the therapy  situation, and an overall improvement in daily  life afforded by  home -
based therap y. Moreover, the technique involved is deemed eas y to learn by adults and 
children ( 6,7,24,30).
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 31of 94IVIG infusions produce an immediate rise in the IgG levels with marked peak levels which 
graduall y decline as the IgG redistributes, equilibration takes place, and the IgG moves into 
the extravascular space over the t ypical 3 to 4 week IV dosing regimen period. The IgG 
decay  occurs with first order kinetics over a period of approximately  3to 4 weeks ( 18,31). 
Consequently  the patient experiences substantial IgG concentration variations rather than a 
steady  IgG level throughout the IV dosing period. Maintenance of higher IgG trough levels 
may benefit patients receiving IgG via the SC route at more frequent intervals ( 18).
Recent studies with SCIG regimens have documented the SCI G regimen results in much less 
variability  in IgG levels, and higher and more consistent trough levels when compared to the 
IVIG regimens ( 32). One possible reason for the stable blood concentrations is that the SC 
infused IgG probably  remains in the SC fat lay er as a depot with a slow and continuous 
release into the circulatory s ystem ( 6) in addition to the increased frequency  of dosing. It has 
been reported that the uptake of the antibodies fro m SC tissue is high and the antibodies are 
not locally  destro yed (18,33), which results in IgG reaching the circulation intact.
Several SCIG products, ranging in protein IgG concentrations from 10% to 20%, are 
currentl y being used to treat PI  most commonl y by either weekly or biweekly  administr ation. 
IGIV -C 10%, a 10% immunoglobulin product, is licensed in the US and some other countries 
(eg, IGIVnex in Canada) for both IV and SC administration. The advantage of higher 
concentration SCI G products (20%) is primaril y reduced infusion volume and sh orter 
infusion time thereby  significantly  increasing ease of administration.
1.3 Stud y Rationale
The investigational product (I P) in this study  is Immune Globulin Subcutaneous (Human), 
20% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified (IGSC 20%), Grifols company  designation 
GRF6017. Henceforth in this document , this product will be referred to as IGSC 20%. The 
second study  drug is Immune Globulin I njection (Human), 10% Capry late/Chromatograph y 
Purified, henceforth referred to as IGIV -C 10% which is approved for the indication of PI
and will be employ ed in this trial  to standardize IV immune globulin administration during 
the initial Run- In Phase and IV Phase ( Section 3.1 ).
The primary  objective of this study  is to determine a dose of subcutaneously  administered 
IGSC 20% that produces steady -state area under the concentration -time curve (AUC) of total 
IgG b y weekly SC administration that is not inferior to that of a regularl y administered IV 
dose of Immune Globulin Injection (Human), 10% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified 
(Grifols IGIV -C 10%).  IGIV -C 10% is a 10% Grifols immunoglobulin product, licensed in 
the US as GAMUNEX®and some other countries (eg, IGIVnex in Canada ) for both IV and 
SC administration.  The add itional objective of the trial is to assess the safety  of the new 
IGSC 20% formulation.
In addition to the information provided here, please also refer to the Investigator’s Brochure 
(IB) of IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 32of 941.3.1 Dose Rationale
AUC -based IVIG to SCIG do se adjustments have historically  been in the range of 1.37 to 
1.53 across products (eg, Gamunex -C,  Hizentra, Gammagard), and this study  will 
commence with an IVIG :IGSC 20% dose adjustment ratio of 1.37, which is the same ratio 
used for the SC IGIV -C 10%.
For IGSC 20% preclinical data support an IVIG:IGSC 20% dose adjustment factor of 1.37. 
In a single dose study  in New Zealand White rabbits, the AUC plasma fractional availability  
was calculated for IGSC 20% v s.IGIV -C 10%. A single 100 mg/kg IV bolus injection was 
compared with IGSC 20% at doses of 1.0, 1.15, 1.3, and 1.5 times the IV dose level. IGSC 
20% produced an AUC that was 74%, 80%, 89%, and 95%, respectivel y, of the AUC 
produced b y 100 mg/kg IV IGIV -C 10%. Thus, it is expected, that an IGSC 20% dose in the 
range of 1.3 to 1.5 times the IGIV -C 10% dose level will produce comparable AUC ( see 
IGSC 20% IB) .
The new product, IGSC 20%, is manufactured in a similar manner to IGIV -C 10% with an 
additional nanofiltration step and a higher final IgG concentrat ion (20%). As such, it is 
anticipated that the clinical dosing strategy , safety, and efficacy attributes of IGSC 20% will 
be similar to I GIV-C 10% in patients with PI . IGIV -C 10% is currentl y approved for SC 
administration in PI  in various geographic regio ns. The dose adjustment ratio employ ed in 
this protocol (1.37) for the transition from IV to SC route has been successfully  evaluated 
with I GIV-C 10% in 2 Grifols clinical studies (06001 and T5004 -401). Accordingl y in this 
study , a 1:1.37 IV to SC dose adj ustment factor will be initially  employ ed for the transition 
from IVIG to IGSC 20% treatment and will be evaluated in the interim PK anal ysis.
Grifols Study  060001 showed that weekly  SC administration of I GIV-C 10% in 
32 adult/adolescents PI subjects resulted in a relatively  constant steady -state trough 
concentration of total IgG (1140 mg/dL). The steady -state trough levels of IgG following SC 
infusions were found to be 19% higher than those from IV infusions. There were no SBIs 
reported in the 24 -week SC treatment phase ( 34). This study  demonstrated that the 1:1.37 I V 
to SC dose adjustment factor produced a point estimate for the geometric least squares mean 
(LSM) ratio of AUC SC vs. AUC IVof 0.888, with a 90% confidence interval (CI) of 0.861 to 
0.917 (anal ysis of variance [ANOVA]). The lower bound of the 90% CI was above 0.80 
indicating that the SC dose was non -inferior to the IV dose in terms of AUC. I n additi on, the 
90% CI  was within the limit of 0.80 to 1.25, a criterion for concluding “bioequivalence” 
between the 2 treatments ( SC and IV doses of IGIV -C 10%).
Additionally , a recentl y completed pediatric stud y (Grifols Study  T5004- 401) of weekly  SC 
administrat ion of IGIV -C 10% in 11 pediatric subjects (age range 4 -15 years) also resulted in 
no SBI reported in the 12 -week SC treatment period. The mean steady -state minimum
concentration (Ctrough) of total IgG was1325 mg/dL following weekl y SC infusion of IGIV -C 
10% which was 31% higher than that of the IV dosing C trough (997 mg/dL )(1.37 dose 
adjustment factor relative to I V). The mean of the ratios of SC AUC vs. IV AUC was also 
favorable (mean ±SD: 1.05 ±0.104).
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 33of 94Accordingl y in this study, a 1:1.37 IV to SC dos e adjustment factor will be initially  
employ ed for the transition from IVIG to IGSC 20% treatment and will be evaluated in the 
interim PK analy sis (Section 3.1.5 ).
2STUDY OBJECTIVES
2.1 Primary  Pharmacokinetic Objective
To determine a dose of weekl y subcutaneousl y administered IGSC 20% that produces 
steady -state AUC of total IgG that is non- inferior to that of the regularly  administered IV
dose of IGIV -C 10% in PI subjects
2.2 Secondary  Objective
To determine if IGSC 20% replacement thera py maintains mean steady -state trough total
IgG levels that are comparable to the mean trough total IgG levels with the IGIV -C 10% 
replacement therap y in PI subjects
2.3 Exploratory  Objectives
To evaluate t max(time to reach C max) and C maxin PI subjects at stead y state
To evaluate trough levels of IgG subc lasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4)
To evaluate antibody  levels for Streptococcus pneumoniae , Hemophilus influenzae , and 
Clostridium tetani (tetanus)
To evaluate the rate of SBIs
To evaluate all infections of any kind (serious/nonserious including acute sinusitis, 
exacerbation of chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, 
infectious diarrhea, etc.) as determined b y the Investig ator
To evaluate validated infect ions documented b y positive radiograph, fever (> 38°C oral 
or > 39°C rectal), culture, or diagnostic testing for microorganisms, eg, bacterial, viral, 
fungal, or protozoal pathogens (for instance, rapid streptococcal antig en detection test)
To evaluate num ber of day s on antibiotics (including oral, parenteral, oral plus parenteral, 
prophy lactic and therapeutic). Use of prophy lactic antibiotics will be distinguished from 
antibiotics fo r treatment of acute infection.
To evaluate number of ho spitalizations due to infection
To evaluate number of day s of work/school/dail y activities missed due to infections and 
their treatment
Trough measles antibod y titers (functional assay) are an exploratory variable for 
informational purposes
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 34of 942.4 Safet y Objective
To assess the s afety and tolerability of IGSC 20% as an IgG replacement therap y in 
subjects with PI
3INVESTIGA TIONAL PLA N
3.1 Stud y Design and Plan
This is a prospective, multi -center, open -label, single -sequence, 6 -month, PK and safety  and 
tolerability  study  of IGSC 20% in subjects with PI. Approximately  50 subjects will be 
enrolled in order to have approximately  30 adult subjects and 12 to 18 pediatric subjects (age 
2-16years) completing treatment  with subcutaneously  administered IGSC 20%.  Pediatric 
enrollment will be st ratified by  age category  with a target of 4 to 6 children for each group: 2
to 5 years, >5 to 12 years, and >12 to 16 years of age . The PK profiles of total IgG following 
administration of both I V (IGIV -C 10%) administration and SC (IGSC 20%) administration 
under approximate steady- state conditions will be determined and compared.  The primary  
objective is to determine a weekl y SC dose of IGSC 20% that achieves an AUC of total IgG 
that is non -inferior to that achieved b y a subject’s IV dose of immune globulin .
This study  will include 3 treatment phases: Run -In Phase, IV Phase (IV administration of 
IGIV -C 10% treatment), and SC Phase (SC administration of IGSC 20%). Before a subject is 
to be enrolled (entering either the Run- In or IV Phase) into the study , the subject will be 
screened during the Screening Phase , which is up to 28days. The specific inclusion and 
exclusion criteria for this study  are described in Section 3.2 .
Subjects, depending on their current IgG treatment regimen, may  be required to enter the 
Run-In Phase to receive IV IGIV -C 10% treatment (Sponsor provided)  to achieve an 
approximately  stead y-state condition prior to entering the IV Phase. They  will then enter the 
IV Phase to determine the AUC profile of IV infusions of I GIV-C 10%.
Subjects with a qualify ing IV IGIV -C 10% treatment regimen (on stable IGIV -C 10% doses
of 300-800 mg/kg) can enter the IV Phase directl y where they will receive IGIV -C 10%
(Sponsor provided). In the IV Phase , steady -state IV PK assessments i ncluding AUC will be 
performed.
After completing the IV Phase , subjects will enter the SC Phase to receive weekl y SC doses 
of IGSC 20% for at least 24 weeks. The IGSC 20% dose will be de termined by  using an 
initial I V to SC dose adjustment factor of 1.37. After r eaching an approximate steady -state 
condition, the SC PK profiles including AUC at SC Week#13 will be determined.
The interim serial PK samples (for both the IGIV -C 10% IVand the IGSC 20% SC dosing 
phases) may  be obtained at an alternate location.  If an outside agency  is utilized for sample 
collection, the sample swill be drawn and processed per protocol and laboratory  manual 
instructions.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 35of 94Comparison of the IV PK profiles and IGS C 20% PK profiles in the first 6 adult/adolescent 
subjects will be performed through an interim PK anal ysis. If the dose adjustment factor is 
deemed acceptable (SC dose of IGSC 20% is non -inferior to the subject’s IV dose) 
(Section 3.1.5 ), all subjects will continue to complete treatment and assessments through 
Week#25 (no further monthly  extension visits) . Otherwise, a new dose adjustment factor will 
be employ ed for all subjects following the procedures d escribed in Section 3.1.5 ,and 
subjects will receive 24 weeks of IGSC 20% treatment at th enew IGSC 20% dose .In this 
study , the PK profiles will be assessed in all subjects. Subjects aged 2 to 5 y ears old will be 
assessed using an abbreviated sampling schedule for PK profiles.
The overall study  diagram is depicted in Figure 3-1and Figure 3-2.  The subject entry  criteria 
are described in Table 3-1.
Figure 3-1 Overall study  design
3.1.1 Screening Phase
At screening, subjects will be categorized into 3 groups: 1) those subjects who can directly 
enter the IV Phase of the study ,2) those who will require a 3 -month Run-In P hase, and 3) 
those who will require a 4 -month Run- In Phase ( Figure 3-1and Table 3-1). The Screening 
Phase is up to 28 day s long.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 36of 94Table 3-1 Study  entry of subjects
Subject Populations at Screening Based upon Most 
Recent IgG Tre atment History
(All must have confirmed diagnosis of PI)Required Study 
Entry PointIGIV -C 10% Dose and 
Interval during Study
1Receiving stable ( ≥3 m onths) dose of IV IGIV -C 10% 
betw een 300 and 800 mg/kg, every 3 or 4 w eeksIV Phase           
(IV#1)Same dose and interval as at 
screening.
2Receiving IVIG other than IGIV -C 10% with doses 
betw een 300 and 800 mg/kg, every 3 or 4 w eeksRun-In Phase      
(3 month)Same dose and interval as at 
screening.
3Receiving IVIG other than IGIV -C 10%, but either 
not on stable dose ( ≥ 3 months) OR dose isnot
betw een 300 and 800 mg/kg OR interval isnotevery 3 
or 4 w eeksRun-In Phase      
(4 month)Dose (300 -800 mg/kg) and 
interval (3 or 4 w eeks) to be 
determined by Investigator.
Receiving SCIG  Run-In Phase      
(4 month)Dose (300 -800 mg/kg) and 
interval (3 or 4 w eeks) to be 
determined by Investigator.
3.1.2 Run-In Phase
Group 1 - Subjects are eligible for direct entry  into the IV Phase:
Subjects who are alread y receiving a stable ( ≥3 months) dose of IV IGIV -C 10% between 
300and 800 mg/kg per infusion every  3 or 4 weeks, do not need to enter the Run- In Phase 
and may  proceed directly to the I V Phase. These subjects will have their IV#1 Visit
scheduled to coincide with the date for their next IV infusion according to their regular 
dosing interval. The subjects will come to the clinic for this visit .
Group 2 - Three (3) -month Run -In Phase:
Those subjects who prior to screening are receiving IVIG therap y (at a dose be tween 300 and 
800 mg/kg per infusion every  3 or 4 weeks) but who are not recei ving IGIV -C 10% 
specificall y (ie, a different commerciall y available IVIG) will be required to receive IGIV -C 
10% intravenousl y (at an equivalent dose and dosing interval as in their previous I VIG 
therap y) for a total duration of a 3 -month Run-I n Phase. Subjects receiving infusions every  3 
weeks will have 4 Run -In visits and subjects receiving infusions every  4 weeks will have 3 
Run-In visits.
Group 3 - Four (4) -month Run- In Phase :
The following subjects will be required to participate in a 4 -month Run-In P hase:
Subjects who are currently receiving IVIG therap y but have not been on a stable dose for 
the 3 months prior to screening OR where the dose is not between 300 and 800 mg/kg 
OR who receive IVIG infusions that are not administered at a frequency  of every  3 or 
4weeks
Subjects who prior to screening are receiving SCIG
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 37of 94Subjects meeting an y of the criteria for Group 3 will be scheduled to begin receiving IGIV -C 
10% intravenousl y at a dose of 300 to 800 mg/kg every  3 to 4 weeks (dose and interval to be 
determined based on the investigator’s clinical judgment) for a period of up to 4months prior 
to the I V#1 visit. Subjec ts receiving inf usions every  3 weeks will have 5 Run -In visits and 
subjects receiving inf usions every  4 weeks will have 4 Run -In visits . 
3.1.3 IV Phase
In the IV Phase, subjects will receive 2 IV infusions of IGIV -C 10%. At the IV#1 visit, 
subjects who have at screening entered directl y into the IV P hase of the study  will receive a 
dose of IV IGIV -C 10% equivalent to their current IgG dose.  Subjects who have been 
required to go through a Run- In Phase will receive the same dose of IV IGIV -C 10% as have 
been admi nistered during that pre- requisite Run -In period.  Blood draws for PK profiling will 
begin just prior to the first I GIV-C 10% infusion (IV#1) and will continue throughout the 
subject’s normal dosing period (3 or 4 weeks total).  At the end of this period a nd in order to 
ensure that the subject shave adequate total IgG levels prior to initiating study  drug b y SC, a 
second dose of IV IG IV-C 10% will be administered (IV#2). The SC P hase will begi n 1 
week after the IV#2 visit.
3.1.4 SC Phase
One week (7 day s) after t he second IV dose (IV#2), subjects will return to the clinic to begin 
the weekl y SC administrations of IGSC 20%.  The SC Phase will continue for a total of 
24weeks (6 months).  The initial weekly SC dose is calculated as described in Section 3.3.2 .
Briefl y, the SC dose is calculated using the following formula:
After 12 weeks (3 months) of weekly  SC therapy , determination of PK profiles for total IgG 
during the SC P hase will begin at the blood draw just prior to the 13thSC infusion with the 
last sam ple collected immediately prior to the 14thSC infusion (7 day s total).
The detailed stud y flow chart and specific time points for PK sampling for IV IGIV -C 10% 
and SC I GSC 20% administration are outlined in Figure 3-2.300 to 800 mg/kg (IV dose)
3 or 4 (regular IV dosing interval in week)× 1.37 (IV to SC dose adjustment factor)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 38of 94
Figure 3-2 IV dosing of IGIV -C 10% and SC dosing of IGSC 20% Clinic Visits and PK sampling schedules (Also 
see Section s3.6.2.3 and 3.6.2.4 )
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 39of 943.1.5 Interim PK Analysis
The dosing regimen for SC administration of I GSC 20% is based on literature data of the 
bioavailability  of subcutaneous administered IgG and p rior experience with SC I GIV-C 10% . 
The weekl y IGSC 20% dosing regimen to be evaluated herein (1.37 times the currently  stable 
IV IgG dose divided b y 4 for subjects on an every -4-week dosing schedule or divided by  
3for subjects on an every -3-week dosing schedule) is predicted to provide an steady -state 
AUC of total IgG levels not inferior to that of the prior IV dose based on the established 
bioequivalence acceptance data.
While it is believed that a dose adjustment factor of 1.37 for determining an SC dose of 
IGSC 20% (from an IV dose) is suitable, an interim PK analy sis is planned to confirm that 
this SC dose adjustment factor calculation is adequate and to allow for potential modification 
of the dose adjustment factor if necessary .  The interim PK anal ysis will be performed as 
soon as practical after the first 6 adult/adolescent subjects (age ≥12-75 years) have completed 
the stead y-state PK sampling schedule for both the IV (IV#2) and SC Phases (SC#14) of the 
trial.  Data from these 6 adult/adolescent subjects will be anal yzed using standard PK and 
statistical methodology  (Section 5 ) to evaluate and compare the AUC 0-τ’sof total IgG from 
the IV administration of IGIV -C 10% and SC administration of I GSC 20%.
The outcome of this interim analy sis will determine whether the dose adjustment factor will 
be modified. If the ratio of geometric LSM for AUC 0-7, SCvs.adjusted AUC 0-7, IV falls below 
10% of the desired 1.0 (ie, <0.9) , and the mean trough concentrations for the SC 
administration of IGSC 20% falls below the target level in more than 3 of the 6 
adult/adole scent subjects, then a dose adjustment factor increase would be implemented to 
ensure that the subjects receive an optimal IGSC 20% and are not susceptible to p otential 
bacterial infections.
If the ratio of geometric LSM for AUC 0-7, SCvs. adjusted AUC 0-7,IV, achieves ≥0.9, there will 
be no change in the dose adjustment factor.
Subjects enrolled early  in the trial may  complete their regularly  scheduled 24 weeks of SC 
therap y on the initial IGSC 20% dose before a decision from the interim analysis is availa ble. 
In this event, these subjects will continue to receive weekl y SC infusions of IGSC 20% until 
the interim PK analy sis deems whether or not a new dose adjustment factor would be 
required.  Subjects will return to the study  center every  4 weeks for evalu ation and have the 
same study  procedures performed as those at SC Week#21 with (at less frequent intervals)
safet y laboratory  assessments , IgG subclass levels, and specific antibody titers for S. 
pneumoniae , H. influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus) every  8 weeks as detailed in 
Section 3.6.2.5 .  This will continue until the interim analy sis is completed.  If the results of 
the interim anal ysis do not indicate a need for a dose adjustment factor change, subjects will 
be brought into the clinic and end of stud y procedures will be performed.
If the need for changing the dose adjustment factor arises, the revised dose adjustment factor 
will be calculated based on the ratio of the geometric L SM for AUC 0-7, SCvs. adjusted
AUC 0-7, IV with consideration of mean trough levels obtained from the SC administration of 
IGSC 20%.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 40of 94The revised dose adjustment factor will be communicated to sites and the revised dose 
adjustment factor would b e applied to the subjects’ nex t SC infusion of I GSC 20% in the 
clinic , which should be scheduled as soon as possible, upon receiving formal notification 
from the Sponsor.  These subjects will re- commence at SC#1 with the new dose adjustment 
factor. All subjects will be required to have a minimum of 24 weekl y SC infusions of 
IGSC 20% with the new dose adjustment factor. For subjects currently  in the SC Phase or 
who have completed the 24 weeks of the SC Phase and are continuing on treatment until the 
results of the interim PK anal ysis are available, subjects will be required to continue in the 
SC Phase with the revised dose adjustment factor for 24 weekly SC infusions. I n both of the 
above situations, all subjects will have a repeat complete IGSC 20% PK profile after 
12weeks on the new do se adjustment factor (same assessment as initial SC Week #13). The 
time points for PK blood sample collection will be those outlined in Figure 3-2and 
Section 3.6.2.4 .
3.2 Selection of Study  Population
Eligible participants for this study  include male or female subjects who are 2 to 75 y ears of 
age and have a diagnosis of PI  requiring IgG replaceme nt treatment. Subjects who initially  
fail to meet eligibility  criteria may  be re -screened once upon consultation with the Sponsor. 
Subjects who fail to meet eligibility  criteria upon re -screen are Screen Failures and will not 
be eligible to participate in the study .
3.2.1 Inclusion Criteria
A subject must meet all the following inclusion criteria to be eligible f or participation in this 
study :
1. Subjects between the ages of 2 and 75 years (inclusive) at Screening.
2.Documented and confirmed pre -existing diagnosis of PI  with features of
hypogammaglobulinemia requiring IgG replacement therapy  including but not limited to
the following humoral -based immunodeficiency  syndromes (eg , X-linked
agammaglobulinemia, common variable immunodeficiency ), and combined
immunodeficien cy syndrom es without ly mphocy topenia (eg , hyper immunoglobulin M
[IgM] immunodeficiency sy ndrome). Please also refer to Exclusion Criteria.
3. The subject has not had a SBI within the last 3 months prior to or during Screening.
4.Current ly on IgG replacement th erapy (via IV or SC infusion) for ≥3 months.
5.Note: This inclusion criterion is removed in protocol amendment 2.
6.Screening trough IgG levels must be ≥500 mg/dL.
Note: If Screening trough levels are not above this threshold, the subjects will be a Screen
Failure, but may  be re -screened following dose adjustment of their original IgG
replacement therap y regimen and maintaining stable dosing for a period of at least 3
months prior to Screening a second time.
7. The medical records for all subjects should be avai lable to document diagnosis, previous
infections, and treatment.
8.The subject has signed an informed consent.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 41of 94Note: The subject must sign the informed consent form (ICF) if at least 18 years old; for 
children of younger age,  the subject’s parent or legal guardian must sign the I CF and if 
appropriate/applicable, the subject must sign a Child Assent form approved b y the 
Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee (IRB/EC) per their requirements (See 
Section 7.4 ).
3.2.2 Exclusion Criteria
A subject meeting an y of the following exclusion criteria is NOT eligible f or participation in 
the study .
1.Clinical evidence of an y significant acute or chronic disease that, in the opinion of the
Investigator, may  interfere with successful completion of the trial or place the subject at
undue medical risk
2.The subject has had a kn own serious adverse reaction to immunoglobulin or an y severe
anaph ylactic reaction to blood or any  blood -derived product
3.The subject has a history  of blistering skin disease, clinically  significant
thrombocy topenia, bleeding disorder, diffuse rash, recurrent skin infections or other
disorders where SC therapy  would be contraindicated during the study
4.The subject has isolated IgG subclass deficiency , isolated specific antibody  deficiency
disorder, or transient hy pogammaglobulinemia of infancy
5.The subject has known selective immunoglobulin A (IgA) deficiency  (with or without
antibodies to IgA)
6.Females of childbearing potential who are pregnant, have a positive pregnancy test at
Screening (serum) or IV#1 Baseline (urine) (human chorionic gonadotropin [HCG] -based
assay ), are breastfeeding, or unwilling to practice a highl y effective method of
contraception (oral, injectable or implanted hormonal methods of contraception,
placement of an intrauterine device [IUD] or intrauterine s ystem [I US], condom or
occlusive cap with spermicidal foam/gel/film/cream/suppository , male sterilization, or
true abstinence) throughout the study
Note: True abstinence: When this is in line with the preferred and usual lifesty le of the
subject. (Periodic abstinence [eg , calenda r, ovulation, sy mptothermal, post- ovulation
methods], declaration of abstinence for the duration of a trial, and withdrawal are not
acceptable methods of contraception.)
7.The subject has significant proteinuria (dipstick proteinuria ≥3+ or known urinary  protein
loss > 1 g/24 h or nephrotic syndrome) and/or has a history  of acute renal failure and/or
severe renal impairment (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] or creatinine more than 2.5 times
the upper limit of normal [UL N]) and/or on dial ysis
8.The subject has Screenin g Visit values of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels exceeding more than 2.5 times the UL N for the expected
normal range for the testing laboratory .
9.The subject has hemoglobin <9 g/dL at Screening.
10.The subject has a h istory  of or current diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or
thromboembolism (eg, deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 42of 94accident or transient ischemic attack); history  refers to an incident in the y ear prior to 
Screening or 2 episodes over lifetime.
11.The subject is currently  receiving anti -coagulation therapy  which would make SC
administration inadvisable (vitamin K antagonists, nonvitamin K antagonist oral
anticoagulants [eg, dabigatran etexilate targeting Factor IIa, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, and
apixaban targeting Factor Xa], parenteral anti coagulants [eg, fondaparinux]).
12.The subject currentl y has a known h yperviscosit y syndrome.
13.The subject has an acquired medical condition that is known to cause secondary  immune
deficiency , such as chronic ly mphocy tic leukemia, ly mphoma, multiple myeloma,
chronic or recurrent neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count less than 1000/µL
[1.0x 109/L]), or human immunodeficiency  virus (HIV) infection/acquired immun e
deficiency  syndrome (AIDS).
14.The subje ct has a known previous infection with or clinical signs and s ymptoms
consistent with current hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
15.The subject (if < 18 years of age) has non- controlled arterial hy pertension at a level of
greater th an or equal to the 90thpercentile blood pressure (either s ystolic or diastolic) for
their age and height ( See Appendix 3 ) or the adult subject has non-controlled arterial
hypertension (s ystolic blood pressure >160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure
>100 mmHg)
16.The subject is receiving any  of the following medications: (a) immunosuppressants
including chemotherapeutic agents; (b) immunomodulators; ( c) long -term sy stemic
corticosteroids defined as daily  dose >1 mg of prednisone equivalent/kg/day  for
>30days.
Note: I ntermittent courses of corticosteroids of not more than 10 day s would not exclude
a subject. Inhaled or topic al corticosteroids are allow ed.
17.The subject has known substance or prescription drug abuse
18.The subject has participated in another clinical trial within 30 day s prior to Screening
(observational studies without investigative treatments [non- interventional] are
permitted) or has received any  investigational blood product with the exception of other
IgG products within the previous 3 months
19.The subject/caregiver is unwilling to comply  with any  aspect of the protocol, including
the home SC infusions, blood sampling, and completion of a SC infusion diary  for the
duration of the study
20.Mentally  challenged subjects who cannot give independent informed consent or assent
21.In the opinion of the Investigator, the subject may  have compliance problems with the
protocol and the procedures of the protocol
3.3 Treatments
3.3.1 Treatments to Be Administered
IGSC 20% ( IP) and IGIV -C 10% (study  drug) are provided by  the Sponsor for this study .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 43of 943.3.1.1 IGSC 20%
Grifols I mmune Globulin Subcutaneous (Human), 20% Capry late/Chromatography  Purified 
(IGSC 20%) is a sterile liquid formulation of immunoglobulin that ispurified from human 
plasma via a multi -step process. IGSC 20% is manufactured using the same process as for 
IGIV -C 10% (Immune Globulin I ntravenous [Human], 10% Capry late/Chromatography  
Purified [I GIV-C]), with the addition of a nanofiltration step and is further concentrated by  
ultrafiltration to a higher IgG concentration (20%). IGSC 20% vials will be supplied in a 
50mL vial size or smaller containing a 20% solution of immunoglobulin, ie, a concentr ation 
of 20 g/100 mL, with a nominal 10 grams immunoglobulin per vial.
3.3.1.2 IGIV-C10%
IGIV -C 10% is a sterile liquid formulation of immunoglobulin that ispurified from human 
plasma via a multi -step process. IGIV -C 10% is a li censed product. IGIV -C 10% vials m ay 
be supplied in the vial sizes of 10, 25, 50, 100, and 200 mL .  In this study , administration of 
IGIV -C 10% will be via the IV route only.
3.3.1.3 Labeling of Investigational Products
IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% will be labeled according to the requirements of local law and 
legislation. Label text will be approved according to agreed Grifols Therapeutics I nc. 
procedures, and a cop y of the labels will be made available to the stud y site upon request.
3.3.1.4 Storage of Investigational Products
IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% must be stored in a secure area accessible to study personnel 
authorized by  the Investigator, such as the stud y staff responsible for the preparation and 
dispensing of IP/stud y drug .
IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% must be stored at temperatures of 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46° F) 
and protected from light. Do not freeze or partiall y freeze . Investigators, or designees, are 
responsible for maintaining storage temperature records and for immediately  reporting 
deviations in temperature to the study  monitor.
Details for the storage a re located in the pharmacy  manual provided to each site and 
instructions will also be provided to participating subjects.
3.3.1.5 Preparation
The volume (ie, total infusion dose administered) of IGSC 20% to be prepared for each SC 
infusion will be individualized f or each subject based on an IV to SC dose adjustment factor 
of 1:1.37 using bod y weight -based dosing. IGIV -C 10% dose will be based on subject’s 
previous IGIV -C 10% or other IVIG product regimen. See Table 3-1.
IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% must be inspected visually  before being administered. The 
solution must not be used if turbid or if it contains visible particles. Solution which has been 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 44of 94frozen should not be used. The Investigator, or designee, is responsible for immediately  
reporting an y issues noted with I GSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% to the study  monitor.
Reference the pharmacy  manual/study  manual for detailed instructions for IGSC 20% and 
IGIV -C 10% preparati on and administration.
3.3.1.6 Accountability for Investigational Products
IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% are to be used onl y for the study in accordance with the 
directions given in this protocol and pharmacy /study  manual. The Investigator, or designee 
such as the stud ypharmacist, is responsible for the distribution of the I P/study  drug in 
accordance with directions given in the protocol and pharmacy  manual.
The Investigator, or designee such as the study  pharmacist, is responsible for maintaining 
accurate records of IGSC 20% and IGIV- C 10% for his/her site. I P/study  drug 
inventory /dispensing documentation, verify ing the receipt, dispensing, destruction or ret urn 
must be maintained and kept current by  the Investigator or designee. The inventory  must be 
made available for inspection by  the monitor. IGSC 20% and IGIV- C 10% supplies must be 
accounted for b y the monitor and inventory /dispensing logs must be verifie d by the monitor 
prior to IGSC 20% and IGIV -C 10% return or destruction. Written documentation of all used 
and unused inventory  is required. At the end of the study , a copy  of the inventory /dispensing 
log(s) will be retrieved by  the monitor and returned to Grifols Therapeutics I nc.
3.3.2 Rationale for Selection of Doses/Timing of Investigational Products
3.3.2.1 Selection of Doses and Timing of Dosing in the Study
In the current study , the initial IV to SC dose adjustment calculation formula used is: 
The selection of dosing regimen for SC administration of IGSC 20% is based on literature
data of the bioavailability of SC administered IgG and prior experience with other products 
(Section 1.3.1 ). The weekly  IGSC 20% SC dosing regimen to be evaluated herein 
(1.37 times the currently  stable IV I GIV-C 10% dose divided by  4 for subjects on an 
every -4-week dosing interval or divided by 3 for subjects on an every -3-week dosing 
interval) should provide a stead y-state AUC of total IgG levels not inferior to that of the 
approved IV dose based on the est ablished bioequivalence acceptance data.
The initial SC dose selected based on a dose adjustment factor of 1.37 will be evaluated in an 
interim PK analy sis after the first 6 adult/adolescent subjects have completed both the IV and 
SC PK sampling schedule. If the interim PK analysis suggests that modification of the SC 
dose adjustment factor is needed, a new SC dose adjustment factor will be calculated and the 
procedures in Section 3.1.5 will be followed.300 to 800 mg/kg (IV dose)
3 or 4 (regular IV dosing interval in week)× 1.37 (IV to SC dose adjustment factor)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 45of 94As described in Section 3.1 , the initial I V IGIV- C 10% dose (Run -In or IV Phase) and dosing 
interval will be individualized based on the treatment each subject is receiving for their PI at 
screening (see Table 3-1).
3.3.2.2 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
The IV and SC dose of study  drug will be individualized based on each subject’s current IgG 
regimen which is assumed to be an effective dose. Subjects are required to have been 
clinically  stable for at least 3 months on an IgG product. The IV IGIV -C 10% dose will be 
between 300 and 800 mg/kg during the Run- in phase and IV#1 and IV# 2.See Table 3-1.
Subjects currentl y on stable IV IGIV -C 10% (for at least 3 months) will receive their first IV 
dose of IGIV -
C 10% at the IV#1 visit.  Subjects currentl y on IVIG therap y other than IV 
IGIV -C 10% will receive IV IGIV- C 10% for at least 3 months (during Run -In Phase) prior 
to the I V#1 visit. Subjects currentl y on SCIG therapy, or whose IVIG dose is not stable for 
the 3 months prior to Screening, or IVIG dose is not between 300 and 800 mg/kg per infusion 
or not receiving infusions every  3 or 4 weeks at Screening will receive IV IG IV-C 10% for at 
least 4 months in Run- In Phase prior to the IV#1 visit. Subjects will return to the clinic at 
their next scheduled IV dosing interval (ie, 3 or 4 weeks later) to receive a 2nd IV IGIV- C 
10% dose (IV#2 Visit).
The first SC administered IGSC 20% will be initiated 7 day s after the 2nd IV IGIV -C 10% 
dose (at the SC Week#1 visit).  Weekly  (q 7 day s ±1 day ) SC administrations of IGSC 20% 
will continue for a tota l of 24 weeks. The weekl y SC dose will be one quarter of the current 
IV monthly  dose if the subject is on a 4 week dosing regimen or one third of the current IV 
dose if the subject is on a 3 week dosing regimen multiplied by 1.37 as previously  described.
If the interim PK anal ysis suggests that modification of the SC dose adjustment factor is 
needed, a new SC dose adjustment factor will be calculated and the procedures in 
Section 3.1.5 will be followed.
3.3.2.3 Subcutaneous Administration Procedures for IGSC 20%
The number of injection sites, infusion rate, and the specific times of the day  for the SC 
infusion may  be individualized by  the subject and Investigator. The first 3 SC infusions will 
be given under supervision in the clinic before self -administration at home will be allowed.  
The selected pump specifically  designed for SC infusions will be provided for individual use 
to each subject prior to the SC Phase and each subject will be trained thoroughl y on its u se.  
The PK focus of the study will be emphasized t o all the subjects/caregivers. Subjects will be 
instructed to closely  adhere to their individualized dosing regimen accurately  and cautioned 
not to round-up to the whole vial or to under dose.  The exact IGSC 20% dose (and dose 
volume) based on the predetermined adjustment factor and the stable IV dose of IGIV -C 10% 
willbe administered and recorded.
Details regarding infusion rate and infusion administration are located in the pharmacy /study  
manual. Subjec ts may  use the same anatomical area or rotate anatomical areas for SC 
infusions throughout the study . No more than 8 infusion sites per infusion will be used. The 
minimum distance between infusion sites is recommended to be no less than 2 inches. The 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 46of 94targe t infusion rate will be no greater than 25 mL/hour/site as tolerated by  the subject and per 
the Investigator’s discretion; the I nvestigator will tailor the infusion configuration for each 
subject. Once the target infusion rate is achieved, it should not be changed in the middle of 
an infusion unless the subject experiences tolerability  issues at that infusion rate. In the event 
that the subject is not able to tolerate the set infusion rate, the rate may  be decreased for 
better tolerability . Conversely , if the target infusion rate is well tolerated during 2 infusions ,
an increase of 20% in infusion rate and volume per site is allowed at the discretion of the 
Investigator at the time of theclinic visit.
The volume infused, number of infusion sites, infusion start date/time, infusion end 
date/time, the location(s) of infusions, and the initial and final rate of infusion for each 
infusion site, and other SC infusion information will be recorded in the SC In fusion Diary  by 
the subject/parents or legal guardians. In addition, SC infusion site reactions may  be recorded 
in the diary . Full details regarding the SC Infusion Diary  are in Section 3.6.2.4.
3.3.3 Meth od of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups
3.3.3.1 Subject Numbering
Within each study  site, subjects in the study  will receive a consecutive subject number at 
Screening Vi sit. Subject numbers are generated beginning with the study  center number 
(3digits, assigned by the Sponsor starting at 100) followed consecutivel y with a unique 
number for each subject (4 digits). For example, if the I nvestigator’s center number is 301, 
subject numbers will be 3012001 , 3012002 , 3012003 , etc., in consecutive order . Subject 
numbers, once assigned, will not be reused at an y center.
3.3.3.2 Randomization
This is a single -sequence, crossover study  with no randomization.
3.3.3.3 Blinding
This is an open -label study  with no blinding.
3.3.4 Treatment Compliance
Reasons for an y deviation from t he administration of less than 100% of all protocol -specified 
doses of IGIV -C 10% or IGSC 20% as prepared by  the pharmacist, or designee, must be 
recorded in the eCRF and in the subject’s source documents.
All IV infusions during the Run-I n and IV P hases a nd the first 3SC infusions will be 
administered in the clinic under the supervision of the treating investigator or designee.  
Subjects will be instructed on SC dosing techniques during the first 3SC dosing infusions in 
the clinic. All dose calculations will be done by theInteractive Web Response ( IWR)system 
and the dose preparation procedures will be provided to each subject for in- home SC 
administration. The actual date/clock time, location of the infusions, number of infusion 
sites, volume, and dura tion of dosing will be recorded.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 47of 94A SC I nfusion Diary  will be provided to document SC infusions self -administered away  from 
the clinic. These data will be used to calculate infusion compliance, dosing complianc e, and 
overall drug compliance.
3.4 Prior and Conco mitant Therapy
Concomitant medications must be recorded in the subject’s source documents and in the 
eCRF from time of consent , including the trade or generic names of the medication, the dose, 
the route of administration, duration, and frequency.
3.4.1 Prohibit ed Medications Prior to Study Participation
Use of the following medications, as specified below, would exclude a subject from 
participating in this study:
At the time of Screening, receiving s ystemic corticosteroids (long -term daily  doses
>1mg of prednisone equivalent/kg/day  for >30 day s) (intermittent courses of not more
than 10 day s would not exclude subject). Note: Inhaled or topical corticosteroids are
allowed.
At the time of Screening, receiving immunosuppressants including chemotherapeutic
agents orimmunomodulators
At the time of Screening, receiving anti -coagulation therap y which would make SC
administration inadvisable (vitamin K antagonists, nonvitamin K antagonist oral
anticoagulants [eg, dabigatran etexilate targeting Factor IIa, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, and
apixaban targeting Factor Xa], parenteral anti coagulants [eg, fondaparinux]).
3.4.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications during the Study
Use of the following during the stud y (from Screening to SC Week#25 Final Visit) is 
prohibited:
Any IgG replace ment therapy  other than IGIV -C 10% or IGSC 20% provided in this
study once the first dose of study  treatment is administered
Corticosteroids in excess of stipulations delineated in Section 3.4.1
Anti- coagulant therap y as outlined in Section 3.4.1
Immunosuppressants including chemotherapeutic agents or immunomodulators
Investigational products not part of this study
3.4.3 Restricted Concomitant Medications during the Study
For subjects receiving a permissible stable dose of sy stemic steroids ( as defined in 
Section 3.4.1 ),it is recommended to maintain the same dose throughout the study .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 48of 94Themedications listed below are not allowed during the stud y as premedication to an SC
infusion; however these medications are allowed during the stud y for general use (eg, to treat 
an AE):
Oral medications:
Ibuprofen
Acetaminophen
Antihistamines
Topical me dications:
Steroids
Antihistamines
3.4.4 Drug Interactions
In the setting of a PI disease state, live viral vaccines have various contraindications and 
specific risks/degrees of effectiveness dependent on the ty pe/category  of the immune 
deficiency  (Medical Advi sory Committee of the Immune Deficiency  Foundation [ 35]). 
Passive transfer of antibodies from IGIV -C 10% or IGSC 20% may  transiently  interfere with 
the immune response to live viral vaccines such as measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella in 
the normal host with an intact immune system. Best medical practices should be followed 
regarding immunization requirements, particularl y for children during the c ourse of this 
protocol.
3.5 Stud y Variables
3.5.1 Primary Pharmacokinetic Variables
AUC in the IV P hase: Stead y-state AUC of total IgG over a regular dosing interval (τ),
either every  3 weeks or every  4 weeks (ie, AUC 0-τ, IVor AUC 0-21days ,IVor AUC 0-28days,I V,
respectivel y) in PI subjects
AUC in the SC P hase: Stead y-state AUC of total IgG over a weekl y SC dosing interval
(τ) (ie, AUC 0-τ,SC or AUC 0-7days,SC ) in PI  subjects
3.5.2 Secondary Pharmacokinetic Variables
Mean stead y-state trough (pre -dose) concentration of total IgG following IV
administration of IGIV -C 10% or SC administration of IGSC 20%
3.5.3 Exploratory Variables
tmax(time to reach C max) and C maxin PI  subjects at steady  state
Trough levels of IgG subc lasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 49of 94Antibody  levels for S. pneumoniae , H.influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus)
Rate of SBI s
All infections of an y kind (serious/nonserious including acute sinusitis, exacerbation of
chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea,
etc.) as determined by  the Investigator
Validated infections documented by  positive radiograph, fever (>38°C oral or >39°C
rectal), culture, or diagnostic testing for microorganisms , eg, bacterial, viral, fungal, or
protozoal pathogens (for instance, rapid streptoc occal antigen detection test)
Number of day s on antibiotics (including oral, parenteral, oral plus parenteral,
prophy lactic and therapeutic). Use of prophy lactic antibiotics will be distinguished from
antibiotics fo r treatment of acute infection.
Number of hospitalizations due to infection
Number of day s of work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections and their
treatment
Trough measles antibod y titers (functional assay) for informational purposes
3.5.4 Safety Variables
The following safety variables wil l be assessed in this study :
Adverse events (AEs), suspected adverse drug reactions (suspected ADRs), adverse
reactions (ARs), serious AEs (SAEs), and discontinuations due to AEs and SAEs
Note: All infusion site reactions will be recorded in the eCRF. For local infusion site
reactions where the s ymptoms/signs lead to infusion interruption or discontinuation,
require concomitant medication, or have an impact on the general condition of the subject
as judged b y the Investigator, they will be considered as AEs .
Vital signs during clinic visits ( systolic blood pressure [SBP] and diastolic blood pressure
[DBP], heart rate [HR], temperat ure [T], respiratory  rate [RR])
Physical Assessments: phy sical exams will be recorded as normal or abnormal, according
to the phy sician’s judgment criteria, and findings will be recorded.
Laboratory  assessments including chemistry , hematology , and urinal ysis.
Total number of non -serious infections and proportion of subjects who experience non -
serious infections of an y kind (includin g acute sinusitis, exacerbation of chronic sinusitis,
acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea, etc.) as determined
by the Investigator.
3.6 Assessments
3.6.1 Assessment Periods
Study  phases in this study  are described in Section 3.1 . The study  consists of Screening (up 
to 28days), Run- In (3 -4 months), I V (4-5 weeks), and SC P hases (24 weeks). The total 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 50of 94duration of st udy participation may  be up to 50weeks.  If there is a revision to the I V to SC 
dose adjustment factor, there may be an additional 24 weeks added to the study  participation.
3.6.2 Observations and Measurements
The following sections describe the procedures/assessments to take place at each stu dy visit. 
See the Schedule of Study  Procedures table in Appendix 1 for a summary of study visits and 
the procedures to be conducted at each visit. For most clinic visits, a ± 1 day  window is 
allowed. For the serial PK sampling visits, see specific PK windows in Section 3.6.2.3 and 
3.6.2.4 . If there are logistical issues requiring schedule adjustment for weekly  subcutaneous 
IGSC 20% administration, SC# 1 may  be scheduled 6 to 9 day s after IV#2.   The SC#2 and 
SC#3 visits must be performed with a +1 day  visit window (ie, these 2 visits cannot be 
performed 1 day  early). Unscheduled visits may  be conducted if deemed necessary  for the 
purpose of subject safet y.
3.6.2.1 Screening Visit
The subject’s medical records will be reviewed to confirm a documented diagnosis of PI. 
Subjects who are interested in participating will undergo the following tests and procedures:
Written informed consent and assent if applicable will be obtained prior to initiation of
any screening procedures
Eligibility  will be checked by  careful assessment of the inclusion and exclusion criteria
Demographics and medical history  will be recorded including age, gender, age at
diagnosis of PI, and past 12 months of previous/current IgG treatments. Record relevant
medical history  defined as any  history  impactful on the subject’s condition in terms of
current functioning, disability , treatment, or management.
A full phy sical exam will be performed (e xcluding breast and genitourinary  exam)
Wells Score will be performed as a pretreatment benchmark for all subjects (Appendix 4
provides Wells Score and management details ; see also Section 3.6.3.3 )
Chest X -ray (if chest X -ray or CT have not been performed withi n past 6 months prior to
screening) Note: at least one radiographic view (anterior -posterior [AP] or posterior -
anterior [PA] ) is required )
Vital signs: SBP and DBP , HR, T, RR after 5 minutes at rest
Body weight and height
Blood and urine samples for clini cal laboratory  assessments (eg, hematology , clinical
chemistry , special tests, urinaly sis, pregnancy  testing) (see Section 3.6.3).
-Hematology : Hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, red blood cell count including red
blood cell morphology , white blood cell count with differential; ab solute reticulocy te 
count (ARC)
-Clinical chemistry : Sodium, potassium, creatinine, chloride, calcium, BUN, 
bicarbonate, albumin, lactate deh ydrogenase (LDH),  AST, ALT, alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP), glucose, total bilirubin, indirect bilirubin
- Special tests: Direct antiglobulin ( DAT ), serum free hemoglobin, and haptoglobin
- D- dimer sample as a pretreatment benchmark for all subjects
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 51of 94-Urinaly sis: pH, protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin, nitrites, urobilinogen, blood, 
leukocy te esterase (with microscopic examination of urine sediment if abnormal)
-Serum pregnancy  test (potential child -bearing females only )
Total IgG trough level determination: participants will be required to hav e a screening
total IgG level of ≥500 mg/dL to enroll
Prior and c oncomitant medications
Adverse events and history  of serious infections
Subjects who are eligible for study  entry  will have their first Run -In Phase visit or IV Phase 
(IV#1 )visit scheduled to coincide with the date for their next I V or SC infusion according to
their regular dosing interval.
3.6.2.2 Run-In Phase (If Required) –IV Administration of IGIV -C 10%
The following procedures and tests will be completed at each visit (every 3 or 4 weeks) for 
those subjects who are required to enter either the 3- month or 4- month Run- in Phase (see 
Section 3.1.2 and Appendix 1 ):
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP and DBP, HR, T, RR )
Body weight
Predose blood draw for trough total IgG prior to IV infusion (within 0.5 hour pr ior to the
start of infusion) .
IV IGIV-C 10% infusions
Adverse events including SBIs (subjects with an SBI will discontinue from the study )
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category *) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .(*The site is to
record non -serious infections [ by category ]which include infections of an y kind
including for example acute sinusitis, exacerbation of chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media,
pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea, etc., which will be recorded as an AE
with the I nvestigator answering the following question affirmativel y in the eCRF: “Is this
an infection? (verbatim term delineating nature of infection). Also record validated
infections documented by positive radiogra ph, fever [>38°C oral or >39°C rectal],
culture, or diagnostic testing for microorganisms eg, bacterial, viral, fungal, or protozoal
pathogens [for instance, rapid streptococcal antigen test]. The specific evaluations
performed to validate infections must be recorded in the eCRF.)
Concomitant medications
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
3.6.2.3 IV Phase –IV Administration of IGIV -C 10%
IV#1 VISIT &PKASSESSMENT FOR IVDOSING
The following procedures and tests (Also see Appendix 1 ) will be completed for all subjects 
at the IV#1 Baseline visit:
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 52of 94Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Body weight and height
Predose la boratory  assessments (as outlined in Screening Visit [Section 3.6.2.1 ] including
hematology , clinical chemistry , special tests, and u rinaly sis) prior to IV infusion
Predose blood draw for trough total IgG, IgG subclass, and antibody titer levels for
S.pneumoni ae, H.influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus) prior to IV infusion (within 0.5 hour
prior to the start of infusion).
Predose urine pregnancy  test (child- bearing potential females onl y)
IV IGIV-C 10% infusion and initiate serial PK sampling as detailed below
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs (subjects with an SBI will discontinue from the study )
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitali zations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
The PK sampling for IV administered IGIV -C 10% will commence at the IV#1 (IV Phase) 
visit for all enrolled subjects .  Subjects who are between 2 and 5 yearsof age will undergo an 
abbreviated sampling schedule for serial PK sampling. 
IV PK Sampling f or subjects >5 years of age :Blood draws for PK assessment will be 
taken at the following time points:
Prior to IV#1 (IV 
Phase) infusion (within 0.5 hour of the start of infusion)
Immediately  at the completion of IV infusion
1 h after completion of infusion
3 to 16 hours post-infusion with a window of 2 hours around the 16 -hour time point if
required b y site
1 day  ± 2 h  post -infusion
2 day s ± 2 h post -infusion
3 day s ± 4 h post -infusion
5 day s ± 4 h post -infusion
7 day s ± 1 day post-infusion
14 day s ± 1 day  post -infusion
21 day s ± 1 day  post -infusion (last sample for subjects on a 3 -week dosing schedule and
is also the pre -dose trough sample for IV#2)
28 day s ± 1 day   post -infusion (only  for subje cts on a 4- week dosing schedule and is also
the pre -dose trough sample for IV#2)
IV PK Sampling for subjects ≤5 years of age: Blood draws for PK assessment s will be 
taken at the following time points:
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 53of 94Prior to I V #1 (IV phase) infusion (within 0.5 hour of the start of infusion)
1 h after completion of infusion
3 to 16 hours post- infusion with a window of 2 hours around the 16 -hour time point if
required b y site
2 day s ± 2 h post -infusion
7 day s± 1 day  post -infusion
21 day s± 1 day  post -infusion (last sample for subjects on a 3 -week dosing schedule and
is also the pre -dose trough sample for IV#2)
28 day s± 1 day  post -infusion ( only for subjects on an every -4-week dosing schedule and
is also the pre -dose trough sample for IV#2 )
The actual date/clock time of the start and end of the IV infusion, the volume/amount of dose 
infused, and the rate of infusion will be recorded.
All efforts will be made to obtain all PK samples in the time frame specified above.  The 
final PK blood sample will be drawn prior to the subject receiving the next dose of study  
drug (ie, the second IV dose) in the clinic . If an outside agency  is utilized in sample 
collection, the sample will be drawn and processed per protocol instructio ns to ensure sample 
integrit y.
IV#2 VISIT
This visit for the second IV infusion (IV#2) will be conducted at the next scheduled dosing 
interval (ie, 3 or 4 weeks from IV#1).  The following procedures and tests will be performed 
at the IV#2 visit:
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP and DBP, HR, T, RR )
Predose blood draw for trough total IgG, IgG subclass, and antibody titer levels for S.
pneumoniae, H.influenzae, and C. tetani (tetanus) prior to SC infusion (within 0.5 hour
prior to the start of infusion).
Note: This trough IgG sample is the same one that is used for PK blood draw at the 21 or
28 day  post -infusion time points.
Pre-dose measles antibody  titer
IV IGIV-C 10% infusion
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs (subjects with an SBI will discontinue from the study )
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizati ons due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Subjects will return to the clinic 7 day s after the IV#2 visit to start the SC Phase of the stud y 
which includes weekly  infusions of IGSC 20% that will continue for a total 24 weeks.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 54of 943.6.2.4 SC Phase –SC Administration of IGSC 20%
CONSID ERATIONS F OR SCADMINISTRATION
The first 3 weekly  doses of SC study  drug will be administered in the clinic by  medical site 
personnel.  During these clinic visits, subjects will be instructed and informed regarding all 
aspects of the techniques and procedures needed for self -administration of study  drug (which 
is to begin at SC Week #4).  The SC dose calculations will be performed by stud y clinic 
personnel and will be verified (double- checked) by  another study  staff member. The exact 
SC dose volume to be administered and rate of infusion will be provided to each subject by  
the clinic personnel. The number and location of SC infusion sites will be determined b y the 
subjects in consultation with the investigator.
SC infusion diary : An IGSC 20% infusion diary  will be pr ovided to each subject prior to the 
first IGSC 20% infusion which may be used to record items including but not limited to: 
infusion site reactions, concomitant medications (including antibiotics [prophy lactic and 
therapeutic]), and details of study  drug a dministration (location and number of sites, 
date/clock time of start and end of infusion, dose/volume of each SC dose, duration and rates 
of infusion). The SC infusion diary  may  also be used to record day s of missed 
work/school/daily  activities due to inf ections and related treatment.
Note :  All infusion site reactions will be recorded. For the subset of local infusion site
reactions where the s ymptoms/signs lead to infusion interruption or discontinuation, require 
concomitant medication, or have an impact on the general condition of the subject as judged 
by the Investigator, these will be considered as AEs.
SCWEEK #1CLINIC VISIT
Subjects with an SBI identified prior to SC#1 administration will discontinue study . The 
following procedures and tests will be completed at the SC Week #1 visit:
A full phy sical exam prior to IGSC 20% infusion (excluding breast and genitourinary
exam)
Predose Wells Score will be performed as a benchmark prior to first IGSC 20% dose for
all subjects ( Appendix 4 provides Wells Score and management details; see also
Section 3.6.3.3 )
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Body weight (will be used for SC dose calculation)
Predose laboratory  assessments (as outlined in Screening Visit [Section 3.6.2.1 ] including
hematology , clinical chemistry ,special tests, and urinaly sis)
Predose D -dimer sample as a benchmark prior to first I GSC 20% infusion for all subjects
Predose virus safety  retain samples
Collection of virus safet y retain samples prior to IGSC 20% infusion as detailed in
Table 3-2. Collect samples but test only  if the subject exhibits clinical signs and
symptoms consistent with hepatitis A virus (HAV), HBV, HCV, HIV, or parvovirus B19
(B19V) infection while participating in the study .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 55of 94Note: For children at the discretion of the Investigator, virus safety  retain samples may  be 
drawn 1 or 2 days prior to SC Week#1 instead of combining with other blood draws on a 
single day . Collect edsamples will be testedonly if the subject exhibits clinical signs and 
symptoms consistent with HAV, HBV, HCV, HIV, or B19V infection while participating 
in the study .
SC infusion of I GSC 20%
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
IGSC 20% dosage (mg/kg) will be based on the subject’s prior IgG replacement regimen
and current bod y weight as described in Section 3.3.
Site personnel will train subjects/caregivers how to administer IGS C 20% using an
infusion SC pump
Train and distribute SC Infusion Diary with subject s/caregivers (See Section 3.6.2.4 )
POST SC #1DAY 2-4BLOOD SAMPLING VISIT ONLY
Obtain a sample for DAT, serum free hemoglobin, and haptoglobin 2-4 days post SC#1.
No other assessments are needed for this blood draw visit .
SCWEEKS #2, #3 CLINIC VISITS
The objective of these 2 visits is for safety  monitoring ,for the subject/caregiver to self-
administer SC infusions at theclinic ,and for additional self-SC administration training and 
support by  the clinical site staff to assure capability  for full independent home administration.
Abbreviated ph ysical exam defined as targeted to sy mptoms and to include examination
of heart, lungs, ears/nose/throat, an d with inspection of previous injection sites , and
Specific Signs/Sy mptoms Check for DVT or pulmonary  embolus ( PE).
Ifthe following specific signs/sy mptoms are present ,perform Wells Score and blood
draw for D- dimer testing (Appendix 4 ;see also Section 3.6.3.3):
a.Clinical suspicion of possible DVT with unilateral symptomatic leg swelling,
accompanied b y any of the following pain, warmth, and/or redness
b. M edical suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or worsening
dyspnea, tach ypnea, chest pain, sy ncope, and cough in the appropriate clinical settin g
(cough should not be due to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphy sema], or
angiotensin- converting enzy me inhibitors)
c.Any single alarm s ymptom such as hemopty sis or cy anosis (36,37,38)
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 56of 94Predose Special tests (DAT, serum free hemoglobin, haptoglo bin) will be performed at
both SC Week #2 and SC Week #3 visits. (These visits represent a 7 -day time point after
the prior IGSC 20% infusion) . Note that a dditional special tests (DAT, serum free
hemoglobin, haptoglobin) will be performed 2-4 days post SC #2 only (also noted below
as a separate Blood Sampling Visit).
Observe subject/caregiver self -administration of SC inf usion of I GSC 20% in the clinic
Note: Site personnel will observe (and re -train if needed)  subjects/caregivers on
administration I GSC 20% using the infusion SC pump
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Review SC infusion diary and infusion details with subjects/caregivers
POST SC #2DAY 2-4BLOOD SAMPLING VISIT ONLY
Obtain a sample for DAT, serum free hemoglobin, and haptoglobin 2-4 days post SC#2.
No other assessments are neede dfor this blood draw visit .
SCWEEKS #5, #9, #17, AND#21CLINIC VISITS
The following procedures and tests will be completed at the SC Weeks #5, #9, #17, and 
#21visits:
Abbreviated ph ysical exam with i nspection of SC injection sites , and Specific
Signs/Sy mptoms Check .
Ifthe following S pecific signs/sy mptoms are present ,perform Wells Score and blood
draw for D-dimer testing ( Appendix 4 ;see also Section 3.6.3.3):
a.Clinical suspicion of possible DVT with unilateral symptomatic leg swelling,
accompanied b y any of the following pain, warmth, and/or redness
b. M edical suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or worsening
dyspnea, tach ypnea, chest pain, sy ncope, and cough in the appropriate clinical setting
(cough should not be due to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphy sema], or
angiotensin- converting enzy me inhibitors)
c.Any single alarm s ymptom such as hemopty sis or cy anosis (36,37,38)
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP and DBP, HR, T, RR )
Body weight (will be used for SC dose calculation)
Height SC Week #9 , SC Week #17, and SC Week #21 only
SC Week #9,  SC Week#17only: Predose laboratory  assessments drawn prior to SC
infusion (as outlined in Screening Visit [ Section 3.6.2.1 ] including hematology , clinical
chemistry ,special tests, and urinaly sis)
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 57of 94Predose blood draw for trough total IgG (all visits)
SC Week #9, SC Week#17 only: IgG subclass, and antibody titer l evels prior to SC
infusion (within 0.5 hour pr ior to the start of infusion).
Review SC infusion diary and infusion d etails with subjects/caregivers
Observe subject/caregiver self -administration of SC infusion of I GSC 20% in the clinic
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
AWAY FROM CLINIC (SCWEEKS #4, #6, #7, #8, #10, #11, #12, #15, #16, #18, #19, #20,
#22, #23, #24)
Subjects will begin home self-administration o f SC infusions of I GSC 20% beginning with 
the 4th SC infusion. If it is felt by  the subject or Investigator that the subject requires 
additional educational training for administering the study  drug SC, additional clinic visits 
will be scheduled to further train the subject.  Subjects will be directed to adhere closely  to 
their individualized dosing regimen and cautioned not to round- up to the whole vial or under 
dose.
SC infusion diary : The IGSC 20% infusion diary  may  be used to record items including but 
not limited to: infusion site reactions, concomitant medications (including antibiotics 
[prophy lactic and therapeutic]), and details of study drug administration (location and 
number of sites, date/clock time of start and end of infusion, dose/volume of ea ch SC dose, 
duration and rates of infusion). The SC infusion diary  may  also be used to record day s of 
missed work/school/daily activities due to inf ections and related treatment.
SCWEEK #13CLINIC VISIT &PKASSESSMENT FOR SCDOSING
The following procedur es and tests will be completed at the SC Week #13 visit:
Abbreviated ph ysical exam with inspection of SC injection sites and Specific
Signs/Sy mptoms Check .
Ifthe following S pecific signs/sy mptoms are present perform Wells Score and blood
draw for D- dimer testing (Appendix 4 ;see also Section 3.6.3.3):
a.Clinical suspicion of possible DVT with unilateral symptomatic leg swelling,
accompanied b y any of the following pain, warmth, and/or redness
b. M edical suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or worsening
dyspnea, tach ypnea, chest pain, sy ncope, and cough in the appropriate clinical setting
(cough should not be due to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphy sema], or
angiotensin- converting enzy me inhibitors)
c.Any single alarm s ymptom such as hemopty sis or cy anosis (36,37,38)
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 58of 94Predose blood draw for trough total IgG
Body weight
Observe patient/caregiver self- administration of SC infusion of I GSC 20% in the clinic
and initiate serial PK sampling as detailed below
Conc omitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Review SC infusion diary and infusion de tails with subjects/caregivers.
PK samples associated with the SC administration of IGSC 20% will commence at the SC 
Week #13 visit for all enrolled subjects including those ≤5 years of age .  Subjects between 
the ages of 2 to 5 years of age will undergo an abbreviated schedule for serial PK sampling.  
Blood draws for PK assessment for subjects >5 years of age will be taken at the following 
times:
Prior to the 13th SC infusion (within 0.5 h of the start of infusion and this is the same
sample for predose trough total IgG level)
1 day  ± 4 h  post -infusion
3 day s ±  4 h post -infusion
4 day s ± 4 h post -infusion
5 day s ± 4 h post -infusion
7 day s ± 1 day  post -infusion (within 0.5 hour prior to the 1 4th SC dose) for IgG trough
level
Blood draws for PK assessment for subjects ≤5 years of age will be taken at the following 
times:
Prior to the 13th SC infusion (within 0.5 h of the start of infusion and this is the same
sample for predose trough total IgG level)
3 day s ±  4 h post -infusion
7 day s ± 1 day  post -infusion (within 0.5 hour prior to the 14th SC dose) for IgG trough
level
The actual date/clock time of the start and end of the SC infusion, volume/amount of dose 
infused, rate of infusion, and location and number of infusion sites will be recorded.  The 
actual date/clock time for each blo od sample for either PK or trough level assessment will be 
collected and recorded. The interim PK samples may  be obt ained at an alternate location. If 
an outside agency  is utilized for sample collection, the sample will be drawn and processed 
per protocol and laboratory  manual instructions.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 59of 94SCWEEK #14CLINIC VISIT
The following procedures and tests will be comp leted at the SC Week #14 visit:
Abbreviated ph ysical exam with i nspection of SC injection sites and Specific
Signs/Sy mptoms Check .
Ifthe following S pecific signs/sy mptoms are present perform Wells Score and blood
draw for D- dimer testing (Appendix 4 ;see also Section 3.6.3.3):
a.clinical suspicion of possible DVT with unilateral symptomatic leg swelling,
accompanied b y any of the following pain, warmth, and/or redness
b.medica l suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or worsening
dyspnea, tach ypnea, chest pain, sy ncope, and cough in the appropriate clinical setting
(cough should not be due to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphy sema], or
angiotensin- conv erting enzy me inhibitors)
c.Any single alarm s ymptom such as hemopty sis or cy anosis (36,37,38)
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Predose blood draw for trough total IgG prior to SC infusio n (within 0.5 hour prior to the
start of infusion). Note: This trough IgG sample is the same one that is used for PK blood
draw at 7 day s post -infusion timepoint (SC Week#13).
Observe subject/caregiver self -administration of SC infusion of I GSC 20% in the clinic
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) and antibiotic treatment as detailed in
Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Review SC Infusion Diary  and infusion details with subjects/caregivers
3.6.2.5 Monthly Extension Visits
The monthly  extension visits will occur only  for subjects enrolled earl y in the trial who may 
complete their regularl y scheduled 24 weeks of SC therap y on the initial IGSC 20% dose 
before a decision from the interim PK anal ysis is available. In this event, these subjects will 
continue to receive weekly  SC infusions of IGSC 20% until the interim PK anal ysis deems 
whether or not a new dose adjustment factor would be required.  Subjects will return to the 
study  center every  4 weeks for evaluation and have the same study  procedures performed as 
those at SC Week#21. At every  8 weeks, safety laboratory  assessments, IgG subclass levels, 
and specific antibody titers for S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus) will be 
performed.  This will continue until the interim PK analysis is completed (See Section 3.1.5 ).
The following procedures and tests will be completed at the Monthly  Extension Visit:
Abbreviated ph ysical exam with i nspection of SC injection sites and Specific
Signs/Sy mptoms Check .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 60of 94Ifthe following S pecific signs/sy mptoms are present perform Wells Score and blood 
draw for D- dimer testing (Appendix 4 ;see also Section 3.6.3.3):
a.Clinical suspicion of possible DVT with unilateral symptomatic leg swelling,
accompanied b y any of the following pain, warmth, and/or red ness 
b. M edical suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or worsening
dyspnea, tach ypnea, chest pain, sy ncope, and cough in the appropriate clinical setting 
(cough should not be due to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphy sema], or 
angiotensin- converting enzy me inhibitors) 
c.Any single alarm s ymptom such as hemopty sis or cy anosis (36,37,38)
Vital signs (pre -infusion: SBP ,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Body weight (will be used for SC dose calculation) and height
Every 8 week intervals only :Predose laboratory  assessments drawn prior to SC infusion
(as outlined in screening visit [ Section 3.6.2.1 ] including hematology , clinical chemistry ,
special tests, and urinal ysis)and IgG subc lass, and antibody  titers for S. pneumoniae,
H.influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus) prior to SC infusion (within 0.5 hour prior to the
start of infusion)
Predose blood draw for trough total IgG
Observe subject/caregiver self -administration of SC infusion of I GSC 20% in the clinic
Concomit ant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Review SC infusion diary and infusion details with subjects/caregivers
If the results of the interim PK analy sis do not indicate a need for a dose adjustment factor 
change, subjects will be brought into the clinic (within one week following the confirmation 
of the initial dose adjustment factor )and end of study procedures will be performed.
3.6.2.6 Final Visit (W eek #25)/Early Termination Clinic Visit
The Final Visit (Week #25) visit will be scheduled one week after the final SC infusion.  If a 
subject discontinues at any  point during the study after the first Run -In visit or IV#1 for those 
who enter the IV Phase directly , the subject will be requested to return to the Investigator’s 
study  site for an Earl y Termination Visit. The assessments at this visi t will be the same as the 
Final Visit in the case a subject who prematurel y discontinues the study .
The following procedures and tests will be completed (note that no stud y-related infusion 
will be scheduled):
Full phy sical exam (excludes breast and genito urinary  exam)
Vital signs ( SBP,DBP, HR, T, RR )
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 61of 94Laboratory  assessments (as outlined in Screening Visit [Section 3.6.2.1 ] including
hematology , clinical chemistry ,special tests, and urinaly sis)
Blood draw for trough total IgG, IgG subclass, and antibody  titers for S. pneumoniae, H.
influenzae , and C. tetani (tetanus)
Serum pregnancy  test (for females of childbearing potential)
Measles antibod y titer
Concomitant medications
Adverse events including SBIs
Note: Record an y SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and
non-serious infections (by category ) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Record day s lost from work/school/daily  activities due to infections and treatment
Review SC infusion diary and in fusion d etails with subjects/caregivers
3.6.3 Description of Laboratory Tests and Procedures
Detailed descriptions of laboratory  test procedures are located in the study  Laboratory  
Manual. Table 3-2provides a summary  of the laboratory  tests conducted for this study .
Table 3-2Name, Description, and Location of Laboratory  Tests and 
Procedures
Test Panel Description Location
Hem atologyaHem oglobin, hematocrit, platelets, red blood cell count including 
red blood cell morphology, white blood cell count with 
differential; ARCCentral
Additional special testsaDAT, serum free hemoglobin, haptoglobin Central 
D-dimer D-dimer Central
ChemistryaSodium, potassium, creatinine, chloride, calcium, BUN, 
bicarbonate, albumin, LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, glucose, total 
bilirubin, indirect bilirubinCentral
IgG levelsa Total IgG levels will consist of trough (pre -dose) measurements 
in all subjects, and for PK profiling of IGIV -C 10% (IV Phase) 
and IGSC 20% (SC Phase)Central
IgG subclass levels and 
antibody titersaMeasurement of IgG subclasses (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4). 
Measurement of levels of selected specific antibodies against H. 
influenzae, anti-pneumococcal polysaccharide ( S. pneumoniae), 
and C. tetani (tetanus) Specialty
Trough measles antibody 
titers (functional assay)aTrough samples for measles antibody titer will be collected at 
IV#2 (before the first SC infusion of IGSC 20%) and at SC 
Week#25Specialty
Serum pregnancy testaQualitative serum β-HCG for females of child -bearing potential 
will be performed at Screening and Final VisitCentral
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 62of 94Table 3-2Name, Description, and Location of Laboratory  Tests and 
Procedures
Test Panel Description Location
Urine pregnancy test Qualitative urine pregnancy test for females of child -bearing 
potential will be performed at IV #1 BaselineLocal
Viral nucleic acid 
amplification technology 
(NAT )testinga, bSC Week #1prior to IGSC 20% infusion :
Collect retain samples for hepatitis A virus (HAV) RNA, HBV 
DNA, HCV RNA, HIV RNA, and parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA 
testingCentral
Viral serology testinga, bSC Week #1prior to IGSC20% infusion :
Collect retain samples for hepatitis A antibody differential 
(IgM/IgG), hepatitis B core antibody differential (IgM/IgG), 
hepatitis C antibody, HIV -1/-2 + Group O antibody, and B19V 
antibody differential (IgM/IgG) testingCentral
UrinalysisaMicroscopic evaluation is done only with cause.
pH, protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin, nitrites, urobilinogen, 
blood, leukocyte esterase (with microscopic examination of the 
urine if abnormal)Central
aSamples collected for laboratory analyses that are non -analyzable due to any factor (ie, lost, quantity 
not sufficient, laboratory error) need to be recollected by contacting the subject and arranging for re -
sampling.
bSee Section 3.6.3.2 for details.
3.6.3.1 Assessment and Recording of Infections
The site is to record non -serious infections (b y category ), which include infections of any  
kind including for example acute sinusitis, ex acerbation of chronic sinusitis, acute otitis 
media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea, etc., which will be recorded as an 
AE with the Investigator answering the following question affirmativel y in the eCRF: “Is this 
an infection? ”(verbatim term delineating nature of infection). Also record validated 
infections documented by positive radiograph, fever (>38°C oral or >39°C rectal), culture, or 
diagnostic testing for microorganisms eg, bacterial, viral, fungal, or protozoal pathogens (for 
instance, rapid streptococcal antigen test). The specific evaluations performed to validate 
infections must be recorded in the eCRF.
3.6.3.2 Virus Safety Testing
Virus safet y (viral NAT and viral serology) retain samples collected at SC Week#1 prior to 
IGSC 20% infusi onwill be tested only  if the subject exhibits clinical signs and sy mptoms 
consistent with HAV, HBV, HCV, HIV, or B19V infection while participating in the study . 
Virus safet y samples will be retained until all analyses in support of the study are complete . 
Additional blood samples for viral NAT and viral serology  testing may  be collected and 
tested during the study  only  if the subject exhibits clinical signs and s ymptoms consistent 
with HAV, HBV, HCV, HIV, or B19V infection while participating in the study . Note: For 
pediatric subjects, at the discretion of the Investigator, virus safety  retain samples may  be
drawn 1 or 2 day sprior to SC Week#1 instead of combining with other blood draws on a 
single day .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 63of 943.6.3.3 D-dimer and Wells Score
The Wells Score for DVT and PE with associated citations is described in Appendix 4 which 
provides full details for assigning point score for each of these individual condition s. At 
Screening and prior to administering IGSC 20% for the first time at the SC Week #1 Clinic 
Visit ,Wells Score and blood draw for D -dimer will be performed to establish a pretreatment 
benchma rk (prior to receiving IGIV- C 10% and pr ior to beginning IGSC 20%, respectively ).
At subsequent visits during the SC Phase, the Wells Score and blood draw for D -dimer will 
be performed only if the abbreviated ph ysical exam and Specific Signs/S ymptoms Check 
(defined in Section 3.6.2.4) raise s any clinical/medical concerns regarding possible presence 
of DVT or PE. 
As delineated in Appendix 4 , any subject with a total Wells prediction score >1 for the DVT
assessment or >4 for the PE assessment should have further diagnostic testing per study  site 
standard of care if medically  indicated -unless the D -dimer is negative since this test has a 
high negative predictive value.  If the D -dimer is positive at any  time after the Screening time 
point (ie, above Screening value, exceeding cutoff range of the reporting laboratory ), redraw 
a blood sample for repeat D -dimer testing at the central laboratory  within one week to 
confirm. In all situations, the Investigator should use best medical judgment to evaluate the 
subject as medicall y indicated.
3.7 Removal of Subjects
Subjects will withdraw or be withdrawn from the study for the following reasons:
At their own request or at the request of their legally  acceptable representative
If, in the Investigator's opinion, continuation in the study  would be detrimental to the
subject's well -being
At the specific request of the Sponsor
Also, subjects willbe withdrawn from I P/study  drug or the study  for the following reasons :
Subjects with an occurrence of a concomitant disease, or an y medical condition which,
either because of its severity  or duration or necessary  change in treatment, contravenes
the condition of the study or puts the subj ect at unnecessary  risk or harm
Subje cts with an occurrence of an AE which in the opinion of the Investigator and/or
subject requires termination of treatment
Subjects who develop an SBI prior to the first dose of IGSC 20%
Subjects who are noncompliant with the protocol per the Investigator’s discretion
Pregnancy
In all cases, the reason for withdrawal must be recorded in the eCRF and in the subject's 
source documentation.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 64of 94If a subject discontinues study  after receiving IGIV -C 10% but prior to receiving the first 
dose of IGSC 20%, an addition al subject may  be recruited into the study  to assure that 30 
adults and 12 children complete IGSC 20% treatment .
3.8 Follow -up of Subjects Withdrawn from Study
Subjects who receive an y amount of I P/study  drug and discontinue early  from the study  will 
be reques ted to return clinic to have all assessments completed for the Early  Termination 
Visit (see Section 3.6.2.6 and Appendix 1 ) as close as practical to 1 week after their last 
administration of the I P/study  drug .
3.9 Premature Termination of Study /Closure of Center
The Sponsor, I RB/EC, and/or regulatory  authorities have the right to close this study  or a 
study  center, and the Investigator/Sponsor has the right to close a center, at any  time, 
although this should occur only  after consultation among involved parties. The I RB/EC must 
be informed. Should the study /center be closed prematurel y, all stud y materials (except 
documentation that has to remain stored at site) must be returned to the Sponsor. The 
Investigator will retain all other documents until notification given b y the Sponsor for 
destruction.
A study  center c an be closed for the following reasons:
Lack of enrollment
Non-compliance with the requirements of the study protocol
Non-compliance with International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical Practice
(ICH GCP)
STOPPING RULES FOR THE STUDY AS A W HOLE :
As a conservative measure, if 5 subjects on IGSC 20% develop an SAE of exactly  the same 
type (ie, the same MedDRA [Medical Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities] preferred term) 
which is not an infection or manifestation of an underly ing disorder documented in medical 
history , then this would constitute an unanticipated clustering which could signal a potential 
safety concern. If this situation were to arise, the Sponsor will constitute a Safety  Review 
Committee (SRC) whose members (from Grifols) will be impartial and independent of the 
clinical trial team. In cases where there is a clear medical plausibility  supporting an 
uncommon clustering of SAEs of the same t ype (not including infections), and these sentinel 
SAEs are designated as ‘definitely  related’, ‘ probably  related’, or ‘possibly  related’ by  both 
the Investigator and the SRC, consideration would be given to possibly  discontinuing the 
study .
4ADVERSE EVENTS
4.1 Warnings/Precautions
For complete informa tion on IGSC 20% or IGIV-C 10%, refer to their respective IBs.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 65of 944.2 Adverse Event Monitoring
Subjects must be carefully monitored for AEs. This monitoring includes clinical and 
laboratory  tests and ph ysical signs. Adverse events should be assessed in terms of their 
seriousness, severity , and causal relationship to the I P/study  drug .
4.3 Adverse Event Definitions
4.3.1 Adverse Events
An AE is defined as an y untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation 
subject administered a medicinal product or stud y treatment and that does not nec essaril y 
have a causal relationship with this treatment . An AE can therefore be an y unfavorable and 
unintended sign (including an y abnormal laboratory  finding), s ymptom, or disease 
temporally  associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not c onsidered related 
to the medicinal product.
Any AE that occurs at any  time between the signature of the ICF and last day  of the subject’s 
participation in the clinical trial must be reported and recorded in the AE eCRF.
All infusion site reactions will be recorded. For the subset of local infusion site reactions 
where the s ymptoms/signs lead to infusion interruption or discontinuation, require 
concomitant medication, or have an impact on the general condition of the subject as judged 
by the Investigator ,these will be considered as AEs .
4.3.2 Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions/Adverse Reactions
All noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product or study  treatment related to 
any dose should be considered suspected ADRs. The phrase “responses to a medicinal 
product” means that a causal relationship between a medicinal product or study  treatment and 
an AE is at least a reasonable possibility , that is, the relationship cannot be ruled out. In the 
framework of this study , a suspected ADR with a causal relationshi p of “definite” will be 
labeled as an AR; thus, ARs are a subset of suspected ADRs.
The Sponsor is responsible for assessing the suspected ADR expectedness during the clinical 
trial.
4.3.3 Causality of Adverse Event
The Investigator is required to provide a caus ality assessment for each AE reported to the 
Sponsor. The Sponsor will consider the Investigator’s causality  assessment. Assessment of 
the causal relationship to the study  drug will be made according to the following 
classifications based on Karch FE et al . (39):
Definite : An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the 
treatment or in which the treatment level has been established in body  fluids or tissues; and 
that is confirmed b y improvement on stopping the treatment (dechallenge), and reappearance 
of the event on repeated exposure (rechallenge).
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 66of 94Probable : An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the 
treatment; that is confirmed by dechallenge; and that could not be reasonably  explained by  
the known characteristics of the subject’s clinical state.
Possible : An event that follows a reason able temporal sequence from administration of the 
treatment but that could have been produced by  the subject’s clinical state or other modes of 
therap y administered to the subject.
Doubtful/Unlikely: An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence fro m 
administration of the treatment; but that could not be reasonabl y explained by the known 
characteristics of the subject’s clinical state.
Unrelated : Any  event that does not meet the criteria above.
The operational tool to decide the AE causal relationshi p is based on algorithms by  Karch FE 
et al. and Naranjo CA et al. ( 40,41).
When an AE is classified, assessing causal relationship by  theInvestigator, as definitive, ie, 
“probable”, “possible” or “doubt ful/unlikely ”, the event will be defined as a suspected ADR. 
A suspected ADR with a causal relationship of “definite” will be defined as an AR. When the 
causal relationship is labeled “unrelated”, then it will be considered that the AE is not 
imputable to the study  treatment and it is not a suspected ADR.
In addition, when a causal relationship between the study  treatment and the AE cannot be 
ruled out by  the Investigator and/or Sponsor, it means that the AE cannot be labeled 
“unrelated”.
For an y subject, a ll AEs that occur at any  time from the beginning of IP/study  drug
administration until the final visit of the clinical trial will be considered as treatment 
emergent AEs (TEAEs).
For AEs that occur during infusions, the infusion rate in effect at the time of onset of the AE, 
the time of onset of the AE and the time of AE change materiall y in intensity and/or resolve 
will be captured.
4.3.4 Severity of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction
AEs and suspected ADRs will be classified depending on their sev erity according to the 
following definitions:
1.Mild: an AE which is well tolerated by  the subject, causing minimum degree of malaise
and without affecting normal activities.
2.Moderate: an AE that interferes with the subject’s normal activities.
3.Severe: an AE that prevents the subject from performing their normal activities.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 67of 94AE and suspected ADR severit y gradation must be distinguished from AE and suspected 
ADR seriousness gradation, which is defined according to event consequence. For example, 
headache can b e mild, moderate or severe but not necessarily  serious in all these cases.
The Investigator will be responsible for assessing the AE and suspected ADR intensity  
during the clinical trial, taking into account current criteria included in this section.
4.3.5 Expec tedness of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction
An AE or suspected ADR is considered “unexpected” if the nature, seriousness, severit y or 
outcome of the reaction(s) is not consistent with the reference information. The expectedness 
of an AR sha ll be determined by  the Sponsor according to the reference document (ie , IB).
Events not listed for the particular drug under investigation in the IB are considered 
“unexpected” and those listed are considered “expected.”  When new Serious ADRs 
(potentiall y related SAEs) are received, it is the Sponsor’s responsibility to determine 
whether the event sare “unexpected” for expedited safet y reporting purposes.
4.3.6 Seriousness of Adverse Event or Suspected Adverse Drug Reaction; 
Serious Adverse Event
An AE or suspected ADR is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the Investigator or 
Sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes:
1.Death
2.Life-threatening AE (life -threatening in the definition of “serious” refers to an event in
which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event
which hy potheticall y might have caused death if it were more severe)
3.In-patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization
4.A persistent or significant incapacit y or subs tantial disruption of the ability  to conduct
normal life functions
5.A congenital anomal y/birth defect
6.An important medical event (important medical event in the definition of “serious” refers
to those events which may not be immediatel y life -threatening, or result in death, or
hospitalization, but from medical and scientific judgment may  jeopardize the subject
or/and may  require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes
listed above).
This definition permits either the Sponsor or the Investigator to decide whether an event is 
“serious”. If either the Sponsor or the Investigator believes that the event is serious, the event 
must be considered “serious” and evaluated b y the S ponsor for expedited reporting.
A distinction should be drawn between serious and severe AEs. The term “severe” is used to 
describe the intensit y (severity) of a specific event; the event itself, however, may be of 
relative minor medical significance (such as severe headache). This is no t the same as 
“serious”, which is defined on subject/event outcome or action criteria usually  associated 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 68of 94with events that pose a threat to a subject’s life or functioning. Seriousness (not severit y) is a 
medical term while severity  is a subjective term.
According to the medical criteria, an AE or a suspected ADR can be classified as serious, 
although it does not fulfill the conditions fixed in this section, if it is considered important 
from a medical point of view.
4.3.7 Adverse Event and Pregnancy Documentation
All AEs and SAEs occurring after the subject has signed the ICF through the Final Visit (ie, 
end of study ) must be fully  recorded in the subject’s eCRF or SAE form and medical record. 
If no AE has occurred during the study period, this should also be indi cated in the eCRF.
It is the responsibility  of the I nvestigator to ensure that AEs are appropriately  recorded.
At each visit, AEs will be elicited b y asking the individual a non -leading question such as 
“Do you feel different in any way  since the last visi t?”  Moreover, AEs will also be collected 
through directl y observed events or spontaneously volunteered b y the subject. Clearl y related 
signs, s ymptoms and abnormal diagnostic procedures should preferabl y be grouped together 
and recorded as a single diagno sis or s yndrome wherever possible.
The following variables must be recorded in the AE eCRF:
1.the verbatim term (a diagnosis is preferred)
2.date/time of onset
3.date/time of resolution
4.severit y (mild, moderate, severe)
5.causality  (unrelated, doubtful/unlikely , possible, probable, definite)*
6.seriousness (y es, no)
7.action taken (with regard to I P/study  drug)
8.other action (to treat the event)
9.outcome and sequel (follow -up on AE)
*Causality  assessment will be made only  when the AE occurs after the subject has
initiat ed at least one infusion of the I P/study  drug. An AE occurring before subject's
exposure to I P/study  drug will be alway s labeled as "unrelated".
For AEs that occur during infusions, the infusion rate in effect at the time of onset of the AE, 
the time of o nset of the AE and the time of AE change materiall y in intensity and/or resolve 
will be captured in the eCRF.
In addition to the I nvestigator’s own description of the AEs, each AE will be encoded 
according to the Medical Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activitie s (MedDRA).
For example, a laboratory test abnormality  considered clinically  relevant, eg,causing the 
subject to withdraw from the study , requiring treatment or causing apparent clinical 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 69of 94manifestations, or judged relevant b y the Investigator, should be re ported as an AE. Each 
event must be described in detail along with start and stop dates, severit y, relationship to 
IP/study  drug , action taken, and outcome. Each event must be adequatel y supported by
documentation as it appears in the subject’s medical or case file.
A pregnancy  not verified before the screening visit but occurring during the course of the 
study  will not be considered an AE unless a relation to the study  drug is at least suspected. In 
any case, a Pregnancy  Report Form must be completed and sent within 24 hours to the 
Sponsor, and the study treatment must be discontinued. A copy  of the form should be filed at 
the study  site for follow -up until the end of the pregnancy .
4.3.8 Type and Duration of the Follow -Up of Subjects after Adverse Events
In so f ar as is possible, all individuals will be followed up until the AE or suspected ADR has 
been resolved. If an AE/suspected ADR/SAE is present when the subject has completed the 
study , the course of the event must be followed until the final outcome is know n, or the event 
has been stabilized and no further change is expected and the Investigator decides that no 
further follow -up is necessary .
Any pregnancy  must be followed by  the Investigator until delivery  or to the end of 
pregnancy .
4.4 Reporting of Serious A dverse E vents or Pregnancy
4.4.1 Reporting Serious Adverse Event
Any SAE (see 
Section 4.3.6 ) that occurs after signing the study ICF through the Final 
Visit (ie, end of study) must be expeditiously  reported whether or not considered attributable 
to the study  drug. Each SAE must be fully  recorded in the subject’s eCRF and SAE Report 
Form.
SAEs will be reported using the designated SAE Report Form. When the In vestigator 
becomes aware of an SAE, she/he must submit a completed, signed and dated SAE Report 
Form (in English) within 24 hours to the Sponsor by  email/fax.
Each SAE must be followed up until resolution or stabilization. After the initial report, all 
relevant information for SAE follow up, and for the outcome, must also be supplied to the 
Sponsor in a timely  manner (within 3 day s from its identification or within 24 hours for 
relevant new information) by  means of the SAE Report Form. In addition, the Spon sor or 
contract research organization (CRO) may  request additional information and/or reports.
All SAE Report Forms and Pregnancy  Report Form smust be reported to:
Grifols Global Pharmacovigilance for Reporting SAEs and Pregnancy
Email:
FAX (back-up onl y):  (US/Canada) and  (International)

Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 70of 94When required, and according to local law and regulations, SAEs must be reported to the 
IRB/EC and regulatory  authorities.
4.4.2 Reporting Pregnancy
Pregnancies occurring during the course of the study  will not be considered an AE unless a 
relation to the study  drug is suspected. In an y case, a Pregnancy  Report Form must be 
completed and sent as soon as possible to the Sponsor for an y pregnancies that occur from 
time of consent th rough the Final Visit (ie, end of study ). A copy  of the form should be filed 
at the study  site for follow -up until the end of the pregnancy . Any  pregnancy  must be 
followed b y the Investigator until delivery or to the end of pregnancy. An y anomalies, 
compli cations, abnormal outcomes, or birth defects observed in the child must be reported as 
an SAE (see email address or fax number in Section 4.4.1) within 24 hours of the 
Investigator or stud y personnel’s first knowledge.
5STATISTICA L METHODS AND DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE 
SIZE
5.1 Statistical and A nalytical Plans
Unless otherwise specified, descriptive statistics will include the number of observations, 
mean, standard deviation (SD), median, minimum , and maximum values for the 
continuous/quantitative data or absolut e and relative frequency  counts and percentages for 
categorical/qualitative data.
Data handling and evaluation procedures will be described as detailed in the Statistical 
Analy sis Plan.
5.1.1 Subject Populations for Analysis
Safety  Population
The safet y population will include all subjects who received any  amount of study  drugs 
(IGIV -C 10% and/or IGSC 20%) and will be used for safety  anal ysis.
PK Population
The PK population will consist of all subjects who receive study  drugs and have sufficient 
and vali d total IgG concentration vs. time data for either the IV or SC P hase to allow 
calculation of AUC 0-τ,SCor AUC 0-τ,IV(the primary PK endpoint).
The validity  of total IgG concentrations  will be reviewed and determined before the database 
lock based on consideration of treatment compliance and blood sampling/testing issues (such 
as collection problem). Any  invalid total IgG concentrations will be flagged with the reason 
for invalidity  in the listing.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 71of 94IgG Population
The IgG population will consist of all subj ects who receive study drugs and have an y total 
IgG concentration data. The summary  of total IgG concentration data will be based on IgG 
Population.
5.1.2 Demographic and Baseline Characteristics
The demographic and baseline characteristics will be summarized. F or quantitative variables, 
mean, SD, median, and minimum/maximum will be provided. For qualitative variables, the 
frequency  and percentage will be provided.
5.1.3 Pharmacokinetic Analysis
All subjects in the PK Population as defined above will be included in the PK analy sis.  Total 
IgG concentrations will be summarized for IV and SC by each timepoint.  Individual and 
mean total IgG concentrations vs. time curves will be plotted.  PK parameters of total IgG 
will be determined b y noncompartmental PK methods using W inNonlin Professional version 
6.4 or above (Pharsight Corporation, Cary , NC).  Steady -state PK parameters to be 
calculated, as appropriate ,or as permitted b y data, will include AUC, C max, and t max.  All PK 
parameters will be calculated separatel y for IV a nd SC administration and will be tabulated 
and summarized descriptively .  The mean and the lower and upper bounds of the 90% CI will 
be calculated on ln -transformed AUC parameters.  These mean and lower and upper bounds 
will be back-transformed (exponentiated) to provide the geometric mean and 90% CI  on the 
original scale .
The Primary  PK endpoint is the steady -state AUC over a dosing interval defined as follows:
AUC 0-τ,SC , the AUC over a weekly dosing interval (τ) at an approximate steady -state
condition following weekly  SC infusion, ie, AUC 0-7 days.
AUC 0-τ,IV , the AUC over a regular dosing interval (τ) at an approximate steady -state
condition following the regular IV infusion, either every  3 wee ks or every  4 weeks, ie,
AUC 0-21 days or AUC 0-28 days , respectively .
AUC 0-τ,SCis to be obtained after the 13th SC dose of IGSC 20% at the weekly  dose 
calculated using the final dose adjustment factor, and AUC 0-τ,IV is to be obtained following 
IV infusi on of IGIV -C 10% at the IV#1 visit.  Since the dosing interval (τ) is 7 day s for the 
SC dose, AUC 0-τ,SC is determined as AUC 0-7 days .  For IV dosing, the dosing interval (τ) is 
21or 28 day s for the 3 -week or 4- week subjects, AUC 0-τ,IVis determined as AUC 0-21 days or 
AUC 0-28 days , respectively.
Prior to statistical comparison of AUC 0- τ’s between the IV IGIV -C 10% and SC I GSC 20% 
doses, the AUC 0-21 days from the IV infusion in subjects on a 3- week IV dosing interval will be 
divided by  3 or the AUC 0-28 days from IV dosing in subjects on a 4 -week IV dosing interval 
divided by  4 for comparison with AUC 0-7 days from the weekl y SC infusion.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 72of 94The hy pothesis to be tested is that the weekl y SC dose of IGSC 20% will achieve an 
approximate steady -state AUC 0-τ,SCof total IgG that is non -inferior to that achieved b y a 
regular IV dose of IGIV -C 10% (AUC 0-τ,IVdivided by  3 or 4 depending on the IV dosing 
intervals).  Non -inferiority  of steady -state IgG AUC between SC dose of IGSC 20% and IV 
IGIV -C 10% administration will be tested based on established regulatory guidelines for 
bioequivalence testing. The 90% CIof the geometric L SM ratio of SC AUC to I V AUC will 
be calculated.  The SC dose is considered to be non-inferior to the IV dose if the low bound 
of the 90% CIfor the geometric L SM AUC ratio is above 0.80 based on loge -transformed 
data.
Secondary  and Exploratory  PK Anal ysis
Secondary and exploratory  PK endpoints include the steady -state mean trough concentration 
of total IgG and the C max, tmaxof total IgG.  D escriptive statistics will be calculated for the 
steady -state mean trough concentration of total IgG and for the C max, andtmaxof total IgG.  
All pre -infusion total IgG concentrations obtained before and at the 13th SC dose of I GSC 
20% will be evaluated to determine if an approximate steady -state condition has been 
achieved b y the 13th SC dose.  The stead y-state mean trough concentrations of total IgG 
following SC administrated IGSC 20% will be determined as the average value of C trough
measurements obtain ed at Weeks#13, #14, #17, and #21. The average steady -state trough 
concentrations of total IgG following IV administrated IGIV -C 10% will be determined as 
the average value of C trough measurements obtained at the IV#1 visit and at 21 or 28 day s 
after the IV#1 IGIV -C10% dose (depending on dosing interval), ie, immediately  prior to the 
administration of IV dose at IV#2 visit.
Summaries will be provided for trough concentration of total IgG and each of its subclasses 
between IV infusion of IGIV -C 10% and SC administration of I GSC 20%.  Summaries of 
trough level concentration of antibody  titers against S. pneumonia, H.influenza, and C. tetani 
will also be provided.
Depending on the number of subjects being dosed on IGIV -C 10% at 3 -or 4-week dosing 
interval s, subgroup anal yses may be performed to evaluate PK variables b y IV dosing 
interval. Subgroup anal yses will additionally  include age, sex, race, ethnicity  and other  
factors as appropriate.
5.1.4 Interim PK Analysis
An interim PK analysis will be conducted as desc ribed in Section 3.1.5 .  This analy sis will be 
performed as soon as practical after the first 6 adult/adolescent subjects (aged ≥12-75 years) 
have completed the PK sampling schedule for both the IV and SC (after the 13th SC dose) 
Phases of the trial.  PK data from these 6 adult/adolescent subjects will be anal yzed using 
procedures as described in Section 5.1.3 above.  A decision on whether to modify  the dose 
adjustment factor for calculating the SC dose will be made base d on this interim PK analy sis.
Final PK and statistical analy sis will be based on the PK data obtained after the final (or 
adjusted, if an y) SC dose administered in all completed subjects.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 73of 945.1.5 Exploratory Analysis
Other exploratory  variables include the following:
Serious bacterial infections
All infections of an y kind (serious/nonserious including acute sinusitis, e xacerbation of
chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, infectious diarrhea,
etc.) which will be recorded as an AE with the Investigator answering the following
question affirmativel y in the eCRF: “Is this an infection? (verbat imterm delineating
infection).
Validated infections documented by  positive radiograph, fever (>38°C oral or >39°C
rectal), culture, or diagnostic testing for microorganisms , eg, bacterial, viral, fungal or
protozoal pathogens (for instance, rapid streptococcal antigen detection test).
Number of day s on antibiotics (including oral, parenteral, oral plus parenteral,
prophy lactic and therapeutic). Use of prophy lactic antibiotics will be distinguished from
antibiotics for treatment of acute infection.
Number of hospitalizations due to infection
Number of day s of work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections and their
treatment.
These parameters will be summarized descriptively. The number and p roportion of subjects 
having any SBI, infections, d ays on antibiotics, hospitalizations due to infection, and days of 
work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections will be calculated and summarized. 
Furthermore, the total number of events or day s and corresponding annualized rate per 
subject of SBIs, infections, days on antibiotics, hospitalizations due to infection, and day s of 
work/school/daily  activities missed due to infections will be calculated and summarized.
5.1.6 Safety Analysis
The safet y analyses are based on the safet y population.
All AEs , suspected ADRs, ARs , SAEs, and discontinuations due to AEs and SAEs will be 
summarized by  presenting the number of AEs and the number and percentage of subjects 
with AEs. The summaries will be presented b y MedDRA sy stem organ class and preferred 
term. A E summaries b y severit y will also be provided. L ocal infusion site reactions will be 
similarly  summarized. Non-serious infections of any  kind (including acute sinusitis, 
exacerbation of chronic sinusitis, acute otitis media, pneumonia, acute bronchitis, in fectious 
diarrhea, etc.) as determined by  the Investigator will also be considered a safet y endpoint and 
will be similarly  summarized .
Subjects with deaths, SAEs, and AEs leading to premature discontinuation from the study  
will be listed and presented in a narrative form.
Adverse events temporally  associated with IV or SC administration of study  drug will be 
defined as those occurring during or within 72 hours of completion of an infusion. 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 74of 94Additionally , local infusion site reactions will be tabulated and su mmarized for the total 
duration of the study  and by  IGSC 20% infusion week.
For all laboratory  tests and vital signs, the original value and the change from Baseline will 
be summarized for numeric results and frequency/percentage will be summarized for 
qualitative results. For laboratory  tests with normal ranges, out of normal range values will 
be flagged and shift tables will be provided.
5.2 Determination of Sample Size
The planned number of subjects is 50 enrolled to provide 30 completing adult subjects and 
12to 18 completing pediatric subjects. This sample size is primarily  based on safet y 
assessment consideration. Also a sample size of 42 to 48 with at least 24 sche duled 
administrations of I GSC 20% would provide the clinical experience data on a total of more 
than 1152 to 1080 IGSC 20% dosing administrat ions for safety  assessment.
The planned minimum enrollment of 42 completing subjects should be more than adequate to 
establish that the AUC for t otal IgG for IGSC 20% is non -inferior to that achieved b y IGIV -
C 10% .
6ADM INISTRA TIVE
6.1 Investigator(s), Other Study  Personnel and External Committees
Information regarding additional key  personnel involved in the conduct of the study , 
including names and con tact details of participating Investigators, monitors, clinical 
laboratories, technical departments and/or institutions, as well as information on members of 
additional study  committees, will be found in the study  files of the Sponsor and at the 
Investigat or sites within the study  reference manual/file.
Investigators and staff will receive training via an Investigators meeting, site initiation visit ,
or other appropriate individual site training session(s).
6.2 Data Quality
Monitoring and auditing procedures de fined/agreed by  the Sponsor will be followed in order 
to comply  with ICH GCP guidelines. Each center will be visited at regular intervals by  a 
monitor to ensure compliance with the study protocol, I CH GCP ,and legal aspects. The 
on-site verification of the eCRF for completeness and clarit y will include cross checking with 
source documents and clarification of administrative matters. Query  verification of data will 
be described in the Data Management Plan.
6.3 Documentation
The study  data will be recorded and ke pt current in the eCRF by  the site study  personnel 
directly  responsible for the information. Entries made in the eCRF must be verifiable against 
source documents, or have been directl y entered into the eCRF, in which case the entry in the 
eCRF will be cons idered the source data.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 75of 94The data in the eCRF will be monitored at the site by  Grifols Therapeutics Inc. 
representatives at regular intervals and reviewed for completeness and compared with the 
source documents. Examples of source documents include individu al subject medical 
records, which are separate from the eCRFs.
All AEs and SAEs must be recorded. All SAEs must be recorded on the SAE form. The SAE 
form must be kept in the site records with a cop y provided to the designated person as 
detailed in the stud y file.
6.3.1 Record Retention
At study  completion, all study  data will be transferred to Grifols Therapeutics I nc. according 
to ICH GCP guidelines, local laws, regulations, and Grifols Therapeutics Inc. requirements. 
The study  file and all source data should be retained until notification is given by  the Sponsor 
for destruction.
An Investigator is required by  ICH GCP guidelines to retain the study  files. If an Investigator 
moves, withdraws from an investigation or retires, the responsibility  for maintaining the 
records may  be transferred to another person (eg, other Investigator). Grifols Therapeutics 
Inc. must be notified in writing of the person responsible for record retention and the 
notification will be retained in the Sponsor study  file and the Investigator site file.
6.3.2 Access to Information for Monitoring
The data will be recorded and kept current in eCRFs b y the study site personnel directl y 
responsible for the information and reviewed for completeness b y the monitor. Grifols 
Therapeutics Inc. personnel or designee can review the records.
In accordance with ICH GCP guidelines, the monitor must have direct access to the 
Investigator’s source documentation in order to verify  the data recorded in the eCRFs for 
consistency ,to verify  adherence to the protocol, and to verify the completeness, consistency , 
and accuracy  of data entered. “Source documentation” includes individual subject files, 
separate from the eCRFs, which should be maintained and include visit dates, laboratory  
results, concomitant treatment, vital signs, medical history , examinations, AEs, I P/study  drug
dispensing logs, and other notes as appropriate. The Investigator agrees to cooperate with the 
monitor to ensure that any  problems noted during the course of these monitoring visits are 
resolved.
6.3.3 Access to Information for Audits or Inspections
Representatives of regulatory  authorities or of Grifols Therapeutics Inc. may  conduct audits 
or inspections of the Investigator stud y site. If the Investigator is notified of an audit or 
inspection by  a regulat ory authorit y, the Investigator agrees to notify  the Grifols Therapeutics 
Inc. Medical Monitor immediately . The Investigator agrees to provide to representatives of a 
Regulatory  Agency  or Grifols Therapeutics Inc. access to records, facilities, and personn el 
for the effective conduct of an audit or inspection.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 76of 947 ETHICA L AND LEGA L ASPECTS
7.1 Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee
Documented approval from appropriate IRBs/ECs will be obtained for all participating 
centers/countries prior to study  start, accor ding to ICH GCP guidelines, local laws, 
regulations and organizations. When necessary , an extension, amendment or renewal of the 
IRB’s/EC ’s approval must be obtained and also forwarded to the Sponsor. The I RB/EC must 
supply  to the Sponsor, upon request, a list of the IRBs/ECs members involved in the vote and 
a statement to confirm that the I RB/EC is organized and operates according to ICH GCP 
guidelines and applicable laws and regulations.
7.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The procedures set out in this protocol , pertaining to the conduct, evaluation, and 
documentation of this study , are designed to ensure that the Sponsor and Investigator abide 
by ICH GCP guidelines. The study  will also be carried out in keeping with applicable local 
law(s) and regulation(s). Th is may  include an audit by  the Sponsor representatives and/or an 
inspection by  Regulatory Authority  representatives at any  time. The Investigator must agree 
to the audit or inspection of study -related records by  the Sponsor representatives and/or 
Regulator y Authority  representatives, and must allow direct access to source documents to 
the Sponsor and/or Regulatory  Authority  representa tives.
Modifications to the study  protocol will not be implemented by  either the Sponsor or the 
Investigator without agreemen t by both parties. However, the Investigator may  implement a 
deviation from, or a change to, the protocol to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the stud y 
subjects without prior I RB/EC/Sponsor approval/favorable opinion. As soon as possible, the 
implemente d deviation or change, the reasons for it, and,if appropriate ,the proposed 
protocol amendment should be submitted to the IRB/EC/Sponsor. Any  deviations from the 
protocol must be fully  explained and documented by  the Investigator.
7.3 Regulatory  Authority  Approvals/ Authorizations
Regulatory  Authority  approvals/authorizations/notifications, where required, must be in place 
and fully documented prior to study  start. Study  information including contact information 
for Investigator sites responsible for conducting the study  will be posted on a publicly  
accessible clinical registry(ies) as required b y local law.
7.4 Subject Information and Consent
Subject information, I CF, and Assent Form will be provided to Investigator sites. Prior to the 
beginning of the stud y, the I nvestigator must have the IRB/EC written approval/favorable 
opinion of the written I CF, Assent Form, and any  other written information to be provided to 
subjects. The written approval of the IRB/EC together with the approved subject 
information/Assent Form /ICF must be filed in the study  files and a cop y of the documents 
must also be provided to Sponsor by  the Investigator site.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 77of 94Written I CF b y the subject or a parent and/or legal guardian along with subject assent, if 
applicable, must be obtained before an y study  specific procedure takes place. Participation in 
the study  and date of ICF given by  the subject should be documented appropriately  in the 
subject's files. A signed copy  of the subject ICF and Assent Form, if applicable, will be 
provided to the subjec t or subject 's authorized representative (ie , parent or legal guardian).
7.5 Insurance
Sponsor shall maintain comprehensive general liability insurance or self -insurance in 
amounts adequate to cover an y damage, demand, claim, loss or liability  caused or incurr ed 
by Sponsor, or as otherwise required b y applicable laws and/or regulations.
7.6 Confidentiality
All records identify ing the subject will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by  
the applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly  available.
Subject names will not be supplied to the Sponsor. Only  the subject number and subject 
initials where it is permitted will be recorded in the eCRF, and if the subject’s name appears 
on any  other document (eg , pathologist report), it must be oblit erated before a cop y of the 
document is supplied to the Sponsor. Study  findings stored on a computer will be stored in 
accordance with local data protection laws. Subjects will be informed in writing that 
representatives of the Sponsor, I RB/EC, or Regulato ry Authorities may  inspect their medical 
records to verify  the information collected, and that all personal information made available 
for an audit or inspection will be handled in strictest confidence and in accordance with local 
data protection laws.
If the results of the stud y are published, the subject’s identity  will remain confidential. 
The Investigator will maintain a list to enable subjects’ records to be identified.
8USE OF DA TA AND PUBL ICATION
Sponsor is committed to honoring the principles of aca demic freedom while, at the same 
time, protecting its confidential information, the subjects, and the integrit y of the study , and 
the study  documentation all in compliance with applicable law. Institution and/or I nvestigator 
recognize that, with respect to any study that is part of a multi- site study , there is a need for a 
coordinated approach to any  publication or presentation of results from the sites. 
Accordingl y, the Institution/I nvestigator shall not publish or present any  results from this 
study  to an y third parties until: (1) Sponsor publishes the results; (2) Institution and/or 
Investigator receives written notification from Sponsor that publication of the results is no 
longer planned; or (3) twelve (12) months following the close of Study , whichever occurs 
first.
Institution and/or Investigator shall submit to Sponsor for its review a cop y of an y proposed 
publication at least thirty  (30) calendar day s prior to the planned date of submission for 
publication or presentation. I nstitution and Investigato r shall consider in good faith all 
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 78of 94comments received from Sponsor during the review period and shall delete Sponsor’s 
confidential informat ion (other than study  results).
If Sponsor determines that the publication contains patentable subject matter which r equires 
protection, Sponsor may  require the delay  of submission for publication or presentation for 
an additional period of time for the purpose of filing patent applications or otherwise take 
measure s to protect such information.
Institution and/or Investigator shall acknowledge Sponsor’s support in all pub lications and 
presentations.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 79of 949REFERENCES
1.Rosen F. Primary immunodeficiency  diseases report of an IUI S Scientific Committee.
Clinical & Experimental Immunology . 1999;118(S1):1-28.
2.Boyle J, Buckley  R. Population prevalence of diagnosed primary  immunodeficiency
diseases in the United States. Pharmaceuticals Policy  and Law. 2008;10:99 -108.
3. Bousfiha AA, Jeddane L, Ailal F, Benhsaien I, Mahlaoui N, Casanova J- L et al. Primary
immunodeficiency  diseases wor ldwide: more common than generall y thought. J Clin
Immunol. 2013;33: 1 -7.
4.Buckley  R, Schiff RI. The use of intravenous immune globulin in immunodeficiency
diseases. N Engl J Med. 1991;11(2):110-7.
5. Sacher RA. Intravenous immunoglobulin consensus statement. J Allergy  Clin I mmunol.
2001;(4 Suppl):S139- S146.
6.Gardulf A. Immunoglobulin treatment for primary  antibody  deficiencies advantages of
the subcutaneous route. Biodrugs. 2007;21(2):105-16.
7.Helbert M, Farragher A. Subcutaneous immunoglobulin for patients with antibody
deficiency . British Journal of Hospital Medicine. 2007;68(4):206 -10.
8.Ochs H, Gupta S, Kiessling P, Nicolay  U, Berger M, the Subcutaneous IgG Study  Group.
Safety  and efficacy  of self -administered subcutaneous immunoglobulin in patients with
primar y immunodeficiency diseases. Journal of Clinical I mmunology . 2006;26(3):265-
73.
9.Boyle ML, Scalchunes C. I mpact of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment
among patients with primary  immunodeficiency  diseases. Pharmaceuticals Policy  and
Law. 2008;10:133–146.
10.Stiehm E, Casillas A, Finkelstein J, Gallagher K, Groncy  P, Kobay ashi R et al. Slow
subcutaneous human intravenous immunoglobulin in the treatment of antibody
immunodeficiency : Use of an old method with a new product. J Allergy  Clin I mmunol.
1998;101:848 -9.
11.Radinsky  S, Bonagura V. Subcutaneous immunoglobulin infusion as an alternative to
intravenous immunoglobulin. J Allergy  Clin I mmunol. 2003;112 (3):630-3.
12. Thomas M, Brennan V, Chapel H. Rapid subcutaneous immunoglobulin infusions in
children. The La ncet. 1993;342:1432-3.
13.Hagan JB, Fasano M, Spector S, Wasserman R, Melamed I, Rojavin M  et al.  Efficacy
and safet y of a new 20% immunoglobulin preparation for subcutaneous administration,
IgPRo20, in patients with Primary  Immunodeficiency .  J Clin I mmuno l 2010;30(5): 734 -
45.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 80of 9414.Jolles S, Bernatowska E, de Gracia J, Borte M, Cristea V , Peter HH et al. Efficacy  and
safet y of Hizentra®in patients with primary  immunodeficiency  after a dose -equivalent
switch from intravenous or subcutaneous replacement therap y. Clinical Immunology .
2011a;141:90 –102.
15.Jolles S, Borte M, Nelson RP, Rojavin M, Bexon M, L awo J -P at el. L ong-term efficacy ,
safet y, and tolerability of Hizentra® for treatment of primary  immunodeficiency  disease.
Clinical I mmunology . 2014;150:161 -169.
16.Abrahamsen TG, Sandersen H, Bustnes A. Home therap y with subcutaneous
immunoglobulin infusions in children with congenital immunodeficiencies. Pediatrics.
1996;6:1127 -1131.
17.Gaspar J. Gerritsen B, Jones A. Immunoglobulin replacement treatment b y rapid
subcut aneous infusion. Arch Dis Child. 1998;79:48 -51.
18.Berger M. Subcutaneous immunoglobulin replacement in primary  immunodeficiencies.
Clin I mmunol. 2004;112:1 -7.
19. Chapel HM, Spickett GP, Ericson D, Engl W, Eibl MM et al. The Comparison of the
Efficacy  and Safet yof Intravenous Versus Subcutaneous Immunoglobulin Replacement
Therap y. Journal of Clinical Immunology. 2000;20(2):94 -100.
20. Chinen J, Shearer WT. Subcutaneous immunoglobulins: Alternative for the
hypogammaglobulinemic patient? J Allergy  Clin Immunol. 2004;1 14:934 -5.
21.Chouksey  A, Duff K, Wasserbauer N, Berger M. Subcutaneous immunoglobulin -G
replacement therap y with preparations currently  available in the United States for
intravenous or intramuscular use: reasons and regimens. Allergy , Asthma, and Clinical
Immunology . 2005;1(3):120 -30.
22.Gardulf A, Björvell H, Gustafson R, Hammarström L , Smith CI . Safety  of rapid
subcutaneous gammaglobulin infusions in patients with primary  antibody  deficiency .
Immunodeficiency . 1993;4:81 -4.
23.Gardulf A, Björvell H, Gustafson R, H ammarström L , Smith CI . The life situations of
patients with primary  antibody  deficiency  untreated or treated with subcutaneous
gammaglobulin infusions. Clin Exp I mmunol. 1993;92(2):200-4.
24. Gardulf A, Andersen V, Björkander J, Ericson D, Frøland S, Gustafso n R et al.
Subcutaneous immunoglobulin replacement in patients with primary  antibody
deficiencies: safet y and costs. The Lancet. 1995;345:365 -9.
25.Gardulf A, Nicolay  U, Math D, Asensio O, Bernatowska E, Böck A et al. Children and
adults with primary  antibody deficiencies gain quality  of life by  subcutaneous IgG self -
infusions at home. J Allergy  Clin Immunol. 2004;114 (4):936-42.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 81of 9426.Gardulf A, Nicolay  U. Replacement IgG therapy  and self -therapy  at home improve the
health- related quality  of life in patients with primary  antibody  deficiencies. Curr Opin
Allergy  Clin Immunol. 2006;6:434 -42.
27.Gardulf A, Nicolay  U, Asensio O, Bernatowska E, Böck A, Carvalho BC et al. Rapid
subcutaneous IgG replacement therap y is effective and safe in children and adults with
primary  immunodeficiencies —a prospective, multi -national study . J Clin Immunol.
2006;26(2):177 -85.
28.Hansen S, Gustafson R, Smith CI , Gardulf A. Express subcutaneous IgG infusions:
decreased time of delivery  with maintained safet y. Clin I mmunol. 2002;104 (3):237-41.
29.Nicolay  U, Haag S, Eichmann F, Herget S, Spruck D, Gardulf A. Measuring treatment
satisfaction in patients with primary  immunodeficiency  diseases receiving lifelong
immunoglobulin replacement therap y. Qual Life Res. 2005;14:1683 -91.
30.Nicolay  U, Kiessling P, Berger M, Gupta S, Yel L, Roifman CM et al. Health- related
quality  of life and treatment satisfaction in North American patients with primary
immunodeficiency  diseases receiving subcutaneous IgG self- infusions at home. J Clin
Immunol. 2006;26(1):65 -72.
31. W aldmann TA, Strober W, Blaese RM. Metabolism of immunoglobulins. Prog Immunol.
1972;891-903.
32.Orange JS, Belohradsk y BH, Berger M, Borte M, Hagan J, Jolles S, et al. Evaluation of
correlation between dose and clinical outcomes in subcutaneous immunoglobulin
replacement therap y. Clinical and Experimental Immunology . 2012;169:172 –181.
33.Wanieski J,  Gardulf A, Hammarstrom L. Bioavailability  of gamma -globulin after
subcutaneous infusions in patients with common variable immunodeficiency.J Clin.
Immunology . 1994;14:90 -97.
34.Wasserman RL , Irani A -M, Tracy  J, Tsoukas C, Stark D, Levy  R, et al. Pharmacokinetics
and safet y of subcutaneous immune globulin (human), 10% caprylate/chromatograph y
purified in patients with primary  immunodeficiency  disease.  British Socie ty for
Immunology , Clinical and Experimental I mmunology . 2010;161:518–526.
35.Shearer WT, Fleisher TA, Buckley  RH, Ballas Z, Ballow M, Blaese RM et al.
Recommendations for live viral and bacterial vaccines in immunodeficient patients and
their close contacts. J Allergy  Clin I mmunol. 2014;133(4):961 -966.
36.Levin D. Seo JB, Kiely DG, Hatabu H, Gefter W, van Beek EJR, Schie bler ML  on behalf
of the 2013 International Workshop for Pulmonary Function al Imaging (I WPFI ). Triage
for suspected acute pulmonary  embolism: th ink before opening Pandora’s box. European
Journal of Radiology  2015; 84: 1202 -1211.
37.Wilbur J, Shian B. Diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary  embolism. Am
Fam Phy sician 2012; 86(10):913-919.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 82of 9438.Oudega R, Moons KGM, Hoes AW. Ruling out deep venous thrombosis in primary  care.
Thromb Haemost 2005; 94: 200-205.
39.Karch FE, Lasagna L. Adverse drug Reactions. A critical review. JAMA. 1975;234:
1236 -1241.
40.Karch FE, Lasagna L. Toward the operational identification of adverse drug reactions.
Clin Pharmacol Th er. 1977;21:247-54.
41. Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM et al. A method for estimating the probability  of
adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1981;30:239-45.
42.Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC et al. 2001 SCCM/ESI CM/ACCP/ATS/SIS
International Sepsis Definitions Conference. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:1250 -1256.
43. International Consensus Conference on Pediatric Sepsis. Pediatric Crit Care Med. 2005;
6:2-8.
44.FDA Guidance for Industry  “Acute Bacterial Meningitis – Developing Antimicrobial
Drugs for Treatment,” Draft Guidance, July  1998.
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm070937.pdf . Last checked: 13
Feb 2015.
45.FDA Guidance for Industry  “Community  Acquired Pneumonia –Developing
Antimicrobial Drugs for Treatment,” Draft Guidance, July  1998.
http:/ /www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/u
cm123686.pdf . Last checked: 13 Feb 2015.
46.Anderson DR, Kovacs MJ, Kovacs G, et al. Combined use of clinical assessment and D-
dimer to improve the management of patients presenting to the emergency department
with suspected deep vein thrombosis (the EDITED Study ). J Thromb Haemost
2003;1(4):645 -51.
47. Wells PS, Anderson, DR, Rodger M, et al. Evaluation of D-d imer in the Diagnosis of
Suspected Deep- Vein Thrombosis. N Engl J Med 2003; 349:1227-35.
48.Wells PS. I ntegrated strategies for the diagnosis of venous thromboembolism. J Thromb
Haemost 2007; 5 Suppl 1: 41-50.
49.Adam SS, Key  NS, Greenberg CS.  D -dimer antigen: current concepts and future
prospects. Blood 2009; 113(13): 2878 -2887.
50.Wells PS, Anderson, DR, Rodger M, et al. Derivation of a simple clinical model to
categorize patients probability  of pulmonary  embolism: increasing the models utility  with
the SimpliRED D -dimer. Thromb Haemost 2000;83(3):416 -20.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 83of 9410APPENDICES
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 84of 94Appendix 1 Schedule of Study  Procedures
Phase
Clinic V isits
Procedures and 
EvaluationScreen ing
(up to 28 
days)Run-In          
(if 
required)
(IGIV -C 
10%)
(3 to 4 
months)IV Phasea
(IGIV -C 10%)SC Phaseb
(IGSC 20% )
IV#1
BaselineIV#2SC  
Week   
#1+2-4 
days 
post 
SC#1SC  
Week 
#2+2-4 
days 
post 
SC#2SC  
Week
#3SC    
Week   
#5SC
Week   
#9SC  
Week 
#13SC  
Week  
#14SC  
Week  
#17SC 
Week
#21pFinal 
Visit 
(Week 
#25)/
Early 
TermMonthly 
Extension 
Visitc
Informed consent/assent (if 
applicable)X
Inclusion and exclusion 
criteria (confirm eligibility)X
Medical history , 
demographicsX
Full physical examdX X X
Abbreviated  physical exam 
and Specific Signs/Symptoms 
Check (SSC)eX X X X X X X X X
Pre-dose W ells Score and D -
dimer testing (at subsequent 
visits only if indicated per 
Specific SSC)eX X SSCeSSCeSSCeSSCeSSCeSSCeSSCeSSCeSSCe
Chest X -rayfX
Vital signsgX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Body weighthX X X X X X X X X X
Height X X X X X X
Pre-dose laboratory 
assessments (hematology , 
chemistry , urinalysis)iX X X X X X Xc
Special tests (DA T, serum
free hemo globin, haptoglobin)X X X X X X X X X X Xc
Serum pregnancy testjX X
Urine pregnancy testjX
Pre-dose sample for total IgG 
levelk X X X X X X X X X X X X
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 85of 94Phase
Clinic V isits
Procedures and 
EvaluationScreen ing
(up to 28 
days)Run-In          
(if 
required)
(IGIV -C 
10%)
(3 to 4 
months)IV Phasea
(IGIV -C 10%)SC Phaseb
(IGSC 20% )
IV#1
BaselineIV#2SC  
Week   
#1+2-4 
days 
post 
SC#1SC  
Week 
#2+2-4 
days 
post 
SC#2SC  
Week
#3SC    
Week   
#5SC
Week   
#9SC  
Week 
#13SC  
Week  
#14SC  
Week  
#17SC 
Week
#21pFinal 
Visit 
(Week 
#25)/
Early 
TermMonthly 
Extension 
Visitc
Pre-dose sample for IgG 
subclass levels and antibody 
titerslX X X X X Xc
Pre-dose measles antibody 
titer samplesX X
Pre-dose virus safety retain 
samplesm X
IGIV -C 10% infusions X X X
IGSC 20% infusionsn& 
infusion numberXq
weekly 
#2  q 
weekly 
#3q
weekly 
#4-8q
weekly 
#9-12q
weekly 
#13q
weekly
#14-16q
weekly
#17-20q
weekly 
#21-24q
weekly
Serial PK sampling (subjects 
age ≤5years, abbreviated 
schedule )XoXp
Concomitant medications X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
AE Assessments including 
SBIsq X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Record days lost from 
work/school/daily activities 
due to infections and 
treatmentX X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Subject SC Infusion Diary 
review and infusion detailsX X X X X X X X X X X
aTime between IV#1 and #2 visits (IV Phase) will be dependent upon subject’s IV dosing interval (3 or 4 w eeks) upon entering the IV Phase.
bSC week number = SC infusion number with the exception of Week#25 which is the Final Visit/Early Termination Visit. 
cIn the event that subjects complete their regularly scheduled 24 w eeks of SC infusions prior to the results of the interim PK analysis, they will continue to 
receive weekly S C infusions of IGSC 20% and return to the clinic for monthly (every 4 weeks) visits which will have the same assessments as S C Week#21 
visit  including (at less frequent intervals) safety laboratory assessments, IgG subclass levels, and specific antibody t iters for S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, 
and C. tetani (tetanus) every 8 weeks. They will continue to be follow ed m onthly until the results of the interim PK analysis are available .  If a dose 
adjustment modification is not required, subjects w ill return to the clinic for a final visit.
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 86of 94dA full physical exam will be performed (excluding breast and genitourinary exam) 
eAbbreviated physical exam (targeted to symptoms and to include examination of heart, lungs, ears/nose/throat, and inspection of previous injection sites. ). 
Specific Signs/Symptoms Check : If the fo llowing Specific Signs/Symptoms are present ,perform Wells Score and blood draw  for D -dimer testing ( Appendix 
4; see also Section 3.6.3.3 ): (a) clinical suspicion of possible DVT w ith unilateral symptomatic leg swelling, accompanied by any of the following pain,
warmth, and/or redness; (b) medical suspicion of possible PE in a subject presenting with new or w orsening dyspnea, tachypnea, chest pain, syncope, and 
cough in the appropriate clinical setting (cough should not be du e to infection, lung disease [eg , asthma, emphysema], or angiotensin -converting enzyme 
inhibitors), (c)Any single alarm symptom such as hemoptysis or cyanosis ( 36,37,38).
fOnly if chest X -ray or C T have not been performed in the past 6 months at Screening (Note: at least one radiographic view (AP or PA) is required .)
gVital signs (systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, and respiration rate) w ill be measured prior to infusion.
hBody  weight is measured to determine the IV or SC study drug dose.
iLaboratory assessments to be obtained prior to infusion of any study drug (IV IGIV -C 10% or IGSC 20%) at all specified visits. Additional special tests 
include DAT, serum free hemoglobin, and haptoglobin. Laboratory testing includes Hematology: Hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, red blood cell count 
including red blood cell morphology, white blood cell count w ith differential; ARC. Chemistry: Sodium, potassium, creatinine, chloride, calcium, BUN, 
bicarbonate, albumin, LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, glucose, total bilirubin, indirect bilirubin. Urinalysis: pH, protein, glucose, ket ones, bilirubin, nitrites, 
urobilinogen, blood, leukocyte esterase (w ith microscopic examination of urine sedim ent if abnormal).
jPregnancy testing will be repeated at any time if pregnancy is suspected. Pregnancy testing including serum and urine tests will be performed for child -
bearing potential females only .
kBlood samples for total IgG trough level to be obtained prior to infusion of study drug (IGIV -C 10% or IGSC 20%) where indicated.   
lIgG subclasses IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4, and antibody levels for S. pneumoniae ,H.influenzae, and C. tetani (tetanus).
mCollect virus safety retain samples at SC Week #1 pri or to IGSC 20% infusion but test only if the subject exhibits clinical signs and symptoms consistent w ith 
HAV, HBV, HCV, HIV, or B19V infection while participating in the study.  See Section 3.6.3.2 and Table 3-2for details. Note: For children at the 
discretion of the investigator,  virus safety retain samples may be draw n 1 or 2 daysprior to SC Week #1 instead of combining with other blood draws on a 
single day.
nWeekly SC dosing may be 7 days ±1 day . If there are logistical issues requiring schedule adjustment for weekly subcutaneous IGSC 20% administration, 
SC#1 may be scheduled 6 to 9 days after IV#2. SC#2 and SC#3 visits must be performed with a +1 day  window . The first 3 SC infusions of IGSC 20% will 
be performed in the clinic where site personnel will instruct on/observe proper SC dosing technique using the pump.  Subsequent monthly SC infusions w ill 
also occur and be observed in the clinic after labs and total IgG trough levels are obtained.  Other SC infusions will be performed at home for interim weeks 
starting after the SC Week #3 visit.
oBlood samples for IV#1 (IV Phase ) PK assessments are at the following time points for s ubjects >5 years of age : prior to the IV#1 I GIV-C 10%  infusion 
(within 0.5 hour of the start of infusion); immediat ely at the completion of the IV # 1 infusion; 1 hour after completion of infusion; 3 to 16 hours with a 
window  of 2 hours around the 16 -hour time point if required by site; 1 day  ± 2 hours  post infusion; 2 day s± 2 hours  post infusion; 3 days ± 4 hours post 
infusion; 5 days ± 4 hours post infusion; 7 days ± 1 day post infusion; ; 14 days ± 1 day post infusion; 21 days ± 1 day post infusion; 2 8 day s ± 1 day post 
infusion (only for subjects on a 4 -week dosing schedule; within 0.5 hour prior to the IV#2  dose) for total IgG trough level. Subjects who are between 2 to 
5 years of age will undergo abbreviated serial PK sampling : Prior to IV #1 IGIV -C 10% infusion (within 0.5 hour of the start of infusion); 1 h our after 
completion of infusion; 3 to 16 hours with a window of 2 hours around the 16 -hour time point if required by site; 2 days±2 h ours post infusion;7 days± 1 day
post infusion; 21 days± 1 day post infusion ; 28 days±1 day post infusion (only for subjects on a 4 -week dosing schedule ; within 0.5 hour prior to the IV#2 
dose).
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 87of 94pBlood samples for SC Week#13 PK assessments are at the follow ing time points for subjects >5 years of age: prior to th e 13th IGSC 20% infusion (within 
0.5 hour of the start of infusion); 1 day ± 4 hours post 13th  infusion; 3 days ± 4 hours post 13th  infusion; 4 day s ± 4 hours post 13th  infusion; 5 days ± 4 
hours post 13th  infusion and 7 days ± 1 day post 13th  infusion (w ithin 0.5 hour prior to the 14th IGSC 20% dose) for total IgG trough level. Subjects who 
are between 2 to 5 years of age will undergo abbreviated serial PK sampling :prior to the 13th IGSC 20% infusion (within 0.5 h our of the start of 
infusion); 3 day s± 4 h ours post 13thinfusion ; 7days ± 1 day post 13th infusion (within 0.5 hour prior to the 14thIGSC 20% dose ).
qRecord any SBIs (defined in Appendix 2 ), hospitalizations due to infections, and non -serious infections (by category) as detailed in Section 3.6.3.1 .
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 88of 94Appendix 2 Diagnostic Criteria for Serious Infection Ty pes
Infection:  Bacteremia/sepsisa
Symptoms:   chills, rigors
Physical findings: fever, hypothermia, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypocarbia, hypotension 
(systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or a reduction of >40 mmHg from Baseline in the 
absence of other causes of hypotension), altered mental status, petech iae, purpura, 
oligouria, cutaneous vasodilation/vasoconstriction 
Laboratory tests :  positive blood cultureb, leukocytosis (white blood cell (WBC) count 
>12,000/mm3), differential WBC count demonstrating >10% immature (band) 
neutrophils, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, lactic acidosis
Infection: Bacterial Meningitis
Symptoms :  headache, stiff neck, mental status changes, irritability, decreased feeding 
(infants), photophobia, nausea/vomiting, rigors, seizures 
Physical findings :  Kernig’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign, meningococcal rash, fever of >38°C 
oral or >39°C rectal
Laboratory tests:   positive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Gram stain and/or culture
and/or positive CSF bacterial antigen assay, positive blood culturec, CSF leukocytosis 
with ne utrophil predominance, decrease in CSF glucose
Infection: Osteomyelitis/Septic Arthritis
Symptoms :  pain, decreased range of motion, tenderness, edema, redness, warmth over 
the involved site (local inflammatory symptoms/signs may be lacking in adults.) 
Physical findings :  evidence of soft tissue infection adjacent to the involved bone/joint, 
drainage from sinus tract from involved bone, fever of >38°C oral or >39°C rectal 
Laboratory tests :  positive blood culture, positive probe to bone, positive bone as pirate 
culture, positive bone biopsy culture, positive bone histopathology, positive joi nt fluid 
Gram stain and culture
Imaging studies :  positive X-ray, nuclear medicine bone scan, magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan, or computed tomography (CT) scan s howing bony destruction with radiolucent 
areas; for chronic osteomyelitis: sequestra, involucra
Note: Items in bold are considered essential diagnostic features.
aTwo of the following should be present to make the diagnosis of sepsis in adults: temperature >38°C oral/ 
>39°C rectal or <36°C oral or <37°C rectal; heart rate >90 beats/min; respiratory rate >20 breaths/min , or 
PaCO 2 <32 mmHg; WBC count >12,000/mm3, <4,000/mm3, or >10% immature (band) forms (42).For 
pediatric subjects, w e recommend you employ the definition of sepsis using age -specific crit eria as 
recommended by the International Consensus Conference on Pediatric Sepsis (43).
bIndw elling catheter -or vascular access device -related blood -borne infections are not included because 
evidence is lacking that these are preventable w ith IVIG replacement therapy. For subjects w ithout indwelling 
catheters or vascular access devices, a single blood c ulture positive for a pathogenic organism will meet the 
diagnostic criteria for bacteremia. (Multiple blood cultures are typically obtained in cases of suspected 
bacteremia/sepsis, as per standard medical practice, and the finding of a single positive cult ure should prompt 
additional confirmatory cultures). Subjects meeting criteria for positive blood culture but without 2 or more of 
the sepsis criteria listed above will be classified as having bacteremia.
cA blood culture positive for grow th of S. pneumon iae, Neisseria meningitides , or H. influenzae, in 
combination with CSF leukocytosis and/or decrease in CSF glucose, can serve to confirm the diagnosis of 
acute bacterial meningitis (44).
Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 89of 94Infection: Bacterial Pneumoniad
Symptoms :  productive cough/change in character of sputum, dyspnea or tachypnea, 
chills, chest pain, rigors, headache, fati gue, sweats, anorexia, myalgias
Physical findings :  rales; pulmonary consolidation as reflected by: dullness on 
percussion, bronchial breath sounds, egophony; fever >38°C oral or >39°C rectal, or 
<36°C, hypothermia (temperature <36°C oral or < 37°C rectal)
Laboratory te sts:  leukocytosis, differential WBC count of >10% band neutrophils, 
leukopenia, hypoxemia (PaO 2 <60 mm Hg on room air), positive blood culture, Gram 
stain and culture of deep expectorated sputume, positive culture with or without positive 
Gram stain of tr anstracheal aspirate, pleural fluid culture, lung biopsy, bronchoscopy 
with bronchoalveolar lavag e or protected brush sampling,
Imaging studies :  Pulmonary infiltrate with consolidation on chest X -Ray (CXR) 
(new i n comparison with Baseline CXR)
Infection:  Visceral Abscess
Symptoms:  abdominal pain, anorexia, weight loss, cough/pleuritic chest pain (hepatic 
abscess), rigors (seldom present)
Physical findings:  intermittent fevers (temperature >38°C oral or >39°C rectal), 
abdominal tenderness, pal pable mass, hepatomegaly, jaundice
Laboratory tests:   positive Gram stain and/or culture from the infected site, with 
isolation of an appropriate pathogen, positive blood culture, leukocytosis with 
accompanying left shift, differential WBC count of >10% i mmature (band) neutrophils, 
elevated serum amylase concentration (pancreatic abscess), elevated alkaline 
phosphatase concentration (hepatic abscess) pyuria in renal abscess
Imaging studies:   typical findings on ultrasound, CT scan, MRI scan, or 
radionucli de scan
Note: Items in bold are considered essential diagnostic features.
dFor the diagnosis of pneumonia in adults, commonly at least 2 of the listed symptoms and/or signs should be 
present in conjunction with at least one laboratory and one imaging studies diagnostic element. How ever, for 
the purposes of counting serious infection episodes in a clinical trial of IVIG, the finding of a new pulmonary 
infiltrate with consolidation on CXR is considered sufficient. To establish the diagnosis of bacterial 
pneumonia for pediatric patients, most of the same diagnostic criteria listed may be used, with the following 
exceptions: Because pediatric patients may not produce a sputum specimen for culture, blood cultures or 
serology may be substituted to identify th e etiologic bacterial pathogen. In infants age 3 to 24 months, who 
tend to have a higher baseline temperature, fever is defined as a rectal temperature >38.3°C (101°F). In 
children >2 years, fever is more commonly defined as a rectal temperature >38°C (100 .4°F). In pediatric 
patients, elevations of WBC counts >15,000/mm3are frequent but could be variable in patients with bacterial 
pneumonia, or leukopenia with WBC count <5000/mm3may be observed, usually associated w ith severe 
infection (45).
eWe recommend a deep expectorated sputum gram stain to demonstrate the presence of microorganisms on 
examination of 10 -20 oil immersion microscopic fields and < 10 squamous epithelial cells and 
>25polymorphonuclear leukocytes at 10X low  power magnification to determine suitability of sputum culture 
(45).
Protocol GTI1502 –Amendment 2
CONFIDENTIALAppendix 3 Blood Pressure Percentiles for Pediatric Patients
Amendment 2
Page 90of 94Blood Pressure Percentiles for Pediatric Patients
15 Mar 2016
Blood Pressure Percentiles for Pediatric Patients

Protocol GTI1502 –Amendment 2
CONFIDENTIAL
Amendment 2
Page 91of 94
15 Mar 2016

Protocol GTI1502 –Amendment 2
CONFIDENTIAL
Amendment 2
Page 92of 94
15 Mar 2016

Protocol GTI1502 –Amendment 2
CONFIDENTIAL
Amendment 2
Page 93of 94
15 Mar 2016

Protocol GTI1502 – Amendment 2 15 Mar 2016
CONFIDENTIAL Page 94of 94Appendix 4 Wells Score
Deep Vein Thrombosis (46,47)
Clinical Characteristic Score
Active cancer (treatment ongoing, within previous 6 months or palliative) 1
Paralysis, paresis, or recent plaster immobilization of the lower extremities 1
Recently bedridden >3 days or major surgery within previous 12 w eeks 
requiring general or regional anesthesia1
Previously documented DVT 1
Localized tenderness along distribution of deep venous system 1
Entire leg sw ollen 1
Calf Swelling 3 cm larger than asymptomatic side (measured 10 cm below  
tibial tuberosity)1
Pitting edema confined to the symptomatic leg 1
Collateral superficial veins (non-varicose) 1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT -2
Total Score:
Any subject with a total Wells prediction score >1 for DVT assessment should have further 
diagnostic testing per study  site standard of care if medically  indicated -unless the D -dimer 
is negative since this test has a high negative predictive value.  If the D -dimer is positive at 
any time after the Screening time point (ie, above Screening value, exceeding cutoff range of 
the reporting laboratory ), redraw a blood sample for repeat D-dimer testing at the central 
laboratory  within one week to confirm. In all situations, the investigator should use best 
medical judgment to e valuate the subject as medically  indicated (48,49).
Pulmonary Em bolism (50)
Clinical Characteristic Score
Previous DVT or PE 1.5
Surgery or bedridden for 3 days during past 4 w eeks 1.5
Active cancer (treatment within 6 months or palliative) 1
Hem optysis 1
Heart rate > 100 beats/min 1.5
Clinical signs of DVT 3
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE 3
Total Score:
Any subject with a total Wells prediction score >4 for the PE assessment should have further 
diagnostic testing per study  site standard of care if medically  indicated -unless the D -dimer 
is negative since this test has a high negative predictive value.  If the D-dimer is positive at 
any time after the Screening time point (ie, above Screening value, exceeding cutoff range of 
the reporting laboratory ), redraw a blood sample for repeat D- dimer testing at the central 
laboratory  within one week to confirm. In all si tuations, the investigator should use best 
medical judgment to evaluate the subject as medically  indicated (48,49).