Restoration of Cognitive Function with TDCS and Training in S erious Mental Illness  
9/19/2022 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
 Development of interventions that can effectively target and remediate the cognitive and functional impairment 
associated with serious mental illness  has been aggressively pursued and is a treatment priority.  Transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a safe, non -invasive neuromodulation technique that is capable of stimulating 
brain activity to facilitate learning.  As such, it shows promise as an adjunctive technique that could potentiate the impact of cognitive remediation and enhance cognition and functioning in this patient population.  
 The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the pairing of two therapeutic techniques, cognitive remediation 
and tDCS, as a cognitively enhancing intervention.  The efficacy of a cognitively enhancing intervention is critically dependent on its capacity to improve performance on untrained tasks assessing the same cognitive 
domain.  In addition, it would be highly desirable if intervention- induced change also generalized a) to improve 
functioning on cognitive domains beyond those that are trained and b) to improve capacity to perform real -world 
cognitive demands.  To address this objective, this study is designed to address the following  questions.  Is 
cognitive remediation paired with tDCS more efficacious than cognitive remediation delivered with sham 
stimulation?  Is intervention- induced cognitive change sustainable?  
Specific Aims.                      
Specific Aim 1: To
  examine the incremental benefit of pairing tDCS with cognitiv e remediation, we will enroll 
outpatients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or bipolar I disorder  to a double- blind, double- baseline, 
sham -controlled study.  Working memory focused cognitive remediation concurrent with tDCS or sham w ill be 
administered for 48 sessions. We will examine efficacy of the intervention with change on:   
a) nov el versions of two working memory training tasks;  
b) untrained measures that assess three domains of working memory performance – goal maintenance, 
capacity, and interference control (near generalization);  
c) related cognitive constructs (far generalization);  
d) functioning, measured in terms of capacity as well as community participation; and  
e) symptom severity, measure in terms of overall symptom severity and severity of negative symptoms .  
Hypothesis 1:  We hypothesize that there will be an incremental benefit to augmenting working memory focused 
cognitive remediation with tDCS.  Specifically, we predict that repeated administration of tDCS will produce 1) greater gains on novel versions of training tas ks, 2) greater generalization of performance gains to conceptually 
similar (near transfer) and related cognitive processes (far transfer) , 3) greater change in functioning, and 4) a 
larger reduction in symptom severity  than working memory focused cognitive remediation administered with 
sham.  
Specific Aim 2.   The d
 urability of intervention- induced changes in working memory, related cognitive domains, 
functional capacity, community functioning, and symptom severity  will be examined in patients 6 weeks after 
working memory focused cognitive remediation with tDCS or sham.  Hypothesis 2 :  We hypothesize that training 
gains achieved through pairing tDCS with working memory focused cognitive remediation will be maintained 
over time so that the predicted post -intervention between group difference in performance is sustained at 6 
weeks post -intervention.   
Achieving the proposed objectives will yield important information about the efficacy  and  durability  of a novel 
pairing of cognitively enhancing interventions.  Findings will inform treatment development with other cognitively compromised patient populations.  
 
  
 
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Despite pharmacological intervention, serious mental illnesses are among  the leading causes of disability  (1). 
This section will review the link between cognition and psychosocial functioning, highlight current efforts to 
address illness related cognitive impairments , and descr ibe the development  of cognitively enhancing 
interventions . 
Cognition as a Treatment Target in  Schizophrenia and Bipolar I Disorder . Research characterizing the 
nature of cognitive impairment in schizophrenia has established that cognitive impairment  is: nearly ubiquitous; 
sever e, compromising cognitive function  by 1 to 1.75 standard deviations across a multitude of domains ; 
relatively  independent of clinical symptom severity ; and predictive of clinically significant functional outcomes 
(2).  Cognition in individuals with bipolar I disorder in an euthymic state has also been found to be impaired.  The 
breadth and profile of neuropsychological changes is similar  to that observed in schizophrenia and 
schizoaffective disorder, differing only in that the magnitude of impairment is less severe (118, 119).  However, 
just as has been observed in schizophrenia, cognitive impairments associated with bipolar disorder have been 
found to contribute to poorer role functioning in the community (120).   Community functioning  (3), functional 
capacity  (4, 5) , and responsiveness to psychiatric rehabilitat ion (5) are all predicted by level of cognitive function, 
with cognitive performance often accounting for a greater proportion of the variance in functional outcomes than symptom severit y (4, 5) .  Most i mportantly, when neurocognit ion has been found to change in the course of 
intervention, cognitive change has related to functional improvement, suggesting that cognitive change can 
potentiate functional change (6, 7) .  
Thus, development of new in terventions that specifically ad dress cognition  has been ambitiously pursued. The 
mode of intervention that has shown the most potential  is cognitive remediation, an intensive, behavioral 
intervention that engage s cognitive processes  through a highly structured learning experience .  Restorative 
approaches to cognitive remediation aim to capitalize on neural plasticity, the brain’s ability to alter it’s structure, 
function, and connectivity in response to environmental demands  (8). Treatment protocols are structured to 
provide repeated practice with tasks  that target  and exercise a cognitive function. Two meta-analyses  concluded 
that intensive cognitive training (24 -50 sessions) wa s capable of modifying cognition in patients with 
schizophrenia (9, 10) . Few studies have examined the impact of cognitive training in individuals with bipolar 
disorder, however a recent, well -powered clinical trial found improvement in multiple cognitive domains (121).  
However, effect sizes in the meta -analyses for interventi on-induced cognitive change were modest (d  = .41 -.45), 
and these estimates have become controversial .  Methodological weaknesses common in the field might  have 
contributed  to an overestimate of treatment effects  (11, 12) . Among r ecent , methodologically strong,  studies , 
several  have reported medium to large performance gains on training tasks but have failed to find evidence of 
transfer  to untrained task s (11, 13- 16), although there have been some successes  (17, 18) .  At present , the 
inconsistency with which generalization occurs significantly limits the viability of cognitive remediation as an  
intervention for this population.    
To establish that change in a cognitive function has occurred, evidence of transfer must be demonstrated through improved performance on an untrained task that uses unfamiliar stimuli and/or procedures to assess the same ability (near transfer) (19) . The extent to which cognitive training generalizes to untrained tasks and related 
cognitive domains (near and far transfer) can be assessed with a focused training protocol.  Our current understanding of neuroplasticity suggests that the most effective point of intervention is likely to be with a higher 
order cognitive process that is supported by a distributed neural ne twork  (19-21).  According to the neuronal 
overlap hypothesis, focused training has  the potential not only to restore the targeted cognitive function but also 
to enhance closely related cognitive functions (far transfer) that  share common neural circuitry.  Based upon 
these theoretical assumptions, working memory, a higher order cognitive process supported by neural circuitry 
spread throughout the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate 
cortex, and thalamus  (22), has become a primary treat ment target.  
Impact of Working Memory Training (WMT) . WMT  studies with healthy adults have examined behavioral and 
neural outcomes, and findings, while not robust, suggest that working memory is a modifiable cognitive function 
(23-26). Recent meta -analyses have revealed several meaningful tr ends in the literature.  First, despite use  of a 
variety of different WMT  protocols , support was found for near transfer in verbal (d = .79) and nonverbal (d = 
.52) working memory domains in healthy adults (23).  Furthermore, evidence of far transfer was found on 
measures of complex attention (d = .32) and nonverbal reasoning ability (d = .19) but not on abilities such as 
verbal ability (d = .13), word decoding (d = .13), or arithmetic (d = .07).   Finally, when specific types of WMT  
protocols were tested for evidence of transfer, training on complex span working memory tasks was related to 
transfer to complex attention task s (24), while n -back training was  linked to improvements in fluid intelligence 
(24, 25) .  Furthermore, i maging studies of healthy adults have found changes in regional brain activatio n (26), 
network connectivity (27), and increased perfusion  (28) with WMT .  These results suggest that working memory  
is modifiable  and that enhancement  can produce improved performance in related cognitive domains and  
enhanced neural readiness  and efficiency .  
Working Memory in Schizophrenia  and Bipolar Disorder .  Working memory is strongly related to intelligence 
and other higher order cognitive functions in both healthy adults and patients (29).  Impairment in this d omain 
has significant  functional consequences  for patients . Working memory performance is positively related to 
community functioning (30) and vocational status (31) and is predictive of functional recovery after an acute 
episode (3, 32). Patients with greater working memory ability make greater functional gains during participation 
in psychosocial rehabilitation (33) and are mor e likely to  return to work  (3) and to demonstrate greater 
interpersonal role functioning (32) one year after an acute episode.  Studies indicate that patients and healthy 
individuals activate  the same neural network when completing working memory tasks; however, the impaired 
performance observed in schizophrenia is associated with activation and connectivity abnormalities in the 
underlying neural circuitry  (34)(122) .  Most notably , hypoactivation in the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex has been 
observed during performance of working memory tasks, suggesting that patients have difficulty mobilizing neural resources for optimal t ask performance (34-36).  In addition, patients appear less able to modulate connections  
between the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex and other brain regions  supporting working memory function 
(37)(123 -124).  These findings suggest that disruptions within and between regions of the neural network 
supporting working memory function contribute to its impairment in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder .  
Modifiability of Working Memory in S erious Mental Illness.  Only two published studies have examined the 
behavioral impact of  WMT  in patients with schizophrenia.  In a poorly powered pilot study, transfer to an untrained 
verbal working memory task was found, while no group differences were found on a visual working memory task  
(38).  In the second study, support was found for near transfer on  a verbal working memory task  (trend) and far 
transfer on an episodic memory task (significant).  However, transfer to a more remote measure, global cognitive 
ability was not significant  (39). To date, no studies have examined the behavioral impact of working memory 
training in patients with bipolar disorder. While there  is a dearth of  studies exploring the behavioral impact of 
WMT , imaging studies with patients with schizophrenia suggests that the neural network supporting working 
memory  is modifiable.   In a meta -analysis of imaging st udies conducted in conjunction with WMT , both patients 
and healthy controls demonstrated changes in activation in multiple brain regions, suggesting that both groups have neural networks that are capable of change  (26).  Furthermor e, in patients, change in neural activation has 
been associated with intervention- induced changes in working memory  performance (40-43). Thus, imaging  
outcomes indicate that the underlying neural network is responsive to training.   
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)  as an Intervention.  TDCS is a non- invasive brain st imulation 
technique that can enhance cognitive performance by modulating neuro- excitability  (44). Its primary mechanism 
of action is to shift resting membrane potential s in a polarity -dependent direction, with anodal stimulation typically 
increasing excitability. The mild stimulation delivered with tDCS does not induce action potentials, but rather , 
modulates spontaneous neuronal network activity. Thus, if the underlying neurocircuitry is capable of responding 
to stimulation, tDCS administration  can facilitate neuroplasticity by changing the intensity and frequency of 
neuronal firing. TDCS is administered by placing two electrodes on the scalp , enabling stimulation to be t argeted 
at specific neural regions . However, EEG and imaging st udies have demonstrated that tDCS stimulation extends 
beyond the point of application to the entire neural network supporting a cognitive  function (45, 46)  as well as to 
functionally  connected  regions (47) . TDCS administration has been found to be mo st effective when paired with 
cognitive training in healthy participants  (48, 49) . The proposed study aims  to test the hypothesis that tDCS 
paired with WMT  will enhance learning and generalization of training gains  in patients with s erious mental illnes s.   
 Repeated TDCS Administration in Healthy Adults.  When  tDCS or sham has been offered concurrent with very 
brief cognitive training protocols , four of the six  studies found significant improvement  post-intervention in tDCS 
but not sham conditions on tasks conceptually similar to the training tasks  (50-55). Importantly, three of these 
studies examined the stability  of tDCS -induced cognitive change and found support for its durability.  Au et al. 
(53) reported that tDCS induced gains in working memory performance were maintained three months post -
intervention, as measured by performance on a training task . Interestingly,  Jones et al. failed to find a between-
group difference in performance gain post- intervention but found that the tDCS group maintained the training 
gains at a 1- month follow up, whereas the sham group did not (55). Most promisingly, Stephens and Berryhill 
(54) reported that 1- month post t DCS and WMT, significantly greater  impro vement on a measure of fu nctional 
capacity was found  in the tDCS condition. Given that training protocols of at least 32 sessions are recommended 
when cognitive training is offered alone (12) , it is encouraging that significant and durable cognitive change is 
emerging within 10 sessions with the addition of tDCS.  These findings suggest that tDCS could make a 
meaningful impact as a clinical intervention.  
 Repeated TDCS Administration in Patients with S erious Mental Illness.  Only three published studies have 
examined the impact of repeated tDCS in patients with schizophrenia. Mondino et al. reported that patients 
receiving tDCS exhibited significantly fewer source monitoring errors after 10 sessions of tDCS (56) .  
Unfortunately, no other aspects of cognition were assessed.  In a study targeting the left dorsal lateral prefrontal 
cortex, investigators found that repeated administration of tDCS  produced significantly greater cognitive 
improvement on measures of working memory, attention, and global cognitive function as compared to sham, 
with lar ge effect sizes noted (d = 84. - 1.25) (57). Last, a case study examined two patients who received tDCS 
concurrent with 12 of 20 cognitive training sessions  (58). Investigators reported moderate to large changes in 
multiple aspects of cognition in both participants, comparable to what is observed when cognitive training alone 
is offered for a much longer duration.  Unfortunately,  there was not a sham control, and therefore, performance 
gain due to tDCS could not be quantified. T hese findings suggest that tDCS  can produce enhanced cognitive 
performance  in schizophrenia. Presently, no study has examined tDCS combined with focused cognitive training 
to explore the impact of this paired approach on cognitive function and functional outcomes.  Repeated 
administration has been studied to examine it’s impact on depression and safety in patients with bipolar I 
disorder.  Stimulation applied to the left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex has been found to be safe and to reduce symptoms of depression (125, 126)  Presently, well- powered randomized controlled trials are needed to assess 
the efficacy of this intervention in clinical populations (59) . 
 
Transfer of Working Memory  Gains to Functional Outcomes.  Development of  cognitively enhancing 
interventions is  motivated by the goal of reducing disability in schizophrenia. Recently, the results of two  studies 
suggest that target ing working memory can have a measurable impact on functional outcomes  (7, 60) . Rispaud 
et al. (7) found that intervention- induced change in working memory and processing speed during a year of 
cognitive remediation was predictive of change in functioning, while changes in episodic memory and problem 
solving were unrelated to functional gains.  Similarly, Subramaniam et al.  (60) found that intervention induced 
change in working memory was predictive of vocational functioning at a six month follow up.  Research suggests 
that transfer of cognitive gains to functional outcomes is facilitated by strategy training and opportunities to use 
cognitive skills with everyday activities (61).  The addition of  strategy training has been found to  increase the 
impact of cognitive training on functional outcomes , d=.47 vs .34 (10), while action- based techniques that enable 
practice of cognitive skills in simulated environments has been found to produce signif icantly greater functional 
gains than cognitive training alone  (62).  Presently, the extent to which tDCS -induced cognitive gains can transfer 
to functional outcomes is unknown.   
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 Participants  will be randomized to a double- blind , double- baseline, sham controlled trial of a 48 -session working 
memory focused cognitive remediation intervention paired with t DCS  or sham .  All participants  who complete 
the 48- session intervention will be asked to return for f ollow up  assessment  6 weeks post -intervention.  A double-
baseline design is being used to minimize measurement error , as the largest practice effects are observed  
between t he first and second assessment.  Given that very little is known about the durability of tDCS -induced 
change in cognition, the follow -up assessment will allow us  to examine stability . 
 Participation in this study will be in addition to the clinical care that patients are receiving at study entry and will 
not replace psychiatric or case manage ment services.   
 
Data Collection.   
 Participant Recruitment and Screening.   Participants will be clinically stable outpatients 
between the  age of 18 and 65 who meet DSM -5 criteria for schizophr enia, schizoaffective disorder , bipolar I 
disorder .  Clinical stability is defined as  not severely depressed or acutely manic and not having any 
hospitalizat ions or antipsychotic medication changes in the 4 weeks prior to enrollment.  Establishing clinical 
stability prior to study enrollment is necessary, as acute psychotic, depressive, or manic episodes or side 
effects due to recent medication changes could i nterfere with a participant’s ability to complete the study 
protocol.  Studies of patients with schizophrenia , schizoaffective disorder, and bipolar I disorder  have found 
that these patients have very similar profiles of cognitive impairment, differing onl y in severity  (63) (118). 
Therefore, patients with any of these diagnos es will be included in the study.  In addition, given the ubiquitous 
nature of cognitive impairment in s erious mental illness  and our current lack of knowledge about who will 
respond to cognitive remediation, current research (64) and practice recommendations (65)  are to offer the 
intervention to anyone with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder , or bipolar I disorder   Specific 
exclusion criteria will be : diagnosis of severe alcohol or substance use disorder in the last 6 months or mild 
alcohol or substance use disorder in the last month; history of a head injury or neurological disease that has compromised cognitive functioning; ability to speak English that is not sufficient to comprehend testing 
procedures; diagnosis of a learning disability, mental retardation, or a pervasive developmental disorder 
(premorbid IQ less than 75), diagnosis of a medical condition that is incompatible with tDCS procedures such 
as pregnancy, seizure disorder, eczema, metal or implants in their head, and open head wounds; participant 
does not  demonstrate understanding of study procedures  during consent process; participant has  documented 
behavioral problems that prevent participation in a group intervention; and participation in a study of tDCS or 
cognitive remediation in the previous 12 months. 
 Patients will be recruited for the study in several ways .  Dr. Nienow is a provider in Outpatient Mental Health at 
the Minneapolis VAHCS.  She or a research staff person will meet with mental health staff to provide information about the study and to request that information be provided to appropriate patients.  IRB approved descriptions 
of the study will also be included in the daily briefing to staff so that medical and mental health staff are aware of 
the study.   Advertisements describing the study also will be posted at the VAHCS for potential participants to 
see.  An IRB approved brochure and posters will be on display in the mental health clinics, in research kiosks in  
Building 70, and on the VA research website.  Third, a  waiver of consent for screening and a waiver of HIPAA 
authorization for screening purposes is being requested as part of this application.  If approved, investigators will 
request a list of patients treated at the Minneapolis VAHCS who have a chart diagnosis and are within the age 
of participants eligible for this study.  These individuals will be sent an IRB -approved letter that describes the 
study and that offers them the opportunity to indicate whether they would like to be provided with more 
information about it.  Fourth , patients who have previously participated in research conducted by Dr. Nienow and 
who have expressed an interest in being contacted about future research will be sent an IRB -approved letter 
describing the study.   
If a prospective participant expresses interest in the study after being approached through one of these means, 
a research staff person will provide him/her with more information about the study. If the individual continues to express interest, a brief, standardized, eligibility screening questionnaire will be completed.  If the individual 
appears to be eligible, he/she will be scheduled for an in- person appointment and asked to provide consent for 
a diagnostic screening interview.  At the time of scheduling, participants will be educated that there are risks to coming to a public space such as the VA during the COVID -19 pandemic, they will be told of the precautions 
taken by staff to minimize the risk of transmission during the screening session, and they will be provided with 
information about the types of safety practices they would be expected to abide by while on- site.  If the participant 
continues to be interested, they will be scheduled for a screening session.  
If after a diagnostic interview and a review of available medical records, the potential participant appears to be 
eligible for the study, he or she will be offered admission into the study.  The consent form will contain a detailed 
description of all study procedures and possible risks and benefits of participation.  Dr. Nienow or a trained research staff person will review the content of the form with the participant and will respond to any questions or concerns.  The random assignment to cognitive remediation with tDCS or sham will be explained to participants.  
To ensure comprehension of the information provided in the consent form, participants will be asked a series of questions to assess their understanding.   
Assessment . The 
 assessment s chedule is summarized in Table 1.  The instruments administered at each 
assessment point  are described below.  The screening session will be 2 hours in length.  Baseline, post -
intervention, and follow up assessments will take approximately 5 hours to complete and will be divided into two 
2 ½ hour sessions . Partic ipants will be paid for their participation in all assessment sessions at a rate of $15/hour.   
Diagnostic Screening Assessment (120 minutes).  DSM -5  diagnosis will be established with the Structured 
Clinical Interview for Axis I Disorders (SCID -I) (66).  Mood, psychosis, and substance use sections will be 
administered.  Participant self -report and available medical records will inform these ratings.  As part of the 
diagnostic assessment, a psychosocial, medical, and psychiatric history interview will be completed.  To ensure 
study eligibility, the  Test of Premorbid Functi oning (67) will be administered to obtain an estimate of premorbid 
intellectual ability.  Last, a tDCS safety screen will be administered to identify existing medical conditions that are 
incompatible with tDCS (68)(115) . 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
Cognitive , Functional , and Symptom  Assessment . This set of assessment measures will be administered at 
baseline, post -intervention (4-month assessment), and at the follow up assessment (5.5-month assessment) to 
evaluate different degrees of skill transfer and cognitive generalization and to monitor symptom severity.   
Symptom Assessment . 
 The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) (69) and the Brief Negative Symptom Scale 
BNSS) (105)  will be administered to assess symptom severity in the previous week . With training, good reliability 
can be obtained on the BPRS and the BNSS with median ICCs of .81- .83 and .89 -.95 being reported, respectively 
(70)(105) .  
Cognitive tasks administered as part of this assessment i nclude: 1 ) novel versions of training tas ks; 2) untrained 
working memory measures; and 3) measures of related cognitive constructs .  As working memory is a 
multifaceted construct, and it is unknown whether components of this cognitive domain differ in malleability, near 
transfer measures were selected so that three distinct components of working memory – capacity, interference 
control, and goal maintenance could be assessed (71) .   
N-bac k tas k. This task measures executive processes in working memory  and requires continuous monitoring, 
updating, and inhibition of irrelevant items to complete (72). This task  presents participants with a series of stimuli  
that appear  sequentially  at the center of the computer screen for 500 ms with an inter -stimulus inter val of 2000 
ms.  Participants are required to press one of two buttons identifying each stimulus as a target or a non- target , 
depending on whether it is a  match to the stimulus two before it. Targets will occur on one- third of the trials. The 
task has demonstrated acceptable retest reliability (ICC = .80- .91), small practice effects ( -.07 SD’s), and little 
exposure to ceiling or floor effects  (73).  D prime,  a performance indicator that controls for response bias , will be 
used to measure performance on this task.  
Adaptable N -back tasks will be used as training tasks in the clinical trial.  Non- adaptable, novel  variants of the 
N-back tasks will be included in the assessment sessions.  N- back  tasks will be administered to assess transfer Table 1 .  Assess ment Schedule  
Time  
Assessment Instrument  
Screening Interview  
Baseline  
2nd Baseline 
Post- Intervention   
(4-months)  
6-wk Follow Up  
(5.5 months)  
SCID -I/DSM -5 conversion  X     
Demographic Interview  X     
Test of Premorbid Functioning  X     
TDCS Safety Screen  X     
Number and Picture N-Back Task s  X X X X 
Rotation and Reading Complex Span  Tasks   X X X X 
Dot Pattern Expectancy  Task   X X X X 
AX-Continuous Performance  Task   X X X X 
Change Detection Task   X X X X 
Change Localization Task   X X X X 
MATRICS  Consensus Cognitive Battery   X X X X 
University of California Performance -Based Skills Assessment -Brief  X X X X 
First Episode Social Functioning Scale ( FE-SFS)   X X X X 
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale   X X X X 
Brief Negative Symptom Scale   X X X X 
on procedurally similar tasks with novel content.  
Complex Span task .  This task requires both memory storage and a manipulation processing requirement  (74).  
Each trial  starts with a memory item that is presented at the center of the computer screen for 500 ms.  The 
memory items are  followed by a distracter, presented in the center of the computer screen.  The participant is 
asked to make a decision about the distracter (processing requirement) as quickly and accurately as possible.  
The distracter disappears after the participant’s response, and the next memory item appears.  After a few 
memory –decision sequences, participants are asked to recall the memoranda in correct serial order.  The 
number of memory -decision sequences increases with each trial.   Test-retest reliability has been r eported to 
range from (ICC = .71-. 90) across versions of the task  (75).  Per formance is based upon the proportion of list 
elements recalled in correct serial order across trials . 
Two adaptable versions of  t he complex span task will be used as training tasks in the clinical trial.    Novel 
versions of these tasks will be administered in the assessment sessions so that transfer to novel versions of 
training tasks can be measured  as well as impact of the intervention on the interference control component of 
working memory.  
Dot Pattern Expectancy Task .   This  task was created to assess context processing deficits in patients with 
schizophrenia and is recognized as a measure of goal maintenance (76) .  In this continuous performance test 
the participant views a series of dot patterns that are presented sequentially in the middle of the computer screen.  
Participant s must decide whether each stimulus is a target or a non -target, depending upon whether it was 
presented immediately after a to- be-remembered stimulus. The task has been found to have good internal 
consistency  (alpha .70- .97), little exposure to ceiling effects, and good retest reliability  (77).  Performance will be 
assessed with d prime, a measure of sensitivity .  
AX-C ontinuous Per formance  Task.   This task is recognized as a measure of goal maintenance (106).  In this 
continuous performance test, the participant views a series of letters that are presented sequentially in the middle of the computer screen.  Participants must decide whether each stimulus is a target or non- target, depending 
upon whether it was presented immediately after a to- be-remember stimulus.  This task is highly correlated with 
the Dot Pattern Expectancy Task (r  = .65) but is  easier to complete (107).  Both tasks have been shortened and 
a composite measure will be made by com bining d prime scores on these tasks into a single indicator of goal 
maintenance performance.   
Change Detection Task . (7
 8) In this task, a sample array of colored objects is presented to participants on a 
computer screen for 200 ms.  After a 1,000 ms delay, a test array of colored objects is presented for 3000 ms.  
On 50% of the trials, the color of one of the items has changed between sample and test arrays.  Participants 
are asked to indicate whether the sample and test arrays are the same or different.  Performance across trials 
is measured with proportion correct, an index of the number of items that have been stored in working memory.   
Change Localization Task.  (7 9) In this task, a 5 -item array of colored squares were equally spaced around an 
imaginary circle at the center of the screen.  The array is presented for 500 ms.  After a 1000 ms delay, the 
encoding array is followed by a test array.  Participants use a mouse to click on the item that has changed to a 
different color.  Performance across trials is measured with the proportion correct and is a measure of working 
memory capacity.  Performance on change detection and localization tasks w ill be averaged to obtain the working 
memory capacity meas ure. 
MATRI CS Consensus Cognitive Battery  ( MCCB ). This battery  was developed specifically for clinical trials of 
cognitively enhancing agents developed for  individuals with schizophrenia  (80).  The battery  assesses 7 domains 
of cognition that have been identified as impaired in schizophrenia.   All subtests have good test -retest reliability, 
ICC = .68 -.85, relatively small practice effects d = .00 -.22 across a 4- week interval, and little exposure to ceiling 
or floor effects  (80).  The MCCB assesses  processing speed and reasoning. These dom ains may show 
improvement as a secondary effect of enhancing  working memory , as working memory supports these  cognitive 
processes  (73, 74) . The average of T -scores in these two domains will be the measures of far transfer.   
 
Functional measures will be administered to assess functional capacity and community functioning.  
 
University of California, San Diego Performance -Based Skills Assessment -Brief (UPSA-B) .  This measure of 
adaptive behavior will be used to assess skillfulness with activities of daily living  (81). Participants are asked to 
complete brief role play tasks so that competence can be rated in two areas:  finance and communication. Th e 
scores in these two  domains are summed to obtain a total score. The UPSA has been validated for use with 
patients with schizophrenia and was found to have excellent inter -rater reliability (ICC = .91)  and t est-retest 
reliability across a 2 -week interval, r = .93  (81). The brief version of this measure has been found to correlate r= 
.91 with the full measure (108).  
First-E pisode Social Functioning Scale (SFS).  This self -report inventory will be used to assess  functioning in the 
community in the prior 3- month period.  This scale was developed for and validated with individuals with 
schizophrenia.  Subscales assess independent living skills, interacting with people, social activities, intimacy, 
friendships,  and family rela tions.  Subscales have been found to have good internal consistency (alpha = .63-
.80), to be sensitive to change, and  without  floor or ceiling effects  (82).  Subscales 1-5 on actual performance 
subscales will be summed  to generate a total score.  
Randomization.  Group assignment will utilize a randomized block strategy, which is the preferred method of 
group assignment for small clinical trials of this nature (83). Accordingly, groups of 2 to 4 volunteers will be 
stratified into two groups so that patients assigned to each condition are equivalent in baseline N- back scores  
and age. We predict groups of this size will accumulate over 6-8 weeks of active recruitment. These stratified 
groups  then will be assigned randomly  to treatment conditions. The advantages of the randomized block strategy 
are that it  maintains approximately equivalent group sizes throughout the trial, minimizes the confounding effects 
of initial differences (thereby decreasing reliance on statistical corrections such as ANCOVA), while at the same 
time preserving the interpretive strengths of  unrestricted randomization.  
Intervention.  The working memory focused cognitiv e remediation 
intervention will consist of two components:  focused cognitive training 
and bridging activities.  Participants will attend 2 -3 120-minute training 
sessions a week.  A typical session protocol is presented in Table 2 .  
To be considered a completer, a participant must complete 80% ( 39 
sessions ) of treatment.  To maximize treatment completion, make- up 
times will be available each week. In addition, participants will receive payments for completion of treatment sessions. The paym ent scale 
increases by $1 after every 3 training sessions  and ranges from $10 
dollars per a session for the first 3 training sessions and $25 per a 
session for the last 3 training sessions .  
Focused Cognitive Training.  The
  cognitive training is computer -based and  consists of approximately 15 adaptive 
computer exercises that place demands on working memory functions through verbal, visual, and spatial stimulus modalities.  All tasks chosen for the intervention met the following criteria:  1) provide training in one or 
more working memory funct ions; 2) provide participant with ongoing feedback on performance; 3) allow task 
difficulty to be modified so that errors during training are minimized, 4) present novel stimuli, and 5) are appropriate for an adult patient population.  The training t asks w ere selected from Happy Neuron software  and 
experimental tasks used in research with patients with schizophrenia (40).  The cognitive  training intervention 
will be  provided by a trainer  in a 2 to 1 (participant  to interventionist ) ratio.   The interventionist  will provide 
instruction about the computer software, monitor participant progress, and facilitate engagement by rewarding effort and minimizing frustration. The interventionist s will be Master ’s level psych ology technicians supervised 
by Dr. Nienow.  Participants will receive 48 hours of focused cognitive training , an amount consistent with dose 
recommendations for clinical trials of this nature (12) .  
Bridging Sessions :  It ha
 s been recommended that bridging sessions provide metacognitive skills training that 
contains the following critical elements: identification of a highly valued personal goal; activities aimed to heighten 
awareness of cognitive strengths and weaknesses; explicit training in strategy use; training to plan, monitor, and 
evaluate task approach; and exploration of beliefs about individual abilities and situational challenges (61) .  All 
participants will participate in a 45- minute, group -based, bridging session immediately after the computerized 
cognitive training session.  The curriculum for the bridging sessions will include each of these elements and be 
based on two manualized approaches that have been found to produce significant functional gains  (62, 84) , 
Comp ensatory Cognitive Training (84) and Action -Based Cognitive Remediation (62).  Compensatory Cognitive 
Training provides education about cognitive difficulties associated with schizophrenia and teaches explicit Table 2.  Training Session Protocol  
Training Activity  Time  
(min)  
TDCS/Sha m Set Up  5  
Lesson Planning  5 
Cognitive Training  60  
TDCS/Sham Equipment Removal  5 
Bridging Activities  45 
Total  120 
strategies for efficiently using attention, memory, prospective memory, and problem -solving skills.  Action -based 
cognitive remediation builds on the intensive computerized cognitive training by pairing it with opportunities to 
apply cognitive skills in simulated real -world environments.  Tasks are designed so that participants can 
immediately transfer the cognitive training to a tangible set of behaviors.  This environment provides a platform 
for the therapist and group members to observe cognition in action and to discuss thoughts related to applying 
cognitive s kills.  In addition, both of these approaches place emphasis on setting individual goals that can be 
linked to the cognitive training.   
Once every two weeks, an interventionist  will meet with a par ticipant individually , rather than in the group setting.  
These individual sessions will run concurrently with the group training, with one interventionist meeting with a 
participant individually and the other interventionist conducting the group- based training with the other 
participants.  In the course of the 48 -session training protocol, each participant will engage in 19.5 hours of group 
bridging activities and 4.5 hours of individual assessment and goal setting.  The individual sessions will be used 
to establish and review progress toward goals .   
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: T DCS will be administered  with a StarStim neuro modulator . This device 
has been approved for use in research with an investigational device exemption due to meeting criteria for non-
significant risk.  Following the same procedures as were used during our pilot work, the current will be 
administered at 1 mA via t wo saline soaked electrode sponges ( 5 x 7 cm) for 2 0 minutes.  The electrode 
placement will be based on the 10/20 EEG system.  Specifically, the anodal electrode will be placed over F3 (left 
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex) and the cathodal electrode will  be placed in the contralateral supraorbital position. 
The neuromodulator  can be programmed to offer tDCS or sham stimulation based upon a participant 
identification number that is programmed into the device.  Thus , the device will administer either tDCS or sham 
stimulation, depending upon condition assignment, and neither the interventionist  nor the participants will know 
the individual’s assignment.  Participants who are in the sham condition will receive 30 seconds of stimulation at the beginning of the session to mimic the experience of tDCS.  This protocol has been found to be effective and 
is the recommended protocol for blinded tDCS administration (85).   
Integration of Cognitive Training and TDCS .  A
 daptive versions of two integrative working memory tasks, the N -
back and complex span tasks, will be trained on during every session.  These tasks will be completed at the 
beginning of each session and will always be the training tasks used concurrent with tDCS or sham stimulation.  
These tasks were selected for training in conjunction with stimulation because:  1) they require the coordinated 
use of multiple working memory components, 2) have each been found to produce generalization, and 3) make 
independent contributions to the prediction of intelligence, suggesting a strong relationship with other higher 
order cognitive functions (72) .   
Study Blinds .   To maximize the interpretability of any group differences that occur between the tDCS and sham 
conditions, multiple  blinds will be in place. To equalize expectancy effects, patients will be blind to condition 
assignment.  The StarStim neuromodulator  will be used with all participants and is capable of offering a sham 
stimulation experience that is indistinguishable fro m tDCS.  In addition, to minimize demand characteristics and 
differential prov ision of treatment, the interventionists  who provide cognitive remediation will be blin d to 
participant condition (tDCS  vs sham). Furthermore, steps will be taken to blind the psychology technician who 
conducts the outcome assessments.  Participants will be asked not to describe the intervention they are receiving 
to the psychology technician.  In addition, the technician who conducts the outcome assessments will not provide 
the c linical intervention.  The data collected will be coded in such a way that the investigator who conducts the 
data analysis will be blind to group membership.  
 Statistical  Analysis Plan .  T-tests  will be conducted to determine whether important baseline  variables are 
matched, such as working memory performance (N- back performance) and age. If any between- group 
differences emerge on these factors and they are found to relate to the dependent variables in any of the planned comparisons described below, the confounding variable will be added as a covariate of non- interest in the 
analysis.   
 
Data  R
eduction:  Consistent with recommendations that change in cognitive function be assessed with multiple 
measures of the construct  (19), each working memory component will be assessed with two meas ures.  
Composite scores will be created by averaging the two measures of each aspect of working memory.  Co mposite 
novel N -Back and novel complex span variables will represent performance on procedurally similar working 
memory tasks with novel stimuli, composite scores on capacity, interference control, and goal maintenance tasks 
will reflect near transfer on untrained working memory  measures, the MCCB Speed of Processing and Problem 
Solving and Reasoning composite will reflect far transfer to a related cognitive domain.  T ransfer to  functional 
capacity and community  functioning will be measured with performance on the UPSA -B Total score and the FE-
SFS Total score.  Impact on symptom severity will be assessed with the BPRS Total score and the BNSS Total 
score.  
 
Data Analysis Plan for Aims 1 and 2:  Cognitive and functional improvements  are considered equally important 
outcomes for interventions targeting cognition  (64).  The primary measures of cognitive outcome for this study 
will be the capacity, interference control, and goal maintenance composites. These variables were selected as the primary outcomes, as near transfer must be demonstrated for an intervention to be  deemed cognitively 
enhancing (19) . The measure of functional capacity, the UPSA -B Total score, will be the primary functional 
outcome.  This is consistent with the NIMH criterion that improvement on a measure of functional capacity must be demonstrated in addition to cognitive improvement for an intervention to be classified as cognitively enhancing  
(86).  Thus, near transfer and change in functional capacity are the outcomes that have been deemed to be 
clinically meaningful.  M ixed model approaches will be used, as they are well -suited to examining within subject 
change over time.  
Specific Aim 1:   N
 ear and Far Transfer of Training.  Mixed effect, repeated measure ANOVAs will be 
completed to test the hypotheses that WMT and  tDCS will enhance performance significantly more than WMT 
and sham on 1) novel versions of  trained task s, 2) untrained working memory measures, 3) measure of related 
cognitive functions,  4) functional capacity, and 5) community functioning. Symptom severity is predicted to 
improve significantly more with WMT and tDCS than WMT and sham.   Significant Group x Time interactions will 
allow rejection of the null hypothesis that WMT  + tDCS offers no benefit as compared to sham.   
Specific Aim 2:   D urability of Cognitive and Functional Changes. To examine durability of near and far 
transfer  and symptom change, mixed model repeated measure ANOVAs will be conducted.   TDCS -induced 
cognitive change is expected to endure and post -intervention between group differences maintained.  
 
       
 
        
 
 
  
 
 
References  
 
1. Fleischhacker WW, Arango C, Arteel P, Barnes TR, Carpenter W, Duckworth K, et al. Schizophrenia--
time to commit to policy change. Schizophr Bull. 2014;40 Suppl 3:S165- 94. 
2. Gold JM. Cognitive deficits as treatment targets in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2004;72(1):21 -8. 
3. Nuechterlein KH, Subotnik KL, Green MF, Ventura J, Asarnow RF, Gitlin MJ, et al. Neurocognitive 
predictors of work outcome in recent -onset schizophrenia. Schizophr  Bull. 2011;37 Suppl 2:S33 -40. 
4. Nienow TM, Docherty NM, Cohen AS, Dinzeo TJ. Attentional Dysfunction, Social Perception, and Social 
Competence: What Is the Nature of the Relationship? J Abnorm Psychol. 2006;115(3):408 -17. 
5. Gupta M, Holshausen K, Mausbach B, Patterson TL, Bowie CR. Predictors of change in functional 
competence and functional behavior after functional adaptation skills training for schizophrenia. J Nerv Ment Dis. 
2012;200(8):705 -11. 
6. Brekke JS, Hoe M, Green MF. Neurocognitive change, functional change and service intensity during 
community -based psychosocial rehabilitation for schizophrenia. Psychol Med. 2009;39(10):1637- 47. 
7. Rispaud SG, Rose J, Kurtz MM. The relationship between change in cognition and change in functional 
ability in schizophrenia during cognitive and psychosocial rehabilitation. Psychiatry Res. 2016;244:145- 50. 
8. Vinogradov S, Fisher M, de Villers -Sidani E. Cognitive training for impaired neural systems in 
neuropsychiatric illness. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37(1) :43-76. 
9. McGurk SR, Twamley EW, Sitzer DI, McHugo GJ, Mueser KT. A meta- analysis of cognitive remediation 
in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(12):1791- 802. 
10. Wykes T, Huddy V, Cellard C, McGurk SR, Czobor P. A meta -analysis of cognitive remediation for 
schizophrenia: methodology and effect sizes. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168(5):472 -85. 
11. Dickinson D, Tenhula W, Morris S, Brown C, Peer J, Spencer K, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of 
computer -assisted cognitive remediation for schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167(2):170 -80. 
12. Keefe RS, Vinogradov S, Medalia A, Silverstein SM, Bell MD, Dickinson D, et al. Report from the working 
group conference on multisite trial design for cognitive remediation in schizophrenia. Schizophr  Bull. 
2011;37(5):1057 -65. 
13. Gomar JJ, Valls E, Radua J, Mareca C, Tristany J, Del Olmo F, et al. A Multisite, Randomized Controlled 
Clinical Trial of Computerized Cognitive Remediation Therapy for Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2015.  
14. Murthy NV, Mahncke H, Wexler BE, Maruff P, Inamdar A, Zucchetto M, et al. Computerized cognitive 
remediation training for schizophrenia: an open label, multi -site, multinational methodology study. Schizophr 
Res. 2012;139(1 -3):87- 91. 
15. Keefe RS, Vinogradov S, Medalia A,  Buckley PF, Caroff SN, D'Souza DC, et al. Feasibility and pilot 
efficacy results from the multisite Cognitive Remediation in the Schizophrenia Trials Network (CRSTN) 
randomized controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73(7):1016 -22. 
16. Rass O, Forsyth JK, Bolbecker AR, Hetrick WP, Breier A, Lysaker PH, et al. Computer- assisted cognitive 
remediation for schizophrenia: a randomized single- blind pilot study. Schizophr Res. 2012;139(1 -3):92- 8. 
17. Fisher M, Loewy R, Carter C, Lee A, Ragland JD, Niendam T, et al. Neuroplasticity -based auditory 
training via laptop computer improves cognition in young individuals with recent onset schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2015;41(1):250 -8. 
18. Dale CL, Brown EG, Fisher M, Herman AB, Dowling AF, Hinkley LB, et al. Auditory Cortical Plasticity 
Drives Training- Induced Cognitive Changes in Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2015.  
19. Lovden M, Backman L, Lindenberger U, Schaefer S, Schmiedek F. A theoretical framework for the study 
of adult cognitive plasticity. Psychol Bull. 2010;136(4):659- 76. 
20. Kelly C, Foxe JJ, Garavan H. Patterns of normal human brain plasticity after practice and their 
implications for neurorehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006;87(12 Suppl 2):S20 -9. 
21. Klingberg T. Training and plasticity  of working memory. Trends Cogn Sci. 2010;14(7):317- 24. 
22. Minzenberg MJ, Laird AR, Thelen S, Carter CS, Glahn DC. Meta- analysis of 41 functional neuroimaging 
studies of executive function in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66(8):811 -22. 
23. Melb y-Lervag M, Hulme C. Is working memory training effective? A meta-analytic review. Dev Psychol. 
2013;49(2):270 -91. 
24. Shipstead Z, Redick TS, Engle RW. Is working memory training effective? Psychol Bull. 2012;138(4):628-
54. 
25. Au J, Sheehan E, Tsai N, Duncan GJ, Buschkuehl M, Jaeggi SM. Improving fluid intelligence with training 
on working memory: a meta- analysis. Psychon Bull Rev. 2014.  
26. Li X, Xiao YH, Zhao Q, Leung AW, Cheung EF, Chan RC. The neuroplastic effect of working memory 
training in healthy volunteers and patients with schizophrenia: Implications for cognitive rehabilitation. 
Neuropsychologia. 2015;75:149- 62. 
27. Jolles DD, van Buchem MA, Crone EA, Rombouts SA. Functional brain connectivity at rest changes after 
working memory training. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013;34(2):396- 406. 
28. Buschkuehl M, Hernandez -Garcia L, Jaeggi SM, Bernard JA, Jonides J. Neural effects of short -term 
training on working memory. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2014;14(1):147- 60. 
29. Johnson MK, McMahon RP, Robinson BM, Harvey AN, Hahn B, Leonard CJ, et al. The relationship 
between working memory capacity and broad measures of cognitive ability in healthy adults and people with schizophrenia. Neuropsychology. 2013;27(2):220 -9. 
30. Alden EC, Cobia DJ, Reilly JL, Smith MJ. Cluster analysis differentiates high and low community 
functioning in schizophrenia:  Subgroups differ on working memory but not other neurocognitive domains. Schizophr Res. 2015;168:273- 8. 
31. Kaneda Y, Jayathilak K, Meltzer HY. Determinants of work outcome in sc hizophrenia and schizoaffective 
disorder: role of cognitive function. Psychiatry Res. 2009;169(2):178 -9. 
32. Smith TE, Hull JW, Huppert JD, Silverstein SM. Recovery from psychosis in schizophrenia and 
schizoaffective disorder: Symptoms and neurocognitive r ate-limiters for the development of social behavior skills. 
Schizophr Res. 2002;55(3):229 -37. 
33. Kurtz MM, Wexler BE, Fujimoto M, Shagan DS, Seltzer JC. Symptoms versus neurocognition as 
predictors of change in life skills in schizophrenia after outpatient rehabilitation. Schizophr Res. 2008;102(1 -
3):303 -11. 
34. Glahn DC, Ragland JD, Abramoff A, Barrett J, Laird AR, Bearden CE, et al. Beyond hypofrontality: a 
quantitative meta- analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of working memory in schizophrenia. Hum Brain 
Mapp. 2005;25(1):60- 9. 
35. Anticevic A, Repovs G, Barch DM. Working memory encoding and maintenance deficits in schizophrenia: 
neural evidence for activation and deactivation abnormalities. Schizophr Bull. 2013;39(1):168- 78. 
36. Henseler I, Falkai P, Gruber O. A systematic fMRI investigation of the brain systems subserving different 
working memory components in schizophrenia. Eur J Neurosci. 2009;30(4):693 -702. 
37. Anticevic A, Repovs G, Krystal JH, Barch DM. A broken filter: prefrontal functional  connectivity 
abnormalities in schizophrenia during working memory interference. Schizophr Res. 2012;141(1):8- 14. 
38. Hubacher M, Weiland M, Calabrese P, Stoppe G, Stocklin M, Fischer -Barnicol D, et al. Working memory 
training in patients with chronic schizophrenia: a pilot study. Psychiatry J. 2013;2013:154867.  
39. Hargreaves A, Dillon R, Anderson- Schmidt H, Corvin A, Fitzmaurice B, Castorina M, et al. Computerised 
working -memory focused cognitive remediation therapy for psychosis - A preliminary study. Schizophr Res. 
2015.  
40. Haut KM, Lim KO, MacDonald A, 3rd. Prefrontal cortical changes following cognitive training in patients 
with chronic schizophrenia: effects of practice, generalization, and specificity. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2010;35(9):1850 -9. 
41. Wexler BE, Anderson M, Fulbright RK, Gore JC. Preliminary evidence of improved verbal working 
memory performance and normalization of task -related frontal lobe activation in schizophrenia following cognitive 
exercises. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157(10):1694-7. 
42. Wykes T, Brammer M, Mellers J, Bray P, Reeder C, Williams C, et al. Effects on the brain of a 
psychological treatment: cognitive remediation therapy: functional magnetic resonance imaging in schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry. 2002;181:144 -52. 
43. Bor J,  Brunelin J, d'Amato T, Costes N, Suaud- Chagny MF, Saoud M, et al. How can cognitive 
remediation therapy modulate brain activations in schizophrenia? An fMRI study. Psychiatry Res. 2011;192(3):160 -6. 
44. Brunoni AR, Nitsche MA, Bolognini N, Bikson M, Wagner T, Merabet L, et al. Clinical research with 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future directions. Brain Stimul. 2012;5(3):175- 95. 
45. Meinzer M, Antonenko D, Lindenberg R, Hetzer S, Ulm L, Avirame K, et al. Electrical brain st imulation 
improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and task -specific activation. J Neurosci. 
2012;32(5):1859 -66. 
46. Park CH, Chang WH, Park JY, Shin YI, Kim ST, Kim YH. Transcranial direct current stimulation increases 
resting state interhemispheric connectivity. Neurosci Lett. 2013;539:7- 10. 
47. Zheng X, Alsop DC, Schlaug G. Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on human 
regional cerebral blood flow. Neuroimage. 2011;58(1):26- 33. 
48. Mancuso LE, Ilieva IP, Hamilton RH, Farah MJ. Does Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Improve 
Healthy Working Memory?: A Meta- analytic Review. J Cogn Neurosci. 2016:1- 27. 
49. Gill J, Shah -Basak PP, Hamilton R. It's the thought that counts: examining the task -dependen t effects of 
transcranial direct current stimulation on executive function. Brain Stimul. 2015;8(2):253 -9. 
50. Park S -H, Seo J -H, Kim Y -H, Ko M -H. Long -term effects of transcranial direct current stimulation 
combined with computer -assisted cognitive traini ng in healthy older adults. Neuroreport. 2014;25:122- 6. 
51. Richmond LL, Wolk D, Chein J, Olson IR. Transcranial direct current stimulation enhances verbal working 
memory training performance over time and near transfer outcomes. J Cogn Neurosci. 2014;26(11):2443 -54. 
52. Martin DM, Liu R, Alonzo A, Green M, Player MJ, Sachdev P, et al. Can transcranial direct current 
stimulation enhance outcomes from cognitive training? A randomized controlled trial in healthy participants. Int 
J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013; 16(9):1927- 36. 
53. Au J, Katz B, Buschkuehl M, Bunarjo K, Senger T, Zabel C, et al. Enhancing Working Memory Training 
with Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation. J Cogn Neurosci. 2016;28(9):1419 -32. 
54. Stephens JA, Berryhill ME. Older Adults Improve on Everyday Tasks after Working Memory Training and 
Neurostimulation. Brain Stimul. 2016;9(4):553- 9. 
55. Jones KT, Stephens JA, Alam M, Bikson M, Berryhill ME. Longitudinal neurostimulation in older adults 
improves working memory. PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0121904.  
56. Mondino M, Haesebaert F, Poulet E, Suaud -Chagny MF, Brunelin J. Fronto- temporal transcranial Direct 
Current Stimulation (tDCS) reduces source -monitoring deficits and auditory hallucinations in patients with 
schizophrenia. Schizophr Res. 2014.  
57. Smith RC, Boules S, Mattiuz S, Youssef M, Tobe RH, Sershen H, et al. Effects of transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) on cognition, symptoms, and smoking in schizophrenia: A randomized controlled study. Schizophr Res. 2015;168(1 -2):260- 6. 
58. Tarur Padinjareveettil AM, Rogers J, Loo C, Martin D. Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation to Enhance 
Cognitive Remediation in Schizophrenia. Brain Stimul. 2014.  
59. Hill AT, Fitzgerald PB, Hoy KE. Effects of Anodal Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation on Working 
Memory: A Systematic Review and Meta- Analysis of Findings From Healthy and Neuropsychiatric Populations. 
Brain Stimul. 2015.  
60. Subramaniam K, Luks TL, Garrett C, Chung C, Fisher M, Nagarajan S, et al. Intensive cognitive training 
in schizophrenia enhances working memory and associated prefrontal cortical efficiency in a manner that drives long- term functional gains. Neuroimage. 2014;99:281- 92. 
61. Cella M, Reeder C, Wykes T. Lessons learnt?  The importance of metacognition and its implications for 
Cognitive Remediation in schizophrenia. Front Psychol. 2015;6:1259 -68. 
62. Bowie CR, Grossman M, Gupta M, Holshausen K, Best MW. Action- Based Cognitive Remediation for 
Individuals With Serious Mental Illnesses: Effects of Real -World Simulations and Goal Setting on Functional and 
Vocational Outcomes. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2016. 
63. Heinrichs RW, Ammari N, McDermid Vaz S, Miles AA. Are schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder 
neuropsychologically distinguishable? Schizophr Res. 2008;99(1 -3):149- 54. 
64. Keefe RS, Haig GM, Marder SR, Harvey PD, Dunayevich E, Medalia A, et al. Report on ISCTM 
Consensus Meeting on Clinical Assessment of Response to Treatment of Cognitive Impairment in 
Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2015. 
65. Medalia A, Revheim N, Herlands T. Cognitive Remediation for Psychological Disorders:  Therapist Guide. 
New York: NY: Oxford University Press; 2009.  
66. First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams J. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Axis I Disorders, 
Clinician Version (SCID- CV). Was hington D. C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc.; 1996.  
67. Holdnack HA. Wechsler Test of Adult Reading :WTAR. San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation; 
2001.  
68. Nitsche MA, Cohen LG, Wassermann EM, Priori A, Lang N, Antal A, et al. Transcranial direct c urrent 
stimulation: State of the art 2008. Brain Stimul. 2008;1(3):206 -23. 
69. Lukoff D, Nuechterlein KH, Ventura J. Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. Schizophr 
Bull. 1986;12:594 -602. 
70. Ventura J, Green MF, Shaner A, Liberman RP. Training and quality assurance with the Brief Psychiatric 
Rating Scale: "The drift busters.". Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 1993;3(4):221- 44. 
71. Barch DM, Moore H, Nee DE, Manoach DS, Luck SJ. CNTRICS imaging biomarkers selection: Working 
memory. Schizophr B ull. 2012;38(1):43 -52. 
72. Kane MJ, Conway AR, Miura TK, Colflesh GJ. Working memory, attention control, and the N -back task: 
a question of construct validity. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn. 2007;33(3):615 -22. 
73. Jaeggi SM, Buschkuehl M, Perrig WJ, Meier B. The concurrent validity of the N -back task as a working 
memory measure. Memory. 2010;18(4):394- 412. 
74. Conway AR, Kane MJ, Bunting MF, Hambrick DZ, Wilhelm O, Engle RW. Working memory span tasks: 
A methodological review and user's guide. Psychon Bull Rev. 2005;12(5):769- 86. 
75. Schmiedek F, Lovden M, Lindenberger U. A task is a task is a task: putting complex span, n -back, and 
other working memory indicators in psychometric context. Front Psychol. 2014;5:1475.  
76. Barch DM, Berman MG, Engle R, Jones JH, Jonides J, Macdonald A, 3rd, et al. CNTRICS final task 
selection: working memory. Schizophr Bull. 2009;35(1):136- 52. 
77. Jones JA, Sponheim SR, MacDonald AW, 3rd. The dot pattern expectancy task: reliability and replication 
of deficits in schizophrenia. Psychol Assess. 2010;22(1):131 -41. 
78. Fuller RL, Luck SJ, Braun EL, Robinson BM, McMahon RP, Gold JM. Impaired control of visual attention 
in schizophrenia. J Abnorm Psychol. 2006;115(2):266- 75. 
79. Gold JM, Barch DM, Feuerstahler LM, Carter CC, MacDonald AW, 3rd, Ragland JD, et al. Working 
memory  impairment across psychotic disorders. Schizophr Bull. 2019;45(4):804 -12. 
80. Nuechterlein KH, Green MF. MCCB:  MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery. Los Angeles: MATRICS 
Assessment; 2006.  
81. Patterson TL, Gol dman S, McKibbin CL, Hughs T, Jeste DV. UCSD Performance- Based Skills 
Assessment: development of a new measure of everyday functioning for severely mentally ill adults. Schizophr 
Bull. 2001;27(2):235 -45. 
82. Lecomte T, Corbiere M, Ehmann T, Addington J, Abdel -Baki A. Development and preliminary validation 
of the First Episode Social Functining Scale for early psychosis. Psychiatry Res. 2014;216:412- 7. 
83. Johnson LL, Borkowf CB, Albert PS. An introduction to biostatistics:  randomization, hypothesis testing, 
and sample size estimation. In: Gallin JL, Ognibene FP, editors. Principles and practice of clinical research, 2nd edition. New York: Elsevier; 2007. p. 165- 96. 
84. Twamley EW, Vella L, Burton CZ, Heaton RK, Jeste DV. Compensatory cognitive training for psychosis: 
effects in a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73(9):1212 -9. 
85. Giglia G, Mattaliano P, Puma A, Rizzo S, Fierro B, Brighina F. Neglect -like effects induced by tDCS 
modulation of posterior parietal cortices in healthy subjects. Brain Stimul. 2011;4(4):294 -9. 
86. Buchanan RW, Keefe RS, Umbricht D, Green MF, Laughren T, Marder SR. The FDA -NIMH- MATRICS 
guidelines for clinical trial design of cognitive -enhancing drugs: what do we know 5 years later? Schizophr Bull. 
2011;37(6):1209 -17. 
118. Esan, O., Oladele, O., Adediran, K. I., Abiona, T. O. (2020).  Neurocognitive impairments (NCI) in bipolar 
disorder:  Comparison with schizophrenia and healthy controls. Journal of Affective Disorders, 277, 175- 181. 
119. Milas, D. Z., & Mlas, G . (2019).  Working memory in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar affective 
disorder:  Quantitative or qualitative differences?  Psychiatria Danubina, 31, 54 -61. 
120. Ehrminger, M., Brunet -Gouet, E., Cannavo, A- S., Aouizerate, B., Cussac, I., Azorin, J -M, Bellivier, F., 
Bougerol, T., Courtet, P., Dubertret, C., Etain, B., Kahn, J -P, Leboyer, M., Olie, E. (2019).  Longitudinal 
relationships between cognition and functioning over 2 years in euthymic patients with bipolar disorder:  a cross- lagged panel mod el approach with the FACE -BD cohort. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 1- 8. 
121. Lewandowski, K.K., Sperry, S. H., Cohen, B. M., Norris, L. A., Fitzmaurice, G., M., Ongur, D., Keshavan, M. S. (2017).  Treatment to enhance cognition in bipolar disorder (TR EC-BD):  Efficacy of a randomized 
controlled trial of cognitive remediation versus active control.  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 78, 1242- 1249.  
122. McPhilemy G, Nabulsi L, Kilmartin  L, Whittaker JR, Martyn FM, Hallahan B, McDonald C, Murphy K, 
Cannon DM. Resting -State Network Patterns Underlying Cognitive Function in Bipolar Disorder: A Graph 
Theoretical Analysis. Brain Connect. 2020 Sep;10(7):355- 367. doi: 10.1089/brain.2019.0709. Epub 2020 Jul 
21. PMID: 32458698.  
123. Huang CC, Luo Q, Palaniyappan L, Yang AC, Hung CC, Chou KH, Zac Lo CY, Liu MN, Tsai SJ, Barch 
DM, Feng J, Lin CP, Robbins TW. Transdiagnostic and Illness -Specific Functional Dysconnectivity Across 
Schizophrenia, Bipolar Disorder, and Major Depressive Disorder. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci 
Neuroimaging. 2020 May;5(5):542 -553. doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2020.01.010. Epub 2020 Feb 10. PMID: 32276887.  
124. Dell'Osso B, Cinnante C, Di Giorgio A, Cremaschi L, Palazzo MC, Cristoffanini M, Fazio L, Dobrea C, 
Avignone S, Triulzi F, Bertolino A, Altamura AC. Altered prefrontal cortex activity during working memory task 
in Bipolar Disorder: A functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging study in euthymic bipolar I and II patients. J 
Affect Diso rd. 2015 Sep 15;184:116 -22. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.05.026. Epub 2015 May 21. PMID: 26074021.  
125. Brunoni, A. R., Ferrucci, R., Bortolomasi, M., Vergari, M., Tadini, L., Boggio, P.S., Giacopuzzi, M., 
Barbieri, S., & Priori, A. (2011).  Transcranial direct  current stimulation (tDCS) in unipolar vs. bipolar 
depressive disorder.  Progress in Neuro- Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 35, 96- 101. 
126. Sampaio- Junior, B., Tortella, G., Borrione, L., Moffa, A. H., Machado- Vieira, R., Cretaz, E., Fernandes  da 
Silva, A., Fraguas, R., Aparicio, L. V., Klein, Il, Lafer, B., Goerigk, S., Mensenor, I.M., Lotufo., P. A., Gattaz, W. 
F. & Brunoni, A. R. (2018).  Efficacy and safety of transcranial direct current stimulation as an add- on treatment 
for bipolar depression:  A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 158- 166. 
 
 